



===== FILE: text/part0012.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Two 
 The Ottoman system 
 T he Ottoman Empire has long served as the particularly egregious example of the dangers of a pre-modern society where militaristic values and demands predominated, and civilians were subordinated to the military class, a situation which ‘discourages independent and original thinking, which in turn precludes innovation’. 1 By this definition, the economy was also driven predominantly by the demands of the military. When a ‘high percentage of its [society’s] surplus is committed to nonproductive enterprises, usually related to the military, economic adjustment is consequently difficult and progress slow’. 2 Individual soldiers in the Ottoman context became the ‘bandits of God’, the instrument of a state whose chief raison d’être was ‘to extend the realm of Islam’. The failure of the Janissaries was equally the failure of the state: ‘The Ottoman Empire, a military society, declined when its army failed and disappeared when its army disintegrated’. 3 By the parameters outlined above, the empire should have collapsed after 1699. This chapter will explore the reasons why the Ottomans persisted, by arguing that the state of military development in all three imperial centres was at parity in 1700. 
 Most military histories emphasise the imperatives of the battlefield, the evolving use of gunpowder and the necessity for organising large-scale warfare which typifies European states for the seventeenth and eighteenth century. In the period 1660–1700, the Ottomans had been deeply engaged with the Christian powers of Europe, establishing a twenty-year peace with the Habsburgs after the Ottoman defeat at St Gotthard on the Raab River in 1664; finally subduing the Venetians in the siege of Kandia on Crete in 1669, after 24 years of expensive and inconclusive confrontations in the Mediterranean, 4 and extending the furthest into Poland, occupying Podolia for a brief moment, in a contest over what became Ukraine, with Russian, Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and Cossack forces (1671–99). Major coalitions of European powers, as we have seen, checked Ottoman power by 1699. 
 The 1703 crisis in the capital described in the previous chapter was the capstone of a fifty-year period of continuous upheaval in the countryside, driven in large measure by the pressing need for men and money. The ability to restore order and reorganise the Ottoman forces in the 1680s was largely the work of a remarkable family of bureaucrats, the Köprülüs, Ottoman Richelieus and Mazarins, who served off and on as grand viziers and commanders of the army in the field into the first decade of the eighteenth century. Experience on the battlefields of the Danube tended to refresh Ottoman knowledge of evolving battlefield conditions. 
 Major European confrontations of the mid-eighteenth century, however, in which the Ottomans did not participate, significantly altered both military organisation and technology, especially as regards small arms and artillery, changing the balance of power by the time the Ottomans confronted the Russians on the Danube in 1768. It is generally conceded among military historians that the Ottomans could hold their own on the battlefield until at least 1700. What holding their own meant in that context will be explored in this chapter. As Chandler notes: ‘… the Turk remained a doughty opponent, if only on account of the size of his forces and the fury of his initial attacks, earning the grudging admiration of his Austrian and Russian foes.’ 5 
 Rethinking imperial military history 
 Military historiography after Clausewitz has generally been dismissive of pre-Napoleonic warfare, exhibiting ‘a tendency to underrate the determination and ability of aristocratic societies’, 6 and making even shorter shrift of the Ottomans, concluding that they never faced significant military opposition until the armies of Montecuccoli, Prince Eugene of Savoy, or the Russian Field Marshals Rumiantsev and Suvarov. Yet for all three empires, it was the age when weather, crop failure, disease, and distances from sources of supply were just as important in determining success on the battlefield as weak central command, or incompetent leadership. Such factors were great levellers of military competence. As whole societies came to be mobilised to sustain dynastic goals, resistance to collaboration with imperial aims emerged. Re-emphasis on warfare as one of the catalysts of modern state development has produced a number of works on the evolution of armies of large empires, with universalist pretensions, pre-industrial and multi-ethnic societies, whose legacy can be traced into the modern period. In that context, Ottoman historiography has taken some interesting turns, among them a reassessment of Sugar’s ‘near-perfect military society’. 7 
 One of the products of this new approach is an appreciation of the relationship between ruler and ruled in absolutist contexts, as well an understanding of the societal costs of mobilising the countryside, and the impact that the constants of war (shortages, hoarding, starvation, disease, and nomadism) exerted on rural populations. The most successful early modern proto-state was the one which monopolised the control of internal and external violence, including the organisation of capital. 8 Dynasties could not continuously over-extend their extortion of the very provincial manpower and resources which sustained their bid for hegemony, any more than they could overburden those who chose to support the enterprise. Negotiation over rights to collect taxes, and other such privileges, were an integral part of going to war, and understandably the source of wealth of many of the prominent families of Europe of the seventeenth and eighteenth century. The delicate balance between bellicosity and the ability of the state to finance it has recently been graphically described: ‘The simplest, most effective check on the king’s power to tax arbitrarily was the peasants’ refusal to pay. In the late 1630s and 1640s, this refusal to pay reached staggering proportions and it served as a major impediment to the extension of the king’s power.’ 9 This is no less true for the Ottoman Empire, and part of this study will be devoted to the ways in which the empire attempted to finance warfare in the later period. 
 Scholarly interest has recently reawakened concerning the use of myth and symbols to promote dynastic power, albeit in the late Ottoman context. 10 In order to understand the internal dynamics of the Ottomans, and by contrast, the other two very complex and extensive enterprises which confronted one another across the Danube, we must also consider the use of psychology and ideology as part of the rhetoric of imperial identity. The justification for excessive exaction was generally accompanied by an articulation of an imperial worldview emanating from the dynastic household. Subscription or submission to a potent ideology which merged dynastic and religious ideals was part of an array of strategies available to potential competitors in early modern societies. Such forces certainly influenced the Ottoman context, and recognising them allows us to see more clearly beyond the Janissary and holy war script which has satisfied the community of historians for so long. 
 The nature and composition of the Janissaries 
 That competent bureaucrats could revive the economy is only one dimension of the story of Ottoman perseverance. The Ottoman military system consisted of a standing army, the Janissary corps, and the artillerymen; a fief-based cavalry ( sipahi ) and various auxilliary forces, most often drawn from the proximate terrain of the battlefield, and from among both Muslim and non-Muslim populations. In order to understand how the dynasty survived the crisis of legitimacy described in the previous chapter, and managed to assemble within a decade the reputedly huge force which outnumbered and overawed Peter the Great on the Prut in 1711, we must examine the nature and composition of the Ottoman army of the period. 
 The Janissaries were the salaried imperial infantry corps, founded in the mid-fourteenth century, which was the heart of a military system which was the ‘terror of Europe’ until well into the eighteenth century. Accurate statistics for the corps after 1650 are hard to come by, reflecting the problem of military statistics in general. 11 The number of active or effective members of any corps of the early modern period is hard to extract from either the official rolls (generally acknowledged as inaccurate reflections of reality), or contemporary observers, whose desire to inflate the numbers of the enemy, dead or alive, is understandable. The problem is particularly acute in the Ottoman context, because of the tendency to view every member of society except the peasant as a member of the Janissary corps. Take the lament of Thomas Thornton, author of a history of the Ottomans, writing in 1807: 