 The Ottomans preferred clientism to colonisation in their dealings with the Tatars. In periods of crisis in Ottoman dynastic succession, acute in the first half of the seventeenth century, the Khanate in Bahçesaray (Crimea) was often proposed as the potential heir of last resort to the line. As this study opens, Tatar–Ottoman relations had become more complex, with the sultans intervening in appointments, supporting exiled Tatars in Istanbul, and paying considerable sums to the current Khan to incite him to the northern raids which preceded major Ottoman campaigns on the Danube. In spite of Tott’s expressed admiration for the Tatar nobles in the late eighteenth century, they had, in fact, become a liability and obstacle to Ottoman military reform, expressly so in the 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman War, although not all Ottomans would have agreed with that sentiment. 26 All of the treaties between the Romanovs and the Ottomans took up the matter of control of the Tatars, and just as often they were the excuse for breaking the peace between the two empires. Ottoman campaigns on the northern shores of the Black Sea were rare after the sixteenth century, as the Tatars served the Ottomans effectively as a military buffer zone until 1700. Tatars were instructed to wreak havoc on the borderlands to preface the arrival of the imperial army. We shall see how the army organ-isation fared when they were forced to alter their strategy concerning the Tatars after 1774, as the reality of the loss of the Crimea became apparent. 
 Eastern border strategies 
 The eastern end of Ottoman territories, stretching from Baghdad into Central Asia, was another zone of nomadism, religious confrontation and warfare for the Ottomans, this one on very different terms. Since the early 1500s, the Ottomans had been in competition in the east with the Persian Safavids, a dynasty of Sufi mystic origins which adopted Shiism as the state religion and challenged the very basis of Ottoman rule. The sixteenth-century struggle between Ottoman Sunni and Safavid Shiite was an eastern echo of the reformation underway in western Europe. The Religious Peace in Augsburg and the Treaty of Amasya, by coincidence both negotiated in 1555, legislated the right of individual princes (Christian or Muslim) to determine religious preference within their own territories. This had followed on the Ottoman defeat of the Mamluks in Cairo, which gave them access to Mecca and Medina, the most sacred sites of the Muslim world. The Safavids challenged the world ambitions of the Ottomans, who on numerous occasions responded to requests for assistance from other enemies of the Safavids, such as the Sunni Shaybanids in the north, numerous rulers on the shores of the Indian Ocean, and even from the rival Sunni Mughal house in Delhi. This geopolitical context of the Ottoman/Safavid territories for the early modern period has been very little studied from the Muslim point of view; it is generally discussed in the larger context of the international spice trade rivalries, especially after the arrival of the Dutch and English in the early 1600s. Even the papacy was not above trying to ally itself with Asian enemies of the Ottomans, a strategy with a long history beginning with the Mongols. 
 The Ottomans were clearly aware of the threat from both land and sea by 1600. They had made significant incursions into Eurasia to prevent the further advances of Muscovy under Ivan IV, and failed. They countered the Portuguese off the coast of East Africa and in the Indian Ocean, temporarily, with some success. They established the district ( sancak ) of Akkirman in 1538 to close the circle of defence on the Black Sea. Confronting the Ottoman and Tatar threat made for some curious bedfellows: the Pope and the Muscovites; the Persians and the Muscovites; subsequently the Persians and the English. As this study gets underway, the Russians, British and Persians, for whom the primary issue was trade, began the long struggle for economic supremacy in Iran and Central Asia, the latterly named ‘Great Game’ of the nineteenth century. 
 By 1700, the border between the Ottomans and the Persians was defined by the Treaty of Zuhab, 17 May 1639, following the Ottoman recapture of Baghad in 1638 by Murat IV (1623–40). The treaty is notable for its language, for the recognition of the shah of Persia as ‘… the ornament of the Persian Throne, the splendour of the kingdom of Djem, and whose magnificence is equal to that of Darius, the great prince and illustrious Lord, the Precious Pearl of the Sea of Royalty, the sun of the sky of Sovereignty, the noble Eagle of the high region of the Dignity of Shah, the Most Illustrious and Majestic Prince’, and for the reiteration of the role of the Ottomans: ‘… the most glorious Padishah who is the Defender of the faith, whose Majesty is as great as that of Solomon, who is the substitute of God in the world, and who has justified the maxim that An equitable Sultan is the shadow of God on earth; … the supporter of Islamism and Musulmans, the exterminator of heresies and of the polytheists, the Sovereign of the two Orients and the two Occidents, the servant of the two Holy Cities, the Treasure of Mankind and the apple of the age, who is protected by the Supreme Being whose divine assistance men implore, and favoured by the most High and propitious God.’ 27 Much has been made of the Ottoman reluctance to fight with brother Muslims, prohibited as it was by Islamic law. While the threat to the Shiite ‘heretics’ is implied in the text of this treaty, it reads far more like a statement of divine right along the lines of James I of England, and reflects the rhetoric of dynastic politics of the early modern age. 
 This border agreement survived into the nineteenth century, but unrest along the Sunni–Shiite frontier zone was continuous, exacerbated by the rise of Russia and the resultant migration and emigration of populations. Immigrant nomadism was accelerated by the shifting balance of power and increasing intolerance of religious and ethnic difference that char-acterised both Russian and Ottoman imperial centres. Significantly, the east was a border of few fortresses, where formidable and forbidding mountain ranges and a climate of extremes served just as well to prevent conquest. It was also a mix of ethnic and religious communities: besides the Sunni/Shiite, Kurd, Armenian, Georgian, Çerkes, Laz, Abkhazia, Tatar, Kalmyk and Kazakh to name a few. 
 The geopolitical realities of such vast territories, nominally Ottoman, drove not only the language of diplomacy, but also the style of and limitations on warfare, the creation of real or imaginary frontier zones, and greater or lesser central control. Distance, seasonal change, and unpredictable but regularly expected disasters: famines, floods, and plague, made sustained campaigning unrealistic. The harsh and stark setting, Safavid scorch-and-burn strategies, and increasing Janissary resistance to eastern campaigns kept Ottoman major incursions in the east to a minimum in the seventeenth century. (It is worth remembering that Baghdad was 1,334 miles from Istanbul, Belgrade 587). 28 The spectacular campaigns of Murad IV to Baghdad and to Erivan a mere three years earlier (1635) were unusual, attributable to a sustained lull on the western frontier as Europe was distracted by the Thirty Years War, and to considerable robustness in the treasury as a result of Murad’s fiscal reforms. Such campaigns, mobilising an estimated (and usually exaggerated) 100,000 troops, were difficult to organise and costly to sustain. 29 
 The tenuous Safavid hold on Persian hegemony fell apart after 1719, especially so by 1722 when Isfahan was conquered by the Afghan leader Mahmud Ghazlay. The Ottomans became further embroiled on the eastern frontier, with some predictable results, such as a further loss of control over revenues, with an increasing degree of nomadisation of eastern and northern Anatolia. A well-documented Janissary revolt, led by Patrona Halil in Istanbul in 1730, was directly related to the campaign mobilisation effort for that particular frontier. Uncharacteristically, the Ottoman thrust into the Caucasus in this period was sustained, driven by Russian encroachments in Georgia, but just as much determined by the Ottoman need to recoup increasingly unruly territories. Sporadic and inconclusive confrontations continued until 1746, when the 1639 borders were essentially re-established. Distance, heterodoxy and nomadism remained powerful obstacles to rationalised warfare in the east, and total war unjustified in the popular mind against co-religionists, even those officially viewed as Muslim heretics. This book ends with the Ottoman sultans of the Tanzimat period still attempting to consolidate control over eastern tribal confederations. 
 The Habsburgs and the Romanovs chose, by contrast with the Ottomans, to establish military frontiers as a means of defence of increasingly closed or contentious borders. The settlement and employment of distinct populations was part of the strategy. The Russians also had a series of military colonies, as defence lines against Tatar and Cossack, which were enlarged precisely in the first period of our survey, and were double in number by the mid-seventeenth century. 30 
 Imperial aims: Ottoman, Habsburg, Romanov 
 The Habsburgs ruled over a complex federation of well-entrenched nobilities, economically self-sufficient for the most part, but tied to an imperial centre through a common culture, counter-Reformation Catholicism. In the period under discussion, especially the 1680s–1740s, the Austrian model of empire had its moment of fruition, even as more disparate populations were added to its territories, though never in the bewildering variety of either the Russian or the Ottoman case. In an attempt at centralisation and reform, Maria Theresa and Joseph II continued the basic contradictory policies of the counter-reformation age, even as they laid the foundation for the Austro-Hungarian monarchy of the nineteenth century. Roman Catholicism remained the bulwark of their universal message. The great struggle for the Habsburgs after 1700 was the challenge from Prussia and later from Napoleon Bonaparte, which led to the dimunition and total reconfiguration of Habsburg territories. 
 In Russia, vast expanses of territory and multiethnic populations in the hundreds were added to the Russian dominions in the period of study, and the construction of a universal empire was intricately bound up with local military and administrative service and supply of men and arms. Peter the Great is credited with creating the modern Russian army, but the process of reform had begun under his predecessors. Peter’s major contribution lay in the 1722 Table of Ranks, which brought coherence to the Russian administration and created a ‘new service nobility’. 31 Catherine the Great’s Charter of 1785 continued the process by establishing a corporate structure and legal privileges, but reasserted Orthodoxy as the religion of empire, and the rights of the nobility over the serfs. Both compacts required the kind of negotiations familiar to Ottoman and Habsburg rulers, which included concessions to the aristocracy and the populace at large. Russification and conversion were integral parts of the equation of Romanov universalism, strengthened in nineteenth-century Orthodox missionary movements in central Asia, and often opposed vigorously. 
