 Rami Mehmed Efendi was chief of the Ottoman delegation at Karlowitz. Rami Efendi was a bureaucrat, the Reisülküttab , Chief of the Scribes, an office which was to evolve into the Ministry of Foreign Affairs by the nineteenth century. Heretofore, negotiations between belligerents had been conducted on the battlefield by the sultan and grand viziers. The Ottomans, decisively defeated for the first time in two centuries, were no longer able to dictate terms unilaterally, and began a long period of adjustment to European-style diplomacy. The reis and his staff became adroit at the niceties of diplomatic manoeuvring, as observed by diplomatic representatives of friend and foe alike. Posturing and feinting, offence and appeasement were all part of the theatre of international relations, which was often manipulated, sometimes successfully, by the Ottomans. 
 At Karlowitz, Rami Mehmed Efendi reputedly insisted stubbornly on the few concessions to be made by the victors, arguing that the clause concerning the evacuation-demolition of any forts in Ottoman territories be included exclusively for Ottoman benefit. In the event, the Habsburgs conceded to this small gesture which served to salvage Ottoman honour. 19 Far more interesting, however, is the justification for peace to be found in the preface to the Ottoman Turkish version of the treaty. The thrust of the language was this: The Austrians, Poles, Russians (called Moskov, or Moskova, from Muscovy, by the Ottomans) and the Venetians had so strongly united together and attacked the Muslim frontiers from all sides, from land and from sea, that it was impossible to divide and conquer them. Suspending hostilities and seeking peace was to be interpreted as the equivalent of jihad, and therefore good for the supreme state. This, it was argued, was why the men of state, the ulema and the sultan had agreed to it. 20 Jurists were reinterpreting the concept of holy war to permit a legal state of peace, basing it on the rationale of the good of the Muslim community – maslaha – a term much evoked in later treaties. 21 In other words, peace was another way to continue war. The justification was legitimated by the story of the prophet Muhammad, which became a cliché in Ottoman writings on war and peace. In the Treaty of Hudaybiya in 628 AD between Muhammad and the Meccans, the prophet was forced to concede a truce of ten years, in order to enable the new Muslim community to perform the pilgrimage in the city of Mecca. In the event, Muhammad and his community made a triumphal entry into Mecca the following year. In other words, such concessions were only a temporary stop on the way to the ultimate Muslim victory. 
 This obvious fiction, recognised as such or not, was in keeping with the Ottoman imperial notion of the permanently expanding frontier of the abode of Islam ( Dar-al-Islam ), and the inadmissibility of peace with infidels. It sufficed for the treaty of Karlowitz, amid considerable protest and rebellion, but became harder and harder to maintain as defeat piled upon defeat in the later eighteenth century. It was based on a vision of an empire surrounded by a wide buffer zone, where clientage and border raids, sometimes called razzia (from the Arabic ghazi , warrior, often translated as warrior for the faith, an interpretation hotly contested among Ottomanists), 22 protected the interior of the empire. In such a conception of empire, the key to military success lay in the ability to coerce or cajole the border communities to escalate frontier skirmishes into sustained campaigns. The problem of control over such autonomous populations was ever present, and a very significant component of the narrative of late Ottoman history. Legitimacy was argued by adherence to Islamic law, the shar‘ia, and justified by the seal of approval of the chief religious officer ( Ş eyhülislam ), although in actuality sultanic ordinances ( kanun ) had long coloured the nature of Ottoman administration. In some sense, in the period under discussion, the Ottoman loss of control over its ulema represented as great a challenge as the battlefield losses. The problem of imperial aims and religious justification was hardly unique to the Ottoman context. The Russian Orthodox church, by way of comparison, became an extremely important arm of the civilising mission of the Romanovs in the very same era. 
 The rhetoric of justification for the Karlowitz treaty took one form; what the treaty actually meant on the ground, another. By the realities of defeat, the Danube assumed the function of the final frontier, especially after Teme ş var was ceded to the Austrians in the Belgrade treaty of 1739. After 1700, preservation of the fortress line from Belgrade to Azov became the primary strategy of all future Ottoman campaigns and treaty negotiations. Neutrality, or at least disengagement, was also a part of the tools of the new diplomacy following the Karlowitz treaty, especially in the middle years of the eighteenth century. 
 The Russians signed their own treaty with the Ottomans in 1700, withdrawing claims to the Crimea, having learned the hard lessons of the logistics of campaigning on the northern shores of the Black Sea and in the Caucasus, lessons which continued until 1783, when they were rewarded with success and the addition of the Peninsula to the Russian empire. ‘The fundamental fact of Russian history was colonisation in a great plain’, according to the Russian historian V.O. Klyuchevsky, which he divided into three periods: first, of Kievan Rus and the river Dnieper; second, of the upper Volga and of a consolidation around Moscow by the late fifteenth century. The third period of colonisation, by his account, began in the seventeenth century, with the Romanov entrance onto the European stage, the third side of the triangle which included the Poles and the Ottomans. 23 Here, again, topography and environment drove the style of warfare as much as the wavering loyalties of Tatar and Cossack. The territory between the Prut and Dnieper to the Don and Kuban and beyond to the Volga Basin was contested for over a century, with significant dislocation and resettlement of populations on both sides. 
 The Principalities 
 The western end of the Ottoman frontier zone of influence was dominated by periods of war and peace with Poland and fluctuating loyalties of the tributary territories of Transylvania, Wallachia and Moldavia, the latter two coming under Ottoman suzerainty by the mid-fifteenth century. As Belgrade and Azov represented the east–west axis of defence, Hotin on the Polish–Ukraine border assumed that role as the northernmost pivot of Ottoman imperial interests, so that one of the focal points of Ottoman–Russian campaigning in the eighteenth century became the Prut River valley. With 1699, the Poles had thrust the Ottomans back on that defence line; by the end of the century, the estuary of the Danube itself was under siege. 
 While the 1700 treaty recognised Peter the Great’s enterprise in capturing Azov and establishing a naval base at Taganrog, his gains were lost at the spectacular Ottoman victory at Prut in 1711, played out against Peter’s Great Northern War with Sweden (1700–21), the flight of Charles XII into Ottoman territory and increasing Russian interference and control of Poland. When a final agreement was reached in 1713, Azov was repinned onto the Ottoman defence map, but the Russians had achieved the right to a permanent representative in Istanbul for the first time. In the mid-eighteenth century, the Ottomans attempted to remain neutral in the face of the occupation and partition of Poland which began with the succession struggles in the 1730s. In 1768, however, Russian–Polish–Cossack skirmishes on the Ottoman frontier served as the excuse for the Ottomans to return to war against Catherine the Great. 
 Much is often made of the Russian support for the Orthodox coreligionists in Ottoman territories in this period, as reflected in the behaviour of the leaders of the Principalities: Dimitrius Cantemir in Moldavia and Constantine Brancoveanu in Wallachia were both accused of collaborating with Peter. In fact, their assumed treachery resulted in the establishment of the Phanariot regime in the Principalities, an Ottoman attempt at centralisation quite contrary to almost two centuries of rule of the two semi-autonomous territories. Effective Russian manipulation of the rhetoric of defence of co-religionists as means of intervention in Ottoman affairs was a product of the treaties at the end of the eighteenth century. In the language of the Prut peace terms, there is little hint of religious protectionism: ‘The Sublime Porte for its part and the Russians for theirs shall promise that the inhabitants, subjects, or other persons who may be under their protection shall nowhere be molested or caused anxiety.’ 24 
 Susceptible to conflicting religious ideologies as were the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia, so too were the Christian populations in other, more fully integral Ottoman territories of the Balkans, such as Croats, Greeks, Serbs, Macedonians, and a host of other ethnicities. A similar cultural style and Ottoman adaptation of local boundaries and governance sustained the empire until later in the seventeenth century. As Ottoman administrative systems began to break down, and local rivalries heated up, religious rhetoric challenged the Ottoman imperial worldview. The degree of their influence on the flow of events remains a much-debated subject, but contemporary writers expressed the Turk–Christian confrontation as the pre-modern equivalent of the ‘clash of civilizations’, however much we wish to deny it. Ethnic nationalist fervour, sometimes contesting, sometimes subsuming religious affiliation by the nineteenth century, has anachronistically been applied to the period under discussion. 25 
 Ottomans and Tatars 
 Since the late fifteenth century, the Tatar–Ottoman relationship was a fruitful one, with the vast northern Black Sea steppe frontier serving as the Ottoman–Moscow border. Tatar horsemen were understood to be the legitimate descendants of the Golden Horde, who had settled in the Crimea and dominated Moscow for over two centuries. Tatar raids into Russian territories, for both plunder and slaves, were legendary and constant. Their renowned horsemanship, and durability in harsh conditions, are the subject of pervasive legends. The relationship between the Ottoman dynasty and the Tatars was equally driven by the recognition of the potential value of the Tatar cavalry to Ottoman warfare. They were particularly adept at harassing the enemy territories, armies and supply lines. The Ottomans could count on the Tatar Khan, who was generally appointed with Ottoman consent, to serve as the vanguard for any new campaign not only in the northern steppe regions, but also in Poland and the Principalities, as was the case in the Holy League wars. In the period under discussion, the relationship between Tatar and Russian, as well as Tatar and Ottoman, altered significantly and permanently. 
