 The Ottoman rise and eclipse starts and ends earlier than either Habsburg or Romanov. Ottoman history of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is generally viewed as a time of stasis and decline, a paradigm that has resisted modification until recently, when more research has focused on internal dynamics of change. 32 At the beginning of our period, the Ottomans had just suffered a humiliating defeat, accepted treaty conditions which challenged their political legitimacy, and faced the imminent collapse of the centre in 1703, in one of the most severe Istanbul revolts of the period. 
 The Ottoman universal message continued to be Muslim, an Islam generally tolerant (in theory more than pratice) of multi-ethnic polities: to become Ottoman was to assume a cultural, rather than necessarily an ethnic, identity. Ottoman patronage of the shar‘ia, and the persistence of a belief in the impartiality of Islamic law among large segments of the population, however imaginary, constituted a powerful unifying ideology. Growing intolerance towards non-Muslims is one of the principal trends of the era under discussion, imposed by shrinking borders, the dislocation of Muslim populations, and the increasing volume of rival Christian rhetoric justifying imperial territorial claims discussed above. Ottoman dynastic, household imperatives resisted the inclusion of the new sources of power emerging in the countryside. The new challenge of provincial elites arguably emerged precisely in response to the exigencies of the needs of the battlefront. 
 In this they differed sharply from their Habsburg and Romanov rivals, who strove to include newcomers, albeit in very circumscribed terms. Maria Theresa’s and Joseph II’s long internal struggle with the Kingdom of Hungary and the international conflict with Prussia are well known. Habsburg policies were governed by Maria Theresa’s profound commitment to Catholicism, although they were later tempered by Joseph II’s more moderate views. Discussion of Romanov colonialism and negotiation with the ‘others’ in the east is just emerging in post-Soviet Central Asian studies. 33 True assimilation in the Russian context required conversion to Orthodoxy. By contrast, the Ottoman re-appropriation of exclusively Muslim symbols and Turkish ethnicity was belatedly undertaken in the nineteenth century, when they had already lost the loyalty of a majority of the non-Muslim subject peoples. 
 The Ottomans resisted the inclusion of emerging provincial powers into the royal household for a number of reasons, most of which require a definition of the dynastic household and its unifying icon, the Janissaries. In 1700, the opening moment of this study, the sultanic household faced possibly the greatest challenge to its survival to date, following upon multiple defeats on the battlefield and the signing of a deeply humiliating peace treaty with the Holy League. More importantly, the failures accompanied and followed more than half a century of Ottoman reform masterminded by the vigorous reforms of the Köprülü family of grand viziers. 
 The Istanbul revolts that occur throughout the war period, especially after Grand Vizier Kara Mustafa’s spectacular failure at Vienna in 1683, are indicative of a significant power struggle between the sultan and and his senior officers: the grand vizier, the commander of the Janissaries ( Agha ), and the Ş eyhülislam . Mustafa II (1695–1703), under tutelage of his mentor, the Ş eyhülislam Feyzullah, had envisioned himself as the new Süleyman the Magnificent, and had led his army onto the battlefield at Zenta in 1697. Although successful in small field battles and sieges, the army under the sultan was annihilated by Eugene of Savoy in open field confrontations, which finally forced the resolution of the conflict. An attempt was made to keep the reality of the treaty of Karlowitz from the public for a considerable period. As part of that strategy, Mustafa II decreed the move of the seat of power from Istanbul to Edirne, where he took up residence in 1701, ostensibly to facilitate the signing and implementation of the conditions of the treaties. 
 Revolts in Istanbul circa 1700 
 In 1703, a very serious revolt broke out in Istanbul among the military, who complained of overdue pay, and of the sultan’s absence in Edirne. This was not the first nor the last such Janissary revolt of the period, but there were some new elements who were added to the ranks of the rebels. Observers noted an interesting mix of civilians, a new coalition of soldier, artisan and members of the religious class, disdainful of any attempts by the sultan to mask the loss of political legitimacy. One of the real causes for grievance was the perceived lack of balance in power. Ş eyhülislam Feyzullah, who continued to be patronised by Mustafa II, was the focus of much of the anger, his corruption and nepotism excessive even for the time, and his influence over the sultan considered too great. Furthermore, he overstepped the boundaries of his position as head of the religious arm of the household, establishing corporate relationships traditionally the domain and prerogative of the vizierial and pasha households. He antagonised the potential candidates for the post of grand vizier, the head of the bureaucracy which had begun its consolidation under the famous Köprülü family in the mid-seventeenth century. 
 The demands of the rebel leaders in Istanbul were articulated by members of the religious class, the ulema, who, like the Ş eyhülislam , were servants of the sultan, but rarely participants in the unruly behaviour of the military arm. They operated as the arbiters of justice in interpreting the shar‘ia, which was enforced in the local courts scattered throughout the Ottoman realms. The courts, and the kadis, or local judges, were the single, most consistent representation of Ottoman rule in the provinces. In this instance the religious officials first attempted mediation, and then provided a justification for the rebellion, once they saw that the rebels intended to march on the sultan in Edirne. Couched in the question-and-answer style rhetoric of the religious ruling called a fetva , four questions were posed and answered: the first concerned Mustafa II’s neglect of his ‘trust’ in looking after his subjects, ‘allowing injustice and inequity to reign’ while he went hunting, wasting the public treasury. The second legitimated the right of a Muslim community to stand up to an unjust ruler. The third condemned those who sided with an unjust ruler. The fourth charged Mustafa II ‘… with having compromised his mandate by accepting the peace treaties’ and conceding so much territory to the Christian powers. 34 
 This manifesto, as with many others of the period before and after, is couched in the religious rhetoric of Islam, arguing that the sultan’s chief duty lay in maintaining the balance and stability of the Muslim community, while defending and extending the borders of the territories of Islam. Its consistent use in such manifestos has blinded historians to the reality of dynastic politics, which often operated at odds with such justificatory rhetoric. The sultan was interested in personal and familial survival. For that, he depended upon the Janissaries, whose loyalty had to be reacquired at each accession. They represented ‘… the necessary ceremonial action and illusions upon which sultanic rule depend[ed].’ 35 
 As a result of the 1703 revolt, Mustafa II’s brother, Ahmed III (1703–30), became sultan. Military confrontation outside of Edirne was avoided, as the imperial loyalists, mostly troops recruited from the Balkan countryside, deserted Mustafa and joined the ranks from Istanbul. The bloodshed which followed, once Feyzullah was brutally eliminated, did not centre on Mustafa II or his household; he spent the remainder of his life in seclusion in the palace. But the violence in Istanbul became more generalised, resulting from three related problems: the lack of discipline and control over the disorder and destruction; the dissolution of rebel unity, amidst rivalries concerning the balance of power; and finally competition for the coronation accession gifts, the traditional reward for the Janissary pledge of allegiance to a new sultan. 36 By this time, the ceremony of submission by which the Janissaries swore allegiance to the new sultan was a theatrical gesture masking the real power of the corps to control events in the imperial capital. As one historian has noted, the results of this particular rebellion indicate ‘no significant interest among the military … to exercise leadership of the government … a lack of the need to wield sovereignty.’ 37 The consequence for military affairs was in the reassertion of the power of the grand vizier over the commander of the Janissaries, and a willingness by the rank-and-file Janissaries to accept the return to the normal balance of power. 
 Janissary loyalties and ethos 
 The key to Janissary acquiescence lies, once their immediate demands of payment were satisfied, in the Ottoman notion and operation of households (the preferred term for Ottoman-style elite courts). As kapu kulu (‘household-slave’, the term used for the imperial troops), the classical imperial Janissary served the sultan, and operated within a corps structure for whom the virtues of ‘unswerving gratitude, loyal servility to the sultan and unflinching heroism’ 38 represented the ideal. For the earlier period, the relationship of sultan to his troops has often been described as that of father to his sons. This also gave them the right to challenge their father, so to speak, when his authority was too lax, too oppressive, or otherwise interpreted as inappropriate. Servitude was characterised by periodic insubordination, more of a constant than contemporary histories of the earlier period allow us to believe. The revolt I have just described was by far the most sustained to date in the capital itself. While it would not be the last, it restored the traditional balance, which more or less guaranteed the continued mediocrity of military leadership, subordinated to the emerging service elite of the bureaucracy, and the continued appointment of the commander of the Janissaries by the grand vizier. By the mid-eighteenth century, the grand vizier himself was not, with rare exceptions, drawn from those with military prowess, or experience in provincial administration. 39 Rather, the grand viziers were increasingly palace appointments as bureaucrats, made and unmade by palace corporate politics. 
 By 1700, the provinces of the empire were ruled by court-appointed governors ( valis, pashas ) who had established significant networks of power in extended households which mirrored the royal household in Istanbul. As such, they organised small, Janissary-style mercenary armies in their own entourages, called the kapu halk ı (‘household folk’). The significant power struggle even before 1650, but intensified thereafter, lay in the competition over the control of tax revenues among Ottoman officials such as the provincial governor, generally the career route to grand vizierial appointment; the Janissaries, posted to the countryside and in major fortresses, as well as the ayan , who emerged as the result of this rivalry, and are a prevalent part of the landscape in the period under discussion. The imperial Janissaries of Istanbul functioned after 1700 as the imperial guard of the sultan. The provincial households became the source of armed manpower, and as such could not be ruled as much as co-opted by the imperial circle. As with European monarchs, such as the Habsburgs, the sultan had to contend with independent armies from a very early date. 
