 The demographics of exile described above, however, meant a tremendous influx of Muslim peoples into highly mixed territories in Anatolia and the Balkans, reflected in the increasing public clamour for a reiteration of Ottoman Muslimness by 1800. Shrinking boundaries, and mounting distrust of the loyalties of Christians forced an increasing reliance on the peoples from the peripheries of empire: on the exiles as well as on the long-standing use of Albanians and Kurdish tribal groups as the source of manpower for the militias of later campaigns. Particularly problematic in the east was the unreliability of religious sensibilities of the eastern frontiersmen, Muslim co-religionists for the most part, but historically heterodox and despised by the Ottoman elite. The volatility of this particular mix is exemplified in the problems of command and insubordination which most characterise the military campaigns of the late eighteenth century. 
 The northern frontier 
 The Ottomans preferred zones of influence, and clientage, to defensive corridors for their territories north of the Danube and the Black Sea. The Tatar Khanate, centred at Bahçesaray in the Crimean Peninsula, and the territories of Wallachia and Moldavia were required to contribute men and supplies to the major campaigns, the latter two in return for semi-autonomous, non-Muslim status. No more than a token presence of Janissaries was legislated as part of the equation in the case of Moldavia and Wallachia. The Muslim Tatars, potential heirs to the Ottoman house, by contrast, were generally incited to raid enemy territories at the beginning of the campaign season, and remained useful at harassing supply trains and small columns of Russian soldiers even in the 1768–74 War. The relationship was ambivalent at best; the Khanate was in fact maintained by large influxes of money from Ottoman coffers, a system which guaranteed Ottoman continual interference in Bahçesaray politics. Once the Russians began the invasion of the Black Sea littoral and penetrated Moldavia on a regular basis, Tatar usefulness on the Danube was considerably lessened. After 1774, when Tatar independence was secured by the Russians as part of the Küçük Kaynarca treaty, the issue of Tatar survival was subsumed in the greater public debate and pressure to recover a large chunk of lost Muslim territory. This accounts for the sustained and debilitating attempts to recover the northern shores of the Black Sea that drove Ottoman foreign policy until 1792. 52 
 Moldavia and Wallachia were essential for providing grain and livestock. In both, hereditary princes had been allowed to rule their Christian populations by contributing both men and supplies to the imperial campaigns. In practice, this meant they maintained their own private armies, and were susceptible to competing loyalties, the situation faced by the Habsburgs once they acquired a majority of the territory in Hungary after 1699. It is precisely in the period following 1700, especially after 1711, when Moldavians under Dimitrius Cantemir joined the Russian army at Prut, that the Ottomans attempted to alter the relationship in Moldavia and Wallachia by appointing ruling households from within the Istanbul Phanariot community, and by curbing, and sometimes eliminating, the local armies. Thereafter they could no longer depend on the manpower from those territories. The attempt at imposing central control demonstrates Ottoman awareness of how essential the Principalities were as a bufferzone, and as the breadbasket of the army and Istanbul, but the new regime forced them into other regions for mobilising campaign irregulars. 53 As to the numbers involved in 1683, Marsigli estimated the tributary troops in the field army at 28,000: 12,000 Tatars, 8,000 from Transylvania, and 4,000 each from Wallachia and Moldavia. He added another 10,000 Tatars who were paid to help in the defence of Buda. 54 The one notable Ottoman experiment in ethnic regiments, the Zaporozhian Cossack regiment of Silistre, was established only as part of Mahmud II’s reforms of the 1820s, from Cossacks who had relocated into Dobruja. 55 
 The southern frontier: Egypt and the Arab Provinces 
 Practically speaking, Egypt and the Arab/Kurdish provinces of the empire, predominantly Muslim, can be conceptualised as the southern Ottoman frontier, especially by 1800. The entire eighteenth century, especially after 1750, was largely characterised by massive campaigns on the northern frontier. What that led to in areas around Baghdad, Damascus, and the Levant coastal cities, was the emergence, and in some cases the re-emergence, of nomadic or semi-nomadised tribal groups and mountain men, such as the Türkmen, various Kurdish populations, the Bedouins, and the Druze. This was particularly troublesome for the empire, which depended on the success of the pilgrimage from Damascus to Mecca for both status and finances, and the stability of Egypt for its annual tax revenue, and for the 3,000 Janissaries normally supplied for large campaigns. The physical and financial neglect of the Janissary garrisons in cities of the southern tier seems to have been fairly profound. What arose in the void as a consequence will be discussed later, but some trends are worth noting. Istanbul relied on the dwindling numbers of Janissaries to make their own way. To do so turned them into entrepreneurs, bandits and even gun runners. City defence mechanisms involved creating local armies, such as the yerliye of Jerusalem, or the mamluks , of Cairo fame, who competed for local resources and attacked the Janissary garrisons on a regular basis. The centrally-appointed Ottoman governor generally walked into a maelstrom of competing militias, and could find himself besieged in his own fortress. Another consequence was the gradual sorting out of the locals (Arabs, Bedouins) from the ‘Turks’, troops sent from Istanbul or Anatolia. Hence, local rulers such as Cezzar Pasha, defender of Acre against Napoleon, created and financed their own mercenary armies, which very often incorporated foreign (including European) renegades, precisely because of the unreliability of local networks and loyalties. Hence the Arab provinces, and especially Cairo, were undergoing their own introduction to a different military culture at the same time as Istanbul, which would have different outcomes. 56 
 Auxiliary forces: the religious factor 
 Ottoman use of Christian and Muslim auxiliaries as local militias, in garrisons and in the fleets on the Danube, was one which served them well on the European battlefronts. It was an integral part of the strategy of conquest of earlier centuries. Such auxiliary forces could occasionally acquire advantageous tax status, but more often were simply levies of the local population. These militia could be cavalry and infantry units, or local peasants assigned to many of the less glamorous tasks of warfare, such as building defences or digging ditches. The plethora of names, the range of definition and the longevity of the associations in the popular mind and in Ottoman documentation are phenomena familiar to those who write the military history of the early modern age, when shovels were far more numerous than cannons in fortress inventories. As an example, Murphey’s close study of campaigns and sieges in the east in the seventeenth century are especially evocative: for the siege of Baghdad in 1638, 24,000 beldar (trench diggers) were levied from one in twenty Anatolian households, and marched to the front. 57 Karaferye kaza (present-day Greece) was ordered to supply 100 beldars for the 1768–74 war in February 1769, suggesting the continued practice of levying non-Muslim villages for auxiliary units. 58 
 Although it is difficult to sort out the mobilisation and financing of the Ottoman borders after 1650, we do have information on their organ-isation of the Hungarian and Bulgarian fortress systems of the previous hundred years from which to draw some examples: martolos , generally assumed to be Slav, Christian cavalry, served in campaigns, as crews of river fleets, and even occasionally as paid garrison soldiers. They formed the backbone of the defence of the borders in the sixteenth century, along with the ak ı nc ı , who were irregular raiding parties. Such local troops were tax exempt, and the martolos sometimes received a salary. 59 Another example of a local group was the voynuk corps, largely in interior Bulgarian territories, especially around the Filibe–Sofia–Belgrade axis. Again, service meant tax exemption – these were border forces called into the service of the sultan on campaign. 60 Other troops, massed in Hungary more than Bulgaria, especially after the conquest in the sixteenth century, included the Ulufeciyan-i süvari , be ş lüs , farisan , various terms for salaried cavalry regiments, most likely, but not always, Muslim. Azabs , in the Balkans and Hungary, were generally a lower class of infantry, distinguished from the müstahfizes , local fortress guards, who in the sixteenth century were probably non-Muslim, and not Janissaries. The müstahfiz corps was commanded by the dizdar , the local fortress commander. Yerli (meaning ‘local’) came into use in the seventeenth century for various local services, generally hired on a contingency basis, for building bridges, etc. Yerli , like müstahfiz , implied non-Janissary until the mid-seventeenth century. Their tasks were various. Yamak (recruit), a term of opprobrium by the nineteenth century, came into greater use in the post-1700 period. Initially it appears to have meant civilians mobilised for specific tasks in the times of war. Equally, the term seems to have replaced the gönüllüs (‘volunteers’) of earlier centuries who wanted to join the Janissary regiments, and who were used for a variety of tasks. In reality, yamaks became the ill-paid, ill-trained Muslim garrison guards of Danubian, but more especially of the Black Sea and Bosphorus, fortresses who were the source of much military unrest by the end of the eighteenth century, and very often blamed for resisting attempts at reform, most especially in the downfall of Selim III in 1807–08. 61 
 The Ottomans, at least initially, made a clear distinction between major fortresses, with resident regiments of Janissaries supplemented by Istanbul Janissaries at the inauguration of campaigns, and lesser lines of defence, largely the domain of local troops. Estimates for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries indicate that one tenth of the manpower in the Hungarian fortresses represented salaried Janissaries. The rest were local. 62 Marsigli puts the garrison Janissaries at 21,426 at the time of the 1683 campaign. 63 
