



===== FILE: text/part0013.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Three 
 From Prut to Belgrade: illusions of success and failure 
 The political setting 1700–50 
 T he first half of the eighteenth century saw the continuation of the closing of the eastern frontiers of Europe, in a series of campaigns in which Ottoman, Habsburg and Romanov armies played out victory and defeat along the Danube. Between 1700 and 1739, the Ottoman army participated in two swift and successful campaigns: on the Prut in 1711 and against the Venetians in the Morea in 1715, but suffered costly defeats by the Austrians in 1717. In a series of confrontations which reiterated the magnitude of the problems in the military organisation, the Ottomans faced Russian and Austrian armies again in 1736–39, on contested frontiers around Belgrade, Ochakov and Azov. That is the subject of this chapter. 
 The triumph of the Treaty of Belgrade in 1739, which returned the pivotal fortress for the entire northern defensive line to the Ottomans, resulted after three years of Habsburg hesitancy, incompetence, splintered command, and insufficient men and supplies. The Russian thrust into the Crimea in early 1737 under Commanders Münnich and Lacy was equally wasteful, but psychologically important as Münnich also penetrated deep into Wallachian territory before being forced to withdraw as peace was concluded. 
 Ottoman mobilisation and supply systems, slowly organised, proved resilient on the Danubian front, less so in Ukraine and the Crimea. The victory accorded them at Belgrade prompted complacency among Ottoman bureaucrats at the court concerning the need for reforms, which became increasingly essential as the century wore on. Istanbul, no less than Vienna, suffered from the factionalism and psychological blows of victories followed by retreats which characterised 1737 to 1739. St Petersburg watched in astonishment as most of the territories captured by Eugene of Savoy were ceded to the Ottomans by the Treaty of Belgrade. Perhaps the greatest enemy of all was disease, which crippled the campaigns of all three armies in 1738. 
 The Europeanisation of Ottoman diplomacy continued, as each new diplomatic or hostile confrontation was accompanied by mediation by other western powers. France, Great Britain, the Dutch Republic, and latterly Prussia offered to intervene in the eastern European quarrels. Ottoman embassies to Europe became more commonplace, and concerted efforts at mid-century to stay out of European conflicts, especially during the vizierate of Mehmed Rag ı b (1756–63), known as Koca Ragib, are also indicative of a new diplomatic worldview. 1 
 The Ottoman case 
 Religious rivalries, Catholic, Orthodox and Muslim, played a role in the movement of populations in the Balkans, most especially on the Bulgarian– Wallachian border after 1715. The impact of retreating Muslim populations behind newly-defined Ottoman boundaries, however, is less well understood. 2 The increasing use of Albanian troops in the Morea and on the Black Sea fortress line, whose undisciplined bravado and ferocity generally went unchecked, did little to foster sympathy for the empire, and a great deal to alienate the populations of the periphery. Traditional formations, such as the Bosnian Muslim militia troops, remained especially loyal to the Ottomans, and proved very effective during the 1736–39 War. 
 The consolidation of local dynasties continued in the eighteenth century, and one of the more vigorous historiographical debates among Ottomanists concerns the genesis and significance of such families in the Balkans as well as the Arab provinces. The significant figures of the latter half of the eighteenth and into the nineteenth century, such as Canikli Ali in Trabzon, Mustafa Alemdar Pasha in Rusçuk, Osman Pasvano ğ lu in Vidin, or Ali Pasha of Iannina, emerge from the context of conflicting loyalties, and skillful negotiation of demands for men and supplies from Istanbul. 
 Significantly, the grand viziers of the 1736–39 war period were some of the last of the centrally-trained military commanders with empire-wide experience of governance. One such, Hekimo ğ lu Ali Pasha (1732–35; 1742–73; 1755), was three times Grand Vizier, and successively defended Bosnia against the Habsburgs in July of 1737. Others include Muhsinzade Abdullah Pasha, Bender Commander against Münnich and the Russians, briefly Grand Vizier in late 1737, and İ vaz Mehmed Pasha, Commander of Vidin, Grand Vizier in 1739–40, who proved both a competent commander against the Habsburgs at Grocka, and a wily and tenacious negotiator with Austrian representative Neipperg over the surrender of Belgrade. 
 Warfare, however, particularly burdensome in the Balkans in this first half of the eighteenth century, accelerated both the redistribution of tax revenues to local power sources, and the decentralisation of governance. By the end of the period, local elites were chiefly reponsible for manning and supplying the army, and in some cases, for defending the borders almost single-handedly. Local families profited from the needs of the state, and their challenges to Ottoman sovereignty itself by 1800 are well documented, but new allegiances to the dynasty were also created, a process of Ottomanisation which allowed for the nineteenth century bid for absolutism under Mahmud II (1807–39) and Abdülhamid II (1876–1908). Many of the revolts of the period represent the struggle not just against Ottoman oppression, but also the rivalry between older elites, such as the centrally-appointed and locally-despised Ottoman governors mentioned previously, and the newer gentry who profited from proving their reliability as suppliers of men and food. Balkan and Arab provincial areas shared such trends, with nuances of difference driven by the ethnicity and religion of their respective populations, and the degree to which local Janissaries played a part. 
 The centuries-old gradual nomadisation of eastern Anatolia, for example, was exacerbated in this period by the dissolving Safavid–Ottoman borders and the new alliances of tribal with urban elites. In the first half of the eighteenth century the Ottomans engaged in a long struggle with Nadir Shah and the Afsharids in the 1720s and 30s, a struggle finally settled only in the treaty of 1747. War against fellow Muslims, however heretical, was never popular, so major campaigns could seldom be mounted to the east. The obdurance of the Janissaries in Istanbul, who expected little profit from warfare in the east, proved an effective deterrent. This led to the increasing reliance of the grand viziers on local military leaders, such as the Jalili family in Mosul, who were responsible for preventing the Persian occupation of Baghdad in 1743. 3 The breakup of Safavid hegemony preoccupied not just the Ottomans, but also the Russians in the Caucasus. 
 Austria’s position and ambitions 
 The Austrian surrender of Belgrade to the Ottomans in 1739 is much debated among historians. In spite of a better-organised and financed standing army, the Habsburg failure in high command, the demands of European theatres of war, and a considerable underestimation of Ottoman recuperative powers, led to the loss of face in the treaty of Belgrade, which became an impetus for the reforms of Maria Theresa, especially after Frederick the Great invaded Silesia the following year. A consensus appears to assign mediocrity to much of the Austrian military leadership of the eighteenth century, the notable exception being the triumphs of Eugene of Savoy at Varadin in 1716 and Belgrade in 1717. 4 Without generals of the stature of Eugene, who died in April, 1736, Habsburg military command floundered. Significant reforms would not be undertaken in Vienna until after 1748, once the disastrous confrontations with Frederick the Great and the Prussians had revealed the shortcomings of an organisation relying on federative arrangements with the provincial estates. Prussian and Russian recruitment systems outclassed the Austrian, and under-funding was a chronic problem. Hochedlinger’s study emphasises the defensive nature of Austrian strategy, which varied according to whether they faced an eastern or western enemy. The eastern front was characterised by ferocity which was exacerbated by the so-called ‘locust strategy’ of regional armies. 5 
 The Habsburgs were engaged on both western and eastern fronts in the first half of the century, a circumstance which drove much of their strategic planning of the period. By 1739, the need to incorporate and stabilise newly-acquired territories such as Italy and the Banat (Teme ş var), generated a realignment of Austrian diplomacy by mid-century. The ‘diplomatic revolution’ of 1756, when traditional rivals France and Austria joined forces to the astonishment of Europe, was contingent upon a gradual withdrawal of the Habsburgs from much of the west of their empire. The Franco-Austrian alliance itself is certainly emblematic of the changes in the Habsburg geopolitical position in western Europe, which was enabled by an earlier reconciliation of Bourbon–Habsburg interests in the 1752 Aranjuez pact. 
 Justified concern over the rise of Prussia (Hohenzollern) was certainly influential in forcing a reversal of alliances, as were the world-wide British–French conflicts which were pending. Closer to home, the Prussian threat imposed uneasy alliances with Russia, the new northern giant with eyes on expansion south and west. The Hungarian bid for independence in the Ferenc II Rákóczi war which opened the century was an additional incentive to consolidate imperial holdings, especially once the Banat was surrendered to Austria by the Ottomans in 1718. 6 
 Austrian fear of Russian expansion and of ‘Orthodox internationalism’ meant that adhering to the Russo-Austrian defensive alliance of 1726 would be tempered by the desire to keep the Russians from the permanent occupation of the Danubian Principalities, even if that required supporting the survival of the Ottomans. 7 Much hesitation and ambivalence in Austrian strategic thinking and diplomacy is evident in the disengagement from the Balkans in 1716, 1739 and again in 1791. When Frederick II struck Saxony in 1756, marking the beginning of the Seven Years War, the Prussians inaugurated the first great age of global imperialism, which France, Britain and their allies played out in India, America and the Middle East as well as Europe. 8 
 Russian expansion and the pre-modern impasse 
