 A particular genius at logistical systems is generally acknowledged as part of the Ottoman success even well into the period under discussion. While the story of changes and dissolution of the system belong to later chapters, a few observations seem in order here. Overabundance of both men and supplies was one of the characteristics of the army organisation, and one that might have had an impact on the outcome of particular battles, such as Zenta in 1697. 71 Excess of manpower, in particular, is one of the complaints of Ottoman observers in the eighteenth century, a phenomenon which tended to overwhelm even well thought-out supply systems. Commanders and provincial pashas came with large entourages, in imitation of the grand vizierial staff, which included the bureau chief of most of the central offices of the bureaucracy. Campsites were also plagued with followers of all stripes, reckoned in the thousands, who set up stalls and coffee shops. By contrast, though camp followers were a persistent problem in European armies of the eighteenth century, frugality and mobility had become an essential part of their military strategy. 
 The Ottoman soldier, even at the worst of times, was often better fed than his opponents. Sharing a meal with one’s soldiers remained an important part of Ottoman military ceremonial, and keeping the Janissaries well fed and supplied was a constant of Ottoman campaign strategy. Bread and/or biscuit were imperatives, with rice and mutton, and barley for individual horses and pack animals forming part of the rations. For the 1683 campaign, this probably meant as much as 32,000 lbs of meat and 60,000 loaves of bread per day to maintain the troops. 72 In 1768, the initial requisition of biscuit ( peksimed ) was for 22,400,000 kilograms from Istanbul, Gallipoli and İ sakc ı , the main supply centre at the mouth of the Danube. These central depots were supplied by biscuit produced by villages all over the empire. 73 
 Camels, mules, water buffalo and oxen drew both supply wagons and artillery, the largest of the cannon requiring up to twenty oxen. The successful Baghdad campaign of 1638–39 required 77,444 camels carrying 542,113 kile (almost 14,000,000 kilograms) of grain, primarily barley for fodder, in territories notorious for their harshness and scarcity. 74 In one report for 1769, the Chief Drover reported that 962,353 camels and 52,578 mules were leased for the campaign season, the camels assigned to the imperial army and the grand vizier, while the mules were primarily for the transport of supplies. Of these camels, 48,306 were distributed to the entourage and officials of the grand vizier alone. 75 
 Supporting the numbers described above forced early on the creation of a system of warehouses and well-stocked way-stations ( menzils ), a responsibility of the towns and villages of the area, which were theoretically paid at fixed prices for the goods they brought to the army, or whose taxes reflected their obligation to military supply. This is in keeping with the general principle of communal obligation, or guarantee, which operated in all transactions between the state and subjects. Villagers were obliged to stand surety for local militias, should they desert, for way-stations, for grain, for wagons, for drovers, among a myriad other expectations around pre-modern communities and warfare. There were just as many opportunities for the entrepreneur as there was the potential for ruin of village economies. The way-stations’ primary purpose was to stable spare horses to maintain speedy communications with Istanbul. For the post-1700 period, military supply and its impact on the local economies is a vastly under-studied field, rife with historians’ assumptions about extractions, devastation and oppression. One late account for the way-stations on the road from K ı rkkilise in Thrace to the mouth of the Danube at İ smail, broken into ten stages gauged at 97 hours march, records both the central state and village contributions ( imdadiye , campaign tax). The total imdadiye was 49,500 kuru ş , and the additional central treasury contribution was 34,500 kuru ş : not exactly matching funds, but not insignificant. Villages would have been required to stock the way-stations with other supplies as well as horses. By 1700, pack animals were supplied on the basis of rent and wages of drovers. By 1800, cash substitution and market prices had become the order of the day for much of what had previously been exchanged in kind, and as tax relief. This discussion of the impact of imperial campaigns on local populations will be continued in subsequent chapters. 76 