 The expansion of the Russian empire which begins in this period is truly remarkable. Great distances, untamed, wide and depopulated territories, as well as fluctuating loyalties of Orthodox populations, added to the complexities of establishing a military presence on the Danube. By the end of the century, Russian garrisons lined the frontier from the Baltic to Black Sea with ports on both. 9 The Great Northern War, which ended in 1721, established the Russians on the Baltic. Azov, the strategic post on the north and easterly end of the Black Sea, like Belgrade at the western end, passed back and forth between belligerents, but was the one substantial gain for the Russians in the 1739 Belgrade Treaty. Odessa was the new Russian port at the western end of the Black Sea at the close of the eighteenth century, a project made possible by the unilateral annexation of the Crimea in 1783. Security, however tenuous, on the Far Asian border was also achieved by an agreement to consolidate the South Siberian frontier with China in 1717, by basic Chinese ‘indifference’ to the Russians in the period, and by the voluntary submission of some of the Kazakh steppe nomads to Russian hegemony (in 1730). 10 Thus, much like the Habsburg version, the first half of the Romanov eighteenth century passed in the consolidation of borders. Both the Habsburgs and the Romanovs participated in the breakup of Poland, and one of the reasons for the Ottoman declaration of war against Russia in 1768 was most certainly the fear of the Russian eventual occupation of Poland and western Ukraine. By the end of the century, it was generally conceded that no one country could or should control the contested territories, an impasse dramatically demonstrated on many bloody battlefields, and mandating the continuation of balance of power diplomacy as the ‘Eastern Question’. 
 It is within this context that we need to examine Ottoman successes and failure in the first half of the century, that is, before Habsburg and Romanov participation in the European wars at mid-century (1740–48, War of Austrian Succession and 1756–63, the Seven Years War) which by all accounts inaugurated a different age of warfare and widened the technological and organisational gap between Europe and the Ottomans. Frederick the Great, in particular, learned a valuable lesson: before 1759, he paid little attention to rising Russian might; afterwards, he cautioned his brother Prince Henry about Catherine II’s potential ‘to make Europe tremble’. 11 The undeniable, single-handed victories by Catherine II’s armies over the Ottomans from 1768, however, brooked no interference, and the issue of equilibrium was a moot point. European territorial and diplomatic considerations thereafter stretched to Istanbul. 
 Centralisation of the control of violence 
 Peter the Great’s military reforms began in 1699 with the elimination of the traditional infantry forces, the streltsy . They were gradually replaced by a conscript army, based on service for life. The new conscripts were drawn primarily from Russian serfs. ‘[Peter] initiated the change from a semi-standing, semi-regular army to a standing, regular army by disbanding much of the Moscow garrison, converting 24,000 southern frontier infantry into taxpaying farmers, and ordering the raising of a new army of three divisions of nine regiments each. Attaining peace with Turkey on one day, he used his new army to attack Swedish possessions on the next.’ 12 This system, in spite of its cruelty, generally served the Russian war aims well. The Romanovs, like the Ottomans, had a ready supply of recruits, the former conscripted, the latter voluntary. Both sides appeared immune to huge battlefield losses, something which ‘amazed and horrified contemporaries’. 13 Peter reorganised the military and civil bureaucracy in the 1722 Table of Ranks, though the extent and effectiveness of his military and civil revolution is still debated. Russian military command in the Seven Years War has been described as ‘uninspired and notably cautious’, 14 much as in the Habsburg case. The middle ranks of command in that war, however, included future brilliant commanders of the Danubian frontier in 1769 and 1770, such as P.A. Rumiantsev. 
 Other areas of military organisation did not receive the same kind of attention. The lack of a consolidated supply system failed the Russians repeatedly on campaign, demonstrably so in 1711 and at Ochakov in 1738, and even in the Seven Years War, when famished Russian soldiers, forced to haul wagons like draught animals, with nothing but oak leaves to eat, were dying daily by the hundreds. 15 The settlement of Ukraine in the second half of the eighteenth century, the extended fortress line, and access to warehouses in newly acquired territories did much to alleviate the chronic Russian shortages, but could not prevent the patterns of pillage and scorched earth tactics which were prevalent parts of pre-modern warfare on the Danube, less so on the Habsburg than on the Russo-Ottoman frontiers. 
 Peter the Great instituted a central military command (by 1718 the Military College), one of the most influential of his military reforms. In the late seventeenth century, there had been eighteen military chancelleries in Russia. 16 Harnessing warfare with an appropriate bureaucracy was a feature of eighteenth-century European politics, and the lack of it one of the chief defects of the Austrian structure in mid-century. In the Russian context, centralisation of command was part of Peter the Great’s redefinition of the bureaucratic and military obligations of the aristocracy. 
 The consolidation of Austrian arms 
 Prince Eugene of Savoy was responsible for the reorganisation of the Austrian military as well as for its brilliant successes on the battlefield. As president of the Imperial War Council from 1703 until his death in 1736, Eugene had an enormous influence on the course of affairs in Austria. He introduced regimental and disciplinary reforms comparable to those elsewhere in Europe, although from this historical distance his legacy is viewed as rather more conservative, resisting significant structural changes. Revenues increased by the acquisition of new territories in the Treaties of Utrecht–Rastatt (1713–14) also allowed for maintaining a larger standing army, one which stood at over 300,000 by 1790. 17 With such renewed forces, Austria was able to defeat the Turks and make further gains in Serbia and the Banat by the mid-eighteenth century, but suffered reverses because of indecisive command and conflicting aims of the participants in what was still essentially, if waning, coalition warfare of the Holy Roman Empire. Consolidation was impeded with the acquisition of further border territories, and populations accustomed to the clientage policies of Ottoman-style sovereignty. Persuasion, especially of the Hungarian nobility, required much alteration to the Habsburg imperial premise, no more evident than in the creation and elaboration of the military corridor ( Militärgrenze ). 18 
 Ottoman administration of warfare of the period is best illustrated by focusing on contemporary campaigns: Prut against the Russians in 1711; the Morea (Peloponnesus) in 1715, and select confrontations of the 1736–39 Russo-Austrian–Ottoman War followed by a discussion of the Treaty of Belgrade. 
 Origins of the Prut campaign 
 Frederick the Great once asked Ottoman diplomat Ahmed Resmi (d. 1783) why the Ottomans had treated the Russians so leniently on the Prut River in 1711. Resmi replied cautiously, as one might expect, stressing the sultan’s generosity and satisfaction with the restoration of the Black Sea fortress line by Peter’s surrender of Azov and the surrounding fortresses. In a further comment, Resmi noted that Frederick had good reason to question Ottoman strategy, having been extremely pressed himself by the Russians in recent times. 19 
 The tales of leniency, conspiracy, betrayal and bribery which accompany almost every version of the Prut campaign of 1711 make it worth re-examining from some contemporary sources, as a way of entering the world of Ottoman, Russian and Austrian warfare in the first half of the eighteenth century. The story involves two audacious and impetuous military adventurers, Charles XII (1697–1718) of Sweden and Peter the Great of Russia, whose long struggles over the Baltic Sea and territories from Livonia to the Ukraine involved Poles, Cossacks, Tatars, Mold-avians, and ultimately the Ottomans. The European context of their headlong confrontations, culminating in the famous battle of Poltava on 9 July 1709, when Peter’s victorious troops outnumbered those of Charles XII by almost four to one, is well known, and need not be reiterated here. 
 The Swedish monarch took refuge in Ottoman territory after Poltava, with a few of his Polish allies, where he was subsidised by the Ottoman government and installed in the border fortress of Bender. His natural, if unreliable, allies were the Crimean Tatars, who had lost the Russian subsidy they felt their due by the treaty of Karlowitz and were anxious to regain their influence and status as the frontier zone between Ottoman and Russian. 
 These two forces have often been credited with forcing Ahmed III (1703–30) to war with Peter, a common assumption made about Tatar influence throughout the eighteenth century. While Tatar politics and refugees in Ottoman territories considerably influenced the Ottoman– Russian confrontations in the latter half of the century, in this instance it was less so. Even though the Tatar contingent of 70,000 horsemen was integral to the Ottoman victory, their demands were ignored in the treaty which followed. There are two other important aspects of Ottoman involvement in this campaign: one was the restoration and maintenance of the fortress line from Belgrade to Azov; the other was the repositioning of the relationship with the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia. When Moldavian Prince Dimitri Cantemir, a presumed loyal ally to several sultans, deserted to the Romanovs, it must have been particularly galling. 20 
 Cantemir’s own history of the period records Ahmed III’s concerns. More disturbing to the sultan than Charles XII or the Tatars was the news that Peter was building a great fleet at Taganrog, especially as the Russians, ‘who had been before entirely ignorant of naval affairs, had now gained such knowledge therein, that they ventured to send their ambassadors to Constantinople in ships of war.’ The sultan was of the opinion that this czar aspired to be Alexander the Great and had to be ‘chastised’; otherwise ‘he will cause trouble when we are engaged elsewhere.’ Ahmed III was also persuaded that Constantin Brancoveanu (d. 1714) of Wallachia was plotting against him with the Russians. Cantemir himself was sent in late November 1710 to replace Nicholas Mavrocordato in Moldavia and seize Brancoveanu in Wallachia. Among other things, Cantemir was promised Wallachia in perpetuity and assured that he would not have to pay the annual tribute ( pi ş ke ş ) while he was master of Moldavia. His grievance, when he arrived on the scene and learned that, on the contrary, he must not only pay the pi ş ke ş but also raise troops, build bridges and give aid to Charles XII, is palpable on the page: ‘[P]erceiving how little faith was to be expected from the infidels, [he] throws off his attachment to the Turkish interest … [and] sends a trusty messenger to the Czar, with an offer of himself and his Principality.’ 21 
