 Another category of provincially-mustered troops which became a common feature of the battlefront in the eighteenth century were the local regiments (sometimes called yerli kulu , or yerliye ) raised by governors and other officials of the provinces. The categories often overlap, and the distinctions are more obvious in the seventeenth than the eighteenth century, when central control over the provinces became more and more tenuous. These latter soldiers, recruited locally, became the private armies of ambitious local lords. 36 
 The evolution from sipahis to private armies was accelerated by the Ottoman use of local irregular bands, mercenaries variously known as levend, sar ı ca and sekban , as early as the sixteenth century. 37 Sar ı ca and sekban refer to armed infantry musketeers, similar to the militias of Europe. They were drawn from among the levend , a term which originally connoted armed, vagrant, and landless peasants, and then evolved into its military usage. All functioned as ‘independent soldiery companies’. 38 The mobilisation and demobilisation of these companies have been linked, as with the sipahis , to major revolts in the seventeenth century. Such roving bands, when organised into fighting forces in the eighteenth century, were called household levend , or state levend , the distinction being whether or not they were part of the provincial governors’ forces ( kapu halk ı ), paid from provincial revenues, or directly by the state ( miri levend ). 39 By the 1720s, the provincial governor was expected to arrive on the battlefield with 200 of his private entourage ( kapu halk ı ) and 1,000 to 2,000 recruits, infantry and cavalry, the latter increasingly paid out of the inner treasury of the sultan. Specific battlefield statistics are still in want of study, but between 1683 and 1769, the number of mustered state militia-men, paid directly from the centre, rose from roughly 10,000 to 100,000, a remarkable change in the style of recruitment of manpower for the Ottoman army. 40 
 This came about largely because of the need for the Ottomans to organise provincial security in cooperation with the state-appointed religious official, the kadi , to curb the abuses of the military administrative class and to control countryside violence. 41 That imperative had sent Janissaries into the provinces in the attempt to curb local revolts. I have alluded to the struggle to establish local notable households which was endemic in the eighteenth century, a struggle if not generated, certainly exacerbated by Ottoman attempts to maintain order. It was common practice for the Ottomans to eliminate the militia-turned-bandit by arming the countryside for its own protection, and then enlisting the resulting bands for the next campaign, what has been described as the Ottoman effectiveness in ‘embodying within itself the potential forces of contention’. 42 
 In military terms, this process resembles to a degree what John Lynn, in studying the policies of Louis XIII and XIV, has called the evolution from aggregate contract (‘off the shelf’) to ‘state commission’ armies. 43 State commission armies, according to Lynn, represented a stage between rapidly raised, unreliable contingency services and trained, standing troops, also a transition to conscription rather than contract. In the Ottoman context, I would argue, the loss of control over the distribution of the Janissary and timariot entitlements forced the evolution of a system which resembled the Bourbon case, especially after the crises around the sultan in 1700 determined that devolution was to continue. Over the next hundred years, the increased use of such troops was instrumental in the Ottoman ability to make the transition to a (modern) conscript army. Of course, in the Ottoman context the reliability and loyalty of such troops was an acute problem, especially as determined by the financial stability of the state, and its willingness to redistribute provincial revenues for the benefit of local officials. Two factors militated against making possible a full transition to a ‘state commissioned’ army: justifiable Ottoman paranoia of all forms of banditry and rebels, combined with an elite disdain for the upstart. Both impressions are reinforced by examining surviving Ottoman archival documentation, and by the official and semi-official chronicles that label all insubordination as rebellious. 
 Nationalist historiography of the Balkans and Republican Turkey once prevented a more realistic picture of the role and manipulation of the Ottoman rural flotsam and jetsam from emerging. Consider, for example, the word haydut , represented in Bulgarian historiography as a nationalist movement, ‘… the longest-lasting resistance to Ottoman rule in the Bulgarian lands … a symbol of the national spirit.’ 44 Ottoman attempts to curb their excesses were continuous for two hundred years, but just as assuredly, those bands represented potential cannon fodder, and Habsburg, Romanov and Ottoman made use of them at various times. Ambitious local leaders also did so, and it is this tango of ambivalence that so characterises Ottoman eighteenth-century history. From 1700 to 1826, there is scant evidence of Ottoman attempts at settlement of borderlands for the purpose of defence, though, as we will see, the remaining lower Danube fortresses were regularly reinforced and refortified. The town of Vidin was reorganised shortly after 1699, for example, as it had become the pivotal fortress on the western end of the Belgrade–Azov line. 
 Various degrees of incorporation of rebellious ethnic forces into their regimental structures distinguish the Habsburg and Romanovs from the Ottomans in this later period. The Cossacks, frontier colonists par excellence and a free population that escaped serfdom by settling and defending the fringes of the Russian empire, could serve as one illustration. The process of settlement of the southern regions of Muscovy was accelerated after the Russo-Ottoman War of 1677–81, when new infantry regiments successfully defended Ukraine against the Ottomans. For example, the Russian foot soldiers in Belgorod region numbered under 8,000 in 1674; after 1681, the regiments included 17,000 men. Russian Field Marshal Rumiantsev is credited with reorganising the Cossacks into his regimental structure in the 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman War, part of an extensive Cossack settlement system implemented by the Romanovs and often vigorously resisted. 45 A plethora of historical obligations, based on hereditary service and land entitlements, conflicted with the new military demands in a territory that was sparsely populated and agriculturally poor. It also forced considerable negotiation between the state and the southern tier which was only partially solved by relocation of Russian and German civilian populations into the province of New Russia in the late mid-eighteenth century. 46 
 The Habsburg military border was similar in its initial functional use as a buffer zone in ill-defined border regions, and as a long-term mechanism for drawing unruly and mixed ethnic populations into the imperial orbit, and settling them on abundantly available land. Military service was tied to land allotments in Croatian territories as early as 1535. Settlers were given basic autonomy, freedom to practise their own religion, and tax relief in exchange for permanent military service. Two regions developed: one centred on Karlstadt fortress between the Adriatic Sea and the Sava River; the other was Varadin between the Sava and Drava Rivers. The command of these border troops was regulated by the Hofskriegsrat first in Vienna, and then decentralised in the Inner Austrian administration in Graz. The troops numbered 5,913 in 1573. In the 1683–99 war, they served in an auxiliary capacity, raided Bosnia and extended their (and Habsburg) control over parts of southern Croatia. A similar system was established along the Tisza, Maros and Danube Rivers, the Slavonian Military Corridor in the Habsburg acquisitions after 1699, mostly made up of Serbian Orthodox refugees, who were also added to older districts, and represented a considerable light infantry force. Eighteenth-century reforms gradually incorporated Grenzer units into the imperial army, and the military frontier became a cheap source of trained troops for the state. Some 88,000 Grenzers served in the Seven Years War. Before its dissolution, the military border system extended 1,000 miles, 20 to 60 miles deep, from the Adriatic Sea to the Carpathian Mountains. 47 
 Survival strategies 
 To suggest that Russian or Austrian frontier strategies were more successful than the Ottoman version is to lose sight of the human cost. The life of the Grenzer was miserable; they and their families ‘lived continually on the brink of starvation’. 48 Attempts to incorporate the Orthodox Grenzers into Habsburg forces faced stiff resistance to the Catholic proselytising and revocation of special rights which accompanied such incorporation, and provoked rebellions in 1695, 1714, 1719, and 1728. In 1735, a serious insurrection in Varadin was directly related to attempts at conversion. The loss of frontier freedoms represented by more closely-regulated regimental structures was the root cause of a Slavonia-wide revolt in 1765. 49 
 Tsarist colonisation of the Crimea and Caucasus was predicated on the same disdain and contempt for non-Russians as attributed to Ottoman elites, coupled with an intolerance for Muslims that meant the voluntary and involuntary exile of hundreds of thousands of Tatars and other Caucasian Muslim groups into Ottoman territory after 1783, when the Crimean Peninsula was annexed by Catherine II. 50 Apostasy to Islam of baptised Tatars ( Kriashens ) in the Volga region is an example of a strategy of resistance that occurred throughout the nineteenth century. 51 
 Subversive strategies abounded, and the lines drawn by ethnicity, style of life (nomad, mountaineer, bandit), and religious persuasion of such groups in the period under discussion are ambiguous and multi-layered. This suggests that struggle was as much over centralisation and loss of autonomy as over religion. Military imperatives can be a great leveller, especially in the service of consolidation of territory. A standing army required a census: conscription and forced settlement often went hand in hand, although military colonies were freer than mobilised regiments, especially in Russia. Nonetheless, the ideology of unity and exhortation of Romanov and Habsburg, however fictive, was couched in religious garb: inclusion (‘citizenship’) implied Orthodoxy in the Romanov context, as it implied Catholicism in the Habsburg realms, and conversion was a matter of eighteenth-century dynastic strategy. Muslimness was assumed if one served in the Ottoman forces, a badge of exclusivity, if one was in the Ottoman circle, but conversion was simply not part of Ottoman Balkan military strategy in the eighteenth century as it so clearly was in the other two dynasties. 
