

 Plate 5    Members of various pre-reform Ottoman forces (Chevket Pacha (Mahmond ), L’organisation et ces uniformes de l’amée Ottomanne (Depuis sa création jusqu’à nos jours), Vol. 1, 1900 ). 
 The surviving Janissary rolls are a reminder of a well-documented problem of controlling registration in the famed corps: for example in 1688, the rolls were reduced by 20,000 names; 25 again in 1771, 30,000 names were stripped from inaccurate, often corrupted registers, to mention only two examples. 26 In reality, reforming grand viziers had always to contend with inflated muster rolls, often benefitting themselves from pocketing salaries of non-existent soldiers. Sultan and grand vizier alike faced the increasing debt burden not just of army wages, but also of the aforementioned accession gift, what had become the obligatory contractual agreement between the Janissaries and any new sultan who took the throne. The scale of that one-time payout simply ballooned. Uzunçar ş ı l ı gives several examples: in 1687, 4,557 kese were distributed: roughly one-third came from the sultan’s inner treasury, and two-thirds from the annual Egyptian tribute to Istanbul. At Ahmed II’s (1691–95) accession, because of the war, instead of a two akçe increase to salary, and a 3,000 akçe gift, 6 kuru ş (720 akçe ) was distributed to each of 17,000 Janissaries, with a promise of the remainder when they returned home. Sar ı Mehmed Pasha, Chief Financial Officer six times between 1703 and 1716, was said to have melted the palace silver to make up the accession payment for Ahmed III (1703–30). Mahmud I (1730–54) distributed 29,530 kese akçe . 27 Obviously, this was a ruinous policy, which fell by the wayside as the economic crisis deepened at the end of the century, but the payment for valour, special duties, captives, wounds, and numbers killed in battle continued until the mid-nineteenth century. The Janissaries embodied a pre-modern social welfare system which extended throughout Ottoman society. Small wonder, then, that there was a clamour to join the ranks as volunteers, and a vigorous resistance to change. 
 Seeing beyond the Janissaries has been one of the largest challenges to traditional Ottoman historiography, especially in the eighteenth-century period, when they seemed to be everywhere. For most of the principal campaigns, however, the palace corps represented only one-fifth of the assembled forces, which were overwhelmingly composed of cavalry rather than infantry as our period opens. For the campaigns of the second half of the eighteenth century, the Janissary corps had to be rebulit by adding raw recruits on the march. 
 Janissary command and discipline 
 The Janissary Agha was in charge of an organisation which was a law unto itself, but as was previously noted, he was appointed by, and subject to, the authority of the office of the grand vizier, who was considered the sultan’s absolute deputy until the dissolution of the Janissaries in 1826. Within the organisation itself, promotion was based almost entirely on seniority and favouritism, as such influences were pervasive throughout the Ottoman system. It proved fairly easy to buy one’s son into the corps, and hence, promotion likely followed much the same pattern. As we will see in later chapters, the development of a general staff, and the inculcation of military merit and discipline in the officer corps, were the least successful of the reforms even after 1826, because of the entrenched resistance to the training and educating of non-palace, i.e. untrustworthy (and unknown), men. 
 Military regulations were included in the kanunnames of the sultans, quite distinct from the shar‘ia. Military justice was overseen by the two military judges ( kaziaskers ) of Anatolia and Rumelia, with the latter presumed to be the senior of the two. For the period under discussion, we have one example of the military regulations, called Eyyubî Efendi Kanûnnâmesi , after the presumed author, about whom we know next to nothing. From internal evidence, it would appear to have been compiled in the reign of Mehmed IV (1648–87). A very comprehensive description of Janissary rules and financing, it also includes a description of the internal discipline of the Janissaries. Miscreants were subjected to shaming and the bastinado, applied to the feet. The severity of the crime determined the number of strokes. Very severe crimes (not specified) called for clapping the offender in chains. If execution was warranted, this was carried out in a humiliating fashion. The Janissary was choked by an executioner, and unceremoniously dumped into the sea, with the death formally announced by firing a cannon. 28 There is no other evidence, in this manual at least, about other forms of military discipline: attendance at roll call; restriction to barracks, even training and drilling. Archery practice was known, as the sultans often participated in such displays, but all other forms of military discipline seem to have fallen by the wayside by 1700. We will take up the attempts to reinstate the former strict and effective discipline with the discussion of the reforms of Selim III and Mahmud II. 
 Provincial forces: sipahis 
 The oldest element of the Ottoman forces was the military organisation based on the timar , the land grant (usufruct) to a sipahi who received his estates in return for military service, but who retained the right to the fief for his lifetime only. The sipahi’s position as a feudal landlord was ‘precarious and revocable’. 29 The main obligation of the ordinary sipahi was to report to campaign in person. The size of the timar determined how many squires, armed retainers and tents he was required to supply. Sipahis were also obliged to furnish their own horses, arms and sustenance, and soldiers from each sancak often collectively organised their own supplies. Governors of the provinces were responsible for mobilising the sipahis for campaigns, and army headquarters maintained registers, updated as each cavalryman arrived on the battlefront. Those who did not report were in danger of losing their entitlement, initially temporarily; as time went by, and more and more timariots failed to appear, the authorities responded by striking the defaulters from the lists. The demise of the timar system was bound up with the changing nature of warfare, as well as the parsimony of the dynasty, slow to respond to the changing economic condition of the provincial forces. 
 The story of the dissolution of the timar system starts far earlier than 1700, in fact, as part of Ottoman realisation of the need for more massed firepower against the Austrians. The evolution to favour infantry and massed formal battles in western European arenas was not as evident in Danubian warfare. The Hungarian campaigns of 1684–99, for example, involved a series of sieges, with occasional massed open-field battles. We will see the same pattern unfold in the 1736–39 war in the contest over Belgrade. It is the case, however, that Ottoman officials were aware of the advantage of trained infantry as early as the Long War (1593–1606) between the Habsburgs and the Ottomans. Arming the peasantry, first as regiments of soldiers during that struggle, and then as provincial militias to protect themselves against rebel bands, complicated the scene. The relationship between displaced timariots , or other demobilised combatants, and the very serious extended rebellions (the Celali revolts) that were endemic between 1591 and 1611 and episodic thereafter, has long been a source of discussion among Ottoman historians. Ottoman fear of an armed countryside is palpable in the documents that survive which were issued in an attempt to control the distribution and use of handguns. 30 Sorting out how these potential soldiers were reabsorbed into the system, or forced into banditry, is one of the tasks of the military historian looking at the evolution of the Ottoman army after 1650. It has proved no less difficult for European military historians in like contexts. 31 
 The more serious problem for Ottoman stability was that the timar land could no longer support the cavalryman’s obligations to report to campaign. By the end of the seventeenth century, the revenues of entitlement from the timar were not sufficient. Many timariots simply could not afford the cost of campaigning. Those who did turn up for a campaign were ill-equipped to face the mercenary firepower of the Habsburgs, were increasingly reluctant to fight, and the first to want to leave to return to their holdings. The question of who owned the timar lands became decidedly muddy after the early 1600s, and the right to distribute them more diffuse. The tendency was to convert the fiefs into tax farms, and large numbers fell out of the jurisdiction of the sipahis , part of a general trend of the seventeenth century, by which revenue collection devolved to emerging gentry households, consistent with similar trends in other parts of the early modern world. 32 Beneficiaries of the evolving system were the imperial household, administrative officials and Janissaries, the latter coincidentally, who, as noted above, were sent into the provinces to quell the Celali revolts; by the mid-seventeenth century, reassigned timars regularly went to members of the Janissary corps, sometimes in lieu of pay. 
 Sipahis were initially drawn from the earliest and central Ottoman territories of Anatolia and parts of Rumelia. Tributary and frontier territories added at a later date were governed more loosely, or submitted annual tax revenues, called salyaneli . Here again, as with the Janissaries, we must be cautious about figures: during the long Süleymanic age (1520–66), sipahis numbered around 80,000; by the early 1600s, their number had dropped to half that amount. A realistic count of timariots would hover around 50,000 for smaller campaigns, and 80,000 for sultan-led campaigns, which were far fewer for most of the seventeenth century and non-existent in the eighteenth. 33 It would appear to tally with Marsigli’s figure for the field army mobilised from the provincial timariots for 1683, roughly 65,000. 34 How many of them showed up is of course another story. A hundred years later, Ahmed Resmi noted a few stragglers in 1769, old men calling themselves ‘ timarl ı s ’, encumbered with too much baggage and too many retainers. No official Ottoman counts of soldiers for the 1768–74 war includes timariots . Instead, Janissaries were continuously demanding that they be given timars , as supplementary income. 35 Most of the remaining timars had long been converted into taxes to replace military service, or otherwise absorbed into tax revenue farms, and no longer represented soldiers required to report to the battlefront. 
 Frontier defence systems 
 What happened, then, to the potential military manpower represented in the sipahis in the century following the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699? This remains one of the most vexing problems in Ottoman military history. The broad band of frontier territory on all fronts required numerous levels of contracts for particular services for a given campaign, sometimes on a permanent tributary basis, for protection and/or tax relief, sometimes on a contingency basis. The latter might include siegework diggers (sappers), crews to repair roads and build bridges, or transport crews, i.e., wagons and drovers, as auxiliaries. These needs were most often met on the local level, by recruitment or coercion, often negotiable as part of the tax burden on villages and towns. The Ottoman sources use the term serhad kulu , ‘frontier troops’, sometimes for this kind of mobilisation, which might include cavalry frontier guards and permanent garrison troops, as well as campaign-contingent auxiliary corps. We will return to them shortly. 
