

 Plate 6    Examples of Ottoman transport circa 1700 (Marsigli ) (L’etat militaire de l’empire Ottoman: ses progrès et sa décadence/par Mr. le comte de Marsigli. A La Have: Chez Pierre Gosse & Jean Neaulme, Pierre de Hondt, Adrien Moetjens: A. Amsterdam: Chez Herm Uytwerf, Franc. Changuion, 1732 ). 
 At least until 1800, representatives from all the guilds of Istanbul were required to accompany the army on campaign. In an age when all expected to be tapped to support the campaigns in some fashion, the community of merchants and tradesmen were obligated to do their share, both by producing a collective levy, and by accompanying the troops, with a tent and goods to sell. In theory, they stood to make a profit on the battlefront. For the proposed Persian campaign of 1730, for example, one or two representatives of 28 trades with 85 tents were required to report for duty with the cash contribution of each guild, called the ordu akçesi . Included were leather workers, saddlemakers, butchers, bakers, grocers who supplied dried and fresh nuts and vegetables, mattress and blanket makers, soup makers, and blacksmiths of various sorts, who produced horseshoes, utensils and cauldrons, etc. In 1730, however, the trades collective, while willing to produce the required levy, officially protested against the misuse of the funds by the government when the campaign was delayed, and demanded the return of their ordu akçesi in the Istanbul court – one of the underlying explanations for their participation in the Patrona Halil revolt of 1730, which is almost invariably described as a reactionary revolt of Muslim fanatics against the westernisation of the court of Ahmed III (1703–30). 77 The targets of the mob were indeed the fancy, western-style pleasure palaces of the Ottoman court, but the real issue was elite excess and inequity. Later chapters will assess the call for reform represented by the post-1700 revolts in the capital of the empire, and the success or failure of the Ottoman bureaucracy in responding to the crises. 
 Campaign financing 
 Imperial household budgets and the general financing to sustain the dynasty have received considerable scholarly attention in the last decade. Before turning to the campaigns of the eighteenth century, I would like to point to a number of the significant trends which recent studies have elucidated. First and foremost, it must be stated that all Ottoman reform efforts were directed at resisting the growth of rival power bases, which were considered a threat, and thus the fiction of miri or state land was maintained, in order to mask the real growth of private property in the eighteenth century. Tax devolution to provincial tax farmers shifted from annual to lifetime revenue farms ( malikane ), bid for at periodic auctions. 78 This had the dual effect of further reducing the actual return to the imperial treasury and creating a gentry class of brokers in the countryside, who were powerful enough to negotiate their share in the war effort, be it for men or supplies. While full information is scarce and may never prove to be completely recoverable, the central treasury budgets for the 1500–1700 period appear not to have risen or fallen dramatically, causing Murphey to argue for a degree of continuity unaffected by warfare, although he does acknowledge that the sultan’s Inner Treasury (Privy Purse) tended to be tapped to cover campaign expenses. 79 The budgets extant for the 1768–74 war period, again fragmentary, indicate significant minting of coins, and the financing of the provincial non-Janissary militias almost exclusively from Mustafa III’s (1757–74) private purse funds. 80 I would argue that these trends, accelerated by the demands of increased army size and more sophisticated arms of the eighteenth-century battlefield, led directly to Selim III’s moment of bankruptcy, which prevented the full implementation of his planned reforms after 1792. Ottoman military reforms of the later period are invariably accompanied by treasury reform and an acute shortage of cash. 
 The imperial Janissary troops in the fortresses were always paid, although often late, by the normal tri-monthly increments of the system which was underwritten by the non-Muslim poll tax ( cizye ). Local garrison forces were supported in a variety of ways, but often by defining a group of tax farms as an ocakl ı k , revenues assigned to the wages and maintenance of the garrison forces ( ocak , or regiment). The Bosnian militia, with a proud history of service with the empire, were organised in this fashion; so too were fortresses like Vidin, particularly after great influxes of Janissaries following Vidin’s reversion to a border fortress in our period. 81 By the end of the eighteenth century, the Janissaries of the border fortresses were supported by a combination of the poll tax and tax farm revenues ( mukataa ) from Muslim and non-Muslim alike, both gathered from far-flung districts. Considerable [re]organisation and ad hoc arrangements were needed in order to get the job done. The impact of declining revenues increased the encroachment on provincial tax bases which supported the local militia arrangements. 
 Shortage of money meant that the tax contributions which village collectives had often paid in kind, be it for horses, wagons, grains or other supplies, were converted into cash substitutes, a cycle which Balkan historians have noted increased village indebtedness and enriched local power brokers. A system which involved an Ottoman official, the mubaayac ı , or state purchaser, who was instrumental to this process, has received little study. These individuals determined the village contributions by distributing them over a tax base, saw to the payment and shipping of war supplies, most particularly grain, and attempted to maintain the balance between state needs and village realities. 82 This function was devolved even further to provincial officials in the eighteenth century, though occasionally centrally-appointed overseers were also sent out as inspectors, which was a potential source of aggrandisement and abuse. One alternative for the villager was simply to flee, and join the ubiquitous bands of tax rebels, who then turned up on the battlefront as recruits. 
 Another way to finance war-related enterprises was to give local officials, governors and their representatives (district tax and law enforcement officials: mütesellims , or mutasarr ı fs ) the right to levy provincial taxes. These included a bewildering variety of extraordinary taxes, which were reorganised by 1700 into a levy of village households, called avarizhane . The local judge, combined with a local official (elected, state or self-appointed – all three were possible), determined the equitable distribution of such taxes across the tax base. Such extraordinary taxes were assessed generally on a six-month basis in the provinces and might include paying for visits of pashas on the way to the battlefront, support of local officials in fulfilling their duties, and a host of other minor exactions. 
 Emerging out of the difficulties of financing the campaigns of 1683 was another category of taxation to assist provincial officials called to war. This was the imdadiye , or imdad-i seferiye , the extraordinary campaign tax previously mentioned. The imdadiye was a right of taxation granted in response to their pleas that they could no longer finance their entourages out of their revenues. The campaign tax was imposed for specific campaigns, and attached to particular commanders, as a means of raising troops and supplies. It, like all such extraordinary taxes, became ordinary over time. Thus, as our study opens, the right of extraction from local revenue sources, most stipulated for the use of the appointed governor, or equivalent, was in the process of devolving into the hands of a new class of local magnates. 
 That the sultan and his court might be more than willing to tap this rising wealth in times of need should be familiar to military historians. The sultan viewed the campaign tax as a loan: records indicate an increasing reliance on the governor’s personal contribution to war efforts over the eighteenth century, and attempts by the sultan to recover the ‘loan’. Confiscation of estates was also practised, for those either dismissed from office, or who failed on the battlefield. To counter the exactive power of the state, more and more of taxable territory was alienated by converting it to charitable uses. Individuals of means set aside their estates by creating endowments ( vakfs ). Such tax-exempt, large-scale charities offered the corollary benefit of social welfare to the Muslim community at large, in hospitals and schools, but impoverished the central treasury. The royal household itself, especially the women of the harem, had, in earlier centuries, supported war efforts with contributions from their own endowments. 83 
 Protection from state oppression came also in the guise of entitlements, and goes a long way to explain the continuation of the Janissary system. Documentary entitlements, be it the right to pay and rations of the Janissaries ( esame ), or licences (patents) of privilege ( berat ) for almost any category of service and trade, could imply tax exemption, or status, and were the badges of membership in Ottoman pre-1800 society. Each group took care of its own: each Janissary regiment had its own treasury, and court cases are full of inheritances recorded as reverting to individual regimental treasurers. At the village level, appeals for tax relief took the form of judicial affidavits (from provincial courts, hüccets ) which appealed to the sultan’s justice, and often received attention. Increasingly, the study of village organisations reveals similar types of collective protection which developed in response to increasing tax coercion. Regions in the war zones and border fortresses were often exempt from extraordinary impositions as they already supported local garrisons, in the ocakl ı k system described above. 
 Ottoman logistics depended on the will of the population to participate in the supply system as it has been described. Archival documents reveal a plethora of obligations concerning all manner of military purchase and supply, which cemented the contractual relationship of sultan and subject. In other words, there were some ways of negotiating respite from the long arm of grievous exactions, at least for those who could afford it, or had access to capital or a network of influence. Little could otherwise prevent the strong-arm tactics imposed on peasants and townsmen by rapacious overlords. 
 These were the general conditions of the Ottoman military and its financial base at the opening of our more detailed study of the eighteenth-century campaigns. Western sources universally accord Grand Vizier Baltac ı Mehmed Pasha’s victory over Peter the Great at Prut in late July 1711 as owing to the overwhelming forces he had at his command, which outnumbered those of the Czar by four to one. Mehmed Pasha was severely criticised, indeed ultimately dismissed, by the sultan, for having let the Russians escape stiffer penalties. As we turn to the Prut campaign in order to discuss the Habsburg, Romanov and Ottoman confrontations on the Danube and Black Sea in the first half of the eighteenth century, we may discern other reasons for Mehmed Pasha’s reticence. 