 An official record for the period 1771–79 is illustrative of the continued commitment to manning the strategic fortresses: Belgrade averaged 5,798 resident guards between 1771 and 1779; Vidin 9,238 for the same period; Ochakov averaged 7,795, Bender 6,735. 64 By that time, deployment of military manpower was divided along religious lines – one must presume the non -Janissary salaried soldiers in these fortresses, the yamaks mentioned above, to be norminally Muslim, as they also were for the Black Sea fortresses. Still, the use of Christian auxiliaries continued, especially in areas where large Christian populations remained under Ottoman jurisdiction. They served, or were coerced into the necessary tasks of campaigning, be it manning the Danube fleet, digging siegeworks, or driving wagons. Ottoman documentation is very clear about their right to payment, or tax relief. In most surviving documentation, military occupations are not identified by religion, but by entitlement, or as a village collective with historic tax obligations and exemptions. Some relocation occurred: Gradeva argues that physical separation of Christian from Muslim populations occurred in Vidin, by creating separate districts, once the city returned to border status after 1699, as part of serhad strategy. Local troops were reassigned to outlying minor fortresses, perhaps another indication of separating soldiers of different religions. 65 
 Realities of Danube warfare 
 Paper trails and life on the ground are two different realities, however, and daily life is almost impossible to recover. Murphey argues that the military historian’s concentration on major confrontations such as St Gotthard in 1664 neglects the importance of frontier warfare, what he calls ‘a pattern of uncontested or minimally contested offensives’, common to both sides, in which the local border forces play a very considerable role. His example is the spring 1664 Ottoman offensive to recover and repair fortresses in territories damaged by Croatian and Hungarian winter raids, after the main Ottoman army had been demobilised. The unopposed sieges of Pecs and Ösijek by the Ban of Croatia, Nicholas Zriny, in January and February of 1664, although abandoned, caused considerable damage to two fortresses pivotal to the Ottoman defence system, and required the rebuilding of the outer walls at Pecs and the bridge at Ösijek, and large crews of mobilised local manpower over several months, a process not quite completed when Grand Vizier Faz ı l Ahmed Pa ş a arrived with the army in mid-May. Zriny had also besieged Kanizsa on the Tisza River in April, which forced the army to repair the recovered fortress, and neutralise seven lesser fortresses of the Croatian border, by a series of swift attacks on them throughout July 1664. With the exception of a two-day siege at Pölöske, the other garrisons surrendered or fled. Conclusion of these encounters was generally accompanied by voluntary surrender, and the promised safe passage being integral to the negotiations. After the investment of Uyvar by the Ottomans in 1663–64, the conditions of surrender included supplying the retreating soldiers with grain and wagons for transport, as well as a letter to Habsburg Emperor Leopold confirming the bravery and determination of the garrison’s resistance. 66 In this case, the Davids and Goliaths shared a code that operated when the balance of power was lopsided. This was probably as typical as the stories of violations of such a code which dot the narratives. 
 The human cost and dislocation of Danubian warfare can be glimpsed in the rare autobiographical accounts such as that of Osman Agha, a cavalryman captive of the Habsburgs for a number of years, whose tale best illustrates the nature and uncertainty of border warfare. As a young man, Osman participated in border raids around Teme ş var. When he matured and inherited some property, he equipped himself properly with horse and weapon, and was assigned as the head of a detachment of light cavalry with ten men under him. At that time, after the 1683 campaign, the Habsburgs were besieging the fortress line along the Tisza and Maros Rivers, had attacked the fortresses of Çanad and Arad north of Teme ş var, then burned the perimeters and withdrawn. ‘All the Serbian people who had run away became bandits or mercenaries attached to the Austrians … Almost every day, they would attack Teme ş var residents, killing or enslaving travellers, farmers and the like, taking them to their forts to be imprisoned, later ransomed. We, too, attacked their forts and took prisoners’. This was the situation when Osman’s detachment was asked to deliver the Janissary salaries to Arad fortress. Their task was to escort the salary money as far as Lipova, a lesser fortress to the east of Arad on the Maros River, a ten-hour ride from Teme ş var. Osman was among 80 soldiers assigned for the task which they accomplished without incident. 
 It was cherry season in Lipova, so the detachment dallied an extra day to enjoy the abundance. The defence of the fortress, Osman declared, was reduced to ‘… less than three hundred men, more than a hundred having been killed in previous battles. In short, including us, there were fewer than 500 soldiers in the garrison … The Austrians had sixteen infantry and cavalry regiments.’ It proved impossible for the visiting detachment to escape as over 2,000 Serbian bandits and other irregulars blocked the Maros bridge crossing. Osman and the others retreated to the fortress, after burning the bridge. The siege of the fortress began the second day before dawn. ‘… [T]hey began to pound the walls with cannons and mortars, and demolished a large enough section to get through by afternoon. A few of the company inside responded by filling the gap with pillows and mattresses.’ As the Austrians closed, most of the defenders concentrated their fire on the breach, fighting with light cannons and hand guns, and leaving the other gates unattended. These were forced by the Serbian and Hungarian bandits and irregulars. The defenders found themselves besieged in the inner fortress, the outer perimeter and the town of some 2,000 houses having been burned. For three days and nights, the Austrians pounded the walls and picked off defenders from atop minarets and roofs. Osman’s detachment was assigned the most dangerous part of the walls. Finally, the fortress raised the white flag. The defenders asked to be allowed to depart in peace for Teme ş var. This was refused, the Austrians reserving the right to take prisoners. Fighting was resumed for another two days, after which the fortress surrendered unconditionally. 
 ‘According to the agreement, men and women in the fort began to go out unarmed. We were watching the process from the battlements. Austrian soldiers had lined up from their army to the fort in two rows. The distance between the Austrian army and the fort was a quarter of an hour … The soldiers standing on the road forcibly pulled at the men, women and servants and stripped them. Those who resisted were killed and robbed of everything … Their carcasses were spread all over the road. However much the Austrian officers wanted to stop this, it was not possible. Even as we watched, generals on horseback shot and killed some of those who stripped and killed Muslims.’ Osman and his companions stripped themselves so as to avoid a similar fate. 
 About sixty of the garrison fighting force were kept as captives for potential ransom, while the rest of the population of Lipova was reduced to slavery. Only women, the sick and the most poor were allowed to depart for Teme ş var. Osman and a companion were sent to officers in the General Prince Louis Guillaume de Bade regiment as captives. Osman’s master, a Lieutenant Fischer, had as a servant a ‘Saxon’ girl from Erdel province, with whom ‘he fulfilled some of his bodily needs’. She served as translator. Before long, the Lieutenant proposed that Osman go home to Teme ş var and arrange his ransom. Osman secured a guarantor in return for raising a second ransom, and actually returned to Teme ş var for that purpose. Five of them crossed an abandoned landscape to their homes. In the promised seven days, they returned to Austrian territory, with the ransom, only to find their captors had been reassigned to the area around Ösijek. Again, they marched across boundless wasteland, ‘passing towns left abandoned and derelict by the heels of the Austrian soldiers, using the wells dug in their encampments, and encountering Serbian bandits, who questioned them, but did not harm them.’ Then, they had the misfortune to run into some Hungarian bandits. 67 In the end, Osman was not released by his Austrian master, even after the Karlowitz treaty. He finally escaped after eleven years of slavery, seven of them spent in Vienna, and returned to a much changed Teme ş var, which most of his family had left, where he served the local governor as a translator for a number of years, and appears to have been involved in the commissions established to solve border disputes arising from the new treaty line. By the time Teme ş var itself surrendered to the Austrians in 1717, Osman had lost everything, including his wife. Afterwards, he served the Vidin commander as translator, then emigrated to Istanbul in 1724. 68 
 Logistics of warfare on the Danube: the Belgrade–Azov fortress line 
 Osman Agha’s story must have been typical in many ways for the period, although he appears to have come from a background of some wealth and education. His adventure could be duplicated for the entire fortress system of the Belgrade–Azov line, the one which will preoccupy us throughout the period under study: Belgrade, Vidin, after 1699, Rusçuk, Silistre, İ brail, Tulcea, İ smail, Kilya, Hotin, Bender, Akkirman, Kilburun, Ochakov, Yenikale and Azov. Edirne served as the mobilisation and supply base for Danubian campaigns; Sinop served as the base and port for transport to the northern Black Sea garrisons; Salonika served that purpose for campaigns into Greece. The Black Sea and the Danube were absolutely crucial for the movement of supplies for the army, and blockades and inaccessibility of fortresses are determinants of failure in the campaigns of the eighteenth century. 
 The logistics of maintaining such a long frontier, as well as supplying the larger campaigns in the field, was an undertaking of enormous proportions for any pre-modern dynasty, but particularly so in the geographical context we have described. To the issues of terrain, distances, and infrastructure must be added the question of unpredictable seasonal variations, dry and wet, which plagued all military reliance on grain. For the Ottomans to organise and go on campaign was a cumbersome and lengthy process. The call to arms was sent out on the main campaign routes to Anatolia and the Balkans in December of the year before the campaign, often signalling to opponents the intention before the declaration of war. 
 Troops in Istanbul mobilised and left the city in early spring, while those raised from the countryside were ordered to join the main army on the march. The tremendous distances, and an average daily march of no more than ten miles, meant that reaching the actual battlefields in Hungary or in eastern Anatolia might not occur until mid-June. 69 From Edirne to the Drava crossing in the spring of 1663, the army took 85 days. This included a sixteen-day stop in Sofia to pasture the animals on new fodder and wait for troops to arrive, and another eleven days in Belgrade to gather supplies. By the time the army reached Esztergom to make the final Danube river crossing to Uyvar, 119 days had passed. 70 Major confrontations were often confined to July through October, when field conditions and the lack of fodder generally forced the suspension of hostilities. 
