 Second, success was determined by the superiority, even a plethora, of numbers of Ottoman troops and the continued willingness to tolerate large losses and considerable desertion. For example, on 2 August, the grand vizier ordered the passage to Corinth closed to prevent desertion. 53 Brue estimated that 8,000 were killed and another 6,000 wounded during the nine-day siege of Nauplion, forcing the grand vizier to move camp because of the stench. 54 At the siege of Modon on the western side of the Peninsula in mid-August, the number of Janissaries had been reduced to 11,000. 55 
 Yet a third factor contributing to the success was the constant communication and apparent cooperation between the Ottoman naval and land forces. The Grand Admiral ( Kapudan Pasha ) not only captured a number of the smaller islands; he also ferried the largest of the siege guns (the number at Nauplion estimated at seventeen, the largest of them weighing 390 okka ) 56 from A ğ r ı boz to Nauplion and then to Modon. In both cases, while the damage inflicted by the guns was negligible, their arrival tipped the balance in favour of the Ottomans. The role of the artillery on the battlefields of the Balkans will be taken up at the end of this chapter. 
 A final factor has to do with command. Brue dismissed the grand vizier on this campaign, saying he could not control the Janissaries or the quarrels among his officers. Damad Ali Pasha apparently admitted early on in the campaign that he was a novice, and left the conduct of affairs to his officers. 57 In that, Brue misapprehended the culture of the Ottoman camp. He records councils of war in the grand vizier’s tent on a number of occasions, after which orders were carried out, and officers and regiments dispatched to various duties. Intelligence received from spies and captured Venetians, as well as representatives of local populations seeking Ottoman protection, was analysed and incorporated into the command. On at least one occasion, in late June, the grand vizier deprived himself of transportation in order to send food and fodder to the advance guard. 58 There are an equal number of entries in the Brue journal of the imposition of discipline on officers who disobeyed commands, abused privileges, etc. Nonetheless, the ill-defined command hierarchy, and rivalries among the grand vizier, the Grand Admiral and the Agha of the Janissaries, could lead to battlefield disarray. The accident of command, based more on proximity and loyalty to the sultan than on competence, and the rivalry between various branches, such as the artillery and the infantry, are all evidence of the cracks in the Ottoman military edifice that continued to widen in the eighteenth century. 
 The real question of control concerned the Janissaries who, in the course of the siege at Nauplion, attacked against orders and essentially mutinied, blaming the grand vizier for a lack of leadership. Control also proved difficult in the matter of enslaving populations, and in enforcing capitulation conditions, if the fortress surrendered. In the case of Nauplion, which did inflict large casualties on the Ottoman troops, that meant considerable abuse of the local population, although even Brue notes the frequent grand vizierial intervention in the matter of slaves. 59 Incentives remained cash bonuses for valour and wounds as well as booty, human and otherwise, for what had become essentially a voluntary army, though technically bolstered by fictive registers of a professional remnant, with a totally inadequate pay scale. 
 Austria enters the war 
 In the spring of 1716, the Habsburgs reaffirmed their defensive alliance with Venice, and declared war on the Ottomans for the continued violation of the stipulations of the Karlowitz treaty. The massive Ottoman failures at Varadin in August of 1716, the capitulation of the Banat in 1717, and the loss of the fortress of Belgrade after the capture of the city in that same year, shocked Ottoman bureaucrats, after the relatively easy successes on the Prut and in the Morea. At Varadin, Grand Vizier Damad Ali Pasha, the veteran of the Morea, who had assembled the same kind of force as before, faced Eugene with evenly matched forces, numbering in the area of 60,000 on each side. 60 ‘The German cavalry proved their superiority to the Asiatic in regular charges, and the victory of the Christians seemed secure, when the Janissaries on the Turkish left broke the Austrian infantry, routed the wing opposed to them, and pressed hard upon the centre. Eugene immediately brought up a reserve of horse, with which he charged the Janissaries, and retrieved the fortunes of the day.’ 61 The grand vizier, credited with charging into the final clash, lay among the casualties, as well as great quantities of booty. The battle lasted five hours. Within 20 days, Eugene turned his attention to Teme ş var, which capitulated by the end of the year. Serbian irregulars were instrumental in subduing the countryside. 
 The new grand vizier Halil Pasha (1716–17), previously Commander of Belgrade, was appointed upon the death of his predecessor on the field and charged with reassembling the army for the spring campaign. Eugene again took the initiative, and besieged Belgrade on 15 June 1717 before the large Ottoman relief army arrived from Ni ş . Finding his army encircled, Eugene saved the day by confronting the arriving troops and scattering a far superior army. Eugene ordered an attack on the Ottoman forces at two in the morning of 16 August: ‘The Turkish outposts were negligent; the discipline of their whole army was lax; they had slept in careless confidence; they woke to panic confusion; and when once the Christian columns were within their works, the greater part of them fled without even attempting resistance.’ 62 The Belgrade garrison, deprived of relief, surrendered the next day. Casualties on the Ottoman side numbered as many as 15,000 to 20,000, with less than 6,000 Austrian losses. 63 By September 1717, both sides were anxious for peace. The 1718 Treaty of Passarowitz completed the Austrian acquisition of the remainder of Hungary, begun with Karlowitz in 1699. Most importantly, the city of Belgrade was transferred into Austrian hands. Teme ş var (Banat) and Western Wallachia (Oltenia) were also ceded to Austria. 64 The Peloponnesus remained Ottoman territory, and ended the 200-year-old Venetian–Ottoman rivalry. Eugene of Savoy’s great triumph at Belgrade proved temporary, however, when later Ottoman–Habsburg rivalries forced another series of lengthy and costly confrontations on the Orsova stretch of the Danube. 
 Renewal of Ottoman–Habsburg conflict on the Danube, 1736–39: stalemate 
 Within 20 years of 1718, much of the territory ceded to the Habsburgs had been returned to Ottoman rule. By contrast with the 1716–18 campaigns, in 1737, 1738 and 1739 the Austrians were indecisive and defensive, while the Ottomans showed unusual sustaining power, the single most important objective for them the return of Belgrade. As before, this coverage of the 1736–39 campaigns will emphasise the Ottoman side, as both the Austrian and Russian contexts have been well covered. 65 
 Uneasy alliances 
 Russia declared war on Turkey in April of 1736. Austria, allied with Russia since 1726, at first attempted to mediate between the belligerents, reluctant to mobilise once again on the eastern frontier. The ostensible reasons for the Russian declaration were two-fold: Tatar raids in the Ukraine and the Ottoman–Persian struggles in the Caucasus, to which the Tatar Khan and his army were ordered as auxiliaries. To reach the frontier, the Tatars were forced to cross Dag ı stan, then occupied by Russian troops and claimed by St Petersburg. 66 The Russians struck first. By April, Russian Commander Burkhard Christoph Münnich was within a few days’ march of Perekop, the mouth of the Crimea, with 54,000 troops, including 5,000 Don Cossacks, 4,000 Ukrainian Cossacks and 3,000 Zaparozhian Cossacks. 67 They had grain enough for two months only, and too few horses, expecting to find both in the Crimea. Perekop, the key to the Peninsula, fell in May 1736. The Ottoman commander of the garrison and his remaining 2,544 men surrendered and were made prisoners. 68 Azov, on the mouth of the Don, was also invested under the command of General Peter Lacy, and the Ottoman garrison surrendered after a magazine blew up in the fortress. On 1 July 1736, 3,463 men, 2,333 women and children were allowed to leave the fortress unharmed. 69 In spite of those early successes, neither army was able to follow up with complete control over the Crimea. Tatar strategy was to harrass supply trains, make small raids, and burn all fields and villages on the Russian route. After Perekop, there were few significant engagements, although Bahçesaray was sacked and burned before the Russians withdrew in frustration. Both the Ottoman and Tatar troops had retreated to Kaffa, where supply ships promised both relief and the possibility of defence. The campaign of 1736 ended in Russian withdrawal into the Ukraine, after a tremendous loss of life, an estimated 30,000 deaths from hunger, famine and disease. Only 2,000 died in battle. 70 
 Surprised by the preemptive strike in the spring of 1736, the Ottomans had hastened to assemble a force to protect the Crimea and Ochakov. In April of 1736, Grand Vizier Silahdar Seyyid Mehmed Pasha (1736–37) was ordered on campaign, and the Governor of Trabzon Yahya Pasha was put in charge of Ochakov, key to Crimean defence. In the normal course of affairs, four to six months were required to fully mobilise the Ottoman troops from long distances. Levies of soldiers from Bosnia and Albania were ordered in the summer of 1736, one in twenty from the Bosnia militia, estimated at the time at over 20,000 strong. 71 By the following summer, the garrison at Ochakov included 7,000 Albanian and Bosnian recruits. 72 Consequently, the ill-prepared Ottomans relied heavily on the Tatars in 1736, as they always had in the Crimea. Until that time, the Russians had not seriously attempted to conquer the peninsula. The Ottomans were also preoccupied in the Caucasus, where a treaty with Nadir Shah and the Persians was not finally in place until October of 1737. 73 Peace with the Persians provided the opportunity to redirect soldiers to the Danubian battlefields. 