



===== FILE: text/part0014.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Four 
 The Austrian–Russian– Ottoman Danube waltz, 1768–92 
 Overview 
 T his chapter deals with two pivotal wars in Ottoman history, known to the Russians as Catherine II’s First and Second Turkish Wars, rightly celebrated (at least the first one) in St Petersburg and Moscow as the triumph of her southern strategy to acquire access to the Black Sea. For the Ottomans, it is the moment of greatest collapse and humiliation after Karlowitz, and inaugurates the military reform period we describe generally as the New Order of the two sultans Selim III (1789–1807) and Mahmud II (1808–39). Among historians of Europe, this period is generally regarded as stimulating an international relations debate around the ‘Eastern Question’, on the future of the Ottoman Empire. 
 Bearing in mind that anything written about the Ottoman Empire after 1760 peeks out from behind the Eastern Question curtain, this chapter briefly looks first at the political and social settings in the Balkans in 1768, then examines mobilisation, logistics and financing in the 1768–74 and 1787–92 campaigns. Of particular emphasis will be the complete collapse of the Ottoman supply systems. Descriptions of major confrontations allow for an examination of the strengths and weaknesses on the Austrian, Russian and Ottoman side. The chapter concludes with some reflections on the impact of this period on the imperial order in all three contexts. 
 1768–92 and the Ottoman Empire 
 The period from 1740 to 1768 was one of the longest periods of peace for the Ottoman Empire in its entire history. With the exception of the Iranian frontier, which erupted in warfare and rebellion after the break-up of the Safavid order in the 1720s, the empire rested on the triumph of Belgrade in 1739. Led by an astute grand vizier, Koca Rag ı b Pasha, Vizier 1757–63, who convinced several sultans of the virtue of peace and multilateral negotiations, the empire achieved two decades of tranquillity and economic recovery. The Ottomans benefited from the expanding world economy of the period as well. 1 
 Part of the reason for prosperity was that the Ottomans sat out the international upheavals of the series of continental and worldwide campaigns that permanently altered the balance of power of Britain and France in North America and India, and established the importance of Russia and Prussia in eastern Europe. The Seven Years War (1756–63) is also acknowledged as pivotal to the military history of Russia, producing generals like Rumiantsev and Suvorov who were to provide such decisive leadership in the two Ottoman–Russian wars at the end of the century. Austrian struggles with Ottoman and Prussian armies alike shook Habsburg Vienna from its lethargy, leading to a vigorous reorganisation of the military. 2 
 In the 1760–1830 period, Ottoman country-wide gentry, or ‘Ottoman-local elites’, figured enormously in the success or failure of the Ottoman war effort. War profiteering was a constant stimulus for temporary, if reluctant, loyalties, and generated powerful regionalisms, manipulated by colourful and controversial figures, who both challenged and cooperated with the late-eighteenth, early-nineteenth century Ottoman state. The conflict between the Janissary loyalists and the new upstarts is one of the constant motifs of the chronicles, most widely studied by scholars of Ottoman Egypt and Syria. 3 
 The growth of a provincial elite was facilitated by the decentralisation of tax collection, especially the widespread use of tax farming ( iltizam ) and the concentration of both mobilisation and supply in the hands of many of the same tax officials, frequently referred to as mutasarr ı fs . 4 By 1768, local ‘committees of notables’ and Muslim judges were responsible for campaign preparations: mobilising troops, requisitioning grain and biscuit ( peksimed ), supplying draught animals and wagons, and provisioning the bivouacs ( menzil ) along the route of the army’s passage. In the midst of the widespread corruption and abuse of taxation privileges which accompanied warfare, honesty occasionally prevailed, in the reports of concerned bureaucrats which dot the account books of the war periods, allowing us glimpses into the ‘realities’ of Danubian logistics. Still, one of the most obvious consequences of shrinking territories was that the tax burden was redistributed to smaller, often dislocated populations. This too is reflected in the local court records, where distribution of the extraordinary taxes across village collectives is evident ( avariz , and tevzi ). 5 While we are not yet in a position to talk about the burden of taxation for the whole period, there is clearly emerging evidence of severe pressures on local resources after 1760. 6 
 When the Ottomans took up arms again in 1768, it was to inaugurate almost a century of confrontation on the Danube line, the ‘waltz’ in the title of this chapter. The pattern of events indeed took on a certain rhythmic regularity. Austrian or Russian armies invaded a Danube Principality, which precipitated a hasty declaration of war from the Ottomans. Russian army headquarters were established in Jassy, from which the commanders could deploy troops down the Prut to pivotal garrisons on the mouth of the Danube. In the years after 1774, the Russians maintained troops in Moldavia (Jassy) or Wallachia (Bucharest) almost at will. The Ottomans did not maintain a regular field army, and were slow to mobilise, although considerable and fairly constant attention was paid to the garrisons in the line from Belgrade to İ smail. The Ottomans considered the investment in that line absolutely essential. After 1812, when for example the Rusçuk fortress and its town were completely destroyed by the Russians, and again in 1828, Mahmud II initiated reconstruction projects of the fortress system that lasted until the loss of Bulgaria in 1877. Such attention accounts in part for the initial success of the Ottomans in the Danubian battles of the Crimean War, as well as for the stiff resistance of the Ottoman forces under Commander Osman Pasha at Plevne in the 1877– 78 War. 
 The two wars of the period under discussion were characterised by a long and bitter series of sieges, by numerous bloody attacks and counterattacks, mining, and sapper activity. The Ottoman garrisons were eventually worn down by endless artillery barrages, and often a massacre of the occupants of the fortress towns followed. For example, Ochakov, the last Ottoman garrison in the Crimea, was invested and captured in 1788, and İ brail, a major garrison (and source of supplies) protecting Bulgaria, in 1791: these were very significant victories for the Russian army. Russian observers were impressed by Ottoman last-ditch efforts, which often resulted in a terrible toll, with troops dying to the last man. Ş umnu, in present-day Bulgaria, became Ottoman headquarters in the late eighteenth century, and figures largely in the wars of the first half of the nineteenth century. Increasingly, the Russians focused on subduing the Trans-Caucasus, a secondary diversion for the Ottomans which assumed primary importance by the Crimean War. Kars and Erzurum in eastern Turkey were first attacked and occupied by Russian armies in 1828. Peace was often hastily constructed on the battlefield – between commanders – in response to Istanbul pressure, but just as often because of grand vizierial consultations in situ . During the confrontations of 1828–29, the Russians came perilously close to Istanbul, a fact which led to panic and quick capitulation by the city and dynastic household. 