 An Ottoman assault on Adakale was repelled by cannon fire again on 13 July, but a general rout was prevented by the forceful command of İ vaz Mehmed, who reorganised the scattered bands and was reinstated as Serasker by Grand Vizier Ye ğ en Mehmed. By 18 July, the siege of Adakale was once again underway, this time with the entire Ottoman arsenal, perhaps as many as eleven batteries of 120 cannons and 14 mortars. 94 More significantly, the Ottoman sappers undermined the defences, and the dry summer lowered the Danube level sufficiently to allow the besiegers easier access. Capitulation occurred on 15 August, just in time for İ vaz Mehmed, who was facing massive problems on his side. 95 On this occasion, it was Istanbul’s turn for jubilation, despite its preoccupation with shortages and rebellion. The two belligerents spent the remainder of the year rehearsing the final confrontation beneath Belgrade the following summer. By the end of the year, French mediation was accepted as a fait accompli by both sides. Hertz rightfully argues that the fall of Adakale was pivotal to the events of the following year, pointing to its significance in all subsequent peace negotiations. 96 The 1738 campaign left the Ottomans in a position of strength. 
 The 1738 season was just as disastrous for the Russians as the Austrians. Münnich once again failed to cross the Dniester in his march on Bender. Having overloaded his army in preparation for the desolation of the proposed march, he did not reach the banks of the Dniester until mid-July, where he faced an entrenched Ottoman army of 60,000. Disease forced the Russian garrison to abandon Ochakov by the end of the year. General Lacy made the same trek into Crimea as in the previous two years, retreating as before with very little accomplished. 97 
 With a new resolve, Vienna and St Petersburg decided on closer coordination in the 1739 campaign. The empress pledged 20,000 Russian troops to aim at Hotin and Transylvania to divert the Ottoman forces from the Danube, but international pressure on all sides was also urging an end to the hostilities. In Istanbul as well, the peace party prevailed by mid-March in the appointment of İ vaz Mehmed as Grand Vizier (1739–40). The Ottomans inclined to end the conflict with diplomacy. By early May, Sultan Mahmud I (1730–54) gave the French Ambassador, the Marquis de Villeneuve, the power to negotiate the treaty on behalf of the Ottomans. 98 
 For the 1739 campaign, Wallis was Commander-in-Chief of the Austrian forces, while nominal supreme commander Franz-Stephan remained far from the disease-ridden battlefront. Wallis arrived at Belgrade by mid-July. İ vaz Mehmed was stationed south-east at Semendre, Habsburg headquarters from the previous year, with an advance guard at Grocka, a day’s march to Belgrade, on the southern Danube shore. Wallis marched to Grocka with his cavalry on the night of 21–22 July. The same night the Ottomans moved their entire army to defend the narrow pass and road at Grocka. The most significant confrontation of the year occurred there, with the Austrians gaining the upper hand after an exhausting day-long contest and the arrival of cavalry reinforcements under Count Reinhard Wilhelm Neipperg. The carnage left over 3,000 Austrian dead, with another 2,500 wounded. The following year a traveller would note that ‘… one cannot go ten steps without stepping on human corpses piled on top of one another, all only half decomposed, many still in uniforms.’ 99 Wallis retreated in the middle of the night of 22 July, fearful of the Ottoman strength. Remarkably, the Ottomans did not harass the withdrawal, which would have been more typical. İ vaz Mehmed’s restraint must have been dictated by the certain knowledge that they had won the day. 100 By August Belgrade had been surrounded, and Commander-in-Chief Wallis was in slow retreat. Included in the Ottoman ranks was Hekimo ğ lu Ali Pasha, the Governor of Bosnia who had been so instrumental in securing Serbia earlier in the war, 101 with 30,000 men. 
 Early in August, negotiations got under way between the Habsburgs, represented by Chief Negotiator Neipperg, and Villeneuve on behalf of the Ottomans. In the meantime, Schmettau, veteran of the 1737 campaign, had been sent by the War Ministry in Vienna to assess the real situation, and to invigorate the dispirited and inactive Wallis. Schmettau was appointed Commander of the Belgrade garrison, and discovered a fit garrison of almost 12,000 men. He achieved a small victory over the Ottomans with a pre-emptory assault on the Borsha redoubt across the river on 29 August, which encouraged Wallis to redirect the efforts of the main army against Belgrade. News from Hotin was encouraging: Münnich was about to cross the Dniester. In other words, the position of the two allies called for a halt to negotiations and an attempt to change the status quo on the battlefield. 
 Isolated (a virtual hostage) in the Ottoman camp, however, Neipperg remained ignorant of the changing environment, and operated on instructions from the emperor himself, dated from 18 August. On 29 August, as Schmettau attacked Borsha, the plenipotentiaries drafted a peace treaty, which was followed by another ten days of arguing over the peace with Russia, resulting in treaties which all three sides officially signed at Belgrade on 18 September. On 6 September, as part of the treaty stipulations, the demolition began of the outer, new fortifications erected by the Habsburgs at Belgrade. 102 On 8 September, the news arrived in Vienna. Münnich, who had routed the Ottoman army at Hotin, received the news in astonishment at his new headquarters in Jassy, Moldavia on 24 September. All sides were forced to accept the triumph of the Ottomans and Villeneuve by December of 1739. 103 
 By the conditions of the treaty, the Ottomans acquired Belgrade, Old Orsova and Adakale. Azov remained under Russian control, although the fortress was razed and the territory became a no-man’s-land. Russian merchants would be allowed the right of free trade in the empire. Villeneuve’s reward was the renewal of the French capitulations in 1740, guaranteeing substantial French trading privileges, with the Ottomans. Small wonder that the Ottomans rightfully viewed the Belgrade treaty as a vindication of their half-century of efforts on the Danube and the Black Sea. How illusionary the victory actually was would be borne out on the battlefields of 1768–74. 
 We should not underestimate what exchanging the territories in the Danube area did to local populations, Muslim and Christian alike. One western observer of the exchange of power in Belgrade noted: ‘Earlier one thought himself to be in Germany because of the architecture, administration, commerce and manufacture, clothing, citizens, spirit, Christians and Jews – all were German; and now: All European culture has disappeared, the city and its inhabitants have been devoured as if from earth and the city seems possessed by a foreign, Asiatic being.’ 104 Bias aside, the observation points to the human costs of year after year of imperial campaigns in this region, especially in the case of the Serbians (or Rascians, as they are often called in the texts), whose loyalties were suspect, who fought on either side, or as bandits as it suited individual groups. 105 Belgrade became the western end of a middle ground frontier for Janissary and Serbian haydut alike. As McNeill so acutely notes: 