

 By 1740 or thereabouts, therefore, one may properly say that only very narrow interstitial areas remained unincorporated into one or the other of the great agricultural empires that had long bordered upon Danubian and Pontic Europe. An almost uninhabited stretch of territory still separated the Russian Ukraine from the Crimean settlements and Turkish border forts at the mouths of the Dniester, Dnieper, and other strategic points. 106 
 Ottoman military strengths and weaknesses 
 I have spent considerable time on the narrative of these campaigns to demonstrate Ottoman military strengths as well as their weaknesses. Baltac ı Mehmed’s army at Prut had recovered from the revolts endemic in Istanbul after 1700. The Janissary Corps appears to have reorganised itself without difficulty. Still, increasingly, military service drew more heavily on voluntary, temporary mobilisation, even to fill the Janissary ranks, and the bulk of the troops on the Prut were raw and undisciplined, willing but untrustworthy, as Hasan Kurdi so vividly demonstrates. The problem of discipline had not been adequately addressed, possibly the main reason for keeping the troops in Edirne months after the campaign was finished. The technical difficulties of troop movement and supply seem to have been overcome, as evidenced by the crucial bridge-building at the time of the Prut encounter. Brue’s description of the 1715 campaign in the Morea, where the Ottomans faced little resistance from the Venetians, illustrates much the same thing: the continued unruliness of the Janissary troops, whose impetuous fighting style remained dangerous to friend and foe alike. He was witness to an army that succeeded when the odds were overwhelmingly in its favour, and when sufficiency of supply and ready cash were used as incentives for encouragement of individual valour. Again, the cooperation between army and navy, and the adroit psychological use of artillery, militarily effective or not, suggests a still formidable organisation. 
 The success on the Danube I have just described as part of the 1736–39 War is grudgingly accorded the Ottomans only after the weaknesses of their enemies have been catalogued. In particular, emphasis on Villeneuve as engineer of the coup during negotiations over Belgrade has masked a considerable body of evidence that the Ottoman negotiating team was clear-sighted and tough. Not only was Hekimo ğ lu Ali Pasha involved, but also Mektupçu Koca Rag ı b Pasha, later grand vizier under two sultans, already a veteran of crafting peace with Persia, and Reisülküttab , Mustafa Tavukçuba ş ı Efendi, Chief Scribe, functioning as foreign secretary. Both men were instrumental in keeping the Ottomans out of European wars for the next two decades, Koca Rag ı b especially in the long flirtation between Frederick the Great and the Ottomans over the possibility of a Prusso-Ottoman alliance. Koca Rag ı b’s account of the siege of Belgrade and the resulting negotiations became one of the most widely circulated manuscripts of the eighteenth century. 107 
 The resources of the empire were still robust enough to allow for the massive organisation and transport of supplies, food and materials such as pontoons, but not in a way which compensated for the essential vacuum in military command. In the course of any battle, the role of the Janissary commander and the provincial commanders seems crucial, and indeed valour and success were regularly recognised in the battlefield parades, official gifts from the sultan, and the consultations between grand vizier and commanding officers that punctuate narratives of campaigns such as this. As with any other early modern army, the disjuncture between field command and dynastic or factional politics remained acute. The consequences of neglecting certain aspects of military organisation, such as the creation of an officer class, or the organisation of trained and disciplined infantry and artillery troops, would not become apparent until the latter half of the century. In this regard, the Ottoman enemies were quicker off the mark. It is one of the curiosities of Ottoman history that their innovations in firepower and logistics of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries served them well enough, in spite of Karlowitz, to engender complacency that long outlived the reality of the lack of societal investment in military technology and training. 
 Some few Ottoman intellectuals were aware of the growing gap, notably İ brahim Sar ı Mehmed Pasha, who was the chief financial officer ( defterdar ) of the empire six different times between 1703 and 1716. He was particularly concerned with the well-being of the enlisted men, but equally insistent that good leadership and knowledge of the strategy of the enemy were just as important. His contemporary İ brahim Müteferrika (d. 1745) went even further, citing the model of Peter the Great who had rebuilt his army by imitating those of victorious nations. 108 This included the instruments of warfare, in particular the victorious arms. 
 These are questions that would become particularly pressing with the outbreak of war in 1768. Before then, with relative peace on both eastern and western fronts, and considerable pressure to maintain it exerted among the bureaucrats of Istanbul, the empire experienced an almost unprecedented quarter-century of calm before plunging once again into an interminable struggle with the Romanovs over control of the northern Black Sea coast. By that time, both Habsburgs and Romanovs had engaged in the first era of global conflict instigated by Anglo-France rivalries and the rise of Prussia. 