

 Plate 8    Map of Crimea, northern Black Sea Coast, 1737–39 (Keralio, Louise Felix , Histoire de la guerre des russes et des imperiaux contre les turcs en 1736, 1737, 1738 en 1739, v vols., Paris, 1780 ). 
 In late October, the Turks attempted to retake Ochakov, besieging it with an estimated 20,000 Ottoman soldiers and an additional 20,000 Tatars, an unusual step for so late in the campaign season. 81 Huge losses, torrential rains and desertions on all sides forced the Ottomans to abandon the siege by 10 November. Lack of initiative on the part of the Danubian fleet, which failed to attack the Russian ships defending Ochakov on the seaward side, was also one of the reasons for the failure. 82 Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Abdullah Pasha was replaced by Ye ğ en Mehmed (1737–39), notable as belligerent and determined to continue the conflict into 1738. 
 The Bosnian army under Governor Ali Pasha 
 Yet another reason for the Ottoman failure in the Crimea was the necessity of maintaining a second front around Belgrade. The combination of ineptitude, lack of supplies and poor communications appears to have afflicted both sides of the conflict over Vidin and Ni ş . At first, Seckendorf’s army was successful, and easily captured Ni ş , as Ottoman forces melted away from the various frontier garrisons and palankas (border outpost). Seckendorf’s complacency prevented him from following up with a quick strike at Vidin, the original aim of Austrian strategy, where the Ottoman army had begun to assemble. By August 1737 the Nemirov Peace Congress was underway, the Ottomans had fortified Vidin and Hildburghausen had been bested by an Ottoman relief force at Banjaluka under Bosnian Governor Hekimo ğ lu Ali Pasha. 
 The Austrian attack aimed at Izvornik and Banjaluka began in July 1737. Ali Pasha assembled a counterattack force from the local militia population which had been reduced in numbers owing to the 1736 levies for the Ukrainian/Crimean battlefront. 83 Following orders from Istanbul, Ali Pasha instructed local commanders to appoint officers, and assemble troops in the area of Travnik, the provincial capital, to replenish the provincial troops who had already left. These troops were crucial, as mentioned above, in defending besieged Banjaluka on the Verbas River in late July 1737. 
 The Croatian army under Hildburghausen moved from Gradiska south to encircle Banjaluka, just a few days after a company of the local militias had arrived to reinforce the Banjaluka garrison. The garrison decided on a preemptive strike, attacked the 8,000-strong Austrian vanguard and pushed them back across the Verbas. Austrian losses on that occasion were large, but even worse when the main relief force under Ali Pasha, probably no more than 20,000, dispersed a similar-sized force of Austrians before Banjaluka on 4 August, breaking the back of the Hilburghausen offensive in Bosnia, and forcing a retreat to the opposite side of the Sava River. 84 
 A third front for the Ottomans developed at Vidin at the end of the year. Once the threat to Bender from Ochakov failed to materialise, the grand vizier ordered troops to assemble at Vidin. In early August, a corps of 9,000 Austrians was sent to Vidin under Khevenhüller. Approached about capitulation, the Vidin garrison under İ vaz Mehmed refused to surrender. On 14 August, when the Austrians tested the defences of the fortress, İ vaz Mehmed proved resilient and resisted the attack. This setback further disheartened Seckendorf, who held a council of war on 29 August and decided to abandon the attempt on Vidin, especially after hearing of the Ottoman victories in Bosnia. Thereafter he ordered his own troops to the defence of Bosnia, and then back over the Sava, while Wallis withdrew into western Transylvania, leaving Khevenhüller with 5,000 men, and General Doxat at Ni ş exposed to the Ottoman advance at Vidin, under the command of Ahmed Köprülü. Doxat reputedly had close to 4,000 effective troops, and close to another 3,000 too ill to fight. The fortress was short of water. 
 Khevenhüller then withdrew to Radhujevac in Habsburg territory, still able to defend the Timok halfway up to Ni ş . He did not have long to wait. On 29 September, the Ottoman forces, 15,000 strong, crossed over the Timok and forced Khevenhüller back from his strategic position. İ vaz Mehmed had 50,000 men assembled to retake Ni ş . Stranded by his commander-in-chief, General Doxat surrendered Ni ş to the Ottoman forces without a struggle on 16 October, and was given safe conduct to Belgrade. Late in the season, the 15,000-strong garrison at Vidin, commanded by the newly promoted Serasker İ vaz Mehmed, pressed their advantage upstream with army and navy as far as the treacherous rapids known as the Iron Gates. Raiders invaded Habsburg territory around Orsova, as the island fortresses were assaulted on 11 November. The blockade lasted a week, but was lifted as the season was too late to prolong it, and the Ottomans withdrew to Vidin. 85 
 For refusing to stand and fight, Doxat was executed in March of 1738. Seckendorf was placed under house arrest throughout the remainder of the war. 86 A less than glorious season of warfare for the three imperial giants came to a close. The Russians occupied Ochakov, but the Ottomans had managed to recapture Ni ş and repulse the attack on Bosnian territory. Belgrade and Teme ş var remained in Austrian hands. 
 While the Austrians are castigated in hindsight for weaknesses in command, other problems point to endemic difficulties regarding mobilisation and supply. By all accounts, the Austrians had to rebuild the army on the Hungarian front from scratch, as the imperial army had been deployed on three different fronts for too long a period. The Russians suffered acutely by underestimating distance and supply. Until the spring of 1737, the Ottomans were deceived by Austrian protestations that they did not intend war, accounting in part for the unusually late mobilisation on the upper Danube. All sides were crippled by disease and insanitary conditions. The period 1737–39 are notable plague years, and disease accounted for more deaths than the fighting. By the time of the Belgrade treaty in 1739, for example, the Russians had been forced to withdraw from Moldovia and the Crimea because of the impossibility of maintaining healthy and well-supplied garrisons in the area. At Ochakov alone, an estimated 60,000 Russians were lost before it was razed and abandoned in late 1738. 87 Ottoman loss and desertion figures are practically impossible to estimate with any certainty, although archival documents will occasionally reveal the continuing problem of getting men to the battlefield and keeping them there. 
 Diplomatic negotiations at Nemirov were suspended when the Ottoman legation left in mid-October; relations between the partners in Vienna and St Petersburg were fractious and fraught with mistrust, as both sides persisted in secret diplomacy. For the remainder of the war, Ottoman diplomacy aimed first at an alliance with France, and when that proved unrealisable, at French mediation. 88 On both the diplomatic and military fronts, the Ottomans exhibited a tenacity which exasperated diplomats and discouraged both opponents. 
 Ottoman victory at Orsova, 1738 
 The pattern of victory and retreat continued in the few confrontations of 1738, but one thing is certain. Ottoman exertions had one aim in mind: the capturing and fortifying of the string of garrisons that marked the Danube path to their main objective, Belgrade. The campaign season opened in February, when Ali Pasha sent 15,000 men into Serbia, capturing strategic border garrisons in the Morava valley, which re-established Ottoman control in Serbia. 89 As the campaign season opened in Austria, the Austrian forces on the Danube were badly depleted; most garrisons were undermanned, and the imperial treasury stretched. This was especially true of the garrisons around Orsova. The Austrian intent to avoid open confrontation with the Ottoman main army resulted from poor command as much as from insufficiencies in men and supplies, notably transport. 90 Lothar Königsegg, President of the Ministry of War, not noted as a military genius, was appointed actual Commander-in-Chief, although nominal command was left to Charles VI’s young son-in-law, Franz Stephan of Lorraine. A significant dearth of competent commanders plagued the Habsburgs after the death of Eugene of Savoy, who had discouraged the emergence of potential rivals. 
 Most of the 1738 campaign season was spent in investing and surrendering the strategic areas around Orsova (Old Orsova), specifically Adakale (New Orsova), an island just downriver from the Iron Gates. 91 Old Orsova on the northern shore fell to Serasker İ vaz Mehmed in early May. By June the Ottomans had captured Mehadia, allowing them deep access into the Banat. On 15 August 1738, the Austrians surrendered Adakale, in spite of their valiant resistance and recapture of Mehadia. The surrender of the island followed two unsuccessful efforts the same summer, and was achieved through the tenacity of Serasker İ vaz Mehmed, and with the support of the main artillery corps, as well as through the initial failure of the Austrian field command to appreciate the Ottoman single-mindedness concerning the control of the lower Danube around Vidin. When the two armies, evenly matched at 15,000 men, did confront one another, on 4 July at Cornea, 25 miles north of Orsova, the Austrians beat back the advancing Ottoman forces, and regained Mehadia on 9 July. Thereafter logistics kept the Austrians from advancing further, even though the victory was followed by a quick dissolution of the Ottoman will to fight, a general flight toward Fethülislam, and the abandonment of the Ottoman camp, notably 1,500 wagons, 3,000 heads of cattle, 50 cannons and 14 mortars. 92 Franz Stephan was hailed as the second Prince Eugene in the streets of Vienna. 93 Serasker İ vaz Mehmed was removed from command and confined to Vidin. 
 The Ottoman main army under Grand Vizier Ye ğ en Mehmed had arrived in Vidin by early July, but was hampered by having to await the arrival of transport and supplies. Austrian commanders inexplicably disregarded intelligence concerning Ottoman troop strength and preparations for what would prove to be the main offensive of the war. This omission might be explained by the eighteenth-century preference for open-field confrontation rather than the defile strategy demanded by the mountains and valleys of the Orsova area, and the generally-accepted notion that open-field battles were to be avoided unless victory was certain. Most compelling are the reports on logistics, scarcity of food and transport which particularly afflicted the Austrian side. Königsegg found himself in the middle ground of suspect loyalties and banditry so characteristic of Ottoman borderlands of the period. Even as the Ottomans closed in on Orsova, the Austrian Commander ordered retreat of the relief force. 
