

 Plate 7    Map of Lower Danube at time of Habsburg-Ottoman campaigns, 1737–39 (Keralio, Louise Felix, Histoire de la guerre des russes et des imperiaux contre les turcs en 1736, 1737, 1738 en 1739 , v vols., Paris, 1780 ). 
 Silahdar Mehmed Pasha is universally condemned as obstinate and inept, perhaps an additional reason for the apparent inactivity of the Ottoman command in the summer of 1736. His vizierate was actually run by Osman Halisa Efendi, Deputy to numerous grand viziers, whose arrogance and lack of preparation for the war in 1736 and 1737 were the cause of his dismissal and execution in 1737. Silahdar Mehmed escaped execution but was replaced by Muhsinzade Abdullah Pasha in August of 1737. 
 Throughout late 1736 until the spring of 1737 at Ottoman headquarters at Babada ğ ı , Austria’s representative Leopold von Talman and Ottoman officials had futiley attempted mediation and construction of a peace congress, which would finally be held at Nemirov, near the Ottoman and Russian borders, beginning in August of 1737. All the while, preparations for war continued in Vienna, and in January 1737, the Austrian Council agreed to support their ally by opening up a Russian campaign on the Danubian frontier. The Habsburgs assumed that the Russian army, with Münnich in charge once again, would concentrate on Wallachia and Moldavia, which caused much apprehension in Vienna. Austrian forces, meanwhile, would attack the Bosnian and Serbian frontiers, east and west of Belgrade, especially Vidin, the primary fortress protecting Ottoman Wallachia after 1718, and Ni ş on the Morava River, another important Ottoman base, close to the Habsburg border. 
 General European opinion was that the ‘fatal moment’ of the Ottomans had arrived. Religious fervour against the infidel had not entirely died, making it easy to stir up popular opinion in Habsburg lands. On paper, Austria assembled an army of 122,540 combatants, divided into three divisions: one for Wallachia and Moldavia, one for Bosnia, and the third to attack Vidin and Ni ş . 74 Field Marshal Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorf was in command of the main army attacking Vidin; Joseph Friedrich Hildburghausen was posted to Bosnia; George Olivier Wallis to the left bank of the Danube. Division in command, exacerbated by Emperor Charles VI’s accommodation of the Catholic opposition to the Protestant Seckendorf, is often cited as a reason for the failures of 1737; more likely indecision on the ground and poor communications about enemy whereabouts contributed as much to the outcome. 
 Ochakov and the Crimea, 1737 
 Austria declared war on the Ottomans on 14 July 1737, having been in the field since May, and concentrated immediately on reducing Vidin and Ni ş in order to penetrate into Ottoman territory, counting on the proximity of the Russian forces in Wallachia. As it turned out, however, Russian objectives in 1737 did not match those of Austria. Münnich spent the spring months descending the Bug River in the Ukraine in preparation for an attack on Ochakov, which he reached in early July. Ottoman spring mobilisation concentrated on Ochakov, to defend against the Russian siege. This time, Münnich came fully supplied, but at the cost of delays, meaning that it took over three months to reach Ochakov. By the time they got there, they found Ochakov well defended and stocked, with over 20,000 men and sufficient artillery and supplies for a sustained siege. 75 Turkish sources claim that Commander Yahya Pasha had made an appeal to the grand vizierial camp on the Danube for both men and supplies, having only 6,000 in the fortress, an appeal which was ignored by Grand Vizier Silahdar Mehmed Pasha. Instead, 3,000 troops were sent by Bender Field Commander Muhsinzade Abdullah Pasha. 76 Even at 20,000, however, the Ottomans were outnumbered by a ratio of three to one. 
 The first storm of the fortress by the Russian forces was repelled with heavy losses, though the fortress Commander, Yahya Pasha, failed to follow up the advantage gained over the Russians. 77 The Russians were without their large artillery, had to cross a considerable ditch which had been dug around the fortress, and lacked the proper equipment for scaling the walls. As a result of Russian mortar fire on the houses within the fortress, fire broke out, and on the second day of the siege, the powder magazine within the city blew up, killing an estimated 6,000 defenders. Thereafter the fortress capitulated, and in the ensuing slaughter, in spite of the white flag, all but 3,000 of the garrison were killed. ‘… [Within] twenty-four hours the stench of decaying corpses was such that the Russians had to withdraw fifteen miles from the fortress.’ 78 Russian casualties were estimated at 4,000, but disease and hunger took an additional toll, making their losses more the equal to those of the Ottomans. 79 At the end of the 1737 campaign session, during which Münnich’s forces proved unable to move on to Bender, the Russians left a garrison of 5,000 to defend Ochakov, and returned to winter quarters in Poltava. 80 Lacy, with 40,000 troops, had much the same fortune in the Crimea in 1737, withdrawing after deep penetration of the peninsula to winter headquarters. 