 Cantemir is often characterised as a nationalist seeking Romanian independence, whose transfer of loyalties had ‘wide popular backing and attracted large numbers of volunteers into his army … The breadth of support for the prince’s bid for independence justifies the assertion: “The war fought against the Turks was, as always, a popular one.” ’ 22 Whatever the extent of the uprising, Peter certainly recognised Cantemir’s support in the charter of 13 April 1711: ‘We, the great sovereign, Our Tsarist Majesty, having invoked the aid of the Lord, and trusting in the justice of our arms … have ordered our armies to invade the Turkish lands under our personal leadership, in the hope that God will give us victory over this perjurious and hereditary enemy not only of ourselves but of all Christendom … Dimitri Kantemir, being a pious Christian and zealous in the cause of Jesus Christ, has seen fit to offer to collaborate with us toward the liberation of the glorious Wallachian people, which is under his rule, as well as of other Christian nations now suffering under the barbarous yoke.’ 23 Peter’s call for the liberation of the orthodox Christians, in separate manifestos to Serbia, Slavonia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, illicited little support. It was probably drafted by Raguzinsky, a Serb with experience of Istanbul, who like Cantemir encouraged Peter’s southern aspirations. 24 In spite of the initial promises of men and supplies from Cantemir, Brancoveanu, and Raguzinsky, a general rebellion during the brief campaign of July never materialised, at least in part because the countryside of Moldavia was in the midst of a famine and many of the residents had fled to the safety of the hills. Brancoveanu defected early, and turned the war supplies he had promised the Russians over to the Ottomans. 
 An interesting manuscript on this campaign by a Janissary named Hasan Kurdi, one of the last generation of the traditional system, 25 gives us his version of the Romanov initiatives in the Principalities. The manuscript begins with an imaginary speech by Peter, a narrative technique the author uses throughout in a very dramatic way. Peter begins: ‘All the lands of the Ottomans are inhabited by Orthodox Christians, who speak a single language. The whole population is so ready, they will arise before our arrival, and attack the cities. The Ottomans have no power; they have no artillery or treasury. They may be able to raise 50,000 soldiers, but those soldiers have suffered so much because they haven’t been paid, they are weary, and disobedient.’ Therefore, the author comments, Peter had sent word to the Christians ( Rum taifesi ) that they should rise up and enslave the Turks. On another occasion, he has Peter saying: ‘All the peasants of Rum are my soldiers: when I set out, they will attack every province. The Ottomans are slow to act; before they arrive, I will cross the Danube.’ 26 Later, Hasan imagines the Czar’s observing the arrival and encampment of the Ottoman army on the Prut, which Hasan describes as ‘an endless spread of white, ornamented tents’, and has him say in amazement: ‘They didn’t tell me it was like this. The Ottomans do not even have the strength of 50,000, so what is this army?’ 27 Part of that army included Hasan Kurdi’s estimated 50,000 Serbs and Croats, soldiers he calls miri levendat (state-funded militias), under the command of Hersek (Hercegovina) Governor Durmu ş Pasha. 28 
 The miscalculation and misinformation implicit in this characterisation of Peter proved costly. The czar, in fact, was neither well-endowed with friends at the moment, nor well-prepared for an all-out campaign against the Ottomans. Most of Europe was absorbed by the War of the Spanish Succession, lasting until 1714, when the Treaty of Utrecht temporarily settled the Habsburg–Bourbon rivalry, at least concerning Spain. Furthermore, the Poltava victory had alerted western Europe to the dangers of an expanding Russia. Efforts were made to bring the Great Northern War to an end by mediation. English and Dutch representatives also served as negotiators in the long effort to get the 1699–1720 Russian–Ottoman northern border conflicts settled by mediation. 
 After the Swedish defeat at Poltava, Augustus II was restored as King of Poland under Peter’s protection. That did not guarantee the Diet’s agreement to participate in a new Russo-Ottoman War, and in fact the Polish nobility refused to break off relations with the Ottomans. While Augustus remained steadfast to the Czar, his subjects did not. The Zaporozhian Cossacks, already riven by Hetman Mazeppa’s support of Charles XII at Poltava, could be found on both sides in 1711. Peter used Cossack regiments as mercenaries, under their own leaders, to his advantage in the course of the Great Northern War. 
 Great distances and imperial over-extension characterised the campaign on the Prut River. The Romanov new-style army had proven its mettle at Poltava, but had been in the field since 1700, and in 1711 was scattered over a wide stretch of territory between the Baltic and the Black Seas. In 1695–96, the traditional streltsy infantry had been instrumental in taking Azov from the Turks, but a revolt in their ranks in Astrakhan in 1705–06 was excuse enough for their final elimination. 29 In 1699 Peter ordered the construction of new infantry regiments as an alternative force; by 1705 the standing army, raised primarily by levy, totalled 168,000, 130,000 of them foot soldiers. 30 The new levy system required one man in fifty households; the new ‘immortals’, liberated but in military service for life, were raised primarily from among household serfs and slaves. In 1705 the number was one in twenty; by 1711 when the new war with the Ottomans threatened, one man in three from amongst household servants was raised in Moscow. By the end of Peter’s reign in 1725, 53 levies had raised close to 300,000 recruits. To acquire such recruits was one thing; to keep them necessitated various measures such as chaining them together in carts for transport to their units, or the branding of individual recruits, introduced in 1712. 31 
 That Peter had built a disciplined, effective force in so short a time was a cause of considerable admiration as well as criticism: in 1710, Austrian diplomat Otto Player commented that ‘… they have reached an amazing degree of proficiency thanks to the incessant application and efforts of the tsar and to severe punishments and marks of favour and distinction, as well as to the experience of foreign officers of all ranks drawn from many nations. It is surprising what perfection the soldiers have attained in military movements, how orderly and obedient they are to their superiors’ commands, and how bravely they conduct themselves in battle.’ Still, ‘… little thought is given in Russia to the preservation of soldiers. Bad organisation and inadequate supervision of essential military stores are almost the only, though they are the most serious, defects.’ Scarcity of men was hardly the problem. The issue was supply: ‘… peasants are taken away from the soil and often die of hunger in the field for lack of food.’ 32 Faulty supply and intelligence systems were the real cause of the failure on the Prut. The organisation of provisioning systems was the least successful of the military reforms of the Romanovs. Supply breakdowns were the primary cause in the failure of military manoeuvres again in the 1736–39 Russian Crimean campaigns, and during the Seven Years War. 
 This was in direct contrast to Ottoman attitudes to the individual soldier. Paramount to successful Ottoman warfare was the perceived necessity to have adequate provisions in well-defined, well-placed warehouses, and the judicious application of wages and bonuses throughout the campaigns. This implied an adequate transportation and communications system. Neither the supplies nor the roads were an easy problem to solve in this particular period, or in this particular arena. Nor was it much different from the rest of Europe. By Chandler’s account, the wars of Louis XIV are reckoned as embodying an era of warfare when ‘wars became matters of elaborate manoeuvre’, and armies ‘… were too preoccupied with problems of supply to achieve a truly total victory.’ 33 Supply trains and grain dominate much of the military thinking of the first half of the century. Central and eastern European warfare was equally subject to the unpredictability of the elements which contributed to a successful campaign: good weather, fair crops, and a population large enough to sustain the considerable impact of foraging troops and their hungry mounts. An outbreak of plague, or, as in this case, a plague of locusts which left the Moldavian countryside bare, produced more casualties than actual confrontations. The three days of fierce hand-to-hand combat on 20–22 July 1711 were preceded by months of march, desertion, exhaustion and hunger, the latter a Russian rather than an Ottoman problem. In fact, once a truce was declared, the Russians purchased their much-needed food from the Ottoman stores. 34 
 On the march – Prut 1711 
 The preparations for the campaign on the Ottoman side began in late November 1710 with the declaration of war, signalled by arresting Tolstoy, the Russian representative, as a guarantee against the behaviour of his government. Simultaneously, orders were sent to Tatar Khan Devlet Giray to penetrate and raid Russian territory in the direction of Moscow immediately. 35 Charles XII was sent 500 purses and 36 horses. 36 The call to arms went out to both Anatolian and Rumelian governors and provincial commanders, with orders to assemble by March of the following year. At the same time, orders concerning the assembling of supplies and munitions were issued. Hasan Kurdi noted that the gathering and parade of the troops in Istanbul occurred between the 12 and 16 March; salaries were distributed to the Janissaries on 1 April; by 20 April, the Grand Vizier Baltac ı Mehmed Pasha and Janissary Agha Yusuf Pasha had arrived in Edirne. Here, the horses were allowed to graze on the spring grass for more than twenty days, as the Istanbul contingent awaited the arrival of troops from Anatolia. Those from the Rumelian provinces travelled via Sofia to rendezvous at İ sakc ı on the southern shores of the Danube. Soldiers from the Arab provinces, and the 3,000-strong Egyptian contingent, demanded for every major campaign, came via Gallipolli. The governors of Trabzon and Erzurum in eastern Anatolia were assigned to defend the Crimea, under the command of Commander-in-Chief İ smail Pasha, stationed at Ochakov. His task was to protect the passage into the Crimea in case of a Russian attack, or to sail to the aid of the troops on the Danube, if necessary. 37 
 The march from Edirne to İ sakç ı took 23 days. By 15 June, the first of the troops was crossing the bridge on the Danube. The Grand Vizier crossed to Ismail on 28 June. 38 By early July the Ottomans confronted the Russians on the Prut, outnumbering them, by one estimate, six to one (100,000 cavalry and 140,000 infantry to Peter’s 7,000 cavalry and 33,000 infantry). 39 The Ottomans succeeded on this occasion in crossing the Danube before the Russians could prevent it. 
