 Peter had left Moscow with the main army on 17 March. Even earlier, in mid-January, Field Marshal Sheremetev was ordered to march to the Russian border at the Dniester, and prevent the Ottoman crossing of the Danube, along with regimental guards sent from Moscow. By 6 June Sheremetev was at the Dniester; by 16 June, harassed by Tatars, low on supplies due to the famine in Moldavia, and discouraged by his calculations that the Ottomans would arrive at the Danube before him, he marched to Jassy, where Cantemir and his estimated 5,000 troops and supplies awaited. By 25 June, the main army with Peter was assembled at Shorofi (Soroki) on the Dniester, where they received Sheremetev’s news that he had not prevented the Danubian crossing of the enemy. Angered, Peter pressed on to Jassy during the first week of July, where he found himself stranded without further promised supplies and men from Moldavia, and a camp already exhausted of its own meagre supplies. On the march, water was scarce. Peter elected to send a contingent with Cantemir to attack and capture Ibrail, an important Ottoman depot on the Danube, in order to feed his army. Meanwhile, another force under Sheremetev would proceed along the right bank of the Prut to prevent the Ottoman crossing. This is how the forces stood on the evening of 19 July. 40 
 In the Ottoman camp, Janissary Agha Yusuf Pasha and his vanguard ( serdengeçti ) were busy building the pontoon bridges over the Prut at Falçi. In order to prevent the Russian advance guard from interfering, troops crossed the river by barge; just as many, mostly Tatars, swam across and engaged the enemy during the night of 19 July, with Çerkes Mehmed Pasha and Diyarbak ı r Governor Ali Pasha appointed to the task. Fierce fighting ensued, and the Ottoman soldiers were rewarded with ‘tongue and head’ money, at first 100 alt ı n a head, but by afternoon, only 30 kuru ş . Russian soldiers were captured; the rebels from the Principalities were killed. 41 By morning, the three bridges had been built, and the rest of the Ottoman army had crossed to the right bank of the Prut. 
 Peter, fearing for the advance guard, moved the main army forward, but was unable to relieve them and entrenched himself at the rear. As darkness fell, fighting ceased. The advance guard joined Peter’s troops. They decided to retreat to a safer position and set up a defensive position at Novostanili ş ti, with their backs to the Prut. Here, Peter found himself completely surrounded, unable to get supplies or water from the Prut because of continual artillery barrages from the Ottoman emplacements. Fighting continued for over three hours on 21 July, but the Russian position and fierce resistance prevented a decisive conclusion to the battle. Considerable casualties had occurred on both sides, which were badly demoralised. The Janissaries, who had reputedly been reduced by 7,000 men that day, had lost the will to continue. Hasan Kurdi noted the hesitation when the troops were ordered to regroup and besiege the Russian entrenchments, and attributed it to fatigue and lack of morale. ‘A huge cry went up, like the day of judgment. “We have no recourse [or guide], so be it,” and they stood at the ready, their hands on the bridle. Some stood in prayer, some in kneeling position; some recited the glory of God, while others sat and prayed. Still others humbly raised their hands in supplication, while many were heedless, some of them shouting vociferously.’ On 22 July, the grand vizier attacked the Russian rearguard at dawn. The Ottomans rained cannon fire on the Russian camp. The Russians were starving and thirsty; the horses dying. Hasan Kurdi imagines the Russian soldiers dropping their weapons, saying: ‘We have no power to fight the Ottomans. It is better to save ourselves and submit than all be destroyed, as we have no strength to resist this army, and these soldiers and so much artillery.’ 42 Peter ‘retired to his tent overcome with grief … and forbade anyone to enter.’ 43 
 Sheremetev offered peace in Peter’s name, and it was accepted after some delay, by Baltac ı Mehmed. The Ottomans first pressed for the surrender of the traitorous Cantemir (and Raguzinsky), but Peter was adamant about protecting them. The treaty was opposed by the Tatar Khan and Stanislas Lesczynski, the deposed king of Poland, Charles XII’s representative on the battlefield. The King of Sweden himself was swimming the Prut at the time in a last-ditch effort to reach the negotiations. 44 Baltac ı Mehmed had just received the news that Peter’s General Ronne, with 12,000 cavalry, had besieged the fortress at İ brail, the supply depot, which, combined with his uncertainty about the stamina of the Janissaries, made him hesitant to renew fighting. Ronne, in fact, occupied İ brail on 24 July, and surrendered it as part of the treaty settlement three days later. 
 Peter’s humiliation was slighter than expected, but the Ottomans achieved their aims: Azov would be returned intact; the newly constructed forts were to be demolished. Russian troops were to leave Poland immediately. Peter was denied access to the Black Sea, and denied a representative in Constantinople. Charles XII was free to return to Sweden. 45 Moldavian and Wallachian rebel leaders had been eliminated. It is not insignificant that the Ottomans henceforth appointed the governors of the Principalities from within trusted Greek families in Istanbul. 
 The treaty was signed on 23 July 1711, but required two more years of bellicose threats, counterthreats and negotiations before the final version, known as the Treaty of Adrianople, was ratified in June 1713. The Romanov southern aspirations had to wait to another day, in 1774, when the battlefields were the same, but the balance of power had shifted to the victorious troops of Catherine II. 
 Hasan Kurdi’s narrative demonstrates less interest in higher politics than in the difficulties the army now faced in returning to Istanbul. For reasons that are not entirely clear, this took until the end of the year. First, on the battlefield, the wounded and valorous were rewarded: the Janissary Agha was given 50 kese to distribute to the wounded, and many of the veteran soldiers were rewarded with stipends in cash or as land grants. The grand vizier and his officers prepared a full report to the sultan, and bridges had to be built in order to move from the Prut to the Danube itself. At the beginning of September, the main army was still on the northern shores of the Danube, where wages were distributed. A constant of Hasan Kurdi’s narrative is bad weather: high winds and tremendous amounts of rain; swollen rivers and difficult passages. The passage to Edirne lasted until early November, where the army was again paid (6 November 1711). Here, Baltac ı Mehmed was dismissed, and Janissary Agha Yusuf Pasha was temporarily appointed grand vizier. Not until early December did the Janissaries enter Istanbul. 46 By that time, Ahmed III was already contemplating another campaign to force the acceptance of the treaty arrangements, as Peter resisted abiding by them. In fact, as noted, the sultan declared war two more times before the final settlement in 1713. 
 The recovery of the Morea 
 Once peace with Russia was assured, the Ottomans turned their attention to the Morea, which they wished to recapture from the Venetians. The army, revitalised by the Prut campaign, required only an excuse for the call to arms. In December 1714, Ahmed III declared war on the Venetians by arguing that Venetian support of Montenegrin rebels and interference with Ottoman merchant vessels in the Mediterranean was in breach of the Karlowitz Treaty. Scholarly consensus is that the Ottomans were keenly aware of both the weakness of the Venetian hold over the Peloponnesus, and of the general disarray in the western allies following the War of the Spanish Succession. The centuries old Venetian–Ottoman rivalry over the Morea had involved repeated capture and surrender of strategic fortresses, and was likely viewed as restoring the Mediterranean frontier. 47 Habsburg–Ottoman relations prior to the Morea invasion were cautiously cordial: the Austrians were preoccupied in western Europe; the Ottomans maintained a healthy respect for the victors of the Karlowitz Treaty. Even as they invaded the Morea, an Ottoman delegation was sent from Istanbul to Vienna to reassure the Habsburgs of their desire to maintain peace. 48 
 Venice stood alone against the Ottoman invasion in the spring of 1715. The record of Venetian occupation of the territory ceded to them by Karlowitz in 1699 is mixed. Catholic and Orthodox animosities coloured much of the politics, but military policies, relying on local taxes and conscript labour to construct new or revitalise old garrisons, also alienated the largely Greek population. New fortifications at Corinth and Nauplion were insufficient to prevent the swift reconquest by the Ottoman army in a few months. Thereafter, Venice withdrew from international conflict, and became a Habsburg client and ally until Napoleon abolished the Republic in 1797. 49 
 The Ottoman army which invaded the Morea left Salonika on 22 May and arrived at Thebes on 9 June, where the Janissary advance guard paraded for the Grand Vizier Damad Ali Pasha (also unown as Silahdar Ali Pasha, 1715–16). The troops marched an average three to five hours, covering nine to fifteen miles per day. On 13 June, a council of war was held in the grand vizier’s tent. Kara Mustafa Pasha was sent to İ nebaht ı with 15,000 Janissaries; Yusuf Pasha was sent ahead to Corinth with the Agha of the Janissaries and the remainder of the army; the grand vizier was to follow. The targets of the main army were the fortresses at Corinth and Nauplion, the latter heavily fortified by the Venetians. By one contemporary estimate, the total number of troops in camp on 9 June was 14,994 cavalry and 59,200 infantry, numbers, as always, to be used with considerable caution. 50 Between 16 June and 13 September when the grand vizier’s return journey to Istanbul began, Corinth, Nauplion, Koron, Modon, and İ nebaht ı had been captured or capitulated, with little resistance. Venetian control of the Peloponnesus was at an end: capture of some of the islands ended more than 300 years of Venetian rule in the Aegean. 
 By 22 September 1715, the grand vizier was within a day’s march of Nauplion, when the sultan’s official congratulations and gifts reached him. Parades and ceremonies to celebrate the victory continued for a week, during which time the normal three months pay was distributed to the Janissaries. On 10 October, the standard of the Prophet, the official signal that the Ottomans were on campaign, was formally replaced in its ceremonial casket. On 17 October, six months more pay was distributed near Larissa. Then, by slow stages, the army returned to Istanbul, arriving in Edirne on 5 November. The grand vizier’s entrance into Istanbul occurred on 2 December 1715. 51 
 There are a number of points to be made about this brief campaign, and the earlier one on the Prut. First, Venetian lack of preparation and inability to finance the war meant that it was basically a walkover for the Ottomans. Venetian fortification included much war materiel, but little manpower. The nine-day siege of Nauplion (12–20 July) involved probably no more than 1,000–1,500 Venetian and Greek soldiers, but the fortress yielded very large quantities of munitions. 52 
