

 The rains which have been pouring here uninterruptedly for three weeks, sometimes with snow and violent storms, have brought a cold and very severe weather, unusual for the local climate at this time of year. The water from overflowing rivers has flooded many villages and even washed way some of them together with inhabitants, as well as all the bridges. Our vessels located in many places in the Danube and other rivers … have been damaged by the stormy element and part of them loaded with victuals have been wrecked. For many days, communication across the rivers was interrupted, and couriers going to me or from me were waiting for a week to cross. 75 
 Rumiantsev’s assessment of the situation in late 1773 reveals both Ottoman strategic initiatives and the arenas that would engage the Russian forces in the second of the two Ottoman Russian Wars, when Catherine II’s southern policy, under considerable attack in St Petersburg, would bear further fruit. By his account, the Ottomans were firmly entrenched with skilled warriors in the Rusçuk, Ni ğ bolu, Vidin and Belgrade garrisons, and had proved their mettle in holding those fortifications. Extending the Russian forces south into the area around Varna simply left Wallachia vulnerable to Ottoman attack. The Ottomans had complete mastery of the Black Sea. As long as the Ottomans continued to hold Ochakov and Kilburun, they could supply the Crimea – even wood was delivered that way – and keep the Tatar hopes alive. In spite of the Russian success in the Crimea and Bucak, the Ottoman fleet guarded the Danube estuary, and hence maintained control of the Crimean Peninsula. Building a bridge across the Danube remained unrealistic because no one could control the flooding, which had been excessive throughout 1773. Crossing had to be by vessel. 76 The final capture of Ochakov lay in the future (1788), but Kilburun, across the bay at the mouth of the Dnieper River, was captured by the Russians before the treaty was signed at Küçük Kaynarca in 1774. 
 In spite of spirited regrouping in fall 1773, the Ottomans were unable to mobilise an army of sufficient size to resist the Russians in the spring of 1774. Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed commanded a completely demoralised and disintegrating army. The prospects for 1774 were bleak. Camp revolts were common, looting of supplies normal, and desertion endemic. In spite of the exaggerated statistics of Ottoman strength, neither side had more than 50,000 troops (the Russians far fewer than that) in the final set of confrontations around Ş umnu in late June 1774. Completely surrounded, and hopelessly outnumbered, the gravely ill Muhsinzade Mehmed agreed to a cessation of hostilities and an immediate peace conference. He died just after the 21 July 1774 treaty was signed by Ahmed Resmi and Nikolai Repnin, plenipotentiaries for the two sides, at Küçük Kaynarca, headquarters of Rumiantsev. Henceforth ‘Küçük Kaynarca’ became synonymous with the Eastern Question. 
 It was in fact a Russian triumph. Rumiantsev’s army had occupied the Principalities, and penetrated deep into Ottoman territory, to the south (right) bank of the Danube, however temporarily. Russian success was predicated on the characteristics we attribute to modern armies: massive conscription, disciplined soldiers, and a unified and hierarchical chain of command. Inhospitable terrain, unpredictable rivers, and disease-ridden marshes were all much magnified by the distance from home territory and access to supplies. The Russians were well matched in the renowned Ottoman tenacity and ability to sustain sieges, but the Ottomans were operating with a confederative, temporary force that suffered from lack of expertise, and opportunism rather than sense of purpose. Russian and Ottoman soldiers were both credited with the ability to withstand hardship and deprivation, but in fortress defence the Ottomans had the edge. ‘Experience has often demonstrated,’ mused Vas ı f, ‘that 10,000 well-disciplined troops sufficed to vanquish 100,000 Muslims; but an army of 100,000 did not suffice to force 10,000 besieged Muslims.’ 77 There is no way to calculate real statistics for the 1768–74 confrontations, but the combination of battle and disease may well have cost the two sides in the region of 500,000 lives. 1768 inaugurated more than 50 years of continuous fighting on the Danubian and Black Sea littoral, with accelerating damage to both the ecology and the human community. 
 The Ottoman supply system faltered in this war, but even so, besieged fortresses often held out because of well-supplied and well-fed troops. That contrasts with the subsistence level offered (perforce and as strategy) by the commanders of the conscript army of the Russians. Time after time in Russian battlefield accounts, they report that when the Ottomans fled, they left behind them rich treasures of arms and supplies. This is a topic waiting for significant study and analysis in this period. 78 
 By the treaty stipulations, Russia retained Kilburun, Taganrog and Azov on the mouth of the Don River; Kerch and Yenikale where the Sea of Azov joins the Black Sea, and Greater and Lesser Kabarda on the eastern end of the Black Sea. Kabarda caused endless diplomatic problems, territory which the Ottomans would contest until the treaty ending two more wars over the same terrain in 1829. The Ottomans retained Ochakov, Yedisan (later Bessarabia), Akkirman, Kili, İ smail, Bender and Hotin, but had to surrender their sovereignty over the Crimean Khanate, and grant the Tatars their independence. The Russians had a toehold on the Black Sea, cause enough for alarm bells to ring in European courts. The Principalities were restored to their former status, but the Russians assumed the right of protection over the Orthodox populations. In spite of much debate among historians about the significance of the religious clauses of the treaty which precipitated later Russian interference in Ottoman minority affairs, real Ottoman anger was reserved for the article that had caused the breakdown of negotiations in 1772: Tatar independence. It was well understood that the so-called independence was simply a step towards incorporation of the Crimea into Russian territory. While remaining ceremonially and religiously tied to their fellow Muslims by the treaty (the sultan was recognised as the Grand Caliph, a term alien to Tatar–Ottoman relations, and to Muslim law), 79 no one was to interfere with their political and civil liberty. Ottoman loss of the first major piece of Muslim-inhabited territory represented the most humiliating blow inflicted by the treaty. 80 The year 1774 was simply Round One of Ottoman–Russian treaty negotiations that continued through the Crimean War. 
 It was as the Russians were withdrawing troops from Bukovina and the Principalities that Austrians occupied the former, thus acquiring by stealth 10,500 square kilometres and 70,000 inhabitants, largely Romanians and Ruthenians. To prevent further conflict, the Ottomans sanctioned the acquisition in May 1775. Habsburg Emperor Joseph II, after sending 15,000 troops into Bavaria, provoked an international crisis which diverted attention from the eastern frontier and engaged both Austria and Prussia in the War of Bavarian Succession. 81 
 For the next decade, the Ottomans struggled to come to terms with the loss of the Crimea. In 1777, Ş ahin Giray, supported by Russia, was installed as Khan at Bahçesaray, and shortly thereafter took control of all of the Crimea from his rivals. In 1778, the war party prevailed in Istanbul and sent troops and a fleet of ships in support of a revolt by claimant Devlet Giray against Ş ahin Giray. Repulsed by the Russians off the Crimean coast and plagued by bad weather, the fleet returned to Istanbul. French Ambassador St Priest and British Ambassador Ainslie mediated between the courts of Catherine II and Abdülhamit I (1774–89). More level heads among the Ottomans, including many veterans of the 1768–74 campaigns, prevailed. The Sultan agreed to recognise the independence of the Crimea in the Convention of Aynal ı kavak (1779), even as the Russians continued their occupation of key fortresses such as Kilburun, directly across the inlet from Ochakov, and fortified their newly-acquired fortresses on the northern Black Sea coast. 82 Catherine went one step further in 1783, and annexed the Crimean Peninsula, Taman and all of the Kuban, justifying the action on the basis of the treaty of Küçük Kaynarca, and the supposed interference of the Ottomans with Tatar sovereignty, in violation of the treaty. In early 1784, they jointly signed the Convention recognising the fait accompli . Ochakov remained in Ottoman hands, but not for long. Border territories at each end of the northern Black Sea become the site of significant voluntary and involuntary transference of Muslim and Christian populations, causing the displacement and ethno-religious conflicts better known in the nineteenth century. The Russians frequently evoked their treaty right to protect the Christian population in the Principalities as an excuse for continued occupation. 
 Austro-Russian–Ottoman confrontations 1787–92 
 Public concern in Europe, especially Britain, was not truly engaged, however, until the events of the second Ottoman–Russian war of 1787–92, when Field Marshal Rumiantsev was eclipsed by two other major Russian figures of the period: Grigorii Potemkin and A.V. Suvorov. Catherine II had not relinquished the larger aim of her southern policy, no matter how illusionary its real prospects might remain. For one, she established a protectorate over parts of Georgia in the Caucasus in the course of 1785, while the Ottomans affected a similar policy with rival Georgians. The Russian ambassador pressed their new treaty-based privilege of establishing consulates in Ottoman cities, especially at Varna on the Black Sea. The Ottomans remained hostile to such establishments, perceiving them as centres of provocation. 83 
 Catherine II’s diplomatic correspondence of the period resonates with a project to restore the Greek Empire, to be called Dacia (ancient country and Roman province, contiguous with present-day Romania and Bessarabia), envisioned as a vast Orthodox imperium. She corresponded especially with Joseph II, who stood to benefit from the scheme but was reluctant to see the further dismantling of the Ottoman European territories. Lured by her own rhetoric, as well as by her favourite Potemkin, who was installed on vast estates in Poland, Catherine II engaged to tour the Crimea, especially the new Russian Black Sea ports, with Joseph II in the spring of 1787. With an international diplomatic entourage, she visited the new Russian bases at Kherson on the Dnieper and Sebastopol, passing under archways erected in her honour inscribed with ‘the road to Byzantium’. 84 
