 Neither side wanted to go back to war, but Catherine II insisted that in doing so, Rumiantsev press his troops south of the Danube for the coup de grâce which would force Ottoman acquiescence to her treaty conditions. There was some urgency in her request, as 1773–75 were also the years of the Pugachev Rebellion, when a pretender to the throne, and his Cossack supporters, represented a very real threat to Catherine’s rule and distracted reinforcements from the southern frontier. 71 The campaign year of 1773 was punctuated with significant confrontations up and down the banks of the Danube, as recorded in Rumiantsev’s dispatches. In early June, for example, General Weissman, after crossing the Danube at Tulcea, reported attacking 12,000 of the enemy at Karasu. The Ottoman commanders were Arnavut Abdullah Pasha, Çerkes Hasan Pasha and Tatar Sultan Ba ş met Giray. 72 The Ottomans appear to have been able to move supplies by ship from Rusçuk to Silistre, as reported by Rumiantsev’s informants: some 40 vessels had been seen arriving in early June 1773. 73 Silistre was the focus of attack by the Russians until early July. 
 The fighting moved along the Danube to Hirsova, where Suvorov (of later Ochakov fame) was put in command. Reinforcements from the Grand Vizier, deep in Bulgaria at Ş umnu, were sent to Silistre, which was finally abandoned by the Russians. Ottoman troops proceeded to Hirsova under the command of Numan Pasha. Battlefield impressions, as well as diplomatic dispatches from Russian field commanders, warned that the Ottomans had ceased to think of peace, and that the Russians were facing choice and fierce troops. It is one of the maxims of Ottoman warfare that here, as in the 1736–39 War, the Ottomans were able to recuperate from tremendous losses with a greater resolve to resist, if only temporarily. This is especially the case along the Danubian garrison line, as we shall see again in 1787–92, 1806–12, 1828–29, and 1853–54. On this occasion, they no doubt used the extended truce to regroup. It is also important to remember that the commanders were increasingly local, defending home territory with their own troops. 
 Supplies were a constant worry for Rumiantsev, who competed with the Ottomans for victuals from the fertile plains of Wallachia. Bulgaria proved daunting for the Russian regiments. ‘Steep mountains and deep pits define its conditions. We had taken entire camps, baggage-trains, and artillery from the enemy, but there was no possibility to defeat entirely his troops, who found shelter in forests and ravines where … our cavalry and infantry … could not move. On the contrary, nothing is so easy in that land as to make an ambush and to attack unexpectedly’. 74 By October, however, the Ottoman army was once more in disarray. Numan Pasha was replaced by Da ğ istanl ı Ali Pasha, who was forced to defend Bazarc ı k, not far from the Grand Vizier at Ş umnu, against Russian attack. Winter brought a hiatus. Rumiantsev reported: 