 In response to such provocation, the Ottomans requested mediation from the English, as their long-time allies the French were about to sign a commercial treaty with Russia (which they did in January 1787). Franco-British rivalries influenced the course of negotiations in Istanbul. Real attempts at mediation were never seriously undertaken. British Ambassador Ainslie continued to thwart the French without offering any real backing from England, while Catherine II preferred to take the belligerent road with the Ottomans, rejecting all such mediation. The Prussian ambassador, working throughout the period on a Prusso-Ottoman alliance, was equally culpable for stirring up the Ottoman officials (an alliance was in fact negotiated and signed in 1790). Public outrage and dishonour at the loss of the Crimea, and potentially the Caucasus (Georgia), however, probably had a greater influence on the final decision in Istanbul. Catherine II’s trip was the coup de grâce . The period is characterised by court rivalry between Grand Vizier Koca Yusuf Pasha (1786–89), head of the pro-war party, and Grand Admiral Gazi Hasan Pasha, the more seasoned and cautious politician. In the event, the ‘war party’ prevailed and the Ottomans declared war on Russia in August 1787. 85 Austria, reluctant partner to the Russians since 1781, declared war in early 1788. 
 Situated at the junction of the rivers Bug and Dnieper on the northern Black Sea coast, Ochakov was the key to the entire Russian Black Sea presence and the main focus of the war. For the Ottomans, recovery of the Crimea was the main reason for the war. Ochakov was the last remaining Ottoman outpost of the Danube and Black Sea strategic line that stretched east from Belgrade. It had previously sustained sieges of a significant and bloody order, especially in the 1736–39 War. In times of peace the Ottoman garrison numbered perhaps 6,000 to 8,000 guards. During the campaigns of the eighteenth century, the number could rise to 20,000 sipahis and Janissaries, and more. Ochakov was difficult of access from land, and required manning and stocking from the sea, as well as investment from the sea. 
 In August 1787, hostilities began when an Ottoman naval detachment fired on Russian frigates off Ochakov, as part of their assault on Kilburun. Two Ottoman attempts on the Kilburun fortress, a narrow strip of land located on the Dneiper mouth, only a few hundred metres opposite Ochakov, were repulsed by Suvorov. The Russian fleet did not perform well in the confrontation, however, and later was badly damaged by a late autumn storm. 
 André Lafitte-Clavé, sent by the Ottomans as head of an artillery corps to prepare the Ochakov defences in April 1787, was the engineer of the assault on Kilburun. He knew the Black Sea coast, having circumnavigated the estuary of the Danube and the northern littoral in 1784. In spite of the recent rapprochement of France and Russia in the newly-signed commercial treaty, Lafitte-Clavé was appointed after presenting his plan for the refortification of Ochakov to Ottoman officials. Ambassador Choiseul-Gouffier expressed astonishment at the confidence the Ottoman had reposed in a Christian, ‘… un preuve qu’il n’est plus impossible d’engager les Turcs à vaincre leurs préjugés.’ 86 The town resembled ‘… a long parallelogram from the crest of the hill down to the waterside, fortified with a wall of considerable thickness running around it, a double ditch … flanked by six bastions, a spit of sand running out from the west flank into the Liman which flanks the sea wall and terminates in a covered battery.’ 87 
 Lavitte-Clavé noted that the plan would have succeeded if the Janissaries had followed his advice. He envisioned an attack in stages with a landing on the very end of the sandy peninsula on which Kilburun rested. Some of the troops made an earlier assault on a beachhead closer to the fortress but it was disorderly and gave away their intentions. Lafitte laboured in vain to have the commanders recall the unruly troops, who provoked a response by the fortress guards. But to his surprise, the Russians did not press their advantage after repelling the attack. The Ottomans captured two Russian cannons, as they had been unable to unload their own artillery. The Janissary sûr’atç ı s (rapid-fire artillerymen) put them to good use, even though they had to use paper fuses. Lafitte-Clavé reckoned that a disciplined force could easily outsmart the Russians, but the majority of the Ottoman troops were inexperienced and simply flew at the first engagement. He regretted the bad habit of the Turks [the term he uses throughout his narrative instead of Ottoman] of rewarding their soldiers on the spot for capturing men and property. He saw that it led to soldiers quitting the fracas (where they might be more useful), in search of a potential prize. In less than a minute, he noted, ‘I saw several of them approach the commander with seven or eight Russian heads, and myself saved one of their captives by expressing the need to extract information from him.’ Lafitte-Clavé estimated that the excursion cost some 250 deaths and 500–600 wounded on each side. Lafitte is at pains to assert that the Janissaries blamed themselves and assured him that they would have won if they had listened to his advice. 88 
 Lafitte was among the technical advisers recalled to France at the end of 1787, and was not witness to the final Russian assault on Ochakov the following year. The consequences of the Ottoman failure to reduce Kilburun became apparent the next June, when fifteen ships of the Ottoman Black Sea fleet were destroyed while trying to escape the newly-installed Russian battery at Kilburun. 
 For the Habsburgs, the campaign against the Ottomans assembled the largest Austrian army to date. Joseph II’s military reforms had included the introduction of a limited conscription system, which allowed for the confrontation with the Ottomans now before them. Field Marshal Franz Moritz Lacy, son of Peter Lacy of Crimean fame, and veteran of Ottoman– Austrian campaigning, proposed that six separate army corps cover the Habsburg–Ottoman line from the Adriatic to the Dniester: the main army under the emperor concentrating at Semlin opposite Belgrade; a second in Croatia; a third army corps stationed along the Sava River; another to cover the Banat/Teme ş var; a fifth protecting Transylvania and a sixth in Galicia/Bukovina. Some 245,000 troops, with 898 field guns and 252 siege guns, were initially deployed on the Ottoman frontier – a number which later rose to some 294,000 – approximating the Russian mobilisation in the Principalities and the Crimea. The plan was to capture Belgrade and secure the left bank of the Danube into Lesser Wallachia, while the Galician army pushed towards Hotin to meet with the Russian army in Moldavia. 
 The Russians had mobilised two armies: one under Potemkin, to capture Ochakov, the other to concentrate on the Danube, Prut and Dniester basins, after joining up with the Austrians. Slow Russian war preparations meant the Ottomans could concentrate their force on Belgrade in 1788, once Joseph II reluctantly declared war in February of that year. Austrian strategy depended on the Russian support in Moldavia, which failed to materialise until late in the 1788 campaign season. Joseph II seems to have been reluctant to confront the Ottoman army as the summer advanced. Ottoman troops reached Vidin in July 1788, crossed the Danube and broke through the Austrian defences of the Banat. The old foes found their armies ranged once again in the Mehadia passage to Teme ş var as in the 1736–39 war. Both sides were short of supplies, and by mid-July 200–300 men were falling ill every day in the Habsburg camp. Refugees, largely Serbian, perhaps as many as 50,000, flooding across the Danube caused logistical problems for the Austrian army. Joseph II moved 20,400 troops into the Banat in mid-August, while the Ottomans dug in at [Old] Orsova after destroying lives and property at will, in a scorched-earth campaign which proved detrimental to both sides. They failed to follow up on the confusion in the Habsburg army north of Mehadia. In mid-September, the Ottomans forced the blockade of the Danube, instead, while the Habsburg troops withdrew from its shores. In late October, Habsburg commanders braced for a full-scale attack by Grand Vizier Koca Yusuf Pasha at Semlin, but it failed to materialise, and by the end of October, the Ottoman army had withdrawn from the Banat into winter quarters in Sofia. Habsburg casualties (military and civilian) were estimated at 80,000. 89 The Austrians had more success in Moldavia: by September they had occupied Jassy, and with the Russians besieged Hotin, which surrendered that same month. The Ottoman forces were given ten days to evacuate the fort at Jassy, with full honours, which infuriated Field Marshal Rumiantsev, commander of the Russian army on the Prut. 
 Potemkin, meanwhile, continued to propose the evacuation of the Crimea altogether, while he gradually encircled Ochakov by land. A total of 50,000 troops crossed the Bug in June, and by mid-July, Potemkin had spread his forces in an arc around the town. He chose in the end to delay the final assault to mid-December. Suvorov however was more impatient, and in late July engaged with a sortie of 50 Ottoman cavalrymen, which proved disastrous when a superior force of Ottomans forced the Russians back to their lines. Suvorov himself was wounded, and 200 soldiers were killed, their heads displayed on stakes around the fortresss. Potemkin censored him for his haste, and the waste of manpower. Suvorov would figure much more prominently in the fall of the Danubian fortresses later in the war. 
 In mid-August, the Ottoman garrison made another sortie, during which General Mikhail Kutuzov, later commander in the 1806–12 Russo-Ottoman war and famous for the defence of Moscow against Napoleon in 1812, was wounded and blinded in one eye. Russian ships fired on the Ottomans, forcing the end of that particular engagement. 90 Part of the reason for Potemkin’s delay till winter was the presence of the Ottoman fleet, which as late as October had managed to break the Russian blockade and disembark 1,500 soldiers at the fortress of Ochakov. 91 Potemkin also hoped to negotiate a surrender rather than force a bloodbath. Furthermore, with the surprising resilience of the Ottoman army on the Danube, he understood very well that the war would not end with the taking of Ochakov and was already making plans for the campaigns on the lower Danube the following year. 
 Waiting took its toll on the besiegers. Fresh water was scarce; winter arrived early, with temperatures of −15° Celsius, and ‘the camp became “snow and shit” ’, making life unbearable for the soldiers in the trenches, who created burrows for themselves. In spite of conditions, and much illness, Potemkin appears not to have lost as many soldiers to disease and dysentery as Münnich or Rumiantsev, his predecessors in the Crimea, or indeed as many as Joseph II was losing daily on the upper Danube. 92 
