 For the Ottomans, of course, the Russian occupation of fortresses like Hotin, İ smail, Kilya and Bender was disastrous, not just from a strategic but also from a logistical point of view. The Ottomans were justly famous for, and dependent on over-supply, but the 1740–68 hiatus in campaigning had meant a neglect of the roads and warehouse systems which guaranteed their ability to function in the Danube region. Furthermore, they maintained a Danube fleet, which in the seventeenth century numbered 52 vessels. 49 The 1769 campaign required the restoration of fortresses, supply depots, and means of transportation which disabled much of the field action of that year. In 1770, the Ottomans suffered tremendous losses, and abandonment of much of their supplies to victorious Russian armies. A further disaster in 1770 was the occupation and blockade of the Dardanelles by the unprecedented appearance of a Russian fleet, which defeated and set alight the entire Ottoman Mediterranean fleet at Çe ş me, near present-day Izmir. The net effect was to strangulate the supply system of Istanbul. Combined with disorderly retreats, and the invidious habit of fleeing troops to plunder their own camps, the renowned Ottoman supply system fell apart. 
 The collapse of the Ottoman supply system 
 Behind these catastrophes lies another story remaining to be told about how the supply system actually worked from fortress to fortress. Such an investigation requires addressing the enormous surviving documentation of the Ottoman archives concerning the problem of acquisition and distribution of foodstuffs to the troops in the field. I have consulted some of those for İ sakc ı and Rusçuk, both fortresses, ports, and supply warehouses on the south shores of the Danube, which were absolutely pivotal to the well-being of the Ottoman army as it marched north into the territories between the Prut and the Dniester. The frontline supply depot was at Hantepesi, north of Jassy and south of Hotin. The passage between was punctuated with bivouacs, which were also generally supplied with pack animals and food levied from the countryside. 
 İ sakc ı Warehouse Superintendent Hatibzade Ahmed Agha reported in early 1769 on the structural repairs that had been ordered in late 1768 for the warehouse. He had been spending 2,500–3,000 kuru ş a month over the last year on salaries for trench diggers, ironmongers and carpenters, and listed considerable expenses for daily supplies he was drawing from Moldavia. 50 Similarly, orders to purchase a supply of 4,500 wagons of straw, 40,000 kantar of hay and 9,000 wagons of firewood at fixed prices were sent to Chief Commissar Mehmed Tahir and the İ sakc ı judge in January 1769. The Warehouse Superintendent and the Commissar were also responsible for seeing to the purchase of grains (barley, wheat and flour) as well as biscuit ( peksimed ). 51 This was shipped from all over the Balkans. Multiple orders to individual state provisioners ( mubayaac ı ) in late 1768 indicate the concern of Istanbul about provisioning the fortresses from the recently harvested crops. The orders contain specific cautions about sifting the grain for impurities. 52 Similar orders were sent to the bivouacs with explicit reference to the amounts and prices in the records for the previous campaign of 1736. By December 1769, projections and records of purchases for the 1770 campaigns were received from the new İ sakc ı Warehouse Superintendant, Ali Agha. This document is particularly revealing, because it notes the cancellations of numerous orders due to peasant resistance, and chaotic conditions up and down the shores of the Danube. 53 By February and March, former Deputy Grand Vizier Ahmed Resmi was instructed to buy supplies at market rather than fixed prices and ship them to the Burgos depot on the Black Sea because of the impossibility of obtaining supplies in Wallachia and Moldavia. He was given 330,333 kuru ş to do so, an enormous sum to be handed over to an individual bureaucrat. 54 It suggests a measure of desperation that is borne out by multiple records for the same period. One records the fact that 60,000 kantar of biscuit was shipped from the naval storehouses of Istanbul because rebellions in the Principalities made it impossible to collect the grains usually supplied from those regions. 55 
 It only got worse: in August of 1772, the Ochakov Defterdar wrote in desperation about his debts accumulated because of the matter of supplies and rations: daily barley and flour rations were arriving, but there was no back-up supply for the winter. The biscuit supplies were low because of the last siege. The fresh meat ration had been cut from all soldiers. There had been two meat deliveries at 14,000 okka each, but they had not sufficed. Cash substitutes for non-existent supplies had caused him to take loans and issue promissory notes to the clamouring soldiers. He was already 150,000 kuru ş in debt, and needed 110,000 more to get through the winter. A subsequent set of documents record him as the ‘late’ Defterdar and includes a list of creditors, most of whom are identified as commanders of the various corps. 56 
 Another cri-de-coeur from Rusçuk to the Grand Vizier, in December of 1772, reported that the commissary had managed to distribute only nan-i aziz (‘white’ bread for the Janissary corps and central government officials) for the two months since rations were sent from army headquarters. Foraging in the neighbourhood had produced enough barley for nine days only and the suffering had been dreadful. An additional 10,000 kuru ş was forwarded to Rusçuk in response to this request, an insufficient gesture in a countryside which had no supplies to buy. 57 In late 1772, the Ottoman and Russian armies were idle, while diplomats engaged in the long, fruitless negotiations for peace that continued until the spring of 1773. By that time, Tott noted, Mustafa III had spent more than 25,000,000 (sterling) on the war. 58 Ahmed Resmi, a scathing critic of Ottoman logistic efforts in this period, notes how ill-prepared the chief administrators were, referring particularly to the ‘demented’ Commissar Tahir Agha, who failed to see that the warehouses on the passage to the front were adequately prepared, causing needless death and suffering of the soldiers. 59 As Rumiantsev noted in his despatches, the Grand Vizier could not move all his forces forward to Hotin, largely because his main supply depot was two hundred versts away. 60 After 1770, the Ottomans had to rely entirely on their own territory for supplies, a significant influence on the outcome of events. 
 Two major confrontations dominate the 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman War. The first, the siege and ultimate capture of Hotin in 1769, was char-acterised by the preponderance of cavalry. The second, at Kartal (Kagul) in 1770, was the major confrontation of the war, with the fully arrayed Ottoman army backed up against the Danube across from İ smail and the significantly smaller Russian army under Rumiantsev confronting them. As elsewhere in this book, I will tell the story out of contemporary chronicles, of which there are a significant number for this war. 
 Hotin lay at a junction of the Dniester and Prut rivers, in heavily forested territory, making it difficult for cavalry actions, and requiring significant logistical talent for coordinating the necessary fording and foraging. Under Golitsyn’s command, the Russians made an early crossing of the Dniester in April, 1769, to face a heavily defended Ottoman fort, with possibly as many as 12,000 troops, and 30,000–40,000 cavalry under four commanders. Within two leagues of the fortresses, after a difficult forced march, Golitsyn elected to withdraw across the Dniester. His ostensible reason for retreating was the news of the impending approach of the main Ottoman army. In fact, the fortress had just been rocked by a rebellion of the Ottoman fortress guard, who had killed the garrison commander. Rumeli Mehmed Pasha, one of the more successful of Ottoman cavalry commanders in this war, was credited with chasing the Russians back over the Dniester. Golitsyn’s indecisiveness would cost him his command later in the fall. 61 
 Phase two of the battle for Hotin involved a siege. In early July Golitsyn’s troops crossed over the Dniester again, and besieged the fortress. Battlefield chronicler Enverî takes up the story: in the face of the Russian assault, Rumeli Mehmed and his estimated 10,000 troops withdrew into the fortress. The Russian siege of Hotin lasted 27 days. By the twenty-third day of the siege, all supplies of barley, fodder and biscuit were exhausted. The Russian camp was equally desperate for food, and foragers were travelling two days’ distance to find supplies. Moldovanc ı Ali Pasha, commanding a relief force, was known to be marching north from Hantepesi. Golitsyn, worried about the relief force and about supplies for his troops, crossed back over to the Dniester. Moldovanc ı Ali, credited with forcing the retreat of the Russians, was appointed Grand Vizier in place of Mehmed Emin Pasha, universally excoriated as a complete incompetent. 62 
 The third phase of the siege and abandonment of Hotin involved the Ottoman army building a bridge across the Dniester, and sending advance guards across the river. The main army could not make the crossing until early September. Already entrenched for the winter near Kameniçe, the Russians gained the upper hand, routing the Ottoman troops, who managed to recross the bridge before it collapsed. Golitsyn estimated Ottoman losses at 3,000 during the day-long confrontation. By mid-September, Golitsyn had ordered his soldiers to cross the Dniester again, only to find Hotin fortress entirely deserted. Ahmed Resmi noted that the Grand Vizier simply walked out and left the doors open, largely because of the lack of supplies, but also because of desertions and the quarrelling among the commanders. 
 Golitsyn credited the Polish and Albanian troops under his command for their valour. He also had ten battalions of grenadiers who cut down the Ottoman cavalry. While the Ottomans had firearms and artillery with them, both proved ineffective. The problem was always the same: Ottoman generals ordered skirmishes but failed to mount a real resistance to the Russian advance. To fight in this arena, the Ottomans were now relying almost entirely on unruly cavalry, called up as levend , or as part of the Khan’s entourage. This would be typical of the rest of the war. By the end of the year, the Russian vanguard was established at Jassy, and had penetrated deeply in Wallachia, attacking the fortresses on the Danube. The main Russian army, under Rumiantsev’s command, spent the winter to the north of the Dniester. The Grand Vizier and the main Ottoman force had withdrawn to the south of the Danube at Babada ğ ı . 
 Rumiantsev argued that the Ottomans would reassemble the army in the spring, and that his own troops needed to have comfortable winter quarters meanwhile. Furthermore, he noted, the Ottomans would increase the number of their infantrymen, that having been their disadvantage in the Hotin confrontations, and that his own light-horse cavalry had suffered tremendous loses which it would be impossible to restore before the spring campaign. In fact, the surviving Ottoman documents, mentioned above, does in fact reveal a preoccupation with supplies, along with a list of 20,000 infantry and 11,500 cavalry troops who were ordered to be mobilised from Rumeli and Anatolia. 63 
 The year of disasters: Çe ş me and Kartal (1770) 
