

 Plate 9   The Danube basin (a map of the Russian dominions in Europe) (McMaster University Library, Rare Maps Accession #9464. A Map of the Russian Dominions in Europe, with Adjacent Countries extending Westward beyond the Vistula. London. Published by J. Cary, No. 181 Strand May 1st 1814). 
 Once actual conditions of peace were agreed upon, carrying out of the terms often lasted decades, especially in the 1760–1830 period. The loss of the Crimea in 1783 was bitterly resented in Istanbul. Arguments over borders in the eastern Black Sea region were long and acrimonious after 1807. Similarly, Mahmud II stiffly resisted external interference with populations he considered his subjects, notably the Serbians and then the Greeks. It is easy to argue that the Ottomans and Russians were in a constant state of hostility after 1768, with the possible exception of the uneasy (and brief) alliance against Napoleon at the turn of the century. 7 
 By 1768, the Ottomans had largely moved from a professional to a ‘volunteer’, militia-based army, paid for by a combination of local, sometimes extraordinary taxes, combined with direct support from the sultan’s treasury. Even the Janissary regiments, who still manned the border fortresses, were newly reconstituted for the campaigns that began in 1768. The hiatus had meant the almost total collapse of any system of discipline and recruitment, and the Ottomans were completely unprepared for a major campaign when they made the initial declaration of war against Russia in 1768. Their tenuous economic recovery was halted by the two decades of warfare on which they embarked, impeding any efforts at military and fiscal reform until the peace of Jassy in 1792. Between 1760 and 1800, prices trebled, deficit budgets became the norm, and the state occasionally resorted to forced loans from its nobles and confiscation of their estates in order to continue to finance warfare. 8 
 The period after 1750, it has been argued, was one of the most significant of the phases of the development of the modern European army. 9 The Ottomans missed a generation of developments by remaining outside the battlefields of the Seven Years War. Thus, the technology gap significantly hindered their ability to counter the massed firepower of the mobilised rapid field artillery characteristic of the post-1756 period. Ottoman sultans like Mustafa III (1757–74) were well aware of the problem and commissioned foreign experts such as Baron de Tott to rectify the deficiency, but systemic economic and organisational problems proved insurmountable. It is possible to argue, however, that erratic but fairly consistent attention to the artillery as an essential auxiliary corps characterised the period 1760 onward. Reconfiguring the armed forces generally became a primary preoccupation of generations of Ottoman statesmen only after the utter collapse of the Danube defence system after 1787. 
 1768–92 and the Russians 
 A glance at Russia for the period under discussion reveals similar problems but a very different outcome. The most striking aspect of the period 1760–1830 in the Romanov Empire is the massive amount of territory it acquired under Catherine II (1762–96), including not only Ukraine and chunks of Poland but also great parts of the northern Black Sea coast, the Caucasus and Central Asia. An expanding rather than a contracting empire, Russia under Peter the Great and Catherine added multi-ethnic, multi-religious populations in great numbers, challenging and ultimately reinforcing Russian orthodoxy as the state ideology of the nineteenth century. Similarly, Peter the Great’s early eighteenth-century radical transformation of the Russian military into a professionally run and empire-wide mobilisation project, ultimately forced the continuation of serfdom as the bedrock of an imperial system until the middle of the nineteenth century. The construction of universal political sovereignty, Russian-style, required the cooperation of the local military and administrative service and supply of men and arms. Peter rationalised military and civilian service in the Table of Ranks (1722). Catherine the Great’s Charter of the Nobility of 1785 formally liberated the nobles from servitude to the state, and guaranteed their property rights, and by extension, their serfs. 10 Both rulers inaugurated the Russian social transformation, anticipating the Ottomans in the process of modernisation by a half-century. 
 To insist on Catherine’s enlightenment agenda is to blind us to the realities of imperial politics, however, and the horrors of the dreadful battlefields of the northern Black Sea coast. Her difficulties are best demonstrated by her policies concerning the Crimea, where an administrative reform agenda conflicted with the realities of accommodating new settlers in Muslim territories. The unilateral incorporation of the Crimean Peninsula into the empire in 1783 offered an opportunity to test policies that later operated in the expanding frontiers of Muslim Central Asia. Efforts to draw Tatar nobles and Muslim religious officials into state service, however, were accompanied by colonisation measures which forced the significant exile of Tatar populations into Ottoman territories, from land already much depopulated by decades of warfare, into lands which would be contested by Tatars, Circassians, Kurds and Christians (Armenians and Georgians) until the twentieth century. By the nineteenth century, the Crimea was predominantly Russian/Orthodox territory. 
 Expansion into the Ukraine and the Crimea considerably enabled the Russian war effort by stabilising a notoriously unruly frontier and gradually bringing the Cossacks under state control. Late eighteenth-century warfare on the Ottoman frontier was costly and wasteful, however, no more so than in the confrontations in the Principalities and the Crimea. Financing became an acute problem for the Romanovs in the 1780s, when the brilliant, and savage, conquests of Suvorov climaxed two decades of victories in the south for the Russians. Europeans remained impressed with the courage and tenacity of the Russian infantryman, proved on the battlefields of the Seven Years War. 11 The Russo-Ottoman wars of 1768–74 and 1787–92 (the latter including a reluctant Austria from 1788–91), however, proved very destructive to Catherine’s legislative and economic reforms, and generated opposition from noble and peasant alike. 12 The 1773–74 Pugachev Rebellion in particular threatened to bring down the dynasty altogether. The Russian army, composed of mobilised and ‘freed’ serfs, increased threefold in the decades under discussion, with a similar increase in expenditure. 13 
 It is thus possible to consider the Russian imperial drive entering a different phase after 1790, when the three contenders for control of the Danube and the Black Sea paused to catch a breath before being drawn inexorably into the international context of the Napoleonic period. The Ottomans struggled to regroup under Selim III and Mahmud II; the Romanovs, under Catherine’s successors Paul and Alexander, slowed the process of reformation, restored the predominance of the military, and reinstated the role of the Church in imperial affairs. 14 Adherence to Orthodoxy, and Russification, became integral parts of later Romanov subjecthood. 15 
 1768–92 and the Austrians 
 The Habsburgs, by contrast, after acquiring prodigious amounts of territory between 1714 and 1739, were exhausted by several decades of expansion and campaigns on multiple fronts. During the 1737–39 War, as we have seen, Austria fielded 140,000 regular troops as well as 45,500 irregulars from the military border settlements, but had proved unable to dominate the struggles with the Ottomans on the upper Danube, resulting in the loss of Belgrade in 1739. That humiliation was followed immediately by Frederick II’s attack on Silesia in December 1740, which continued in the War of Austrian Succession until 1748. Both it and the Seven Years War which followed proved a trial by fire for Maria Theresa (1740–80) and her son Joseph II (1780–90). Extensive Prussian-style reform of agrarian estates and military conscription led to an increasing militarisation of Austrian society. By one reckoning, 50 per cent of state expenditure went to the peacetime Austrian army in the 1780s. 16 Austrian strategy in the 1760s and 1770s was to explore diplomatic alternatives in preference to open conflict with the Ottomans as well as Prussia and Russia. ‘Vienna had come to value the Turks as peaceful neighbors, and the Carpathian Mountains constituted a natural border between Austria and Poland.’ 17 This may have prompted the July 1771 treaty with the Ottomans, by which the Ottomans promised a subsidy to Vienna and the cession of Little Wallachia, which the Austrians had surrendered in 1740, in return for guaranteeing Polish territorial integrity. It was abrogated by Austria in 1772, never seriously implemented, and in any case, rendered void by the first Polish partition. 
 An uneasy rapprochement with Prussia, equally fearful of the substantial Russian gains in the 1769–70 campaigns against the Ottomans, allowed for the first partition of Poland in 1772 by which Austria added Galicia to its territories. An opportunistic seizure of Bukovina from the defeated and vulnerable Ottoman Empire was territory gained at little expense. The theft was formally acknowledged by the Ottomans in 1775. By 1781, Joseph II had signed a secret alliance with Catherine the Great, which would eventually draw Austria into the second Russo-Ottoman War of 1787–92. The alliance followed discussion between the two monarchs concerning the division of the Ottoman territories, especially Moldavia, Wallachia and Bessarabia. Known as the ‘Greek Project’, in reality it was the testing of waters about the division of spoils should the Ottomans begin war anew, an early stage of the Eastern Question. Catherine aimed at liberating the three territories above, an independent state to be called Dacia, while Joseph II was to have a free hand in the rest of the Balkans. As events unfolded, Austria aimed at a border approximating that of Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718; Catherine’s interests lay primarily in the Crimea, and Ochakov, key to the northern Black Sea littoral. In spite of an ambitious conscription programme, and no less than six Austrian armies spread along the eastern frontier, the Ottomans proved a resilient foe in the rough and disease-ridden terrain of the Austro-Ottoman border. French loss of influence in Europe, and the deterioration of relations with Austria, left Joseph II vulnerable by 1790. He died in February of that same year, and was succeeded by his brother Leopold II (1790–92). Prussia chose that moment (January 1790) to conclude a defensive alliance with Selim III. Austria found itself on the brink of war with Poland and Prussia, and forced into an early withdrawal from the war with the Ottomans by a September 1790 armistice, in spite of notable territorial successes on the battlefield in the year. The upshot was the July 1791 Austro-Prussian treaty, and the August Sistova Treaty with the Ottomans. By special convention the Austrians acquired Old Orsova at last, a very costly enterprise for a postage-stamp, but a vital piece of cross-Danube territory, and gateway to the Banat. 18 
 The extremely taxing and costly campaigns against Napoleonic armies in 1796–97, and the peace of Campoformido of 17 October 1797, capped an age of Habsburg military engagement and defeats which would lead to a complete reordering of Austrian Habsburg territories by 1803. 
 1768–74: Russian miracle, Ottoman debacle, and Austrian test 
