 The sultan had previously ordered 6,000 troops to each of the two pivotal fortresses of Hotin and Ochakov. He also ordered Tatar Khan K ı r ı m Giray to make raids into the new Russian territories in the Ukraine as early as January of 1769. 28 Further Ottoman mobilisation efforts can be followed in a unique source, the record of the actions of the central Defterdar , Sar ı m Ibrahim Pasha, at the beginning of the campaign. 29 The first thing to be considered was to ensure that the fortresses on the strategic line – Hotin, Bender, Ochakov, İ brail and Killi – were supplied with 100,000 kile each of barley, wheat ( h ı nta ) and flour ( dakik ). This would normally be secured by forced purchase at fixed prices ( mubayaa ). The manuscript includes a very extensive list of the supplies and animals considered essential to the beginning of a campaign. In the matter of hard-tack ( peksimed ), for example, 400,000 kantar were requisitioned from bakeries in Istanbul, Salonika and Gelibolu, with a price tag of 2,708 kese , by far the largest expense on the list. Other examples include: 820 pairs of water buffalo, for 69 kese ; 1,450 draft horses, 58 kese ; 1,000 trench diggers ( beldar ) two months wages, 58 kese , and so forth. Fortress repairs, lumber for Danube bridges, army supplies, tents, etc., are all carefully recorded in Mustafa Kesbi’s account. 
 The second matter was securing the sufficient tax revenue from the countryside, and minting coins to pay for the campaign. Insufficiency drove the minting of coins: 2,000 nisfiye (half sequin) and 2,000 zer-i mahbub (gold coin worth 25 kuru ş ) were produced. The next stage was mobilising the countryside, through the levendat militia system. 30 Deployment of the troops thus mobilised was envisioned in the following proportions: 6,000 infantry and cavalry under Albanian Kahraman Pasha, to guard Moldavia; 14,200 for Ochakov fortress; 17,560 for Hotin fortress; 3,100 for Bender fortress; 24,000 for Crimea; 2,000 for the Khan’s entourage; 15,000 palace sipahis for the Bender Commander’s entourage – 81,760 troops in total. 
 If we add some 60,000 Janissaries and related corps assembled in Babada ğ ı , plus 40,000–50,000 Tatars raised by the Khan, we arrive at the anticipated need of 150,000–200,000 men for the Danubian and Black Sea frontier in this war. Kesbi has an all inclusive total of 254,900 cavalry and infantry on the same page, then later details the numbers of Janissaries, and close to a thousand officers and their entourages. 31 
 A sample listing of the regional commanders ordered to report to Hantepesi mustering grounds (north of the Danube crossing at İ sakc ı ) suggests that the soldiers for this war were drawn from the Balkans, Anatolia and the Caucasus: Arnavut (Albanian) Kahraman Pasha, Abaza (Abkhazian) Mehmed, Tarsuslu (South-east) Koca Agha, Canikli (on the Black Sea) Ali Pasha and sons; Kütahyal ı (Aegean) R ı dvan Agha, Dagistanl ı Ali Pasha; Çerkes Hasan Pasha, etc. (Caucasus). In the list as well are major family names, important to later events: Karaosmano ğ ullar ı , Çapano ğ ullar ı among others. Token troop numbers from Egypt (3,000 were automatically – on paper – sent from Cairo as part of the tributary arrangements), and the Arab provincial recruits, coming from long distances, arrived after the main body of troops was already in place at Hantepesi. There, a roll-call determined actual battlefield numbers for the distribution of salaries and supplies as above. 32 Artillery, and the large corps of topcus (gunners), cebecis (armourers) and arabac ı s (waggoners) accompanied the army, although the biggest pieces were first transported by ship to Varna. Guns including 150 ten-pounders, 50 heavy guns, and an equal number of mortars are estimated to have been the original requisition of artillery for the 1769 campaign. 33 
 Estimates in western sources about the size of the Ottoman armies are generally out of proportion to the realities, largely because the Ottomans still insisted on travelling as of old, with huge baggage trains and large numbers of camp followers. Late eighteenth-century Ottoman camps may be likened to disturbed beehives. It was also the case that the government accompanied the Grand Vizier, so the Chief Financial Officer and his staff, for example, were in command headquarters, while stand-ins held their offices in Istanbul. An acute shortage of trained officers characterises this war and the following ones until well into the mid-nineteenth century, so much so that state bureaucrats often were appointed officers in the heat of the moment to fill the breach. 34 
 The fighting potential of these forces on the battlefield is also generally exaggerated. For this campaign, probably 70 per cent of both the central and provincial forces were raw recruits; insubordination was endemic; the encouragement of individual prowess and immediate cash rewards for valour persisted. While it appears from the documentation that manpower was over-abundant, the vast armies vanished into thin air on the road, and almost immediately upon a major confrontation with the enemy. One significant reason appears to have been the serendipitous application of discipline, severe when meted out but generally not part of the daily life of the Ottoman soldier. There was no equivalent to the ubiquitous gauntlet in use in European armies, reputedly most severely applied in the Russian case. Ottoman punishment took two forms: banishment to one of the castle-prisons, such as in Gelibolu – or immediate execution. 35 Ahmed Resmi’s observations of Frederick the Great’s military exercises while he was at Potsdam are instructive. He remarked on the miserable soldier (using the word sultat ) forced to drill, … bewildered and confused … worse than slaves, starving and ill-dressed. He was horrified by the use of the gauntlet for discipline. 36 The bastinado is conspicuous by its absence in contemporary Ottoman military reports, even though it was the traditional disciplinary weapon of the Janissaries. The single most persistent problem for the Ottomans was the disdain of Janissary officers and officials for the provincial forces, a refusal to respect the demands of the uncultivated recruits and their upstart commanders. By gradually turning their peasants into soldiers, the Ottomans violated one of the basic principles of the state ideology, which advocated a strenuous demarcation of the line between peasant and soldier. From the 1790s, the reformers advising Selim III tacitly recognised the blurring of categories when advising the sultan about using raw Anatolian recruits for his Nizâm- ı Cedid troops. 
 By contrast, the Russians had introduced considerable European order and discipline into the post-Petrine army, as well as the beginnings of a military command structure. This was more evident after they began to emulate Prussia in the 1740s, but the system was further extended during this war under Field Marshal P.A. Rumiantsev, who was given sole command of the battlefield after his victory at Kartal in 1770. He was responsible for the strategy of installing military settlements in the newly-acquired territories of the south, and his instructions concerning recruitment and training, especially field formations and discipline, became operational over the rest of the century. Rumiantsev was known as ‘the Transdanubian’, as the first Russian officer to break the formidable Ottoman fortress line along the Danube in 1773–74. 
 Russian mobilisation was based on an elaborate conscription system, which raised 300,000 troops for the 1768–74 campaigns alone. This was accomplished with great difficulty, and targets were rarely reached. Desertions were a constant, although not as high as the 10 per cent of Peter’s earlier army. Villages surrendered their ill and old for the levies when possible, although the strong and young were first choice of recruiters as well as of landlords. Mutilation and buying one’s way out, or finding a substitute, offered a means of escape. To be conscripted was to be given a death sentence, as the term of service for life was only reduced to 25 years at the end of the century (1793). Between the 1680s and the 1790s, the Russian standing army almost doubled in size, from 200,000 to perhaps as much 350,000, making it reputedly then the world’s largest. The army was financed on one-fifth of the revenue of the French monarchy, by contrast, making it also one of the most parsimonious. 37 In 1769, the Russians fielded two armies: the first, 60,000 strong, commanded by A. Golitsyn in Poland and aimed at Wallachia and Moldavia, and the second, 40,000 troops, under Rumiantsev across the Crimea. More than half of the army in the Crimea was made up of irregulars, especially Cossack and Kalmuk cavalry. 38 For artillery, the first army in Poland had 120 twelve-pounders, and the second army 48 pieces. 39 The Russian command had the advantage of experienced soldiers, but the government still ran on a very small provincial bureaucracy, fewer than 5,000 officials for the entire empire, who served as officers during the wars. 40 Financing war was a constant problem, and deficits in Russia jumped from 2,000,000 roubles in 1769 to 9,300,000 in 1772. The government resorted to printing money and borrowing from foreign creditors. 41 On the Ottoman side, military expenditures doubled during 1768–74. 42 
 While command gave the Russians considerable advantage over their Ottoman foes, supply remained the greatest imponderable, affected by dreadful terrain and uncertain weather, and consequently levelling the presumed advantages of either side. We have already seen how difficult the Crimean Peninsula proved to be for Russian armies in the 1736–39 campaigns. Wallachia and Moldavia were equally difficult to manoeuvre, criss-crossed with gorges and ravines. The Danube regularly flooded, forcing constant vigilance at strategic crossings. The Ottomans had to rebuild the bridge over the Danube (at İ sakc ı ) in 1769, and again in the spring of 1770, when it was washed out by floods. Spring thaws brought oceans of mud. In 1773, Rumiantsev could not besiege Rusçuk and Silistre until mid-July because of excessive rain. 43 Drought often preceded or followed flooding, making crop availability uncertain. And everywhere there were insects. Ahmed Resmi commented about the main army’s arrival in Bender in 1769 that it was as if ‘… the world was covered with flies.’ 44 An unexpected blizzard at the same fortress in 1788 killed one quarter of the Russian troops. 45 Plague continued its devastation in such a setting: in August 1771, 400–500 Russians a day were dying in a particularly virulent outbreak caused largely by the war conditions of the southern frontier. 46 
 Writing to Catherine II just prior to a major confrontation with the Ottomans, Rumiantsev’s observations about the conditions in Wallachia and Moldavia in June 1770 are particularly apt: the land was wasted, the villages depopulated, the inhabitants, fleeing both the enemy and the plague, had abandoned their fields completely. There was no evidence of their ability to feed themselves, much less supply the troops. Since the previous September, the Russians had deprived the local populations (north of Hotin) of their horses, oxen and wagons, to transport the only food supply the troops had had over a long and wretched road. 47 Supply problems were alleviated as the Russians captured well-stocked depots along the Prut, in their 1770 march to the Danube, suggesting both a sufficiency on the Ottoman side and a continued ability of Wallachia to produce the needed grain supplies, if effectively managed. 48 
