 The final assault on 16 December 1788 occurred after a month of Russian shelling from the harbour, and delays due to the severity of the winter. The barbarity on both sides was unparalleled. Creasy, writing a hundred years later, evoked the battle as follows: ‘The Turks of Oczakov had before the siege surprised a Russian village in the vicinity and mercilessly slaughtered all the inhabitants. Potemkin and Suwarrow caused the Russian regiments that were there to assault the town, to be first led through this village as it lay in ashes, and with its street still red with the blood of their fellow countrymen … [the] Russians advanced … whole ranks were swept away by the fire of the besieged: but the supporting columns still came forward unflinchingly through musketry and grape; 4,000 Russians fell; but the survivors bore down all resistance, and forced their way in to the city, where for three days they revelled in murder and pillage. No mercy was shown to age or sex; and out of a population of 40,000 human beings, only a few hundred (chiefly women and children) escaped.’ Potemkin himself described the Russian soldiers like a ‘strong whirlwind’, and the Turks ‘fell in piles, over which [the Russians] trampled, their legs sinking into bleeding bodies’. The final confrontation was commemorated in a song: ‘Turkish blood flowed like rivers, and the Pasha fell to his knees before Potemkin’. 93 
 The new Triple Alliance of Britain, Prussia and the United Provinces (the Dutch Republic) had offered mediation in August 1788, but Catherine II rejected it. The extent to which such gestures were meaningless is borne out by the continuous Prussian thrust for an Ottoman–Prussian alliance and the significant trade in arms between the Ottomans and the British, primarily in gunpowder, but also warships. 94 Istanbul was in disarray, because of the defeats of the campaign season, and the continuing rivalry between Grand Admiral Gazi Hasan Pasha and Koca Yusuf Pasha, the latter held responsible for the fall of Ochakov and Hotin. In April of 1789, a change in sultans further complicated the scene. The new sultan, Selim III, 1789–1807, was young, idealistic and a decided francophile. He ascended to the throne at possibly the most critical moment in the entire history of the dynasty. Advised by his counsellors to settle with Austria and Russia, he chose to continue the war, with Koca Yusuf Pasha, universally despised by those he commanded, in charge. 95 
 In 1789 the Austrians, under Field Marshal Laudon, 72 years old, stormed Belgrade with 62,000 troops against a garrison of 9,000 Ottomans, which capitulated in October 1789. The Austrians had occupied Wallachia by November. The Russians captured Akkirman in October and Bender in November. Cooperation between the two armies in Moldavia led to a defeat of the main Ottoman army under Grand Vizier Kethüda Hasan Pasha (1789), who had replaced KocaYusuf in May, at Martineshti on 22 September 1789. 
 The Austrians, increasingly reluctant eastern frontier warriors, wanted out. Financial and human costs were high: sick and wounded for one year alone (1788–89) numbered 172,000 soldiers, of whom 33,000 died. 96 Revolt in Hungary, and resistance in the Austrian Netherlands against Emperor Joseph II, was partly responsible for the poor showing of the Habsburg armies against the Turks. Indecisive leadership also played a part. Prussia looked poised to attack Austria in the north in the spring of 1790. Public opinion in Vienna opposed the continuation of the war. Once Prussia and Austria settled their differences in the Convention of Reichenbach, in 1790, the Habsburgs were free to negotiate the Austro-Ottoman treaty of Sistova in August 1791, mediated by the Triple Alliance. Old Orsova, on the Ottoman–Habsburg frontier, and a subject of dispute arising from the 1739 Belgrade treaty, was the sole, but important, fruit for Austrian efforts. Relieved of the pressure on the western front, the Ottomans still had to face the Russians entrenched along the Prut and threatening the forts on the Danube basin. The campaign of 1790 was perhaps the worst year ever for the Ottoman forces in terms of catastrophic collapse of mobilisation and logistical systems. 
 There were now essentially two fronts: one on the Black Sea to the east of the Crimean Peninsula at Anapa and Kerch – the latter of which the Ottoman navy aimed to recapture as part of the effort to regain the Crimea – and another focused on the forts of the Danube estuary, with Ottoman headquarters at Ş umnu as in 1774. By the end of 1790, the Ottomans had to acknowledge the finality of the loss of the Crimea. Kilya, Tulcea and İ sakç ı also fell in October and November. İ smail, the strongest fortress of the Danubian system like Ochakov, was essential to Ottoman military and naval operations. There were probably 35,000 men with 265 guns in the fortress, and it was well supplied. ( İ sakç ı and İ smail, it will be remembered, figured heavily in the first Russo-Ottoman War as centres of supply.) Russian forces stood at 31,000 men with 600 guns. Suvorov was put in command in early December when Potemkin despaired of the indecisiveness in the Russian command. Suvorov boasted he would storm İ smail in five days. At his side was Kutuzov. In fact, it took even less time. On 10 December, the attack began at dawn and by 11 a.m., a number of the gates were in Russian hands. The battle took to the streets, each one of which was fought for with great ferocity, until four in the afternoon. The Serasker and 4,000 men defended the last bastion but were slaughtered to a man. Turkish losses stood at 26,000 dead and 9,000 prisoners. 
 Suvorov allowed his soldiers three days of looting, following one of the bloodiest confrontations in all Russian history, which cemented Suvorov’s military fame. 97 Austrian Field Marshal Laudon, victor at Belgrade, wrote: ‘It is beyond all human powers of comprehension to grasp just how strongly these places [Ottoman defensive works] are built, and just how obstinately the Turks defend them. As soon as one fortification is demolished, they merely dig themselves another one. It is easier to deal with any conventional fortress and with any other army than with the Turks when they are defending a stronghold.’ 98 
 Peace – lessons learned 
 The year 1791 was even worse for the Ottoman forces. Russian armies penetrated twice deep into Ottoman territory south of the Danube, until by July they were in control of the entire estuary. Russian guns could reputedly be heard from Istanbul in a final Russian naval victory near Varna. Peace, as in 1774, when the Ottomans finally capitulated, was arrived at with astonishing rapidity. It also closed the Potemkin phase of Catherine II’s Russia, as he died in October of the same year, still hard at work attempting to modify certain unacceptable clauses of the final Jassy treaty, concluded in December 1791. By it, the Ottomans ceded Ochakov, and regained the Principalities and the strategic fortresses at the mouth of the Danube. Catherine II’s aggressive focus on the southern territories had paid off, but in tremendous societal costs and financial difficulties that restricted the continued modernisation of the military. Success also bred complacency. Catherine II’s successor Paul (1796–1801) proved more interested in military parades than serious reform, dropping many of the initiatives of Rumiantsev, Suvorov and Potemkin. The consequences of lack of attention to military affairs would only become apparent on the battlefields of the Crimean War. This was particularly true around the question of artillery and engineering. The training of native engineers lapsed in the second half of the century, and reverted to a reliance on foreigners. Many of the initiatives of Peter and Catherine II did not survive into Tsar Paul’s reign. Paul was responsible for abolishing the General Staff, consolidated over the previous century from a bewildering number of bodies responsible for the organisation of warfare. 
 Russian success in the 1768–92 era lay in its infantry organisation, and in the leadership of Potemkin and Rumiantsev, who were given full authority on the battlefront. Regular regiments relied on continuous conscription. There were 31 levies between the years 1762 and 1799, costly in human terms but effective in fighting the southern wars. Russia’s expansion into the new territories in Ukraine and Belorussia was accompanied by the extension of the levy, so demand rarely outstripped availability of manpower. Rumiantsev and Suvorov were not just brilliant commanders; they were also innovators in the use of drill, discipline, and camaraderie usually attributed to Napoleon and his ‘citizens’ army’. As Suvorov once noted, they understood that there were ‘two distinct military worlds’: the linear order of the Prussians versus the irregulars of the Turks. 
 Under Tsar Paul, the Russian officer corps, drawn primarily from the nobility, gradually lost its status and individuality after this period, a trend observable in the evolution of western European armies of the period. By 1788, civilians were recruited into the officer corps. More foreign officers were added to the Russian army, a source of considerable resentment among native officers and rank and file alike. Real innovation in the evolution of the military lay with the organisation of the border garrison troops. Ukrainian Cossack landmilitia , the equivalent of the Habsburg Militärgrenzer , became regular army regiments under Rumiantsev in 1769. Potemkin understood the need to draw the Cossack populations of Ukraine in general, and the Crimea in particular, into the Russian system. Potemkin called the Cossacks ‘the eyes and protectors of the army’, and worked towards the formal integration of the informal Cossack irregulars into the Russian military until his death in 1791. As military settlers, they could be self-sufficient in peace-time; as auxiliary light cavalry, they had a significant role to play in the unconventional war that continued to unfold in Eurasia. The emphasis on mobility, self-sufficiency in logistics, and the increased use of light infantry formations presaged the tactics of the United States army against the plains Indians of the nineteenth century. Still, as with other aspects of the military, innovative approaches to geography of warfare were abandoned by Catherine’s successors. 99 
 While the Austrians under Joseph II had gone a long way to modernising their military machine, they never reached the stage of total war adopted by the French after 1793. Coupled with a lack of popular investment in a radical revolutionary worldview, and an ongoing crisis in command structure, the Austrians were out-manned by a two-to-one margin, once the levée en masse was in place in revolutionary France. The perpetuation of privilege, and the general ancien régime mistrust of the public in arms, temporarily in abeyance in France, continued to influence military thinking in Vienna. Universal conscription in both Austria and Hungary was only introduced in 1868. 100 Austria and Russia were caught up in the struggle with the new European leviathan, Napoleonic France, while the Ottomans entered the first phase of desperately-needed reform. 
