 The winter of 1769–70 was unusual for the Ottomans in that the Grand Vizier remained in campaign headquarters at Babada ğ ı . Russian regiments harried the Danube fortresses, especially around Giurgevo, and in early February 1770, Ottoman troops from Craiova, Ni ğ bolu, Rusçuk and Giurgevo, numbering perhaps 20,000, confronted the Russians at Bucharest and were routed. By mid-February, General Stoffeln had occupied Giurgevo. His report on the confrontation at that fortress reveals the extent to which Ottoman commanders could mount a defence, but were unable to resist a determined advance. A total of 10,000 Ottoman cavalry appeared at the first engagement, along with 5,000 infantry with artillery support. The cavalry dispersed almost immediately. The infantry abandoned three cannons and pulled back to another set of trenches, fortified with a moat and a high rampart from which artillery fire continued. Some 3,000 Ottomans reputedly were killed in the attempt to defend the town of Giurgevo, which they finally abandoned. Later despatches report that the Russian troops had left Giurgevo, unable to sustain the occupation of the area. Stoffeln ordered the firing of the town, all the warehouses and magazines and some hundred vessels, along with all the surrounding villages. 
 Contrast Stoffeln’s account with that of Ottoman chronicler Vas ı f Efendi’s description of the attempt on Giurgevo. It is likely that Vas ı f was part of the Ottoman contingent. Commander Sar ı m Ibrahim Pasha crossed the Danube to Giurgevo in later January. The confrontation began with equal force, when a fog enveloped the combatants and hid earth and sky. The Ottoman forces were paralysed by the fog, and a Russian battery of twenty cannons took advantage of their surprise. Ibrahim had only five artillery pieces with him, which he had not had the time to install properly. His troops fled. Three hundred of the enemy attempted the assault, but after three days, they saw the futility of the siege, fired the surroundings of the fortress, and retreated toward Bucharest. 
 Since the Russians had entered Wallachia, Vas ı f continued, they had actively tried to seduce the subjects of the sultan. They, in turn, subscribing to the maxim that ‘one should recognise as master the conqueror rather than the conquered’, sided with the Russians and provided the enemy with supplies. Such was the case at Slatina on the River Olt. A small corps of the enemy was harboured in that village and threatened Craiova. The ban of the village was a Greek called Manolaki, who had been appointed by the Hospodar of Wallachia, himself a traitor who had fled to the Russians. This Manolaki, incensed by the treason of his Prince, requested aid from the pasha of Vidin. Gathering around him the Albanians scattered throughout Wallachia, and with some help from the Vidin pasha, he successfully defended Craiova. His fame reached the ears of the Grand Vizier, who was persuaded that any individual, no matter his religion, merited compensation for his loyalty, and commanded his appearance at Babada ğ ı in order to be recognised. 64 
 Vas ı f’s account of the events of fall 1769 repeatedly reports the merits, exploits and loyalty of individual commanders such as Manolaki and Moldavian Commander Abdi Pasha. The latter’s bravery in repulsing the Russian conquest of Galatz, and his subsequent defence of İ brail, two absolutely vital fortresses for the Ottomans at the mouth of the Danube, are both documented by Vas ı f. As Abdi Pasha and his troops approached Foksani, to which the Russians had withdrawn, he harangued his troops: ‘Do not take prisoners and count their heads until the enemy has been routed; do not plunder until you are assured of victory. Think of the glory and merit you will acquire by fighting with the pure intention of serving the religion of the prophet.’ All appeals were without avail. At the first volley of enemy fire, most fled. Nonetheless, a stiff resistance at İ brail, which was well fortified with perhaps 5,000 to 6,000 troops, forced a Russian retreat and their subsequent attacks on Bucharest and Giurgevo, as attested above. Rumiantsev’s despatch is terse: İ brail’s resistance was too strong for the fortress to be taken with bare hands. But the Grand Vizier, pressed for reinforcements in Babada ğ ı , could only muster 200 men, who could not cross the Danube because of great blocks of ice that were hurled down the fast-running river. 65 Uncoordinated command, and the consistent insubordination of the troops, who preferred pillage and desertion to sustained attack, paralysed the Ottoman war effort. 
 The damage to the Danubian defence system as a result of the Russian successes of 1769 was incalculable, and also promised to cripple the Ottoman supply system for the second year in a row. Furthermore, even in May 1770, Russian spies were reporting that the Grand Vizier had only 20,000 troops, and that his forces were depleted by desertion as much as they were increased by new arrivals from Anatolia and the Black Sea coast. The Ottomans were also having difficulty building the bridge across the Danube, as the waters were very high in the spring of 1770. It was a year of famine as well, with crop failures all over the region. 
 A sustained revolt in Morea, stirred up and supported by Russian agents and arms, as a prelude to the arrival of the Russian fleet in the eastern Mediterranean later in the year, compounded the problems of mobilisation. The series of rebellions that broke out all over the peninsula preoccupied Morean Governor Muhsinzade Mehmed after March 1770, forcing him to divert to the Morean revolt Albanian irregulars ( levend ) headed for the Danubian battlefields. The revolts are significant not just because of the emerging Orthodox politics of resistance to the Ottomans, but also because of the ferocity of Christian attacks on the Muslims and the equally ferocious retaliation by the Albanian troops. The result was a considerable flight of the Morean (Orthodox and Muslim) population to the Aegean coast of Anatolia and elsewhere. 66 
 The campaign season of 1770 thus compounded the disasters of the previous year, even though in April, Commander Abdi Pasha had some success in pushing the Russian advance guard back from the area around Craiova to Jassy, where Rumiantsev had established Russian headquarters. In August, the two armies faced one another at Kartal, with the Ottoman forces backed up against the Danube in the marshy delta of the Kagul River. By late July, Rumiantsev, greatly outnumbered, had already succeeded twice in routing the Ottoman combined forces along the Prut River, commanded by Abdi Pasha and Crimean Khan Kaplan Giray, and stood poised to lay claim to the entire chain of fortresses along the estuary of the Danube. Grand Vizier Halil Pasha had crossed the Danube in July to join the other forces. The Russians may have been outnumbered by as much as five to one (100,000 to 20,000). 
 Vas ı f, who was in Abaza’s entourage, described the army as resembling the waves of an ocean. Rumiantsev remained astonished by the Ottoman ability to dig trenches overnight, and the considerable resistance of what he described as the last of the formidable Janissaries in the inner ring of trenches. In his report to Catherine, Rumiantsev described the confrontation with the Janissaries as fierce, and accompanied by five hours of continuous firing from the heaviest cannons. 67 The Khan’s cavalry fled first, sparking the desertion of the infantry and leaving Abdi Pasha’s infantry and the Janissaries to bear the brunt of the confrontation. The entire baggage-train and 150 cannons and carriages were left behind and captured by the Russian forces. Some 3,000 Ottoman soldiers are said to have died at Kartal, but worse followed. Those fleeing had to cross the Danube by boat – and the Russians fired on the fleet assembled for that purpose, sinking many vessels. ‘Fleeing troops were crushing and slashing each other, some climbing about the ships, others clutching at the ropes and planks. The greatest loss was there – as evidenced by the drowned bodies floating in the river.’ 68 The estimates ranged from 20,000 to 40,000 dead, after the final confrontation before İ smail a few days later, when it too was captured. 
 The news of the worst military disaster ever suffered by the Ottomans arrived in Istanbul simultaneously with the news of the complete destruction of the Ottoman navy at Çe ş me, burned after an attack by the Russian flotilla, which astonished all of Europe by its presence in the Mediterranean. The 24 Russian ships, commanded by Alexis Orlov and several naval officers of British origin after an extensive refitting in British naval dockyards, sailed through Gibraltar and attacked the Ottoman fortress towns in the Morea without opposition from the Ottoman fleet, which withdrew into the safety of Çe ş me harbour. Caught there, the twenty-odd Ottoman ships were destroyed. 69 Even so, the Morean revolt was suppressed before it could materialise, but left a legacy of animosity between the Greek and Albanian populations which played itself out during the Greek Revolution later. 
 Peace negotiations and the Crimea 
 The campaign season of 1771 was desultory, with considerable skirmishing in and around the fortresses stretched along the Danube west from İ smail to Belgrade. The Russians had occupied Bucharest and remained there for the duration of the war. While small Russian detachments could push to the south of the Danube, the territory could not be invested in any permanent way. By November 1771, when Muhsinzade Mehmed was reappointed as Grand Vizier and Commander-in-Chief, both sides needed a ‘time-out’. Catherine II, from the first determined to negotiate without intermediaries, steadfastly opposed the mediation of interested parties such as the Austrians, the Prussians or the British. The Ottomans settled on Prussian and Austrian mediation, and negotiations got under way in July 1772, although the mediators were ejected by the Russians at the first meeting. By late August, negotiations had broken off over the question of the independence of the Tatars. Field Marshal Rumiantsev wrote the Grand Vizier directly to try to salvage the moment, and together they arranged a peace conference in Bucharest in November that extended the truce until March of 1773. 
 For historians more informed concerning the Polish Question than the Tatar Question, August 1772 resonates as the date of the first partition of Poland. Some argue that the outcome of the Russo-Ottoman peace negotiations was dependent on the settlement of that question, which temporarily resolved the differences among the Russian, Austrian and Prussian courts. For the Russians, it meant the Russian military presence in Poland could be reduced or redirected to the Ottoman frontier. Catherine spent most of the winter of 1771–72 negotiating an alliance with the Crimean Khan, that effectively broke the centuries-long Ottoman–Tatar connection. The alliance also fractured already divisive Tatar factions who took refuge in Ottoman territory and incited Istanbul to continuous belligerence over the question of Crimea and the strategic fortresses of the northern Black Sea coast. 70 
 Plenipotentiaries Abdürrezzak for the Ottomans and Obreskov for the Russians started negotiations in November 1772, but were unable to break the impasse over Tatar independence. By February 1773, Obreskov made the following offer: Tatar independence under a Russian guarantee; continued Russian occupation of the fortresses of Kerch and Yenikale at the egress of the Sea of Azov, and free navigation of the Black Sea and Bosphorus Straits by Russian ships. This proved totally unacceptable to Istanbul, even though those conditions formed the basis of the final treaty of 1774. 
