 There are two persistent ideas about the 1768–74 war, both of which concern Poland. The first is that the outcome of the war could only be determined after Austria, Prussia and Russia decided on the first division of Polish territory in 1772. The second is that French diplomats were responsible for bribing the Ottomans to precipitate the hostilities in late 1768, as part of their effort to secure their candidate in the succession question in Poland. The first idea owes its predominance to the historiography of high politics, arguing the shifting balance of power in eastern Europe consequent upon the challenge of Frederick of Prussia, which unsettled all of Europe. The second view makes France the earliest and longest ‘friend’ of the Ottomans, and justifies Ambassador Villeneuve’s diplomatic triumph over the Habsburgs in the Treaty of Belgrade, with which I closed the previous chapter. 
 France was an ally of Sweden and the Ottoman Empire, and latterly the Austrians, after 1756, while Britain proved a distant, often frosty friend of Russia. For the 1760s–1780s period, protection of trading networks remained paramount for both powers, while the Colonial Wars played out the future of Franco-British rivalries on the world stage. For the three territorial empires of eastern Europe, the disposition of Poland was a more acute and pressing problem, arguably one that inaugurated the ‘Eastern European Question’. Frederick the Great’s expansionist aims served as the catalyst after 1740. Poland, as a political entity, disappeared off the map of Europe until the twentieth century, following the third and final partition in 1795. 
 Neither view of the 1768–74 war in itself is particularly wrong, merely incomplete: they ignore Ottoman strategic imperatives. Ottoman diplomacy, conducted until the end of the century from Istanbul, depended on information circulating in the hothouse of the foreign community, using the infamous dragomans, or interpreters, as their linguistic go-betweens. Another source of intelligence was the Tatar exile community, whose size and influence expanded enormously as a result of the Russian conquest and subsequent annexation of the Crimea. Sifting through the conflicting reports from the Crimean Khan and his rivals, as well as from the governors of Moldavia and Wallachia, was the task of the newly emerging foreign affairs bureaucracy of the eighteenth-century Ottoman court, which had became the responsibility of the Reisülküttab and his staff. 19 The Reis and the Grand Vizier were fully aware of the problem of Poland, but more concerned about the territorial aggrandisement of Russia, as numerous political memoranda of the period acknowledge. Furthermore, the lengthy negotiations which Frederick the Great carried on for a decade with Mustafa III and Grand Vizier Koca Rag ı b, culminating in Ahmed Resmi’s official embassy to Berlin in 1763, demonstrate a level of awareness generally not accorded the Ottoman side. Resmi’s route took him across Poland, and he described the current disorder there following the death of Augustus III. 20 French pressure to intervene aside, the Ottomans preferred neutrality in 1764, when a note was circulated to that effect to the diplomatic community in Istanbul. 21 
 In fact, the gradual Russian incorporation of the various parts of Cossack territories, especially its encouragement of the settlement and active fortification of Zaporozhian borderlands by the Russians after the 1750s, alarmed the Ottomans. By 1764, the northern frontier of the Zaporozhian Cossacks had become an imperial province known as New Russia, which organised colonists on a military frontier. It is no small coincidence that the first Governor General of the new territory was P.A. Rumiantsev, whose outstanding performance as Commander-in-Chief of the Russian forces in 1768–74 was built on his detailed knowledge of the problems of mobilisation and logistics in the newly-acquired imperial territories. The last of the Zaporozhian territory was incorporated into the Russian empire in 1775, immediately after the victories of the 1768–74 War gave Catherine access to the Black Sea. 
 Poland, Russia and the Ottomans were equally engaged in attempting to pacify unruly borderlands, the first two on the right and left banks of the Dnieper and the Ottomans in the Principalities to the southwest, Moldavia and Wallachia. Poland and Russia feared the potential coalitions of Orthodox Cossacks and peasants ( haidamaks ) which periodically erupted in the territories described. Polish Catholics resisted Russian influence, particularly after the Russian installation of Stanislaw Poniatowksi as King of Poland in 1764. 
 In 1768, the Bar Confederation, an insurrection of Polish Catholic nobles, resisting the imposition of the Russian puppet-king, stimulated a counter Cossack/ Haidamak revolt of significant size. A Russian army, already stationed in Poland, moved south to suppress both, and violated Ottoman territory at Balta. This was too close for Ottoman comfort, and a protest was lodged, which then became an Ottoman declaration of war. France’s leading minister, the Duc de Choiseul, may have crowed that French influence and bribery forced the Ottomans to the battlefields, but the politics of the Danube proved equally influential. 
 The centre of the conflict: the lower Danube River 
 A closer look at the state of the Principalities will perhaps make this assertion clear. Nicholas Mavrocordato was the first Phanariot ruler ( voyvoda , later hospodar ) of the Principalities, appointed by the Ottomans first to Moldavia (in 1711) and then to Wallachia (to 1715). Thus began the semi-colonial rule of the territories, subservient to their masters in Istanbul, and initially demilitarised. The Ottomanisation of the influential Phanariot families, part of the creation of the empire-wide Ottoman-local elites I alluded to earlier, has prompted much debate about the subsequent development of Romania. Ottoman policy was inspired by strategic concerns, driven by repeated evidence of the disloyalties of the quasi-independent voyvodas and boyars of earlier centuries, and by the increasing vulnerability of the Ottoman–Russian frontier. During the Phanariot period, which lasted into the 1830s, the countryside was occupied four times by Austrian and Russian armies, and the populations subjected not just to the hardships of warfare, but increasingly odious tax and service burdens imposed by their new rulers. Stripped of their private armies, the governors were responsible nonetheless for buying, often at fixed prices, and delivering, the agricultural products demanded by Istanbul and Russia. The result was peasant flight, with one estimate for Wallachia and Moldavia suggesting a loss of half of the peasant families to territories south of the Danube in the 1740s. The alternative for those of means was to sell to the expanding European market upstream, a trend effectively argued by Stoianovich decades ago. 22 
 Ottoman bureaucrats were not completely oblivious to the problems on the Danube. One convincing piece of evidence is an Ottoman investigative report filed in Istanbul in 1759 or 1760. It concerned the illegal occupation of Wallachian farmland by Ottoman soldiers and vagrants engaged in farming, who had crossed from the south of the Danube. This represented an encroachment on peasants’ agricultural rights. The investigative committee surveyed and mapped the territory from Fethülislam to İ brail, and restored property, or compensated the rightful owners. The report is a rare indicator of the concern of the central authorities with the stabilisation of the Danubian territories. 23 
 The fortress of Vidin, a pressure point of the northern border and scene of numerous bloody conflicts since 1718, was the source of the problem. Large numbers of Ottoman soldiers (described as Janissaries, yamak , and other mevacibli , or salaried), stood idle at Vidin, their numbers swollen by the exodus of Muslims from newly-acquired Habsburg territories, Hungary and Transylvania. They appear to have been supporting their fellows ( yolda ş , comrades, also called serseri , or vagrants, in the documents) in Craiova, a town north of the Danube in present-day Romania. Demobilised soldiers, local militias and Janissaries were all involved in a network of agriculture and commerce. This was contrary to the agreements with the Principalities, dating from the 1500s and renewed after the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718, which prohibited the settlement of Muslims on Christian lands north of the Danube. The soldiers were equally guilty of violating peasant rights, the defence of which was one of the principal tenets of the Ottoman dynasty. The commission confiscated some 1,300 small farms, which is one measure of the size of the problem. Returning the lands to the original owners, and resettling peasants who had fled, was also part of their charge. 24 
 There is little doubt that such encroachments were now a constant problem of the region, exacerbated by a system of mobilisation that encouraged the creation of private armies, or warrior bands, upon campaign demobilisation. In Sofia, on the eve of the declaration of war in 1768, one such band was responsible for attacking a group of Muslim and Jewish merchants travelling to Samokov, killing two of them and wounding several others. The striking aspect of the names of the culprits is that they are mostly identified as be ş e , making them fellow travellers of the Janissaries. 25 
 Thus, the Ottomans were sensitive to border disturbances in the Balkans, and wary of the gradual creeping imperialism of Russia in Ukraine and Polish territories. The Bar Confederation, led by Potoski, appealed to Sultan Mustafa III, who found a large Russian army close to Moldavia alarming, and had continuous news from the Crimea of Russian fortress repair and building. Notes were exchanged, but Russian equivocation about the size of the force in Poland dissatisfied the Sultan, who was already more than convinced that it was time for war. Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed Pasha urged caution, arguing forcibly that the empire was simply unprepared for a major campaign, but to no avail. He was dismissed, and replaced by Hamza Pasha, a man more amenable to the wishes of the court, but extremely incompetent, and likely mad. Hamza Pasha was quickly replaced by Mehmed Emin Pasha, himself a product of the court system. It was he who commanded the troops as they left Istanbul. The Russian resident Obreskov, with ten of his entourage, was locked up in the Istanbul fortress of Yedikule, the traditional Ottoman signal that hostilities were about to begin. The official wording blamed the Russians for violating the treaties, territory and persons of the Ottoman sultanate, while interfering in the sovereignty of Poland. 26 The date was October 1768. 
 Declaration and preparations for war, 1768 
 Neither side was prepared for engagement on the Danube or in the Crimea, but the precipitate declaration of the Ottomans meant that the belligerents had six months to prepare before serious confrontations could begin the following spring, a fact which gave the Russians, with troops already stationed in Poland and Ukraine, something of an edge. Catherine II was preoccupied in Poland with civil conflict, but quickly organised her resources for war. Putting her legislative reform agenda on hold, Catherine II created an informal council to run the war and negotiations. The sultan’s hasty declaration had the unintended effect of refocusing Russia’s expansionist policies to the south, and realigning the relations between Prussia and Austria, which led ultimately to the first partition of Poland in 1772. Both Frederick II and Austrian Chancellor Kaunitz considered that the declaration of war had fundamentally altered Europe’s political system. 27 
