 To survive the disasters of the second Russo-Turkish war, the sultans relied on the Ottoman provincial elites to mobilise and supply the fortresses. The infantry and cavalry both resembled voluntary militia, and reckoned on the rewards for individual valour rather than fear of discipline, or regimental camaraderie. Such a reliance on a confederative approach to mobilisation and supply set up serious expectations and pretensions among the provincial notables that a new political order was emerging, a more inclusive distribution of power and command. In stark contrast to the Russian use of irregulars, the Ottomans took up and discarded the irregular troops as need dictated, and were careless about the impact of such a policy on local populations. Hence there was considerable blurring of peasant and soldier, and reduction of border territories to banditry and unrest. 
 The events surrounding the rebuilding of the Ottoman military, after its complete disintegration in the two Russo-Ottoman Wars, is the subject of the chapters to follow. Selim III’s reign is most often characterised as the period when attempts at military reform failed. I think it more correct to view the years after 1793 as the prelude to the complete overhaul of the Ottoman system of governance, not just the military. Not until the reign of Mahmud II could that sort of revolution be contemplated, much less pursued, and then not until the decade of the 1830s. The Russia of Peter the Great was invariably the reference point for the Ottoman reformers who emerged after 1792. Surely emulation of the artillery success on the battlefield would suffice to restore Ottoman greatness, they reasoned. The understanding that such piecemeal military change did not produce the modern state, but was rather the product of the entire western system, came rather more slowly. Selim III struggled throughout the Napoleonic period to maintain the integrity of the Ottoman Empire, as territories bordering the empire succumbed to the colonial powers of France, Britain, and Russia. Selim III’s diplomatic manoeuvres, and his perspicacity in sending permanent Ottoman representatives to the capitals of Europe for the first time in 1793, most assuredly rest in the experience of the previous hundred years of the ‘Europeanisation’ of Ottoman diplomacy. 
 Which, is, of course, another way of returning to the Eastern Question. The ‘Crisis of Ochakov’, as it is sometimes called, describing the intense diplomacy arising from the fall of that fortress to the third partition of Poland in 1795, involved the cabinets of Prussia, Austria, Russia and Britain in a long and potentially bellicose debate over the significance of the collapse of the Ottoman Crimean system. Further bloodshed was finally forestalled by the third partition of Poland in 1795. Catherine II died a year later, in December 1796. On an even larger map lay the confusion and disorder of the French Revolution. Napoleon’s bold thrust into the eastern Mediterranean in 1798, prelude to his imperial reign, is very often held to be the beginning of the ‘modern’ age in the Middle East. My sense is rather that the modern age for the Ottoman Empire began on the fields of Kartal and at the walls of Ochakov. 