 Military reform was, in fact, pursued at the Ottoman court with considerable vigour after 1700, but only became a life-and-death matter by the end of the century. With Selim III, the nature and source of the ideas concerning the transformation of Ottoman society changed radically. There are many critical questions to consider: can it be argued that Selim III inaugurated the transformation of the empire into a Muslim absolutist state by mid-nineteenth century? Though a transitional period, and Selim III’s political philosophy unarticulated, to what extent did his reformers understand the social transformation implied in the adoption of western military styles and institutions? How did Selim III’s enactments of a reformed army and financial administration assist in that transformation? To answer these questions, we have to consider the nature and rational-isation of military reform prior to the Sultan’s accession. 
 Ottoman military reform prior to Selim III 
 Military historians often conceive of reform as technical innovation, and are generally on the hunt for revolutionary changes in weaponry, or metallurgy, as part of the ‘why didn’t they’ school, as in ‘Why didn’t the Ottomans emulate Europe?’ Russia has very often come under a similar scrutiny, and serves as convenient comparison to the trajectory of Ottoman reform in the eighteenth century. Peter the Great’s massive restructuring of his society began some half-century earlier than that of the Ottomans, but was continued, and in fact stalled, by many of the same cultural variables the Ottomans faced in the early 1800s, including the problem of finance, the strength of religious hierarchies, and resistance from both intellectuals and provincial elites. The comparison is relevant also because astute Ottoman statesmen explicitly drew on the Russian example to convince their sovereign and the Ottoman public about the need for restructuring the army. 
 Historians also tend to argue that pre-modern, agrarian empires were awakened from their supposed lethargy by teams of foreign technical advisers, who served as mediators of information, and assisted the development of indigenous industries along European models. In both instances, the Ottomans are represented as losing the arms race, with battlefield failure determined by their lack of superior weaponry. Such approaches to military history avoid the social context of resistance, preferring to mark ‘revolutionary’ advances or technological leaps. In the Ottoman case, particularly, fundamental social change as a product of and contributing to military modernisation has been neglected. It is important to stress the influence and limitations of particular cultural settings, while also assessing the presence or absence of an early modern military bazaar in the Ottoman context. 6 
 Middle Eastern historians discuss reform in the Ottoman context by reference to series of texts, collectively called nasihatnames , or more recently, ı slahatnames (advice manuals), which invariably deal with the state of the Janissaries, who served as the barometer for the health of the empire. An aspect of Ottoman courtly culture, the political philosophy exemplified in such advice manuals is the least understood aspect of Selim III’s reforms, because of the references to the ‘golden age’ of Süleyman the Magnificent, and calls for the restoration of past greatness, which characterise the particular examples that are regularly cited by historians to explain Ottoman backwardness and stasis. Arguably iconographic and deliberately evocative of bygone eras, such ethical critiques were conceived in a certain style and tradition, and often generated at the behest of a sultan, and thus were part of the legitimate discourse of the court. Topics of such manuals included the need to address corruption, disorder, and subordination to the sultan’s justice, and restore an idealised vision of a state of equilibrium among social orders. Recommended solutions generally included purifying the ranks of the Janissaries, cleaning up the corruption among the timariots , regulating the appointments to both the central bureaucracy and religious class, and stabilising the economy. Süleyman the Magnificent served as the exemplar of the ideal for reform, in much the same way as Greece and Rome became the model for military organisation in early modern Europe. Most historians resist this comparison, preferring instead the obscurantist Islamic backwardness model. 7 Murphey’s Ottoman Warfare is one of the few to engage with both these tracts and much of the official historians’ literature of the seventeenth century to discuss the nature of Ottoman military culture, without pre-judging the cultural context. 
 Eighteenth-century examples of these advice manuals exist, but are different from their predecessors by advising directly that reform initiatives consider the successful examples of transformed (Christian) armies, particularly the Russians. The particular break with the traditional form of discourse occurs precisely as the ability to maintain or reconstruct the military forces collapses completely, as demonstrated in the previous chapter. Prior to Selim III’s reign, the chief proponents of the ‘modern-isation’ school, were İ brahim Müteferrika (d. 1745) and Ahmed Resmi Efendi (d. 1783). Müteferrika argued that the reform of the military could be accomplished by learning from other states, without jeopardising sultanic and Quranic notions of justice and order. 8 Specifically, he pointed to the disorder in strategy and logistics, to the huge size of the forces, to the total lack of discipline which overrode individual courage and wisdom, and to the need for accurate intelligence of the enemy. Ottoman bravery, agility and heroic nobility were unknown in the Christian world. All that was required was to harness and discipline that energy to triumph once again. 
 Müteferrika’s work, published in 1732 on his own inaugural Ottoman printing press, probably reached a much larger audience than had hitherto been possible. His work enfolded the justification for military change into a larger critique of the need of the Ottoman–Muslim world to widen its intellectual horizons, and to study successful enemies, and thus joined the Muslim reformist literature which continued to punctuate reform agendas both inside and outside the Ottoman context until the fall of the empire. Such literature very often evoked the Prophet Muhammad’s successful military innovations as justification for reform. 9 
 Ahmed Resmi (d. 1783) represented another stage of the break with the past. An experienced diplomat, he served as deputy to Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed during the 1768–74 war, and was the unfortunate plenipotentiary who signed the humiliating Küçük Kaynarca treaty (1774). Author of Hulâsat ül- İ ’tibar , completed shortly before his death in 1783, Ahmed Resmi was an acute critic of the state of the Ottoman armed forces and logistics of his era. 10 Of most importance is an essay he submitted to then Grand Vizier Halil Pasha while on the battlefront, sometime in late 1769. It contains a list of thirteen issues concerning mobilisation and provisioning that he thought needed attention, following the disasters of the first year of war. The Layiha reads as a recipe for such a reconstruction. The most significant issues include: 