

 reorganise the Janissaries, by teaching them regimental order and discipline from Christian models 
 gather new troops from Anatolia, up to the number of 40,000 – introduced slowly into the existing corps 
 organise special small troops of crack infantry, drilled constantly 
 organise sekban (reserves – provincial militia), 15,000–20,000 strong 
 reconstitute the rapid-fire cannon corps as part of reforming the artillery corps 
 procure officers from Prussia, France and other countries to aid in the reorganisation of the army 
 translate important European texts on military science. 14 
 Tatarc ı kzade Abdullah’s reform proposal survives in full, in multiple manuscripts, and also a printed, Ottoman version. His recommendations were far more detailed and critical than those of his contemporaries, and probably exerted the greatest influence on Selim III. Abdullah particularly noted Peter the Great’s success in turning the ‘beast-like’ [his choice of word] tribes (Kazakh, Kalmuk, etc.) living under the hegemony of the Crimean Khanate, into well-ordered and trained soldiers. This Peter had achieved by staying abreast of all the arts of war, which the Ottomans and the Janissaries had neglected. Abdullah thought that it would be possible to build a new army by combining the best elements of the existing ortas (40 to 50 from each), with new recruits from outside the system, properly outfitted and regularly paid. Each member of the new battalion should be trained in the use of muskets; each battalion should be assigned two to four rapid-fire cannons, manned by ten sür’atçis, or rapid-fire artillery-men, like those that had been organised and trained by Baron François Tott under Mustafa III, discussed below. The new troops ought likewise to be trained with help from expert English and French officers. Such disciplined soldiers could be spread across the territories of the empire in the course of 5–10 years, reaching the number of 40,000–50,000, but the training had first of all to start in the barracks in Istanbul. Abdullah felt that similar remedies had to be undertaken for the Mortar ( Humbarac ı ), Sapper ( La ğ ı mc ı ), and regular Artillery Corps ( Topçu and Arabac ı ). He also made other recommendations about the navy and the dockyards, pointing again to the reforms that Peter had undertaken in Russia. 
 Such reforms in the army could not be undertaken without similar efforts being made to reform the administration and the sources of revenues, continued Abdullah. These are recommendations we have seen that Selim already implemented when he created the İ rad-i Cedid . Significantly, Abdullah felt that the ranks of the viziers and the judges ought to be scrutinised, and their ranks thinned. He noted, again by comparison with the European context, that Ottoman administrators, especially the governors of provinces, lacked the experience and knowledge of the countryside of their European counterparts. They also needed the physical and financial security to carry out their duties effectively. He recommended longer appointments, and the abolition of official appointment fees, as a means of eliminating bribery. Abdullah was not hesitant to address the problems even in his own religious class, advising curbing the selling of offices, and restricting the appointment of judges to those who were legitimate graduates of the religious schools, and able to demonstrate their facility in the religious sciences by means of examinations. 15 
 Initial reforms 
 In an ambitious programme to modernise the military, Selim III acted on all the proposals enumerated by Tatarc ı kzade Abdullah. The reforms were both restorative, as with the existing corps and administrative systems, and innovative, especially regarding the new model army, the Nizâm- ı Cedid . Selim first attempted to reform the Janissary organisation, by appointing a supervisor ( naz ı r ) to each of the corps, weeding out incompetent officers, and setting the terms of their service at three years. He also created a hierarchy of command, dividing the troops into proper battalions ( orta ) and companies ( bölük ), with the companies assigned cannons or mortars, and each manned by master gunners. New barracks were built, with parade grounds, and drilling with arms was ordered a minimum of two days a week for the Janissary regiments; five days a week for the artillerymen. (Instituting two days a week for Janissary drills suggests that none was the standard heretofore!) An effort was made to bring order back to wages and daily rations, and establish a climate of discipline within the Janissary system, which remained self-regulating, although the supervisors were appointed from within the court bureaucracy as a kind of check on the military. Bonuses were to be handed out for special bravery, including one for information concerning violations of the new orders. 16 Selim III also set out orders for the garrisons on the Bosphorus and the Black Sea, which included regular drill with muskets. 
 Nor did he neglect the question of supply. The grain trade and the widespread abuses, very often the subject of complaint by the reformers, were inextricably linked to the success and failure of warfare in the Principalities, which became an especially acute problem when Russia occupied the fortresses at the mouth of the Danube after 1800. Ottoman and Russian armies on the Danube, French and British garrisons in the Mediterranean, all competed for the grain supplies. The majority of the grain (and about half of the sheep) which supplied Istanbul until the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, was shipped down the Danube and via the Black Sea to Istanbul, or driven overland on execrable roads. Prices were generally fixed ( miri ) at untenably low levels. Adequate grain supplies were a continual preoccupation of the administration in Istanbul, as shortages and famines were certain to result in riots in the city. Selim reorganised the essential grain supply system to Istanbul, ordering the construction of granaries in the Principalities, spending some 12,500,000 kuru ş on purchasing grain at market prices, in a deliberate attempt to restore confidence in the supply system. To oversee supply and delivery, Selim III created the Grain Administration, which regulated the cereal supply to Istanbul until 1807, when the miri system was reimposed after Selim III’s fall from power. Selim III’s efforts in this regard have been described as a ‘giant economic enterprise’. 17 In 1839, the Tanzimat regulations abolished the miri price regulations, and grain purchases were then regulated by the market. 
 Gunpowder and arms 
 Selim also dealt with munitions, especially gunpowder manufacture, which aggravated him considerably as the state was forced to rely on foreign purchases and corrupted shipments. Demand was a consequence of the increased emphasis on artillery, as part of the modernisation process. He had the Istanbul factory re-equipped, and established another plant at Azadl ı (near Küçük Çekmece outside Istanbul), close to a more convenient water supply. Together, these plants reputedly produced 10,000 kantars of gunpowder in 1798, of a quality equivalent to that supplied by the Netherlands and Great Britain. Azadl ı ’s production proved sufficient for the supply, and replaced the older plants at Gallipoli, Salonika and Izmir. 
 This was the beginning of the recovery of the production in war material which brought the Ottomans level with the Russians within another generation, also evident in the output of the cannon works modernised by Selim III after 1793. The Tophane foundry was expanded, and the Hasköy foundry of Baron de Tott revived. Machinery imported from Britain and France, coupled with French expertise, and 70 master gunners, continued the modernisation begun by Tott, as discussed below. Saint-Denys, a French army officer, who witnessed the revolutions of 1807–8 that brought down Selim III and who traced the development of the Ottoman artillery from the empire’s early days to his own, acknowledged Tott’s contribution but also observed that Selim III had independently ordered the manufacture of the small-calibre cannon (4, 8, and 12 bores) which became a standard component of the Ottoman arsenal. In adopting new weapons, the Ottomans had not slavishly imitated the French, but adapted both Russian and Austrian weapons which had already been proven on the battlefield. 18 
 A similar but less successful process of modernisation was begun to improve firearms. Although a new musket factory was established to serve both the Janissaries and new troops at Levend Çiftli ğ i, under French supervision (1795–98) until the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt, incompetence and the rivalry between the English and Swedish supervisors who followed meant less success in transforming local small firearms production. Nonetheless, by 1800 the Ottomans began, according to Jonathan Grant, ‘… to fit into the general pattern of technical advances taking place in Europe.’ 19 
 Creation of a new army, the Nizâm- ı Cedid 20 
 It proved impossible, however, to modernise the Janissary forces, who resisted each of the imposed reforms in the established pattern, by rebelling in the streets and demanding the heads of their officers and the court bureaucrats. The situation was so dangerous that Selim’s reformers were forced to isolate the new troops, who were to be organised and disciplined explicitly along European lines, in places far afield and in garrisons separated from the Janissary and court Sipahi corps. By 1798, although 12,000 had been targeted as a proper starting figure, less than half that were bivouacked at new barracks in Levend Çiftli ğ i. Recruits were drawn from the streets of Istanbul, and the provinces, in order to avoid enrolling the fractious Janissaries and their brethren, but they proved untried and equally difficult to discipline. To disguise the reorganisation, they were at first attached to the Bostanc ı (Palace Guards) and known as the Bostanc ı Musket Regiment ( Bostanc ı Tüfenkci Oça ğ ı ). One regiment was to be composed of twelve companies of one hundred each, every regiment to be commanded by a binba ş ı (colonel, later major) and made up of 1,602 officers and men, both regular infantry and gunners in considerable numbers. This was based on the regimental model which had come into fashion for European armies. 21 The new army grew very slowly, even though pay was generally better than the Janissaries’, so that when Napoleon invaded Egypt in 1798, the Ottomans had scarcely begun the transformation from old to new. In fact they were maintaining two systems simultaneously, the Janissary and the Nizâm- ı Cedid , and relying on a third, the countryside militias, for defence of the borders against internal and external enemies. 
 After 1799, two more army regiments were created to accelerate the process of mobilisation, one by a different means of recruitment. First, the barracks were expanded and a second regiment was added at Levend Çiftli ğ i. Then, the provincial governors were ordered to recruit men locally, to be trained after the new fashion, while simultaneously a central regiment was created in Istanbul, with new barracks constructed at Üsküdar on the Asian side of the Bosphorus for that purpose. 
 The orders for these troops were rather carefully constructed, spelling out training, when and how they would drill, daily roll call, the obligations of guard duty, maintaining the hierarchy of ranks, as well as the punishments to be meted out for dereliction of duty, failure to report, and minor infractions, all in line with the regulations of the regiments already in place in Istanbul. 22 
 The new order expands beyond Istanbul 
