

 Plate 10    Cartoon satirising the French military mission in Istanbul in 1783 (Elmar Stolpe , Klassizismus un Krieg, Uberden Historien-Mater Jacques – Louis David, Frankfurt and New York: Campus Verlag, 1985 ). 
 Experimentation with training as well as casting had continued throughout 1772 and 1773. During that time, Mustafa III expressed a second desire for a new Corps of Rapid-Fire Artillerymen, 39 including mobile field artillery, which now acquired the name of Sür ” atç ı s , reflected in the official order for its establishment issued in January 1774. 40 The imperial order includes 11 articles and an introductory command worth summarising. ‘Even though the imperial arsenal is known for its perfection in the arts of war,’ it began, ‘… in recent times, other states have invented and developed small, well crafted cannon capable of rapid fire, reaching an understanding of the science through experimentation.’ 41 The orders describe the regimental organisation and pay schedules. The new troops were to be issued distinct uniforms, undergo inspections, daily roll calls, and patrol and guard duty. 42 
 The Sür ʾ atç ı s were reorganised in January 1775. Ten guns and eighty soldiers and officers were placed under the command of Mehmed Emin Agha, a confidant of Abdülhamit I, his siladar and briefly grand vizier between 1779 and 1781. 43 The corps continued without Tott or Mehmed Emin until September 1776. 44 A large French contingent, which may have numbered as many as 300 officers and engineers during the 1780s, continued to serve the Porte in various capacities until 1788, when the mission was recalled just prior to the French revolution. 45 Precise figures of the size of the rapid-fire Artillery Corps are unreliable, but the French advisers may have been involved with training as many as 500 artillerymen before they were recalled. 46 
 Under Selim III, artillery reform continued. Technical aspects of warfare were introduced in more concrete ways in this period, with the help of a new French mission invited to Istanbul by the sultan. In 1796, the new French ambassador, Albert Dubayet, presented the sultan with a complete battery of French field artillery, samples of French munitions and a number of French engineers. Juchereau de St Denys was among them, one of the few who stayed on, and he wrote extensively about the reforms. He remained in Istanbul off and on until 1844. His accounts of Selim III and Mahmud II are based on long intimacy with Istanbul and the two sultans. 
 The number of Artillery ortas under Selim III was set at 25; each orta was given 10 cannons, a master gunner and an assistant. By 1796, the Topçular included 2,875 artillerymen in 15 companies of 115 officers and men. In 1806, the number of artillerymen stood at 4,910. The Transport, Sappers ( La ğ ı mc ı ), and Humbarac ı corps were similarly reconstituted. In 1806, the Transport Corps stood at 2,129 officers and men, the Bombadiers at 960; the La ğ ı mc ı , divided into sappers and military engineering, at 320 officers and men. 47 
 Even after the fall of Selim III in 1807, the Artillery Corps remained the most stable of the Ottoman forces. By 1827, Mahmud II had increased the size of the force to 14,000 artillerymen and 4,414 waggoners, and continued to pay more attention to it than to the other services, which may account for the fact that the artillery corpsmen stood behind Mahmud II in June 1826, when they turned their cannon on the Janissaries for the final confrontation. 48 While the numbers may be impressive, Ottoman artillerymen apparently still had some distance to go as a disciplined modernised force. Major Helmuth von Moltke (the Elder) observed the corps in 1828: ‘Although the Turks had made great improvement in their artillery, they were still very far behind their opponents … The guns were 3, 6, 8, 12, and 24-pounders, roughly mounted, and the shot ill cast. The effect of their artillery could never be very great; nevertheless, as the Turks laid great stress upon this arm, it had its moral worth.’ 49 
 Selim III also established the Army and Navy Engineering Schools where European technical works were translated and printed on the revived press in Istanbul. Significant numbers of recruits were added to the ranks of artillerymen. Students at the new schools learned French and Arabic, mathematics, surveying, the art of warfare, and became the officers and advisers of the new army, but not of the Janissaries. Divided into four branches, the new school taught cannonry, mortars, mining and engineering. Küçük Seyyid Mustafa was a product of the new schooling. His Diatribe de l’ingénieur Seid Moustapha sur l’état actuel de l’art mi-litaire, du génie et des sciences à Constantinople is an enthusiastic restatement of the need to learn from Europe and the philosophes , and to continue the success of the Nizâm- ı Cedid . Seyyid Mustafa’s treatise represents another of the fascinating propaganda pieces produced during Selim III’s reign, published not just twice in Paris but also in Arabic in Beirut. 50 
 Küçük Seyyid Mustafa began his treatise by pausing on European success in mastering military discipline and technology. This they had done by competing with one another, evolving different strategies to face the Ottoman armies, and generally pursuing military problems with energy and a willingness to profit from their mistakes. By contrast, ‘our fathers, the Ottomans,’ he continued, were content to rest on their successes, and furthermore, viewed military discipline and drill as if it were child’s play. ‘The idiotic and superstitious, of which no country is exempt,’ profited from this state of affairs, and persuaded the majority that it was wrong for a Muslim to attempt to equal one’s enemies. Hence, they had left us no refuge except valour and courage, denuded of all art. Sultan Selim III was determined to remedy this, Seyyid Mustafa continued, and his determination is evident in Tableau des nouveaux reglemens , which Selim III himself penned in French and Turkish. Nothing deterred him from his task: ‘aucun de ces contretemps mis en usage par les mal-intentionnés ne parut l’ébranler un seul instant: sa carrière de restaurateur de son empire fut une fois traceé; il la suivit avec ce sang-froid inébranable qui caractérise les hommes supérieurs.’ 51 
 Such an encomium must have served much the same purpose as that of Vasif’s lecture to the Janissaries, quoted at the beginning of the chapter, as a means of responding to the critics of the reforms. Their number increased in proportion to the loss of Ottoman territory, notably after Catherine II annexed the Crimea in 1783. Two million refugees and immigrants may be an exaggeration, but without a doubt, tremendous demographic upheaval resulting from the Russo-Ottoman wars was under way throughout the period under discussion, most on the frontiers of the empire, in the Balkans and the Caucasus. Reform authors cautioned the sultan about the need to settle such exile tribal populations, be they Georgian, Circassian, or Tatar, to name just a few, who stimulated unrest in areas such as the lands south of the Danube estuary, and who brought with them diverse views on the future of the Muslim Ottoman synthesis. Generic mountain bandits ( da ğ l ı e ş kiyalar ) came to represent both uncivilised and anti-reform forces for these authors. 52 
 Some of the new immigrants found their way into the court as supporters of the reform environment; others operated from within religious organisations such as the Naqshbandi Sufis, who would have a considerable influence on court ideology over the next few decades. Selim III, for example, founded a Naqshbandi convent in his new Selimiye Barracks at Üsküdar in 1805, as part of setting a new orthodox standard for the modernised army. Among such new immigrants was Dervi ş Ku ş mani, author of ‘Zebire-i ku ş mani fi ta‘rif-i nizâm- ı ilhami’, a dervish from Abkhazia and likely a Naqshbandi, who visited Istanbul twice in 1798 and again 1805–06, when his manuscript was produced. His work was probably the first to attack the Janissaries, not just as outmoded soldiers, but also as social pariahs, because of their allegiance to the Bektashi Sufi order. 
 Mehmed Emin Behiç Efendi, a childhood friend and influential associate of Alemdar Mustafa Pasha, was, like his patron, from Rusçuk. His ‘Sevânih levâyih’i’, written in 1802–03, is a remarkable critique of the current reform agenda, with a far-sighted view of stimulating a national economy. He too emphasised the need for instilling and spreading a Muslim orthodoxy as part of the modernising and centralising reforms necessitated by the current crisis. His proposals addressed the ignorance of the palace bureaucracy, the need to codify Islamic law and regulate the training of religious officers high and low, as well as the need to broaden the consultation base of the sultan, in an implicit criticism of the kitchen cabinet which ran affairs in secret. More than that, Behiç Efendi advocated the creation of a municipal police force to control the streets of Istanbul. His chief contribution to the reform debate was to underline the absolute necessity of creating a native mercantile class, which would counteract what he saw as the domination of non-Muslims in the luxury trades, who escaped major taxation and had little investment in the sultan’s reform agenda. These latter two works were never published, likely because the revolt which would bring about the fall of Selim III began shortly thereafter. They prefigure nonetheless the reform agenda, and the changing religious climate which would unfold under his successors. The tumult which exploded in 1807 delayed further implementation of reforms for two decades. 53 
 I have concentrated in this chapter on the reforms of the artillery corps because of the peculiar resilience of the view among historians that the Ottomans remained impervious to changing technology, and because it was those very reforms that saved Mahmud II’s throne in later years. Selim III’s vision was comprehensive and ambitious, but deeply disturbing to the traditional corps, Janissaries or otherwise, as well as to the members of the court whose wealth and/or religious standing depended on the status quo. What the reforms did not effectively address was the autonomy of the Janissary ocak, which remained, as was traditionally the right, outside any sultanic judicial system. Even the Janissary Agha, nominally appointed by the sultan, was incapable of bringing systematised order to the rank and file. Hence, the installation of western-style discipline, with significant, timely and exemplary punishment, was not even attempted there, but only in the Nizâm- ı Cedid corps. While ceremonial, iconographic hierarchy was always rigidly observed in the court, and hence in the Janissary corps, the hierarchy of military rank and the obligation of an officer class to obey orders, perform as instructed on the battlefield, and care for men under their command, were alien to Janissaries and court Sipahis of the Ottoman eighteenth century. Individual prowess was prized and bought; loyalty seldom went beyond fellow soldiers in an orta , or allegiance to a particular household in the court. Discipline was swift, but serendipitous, in response to extreme aggression against high state officials. 54 Command was dependent on negotiation, not automatic compliance. Admittedly, rigid discipline and rationalisation of command were not parts of military life ‘native’ to European contexts either, but they were integral developments of armies of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which simply could not have operated otherwise, given the huge scale of military operations by the time of the Napoleonic Wars. 
