

 Shall I give you some account of the troubles which occurred in the world before the Nizam-y Gedid existed … ? Such as … the calamities inflicted by the unemployed Levendis, who turned the province of Anatolia upside down; and the continued bad success which attended the arms of the followers of Islam, for the space of seven years, during the Muscovite war, which began in the year 1182 [1768–69]; the defeats which our great armies suffered every year, with the loss of so many thousand tents, such abundance of camp equipage, treasure, artillery, bombs and military stores, sufficient for the consumption of many years, and so great a loss of our troops, either taken, drowned or killed, and the capture as well of our small forts and retrenched posts, as of our large fortresses, some of which were reduced by famine, and others by force; and the impossibility of delivering so many thousand women and children whom they contained, and who, still remaining in captivity, pass their lives in tears. These are things, the bitter remembrance of which can never be erased from our hearts. 
 Thus Vas ı f Efendi exhorted discontented troops resisting the military reforms of Selim III circa 1807. He and other Ottoman officials were members of the sultan’s ‘kitchen-cabinet,’ the group of close advisers responsible for engineering and implementing the military and administrative reforms of the period. They were a new breed of Ottoman administrators, many of whom were experienced veterans of the battlefront, and they understood the need for the overhaul of the defeated army. They emerged during this crucial period of empire, and in a desperate attempt to remedy some of the worst of the empire’s excesses, began a process of reorganisation that carries through the rest of the period covered by this book. 2 
 A description of a mutiny by cavalrymen of the Ottoman army, which broke out on the battlefront just as the Russo-Ottoman truce ending the 1787–92 war was being negotiated, more than demonstrates the difficulties facing Ottoman bureaucrats and military men. Cevdet’s history records two versions of events, as well as his own comments. The first version is drawn from Ahmed Vâs ı f, the second from Sadullah Enverî. At the beginning of the war, while 12,000 of the palace sipahis were on the rolls, only 2,000 could be mustered, and those with much difficulty. By spring 1791, there were none. Replacement cavalrymen (the Levendis of Re ş id’s comments) from Rumeli and Anatolia had been hastily organised and ordered to headquarters on the Danube for the spring campaign of 1791. Some 10,000 were said to have responded to the call. Rather than have that many join the grand vizier and the main army, select members were chosen and sent to the front, the others maintained as a reserve behind the frontlines. Few of the horsemen were actually regular cavalarymen ( sipahis ), but rather rebel bands from Sivas and other areas of Anatolia, some led by leaders of provincial households of long standing, such as the Cebbarzade (also known as the Çopan ŏ glu) and Karaosmano ğ lu. These bands had arrived at the battlefront exhausted and quarrelsome, and attacked the legitimate officers of the army who were attempting to bring some order to their ranks. 
 In early April, a disastrous defeat at the hands of the Russians at Maçin forced the Ottoman final capitulation to mediation of the war. Soon after the truce of July 1791, the army had been ordered to withdraw to Hirsova. The new arrivals refused to follow those orders, and determined to march on to Ş umnu, the main headquarters of the army. The Grand Vizier, Koca Yusuf (1791–92), who had hastily been reappointed to the post at the beginning of the campaign season, was forced to deal with a major rebellion just as he began negotiations with the Russians. He convened an army council to discuss what to do with these rebel sipahis , called ‘riff-raff and vermin’ by Cevdet. Reluctant to attack fellow soldiers, the assembled group decided on subterfuge and execution of the instigators of the events. The Cebbarzade and Karaosmano ğ lu factions were ordered to Ş umnu, and followed by Çarhac ı (Head skirmishers) Ali Pasha, who negotiated with the men and persuaded the majority to return to their bivouac in Hac ı o ğ lu Pazar ı . Upon investigation, the instigators of the rebels turned out to be part of the legitimate army corps, Silâhdar Kâtibi Kadri Efendi and his second-in-command, who were both executed. The account by court historian Ahmed Vâs ı f ends by noting that Kadri Efendi’s father had also been executed during the reign of Sultan Mustafa III, a suggestion of a lineage of revolt. 
 Enverî, a veteran campaigner, described the revolt in different terms. By his account, the sipahis had heard of the truce, and aimed for Ş umnu because they knew that the grand vizier would return there with the sacred banner. Penniless and exhausted, they rushed to join him to plead their case. The Cebbarzade and Karaosmano ğ lu soldiers, along with Çarhac ı Ali Pasha, were sent after the rebels. The negotiations occurred in a small town one hour from Ş umnu. The rebel sipahis were asked what they wanted. The fact was, they said, that the 10–15 akçe they were given upon mobilisation had not been sufficient. They had been forced to sell their horses and firearms to reach the front. They had come to Ş umnu to demonstrate their need. In the end, they agreed to 40,000 akçe in lieu of official registration in the muster rolls. Enverî’s emphasis on the plight of the soldiers is in distinct contrast to Vâs ı f, who could only see their demands as a rebellion against the state. The two views of the nature and utility of such recruits are reflected in many of the documents of the reform era. 
 Cevdet, after recounting the two versions in his own history, is prompted to comment that both views had merit. He continued: ‘Such is the natural consequence when law and discipline are overturned. The sipahi regiments were those historically given the most attention by the Ottoman state. The old order which would have kept them in place had been upset, and their wages served as a feeding trough for this one and that one … Even though they were useless, their wages were still paid from the treasury. Even that did them little good, as they had to share much of it with their collaborators among the officials. The state of the cavalrymen in the ranks was to be pitied.’ 3 
 These depictions of the events highlight not just how confusing all the military categories had become, but also the extent to which local magnates, or warlords, in this case the Cebbarzade and Karaosmano ğ lu households, and their private armies, continued to play a major role in mobilising and supplying the wars the Ottomans fought after 1768. Such provincial power-brokers would become a major target of reform in the period under consideration, part of a recentralisation process that continued under sultans Selim III and Mahmud II until the middle of the nineteenth century. 
 Economic reforms 
 It is hard not to sympathise with Selim III, an isolated and insolvent sultan, who was prey to the vicissitudes of internal and international politics. One of his very first acts was to order the rebuilding of the artillery corps, after an occasion, as recorded by Cevdet, when the sultan realised the extent of the corruption represented by inaccurate registers. Looking at a recent register of ‘active’ artillerymen, in order to estimate the financing available for new artillerymen, Selim found that of 1,059 troops listed, 33 were wounded, 90 were assigned to the foundry, 90 to the rapid infantry corps, 76 to the fire brigade, and 770 handicapped, old, or retired, were assigned to guard duty. His advisers estimated that it would take twenty to thirty years to settle the claims and straighten out the rolls to find the salaries for the new artillerymen. Selim III is recorded as saying angrily: ‘My God! What kind of situation is this? Two of the barbers who shave me say they are members of the artillery corps! If we call for soldiers, we are told “What can we do? There are no salaried soldiers to go on campaign.” Let others be enrolled, we say, and we are told “There is no money in the treasury.” If we say, there must be a remedy, we are told “Now is not the time to interfere with the regiments.” We are not saying remove them all; rather enroll them [new recruits] as others perish.’ Selim then insisted that each battalion ( orta ) of the Janissaries be equipped with ten experienced artillerymen, to be paid from the vacancies in the rolls. The new sultan’s frustration was intentionally made obvious by Cevdet, most likely to emphasise Selim III’s ignorance and therefore innocence regarding the extent of the corruption. 4 
 The Peace of Jassy in 1792, which ended the second Russo-Ottoman war, gave Ottoman bureaucrats the opportunity to draw breath for the first time in more than two decades. Selim III’s advisers outlined for him a series of proposals to reform the military that varied from restoration of the traditional to adoption of the novel. The period after 1793 saw the implementation of a number of those initiatives. Effectively bankrupt upon his accession, Selim III had first to reorganise the treasury and taxation system in order to be able to finance the needs of the military, in a systematic fashion. Hence, one of his first acts was the creation of the İ rad-i Cedid , or New Revenue (Treasury), which was established to support the formation of a new army, the Nizâm- ı Cedid , or New Order, in March 1793. By 1798, the new revenues reached 32,250,000 kuru ş , a considerable recovery based on some fairly simple fiscal reform. Mustafa Re ş id was put in charge as Treasurer and Supervisor of the Talimli Askerler , or Trained Soldiers. The revenue of the life-term tax farms ( malikane ), and tribute from the Sacred Cities of Mecca and Medina, was assigned to the new Treasury. A serious and vigorous attempt was made to recover lost income from the essentially defunct timariot system, from the tax farms ( malikane ) as well as from the customs revenues, themselves very often configured as tax farms. However, opposition was vigorous from powerful land-owners, and results fairly unproductive except in the short term. It was a sign of things to come. 5 
 New military organisations 
 Of Selim III’s other significant reforms, a few with lasting repercussions stand out. First, he encouraged a climate of criticism in court politics, and involved himself in the discussions with the grand viziers and other bureaucrats about what should be done to remedy the situation of the empire. Secondly, he initiated a system of recruitment and training of soldiers that challenged the guild-like structure of the traditional army, inaugurating a transformation that reconfigured the empire by the mid-nineteenth century, and third, he continued the modernisation of the artillery corps, relying on foreign advisers, largely French, but also British and others, for technical expertise, although gradually working towards Ottoman self-sufficiency in production and deployment. The internal obstacles to such proposals must have seemed overwhelming, and defeated him personally in the end, but the initiatives of his reign were carried over into that of his successor, Mahmud II, who continued the development of the artillery corps, replaced the Janissaries altogether in 1826, but also convinced (subdued) the powerful elites in both Istanbul and the provinces of the need for a reconstituted system of governance, and enhanced bureaucracy to support the new army. Achieving such cooperation or submission of the regional power-brokers was to be Selim’s singular failure. 
