

 the problem of Anatolian troops, ‘a filthy horde of thieves and vagabounds’, who plundered their way to the battlefront – his particular targets are the governors who brought sufficient troops but could not control them, meanwhile demanding cash up front for useless soldiery. 
 the control over the army headquarters (at Ş umnu) – Resmi estimated 20,000–30,000 camp followers burdened the army. He was incensed, for example, by those who pitched the tents for the troops (Druzes from Syria) who essentially went on strike if not properly compensated. Lack of control over prices for goods delivered to the camp meant extortion. Similarly, lack of control over those responsible for the delivery and maintenance of the pack animals, as well as mounts, meant considerable abuse and unnecessary waste. 
 the matter of esame , or the regimental pay tickets – Resmi foreshadowed Selim III’s reforms by pointing to the corruption in the muster rolls, as well as suggesting that small groups of raw and untainted recruits be organised and disciplined as he had seen on parade in Potsdam, as guest of Frederick the Great, while there as Ambassador in 1763–64. 
 the matter of supplies – the complete breakdown in shipments of flour and bread meant men were dying by eating loaves adulterated with dirt. At his angriest here, Resmi was indignant that the staff of life should thus be abused. Remedies he suggested included foresight in warehousing, a central commissary system and incorruptible officials. 11 
 The Layiha succinctly lays out the problems Resmi alluded to in his later Hulâsat , itself more of a history of the war than an actual reform agenda. Resmi remained a member of the court circle of reformers until his death. He was patronised first by Koca Rag ı b, Grand Vizier to Osman III and Mustafa III, Muhsinzade Mehmed, Grand Vizier and Commander-in-Chief on the Danube as noted above until his death in 1774, and then Halil Hamid, Grand Vizier to Abdülhamit I, 1782–85, all sage and loyal reformers and statesmen of the late eighteenth century. 
 His was not the only veteran voice of complaint in the period following 1774. Süleyman Penah Efendi (d. 1785), a seasoned bureaucrat in the military accounting offices, was the author of Mora İ htilâli Tarihi , a description of the massive rebellion, previously discussed, which broke out in 1770 in the Morea in the Peloponnesus. Muhsinzade Mehmed, it will be remembered, was ordered to suppress the rebellion, and he did so by diverting Albanian irregular recruits who were on their way to the Danubian front. The Albanians’ disorder and ferocity caused untold suffering and flight. Süleyman Penah was an observer of these events, and his telling of the story is a fascinating glimpse into the period. As an appendix, he commented on the state of the soldiery during the events, noting three things of interest to us here: the ubiquitousness of so-called Janissaries; the widespread misuse of esames , and the problem of raw (Albanian) recruits. His comments are prefaced by contrasting Ottoman disorder to the regimental order of the Christians, who had become like ‘a string of camels reined in and led by a camel driver’. 12 
 To avoid the accusation of neglecting their duties to undertake warfare on behalf of the sultan and empire, provincial administrators created Janissaries of inhabitants both insignificant and influential, peasant and intellectual alike, without distinction of rank. With such soldiers, wrote Süleyman Penah, all order had been overturned. There was no way either to make them fight, or to keep them from flight. Such an army was worse than a rag-tag general call-to-arms ( nefer-i ‘am ). Their inexperience had brought defeat, rout and a loss of zeal. Secondly, for those with official entitlements, there was no indication where they were posted, so that a Janissary could claim his right to a posting anywhere. This, Süleyman Penah continued, would be easy to fix, if a proper registration were undertaken, and the number who should be in the fortresses was well established and maintained. 
 His third observation concerned Albanian ( Arnavut ) irregulars. The type ( taife – also group, sort) sent to the Morea were nothing but scum who would obey no one. Furthermore, they spoke Albanian among themselves, and did not understand Turkish, so they were untrustworthy and difficult to train. While this was a common complaint about Albanians, Penah’s observations represent a different way of thinking about them. First, he compares the situation to the Spanish and their American colonies, and how they spread the use of the Spanish language by educating select individual natives. Likening it again to the Spanish example, he recommended the bringing of small groups of such troops from sancaks like Delvine and Avlonya to Istanbul, to train and educate them properly, and then scatter them all over the empire, with benefits both to the army and the outlying territories. He regarded the expense to the treasury as more than justified in order to improve the current system. In his view, the Morea was colonial territory, to be incorporated into the Empire by an Ottoman–Albanian civilising mission. 
 A third veteran of the Russo-Turkish wars, Canikli Ali Pasha, was a seasoned soldier, recognised for his contribution to the war effort in 1768–74 by being awarded much of the territory of Trabzon Province, especially the Canik sancak on the southern shore of the Black Sea. Likely written between 1780 and 1782, when he was Governor of Trabzon, Canikli Ali’s Nasayih al-Muluk is an indictment, among other things, of the provincial supply system, the mubayaa system, based on fixed prices and state purchase. The individuals involved, he claimed, had no stake in seeing their duties carried out properly. The state made requests for provisions based on historical lists, without checking on a region’s current ability to provide the grains, animals and/or other types of supplies required for the army. When a state purchaser ( mubayaac ı ) was appointed, local ayan were happy because they could collude on the enumeration of individual holdings. For example, a peasant had one ox; it was recorded and taxed as a pair. Furthermore, the ayan confiscated and hoarded the grain supplies, in the hopes of a higher price and were not above selling rotted grain to the state. Even the captains of the grain transport ships in the Black Sea and on the Danube were involved – they shipped barley mixed with chaff, and wheat cut with sand. One of Canikli Ali’s suggestions was to bypass the corruption, and institute a system of direct buying, half at fixed and half at market price. As with Süleyman Penah and Ahmed Resmi, Canikli Ali was calling on the sultan and his grand viziers to exert some leadership, and address the undue oppression of the peasantry. 
 In addition, Canikli Ali’s familiarity with the Russo-Iranian frontier made him caution the grand vizier about protecting the Ottoman borders – for him, Egypt, the Black Sea and Northern Anatolia, and Baghdad were vulnerable frontiers. He especially felt that Kars, Van and Erzurum required permanent garrisons and constant vigilance. The frequency of changes of personnel, requiring constant mobility of valis and other officials, had a deleterious effect not just on loyalty, but on the stability of empire, when the state was relying on unknown and unreliable men. The men-of-state and the ulema were making military decisions, rather than those with the experience of warfare who should be the ones consulted to advise and restore order to the ranks of the Janissaries. Of particular interest to him were the ineligible members of the ocak who were enrolled as a result of the selling of appointments and the esame to state servants and the ulema, as well as esnaf . He wondered why it would not be possible to establish eligibility of each esame -holder on pay day by asking particular questions about the last campaign and aspects of the enemy that only a seasoned soldier could answer. His aside is particularly revelatory concerning the complete lack of control over individual soldiers. Canikli Ali was equally critical of the lack of order in the artillery corps. He devoted several pages to the need for order in the camp, and the organisation of the artillery as well as its emplacement on the battlefront. Present-day warfare, he asserted, was less a matter of raiding and swords than cannon to cannon. 
 Throughout Canikli Ali’s writing there is a sense of injustice about the demands of Istanbul, which were largely responsible for impoverishing the provinces. During the years of war, the countryside had suffered from the deprivations caused by the raids and plunder of kap ı s ı z levendat , bandits ( e ş k ı ya ), or the greed of state servants. He felt that only by reforming the government in Istanbul could one begin to tackle Rumeli and Anatolia, where major rebellions were under way and much of the population had fled. 13 
 Military reforms under Selim III 
 As these examples have shown, serious critiques of the state of the empire had already appeared, prior to Selim III’s reign which anticipated his own reform agenda. Upon his accession, Selim III, in an unusual move, called together his advisers for a large consultative assembly. Selim also solicited written recommendations about what to do, a number of which survive. Diplomats, soldiers, bureaucrats and judges alike contributed their ideas about the nature of the problem and the possible solutions. We have already noted those of court historians Ahmed Vasif and Sadullah Enverî. Two others by Grand Vizier Koca Yusuf Pasha and Rumeli Kaziasker Tatarc ı kzade Abdullah Efendi were equally influential. The latter is particularly interesting, because one of his obligations was the overseeing of law and order in the Janissary ranks. Among the recommendations represented frequently in these surviving records of the early years of Selim’s reign were the need to: 