 Nine governors responded to the call for provincial recruits, including Abdurrahman Pasha, Governor of Karaman, later (1801) appointed Colonel in command of the force, and Süleyman Pasha, semi-independent Governor of Baghdad. This resembled a provincial militia: half the recruits were trained as infantry to be added to the Levend Çiftli ğ i troops, and half as cavalry, to return to their provincial bases in support of the local governor. The recruits to be sent to Üsküdar were to be drawn from the following districts, all in Anatolia: Ni ğ de (1,000), Bey ş ehir (2,000), Ankara (2,000), Kütahya (1,000), Kayseri (1,000), Kastamonu (1,000), Bolu and Viran ş ehir (2,000), Ak ş ehir (1,000) and Ayd ı n (1,000), totalling 12,000. 23 The example of Ankara may give us an indication of how many were actually recruited. Court records surviving from the years 1802–05 record that one Mes‘ud Agha was charged with responsibility for recruitment in the Ankara sancak . He appears to have sent 750 men to Üsküdar for training. When they returned, they found they had barracks for 450 only, so they applied to the sultan for the funds to build new accommodation. Meanwhile, he continued to recruit soldiers from the surrounding area in order to increase the size of the force to 12 bölüks (1,200 men). 
 The new order directives also intended the abolition of the long-defunct, but unburied, timar system. In 1792, Selim had announced that all timarl ı fiefs would revert to the sultan as imperial lands upon the death of the incumbent sipahi , in order to underwrite the new system. At the time, probably no more than 25,000 of such troops existed. They were generally ill-equipped, totally ineffective and employed as labour corps during campaigns. 24 Selim reconstituted the timariots of Bolu and Hüdevendigâr provinces as regular, salaried cavalry, and added them to the regiments stationed at Levend Çiftli ğ i and Üsküdar. By 1806, 22,685 men and 1,590 officers formed the Nizâm- ı Cedid army. 25 Its significance lies not so much in performance as in composition – most of the latter recruits were Anatolian peasants, largely of Turkic stock, and Muslim. Secondly, the mobilisation of the countryside represented Selim III’s attempt at establishing a relationship – a slim coalition at best – between Istanbul and the countryside, in opposition to the entrenched Janissary force in Istanbul. A further point should be made about these early efforts to recruit in the countryside: the potential for stabilising of the countryside, while obvious, was unrealised as the aim of many of the recruits appears to have been to acquire the means to go raiding in the countryside. 26 The effort to expand the base of recruitment for the new army would have disastrous consequences for Selim III’s own personal rule, when he tried to establish another such army in Rumeli, but it does represent an important first stage to the later imperial consolidation under Mahmud II. 
 Foreign advisers and reform of the Artillery Corps 
 Mixed among the new recruits and advisers of the Nizâm- ı Cedid forces were to be found significant ‘foreigners’ of all stripes. Many were veterans of the long series of wars in Europe and overseas, who, upon demobilisation, sought adventure and employment as advisers and mercenaries for hire. Napoleon himself contemplated joining the French technical mission to the Ottoman Empire in 1795. 27 Others were specifically recruited and hired by the Ottomans, as noted above. Some were spies. All were suspect to the population at large, but many played important roles in the transition from the old to the new military technology. 
 Before and after Selim III’s call for reform, foreigners were an integral part of the process. It is worth noting the significant difference between the Ottomans and the Russians as regards foreign advisers. Officers from Europe dotted the Russian army and navy, a factor which led to a swifter accommodation of western European culture of warfare, even though they were much resented by the native soldiers and officers. In the Ottoman context, foreign officers were never accorded the respect or compensation they thought they deserved. 28 Still, they were occasionally hired, and proved of considerable use. Historically, foreign adventurers brought expertise to the Ottomans concerning two of the auxiliary corps: the Humbarac ı and the Topçu . This discussion will focus on the latter. 
 As a well-developed professional service of the infantry, the artillery corps came into its own in European armies precisely in the period under discussion. By 1750, experiments in casting and mobility had combined to produce small-calibre cannon that could be mobilised as light artillery, and incorporated into the strategy of the battlefield. Even though six- and twelve-pounder guns had been deployed to infantry regiments by Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years War, their effective use as part of the course of battle awaited Frederick the Great in the Seven Years War. Frederick’s organisation of the artillery assigned three- and six-pounder guns to each infantry battalion, but also kept several in the reserve artillery which could be drawn up at will in the heat of battle. By the mid-eighteenth century, each infantry battalion of the British army also had a permanent allotment of two or three light guns. The British in India developed by 1780 what were called galloper guns , six-pounders drawn by horses, which could support cavalry units. 29 
 Technical expertise developed in Austria and France also in the eighteenth century, especially in the work of Gribeauval of France, and had considerably increased the accuracy of such cannons. By 1764, France had a superior range of four-, eight- and twelve-pounder guns. Gribeauval’s experiments in casting and sighting halved the weight of the guns (a four-pounder went from 1,300 to 600 pounds, for example), and improved their accuracy, making them much more mobile. The French had professionalised other aspects of the artillery such as the train, which in both British and French armies had previously been in the hands of contractors, private teams of horses and their drivers. 30 The Russians learned from the experience of the devastating battlefields of the Seven Years War, as at least one Ottoman observer noted concerning small-calibre weapons. 31 Field Marshal Rumiantsev used mobile artillery to good effect during the 1768–74 war. He commented not so much on the Ottoman lack of artillery, as the inability to use it properly. 32 
 The Ottomans lagged behind in these developments, suffering in their own artillery train from the same problems described above, but also from significant under-funding, and lack of expertise concerning metallurgy and use. The technical aspect of new field tactics and training artillerymen had been introduced to the Ottomans by Baron François de Tott, a native of Hungary in service to the French, and simultaneously the Ottomans, under Mustafa III. Tott’s service is worth detailing as his observations dominate the histories of this period, and he is representative of the enlightenment views on the Ottomans. Although only connected officially with the court in 1770, Tott’s experience of the Middle East was already lengthy. His memoirs begin in 1767, when he left Paris for the Crimea. His connection to Mustafa III started when he was hired as an adviser on the project to rebuild and rearm the Dardanelles fortresses after the defeat of the Ottoman navy by the Russians at Çe ş me (1770), in the midst of the first Russo-Ottoman War of 1768–74. His service continued for the next five years. Tott organised and trained a number of artillerymen in Istanbul between 1770 and 1772, at the same time that he was involved with efforts to improve the casting of cannons in the foundry. 33 
 Frustrated by the ignorance of the Ottoman soldiers and officers, Tott wrote: ‘To the haughty ignorance of the generals was added the stupid presumption of the subalterns; and the Turks, who took the field with a prodigious train of artillery, but which consisted of pieces ill mounted, and fully as badly served, slaughtered in every action by the cannon of their enemies, could only avenge themselves for their disasters by accusing the Russians of cowardly artifice. They overpower us, said they, by the superiority of their fire, which, in fact, it is impossible to approach; but let them leave their abominable batteries, and encounter us like brave men hand to hand, and we shall soon see whether these infidels can resist the slaughtering sabre of the true-believers. This multitude of wretched fanaticks even reproached the Russians for having attacked them during the holy season of Ramadan.’ 34 
 Elsewhere, Tott described a demonstration of fifty gunners he organised and trained at Ka ğ ı thane (on the Golden Horn) in front of the sultan and 10,000 spectators. The artillerymen achieved a discharge of five rounds a minute, after which the following exchange took place: the Defterdar (Chief Financial Officer) asked Tott what the rammers were made of. (The Baron recognised a set-up.) He replied: ‘Hair.’ The Defterdar then asked ‘What sort of hair?’ to which Tott answered ‘Pig’s hair.’ A huge cry arose from the crowd: ‘God forbid!’ Tott bested his audience by asking a painter in the crowd what they used to paint the mosques, which of course was pig bristles, which left hair on the walls. ‘If then bristles do not defile your mosques, it cannot surely be improper to make use of them against your enemies!’ The multitude exclaimed ‘Praise be to God!’ 35 Surely the reason for the popularity of the Memoirs was its entertainment value, as this example demonstrates. The work is full of such anecdotes, which generally credit Tott and discredit his interlocutors. 36 
 Arguments about Ottoman intransigence, religious obscurantism, and general obtuseness concerning military change have remained unchallenged, chiefly because of the simplistic explanations which are continually derived from this text. The only significant critique of the Memoirs was that of Louis Charles de Peyssonnel, himself a French appointed consul in the Crimea and then in Izmir in the same period, and author of an important treatise on Black Sea commerce. Peysonnel wondered at Tott’s assertion of Ottoman ignorance, as ‘… a prodigious number of brass pieces have been brought, and come every day from their foundery at Tophana, at Constantinople, of middling, large and enormous bores, very fine, very good, and long since brought to perfection, after the proportions and models of the European artillery. Rows of them have been continually seen all along the flat of Tophana, often two and three deep, and these sometimes of double and treble ranks; and one cannot, without injustice, accuse the Ottomans of a total ignorance in the art of founding cannon.’ 37 
 Fictional or not, the Tott Memoirs have had an enormous influence on the way historians address Ottoman reform. Other sources tell a more complex story than just obstinacy and religious obscurantism. Historian Enverî, on campaign with Muhsinzade Mehmed, south of the Danube in 1772, observed the discipline and training of Ottoman gunners during the extended truce in the middle of the Russo-Ottoman War 1768–74. Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed, concerned about the reduction of the numbers of trained artillerymen, organised a review. He and other high officials observed the firing of the cannon. Numerous cannon were fired three to four times, with ill-processed gunpowder and ill-mounted guns. On the fourth try, they hit the target, and were suitably rewarded by the grand vizier. He ordered daily practice, and continued to supervise it himself now and then. As a result, Enverî noted, a number of master gunners emerged. 38 