



===== FILE: text/part0015.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Five 
 Selim III and the new order ( Nizâm- ı Cedid ) * 
 Introduction: crisis and reform 
 T he next few chapters examine the consequences of the Russo-Turkish wars of 1768–92, and concentrate on the reigns of Selim III (1789–1807) and Mahmud II (1808–39). To do so requires identification of both the main hurdles facing the Ottomans, and the perceptions of what was required: in other words, the climate and articulation of reform within Ottoman society. The incorporation of new-style Ottoman elites into the circles of power in Istanbul; the regulation or ‘regimentation’ of army and society as a result of (or as a prelude to) significant military reforms; and the technicality (or elsewhere, rationalisation, or bureaucratisation) of the ‘culture of rule’, are all aspects of the reform period necessitated by the collapse of the old military system. Related to the question of acquiring control over the countryside, addressed by Selim III but only achieved with some success by Mahmud II, was the necessity of overhauling the political and social premises of Ottoman ‘Muslimness’, which also grew out of reforming the military. Recasting of Ottoman dynastic and religious ideology was one of the unintended results of the reform documentation, as the necessity to persuade local and international critics became part of Ottoman governance. Such changes distinguish the Russian and Ottoman ‘military revolutions’ from those of western Europe, where the question of the creation of modern armies was a constitutional rather than a cultural issue. 1 In all aspects of reform, Selim III encountered significant opposition, facing a multiplicity of voices and a paucity of finances. This present chapter ends with an outline of the major reforms of Selim III and his advisers. 
 Chapter Six takes a broader look at Selim III’s challengers, both internal and external. The 1760–1830 period saw significant upheaval not just in the Ottoman military order but also in its political order, especially with the rise of provincial challengers to Ottoman hegemony, precisely in those areas in the Danubian theatre where warfare had been sustained and proved so costly. Chapter Six includes a brief return to the events of the Napoleonic period, most significantly events just prior to Selim III’s fall, the treaty of Tilsit between Russia and France in 1807, and the Anglo-Russian–Ottoman naval confrontations over the Dardanelles. A description of Selim’s downfall and an assessment of the achievements and failures of the Nizâm- ı Cedid period will conclude the chapter. As will be clear from the narrative that follows, it was the greatest moment of crisis the empire had yet faced. How it was possible for the Ottoman Empire to have survived the period in question? Part of the answer lies in Selim III’s engagement in international diplomacy, as much as in the great power struggles as they were played out in Egypt and the Balkans. Part of the answer lies in the vision of a small number of bureaucrats at the centre, who counselled Selim III throughout this period. 
 The problem 