 Osman Pasvano ğ lu, however, represented the traditional order. He resolutely prohibited the imposition of the new economic and military reforms in the territories under his command, one of the chief reasons for his popularity among the peasants. Foreign observers noted that Christians (Bulgarians) as well as Muslims (Turks) sought refuge in his territories, and fought in his garrison at Vidin. He was well-informed on international affairs by a spy network, and was generally acknowledged to be an adroit manipulator of the French, Russian and Austrian diplomatic initiatives in the territory. Until the Serbian revolt of 1804, Pasvano ğ lu represented the downtrodden of all ethno-religious stripes in one of the most diverse corners of the empire. After 1804, the Christian/Muslim lines started to be more firmly drawn as the Orthodox Serbian communities struggled for autonomy from the Ottomans. 16 Pasvano ğ lu is also credited with creating a vibrant centre of Islamic culture in Vidin, modernising the fortress, repairing the roads, erecting fountains, a mosque, and a library, as well as a modern barracks, most of which is still standing. 17 
 For Selim III and his court in Istanbul, Pasvano ğ lu challenged dynastic and ideological claims, and he had to be branded both a rebel ( e ş k ı ya ) and heretic ( Bekta ş i ) in order to legitimise the attack on him as a usurper of the sultan’s authority. It is possible to argue that the dynasty reasserted its Muslim orthodoxy here, as elsewhere in the period, not just as a response to the Russian and Austrian manipulation of religious identities in diplomatic instruments, but equally because challengers like Pasvano ğ lu cloaked their aims in caliphal arguments. The very name Osman could be used to remind followers of the eponymous founder of the ruling house. As a threat to the new order, Osman Pasvano ğ lu may be likened (only in broad terms) to the 1773–75 Pugachev rebellion in Russia, itself couched as protecting the traditional order and restoring the legitimate dynasty. Pugachev, who had seen service in a Cossack regiment in Bender in 1770, derived his support from rebellious Cossacks, and for a time threatened the social stability of Catherine II’s Russia. It could be argued that Pasvano ğ lu succeeded where Pughachev did not in precipitating the events which brought down Selim III. 
 Radical diplomacy 
 Quite apart from his inability to effectively curb the activities of ayan like Pasvano ğ lu, Selim III was also frustrated by notables who had access to international diplomacy in a way he did not. Their ambivalent relationship with the state would have prevented him from acquiring accurate and speedy information on frontier and external affairs from his provincial allies, with some exceptions, as we have seen in the case of Canikli Ali. Foreign occupation, a very real, frightening possibility after 1792, and even more of a possibility by the end of Russo-Ottoman hostilities in 1812, may have contributed to Selim III’s decision to establish permanent Ottoman embassies in Europe in 1793, the most significant innovation in diplomacy of the age. Deprived of the French military mission (recalled in 1788) and forced to break off relations with the French after the Revolution, the sultanate struggled to maintain Ottoman autonomy. One way to do so was to take the initiative, by embracing the European idiom of diplomatic and social communication at its source. 18 
 Pre-1793 diplomacy 
 Between 1703 and 1774, the Ottoman–European diplomatic system was regularised by the clauses of the Karlowitz Treaty (1699), based on reciprocal rather than unilateral agreements. Most Balkan treaties thereafter used the Karlowitz treaty and subsequently that of Küçük Kaynarca in 1774 as their basis for comparison. Ottoman diplomacy functioned adequately on a significant number of occasions. 19 Each negotiated treaty required an exchange of diplomats, resulting in considerable (and expensive) traffic between the Empire and its various trading partners and erstwhile enemies. Although such embassies supplied the sultans with little significant intelligence on the courts they visited, it is precisely in the mid-eighteenth century that the aim of such embassies began to change. Notable, for example, is the report of Ahmed Resmi following his visit to Berlin in 1763–64. 20 
 The Ottoman embassy to Vienna in 1791–92, to cement the newly signed Sistova treaty ending Austria’s involvement in the Russo-Austrian– Ottoman war, was a temporary, purely ceremonial affair, but the ambassador was Ebubekir Rat ı b, Selim III’s closest confidant, whose mandate appears to have been far broader than just an exchange of treaty instruments. Rat ı b submitted a massive report to Selim III upon his return to Istanbul, almost 500 manuscript pages of description of Austrian military, bureaucratic and political affairs, unique to the eighteenth-century traditional embassies. Ebubekir was present when Selim III convened his first council as sultan, and his report on Austria is acknowledged by historians to have contributed to the later reform agenda, although it is generally conceded that Tatarc ı k Abdullah Pasha’s recommendations were those Selim III enacted. The detail of knowledge about a European court and its military secrets that is embodied in the embassy report was unprecedented in Ottoman circles. Austria, rather than France or Russia, as a model for Ottoman reform, remains a largely unexamined possibility. 21 
 Rat ı b’s experience and advice may have precipitated Selim III’s sudden decision to send permanent embassies to select capitals of Europe: London, Vienna, Berlin and later Paris (1806), in search of further such enlightenment. 22 The implication of Selim III’s decision to take diplomacy to the courts of Europe has been overlooked in most discussions of his reforms, because of the embassies’ relative lack of permanence, and also because the gesture was eclipsed in the chaos that engulfed Istanbul after 1798. Furthermore, the sultan did not have an independent courier system, relying on the diplomatic post of neighbours such as Austria or Prussia. Regular, European-style, permanent Ottoman embassies to foreign capitals were not in place until after 1835. 
 First embassies to Europe 
 The first, permanent Ottoman embassy was to London, an initiative perhaps conceived by Rat ı b Efendi and discussed with Sir Robert Ainslie, long-time British ambassador to Istanbul. Britain’s wealth and power, and potential for support against both France and Russia, must surely have swayed Selim III. Joining Rat ı b in the discussions with Ainslie concerning the proposed embassy were Reis Mehmed Ra ş id Efendi and Tatarc ı kzade Abdullah. The first London ambassador was Yusuf Agah Efendi, whose Chief Secretary, Mahmud Raif, wrote a report of the years in London (1793–97) in French. 23 Author of Tableau des nouveaux règlemens de l’Empire ottoman , discussed in the previous chapter, Raif was one of the first three men to be sent abroad by the sultan with specific instructions to undertake the study of a foreign language. He was 32 years old at the time of his appointment, and very anxious to learn French, the ‘universal language’. 24 Raif is representative of the new-style bureaucrat important to Ottoman reform in the mid-nineteenth century. 25 His account includes a description of the House of Commons and Lords, and the English army and navy, with special emphasis on the ships, the arsenals and docks. Also included is an extensive description of the English economy, and of the city of London. Raif served 1800–05 as Reis , and was on campaign in Egypt in 1801 as part of the Ottoman–British coalition army organised to combat the French occupation. Ambassador Yusuf Agah’s correspondence with Sultan Selim III, preserved in manuscript with the sultan’s notes in the margin, is evidence of his keen interest in refashioning the Ottoman state on foreign models. 26 On the practical level, Ambassador Yusuf Agah sought British friendship and loans, but his official reception did not bode well for the success of the enterprise. British Prime Minister Grenville reacted indifferently to the ambassador, and quite failed to appreciate the significance of Selim III’s decision. 27 
 The second and third permanent ambassadors were sent to Vienna (Ibrahim Afif Efendi in 1797) and Berlin (Ali Aziz Efendi also in 1797). Like Yusuf Agah, and his successor in London, Ismail Ferruh Efendi, these pioneers are generally portrayed in western sources at best as naive; at worst, as serving as dupes of the host governments. Generally unskilled in the languages of the country to which they were appointed, adept at ceremonial but untrained in the intricacies of European diplomacy, they were often lesser bureaucrats of the court in Istanbul, and had to rely on a staff of translators, drawn from the Greek community of the capital, the infamous ‘dragomans’ of all foreign observers. 
 Selim III’s diplomatic initiative annoyed Catherine II and angered the French, the latter long considered the oldest ‘friends’ of the Ottomans. The Ottomans did not send a permanent ambassador to St Petersburg until 1857, a measure of the long years of hostility between the two courts. 28 Selim III had corresponded with the French court, however, before becoming sultan, and remained a Francophile throughout the period. Vergennes, former ambassador to Istanbul, and French Foreign Minister, and a long-time realistic ally of the Ottomans, had died in 1787, and with his death, the putative friendship collapsed. 29 Vergennes was responsible for the operation of the French military mission in Istanbul, which was withdrawn in 1788. It remained to be seen if Great Britain would step into the void. In the 1790s, this was by no means clear. Britain’s Levant Company was close to dissolution (and actually taken over by the British government in 1821), and British officials were more engaged with India and Europe than with the Ottomans. At most, the British ambassador in Istanbul never heard more than ten times a year from his government in London. By contrast, French Ambassador Choiseul-Gouffier (1784–92) received special dispatches from Izmir on a regular basis, and was a particular source of information on international affairs for Selim III. 30 The French dominated Eastern Mediterranean trade between Marseilles and the Ottoman ports, particularly Izmir. After the French Revolution forced a breach in Ottoman–French relations, Selim III’s political manoeuvring in the period 1798–1807 can be interpreted as his continued desire to re-establish the French connection. This was one of the significant reasons for his downfall. 
 Pressure from Ambassador Raymond Verinac (1795–97), the first fully accredited French Republican representative in Istanbul, persuaded Selim III to appoint Seyyid (Moral ı ) Ali Efendi as the first permanent Ambassador to Paris in 1797. The idea probably appealed to Selim III anyway. Ali Efendi was well received in Paris, in the style of Molière’s ‘Bourgeois Gentilhomme’ to judge by one account. 31 Europeans were avid readers of the Arabian Nights and The Turkish Spy , and must have delighted in the virtualisation of their fantasies in the new ambassador. 32 Ali was accompanied by one of the more notorious of dragomans, Pangiotis Codrika, who served Talleyrand in keeping Ambassador Ali Efendi ignorant of French intentions in Alexandria. Ali Efendi was maintained as a virtual prisoner until 1801, like his counterpart in Istanbul the chargé d’affaires Pierre Ruffin, who was one of the last European diplomats to be locked up in the Seven Towers castle, as part of an Ottoman declaration of war. Ruffin later became one of the most influential of France’s Orientalists. 
