

 Plate 12    Egyptian mamluks training in Cairo (Yates, William Holt , The Modern History and Condition of Egypt; its Climate, Diseases and Capabilities with an account of the proceedings of Mohammed Ali Pascha from 1801 to 1843. London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1843 ). 
 Debilitating civil wars among the households had given rise to an extraordinary figure from the Qazda ğ l ı mamluk faction, and achieved the merging of the office of governor and bey in one person by the end of the century. That person, Ali Bey el-Kabir, probably of Christian origin, was a mamluk from Abkhazia. 44 By 1768, he had ruthlessly eliminated his major rivals, disposed of possible rivals in the seven regiments, including Janissaries, and assumed the title of shaykh al-balad , headman of Cairo. By 1769, he had pacified most of Egypt. His tyranny extended to the foreign and minority merchant community, largely Jewish, from whom he extracted ever larger extortions, often given as one of the reasons the government in Paris was later persuaded to allow Bonaparte to attack Alexandria in 1798. Ali Bey deposed the Ottoman governor, and challenged the sultan by refusing to submit the annual tribute to Istanbul, even though he did send the 3,000-troop contingent to the campaigns unfolding in the Balkans in 1769. He reputedly had 25,000 to 40,000 troops at his disposal. 45 
 As part of an ambitious foreign policy, Ali Bey sent his trusted mamluk and brother-in-law, Muhammad Bey, to the Red Sea in an attempt to re-establish Egyptian commercial control over the area, where British and French rivalries were heating up over the lucrative Yemen coffee trade. Ali Bey also had ambitions concerning Syria and Palestine. He surrounded himself with Christian advisers, and employed numerous foreigners, especially artillery experts, and beginning in November 1770, began a campaign to capture the city of Damascus. His ally was Shaykh Zahir al-‘Umar, predecessor to Cezzar Pasha in Palestine. The city of Damascus, abandoned by the Ottoman governor, surrendered to Muhammad Bey, Ali’s hand-picked commander after his return from the Red Sea, in June 1771. In spite of this victory, Muhammad Bey retreated precipitately to Cairo, and participated in a conspiracy to oust Ali Bey. Ali Bey, exiled from Cairo and still allied with Shaykh Zahir in Gaza, enlisted the support of the Russians in his continued assault on Syria. Negotiations with Count Orlov, already in the Aegean stirring up the Greeks of the Morea against the Ottomans, came to little other than some naval support from the Russian fleet. Rumours about an Ottoman assault on Egypt in late 1771 proved groundless. There was little the sultan could do, with Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed engaged in negotiations to end the 1768–74 war with the Russians at Babada ğ ı on the Danube. 
 Mamluk household war continued in Cairo, but Muhammad Bey eventually defeated his erstwhile master at the gates of the city in May 1773, in a battle which ‘would determine not only the leadership of Egypt, but the course of subsequent events in Palestine, Syria, and the Ottoman Empire.’ 46 The significance of these events lies in the autonomy gained by the beylicate as opposed to the Ottoman governor. Ali Bey had defied Istanbul by deposing the Ottoman governor. Muhammad Bey restored both the Ottoman governor and the annual tribute to the sultan, suggesting his collusion with Istanbul, but achieved the same status as Ali Bey when Sultan Abdülhamid I (1774–89) gave him the rank of vizier and was set to appoint him as governor, just shortly before Muhammad Bey’s sudden death in Acre in 1775, where he too was on campaign to reunite southern Syria and Egypt. Both Ali Bey and Muhammad Bey foreshadow the ambitions and achievements of Mehmed Ali by several decades. In the confusion and factional strife which followed Muhammad Bey’s death, the Ottomans were able to re-establish a relationship with the Qazda ğ l ı s which lasted until Bonaparte’s invasion in 1798, but which did not include secure administrative control of such an important province. An Ottoman expeditionary force was sent to restore the sultan’s control over Egypt in 1786, under the command of the well-known Grand Admiral Gazi Hasan Pasha, who had advanced as far as Cairo when he was recalled to Istanbul before he could finish the task to prepare for the campaign against Russia in 1787. As I have argued, defence of the northern arc obsessed the inner circle in Istanbul. Egypt resembled a ripe plum for the plucking, both militarily and economically, as many in Paris, such as Constantin Volney, argued. 47 
 French evacuation of Egypt 
 By mid-1799, however, Bonaparte personally abandoned the Egyptian plum, as his project had become untenable, particularly after the retreat from Acre. Even though his army defeated some Ottoman troops disembarking at Aboukir on 11 July, Bonaparte chose to sail for France with a small escort. He left General Kléber in charge of the evacuation of the French troops. The Ottoman army had begun the advance from Jaffa through the Sinai towards Egypt. Plague and hunger posed as much a threat to the French as mamluk and Ottoman adversaries. In January 1800, persuaded by Sydney Smith, Kléber signed the Convention of El-Arish with Kör Yusuf Pasha (and Smith for the British), for the evacuation of Egypt. The convention was rejected by both Britain and Russia, who insisted on surrender, so the French were forced to dig in. In March, the French defeated the Ottoman (largely Albanian) army and Mamluk troops at Heliopolis (‘Ainshams) and gained control over Upper Egypt. Returning to Cairo, which had revolted in his absence, General Kléber starved the rebels into submission, and then fell victim to an assassin in mid-June. He was replaced by General Menou. 
 By October 1800, British ships and troops had embarked for Egypt, in support of the Ottomans, and in March 1801, the British landed in Aboukir, shortly before Ottoman contingents under Kapudan Admiral Küçük Hüseyin Pasha also arrived by ship. The combined army numbered: 15,000 British, under command first of General Abercromby, then General Hely Hutchinson, and 7,000 Ottomans, under Kapudan Küçük Hüseyin, in Alexandria. In addition, Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf’s army of 15,000 (estimated at 25,000 by the time of its arrival in Egypt) left Gaza in mid-March to cross the Sinai Desert again, arriving on the eastern bank of the Nile in mid-April. The first of 6,000 sepoys from British India, who had left Bombay in December, arrived in Qusayr on the Red Sea in May, and with great difficulty marched down the Nile, reaching Rosetta in time for the final French capitulation. 48 The East India Company used the opportunity to promote further trade in the Red Sea and the Gulf. French General Menou’s ineptitude and delay permitted a disorganised Anglo-Ottoman army to isolate the last of the French army in Alexandria, forcing the French evacuation of Egypt by September 1801. Militarily insignificant, this latter campaign, and indeed the entire Napoleonic interlude, had immense social consequences for Egypt, discussed below. 
 Hostilities ceased with the Treaty of Amiens in June 1802, which was signed by Selim III, renewing all French capitulations and establishing French predominance in Istanbul as before the Revolution, much to the chagrin of the British, who would shortly resume the fight against Napoleon Bonaparte, in the Third Coalition with Austria and Russia (May 1803). Selim III preferred neutrality to breaking the treaty. After much wrangling the last of the British troops left Egypt in March 1803, in order to restore good relations with the sultan. The first colonial thrust into the Middle East was over in a brief three years. The consequences reverberated for another hundred. 
 On the surface, the Ottoman Empire, though not Selim III, escaped with little damage, or no more than the usual destruction inflicted on local populations by warfare and local oppressors, and Selim III’s preference for the French connection, as well as Anglo-Russian vulnerability to Napoleonic ambitions elsewhere, restored Ottoman sovereignty to Egypt, however tenuously. He was grateful for this, and established a medal, called the Order of the Crescent, which he bestowed on the British officers ‘to perpetuate the signal services rendered’. 49 
 What ensued in Egypt, however, was further civil war among the mamluk households, the Ottoman governors, and remnants of the Ottoman army of liberation, mostly Albanians, who caused considerable unrest and widespread misery. A young survivor of 1801, Mehmed Ali, would bid his time, and return to threaten the new sultan Mahmud II (1808–39) in his own home territory of Anatolia. To build his modern army, Mehmed Ali relied, as we shall see, not on the British but on French ideas, technology, military models, and advisers. This was the primary consequence of the Napoleonic invasion, which produced both the chief architect of Mahmud II’s reform agenda, Hüsrev Pasha, and the chief rival to the Ottoman house, Mehmed Ali. The story continues in Chapter Eight . 
 The audacious French thrust into the eastern Mediterranean also resulted in bringing not just the British but also the Russian fleets into fuller operation in the region. In fall 1798, the Russians moved warships through the Bosphorus Straits to support the Ottomans in the emerging struggle with the French. A Russo-Ottoman fleet drove the French from the Ionian islands, establishing the short-lived Septinsular Republic in 1802, largely to protect the inhabitants from the predations of Ali Pasha of Iannina who had captured Preveza and Butrinto from the French. While lending support to Selim III in his bid to subdue Osman Pasvano ğ lu of Vidin, Ali Pasha had succeeded in establishing his own power base in Albania and Greece. He was in a position more powerful than any sultan during the first two decades of the nineteenth century, a problem greater even for Mahmud II than Selim III. 
 Imperial impressions 
 The brief Anglo-Ottoman–Russian coalition against Napoleon Bonaparte left some lasting impressions and attitudes of the Ottomans and their armies with the British officers. Used to the strict hierarchy and discipline of their own system, the British officers were appalled at the unruly disorder of the Ottoman camp, which was noted for its confusion and filth. No attention was apparently paid to the burying of dead animals, or offal. The rivalry in command between the Grand Admiral and the Grand Vizier was palpable to these eyewitnesses, and generally attributed by them as natural in Oriental court politics. 
