 Undeterred by British and Russian opposition to his moves to reconnect with France, Selim III continued to appoint ambassadors to Paris: Halet Efendi (1803–06), and Muhib Efendi (1806–11). In spite of that continued representation, Selim III was compelled, on at least three occasions, to send special plenipotentiaries to resolve some delicate negotiations. One of note is that of Mehmed Said Galib Efendi, sent to negotiate the signing of the Treaty of Paris on 25 June 1802, re-establishing Ottoman– French relations ruptured in 1799, as described below. Of most interest is the fact that Galib Efendi and Halet Efendi survived the rebellions around Selim III’s demise to serve as rivals in the court of Mahmud II. Galib Efendi has acquired the title of father of modern Turkish diplomacy for negotiating the Treaty of Bucharest in 1812, while Halet has been dismissed by Bernard Lewis as ‘a convinced reactionary and hater of all things Western.’ 33 
 While the diplomatic record of these first permanent Ottoman representatives abroad is undistinguished, their exposure to western style and culture was more significant, adding to the information slowly seeping into the upper levels of government in Istanbul, and already apparent on the streets. 34 Their experiences at foreign courts may also have contributed to Mahmud II’s rejection of the system until such time (1835) as he had created a reliable diplomatic corps and trustworthy translators in Istanbul itself before appointing further permanent representatives to the courts of Europe. 
 European governments preferred to acquire their information on the Ottomans from the hotbed of Istanbul itself, probably the last ‘European’ capital where members of all states met on more or less the same terms, even as they complained of the rapacity of the system of ‘gifts’ required to influence Ottoman court politics. That would change with Napoleon’s invasion of Alexandria, which inaugurated the colonial age in the Middle East, when spies, diplomats, translators alike were caught up in the new age of persuasion and ideology. 
 Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt 
 After 1798, Franco-British commercial rivalry, played out all over the world, was intensified in the Mediterranean with warships, as European conflicts spread to the Near East. In 1797, the Habsburgs had abandoned their allies Russia and Great Britain, and signed the Treaty of Campoformio with France, one of the first pieces of news reported home from Vienna by Ambassador Ibrahim Afif Efendi. That treaty dismembered the Republic of Venice, and gave France the Ionian Islands, making France a neighbour of the Ottoman Empire for the first time and exacerbating Selim III’s complicated relationships with Osman Pasvano ğ lu and Ali Pasha of Iannina. 
 In July 1798, General Napoleon Bonaparte, largely on his own initiative, sailed for Egypt with 35,000 troops and a 500-strong team of scientists, archaeologists, linguists and scholars. Landing at Alexandria without much resistance, he marched to Cairo, where he defeated a mamluk army double in size at the Battle of the Pyramids. On 25 July, Bonaparte entered Cairo, but remained precariously perched on the mouth of the Nile. In the annals of military history, the battle stands as the great east-west encounter, with Bonaparte’s hollow squares of infantry cutting down mamluk cavalry armed only with swords and bows and arrows. This was not, however, Italy, as attested by Napoleon’s comments from his memoirs dictated at St Helena: ‘In vain were [the French soldiers] assured that the country was the most fertile in the world, that it was even superior to Lombardy; how were they to be persuaded of this when they could get neither bread nor wine? We encamped on immense quantities of wheat, but there was neither mill nor oven in the country. The biscuit brought from Alexandria had long been exhausted; the soldiers were even reduced to bruise the wheat between two stones and to make cakes. Many parched the wheat in a pan, after which they boiled it.’ Water was a problem: ‘Frequently, after our most oppressive marches, nothing could be found to allay the urgent cravings of thirst but a little brackish water of the most disgusting description.’ The army, almost from the day of arrival, was restive and unhappy. 35 
 Napoleon’s adventure, initially a private enterprise sanctioned by the Directorate, who preferred the general occupied outside Paris, proved disastrous and embroiled France and the entire region in global warfare. (The scholarly enterprise, not under discussion here, proved more lasting in the later publication of the magnificent set of documents called the Déscription d’Egypte .) According to his chief ideologue, Constantin Volney, writing in the Moniteur , Bonaparte had achieved the creation of an Arab nation by his reforms, and aimed at ‘the resurrection of former Arab glory, the destruction of the Ottomans, and the purification of Islam.’ 36 By 11 September of the same year, in agreement with Russia and Britain, the Ottomans were at war with their ‘oldest friends’. 
 Bonaparte’s thrust would be short-lived, however, as the British navy under Admiral Nelson dispatched the French navy at the Battle of the Nile on 1 August 1798, surrounding and destroying most of the fleet off Aboukir. It was a blow to Bonaparte as the destruction of the ships and supplies crippled the enterprise. Great Britain signed the Anglo-Ottoman Defensive Alliance in January 1799, with mutual guarantees for their respective territories, joining the Russo-Ottoman alliance already agreed upon. Rather than becoming mired in Alexandria, Bonaparte marched into Syria in February of 1799, defeating the Ottoman garrison at Jaffa, where the French army executed 4,000 prisoners. He faced stiff resistance at Acre, and withdrew by the end of May, having failed to breach the fortress. Of 13,000 troops under Bonaparte’s command at that time, 2,000 died and another 3,000 were wounded, heavy casualties even for the period. 37 
 The garrison at Acre was commanded by independent ayan Cezzar Ahmed Pasha, another of the controversial figures of the age, who managed 35 years of rule over Syria, sometimes as Governor of Sidon (Sayda), sometimes of both Sidon and Damascus. A Bosnian native who spent time in Istanbul, Cezzar first went to Egypt in the entourage of Ali Bey Agha, who had appointed Ottoman governor in 1756. Cezzar joined the household of Salih Bey, learned Arabic, and acquired power by his associations, especially with mamluk Ali Bey el-Kabir, discussed below. After a falling out with Ali Bey, Cezzar Ahmed escaped from Egypt, only to surface again in Beirut around 1770. Much like Osman Pasvano ğ lu in Vidin, the young adventurer Cezzar turned ‘Albanian’, to attract warriors, and created his own power base in Acre after the death of Zahir al-‘Umar in 1775. His fame rests largely on his defeat of Bonaparte. 38 Cezzar Ahmed faced the French with around 700 Nizâm- ı Cedid troops sent from Istanbul as an advance guard among his own forces, and a British contingent led by Sir Sydney Smith. British ships lent fire support offshore, bombarding French trenches, and kept the fortress supplied throughout the siege. 39 
 While events unfolded at Acre, the Ottomans made preparations for a full-scale campaign by land and by sea in cooperation with the British. Selim III’s advisers in Istanbul discussed the military alternatives in Egypt, in response to Cezzar Ahmed, who had written to Selim III asking to be made Serasker of Egypt and to be given sufficient funds to raise troops and supplies to lead the fight against the French. The imperial council was inclined to comply, but sober thought made them realise that although he was strong in his own territories, Cezzar Pasha was insufficiently powerful to counter the large French army. One of the clinching arguments was that once Cezzar Pasha was in Egypt, who would remove him? Hence, he was ordered to prepare and defend the Syrian coastline, as he appears to have done at least at Acre. Selim III’s advisors preferred to mobilise a coalition army with the British rather than empower a quasi-independent ayan . 40 By mid-1799, the fleet was deployed, under Grand Admiral Küçük Hüseyin Pasha (1792–1803) and the army ordered to mobilise under Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf Ziya Pasha (1798–1805; 1809–11) at Üsküdar. Quite apart from confronting the invasion, the Ottomans sought to re-establish more formal control over Egypt, which had in the previous half-century achieved a considerable degree of autonomy from Istanbul. Before continuing with a discussion of the consequences of Napoleon Bonaparte’s adventure, we need to describe Egyptian affairs just prior to the invasion. 
 Pre-Napoleonic Egypt 
 Egypt and Syria had experienced much the same emergence of militarily independent-minded households as elsewhere. In Syria, as in the Balkans, the line between mercenary and bandit was almost non-existent, and the region had existed for centuries under nominal Ottoman aegis, with private armies and local recruitment. After the dissolution of the Janissaries, in 1826, themselves well assimilated into the local scene and often rivalling yerliye , the relationship between Istanbul and the Arab provinces became even more disconnected. 
 Irregular military groups grew out of many of the same cultural contexts as we have seen elsewhere: clan-based, communal warriors characterised Nablus, for example, and the Hawran of the Druze. Nomadic groups of Türkmen or Bedouins might serve as temporary local combatants, or protectors of the caravan routes. Inter-tribal warfare made that kind of force problematic for the Ottomans, and the centrally-appointed governors often found themselves pawns of local events. A third kind of local force commonly seen elsewhere were the levends : cavalry of mostly Anatolian and Balkan origin, who essentially became soldiers-for-hire when they were demobilised by the Ottoman army itself. They could be Albanians, Kurds, or even Maghrebins, the latter also known as delis , or the later ba ş ı bozuk cavalry. Cezzar Pasha, for example, made extensive use of the levends , as well as independent groups of Bosnians and Albanians. Added to the mix of foreign soldiers were the Wahhabis, who emerged as fierce anti-Ottoman Islamic warriors precisely in this period. 
 The city of Damascus, situated on the pilgrimage route to Mecca, enjoyed moments of stability under the al-‘Azm family, members of whom were also Ottoman governors of the province at least nine times between 1725 and 1808. ‘Abdullah Pasha, one of the last of the family, ruled intermittently from 1795–1807, and assisted then Governor Cezzar Pasha in the struggle against Napoleon at Acre. Subsequently he was dismissed when he could no longer control the local military factions, who could attack the annual hajj caravan at will. A period of undeniable strife and chaos unfolded in the first half of the nineteenth century in greater Syria, as in Egypt in the first decade. 41 
 By the mid-eighteenth century, the Egyptian household system also resembled the Ottoman-style clientage system. The distinct style of the mamluks, however, was that membership of the households was said to be restricted to formally manumitted slaves, largely from the Caucasus. The struggle that unfolds after 1800 concerns the last of the great mamluk households, local bedouin groups, and the imported Albanian soldiers who constituted a good proportion of the Ottoman armies sent to Egypt. The Ottoman governor, an Istanbul appointee, was caught in the middle unless he was able to construct an alliance with the local brokers. 
