 Kapudan Küçük Hüseyin Pasha, who died in Istanbul in 1803, was described as having ‘… great penetration, a marked predilection for every thing European, and a desire to better the condition of every one immediately about him, … [as] the best and most prominent features in his character; but to his education in the seraglio he owes the opposite and dark side of his character, profound dissimulation, and a deep spirit of intrigue.’ It was noted that he was the only one who disciplined his troops properly, having under his command two good regiments of Nizâm- ı Cedid troops. The admiral vigorously strove to keep his troops and those of the grand vizier separate. Those reformed troops were actually under command of the above-mentioned Hüsrev Pasha, protegé of Küçük Hüseyin Pasha, who would be appointed to command Mahmud II’s new army in 1827. For his efforts in Egypt, he was appointed governor. When he tried to introduce the Nizâm-i Cedid regime, he became embroiled in the civil strife, which led to Mehmed Ali’s rise and his own defeat at Damietta in 1803. Hüsrev Pasha is, nonetheless, a towering figure in all subsequent events leading to the creation of the new army. During the Greek revolt in Peloponnesus, Hüsrev Pasha, who had been reappointed Admiral in 1822, would struggle with Ibrahim Pasha, son of Mehmed Ali, for control of the Ottoman campaign against the Greeks, and, pressured by Mehmed Ali himself, Mahmud II would dismiss him in February 1827. 50 
 The gray-bearded Grand Vizier, Kör Yusuf Pasha, blind in one eye, was known for his piety and fatalism rather than his knowledge of European affairs, but was considered an able commander. His principal support came from the Qazda ğ l ı faction under Ibrahim Bey. Of the troops commanded by the grand vizier, the Janissaries were considered dangerous; the Albanians, of the greatest number, were thought to be good light troops but prone to revolt. The cavalry numbered around 5,000 but ‘they have no idea of discipline, and can never be brought to think that acting in a body is preferable to their loose mode of attack. Of course they can never make any great impression on a well disciplined enemy.’ 51 British commanders generally supported the mamluk beys and Arabs over Albanians and Turks in the struggles following 1802, influenced by an increasingly widespread imaginary evocation of the Arabs as an ideal republic. 52 Local civilian populations, however, fed up with mamluk excesses, favoured the reforms of Mehmed Ali, and considerably enabled the transformation of Egyptian society. 
 These were the early days of British global imperialism, before the consolidation of the Raj system in British India, with all its prejudices against ‘Orientals’, was in place. Whether or not the French and British understood their ‘imperial project’ as a ‘civilising mission’ at this juncture , is very much a subject of debate. It could easily be argued that these first impressions of aspiring imperial armies with their Ottoman equivalent were pivotal to the emergence of a certain worldview, what Norman Daniel characterises as the merging of ‘crusade and colony’. 53 
 It could equally be argued that both the British and French transferred their American and Indian experiences and impressions to the eastern Mediterranean. A good number of the officers in Egypt were experienced East India Company army veterans, hence the celebration of the arrival of the sepoy regiments, as well as the inclination to rely on the mamluk-style warrior. The East India Company faced no significant native resistance to British rule before the 1830s, in a partnership of ‘merchants, a patrician military class, and willing native rulers’, until the Company fell into debt and imposed heavy local taxation to support an army that grew from roughly 90,000 in 1793 to about 230,000 in 1820, and spawned numerous local revolts. 54 The sepoys who reached Egypt in 1801 are evidence of the increasing British-style militarisation of India. British officers, such as Sir Sydney Smith, were confronted in the Ottoman command with an imperial disposition to superiority, and cultural disdain equal to their own. This infuriated him enough to refer to them as ‘our ill-informed, illiberal, cruel, avaricious, perfidious allies, the Turks’. General Koehler, Commander of the British Military Mission, wrote: ‘The Turks have great resources, but they are in the last stage of weakness, from the want of knowing how to call them into Action, and how to employ them with advantage afterwards, but above all from want of Patriotism or Publick Spirit, every person in every Station, and of every rank thinks no farther of this situation than as enables him to plunder the State or individuals; No person except the Emperor Himself has the good of the Emperor at Heart.’ 55 
 Observations here would be reinforced on the next occasion when the British and the Ottoman officer classes fought on the same side, first at Acre in 1840, and again in the Crimea in 1854–55. The gulf in the ethos of military command and the conduct of warfare between Ottoman and British remained unbridgeable for most of the nineteenth century. British military advisers, never numerous in court reform circles in Istanbul, were completely eclipsed by Prussian officers and advisers by mid-century. This is at least partially attributable to the early influence of Helmuth von Moltke, who had become chief foreign adviser to Mahmud II at the end of his reign. French influence in the capital also waned after the final defeat of Napoleon, even though the French regimental model was initially adopted for Mahmud II’s new army. In the end it was the Prussian-style army, and a German officer command, that carried the Ottomans through the First World War. French influence, however, remained strong in Egypt and Greece, where the civilising mission drove much of the support for the nationalist struggles of the Greeks, and philhellenism blended past and present. ‘Of course, the modern Greeks needed the guiding light of the West, which was now the repository of antiquity’s legacy.’ 56 Mehmed Ali made abundant use of the technical know-how cloaked in the ideology, and was consistently supported by the French in the challenges to Istanbul that lay in the future. 
 Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti, Egyptian Muslim intellectual and eyewitness to the French invasion, noted that the mamluks were ‘irresolute, and … at odds with one another, being divided in opinion, envious of each other, frightened for their lives, their well-being, and their comforts; immersed in their ignorance and self-delusion; arrogant and haughty in their attire and presumptuousness; afraid of decreasing in number, and pompous in their finery, heedless of the results of their action; contemptuous of their enemy, unbalanced in their reasoning and judgement.’ By contrast, the French acted ‘… as if they were fighters in a holy war. They never considered the number of their enemy as too high, nor did they care who among them was killed. Indeed they considered anyone who fled a traitor to his community, and an apostate to his faith and creed. They follow the orders of their commander and faithfully obey their leader.’ 57 His observations were probably typical of the reaction of local inhabitants, but especially representative of Ottoman thinking as regards the mamluks. The Ottomans too had their own ‘imperial project’ and ‘civilising mission’. 
 Volney noted of the mamluk warriors: ‘their armies are mobs, their marches ravages, their campaigns mere inroads, and their battles, bloody frays; the strongest or the most adventurous party goes in search of the other, which not unfrequently flies without offering resistance; if they stand their ground, they engage pell-mell, discharge their carbines, break their spears, and hack each other with their sabres. A panic frequently diffuses itself without cause; one party flies, the other pursues and shouts victory; the vanquished submit to the will of the conqueror, and the campaign often terminates without a battle.’ 58 This is how the Ottoman reformers had begun to consider not just the mamluks, but also the auxiliary forces such the Albanians, the Kurds, and increasingly, the Janissaries. 
 Jabarti’s likening of the French invasion to a jihad is not far off the mark. Imbued with the zeal of the revolution, which championed liberty and tolerance, Bonaparte professed friendship and brotherhood with the Muslims of Egypt, declared his wish to continue his good relationship with Selim III, and his desire to eliminate the tyranny of the mamluks. He also asserted that his landing represented a blow against British power in India, which had initially persuaded his masters in Paris. The use of ideological propaganda as a tool of warfare, if not precisely his invention, certainly matured in the era of Napoleon. Selim III prepared his own propaganda for circulation. While the Ottomans, he began, had at first hesitated to condemn the Revolution in France out of respect for an old friendship, those the revolution bought to power have subverted ‘under an illusive idea of liberty … every established government, … the abolishment of all religions, the destruction of every country, the plunder of property, and the dissolution of all human society – to occupy themselves in nothing but in misleading and imposing upon the ignorant amongst the people … and render the government permanent in their hands … the French planned to divide Arabia into various Republics; to attack the whole Mahometan sect, in its religion and country; and by a gradual progression, to extirpate all Mussulmans from the face of the Earth.’ Egyptians were warned that once the Frenchmen were in control, they would ‘spread hatred and excite the people to revolt; ultimately to destroy the Holy Places and all the Muslims.’ 59 That prediction was borne out when Bonaparte fired on rebels in Cairo in 1798, destroying parts of the al-Azhar mosque and university complex, an uprising that left 2,000–3,000 Egyptians and 300 French troops dead. 60 
 While such propaganda may have circulated in Egypt to combat the French invaders, it could be and was equally used against internal, Muslim challengers such as the Wahhabis, militant purists who had already attacked the holy places in the Arabian Peninsula and would plague the Istanbul government for the first decade of the nineteenth century. The Wahhabi movement, and its militant revivalism, had an enormous impact on Middle East politics, coinciding with the age of Mehmed Ali and Mahmud II. We will return to that challenge in the next chapter. 
 The final challenge to Selim III 1806–07 
 Selim III was distracted from the chaos in his southern territories by the even more significant challenges of Pasvano ğ lu and Ali Pasha described earlier. The arena of European conflict centred for the moment in the eastern half of the continent, where Napoleon was routing the Third Coalition, while religious propaganda wars moved to the Principalities. (The earliest stages of Serbian revolt have already been mentioned.) Russian frequently played the Serbian Orthodox card in gambling with Napoleon and the Ottomans between 1804 and 1812. The loser was most often the Orthodox or Muslim peasant. 
