

 Plate 11   The Ottoman interior of the Baba Vida fortress in Vidin (author’s photograph). 
 Vidin and Osman Pasvano ğ lu 
 Osman Pasvano ğ lu, who began his career as a member of the Janissaries, like his father, ruled a wide swathe of Balkan territory from his base in the Vidin fortress on the Danube. Pasvano ğ lu engineered a rebellion that engaged Selim III and his government for almost a decade, requiring at one point a massive mobilisation and general call to arms of the population to finally eliminate him. The call to arms stimulated Serbian nationalist sentiments, and Kara George (Petrovic, d. 1817), commander of the forces that eventually put Pasvano ğ lu’s challenge to rest, is celebrated as the founder of Serbian independence. Whether defined as freedom fighter for Bulgaria, or provoking Serbian nationalism, or as an Ottoman subject in open rebellion, Pasvano ğ lu proved very costly to Selim III. 
 Vidin had continued to trouble Ottoman authorities, largely because of its situation on the edge of the Principalities, themselves frontier territory, but also because of the excessive number of Janissaries in the area following mobilisation and demobilisation of the army after more than two decades of war. It was here that Osman had been born in 1758, son of Ömer, a Bosnian, then one of the wealthiest aghas of the area, and a Christian mother. As with Canikli Ali, however, his wealth attracted the attention of the Commander of the Vidin garrison, and hence, of Istanbul. Ömer’s story is sketchy, but expelled from Vidin, he ended up stationed with the 31st Janissary regiment near Belgrade. He and his son Osman were sentenced to death by Abdülhamid I in 1787, for extortion and rebellion. Ömer was executed, but Osman escaped into Serbia, where he distinguished himself in the war against Austria (1787–91) in Wallachia, having ‘turned’ Albanian and gathered around him his own band. The sultan in gratitude allowed him to return to Vidin, and reacquire part of his family property. His personal army consisted of e ş k ı ya , dissatisfied Janissaries and local recruits ( yamaks ), themselves expelled from the Belgrade Pashal ı k by the Ottoman commander Ebu Bekir Pasha, when the Ottomans regained control of the city and province after the peace of Sistova in 1791. 
 Osman continued the pattern of raiding across the Danube into Wallachia, and eventually besieged Vidin itself, taking possession in 1792. He established an extensive and impregnable power base in Vidin, as he petitioned and was pardoned at least twice by Selim III, in documents signed by all the notables of the area. Much as with Canikli Ali, the central government could do little to actually curb such power. By 1794, Pasvano ğ lu had become the most powerful ayan of Rumeli, especially western Bulgaria, while İ smail Tirsiniklio ğ lu Agha controlled the eastern half. The two clashed in 1796–97, when Pasvano ğ lu destroyed many of Tirsiniklio ğ lu’s villages strung out along the Danube to Ni ğ bolu. 
 The battle then began between Belgrade Commander, Mustafa Pasha, appointed by Selim III, a committed reformer, and Pasvano ğ lu. Mustafa Pasha brought order to Belgrade and attempted to appease his powerful rival in Vidin, but to no avail. Pasvano ğ lu had considerable aid from the Janissary regiments stationed in Belgrade, but Mustafa Pasha repelled them in 1795, and many joined Pasvano ğ lu, who had by that time assembled a militia of 12,000 troops, made up of Albanians, Bosnians, Bulgarians and Turks. 8 Mustafa Pasha worked to curb the power of the yamaks , and earned the sobriquet ‘Serbian mother’ from the inhabitants of Belgrade for the care he exhibited concerning the city. 9 Briefly appointed Governor of Rumeli, Mustafa proved unable to resist the increasing raids by Pasvano ğ lu and his troops. Ali Pasha (of Iannina), ayan of Albania and Greece, was then called upon to rout Osman’s army in 1797, incidentally one of the ways in which Ali Pasha himself began his rise. Routed but unbowed, Osman continued to harass the region, until Selim III was forced to mobilise an immense force to put an end to his reign of destruction. 
 In February 1798, some 40,000–50,000 (perhaps as many as 80,000) troops marched against Vidin. They included Grand Admiral and Serasker Küçük Hüseyin Pasha (1792–1803), already renowned for his attacks on Mediterranean piracy; Mustafa Pasha, reappointed as Governor of Rumeli, Ali Pasha himself, plus Tirsiniklio ğ lu İ smail Agha, Adana Mutasarr ı f Yusuf Pasha, Tirhala Mutasarr ı f Kürd Osman Pasha, and ayan from Bosnia, Ş umnu, Hezargrad, Varna and Pravadi, among others such as then Aleppo Governor Mustafa Cebbarzade who joined the Commander-in-Chief’s army in Edirne. 10 
 Hüseyin Pasha is generally acknowledged as one of the superior admirals and commanders of Ottoman forces of the period, put in command here of both the Danubian fleet and the land forces. Still, the situation at Vidin was beyond his capacity to control. The ayan comprising the coalition had little control over their own forces, much less the willingness to submit to a commander from Istanbul. One such example was Kürd Alo Pasha, who, when ordered to bivouac over the winter around Vidin to keep his troops together, took off to Lom with 15,000 infantry and cavalrymen, who immediately scattered, and then opened communications with Pasvano ğ lu. Lured later to the Admiral’s headquarters, he was ambushed and shot by Hüseyin Pasha himself, a measure of desperation that gives a fair picture of the nature of discipline in the army of the Danube at the time. 
 An eight-month siege failed to bring Pasvano ğ lu to heel, and the troops were withdrawn, with considerable casualties. Serasker Hüseyin Pasha wrote to Istanbul of the losses among his own troops: Osman Pasha and 200 of his soldiers had been killed. Soldiers from the nearby town of Lofça, often the object of raids by Pasvano ğ lu’s bands, were notable for their bravery in the course of the siege. Süleyman Agha, their officer, was himself wounded in the foot as he and his men attacked the trenches, and later died. (As historian Cevdet noted acidly, it was strange that Süleyman, known previously to have recovered from more serious wounds with the help of his local surgeons, should die of gangrene in official army service.) 11 Cevdet speaks with the hindsight of the mid-nineteenth century, but his stories are indicative of the lack of trust, resources and manpower at the time, only a few years after the establishment of Selim III’s new order. Furthermore, as the siege got under way, rumours of Napoleon’s fleet preparations at Toulon reached both the Danube and Istanbul, causing a diplomatic flurry and redeployment of military resources. 
 Pasvano ğ lu’s power and prestige were enhanced with another pardon and more titles from Selim III when the coalition army of 1798 withdrew by the end of the year. Admiral Hüseyin Pasha’s ships and soldiers were needed in the Mediterranean. Pasvano ğ lu was irredeemable, however, and resumed his stimulation of local rebellion among the Janissaries in Vidin and the surrounding area. Local Serbian knezes (notables) appealed to Mustafa Pasha to bring order, and he did so in 1799–1800, first trying to put a stop to Janissary raids, and when that failed, by allowing the Serbian population to arm itself. No help could be expected from Istanbul, concerned with the French invasions in Egypt and occupation of the Ionian Islands. Chaos resulted in Vidin and Belgrade, as the government in Istanbul not only did not help, but insisted on the reinstatement of the Janissaries almost as soon as the new Serbian militias were able to expel them. In December 1801, with Pasvano ğ lu’s assistance, the Janissaries wrested control of Belgrade from Mustafa Pasha and executed him. Thus began the brief Janissary dominance of the city, the so-called reign of the day ı s . It was not until the winter of 1804–05 that the Serbs and loyal Ottomans combined to force the day ı s out of the city, and captured both Belgrade and Vidin. 12 
 This tale has been told without the international context surrounding it. Pasvano ğ lu is said to have negotiated with both the Russians and the French. The Russians wished to establish a consulate in Vidin, as they were already well entrenched in the Principalities, having delayed the removal of troops from the region dictated by the 1792 treaty of Jassy. They were prevented by order of the sultan. British and Russian consuls in Bucharest combined to thwart French ambitions, replicating the seething great-power diplomacy of Istanbul. The French had consulates in Bucharest and Jassy after 1795, but they were closed by the Ottomans in 1798. Napoleon sent a mission to persuade Pasvano ğ lu to side with France in 1801, but neither France nor Russia appears to have aided Pasvano ğ lu in any substantial way. 13 
 Nonetheless, when war broke out finally between the Russians and the Ottomans in 1806, Selim III ignored Osman Pasvano ğ lu, whose wings had by that time been clipped, and appointed Mustafa Alemdar Pasha (also known as Mustafa Bayraktar: both mean ‘Flag-Bearer’), based in Rusçuk, and successor to İ smail Tirsiniklio ğ lu, as the Commander of the Ottoman forces. Alemdar proved to be supporter of the Nizâm- ı Cedid , or at least of Selim III. 14 We will return shortly to his role in the events surrounding Selim III’s downfall. 
 Such is the provincial evolution between 1760 and 1830 observable in Anatolia and Rumelia as well as elsewhere in the empire, in cities like Damascus, Aleppo, Baghdad, where other lineages of local Ottoman elites can also be traced. Selim III’s Nizâm- ı Cedid inaugurated an attempt to reimpose central order which worked itself out in extended civil unrest in such regional societies, themselves empowered from the late seventeenth century forward by the state’s need for troops and supplies. The age of the sipahis long over, it had been replaced by the age of ayan , but Ottoman survival depended on curbing or engaging that power as well. The Ottomans failed to forge significant new alliances, preferring an exclusive, absolutist model that bore fruit under Mahmud II, that had unforeseen consequences for the well-being and security of the countryside. Perhaps they had little option, even less inclination. By contrast, ‘… in Europe, … the noble cavalryman became partly redundant but he transformed himself into the officer in his monarch’s army, adding a powerful material and emotional bond to the alliance between ruler and provincial landowning nobility which was the basis of the polity both in eighteenth century Russia and elsewhere.’ 15 The remarkable aspect of stories like those of Canikli Ali and Belgrade Commander Mustafa Pasha, was that there were men, willing and able, to make that same transition in the Ottoman context. They would continue to articulate the need for reform from both province and centre as the nineteenth century unfolded. Whereas such leaders might be amenable to a process of negotiation with Istanbul in 1800, a significant and well-trained officer and administrative class was many decades distant. 
