



===== FILE: text/part0016.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Six 
 The internal and external challenges to Selim III 
 Introduction: provincial allies and colonial powers 
 W e continue the story of Selim III’s reign by examining the forces within and without the empire which challenged the dynasty. They include, of course, the arrival of the armies and navies of the western colonial powers, France and Britain, on the shores of the eastern Mediterranean. Before returning to the broader international setting, however, there is one aspect of Ottoman culture of the period just as important in the discussion of Selim III’s fall as Napoleon: the changing nature of Istanbul–provincial relations. Responding to the opponents to his military reforms in Istanbul, Selim III had to acquire provincial allies: hence, he unintentionally recast centre–periphery politics to suit his vision of reform. He wished to extend his Nizâm- ı Cedid beyond the confines of Istanbul, as we have seen. In this he ran straight up against the new local Ottoman elite class, the ayan , who in the eighteenth century represented a burgeoning social stratum. Although the emergence of the great rural households, sometimes modelled on the imperial court structure in Istanbul and built on loyalty and clientage, was not a new phenomenon, the period from 1760 to 1830 has often been dubbed the ‘age of ayan’, because of their number and influence on central politics. The argument here is that they emerged precisely because of the military needs of the empire for defence as well as reform. The internal challenge was more immediately pressing to the survival of the dynasty than even the international invasions that began in 1798. On most frontiers of the empire, Selim III faced significant challenges not just to his right to rule, as head of the Ottoman dynasty, but equally importantly as the Caliph of Islam. That was particularly true of the southern ‘frontier’ extending from Baghdad to Cairo, where newly emergent Wahhabi Puritanism and increasingly influential Naqshbandi Sufism stimulated debate over the legitimacy of the house of Osman. While Muslim heterodoxy was not absent on the Danubian frontiers, and especially ever-present among Albanian Bekta ş is, Russian Orthodox proselytising and colonising was a far more pressing problem, even after the peace of Jassy. Pressure by French and Russian diplomats on Ottoman measures to protect their co-religionists had the unintended effect of consolidating Muslim orthodoxy within the dynasty. 
 The history of Mehmed Ali Pasha, first Governor and then semi-independent ruler of Egypt, is well known, as he posed one of the greatest of all the challenges of the age, and was central to Eastern Question diplomacy, the problem which Mahmud II inherited from Selim III. Less well known is the earlier eighteenth-century rise of the Qazda ğ l ı mamluk household, from which emerged Ali Bey el-Kabir and Muhammad Bey Abu al-Dhabab, challengers to Ottoman colonialism in Cairo and predecessors to Mehmed Ali. For almost the length of Selim III’s reign, Ottoman–Muslim notables such as Ali Pasha of Iannina, recently described as the ‘Muslim Bonaparte’, and Osman Pasvano ğ lu of Vidin, alternately challenged or allied with the Ottoman dynasty and generally disturbed the balance of power in the Balkans. All played the international and ethno-religious cards as it suited them (or as necessity dictated), situated as they were on the borders most contested during the Russo-Turkish Wars, and then during the Franco-Russian–British confrontations after 1800. Indeed, both Ali Pasha and Pasvano ğ lu were known to engage in international diplomacy with Napoleon. 1 Ali Bey el-Kabir succeeded in wresting semi-independence both from Istanbul and his rivals in Cairo, while challenging the commercial dominance of France in the Egyptian economy. The final and greatest challenge to Selim III’s rule came not from Paris or London, or Cairo, however, but rather from the Balkans. 
 Local Ottoman elites: provincial loyalty and betrayal 
 In order to understand Selim III’s downfall, we must examine the sources of support as well as opposition to his efforts in the provinces. To do so, we return to Canikli Ali Pasha of Anatolia, author of Nasayih al-Muluk , as an example of the new-style Anatolian local notable, and then Osman Pasvano ğ lu’s rise and fall in Vidin and Serbia, as the Danubian example. The chapter ends with a discussion of events in Egypt and Syria prior to and during the invasion of Napoleon Bonaparte in 1798. Ali Pasha of Iannina and Mehmed Ali of Egypt were the most powerful challengers to the second phase of reforms under Mahmud II, and will be taken up in Chapter Seven . 
 Canikli Ali and Osman Pasvano ğ lu, commanders of their own armies, were initially instrumental in protecting the Ottoman frontiers and fighting on behalf of the sultan. Canikli Ali was a provincial appointee, governor of Trabzon throughout most of his career. Osman Pasvano ğ lu first arose as a powerful local ayan , and then spent his career alternately as enemy and ally of the dynasty. Their careers are emblematic of the nature of centre–periphery relationships in the late Ottoman context. Their sources of power relied on the acquisition and control of tax farms. 
 Caniklizades in North Anatolia 
 Canikli Ali, born in Istanbul in 1720/21, established his power base by becoming the tax collector ( muhass ı l ) of Canik, a district stretching along the southern coast of the Black Sea. The Caniklizades controlled the life-term tax farm ( malikane ) of the Muhass ı l of Canik from 1737 to 1808. By the end of their regime over northern Anatolia, they controlled tax-farm and custom revenues in Amasya, Trabzon, Tokat, Gümü ş hane, Kastamonu, Sivas and Erzurum. 2 
 Distinguished service, and recognition for raising local troops in the 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman War, guaranteed his status as a vizier, and secured additional tax farms ostensibly for having suppressed an uprising of ‘ kap ı s ı z levendat ’, maintaining stability in the area, and facilitating as well as policing passage to the Crimea on the Black Sea. He was commended for his ability to raise troops in the area to protect the Black Sea coast. By 1772, as Mutasarr ı f of Amasya, he was entitled to the tax revenues called imdadiye, specifically tagged for supporting war efforts. 
 Canikli Ali was appointed Commander of the Crimea, and Governor of Trabzon in 1773, following the Russian occupation of the Peninsula in 1771, and raised troops and supplies for the many, ultimately futile, thrusts into the Crimea. He was recognised for his ability to mobilize and command armies, and also for his adroitness in making astute alliances, and maintaining open communication and sympathies with the Crimean Tatars. Canikli’s next assignment was the defence of Kars and Erzurum, as Commander of Kars and Governor respectively (1774–76). In March of 1774, he was ordered to mobilize some 15,000 soldiers that he was to recruit from the entire north-eastern sector of Anatolia. In addition, he was ordered to procure camels to be sent to Edirne for the same campaign season. As we know, such numbers of men and supplies were never achieved and the campaign year ended in failure, which led to the final capitulation of the Ottomans to the Russians. 
 In the five to ten years to follow, Canikli Ali was ordered twice more to the Crimea as Serasken , in the struggles which continued with Russia until Catherine II’s unilateral occupation of the region in 1783. In 1777–78, for example, Canikli Ali, then Governor of Sivas, was appointed Serasker of Crimea, and ordered to assemble 40,000 Janissaries and other suitable recruits from all the districts of the southern shore of the Black Sea. He and Admiral Gazi Hasan Pasha attempted a landing at Sevastopol, but returned in disgrace. Throughout the period, he and his sons were repeatedly credited with preventing rebellions, re-establishing order, and putting down banditry in much of north-eastern Anatolia. 3 Here, it would seem, was a dedicated, loyal subject of the sultan, whose service was exemplary. 
 Things began to go wrong when state demands exceeded Canikli Ali’s ability to fulfil them, and a rivalry developed with Mustafa Çapano ğ lu (also known as Cebbarzade), also based in Sivas and Tokat. Particularly in the matter of supplies – grain and animals, desperately needed by the state for campaigns in the Danube and Caucasus regions – Canikli Ali’s apparent insufficient response to the orders, coupled with the extensive and wealthy power base and independence now reported of him, made him an automatic candidate for suspicion in Istanbul. Complaints about his injustice from residents of Amasya started to make their way into courts, and after 1779 he was declared a rebel, accused of extortion and injustice. Canikli Ali marched on Çapano ğ lu Mustafa in an effort to defeat his rival, declaring ‘either you execute him, or I’ll remove him myself’, and found himself an outlaw instead. While Ali remained on the run in his strongholds of Canik and Trabzon, by 1780 the state had managed to confiscate many of the supplies (tents, camp equipment and various other stuffs) he had reputedly stockpiled, which required according to one document 422 hammals (porters) to disembark in Istanbul. Confiscation, although no longer a standard punishment, could still be imposed as one of the routine ways the Ottomans attempted to maintain control over upstart provincial appointees. 
 Canikli Ali, who had taken refuge in 1781 with Sahin Giray in the Crimea, proved necessary to the state, however, and was officially forgiven in 1781, reappointed as Governor of Trabzon and survived to die in his bed. Orders from Grand Vizier Halil Hamid (1782–85) to Canikli Ali commend him for his defence of the coastline of the Black Sea, and ask for further intelligence about the Crimea and the Caucasus. This he appears to have supplied, as evident in his Nasayih al-Muluk , which may have been written for Halil Hamid, but more likely earlier, while he was in hiding. He died in mid-1785. 4 His is a remarkable story, especially for the evidence of the degree to which the state ‘tolerated’ such autonomy on the one hand, and pursued to the point of persecution emerging wealth and power on the other. Canikli Ali’s story may be unique because he left us a record, but all signs indicate he was a faithful Ottoman subject, and a loyal servant to the dynasty for over a decade. His sons, Battal Hüseyin and Mikdad Ahmed, failed to supply troops for the 1787–92 campaigns, and Battal’s son Tayyar Mahmud was accused of neglecting the Caucasian front. Selim III confiscated the Caniklizade wealth and executed Mikdad Ahmed, while Battal and Tayyar Mahmud escaped to Russia, where they stayed until 1799. The final chapter involves Tayyar Mahmud Pasha, who briefly figures in the intrigues around Mustafa IV in 1807, as deputy grand vizier. 
 This broad outline of the fortunes 5 of the Caniklizades, with different outcomes, was repeated in every region of the empire, to a lesser or greater degree, in this early phase of reforms. Istanbul was relying on hundreds of mini-despots for its provincial governance and defence. In the areas surrounding Trabzon, for example, orders to mobilise troops for the 1787–91 campaigns were addressed to 26 family names in 1788 and more than 40 in 1789. In 1796, a French expedition wishing to explore the botany of eastern Anatolia was confronted with three rulers of Trabzon: the official provincial governor, and two chiefs of local notable families: Osman Agha ( Ş at ı ro ğ lu) and Memi ş Agha (Tuzcuo ğ lu), from each of whom they needed to acquire permission to explore the territory. This is only one example of a precarious style of governing which required negotiation each time a new governor was appointed. 6 
