 The coup, or, more accurately, civil war, began among junior officers of the Janissary Corps, who first attempted to enlist their commander, the Janissary Agha, who was promptly killed when he refused to join them. Alemdar was caught at the Sublime Porte, grand vizierial headquarters at the centre of the city, and reputedly himself caused the blowing up of the building during the Janissary attack. He was killed in the explosion and fire that followed. The rebels’ target remained their leadership, so ordinary soldiers went unpunished, and much of Alemdar’s army vanished into thin air. Still, Kapudan Ramiz Pasha elsewhere in the city put up a good fight with the Sekban troops, and regrouped others. The rebels were initially prevented from storming the Tophane arsenal, where the Levend Çiftlik troops were deployed. Abdurrahman’s troops in Üsküdar helped to complete the circle of the city, but no one thought to fight their way through to the grand vizier. The Janissaries demanded concessions from the sultan in traditional fashion, by coercing the ulema (who this time at least were not directly complicit) to secure the appointment of a new agha and new grand vizier. Faced with his predecessor’s fate, Mahmud II turned to the assembled reformed army for aid. On 15 November, 4,000–5,000 troops from Üsküdar and Galata were transported to Topkap ı Saray ı . The new sultan had made his choice. Rebellion continued, while Mahmud II was reluctantly persuaded to execute Mustafa, his only dynastic challenger to the throne. 
 The revolt, called the ‘Alemdar Incident’ in Turkish history texts, turned into a general riot, which left 600 Sekban , and perhaps as many as 5,000 rebels, dead. An extensive fire destroyed many of the districts around the palace by Wednesday afternoon, 16 November. The sultan reached an accommodation with the Janissary commanders, who were ready to pledge obedience if the Sekban corps was dissolved and any of the reformers who escaped were punished. The Janissaries did not demand the head of those who remained in the palace. Mahmud II was the last of the Ottoman line. His death would have created even greater upheaval on the streets of Istanbul. 
 The rebellion received new stimulus, however, when news spread about Alemdar’s death, and the seizing of the Humbar ı c ı barracks and the imperial arsenal across the Golden Horn at Hasköy the following day. By the end of Thursday, the rebels also controlled Tophane arsenal. The barracks at Selimiye and Levend Çiftlik were torched. Ramiz Pasha and Abdurrahman Pasha escaped initially, but were eventually caught and executed. At least one contemporary account, probably an exaggeration, reckoned as many as 50,000 deaths in the events of November. 6 
 Mahmud II was still sultan. The Sened- İ ttifak experiment lay in ruins. The success of the Janissary revolt in 1808 indicates the spontaneous and fragile nature of the reform ‘party’, a cobbled-together set of ideas which attracted adherents according to the self-interests of the parties involved, of which Alemdar Mustafa is the most obvious example. A consequence of the confrontations in the streets revealed the degree to which urban/rural, centre/periphery political worldviews were antithetical, and left an indelible mark on Mahmud II, who vigorously pursued his own program of suppression of independent-minded governors, such as those in Damascus, Baghdad, Vidin and Belgrade, for the next ten years. Furthermore, in building his entourage of loyal advisers, Mahmud II came to rely on many individuals of Caucasus origin, as had Selim III to some extent, the consequences of which were to further ‘Turkify’ the empire in ways which will be discussed below, part of a redefinition of imperial populations along ethnic as well as religious lines. A comparison with Russia is apt for the period, especially in the Caucasus where Russian expansion was extensive, and many of the same questions of the control of violence and state loyalties arose. 
 More astutely than Selim III, Mahmud understood that popular politics had to be manipulated in order to effect major changes. The best way to do so was to establish successful relations with the huge class of ulema, but also to curb their claims not just on the minds, but the lands, of Ottoman subjects. In these ways, Mahmud II was more ‘modern’ than his predecessor, perhaps more ‘western’ as well. The nineteenth century is not only the great imperial age, but also a time when hitherto unregulated populations came under considerable central control, not the least of which involved the development of police forces to establish and maintain urban security. Events in Greece and Egypt, as an extended arena of the Napoleonic Wars, are immensely better known histories, and have dictated a view of Mahmud II’s reign which underestimates the extent to which he managed to redraw the course of the empire long before the final confrontation with the Janissaries in the streets of Istanbul in 1826. 
 The real test of his early years lay in the war with Russia over the Principalities. Begun in 1806, halted briefly in 1808, it had resumed once again in 1809 when negotiations over a possible treaty broke down as Franco-Russian relations grew frosty. Uncertainties about Napoleon’s potential attack on Moscow, as well as the disorder in Istanbul, delayed a resolution. Mahmud II would not entertain the surrender of all of Wallachia and Moldavia. Alexander I of Russia, similarly, required something to show for years of campaigns and occupation that had yielded little. Given the degree of destruction to the military institutions and material in Istanbul, one can only wonder at the nature of the Ottoman army called upon to defend the Danubian fortresses in 1809/10. 
 The state of the Russian military 
 The military system established by Peter the Great would continue for more than 150 years on the strength of the peasant army and the continuation of serfdom. Both would be called into question only after the disastrous performance of the Russian army in the Crimea in 1854–56. Success bred complacency, much as it had in the Ottoman context after the victory at Belgrade in 1739. Paul I (1796–1801) and Alexander I were erratic military leaders, who created divisions among their commanders. Paul’s policies were disruptive of the reforms of Catherine II, and while Alexander I’s resolve in the face of Napoleon’s army before Moscow has salvaged his reputation, in reality, incoherence was the order of the day. 7 The Russia of Nicholas I (1825–55), however, who came to power just as Mahmud II’s plans to eliminate the Janissaries came to fruition, has been described as ‘a gigantic garrison state, an armed camp under the rigorous supervision of an autocratic drillmaster.’ 8 Confronted by the Decembrist revolt of 1825 among progressive officers on his accession to the throne, Nicholas remained suspicious of these who suggested reforms and established the Third Section in 1826, a security force concerned with disloyalty among the officer corps and charged with ‘promot[ing] correct thinking while combating dissent’. 9 
 Russian recruitment, logistics and military command looked much the same in the first half of the nineteenth century as they had in the 1760s. Conscription was more than a reality, it had become a fixture in the lives of serfs. In Alexander’s reign, close to two million men were to be levied from poll tax rolls, although intake may never have matched estimates, as shortfalls were characteristic of the system. 10 Exemptions were granted, dependent on pragmatic decisions, such as the need for settlers in newly-acquired territories, most of whom were involved in borderland defence anyway. Such was the case with the Cossacks in Ukraine and on the Black Sea. The heaviest levy burden fell on the peasants and the provincial estates, although communities were, by and large, able to determine whom they would send and how they would pay both the dues for the recruit, as well as support for the dependents left behind. The target of the levy became the extended household unit by the end of the eighteenth century, with economic and social consequences similar to the Ottoman context. Ottoman villagers were obligated to support militia members and pay collective taxes as part of the burden of warfare, generally proportioned by the local judge (at least in the Balkans) across the village tax-paying population. Of course, this led to the indebtedness of individuals and villages alike, and the beneficiaries were more often than not the local ayan . 
 Rights to conscript substitution in the Russian context created a system of donors (of able-bodied recruits) who could anticipate levies and ameliorate the impact on their own work force. Volunteers for service were often remunerated by other village families, one means of supporting the dependents left behind. Corruption and abuse more often led to extensive indebtedness of the less fortunate. Like the Ottoman esame , or certificate of entitlement, the donors’ certificate of fulfilment of recruitment became a marketable ‘security paper’, although the abuse never exceeded ten per cent. Donors provided a cash grant and foodstuffs collected from their peasants, or fellow villagers, for the initial stages of a recruit’s journey to induction. While the levy system did not lack critics, such as Field Marshal Rumiantsev himself, who advocated the creation of territorial armies, major reform would not be enacted until after the death of Nicholas I. 
 By contrast with the Ottoman system, Russian discipline was much more systematised, and brutal. The use of the gauntlet, an extreme punishment in other European armies, was applied frequently for minor offences, augmenting fear and tension among miserable soldiers. 11 Verses by a grenadier, one Ivan Makarov, survive from 1803: 