 The private armies of the ayan were composed of Albanians who were everywhere, and increasingly, ‘Laz’ from Trabzon, as well the exiled communities from the Caucasus, Tatars and, finally, Kurds from eastern Anatolia. Such mobile soldiers and their leaders would become the officer corps and ‘cannon fodder’ of the reformed armies of Mehmed Ali of Egypt and Mahmud II. The military crisis created a large migrant population, cause of many woes to sedentary populations but also the carrier, not just of orthodoxies, but of heterodoxies. Ethnic categories were further complicated with Muslim, as well as non-Muslim, religious diversity. All this required a certain degree of recasting of the Muslim premises of rule, also an aspect of the strategy of Mahmud II. 
 Simply to polarise the events into a confrontation between Muslim reactionaries and secular reformists is to misrepresent the history of the period altogether. First and foremost, the struggle was an economic as well as a social conflict. As we saw with Canikli Ali, the provincial ayan described above, the wealth in Istanbul, and the hierarchies of power embodied in the imperial court and bureaucracy, were both magnets for the greedy and targets for the resentful. 
 There is little doubt that the ‘golden age’ evoked by the ideologues of reform, cast in the ethical frame of Islam, referred to powerful sultans like Süleyman the Magnificent. The Prophet Muhammad could also be used to justify both the traditional and the innovative, as exemplified in the hadiths concerning his early military prowess against his enemies, the Quraysh. In army life, moreover, the sacred banner and the appeal to fight for God and country were tropes of modern, conscripted warfare everywhere, and often were deliberately employed by commanders to stir the hearts of ignorant and unwilling foot soldiers. 
 But the Ottoman house by 1830 was under siege not just by external imperial and colonial powers but also by its own populations, and foreign missionaries seeking control over the souls of its Christian subjects. Orthodox, and to a lesser extent Catholic, priests under Russian, Austrian and French aegis, reinvigorated Christianity in territories with divided populations, such as Bulgaria, or the Principalities, or Syria in what became ethno-religious nationalist movements. Wahhabi fundamentalism and Naqshbandi sufism also emerged as two very important forces to challenge Ottoman legitimacy in majority Muslim territories. That struggle will unfold further in the next chapter. 
 Mahmud II’s later achievements can be measured by an adulatory story that survives in Cevdet Pasha’s history, written after the sultan’s death. Alemdar Mustafa swore vengeance on those traitorous members of sultan’s inner household ( Enderun ) that he held responsible for the murder of Selim III. Mahmud II, newly-made sultan, replied with his first order: ‘Pasha, I will find them and send them to you. Dismiss your soldiers and have them remove their weapons. Let us then retire to the precincts of the Mantle of the Prophet.’ Alemdar asked if he could continue to wear the scimitar he had at his side, as it had been a gift of Selim III. Mahmud II allowed him the privilege, an extraordinary gesture for a ruler who had just been saved from execution. As if the point was not clear enough, Cevdet continued: ‘Mahmud II was just twenty-four, and had never been in such a crowd, except of his own servants.’ Alemdar later commented: ‘That first order of the Padishah frightened me more than any other time in my life.’ Here, concluded Cevdet, with his hindsight, was the type of brave sultan the Ottoman Empire desperately needed at that moment. 77 An immense task awaited the young sultan. 