 Russian commander Michelson had occupied the Principalities in 1806–07, but his operations were limited because of the small army under his command. The war lost its momentum in the spring of 1807, and an armistice was concluded at Slobozia, after the Franco-Russian rapprochement at Tilsit. When hostilities resumed in spring 1809, Prince Prozorovsky had more troops but failed to defeat the Ottomans, and was badly beaten at İ brail, Kladovo and Guirgevo. Russian Commander Count P.I. Bagration then captured Maçin, and Köstence at the mouth of the Danube, and besieged Silistre with an army of 30,000. Bagration took İ smail and İ brail, but had to lift the siege at Silistre and return across the Danube. Ahmed Agha, Commander at İ brail, held out for over 20 days, and victory caused rejoicing in Istanbul. In September 1809, Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf crossed the Danube towards Bucharest with an army of 40,000, and was confronted by the Comte de Langeron and his ‘regiment of fever’, who had assembled 6,000 reserve troops in Bucharest. (Reputedly 5,000 Russian soldiers in Bucharest and 3,000 at Craiova were incapacitated by fevers and plague.) Langeron drove the grand vizier’s army back across the Danube. In the winter of 1809/10, Count Mikhail Kamensky, with Langeron under his command and over 80,000 men, broke the Danube barrier once again, and captured Silistre and Bazarc ı k, on the right bank of the Danube. Yet when Kamensky attacked at Ş umnu, he was driven back, but not before capturing Rusçuk, Ni ğ bolu and Sistova and retiring to Wallachia. Russian losses were large. 26 
 Ottoman mobilisation orders indicate a clear reliance on the ayan and the populations of the Balkans for the Serbian and Wallachian fronts. Ali Pasha of Iannina, for example, then siding with the sultan, was ordered to Ş umnu with 8,000 of his Albanians during the 1809 campaign. Osman Pasha, Governor of Anatolia, was appointed to face the Russians as they crossed at the mouth of the Danube. Troops were ordered to be sent to him from Karinabad, Yanbolu, Hac ı o ğ lu Pazar ı , Akyol, Kozluca and İ slimiye, as well as those of the ayan of Elbasan and Köstendil. As in previous campaigns, reality rarely reached expectations. Osman Pasha, for example, was sent an additional 300 infantry (raised from the general population) after the first 1,000 vanished on the way to his camp at Ş umnu. A total of 14,000 soldiers were to be recruited from among the Pomaks, and commanded by Pehlivan İ brahim Pasha, for the defence of Ni ğ bolu. Some 3,000 soldiers were to be sent from Plevne to Vidin, similarly, to reinforce the garrison there. The heavy reliance on the goodwill of the local ayan rarely paid off in disciplined and war-ready troops, with some exceptions such as Pehlivan Pasha and Bo ş nak Agha, who distinguished themselves at Tatariçe, four hours from Silistre, when they were vastly outnumbered by Russian troops (Cevdet says 60,000) and forced a Russian withdrawal to Silistre and back into Wallachia at the end of 1809, as above. 27 
 Russian advances were often facilitated by disloyal or vacillating ayan . The ayan of Silistre, Y ı ll ı ko ğ lu Süleyman, for example, first declared his neutrality, and then surrendered the fortress to the Russians without a shot, in June 1810. Bo ş nak Agha, who replaced Alemdar Mustafa at Rusçuk and heroically defended the citadel against the Russians under Kamensky, stood by as the Russians defeated an Ottoman army in September of the same year. 28 
 In the spring of 1811, Kutuzov was made Commander of the Moldavian army on the Danube. Kutuzov was a veteran of previous Russo-Ottoman campaigns, who had fought under both Rumiantsev at Kartal and Suvorov at Ochakov. The Russians were in control of the Danubian fortresses as far upstream as Ni ğ bolu, but had failed to secure the right bank of the Danube in order to force an Ottoman capitulation. Negotiations stalled continuously because of Russian demands for surrender of the Principalities, and concessions on Serbian independence, which the Ottomans steadfastly refused to consider. Europe was certain that Napoleon played the Istanbul fiddle, although Ottoman obstinacy should never be underestimated in delaying the outcome. Mahmud II demonstrated the staying power that Selim III had lacked. Kutuzov was well known and respected in Ottoman circles, not just for his war experience but for participating in the treaty negotiations which had terminated the earlier conflicts. 29 
 Preparations in Moscow for a French attack forced the withdrawal of five divisions from the Danube, although they remained stationed on the Prut River, leaving Kutuzov with 46,240 men, 180 field and 38 siege guns under his command in four divisions: Craiova, Ni ğ bolu, Silistre, and the lower Danube. Of the assembled forces, a considerable number were cavalrymen: 6,539 Cossacks, and 7,605 regulars, a strategy of troop strength and distribution developed by Rumiantsev for Ottoman frontier warfare. The battle line from Belgrade to the Danube mouth was over 600 miles, and the Russian troops were thinly stretched along most of it. Kutuzov’s strategy was not to engage in prolonged sieges, which he thought a difficult and wasteful exercise, but to await the grand vizier’s move from his campaign headquarters at Ş umnu. He anticipated crossings at Vidin, where a large flotilla of boats awaited Ottoman troop passage, and at Rusçuk. He was under immense pressure from Alexander I to finish the matter quickly. 30 
 In 1811 the Sultan, encouraged by deteriorating Franco-Russian relations, decided to go on the offensive against the Russians. He replaced 80-year-old Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf Pasha with Ahmed Pasha (called Laz Ahmed, from Trabzon, Grand Vizier 1811–12), the former commander of İ brail, who had repulsed Prince Prozorovsky’s assault in 1809. Under Ahmed Pasha was Bo ş nak Agha, hero of Rusçuk. Mobilisation was extensive and thorough; by the end of May, there were 50,000 men at Ş umnu, 25,000 men at Sofia and additional troops to arrive. 31 The Sofia army, commanded by Hur ş id Pasha, was assisted by the Bosnian Governor Hilmi Pasha, and aimed at keeping the Serb rebel army and the Russians separated, as in 1809 and 1810. The Russians had attacked Lofça (in Bulgaria) over the winter of 1810, but had withdrawn. The Serbian rebellion, under the leadership of Kara George, with an army of possibly 10,000, had spread into the territory around Ni ş . 
 Sofia became a strategic centre for the remainder of the war, and later as the command headquarters for the sustained offensive against both the Serbs and Ali Pasha of Iannina. Thus, there were two command centres in the Balkans, an unusual occurrence in Ottoman military history. Negotiations were restarted at Ş umnu, and in earnest in Bucharest as well, where the representatives had moved at Kutuzov’s invitation. Meanwhile, Grand Vizier Ahmed had arrived in Ş umnu, prepared to cross the Danube at Vidin. 
 The bulk of Kutuzov’s army awaited him at Rusçuk, to secure the passage, with smaller divisions stationed on the Danube island of Slobozia and in Craiova. He had previously ordered the destruction of the fortifications at Silistre and Ni ğ bolu, and the withdrawal of all his troops except those at Rusçuk, under commanders Counts Langeron and Essen. He secretly opened negotiations with the Vidin Commander, Mulla Pasha, to secure 400 Danube vessels, most locally owned, for Russian use, and dispatched Cossack patrols to reconnoitre across the Danube. 
 Commander İ smail Bey, with 25,000 men, arrived at Vidin in early June, forestalling the treachery of Mulla Pasha. He had orders to send 100 of the boats downriver to the Olt estuary, to aid in the crossing of the Ottomans at Ni ğ bolu. İ smail Bey was to cross with his army into Little Wallachia, towards Craiova, while Grand Vizier Ahmed moved his headquarters first from Ş umnu to Razgrad, dug in there, feinted a crossing at Rusçuk, and then marched on Ni ğ bolu. Kutuzov was aware of the plans, and moved troops into position in April and May. Peace negotiations continued, initiated by the grand vizier and carried out in Bucharest by Hamid Efendi and former Russian Count Andrew Italinsky. They were stalled by the intransigence of sultan and tsar alike, and the delegates awaited the outcome of the summer campaign. 
 By mid-June, Ottoman cavalry were harassing the Russians at Rusçuk, and seizing all boats for the crossing of the Danube. The grand vizier was within a day’s march of the fortress, with an estimated 60,000 men and 78 guns. Facing them were a Russian advance infantry guard, under the command of Voinov, and cavalry regiments, mainly Cossacks. The Ottomans dug in at Kad ı köy, an hour’s march from Rusçuk. They then marched on the fortress, and engaged with the advance guard. Upon hearing of the Ottoman attack, Kutuzov ordered the main body of troops at Rusçuk to come to the aid of the Russians troops, in what would prove to be the largest confrontation of the entire war. On 21 June the grand vizier sent troops to cut off Russian access to the Danube on the left flank. On 22 June he ordered 10,000 cavalrymen under the command of Bo ş nak Agha to make the assault on the fortress, while other troops attacked the Russian right flank in an effort to surround the Russian army. A day-long battle ensued, during which considerable bravery was shown on both sides, but Kutuzov prevailed with a combined infantry and cavalry assault on the Turkish forces late in the afternoon, forcing them to withdraw to Kad ı köy. In spite of his success, he subsequently abandoned Rusçuk, and recrossed the Danube, arguing that it would be far more prudent to draw Ahmed Pasha into a trap on the left bank of the Danube than waste men and supplies on penetrating deep into Bulgaria. At least, that is how he later defended his decision, when subsequent events bore him out. 
 The Russians lost 800 killed and wounded, and the Ottomans 1,500 according to Russian statistics. Kutuzov later observed that during the numerous campaigns against the Turks, he never faced such ferocious and overwhelming attacks as by the troops of Bo ş nak Agha at the battle of Rusçuk. The tsar rewarded Kutuzov with his portrait. Istanbul rejoiced at the victory. Valuable fur coats were bestowed on the Ottoman messengers, and later on the grand vizier. 32 
 By mid-July, Kutuzov had destroyed the fortifications at Rusçuk and retreated into Wallachia, taking with him 635 Bulgarian households. 33 The grand vizier spread his army along the Danube from Ni ğ bolu to Silistre, and waited to hear of the outcome of İ smail Bey’s thrust into Wallachia at Vidin. İ smail Bey and his troops fought through August to establish a strong foothold on the left bank of the Danube, hampered by the marshy area west of Vidin where they tried to cross. They also established an outpost on an island at Lom Palanka to facilitate the grand vizier’s troop passage using the Danube flotilla. Considerable resistance from the Russian troops at Craiova, and the duplicity of Mulla Pasha, Commander of Vidin, prevented İ smail Bey from carrying out his orders and forced his retreat to the right bank of the Danube. 