

 Plate 13    Nineteenth-century print of Rusçuk (The Danube: Its History, Scenery, and Topography. Splendidly Illustrated from sketches taken on the spot, by Abresch and drawn by W.H. Bartlett. By William Beattie, M.D. George Virtue, London, 1844 ). 
 In early September 1811, Ahmed Pasha faced Commander Kutuzov across the Danube. Ahmed Pasha blinked first, and began to move his army across the river. First they attacked and captured the island of Slobozia, on the night of 8 September. Then 6,000 Janissaries and supplies achieved the crossing, and began building fortifications, while a small group of soldiers feinted a crossing a few miles upstream from Giurgevo as a diversion. Within a week, and in spite of some ferocious confrontations, Ahmed Pasha had 36,000 men on the left bank of the Danube, and crossed over to join them, reputedly leaving 30,000 on the right bank. Kutuzov moved from his headquarters at Giurgevo to within two miles of the Turkish army at Rusçuk, and called up two divisions of the Russian Moldavian army that had been withdrawn from the Principalities in anticipation of the war with Napoleon. Ahmed Pasha remained inactive after his landing on the left bank, consolidating his fortifications and awaiting the outcome of his orders to İ smail Bey to attack Vidin once again. His troops were well supplied from the vital camp outside Rusçuk across the river. 
 Kutuzov prepared his own surprise attack on Rusçuk carefully, sending small numbers of troops to build redoubts on the right bank in anticipation of encircling the army stationed there. Meanwhile, desertions increased in the Ottoman camp – as many as 10,000 Albanians vanished as Ahmed Pasha awaited news of Vidin. On the night of 13 October Commander Markov’s troops succeeded in crossing the Danube, and attacked the grand vizier’s camp in Bulgaria, taking the army and bureaucrats stationed there by surprise and effectively surrounding the Ottoman army. By 14 October the grand vizier’s army, 36,000 men and 56 guns, was stranded on the left bank of the Danube. After a spirited defence of Silistre, which fell to the Russians at the end of October, Ottoman troops on the right bank fled in all directions. ‘Meantime, the Grand Vizier’s army suffered under complete blockade. Hunger and bad weather (sleet and frost) spread diseases among the Turks and increased the death rate. Horses were either dead or eaten. Poor Turks had to eat rotten meat and had no salt. They cropped and ate the grass and roots on the territory of the camp, often paying with their lives for such terrible food and dying under the Russian artillery and musket fire. The cold October night worsened their conditions because the Turks did not have wood to warm themselves.’ 34 The grand vizier himself had escaped to the right bank, and pressed for an armistice with Kutuzov in order to save his best troops so helplessly isolated. By 25 October a ceasefire had been agreed, which included biscuit and salt for the trapped troops. Negotiations began at Giurgevo, with Italinsky and Major Sabaneev for the Russians and Müftizade Selim Efendi, Kaziasker of Anatolia, and Galib Efendi, former Reis but Kethüda (Second-in-Command) to the grand vizier since July, for the Ottomans. Ahmed Pasha and Kutuzov were assumed to have the powers to make peace. 
 The condition of the Ottoman army did not improve, however, and by the end of that November, Kutuzov intervened on behalf of the surviving soldiers, and as a means of propelling the negotiations, took them under his protection, promising that he would return them in the spring. As historian Michailovsky-Danielevsky noted: 