 Selim III’s Francophilia was tested once again when he wavered over recognising Napoleon Bonaparte as Emperor of France (1804). Pressured by British and Russian diplomacy, he refused to do so. Napoleon broke off relations, and the Ottomans were forced to rely on Russia, allowing warships through the straits, and further intervention of Russia on behalf of Ottoman Orthodox subjects. Russophile princes (called hospodars instead of Voyvodas , in recognition of the Russian influence) were appointed in the Principalities as a result of the Russo-Turkish Treaty of Alliance, signed by tsar and sultan in October 1805. Two secret articles proposed by the Russians and rejected by the Ottomans continued the decades-long and unresolved problem of the Russian presence in the Principalities and the Caucasus. That problem was a sub-text of the next round of Russo-Ottoman engagements on the Danube beginning in December 1806. 61 
 Selim III was emboldened by news of a massive French victory at Austerlitz (December 1805) to recognise Bonaparte as emperor (February 1806), counting on help from the French in Dalmatia (ceded by Austria at Pressburg on 25 December 1805) against the Serb uprisings. Selim III immediately sent his courtier Muhib Efendi to Paris as Ambassador (1806–11). 62 He also expelled the hospodars from the Principalities. That prompted the Russians to blockade the Adriatic, and send further help to the Serbs. War preparations continued through 1805–06, by the Russians in Bessarabia, by Kara George in Serbia, and the Ottomans in Bosnia and Macedonia. In mid-August 1806, under severe pressure, Selim III reversed his policies yet again and reinstalled the Russian-approved hospodars in the Principalities. In September 1806, worried about war between ally Russia and the Ottomans, the British ambassador demanded that the straits be reopened to the Russian warships. (They had been closed after the Franco-Ottoman rapprochement.) Selim III agreed, but news of further overwhelming French victories (over the Prussians at Jena and Auerstädt in October 1806) emboldened him to defy the Anglo-Russian request. The Russians declared war and occupied Moldavia by December 1806, initially more worried by French proximity and influence on Selim III than Ottoman belligerence. 
 By February 1807, a British fleet under Admiral Duckworth, in support of the Russians, dropped anchor near the Princes’ Islands, after sailing through the Dardenelles. Istanbul panicked, but diplomatic dithering and adverse weather forced a British withdrawal, especially after Selim III had strengthened the fortifications and requested a formal alliance with France (by secret initiative through Muhib Efendi in Paris, which was simply ignored). 63 French Ambassador Sébastiani rounded up some 200 French officers and aides to man the batteries alongside the artillerymen. Every available weapon in the city was mobilised, and within a few days, the shores of the city were bristling with cannon. Crowds of the city’s young men volunteered for service against British and Russian alike. 64 It was perhaps the last moment that Selim III enjoyed the approbation of the streets of Istanbul, as the populace waved goodbye to the British fleet on 3 March, and celebrated as the warships sailed through the Dardanelles with great difficulty. Meanwhile in Egypt, Mehmed Ali was making his bid for power. A British fleet landed briefly at Alexandria in March 1807, in an attempt to back the mamluks. A total of 5,000 British troops under General Mackenzie Frazier were ambushed and routed by the garrison at Rosetta by September 1807. While not personally commanding the garrison, Mehmed Ali’s reputation grew with the victory and the withdrawal of the British fleet. 
 Meanwhile, Napoleon and Tsar Alexander I (1801–25) signed the Treaty of Tilsit in July, 1807, after the Russian loss at Friedland in June. The British found themselves abandoned by Russia, as were the Ottomans by France. The treaty stipulated that should negotiations to restore peace among the belligerents fail, France would join Russia in its war against the Ottomans and they would divide the Ottoman European territories among themselves. Eastern Europe would became a Russian sphere of influence. It was the final blow to Selim III’s strategy to remain friendly with France. 
 So things stood in mid-1807, but Selim III had already been deposed, a victim of his own vacillation and of a revolt in Istanbul against the extension of his new order, indeed against his reforms in general and probably his Francophilism in particular. In 1805, enemies at court and in the Balkans had conspired to resist Selim III’s lastest effort to raise Nizâm- ı Cedid troops in the provinces, in Edirne. A conscription system, rather than the previous voluntary sign-up, characterised his extended new order. It was an ill-advised initiative. Edirne historically served as the staging point for all Balkan campaigns, and was territory whose leaders were fiercely proud of, and profited from, its importance in the military history of the empire. They were therefore likely to be resistant to such an endeavour to replace a well-entrenched system. As we have seen, there were already a plethora of small private armies assembled by the ayan in the Balkans. Selim III must have been desperate for troops, imagining a new campaign against the Russians, and for the defence of his capital, but equally mistaken in his assumption that the public at large welcomed his reforms. Resistance to the conscription orders was fierce, and forced Selim III and his advisers to back down. 
 Balkan notables, chief among them İ smail Tirsiniklio ğ lu in Rusçuk and Silistre, took advantage of the resistance to mobilise what is called by historians the ‘Edirne Incident’. They were aided by the sultan’s opponents in Istanbul, who were led by Grand Vizier Haf ı z İ smail (April 1805 – September 1806). In June 1806, Selim III again ordered a Nizâm- ı Cedid force to be assembled in Edirne, which was to be commanded by Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha, one of the few provincial governors and commanders loyal to Selim III’s reforms. Abdurrahman assembled troops intended for Rusçuk and the defence of the Danube from all over Anatolia in the new barracks in Üsküdar, on the Asian side of the Bosphorus. 65 In early June, İ smail Tirsiniklio ğ lu, at the grand vizier’s secret urging, marched on Edirne with a force estimated at 80,000, commanded by a coalition of Balkan notables who refused to cooperate with the sultan’s orders. Selim III delayed sending Abdurrahman and his loyal troops, numbering 15,000–20,000, against them. When they did march in mid-July, they were confronted outside Edirne by a force of 10,000 Janissaries. Sustaining considerable losses, the Nizâm- ı Cedid army retraced its route to Silivri, where they were halted by Selim III himself. Deliberately supplied misinformation about the size and strength of the resistance, and repeated demands for the disbanding of Abdurrahman’s troops, led Selim III to capitulate, dismissing Abdurrahman and sending the assembled loyal troops to Anatolia. The Grand Vizier was replaced by the Agha of the Janissaries, İ brahim Hilmi Pasha (September 1806 – June 1807), which temporarily derailed further opposition from that quarter. All the rebels in Edirne were pardoned. 
 Selim III’s vacillation clearly played a large role in his own demise. Unwilling to confront the traditional forces, he undermined his own policies by the betrayal of those loyal to him. The reputation of the new soldiers was much tarnished, and contributed to the increasing discontent in Istanbul. An alafranga mode had begun in Selim III’s Istanbul, the city was full of foreigners, discontented Janissaries, and a plethora of unemployed religious students. The latter two were the lethal combination that had plagued urban politics in Istanbul since the early 1700s. Economic reforms were not fully applied, and caused inflation and shortages. Rumours started to circulate about Selim III’s sanity, but especially about corruption and about the sultan’s credentials as a Muslim leader. For a short while, however, his capitulation to the malcontents kept the lid on the cauldron in Istanbul. 66 
 Among those in Tirsiniklio ğ lu’s entourage at Rusçuk was Alemdar Mustafa Pasha. As with the careers of the other well-known ayan already described, Alemdar, born in Hotin but based in Rusçuk, began his rise in Janissary service, as the flag-bearer of his regiment. Caught up in the struggles against Osman Pasvano ğ lu, he served with distinction and was awarded the title of Kap ı c ı ba ş ı , by request of the Silistre governor and the Wallachian Hospodar , and made ayan of Hezargrad in 1803. Thereafter a lieutenant of Tirsiniklio ğ lu, he remained in his service until the latter was murdered in August 1806. 67 Upon the recommendation of local officials and followers of the dead chief, Alemdar was appointed ayan of Rusçuk, and subsequently of Silistre. Selim III resisted the accumulation of power, playing the notables one against the other, but Alemdar seems to have won the admiration not just of the local Ottoman appointees, but also of inhabitants of the Danube shores, for refortifying the towns and lifting the imposition of the much-hated corvée . Selim III was forced to accept him as the chief notable of the Ottoman Danubian shores east of Belgrade. Alemdar was prepared for the Russians, when in December 1806 they attacked and took Bender and Hotin. He faced the Russian penetration of Wallachia on the northern shores of the Danube in the early days of the war, and checked the Russian troops under General Michelson at Guirgevo. Cevdet records: ‘The primary aim of the Russians was to reach Bucharest, there to assemble 50,000 troops, and uniting with the Serbs, to alarm the Ottoman State. Hence, a division had moved in the direction of Bucharest. This division met up with Alemdar’s army. In the confrontation that followed, Alemdar triumphed, causing many losses among the Russians. The news of the victory of Muslim over Russian soldiers, with few casualties, arrived in Istanbul Alemdar and caused great joy.’ Selim III appointed Serasker of the Danube with the rank of Vizier, and Governor of Silistre in February 1807. 68 
 The brief confrontation did not keep the Russians from spreading rapidly into Wallachia and Bessarabia by mid-1807, and being greeted with joy by the inhabitants of Jassy and Bucharest, who were suffering from a century of boyar and hospodar oppression, a succession of bad harvests, and a collapsed economy. As we have seen in earlier campaigns, the Russians, who expected to be supplied locally, were forced to bring supplies across the Dniester, a factor which influenced the direction of the 1806–12 war. 
 The combined efforts of Grand Vizier İ brahim Hilmi Pasha and Alemdar Mustafa checked the potential Russo-Serbian offensive across the Danube. By mid-1807, the line between the Russian and Ottoman armies was drawn. The Franco-Russian rapprochement at Tilsit brought a momentary truce in August 1807 which lasted until March 1809, during which time the Russian army remained in occupation in the Principalities, and Russian policy makers started to think about annexation. 69 
 The other explanation for the hiatus in military confrontations was, of course, the fall of the sultan, and the political uncertainty that followed. In June 1807, as the Grand Vizier, on the march to the front with the main Ottoman army, exchanged greetings and the gifts from Selim III with Serasker Alemdar Mustafa, news arrived of the rebellion and deposition of their sultan. An explosion of anti-Russian sentiment after the invasion of Wallachia, and the obvious inability of Selim III to defend the empire’s borders, had blown the lid in Istanbul. 
