



===== FILE: text/part0017.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Seven 
 Mahmud II and the new absolutism 
 T hrust on the throne by Mustafa Alemdar Pasha, Mahmud II faced three significant crises which would determine whether or not the empire survived: the resumption of the Russo-Turkish war not terminated until the treaty of Bucharest in 1812; the Greek and Serbian revolts, which extended to 1830; and the invasion of greater Syria and Anatolia, 1831–40, by Mehmed Ali Pasha and his son, Ibrahim. The first two are the subject of this chapter. The reforms of Mehmed Ali, and Mahmud II’s own reforms, will be the focus of the following chapter. The confrontations between the Egyptian army and the new Ottoman forces in Anatolia and Syria are described in Chapter Nine . 
 The young sultan inherited an empire whose terminal illness became the cliché of European diplomacy by mid-century, and his own grip on power was indeed tenuous. The geopolitics of the northern defensive border had been altered permanently by two Russo-Ottoman wars, with Russia in possession of the entire northern littoral of the Black Sea and a large part of the Caucasus. Austria had been defeated by Napoleon and Russia would shortly face the same challenge. The southern tier, especially the Egyptian–Levantine coast, had achieved an autonomy which overturned the traditional Ottoman–Mamluk balance, and carried Egypt into the world economy. The sultan could be said to be in control of very little territory except Anatolia, Bulgaria and Thrace. This too was soon to be challenged. 
 Selim III reorganised his court, installing what were to become regular meetings of his advisers, who counselled him on foreign affairs and the need for reform, and had attempted to extend his reform initiatives into the provinces, with some success but considerable opposition. It was his gesture to potential provincial partners that resulted in Alemdar’s return to Istanbul. Discussions concerning the future of the Ottoman Empire dominated international relations. Intervention by Britain, France and Russia at pivotal moments in the civil wars and rebellions within the empire often determined the outcome. Like Selim III, Mahmud II proved resilient in manipulating, but was just as often forced to capitulate to the demands of Great Britain and Russia. Mahmud II proved more successful at dealing with the two major obstacles to a reconsolidation of imperial power. The first were the ayan , necessary to the survival of both Selim III and Mahmud II. The second, of course, were Janissaries. As this book has argued throughout, the two groups were often at odds, but frequently united in opposition to the dynasty. This chapter will weave the threads together in an exploration of Ottoman power politics of the 1820s. As part of the justification for the reconsolidation, ‘Ottomanism’ emerged as the new orthodoxy of the latter days of the empire. To what extent this represented a departure from the traditional view of Ottoman– Muslim sovereignty, and its consequences for the military establishment, are assessed at the end of the following chapter. 
 The over-reaching ambitions of the Ş eyhülislam Ataullah and Istanbul rebel Kabakç ı Mustafa, provoked a reaction and counter-revolution of forces under Rusçuk ayan Alemdar Pasha, who makes a curious figure as a counter-revolutionary. Claimed by some of our sources to be opposed to the military reforms, Alemdar was welcomed to Istanbul by many (including the Janissaries) as a restorer of the traditional order. He championed Selim III’s and Mahmud II’s reforms when it served his interests. Juchereau called the new grand vizier ‘l’idole du jour et le but des espérances de tous les partis.’ 1 
 Forming part of the ceremonial coronation parade of Mahmud II, Alemdar Pasha continued to flaunt tradition by surrounding himself with an entourage of 300 Albanians bristling with muskets and sabres. The challenge to the new sultan did not go unnoticed by his enemies, who represented him as an insolent adventurer who violated the traditional laws. 2 
 Persuaded by Selim III’s reformers in his entourage, Alemdar had re-established the Nizâm- ı Cedid army out of Janissary troops, and renamed them Sekban , an old name for one of the earliest divisions of the Janissaries. He placed them under the command of Abdurrahman Pasha, a survivor of Selim III’s court. Alemdar Pasha was also persuaded to assemble a large council of notables to agree to this reordering of the Janissaries, in order to convince Mahmud II to undertake what they considered necessary. A call was sent out to the principal governors and ayan of the empire. In October 1808, the chiefs of many of the great houses of Anatolia, such as the Karaosmo ğ lu and Çapano ğ lu families and some from the Balkans, convened in Istanbul. Many of the family chieftains were accompanied by large numbers of their own troops, perhaps as many as 70,000 in total by one contemporary account. 3 Notably absent were Grand Vizier Alemdar’s rivals from Bulgaria, and Ali Pasha of Iannina, although the latter sent a delegation. The governors of Kars, Erzurum, as well as the Arab provinces, in Mosul, Damascus, Baghdad, and Cairo, were too far away to make the meeting in time. In effect, the notables who gathered in 1808 represented the major regional forces whose territories would make up the rump of the empire by the end of the nineteenth century. 
 Sened-i İ ttifak – the Deed of Agreement 
 Twenty-five of those present, including Ş eyhülislam Esad Efendi and Grand Vizier Alemdan, signed the Sened-i İ ttifak , or Deed of Agreement, which outlined the relationship and obligations between the sultan and his notables. Seven articles, with an introduction and conclusion, form the document. Article 1 reaffirmed a pledge from the ayan not to oppose or resist the sultan, and to come to his aid should others do so. Article 3 affirmed the commitment to the imperial provincial financial system, essentially confirming the continuation of tax farming. Article 4 asserted the obligations of the grand vizier as absolute representative ( vekalet ) of the sultan, to uphold the laws of the empire ( kanun ), and the obligation of the signatories to the document to stand as his accusers if he violated those laws. Articles 6 and 7 dealt with preventing disorder in the capital city, and protecting the empire’s subjects from abuse and oppression, with the ayan serving as the watchdogs. Articles 2 and 5, however, are the most interesting from the military point of view. Article 2 committed the signatories to cooperate in providing the state troops ( devlet askeri ) for the benefit of the survival of the empire, and assisting the sultan against foreign and domestic enemies when required. Article 5 regulated the relationships among the ayan , the sultan and the central bureaucracy, on the basis of mutual guarantees. The ayan pledged to preserve the authority of the state by maintaining good relations with one another, and with the central state authorities, and in return were confirmed in the possession of their lands, and the rights of their heirs. 4 
 However short-lived, this is still an extraordinary document, sometimes called the Ottoman Magna Carta and elsewhere described as the origin of public law in modern Turkey. 5 Continuing the tradition of grand vizierial councils ( me ş verets ) prevalent on Ottoman battlefields and in the court of Selim III in the eighteenth century, the deed echoes the bargain made by the Janissaries with Mustafa II in 1703, described in Chapter Two . It was, nonetheless, innovative in striking a balance between the sultan and his noble, provincial subjects. By all accounts, the real opposition to the document lay with the sultan himself, who found his power circumscribed by an agreement negotiated between the grand vizier and the ayan which the sultan was invited to ratify. He did so because it was his only recourse, a measure of the degree to which the sultan’s authority had been reduced. Events overtook the intentions of the assembled ayan , however, as a Janissary revolt, which began just a month later, killed the architect of the agreement himself. 
 The ostensible reason for the revolt was that those Janissaries who refused to enroll in the new disciplined forces found themselves off the rolls. Not just Janissaries, but scores of merchants, civil servants, and other beneficiaries of the Janissary payroll, themselves in possession of pay tickets ( esame ), had been deprived of a source of income. Furthermore, Grand Vizier Alemdar proved over-bearing and ostentatious, flaunting his new-found wealth, which he had largely confiscated from his enemies. It is possible to see such revolts as manifestations of a corporate will at work. This one appears to have been a genuine protest against the changes to the system, and the abuses which accompanied them, not as well organised or provoked internally as the betrayal of Selim III described earlier, but by far the most destructive. Palace intrigues lobbied tacitly for the restoration of Mustafa IV, but that did not prove of interest to the Janissaries. The new sultan no doubt also encouraged the destruction of the fragile alliance among fractious notables. 
 By early November, when the city erupted, most of the provincial ayan had left for their own territories, although some 400 of their men had been added to the new troops. Abdurrahman Pasha had assembled 3,000 musketeers from among the disbanded Nizâm- ı Cedid forces. Conscription began in Istanbul, and 4,000 more were added to the soldiers billeted at the barracks in Levend Çiftli ğ i and Üsküdar, as before. Christians may have been among the conscripts, as Alemdar Mustafa was known to have Christians among his own troops. The new force was clearly to be a substitute for the Janissaries, with its own horsetail, insignia, and military band, but was initially made up of the riff-raff from the streets of Istanbul, hardly promising material for immediate action. They were divided into three divisions, white, green and red, determined by the colour of their uniforms. Alemdar had ambitiously envisioned one hundred bölük of 1,600 each, or 160,000 men. The army which supported him against the Janissaries, however, probably numbered no more than 25,000. Their number was even further reduced when his Istanbul enemies prompted the rival ayan on the Danube to threaten his main base at Rusçuk, which forced him to send troops to the defence of his provincial territories. 
