 The revolt began in May 1807, when Mahmud Raif was sent to the Bosphorus fortress at Rumeli Kava ğ ı to distribute the quarterly pay to the soldiers stationed there, and attempt to persuade them to adopt new uniforms. The immediate response was a mutiny by the yamaks who manned the fortresses. These were brand new recruits, numbering 2,000, mostly Albanian, or Laz from Trabzon, only recently added to the Nizâm- ı Cedid troops already in place, in the hopes of inspiring them with the spirit of the new order. 70 But Kaymakam Musa Pasha (formerly Mutasarr ı f of Salonika), who had been called to Istanbul to substitute for Grand Vizier in his absence, and Ş eyhülislam Ataullah, both enemies of the sultan, secretly placed well-chosen discontented Janissaries among them. The rebellion from the start was well organised and manipulated by the inner circles of the court. Once under way, however, it proved difficult to control by the instigators. Mahmud Raif was the first victim of the revolt. 
 Chosen by the rebels as their leader, one Kabakç ı Mustafa demanded dissolution of the ‘infidel innovations’, and the removal of all the Nizâm- ı Cedid troops from guard duty. Selim III capitulated again, and the last of his loyal troops remained confined to their barracks as he was brought down. Musa Pasha ensured that all the regular army joined the rebellion, including the artillery corps, by spreading the word in the barracks. Within three days, the rebels, yamaks and Janissaries, assembled at the Janissary parade ground and demanded the sacrifice of the leaders of reform, with a proper fetva in their hands from the traitorous Ataullah. This too Selim III agreed to, sacrificing his remaining loyal advisers, secretly moving others out of his palace as he could. Of the reformers closest to Selim III, only Mustafa Re ş id Efendi survived, escaping in disguise to return as one of Mahmud II’s chief aides. Prince Mustafa, son of Abdülhamit I, previously prepared, was enthroned as Mustafa IV (1807–08). 
 On 3 June 1807, the Nizâm- ı Cedid and all of its associated institutions were eliminated by the new regime. Janissary Agha Pehlivan Hüseyin had already mutinied against his commander on the Danube, Grand Vizier Hilmi, who resisted the Janissary demand to return to Istanbul. Alemdar Mustafa, responding to the Grand Vizier’s call for help, arrived at Giurgevo on 8 June and restored order to the army under the Grand Vizier. Expecting to be appointed Grand Vizier himself, he was forestalled by the new regime in Istanbul, which appointed Çelebi Mustafa Pasha instead (June 1807–July 1808). Furious, Alemdar withdrew to Rusçuk, taking all remaining Selim III loyalists with him. Cut off from support from both Istanbul and Rusçuk, the main army simply fell apart, and was demobilised by August, leaving the Danube defence line entirely to Alemdar Mustafa. Luckily for the Ottomans the news of the Tilsit Treaty brought respite, as we have seen. 
 A Russian blockade of the Dardanelles was also lifted after the Russian and Ottoman fleets engaged off Limnos, bringing much-needed grain supplies to starving Istanbul. By mid-July, when news of Tilsit arrived, initial fury at perceived French treachery changed to a desire to negotiate, and Muhib Efendi, in Paris, was empowered to do so. By August an armistice with the Russians was signed at Slobozia, negotiated by Galib Efendi, who had sought refuge with Alemdar’s army at Rusçuk. The new Ottoman government accepted the armistice in September, but Tsar Alexander refused to ratify it. The Russians withdrew from Bucharest, but not from the Principalities. By the end of the next year, the abortive armistice was finished and preparations began for a resumption of hostilities in the spring. The war continued, mostly as a stand-off, until 1812, when the French threat to Moscow forced Russia to conclude hostilities in order to redeploy troops. We will finish that story in the next chapter. 
 The Rusçuk Committee and the end of an era 
 Meanwhile in Rusçuk, the surviving generation of reformers under Abdullah Ramiz Efendi, a judge and veteran of the Egyptian campaign, having served as Commander of the Mortar Corps ( Humbarac ı Ba ş ı ), persuaded Alemdar of the advantage of reinstalling Selim III by force if necessary. Istanbul needed help against the erstwhile rebels, who, under Kabakç ı Mustafa, were terrorising the city. By mid-1808, the original conspirators Kaymakam Musa and Ş eyhülislam Ataullah Efendi had fallen out, and administrative disorder ensued as each tried to remove the other from office. The Rusçuk Committee manipulated events to their own ends, persuading Mustafa IV to call on Alemdar and his army for support. By early May, Alemdar had joined the grand vizier in Edirne, and many of the Rusçuk Committee had been appointed or re-appointed to offices in the Istanbul bureaucracy. On 14 July, Alemdar Mustafa and Grand Vizier Çelebi Mustafa marched on Istanbul, with 15,000 troops, where Ş eyhülislam Ataullah, still favourite of the Janissary Corps, held sway. Kaymakam Musa Pasha had earlier been replaced by Caniklizade Tayyar Mahmud Pasha, former Governor of Trabzon, a Russophile and known for his hatred of Selim III. Mustafa IV complicated the situation by courting Tayyar Mahmud and promising to make him grand vizier in order to rid himself of Ataullah and the two remaining princes of the Ottoman dynasty, the deposed Selim III and his cousin, Mahmud. Ataullah secured the dismissal of Tayyar Mahmud, who then joined the side of Alemdar Mustafa as Serasker of Varna. 71 
 The Rusçuk contingent broke the back of the Bosphorus yamak rebellion by ordering Kabakç ı Mustafa to be attacked and killed secretly. One Hac ı Ali was sent with a detachment of cavalry to a village on the Bosphorus, where Kabakç ı Mustafa was living, caught him asleep in his harem, and promptly beheaded him. The yamaks , learning the next day of the death of their leader, were encouraged to revolt by Süleyman Agha, uncle of Kabakç ı Mustafa: ‘These men, who have treacherously caused the death of our chief, wish for nothing more than your death and that of our glorious sultan. Let us seek vengeance for our father; defend our sovereign; support our religion and our laws; and punish these vile murderers, who, sent by that perfidious grand vizier, and the infamous Alemdar, who has declared himself the protector of our enemies, has just committed the most cowardly and horrible of crimes.’ Hac ı Ali and his eighty men took refuge in a lighthouse, where they were besieged for three days, until the yamaks grew tired of the effort and dispersed. Rumours abounded, as the noise of the cannons could be heard in the city, that ‘All the brigands of Rumeli and the mountains of Albania and Rhodope had united to pillage Istanbul, and Hac ı Ali was the chief of the advance guard.’ 72 The rumours weren’t far wrong. 
 By the end of July, the grand vizier Çelebi Mustafa and Alemdar Mustafa had, however, restored order to the city, and eliminated most of the opposition, largely because the Janissaries in the city were disinclined to raise their weapons against their brothers-in-arms of the same regiments who had been on campaign on the Danube. Alemdar imposed strict discipline in his camp, and restored confidence in the merchants of the city, by forcing his soldiers to pay properly for what they bought. 
 The rivalry between the grand vizier and Alemdar Mustafa, however, determined Selim III’s fate. Alemdar hid his real aim, the assumption of the grand vizierate, until 28 July 1808, when he rose up against Çelebi Mustafa and Sultan Mustafa IV, intending to restore Selim III to the throne. The grand vizier surrendered the seal to Alemdar, who immediately marched on the palace. In the very final moments of his rule, Mustafa IV sent his own servants to kill Selim III and prince Mahmud, who escaped. Shown Selim III’s body, Alemdar was overcome with grief, crying: ‘Unhappy prince, what have I done? I wanted to restore you to the throne of your ancestors, and I am the cause of your death. Is this the fate reserved for one with your virtues?’ The Kapudan Pasha, Seyyid Ali, who had joined Alemdar Mustafa, exhorted him: ‘Is it proper for the Pasha of Rusçuk to weep like a woman? It is vengeance and not tears that Sultan Selim III requires of us. Let us punish his assassins. Let us especially not allow a bloody tyrant to profit from his crime, and to assure his reign by the death of his brother, Sultan Mahmud.’ 73 Messengers were sent to find Mahmud, who climbed down from the roof where the Chief Imam Ahmed Efendi had hidden him. The Imam declared, ‘This is Sultan Mahmud. He is next in line as Caliph. I have sworn allegiance to him.’ Alemdar enthroned him forthwith as Mahmud II (1808–39). 74 So ended a revolution unprecedented in Ottoman history, where an army of occupation from the provinces replaced the ruling sultan, without (or in spite of) the ruling of Ş eyhülislam Ataullah, who had been removed from office immediately, disregarding the will of the Janissaries of Istanbul. 75 
 The death of Sultan Selim III is a natural point at which to end this chapter, although it is impossible not to view the 1793–1826 period as a continuum, with the rise and fall of sultans and grand viziers just one of the threads running through the narrative. Selim III was represented in contemporary histories as fostering decadence in Istanbul, preferring entertainments and excursions on the Bosphorus to a serious dedication to his reform programme. His reluctance to press on with it in the face of opposition undermined his initiatives. Observers like Juchereau commented that Selim III had squandered the good will of his Istanbul subjects, who had proved more than capable of saving a nation in moments of extreme crisis. 76 
 Selim III’s reign coincided with the initial phase of the ‘Eastern Question’, that interplay of great power diplomacy and the dismemberment of the Ottoman empire which dominates most histories of the period. This chapter has argued that Selim III’s diplomatic initiatives played an important role in forwarding the reform movement and maintaining Ottoman autonomy and independence. 
 The Selim III period is also transformative in a number of ways, most notably in the proximity and communication between centre and province so evident in Alemdar Mustafa’s arrival in Istanbul. It was an age when the Ottoman provincial aristocracy made its bid for the sharing of power with the bureaucracy in Istanbul. The decisive presence of Alemdar’s troops in Topkap ı palace certainly brought that home to Istanbul residents. 
 Recording the changes in power and associations so characteristic of events in 1807–08, one is struck by the small size of the ruling elite of the vast empire, a problem faced on a far greater scale by Catherine II and her successors in Russia as well. Secondly, it is possible to observe a new swiftness in trans-imperial communication. For example, the army on the Danube was aware within a few days of the Kabakç ı Mustafa revolt. Similarly, the Rusçuk committee reinserted itself with fair rapidity into Istanbul politics after May 1807. Thirdly, there was a certain familiarity (and contempt for one another) among all the ayan that must have resulted from the mobility of armies in the period. The army that was mobilised was more often than not a coalition of provincial mini-despots, as we have seen. Although these forces could not be called swift by present-day standards, they were nonetheless more mobile in comparison with the army manoeuvres of two previous Russo-Ottoman wars, prefiguring the regimental formations of the nineteenth century. The first challenge to Mahmud II would arise from this new class of governors– soldiers–bureaucrats, and their relations with the new sultan would determine the course of events at least until the 1830s. 
