

 For my country I stand on guard / Yet my back is beaten hard / The stick’s the sole reward for me / Who defends us from the enemy / He who beats his men a lot / Rises straight up to the top / And is thought extremely keen / Though a devil he has been. He who fails this brutal test / Has to serve with the rest. 
 For his literary efforts he was forced to run the gauntlet. 12 
 While Catherine II’s military reforms are often lauded, discipline under Tsar Paul was tightened, which had the effect of standardising and legitimating corporal punishment. Consciousness about the plight and contribution of the common soldier to Russian victories, although dotting the military writings of the age, would not be visible as policy in military manuals until the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
 Soldiers’ pay and rations were in theory highly regulated in the Russian army, according to a system often commended by foreign observers. Artels , company level cooperatives, were one way of ensuring the well-being of troops. For example, such collectives could finance the purchase of winter victuals, or horses and wagons, which gave the members of a unit solidarity and pride of ownership. 13 It was, however, an informal system and the monies were actually held by the company commander. The possibilities for abuse are obvious. 
 The soldiers were paid three times a year, although payments were very often in arrears, irregular, and reduced by official deductions. Pay was doubled over the century, with hussars, artillerymen and bombardiers paid double that of the land-militia in Ukraine. By the time of the war under discussion, a cavalryman in the field could expect 12 roubles a year, and an infantryman 14 roubles. Those in internal garrisons received, by contrast, 7.50 roubles. Little is actually known about the purchasing power of such a salary, but Keep’s calculations argue for a deterioration of buying power over the course of the eighteenth century. In this, the Russian army looks little different from others of its age. 14 
 The Janissaries maintained a well-organised system of orta treasuries, like the artels , and traditional rights as well as obligations concerning their pay. With the chaos of the period under discussion, and the destruction of so many of the Janissary records, it is hard for historians to determine how many of those rights were transferred to the new system put in place by Selim III. That the esame were virtually eliminated we understand, but not until the military reforms of 1843 is there a real effort to codify all aspects of military life. 
 What little we do know about wages is that they did not keep up with inflation, in fact, and were fixed at abysmally low levels throughout the latter half of the eighteenth century. Thornton in 1807 estimated an average wage of 30 kuru ş every six months, then the equivalent about one-quarter of a shilling sterling per day. 15 Devaluation, and the loss of other army privileges such as the uniform allowance, caused Janissary revolts throughout the history of the corps, no less so in the period 1807–09. We have seen how cash awards for brave deeds, extraordinary services, and enemy casualty counts continued to serve as a stimulus and compensation for individual valour. This contrasts enormously with Russian military culture. 
 Ottoman commanders disdained (and were unable to impose) discipline. As noted in an earlier context, one Ottoman witness to Frederick the Great’s army on parade in 1764, observing the punishment meted out via the gauntlet, equated the life of a soldier as worse than a slave. Some forty years later, the idea of rationalised discipline remained largely foreign to the Ottoman context, and systematic conscription regulations lay in the future: 1822 in Mehmed Ali’s Egypt, and 1843 in Istanbul. 
 Looting was a fact of life in both armies, in part in the Russian case because of the inability or unwillingness of the government to supply the armies properly. Hunger was a constant; disease was a killer of more soldiers than bullets. Russian military strategy, especially under Nicholas I, was to run the army on as little as possible. Authorities had the luxury of seemingly inexhaustible sources of manpower, and remained impervious to the losses of men to wounds and disease at least until the 1850s. 16 On the borders, the burden of feeding the armies fell heavily on the Principalities and Bulgaria, and increasingly parts of eastern Anatolia and the Caucasus. In the post-1800 Principalities, hunger was an endemic aspect of military service. Half the Russian army died in the winter campaign of 1828, a combination of miserable weather, plague, bad hygiene, poor food supplies, and insufficient medical facilities. 17 Ottoman casualties are always accounted to be large, but fixed figures, or percentages, remain beyond recovery from surviving sources. 
 Religion, or religious propaganda, continued to play a part in both armies, as an ideological stimulus to ferocity on both sides, especially in the Danube and Crimean theatres of war which were notorious in Europe as bywords for the barbaric. We have already seen Suvorov and Potemkin at work at Ochakov and then Suvorov at İ smail in 1788 and 1790 respectively, when entire garrisons were slaughtered. 18 Russian soldiers expected to be badly treated if captured by the Ottomans, and often were killed by individual soldiers for head counts. Ottoman prisoners of war perished on long treks following capture, as much casualties of disease and hunger as brutality. Cossacks fighting for the Russians, and Tatars on the Ottoman side, were especially ferocious mutual enemies. Russia had embarked on a series of colonial wars in the Black Sea and the Caucasus which continued well into the nineteenth century, with consequences for the demographic displacement of Muslim populations into surviving Ottoman territories. 
 Still, in spite of the brutish and dismal nature of the military existence, desertion in the Russian army averaged one per cent by the end of the century, a figure which astonished foreign observers. 19 The common Russian soldier, unlike his Ottoman fellow, could be relied on to respect, even worship, able and strict commanders, on the battlefield, in folktales and songs. Peter the Great had created an officer corps in Russia, and by 1800 a single battlefield command structure was theoretically in place, but a systematic military bureaucracy was slow to develop. Imaginative thinking had to be squared with court politics, resulting in slow steps rather than drastic reform. Talented and critical foreigners, such as the Comte Louis Alexandre Andrault de Langeron, servant of four different tsars, were little appreciated by the native officer corps. Langeron’s writings on the period are voluminous, and he had much to say about the disjuncture between Tsar Alexander I and his senior officers in the field, who were dealing with the shortages and lack of morale of an army that had been stationed in the Principalities since late 1806. 20 
 Much has been made of the ‘Prussianisation’ of the Russian military, but the prime movers of military strategy concerning the Ottomans were the Russian field marshals P.A. Rumiantsev and A.V. Suvorov, both noted for their concern for the well-being of the troops under their command, who responded with immense loyalty. These two giants of the southern battlefield arena were most responsible for the Russian army’s repeated success on the Danube. In 1811, it was to be the turn of General Mikhail I. Kutuzov, the less able but famed field marshal of the Russian army that faced Napoleon in the winter of 1812. 
 Ottoman campaign preparations 
 In March 1809, Tsar Alexander informed the sultan that he intended to annex Moldavia, and follow that by the annexation of Wallachia, an outcome of his agreement with Napoleon at Tilsit whereby eastern Europe came under Russian influence with French acquiescence. When Mahmud II demurred, insisting on the Dniester River as the boundary, hostilities were resumed. Istanbul, according to Cevdet, was a city of disobedient soldiers, an empty treasury, and a hotbed of French intrigue. The Janissaries (hereafter referred to as zorbas , here bullies, by him), stimulated by the prospect of a campaign, became intolerable, authors of shameful deeds that had shopkeepers closing their stores and people afraid to look out of their windows. The Janissaries resisted the enlargement of their numbers, or subverted the Anatolian recruits, calling them the sultan’s ‘flesh fortresses’ (cannon fodder?) or ‘brave sacrificial rams’, and forcing their commanders into collusion with them. 
 Mahmud II implored then Aleppo Governor Kör Yusuf Pasha, veteran of Egyptian and Syrian campaigns, to assume command of the unruly mob and remove them from Istanbul as quickly as possible. In state councils it was decided to appoint commanders to the Danubian fortresses prior to the grand vizier’s departure. Hur ş id Ahmed Pasha, like Kör Yusuf of Georgian slave origin, was left as Serasker in Sofia, and Çelebi Mustafa, grand vizier, and co-conspirator with Alemdar Mustafa, remained as Commander in İ smail. Ahmed Agha was appointed Commander of İ brail. 
 As news arrived of a Russian siege at İ brail, and of Russian intentions to cross the Danube at Silistre, Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf assembled his troops at the parade grounds of Davut Pasha. Although only 4,000 Janissaries and 1,000 retainers, they insisted on the pay and rations for 14,000, as registered in the rolls. Stratford Canning observed the Ottoman forces at Davut Pasha as they mobilised for the campaign, and noted: ‘The mass of the army was composed of levies, whether infantry or cavalry, … animated by a fervent spirit of loyalty and religion, but quite as formidable to the country which they traversed as to the enemy which they had to encounter. Nothing could be more picturesque to an artist’s eye than their appearance under arms, nothing less satisfactory to an experienced observer than their accoutrements, maneuvers and commissariat.’ 21 The army finally left Istanbul in the third week of July, and was in Edirne by mid-August 1809. Istanbul breathed a sigh of relief. 22 Russian estimates put the size and placement of Ottoman forces as follows: 12,000 at İ brail; 10,000 at İ smail, 10,000 at Guirgevo and Rusçuk; 10,000 stretched along the upper Danube to Vidin. 23 
 Support from the ayan of the empire was reluctantly forthcoming, even when they were pressed for aid by the young sultan. In most cases they kept their real soldiers around them, and ‘sent a regiment of farmers and laborers, odds bods, with string stirrups, broken saddles, guns without flints, and pistols without stocks, satisfied they had fulfilled the imperial request.’ 24 
 The Battle for Rusçuk and the Treaty of Bucharest, 1811–12 
 1806–12 was not a brilliant war for the Russians, as noted by Langeron: ‘Never was there a war so poorly fought with such a lucky end.’ 25 Events in Europe and relations between France and Russia, as we have seen, dictated the terms and length of engagement. A final push across the Danube was ordered for 1811 precisely because Alexander I expected Napoleon’s attack on Moscow in 1812. 
