

 the followers of Panayèa [the Virgin – the Greeks] and the Prophet [the Muslims] … are trained to a unique mode of tactics – for ‘in joyless union wedded to the dust,’ they lie at full stretch on the ground, and pop up and grin at, and vituperate one another, past all bearing. They throw up a small heap of stones before them – where no barrier ready made to their hands presents itself – so that little more than the head is visible to an opponent, and that only for the second or two they raise themselves for the purpose of firing; then they bob down again and reload. They are advocates for long shots, and have little sympathy for advancing unless their enemy retire. Sometimes, several of them fire from the same cover; and, again, many others act quite independent of, and at considerable distances from, each other; – straggling in such various directions that one stands almost as good a chance of being shot by a friend as by an enemy. 
 In describing the enemy, Whitcombe noted ‘the Turkish camp at Athens as exhibiting a scene of the greatest confusion; the Pasha’s troops – especially the Albanian and Delhi [ deli ] cavalry – being worked up to a state of complete mutiny owing to the scarcity of provisions and the withholding of their pay.’ 69 
 For this particular campaign in the Morea, we have a unique manuscript of a soldier, son of a standard-bearer in the Ottoman military, whose rather curious narration has recently been translated. Mustafa Vasfi Efendi of Kabud, a village near Tokat in Anatolia, spent the years from 1801–33 as a soldier for hire, first in Erzurum, as part of the troops under Dramal ı Mahmud Pasha. He later travelled to A ğ r ı boz, where he signed on with Çarhac ı Ali Pasha and then Ömer Pasha. Vasf ı Efendi described battles, sieges, looting and pillaging, without batting an eye. The following passage is typical, and is evocative of the life of an Ottoman irregular, just before Mahmud II’s reforms. The events described near A ğ riboz: 
 ‘The Janissaries, because they were on foot, soon fell behind. We, who had good horses, went on ahead. We were altogether eighteen horsemen. Anyway, we went off and arrived in an infidel village.’ They sat down under two mulberry trees, whereupon some local inhabitants approached them, and said: ‘We are afraid of you. We have wives and daughters on that mountain over there. If you give us protection, we will come down. We said: the pasha has sent us and we have orders to protect you. The infidels were extremely glad, went away and brought lambs and bread to us. About twenty to thirty women and girls came with them.’ The cavalry-men were afraid of being outnumbered, and isolated for the night, when they assumed the infidels would slay them, so ‘[we] took the infidels, cut off their heads, captured these thirty women and girls’, and took off. They came upon a church, captured the infidels who were inside the church, cut off their heads and hid in the church for the night. They found 5,000 sheep beside the church the next day, and with sheep and captives, returned towards their camp. It is at this point that they encountered Janissaries, who stripped them of their captives and booty at gunpoint. ‘I had a girl and woman with me, and two mules. They arrived, plundered all my possessions. I remained behind as a simple foot soldier.’ Then, he ran into other Janissaries. Pretending to be a Janissary himself, ‘he complained of his treatment at the hands of other members of the ocak ’. A Kurdish servant of the Janissaries addressed those who had abused him: ‘You have taken this man’s possessions, slave girls, and severed infidels’ heads. Things like this do not befit our corps. Now give this man his belongings.’ Vasf ı Efendi thus retrieved his booty, and returned to camp. His commander rewarded him with two coins for the heads, but chastised him: ‘No-one of the deli horsemen should advance on the main army corps.’ Henceforth, Vasfi Efendi noted, they remained with the pasha. 70 
 Of the philhellenes , their fellow American Samuel Howe wrote satirically: ‘But this was no Greek scheme [referring to the bungled confrontation of the Ottomans in open country beneath Athens], Karaiskakis [Greek commander] would not approve of it; but could a rude uneducated mountain Chief oppose the opinions – of my Lord Cochrane, than whom a better sailor existed not; of his Excellency, Sir Richard Church [Generalissimo], whose skill at the toilet was indisputable; – of the Bavarian Colonel Heideck, whose string of orders, and ribbons, and medals, proclaimed what he ought to have been; and who besides could draw horses to such perfection; – of the crowd of newly arrived foreigners from all nations, who, in more tongues than were heard at Babel, spouted their own titles, the valour of their own countrymen, and breathed vengeance upon the Turks? Surely all these men must be better qualified to judge, than ignorant Greeks.’ 71 
 With the help of Mehmed Ali and his sons, the Ottomans appeared poised to re-establish imperial order in the remaining rebellious territories. The revolutionary forces were in disarray. By 1827, the Greek rebels retained control over Nauplion and Corinth only. The Orthodox Patriarch in Istanbul was seen presenting the sultan with petitions for pardon and amnesty from his followers in many parts of Greece, requesting reinstatement as reaya . 72 Two events altered the outcome of the conflict. First, Mahmud II had found an opportune moment to eliminate the Janissary corps in Istanbul, on 15 June 1826, and did not press the Ottoman advantage in the Peloponnesus. The purge and reconstruction that followed his destruction of the last Janissaries left him reliant on the proxy army of Mehmed Ali in the Greek conflict, and particularly vulnerable in the Balkans. 
 Secondly, Britain, France and Russia intervened in the conflict. Although the three powers pursued a policy of neutrality in the Greek question until 1825, events in the Principalities brought the Russians and Ottomans perilously close to war once more, and the prospect alarmed British and French diplomats, who were increasingly sensitive to Russian imperial aims in the Caucasus and the Black Sea. The disruption of trade was a major cause of concern, as Greek pirates showed little discrimination in their choice of targets. 73 The fall of Missolonghi and Athens raised a public outcry in Europe. Tsar Alexander I died in 1825, and was succeeded by Nicholas I (1825–55), who proved of much firmer resolve concerning the Ottomans. In April 1826, the Duke of Wellington, attending the coronation of Nicholas I, concluded the Convention of St Petersburg with the newly-installed Tsar, by which they agreed to mediate in the Greek conflict. On 6 April 1826, the new tsar presented an ultimatum to the Ottomans concerning the Principalities and the Caucasus, which insisted on implementation of the clauses of the Treaty of Bucharest. Wellington erroneously assumed that would end Russian ambitions in Greece. After stalling during the first months of military reform in Istanbul, Mahmud II concluded the Convention of Akkirman with Russia in October 1826, which temporarily settled the unresolved conflicts from the treaty of Bucharest, calling for the withdrawal of Ottoman troops from the Principalities, and asserting Russian rights at the eastern end of the Black Sea. This gave Russia unparalleled access to the Bosphorus. Mahmud II too may have considered it a means of removing Russia from the Mediterranean equation, or as a delaying tactic until he had his new army ready. 
 Nonetheless, the Greek conflict continued to fester, and as noted above, looked particularly bleak for the rebels in June 1827. On 6 July of that year, the Treaty of London, the official acknowledgment of the Convention of St Petersburg, was signed. By that time France, Austria and Prussia had been added. Unanimity of internal pressure was brought to bear on the Ottomans in a proposed armistice and European mediation to settle the Greek question. The European powers envisioned the initial creation of a vassal state in Greece much like the Principalities, but the sultan had already handed the Ottoman ultimatum to the diplomatic representatives in Istanbul, strongly emphasising that the Greek question was his to solve, and rejecting intervention and mediation by any foreign power. 
 In the firman , the sultan reminded the international powers that he had absolute authority over the nations subject to his dominion. Each independent power ‘possesses also institutions and relations which concern only itself and its internal state, which are the offspring of its legislation and form of government.’ He denounced the revolt of the Greeks, who, ‘from generation to generation, have been tributary subjects to the sublime Porte, … have been treated like Mussulman in every respect, and as to everything which regards their property, the maintenance of their personal security, and the defence of their honour; that they have been, particularly, under the glorious reign of the present sovereign, loaded with benefits far exceeding those which their ancestors enjoyed.’ The Ottomans had never refused to pardon and reinstate rebels, the statement continued, and insisted on non-intervention by foreign powers, and respect for Ottoman sovereign law. The sultan felt it necessary to reiterate that the ‘Greek question’ be recognised as belonging to the internal affairs of the sublime Porte. Although he recognised mediation between two independent nations, ‘a reconciliation may be brought about by the interference of a third friendly power: it is the same in respect to armistices and treaties of peace. But the Sublime Porte being engaged in punishing in its own territory, and in conformity with its sacred law, such of its turbulent subjects as have revolted, how can this cause ever be made applicable to its situation? And must not the Ottoman government attribute to those who advance such propositions, views tending to give consequence to a troop of brigands?’ 
 From this declaration, then, it is clear that Istanbul perceived the Greek Revolt as a fitne , a rebellion against the state, rather than as the rise of a Christian nation, at least for public consumption. Mahmud II saw restoring order ( nizam ) as his absolute right, without outside interference. For the Ottomans, the Greeks had violated the zimmi pact that regulated relations between Muslims and non-Muslims. Mahmud’s statement of June 1827 clearly articulated the revolt in the language of the shar‘ia, and warned against outside interference. In that framework, rebel non-Muslim subjects could be declared harbis , warring non-Muslims, and the sultan could call for a general mobilisation, nefir-i am , to confront a (theoretical) attack on the state. 74 
 When the Ottomans refused mediation, an allied naval blockade was imposed in the eastern Mediterranean to prevent men and supplies from Egypt reaching the Peloponnesus. In October 1827, a fleet of allied ships entered Navarino Bay, where a combined Ottoman–Egyptian fleet lay anchored. On 20 October, after a fierce battle, the entire Ottoman and most of the Egyptian fleets were destroyed. A total of 57 ships sank, and 8,000 men drowned. In little over a month, Mahmud II had repudiated the Akkirman Convention, closed the Dardanelles straits to shipping, and declared war against Russia. By August 1828, Mehmed Ali had deserted the sultan, signed a convention with the allies, and withdrawn all forces from the Peloponnesus, to be replaced with French troops of occupation. 
