 The Philike Hetairia Greek liberation secret society was established in 1814 in Odessa. Its members originally envisioned the restoration of a greater Byzantium, with Istanbul as its capital, rather than the establishment of a modern nation-state. In its first two years the society attracted 30 members, but by 1821 numbered closer to 1,000. The leadership of the organisation eventually fell to Alexander Ypsilanti, son of former Wallachian Hospodar Constantine Ypsilanti. The son was a general in the Russian army and aide-de-camp of Tsar Alexander I. Ypsilanti may or may not have had the tacit approval of Alexander I for his activities, but he hinted at the tsar’s support and attracted important members of Greek elite groups to the fledgling society. More than half of the membership was of the merchant class. Plans for an uprising continued, with the Peloponnesus and the Principalities targeted as the strategic centres. Serbian leader Milos Obrenovic, having established his own peace with the Ottomans, maintained neutrality throughout. In Wallachia, however, Tudor Vladimirescu, a former member of the legally sanctioned (by the Ottomans) Serbian militia, the pandours , was simultaneously organising a Romanian revolt in Oltenia, believing that Russian support would follow. In January 1821, Vladimirescu inaugurated a social revolution in Oltenia, with the following declaration: ‘Brothers living in Wallachia, whatever your nationality, no law prevents a man from meeting evil with evil … How long shall we suffer the dragons that swallow us alive, those above us, both clergy and politicians, to suck our blood? How long shall we be enslaved? … Neither God nor the Sultan approves of such treatment of their faithful.’ Vladimirescu’s call to arms, and promise of Russian support, set off a peasant uprising against the boyars , not against the Ottoman dynasty. Importantly, those who joined Vladimirescu called on Istanbul to investigate the injustices in Wallachia and restore the principalities to pre-Phanariot days. 54 
 In March 1821, Ypsilanti crossed over into Moldavia, seizing the government and implying that a Russian army would soon arrive. On 17 March, however, official repudiation and denial of support from both Alexander I and the Orthodox patriarch in Istanbul arrived in Bucharest. Russian consuls in Bucharest and Jassy were recalled. Russian Foreign Minister Ioannis Capodistrias, himself a native of Corfu, and likely co-conspirator with Ypsilanti, was later dismissed by the tsar. Vladimirescu, with 65,000 men, arrived in Bucharest in early April. Ypsilanti, with no more than 5,000 rag-tag troops, arrived shortly thereafter. Their occupation of the Principalities had resulted in the usual denuding of the countryside we have seen, endemic to Romania of the period. Without Russian support, the two revolutionary armies were stranded. Furthermore, atrocities against Muslim residents in Jassy and Galati, in the early days of the occupation of Moldavia, promised reprisals from Ottoman armies. The chaos had engendered native flight, with one estimate that 12,000 boyars and merchants fled to Brasov and 17,000 to Sibiu in Transylvania. 55 
 On 6 April, revolt had erupted in the Peloponnesus. The sultan could no longer avoid such assaults on his territories and subjects, and prepared to send armies to both the Peloponnesus and the Principalities. At peace with Russia, however, Mahmud II was hesitant to offer Alexander I a cause for a renewal of hostilities. The commander of Vidin, Dervi ş Mustafa Pasha, wrote to the sultan shortly after the outbreak of the revolt, asking for new soldiers and supplies. Mahmud II and his advisers were hesitant to violate the Bucharest Treaty, which prohibited the Ottomans from sending troops into the Principalities. Dervi ş Mustafa warned, in fact, that the peasants were afraid of just such an eventuality, and taking to flight. 56 Nevertheless, by 13 May Ottoman forces had crossed the Danube. They encountered a dissolving militia, inexperienced military commanders, and discord between the two leaders. Ypsilanti’s followers captured and executed Vladimirescu on the night of 8 June, which sealed their fate. On 19 June, at the Battle of Dragatsani, Ypsilanti’s forces were easily overrun by the Ottoman forces, and the leader of the revolt himself escaped into Transylvania, where he was arrested, and he died in an Austrian prison seven years later. 57 Among the fallen was a group of young Greeks, called the Sacred Band, who unlike the majority of Ypsilanti’s troops, reportedly stood firm under the Ottoman assault: ‘… educated in Europe, and for the most part students or merchants’ clerks, who had repaired to the standard of Ipsilanti from Russia and Germany. They wore a uniform of black, as an emblem of mourning for the sufferings of their country, to whose service they had devoted their fortunes and lives … These young men, animated by the spirit which taught their ancestors to perish at Thermopylae, preferred a glorious death to flight or dishonour.’ Four to five hundred of them stood in the open plain against the Turkish attack, ‘at once the flower and hope of their country. The heroism displayed on this occasion will bear an advantageous comparison with the best days of Grecian history.’ Such hyperbole filled the gazettes and journals of London, Paris and St Petersburg, stimulating many more philhellenes to volunteer. 58 
 Mahmud II had escaped the threat of all-out war with Russia for the moment. In April 1822, delegates from the two territories met with Ottoman and Russian delegates to re-establish order. The sultan granted the restoration of native rule, the removal of Greek clergy, to be replaced by native clergy, and the creation of a Romanian militia in place of the Albanian guard. Ottoman–Russian disagreements arose over the old issues: the status of the Principalities, and the right of Russian intervention in the appointment of the hospodars . With the extension of the revolt to the Peloponnesus, relations between the two powers would enter another period of crisis resulting in war in 1828. 
 Revolt in the Peloponnesus and Ionian Islands 
 The revolt in the Peloponnesus proved more resilient than that of the Principalities. Organised by militia bands ( klefts ) and their commanders, in concert with local notables and wealthy shipping magnates, it began as a spillover from Ali Pasha’s resistance as described above, and was exacerbated by Ottoman attempts to coerce the Orthodox leaders into submission. What started as sporadic resistance coalesced into a general revolt in April 1821. Muslim residents were the targets of local anger. Perhaps as many as 15,000 of an estimated 40,000 Muslim residents in the Peloponnesus may have been killed in the course of events. Such atrocities were matched by the ferocity of Ottoman Muslim subjects and soldiers alike. The massacre of Christians on Chios in 1821 resulted in thousands of deaths, and awakened Europe to the fierce struggle unfolding in the eastern Mediterranean. 59 
 Istanbul’s population was traumatised by the outbreak. Mahmud II was forced on the one hand to take measures to protect the large Greek population of the city, while on the other, to secure Muslim residents from the potential violent acts of the Philike Hetairia society, which had relocated its headquarters from Bessarabia in 1818. Reprisals in Istanbul included the public execution of Patriarch Gregory V in April 1821. His death reverberated throughout the Orthodox Christian world. Among other victims was the chief court translator, or dragoman, Constantine Mourouzis, symbol of an office dominated by Greek Orthodox families and considered the most obvious symbol of Greek treason. 60 The outbreak of full rebellion in the Peloponnesus, the internationalisation of the cause, and the factionalism which developed among the Greek parties to liberation, meant the eclipse of the Philike Hetairia and the construction of a fledgling national Greek government. 
 Ottoman commanders had great difficulty controlling their soldiers, as Grand Vizier Salih Pasha reported concerning Chios. There, he said, ‘so-called’ soldiers were plundering pardoned reaya villages and enslaving the inhabitants. The Ş eyhülislam condemned the enslavement of pardoned villagers, who were lawfully considered free men and women. Such was the situation that the grand vizier suggested that the commander on Chios exercise caution with the unruly troops, informing the miscreants of the illegality of their actions, but stopping short of alienating them. His words indicate the depth of the problem of discipline. 
 Marines guarding Ottoman merchant ships, in another example, were castigated for attacking peaceful reaya upon landing in the Dardanelle ports. Commanders in the area warned the sultan of the possibility of massacre. Ordered to discipline the violators, the Janissary Agha refused to assume responsibility, saying they were irregulars, miri levendat . 61 Mahmud II was furious, equating the plunderous marines with the Greek rebels and berating his grand vizier for seeking the consent of the Janissary commanders. Such episodes were endemic during the conflict, and incapable of control from Istanbul. Repeated instances of plunder and massacres, rife on both sides, must have hardened the resolve of Mahmud II to rid himself of the Janissaries. Doubtless, the shock of the revolt prepared public opinion in Istanbul for the series of reforms initiated by the sultan in the middle of the Greek war. 
 After the death of Ali of Iannina, Ottoman armies were able to reassert control over the northern territories of Epirus, Thessaly and Macedonia. They concentrated their efforts on retaking the fortresses in the Peloponnesus, as well as the cities of Missolonghi, Thebes and Athens on the mainland. They faced considerable resistance both from entrenched local armies and from Greek merchant piracy at sea, which crippled supply lines from Istanbul. They were, in fact, losing control of the situation. 
 The continuing success of the Greek side was largely due to the klefts , renowned for indiscriminate banditry throughout and adept at piracy at sea. Their style of warfare suited the terrain, and the political environment. They made fierce opponents to the Albanian warrior bands constituting the bulk of the Ottoman forces. The klefts became the symbol of resistance to the tyranny of the Ottomans, and inspired the philhellenes of Europe, caught up in the enlightenment celebration of classical learning and style. Volunteers, including George Finlay, later historian of the events, travelled to Missolonghi to be with Lord Byron, whose verses stirred the enthusiasm of intellectuals as well as military adventurers. Greek Committees were formed in all the major cities of Europe, raising funds and volunteers for the cause. They joined groups of Greeks, educated abroad, who were imbued with French revolutionary fervour but riven by factionalism. Guerrilla warfare complicated the war of liberation, even as it continued to be supported by the philhellenes . Checked, the Ottomans withdrew to the large fortresses where they were besieged. As always, hunger and illness often claimed more victims than actual battles. 
