 Those initiatives were Canning’s last efforts concerning the Treaty of Bucharest. By the end of June, Robert Liston, the new British ambassador, had arrived to take up his post. Similarly, Kutuzov had been recalled to Moscow and replaced by Admiral Paul Chichagov, who had presented Alexander I with an ambitious design to attack Austria and French Dalmatia with a multi-ethnic Balkan army of 150,000. The core of that army was to come from Kara George, the Serbian rebel, and his militias, and the reaya of the Principalities, who would spontaneously rise with their Orthodox brothers. Alexander, displeased with Kutuzov over the conduct of the war and treaty negotiations, recalled him to Moscow in mid-May, appointing Chichagov in his stead. Perhaps it was a measure of the tsar’s desperation that he entertained the Chichagov plan, which fell apart as soon as its author was confronted with the realities of the Danubian battlefront. Most telling was the total lack of sympathy and refusal among the boyars of Wallachia and Moldavia to entertain the idea of arming the countryside, even when his aims were reduced to calling for the formation of a militia of only 20,000 men. 42 In the end, Chichagov withdrew with his army towards Moscow, and the Treaty of Bucharest stood as signed on 28 May 1812. The idea of an alliance, and the two secret articles, never ratified by the Ottomans, were dropped from Russian demands. The final exchange of documents occurred in mid-July when Napoleon was already on his way to Moscow. 
 The Ottomans may have escaped relatively easily, but the Principalities did not. Six years of Russian occupation and the fighting up and down the Danube reduced Wallachia and Moldavia to desperate straits. Initially, the Russians dealt with the local divans and the hospodar Constantin Ypsilanti, but in March 1808, they appointed Sergei S. Kushnikov as President of the divans , whose first priority was the supplying of the army on the Danube. He achieved little in the two years he was in Bucharest, stymied by a seething centre of multi-lingual, multi-ethnic and cultural rivalries. Kushnikov pressed for order in the army supply system, and demanded such immense amounts from the countryside that much discontent erupted and peasant flight increased. 43 The Russian occupation forces were dealing with contradictory methods of operation in territories of ambiguous status. On the one hand they cooperated with the local notables, such as with the hospodars in Wallachia, while on the other they colonised and resettled in more direct ways. Significantly, in the territory east of the Prut, ceded in 1812 and henceforth acquiring the name of Bessarabia, the Russians took control, expelling the entire population of Tatars and sending them to the Crimea. The inhabitants of Turkish-speaking areas were sent into Russia as prisoners of war, and the land designated crown land. Refugees from across the Danube (Bulgarians) and many orthodox Greeks were encouraged to settle into the emptied lands. The legacies of the Russian occupation and use of the Principalities as a logistics base were ill-will and impoverishment. For those in Bessarabia, it meant becoming part of the Russian empire. For the rest, reverting to Ottoman tributary status did not promise any better future. 
 Confronting rebellion: the Serbs 
 European preoccupation with Napoleon, and studied neutrality on the part of Mahmud II, gave the Ottomans a respite from European affairs. For the period between 1812 and 1826, Mahmud II’s determination to pacify the countryside and rid himself of ‘the usurpers of legitimate authority’, as the ayan were frequently labelled, bore fruit. He faced resistance in Serbia, Iraq, Greece and Albania, as well as Egypt. 
 In Serbia, Kara George continued as leader of the Serbian revolt, which had erupted in February 1804. Initially the revolt aimed at protecting the population of Belgrade against the rapacious yamak day ı s , and restoring the privileges the Serbian population had gained under reformers like Mustafa Pasha, who had been killed in the 1801 yamak coup d’état. Limited autonomy concerning bearing arms and the right to oversee the tax regime were part of the demands. By January 1811, Kara George had acquired the title of Supreme Leader and ruled Belgrade in conjunction with a Legislative Council. Article VIII of the Treaty of Bucharest recognised these developments without committing either side to full Serbian independence. There is considerable evidence that Mahmud II ordered the commanders stationed in the Danube fortresses to implement Article VIII of the treaty by declaring a general amnesty and peaceful takeover of the Serbian garrisons. Deserted by Russia in 1812, the Serbians resisted the overtures and continued fighting, with disastrous consequences. Grand Vizier Hur ş id Pasha (September 1812 – April 1815), stationed in Sofia during the recently completed hostilities, attacked and defeated the Serbian rebels. By October of the following year, the Ottomans had retaken control of Belgrade. Hur ş id Pasha declared a general amnesty, and called on Serbians to return home. Some 30,000 reputedly did so. The new governor of Belgrade appointed many Serbian leaders, among them Milos Obrenovic (1780–1860), to local administrative offices. This was accompanied by an attempt to pacify the region by eliminating many of the powerful local ayan . Harsh imposition of order had the opposite effect of creating more chaos, and precipitated the Second Serbian Uprising, in 1815, which forced the Ottomans to recognise at least part of Article VIII, concerning Serbian internal administration of the Pa ş al ı k of Belgrade, under Supreme Leader Milos Obrenovic (1780–1860), rival and murderer of Kara George in July 1817. 
 Continued Russian pressure to implement Article VIII of the Bucharest Treaty resulted in the Convention of Akkirman in 1826, specifying the limits of Serbian autonomy and reiterated in the Russo-Ottoman Treaty of Adrianople in 1829. By August 1830, Serbia was a principality within Ottoman suzerainty. Obrenovic was confirmed as Hereditary Prince. In 1833 the remaining fiscal obligations to the Ottomans, as well as the stationing of troops along the frontier, were negotiated, but it was not until April 1867 that all Ottoman troops were withdrawn from Serbian soil. Full Serbian independence was only finally enshrined in the Treaty of San Stefano in 1878. 44 Nobel prize winner Ivo Andric’s The Bridge on the Drina imagines the social evolution as follows: ‘The border between the two pashaluks of Bosnia and Belgrade, which passed just above the town, began in those years to become ever more sharply defined and to take on the appearance of and significance of a state frontier. … a whole company of Milo š ’ soldiers and a delegate of the Sultan, a soft, pale fellow from Stambul … confirmed everything. Thus, he said, it had been ordered by Imperial decree that Milo š should administer Serbia in the Sultan’s name and that the frontier should be marked out, to know exactly to what point his authority stretched … And old Hadji-Zuko who has twice been to Mecca and is now more than ninety years old says that before a generation has passed the Turkish frontier will be withdrawn right to the Black Sea, fifteen days march away. … Time did its work. … The Turks had now to abandon even the last towns in Serbia. One summer day the bridge at Vi š egrad was burdened with a pitiable procession of refugees from U ž ice. … in all there were about 120 families. … [One of them said] ‘ “You sit here at your ease and do not know what is happening behind Stani š evac. Here we are fleeing into Turkish lands, but where are you to flee to when, together with us, your turn will come?” ’ 45 
 From the point of view of Istanbul, concessions to the Serbians resulting from foreign mediation were simply unacceptable. The Ottomans had swallowed the annexation of the Crimea by Catherine II in 1783 with great difficulty. That unilateral occupation was perceived to be a humiliating loss of a Muslim frontier zone. Any further concession concerning the eastern Black Sea frontier continued to be unthinkable. The long protestation about outside interference in Serbian negotiations could be that it reflected the sultan’s deep-seated commitment to the preservation of Ottoman sovereignty on the edges of Europe. In 1807, 1808, and again in April 1809, the Serbian rebels were offered amnesty and limited internal autonomy by successive Ottoman sultans. The stumbling block appeared to be the Serbian refusal to accept the offer without foreign guarantees. Preservation of Ottoman territorial sovereignty without international intervention is but one explanation for the decades-long, violent contestation of Serbian rights and privileges during the first half of the nineteenth century. 
 A second is obviously the geopolitical position of Serbia. Belgrade remained the pivotal end of a garrison line that stretched to the mouth of the Danube. Its loss would arguably leave much of Bulgarian territory vulnerable, even though the real weaknesses in the line were the fortresses downriver, as we have seen – at Rusçuk, for example. The Danube had become a lively commercial waterway, integral to the feeding of Istanbul, but also, since 1699, a waterway open to the markets of Europe. Loss of the Principalities threatened at any moment to cut off supplies to Istanbul, as the occupation of Bucharest by the Russians demonstrated. Belgrade (and Vidin) served as a check on those who aspired to colonise Little Wallachia in particular. 
 Thirdly, the initial reaction of the authorities in Istanbul to the rebellion, at least before Selim III’s fall, was to support the resistance of the reayas to unruly Janissary yamaks , ultimately the source of the problem in Belgrade as in Vidin and Little Wallachia. Rebellions demanding justice or restoration of rights, as has been argued throughout this book, were often treated by applying ‘friendly persuasion’ to the rebels, a coaxing back into the sultanic fold, so to speak, accompanied by intimidation when necessary. 46 Such a viewpoint was in keeping with the idealised theory of sultanic justice as protector of the reaya , source of the wealth of empire. The forces of intimidation brought to bear, when necessary, were often neigh-bouring ayan at the head of their own troops. In this case the neighbouring ayan challenged Mahmud II both domestically and internationally, even as he was frequently called on to intimidate his unruly brothers – what has been called ‘modulated anarchy’. 47 The Serbian rebellion crystallised for Mahmud II the problem of the ayan in general, and bringing them to heel would be his chief target over the next decade. There was a consistency of Ottoman policy towards the empire’s Balkan subjects from 1792 to 1822, based on a strong Ottoman tradition of statecraft arguing for reassertion of central control over unruly provinces as the solution to rebellion. Mahmud II was ferocious in his pursuit of that end. In the process, by eliminating the local notables, he also uprooted and destroyed the regional networks and organisations which underwrote sultanic power in 1800. The consequences of this fiercely fought re-centralisation of power would play themselves out over the rest of the nineteenth century. 48 
