



===== FILE: text/part0018.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Eight 
 The Auspicious Occasion and its consequences 
 B efore continuing the story of the transformation of the Ottoman military, we have to return to Egypt, and understand how Mehmed Ali Pasha (1760s–1849) came to challenge his own sultan on the plains of Anatolia. That will be followed by a description of the events around the ‘Auspicious Occasion’, which was Mahmud II’s final confrontation with the Janissaries on the streets of Istanbul, and his general reforms that unfolded thereafter. A discussion of the Russian– Ottoman war of 1828–29, the first test of the new military organisation, will be followed by a brief assessment of the state of the empire before we move on to a description of the important Treaty of Adrianople, and the two campaigns against Mehmed Ali in Syria and Anatolia in the following chapter. The contest of the two titans of reform, one in Istanbul and one in Cairo, engendered a particular style of international intervention in Middle Eastern affairs that has persisted to the present. 
 Mehmed Ali Pasha and the transformation of Egypt 
 Mehmed Ali rose to power as a participant in the defence of Alexandria and Cairo against the French after 1798. Born in the late 1760s, at Kavala in Macedonia, Mehmed Ali was the son of an Albanian Ottoman soldier. In 1801, he was appointed deputy commander of the Kavala contingent to the army of Egypt. By mid-1803, he was commander of his own Albanian army, part of the forces assembled for the 1801–02 campaign. While the newly-appointed Governor of Egypt, Hüsrev Pasha, contended with his rival Tahir Pasha, commander of the combined Ottoman Albanian force, Mehmed Ali consolidated his own power and prepared to confront the mamluk households. In 1803, a riot over pay broke out among the Ottoman Albanian troops, who drove Hüsrev out of Cairo. Tahir Pasha was soon assassinated by the mamluks he had called on for support. Mehmed Ali then assumed command of the Ottoman Albanians as well, defeated Hüsrev Pasha’s army at Damietta, and was appointed governor himself in 1805, following unsuccessful attempts by Istanbul to impose another Ottoman governor on Egypt. 1 Selim III acquiesced to the fait accompli . It was his recognition of the coalition Mehmed Ali had constructed with the backing of the military and the ulema, as well as the merchants of Cairo. It could not have been easy in the chaos of military occupation and reoccupation by both French and Ottoman forces, a period recognised by all who study it as the nadir of modern Egyptian history. Mehmed Ali’s reputation was further bolstered when the British forces landed at Alexandria in March 1807 and were trapped there after their attempt to occupy Rosetta. 2 Selim III’s deposition and death allowed Mehmed Ali a respite from internal challengers. He consolidated power while awaiting his moment, which came in March 1811 when he confronted and eliminated a number of the mamluk Beys in Cairo, by which he acquired independence of action in Egypt. Survivors were incorporated into Mehmed Ali’s new forces. The process of suppression of the traditional forces, and the support of the residents of the city, presaged the events which would unfold in Istanbul in 1826. Mehmed Ali was particularly aided by Umar Makram, the Nakib al-Ashraf (Chief of the Muslim Notables), who was persuaded to return from exile in Palestine to assist in the elimination of the last mamluk chieftains. 3 
 Between 1811 and 1824, when called upon by the sultan to come to his aid against the Greeks in Morea, Mehmed Ali undertook a series of striking and innovative reforms that completely reorganised Egyptian society. This has led some historians to see him as the founder of the modern nation of Egypt. 4 Centralising finances, introducing conscription, monopolising export and import trade, and experimenting with industrialisation were all part of his programme of consolidation and reform. In 1809, he experimented by taxing rakf lands, challenging his erstwhile allies among the ulema, and exiling his former supporter Umar Makram. He began as early as 1810 to reorganise the agricultural system by introducing direct taxation and administration at the provincial level. Between 1812 and 1815, Mehmed Ali revoked the tax farms ( iltizam ), and increased taxes on rakf lands. By 1821, a cadastral survey, registration and the imposition of the new system of taxation had been achieved. Sixty per cent of the territory of Egypt was brought under the new tax regime by these efforts. Mehmed Ali created government monopolies of all of Egypt’s cash crops: grains, rice, sugar, and notably cotton. War in Europe proved a boon to his agricultural reforms, as the demand for grain during the Napoleonic wars made Mehmed Ali a wealthy man. He also introduced a number of long-staple varieties of cotton, increasing the crop yield. In this, as with his other reforms, he worked by negotiation and building coalitions with trusted associates who formed the core groups of Ottoman–Egyptian elites of the nineteenth century. The idea of extending his power to Syria was hatched in this early period as well. As has been argued in previous chapters, control of greater Syria was a preoccupation of Egyptian rulers. Mehmed Ali would prove the most able to carry out his expansionist schemes. 
 Factories were also built in this period, as a means of achieving self-sufficiency in certain goods as well as supplying the army. Arsenals and textile factories, sugar refineries, rice mills and tanneries were all established, starting in 1815. Within two decades, however, most of them were closed or had collapsed because of technical and operational difficulties. The net effect was to facilitate Egypt’s integration into the world market as a supplier of raw cotton to the textile mills of Britain and the United States. 5 Nonetheless, by 1820 Mehmed Ali can be said to have achieved a robust economic base, and sufficient state revenues to underwrite his next series of adventures. 
 The Wahhabi challenge and Mehmed Ali’s new army 
 Mehmed Ali’s reforms of the Egyptian military system remain the most important to this narrative. His first step was to eliminate the mamluk leadership, as described above, in early 1811. In this, he was following in the footsteps of the Ottoman Egyptian governor-appointees, who, on numerous previous occasions, had attempted to eliminate the well-entrenched organisation. Mahmud II, the new sultan, ordered his governor that same year to subdue the Wahhabis in Arabia, who had seized the holy cities of Medina and Mecca. 6 The Wahhabis, named for Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahh ā b (1703–92), followed the Hanbali school of Muslim practice, ‘Abd al-Wahh ā b further advocated that all non-conformists to the shar‘ia, such as Sufis or Shiites, were heretics, and open to attack. This included the Ottoman dynasty, considered illegitimate by ‘Abd al-Wahh ā b and his successors. Selim III and Mahmud II both were confronted with the vigorous revolt of the Wahhabis and their adherents, the Arab tribes of the Najd and Hijaz, especially the family of Ibn Saud, who established a theocracy in Diriyah, near present-day Riyadh, that proved hard to eradicate. 7 The contest in Syria centred on imperial Muslim legitimacy, and the promotion of the Hanafi school of law preferred by the Ottomans. One of the main tenets of Ottoman legitimacy was the support and protection of the annual pilgrimage caravan from Damascus to Mecca and Medina, also a source of revenue for province and sultan alike. This ideology was severely tested by the Wahhabis, when the pilgrimage caravan and holy cities alike came under attack. 
 Once Mehmed Ali was confirmed as the legitimate governor of Egypt, he was obligated to serve the sultan in putting an end to the Wahhabi threat in the Hijaz. Without a doubt, it also served his own purposes. Sending his second son, Tusun Pasha, as commander of the assembled forces, Mehmed Ali recaptured both Mecca and Medina. Over the next two decades, his sons Tusun and İ brahim, especially the latter, would lead military expeditions to the Hijaz, Sudan, Crete, the Morea, and greater Syria. 
 The Wahhabis, however, proved a stubborn foe. Tusun was initially bested by the Wahhabis, but Mecca and Medina were regained by 1813, at a cost of 8,000 men, 25,000 animals and 170,000 purses. When the keys of both cities were presented to the sultan in 1813, Mahmud II and Istanbul rejoiced. Mehmed Ali’s campaign to subdue the Wahhabis completely, however, would not be accomplished until 1818, when his elder son Ibrahim Pasha’s army defeated them in Najd. Perhaps his father’s later ambitions regarding expansion into Syria arose as a result of that expedition. The Wahhabi leader Abdullah was sent to Istanbul where he was promptly executed, and Diriyah was razed. İ brahim was appointed governor of the Hijaz. 8 Although the Hijaz remained under Ottoman hegemony, Najd was reoccupied by the Wahhabis in 1824. Wahhabism continued to influence the religious debates of greater Syria, stimulating many to question the authority of the sultan, and allowing in part for the ease with which Mehmed Ali and his son would conquer and occupy the Ottoman territories there after 1830. Mehmed Ali held Yemen and the Hijaz until 1840. 
 Mehmed Ali’s achievements are remarkable, and no more so in the striking reorganisation of the military, an idea generally acknowledged to have been his. All his other reforms were subservient to the creation of a conscription army and a navy in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea, which, in Fahmy’s view, had made a garrison state of Egypt by the time of his confrontation with the Ottoman army in Anatolia in 1831. Perhaps it was the experience of seeing French soldiers on Egyptian soil that originally stimulated Mehmed Ali’s interest, or his knowledge of the Nizâm- ı Cedid reforms of Selim III. He had likely seen Hüsrev Pasha, part of the Anglo-Ottoman coalition against Napoleon in 1801/02, commanding a Nizâm- ı Cedid regiment. Mehmed Ali demonstrated such knowledge in his treatment of his own Albanian forces, who had repeatedly proven their unreliability and inability to maintain order and discipline in Cairo. In 1815, Mehmed Ali explicitly ordered the unruly Albanians to begin target practice and drill in the manner of the Nizâm- ı Cedid . His orders precipitated a revolt which he had great difficulty bringing under control. He rid himself of the nuisance by repeatedly sending Albanian troops to the Arabian desert in the seven-year struggle with the Wahhabis. 9 By 1822, the date of the first conscription order, Mehmed Ali was instructing his advisers to draft new organisational plans on the model of Selim’s Nizâm- ı Cedid . (Universal conscription eluded the Ottomans until the detailed regulations of 1846.) 10 Mehmed Ali’s decision to turn to the conscription of Egyptian peasants rested on the experience of his army in Sudan from 1820–22. 
 His fame having grown as a result of the restoration of the holy cities to the sultan, Mehmed Ali had turned his attention to the conquest of the Sudan, where he intended the elimination of a few surviving mamluks, and the consolidation of his control. Two aspects of this campaign influenced later developments. First, Mahmud II imposed an embargo on the shipment of mercenaries and slaves to Egypt after 1820, which likely had an influence on his ability to re-man his depleted armies. 11 Second, Mehmed Ali’s Turkish-speaking forces deserted in droves from the intolerable conditions of the Sudan. Hence, a manpower crisis was likely important to Mehmed Ali’s decision to mobilise a Sudanese slave army, some 6,000 strong, following the occupation of Semnar, Kurdufan and Dongola, the latter the stronghold of a number of mamluk emirs. 
