 Hakan Erdem has asserted that one of those consequences was in the clarification of ‘Muslimness’ under Mahmud II. The debate among historians over Ottoman perceptions of ethnicity and religiosity continues, often centred on the meaning of reaya itself. Did the Ottomans in Istanbul consider the word reaya , or peasant, as a marker of tax status, or as a religious (exclusively Christian) identity? Many assume the former to be the case until well into the nineteenth century. Others argue that reaya was consistently used as a label of exclusion and discrimination for all Christian subjects of the empire. At what point did the term reaya become differentiated in official policy by specific ethnic and religious categories? And to what extent were such categories created as part of the reconstruction of the army under Mahmud II? What is clear at this juncture is the sultan’s alarm at the influence of Russian orthodoxy on his reaya , and a gradual sorting out of those Christians who were loyal, and those who were not. With the Greek revolt in 1820, public attitudes in general, and the sultanic reaction in particular, responded to such challenges by the further drawing of ethnic and religious frontiers. 
 Confronting rebellion: Ali Pasha of Iannina 
 Mahmud II continued his policy of containment of the ayan throughout the second decade of the century. The instrument of his will was Halet Efendi, former Ambassador to Paris (1802–06), a man of widespread experience of the provinces. Halet Efendi joined court service in Istanbul through the patronage of Mehmed Ra ş id Efendi. Briefly Reis during Mustafa IV’s short-lived reign, Halet Efendi was exiled to Kütahya for his supposed pro-British sympathies in 1808. By 1810 he had been recalled to Istanbul, and joined Mahmud II’s inner circle. He was immediately sent to Baghdad to confront semi-independent Governor Kücük Süleyman Pasha, who had siezed power in 1808, and who was refusing to pay tribute to Istanbul. Halet, writing to Mahmud II from Baghdad at the time, presages the problems that would await the Ottomans two decades later. Iraq had become a stronghold for Mamluks, local strongmen who seized the governorship during the Wahhabi incursions, and their influence had extended to Mardin, Basra and Shahrizur. The mixture of populations and mentalities, Arab/Kurdish, Sunni/Shiite, and the proximity to Iran, made it imperative to install a strong governor. 49 Rebuffed, Halet Efendi recruited the militias of Abdülcelilzade Pasha, Mutasarr ı f of Mosul, and Abdurrahman Pasha, Mutasarr ı f of Baban, and marched on Baghdad in June of 1810 with 10,000 men to overthrow Süleyman. 
 His success in securing the deposition and death of Süleyman gave him considerable cachet in Istanbul. Upon his return, he was appointed as Kethüda (or steward) to the sultan’s inner circle, the equivalent of the minister of domestic or internal affairs. For more than a decade, he exercised extraordinary influence at court, as the chief adviser to the sultan. He refused to entertain the elimination of the Janissaries, who were the basis of his support, and he had a significant influence on the direction of imperial affairs in the first decade of Mahmud II’s reign. His hand seems to have been everywhere, from securing the appointment of his favourites as the hospodars of Wallachia and Moldavia, to the sabotaging of all efforts by the young sultan to reform the Janissary corps. Halet Efendi concentrated on subduing a large number of the ayanl ı k dynasties of Rumeli and Anatolia at the behest of the sultan. 
 The result was that by 1820, much of the territory in Anatolia and Rumeli and the north Syrian territories had reverted to central government control, except for Ali Pasha of Iannina, 1744–1823, whose life and adventures have influenced all accounts of Greek and Albanian national narratives. Ali Pasha was adroit at manipulating the international context, especially during the confusion in the Adriatic following Napoleon’s occupation of Venetian Corfu and the Ionian islands in 1797, and the attack on Egypt in 1798. Ali Pasha was more comfortable in his dealings with his potential allies Britain and France than with his master, Mahmud II, or the Russians. He proved implacable against any and all, Greek, or Albanian, who rebelled against him in his own lands, and against whatever Ottoman force was sent against him. Celebrated by Lord Byron as the ‘Muslim Bonaparte’, and the subject of countless Oriental fantasies substituting as his biography, Ali Pasha’s challenge to the Ottoman state has rarely received the serious attention he deserves, with some recent exceptions. 50 
 By July 1820, when Mahmud II sent an army against his rebellious subject, Ali Pasha controlled most of Greece and southern Albania, and had his sons, Mukhtar and Veli Pashas, installed as governors of Avlonya and Morea in the Peloponnesus respectively. We have already seen Ali Pasha in his relations with the Ottoman government, as when he joined the Danubian military coalition against rival Osman Pasvano ğ lu, and against the Russians in the 1806–12 war, where the performance of his troops was effective and distinguished. By such service, Ali accrued coveted tax-collecting offices and extended his power, often brutally, over much of the fiercely independent Albanian and Greek territories. Danish traveller Peter Brønsted, one of many diplomats, spies and intellectuals of the late eighteenth century who paid the ‘Diamond of Iannina’ a visit, said of Ali: ‘He had nothing of that white and delicate complexion, which is so common amongst the Turkish seignors; his own was brown and manly; his manners, concise and lively, had absolutely nothing of that slowness and gravity, which is the bon ton with the Turks of high rank. Ali, as the Greeks told me, even frequently mocked such a theatrical sort of gravity. He spoke quickly, moved with rapidity, and in one word, had nothing of an old Turk, except his dress; – his body was that of a Greek, and his soul that of an Albanian.’ 51 
 Ali Pasha first derived his power from his appointment as Derbend Ba ş bu ğ u in 1786, an important frontier position which he held until 1820. It was precisely his own ties to Albanian chieftains (Tosks) in Tepedelen, as well as the increasing use of such warrior stock for the late eighteenth-century Ottoman armies, which gave him his leverage. Albanian recruits pressed into Ottoman service as levends were diverted to the Morea in 1770/71, when Grand Vizier Mehmed Muhsinzade used them to suppress a rebellion in the midst of the 1768–74 war. This inaugurated a cycle of violence between the two communities that Ali Pasha capitalised on adroitly, by coupling the animosities of rival chieftains, Greek and Albanian, with his own particular brand of diplomacy, which was to cultivate, marry his children into, and then eliminate his Ottoman rival appointees in the various sancaks of his own and surrounding areas. In 1810 his reach extended into northern Albania, when he added the sancaks Ohri and Elbasan to his holdings. Mahmud II watched this process helplessly. Ali did respond to the sultan’s call for soldiers in 1809, as we have seen, sending Mukhtar and Veli Pasha with their armies to the Danubian front. By 1819, Ali Pasha reputedly could muster 40,000 men if need be. 52 
 In 1819, however, Ali Pasha fell foul of Halet Efendi, who turned the sultan’s attention to Ali Pasha’s disloyalty. Mahmud II had succeeded by that time in removing or de-fanging most of the lesser ayan of the Balkans, replacing them with more amenable local governors, or central appointees. Dismissed from his position in early 1820, Ali Pasha was ordered to withdraw all troops to his seat of power, the sancak and city of Iannina. Hur ş id Pasha, veteran of Sofia command and the Serbian rebellion, was appointed Governor of Morea, and ordered to march against Ali Pasha with the pashas of adjacent provinces and their personal armies. One of those who joined Hur ş id Pasha was Bu ş atl ı Mustafa Pasha, Governor of İ ş kodra in northern Albania, who had recently been under attack himself by Ali Pasha. Ottoman ships were dispatched to the Albanian coast. Ali Pasha’s response was to stoke an uprising among the Greek rebels in his territories, by signing a mutual aid pact with their leaders. Besieged in Iannina, Ali Pasha held out for two years, but was fatally wounded in fighting with the Ottoman troops and died on 24 January 1822. Halet Efendi, blamed for the Greek rebellion which broke out and subsequently engulfed Greece, Moldavia, and much of the rest of Rumeli, was himself dismissed, sent into exile, and finally beheaded in Konya in November 1822. 53 
 The Greek Revolt 1821–27 
 The decision to confront Ali Pasha had not been taken easily, according to historian Cevdet. Opponents to Halet Efendi, such as Reis Canib Mehmed Efendi and others, were fully aware of the potential for rebellion in the Peloponnesus. Ironically, by subduing the strongest of the ayan in the Balkans, perhaps the only one who might have prevented the revolt, Mahmud II unleashed the greatest threat to the dynasty to date. The Greek uprising that began in Moldavia in March 1821 had its antecedents in Ali Pasha’s resistance after 1820, and more importantly, went largely unchecked for more than a year while the Ottoman army was engaged in the siege of Iannina. 
 Furthermore, the ethno-religious group that rebelled against the Ottoman state was significantly embedded in the central administration of the dynasty, in both commercial and diplomatic spheres. There was not, however, unanimity of aims among the various Greek populations of the empire (perhaps as much as one-quarter of the inhabitants of Ottoman territories) who found themselves caught up in the rebellion. Four distinct areas: the Peloponnesus and the Greek islands of the Adriatic and the Aegean, Wallachia and Moldavia, Bessarabia and the new Russian city of Odessa, and Istanbul constituted areas of great concentrations of Greek-speaking Orthodox Christians. The Peloponnesus was largely self-governing, but also split among the educated classes: priests, large landowners and merchants, and a large peasant population, the latter slow to respond to the call to revolt. Inhabitants of the area were well acquainted with Ottoman retaliatory measures, such as the crushing of the previous uprising in 1770/71, and more recently the heavy hand of Ali Pasha. The Principalities, as we have seen, were administered by Ottoman–Greek boyars, with attachments to the Phanariot families of Istanbul, who had a stake in continuing as Ottoman clients. Moldavia was different even from Wallachia, in that Russian occupation of Jassy had been more or less continuous since the 1760s, and Russification was farther advanced than in Wallachia, where Hellenisation had a stronger hold. In Bessarabia, a policy of resettlement was instituted by the Russians after its acquisition by treaty in 1812. Greeks were numerous among the new settlers, enticed by the commercial possibilities of the frontier territory, Danube trade and the new Black Sea port in Odessa. 
