 Unable to suppress the rebellion, Mahmud II turned to his Governor of Egypt, Mehmed Ali, in late 1824. By that time, Mehmed Ali’s reputation was more than equal to that of Ali Pasha of Iannina. Veteran of domestic and international conflicts, Mehmed Ali had preceded Mahmud II’s army reforms by a decade, and had disciplined troops at his command. Mahmud called on Mehmed Ali to assist him in ending the Greek rebellion. Mehmed Ali agreed to participate only on the condition that his son, Ibrahim, would be awarded the Peloponnesus, while he reserved Crete for himself. In February 1825, after retaking Crete, the Egyptian army, commanded by Mehmed Ali’s son Ibrahim, entered the Peloponnesus. He arrived with 5,000 men, and was soon joined by another 7,000 from Crete, eventually assembling 17,000 troops in the Morea. 62 Ibrahim Pasha relieved Ottoman forces besieged in Patras and by May had captured Navarino. 63 The reformed Egyptian troops, drilled by French advisers, proved more than a match for the Greek regulars and militias. One Greek observer noted that ‘these Arabs make war in a manner that no one has seen before; they advance in regular squares, and standing upright as if a bullet could not harm them, they then rush the Greeks with bayonets stuck on their Tophaics [ tüfenk , or musket] so long, and what soldiers in the world could be supposed to endure that?’ 64 The Greek army was demoralised, and as ill-equipped as their Ottoman opponents. Though Greek ships continued to interrupt Ottoman supply lines, their efficacy was checked by the reformed Egyptian navy. 
 Missolonghi and Athens 
 By April 1826, Ibrahim Pasha and Rumeli Governor Mehmed Re ş id Pasha, Serasker of the Ottoman army in northern Greece, had joined forces and retaken Missolonghi on the Greek mainland after a year-long siege. Just prior to the fall of the fortress, a hastily assembled Greek provisional government committee petitioned Europe with an appeal to ‘all ye who have Greek blood in your veins, to prepare your sinewy arms against the barbarous enemy of Christendom.’ 65 The Ottoman victory was accomplished with significant bloodshed, perhaps as many as 3,000 of the defenders dead, with another 5,000 women and children enslaved. 66 Ambassador Stratford Canning, Ambassador to Istanbul, was invited to Topkap ı palace in June 1826 to view the 5,498 human ears from the victory at Missolonghi, and was the only diplomat present who refused to congratulate Mahmud II on his victory. Stratford was equally dismissive about the Greeks, however, as were many of the philhellenes when confronted with the realities of the Morea. They were ‘Unfit for a state of complete independence … the powers of Europe would dread the establishment in their immediate vicinity of a new state so utterly unprepared for the arduous duties of self-government.’ 67 
 By 15 August 1826, the joint Ottoman–Egyptian army under Mehmed Re ş id Pasha, and Ibrahim Pasha, had retaken Athens, and laid siege to the Acropolis. Admiral Thomas Cochrane, commander of a fleet organised by the London Greek Committee, after more than two years of dallying, arrived in March 1827 to assist the Greeks besieged in the Acropolis. The combined forces, when added to the Greeks commanded by Karaiskakis, numbered 11,000. They first confronted the Ottomans at St Spiridon in Piraeus in an attempt to relieve Athens from the south. The 300 Albanian troops surrendered the monastery, but were slaughtered by enraged Greeks, an act which had most of the foreign officers quitting in disgust. Heavy fighting in open country ensued, ending in the death of Karaiskakis. By the time of the attack to relieve Athens, 6 May, the operation was in disarray, and in the battle which followed, some 900 Greeks, and many of the remaining philhellenes , had been killed. On 5 June, the besieged Acropolis surrendered and was reinvested by the Ottomans. 68 One participant, Thomas Whitcombe, described the style of fighting: 