

 Kutusov accepted the 12,000 disarmed Turks that remained of the Vizier’s army of 36,000 men that crossed the Danube earlier in the year. During its three month long captivity, [the Turkish] army lost over 20,000 men as a result of Russian artillery bombardment, wounds, starvation and cold, while some 2,000 men deserted. On the Vizier’s request and to protect [Russian] troops, Kutusov transported to Ruse some 2,000 men that were ill with fever and other contagious illnesses. He instructed Count Langeron to escort the Turks to designated settlements, some 50 versts [33 miles] behind the Russian army, and demonstrate to them that ‘they are not our prisoners of war, but our guests, willingly staying here.’ Leaving the campsite, the Muslims [Turks] were elated for being rescued from certain death. Capan Oghlu, courageous commander who shared the sufferings of his troops, approached Kutusov with dignity. Kutusov welcomed him and presented him with the best steed in the army. 
 The Turkish camp looked like a dreadful cemetery. Numerous wounded, some of them without limbs, were lying without any medical aid among the decomposed corpses. The elite of the Turkish army had perished there. In the following years, the Porte could never assemble forces similar to the army commanded by Ahmed Bey. These troops were not familiar with the new movements that would soon convulse Turkey. They stood united in their faith and died for the glory of the Ottoman Empire. Therefore, Kutusov was the last of the European generals who fought the Turks, while they still fanatically followed the ancient customs and traditions of their ancestors. 35 
 Kutuzov bivouacked his army for the winter at the outskirts of Giurgevo and Bucharest, and moved his headquarters to Bucharest, where the Ottoman delegates joined him to negotiate the peace. The Russian negotiators began by insisting on acquiring Moldavia and Wallachia, and on some concession of the eastern Black Sea ports they had occupied in Kuban. The aim was to consolidate their holdings in the northern Caucasus, following the annexation of Georgia in 1801. The problem of Russian sovereignty over the Caucasus stemmed from the ambiguities of the 1774 Küçük Kaynarca treaty, in ambiguous wording about Kabarda in the Caucasus, and would continue until the end of the Crimean War. 36 The Russians also demanded the settlement of the Serbian problem by insisting on an amnesty for the rebels, and a guarantee of internal autonomy which the Serbs had not previously had. In spite of the humiliating position the army was in, the Ottoman negotiators would consider neither the secession of Moldavia and Wallachia nor the recent Russian acquisitions in the Caucasus. Furthermore, they consistently argued against any discussion concerning the Serbians, whom they considered part of the Ottoman reaya and not tributary subject peoples like those of the Principalities. 
 General Kutuzov and Grand Vizier Ahmed had settled on the Seret River as the new border in Moldavia, in order to begin the negotiations. By the end of November the negotiators had met twelve times and reached agreement on a number of lesser issues, such as the exchange of prisoners, and stipulations concerning the Principalities. Kutuzov broke off the sessions, however, when instructions and official powers were sent by Mahmud II and his advisers, insisting not on the Seret, but the Prut as the new border, and allowing no concessions in the Caucasus. 
 These treaty negotiations are usually represented, like those of the 1739 Treaty of Belgrade, as having been successfully concluded only with the intervention of international mediators, in this case the British, and more especially Stratford Canning, at the end of his first term of service as minister plenipotentiary to the Ottomans. The Ottomans signed the Treaty of the Dardanelles with the British in 1809, following laborious and difficult negotiations by British Ambassador Robert Adair, in the midst of all the dynastic upheavals and international crises previously described. Hence, the British were in a position to press the Ottoman point of view with the Russians. To view ‘Ottoman fate as being decided in European chancelleries’, 37 as did diplomats of the time and most later historians, however, is to lose sight of the astuteness of both Mahmud II and Galib Efendi, later briefly grand vizier (1823–24). 
 In January 1812 the two sides met again after the hiatus, to find the Russian treaty demands unchanged, except that they had renounced the armistice and now considered the stranded army as prisoners of war. Alarmed, Grand Vizier Ahmed Pasha wrote to Mahmud stressing that the condition of the army precluded a resumption of hostilities. Galib Efendi wrote to his sultan at this point as well, suggesting a letter from Stratford Canning as a means of persuading the Russians. Galib had previously approached Canning in 1810 and again in 1811, but Ottoman–British relations had remained strained. 38 
 Mahmud II convened a general council in early February which met for three days. The council found the Russian demands for the eastern Black Sea littoral particularly onerous, clearly viewing it as establishing a Russian sovereign presence within striking distance of the heart of the empire. From both a strategic and religious point of view, such a development was completely unacceptable. They were, however, fully cognisant of the military and financial woes of the empire, and unwilling to propose a return to war. Mahmud II’s directives to the council forced the decision on them: acceptance of the terms meant discussing the road to peace; rejection of the terms meant a return to war, and were that the case, discussion should focus on the means to that end. He was, he added, unprepared to accept his troops being made prisoners of war, which they took to mean his preference for renewal of hostilities. It may well have been a strategy on the part of the sultan to pacify the streets of Istanbul, demonstrate the empire’s complete inability to go back to war, and secure peace. On 14 February, Mahmud informed Grand Vizier Ahmed Pasha of the general council’s decision, and then proceeded to order him to reverse it, while ensuring the compliance of his own ministers in Istanbul through further discussions. As we have seen at other crucial moments in the empire’s history, this involved discussions with religious officials as well as the military officers, whose agreement that a return to war was impossible was secured. Grand Vizier Ahmed Pasha was granted exclusive power to decide on war and/or peace. 
 Mahmud II also followed up on Galib’s advice, and approved of the correspondence between Stratford Canning and Count Italinsky in Bucharest and the Duc Sierra Capriola in St Petersburg, urging the Russians to moderate their conditions. Belatedly, Napoleon appealed to Mahmud II to join him with an army of 80,000 in Poland, in correspondence that arrived in Istanbul in early March. The appeal followed the signing of a French alliance with Austria, which included a guarantee of Ottoman integrity. Mahmud II and his grand vizier still recalled what was generally perceived as the treachery of Tilsit, and appear never to have seriously considered such an alliance. 39 
 The Russians reoccupied Sistova in February 1812, but negotiations continued. The main issue remained the eastern Black Sea littoral. Kutuzov offered a Russian alliance at the end of March, to counter the French initiatives, subsequently insisting on it being part of acceptance of the treaty. Galib held out steadfastly for neutrality, as did his sultan, but in the event of a need for capitulation, Galib recommended a preference for a French alliance rather than a Russian one. 40 Both sides were anxious to conclude peace, fearing that a Russo-French war would protract negotiations and even renew the conflict, which Russia could ill afford. 
 At the beginning of May, the Russian demands were altered to draw the new border at the Prut River rather than the Seret, including the mouth of the Danube at Kilya. They also asked for the use of the Black Sea coast littoral on the Asian frontier. The sultan intially agreed, on condition that Kilya and İ smail remain Ottoman possessions, and that the prewar Georgian frontier be restored. What remained for settlement were the Serbian question and the restoration of certain Ottoman rights concerning the Principalities. The grand vizier insisted on the Serbian surrender of arms and renewal of loyalties to the empire. The Russians were also not to interfere with the appointment of hospodars in the Principalities. By the end of May a treaty was drawn up with sixteen articles, and a separate, secret treaty with two articles: one regarding the demolition of the fortresses of İ smail and Kilya, and a second allowing Russian access to the eastern Black Sea ports. Article VIII stipulated that the Serbians acquire internal autonomy, and a fixed tax rate which they themselves would collect, as part of their reconciliation with the sultan. 
 On three counts, Mahmud II remained adamant. First, he refused to accept the secret articles, and the proposed alliance, even at the risk of going back to war. Secondly, he and his advisers understood that having access to a port and passage at the eastern end of the Black Sea was just a means for the Russians to supply weapons to the area, as part of the Russian aim to ‘conquer Georgia, Iran, Abkhazia and Circassia totally, and to execute the designs they have long harboured against the Ottoman Empire’. Finally, they understood that acceptance of Article VIII was tantamount to accepting future Russian interference in Serbia. 41 
 Ahmed Pasha had already signed the definitive instruments when he received these instructions on 28 May, and had sent the text to Istanbul for ratification, where Mahmud II and his court considered it on 2 June. He and Galib Efendi pressed for an understanding with the Russians concerning Article VIII. Galib argued that the article did not force anything on the Ottomans, as the Serbians continued to be reaya , and any settlement of the revolt would require negotiations with the rebels on that basis. Canning was asked to press the Russians not to insist on the alliance, and to drop the secret treaty clause concerning the Caucasus, acknowledging in his dispatches, like Mahmud II, that Russian colonial aims in that region posed a serious threat. They were anticipating the ‘Great Game’ of the nineteenth century, shortly to become a major concern of British India. 
