 In describing the garrison line on the Danube, Moltke remarked acutely that apart from the large towns, such as Vidin, Rusçuk, Silistre or İ brail, the majority of the fortresses were in very bad repair, relying on the local inhabitants for defence. ‘They make up for want of outworks by a skilful use of the dry ditch, and their most vigorous defence commonly begins at the point where with European troops it usually ends – from the moment when a practicable breach has been effected. With us a large number of wealthy householders are a serious impediment to a protracted defence of a fortress; but in Turkey it is quite the reverse; every man capable of bearing arms is a soldier, and makes his appearance on the walls daily.’ 73 
 As I have argued previously, such territories were, in fact, defended when necessary not just by the inhabitants, but by regional armies commanded by local strongmen who participated at will and abandoned the battlefront equally wilfully. That system remained untouched by the new regulations, and in fact may have stimulated its continued existence, as Mahmud had to rely on provincial irregulars to support the new army in the new campaign against Russia. Reform of the provincial military forces had to wait until 1834, with the establishment of the redifs . 
 Mahmud II had first tried to recapture the fiefs, but the impending war forced him to reverse the policy. He retained the timarl ı sipahis , as semi-regular cavalry, called the Asakir-i Mansure-yi Muhammadiye Suvarisi , by a February 1828 regulation which envisioned a battalion of 889 peacetime officers and men. For the war with Russia, battalions were increased in size to 1,087 officers and men by the end of the war. The troopers would continue to be assigned fiefs, but based on the modernised organisation model and applied to all fief holders in Anatolia and Rumeli. Fiefs were held to a maximum annual income of 3,500 kuru ş , and all deeds/licenses ( berats ) had to be approved by the new Asakir-i Mansure administration in Istanbul. An enlisted trooper earned (or was entitled to) 750 kuru ş per month. Initially introduced in the Balkans and Anatolia, it was extended to Damascus, Aleppo, Mara ş and Malatya in late 1828, with Aleppo the headquarters and officers appointed from the Court Battalion in Istanbul. During the 1828–29 war, the Ottomans could not reorganise and register more than ten per cent of the estimated 30,000 feudatories. 