 ‘As all Muslim people know, the Ottoman state owes its creation and its late conquest of the East and the West solely to the powerful influence of Islamic religious spirit, Muslim law, the sword of jihad and the gazi spirit,’ the document began. It continued by reviewing the history of the reforms, from the time of Selim III, casting the blame on the Janissaries who refused to submit. ‘This had given the enemies of the Ottoman state the opportunity to advance against us … The Janissaries had revolted one last time: They shouted, “We don’t want any drill,” and, in spite of the holy sanctions, the proclamation, their sworn allegiances, and the sacred fetvas , they turned the weapons given them by the state against the government of the Muslim people and broke out into rebellion against their legitimate sultan. Today they are nothing more than a useless and insubordinate body which has become the asylum of the spirit of unrest and seditions in which the number of evil men have outgrown the number of good ones … Among those who have just been executed were found some Janissaries who bore tattooed on their arm along with the insignia of the 75th [Janissary] mess, the cross of the ghiaurs. This simply proves that infidel traitors, parading in the disguise of Muslims, have for a long time been using the Janissary corps to further their own nefarious ends by spreading false rumours … Hence, let all the congregation of Muslim people, and the small and great officials of Islam and the ulema, and members of other military formations, and all the common folk, be of one body. Let them look upon each other as brethren in faith. Let there be no difference and contrariness between you. Let the great ones among you look with a merciful and compassionate eye upon the little ones, and let the minor ones, moreover, in every instance be obedient and submissive.’ The document ended by exhorting the various officials and imams to spread the word and instruct the true believers to thank the state for its beneficent intentions on this occasion, and to live quietly and contentedly in the shadow of the power of the sultan.” 41 Thus, the corps was wiped from the pages of Ottoman history, the reformers pausing only to blame the ‘enemy-in-our-midst’, the infidel infiltrators. We will examine the implications of that for the reorganised army in due course. 
 Elimination of the Bektashis 
 The proclamation made for wonderful theatre, and in many ways presaged the Gülhane rescript text inaugurating the Tanzimat thirteen years later. It is, however, also a straightforward statement of Mahmud II’s Ottoman-Muslim absolutism, no matter how much it was a gesture to reassure the people of Istanbul of the legitimacy of his actions. The document also shows the influence of new strains of religious thought in Ottoman ruling circles, one of numerous claims that accompanied diverse peoples exiled into central Ottoman territories, particularly from the Caucasus. Especially influential were the teachings of the Naqshbandi tekkes (lodges), whose sheikhs first made a significant appearance in elite ranks in the late eighteenth century, and who had already become advisers to Selim III. By the 1820s, their teachings had become part of popular discourse in Istanbul, and were extremely influential in the latter half of the nineteenth century especially in the inner circles of the sultans following Mahmud II. The rather more strictly defined Muslim orthodoxy of the Naqshbandis clashed with more tolerant (liberal or heterodox) Sufi organisations such as the Bektashi, installed as the chaplains of the Janissary Corps in the sixteenth century, or the Mevlevis, followers of Rumi’s teachings, who served as spiritual advisers to many of the sultans from the seventeenth century forward. Sultans Abdülmecid (1837–61) and Abdülaziz (1861–76) are said to have embraced an ideology based on an Ottoman/Naqshbandi synthesis which emerged first during the reign of Mahmud II. The passage into court circles was via influential court imams but also as part of the household slave system, which produced individuals such as the ubiquitous Hüsrev Pasha, himself from Abkhazia, and his protegés, many of whom came from the ‘Turkic’ Caucasus and later became the prominent statesmen of the Tanzimat. 42 
 The teachings that spread to the tekkes of Istanbul were likely those of Shaykh Khalid. They advocated a strict emphasis on the sunna and the shar‘ia, the supremacy of the shar‘ia in the life of the community and state, hostility to Shiites, and especially to non-Muslims. Among those with links to the order in the inner circle of Mahmud II were Ş eyhülislam 
 Mustafa As ı m Efendi, the aforementioned Hüsrev Pasha, Pertev Pasha, and Mustafa Re ş id Pasha, later grand vizier, and chief architect of many of the Tanzimat reforms. 43 The prominence of Naqshbandi thought probably exerted an influence on the banning of the Bektashi order, which occurred three weeks after the elimination of the Janissaries. Hajji Bektash was the patron saint of the corps; new inductees to Janissary regiments were required to swear by the twelve imams, and on the virtue of ‘Ali as well as the light of the Prophet. Closely intertwined as they were with the Janissaries, they were no doubt doomed from the day the decision was made to eliminate the Janissaries themselves. 44 
 Ş eyhülislam Tahir Efendi, Mahmud II’s chosen enforcer, convened a meeting of top ulema and sheikhs of eleven Sufi orders: Naqshbandi, Qadiri, Halveti and Mevlevi among them, but not the Bektashi. He opened the meeting with a lengthy diatribe against the Bektashi, and asked for evidence of their heresy, in what was essentially an inquisition. Those in attendance were reluctant to give evidence one way or the other, so encountering no significant objection, Tahir Efendi proceeded to supply the Sultan with a report that the tekkes should be shut down, and some 25 Bektashis should be banished to Anatolia. Three main Bektashi leaders were executed, accused of fomenting schism and heresy, of being libertarians and heretics. Their tolerance of religious diversity in light of the Greek revolt must have been extremely irksome. The extremity of the language argues for the reiteration of orthodox ideology in Istanbul and the palace. 45 
 Istanbul was also purged of potential troublemakers among the yamaks , who were stationed in the Bosphorus. They were replaced with loyal artillerymen. Other units such as the standing cavalry were disbanded and reformed. The former Janissary corps who remained loyal, such as the artillerymen ( topçu ), the bombardiers, armourers ( çebeci ), etc., were not demolished but reorganised. Many loyal Janissary officers were rewarded for their support of the sultan, but not given commissions in the new army. 46 Boatmen, watchmen, and the corps of firemen, traditional supporters of Janissary uprisings, were also disbanded and exiled from the city. By the order of the sultan, the Armenian patriarch was to assemble 10,000 of his community to serve as firemen (the Tulumbac ı s ). As early as 26 June, 2,000 of them had been organised, and replaced the Janissaries hitherto assigned. 47 Given also the upheavals surrounding the Greek community in Istanbul following the 1821 uprising, it must have been an extraordinary period of re-sorting of ethnic categories in the capital. Nor were residents spared the usual fires. On 31 August 1826, the worst fire in a century broke out in the city. The blaze, likely arson set by disgruntled ex-corpsmen, destroyed private and public buildings alike, with losses estimated at three million pounds by Stratford Canning. 48 
 Systematic obliteration of sedition continued throughout Ottoman territories. Mahmud’s preparations were well laid. Special couriers were sent in advance to governors of provinces with large Janissary contingents, but they appear to have capitulated to the new regime with little difficulty, with some exceptions, such as Bosnia. 49 In major concentrations of Janissaries such as Vidin, Edirne, and Erzurum, resistance was subdued with banishment or execution of a few key figures. The venerable Galib Pasha, then commander of the Eastern frontier, reputedly addressed the troops at Erzurum saying that ‘he did not wish to subdue them by force, that he would require at least 10,000 men to do this, and that he had but 500; that if they did not want him to carry out his orders, he was ready to retire; that poor, infirm, devoted to his master, he did not dread his vengeance, but that he was much more concerned about the fate of a province he had administered, and which, if it should resist, would have to combat all the forces of the empire at a time when it was already menaced by a war in progress on its frontiers.’ 50 Surprise and speed were instrumental in establishing the new order, but could not remove widespread resentment, which influenced the ability to conscript troops for the new army. Such purges, however limited, also further reduced the experienced manpower base. 
 One provincial reaction, by a soldier and Ottoman official in Damascus named Hasan Agha, illustrates the success of the sultan’s message: ‘It was reported to us that there was a great incident in Istanbul wherein approximately twenty thousand people perished. The disbanding of the ocak was a great event because many rulers and sultans had wanted to do this but were not able … God granted the great Sultan, king of the kings of the Arabs and non-Arabs, the just ruler Mahmud Khan … the capacity to disband them, because they had rebelled against kings and viziers and the lords of the state to the point where they were feared by the old and the young, had come to hold decisive power, and the Sultan had become their ward. They did as they pleased and the wealth of the Ottoman lands became theirs. The fact is that the disbanding of this corps was a mercy from God to the country and to the people. The janissary corps did no good, but only harm.’ Hasan Agha may have once been a Janissary himself. 51 
 The realities of reconstruction 
 There are two aspects of these preliminary stages of the transformation which merit comment. One is the financial state of the empire; the other, the question of leadership and Mahmud II’s understanding of it for the new army. Without cash, rebuilding an effective army would prove exceedingly difficult. Ş evket Pamuk has recently asserted that Mahmud II’s era experienced a steep rise in inflation, greater than any other in the empire’s history. He has calculated that prices increased 12–15 times between the late eighteenth century and 1850, attributing it to the state’s debasement policies. After the elimination of the Janissaries, the most formidable obstacle to devaluation of their fixed salaries, debasement was applied liberally, ‘reducing the specie content of the kuru ş by 79 per cent within a period of four years.’ 52 Furthermore, in spite of pledging to abolish the practice of confiscation of the estates of deceased officials (known as müsâdere ), Mahmud II did not hesitate to execute three of Istanbul’s wealthiest Jewish bankers, who were moneylenders and suppliers to the Janissaries, and seize their estates, worth an estimated 108 million kuru ş , at a time when annual revenue by one estimate was some 200 million kuru ş . 53 
