 The new regimental structure was organised around the French battalion (called tabur ), much smaller than the company unit of the 7 July regulations. Napoleon’s formations were small and mobile, with infantry and artillery separate. Each battalion had around 800, and was divided into eight musket companies, now called bölüks . Companies were divided into small squads, again eight in number. More officers were added, and a European-style pyramid of command instituted. Three battalions formed one regiment, now called an alay , commanded by a colonel ( miralay ) and a lieutenant colonel ( kaymakam ). Such was Hüsrev’s influence on these developments, that three-line firing drill, already in place in the 7 July regulations, became known as ‘the drill of Hüsrev’s men’. 64 
 The reform was accomplished rapidly, and without the necessary approbation of the ulema. In Istanbul ten new battalions resulted, after removing artillery and transport elements. In the provinces 21 new Asakir-i Mansure battalions were raised. Galib Pasha produced another one in Erzurum at his own request in late September 1827. The aim was to have a core force of about 25,000 men, but eventually to assemble an army of 100,000. By October of that same year, a regiment of the Hüsrev reorganisation performed the drill on the parade grounds of Davut Pa ş a. Full regimental organisation, however, was not completely in place until 1831. The army which marched to Ş umnu in spring 1829 was arranged in four regiments of five (rather than three) battalions each, largely because of the shortage of competent officers. Notably, three of the four newly-appointed colonels were former kuls of Hüsrev Pasha. 65 
 To concentrate on the infantry reforms is to neglect the other branches of the military system. Briefly, the Bostanc ı palace guards were abolished on 31 August 1826, and replaced with a European-style guard called the Hassa . In February 1829, they numbered 3,500 officers and men and remained in Istanbul during the 1828–29 war. The palace cavalry proved too costly to reform initially, so a provincial Asakir-i Mansure regiment was established at Silistre in November 1826, for a number of reasons: it was less expensive; fodder and horses were more accessible; the fortress was on a very sensitive military frontier, and Dobruja was full of noted horsemen – Tatar and Turkish tribesmen and Christian Zaporozhian Cossacks, who had settled there after 1775. They were already irregulars for the Ottomans, performing guard duty and supplying men and animals. Several hundred served in the Danube flotilla. The inspiration for the move came from Grand Vizier Benderli Mehmed Selim, familiar with the region as a former governor of Silistre. The officers, in contrast to the infantry regiments, were to be recruited locally from the ethnic groups listed above. The troops were organised into companies of Turks or Cossacks, respectively, on the left wing, while the Tatars served on the right wing. Each wing was commanded by its ethnic officers, with a special additional office of Kazak Ba ş ı for a Cossack officer. The regiment numbers stood at 1,323 men, of which 109 were officers. Of the total number, 329 were to be Cossacks. Daily rations were specified for bread, meat, barley and straw, with pay much the same as with the new infantry companies. Both priests and imams were assigned to the companies. Restrictions on the Cossacks initially included barring them from rising above the rank of troop captain, and from commanding mixed formations. They were generally paid less, received half the rations and inferior uniforms, but were allowed to wear their distinctive headgear, the kalpak . The Muslim cavalrymen wore a ş ubara , a rounded-crown cap, as did their brothers in the infantry until the adoption of the fez in 1828. 
 Horses were a particular problem as they were so expensive: Cossack and Turkic militia communities received a one-time payment of 150 kuru ş for every horse and saddle set, and thereafter were expected to supply the others without compensation. Tatars were expected to supply their own horses. As a saddle set alone cost 125 kuru ş in Istanbul, it is easy to see why the government felt it prudent to start the reorganisation on the frontier. These companies were asked to serve four months, and to be combat ready for the rest of the year. When the Hüsrev reforms came into effect, the Silistre regiment was likewise reformed, and Christian and Muslim compensation equalised. In anticipation of the war, the size increased to two tabur of 884 officers and men each. By 1830 a cavalry battalion ( tabur ) became a regiment ( alay ) with the 884 officers and men divided into six troops. The commander became a miralay . These troops participated in the Danube fighting in 1828–29, with some defections to the Russians. After 1829, there appears to have been a decline in the numbers of Cossack soldiers, perhaps also based on the demographic changes in Dobruja, although such mixed regiments continued to serve throughout the 1830s as regular full-time cavalry attached to the infantry. Cossacks continued intermittently in the Ottoman army, but were disbanded under Abdülhamid II. The organisation of the Cossacks remains an exception to the general rule in the attempt to create a modernised, religiously and ethnically mixed cavalry force much as the Russians and Austrians had achieved. 66 
 In February 1827, a cavalry regiment was organised in Istanbul at the time of the Hüsrev reforms. The new regiment was attached to the Asakir-i Mansure , under administration of the Serasker , and assigned 24 artillerymen and 16 craftsmen. It was expected that the regiment would number 1,582 officers and men. Salaries were set higher than for the infantry, because of the trooper’s responsibility for his horse, and service ten years rather twelve. A cavalryman earned 24 kuru ş per month, as opposed to the 20 kuru ş for the infantryman. 67 Further reforms and expansion of the cavalry would wait until after the 1829 Treaty of Adrianople was signed. 
 Mahmud II was especially careful with his artillerymen, the topçus and arabac ı s (gunners and waggoners), who were his primary reason for being alive, and continued to perform police duties for the sultan in an unstable moment of transition. At the time of the reforms of Hüsrev in July 1827, they stood at 82 batteries of artillery and 22 transport companies, the 20,000 mentioned above, of which half were in Istanbul. Mahmud had also raised a regiment of mounted, light artillery, of 70 mounted field pieces and 60 teams of transport men. Rather than attack the loyal organ-isations head-on, Mahmud II at first gradually removed the cannoneers from Tophane to other locations. In August 1826, he had replaced them with an Asakir-i Mansure infantry regiment, to which was assigned an artillery and transport unit: 122 artillery and 62 transport officers and men with 12 cannons. Hence he effectively merged the two branches of the military under the Serasker , but left the old corps intact. The Superintendent of the combined corps was responsible for day-to-day management with the commanders of each corps. The officer staff retained former positions, but their authority was reduced, as was the size of the total force, from 82 to 60 batteries and from 32 to 30 transport companies. The 60 artillery batteries were divided into two brigades: a left and a right wing. Much of the former system was preserved, including promotion by seniority rather than merit. The two new artillery brigades, of 30 batteries each, totalled 7,244, with one battery composed of 120 men and two cannons. 
 The mounted artillery, much the most modern of Mahmud II’s military, were reorganised as two battalions, with transport and cannoneers merged as 3.5 gun companies, and 3 transport companies, and made to resemble the Asakir-i Mansure organisation. Drilling and training were mandatory for all, as with the infantry. A gunner received 40 kuru ş a month. Much the same reorganisation occurred in the transport companies, with the estimated total force of all, including the mounted artillery at 12,924. 68 
 It was deemed prudent to concentrate men and cannons in strategic forts, so many of the artillerymen were consolidated in strongholds on the Danube and the Aegean. A new armoury and munitions organisation grew out of the old cebehane , and many of the auxiliary service corps underwent some form of overhaul. Here as elsewhere, Mahmud II was thorough, but prevented from truly extensive reforms because of lack of money. In late November 1827, a month after the naval disaster at Navarino and not quite two years from the ‘Auspicious Occasion’, 51,000 was reported as actual total empire-wide troop strength, of which 29,000 were Asakir-i Mansure regiments. These included the regiments raised in the countryside, in Anatolia especially, where recruitment seems to have gone most smoothly. Even as late of 1829, the second year of campaigning against Russia, the complement of the Asakir-i Mansure never topped 40,000. 69 
 Most foreign eye-witnesses of the period, admiring the fortitude of Mahmud II, were contemptuous nonetheless of the condition of the military, especially the artillery as we have already seen, and even more especially of the fortress organisation. Reverend Walsh, pastor of the British Embassy in Istanbul, writing in late 1827, noted that ‘the Turkish empire seems just now in a perilous state of imbecility. The old military destroyed, the new unorganised; their courage subdued, their attachment alienated.’ 70 
 Moltke’s well-known description of the new army bears repeating: ‘men disciplined after the European fashion wearing Russian jackets and Turkish trowsers; with Tartar saddles, and French stirrups, and English sabres; it consisted of Timariots, or troops giving feudal service [ sipahis ]; troops of the line, whose service was for life; and of militia, who served only a term of years, of whom the leaders were recruits and the recruits mere children. The system of organisation was French, and the instructors were men from all parts of Europe. The splendid appearance, the beautiful arms, the reckless bravery of the former Moslem horde, had disappeared; but yet this new army had one quality which placed it above the numerous host which in former times the Porte could summon to the field – it obeyed.’ 71 
 Another foreign observer, with the troops at Rusçuk in April 1827, noted: ‘The Turks showed the greatest curiosity respecting our arms; and one or two of them, taking hold of a rifle … went through the manual and platoon exercise as taught by Europeans. They then asked me to do the same, which I did, to their great satisfaction. They next begged me to show them how to face and wheel … and [I] put them through various maneuvers to their great delight. I was much surprised with the quickness they showed in learning this; for at first, they did not know how to face or wheel, but stepping backwards or forwards too far, always came violently in contact with each other. The aptitude they showed for martial exercises, made me tremble for the success of the cause in the Morea [Greek revolution]; for should the Turks once take cheerfully to the new system of organization, Europe will find them more formidable than she had ever known them to be.’ 72 
