 The practice of devaluation of coinage, coupled with unjust confiscation of wealth and new taxes, had the net effect of further crippling the economy and alienating generations of Ottoman subjects. The cycle of indebtedness led to foreign intervention in Ottoman fiscal affairs by mid-century. Efforts were initially made to recognise the esame of surviving Janissaries and officials, but the scrutiny and cross-examination by Hüseyin Agha Pasha was so severe that many thought it prudent simply to surrender them, hence saving the government more money. 54 An export tax of 12% on silk, and a stamp duty of 2.5% on imported manufactures, were other means Mahmud II employed. Some effort was made to attack the problem of tax farming, and to confiscate waqfs , the charitable foundations (tax havens) of the ulema, but it was still insufficient. As Lieven puts it: ‘More than four-fifths of the state’s revenue in one way or another [stuck] to the fingers of those who collected it.’ 55 
 The second major problem was the lack of foresight about the formation of the new army. There are several explanations for that: the speed of the transformation, for one. Secondly, unlike Mehmed Ali, Mahmud II resisted the use of foreign advisers. Early on, in August 1826, he requested Mehmed Ali to send twelve officers to Istanbul to aid in the training of the new army. His governor, whose own forces were engaged in the Peloponnesus, and whose own reforms had not been underway for long, refused the appeal. Mahmud II could not, and just as likely did not want to, pay what Mehmed Ali did for his French officers and technical advisers. Colonel Sèves received 17,500 kuru ş a month from Mehmed Ali. By contrast, another Frenchman, Gaillard, veteran of Napoleon’s armies, was paid 1,200 kuru ş per month as Mahmud’s chief infantry officer. Others were paid even less, obviously a disincentive for particularly bright and ambitious military minds. Those who were employed were of lower ranks, non-commissioned officers, even privates, with little experience of command. They proved particularly susceptible to manipulation by the Ottoman pashas, where the real problem of command lay. 56 
 The new regulations of 7 July, described below, specified that officers be appointed based on ability and seniority, rather than favouritism and venality, which had been the practice with the Janissaries. In practice, favouritism continued, in large part because of the household system I have alluded to previously, but also because that is the way Mahmud II understood military command. Senior officers were picked from a select social group, the imperial household. The imperial household was staffed, as we saw with Hüsrev Pasha, by kuls , brought up in their patrons’ households, and groomed for palace and imperial service. Although his was an exceptional household because of its size (of 50 male kuls , 30 became pashas, grand viziers and ministers of the late Ottoman state), it was typical. 57 These vast organisations maintained ties throughout the empire, and their structures were imitated in the main provincial cities of the empire. The difference between the sultan’s household and the courts of St Petersburg and Vienna, where favouritism and privilege were not in short supply, was in the ferocity of the factionalism among the large households, and the vulnerability of service, subject to the imperial will. 
 Mahmud II hence assumed that the officer corps would emerge from his own court. Members of the households, such as that of Hüsrev Pasha, were given senior commissions in the new army. Junior officers, on the other hand, were randomly picked from among new recruits, and put into service with little training. Immediately after the elimination of the old corps, Mahmud II set up the Court Battalion of the Aghas of the Inner Service, which was an attempt at an officer training school. Slaves and sons of courtiers served together, trained by the Italian Calosso, who was paid 2,000 kuru ş per month, the largest salary given a foreigner by Mahmud. 58 By fall 1827, the battalion reached its maximum size of 400, half infantry and half cavalry. These are the troops that Macfarlane observed. The system did produce officers with a certain uniformity, with loyalty to the sultan, but promotion was rapid, and military tactics and strategy were absent from the curriculum. In 1830, Mahmud II abolished the court battalion, irritated because the courtier–trainees proved difficult to discipline. After repeated battlefield failures of military command, an effort was made to create a more professional cadre of officers, including examinations for promotion, and a system of merit which presupposed that officers began service as privates. Mahmud II himself violated his own principles, however, by appointing his own courtier, and son-in-law, Said Mehmed Efendi, to the rank of brigadier-general in 1833. The sultan was not above, perhaps was even a master of, the fractional politics of his court. 
 A French observer noted the casual training of the officer class in 1834, characterised by little instruction and high levels of illiteracy. In that same year, however, an officers’ training school was established, the School for Military Science ( Mekteb-i Ulum-i Harbiye ), with cadets numbering around 400 by 1839. Regular classes only got fully under way in 1836, but apparently the curriculum remained restricted to Arabic, French, history, a bit of arithmetic, and infantry drill. Nam ı k Pasha, Ottoman official and important reformer under four sultans, was the founder of the school. In fact, schools for naval and land engineering, emerging from Selim III’s School of Mathematics, and a medical school for army surgeons (1827) were already in operation. The new officer school quickly created an officer caste, as senior officers were given honours and governorships, as well as pensions and benefits for surviving family members. Officer training would ultimately serve as the single most important modernising force of the empire. 59 In this period, however, rivalries and factionalism remained the order of the day, and are generally accorded to be the real cause for the later failure of the Asakir-i Mansure army against Mehmed Ali’s army in Anatolia. 
 Asakir-i Mansure regulations 7 July 1826 
 After what has been said about speed and the lack of preparation, it will come as no surprise that the first detailed list of regulations for the new army replicated, in many respects, the Nizâm- ı Cedid of Selim III. The basic organisation of the corps looked much the same: 12,000 troops, divided into eight regiments ( tertib , later alay ), each with a binba ş ı . Each regiment was to have 1,527 men (as contrasted with the 1,602 of Selim III), that is, divided into twelve musket companies with twelve cannons. Six of such companies constituted what normally amounts to a battalion, called here an arm, or wing ( kol ), and commanded by a kol aghas ı (major), two for each regiment, the left and right. The senior officer ( ba ş binba ş ı ) of the 12,000-man force was paid 1,500 kuru ş a month. He reported to the Serasker , who was paid 25,000, and to the Nazir , paid 7,500 kuru ş . Among other officers and enlisted men, a binba ş ı was paid 750; a kol aghas ı 400; a yüzba ş ı (captain) of a company 180; a corporal 30, and a private 20 kuru ş . Salaries were to be paid monthly (every three months in the provinces), with regular updating of the muster rolls. Recruits were given two daily meals of soup and bread or stew, with pilav on Sunday and Thursday nights. Uniforms, to be manufactured locally, were distributed once yearly, with shoes. 60 By May 1827, the fez, with express approval of the ulema, became the standard headgear. The crescent and star were adopted as the insignia of rank at the same time. Muskets, bayonets and cartridge boxes became standard issue, with the sabre reserved for officers. Recruitment age was 15–30 years, with twelve years as the term for pensionable service. 
 The regulations emphasised discipline, and prevention of desertion. Enlisted men were allowed home leave, or to perform the hajj; officers were not. Imams were appointed as chaplains to each regiment to lead prayers, and a mekteb was established to teach the basics of Islam. The critical shortage of surgeons and physicians, and of money to pay Christian doctors sufficiently, forced the establishment of the medical school mentioned above. A similar problem existed with the engineering schools, those with the longest history. It would be a number of years before the first graduates could be enrolled in the army. Each regiment was assigned craftsmen such as blacksmith, gunsmith, saddlemaker, six in all, who were considered military personnel. The army bands were reorganised in March 1827 to include clarinets, and in September 1828, Giuseppe Donizetti Pasha, brother to the better-known composer, began his 28 years of service with the Ottomans. 61 Hence the surprising western flavour to many of the military tunes of the transformed army. 
 Two of the new Asakir-i Mansure regiments remained at Serasker headquarters, and also served as Istanbul police; the other six were to be housed at new barracks at Üsküdar and Davut Pa ş a. The Superintendent’s staff combined the duties of commissariat, munitions and paymaster combined. It was quickly reorganised in 1827 to resemble a more modern division of labour, with eight separate offices to cover a range of duties, such as military supply, provisions, fodder, the yoklama (or muster) office and a general treasury. Oversight of these operations was included as part of the regulations. 62 
 The first provincial regiment was established in Edirne by order from Istanbul on 4 August 1826. It was based on the Istanbul model. Recruiting was to be local; officers sent from Istanbul would command. Plans were made for five regiments (of 1,527 men as above) in the Balkans: two in Edirne, and one each in Silistre, Vidin and Salonika. Another five were to be established in Anatolia: Erzurum, Çank ı r ı , Bolu, Kütahya and Izmir. The colonel of the provincial regiments was under the command of the military offices in Istanbul, but also obligated to the governor in matters of local policy. Roll call was monthly; payments were directly in cash, sent from Istanbul, or written off provincial tax revenues. 63 
 Further regulations 1826–27 
 The 7 July 1826 regulations, modelled on Selim’s Nizâm- ı Cedid , resembled neither Mehmed Ali’s new army formations nor those of any other European nation. Yet it is important to note that these regulations, ideas carried forward from previous attempts and promulgated in a period of intense crisis, served as the backbone of all military regulations thereafter. While Hüseyin Agha had loyally carried out the sultan’s orders, he was essentially a Janissary, and the press of time and disorder, coupled with lack of imagination, had forced the creation of an outmoded hybrid infantry. Admiral Hüsrev Pasha, however, was an experienced reformer of the Ottoman navy, who had recently been dismissed from command in the Peloponnesus by Mahmud II at the insistence of Mehmed Ali. Hüsrev and Ibrahim Pasha had clashed constantly over command of the naval forces in the Mediterranean. Hence, in February 1827 Hüsrev was in Istanbul, temporarily unemployed but accompanied by his infantry battalion, which had been organised and trained by Gaillard, mentioned above, along French and Egyptian lines. On 8 May 1827, Hüsrev was appointed as Serasker , as a recognition of his abilities as much as a signal to an increasingly presumptuous Mehmed Ali. 
