 All was in readiness to enlarge the circle of participants. On 28 May 1826, 66 Ottoman officials and ulema, as well as the grand vizier and other members of the bureaucracy, assembled at the headquarters of the Ş eyhülislam . Of those present, 34 were prominent religious officials. The grand vizier addressed the assembly concerning the necessity for reform. Among his arguments: (1) that Muslim soldiers had fallen into a state of permanent revolt; (2) that they fled in the face of the enemy, bringing shame and dishonour upon the community; (3) that the corps had been infiltrated by all kinds of impostors, especially those so-called reaya , the Greek rebels ( e ş k ı ya-yi Rum ). They had spread the rumour that the war against the rebels was intended to suppress the corps rather than suppress a revolt of the reaya . Such rumours had paralysed the zeal of the Janissaries. (4) The weakness of the religious spirit and inattention to the ancient military laws had led to a decadence within the corps. (5) Muslim soldiers no longer paid any attention to religious duties, to the merit of being a ‘warrior for the faith’, or to the obligation to obey their superiors. The grand vizier concluded by exhorting those assembled to choose the methods to redeem the glory of the empire. The Reisülküttab spoke of the external threat to the empire on the Danube, and the unjust demands of the foreign powers vis-à-vis the Greek insurrection. The ulema followed one by one, reiterating their approbation of the study of military sciences, and the necessity of obeying the sultan. Finally, Hasan Agha, Janissary Kul Kahyas ı (Lieutenant General), exhorted his assembled cohort of his readiness to accept the reforms. They too acclaimed the remedy. Once the approval had been secured on all sides, the new E ş kinci regulations were read out loud. This was followed by draw ı ng up an affidavit of commitment to the reforms, as well as a fetva submitted by the Ş eyhülislam . 31 Signed by all present, it was then carried to Janissary headquarters. There, all three documents were read again, and further signatures were attached, some 209 in all. Approximately two-thirds of the signatories were Janissary officers. 32 
 The document itself is very carefully prefaced to legitimise reform and military discipline as a religious duty, and as conforming with the Qur ʾ an. Then a long, rambling text refers to the new regulations. The E ş kincis were to be drawn from the existing ortas of the Janissaries: 150 men from each of the 51 ortas in Istanbul. Hence, 51 new companies (or 7,650 men) were to be established, each with seven officers, listed here in rank order, beginning with a Captain ( Çorbac ı ), a Lieutenant ( Odaba ş ı ), Paymaster, Standard Bearer, Commissary officer, Top or Master Sergeant ( Ba ş karakollukcu ), and a Sergeant. For each of the companies, 15 corporals ( karakollukcus ) would be selected from among the 150, in other words, one for every nine enlisted men. Each company was also assigned a surgeon and a prayer leader. Salaries ranged from 66–67 kuru ş per quarter year for an enlisted man to 750 kuru ş per quarter for the Captain. The Janissary high command structure remained in place, but a Corps Superintendant ( Naz ı r ) was to oversee the E ş kincis . Rank and promotion were determined not by merit so much as by vacancies, and movement through the hierarchy described. Captains who did not move on into the high command would be retired after six years. Pensions were assigned to retirees, the ill and the wounded. 
 Each soldier was to be issued a musket and sabre, traditional weapons. The corporals were to be issued a crimson waistcoat, baggy trousers and a pair of red gaiters, as well as a fur cap. Other uniforms were not regulated. Rations were also regulated, in an attempt to remove the monopolies and irregularities of the traditional corps. The trade in pay tickets was strictly forbidden. The document is clear on the intention to round up the tickets of retired soldiers, while acknowledging that those of active Janissaries would continue to be paid. The E ş kincis were to be paid in the presence of their commanding officers, but only after a roll call. 
 Drill was regulated in the document. The main intention in establishing the troops, according to the text, was to ‘train them in the art of war, requiring regular and constant practice.’ 33 Companies were to drill in rotation, and target practice was also mandated. Discipline was to be strictly enforced. The men were to be present in their barracks at all times. Leaves were also to be strictly regulated, and those who did not return were to be reported and sought. Guard duty was mandated and specified for each of the new companies. Considerable detail was included on the daily routine of the new trainees, obviously one of the sources of discontent with the Janissaries. 34 
 Missing from these regulations are the details about the specific responsibilities of the various officers, and any definition of the kind and extent of punishments to be meted out for violation of the new regulations. Most historians agree that the e ş kinci reform project was an overhaul of the Janissary regulations rather than a radical break with the past, but it is worth remembering how consensual this process was, with Mahmud II insistent on acquiring the approval of large numbers of both military and religious officials. Even so, on the documents submitted to him on 28 May, he noted that the potential for rebellion still existed. 35 
 In spite of the careful preparations, rumours circulated widely among the Janissaries that Mahmud II sought their destruction. They appear to have been especially unhappy about the new regulations concerning the pay tickets, as well they might, for by one estimate some 135,000–145,000 names were on the rolls, while not more than 10,000 were on duty in Istanbul. 36 On 30 May 1826, orders were sent to the Janissary Agha to organise the reformed troops, and within a few days, their number had climbed to 5,000 men. On 12 June 1826, a small number of the new troops, among them the captains and senior officers of the new organisation, demonstrated the drill in front of Ottoman high officials and members of the ulema. 
 But all was not well with the Janissaries, including one or two of the officers supposedly convinced to join the reforms, who were among the instigators to rebel in the corps. The government, aware of the unrest, hastened to assure existing Janissaries that their pay tickets would continue to be honoured. On Wednesday, 14 June 1826, Janissaries began to assemble in Et Meydan ı , the traditional square for signalling a rebellion. They first attacked and burned the Janissary Agha’s headquarters. According to one source, their numbers grew to 20,000 or 25,000, suggesting that parts of the population joined in. The residence of Necib Efendi, Mehmed Ali’s representative in Istanbul and a known reformer, was attacked, as was that of the Grand Vizier, the Sublime Porte. Both men escaped. Loyal auxiliary corps, artillery, bombardiers, sappers and marines, combat ready, were ordered to the palace. The ulema sanctioned force for putting down the rebellion. Mahmud II picked up the sacred banner, wishing to lead the troops in person, but was persuaded otherwise. In the event, the sultan, having prepared the ground well, bested his opponents for the moral high ground and found large parts of the city’s inhabitants willing to fight with him. The assembled Janissaries found themselves cornered in their barracks in Et Meydan ı , as troops of mounted artillery under Hüseyin Agha Pasha approached from the south via Divan Yolu, and another column, under İ zzet Mehmed Pasha, advanced from the northwest. A citizens’ group was thrown together and sent as a third column. After a fierce confrontation, and adroit use of the artillery, the barracks were invested, and began to burn. By mid-afternoon 15 June, the rebellion was over. The Sultan had managed to eliminate the dreaded rabble on a day which became known as the ‘Blessed Affair’ or ‘Auspicious Occasion’ ( Vak’a-yi hayriye ). 37 
 On 16 June 1826, when Sultan Mahmud attended Friday prayers, he had already replaced his Janissary escort with a special guard of the new troops, which signalled to all his commitment to the new regime. His careful, studied approach had achieved the opening for a complete transformation of the Ottoman order. When Selim III had tried the same thing with his Nizâm- ı Cedid troops, his action contributed to the revolt which brought down his reign. 38 But Ottoman officials wasted no time in eliminating possible pockets of resistance. That same day, two courts were set up to interrogate the surviving Janissary prisoners, one by the Grand Vizier in the Hippodrome, and the other by the Janissary Agha at his headquarters and 300 were summarily executed. The day after that, 17 June 1826, a great council was assembled to formally abolish the Janissary Corps and replace it with the Muallem Asakir-i Mansure-yi Muhammadiye , the Trained Triumphant Soldiers of Muhammad, hereafter Asakir-i Mansure . 39 Henceforth the name Janissary was to be abolished, and the former Janissary Agha became the Serasker , or Commander-in-Chief. This was accomplished by the reading of a public edict by Esad Efendi, who later published the text in full. 40 He reported that he ‘kissed the precious banner of the Prophet with trembling lips, retired respectfully a few steps down the pulpit staircase, faced the immense crowd of Muslims and read aloud the firman ordaining the destruction of the Janissary corps, their name and insignia, whose existence had desecrated the temple of Islam for too long a period.’ 
