

 Plate 14    Mehmed Ali’s reformed army uniforms (Yates, William Holt , The Modern History and Condition of Egypt, its Climate, Diseases and Capabilities with an account of the proceedings of Mohammed Ali Pascha from 1801 to 1843. London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1843 ). 
 The expeditions to the Sudan proved an unmitigated disaster. A major revolt in 1822 resulted in the death of Commander İ smail Pasha, Mehmed Ali’s third son. The Sudanese population proved unable to survive enslavement and transportation. After four years in the Sudan, of 20,000 Sudanese troops collected by the army, only 3,000 were still alive. 13 The expeditionary armies themselves fell ill of dysentery and other fevers, and grew mutinous. As a result, the conscription of the peasants (the fellahin ) of Upper Egypt began, although the Sudanese continued to form the mainstay of the army in training in Aswan in 1822 under Mehmed Bey Lazo ğ lu. A second training camp was created outside Farshut in northern Egypt, with 4,000 recruits from among the fellahin . Service was set at three years, and replacements were to be drawn from village census rolls resulting from the new land surveys and tax registers. In reality, conscription was brutal and haphazard, and the length of service was set at 15 years only in 1835. 14 
 Simultaneously, Mehmed Ali organised an officer training school of his own slaves and Turkish-speaking soldiers of the old army, requesting teachers from his agent in Istanbul, Necib Efendi. He also sought the advice and assistance of the French, notably Colonel Sèves, known as Süleyman Pasha, who rose to rank of chief-of-staff to İ brahim Pasha’s campaign in Syria in 1831. 15 As early as 1816, Sèves began training 500 selected youths at a barracks in Aswan. 16 Initially, however, all non-foreign commanders were appointed from among ethnic Turks. Arabs could not rise above the rank of captain ( yüzba ş ı ). As Mehmed Ali once explained: ‘I have not done in Egypt anything except what the British are doing in India: they have an army composed of Indians and ruled by British officers, and I have an army composed of Arabs ruled by Turkish officers … The Turk makes a better officer, since he knows that he is entitled to rule, while the Arab feels that the Turk is better than him in that respect.’ 17 Rank-and-file conscripts resented the discrimination bitterly. Native officer training was escalated in 1827, under the direction of the French mission. Only in 1828, when Mehmed Ali openly defied Mahmud II by not sending the troops to the Danubian front as requested, and dismissed some 700–800 Turkish-speaking officers, were new native graduates of the school commissioned. 18 Still, the highest ranking officers remained Turkish-speaking even during the Syrian campaign. 
 Mehmed Ali’s militarisation of Egyptian society did not go uncon-tested. In 1823, a large revolt against the new taxes and conscription broke out in lower Egypt, which was only defeated by troops led by the Pasha himself. In 1824, some 30,000 men and women participated in a similar rebellion in upper Egypt. Mehmed Ali sent the new troops to quell the revolt successfully after only two weeks, leaving behind 4,000 casualties. He also used them against Wahhabi resurgence in the Hijaz, again with some success. In March 1824, a powder magazine exploded in the Cairo citadel, killing some 4,000 people. A battalion of the new troops put down the putative rebellion, rumoured to be the work of disgruntled Albanians. Hence, Mehmed Ali and his new army were already tested as a domestic force before the call came from Mahmud II. 19 We will return to the state of Mehmed Ali’s army in 1831–40, during the campaigns of Mehmed Ali’s greatest aggression against the sultan. 
 In 1824, however, a desperate Mahmud II, facing defeat in the Peloponnesus, offered Mehmed Ali Crete, Cyprus and the Morea if he would eliminate the Greek threat to the Ottomans, the outcome of which was described in the previous chapter. 20 Mehmed Ali’s intervention in Greece gave Mahmud II the respite he needed to transform his own army. Given the extent of the threat to the dynasty in the latter days of 1826, it is remarkable that the sultan moved forward with the reform programme at all. 
 The Auspicious Occasion, 1826 
 Charles Macfarlane, resident in Istanbul in these crucial years, provided a description of Mahmud II shortly after the elimination of the Janissaries: 