

 Instead of melancholy and a doomed man, I remarked an expression of firmness and self-confidence, and of haughtiness not unmixed with a degree of ferocity. His lift and orientally arched eye-brows, his large coal-black eyes, (which are habitually however rather heavy than otherwise,) his thick black beard and mustachoes, which completely veil the expression of the lower features, the lordly carriage of his head, are all calculated to strike, and coincide perfectly, with our picturesque idea of an eastern despot. He had become fond of military training exercises, and commanded his own squadron of horse. He was renowned for his prowess with the bow and arrow. His transition from ‘the habitual life of the sultan to the life of a sort of Frederick the Great’, has rather improved his general health than otherwise. In the summer of 1827, he was continually out with his tacticoes at Daut Pasha. 21 
 It was but a brief moment of triumph. Mahmud II had successfully eliminated the gravest of his internal threats, the Janissary Corps, and temporarily checked the Greek Revolution, but ahead lay the disaster of Navarino, in October 1827, when the entire Ottoman–Egyptian fleet sank to the bottom of the Mediterranean. Ahead also lay the Russo-Ottoman war over the Principalities, 1828–29, and the first major confrontation with Mehmed Ali’s son, İ brahim Pasha, in the plains of Anatolia in 1831. Both would severely test the newly formed army, the Asakir-i Mansure-yi Muhammadiye , on the battlefield. How did Mahmud II manage it? 

 Plate 15    Sultan Mahmud II, 1829 (Macfarlane, Charles , Constantinople in 1828: A residence of sixteen months in the Turkish capital and provinces, with an appendix to the autumn of 1829. 2nd edn. 2 vols. London: Saunders and Otley, 1829 ). 
 Halet Efendi, engineer of the savage repression of the countryside following 1810, was blamed for causing the Greek revolt in 1821, and dismissed and banished by 1822. With Halet’s subsequent execution, the sultan ended what might be construed as a regency, and came into his own. From 1822 forward, Mahmud II appointed the most able men around him as his advisers, but kept a tight rein on state affairs, removing rapidly those who opposed him or proved unable to carry out his orders. When the Janissaries challenged the sultan in the streets of Istanbul, he matched violence for violence. Mini-revolts became an excuse for the shakedown of senior officers of the corps, and the dismissal of those who opposed the sultan’s designs. Mahmud II removed many of the troublemakers in the city by first exiling them one by one to a distant province, and subsequently ordering a secret execution of the offender by the provincial governor. By these ruthless means he contained much of the corruption and disorder, and may have produced a degree of loyalty to his reform mission, but he also eliminated most of the experienced cadre of officers around him, with grave consequences on the battlefield. Moreover, the policy did not achieve its aim of controlling the Janissaries. Thinning the ranks did produce Hüseyin Agha, who rose through the hierarchy to be appointed as Commander of the Janissaries in February 1823. He proved to have the mettle in the struggle with the corps almost immediately, removing suspected adversaries from the rank and file and banishing them in large numbers. For his efforts, he was awarded the honorary rank of vizier. Hüseyin hence came to be known as Agha Pasha. When his harsh measures provoked a reaction in the corps, Mahmud II removed him from the post, but made him commander of the Bosphorus forts, as well as Governor of Bursa and İ zmit, close by when required. When two grand viziers, Deli Abdullah (also known as Hamdullah Pasha), and Silahdar Ali Pasha, proved incapable of disciplining the Janissaries, they were relieved of command in quick succession. In December 1823, Mahmud II turned to his reliable servant, the aged Mehmed Said Galib Pasha, and appointed him Grand Vizier. Galib, it will be remembered, had survived the riots and purges around Selim III and Alemdar Mustafa, and returned to help to negotiate the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest. Galib was secretly informed of Mahmud’s plans for the elimination of the Janissaries, and recommended the appointment of a more seasoned soldier for the task than himself, alighting on Benderli Mehmed Selim Pasha, then Governor of Silistre. Mahmud sent for him, and Mehmed Selim arrived in Istanbul disguised as a Tatar messenger. He was appointed Grand Vizier on 14 September, 1824. 22 
 While searching for the appropriate instrument for the destruction of the troublesome Janissaries, Mahmud II continued focusing his attention on his artillery, doubling the size of the corps in Istanbul to 10,000 gunners and 4,400 drivers by 1826. Within the larger organisation, a small mobile artillery regiment, which had been almost annihilated in the 1806–12 war, was reorganised and continued its training on western models. After the war, that regiment’s strength was increased to around 1,000 officers and men with 70 light field pieces. 23 The artillery forces were well paid, and allowed long leaves home, all part of Mahmud II’s effort to earn their loyalty. 24 These precautions of the sultan bore fruit, as the regiment stood by him in 1826. 
 Hüsrev Pasha rebuilt the Danube flotilla while Admiral of the Black Sea fleet from 1811–18. It was composed of 20 sloops and 80 large sandals (rowboats) divided into four equal forces and moored at İ brail, Silistre, Rusçuk and Vidin, with 400 men attached to each fortress, for a total of 1,600 men. After 1821, when Greek sailors were eliminated from the Ottoman fleet, Muslims from North Africa and Christian Cossacks from Silistre, some 500 of them, were enlisted and brought to Istanbul in 1825 upon the suggestion of Grand Vizier Benderli Mehmed. These initiatives would prove of importance to the war effort in 1828 and 1829 against Russia. 
 The sultan also directed the strengthening of the fortification system after 1812, on the Danube, Bosphorus and the Dardanelles. The military arsenals were reorganised, gunpowder production stepped up, and large quantities of arms, such as 50,000 muskets from Liège, were imported from Europe in early 1826. Thus, when June arrived, Mahmud II had shored up his defences and secured a cadre of loyal officers and bureaucrats in order to see him through the final confrontation with the Janissaries. They included Celaluddin Mehmed Agha, appointed Commander of the Janissaries and the last to hold that office, in September 1825. Admiral Hüsrev Pasha, implacable foe of Halet Efendi, alike, was reappointed in 1822, after Halet Efendi’s exile, and detailed to the Morea upon the outbreak of the Greek revolt. Dede Mustafa Agha, known to be steadfast and capable, was appointed in February 1826 as Commander of the Bombardiers. 25 
 By the spring of 1826, public opinion was in favour of reform as well. The successful siege of Missolonghi had proven the mettle of Egyptian Governor Mehmed Ali’s reformed troops, as contrasted with the rag-tag Ottoman army. Many observers, native and foreign alike, asserted that it was clear that discipline and training gave the Egyptian army an edge. The population of Istanbul must have been heartily sick of the constant upheavals in the streets of the city. In 1821, for example, when the leader of the Greek revolt, Ypsilanti, invaded Moldavia, 5,000 Janissaries were recruited, and sent to the Danubian Principalities to put down the uprising. They started their ‘campaign’ before they had left the Istanbul district of Be ş ikta ş , destroying the houses of Christians on their march out of the city. 26 
 Thus, Mahmud II had carefully paved the way for the confrontation by staffing key positions with his most trusted officers. The Janissaries themselves had alienated most of their potential loyal backers in Istanbul. Still, Mahmud II had to acquire the approbation of the ulema, notably of the office of the Ş eyhülislam . In November 1825, Mahmud II appointed Mehmed Tahir Efendi to the post, known to favour the reforms the sultan intended. Earlier in the year, an influential Muslim official in Istanbul, by the name of Halim Efendi, began speaking out against the disorderly Janissaries. Once word of his disapproval reached the Corps, his banishment was demanded. Mahmud II acquiesced in his banishment, but as Cevdet commented: ‘… there were many who, in their hearts, were pleased … [as] everyone had become exasperated with the evil state and disorder of the corps.’ 27 
 Nor did Mahmud II neglect the propaganda necessary to convince the public at large about the necessity of his reforms. Mehmed Esad Efendi, himself a member of the ulema, was appointed as official historian in September 1825 and later commissioned to write a history called Üss-ü Zafer ( The Foundation of Victory ), which was published shortly following the events of 15 June 1826. It serves as one of the primary sources concerning the final destruction of the Janissaries. 28 Mahmud II also ordered the writing and distribution of books on the life of the Prophet Muhammad, which may have been intended to appease the ulema as well as the public. 29 
 Formation of the E ş kinci Corps, May 1826 
 Ambassador Stratford Canning witnessed the last quarterly payment ceremony of the Janissaries on 30 March 1826. Power in the Istanbul barracks still lay with those who controlled the pay tickets of their fellow Istanbul officers and men. Plans were very carefully laid by the sultan to forestall the kind of resistance which had overcome his predecessor Selim III. At the end of May, Grand Vizier Mehmed Selim Pasha, Ş eyhülislam Mehmed Tahir Efendi, and Janissary Agha Mehmed Celaluddin assembled prominent members of the ulema, and presented the sultan’s programme of reform to them. The arguments focused on the disorder and lack of discipline in the Janissaries. Apart from the decay of the corps itself, they argued, foreign spies had infiltrated their ranks. They spread the ‘disease’ of sedition, and the ‘fever’ of anarchy. Many previous sultans, they continued, had endeavoured to restore discipline to the infantry, notably Mahmud I (1730–54), who died before he could finish his undertaking, and Abdülhamid I (1774–89) who was forced to confront internal disorder in Egypt, but also that engendered by the unruly levends in Morea. Selim III, who set about his reforms too hastily, saw his new troops defeated by the Janissaries. Hence, they concluded, the only way to succeed was to begin the reorganisation from within the existing corps. They proposed the formation of squadrons of soldiers, called E ş kinci , from within the Janissaries themselves. The assembled ulema agreed to the scheme, unanimously approving the action by ruling that it was incumbent upon Muslims to study military science. The officers of the Janissaries pledged the cooperation of the members of the ocak . 30 
