



===== FILE: text/part0019.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Nine 
 In Empire returns to war 
 Russo-Ottoman conflict resumes on the Danube, 1828–29 
 W hat possessed Mahmud II to go to war, unprepared as the empire was for another confrontation on the Danube? Most contemporaries concluded that there was little else he could do, as the empire was faced with dissolution on all sides, by an aggressive challenger in Egypt, by a cacophony of voices of resistance from his Muslim subjects, and by the continuous Russian encroachment in both the Caucasus and the Balkans, and even in the Mediterranean, where a Russian blockade of the Dardanelles began with the declaration of war. The empire was stunned and the sultan humiliated by the sinking of the fleet at Navarino earlier that same year. In retaliation, Mahmud II closed the straits to foreign shipping. On 20 December 1827, Mahmud II declared war on Russia. He presented the case to his own public, justifying the new conflict as a jihad. The text of his declaration is full of evidence of the impact the Greek rebellion had made on his thinking. In summary form: All infidels, but especially the Russians, the declaration began, were mortal enemies of ‘the Islamic millet and the Sublime State of Muhammad’. The elimination of the Janissary e ş k ı ya had allowed the Russians to invade and conquer Islamic territory as they had for the past fifty years. They had provoked their co-religionists into treason, aiming at the destruction of the Ottoman state. While the rebels of the mainland had generally been repressed, the bandits of the Morea continued their rebellion, calling themselves, ‘with unspeakable nonsense’, the Greek government ( Yunan hükümeti ). Then the Russians, English and French entered the fray, with the aim of separating the Greek millet from Ottoman subjecthood. Their offer of mediation in order to achieve autonomy for the Greek millet was unacceptable, even after they attacked and destroyed the Ottoman navy at Navarino. The sultan called upon all Muslim subjects to unite in this war, which was not only about land and boundaries. The goal of the infidels was to eradicate the Muslim millet from the face of the earth. 1 For Mahmud II, known to all as the ‘infidel sultan’, this was clearly a piece of propaganda which aimed at arousing the public and swelling the ranks of his new army. His declaration may have been an attempt to pre-empt resistance, for, while the sultan experienced some success at raising new troops, Mahmud II found both his administrators and his subjects deeply divided on the question of whether or not to go to war with Russia in 1828. 
 In spite of the initial success in raising troops for the Asakir-i Mansure , perhaps as many as 10,000 infantrymen in Istanbul in six months, the rush to join slowed thereafter, undoubtedly the result of increased taxation to pay for the reforms, but also because of the reordering of lines of authority and communal relationships implicit in the new order. Pockets of resistance emerged, and purges of the Asakir-i Mansure rolls, as well as coercive forms of conscription, became the order of the day. Reaction to the new army units ranged from the violent, especially against conscription, to the derisive. Macfarlane records the comments of a ‘true Turk’ in Izmir, while observing a review of the new troops. ‘And what in Allah’s name can the sultan expect to do with these beardless, puny boys, with their little shining muskets? Why, they have not a yataghan among them! The yataghan is the arm of Mahomet and his people and not that chibouque-wire I see stuck at the end of their guns. Masallah! And what sort of monkey’s dress is that? What sort of ugly-faced, shrivelled, puling dogs are these? Why, they don’t look like Osmanlis!’ 2 
 Mahmud II had assumed the enormous risk of hollowing out the core of his society, and waited to see the results of his actions. The population of Istanbul suspended judgement, but made fun of the new recruits, who were ridiculed for taking twelve days to march from Edirne to Filibe (Plovdiv), a march that the Janissaries were reputed to have accomplished in 32 hours. Pay for the army fell into arrears, and horses for the cavalry were raised by forceful pressure on local pashas and aghas to ‘donate’ them to the cause, only part of the exactions that the new military required. Rapid promotion initially proved enticing to recruits, but by the outbreak of hostilities in mid-1828, the leadership had returned to the old order of favouritism and factionalism over merit. 3 
 Bosnia, home of loyal soldiers of old, proved particularly stubborn, with a popular rebellion led by ex-janissaries against the governor and the new uniforms. Mahmud II appointed a new governor who was able to settle the province, but no soldiers from Bosnia signed on for the 1828 campaign. Albanians were reluctant as well, although 10,000 of them did join the grand vizier at Ş umnu in mid-July, under the command of one Ömer Vrione Pasha, who would distinguish himself at Varna. Mehmed Ali refused to send the Egyptian troops requested by Mahmud, largely because his own army was caught in the Greek struggle, which had become an international issue. Arab Syria resisted sufficiently to halt conscription efforts for fear of general uprisings. The Kurds, another backbone of the Ottoman military, largely chose not to participate, but were caught up on the eastern frontier, as we shall see. Conscription failed altogether – recruits that were enrolled were often youths aged twelve or thirteen, chained together to get them to the barracks and keep them from escaping: echoes of the Russian practice. 4 
 Contemporary sources described the forces available to the sultan across the empire, which include the provincial irregulars, as well as the reformed and semi-reformed units as follows: 