 Meanwhile, Hüseyin Pasha had continued to fortify Ş umnu, and ordered an 8,000-man Asakir-i Mansure unit, mostly cavalry, to defend Bazarc ı k against a Russian advance. On 7 July the Russians saw the new cavalry for the first time, and were impressed with the discipline and order. After driving the Ottomans back, the Russian forces assembled at Bazarc ı k, some 24,000 men of which 2,500 were cavalry. An imprudent, early thrust on Varna was repulsed by a strong Ottoman garrison. Varna by that time had 14,000–15,000 men, so could not easily be invested. The Russians turned to Ş umnu instead. By 20 July, the tsar marched at the head of his entire army on the road to Ş umnu, from Yenibazar. Ş umnu, it will be remembered, was where Grand Vizier Muhsinzade Mehmed surrendered in 1774, but the fortified town was not entered then or later by foreign troops. Nor would it be now. The fortress was well situated on a flat plateau with steep heights and precipitous walls rising above the Bulgarian plain about 600 or 800 feet. There were at the time about 40,000 inhabitants, three-quarters of them Muslims. Here the Ottomans built outer works and redoubts, in contrast to many of the fortresses on the Danube. The main road to Silistre and Rusçuk guaranteed the arrival of provisions for the Ottoman army from territories not occupied by the enemy. Serasker Hüseyin had 40,000 troops at his command, including the 10,000 Albanians under Ömer Vrione. The Russians proceeded to entrench themselves around Ş umnu. Hüseyin Pasha stayed put, sending sorties of cavalry to attack Russian emplacements but refusing to engage fully. By early August, that standoff had become untenable. Tsar Nicholas left with a regiment of horse and foot to relieve the troops before Varna and press the siege. By late August, Serasker Hüseyin, apprised of the vulnerability of the troops left behind, ordered a night attack on a Russian redoubt, in anticipation of an even greater attack on the remaining battalions of Russians entrenched around the fortress. At dawn on 27 August, two columns of the Asakir-i Mansure infantry stormed the right wing of the Russian camp. A similar attack was made on the left wing. The Ottoman troops were driven back into the fortress, but had acquitted themselves well, though still unequal to the Russian order in the open plain. The Russians suffered tremendously from hunger and exhaustion in the late summer heat. Horses, lacking forage which had become impossible to find, began to die at the rate of 100 to 150 a day. As the Ottomans gained the upper hand, news arrived that Grand Vizier Mehmed Selim was on the march from Aydos, and that the Russian siege of Varna had begun. Ömer Vrione and his 14,000 Albanians were detailed to join the grand vizier there. 14 
 Varna’s situation on the Black Sea meant that both Russian and Ottoman fleets could be called into action. The Ottomans, of course, were in the process of rebuilding a fleet, but still managed to engage the Russians at least once early in September. Two Ottoman ships were captured, and a third sunk by Admiral Grieg, then part of the Russian navy. 
 By late July the garrison numbered 15,000, of which 7,000 were Albanians, and was fortified with some 162 guns. The Russian fleet reached Varna the first week of August. It included eight ships of the line, five frigates, and a number of other gunboats and transport, as well as troops. The land forces were under the command of Prince Menshikov. With the arrival of the troops by ship and the troops under Nicholas I from Ş umnu, Russian forces investing Varna now numbered about 9,000, still insufficient to force capitulation. The tsar left for Odessa, where he remained until early September, awaiting reinforcements. A month of emplacements, sorties, and skirmishes followed. Late in August, the besieged garrison vigorously attacked the Russian redoubts by night, with some success. By mid-September, however, with the arrival of Russian reinforcements, the besieging force rose to 18,000–20,000 men, which allowed the Russians to invest the northern side of the fortress and begin digging mineshafts. An explosion, and partial breach, was followed by proposals for surrender sent the following day to Garrison Commander Yusuf Pasha. The breach appeared to strengthen the resolve of the garrison, however, which held out for close to another month before surrendering. Ömer Vrione arrived at Varna, having increased his army to 25,000 by reinforcements sent him by the grand vizier. His defence of the southern flank of the fortress is one reason the besieged were able to withstand the three-month siege. The Russians spent much of September repositioning troops to confront the new arrivals. At the battle of Kurt-Tepe, Ömer Vrione’s relief army, perhaps as many as 20,000, was checked by resolute Russian troops, but held firm on 30 September and forced a Russian withdrawal. Ömer Pasha then sat for three days without pressing his advantage against a weakened Russian side, and going to the aid of the besieged fortress, which, owing to the premature capitulation of Yusuf Pasha, surrendered to the Russians on 10 October. Throughout all of this, the grand vizier himself remained idle, most likely because he was without troops. Ömer Vrione retreated precipitately upon learning of the capitulation of Varna, and on 15 October was driven further back with the grand vizier to Aydos. 15 
 The remaining strategic target, Silistre, was not well situated for fortification, and had already been the scene of conflict and destruction in 1810. Located on the shores of the Danube, it too could be served by the fleets of the opposing forces. In October 1828, there were likely some 24,000 inhabitants, and a strong garrison, in the neighbourhood of 10,000–15,000. Most of the summer had passed with skirmishes, small engagements and waiting. In mid-August 36 vessels of the Russian Danube fleet arrived, but the conflict remained desultory. One explanation could be disease: European newspaper accounts from early November reported that 500 men had died in two days behind Russian lines. Hüseyin Pasha remained passively at Ş umnu after the siege at Varna got under way. In mid-October, the Russian troops at Ş umnu marched on Silistre, in the hope of forcing the capitulation. Ottoman garrison strength, weather, disease, and exhaustion prevented the completion of the siege, however, and it was lifted on 10 November. The new grand vizier, İ zzet Mehmed Pasha, made a brief attempt to retake Varna, but lacked the troops to press the Russians. All the irregulars left the battlefield for the winter. The Russians withdrew into the area around and north of Varna, where they remained for the winter. 
 Campaigns on the upper Danube, continuing into early 1829, in the main left the Russian army in charge of the Danube littoral. Similarly, the army in the Caucasus had made further inroads, capturing Anapa, a subject for later discussion. Russian steadfastness had gained the day, but the human costs were terrible. Half of the Russian troops died, most from some form of illness. Typhus, fevers, dysentery, scurvy, and inflammatory disorders, killed ten times as many soldiers as did plague. Russian hospital records from the period indicate that 210,108 were treated with lesser and greater illnesses from May 1828 to February 1829, twice the troop strength on campaign! By May 1829, plague had spread to Varna, and 50–80 new cases were brought in daily in June. In the five months of March–July 1829, 28,746 died in hospital, all due to sickness and not bullets. The plague proved particularly virulent at Edirne, which was crippled with the number of cases of dysentery and diarrhoea. The stench must have been frightful. 16 
 The campaign of 1829 and Ottoman collapse 
 Mahmud II’s new organisation had distinguished itself not by initiative, but rather by perseverance and traditional Ottoman defensive strategies. Nonetheless, confidence had temporarily been restored; Macfarlane noted: ‘the Turks, lambs at the commencement of the campaign [of 1828], were lions at its end.’ 17 No help was forthcoming from either France or Britain, both waiting for Mahmud II’s acquiescence to the Greek question. French forces had replaced Mehmed Ali in the Morea in the late fall, and could hardly be thought to come to the aid of the Ottomans. Mehmed Ali, as we have seen, sent money rather than troops. Hence the two sides were left to face one another again on the Danube in spring 1829. Hüseyin Pasha was reassigned to the troops at Aydos. İ zzet Mehmed Pasha, who had defended Varna till the last moment in the face of the betrayal by Yusuf Pasha, was appointed grand vizier in place of Mehmed Selim, as we have seen. Re ş id Mehmed, the kul of Hüsrev, and veteran of Greek campaigns with İ brahim Pasha, was appointed commander of the army in the field. About 50,000 of the Asakir-i Mansure troops were sent to Ş umnu, largely mobilised by impressment, rather than systematic conscription, ‘the most unwarlike, the poorest and worst class of the Osmanlis.’ 18 The Bosnians continued to resist enlistment. The Albanians refused aid until they were sufficiently paid. The Asakir-i Mansure suffered throughout the period from serious manpower shortages. 
 While Nicholas I might have preferred peace and a heavy indemnity, he had to force the issue for a second year to protect Russian interests in the Dardanelles. Replacing men and material, however, proved difficult. Most of the horses had perished, and plague was decimating veterans and new arrivals alike. The Tsar refrained from joining the troops in the second year of campaigning, and replaced Wittgenstein with Count Diebitsch, whose able command improved the lot of the common Russian soldier to the degree possible under the circumstances. Camels were imported from the steppes to supplement scarce horses, and used for the baggage trains. The morale of the soldiers remained low, however, and with it their increased adherence to religious rituals. Troop strength stood at 68,000 men by the first engagement. 
 The Russian navy seized the initiative in early 1829, establishing a base for supplies and men below Varna at Sizeboli on the Black Sea, south of Burgas, where they scattered the small garrison. Mahmud II ordered Hüseyin Pasha to march on Sizeboli from Aydos, three days away, but apparently it took Hüseyin seven weeks to carry out the order. A vigorous Ottoman attack on the garrison was repelled, and not repeated. The small Ottoman fleet made a brief appearance before Sizeboli, but did not attack the Russian ships anchored there. Consequently, Russian fleets were able to establish blockades of the Bosphorus as well as the Dardanelles, further increasing shortages in Istanbul. 
 The Russians under General Diebitsch laid siege to Silistre in mid-May, delaying the opening of the campaign until a bridge of rafts could be built to ensure the connection to the right bank of the Danube. Material collected at Bucharest, and assembled at Oltenitza, was floated downriver to the spot selected for the crossing, and was briefly, ineffectively, harrassed by the Ottoman Danube flotilla. The Russians had 14,000–15,000 men and 56 field guns. By Russian estimates, the Ottomans had 13,000 soldiers and 8,000 armed inhabitants at Silistre, under the command of Sert Mehmed Pasha. The siege continued throughout June, but after six weeks, the defenders capitulated. Some 9,000 men, including three regiments of Asakir-i Mansure troops, surrendered. Perhaps as many as 7,000 others died in the siege. The Russians found 230 pieces of artillery on the walls, and 31 on board gunboats in the Danube, although more important to this particular siege were the considerable earthwork and mining operations on both sides. 
