

 Plate 17   Column commemorating Mahmud II’s visit to Tutrekan in 1837, now standing in the garden of the local Historical Society (author’s photograph). 
 It is hard to imagine which of these articles most offended Mahmud II, but the indemnity, later reduced to 250,000,000 kuru ş , was guaranteed to slow the sultan’s further reform agenda. It also contributed to the increased use of debasement, as we have seen, and disastrous financial strategies, such as monopolies, which crippled already over-burdened populations and threatened international commercial interests. 
 In addition, the Ottoman first line of defence became the Balkan Mountains, rather than the Danube itself. Russian troops remained in Silistre and the Principalities until 1835, when Mahmud finally paid 800,000 pounds sterling, or 3,000,000 kuru ş , to invalidate Russian excuses against the evacuation. At that time, Russia still had 11,000 troops in the Principalities and 17,000 in Silistre. In 1833, when Mehmed Ali and son İ brahim threatened to storm Istanbul from Kütahya, in 
 Anatolia, Mahmud called on those same Russian troops to prevent the imminent collapse of his empire, an astounding reversal that awoke Great Britain to the real dangers of Ottoman collapse. We will come back to that agreement, known as the Treaty of Hünkar İ skelesi (1833), and the events leading up to it, shortly. 35 
 One of the results of these two years of war was the decision taken almost immediately by Nicholas I to work in concert with the other European powers concerning the future disposition of the Ottoman Empire. He had concluded that the elimination of an Ottoman Europe or Istanbul was not in the best interests of the tsar. This, and the continued Russian occupation along the littoral, offered the sultan an interlude from maintaining vigilance on the Danube, and an opportunity to consolidate his hold on his remaining territories. 
 The Syrian Question 1831–33 
 The Treaty of Adrianople also laid the Greek question to rest for the moment, although Greek independence had already been determined at Navarino and by the evacuation of the Egyptian army, completed as the French occupation troops arrived in August 1828 to oversee the transformation to statehood. The drawing of the borders of the new Greek Republic only served to bring into stark contrast the fact that more potential ‘Greek’ nations remained outside those borders than within, a problem for future generations. 
 After Navarino and the surrender of the Morea to the European powers, Mehmed Ali contemplated further expansion, independent of his master in Istanbul. To the west, the French talked of joint operations against Tripoli, Tunis and Algiers, but then occupied Algeria themselves in 1830. The more logical move for Mehmed Ali was to occupy greater Syria, historically seen as an extension of Egypt. Syria represented a buffer zone, a source of manpower, and natural resources such as iron, wood and coal, as well as an opportunity for Mehmed Ali to broaden his tax base. Both Mehmed Ali and İ brahim coveted the Damascus pashal ı k , a centre of potential wealth, because the city served as the hub of pilgrimage and trade routes. Mehmed Ali had ignored Mahmud’s request for troops in the 1828–29 war against Russia, sending money instead. He ignored the sultan again, when requested to send troops to the fight against the Albanians led by Bu ş atl ı Mustafa Pasha. Mehmed Ali had spent some 20–25 million riyals on the invasion of the Morea, 36 and was rebuffed when Mahmud II only offered him control of Crete, rather than his coveted Syria. Mehmed Ali did not regard Crete, also the seat of Greek rebellion, as adequate compensation. Whether or not Mehmed Ali contemplated dynastic independence, or was simply behaving in the time-tested Ottoman ayan/vali fashion, seems a moot point. By 1828 expansion was clearly on the Egyptian agenda, and Syria was the target. 37 
 What does set Mehmed Ali aside from the other notables of his era was his perspicacity in economics and the military. Honed in the Morea, the reorganised army and the financial base upon which it stood would truly be tested in the Syrian campaign, which amounts to a prolonged civil war internationalised after 1833. 38 From 1828–31, intensive preparations were under way in Cairo and Alexandria. The navy was rebuilt, the army reorganised, and conscription intensified. European observers speculated at the aim of such intensive preparations. By the end of 1831, it became clear as troops and ships left Egypt for Sidon. 
 After subduing Mustafa Pasha in the mountains of Albania, Mahmud II was in a position to turn his attention to consolidating the Arab provinces, which continued to resist his economic and military reforms. His preoccupation in the north, and with rebellions in the Balkans and Baghdad, had led to neglect of the territories of Syria and Palestine. Moreover, the region had long resisted full integration into the empire, as Ottoman authorities were but one of the local power brokers in the region, who formed coalitions to side against centrally-imposed governors. 39 The Acre–Sidon–Damascus triangle had undergone a decade of disorder and chaos before Mehmed Ali chose to invade, much of it driven by the relentless Istanbul reform agenda, as well as the increasing integration of the region into the world economy. In June 1831, in fact, a major rebellion broke out in Damascus. The governor, Selim Pasha, had imposed a new surtax on the merchants of the city, which engendered a revolt. The rebels, fired upon by the governor’s troops, besieged the citadel, burned the government buildings, and killed the governor, and many of the 5,000 troops who accompanied him. Elders of the city established an interim government while they awaited the arrival of the new Ottoman appointee. This must have simplified İ brahim’s occupation of the city in June 1832, just as the rebellion was losing force. 40 
 İ brahim Pasha, universally admired as a commander of troops, is generally credited with moderation in the early days of the occupation. He would prove adroit at exploiting the simmering discontent among inhabitants of greater Syria, Muslim and non-Muslim alike. To the Christians, he promised tax reform and exemptions. To the Muslims, he (and his father) argued the sultan’s unsuitability as caliph, appealing to the divergent voices already raised in protest against the reform regime. Mehmed Ali was just as willing as Mahmud II to using religious symbols to stimulate enthusiasm, hence his army was known as the Cihadiye (the Jihadists), certainly another explanation for the early success of the invasion. 
 For the next decade, Mehmed Ali and Mahmud II were rivals in Syria not just for territory and taxes, but also for adherents to their expansionist and reformist aims, and for manpower for their armies. By design, Mehmed Ali had insisted on his senior officer class being Turkish-speaking, while the enlisted men were Arabic-speaking. Were his commanding officers to be Arabs, he foresaw that bonds would be enforced with the enlisted men that would challenge his own authority. Hence, ‘Arabs’ could be promoted only as far as the rank of lieutenant. Such a practice had led to the elision of distinctions under the rubric ‘Turkish’, leading to the absorption of numerous ethnic categories which had made up the ‘Mamluks’, for example Circassians or Georgians, into the Turkish-speaking ranks, and the creation of an officer corps extremely loyal to Mehmed Ali. It also meant a constant flow of able officer stock from the Asakir-i Mansure to the Cihadiye camp. Such defectors joined European officers of equal rank, who were paid very well, such as the previously mentioned Süleyman Pasha (Colonel Sèves), İ brahim Pasha’s second-in-command. In more than one instance, Ottoman prisoners who spoke Turkish were appointed as high-ranking officers over İ brahim’s troops, and even commanded their own regiments of Ottoman prisoners. 41 It is not hard to imagine the resentment of enlisted men discovering they were under the command of privileged, but vanquished, ‘Turks’. The most notorious Ottoman defection was in July 1839, when Grand Admiral Ahmed Fevzi surrendered the entire fleet to Mehmed Ali in Alexandria. 
 While the Turk–Arab rivalry is fairly well understood, I think military historians have long underestimated the role religion plays in this confrontation at the Taurus Mountains. The anti-reform movement which gained momentum in the 1830s was undoubtedly stimulated by Mahmud’s relentless intervention in the countryside, and his overturning of the traditional order. Less well understood is the degree to which Mehmed Ali in these few years came to represent a new order, an alternative to the infidel sultan, who in the minds of many, had violated the shar‘ia. After 1831, even the ulema in Istanbul began inciting the public from their pulpits. Insurrections in Albania, Bosnia, Macedonia and Baghdad, as we have seen, were couched in terms of the sultan’s violations of the traditional law. Unrest spread into heartland Anatolia: to Ankara, Kayseri, Ayd ı n and Tokat. In August, 1831, a fire in Pera, the European quarter of Istanbul, destroyed 10,000 homes. Public expressions of resistance to obvious signs of westernisation, such as the sultan’s portrait and wardrobe, escalated. Mahmud was openly called ‘infidel ruler’ as he ceremoniously crossed the new Galata bridge over the Golden Horn in 1837: ‘Infidel sultan, God will demand an accounting for your blasphemy. You are destroying Islam and drawing down upon us all the curse of the Prophet.’ 42 
 Such demonstrations were a prevalent expression of social identity which cannot simply be dismissed as religious obscurantism. It appeared to many across the empire that the caliph in Istanbul was at war not just with external enemies, but with his Muslim subjects, most especially the traditional political and social hierarchy of tribal and household patriarchs such as Busatl ı Mustafa Pasha in Albania. Equally important, the resistance to his rule coincided with the rise of militant Muslim voices, such as the Wahhabis, as well as the quietest Naqshbandis, calling for reform from within the faith itself. 
 The Egyptian Governor’s aggressive expansion, and initially successful campaign, however, was also engendered by increasing problems at home in Egypt. Conscription of the fellahin had produced some 130,000 recruits by the time of the invasion of Syria. In under ten years, Mehmed Ali had not only transformed a traditional, agricultural society into a plantation economy, he had radicalised the relationship between a government and its people. Logistics, discipline and troop welfare all appear to have been successfully coordinated in the initial stages of the new expansionist enterprise. Yet desertion remained appallingly high, and the death toll from plague and other diseases insupportable. Rural disorder was on the increase, as banditry became an essential form of collective political action. Piracy and theft from state warehouses forced patrol of Egyptian harbours by gunboats in 1831. In June 1832, press gangs posted simultaneously in every quarter of Cairo rounded up the male population for the ongoing campaigns, a measure of the strength of resistance to conscription. Paying and feeding an army of the magnitude of 130,000– 150,000 led to increasing debts and restive populations. 
