

 Plate 18   ampaigns of Mehmed Ali and his son İ brahim in Greece, 1824–33. 
 As the siege of Acre continued, more troops were sent from Egypt. In January 1832, news of the imminent arrival of an Ottoman relief army kept the besieged from surrendering. Meanwhile, Mahmud II responded to the invasion first by sending an emissary to Alexandria in December, threatening reprisals. In February, he appointed Mehmed Pasha as the Governor of Aleppo, and Serasker of Syria and Arabia. Mahmud II ordered the other governors of the area to send troops to Aleppo, from all over Anatolia. 48 Mehmed Ali and his son were deliberately left out of the annual Ottoman appointment register ( tevcihat ) of 1832. Agha Hüseyin Pasha, Governor of Edirne, was appointed to the pashal ı ks of Jiddah, Crete and Egypt instead. A blockade was imposed on Egyptian ports. Hüseyin Pasha was also appointed Serasker of the Anatolian forces, and ordered to join Mehmed Pasha in Aleppo. By March 1832, Mehmed Pasha and Osman Pasha of Tripoli had gathered a large, mostly irregular force, some 18,000–20,000, at Homs. Leaving only 5,000–6,000 troops to carry on the siege, İ brahim hastened to confront the Ottomans at Homs. After a brief confrontation at Tripoli, Osman Pasha was beaten back by İ brahim’s regular troops. He retreated to Homs, where a brief battle on 14 April resulted in 300 casualties among Osman’s troops. İ brahim gathered his forces at Baalbeck, awaiting the outcome of the siege. In April a fetva was issued in Istanbul, declaring both father and son rebels, and enemies of Islam. 
 On 27 May 1832, a final assault on Acre forced the surrender of Abdullah Pasha who was sent as a prisoner of war to Egypt. Six months of bombing had destroyed the city, and the siege represents the beginning of the end of the once-vibrant port. İ brahim Pasha lost 4,500 soldiers. His victory freed him to march on Damascus, which surrendered with little fight on 16 June. Ali Pasha, commandant at Damascus, retired to Homs, where he joined Mehmed Pasha, with a combined force amounting to 30,000–35,000 men, again half of them irregulars (four infantry regiments, three cavalry and 15,000 irregulars). 49 Hüseyin Pasha’s Anatolian army was still in Antioch. İ brahim Pasha pushed north from Damascus with 30,000 troops and arrayed his army before Homs in a form that Marshal Marmont described as so ‘judicious and complete as to leave no opening for criticism’. The army comprised seven regiments of infantry, each of four battalions; six regiments of cavalry, divided into 24 squadrons; seven batteries of artillery, and two howitzers, formed into three lines. The Ottoman army was deployed in two lines, with the cavalry placed on the flanks, and the artillery distributed among the infantry, one gun per battalion. The Ottomans were not well placed, however, and after fierce fighting, the Egyptians advanced on the centre of the Ottoman line, which broke and fled in disarray. Some 2,000 were killed and 2,500 prisoners captured. On 8 July İ brahim entered Homs, and captured an additional fifteen hundred soldiers and 24 cannons. 50 The remaining Ottoman army fled to join Hüseyin Pasha at Antakya. Aleppo shut its gates to Hüseyin, and submitted to İ brahim on 15 July. On 29 July, 16,000 Egyptian troops confronted around 20,000 Ottomans of the combined armies of Mehmed Pasha and Hüseyin Pasha in front of the village of Beylan. After three hours of heavy fighting, İ brahim’s army was victorious, and his losses slight: 102 men and 172 horses, and 162 men wounded. Ottoman losses stood at 1,000, with 1,900 prisoners. Hüseyin’s troops abandoned the field, camp, baggage and 25 guns. 51 
 So far, the performance of the Ottoman armies had been absymal, but success of the Egyptian troops was also due to their training, to İ brahim Pasha’s experienced command, and to the voluntary submission of most of Syria and Palestine, and then Aleppo, to his authority. By 31 July 1832, İ brahim controlled Tarsus and Adana. By October, and the arrival of new Egyptian recruits, İ brahim Pasha consolidated control of the region by occupying Urfa and Mara ş , to maintain strategic access to Erzurum and points east. He camped in Adana, and awaited orders from his father. His primary communication with Egypt was by sea, well patrolled by the Egyptian navy. 
 Mehmed Ali, at least until the early months of 1832, continued to insist that his invasion was a punitive campaign against Abdullah Pasha. At the end of August of that same year, however, Mehmed Ali wrote the sultan to begin negotiations, but Mahmud II delayed responding, as he awaited the fruition of two initiatives: a diplomatic appeal to Britain to intervene, and orders to Grand Vizier and Serasker Re ş id Mehmed Pasha, veteran of campaigns against Bosnian and Albanian rebellions, to mobilise a large army from all over the empire. Between July and October 1832, four armies were raised, for a total of some 80,000 regulars and irregulars: 20,000 Albanian and Asakir-i Mansure troops under his command, who were stationed in Scutari [Albania]; similarly, 20,000 from territories around Erzurum under Osman Pasha, Governor of Trabzon; a third group, of 10,000 troops, stationed north of İ brahim Pasha’s army in Adana; and finally, another 20,000–30,000 stationed near Konya, survivors of the previous confrontations, under the command of (Mehmed Emin) Rauf Pasha, Governor of Karahisar. 52 
 Raising troops from recently subdued Albanian and Bosnian communities seems a particular act of desperation for Re ş id Mehmed and Mahmud II, can only have been accomplished with considerable force, and likely fell back on the old habits of requesting local officials to raise troops from the villages. 53 The census of 1831 established quotas for each governor across Anatolia and the Balkans, but in actuality, arbitrary numbers were assigned each town and village, forcing undue hardships on Muslim households. Enlistment was technically for twelve years by that time, but, as with the Egyptian army, and the Russian armies for that matter, conscription was a death sentence. Massive resistance and desertion, or self-mutilation to prevent recruitment, appears to have been rife in both the Ottoman and Egyptian armies. Desertion statistics averaged 10–25 per cent in the Cihadiye early on, but six years after the campaign began, Mehmed Ali received a report that said that 60,000 soldiers had deserted the army, a loss of one in every two conscripts. 54 By one account for the Ottoman side, from 1837, 500,000 soldiers had been conscripted since the beginning of the new order ten years previously. One in four was deserting (especially among Kurds). Death and desertion may have reached 45,000 men a year over the ten years. 55 
 When the two armies finally met on the plains north of Konya, the Ottomans outnumbered the Egyptians three to one: 50,000 under the Serasker to the 15,000 commanded by İ brahim Pasha. Rauf Pasha had retreated from Konya to Ak ş ehir on 17 November 1832, as İ brahim Pasha approached the city. On 18 December, the Egyptians defeated a small vanguard of Re ş id’s army, mostly Albanians, many of whom defected to the Egyptians. 56 The main confrontation occurred on 21 December, in a battle which began at noon with Ottoman artillery fire. A young lieutenant, Zarif Mustafa, was among those with Re ş id Mehmed Pasha at Konya. This brief excerpt from his memoirs begins the night before the battle: ‘Other than Re ş id and Ahmed Pashas, no one else had a tent. I dug a hole in the snow, and entered it. That night, everyone stayed that way. I slept a little, and my boots froze to my feet. I cut the boots and took them off my feet. Next day, the battle began, and I had no official duty in the fight. Then, the lines began to open up, and the cannons started firing, and many shells fell on our left front regiment, which became like garden posts. Their cavalry attacked. Ahmed Pasha attacked with three companies, and I was behind him. The enemy kept coming, and we turned back. Ahmed Pasha fled, and one of the Arabs struck me with a bayonet, but it had little effect. In three to five days, the wound was fine.’ 57 
 A dense fog had made visibility difficult on the battlefield. The Ottoman side manoeuvred badly, allowing the Egyptian army the opportunity of isolating and attacking the left flank, largely cavalry. The Ottomans began firing at 640 yards, thereby marking their position even in the fog. İ brahim urged cavalry and reserves, backed by heavy Egyptian artillery fire, towards the Ottoman cavalry on the left flank, forcing a retreat. As Re ş id Mehmed tried to regroup, he lost his way in the fog, and infantry and cavalry of centre and left flank were forced to surrender, including Re ş id. The right flank had meanwhile surrounded the Egyptians on their left flank, and engaged with the battalion’s square formation in a battle which lasted seven hours. A group of 2,500 Ottoman cavalry broke through the line but kept going, and combined with the capture of Re ş id Pasha, precipitated the retreat of the rest of the right wing. İ brahim had his greatest victory yet at the battle of Konya. The Ottoman forces lost 92 cannons, 3,000 casualties and 10,000 prisoners. The Egyptians, by contrast, suffered 262 casualities and 530 wounded. 
 By the beginning of 1833, inhabitants of Anatolia from Konya to Kayseri were inclining to İ brahim, whose adroit use of real and ideological pressure attracted adherents and volunteers for his army. Marmont continues: ‘Had he marched on Constantinople on the day succeeding … he might have arrived opposite that capital, without difficulty, by the third or fourth of January, at which period the Russian artillery corps had not reached the Bosphorus. The appearance of the Egyptians at Scutari [Üsküdar] would have produced a revolution at Constantinople, and overturned the Turkish Government, crushing the Sultan in its fall, or compelling him to act as an instrument of İ brahim’s power. … A new Mussulman Empire might then have arisen, which with Egypt for its basis would have been guaranteed from external dangers … in the possession of a brilliant reputation [in İ brahim] and would have been respected by European nations, from the successful adoption of their military institutions.’ 58 İ brahim must have felt much the same way, and continued his movement of troops until he stood at Kütahya, where his father ordered him to halt by the end of January 1833, but sent him further relief troops. 
