

 These are obviously estimates, reproduced here to reiterate the inflation of Ottoman military power which is standard in accounts of the period, but also to emphasise the degree to which regional and private armies were crucial to the survival of the empire. If the figures for the Ottoman forces are cut in half, to 90,000, the Russian army they were about to face on the Danube, on paper at least, was three times that size. In the areas where the real confrontations took place, around Ş umnu, İ brail, Silistre, and Varna, they were probably numerically evenly matched. The Russian military could count on a depth of experienced reserves that simply did not yet exist for Mahmud II. The degree to which the Ottomans left the Caucasus undefended is noteworthy, a subject to which we will return in the next chapter – the concentration around Istanbul, Edirne and Ş umnu is testimony to the sultan’s understanding about the vulnerability of Istanbul. 
 Russian tsar Nicholas I insisted on accompanying his army to the Danube, and his caution often represented a serious obstacle to the conduct of operations. 6 Furthermore, the Napoleonic Wars demonstrated the vulnerability of the western frontiers of the empire. Henceforth a majority of the military forces available to the tsar were spread along the frontiers of Europe. Of 800,000 troops, only 100,000–150,000 were deployed against the Ottomans in 1829. The rest were stretched along the Austrian and Prussian borders, the Baltic and Black Sea littoral, in Siberia, and in the Caucasus. 7 
 The ostensible Russian reason for going to war was to enforce the Ottoman understanding of existing treaties, especially Bucharest, as we have seen, on the question of the Principalities and on the fortresses and frontiers in the Caucasus. Caution about the international impact kept the Russians from responding to the Ottoman declaration of war until late April 1828, at the same time as their troop movements into Ottoman territories began. By Moltke’s account, 120,000 men of the second army were deployed along the Danube, under Field-Marshal Count Wittgenstein, composed of 88 squadrons of cavalry, 96 battalions of infantry and 31 batteries of artillery. A total of 45,000 men were sent to the Caucasus, commanded by General Paskevich. Realistically, the army which crossed the Danube, in mid-1828, probably numbered in the area of 65,000 fighting men, which included 4,000 Cossacks. 8 Russian cavalry was estimated as being too heavy, and too few in number, as contrasted to the lightly-armed but quick and well-mounted sipahis . That was an old problem, which the Cossack units had been organised to address, but they also were too few in number, and had adopted the same large horses preferred by the Russians, a hindrance in the Balkan terrain. As Moltke noted, the Russian soldier had been reduced to a machine, but ‘the infantry went through all their evolutions with perfect order, and were perfectly steady under fire.’ 9 
 What beat the Russians in the latter half of 1828 and 1829 was not the Asakir-i Mansure troops but rather terrain, an inadequate commissariat, and a particularly bad plague year. The Russians were over-confident in their ability to overwhelm the Ottoman forces, but previous campaigns in the area made them cautious about problems with transport, foraging and supplies. When the Russians occupied Bucharest in mid-May 1828, Count Pahlen, appointed Governor-General of the Principalities, was ordered to supply the Russian second army with ‘250,000 measures of grain, 400,000 loads of hay, 50,000 kilderkins of brandy and 23,000 oxen,’ let alone press 16,000 peasants into planting and harvesting hay, and supplying untold wagons and horses. The problem was that the Ottomans, and especially the Albanians, had already been there. The Ottomans had requested ‘20,000 loads of corn, 10,000 head of cattle, 30,000 sheep and 1,000,000 kuru ş ’ from the Hospodars , of which less than half had been collected. What the Russians found was devastation and desertion on all sides. Mahmud II had ordered the evacuation of the left bank before the campaign began, except for İ brail and few minor bridgeheads. İ brail was the last fortress in Ottoman hands on that side of the Danube. 10 
 The Russian plan was to deploy troops in three directions: against the Vidin–Rusçuk line, against Silistre, and against İ brail, the latter representing the gateway to the road to Varna and Istanbul. In the event, most of the engagements of late 1828 occurred on the mouth of the Danube, at Varna and at Ş umnu. The Ottomans were typically slow to mobilise. The new ‘independent commander’ of the army, Müstakil Serasker Hüseyin Agha Pasha, did not leave Istanbul with his army until late May. The unpreparedness of the reformed army may have been one reason for delay. MacFarlane, eyewitness to the departure, notes: ‘The levies from Asia Minor, armed and equipped, … were the most numerous part of the motley corps d’armée , and mixed with these were above five hundred irregulars, on horseback, mounted generally on miserable hacks, and armed in the strangest and most varied manner. The scimitar, which they were once so famed for, was a rare weapon; but twenty or thirty of them bore long spears in their hands. The tacticoes [ Asakir-i Mansure troops] were for the greater part mere striplings, and so ragged and dirty that they looked as if they were returning from a campaign rather than starting for one; their muskets, of inferior French manufacture, were dirtily kept, furnished with bayonets of different lengths. All those on foot, regulars or irregulars, seemed to eye with particular envy their companions on horseback.’ 11 
 A further ostensible reason for the late start was the debates around the sultan. All of his senior administrators opposed the war, and one at least, İ zzet Molla, was exiled for writing and speaking out publicly. General morale was exceedingly low, as the well-known (and increasingly well-founded) superstition that the Russians were destined to be the conquerors of Istanbul circulated widely. And finally, a bitter rivalry between Serasker Hüsrev and Grand Vizier Mehmed Selim kept the two best commanders of Ottoman troops close to the sultan in Istanbul. The grand vizier finally left Istanbul for Edirne at the beginning of August. Suffice it to say that the rivalry was a contributory factor to the lack of proper command of the two years of this particular war. 
 The Russians first crossed at Satunovo (by lake Kartal, the site of the Ottoman 1770 debacle) in early May, as it was practically the only conceivable place to cross on the marshy territory of the lower Danube. It required the building of a dike some 7,000 paces long, with a special passage of wood of 3,000 paces. Wood was difficult to find, as the Ottomans could attest from previous campaigns. The Russians who were building the dike were fired upon by an Ottoman entrenchment, perhaps as many as 10,000–12,000 men. The first actual crossing of Russian troops was accomplished with the help of the Cossacks living in northern Dobruja, formerly loyal to the sultan, who defected with their Hetman and transported a Russian battalion across in their light boats. The Ottoman forces, mostly irregular cavalry, were taken by surprise, and fled to neighbouring fortresses. The wooden and canvas pontoon bridge was completed in the next two days. Thereafter, some 30,000 Russian troops made the crossing. Tsar Nicholas I joined them in early June. 12 
 The siege of İ brail began a week later. In contrast to many of the smaller fortresses on the left bank, İ brail was large, and had a commanding location some eighty feet above the Danube. It had 24,000 inhabitants at the time of siege; probably only 7,000–8,000 bore arms under Commander Süleyman Pasha. Well stocked, and well armed, with 278 guns and mortars, İ brail had shown itself capable of withstanding sustained sieges before, especially when the Ottoman Danube flotilla was able to keep it supplied. Russian forces, commanded by Grand Duke Michael, totalled in the neighbourhood of 16,000–18,000 men. Defence was spirited. The troops fired on the Russians with considerable accuracy, and occasionally engaged in ferocious sorties. Hüseyin Agha Pasha had reached Ş umnu with the main army by early June, but was unable to send aid from Ş umnu, or anywhere else, to lift the siege, which by then had been under way for over two weeks. Mines were eventually laid by the Russians, and set off on 7 June, but a Russian attempt to storm the walls resulted in loss of some 120 volunteers when the anticipated breach did not appear in the walls. Such persistence intimidated the Ottoman garrison. Süleyman Pasha continued the siege for ten more days, but surrendered in mid-June after Maçin had capitulated; the Ottoman Danube fleet lost 13 gunboats to Russian flotilla fire, and was forced to retire to Rusçuk. Süleyman and his men were allowed to retire to Silistre, leaving behind considerable supplies and munitions. A plethora of various artillery pieces were left behind, the most effective of the guns being a small, movable seven-pounder Coehorn, with which the Ottomans took precise aim with high elevation for short distances. Still, they were unable to take advantage of opportunities that such accuracy and plenitude gave them. Shortly thereafter, Hirsova, İ sakc ı , Tulcea and Köstence also capitulated. In abandoning the fortifications, the Ottomans unwittingly supplied their enemy with much-needed stores. By early July, the Russians were in command of the mouth of the Danube. Silistre had not been besieged, however, and its garrison was strengthened by the troops retiring from other fortresses. The main Russian army proceeded against Varna via Bazarc ı k instead, without back-up from the rear. 13 
 Standoff at Ş umnu and the siege of Varna 
