 These problems would only be exacerbated as an invasion army became a ten-year army of occupation, more especially as Egyptian exports came into intense competition from European markets, and growth slowed. The globalisation of trade was a major catalyst for many of the events of this ten-year period, and crucial to the decisions made by European allies concerning Mehmed Ali. The contest was as much about a share of the international market as about caliphal leadership. There is considerable logic to Lawson’s assertion that the invasion of Syria was prompted by a need to expand the cash crop base, as the contest over shrinking agricultural surpluses intensified. The would-be beneficiaries of such an invasion were Cairene merchant families with Damascene connections. 43 
 İ brahim Pasha and the siege of Acre 
 Mehmed Ali’s ostensible ally in Acre was Abdullah Pasha, Governor of Sidon, whom he had helped restore to favour in Mahmud II’s court by lending him 11,000 purses in 1822, but who now stood in his way as the sultan’s protector of the Levant coast in Acre. 44 The official reason for the invasion was to punish Abdullah for sheltering some 6,000 fellahin recruits who had fled the Egyptian delta for Sidon. On 2 November 1831, İ brahim Pasha left Egypt at the head of a fleet of 16 ships of war, and 17 transport vessels, carrying his staff officers, 40 small cannons and several siege cannons, along with supplies for an army of 30,000. The troops, meanwhile, had begun the march overland via al-Arish to Jaffa. Their departure had been delayed until late autumn as the result of an outbreak of cholera which killed as many as 5,000 soldiers and 150,000 civilians in just over a month, perhaps as much as three per cent of the population. 45 Contemporary estimates of the Egyptian commitment to Syria ranged from 25,000–100,000 per year over ten years, if irregulars are included in the figures. 46 
 In mid-November 1831, İ brahim’s army entered Jaffa and Haifa without resistance. By December, Sidon, Tyre, Beirut, Tripoli, Latakia, Jerusalem and Nablus swore allegiance to İ brahim Pasha, and he could concentrate on the fortress of Acre. İ brahim commanded 30,000. Abdullah was said to have 2,500 men and a year’s supplies. A six-month siege ensued, during which İ brahim consolidated his position in the surrounding area. The Maronites of Mt Lebanon, under Emir Bashir II (Sihab), at first remained neutral but were persuaded by Mehmed Ali himself to join İ brahim, which gave him the command of Syria from Damascus south. 47 