 Meanwhile, in early May, Grand Vizier Re ş id Mehmed had marched out of Ş umnu against the Russians, towards Pravadi, at the head of not more than 15,000–20,000 combatants. With Hüseyin Pasha’s troops, the Ottomans probably had 60,000 in the field. The Russians had available only 12,000–14,000 to set against them. Two columns advanced on the Russian positions around Varna. The 10,000 troops under the grand vizier encountered the Russian entrenchments before Pravadi, and inflicted considerable losses, but failed to seize the day, and fell back on Ş umnu. Still, the determination of the troops and their commanders – both Re ş id Mehmed and Halil Pasha, commander of the other column, were wounded in the attack – bode well for the reformed military organisation. By the end of May, Hüseyin Pasha, at the head of a second army, marched from Rusçuk, where he had been sent to raise another force, to join up with the grand vizier, but they were unable to coordinate that effort. On 28 May, Re ş id Mehmed and 40,000 men advanced on the Russian position at Kozluca. Twenty regiments of infantry and five of cavalry – all Asakir-i Mansure – formed the core of this army. A Russian relief corps of 15,000 under General Pahlen left the siege at Silistre in early June and after a forced march of five days covered the sixty miles to join up with the Russian forces at Pravadi. On 10 June, the grand vizier might have been able to force the issue against the spread-out and much-taxed Russian side, but General Diebitsch took the initiative on 11 June instead, barring the grand vizier’s passage on the Pravadi road back to Ş umnu. This proved to be the defining battle of the war. The Ottoman soldiers, charging impetuously at first, soon dispersed, and turned the battle into a rout. Hüseyin’s impassivity the previous year had allowed the Russians to recuperate over the winter; Re ş id Mehmed’s impetuosity cost him his army, and this battle of Kulewtscha cost Mahmud II his war. 19 
 Too weak to follow up on the victory, General Diebitsch and his army debated strategy, redeployed troops, and began negotiations with Re ş id Mehmed. Much skirmishing continued in the area around Ş umnu, and the Russians faced hostility and resistance from armed local inhabitants. Asakir-i Mansure troops were observed exercising in camp as negotiations continued. After nearly four weeks before Ş umnu, the Russian forces were considerably increased by the arrival of the troops and baggage train from Silistre. The Russians decided to bypass Ş umnu, cross the Balkan mountain range and aim for Edirne. Aydos, Misivri, Burgas all fell to the Russians, and in nine days, the Russian forces had covered one hundred miles almost unchecked. The grand vizier did send 10,000–12,000 men to Aydos, but they were scattered by a brigade of Russians under General Rüdiger. Aydos became Russian headquarters. ‘The filth of the camp, and of the town itself, was frightful: hundreds of dead bodies of men, horses, and camels lay festering in the streets and courts. The atmosphere was poisoned to such a degree that the seeds of the diseases which henceforth raged among the Russian troops were probably sown during their stay in Aydos.’ 20 About 25,000 men gathered at Aydos; the grand vizier is thought to have had only 15,000 at Ş umnu. Each side continued to overestimate the threat of the other. The Russians especially faced a completely collapsed military system, demoralised soldiers, desertion and plundering on all sides. South of the Balkan range, the Christian population welcomed the conquering army. Still, on 31 July in the march on Yanbolu (Jamboli), the Russians encountered a regiment of the new Ottoman troops, who attacked their batteries steadfastly, inflicted considerable losses, but retreated in the night towards Edirne. The Russians found huge stores of biscuit and cartridges. 21 
 By mid-August, Diebitsch was within a day’s march or two of Edirne, with 20,000 troops, when the grand vizier proposed an armistice. At a three-hour battle at Slivno on 12 August, the Russians cut off the grand vizier’s route to Edirne. By the nineteenth of the same month, four weeks after crossing the Balkans, the Russians camped before Edirne, a town of some 80,000 inhabitants. It was estimated in the Russian camp that at least 20,000 combatants were in Edirne, under Halil and İ brahim Pashas. In the event, the Ottoman commanders negotiated the immediate capitulation of the city, and were allowed to retire unmolested. The Russians had still to fear the forces of late-comer Bu ş atl ı Mustafa Pasha of İ ş kodra, who had served the sultan in helping to defeat Ali Pasha of Iannina, and also in the Greek revolt, but remained passive in the war with the Russians. He was said to have had 30,000 Albanians and Bosnians under his command in Sofia, with another 10,000 advance troops as near as Filibe. The 30,000 troops that were reputedly sent by Mahmud II in spring 1829 to man the fortresses of Istanbul, the Bosphorus, and, as we have seen, the coastal areas below Varna, had performed poorly. Ş umnu, though under-strength, still remained unconquered, but the will to fight had left the imperial Ottoman forces and panic reigned in Istanbul. 
 So it was with relief on both sides that negotiations began between the two belligerents, urged on by the return of French and British ambassadors to Istanbul, and enabled by Prussian mediation. The Ottomans admitted defeat in mid-August by acquiescing to the Treaty of London (1827) and the Convention of Akkirman (1826). The plenipotentiaries first met on 1 September. The sultan was prepared to accept all the territorial cessions in Europe but initially resisted ceding those in the Caucasus, and was in despair over the size of the indemnity, originally set at 11,500,000 ducats or 400 million kuru ş . An additional show of force by Diebitsch, by marching his men to within 60 miles of Istanbul, prompted British Ambassador Gordon and French Ambassador Guilleminot to intercede on behalf of the sultan: ‘The Sublime Porte has formally declared to us, and we do not hesitate to attest to the truth of the declaration, that [by a march on Istanbul], it will cease to exist; and in annihilating its power the most terrible anarchy will strike indiscriminately, without means of defence, at the Christian and Muslim populations of the Empire.’ 22 The Treaty of Adrianople was signed by the two sides on 14 September 1829. 
 Bu ş atl ı Mustafa Pasha was not yet finished: in spite of the sultan’s insistence that he lay down arms, he refused, on the grounds that he had no money with which to dismiss his Albanians. He informed General Diebitsch that he would arrive in Edirne on 10 October, to take up winter quarters. The Russians sent a small detachment to face him down, and routed the Pasha’s forces. He and his largely Albanian irregulars would spend the winter laying waste to the country around Filibe, much to the chagrin of the sultan, who was later forced to send an army against him in mountainous Albania. The Russians evacuated Edirne on 20 November 1829, after Nicholas I ratified the treaty on 3 November. Istanbul rejoiced. 23 
 Assessing the new army 
 Before turning to the implications of the treaty, and the next phase of the Eastern Question, a few comments are in order about the state of the sultan’s new army. Mahmud II had broken the spine of the traditional order, but barely begun the inculcation of systematic discipline and hierarchical command characteristic of the European armies. We have already seen some evidence of the new style of control on the field, especially of heretofore unruly cavalry, of the use of night attacks and concerted sorties that observers remarked as part of the new order. Steadfastness in sieges, long an Ottoman speciality, was accompanied by an increasingly sophisticated use of artillery against besiegers. Russian officer Count Pozzo di Borgo wrote in June 1829: ‘The Emperor has put the Turkish system to the proof, and His Majesty has found it to possess a commencement of physical and moral organisation which it hitherto had not. If the sultan has been enabled to offer us a more determined and regular resistance whilst he had scarcely assembled together the elements of his new plan of reform and ameliorations, how formidable should we have found him had he had time to give it more solidity and to render the barrier impenetrable which we find so much difficulty in surmounting.’ 24 
 In spite of shortages in 1828–29, the new Ottoman soldier could still count on being better fed than his Russian opposite number. Turkish soldiers were heard to say, as they threw out their offal, that it was ‘for the dogs and the Russians’. By contrast, as we have seen, the Russian soldier lived on daily rations of black bread, a bit of salt, and a portion of spirits. Urquhart, admittedly a notorious Russophobe, noted: ‘the steam of the Nizam kettles and the sight of its Pilaf is more alarming to [Russia] than all the phrases that ever were penned on the rights of man.’ 25 
 Further aspects of military discipline make their startling appearance in 1828. Russian prisoners were neither automatically killed, nor made into slaves. Instead, Mahmud II had them paraded through the streets of the city during the winter of 1828/29. Body parts, in return for cash payments, were forbidden during this war, a striking change from the Greek rebellion, when ear counts were routinely used to proclaim victory. Street reaction to that was caustic: ‘Very pretty this! We are not to cut the pezvanks ’ throats when we have an opportunity, and we must not make them slaves; no, though the blessed prophet himself has authorised us so to do, and has declared the captive of the sword to be the property of the captor.’ ‘No,’ another reportedly said, ‘if you see an unclean Muscove kill your very child, or your brother in battle, and you should afterwards make him prisoner, you are to put your yataghan into your girdle, and kindly tell him to walk this way – talk not of blood for blood, and the ties of kindred and affection, you must not even slit the Karata ’s ears.’ ‘And when they come to Stambool as prisoners of the sultan,’ his companion rejoined, ‘I understand that as the bagnio is not good enough for them, they are to be lodged in serais and fed on pilaff and kibaubs.’ 26 
 The newly ‘civilised’ army had serious shortcomings, but the main problem for the sultan was recruitment, for he had not convinced his subjects of the legitimacy of his project to transform the empire. For the next two years, serious revolts, such as that of Mustafa Pasha of İ ş kodra, continued across the sultan’s territories, as if the Treaty of Adrianople signalled the nail in the coffin of empire. The revolts were undoubtedly stimulated by the chaos, shortages and exactions of the two years of war, but were also instigated by opponents of the new order, and by legitimate fears of what conscription meant. The sultan turned his new troops against those internal revolts, and the new army honed its skills against its fellows, as Mehmed Ali was forced to do in the initial stages of building of his new Egyptian army. 
