 To illustrate that point, let us take the example of Mü ş ir Zarif Mustafa Pasha (1816–61), participant at Konya in 1832 above, and later Commander of the Anatolia army in the spring of 1854. His training appears to have been scribal, for he joined the Hassa regiment as a scribe at the age of 14. ‘Hamdi Bey [unknown] came into the office, and began talking to his acquaintances, and I was among them. I’ve been made a major, he said, and I am looking for a secretary to replace me. Is there any one having such a wish, he began by asking. Me, I said. Let me see your writing, he said. Is your father willing? Whether he is or not, I want to be a soldier, I said. Well, let’s go, he said. From there, we mounted up and went straight to the barracks. The late Sultan Mahmud II was there. Hamdi Bey took me directly to the office of Ahmed [Fevzi Pasha, later Grand Admiral]. Here is my replacement, he said. This is his handwriting. My son, do you want to be a soldier? he asked. Yes I do, sir. Come, follow me, he ordered.’ He was given a uniform and a sword. Once in a while, they were drilled. He was assigned as mülazimlik (Lieutenant), and a substitute for a Captain of the Hassa . His first action was a year later in the entourage of Re ş id Mehmed’s campaign in the far reaches of Albania (1831). It was his first journey outside Istanbul. He next fought in the campaign against İ brahim, in 1832, as we have seen. In 1845, at the age of 30, he was made a Ferik . All those around him, with few exceptions, were raised and promoted this way. The striking thing about the Konya campaigns is the youth of all the commanders. 69 
 The Hassa was the imperial guard which replaced the old Bostanci palace guards and remained under the particular attention of the sultan. By 1835 there were 11,000 men in the Hassa , and it was there that the sultan set up the School of Military Sciences for officer training beyond Hüsrev’s reach. After 1834, during the lull in the conflict with Mehmed Ali, Mahmud II used these reforms as a means of curbing the power of Hüsrev. After Grand Vizier and Serasker Re ş id Mehmed, Hüsrev’s protégé, was captured and sent to Egypt, Mahmud II appointed (Mehmed Emin) Rauf Pasha to the post. Rauf Pasha, five times grand vizier in this period, was known to be an independent. Ahmed Fevzi, another enemy of Hüsrev, commander of the Hassa , was raised first to Ferik and then to Mü ş ir , and in 1836 to Grand Admiral. Mahmud II appointed his own courtier Said Mehmed to the post of Mü ş ir of the Asakir-i Mansure in 1836, instead of Hüsrev’s preferred candidate, Halil R ı fat Pasha. Both Said and Halil had married daughters of the sultan. Hüsrev Pasha was dismissed as Serasker in early 1837. 70 
 Immediately thereafter, Mahmud established the first of two important councils: the Ş ura-yi Askeriye (Military Council), inaugurated in July 1837, composed of twelve army officers from all the branches and two civilians, one of whom was a jurist. The role of the new Council was to advise and oversee the office of Serasker . The orders for its foundation afford an interesting glimpse into the degree to which Mahmud II supervised the reforms: the new council regulations included instructions about using a round table and chairs, rather than the traditional divan-style low couches and pillows. Coffee and smoking were prohibited in the room. Attending servants were forbidden entrance, and were not allowed to loiter or make noise outside the room. Junior officers were to be encouraged to speak first, so as not to be intimidated. 
 Of most interest is the fact that the very first topic was the reduction of the term of military service to five years, a decision incorporated in the Gülhane decree two years later. The system of councils proved popular and proliferated across the military system, prompting the sultan to introduce further such consultative bodies at the top of the hierarchy: a Privy Council, the Meclis-i Valâ-yi Ahkâm-i Adliye (High Council of Judicial Ordinances), and an equivalent for the Sublime Porte, the Ş ura-yi Bab-i Âli (Council of the Sublime Porte). Both were in place by March 1838, and rather astonishingly, Mahmud II chose Hüsrev Pasha as chairman of the Privy Council. It must be said that regardless of his motivations, Hüsrev Pasha remained steadfast in his support of the sultan’s reforms; indeed we will find him reponsible for organising the redif below. 71 
 In ten years, every aspect of the Ottoman administration had been touched by the reforming hand of the sultan. Most of the changes at the centre remained tentative, but the seeds of new forms of governance had been planted which would allow the following generation of reforming bureaucrats to continue the process, and dominate the first two sultan successors to Mahmud II. Two other problems plagued the reform agenda: fiscal crises and the acute lack of manpower. 
 Devaluation, taxes on luxury items, the conversion of timars to crown lands, and the confiscation of estates of ‘enemies’ have already been described as methods used by Mahmud II to finance his reforms, even though he is also credited with eliminating the müsadere . The recovered land leases of Ali Pasha of Iannina, for example, some 1,158,000 kuru ş , were the main revenues for a new Army Finance Secretariat established in 1827. Mahmud II had also attempted to divert the revenues of the charitable endowments by creating a Directorate for that purpose, which worked with some success under his successors and undermined the power of the ulema. Other measures included a surtax on the poll tax on non-Muslims, specifically for the army, and the increased use of Rusûmati Cihadiye , or Holy War duties. A real attempt was made to instill honesty and regularity in accounting methods, and payments of salary, but the conflict with Mehmed Ali derailed the efforts under way. In early 1835, the Sultan was spending 2,000,000 kuru ş a month on the army; by summer 1835, it was 4,500,000, and by early 1839, the amount rose to 18,000,000 kuru ş a month, when annual revenues have been estimated to have been at somewhere between 300,000,000 to 800,000,000 a year. 72 
 We have a snapshot of the army in 1841 which illustrates the continuing burden of the military expenses. For Istanbul alone, the cost of maintaining close to 40,000 soldiers annually was 69,285,826 kuru ş . (It must be remembered this was a year when the war with Mehmed Ali was winding down.) Some 65,093 soldiers were scattered in fortresses across the empire, at a cost of 88,357,237 kuru ş . Discussions at the Meclis-i Vâlâ were estimating the cost at 197,383,000, which did not even include such expenses as munitions or tents. 73 
 As one solution to the failure of conscription, and to try to minimise expenses, Mahmud and his advisers revived the idea of a national militia, first floated under Selim III. The new military organisation, known as the Redif ( Asakir-i Redife-i Mansure , or Victorious Reserve Soldiers, also known as ihtiyat , yet later yedek ), would survive as an organisation with various reforms until 1912, when it was merged with the regular army. It deserves particular attention for the lasting impact it would have on all of Ottoman society. It is also one of the better-documented reforms of the period because all the regulations were published in the new Takvim-i Vekayi . 
 A new national reserve system 
 The primary reason for establishing such a system must have been the need to supply reinforcements to the armies of Anatolia where Egyptian occupation had considerably reduced the areas of the empire available to Ottoman recruitment. A secondary aim was to create a means of screening young recruits, and to ease the burden of rapid levies on the countryside. In May of 1834, Mahmud II assembled a large council of prominent statesmen and soldiers, coincidentally in Istanbul as his daughter’s wedding guests, to discuss the creation of an empire-wide auxiliary force, likened to the Prussian Landwehr . Among those present were Hüsrev Pasha, and the first Serasker Agha Hüseyin Pasha, as well as former grand vizier İ zzet Mehmed Pasha. 