 On hearing of the latest defeat, Mahmud II acquiesced to Mehmed Ali’s request for negotiations, and sent Grand Admiral Halil Pasha to Egypt for that purpose in mid-January 1833. Halil Pasha was instructed to reinstate Mehmed Ali as Governor of Egypt, Crete, Jiddah, Sidon, Tripoli, Jerusalem and Nablus, but not Aleppo and Damascus. Tortuous negotiations, mostly facilitated by the Russians and the French, were carried on between Alexandria and Istanbul until May 1833 when the convention of Kütahya was actually signed. By March, Mehmed Ali wanted all of Syria and Adana, İ çel, Alaiye and Silifke in Anatolia. İ brahim Pasha pressed his father repeatedly to ask for independence from the sultan, a stance he apparently took from the beginning of the invasion, but Mehmed Ali, at this stage at least, did not envisage independence as an option. 59 Mahmud II finally acceded to the appointment of İ brahim as governor of Damascus, Aleppo and Adana in a verbal commitment on 5 April. Still, giving away Adana, heartland Anatolia, must have rankled with the sultan, because further negotiations turned on İ brahim’s appointment there. Mahmud II finally conferred on İ brahim an appointment as Muhassil (Tax Collector) of the district of Adana in early May 1833, with the proviso that he immediately begin withdrawing his troops. İ brahim left garrisons in Urfa, Mara ş and Antep, outside the Adana jurisdiction. As of 10 May 1834, Mehmed Ali was to begin paying a tribute of 30,000 purses to the sultan for the newly-acquired territories. 60 
 The European powers and the Treaty of Hünkâr İ skelesi 
 No one in either of the courts, or in diplomatic circles, expected the Convention of Kütahya to be the end of the matter. Indeed, the situation had become rather delicate, once Mahmud II requested Russian support in early 1833. Two envoys to Palmerston’s government in London had failed to generate the British naval blockade of Alexandria requested by the sultan. Envoy Nam ı k Pasha left London for Istanbul on 17 March 1833, empty-handed. The French offered to mediate, as they sided with Mehmed Ali throughout the period. The Russians offered military assistance, as both naval and land forces stood a few days’ distance of Istanbul. On 2 February, Mahmud II made a formal request to the Russian Minister in Istanbul for military support. By 20 February Russian ships with troops on board anchored in the Bosphorus, at Beykoz and Büyükdere. The troops camped at Hünkâr İ skelesi on the Asian shore. Meanwhile the French continued unsuccessfully to act as brokers. As we have seen, Mehmed Ali’s demands were enlarged by early March, and he sent Istanbul his ultimatum. Mahmud II counter-offered to İ brahim Pasha directly in Kütahya in early April, as described above. On 5 April, a second contingent of 5,000 troops arrived on more Russian ships. France and Great Britain reacted by sending squadrons to Besika Bay just beyond the Dardanelles. Still, relations between the two great powers was at that moment not sufficiently cordial to force the issue with Russia. In the end the Russians left, only after they had secured the Treaty of Hünkâr İ skelesi, an eight-year mutual defensive alliance, with pledges to consult with one another in matters of security (8 July 1833). A famous ‘secret’ article was also included, by which the Ottomans guaranteed to close the Dardanelles to all foreign warships in the event of an attack on Russia. 61 Simultaneously, Tsar Nicholas I was negotiating the Münchengrätz Convention with Prussia and Austria, signed in September, 1833. That agreement undertook to oppose further Mehmed Ali expansion, and maintain Ottoman integrity. This, as we have seen, was to be the new Russian policy towards Istanbul. 62 
 The British spent the rest of the decade re-establishing their relationship with the Ottomans, somewhat alarmed at the influence the Russians had acquired with the sultan. With the Kütahya agreement, Mehmed Ali had nominal authority over the two routes to India, the Suez–Red Sea, and the Euphrates–Basra in Iraq, the latter of which, coincidentally, British explorer Captain Chesney would successfully navigate with a steamer in 1836–37. Lord Palmerston, both Foreign Minister (1830–34) and then Prime Minister (1835–41), who once viewed the collapse of the empire as imminent, did an abrupt about-face. ‘Because British policy was Russophobe and Egyptophobe, it now became strongly Turcophile … The Ottoman Empire was to be preserved, supported, reformed, and strengthened. … In the 1830s Britain prescribed a regimen of what might be called trade and aid for the Ottoman Empire.’ 63 Palmerston gave immediate orders that the Levant fleet be strengthened and stand ready to serve the sultan if Mehmed Ali threatened further action, upon authorisation of the British ambassador in Istanbul. It was a stand-off that never really threatened war, but presaged further crises in the decade to come. The next phase of the Eastern Question had begun. 
 Palmerston offered both military and naval missions to Mahmud II as a gesture to redress Britain’s former neglect. The naval mission had considerable success, and was instrumental in the final showdown with Mehmed Ali, 1839–41. The military mission was a failure, however, for many of the reasons we have seen before. Palmerston sent a Polish officer in British service, by the name of Chrzanowski, to Istanbul, suggesting he be added to the sultan’s staff. He was joined by a Captain DuPlat and Lieutenant Colonel Considine, but they were not received well, and abandoned the effort by 1837. 64 Moltke and the Prussians who entered Turkish service about the same time fared better, largely because they advised without insisting on Ottoman military rank. Only with the Crimean War was that pattern broken – especially, as we will see, in the Caucasus. 
 Ottoman reforms 1834–39 
 Mahmud II pressed forward with his reform agenda, touching on nearly every aspect of Ottoman society. In 1835, three independent branches of government were reorganised: the military ( seyfiye ), the judiciary ( ilmiye ), and the civil bureaucracy ( kalemiye ). This elevated the Serasker to equality with the ş eyhülislam and grand vizier, and reduced the status of the latter, heretofore known as the ‘absolute deputy’ of the sultan. It also marked the beginning of a true civil service, although well-trained candidates for offices were several decades away. Mahmud II understandably had to concentrate on the military, so it should come as no surprise that one of the long-term consequences of these reforms was the valuation of the military over the civilian career. Salaries for the officer corps and related staffs grew tremendously in an era of great fiscal crisis. Educational institutions were revived or inaugurated. The naval and military engineering schools continued to function. A medical school to train doctors for the army had been opened in 1827, but was reorganised in 1838, when it was transferred to Galatasaray, the venerable palace training school. An imperial music school followed by 1834, as well as the School of Military Sciences ( Mekteb-i Ulum-i Harbiye ) mentioned in the previous chapter. By 1838, the sultan was contemplating a system of secular elementary and secondary schools, a few of which were opened in his lifetime, and which he celebrated on his tours of Thrace and Bulgaria, as we have seen. 65 
 Major initiatives around diplomatic practice also occurred at this time. Mahmud II had attempted to send numerous young men overseas for education in 1827, much as had Mehmed Ali in 1826, with only limited success. The language barrier was an acute one, which Mahmud addressed in 1833 by creating a Translation Bureau in Istanbul to train local Muslims in the language of diplomacy. It grew to a staff of 30 by 1841. In 1834, embassies were reopened in major European capitals, and the young diplomats and translators sent to Paris, Vienna and London formed the nucleus of the Tanzimat leadership for the following decades. Among them were Mustafa Re ş id, Ali and Fuad Pashas, all future grand viziers, and protegés of Reis Pertev Pasha, himself chief opponent of Hüsrev Pasha until the latter engineered Pertev’s downfall in 1837. 66 
 The language of governance also changed at this point. Government departments were reorganised as ministries. For example, in 1835–36, the former offices of the Kahya and Reis , both under the grand vizier at the Sublime Porte, were renamed the Ministries of Civil and Foreign Affairs. By Mahmud II’s death in 1839, Civil Affairs had become the Ministry of the Interior. In 1838, the office of Grand Vizier briefly became the office of the Prime Minister ( Ba ş vekil ). These changes reflected the increasing importance of negotiations with the European powers, but also a slow rationalisation of the tasks of a modern bureaucracy. 
 In 1831, to promote the progress of reform, the sultan agreed to the publication of Le moniteur Ottoman by Alexandre Blacque, founder of the Spectateur de l’Orient (later Courier de Smyrne ) in Izmir. A year later, a Turkish version, Takvim-i Vekayi , started publication. Both served initially as official gazettes. The introductory article of Le moniteur made an explicit reference to the important (and traditional) role of historiographers and annalists in the empire, and the contents of both presses were regularly reviewed by the sultan himself. A more independent newspaper, the Ceride-i Havadis , started publication in Istanbul in 1840 after Mahmud II’s death, but a critical and more independent press began only after the Crimean War. 67 
 Major changes continued to unfold in the military, but many of the reforms were blocked by the continued influence of Hüsrev Pasha. After the 1828–29 war, Hüsrev was regarded as the most powerful Ottoman after the sultan. When Moltke saw him in 1836, Hüsrev was more than 80 years old, having served in various posts for over 33 years, and survived (and contributed to) some of the most convulsive decades of the empire. He had managed, by the end of Mahmud II’s reign, to combine in himself the functions of the office of Serasker , commander of the Asakir-i Mansure troops and all other aspects of the military: Commandant of Istanbul, Chief of the General Staff, and Minister of War. Chief of Police of Istanbul was an appropriate position, continued Moltke, ‘for an individual who controlled vast wealth, had spies everywhere, and without whom it was impossible to operate. His sole passion was for power, and woe to those who stood in his way!’ 68 He and his protegés literally controlled almost all the offices of the empire. 
 Reform of the designations and assignments of the officer hierarchy had been under way for some time, nonetheless, corresponding to the changes in organisation of the army. In 1832, brigades ( liva ) were established, and brigade commander, Mirliva (Brigadier General), was added to the ranks of Mü ş ir (Marshal, rank of Vizier, later Field Marshal), and Ferik (General). By 1837, there were 64 officers designated as Ferik . The problem of too many chiefs and no subalterns remained an acute one, however, a situation in the Ottoman command structure which continued until after the Crimean War. A true general staff was very slow to emerge. Literacy and training remained a significant part of the problem, of course, but household politics, and especially the extraordinary reach of Hüsrev Pasha, dominated all else as the primary obstacle. 
