 Who were the new recruits? By sultanic decree, they were Muslims, but the ethnic core of the new, ‘docile’ army was made up of ‘Turks’, the Türk u ş a ğ ı ’ (‘Turkish lads’) which Ottoman commanders increasingly saw as the most reliable, most malleable cannon fodder. The word ‘Turk’ here is as much an ethnic stereotype as ‘Albanians’, or ‘Kurds’, or, as we have seen, ‘Greeks’. The difficulties of recruiting other populations were not just a result of Mahmud II’s choice to reassert the primacy of Muslim orthodoxy and shar‘ia as part of his imperial image, but also because of his sense of betrayal by his Greek subjects, hence the categories of ‘disloyal’ or ‘unsuited’ (for conscription or recruitment) in public documents. Suspect groups included converts, heterodox Muslims, Greeks ( Yunanl ı ), Albanians ( Amavut , virtually synonymous with Bektashis and classed together with Greeks), Kurds, Bosnians, and Arabs, to name those most frequently evoked. Converts were explicitly barred from enlistment. Such categories were but vague generalisations based on military prowess and faithfulness to the dynasty. The attitudes so expressed prevented a systematic rationalisation of conscription, which, coupled with fiscal difficulties and lack of accurate census information, crippled the Ottoman military system for the next decade. When the sultan attempted to extend the Asakir-i Mansure regime to Damascus, for example, he envisioned sending troops from Istanbul or from Sivas and Adana to replace the locals. Local recruits were not to be considered, as they were too attached in the old system, and proved more than able to resist conscription. 27 
 During the Greek revolt, Ottoman commanders in the Balkan fortresses had repeatedly requested recruits from Turkic populations, such as the Evlad-i Fatihan mentioned previously, as antidotes to the Albanians. Greeks and Albanians occasionally collaborated, as when they served under Ali Pasha, but more often fought one another. Albanians were perceived to be of a rebellious nature even when they were not. Albanian territories were Bektashi territories, and hence banned from the new army, but Albanians were also fiercely independent mercenaries. In 1828–29, with the exception of Ömer Vrione’s troops, they opted out. After the 1828–29 war, the regiments of Fatihan re-established by Mahmud II became regular regiments of the Asakir-i Mansure , and were instrumental in the pacification of northern Albania during Mustafa Pasha’s revolt. 
 A further comment seems in order about Bosnia and northern Albania. Here, rebellion was undoubtedly driven by an intense sense of betrayal. After all, Bosnians and Albanians had heroic histories as part of the imperial military system. Some have argued that old ethnic rivalries, in this case Balkan versus Caucasus (Circassian, Georgian) military elites (the latter dominating Mahmud II’s circle at the time), contributed to the contempt for the ‘ Arnavut ’ repeatedly expressed by officers of the new army. A more compelling argument is that the radical reordering of the premises of local rule and military contributions had a profound effect on local economies and traditional relationships. From the military reformers’ points of view, such independent warrior bands represented an affront to the push to centralised order. Still, Re ş id Mehmed seems to have been particularly ruthless in his campaign against the once-loyal Mustafa Pasha. Mahmud II prepared the field by simply removing Mustafa Pasha’s right to administer taxes. Mustafa responded by a call to the Muslims of Albania to take arms against an infidel: ‘As everyone knows, Re ş id Mehmed Pasha is the enemy of the entire Muslim community and is in particular the deadly enemy of Arnavudluk, and it is obvious from his character and actions that he intends to destroy us’, a message he sent not only as the governor of İ ş kodra but on behalf of the ‘Allied Muslims’ ( muttefikan-i müsliman ). 
 It seemed particularly galling to Muslims in general that Mahmud failed to defeat the Christian armies, and aimed his wrath at those of his subjects who were most loyal. 28 Mustafa Pasha marched against Re ş id Pasha in Monastir at the head of 10,000 Albanians in 1830–31, and was barely defeated. Bosnian rebels, led by Kapudan Husayn Gradasevic, attacked Kosovo but agreed to negotiations once Mustafa Pasha had been defeated. Rivalries among the powerful the Muslim landowners kept the rebellion from succeeding, in spite of military successes against the Ottoman army sent into the area. The insurrection was finally put down in 1832. Ali Pasha (R ı dvano ğ lu), Kapudan Husayn’s chief rival, was appointed as Governor of Herzegovina. Mehmed Ali’s attack on Syria delayed further imposition of the reforms, as the immediate concern became raising an army to confront the Egyptian army of İ brahim Pasha in Anatolia. Re ş id Mehmed was charged by Mahmud II to do just that. Many of the rebels were forced into the army that marched into Anatolia. 
 Such instances of massive rebellion by potential recruits only reinforced the presumed unsuitability for the Asakir-i Mansure of men other than of ‘Turkic’ stock. İ brahim Pasha, the Commander of the Vidin fortress in 1828, for example, wrote to ask for Turkish recruits from Hüdavendigar, Kocaeli, Ayd ı n and Sar ı han sancaks (all in Anatolia) to be sent to counterbalance the Albanians, who could only be controlled if dominated by soldiers of another sort ( sair cins asker ). 29 Nevertheless, the sultan could not survive with an army of recruits from Turkic stock only, as they were a minority population in the empire overall, and conscription exhaustion of Turkic Anatolia quickly set in. Albanian soldiers continued to play a role as part of the forces, as we shall see. By the end of his reign, Mahmud and his advisers were considering how to implement universal conscription. The basic conundrum for the military system was not the question of ethnicity, but the question of religion. Mahmud’s views are contradictory in that regard, for he is often viewed as more liberal than his successors regarding non-Muslim rights. There are indications that Ottoman officials began to reiterate the official policy of zimmi tolerance, precisely in response to the rebellions erupting with increasing frequency in largely Christian territories. 
 As early as 1809, Alemdar Mustafa Pasha decreed that Muslims should not use the word infidel ( gâvur ) to refer to Christians, as they served the same God. 30 These ideas are reflected in surviving firmans of Mahmud II, such as that of July 1829, addressed to the Greeks of Morea: ‘There will in the future be no distinctions made between Muslims and raya [reaya] and everybody will be ensured the inviolability of his property, life and honour by a sacred law and my sublime patronage.’ 31 Mahmud II repeated his promises in public on an official tour of Bulgaria in the late 1830s, the first time a sultan had left greater Istanbul in over a century, one of five such journeys he made. 
 Ostensibly he undertook military reviews of the new redif militia organisations, to be discussed below. The trips were, however, an intensive effort to capture the loyalty of his non-Muslim subjects. He moved among them, dressed in western garb, gave speeches, and curtailed excessive ceremony. More importantly, he routinely gave money for the repair of churches and synagogues, and gathered children of all religious communities to stress the importance of education. During a meeting with the leaders of the Principalities in 1837, for example, he said: ‘It is our wish to ensure the peace and security of all inhabitants of our God-protected great states, both Muslim and raya. In spite of all difficulties we are determined to secure the flourishing of the state and the population under our protection.’ Later the same year, he referred to his subjects as his children whom he treated equally, ‘the only difference perceived among them being of a purely religious nature.’ Or at Ş umnu, ‘Your faith is different, but all of you equally guard the law and my Emperor’s will.’ 32 
 Moltke, with Mahmud II in Ş umnu, had this to say about the sultan: ‘In this country where the peasant is accustomed to doing everything gratis, in the name of corvée, for the lord, the sultan pays to cover the cost of his voyage. I was told that he carried on him 2.5 million florins, and a mass of precious objects; we do not pass any destitute or disabled person that the sultan does not order that a gold piece be given to him. At his departure, he left 10,000 florins for the poor of Ş umnu, and took specific measures to insure that the money arrived at its destination and that too much not stay in the fingers of the distributors. The imams were charged with reporting to him. During the voyage, I always saw groups of women holding their supplications above their heads. An officer approached, collected the petitions, and passed them to the almoner. Later, the sultan was promenading in a four-horse phaeton which he himself drove handily; a poor woman lifted a paper high on a cane, but as the procession was passing very rapidly, no one noticed her. Except the sultan, who stopped the horses, despatched an officer and continued on his way.’ 33 These gestures of inclusion and noblesse oblige predate by only a few years the Gülhane rescript of 1839, which promulgated equality of citizenship and empire-wide conscription in the army. The problem of mobilisation of able manpower would become abundantly apparent in the contest over Syria between Mehmed Ali and Mahmud which unfolded after 1831. 34 
 The Treaty of Adrianople, 1829 
 By the Treaty of Adrianople, Russia restored all the cities, harbours, fortresses and districts south of the Danube to the Ottomans. The fortresses of Turnu, Kaleh and Giurgevo, on the left bank of the Danube, were to be razed, and their Ottoman garrisons removed from the Principalities. İ brail, Tulcea, İ sakç ı , Maçin and Köstence fortresses were also razed. By Article III, the Prut remained the Ottoman–Russian frontier, but Russia acquired all the islands of the very mouth of the Danube. Article IV aimed at settling at last the territorial disputes in the Caucasus, as Russia had penetrated as far as Erzurum in the course of this war. By it, Georgia, Imertia, Minrelia, Guria, and the provinces ceded by Persia in the treaty of Türkmançay in February 1828, remained in Russian hands, and the border ran along the edge of the pashal ı ks of Akhaltzikhe, Trabzon, Kars and Erzurum. We will return to these developments in our final chapter. 
 Article V clearly set out the rights of Wallachia and Moldavia, which remained under the nominal suzerainty of the Porte, but the language emphasised their freedom of religion and the right to an independent national administration, guaranteeing the further influence of Russia. The regulations which had been referred to in the Convention of Akkirman became the ‘Organic Regulations’, a document closely identified with the period of Russian domination before Romanian emancipation after the Crimean War. Articles IV and V of the treaty were those concessions that Mahmud II so vigorously resisted in the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest, and delayed signing until absolutely forced to do so in the Convention of Akkirman in 1826. Effectively, the sultan had only the right to invest the hospodars , and maintain a fiction that the Principalities were still an integral part of the Ottoman system. Article VI restored six districts to Serbia, and guaranteed its freedom, another of the much-contested concessions. Finally, Article VII allowed complete freedom of trade in the Black Sea, and passage of merchant ships through both the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles. 