 The Anglo-Russian accord continued, with Tsar Nicholas I visiting England in 1844, to discuss the future of the Ottoman territories with the British Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary. Although no formal agreement was reached, Russian Chancellor Nesselrode later drew up a memorandum that Nicholas I mistakenly took for an Anglo-Russian understanding on the preservation of the empire, part of the misunderstandings that led to the Crimean War. Temporarily defused, the Eastern Question took a backseat to other events in Europe, notably political instability in England and the unrest and revolutions of 1848 in the rest of Europe. The latter brought the problem of the Ottoman future back to the fore, in particular following the struggles in Hungary and the Principalities. 
 Further military reforms: divisional armies 
 The respite from the Egyptian challenge gave the new sultan an opportunity to continue his reform agenda, but his chief agent, Foreign Minister Mustafa Re ş id, had resigned in March of 1841. Ostensibly his resignation was because of his resistance to Mehmed Ali’s demands, but equally because the more conservative forces regained the upper hand in the bureaucracy. Already an effort had been made to prohibit the sale of offices, to regulate the salaries of the state employees, and to reduce the number of internal customs that were levied on a myriad of goods, at least in Istanbul and the provinces of Bursa and Gallipoli, but the speed of the reforms, the unpopularity of many of them, such as the fixed import and export tax rates dictated by the 1838 Anglo-Ottoman Convention, coupled with a bare treasury, forced an inevitable reaction to the ambitious agenda of Re ş id and his protégés. He was packed off as Ambassador to Paris for the next three years. 
 The decade before the Crimean War in Istanbul belongs to Stratford Canning, who returned to Istanbul in 1842, and would serve as British Ambassador, with one visit home, until 1853. His belligerence, self-importance, and religious zeal set a tone for diplomacy in Istanbul that did little to support the reformers, or stimulate the admiration of the city’s foreign community. His personal focus was on establishing a Protestant millet and church in Jerusalem. (The first Protestant missions had been allowed into Istanbul in 1831). His method was to attack the Ottoman religious establishment and the shar‘ia, in the name of religious freedom, and promote the proselytising of Christians (largely Armenians) which was already underway, and was considerable by 1853. Ambassador Canning was personally responsible for a crusade which became a worldwide clamour about Christian martydom by Turks and Muslim fanatics. 7 This had obvious deleterious effects on the reform efforts, especially as Mustafa Re ş id served as Canning’s ally and chief instrument, and contributed to the poisonous environment of sectarianism which exploded in violence after the Crimean War. It also stimulated much of the fog of misunderstanding around the War itself. 
 Sultans Abdülmecid and Abdülaziz (1861–76) carried on with the modernisation of the palace and the image of the sultan by making public appearances in Istanbul, travelling in the countryside, enacting ceremonies, and presenting certificates and medals of valour typical of their absolutist neighbours in Moscow and Vienna. They maintained four separate establishments, and their reigns are notable for the increasing size and power of the bureaucracy (the ‘Sublime Porte’), the elaboration of the palace service ( mabeyn ), the profligate habits of the dynasty, and financial scandals that created a crisis in 1861. Abdülmecid has the distinction of accepting the first international loans for the empire, when the Ottoman Bank, largely with British capital, was established in 1856. He also built the extravagent Dolmabahçe Palace, completed in 1853. 
 Meanwhile, military reform was carried on by the old guard who surrounded the young sultan. These included Hüsrev Pasha, Halil Rifat Pasha, (who, it will be remembered, had married into Mahmud II’s family, served twice as Grand Vizier, but continued as Grand Admiral for four different terms until 1855), and Damat Mehmed Ali Pasha, also a son-in-law of the royal household, who was Grand Admiral five times, Serasker twice (1849–51, 53–54), and Grand Vizier in 1851–53. In 1842, the sultan himself seems to have exerted some control over affairs of state. He was all of nineteen. In August 1842 Rauf Pasha was reappointed Grand Vizier, and Mustafa Nuri Pasha was Serasker (1840–43). Mustafa Nuri was a product of Mahmud II’s inner circle, the Mabeyn , and had been appointed Private Secretary in 1823. Following several short terms as governor in Rumelia, he was appointed Serasker in 1840. Hasan R ı za Pasha, his successor, under whose aegis the next, important round of army reforms would be promulgated, was also introduced into Mahmud’s inner court at a young age. After his first term as Minister, from 1843–45, he would be reappointed to the post seven more times, until April 1876. Damat Mehmed Ali Pasha (1853–54) and Hasan R ı za Pasha (1854–55) were the Seraskers during the Crimean War. Even our old friend Hüsrev Pasha was briefly Serasker again during 1846, nine years before his death in 1855. 
 What is so striking is the closed circle at the top of the military command, and the much-attested parochialism, corruption and ignorance. 8 What we have also seen is the inability of the Mekteb-i Harbiye to produce sufficient numbers of qualified officers, a phenomenon which is undoubtedly connected to the grip of the household patronage system on the court. The competent field commanders of the Crimean generation arose in the provinces, not at court. A significant general command, officer training system and a modern Ministry of War are all post-1870 developments. Nonetheless, the Office of the Serasker remained extremely influential in the reigns of Abdülmecid and Abdülaziz, especially in the latter, for the reasons suggested, and because of the prominence accorded to defence of remaining Ottoman territories. 
 New military regulations were instituted in 1843 and 1846. The army was renamed the Asakir-i Nizamiye-yi Ş ahane (or simply nizamiye , Regular Army) in 1841. The law of 6 September 1843 became known as the R ı za regulations, as much of the system survived until after the turn of the century. The Gülhane Edict had noted: ‘Although, as we have said, the defence of the country is a matter of importance, and that it is the duty for all the inhabitants to supply soldiers for this purpose, it has become necessary to establish laws to regulate the contingents which each locality, according to the necessity of the moment, must provide, and to reduce to four or five years the period of military service. For to take, without regard to the respective population of different areas, from one more, and from another fewer, men than they can supply, is simultaneously to do an injustice and strike a moral blow to agriculture and industry; in the same way to keep soldiers in the service for the whole of their lives is to reduce them to despair and contribute to the depopulation of the countryside.’ 9 
 The new law, which was actually an elaboration of the redif law of 1834, addressed these problems directly by creating a system of five regional armies ( ordus ). These were located as follows: the first army, the Guards, in Üsküdar (the Hassa ordusu ); the second in Istanbul (and latterly Ankara, called the Dersaadet ordusu ); the third army for the European territories, in Manast ı r ( Rumeli ordusu ); the fourth army in eastern Anatolia, at Harput ( Anadolu ordusu ), and the fifth army to guard the Arab provinces at Damascus and Aleppo ( Ş am ordusu ). The Egyptian contingent of 18,000 was to serve as reserve reinforcements for the Damascus army. A sixth army was added in 1848, in Iraq ( Ba ğ dat ordusu ), and was responsible for the Arabian Peninsula. Each of the first five armies was composed of two services: the nizamiye active and the redif reserve, plus auxiliaries and ba ş ı bozuk (irregular cavalry), the last to be called up only in times of war. Such irregular cavalry could be Cossacks or Tatars from the Dobruja, or Türkmen and Kurds from eastern Anatolia, as well as a myriad of tribesmen from the Caucasus. Each army commander was to hold the rank of field marshal ( mü ş ir ), appointed by the Serasker in Istanbul. Under him the active forces contained two corps, commanded by generals ( ferik ), while the reserves, also divided into two corps, were under the command of a brigadier-general in peace-time. The new organisation allowed for considerable autonomy at the ordu level, but centralised control over the divisional command. The Serasker continued to embody the functions of both Minister of War and Commander-in-Chief. His office in Istanbul grew during Abdülaziz’s reign, and was diversified by a general staff ( Erkân-i Harbiye ) and various departments dealing with the facets of the military, such as artillery, engineering, supply, etc. 