 On the morning of 24 June, İ brahim deployed his troops in three columns between Nizib and Birecik, so that he was situated between the Ottoman army and its stores. There was no place for retreat. The Ottomans had to regroup their lines to face the Egyptians, who advanced in admirable order. Moltke continued: ‘the depth of their reserve [troops] was probably around three-quarters of a league … They arranged the artillery wisely, and used their cavalry to cover the artillery … Hence, while our rapid fire scattered over a large space, without reaching the reserves, their guns covered our entire line with their shot. In a few minutes, we had hardly any battalions where courage was not shaken by losses. Seven-eighths of these men had never heard the whistle of a gunshot; when a howitzer shell fell by chance on a column and exploded, entire companies began to disband. A short time later, almost all the battalions were praying, their hands to the sky … Once morale was lost, the battle was lost.’ The army began to melt away; the Kurdish recruits became the enemy. Some fired on their own officers and comrades. Others simply threw off their uniforms and fled. Haf ı z and his remaining army fell back on Malatya, leaving behind artillery and supplies for the Egyptians. According to Moltke, one-sixth of the army remained when they reached Malatya: the redif forces simply went home en masse . İ brahim proceeded to occupy Antep, Mara ş , and Urfa by 28 June, and there he stopped, persuaded by his father’s orders not to cross the Taurus Mountains. He too had watched his army melt away, which might also explain his reluctance to follow up the resounding victory. 83 
 Sultan Mahmud II died of tuberculosis on 30 June 1839, without hearing the news of the latest failure of his reformed army. On 14 July the entire Ottoman fleet surrendered to Mehmed Ali, largely because Admiral Ahmed Fevzi Pasha was fearful that the new sultan (and his new Grand Vizier, implacable enemy Hüsrev Pasha) would surrender the navy to the Russians for a joint action against Mehmed Ali. By 27 July, the five Great Powers (France, Britain, Austria, Germany and Russia), through their diplomatic representatives in Istanbul, had indicated their willingness to help the new sultan end the conflict with Mehmed Ali. It seems an appropriate place to pause, as the events mark a significant turning point in the fortunes of the Ottoman Empire. 
 It is difficult to assess the contribution of Mahmud, whose ferocity was matched by a vision not unlike that of Peter the Great. He inaugurated a process of reform and centralisation that would continue into the next two reigns, but did so by violently attacking his own citizens, gutting local economies, and laying the empire open to economic colonialism. During his reign, Greece, Serbia, Moldavia and Wallachia broke free; Egypt, Syria, Crete, Adana and Arabia were up in arms. The Russians acquired Bessarabia and large parts of the Caucasus. Algeria was occupied by France; Tunisia achieved virtual independence. Bosnia, Albania and Tripoli obeyed in name only, and the Russians passed the Balkan range. An infidel army had to protect the sultan in his own home against a Muslim army. Finally, Mahmud drew a line in the sand. With his journeys around the Balkans, the increasing reliance on ‘Turks’, and his refusal to countenance Mehmed Ali’s army in Anatolia, he defended the very territories that Mustafa Kemal claimed for the Republic after 1918. He also created a template for the modern army which would allow it to happen. On his premature death, he left an empire perilously close to implosion. 