 Greater Syria was restored to the Ottomans with İ brahim’s withdrawal in 1841. The sultans reclaimed their own territories, which had been badly neglected even before the 1830s, and occupied for a decade by a modern-ising, and latterly draconian, Egyptian army. İ brahim reportedly taunted an Ottoman general by saying: ‘You, with the assistance of the English, have expelled me; you have put arms into the hands of the mountaineers; it cost me nine years and ninety thousand men to disarm them. You will yet invite me back to govern them.’ 17 Mahmud II had never been able to establish full control over the territories, and delayed introducing conscription because of the mistrust and unruliness which inevitably followed. The harsh conscription methods of İ brahim Pasha were a more recent memory. Furthermore, the final confrontation with İ brahim had been facilitated in part by arming the countryside. Tribal leaders were loath to surrender their weapons. Entrenched notable families, who over the previous century had acquired significant control over agricultural resources, contested many of the new regulations. 
 The familiar provincial lines of Aleppo, Damascus and Sidon, absorbing the old province of Tripoli, were re-established. Sidon was the most changed: the new capital was Beirut, and it included most of Lebanon and Palestine. Beirut had gained considerable prominence as a port city, and would continue to do so in this period as the administrative centre of the newly-drawn territories. The province of Damascus was also realigned, and included the al-Biqa valley of Mount Lebanon within its boundaries. Emir Bashir II’s rule of Mt Lebanon had ended with İ brahim Pasha’s withdrawal from Greater Syria. The Ottomans deposed his successor Beshir III, and ended the reign of the Shihab family. The power vacuum thus created simply perpetuated tensions between the Druze, Muslim and Maronite communities, which was often stimulated by Ottoman governors, who, short of soldiers, set factional tribesmen one against the other. The Ottoman army could not exert control especially over the warrior clans and bedouins of Hawran, Nablus, and the Negev desert, as we have seen in the contest with İ brahim’s army. İ brahim had succeeded in a partial disarmament, but the districts reverted to old patterns with the Egyptian departure, and the Ottomans were unable to restore order over the population. Much of Palestine remained that way for the next decade. 
 Jerusalem (with Nablus and Gaza added) and Mount Lebanon were accorded special status. Jerusalem was governed as a special district under a mutasarr ı f . Mt Lebanon was divided into Druze and Maronite districts in 1843, after massacres and rebellions alarmed the international community and forced the Ottomans to act. Further negotiations around the special nature of these territories led to another set of regulations in 1845, on the principle that the religious communities could regulate themselves and collect taxes locally, under two kaymakams . This was agreed to by all sides in 1846, but the basic tensions remained. Events on the European frontiers of the empire distracted both Ottoman governors and foreign representatives from Mt Lebanon until after the Crimean War. 
 European diplomatic harmony, which had allowed for the settlement of the Mehmed Ali crisis of 1841, soon settled into the more normal Franco-British disharmony of the Eastern Question. Lebanon, Palestine and Jerusalem were territories which became a special zone of interference by the European concert powers concerned with the brutality inflicted on non-Muslim communities, and who initially supported the re-installation of the Shihab family. The French were known to act as provocateurs among the Maronite Christian communities, and the Ottomans just as often were accused of ‘letting loose’ the Druze on the Christian communities. The ba ş ı bozuks , often the substitute for nizamiye troops, were just as capable of atrocities as the Maronite and Druze chieftains. 
 British Ambassador Stratford Canning was newly returned to Istanbul, and was the chief negotiator for the introduction of the kaymakam system which gave Lebanon a modicum of peace from 1845 to 1860. The events had the effect of raising the temperature of the international community concerning Ottoman barbarity against non-Muslim subjects, which struck a chord with the zealous evangelism of the Ambassador. Frustrated by the general lack of progress of the Tanzimat, Canning chose this moment to force on Sultan Abdülmecid the abolition of execution for apostasy, one example of his new-found evangelical zeal for protecting Christian (Protestant) rights. He followed that up by establishing a Protestant church in Jerusalem in 1845, and then insisting on the recognition of a Protestant millet within the empire. It is not hard to imagine the resentment about Great Britain that must have built up in the Ottoman palace in the years prior to the Crimean War, especially as Canning quickly developed an intimate relationship with young Sultan Abdülmecid. 18 
 Rebellion in Aleppo 
 The Arab provinces continued to be governed by a vali , but after 1844 the serasker ( mü ş ir ) of the fifth army in Damascus assumed authority over the governors. Mü ş ir Nam ı k Pasha served in that capacity from 1844–49. There was a great deal of confusion about military and civilian authority, especially as Istanbul was given to merging and splitting the two centres of power at will. With the reassertion of the powers of the governor in the 1852 provincial regulations, the army assumed a certain independence from civilian affairs, a trend interrupted by the Crimean War. 
 Hence, the army was the instrument of the Tanzimat in the Arab provinces. To locals, it must not have appeared much different from occupation by Egypt. The quality of administration depended entirely on the quality of the nizamiye . Before 1843, insufficient numbers of regular troops (some 15,000–20,000 men) forced the officers to use the redifs and local irregulars, such as deserters from Mehmed Ali’s army, largely Albanians, and the ubiquitous ba ş ı bozuks . The 1843 regulations mandated divisional army of 25,000: 19,000 infantry, 4,000 regular cavalry, and 2,000 artillerymen with 72 guns. This was the army of Nam ı k Pasha, who established his headquarters in Aleppo so as to be able to control the redif troops drawn from Anatolia and Iraq. He apparently succeeded in dissolving the Albanian bands, and is reported as saying to local chieftains: ‘Formerly, we could not compel you to obey us. But now we are strong, and if you are insubordinate, I will … throw you into the sea.’ 19 After 1845, he moved his headquarters back to Damascus, distributing about half the army across Syria and Palestine and leaving half in Damascus. The army was still only some 20,000, troops who were ill-paid and ill-supplied. Acute financial shortages prevented further pacification of the territories. Before 1849–50, when the sixth army was established in Baghdad under Mü ş ir Nam ı k Pasha, the troop presence in Syria represented approximately one-quarter of the manpower that İ brahim had had at his disposal. Neither the fifth nor the sixth army had reserves in this period. The sixth army was split between Baghdad and the Hijaz, with one corps in each. 
 In 1850 the Ottomans extended conscription to the Arab territories in order to remedy the insufficiency of men, but that prompted rebellion in Aleppo. An attempt had been made at a census in the years following the 1843 army regulations, with little success. In 1848, a census survey was again attempted, under Governor Mustafa Zarif Pasha, whom we last encountered among the Kurds, but thousands fled to the mountains. In 1850 rioters in Aleppo shouted, ‘We shall not give soldiers; we shall not pay the poll tax,’ as they had at İ brahim’s recruiters. One of the major factors in the 1850 Aleppine revolt concerned an Ottoman attempt to collect tax-farming arrears, to wrench tax-collecting responsibility from Aleppine notable Abdullah, the civil governor and mütesellim . The revolt itself was likely instigated by the wealthy notables, but the insurrection grew out of hand and resulted in attacks on Christian quarters. The city was occupied by rebels who demanded the abolition of conscription, the restoration of Abdullah as mütesellim , and conversion of the ferde (the Egyptian poll tax) to a property tax. Other demands referred to non-Muslim privileges: no church bells should be rung, no crosses in processions and Muslim servants were not to be employed in Christian households. When reinforcements did arrive, the city was restored to order at the cost of 3,000–5,000 lives. Zarif Pasha was immediately dismissed. His successor arrived with more troops, and imposed the Tanzimat reforms more vigorously than Zarif Pasha, who shortly resurfaced as the heavy-handed pacifier of Vidin in 1850–51. 
 In his memoirs, Zarif Pasha speaks of his experience in Aleppo, as follows: 