



===== FILE: text/part0020.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Ten 
 From Tanzimat to Crimean War 
 T he core of this book has been about the evolution of a military system from the Janissary to conscript army, especially as events unfolded during the reigns of Selim III and Mahmud II. By the latter’s death in 1839, the essentials of the new military system were in place, at significant human cost. The regulations, however, remained unevenly applied and largely underfunded. The next period began with resolution of the Mehmed Ali crisis, 1839–41. With the intervention of the five great powers, committed to supporting Sultan Abdülmecid I (1839–61), rather than Mehmed Ali Pasha of Egypt, the Ottomans continued their integration into the European sphere of international relations. By the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1838, Britain had essentially nullified the 1833 Russo-Ottoman Treaty of Hünkâr İ skelesi, and achieved free-trade access to Ottoman territories, especially in Egypt and the Arab cities of greater Syria. Two further agreements would establish the primacy of the European powers in Ottoman affairs. The first, the Convention for the Pacification of the Levant, or the London Treaty of 15 July 1840, was signed without the agreement of France, but by the other four powers and the Ottomans. If Mehmed Ali were to give up Syria, Adana, Arabia (the Hijaz), and Crete, he and his family could continue to rule Egypt. The second, the Straits Convention of 13 July 1841, signed by all, including France and the Ottomans, followed the military defeat of İ brahim Pasha in Damascus and Beirut. It gave the sultan ‘a manifest proof of the respect which they entertain for the inviolability of his sovereign rights, as well as of their sincere desire to see consolidated the repose of this empire.’ 1 The maintenance of the territorial Ottoman Empire, later dubbed the ‘Sick Man of Europe’ by Tsar Nicholas I, had become an international concern, whose recovery was sanctioned by the European powers. The empire proved an unpredictable patient, however, and manoeuvred its physicians (France, Britain and Russia) into the most foolish and costly war of the entire nineteenth century, the Crimean War 1853–56, acknowledged by many as the first modern world war in terms of scope, immediacy, reporting, public opinion, and global consequences. 
 Great Britain had embarked on an expansion of colonial and semi-colonial regimes in territories as far flung as Africa, India, the Middle East, and China. Underlying the new, and unequal, treaty relationships with non-western countries was a changing view of international relations. Early theorists of international law, which had been understood to derive from ‘natural law’, accorded sovereign rights to all nations, regardless of religious or ethnic populations. By the mid-nineteenth century, international law had come to be understood as ‘an artifact of Christian civilisation,’ and therefore was not fully applicable to Muslim (or other non-Christian) states, who had not yet joined the civilised nations. Civilised in this case meant a state which guaranteed the basic rights of property and person, a political system which could organise self-defence, and which adhered to the rules of international law and diplomacy. International relations theory posited a hierarchy of states, in descending order from ‘civilised’ to ‘barbaric’ to ‘savage’, with the latter two categories remaining outside the realm of international law. This included, of course, the Ottomans, as long as they resisted the introduction of such rights. Foreign representatives used such arguments to justify intervention on behalf of co-religionists in Ottoman territories, and to justify the wide application of the principle of extraterritoriality to very large numbers of Ottoman non-Muslim subjects, a clear intervention in state sovereignty. It is in this international context that the 1839 and 1856 reform proclamations of Ottoman sultans must be understood. 
 All European powers profited from the informal colonial regime established in the Middle East after 1841, if only to give them respite from the potential conflicts which the Eastern Question had engendered. Britain proved the greatest beneficiary, but diplomats, merchants and missionaries of many nations, including the United States, all streamed to the Middle East. The period between the Treaty of London (1840) and the commencement of Russo-Ottoman hostilities in 1853 was a moment of intense religious proselytising, largely stimulated by the increased presence of missionaries among Ottoman Christian populations, but equally attributable to the imperial posturing of France and Russia, in particular, over the protection of their co-religionists and over access to the sacred places of Jerusalem. It is one of the great ironies of Ottoman history that at precisely the moment when Ottoman rulers aimed at introducing universal citizenship and equality before the law, the European powers seized on the religious millets as representing ‘national’ groups requiring their protection. As Berkes acutely notes, ‘The economic interests of the European powers pressed for secularisation while the political-cum-religious interests of the same powers demanded the perpetuation of communal differentiations ranging from the legal and political to the educational field.’ 2 Non-Muslim communities were riven by conflicting loyalties, from those who benefited from continuing ties with the dynasty, to those who advocated outright revolt and separation from the empire. For thousands of Muslims, before and after the Crimean War, it was equally a period of immense upheaval as they found their former status undermined by the new laws concerning equality, and their economic foundations crumbling as Anatolia and the Levant became part of the global economy. The seesaw of reform and reaction which characterises 1839–76, the period known as the Tanzimat, is indicative of the long struggle of an Ottoman Muslim dynasty and its bureaucracy to join the ‘civilised’ nations of Europe on its own terms. 
 The settlement of the 1839–41 eastern crisis is generally described as the triumph of Palmerstonian diplomacy. 3 The resolution of the Mehmed Ali crisis, and the pacification of Syria and Egypt, will be reviewed here to consider the consequences for Ottoman reconstruction in Syria. The real aim of this chapter is to set out the further changes to the military system from 1841 to 1856, and to describe select episodes of the continued empire-wide resistance to reforms, specifically the conscription regulations that were put in place in 1843 and again in 1846. 
 The causes of the Crimean War are numerous, and the conflict itself has received considerable attention in a number of new studies and a large exhibition to commemorate the sesquicentennial anniversary of the war. The causes, major confrontations and resolutions will be outlined, but the emphasis will be on an examination of the conflicts on the western and eastern peripheries of the Ottoman northern frontier. For the last time, we will examine the state of the military in Russia, Austria and the Ottoman Empire just prior to the Crimean War, for while the main protagonists of the war on the Danube were the Russians and the Ottomans, the Austrians had a pivotal role to play in the period just before the conflict, much as they had a half-century earlier. The chapter ends with the 12 March 1854 Anglo-Ottoman–French alliance against Russia, prelude to the Crimean War. What concerns us most are the continued Russo-Ottoman disputes over the Principalities, Moldavia and Wallachia, and the Caucasus. The Crimean War is the last time that British and Ottoman officers actually fought on the same side, and the last time British soldiers fought in Europe until 1914. After 1870, with new regulations giving the army a further Prussian cast, the Ottoman army came under the influence of a German military mission which would carry it through World War I. 
 New sultan, new advisers 
 Abdülmecid was a boy of sixteen when his father died. In the first two years of his reign, quite apart from the pressing international crisis over Mehmed Ali and İ brahim Pashas, still camped with the Egyptian army on his doorstep, he had to deal with the internecine strife in his court over the question of reform. Hüsrev Pasha, feared ancient enforcer of Mahmud’s reign, had one last trick up his sleeve. He is said to have wrenched the seal out of then Grand Vizier Rauf Pasha’s hands, and assumed the office for himself on the accession of Abdülmecid, and kept it for almost a year, until June of 1840. The resolution of the Mehmed Ali crisis was likely delayed by this usurpation, as Mehmed Ali refused to consider Ottoman overtures unless Hüsrev were removed from the position. And yet, adding to the enigma of his long life, arch conservative Hüsrev Pasha was Grand Vizier when the Gülhane Edict (known as Tanzimat F ı rman ı in Turkish, and as the Gülhane Edict, or Rescript in English) was promulgated on 3 November 1839. The text of the proclamation was said to be the work of his greatest rival, Foreign Minister Mustafa Re ş id, Anglophile, veteran of diplomatic missions to Paris and London, who represented the reform party of the empire. It inaugurated the period referred to as the Tanzimat, from the decree itself, Tanzimat-i Hayriye , or ‘Beneficial Reforms’. The period is also characterised by intense rivalries between officials of the grand vizierial offices and the palace, the latter where the military high commanders, the majority married into the royal family, held sway. 
 Mustafa Re ş id is often called the father of the Tanzimat. Six times grand vizier and three times foreign minister, he is certainly one of the main reform figures of the period, along with his protégés Ali and Fuad Pashas. He had served with the army in the entourage of Serasker Seyyid Ali Pasha during the Greek rebellion in 1821, and again as army clerk in the Balkans in 1828, but thereafter joined the bureaucracy as a member of the Correspondence Office, which formed part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He was appointed to important posts as part of diplomatic missions to Egypt, Paris and London, and was named head of the Ministry by 1837. Mustafa was instrumental in securing the Anglo-Ottoman Commercial (Balta Liman ı ) Convention of 1838, and has generally been credited with obtaining the agreement of Abdülmecid to issuing the formal Gülhane decree declaring the Ottoman reformation. British Ambassador John Ponsonby (1832–41) is given much of the credit for the language of the decree, and many of the narratives of this period make the influence of Re ş id and Ponsonby (and later Ambassador Stratford Canning) paramount in all events that unfold. 
 There are, however, strong arguments for also seeing the influence of both the old guard and new religious advisers in Ottoman ruling circles, voices that had emerged as part of the debate over the dynasty’s legitimacy and survival in its struggle with Mehmed Ali. The presence of the Naqshbandi sufi groups in Istanbul in the 1820s has already been noted in relation to the elimination of the Janissary corps. They appear to have dominated court politics for the latter half of the nineteenth century, especially as the imams of the inner circles of sultans Abdülmecid and Abdülaziz. They preached a strict emphasis on the sunna and the shar‘ia, and the supremacy of the shar‘ia in the life of the community and state. Among those whose names were linked to the order were otherwise implacable opponents Hüsrev Pasha and Mustafa Re ş id Pasha. 
