 In a directive that Sultan Abdülmecid had sent to his advisers, he declared his dedication to the principles of shar‘ia law and its application in all the affairs of state, and asked their advice concerning the problems he should address. His ministers replied that three principles should guide his reign: that the guarantees for life and property and for the preservation of honour and dignity should be extended to Muslim as well as non-Muslim; that taxes should be fixed according to the wealth and means of each subject; and that the burden of military service should be devised according to the size of the population in each province. Among the 38 signatories to this response were Hüsrev Pasha, Ş eyhülislam Mustafa As ı m Efendi and Serasker Halil Rifa’at Pasha, as well as Mustafa Re ş id Pasha, all veterans of Mahmud II’s reforms. They set a restorative agenda for the sultan, which was then read in public and, for the first time, in front of the European diplomatic corps. The text included a paragraph in which the sultan ‘pledged to take an oath in the hall of the sacred relics, not to act contrary to its stipulations, and that the senior ulema and state functionaries take a similar oath, an action no Ottoman sultan before Abdülmecid had ever undertaken.’ 4 
 Mahmud II had begun the process of modernising the image of the dynasty, much in the manner of the Romanovs and Habsburgs, by engaging with the public. We have seen how he reconfigured the image of the sultan by personalising his rule and devising symbolic representations of ancient traditions. He left behind the makings of the modern bureaucracy, and established councils of his advisers. His concept of justice ( adalet ) introduced the idea of equality before the law. Abdülmecid continued in like fashion, with the Gülhane Edict, which, following the preamble above, elaborated on the actual reforms Abdülmecid and his adviers envisioned. The inspiration for its creation is actually less important than what it had to say, which was remarkable. The sultan pledged to eliminate tax farming ( iltizam ); to contravene venality; to eliminate confiscation; to guarantee property rights to individuals; and to institute a public and open court system. These concessions were to be extended to all subjects, regardless of faith. About service in the army, Abdülmecid pledged to reduce service to four or five years, and to continue the establishment of local contingents ( redifs ), in order to prevent the impact on agriculture and industry by depleting manpower in particular areas. The implication was that this too would be universally applied. The Supreme Council of Judicial Ordinances ( Meclis-i Valâ-yi Ahkâm-i Adliye ), established in 1838, became the principal consultative and legislative body. Every aspect of society was to be subjected to scrutiny and reorganisation. While most of the agenda was probably premature and unachievable in 1839, the document did set the parameters for discussion about the nature of late Ottoman society. The edict had a dual character, or more accurately, a split personality. It promoted a universality of citizenship which was grounded in the principle of a religious hierarchy: Muslims and the non-Muslim millets . The reformers likely aimed at fostering a new ‘Ottomanism’ that would rally support for the empire, but in fact, the ambiguities about universal equality alienated many Muslims after the initial fervour. 5 Most of the foreign community in Istanbul was sceptical about the possibility of transformation. For the Ottomans, much of the next two decades was spent in working out what it actually meant. We will return to the actual reforms shortly. But first, the Mehmed Ali crisis had to be resolved, and order restored. 
 Taming Mehmed Ali 
 Since the defeat at Nizib, negotiation with Mehmed Ali had continued. Abdülmecid sent a pardon to Mehmed Ali, requesting İ brahim to withdraw to Mara ş . France stood behind Egypt and Mehmed Ali, who appeared bent on keeping Syria and was obdurate about wanting Adana as well. In return, he would surrender the Ottoman fleet and Crete. In July 1840, Mehmed Emin Rauf Pasha replaced Hüsrev as Grand Vizier for his third time in the office. By mid-July, Austria, Prussia, Russia and Britain and the Ottomans signed the Convention of London (15 July 1840). They were to provide assistance in reducing Mehmed Ali’s power, use their fleets to cut off his supplies, and protect the straits, and maintain the rule of closing the straits to foreign ships of war. Mehmed Ali was offered Acre for his life, with the hereditary rule of Egypt. He would have to withdraw his forces from Syria, and Egypt was to be restored to the empire. 
 By August 1840, much of the population of Syria, especially portions of the Druze, and Maronite Christian populations of the mountains, was in arms against the Egyptians, stimulated both by British agents and by İ brahim Pasha’s efforts to disarm the population. İ brahim Pasha’s second-in-command, Süleyman Pasha, was in Beirut to quell the disorder, with 15,000 Egyptian troops who had landed in Syria to suppress the revolt, with the acquiescence of Druze ally Bashir II. The rest of İ brahim’s army was scattered from northern Lebanon to Adana. On 12 August, Sir Charles Napier, on orders from British Admiral Stopford, was anchored before Beirut announcing the Ottoman intention to retake Syria. Mehmed Ali was given an ultimatum which he ignored; by 5 September, the four consuls of the convention signatories in Alexandria declared he had rejected a second offer. Beirut was bombarded by a British fleet of 30 ships, under command of Napier, on 11 September. Napier then landed with a combined force of 5,300 Ottoman troops, who arrived from Cyprus under Mehmed Selim Pasha; 1,500 British troops, and 200 Austrian marines, to secure the territory north of Beirut (Juniya). Some 5,000 Druze and Maronite mountaineers, under Emir Bashir Q ā sim, cousin of Emir Bashir II, Beshir (Shihab) II of Mt. Lebanon, joined the Anglo-Ottoman force. On 24 September, four battalions of the Ottoman soldiers with Napier, under command of Mehmed Selim Pasha, and Prussian General Jochmus, drove back İ brahim’s advance guard entrenched at Chahaoune. On 26 September, Beirut was again bombarded from the sea as Süleyman Pasha evacuated. Two days later, Napier, with 1,000 mixed British and Turkish troops, confronted and defeated the Egyptian garrison at Sidon, taking some 2,000 prisoners. İ brahim had by then set up headquarters in the formidable fortress of Zahle. 
 On 8 October, Emir Bashir Q ā sim, with his 1,000 mountaineers, attacked Egyptian outposts and dispersed them. By firman of the sultan, he was later declared Grand Emir of Lebanon, replacing Bashir II, who had refused to abandon İ brahim. The squeeze of the Egyptian forces by land and by sea continued. On 3 November, Admiral Stopford bombarded the city of Acre for two hours, when the arsenal within the fortress blew up, forcing the surrender of the garrison. The destruction and recapture of Acre, renowned for Cezzar’s 1798 holdout against Napoleon and Abdullah’s 1831 resistance against İ brahim Pasha, signalled the demise of the Egyptian adventure in Syria. By the end of the month, the Egyptians abandoned Adana, Tarsus, Aleppo, Jaffa and Jerusalem. İ brahim himself took refuge in Damascus with 12,000 troops. 
 In mid-November, Napier, acting without official approval, secured Mehmed Ali’s submission. On 27 November, Mehmed Ali agreed to order İ brahim to evacuate Syria, and restore the Ottoman fleet, if the sultan granted him hereditary rule in Egypt. The sultan rejected the convention and demanded instead an unconditional surrender, which was finally achieved on 11 December, and accepted by Sultan Abdülmecid on 27 December. On 30 December, İ brahim evacuated Damascus, to begin a long and grievous retreat across Gaza to Egypt. The army, stragglers and deserters alike, were harrassed by Ottoman troops under General Jochmus, local Bedouins, Maronite and Druze. İ brahim retreated slowly south, and by 6 January 1841, had lost an estimated 10,000 men to desertion and death. By the time the remains of the Egyptian army arrived home, they had been surviving on mule and donkey flesh, and without water for three days. 
 In May 1841, the sultan’s decree accorded Mehmed Ali hereditary status as Governor of Egypt, but the sultan retained the right of approval of the heir. Mehmed Ali was to pay an annual tribute of one quarter of Egyptian revenues. These latter two points were contested by Mehmed Ali, and he and his progeny subsequently won the right of independent succession, based on the rule of primogeniture, and a much reduced tribute. The Egyptian army was to be maintained at 18,000 men, and the new Viceroy ( Khedive ) had the right to appoint the Colonels ( Miralays ). The senior commanders, Brigadier-Generals ( Mirliva ) and Generals of Divisions ( Ferik ), were to be appointed in Istanbul. The language of Abdülmecid’s decree, confirming the hereditary status of Mehmed Ali and his heirs, also reveals how Egypt was to be subordinated within the Ottoman military structure: ‘as the land and sea forces of Egypt are designated for the service of my Empire, in time of war it will be permitted to increase the number of soldiers in a way which will be approved by my Empire. As the principle … [of] five years’ service has been established, it is necessary to implement the same principle in Egypt, so 20,000 of the present Egyptian soldiers will be separated out … 18,000 of them will be employed in … the internal service in Egypt … 2,000 soldiers to be employed here [Istanbul].’ While the Egyptians might not stick entirely to the letter of the law, and the degree of independence of the Khedives continued to be contested, both Khedive Abbas Hilmi, 1848–54, and Khedive Said sent contingents of 8,000 troops to the Crimean front. 6 
 France, which had supported Mehmed Ali throughout the crisis, reacted angrily at being excluded from the Convention of London in 1840, but failed to support Mehmed Ali in the final confrontation. For a brief moment European war appeared imminent, but Paris was conciliatory by October of the same year, thus averting a diplomatic crisis. On 13 July 1841, the Straits Convention, signed by the five powers and the Ottomans, reiterated the closure of the Dardanelles and Bosphorus straits to foreign warships, confirmed the integrity and independence of the Ottoman empire, and extended the terms of the 1838 Anglo-Ottoman Convention to Egypt. The French rejoined the Concert of Europe, and the Ottomans were brought into the circle. Mehmed Ali’s regional empire was shattered, but his fondest wish for his family was achieved, and the dynasty lasted until 1952. Britain achieved an overland route to India from Alexandria to Suez. Egypt’s economy was drawn into the world economy as a market for European goods, and a source of grain and cotton. By 1848, both İ brahim and Mehmed Ali, the latter incapable of rule since 1847, were dead. Mehmed Ali’s reforms, like those of Mahmud II, foundered on the expense of a reformed army, and bellicose regional ambitions, but laid the foundation for the modern state. The army came to represent the modernising force of Egyptian society, and an effective means of upward mobility. Egypt had been forcibly subdued, and enfolded into the global diplomatic and economic regime. 
