 Thus, after 1834 the Ottoman military was engaged in simultaneously quelling significant centres of revolt, and impressing large swathes of the Kurdish, Muslim population, much as they had in Albania. Zarif Mustafa Pasha was in Siverek, east of Urfa, in August 1834. ‘When we arrived in Siverek, the Milli tribe was there, which had taken control of the desert, and its leader was known as the Desert Padi ş ah. They were just three hours from us. We needed to befriend them; because they were very numerous, and had so many camels, it was impossible to estimate their number. Miralay Rüstem requested a volunteer, and I said yes. As I approached the tents, the Arabs, seeing me, sent up a cry, and jumped up. He was taken to the tent of one Eyup Bey. Everyone was looking at him because of his silver embossed jacket [epaulets]. They greeted one another courteously, whereupon Eyup Bey asked: “Why are you feeding your animals my grass?” “We know we are, but you are the servant of God and the Padi ş ah. They, too, are the Padi ş ah’s animals,” I replied. “Your Padi ş ah does not interfere with the desert, but you have come as a guest, and they sent you here. If you had not come to explain, I would have destroyed you all. Do the Padi ş ah’s soldiers always go around dressed like this?” he asked. “Officers dress like this, but regular soldiers dress in a different fashion,” I answered. “Aren’t you at all ashamed? Such an outfit shows everything” – at which he called for a robe which they placed over my shoulders. If you come here again, do not come so naked, come with the robe, he said, and do not send your animals any further ahead [i.e. into his territory].’ 77 
 Helmuth von Moltke was assigned to Haf ı z Mehmed Pasha, Governor of Sivas and Diyarbak ı r and Commander of the troops in Anatolia, in the spring of 1838. Haf ı z Pasha was subduing the last hold-outs of the Kurdish rebellion in the mountains between Mu ş and Hazo, west of Bitlis. Moltke and two other Prussian officers were charged with mapping the territory, and reconnaissance. Moltke, at Hüsrev Pasha’s request, had already seen to the translation of Prussian descriptions of the Landwehr organisation, and remained an adviser concerning recruitment and deployment of the redif . 78 Including the regiment of infantry, two regiments of Hassa cavalry, several hundred sipahis (one supposes irregulars), and three cannons, Haf ı z Pasha had 3,000 men. He had also called on loyal Kurdish Beys, Vede-Khan now among them, to join him. The passage across the valleys running parallel to the Euphrates tributaries was very difficult, Moltke observed. Ten horses were attached to each artillery piece in order to transport it over the rocks of the peaks. It was difficult even to find a place to pitch a tent. Passing through friendly Kurdish villages, the Pasha himself often remained in a village until the convoy passed, in order to prevent pillage. The next day, they camped next to a hostile village, whose inhabitants had not fled. Putting up a brief resistance, the villagers were surrounded and subdued. The soldiers then began pillaging the houses for booty, but the shooting continued until the last house, of the chief of the village, submitted. Trophies and prisoners were led before Haf ı z Pasha: men and women with bloody wounds; children of all ages; cut ears and heads. All such bounty was recompensed with 50 to 100 kuru ş , a situation that he deplored, but acknowledged that Haf ı z had done his best to prohibit to the extent possible among the ba ş ı bozuks . Losses among the Ottomans were large, but after a day of rest, the campaign continued, amassing a mob of prisoners. By the time he was writing his letter, in mid-1838, the rebellions among the Kurds had for the most part ceased. 79 
 To Moltke, the Ottomans were engaged in no less than ‘brigandage’ of the population. All the reinforcements for the Asakir-i Mansure army came from villages which resisted the government. Moltke gives one example: the town of Siirt, after being subdued by Re ş id Mehmed Pasha, was enumerated as having 600 Muslim and 200 non-Muslim families. From the Muslim families, 200 recruits were impressed. When Moltke was writing his letter, the army was there again for another 200 recruits, but only the very old and very young were to be seen on the streets. The young men had fled to the mountains. In addition, disease and desertion simply carried off as many of those new recruits: in twelve months, some regiments were cut in half by deaths, even in a year of peace. 80 
 For close to three years, Mahmud II had maintained large numbers of troops in Diyarbak ı r. As long as the status quo continued, however, quite apart from the added expenses, and the quartering of thousands of troops on a restive countryside, Mahmud II was simply unable to push through more of his provincial reform. By 1838 the Ottomans were clearly seeking a way to end the dispute, and so were amenable to British interests in a trade treaty, perhaps only as a means to that end. On 25 May 1838, Mehmed Ali announced his intention to declare independence to the European representatives in Cairo. The British and French counselled caution to both sides; the Russians offered military support to Mahmud II. Alarmed, the British pursued the means for reducing the influence of Mehmed Ali, and eliminating the Russian influence. The 1838 Anglo-Ottoman Convention, which resulted from this tense international crisis, satisfied two British demands: abolition of trading monopolies throughout the empire, including Egypt, and abolition of all internal tariffs. The former capitulations were renewed, but the tax structure, fixed for generations at three per cent import and export, was changed. Export duties on Ottoman goods were set at twelve per cent. Import duties were raised from three to five per cent. For Mahmud II, the attraction of such an agreement may have been entirely political, as it would deal a mortal blow to Mehmed Ali, whose economy was built on state monopolies, and perhaps presage further British naval intervention on behalf of the Ottomans. What it amounted to was a free trade treaty, which made of Britain the most-favoured nation, neutralised the Russian influence in Istanbul, and henceforth facilitated British informal colonialism in the Arab provinces. Ottoman trade had been bolstered; the British Mediterranean routes to India were secured. As a follow-up, in November 1839, Foreign Minister Mustafa Re ş id Pasha was despatched to London with a request that Britain join the Ottomans in an attack on Mehmed Ali. Negotiations went on from November to March, before Palmerston’s government offered a draft treaty of alliance, entirely defensive and hence of no interest to Mahmud II. 
 The Battle of Nizib, 1839 
 In the event, it remained a moot point. At the end of 1838, Mehmed Ali was known to be building up his forces around Adana and Aleppo. In January 1839, Mahmud II called a Grand Council on the question of war with Mehmed Ali, but discussions were inconclusive, awaiting the outcome of Mustafa Re ş id’s mission to London. In February, Haf ı z Pasha assured his sovereign that his army was prepared to take Syria, and that the population was ready to rise up against the Egyptian occupation. 81 Against the advice of his court, and the foreign community in Istanbul, Mahmud II ordered a massive Ottoman build-up in Diyarbak ı r, Malatya, and Birecik. Some 3,000 horses, averaging 1,000 kuru ş apiece, were purchased from the countryside around Diyarbak ı r; 40,000 redifs were assembled in Konya, Ankara, Kayseri and Malatya. By late April, the advance army under Haf ı z Pasha was approaching Birecik, southwest of Urfa, on the Euphrates River. İ brahim Pasha was similarly engaged in reinforcing the Egyptian army at Aleppo, and the assumption was that he would press the attack against Urfa and Diyarbak ı r. His passage to Adana could be blocked by the troops of Hac ı Ali Pasha, mobilising to retake Konya. İ zzet Pasha was mobilising in Kayseri. The sultan, cautioned by all sides to desist, would agree only if the foreign powers intervened to restore Adana, Aleppo, Jerusalem, Nablus and Sidon to him, and forced a reduction of Mehmed Ali’s forces. Haf ı z Pasha’s couriers to the sultan noted that the Egyptian army had not been paid for fifteen months, and victory was in his grasp. By May, three corps of 80,000 effectives, the majority fresh levies, redifs , stood under arms on the Syrian frontier, but not under a single command. Half of the regular army were recruits. Most were Kurds, treated as prisoners because of desertion, who were unable to communicate with their officers. Kurdish recruits, Moltke observed, in spite of generally being well fed, and well dressed, never lasted more than two years under arms. In Moltke’s camp at Birecik, by June, 1,000 kuru ş was being offered for the return of deserters, and still they ran. Irregulars arrived daily: Arab tribesmen; ba ş ı bozuk from Diyarbak ı r; and Kurdish allies such as Said Bey, recently defeated, with his entourage. They received a ration of wheat, 100,000 kilos of which had been requisitioned, but for all else had to live off the countryside. By Moltke’s account, money and rations were not in short supply. Organisation and leadership were. 82 
 On the Egyptian side, some 60,000 were said to be stationed between Aleppo and Antep, with 20,000 more on the way, but İ brahim was very short of money so there was misery in the Egyptian camp. Officers and soldiers deserting to the Ottoman side in early June reported eighteen months arrears in pay, and rations in very short supply. The Egyptian army was surviving on one third of the rations of the Ottomans. By this time, the mobilisation had been under way on both sides for over three months. Even so, the other two Ottoman corps had not yet arrived with reinforcements – indeed, had been very slow to follow orders, and the Ottomans were outnumbered, but probably not by more than 10,000. 
 In late May, Haf ı z Pasha, anxious for war, left his camp at Birecik, crossed the Euphrates into Egyptian territory towards Nizib, and began to erect fortifications. His plan was to stimulate revolt around Antep, and he was encouraged when the garrison there, having not been paid for eighteen months, surrendered after a small confrontation, and attached itself to the Ottoman army. At that provocation, İ brahim moved his entire army, commanded by Süleyman Pasha to within five and a half miles of the Ottoman troops. It was clear that the Egyptians were stronger and better situated than the Ottomans. The Ottoman line was too thinly deployed. 
 Frantic warnings and exchanges in the diplomatic community in Istanbul did not sway the sultan. On 9 June, Mahmud II ordered his navy to the coast of Syria. On 10 June Ibrahim led his entire army to the plains between Nizib and Birecik. On the evening of 21 June, Moltke advised leaving the first line of troops in place, to allow the rest of the camp to rest, but Haf ı z kept the entire force on alert for close to three days and nights, so quite apart from being exhausted, the troops were then ordered to confront the Egyptians in the open plain, against the specific orders of the sultan and the advice of the Prussian officers in his camp. Moltke had recommended that Haf ı z Pasha pull back to Birecik, a better position with which to confront the Egyptian army and a means of gaining time for the reinforcements to arrive. Moltke continued that while Haf ı z appeared poised to agree, he was dissuaded from such a course by a number of religious officials in the camp, who apparently persuaded the commander-in-chief that İ brahim intended to retreat towards Aleppo in the morning, and that ‘the cause of the sultan was just; Allah will come to his aid, and all retreat would be a dishonour.’ 
