

 Plate 20    Sketch of ba ş ı bozuk by James Robertson (Illustrated London News, 1854 ). 
 Although there was great variation by location, and by the success or failure of recruitment, the general distribution of soldiers to each ordu ran as follows: three regiments each of infantry, and scouts, two of cavalry and one of artillery, with 33 guns. Each infantry regiment ( alay ) was divided into three battalions ( tabur ). These were further divided into companies ( bölük ) and squads ( manga ) of ten men. The novelty lay not in the structure of the corps, which was based on the Hüsrev regulations of 1827–28, but rather in the application of the system across the empire, and to both active and reserve units. 
 In 1846, a new conscription law ( kur’a nizamnamesi ) was enacted. Conscription was to be regulated by drawing lots. A total of 30,000 recruits, generally aged 18–20, were to be added annually, while a similar number was to be discharged, to maintain an adequate active force. The law included considerable exemptions: members of the scribal and administrative bureaucracy, ulema, kadis and religious students, who had to prove their seriousness by examination in order to be exempt. As one can imagine, the new conscription law had the unintended effect of increasing the numbers attending the medreses. 10 
 The estimated strength of the nizamiye was 150,000–200,000, that is, at about 30,000 per army. Service in the nizamiye was reduced to five years, ultimately two, followed by seven years’ service in the reserves. Initially soldiers could be called to their reserve contingent once a month, but that was later stretched to once every two years. The reserve was configured at 120 battalions of 800 men, or approximately 90,000, but with the new seven-year reserve system, it was estimated that a total 400,000-man army could be raised in that fashion. The imposition of the regular conscription system continued to falter, however, so the army likely never reached that size. James Henry Skene, Consul in Aleppo circa 1851, reported that there were 123,000 actives, and 212,000 effective reserves (total 335,000) in the army, but raised the figure to 365,000 by including four detached corps: one on Crete, with three regiments of infantry and one of cavalry, of 11,000 men; another in Tripoli in Libya; a third in Tunis, and a fourth, the veteran artillery brigades which guarded all the fortresses of the empire, amounting to some 9,000 men. 11 
 These continued to be Muslim men only, although the reformers made ineffectual efforts to enlist Christians, some of which caused rebellions, to which we will return shortly. Christian or Jewish officers continued to be unacceptable to the enlisted men, and Christian populations understandably preferred a buy-out tax, or other forms of exemptions, to enlistment. In 1855 non-Muslims became eligible for army service, and the old poll tax, the cizye , was eliminated. A new exemption tax, bedel-i askeriye , quickly replaced it. By the end of the century, the list of possible exemptions was huge, and included Muslims as well as non-Muslims. So to some extent, the problem of weighing too heavily on one part of the population, and on specific regions, continued. Curiously, keeping the non-Muslims out of the army prompted British observers, and Ambassador Canning, to accuse the Ottomans of violating non-Muslim rights by persisting in exempting them from service. During the Crimean War, foreign commanders with the Ottoman forces wondered at the practice when manpower shortages were so acute. 
 Of the continuities with the Asakir-i Mansure army, the continued discrepancy between the salaries of the chief and inferior officers is striking. A mü ş ir was paid 100,000 kuru ş per year, or roughly 11,000 pounds of the time, which included rations. A ferik in command of a corps got 50,000, while a colonel ( miralay ) received 3,000 and a lieutenant ( mülazim ) 350 kuru ş . A private generally earned 20 to 30 kuru ş and, in theory, was to have access to good rations of meat, bread, rice and vegetables in abundance, with butter and oil for cooking, the equivalent to 60 kuru ş . 
 The Ş ura-yi Askeriye continued to serve as the supreme council which oversaw military matters. It was headed by a mü ş ir and a kaziasker , and it had membership which included civilian as well as military officials. Each army also had its council of war, and could try military offences, but the sentence was passed by the supreme council. The intent was to eliminate abuse among the officer corps as well as among the enlisted men. Corporal punishment was a rarity in late Ottoman armies; imprisonment was preferred. Training and drill were not well implemented, except among the active forces. Some effort was made to post recruits from the same area to a particular ordu in order to facilitate the reserves, who worked the land when not called to duty, but training was minimal, especially once they were technically only to report every two years. 
 One of the striking changes with this reorganisation was the introduction of military preparatory schools at each of the army headquarters, to support the military college Mahmud II had created in Istanbul. Skene says enthusiastically that the enlisted men had learned to read and write. Shaw goes even further, suggesting that the new schools opened the way to secular education, though that might be a bit anachronistic for the 1840s. By the end of the century, a military education and career did offer upper mobility for many Muslims outside the ruling class, as attested by the biographies of the late leadership of the empire, including Mustafa Kemal Atatürk himself. 12 
 Two aspects of these regulations deserve comment. One is the reformer’s concern with the enlisted man, at least on paper, one characteristic carry-over from the Janissary system, which I have argued is partially attributable to Ottoman-shar‘ia idealised notions of justice and protection of the peasant. The second is how local priorities and conditions influenced the design of the system. Although commentators then and now are inclined to see both Asakir-i Mansure and Nizamiye as derivative from French and Prussian models, and risible, there are clearly aspects of these reforms that reflect the specific realities of an empire under attack on all frontiers. One distinction that was commented on at the time was the extensive reserve system, which apart from Prussia had not been widely implemented in Europe at that point. Austria had in fact abandoned its own Landwehr organisation, a people’s army founded in the Napoleonic years, once its utility was no longer demonstrable. 13 
 Further economic reforms: tax farming 
 Reform efforts aimed at replacing an indirect tax regime with direct taxation. In 1840 the tax system was standardised by implementation of a ten per cent cultivation tax, fixed head taxes on cattle, and a graduated cizye for non-Muslims based on individual incomes and the ability to pay. Salaried civilian tax agents, muhass ı l , were sent to the districts to assess and collect taxes. The provinces ( eyalets ), divided into sancaks , or districts, were subdivided into kazas or counties, in an effort to establish control over the countryside and replace the tax farmers, often the governors themselves. Census data was to be collected on all the kazas . Furthermore, regional councils representative of the local populations, Muslim and non-Muslim, were established to act as a check on the governors. While the new taxes were imposed and collected with relative ease in urban settings, the new system utterly failed in the countryside. In fact, the first decade of the Tanzimat reform unfolded as a contest between the traditional rural land-holders and the new centralising bureaucracy. It proved impossible to eliminate tax farming, as the net result was the drastic reduction of the revenues available to the sultan. State revenues collapsed so drastically that within the year, the tax-farming system was reinstituted. In order to meet expenditures, the Ottomans issued paper money ( kaime ) for the first time. This was later followed by state loans from wealthy local banking families, opening the way for foreign loans from Britain and other countries as the century wore on. In spite of the success of many other tax-reforms, the tax-farming system proved resilient, was modified again in December 1855, and remained in place for the rest of the empire. 
 Underfunded and undermanned, the provincial reforms faltered. Sultan Abdülmecid reportedly visited the Sublime Porte in February 1845 and read out loud a proclamation, an unusual intervention in the affairs of state. ‘One cannot deny that, in spite of the care brought to the the realization of my desires, none of my projects, with the exception of military reform, have resulted as I promised. And even the military reform lacks a solid base, which is the general prosperity of the country. I am profoundly distressed.’ The 22-year-old sultan then ordered his ministers to discuss the problem, but advised them that the solution lay in remedying ignorance, and that schools were needed. One of the results of his personal appeal was the convoking of an assembly of provincial representatives to be held in Istanbul, also an innovation, and the creation of local councils, which had a voice, not always effective, in the pre-Crimean War period, applying directly to Istanbul for available funds for public work projects. Inspection commissions were sent to the provinces; Abdülmecid himself went on such inspections in 1844 and 1846. It is in this period that a start was made on the establishment of public schools, and, as Ergut has argued, on the beginnings of a modern police force. 14 The Crimean War interrupted the evolution of this system, as expenses forced the government to stop paying for the work of the councils and the public projects. In 1852 a new Provincial Regulation Law restored the authority of the governors but retained the local council system, in a further ration-alisation of municipal and country-side bureaucracies. In 1848 mixed tribunals of Muslims and non-Muslims attended to interfaith commercial disputes. By 1850 a commercial code became the first western-style law code introduced. 
 The utilitarian aspects of these reforms masks, of course, what was actually going on at the provincial level. A blizzard of enactments by the sultan and his Supreme Council characterise the period, but good intentions were not generally followed up by enforcement and inspection at village level as was originally anticipated. 15 The solution to unrest was to hand the local administration over to the commanders of the new divisional armies, which helped to stabilise the application of the Tanzimat. This could lead, and often did, to great brutality on the part of the Ottoman commanders. One snapshot of the period has the following individuals in place in the divisional armies circa 1850: 1st Army ( Hassa ): Mü ş ir Topçuba ş ı zade Mahmud Pasha; 2nd Army (Istanbul): Mü ş ir Damad Mehmed Ali Pasha, Serasker ; 3rd Army (Manast ı r): Mü ş ir Ömer Lütfi Pasha, soon to assume command of the Ottoman forces in the Crimea, under him Feriks Abdi and Avni Pashas; 4th Army (Anatolia, at Harput): Mü ş ir Mehmed Re ş id (known as Arab, or Darbhor Mehmed Re ş id), said to have studied in France, under him Feriks Ali R ı za and Selim Pashas; 5th Army (Arabia, at Damascus and Aleppo): Mü ş ir Mehmed Emin (Mühendis) Pasha, who reputedly studied at Cambridge, under him Feriks İ zzet and Abdülkerim Pashas; 6th Army (Baghdad and Hijaz): Mü ş ir Nam ı k Pasha (famed for reorganising the Hassa under Mahmud II). 16 By turning to the problem of conscription and direct taxation, intrusions into traditional local systems, we can perhaps gauge the causes of much of the unrest around the Tanzimat reforms in the 1841–56 period. 
 Provincial resistance: post-1841 Syria 
