

 Plate 19    A Redif muster roll from Nov–Dec 1836 (Cevdet Aseriye 635, Prime Ministry Ottoman Archives, Istanbul; thanks to Veysel Ş im ş ek, graduate student, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey ). 
 The regulation was published in Takvim-i Vekayi that August. The reserves, as the council defined them, were to be established to ensure provincial security, and to guarantee a rapid means of levying troops in war. In peacetime, such troops would continue as agriculturalists. In war, they could be called to arms. Every province of the empire was to have a battalion of four large musket companies, with a complement of 330 officers and men. Each battalion would also have four pieces of artillery with 108 officers and cannoneers. The total came to 1,432 officers and men. The men were to be paid 5 kuru ş a month, one-quarter of the pay of a regular soldier, while the major ( binba ş ı ) received 187.5 kuru ş . What distinguished these troops was that the age was higher than the regular infantry at 23 to 32 years old; they could be married, and they did not have to serve outside their province in wartime. Those who retired from or did not re-enlist in the regular army after five years’ service were eligible for this militia service. The officer corps was to be recruited from local notable families, who would be trained in Istanbul as well as their home provinces. Twice a year, the troops were to be assembled and drilled. Officers were issued uniforms and fezes, and required to wear them at all times. The enlisted men need only wear their uniforms for the twice-yearly drills. Some forty redif battalions were mandated, for a total of 57,000 men. Officer trainees were immediately brought to Istanbul, and regular officers were sent to help train the new units. The very first battalions were established in Ankara, Çank ı r ı and Karahisar- ı Sâhib, and the others followed, notably in the same areas where Asakir-i Mansure had been most successful, in Anatolia. By early 1836, the Takvim announced, 33 of the new battalions had been established. The following year, battalions could be found from Cyprus to Urfa to Üsküb. 
 The costs per battalion of maintaining the corps were set at 250,000 kuru ş , and deducted from provincial taxes. Small wonder that some provincial governors embraced the new system. A new treasury, named after the redif force, was established in the capital. A new tax, called the iâne-i cihâdiye (holy war donation) was introduced to further defray the expense of the new system and collected twice a year, in spring and fall, from the population at large. In March 1837, new regulations were issued, after the possibilities for corruption and abuse in the system had become apparent, and Mahmud II attempted to impose more centralised control over the battalions. An entire redif structure resulted, patterned on the regular army, both the troops of the line and the guards, with three smaller battalions, 2,500 officers and men making up redif regiments, for a total of around 100,000 in 120 battalions. These were to be commanded by nine Mü ş irs (Marshals), located in Bursa, Konya, Ankara, Ayd ı n, Erzurum and Sivas, Edirne, and subsequently Ni ş and Ş umnu. Small cavalry squadrons of redif were also established. Regular officers trained in Istanbul began to replace the children of provincial families. Three months’ annual training in rotation substituted for the annual assembly, which became a fourth assembly but of the full complement. By the end of 1837, 90 such new battalions were reported established, but they remained woefully under-equipped, poorly educated and trained. In spite of the optimism of the Takvim report, corruption and desertion continued at all levels. Although its initial effectiveness was questionable, the redif organisation undoubtedly had the potential for exerting a standardisation in military training and presence in the provinces. 74 
 The status quo and negotiations 
 Meanwhile, tension between Cairo and Istanbul escalated. The dispute with Mehmed Ali simmered around a number of unresolved questions: early on, Mehmed Ali was still concerned with the amount of tribute he owed the sultan, and the removal of Hüsrev Pasha, his old rival, from negotiations. Mahmud II demanded the tribute, and the evacuation of Urfa, which lay outside the jurisdication of İ brahim in Anatolia. 
 But the status quo was not going well for either side. Maintaining the army in Syria proved to be costly in military and economic terms for Mehmed Ali and his son. İ brahim, although initially welcomed into Greater Syria and southern Anatolia, soon found himself at odds with the population as Syria began to experience the ‘new order’ Egyptian style. İ brahim established a new town council, the Majlis al-Sh ū r ā , the first in Damascus in 1832, comprising prominent local citizens, to deal with municipal questions beyond the jurisdiction of the shar‘ia. The system was spread to every town of over 2,000 inhabitants. While self-governance was likely welcomed, increased taxation and conscription were not. In early 1834, Mehmed Ali, increasingly pressed at home for new recruits and new sources of revenue, insisted that his son impose a head tax, the ferde , on every male in Syria between the ages of 12 and 60. Already burdened by a series of extraordinary taxes, the population resisted when that was followed in mid-1834 by conscription and corvée . As taxes and the ill-paid forced labour of men and animals increased, so too did the resentment of the local populations. 
 As İ brahim began to impose conscription across Syria, rebellions broke out in northern Syria, Lebanon and Palestine, with the most severe in Jerusalem. By mid-June 1834, Jerusalem came back under Egyptian control, but İ brahim found himself unable to proceed further and called for reinforcements. Mehmed Ali himself, at the head of 11,500 infantry and cavalry, marched to Jaffa to the aid of his son. One of the results of putting down the rebellion was the disarming of much of the population of Palestine, Damascus and Aleppo, but pockets of resistance, in hard-to-reach regions such as Hawran, remained unbowed. Partial disarmament made conscription somewhat easier, although the old culture resurfaced once the Egyptians departed. The Ottomans began systematic application of both disarmament and conscription only after 1845, when regiments of the regular army began to be stationed in the provinces. Even then, it was sporadic and was resisted vigorously. Ottoman authorities were constantly forced to ameliorate the conscription regulations in Syria, especially as they failed to disarm the population after the Egyptian withdrawal in 1840. In urban areas they ultimately gained the upper hand over the remnants of the old para-military order; in the countryside, it took much longer. 75 
 At the beginning of 1834, İ brahim maintained headquarters in Antioch, with troops in Urfa, while Ottoman army headquarters continued at Sivas under Re ş id Mehmed Pasha. In August, Re ş id Mehmed advanced to Malatya, north of Urfa, with 11,000 men and artillery. Mahmud II simultaneously proposed intervention while threatening naval action against the Egyptian fleet. The British fleet in the Mediterranean was placed on alert. As the stand-off continued, Mehmed Ali began to hint at independence in his negotiations with Great Britain and France, but found both powers intent at this point on preservation of the empire. To forestall the possibility of independence, Mahmud II agreed to settle the tribute question if Urfa were to be evacuated. Mehmed Ali opted for the compromise. The potentially explosive moment was avoided. 
 The next two years were spent in mediation, appeals to the European powers for support, offers and counter-offers, and diplomatic missions to and from Istanbul and Cairo. Mahmud II took the international community by surprise by sending an expeditionary force to Tripoli (Libya) in May 1835, ending 200 years of semi-independence of the Karamanll ı family. By April 1837, Mahmud II began negotiating with Mehmed Ali for his hereditary rule of Egypt and Syria, and Mahmud II appeared willing to concede the dynastic principle but not Damascus, Aleppo or Adana. This proved unacceptable to Egypt. In September 1837, Mehmed Ali captured Aden in the Gulf, extending his power over Arabia from Suez to Mukha on the Red Sea and threatening the British steam trade routes from Egypt to India. But İ brahim faced a sustained revolt of the Druze in Hawran at the end of 1837. An army of 20,000 finally defeated the Druze only in June 1838. In the negotiations which followed, İ brahim granted the Druzes considerable autonomy and exemption from conscription. By that time, Mahmud II’s commanders had amassed 50,000 troops at Urfa, while Mehmed Ali accelerated his build-up in Syria in response. Another international crisis loomed. 
 Redifs and Kurds 
 Most of the redif recruits in Urfa were Kurds, as Re ş id Mehmed Pasha’s responsibilites there had included surveillance of Egyptian troop movements, as well as pacifying uprisings in territories around the city of Diyarbak ı r. Diyarbak ı r had an even longer history of semi-autonomous rule than Albania or Bosnia, situated as it was along the fault lines of the early Ottoman state, and Kurds, like Albanians, proved able but independent warriors. The history of the province followed many of the trajectories of resistance to centralisation and reform that we have seen elsewhere. 
 Kurds, like Albanians, spoke a different language from Turkish, actually several different languages. Also, like Albanians, many were putative Shiites, alevis . Kurdish tribal leaders, mirs , acquired tax-collection rights in exchange for military manpower. By the eighteenth century, much of the territory functioned as separate emirates, with official appointments from the Istanbul government such as the mütesellim , or tax collectors, who generally came from the local families. The governor of Diyarbak ı r, as with other provinces, was an Istanbul appointee. The population was extremely diverse: not only Kurds but Jews, Armenians, Türkmen and Bedouins in large numbers were native, or migratory, to the area. Isolation, mountainous and barren territory made incorporating the territory difficult – that is, until the time of Mahmud II. 
 In 1819, the city of Diyarbak ı r itself revolted against a particularly ruthless Ottoman Governor, Behram Pasha, Mahmud II’s appointee to subdue the powerful merchant family elites. Behram Pasha was besieged in the fortress at Diyarbak ı r for close to three months, before the superior fire of his forces demolished the rebellion. Revolts began in the 1830s under the leadership of Said Bey, Ismail Bey, Vede Khan Bey, Bedr Khan of Cizre, of the Botan emirate, and Mir Mehmed Pasha of Rawandiz in present-day Iraq. The latter revolt was particularly vigorous, but successfully suppressed by Re ş id Mehmed Pasha in 1835. For another decade, the territory was engaged in a long resistance to conscription and incorporation into the reformed empire. In 1838 the Ottoman forces finally defeated Bedr Khan of Cizre, but he emerged again after the Ottoman defeat at Nizib, in 1843, and with Nurullah in Hakkari, threatened the new sultan sufficiently to become a cause of international concern, especially after the massacre of local communities of Nestorian Christians. This last revolt could only be contained in 1847 by mobilising a large Ottoman army in the east under Ömer Pasha of later Crimean fame. Following its suppression, the Ottomans redrew the lines of the province of Diyarbak ı r, and stationed state troops on the Iranian/Russian border, arguably one of the last phases of the Ottoman pacification and incorporation of this particular frontier territory but hardly the last of its resistance. We will return to the discussion of this terrain, the Caucasus, Erzurum and Kars in the last chapter. 76 
