 Mehmed Ali Pasha responded to the Russian demand on two levels: R ı fat was told to continue negotiating, while he approached the British and French about naval aid. He also began secret communications with the military about Ottoman preparedness. The French responded immediately, and by April, the French fleet was anchored near Athens. The British hesitated, misinterpreting the seriousness of the situation. Negotiations between Menshikov and R ı fat continued, but the Ottomans simply refused to offer more than guarantees of such privileges by sultanic order. On 13 May, Mehmed Ali Pasha’s government was dismissed by the sultan, probably at the instigation of Menshikov’s staff and in collusion with Mustafa Re ş id, his replacement. Re ş id represented the peace party, and was presumed to be more amenable to Russian demands, while Mehmed Ali was secretly preparing for war. Mehmed Ali’s views were shared in the streets of Istanbul. Mehmed Ali was moved to the Seraskerlik , and proved to be just as influential in the direction of discussions on the Supreme Council. Muslims of the empire had become more vociferous about the restoration of Ottoman prestige, after decades of humiliating treatment by Christian powers, and this sentiment, shared by Mehmed Ali and others on the council, would ultimately affect the decisions made there. 
 In a final gesture to save a diplomatic break with Russia, Re ş id called a general assembly of 48 members of government, including both Hüsrev and Fuad Pashas, to deliberate on the possibility of war. The greatest impediment was the lack of the guarantees of great power support. A diluted response to the Menshikov ultimatum was crafted, which offered a firman rather than a treaty, reasserting the existing privileges of the Orthodox Church and a return to the status quo over the Holy Places. This was flatly rejected by 18 May, and the Russian mission left with the entire Istanbul embassy by 21 May. Tsar Nicholas subsequently threatened to occupy the Principalities, and, if that did not force a capitulation to the ultimatum, to blockade Istanbul. Menshikov blamed Stratford Canning for the failure of the mission. 
 Meanwhile, an Ottoman bank was established specifically to organise state finances in the case of war. A £450,000 pound loan was negotiated in London. By 18 May, the entire empire was put on naval and military alert, including the reserves. Orders were issued by the sultan that all measures should be taken to protect the Christians of the empire from Muslim abuse during the crisis. On 2 July 1853 50,000 Russian troops, under Prince M.D. Gorchakov, crossed the frontier into the Principalities, and by the middle of July had occupied Bucharest. The Ottomans stalled for time. Some 10,000 Egyptian troops, three battleships and six other vessels joined the Ottoman fleet by August. Adolphus Slade, then an Ottoman naval adviser in Istanbul, may have influenced Serasker Mehmed Ali’s thinking that the Ottomans were strong enough to defend Istanbul. The city’s defences continued to be upgraded, with thirteen forts manned with more than 300 guns. 41 Such warlike preparations had the Russians contemplating a joint land–sea operation from Varna, which was rejected in preference for the initial occupation of Wallachia and Moldavia in the hopes of preventing a wider conflict. 
 British Ambassador Canning, who had returned from a short absence in London just as Menshikov arrived, had begun to distance himself from the reformers and from the Ottoman reform agenda altogether. In 1852, a financial scandal involving the sultan’s closest advisers, including Mustafa Re ş id, discouraged the Ambassador. His attitude was hardly unique, as it was an era when British attitudes hardened against the Ottomans in general. Prime Minister Aberdeen was known for his hatred of Muslims and Ottomans, confiding to his Lord Admiral: ‘I should as soon think of preferring the Koran to the Bible, as of comparing the Christianity and civilization of Russia to the fanaticism and immorality of the Turks.’ 42 British and French discord, and inflexible British diplomatic attitudes, meant the two powers were initially powerless to influence the drift to war. Still, British policy aimed at maintaining the Ottoman status quo, while the Russians were already envisioning its demise and partition among the great powers. Such fundamental misunderstanding certainly contributed to the escalation of hostilities. 
 By mid-June, both British and French fleets had anchored just outside the Dardanelles, part of the reason why Nicholas abandoned the proposed double-pronged land attack on Varna and the naval attack on Istanbul. The Russian occupation plan depended on continued good relations with Austria, which, as we have seen, failed to materialise after mid-1853. In July, with the Russians in occupation in the Principalities, the Austrians proposed a four-power diplomatic conference in Vienna to solve the crisis. The discussions were to produce the Vienna Note, which became the central document of controversy in the next stage of the crisis. In Istanbul, Mehmed Ali, alarmed at Re ş id’s passive reaction to the Russian occupation, attempted to replace his rival with Ali Pasha. Stratford Canning demanded the return of Re ş id, and entangled the British even further in the looming war by interfering in local politics to support Canning’s protégé. Grand Vizier Mustafa Naili and Foreign Minister Re ş id Pasha were reinstated on 9 July, but were reduced in the eyes of the public to the status of British lackeys. 
 Their solution to the crisis was to call another general assembly to discuss the Russian occupation. The ultimatum of 23 July, as it is called, reiterated Ottoman sovereignty in relation to its own subjects, and promised to grant the same rights to the Orthodox Greeks which other millets already had, rejecting Tsar Nicholas’s demands once again. The ultimatum sounds remarkably like that of Mahmud II on another occasion (1828), and was considered by the diplomatic community to be the last concession the Ottomans would make. Should the Russians accept the condition, the Note would go with a special Ottoman envoy to St Petersburg, and the Russian troops could then be withdrawn from the Principalities. 
 Meanwhile, negotiators in Vienna had crafted a similiar Note by the end of July, but without consulting Istanbul. Their version had significant variations, which favoured the Russian view of its right to intervene, drawn from the language of the Küçük Kaynarca Treaty, and insisted that any changes to such language be approved by both France and Russia. While the Ottoman Ultimatum of 1853 preserved the fiction of Ottoman independence from foreign intervention, the Vienna Note did not. The Vienna conference gave preference to the great power version; the Austrian representative is said to have repressed the Ottoman version on orders from Franz Joseph, hardly the behaviour to gain the confidence of the Istanbul government. 
 The story now takes on aspects of an Oriental tale, with a blizzard of textual variations and attempts to intercede between Russia and the Ottomans. The diplomatic community had miscalculated (or simply dismissed) the strength of Ottoman resistance to the question of Russian intervention in what Ottoman negotiators insisted was a matter of sovereignty. ‘There was very general irritation with the Ottomans who, according to The Times , were in themselves of no more account “than the red Indians of Yucatan,” but the very circumstance that they were perceived as the cause of the crisis reflects the fears routinely evoked by any new instalment of the Eastern Question.’ 43 On 18 August the Ottomans rejected the Vienna Note and offered another one of their own, which was also rejected by Nicholas. A diplomatic impasse had been reached. 
 Ottoman fears of Russian intentions concerning Serbia and Greece, as well as the tense atmosphere of the northern border areas that has been described, were paramount concerns among Ottoman bureaucrats. Austria maintained observation troops in Transylvania, which must also have been seen as menacing to Ottoman security. Much discussion centred in council on the Caucasus frontier as a place where the Ottomans could make a stand against Russia. By early September, the ‘war party’, likely stimulated by Mehmed Ali Pasha and his entourage, had begun to dominate street politics in Istanbul. Mustafa Re ş id pressed for a four-power guarantee of the Ottoman Empire, which was resisted by both France and Britain. News spread that Nicholas and Franz Joseph intended a meeting at Olmütz to discuss differences. This was interpreted as a war council. Petitions calling for holy war were submitted to the sultan, from prominent members of the ulema, in the midst of disturbances in Istanbul in the second week of September. Re ş id pressed France and Britain to move their ships into the Bosphorus. The demonstrators in Istanbul further petitioned the sultan, who urged his religious officials to argue for the virtues of the diplomatic avenues. 
 While it appeared to many that the sultan’s throne was in danger, as during the accession of Mahmud II, wiser observers saw the hand of Mehmed Ali Pasha and the small war party at work. Foreign observers, however, gauged that an influx of refugees from the Balkans, largely Christian, and war-enthusiastic volunteers from all over the empire might have numbered a quarter of a million. 44 This was a volatile situation for any government. Sultan Abdülmecid convened a large general council on 26 September. They were as yet without news of the Olmütz meeting on 22 September, when Nicholas I made further concessions which might have made the Vienna Note more palatable to the Istanbul government. An extensive discussion ensued, but neither side had proper information to make a considered decision about the Ottoman ability to defeat the Russians. Mustafa Re ş id was unable to persuade the council to wait for guarantees from Britain and France. They concluded that accepting the current Russian version of the Vienna Note was tantamount to ‘drinking poison and simply dying’. According to Temperley, as the debates proceeded, ‘the naked face of fanaticism peered forth.’ 45 
 On 29 September, Abdülmecid accepted a recommendation from the council to declare war, and 40,000 reservists were ordered mobilised. The war manifesto avoided the call to holy war, and spoke of the protection of the sultan’s subjects. ‘This declaration of war, which concerns Russia, is required by the need to work for the defence and interest of the Exalted State. Even more care and attention than previously will be taken to defend and protect the Christian subjects of the Exalted State. It will be of the utmost importance and a primary responsibility of government to evade anything which would invite the hostility of other states by reason of bad treatment of them.’ 46 
 As the hostilities escalated, the Takvim-i Vekayi recorded speeches by leaders of the various Christian millets attesting their loyalty and commitment to the conflict. 47 Ömer Pasha, stationed at Ş umnu, gave Russia two weeks to withdraw from the Principalities on 6 October. Instead, Nicholas I and his military advisers made plans to take the war to the Caucasus, aiming at Kars. On 22 October, Istanbul instructed Ömer Pasha to begin military operations against Russia in the Principalities immediately. 48 
