

 In 1848, I was appointed as Governor of Aleppo. I was very happy and expressed my profound thanks [to the sultan]. We went by steamship to Rhodes. From there we arrived at İ skenderun, disembarked and prepared the animals. We arrived in Aleppo via Antioch. Nam ı k Pasha, shortly to be appointed Mü ş ir to Baghdad, was there. [His first instructions were to apply the Tanzimat reforms to Urfa, starting with taking a census, nine years after the Gülhane Edict.] First, I sent two battalions. Then the census-takers. At the same time, I went to Birecik with two squadrons of cavalry and 300 ba ş ı bozuks . The census was completed, but the local [financial] records were only partially revealed. I assembled 2,000 of the elders and leaders of Urfa and surrounding villages, and announced the institution of the reforms. [They brought the remainder of the records, which revealed further local expenses. Zarif then set a tax bill for the state, and negotiated exemptions with the elders and tribal leaders.] I spent 140,000 kuru ş on ceremonial robes, watches, and other gifts, and returned to Aleppo … The Bedouins started to attack and I stopped them with the ba ş ı bozuk . I was ordered to collect some 30,000 kese that İ brahim Pasha had left in Aleppo, and send 14,000 kese to the [sixth] army in Baghdad. I was then ordered to confiscate any property and goods of anyone in arrears. That was followed by an order for conscription. Arabistan [his word] did not want to give soldiers; as for the rest, they are Aleppo bandits. Abdullah Bey had only 4,000 kese . [In the midst of trying to impose the new regulations, a riot broke out.] I rode out with a few servants, police and a few guards to the area of the disturbance. Three to five thousand people stood in front of me with weapons in their hands. ‘Do not approach or we will shoot,’ they said. ‘Hey you, it’s me!’ I shouted. They said, ‘Whoever you are, we’ll shoot!’ I said, ‘Oh yeah? Go ahead and shoot!’ All those men shot at me. 
 He retreated to the front of the inner fort, and called on the guards to close the gates. Then he assembled a company of soldiers, but they told him they did not have any ammunition. 

 I sent them back. I sent the news to the barracks, but then shots began to be fired from everywhere. I was told they had raided the barracks and were killing the soldiers. I went crazy and wanted to ride to the barracks, but they held me back. One Ömer Agha, an Albanian chief, told me to follow him, and helped me make my way to the barracks. 
 Arriving at the barracks, he learned that the soldiers had prepared a few artillery pieces, but that there were only 250 men in the place. 
 The rebels then attacked the Christian districts. He had no choice. Without soldiers, Zarif was forced to summon Abdullah Bey, and with much pleading, begging and promises, he asked him to put a stop to it. It was only then that Zarif learned the reasons for the revolt, which are listed above. By the next morning, the crowd had increased by his estimate to 40,000–50,000. He sent his 250 infantry and two companies of cavalry into the Christian quarters, but they could do nothing. He surrendered the city to Abdullah and the ulema, and retired to the palace for 20 days, having secretly sent for reinforcements. Mü ş ir Emin Pasha sent three battalions of infantry, a regiment of cavalry and about 500 ba ş ı bozuks . As the nizamiye troops approached the city, the inhabitants got wind of it and shut down the market. Ultimately, 2,500 soldiers and ten cannons faced down the revolt. For the most of the next three days, the marketplace was a battleground. Zarif burned down the houses of the insurgents. He praised the regulars who struggled so bravely as they conquered the house of Abdullah. ‘Long live our padi ş ah, they cried!’ In three days, 8,000 cannonballs were shot but with little effect. The troops behaved well. Zarif claimed to have distributed 1,000 kese as encouragement for those who were fighting. He reclaimed some of the goods stolen from the Christian quarters. He also raided the Bedouin camp, and took some 20,000 sheep, camels and oxen. It was over, and business was resumed. The consuls and the Christians came to thank him. He cautioned that they needed 10,000 soldiers to keep order in Aleppo. The consuls protested that should it happen again, they would demand an indemnity. Relief forces arrived, and Zarif Pasha left Aleppo for İ skenderun with 150 prisoners, among them Abdullah Bey, who died before they arrived in Istanbul. 20 While Zarif Pasha is no stylist, the story conveys his methods as well as the inadequacy of the forces under his command. He will resurface not just in Vidin but in Erzurum as well, at a crucial stage in the Russo-Ottoman confrontation there during the Crimean War. 
 Conscription was not fully imposed on Aleppo until 1861; in Damascus conscription was operational after 1860, although urban inhabitants found ways to escape, such as flight or self-mutilation. Here, as elsewhere, it soon became apparent that there were fairly easy ways of being declared exempt from service, the simplest by bribing the officials in charge of the balloting system or by finding substitutes. Sultanic firmans reinforced this. Published in both Arabic and Turkish, they confirmed that only one in eleven of men between 20 and 25 would be called up. Invalids, only sons, and students were exempt. 21 After 1853, apart from the Jabal Hawran Druzes, who resisted conscription until 1896, conscription was no longer a contentious issue for local populations but remained deeply unpopular. 
 Restoring order was inevitably hampered by the reduction in the number of regulars of the fifth army, when troops were redeployed to other parts of the empire to assist in pacification elsewhere. In 1853 17,000 Syrian army troops were transferred to the Crimean battlefront, leaving the Syrian territories largely in the hands of as few as 10,000 nizamiye , and the ba ş ı bozuks . By some reports, no more than a total 4,000 nizamiye troops were stationed in Aleppo and Damascus just prior to the massacres of Christians in Damascus in 1860. Only after those massacres provoked an international outcry did the government in Istanbul send an additional 20,000 regular army troops to Damascus. 22 
 Similarly, the efforts to impose direct taxation as described above foundered in the Arab provinces. Tax-farming continued throughout the reform period. Initially the Ottomans considered abolishing the individual urban tax, the ferde , the unpopular levy imposed by the Egyptians, but it was reinstated at one-third of the Egyptian rate. As we have seen in Aleppo, it too was often the cause of rebellions. After 1852 it was converted to a generalised property tax ( vergi ), more in line with the principles of the Tanzimat. 
 The local councils, first established by İ brahim and part of the Tanzimat reforms as well, did exert considerable power as an advisory body, with many executive and judicial functions. Unlike those of İ brahim, the new Ottoman meclis was less representative of the non-Muslim populations. Local Muslim notables and the ulema consolidated Syrian resources in the hands of the wealthy landowners. After 1852 the councils were returned to the authority of the governors, and their effectiveness was determined by the level of cooperation that could be achieved among the various constituencies. Muslim violence against Christian communities in Aleppo, Nablus, and finally Damascus in 1860, was symptomatic not just of the Ottoman state inability to maintain order and stability, or of the new international trading regime imposed by the 1838 Anglo-Ottoman convention. It was equally emblematic of the turmoil within the old urban order and their militias, and the impact of the Tanzimat reforms on the equilibrium of both urban and rural populations. 
 Seeds of Russo-Ottoman conflict on the Danube 
 In Vidin and other towns along the Danube, problems like those of the Arab provinces, and later Bosnia, emerged shortly after the promulgation of the Tanzimat and were linked to developments both in Serbia and the Principalities. The social transformation in north-western Bulgaria was influenced in this early period by its strategic position as the Ottoman European frontier, and by the convulsions occurring across the border after 1848. 
 As we have seen, the 1826 Russo-Ottoman Convention of Akkirman had promised to fulfil the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest, granting semi-autonomy to Serbia. The Treaty of Adrianople (1829) had once again imposed that condition. In August 1830, Mahmud II confirmed Milos Obrenovic as Hereditary Prince of Serbia, recognising the autonomy of the territory, defining the border, setting out the annual tribute as compensation for abolishing the Ottoman land regime, and regulating the stationing of Ottoman troops in the country. Muslims were prohibited from settling in Serbia. By 1838, a new constitution was declared. In the in-between years, the tension between the Ottoman nominal regiment in Belgrade and the Serbian government often led to strife, and the renegotiating of spatial and ‘national’ lines. By 1867, the last Ottoman troops were withdrawn from Belgrade. 
 Thus in north-western Bulgaria, Tanzimat reformers and military men were dealing with the presence of a nascent nation-state in Serbia, and stirrings of constitutionalism and unification in the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia. In addition, as we have seen, the 1827 Treaty of London gave the foreign powers carte blanche to intervene on behalf of their religious communities, which they did with regularity, both in the Arab provinces and on this border. However, external pressures influenced the confrontation of old and new Ottoman regimes in distinct ways in this European/Ottoman contact zone. But initially not by much. Rebellions, first in Ni ş in 1841, and then in Vidin in 1850, focused on the question of property and taxation, as might be expected the Tanzimat reformers had aimed first at abolishing the timariot system, in order to reorganise the distribution of land. This resulted in exacerbated conflicts between peasants and large land-holders over rights to land. As elsewhere, the loosening of the bonds of the Ottoman land regime had the net effect of entrenching the power of the local landlords, largely Muslim families. Much of the old system remained in place. The Ni ş revolt in 1841 was linked to the fundamental conundrum of the old and the new systems: Christians were to be treated as equals, but Muslims benefited most from the land reforms. Governor Sabri Mustafa Pasha began a tax survey at the end of 1840, in order to implement the new reforms. A combination of the new tax regime, and the quartering of troops on families in the area, provoked the revolt, which the Governor put down by calling in some 2,000 Albanian irregulars, whose pacification techniques we have encountered before. Many of the inhabitants fled to Serbia, but peasant appeals called for sultanic intervention, not for liberation, even though the Ottoman governor later blamed Serbian interference. A petition from 1,000 Christians to the Prince of Serbia in 1841 noted: ‘People are not revolting against the legitimate government of the Sultan; rather they want that the benevolent terms of the Hatti Sherif of Gülhane be faithfully and exactly carried out.’ 23 The Istanbul government was slow to respond, but after the rebellion itself had essentially been pacified, sent commissioners to resettle the claims of returning villagers. Little actually changed to benefit the agricultural sector. 
