 In Vidin, the situation was more complicated. Already a divided city, between the Muslim garrison and the rest of the town, it had become predominantly Muslim as a result of emigration from surrendered lands. A later Ottoman census, which did not include the soldiers of the garrison, estimated some 23,000 inhabitants in Vidin, making it one of the largest cities along the Ottoman Danube. The fortress had been reconstructed according to the Vauban system during the Austrian occupation in the early 1700s, and it continued to be well fortified after it was returned to the Ottomans. Strategically important to the Ottomans, Vidin, as with all the previous Russo-Ottoman wars we have seen, was one of the flash-points preceding the Crimean War. 24 
 In 1845, as elsewhere, the government attempted to establish local councils and consultative bodies in the town, but they met with little success. The petitions of those who rebelled in 1850 stressed the abuses of local tax officials, tax farmers and village landlords. As in Ni ş , initial expectations of the Tanzimat decree were met with disappointment. Anticipating better treatment by the legal system, and an amelioration of the tax burden, the peasants found that abuses continued. Whereas elsewhere in Bulgaria the timariots were to be pensioned off by 1842, and some territory did move into individual peasant holdings, it is unclear that the reform was implemented in Vidin to any great degree, again partly because of the defensive position of the town. As in the cases where the timariot rights were abolished, the land quickly fell into large Muslim landowners’ hands. The other source of peasant anger was the continuation of forced labour, contrary to the promise of the Gülhane Edict. 
 1848 revolutions and the Ottoman northern frontier 
 The revolt which broke out in 1850 may have been organised in Serbia and instigated by the Russians, who had troops stationed in Wallachia after 1848, and at one point moved three battalions to Kalafat, across the river from Vidin. This requires a little explanation, and an introduction to Ömer Pasha, Commander of the Third Army, and later Mü ş ir of the Ottoman contingent at Sevastopol. 
 The Treaty of Adrianople between the Russians and the Ottomans had secured virtual autonomy for Wallachia and Moldavia. The Organic Regulations of 1829 set out the principles of self-government for the two territories, but in effect the Principalities became subject to a dual protectorate, the Russians and the Ottomans, with the Russian army in occupation until 1834. Ottoman influence has been reduced to the collection of a fixed tribute and a say in the choice, later election, of the princes. Equally important, a quarantine zone was established along the Danube and the Ottoman monopoly on grain, animals and timber was eliminated. Muslims, as before, were prohibited from residing in the territories. The Organic Regulations, under the administration of Russian Count Pavel D. Kiselev, were issued in July 1831 in Wallachia and January 1832 in Moldavia. Two provinces were established, under princes, with legislative representation by assemblies of the boyars. The move towards a representative government changed very little fundamentally for the peasants. Boyars were made the owners of the land, and still demanded labour services of the peasants on their farms. Serfdom had disappeared from Wallachia and Moldavia in the eighteenth century, but the peasants who remained had little freedom of movement. Still, with the Ottomans prohibited from exacting the agricultural products they had long come to expect from Wallachia and Moldavia, Romanian peasants did benefit from the demand for their agricultural products upstream from Vidin, and their increasing incorporation into the markets and cultural life of Europe. 
 In 1834, the Ottomans and the Russians signed the Convention of St Petersburg. The Ottomans recognised the new statutes, set the tribute at three million kuru ş , and Russian troops departed. The two powers appointed new princes, who ruled for the next seven years. Though they were years of prosperity and awakening, it was also a time of much struggle among the landed boyars of the assemblies, princes, and Russian consuls who intervened at will in local affairs. Wallachians and Moldavians technically had the right of appeal to either Russian or Ottoman authorities. By 1840, the Russians were attempting to turn a right into a stipulation that the statutes could not be changed without the approval of the two empires, which threatened the autonomy especially of Wallachia. By 1842, Alexander Ghica, the appointed prince of Wallachia, had been deposed, and George Bibescu was elected by the assembly, but his rule suffered the same interventionism of Russian diplomats and advisers. Moldavia, long drawn more peacefully into the Russian orbit, still chafed at the restrictive regime of the statutes. 
 Opposition grew as a larger number of boyar children experienced European life, especially in Paris. So when the winds of revolution swept Europe in 1848, two territories were most effected: Hungary and Wallachia. The Hungarian problem in the Habsburg Empire was a long-standing one, and need not be rehearsed here. Chancellor Clemens von Metternich was at the helm, a deeply conservative monarchist and adherent to the historic understanding of the Habsburg empire as a federation of culturally distinct provinces. As we have seen before, the Habsburg involvement in Europe generally meant the neglect of the eastern side of the empire. Preoccupation in this period was with Germany and Italy, and that has been articulated as one of the chief reasons for Habsburg neutrality during the Crimean War. Austro-Hungarian peasants, like their counterparts in the Balkans, had much to complain of regarding their status, condition and lack of voice. In 1848, the call to national liberation and constitutionalism swept from Sicily to Paris, where the monarchy of King Louis Philippe collapsed. The flames spread to Vienna and Budapest in March 1848, when Metternich was dismissed and a new government appointed. The new constitution called for a single centralised regime, single citizenship, and for eighteen-year-old Habsburg Franz Joseph to be crowned as Emperor of Austria, but not as King of Hungary. Further reforms intended the division of the Kingdom of Hungary into new territories, which further stiffened the resolve of the Hungarian revolutionary government. Particularly sensitive for the Hungarians was the removal of Transylvania and its creation as Grand Principality. While most territories of the Habsburg empire had been subdued by the army in mid-1849, Hungary’s revolutionary government, led by Lajos Kossuth and backed by its army, was in control of Budapest. Polish revolutionary General Bem, who had defeated the Habsburg forces, held Transylvania. 25 
 Meanwhile, revolutionary rebellion spread to Romania. Moldavia remained quiet, except for some petitions by the boyars, but Wallachia became the centre of an international incident. In Bucharest, leaders of the rebellion, many of them boyar sons educated at the Collège de France in Paris, organised a rudimentary republican government, a united Romania, which lasted all of three months. A peasant uprising never materialised, although many left their homes to march with their leaders to Bucharest. Bibescu abdicated, and the Russian consul retired to Jassy. This revolt was less about peasant rights and liberation than about throwing off Russian control and liberalising the administration. 26 
 At this point the revolutionaries turned to Istanbul, hoping to prevent a break with one protector while expecting an invasion from the other. Ottoman commissioners were sent to Giurgevo to investigate. The first of them, Süleyman Pasha, was induced to toast the new, illegal government, which prompted Russian protests in Istanbul. A new commissioner, Fuad Efendi, later Grand Vizier Fuad Pasha, was sent at the beginning of September as part of a joint occupation to accompany Russian General Duhanel to put an end to the revolt. Fuad crossed into Wallachia, and camped outside Bucharest with 5,000 soldiers (elsewhere 12,000 or 20,000). The Russians moved 14,000 troops into Moldavia in July, and by October had some 30,000 stationed in Wallachia. (Russia was more concerned with the ongoing Hungarian revolution than the Wallachian one.) With little difficulty, the Ottoman and Russian troops entered Bucharest in late September, and after a brief encounter with a handful of armed rebels, the revolution was over. 27 
 Two inter-related international crises dominated 1849. In January, the Russians demanded a joint protocol with the Ottomans. The military occupation was to extend for seven years, and the two courts were to appoint the hospodars , a significant infringement on the autonomy of the Principalities. More significantly for the rest of Europe, the Russians demanded Ottoman acquiescence to their invasion of Transylvania to help Franz Joseph eliminate the rebellion there. The negotiations in Istanbul, led by Ambassador Canning, have been described as a rehearsal for the Crimean War. Throughout the negotiations, Grand Vizier Mustafa Re ş id intimated that a show of force by the British fleet would be appreciated. The request was consistently rebuffed by Palmerston, who appreciated the significance of a reconstitution of the conservative imperial order represented by the brief Austro-Russian cooperation over Hungarian rebels. When Habsburg Franz Joseph I requested military assistance in May 1849, the Russians invaded Transylvania with an army of 150,000 and defeated the Hungarians. That was preceded by the signing of the Russo-Ottoman Act of Balta Liman ı on 24 April 1849. The Princes of Moldavia were now to be appointed by Russia (effectively) and the Ottomans, rather than elected. Small advisory councils replaced the grander assemblies. The Russian occupation army would remain in the Principalities until 1851. 28 Even more threatening to the tranquillity of European relations was the flood of Hungarian and Polish refugees who entered Ottoman territories, with their leaders Kossuth and Bem among them. Sultan Abdülmecid refused to extradite them, when Russia and Austria demanded the return of their subjects. (Austria evoked the long-standing 1739 Belgrade Treaty stipulations.) Fearful of war, Great Britain reacted swiftly in this instance and a joint French–British squadron headed for the Dardanelles. Meanwhile, Sultan Abdülmecid dispatched Fuad Efendi on a secret mission to Tsar Nicholas I. By November, Nicholas rescinded his extradition demands and the crisis had been averted. Clearly the Eastern Question, exacerbated by revolutionary fervour, and the outcry of nationals and evangelicals alike, was not about to go away. 29 
 Provincial resistance: Vidin in 1850 
