 The military commander of the Ottoman troops with Fuad in Wallachia was Ömer Pasha (d. 1871). Born Michael Lattas of Croatia, Ömer Pasha deserted the Austrian army for Bosnia sometime in the mid-1820s. He joined the Ottoman army under Mahmud II after the elimination of the Janissaries in 1826, serving as an infantry captain and instructor in the new military school in Istanbul. An audience with Mahmud II changed the course of his career, when the sultan appointed him as tutor to his son Abdülmecid. After Abdülmecid’s accession to the throne, Ömer Pasha was promoted to the rank of mirliva . Till that point he had not seen much actual service in the field, but that quickly changed. First he served with the European naval officers during the pacification of Beirut. Next, in 1842–43, he was in Damascus commanding 15,000–20,000 troops aimed at reducing the power of the Druze chieftains in Lebanon. Temperley describes him as ‘the ruthless Ömer pasha’ with his ‘savage Albanians’. He appears to have had some success in reducing the Druze resistance and defeating their leader, before he was reassigned elsewhere. In 1846–47, he was in charge of the pacification of Kurdistan, especially the rebellion of Bedir Khan. At the head of 12,000 troops he moved on Nizib, drew Bedir Khan and his forces in battle, and defeated them. For that triumph, he was promoted to the rank of field marshal ( mü ş ir ) by the sultan. 
 In 1848, as part of the occupation force in Wallachia, Ömer Pasha was credited with acting in a restrained manner. Of course, as we have seen, there were very few armed rebels in Wallachia but large numbers of Russian troops. The point to be made is that Ömer was an integral part of the reformed military organisation, having become the Mü ş ir of the Rumeli third army, which was now called upon to restore order in Vidin and then in Bosnia and Montenegro. 30 
 In Vidin, the Ottoman authorities were aware of possible Serbian agitation, and also of the revolutionary fervour which spilled over into Ottoman territories in the shape of Polish and Hungarian refugees. Discontent with the Tanzimat reforms made fertile ground for ideologues of liberation. Serbia, however, does not seem to have been instrumental in the Vidin events, even though Serbian officials served as mediators for Bulgarian petitions concerning their grievances as the revolt wound down. Ali R ı za Pasha was despatched to restore order to Vidin, but local notables had already called in the ba ş ı bozuks in much the same manner as has been described for Aleppo. Ömer Pasha, on his way to Bosnia, was ordered to negotiate with the rebel camp on the Serbian border. This he appears to have done with some success, persuading the Bulgarians who had fled to Serbian lands to return home by promising them amnesty. Meanwhile, Ali R ı za Pasha, who had arrived in June in Rusçuk, mobilised regular forces to take care of the ba ş ı bozuks and reported on the numbers killed in the repression of the revolt: 15 Turks and 720 Bulgarians. He issued a warning: ‘From now on no objectionable conduct and evil deeds by officials and other persons are permitted.’ A delegation of Vidin residents travelled to Istanbul to present their grievances to the sultan, and to request that Ali R ı za be made Governor. They met with the Supreme Council in August. The Council installed Ali R ı za, promised the delegation that a redistribution of property, in accordance with the Tanzimat regulations, would be undertaken in Vidin, but equivocated about the ways in which it might be carried out. When the delegation returned, the word spread that the Ottoman land regime had been abolished. 
 What had started as a peasant revolt turned into a true test of the viability of the new Ottoman order. In February 1851, the lands of the Muslim lords were ordered to be sold to the peasants, a solution that benefited neither landlord nor peasant. New disturbances brought another inspector from Istanbul, one Ş ekib Efendi, former ambassador to Vienna and Tanzimat bureaucrat, and the appointment of Zarif Pasha to replace Vali Ali R ı za. Zarif is reported as saying he could not understand the selling of property to the reayas, and also as conspiring to have Ş ekib Efendi removed. He was removed himself in January of 1851, and replaced by Vas ı f Pasha, Commander of Belgrade. Both men ended up on the Caucasian battlefront within two years. The example of Vidin is an interesting one. Here, the Tanzimat installation represented a give-and-take between the peasants and the bureaucrats of Istanbul, and a certain amount of restraint is in evidence. Land reforms, however, proved very difficult to impose, and the problem festered for another decade. 31 
 Provincial resistance: Bosnia and Montenegro 
 We left Bosnia in revolt in 1832, when Kapudan Hüseyin and Bu ş atl ı Mustafa of Albania challenged the Ottomans. The Ottoman solution to Bosnia was to back rivals to Hüseyin’s power, and install Ali Ridvano ğ lu as governor of a newly-separate Herzegovina pashal ı k . In 1834, Bosnia was reorganised with six sancaks , and smaller districts as elsewhere. In 1835, the Ottomans abolished the hereditary kapudanl ı ks of the Bosnian Muslim nobility, and replaced them with the office of müsellim . Many of the former members of the Bosnia militias, sipahis and kapudans were thus appointed, so little actually changed. Discontent continued in the province sporadically throughout the 1830s and 1840s. After 1848, revolutionary fervour complicated the picture in Bosnia and especially Herzegovina. The chief difference between Bosnia and Vidin was that rebellion was instigated and sustained by Bosnian Muslim chieftains and their militias. The major issue for local populations continued to be tax revenues and the division of land. The largely Christian peasantry protested at the continued dominance and oppression of the Muslim landlords. 
 Finally, in 1850 Müsir Ömer Pasha was appointed as Governor in Bosnia to replace Tahir Pasha. Word of his clemency in Bulgaria preceded him, and the Christian peasants laid down their arms. It was the Muslim landowners who continued to resist. Ömer Pasha had some 8,000 troops and a number of Hungarian and Polish officers who had joined the Ottoman army. He succeeded where others had failed, breaking down the traditional politics of the Bosnian Muslim notables by 1851, and destroying Ali Ridvano ğ lu, who had attempted independent rule in Herzegovina. Barbara Jelavich states that suppression probably cost 5,000 lives; others refer to 5,000 refugees in Croatia. Temperley weighs in: 