 For the next decade, the emperor himself ran the military, as head of a newly centralised supreme command, with four armies headquartered in Vienna, Verona, Buda and Lemberg. The emperor intervened in the direction of operations in all aspects of the military. His adviser was Field Marshal Grünne, who was patronised by Archduchess Sophie, the emperor’s mother, and was the former chamberlain of Franz Joseph. The reorganisation reflects Franz Joseph’s passage from constitutional monarch to absolute ruler, especially after the office of Prime Minister was abolished in 1852. Army expenses exploded over the next decade, at the same time as army effectiveness declined. Before 1848, 50,000,000 florins annually was the normal outlay for the military; by 1854 this rose to 198,219,783 florins, some 42 per cent of the budget. Pay remained abysmally low, even though there were plenty of candidates. The officer corps was more than fifty per cent foreign-born by 1859, with deleterious effects on camaraderie and loyalty. In July 1852, a univeral conscription law was passed, with eight years in full service and two in reserve. Annual recruits probably never exceeded 80,000, and few were kept on for the full term. Pay, rations, and rates of corporal punishment did not improve significantly as we pass through the Crimean War period. New weapons were introduced, such as the percussion rifle, but training and tactical support did not follow. As elsewhere, the artillery received considerable attention, its numbers doubling in the decade 1849–59. The 1850s saw the establishment of the gendarmerie service, which provided police and security in cities and rural settings. Gendarmes were better paid and housed than the regular army. 
 It was a time of preoccupation with internal security, and the nationalities were governed with considerable severity. Foreign policy was poorly coordinated in the absence of a prime minister, although Franz Joseph had ambitions to restore Austria to European greatness. Confrontations with Prussia over German territories intensified, though they remain outside our story. French power threatened central Europe when Louis Napoleon became Napoleon III in 1851, and Austria hastened to sign a military convention with Prussia against the possibility of French hostility in 1852. Relations with Russia continued to deteriorate over geopolitical conflicts in the Balkans, as previously described, and their further resolutions lie outside the chronology of this book. 
 During the Montenegro crisis, the Austrians had mobilised 50,000 Grenzer at the same time as they issued the ultimatum which forced Ömer Pasha to desist. Austrian generals advised their civilian counterparts that Serbia, Albania and Bosnia should be occupied, to prevent the Russians from doing so. Then Russia reoccupied Moldavia and Wallachia in July 1853, precipitating the Crimean War. The Austrian field army was deployed in Transylvania and along the Danube. The third army in Hungary, and also the fourth in Galicia, were mobilised. In April 1854 Austria and Prussia completed a military alliance, with Prussia promising to support Austria, should Russia not withdraw from the Principalities. By mid-August 1854 Nicholas I had removed the troops from the Principalities, following ten months of Russo-Ottoman confrontation on the Danube, but Franz Joseph continued to mobilise further. By mid-October he was calling for a full mobilisation of the army. Warned of the Russian colossus by his military advisers, he desisted by November, joined the French and British and their Italian allies in December 1854, and declared Austrian neutrality. In the event, Austria did not send troops to the Crimea. 
 The Austro-Prussian–Russian interlude presaged later conflicts, and Habsburg reticence here likely extended the life of the dynasty for another half century. 38 There are striking parallels here with the Ottoman experience, not in terms of constitutionalism but in the struggles to maintain the traditional, autocratic order in a revolutionary age, and the crippling financial debt which the effort entailed. Vienna could not simultaneously be federative, centralised, and nationalist. 
 Concerning the Russian ‘colossus’, Nicholas I’s experience in the 1828–29 Russo-Turkish War had left him with an understanding of the limits of expansion to the south, especially in the matter of logistics. He cooperated with Britain based on his understanding of the Eastern Question throughout the decade of the Mehmed Ali crisis, and joined the Concert of Europe in signing the 1840 Treaty of London, but he also undertook to reorganise the military. From 1832 to 1836, War Minister Chernyshev transfered control over the military from the palace general staff to the Ministry of War, a structural move which clarified the lines of command and eliminated dual structures. This was a significant reform which lasted until the end of the Romanovs, and even into the Soviet era. As with both Austria and Turkey, military expenditures outran even peacetime budgets, but the rationalisation of ministerial staff also began in 1832. One of the aims was the elimination of corruption and improvement of administrative efficiency. 
 A more serious problem of the period was the question of manpower, which was tied to the continued conscription of serfs. The Ottomans created a reserve system in 1834, which became one of the branches of the divisional armies after 1843. The Habsburgs eliminated a Landwehr people’s army, but had 100,000 Grenzer at their disposal. The Romanovs maintained an army three times the size of any army in Europe because they did not have a reserve system. Conscription had dipped so deeply into rural resources as to provoke resistance which could not be controlled by the dispersed army. Landowners were unwilling to part with able men, so recruits were the expendable of rural communities. The excessive 25 years of active service had to be sustained to keep up the numbers in the army. The era under discussion was rife with peasants’ revolts, with origins as much economic as military. 
 Multiple frontiers, as with the Habsburgs and the Ottomans, made for strategies which scattered massive numbers of forces and raised military costs to an intolerable degree. Nicholas I experimented with furloughs, a type of reserve for soldiers who had served 20 of their 25 years, who were presumed to be trained, and could be recalled in emergencies. In 1849 such troops made up those who entered Transylvania, but their numbers were insufficient to the demand. When the Crimean War broke out, Russian military strategists were faced with an unenviable paradox: the army had grown so large that it threatened to bankrupt the state, but it remained too small and ill-equipped to defend the vast territories, and take on Istanbul, as the 1828–29 campaign had demonstrated. The Crimean War demonstrated it again, as nearly two million men were mobilised in the course of the conflict. While the combined allied force amounted to 300,000, Russia’s stood at 31,954 officers and 1,742,343 men in 1856. With irregulars, that number might have exceeded 2,500,000. The problems were legion, but largely due to the vast terrain, poor leadership, inadequate supply, and ‘strategic immobility’. The colossal failure of the Russian military resulted in the greatest of the empire’s defeats in the nineteenth century, and a complete overhaul of the system from 1861 forward, when the Emancipation Edict eliminated the system of serfdom. 39 
 Origins of the Crimean War 
 Revolutionary fervour did not convulse Russia in 1848 as it did elsewhere, but the stationing of Russian troops in Moldavia and Wallachia, as we have seen, did awaken ghosts of previous such provocations in Vienna and Istanbul. I have argued that the introduction of Tanzimat reforms, combined with revolutionary fervour among ethnic communities made for a volatile stew on the Ottoman Danubian frontier. Others have asserted that diplomatic blundering, especially of Russian envoy Menshikov, sent with ultimatums to Istanbul, and of British Ambassador Stratford Canning, were responsible for the curious conflict that unfolded after 1853. To the extent that the British and (less so) the French diplomatic communities misread the Ottoman environment of 1853–54, which turned hostile and bellicose, they should be held accountable. For they shortly found themselves in an alliance with the Ottomans and mobilising large armies for the Crimean battlefront, which would bring together the world’s largest sea power with the world’s largest land power. 
 The focus of the diplomatic wrangling in Istanbul was Jerusalem, where a dispute was under way after 1850 over the primacy of Catholic or Orthodox communities over the holy places. The Russian and French diplomats, respectively, argued their supposed rights to protection of the Ottoman Christian communities, by reference to the language of the treaties of Küçük Kaynarca (1774), for the Orthodox; the Treaty of Belgrade (1739) was the referent for the Catholics. The religious question obscured what most interpreted as the thrust by Napoleon III (installed as Emperor on 2 December 1852) to destabilise the European concert, and reassert some influence over the Levant. By the end of December 1852, the sultan issued a firman giving the Latins (Catholics) control of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem in preference to the Orthodox Greeks. This was the reversal of a previous firman which had promised the Orthodox (and Russia) the same privileges (November 1851). Foreign Minister Fuad Pasha had argued a French alliance would follow, and may have been impressed by French threats about invading Syria. 
 This of course was a direct insult to the Russians, who had argued their right to protect the Orthodox Greek community since 1774. The Orthodox community was in fact substantially larger than the small Catholic community of the empire, and the 1851 decision much more in keeping with Russo-Ottoman diplomacy of previous eras. Tsar Nicholas anticipated British compliance with his view that the Ottomans were on the verge of collapse, and that Russia and Britain had a gentlemen’s understanding about the Eastern Question. That may, in fact, have accounted for initial British reticence over the crisis as it escalated. Tsar Nicholas I, having survived a number of years of passivity and even cooperation with Sultan Abdülmecid, miscalculated about the possible impact of the Menshikov mission on Istanbul politics. 
 On 28 February 1853, Prince Menshikov, accompanied by a large number of naval and military officers, presented the sultan with several notes from the Tsar concerning the question of the Orthodox subjects in Ottoman territories, especially in the Holy Lands. The most demanding was that an international agreement be drawn up to give Russia what amounted to sovereignty over all the orthodox subjects of the sultan. Menshikov bullied his way around the Ottoman bureaucracy. He engineered the resignation of Foreign Minister Fuad Pasha, assumed to be pro-French, by simply refusing to meet with him. The sultan simply replaced Fuad Pasha with pro-Austrian Sad ı k R ı fat Pasha, another of the Tanzimat reformers. The grand vizier of the period, Mehmed Ali Pasha, was informed by Menshikov that he planned a visit to Hüsrev Pasha, ancient and out of office but still valuable as an informant, and ostensibly pro-Russian. Menshikov is also implicated in stirring up the Greeks over a Greek–Ottoman border incident, and in fostering the downfall of the Serbian premier, advocate of the South Slav nationalism described earlier. 40 
