

 Plate 21    Sketch of Silistre fortress system and the Mecidiye tabya still standing ( Kiel, Machiel, ‘Urban development in Bulgaria’, from the International Journal of Turkish Studies, 4, 1989, 79–159 ). 

 Once Kalafat was secured, Ömer Pasha moved troops to Tutrekan; under command of Selim Pasha, they crossed the Danube on 30 October 1853, occupied the island of the quarantine station, and set up batteries below Oltenitsa with 3,000 men. This had been the intended Russian crossing point, along with Silistre. The Russians advanced on 2 November with 9,000 troops, but as Ömer Pasha had fortified the right bank of the Danube, they were beaten back three more times with considerable casualties. Ömer Pasha’s despatch to Istanbul was reproduced in the Illustrated London News on 3 December 1853. British officers General Lord Worsley, Captains Bathurst and Herbert Wilson, and Lieutenant Buckley, with Ömer Pasha at the battle, commended both infantry and artillery for steadfastness and accuracy. 2 
 In early January, Kalafat was threatened by the arrival of Russian reinforcements. A report in the Illustrated London News described the subterranean barracks, modelled on a Wallachian peasant home, which the Ottoman troops inhabited in the miserable winter. A large room was dug out of the earth, sloping down to its greatest depth of about seven feet. A roof of poles was erected over the open hole, which was then covered with mats and a layer of earth. Commander Ahmed Pasha invited his visitor to a night inspection of the troops in these barracks. ‘Standing in double rank within this subterranean room were about 200 men all under arms. In front of them were soldiers who held aloft long candles. The dimness of the light, the smoke of the candles, and the hoarse call of the drill-sergeants, together with the clank of the sabre of the commanding officer, gave the scene the aspect of a meeting of military conspirators. It must be owned, however, that the scene was calculated to give a high idea of the cleanliness and discipline of the Turkish soldiers, who went through that exercise with great precision and spirit.’ 
 Ahmed Pasha and İ smail Pasha (Hungarian General Kmety), later hero at Kars, led ten battalions of those Ottoman troops, and two batteries of six guns, to confront the Russian army at Citate on 7 January 1854. They were accompanied by four regiments of cavalry and 500–600 ba ş ı bozuks . The Russians had 3,000 troops quartered in the village, part Russian soldiers and part Wallachian levies. During the first engagement, the Ottomans routed the Russians. They then confronted a Russian relief force of three regiments, with 600 cavalry and nine guns, and scattered them after a few hours of fierce street fighting. At this point the Ottomans retreated, and failed to follow up on the victory, while the Russians remained just long enough to bury the dead, which one estimate placed at 6,000, as against 1,000 for the Ottomans. Casualties to disease were 20–25 per cent of the effectives in the Russian army, contributing to an estimated 35,000 dead and wounded by the end of 1853. 3 
 On 13 February 1854 the Russians attacked the Ottomans entrenched at Giurgevo and pushed them back to the south of the Danube. On 15 March the Ottomans repulsed the Russians at Tutrekan, across from Oltenitsa. The Russians, however, proved successful in occupying Tulcea Maçin, İ sakc ı , and Babada ğ ı on the right bank of the lower Danube, and by early April they stood in much the same position as they had in 1828–29. The army was held from further southern advance largely because General Paskevich, veteran of the 1828–29 campaigns, took control, and proved more cautious in his command of the Danubian front. By the end of March, France and Britain had declared war on the Tsar. French troops numbering 30,000, the bulk of them from Algeria, left for the east in March, while 27,000 British troops shipped out soon after, both contingents disembarking first at Gallipoli. The whole British force eventually camped at Üsküdar in Istanbul, at the Selimiye Barracks which later served as the famous military hospital of Florence Nightingale. 
 The Ottomans and their allies were momentarily distracted from the Danube by sporadic Greek revolts, which spread from Epirus to Macedonia, usually involving small bands of 500 to 1,000 Greek irredentists, encouraged by King Otto I and pro-Russian elements of the population. These small bands engaged in guerrilla tactics thoughout 1853, but became a serious threat in confrontations with Ottoman regulars and irregulars, mostly Albanians, from January to May 1854. The French and British found themselves in the peculiar position of supporting the Ottomans against Greek partisans, first by using their ships to transport Ottoman troops to the places of insurrection, then by threatening economic sanctions, blockading Piraeus with warships, and landing troops to reinforce the threats. King Otto of Greece was forced to submit, but the allied occupation would continue until after the Crimean War, when the financial affairs of Greece were submitted to an international commission. An estimated 40,000 inhabitants of Piraeus, Athens and environs succumbed to the cholera which accompanied the French troops. 4 
 Meanwhile, the siege at Silistre dragged on. On the advice of General Paskevich, Russian forces had been withdrawn from Wallachia and concentrated on the lower fortresses of the Danube, with Ş umnu and Silistre the main targets for the establishment of bases for future deployment. General Paskevich himself took charge of the siege of Silistre, which began on 14 April 1854. Following three weeks of skirmishing, the Russians had surrounded the south-eastern side of the city, facing an outer defence of the main fortress named Arab Tabya (Arab Redoubt). It will be remembered that both Mahmud II and Abdülmecid I paid particular attention to the defences of Silistre, which included an outer ring of forts, one of which, the Mecidiye, still stands. As the town was not completely surrounded, the garrison had access to food and supplies, much as in the 1828–29 siege. 
 Two British officers, Captain James A. Butler and Lieutenant Charles Nasmyth, were part of the officer staff at the siege, under Musa Pasha, in whose command there were an estimated 12,000 to 18,000 troops. Prussian Colonel Grach, an expert on entrenchments, was also with the Ottoman officers. The Russians initially had 30,000 troops, which grew to 50,000. By May, the siege was reduced to a daily Russian bombardment in what became a monotonous and lethal routine, as the new explosive shells being used for the first time on these battlefields caused considerable damage. The Ottoman commanders resisted making frontal assaults on the Russian positions, as Russian sappers moved the trenches forward in zigzag fashion. A major assault by the Russians at the end of May was repulsed. 
 Ömer Pasha conferred with newly-arrived allied French Commander St Arnaud and British Commander Raglan at Varna on 18 May 1854. The discussion centred on a general allied assault on the Russians. Finally, Ömer Pasha sent a relief force from Ş umnu to Silistre in mid-June. Diversionary attacks were ordered upon Giurgevo and Oltenitsa as well. Ömer Pasha’s widely dispersed army had prevented him from sending the troops earlier, and only as the allied armies moved into Bulgaria could local troops be relieved to come to the defence of Silistre. In mid-June the relief force entered Silistre, where the Arab Tabya had fallen to the Russians, and a general assault on the main fortress was set for 21 June. By that time General Paskevich had resigned and returned to Warsaw. Within another 48 hours, the Russians lifted the siege and withdrew across the Danube. Lieutenant Nasmyth later reported: ‘The Turkish army may well talk with pride. Their opponents had an army on the right bank of the Danube, which at one time amounted to 60,000 men. They had sixty guns in position and threw upwards of 50,000 shot and shell, besides an incalculable quantity of small-arm ammunition. They constructed more than three miles of approaches, and sprang six mines: yet during forty days not one inch of ground was gained, and they abandoned the siege, leaving the petty field work, against which their principal efforts had been directed, a shapeless mass from the effects of their mines and batteries but still in the possession of the original defenders.’ 5 Of course, the withdrawal of the Russians from the Principalities was also driven by an awareness of the immediate threat of an Austro-Prussian alliance, and an ultimatum from Austria sent on 3 June, which Franz Joseph emphasised by ordering the mobilisation of troops in Hungary and Galicia. By 14 June, the Austrians signed a Convention with the Ottomans for a joint occupation of the Principalities. By mid-August Russian troops had withdrawn into their own territory, and the Austrians occupied Bucharest with the Ottomans. 