

 Omer’s methods were barbarous, but he ‘did not his work negligently’ [i.e., he got the job done]. His appeals to the Christians for support were entirely successful. The few Christians taken in arms were liberated, and the mass of them ardently supported him. One by one the castles of their feudal tyrants fell before Omer and his artillery … He announced the end of all feudal privileges. He built the first road in Bosnia between Travnik and Sarajevo. He repressed brigandage with a stern hand. He closed the frontier to Croatia and stopped smuggling. He proclaimed the forests to be crown property, and cancelled the very profitable concessions for timber enjoyed by an Austrian sawmill company. He even attempted to construct a line of steamers for the rivers of Bosnia. Omer’s methods were as vigorous as they were rough. But it was his vigour which was most hurtful to other powers. For Austria demanded and ultimately obtained his recall, and with his fall ended all hope of permanent reform in Bosnia. 32 
 Ömer’s stern rule in 1850–52 provoked protests from Austria especially, but he was defended by Great Britain, and therefore emboldened by his own government to take on the Bishopric of Montenegro, which the sultan claimed as part of his sovereignty. In 1852, massive Ottoman forces entered Montenegro and declared war on the new ruler, who had neglected to inform the Ottomans of his intention to secularise the state. The invasion provoked yet another international incident, in which both Austria and Russia gave an ultimatum to the sultan to order Ömer to withdraw. By March 1853, Ömer Pasha was dismissed. Montenegro had become a Principality, with the tenuous threads of connection to the Ottomans broken permanently. The crisis over Montenegro heightened the drifting apart of the Austro-Russian rapprochement, which led to the break by mid-September when Franz Joseph refused to join Russia in the war against the Ottomans, as we shall see. 
 Meanwhile, as a result of the 1850 revolt, Bosnia and Herzegovina were subdivided into seven sancaks under kaymakams with military and civil powers. Under Topal Osman Pasha (1861–69), the province made considerable strides in education and infrastructure. A local council was created in 1866. Sarajevo became the official residence of the governor. As we have seen in the Arab provinces, however, it proved impossible to institute significant reforms to the agricultural sector. Attempts were made to respond to the peasant demands. In 1859, they were guaranteed certain rights to use of the land, but large estates continued to be run by their Muslim land-owners as tax-farms, leading to further discontent among the peasantry and further rebellions in the 1870s that convulsed large parts of the Balkans and provoked further European intervention. 
 As regards conscription, Bosnia did not contribute much manpower to the Crimean front. Only afterwards did the idea of a Bosnian militia ( mustahf ı z ) finally settle the problem of Bosnian Muslim service in the nizamiye . In 1862, at the suggestion of Grand Vizier Fuad Pasha, a military commission had met secretly to discuss the creation of a home guard, which would solve the major objection of the Muslim population to enlistment in the Ottoman army. They did not want to fight outside their province, and they wished to wear their own uniforms. In 1864–65, a census was taken in Bosnia–Herzegovina, and volunteers filled six companies and 800 officers. The aim was to have 4,800 men under permanent arms, who would serve three years as regulars, which was to be followed by nine years in the redif or seven years in the mustahf ı z , but in the home province. The first two regiments, commanded by local officers, paraded before Abdülaziz (1861–76) in Istanbul in 1865. Besides the regulars, Bosnia eventually had eighteen redif battalions. By 1874, the Bosnian regular and reserve troops equalled 30,000 men. 33 The agreements sound much like the Bosnian ocakl ı k system of the eighteenth century. The new organisation represents one more example of the way in which the Ottoman reformers were forced to compromise by local conditions and traditions. Conscription everywhere remained a combination of volunteerism, balloting, and violent impressment. 
 Austrian and Russian armies revisited circa 1850 
 That is how things stood in Ottoman territories as the imperial squabbles and restless populations threatened to engulf all of Europe in a general war. Having assessed the rather dismal record of the Ottoman reforms, we should pause a moment to consider the state of the military organisation of Austria and Russia as they stood just prior to the Crimean War. The brutal clash of traditional and liberalising ideas exemplified in the Tanzimat were a caricature of similar conflicts in autocratic settings like Vienna and Moscow. After the fall of Napoleon in 1815, Chancellor Metternich saw to the maintenance of stabillity and tranquillity in Habsburg territories by a combination of diplomacy and armed force. Military command was subordinated to dynastic concerns. The wars with France had left both Austria and Russia impoverished, and insufficient and inefficient taxation often mandated the reduction of military expenditures. On paper, the diverse territories of Austria could mobilise 400,000 soldiers, but training, command and supply all lagged behind Prussia and Russia in the period just prior to 1850. The military command, the Hofkriegsrat , was composed of a mixture of civilian and military men, and was ruled over by the Staatsrat . The somewhat cumbersome command structure and the General Staff, in contrast to Prussia, for example, remained much as they were in the eighteenth century. Metternich preferred the supremacy of civilian over military authorities. The military high command remained multi-national, aristocratic, and resistant to change, which set the tone for the officer class and discouraged innovation or assumption of responsibility. 
 The people’s army, the Landwehr , was disbanded by 1831, and selective and unequal conscription was restored, based on the system inaugurated by Joseph II. For example, in Hungary service was for life, while elsewhere it was fourteen years. After 1845, a uniform eight years was fixed throughout the empire. Conscription was by lots, as in Ottoman territories, but often the ‘lots’ drew society’s misfits. Austria was second only to Russia in the poor levels of pay and rations, and the liberal application of punishments, such as flogging, caning, and the gauntlet was routine. 34 
 There were two exceptions to the general system: one, the Tyrolean militias, and the other, the military border system. In an era of poor financing, the latter especially had an important role to play in our context. In 1848, 16,000 Tyrolean marksmen were mobilised when Garibaldi threatened the Austrian borders. The military border system, four General Commands – Croatian, Slavonian–Symrian, Banat and Transylvania – could be counted on to raise 100,000 troops when necessary, as in 1831 when 12 battalions were sent to Italy. 
 In 1848 the Austrian army had, on paper: 315,000 infantry; 49,000 cavalry, 26,000 artillerymen, 5,400 men in technical services, and a wagon train of 4,000, organised across twelve different command centres. Under-funding and desertion meant that actual strength was likely closer to 250,000 men. 35 Armament and equipment, with the exception of infantry arms, saw little change in this period. Cavalrymen still largely relied on the sabre, although some carried carbines. First-line units were equipped with percussion rifles starting in 1835. Proficiency remained high in the technical branches. Elsewhere, however, training was highly deficient. Ceremonial exercises, rather than combat drill, were the norm, although the Grenzer on the Military Border, as always, were better prepared. 
 Austria maintained cordial relations with Prussia and Russia throughout the period, largely due to the general paranoia about the spread of French revolutionary ideas. The emperor’s interests in the German Federation remained, and Austro-Prussian cooperation as a bulwark against France on the Rhine characterised the period. As we have seen in Hungary and Transylvania, Austrian and Russian monarchs did not hesitate to call on one another for military support. Italy was the focus of Austrian concern, though even there, the army was reduced in size from 104,500 men in 1831 to 34,000 by 1846, stationed in the best-armed fortresses of the empire. The Italian force was under command of General Radetzky, who created a climate of training and morale which made it the superior part of the Habsburg forces. By and large, the remaining defences of the monarchy had become obsolete. 36 
 Austria’s chief difficulty lay in the nationalities question, a problem made abundantly clear in 1848 and thereafter. Most of the diverse ethnicities sought their own ‘national’ armies, so the solution remained to station national corps outside their own territories where they could also be used as a police force when necessary. Poorly funded, undermanned, much scattered, with pockets of expertise on the frontiers, the Austrian army maintained a sense of itself as guardian of the empire, and so it proved when the revolutions broke out in 1848. 
 Hungary, however, was another matter. In 1848–49, Hungary made a sustained bid for independence which was predicated on establishing a national army. In July 1848, Kossuth persuaded the Hungarian parliament to finance the Honvéd , a 200,000 strong Hungarian army which would be Magyar in character, language and command. In response to the rebellions in Italy and elsewhere, the Austrian high command mounted a sustained military counter-revolution which eventuated in the restoration of the monarchy in Vienna in October of the same year. Franz Joseph was crowned emperor, but not, as we have seen, King of Hungary, in December 1848. By April 1849 Franz Joseph proceeded to take over supreme command of the army, a decision which influenced the direction of the Austrian military for the following decade. The Hungarian army, which had given up Buda in early January 1849, proved more resilient in other parts of the country, prompting the Hungarian parliament to depose the Habsburg dynasty in April and put Kossuth in charge. Some 60,000 troops under Field Marshal Haynau faced the 80,000-man army of the Hungarian rebels. That prompted Franz Joseph to call on Nicholas I for troops, as previously described. The Russians were commanded by Paskievich, a veteran of the Caucasus Russo-Turkish war of 1828–29. The final confrontation took place near Teme ş var, when the Hungarians were surrounded by the Russian and Austrians. 37 The Hungarian revolution was finished by October. A brief reign of brutal retribution by Vienna followed, with some 490 officers court-martialled, of whom 231 were condemned to death, although most eventually had their sentences commuted. A total of 13 Hungarian officers, leaders of the revolution, were executed, along with 114 civilians. A further 1,765 were imprisoned. The restoration of a centralised Habsburg monarchy came at a large cost to the future viability of a multi-cultural empire, although one of the immediate results was the strengthening of the imperial army, which in 1849 reputedly stood at 648,000 men, with 1,200 mobile field guns. The collaboration with Russia also caused considerable unease among Austrian leaders, as the presence of Russian troops among Slavs of the Military Corridor, for example, stimulated Orthodox Grenzer to join the Russian regiments in saying mass. It did not bode well for the coming Crimean conflict. 
