



===== FILE: text/part0021.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter Eleven 
 Completing the northern arc 
 O f all the wars of the pre-modern Middle East, the Crimean War of 1853–56 has probably attracted the most attention, not only at the time, but in every generation of historians since. As the first major conflict documented on a daily basis by telegraph, photograph and newspaper, it brought a new age of immediacy to global conflicts. It need not consume a great deal of our time here. As a means of drawing this story of the Ottoman military and social transformation to a close, however, this chapter will focus on the Ottoman–Russian confrontations in Vidin and Silistre in 1853–54 and then in the Caucasus, ending with the siege of Kars in 1855. The siege of Sevastopol is somewhat irrelevant to the survey of this war, as beyond some early skirmishes, the Ottomans were largely inactive during the fall and winter, and only tangentially active in the spring of 1855. The stories of the Franco-British alliance, including the failure of logistics and supply systems, and the incompetence in military command on the Russian and British side in particular, have been repeatedly told. Indeed, the tales of sufferings of all the troops, and much revisionist history concerning the myths of the battles in the Crimea, have exposed even more starkly the folly of the enterprise. With the Treaty of Paris in 1856, the Ottomans had to accept the collapse of their military system, reassert their commitment to further social reforms, and accept the further erosion of economic independence. The siege of Sevastopol underlined the desperate shape of the Russian land forces and the vulnerability of their navy, and forced decades of radical reorganisation of Russian society. For neutral Austria, it delayed the moment of military reckoning and isolated the Habsburgs from allies east and west. 
 To focus on Kars is to complete the promised description of the eastern end of the northern arc of Ottoman defence. Kars and Erzurum were immensely important to the Russian–Ottoman confrontations from 1800 to the collapse of both empires by 1918. The siege of Kars is particularly illustrative of the failure of the regular Ottoman army in that region, and of the irreconcilable cultural barriers of British and Ottoman military styles, once British commanders were placed in charge of the campaign. There are myriads of British first-hand accounts of this war, most of which exude contempt for the Ottoman high command. Small wonder, then, that Ottoman military reformers looked elsewhere for inspiration after the Crimean War, and found ready advisers among the Germans, especially after 1870. Our narrative ends with 1869, when a new set of reforms signalled a further effort to construct an Ottoman army based on universal conscription. 
 On the Danube once again: Vidin and Silistre in 1853–54 
 On 23 October 1853, the Ottoman army crossed the Danube at Vidin and occupied Kalafat. On 27–28 October, Ottoman troops on the Transcaucasus border had crossed at St Nicholas, north of Batum on the Black Sea, under Ahmed Pasha, and captured the garrison. The Russo-Ottoman war of 1853–54 began with these small confrontations, which were hailed as great victories in Istanbul, but soon escalated into the contest for the control of the Danubian fortresses which had characterised all previous campaigns in Bulgaria. 
 Ömer Pasha began the war with 18,000–20,000 regulars under his command at Ş umnu. His strategy was to defend the lower passes of the Danube River Basin, but also to cross the Danube to harass the Russian troops which had moved into Wallachia in July 1853, and to prevent their communications with Serbia. Hence, the first crossing to Kalafat passed with considerable ease. It was not until January 1854 that Russian reinforcements could be brought to bear on the north-western frontier of Bulgaria. By then, the Ottoman forces were arrayed in three corps: 34,000 effectives at Karasu, to defend the Danube shores from Hirsova to Tulcea; the centre, at Sistova, under Mustafa Pasha, also with some 35,000 troops, and a left wing, under Vidin Governor Sami Pasha, with 60,000 men, to guard Tutrekan, Ni ğ bolu and Vidin. Of those latter troops, 16,000 were stationed at Kalafat, under Ahmed Pasha. Ömer Pasha, Commander-in-Chief, remained at Ş umnu, with reserves in Sofia. The initial embarrassment at Kalafat forced the Russian commanders to ask for reinforcements, so that by the end of 1853, Gorchakov commanded some 160,000 troops, of which 58,000 were placed under command of General Anrep, in Bucharest, with a reserve of 8,000 in Craiova. 1 