 The British, who apparently truly failed to appreciate the strength of Ottoman resistance to their interference in internal religious matters, likely because of Canning’s obsession with them, found themselves virtual guarantors of Ottoman survival without having acquired any concessions. For the rest of the year 1853, further attempts were made to bring the sides to the negotiating table while the British and French fleets hovered in the Bosphorus. British public opinion grew ‘fanatic’ as anti-Russian sentiments had escalated, stimulated by old Ottoman hands such as pamphleteer David Urquhart. Describing Anglo-Russian relations, and excoriating British administrators, he wrote: ‘You [Britain] discover that she [Russia] is illogical – in rhetoric which has convulsed an Empire; you denounce her to be insane – in marching with your aid on the Bosphorus; you send your men-of-war to the Dardanelles – she seizes the Sound; she grasps the Danube – you send – no, you do not send, a note; she usurps the vastest plain of Europe, and you do send an apology. When she has overrun a province you convoke a conclave … And all this is peace; two campaigns and a dozen fortresses are offered up for the sake of the tranquillity of Europe; and two Empires [Austria and Ottoman] are stripped of their arms in the interest of their defence.’ 49 In the days that followed, war hysteria put pressure on the British government to act. 
 On 22 October, as Ömer Pasha and his army began to cross the Danube, Stratford Canning summoned the British fleet from the Dardanelles to Istanbul. Hostilities had already begun in the Caucasus. For more than a month, Mustafa Re ş id urged the French and British fleets to move into the Black Sea, while diplomatic efforts in Vienna were revived with little result. Mustafa Re ş id argued for an enlargement of the London Treaty of 1841, which would guarantee the freedom of the straits as before, but establish buffer zones between Russia and the empire, such as the long-standing Serbia, Moldavia and Wallachia in the west, and Circassia and Dagistan in the east, the latter two having been surrendered to the Russians in 1829. 50 Confidence was high. The Ottoman army won the first contests of the war, at Vidin and Oltenitsa on the Danube, and St Nicholas in the Caucasus, and raised hopes in Istanbul. In late October the Ottoman navy made an attempt to maintain a token force in the Black Sea, as news of similar patrols by the Russian navy reached Istanbul. The British issued an ultimatum to Russia not to venture out of Sevastopol to attack the Ottoman navy, yet another provocation to war. By mid-November, the remainder of the British and French fleets in the Dardanelles had moved to the Bosphorus, and the entire Ottoman navy had set sail and was anchored at Sinop. On 30 November, six Russian vessels and two frigates (716 guns) overwhelmed and defeated the Ottoman force of seven frigates and four light ships (472 guns) in two hours. Some 4,000 are said to have perished in the bombardment and fires which followed. As the news of that disaster sank in, word arrived in Istanbul of a Russian victory at Ba ş gedikler on the road to Kars. 51 The European allies had reached the point of no return: either they supported the Ottomans, or they watched an uncertain dissolution of the empire following Russian certain victory. 
 Taking advantage of a moment of uncertainty in Istanbul, Stratford Canning is said to have pressed Mustafa Re ş id to commit to international negotiations for peace in order to engage the joint Franco-British expedition into the Black Sea. Hints of such a capitulation set off riots in Istanbul, likely stimulated by Serasker Mehmed Ali. A squadron of French and English ships made a show of force in Istanbul, the sultan and his advisers broke the back of the resistance, and a grand council agreed to continue negotiations. But the damage to British–Ottoman relations was severe. Then news arrived from Europe that a joint Franco-Ottoman force was to sail into the Black Sea. With the new year, on 3 January 1854, three squadrons of the joint command left Istanbul for the east, some packed with Ottoman reinforcements for the eastern battlefront. On 12 January the French and British Ambassadors informed the tsar’s government that Russian ships who left port would be treated as hostile, another deliberate provocation. Even then the allies dallied, likely because of weather and the need to prepare. On 12 March the Ottomans, French and British signed an alliance. On 27 and 28 March, Britain and France declared war on Russia. Palmerston argued at that time that British aims ought to include ‘the restoration of Poland as of 1772; the union of Finland with the kingdoms of Sweden and Norway instead of with Russia; Austria’s retention of the Danubian Principalities, with the surrender of Lombardy and Venice; Turkey’s enlargement through the acquisition of the Crimea and Georgia, and the enlargement of Austria and Prussia in a Germany free from the domination of the tsar.’ 52 The Crimean adventure had begun. 