 By mid-1855, Ömer Pasha was pressing the allies to be allowed to take his troops to the Caucasus, where General Muraviev had begun the approach to Kars. The entire episode suffered from the vexing problem of command and communication. British Commissioner Colonel (later General) W.F. Williams, in command of Kars Ottoman garrison during the siege, Ömer Pasha stuck in the Crimea with some 20,000 troops, and Ambassador Stratford Canning in Istanbul operated with three separate and obstinate agendas. Canning was fielding angry communiqués from Williams, and much criticism from London, while Ömer Pasha lobbied to have his troops sent to the Caucasus. 
 Much confidence was placed in the new Turkish Contingent by Raglan and his staff, as the Contingent was to be under the direction of British officers. They were assembling on the banks of the Danube, while General Williams in Kars demanded, and got, the dismissal and court martial of many of the Ottoman officials in the province of Erzurum, including Governor Zarif Mustafa. It was the first time a foreign, non-Muslim officer, was accepted into the Ottoman command structure on his own terms, and it must have rankled deeply. 
 Serasker Mehmed Ali was disgraced and exiled in February 1854, to be replaced by Hasan R ı za Pasha, who was a Mehmed Ali protégé and was himself replaced by Mehmed Rü ş dü in June 1855. Zarif Mustafa was R ı za Pasha’s protégé, likely accounting for the appointment to Erzurum after his dismissal from Vidin. Mehmed Rü ş dü, while part of the palace clique around Abdülmecid, appears to have been more compliant concerning the British high-handedness during the Crimean War. Ömer Pasha, a product of the court environment, commanded the respect of all the factions in Istanbul. 
 There was little apparent reason for keeping Ömer and his men in the Crimea, except likely as reserves, and because of the natural prejudices against the ‘cowardly’ Turkish soldier. Stratford Canning alludes to intrigues in Istanbul around the disgraced War Minister Mehmed Ali Pasha, which may or may not have involved Ömer Pasha, but likely the focus on Sevastopol, the hopes for the new Turkish Contingent, and matters of transport and manpower played a greater role in the allied commanders’ delay in releasing the troops to be sent to relieve Kars. 13 On 12 July 1855, Ömer Pasha requested permission to go with his 25,000-man force from Eupatoria to cause a diversion in the Caucasus, and come to the aid of Kars. He was clearly opposed to using the newly formed Turkish Contingent, as the men were not yet acquainted with their officers, who did not speak their languages, and it was as yet too small. He argued that he was more knowledgeable, and therefore could be more persuasive among the inhabitants. If his existing force were to threaten Russian communications with Georgia, he argued, they would be forced to abandon the campaign. On 23 July, Ömer Pasha was in Istanbul, conferring with Mehmed Rü ş dü and the sultan. The plan was to take the 25,000 men, add another 10,000 from Batum, and after landing near Poti, move to isolate the Russian troops in the south Caucasus. The British commanders thought the relief force should land at Trabzon. The dispute about aims in the Caucasus continued over the next month, with the British insisting on reinforcing Erzurum and surrounding areas from Trabzon, while Ömer Pasha argued more broadly for defending the Anatolian frontier and the Black Sea port line. He persuaded the council in Istanbul, although Sultan Abdülmecid expressed willingness to keep the discussion with the allies open. Ömer Pasha’s plan was vetoed in London, and Ömer Pasha did not leave the Crimea until 29 September 1855. By that time, General Muraviev had launched an all-out attack on the fortress at Kars. 14 
 Before continuing the story of the siege of Kars, however, we need to review the previous confrontations in the area. For half a century, the Russian and Ottoman armies had confronted one another in the Caucasus, home of myriad mountainous tribal peoples who sometimes sided with the Russians, sometimes with the Ottomans. Until 1812 the area was of little strategic significance to the Ottomans. Much like the mountains of western Greece and Albania, the mountains of the Caucasus not only served as a natural barrier but remained virtually impenetrable, and extremely difficult for military manoeuvres. For the Russians ‘[a] century and a half ago, Moscow was twenty times farther removed from the Caucasus than it is from Washington, D.C., in our time.’ 15 Much of eastern Anatolia was governed indirectly, and virtually autonomous until the early days of the Tanzimat reforms as we have seen. The chief city of the area, Erzurum, with a large fortress, was the seat of a governor consistently from the earliest days of the empire, and served as a second centre of empire after Istanbul. Erzurum lay on the great Anatolian trunk road from Sivas via Erzincan. It was one of the first centres targeted for the earliest round of military reforms after 1826, but half of the forces mobilised for any campaign into the area were certain to be irregulars: from Georgians (Imeretians, Mingrelians and Gurias, Acars, Lazis, Abkhazians (Abazas)), Circassians (Çerkes), Ossetians, and Dagistanis (Chechens, Andis and Avars). Armenians and Kurds, Türkmen and Azeris were also native to the area. Erzurum was a city probably numbering some 50,000 in 1853. 
 Trabzon and Batum, on the Black Sea, and Kars were the other strong fortresses of the area; Ardahan, Bayburt and Beyazid less so. Kars gave access to Tiflis, which made it strategically important to the Transcaucasus. Mountain passes were tracks; transportation largely by horse, camel and donkey. Even more than in the Balkans, the Caucasus frontier remained untamed. Successive Russo-Ottoman wars had given the Russians access to significant Caucasus ports, from Anapa near the Azov Sea as far south as Poti just above Batum, as well as control of Georgia and much of Dagistan. 
 Until the late eighteenth century, this was territory which was disputed by the Persian Safavids and their successors and the Ottomans. As early as the 1768–74 war, however, Russian armies had penetrated as far as Kutaisi, capital of Imeretia, and laid siege to Poti. The treaty of 1774, much contested by the Ottomans, gave Russia control over Kabarda (Georgia) and Ossetia; by 1783, the Georgian Kartlis signed a treaty with the Romanovs, and Derbent in Dagistan was briefly occupied. The Georgian military road through the Deryal Pass was fortified. During the 1787–92 confrontations, the Ottomans made several attempts at recovering some of the north Caucasus, with heavy fighting around Anapa, near the Kerch Straits. Field Marshal Rumiantsev established a series of forts and military communities called the Azov–Mozdok line up the Kuban River from Kerch. During the same war, Caniklizade Battal Pasha led a great army up the Kuban but was defeated by an inferior force of Russians and Cossacks. 
 In the 1806–12 war, the Ottomans still held the seaports of Poti, Anakliya and Sokhum, and claimed nominal hegemony over the Circassians and the Abkhazians. The new Qajar Turco-Persian dynasty made a bid to capture Tiflis and surrounding areas in 1795, which resulted in the consolidated Russian control of the eastern Transcaucasus, and extension of control up to the Aras River ı n Karaba ğ . Georgia had been officially annexed to Russia as of 1801. The Treaty of Bucharest (1812), negotiated so tenaciously by Mahmud II and Galib Pasha, resulted in the Ottomans retaining only Poti and Anapa, as well as the frontier fortresses of Akhaltzikhe (Ahiska) and Atskhur. Circassia and the mountainous areas of Dagistan continued to be contested and mutinous territory. At this point, various British commissions began to interest themselves in the Persians, the Russians, and the Muslim territories of the south Caucasus, owing to British Foreign Office concerns about Central Asia and access to India. British diplomacy prevented an Ottoman–Persian war in 1821, when a particularly ambitious Persian prince, Abbas Mirza, occupied Kars and Beyazid. In 1827, Muslim revolts in Karaba ğ prompted the Russians to besiege Erivan, and they easily defeated the rebels. The Perso-Russian Treaty of Türkmençay of 1828 consolidated Russian control of Dagistan and removed Qajar Persia from the military equation. 16 
 The strategic line of ports and fortresses from Trabzon to Anapa, with the interior fortresses described, was the strong Ottoman position in 1828, but the fortresses were very poorly equipped with men and supplies. Garrisons in Batum and Poti numbered 2,000, with 5,000 at Anapa. At Akhaltzikhe, there were 4,000 Asakir-i Mansure troops, with 6,000 irregulars, while 30,000 regulars and 10,000 irregulars were concentrated at Erzurum and Kars. They faced a Russian army with decades of victories in the region. General Paskevich had 60,000 troops under his command, including 17 regiments of Cossacks, as well as 36 battalions of regular infantry, and several squadrons of cavalry. Ottoman Anapa surrendered early in the 1828 campaign, as without a navy, sunk at Navarino in 1827, Ottoman land forces could not withstand both the Russian naval and military attack. The fall of Anapa freed the Russians to direct their attack on Kars. On 14 June 1828, Paskevich established his army south of Kars, to counter any relief force from Erzurum. In fact, Köse Mehmed Pasha sent such a force to Kars, which was intended to encounter the Russians on the Erzurum road. By 23 June, the Russians occupied Kars. Paskevich then decided to attack the fortress of Akhaltzikhe from the east instead, and the forces under Köse Mehmed moved via Ardahan to counter the Russians from the south. The Ottomans had 35,000 troops, but two-thirds of them were irregulars. The Ottoman camp did not seize the advantage over the outnumbered troops, so Paskevich attacked first, on 7 August, and scattered the Ottoman forces. The Serasker himself retired into the fortress with 5,000 regulars. Some 6,000 were killed. Fleeing Lazis and Kurds left behind great piles of supplies and animals. Akhaltzikhe, which put up a fierce struggle, was bombed on 13 and 14 August, and capitulated. The other fortresses fell with minimal resistance. ‘In the campaign of 1828, which only lasted five months, three pashaliks had been conquered, namely Kars, Akhiska, and Bayazeed: there had been captured three fortresses, three castles, 313 cannon, 195 standards, 11 horsetails, and 8,000 prisoners.’ The Russians had lost around 5,000 by the end of the summer, about half of them to disease and epidemics. Monteith adds, ‘the magazines taken from the enemy reduced the expenses to 5,000,000 of rubles, which was little more than the troops would have cost in time of peace.’ 17 The Ottomans, as we have seen on other occasions, subsidised their enemy. 
