



===== FILE: text/part0022.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Conclusion 
 H istorians point to a bifurcation in the intellectual classes of the empire in the last decades of the nineteenth century, between non-Muslims, whose affiliations with the French and British created a wealthy middle class, determined to separate from the empire, and Muslims, for whom the army came to represent the passage to wealth and power. As a template it has considerable merit, but I do not think it represents the further divisions within the Muslims themselves, a voice until very recently absent in our narratives. Arguably, within Muslim communities there was also a bifurcation of the imagination of what a reformed Ottoman state might resemble, between a governing elite and a society increasingly defensive and conservative. 1 
 In 1859, for example, Istanbul was treated to a revolt called the Kuleli Vakas ı , which was probably triggered by some officers who survived the Caucasus battlefields, combined with dissatisfied theological students stirred up by a local preacher. Described as an inchoate rebellion, organised by a secret society, it likely aimed at the removal of Sultan Abdülmecid, and may well have been anti-reform in origin, stirring up considerable support in Istanbul. Discontent was fuelled by the pay arrears of the demobilised army, neglect of veterans, and corruption in the dynastic household, as much as by the new wave of reforms. The conspiracy was betrayed to the officials, the ring-leaders rounded up and exiled. The few that were condemned to death had their sentences commuted. Among the conspirators was General Hüseyin Daim, veteran of the siege of Kars. 2 Other such conspiracies dot the decades to follow. 
 In terms of military leadership, while the Ministry of War and the general staff remained little changed in the immediate post-Crimean period, the effect of the military schools began to be felt. Hüseyin Avni Pasha, War Minister four separate times and architect of the 1869 reforms, for example, was a product of the military colleges, as were many of the War Ministers who followed him. As late as 1877, however, only 15–20 per cent of Ottoman officers had been trained in the state-run military schools. They were known as the mektebli , while the majority, often functionally illiterate, were alayl ı , that is, they rose through the ranks. The need for educated politicians and reformers in Istanbul meant that many of the graduates of the military schools stayed on as teachers, or moved into civilian posts, rather than into the ranks of command. The result was that the War College (part of it now the Military Musuem in Istanbul) became a school for the Ottoman elite, the aim of ambitious young Muslim men from all over the empire. Originally modelled on the French system of the 1840s, the curriculum focused on technology and theory, but little practical application. 
 In the 1880s, after the British occupied Egypt, Abdülhamid II invited the Germans to send a Military Advisory Mission to reorganise and re-equip the Ottoman army. Then head of the Mission General Kaehler called on Major Colmar von der Goltz to inspect the curriculum of the War College. Goltz recommended the replacement of a semi-engineering curriculum with the German officer training system, but as with many of Goltz’s other recommendations, it was ignored. Officials of the academy resisted the changes, saying that advanced mathematics and physics had to be maintained in order to train professionals who could handle both civilian and military duties. In fact a reform-minded military general staff posed a significant threat to the sultan himself, so Abdülhamid was complicit in paying no more than lip service to the curriculum recommendations of the mission. 
 After 1885, Goltz was put in charge of the mission, and effected significant changes to the entire Ottoman military system, including replacing British and French contractors with German suppliers of military arms and equipment. He also trained the generation of young officers who would take the Ottomans into the First World War, the likes of Enver Pasha and Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. 3 
 The story of the last days of the empire belongs to others, but a word is in order about the evolution of Ottomanism, the prevailing ideology of the ruling class, which was one of many ‘identities’ contested in the empire in the chaotic decades after 1856. In an era of fading imperial and monarchical traditions, the Ottomans identified themselves with their neighbours, and sought recognition based on the manipulation of the symbols of rule and reciprocal diplomacy. ‘The Ottoman sultan, the Meiji emperor, the Russian tsar, the Habsburg emperor … [a]ll invested in a recharged state mythology, which they sought to inculcate through mass education. All invested to varying degrees in the inevitable technical trappings of modernity: railways, the telegraph, factories, censuses, passports, steamships, world fairs, clock towers and art-deco palaces. All looked to each other to see how their peers were playing the role of “civilized monarchy.” ’ 4 But beneath such posturing of the sultan and household, the Ottoman reformers understood in differing ways the need for the introduction of the ‘rule of law’ in the empire, a process which did not begin with the Gülhane promulgation of 1839, but rather on the battle-fields of 1768–74, when defeat and insolvency required explanation. It has been the habit of historians to locate reform in ‘secular’ texts, to hunt for the political debates among bureaucrats, to deny to the Muslim texts arguing for change any authority, but as more and more of them become available to us, it is possible to trace an Ottoman Muslim road to the modern. The reasons why that road is located in debates about the state of the military, and appear to be largely defensive, even paranoid, should by now be obvious. 
 From a military point of view, while this book began with 1699 and the Treaty of Karlowitz, the Treaty of 1739 is even more significant, as the triumph of the return of Belgrade masked the true state of affairs and delayed a real assessment of both military and financial systems. That assessment began only in 1774, was accelerated by the public’s outrage at the loss of the Crimea in 1783, and finally concluded with the very public elimination of the Janissaries in 1826. To justify the radical reordering of society, an evolution of the authority and legitimacy of Ottoman rule (‘Ottomanism’) can be traced to the reign of Mahmud II, who embodied the modern Ottoman monarch and exemplified the new Muslim autocrat, insisting on reciprocity in international relations and equality among his subjects. That he accomplished much, with great ferocity, cannot be denied. Under Mahmud, the northern arc was refortified, and discussions about citizenship and obligations became part of public discourse, especially as a modern, if heavily censored, press first made its appearance. Called the ‘infidel sultan’, Mahmud II nonetheless made use of the mosque and its rhetoric for reconfiguring the imagined space of the remaining Ottoman territories, and for sorting the loyal and disloyal among those who were within its constricted borders. It took most of the rest of the nineteenth century for Ottoman intellectuals to make sense of the merging of Ottoman–Islamic political traditions and European thought. Ottoman Tanzimat statesmen had access to Vienna, London, Paris, and Berlin, where a similar and vigorous debate over alternative systems of law was under way. This was reflected in the debates which began among Ottoman intellectuals of the 1840s over the Ottoman place in the pantheon of civilizations, and in the assertion of a civilising mission over their rebellious nomads and tribes in the last years of the century: Druze, Arab Bedouin, Kurd, Albanian mountaineers, and latterly Yemenites. In particular, the conquest of Yemen was explicitly argued on the model of British India. 
 According to one recent analysis, the Tanzimat ideology aimed at ‘a balanced, but nevertheless complete, enforcement of the state’s law and prerogatives – be they religiously justified or not’. Public order and just rule remained the bedrock of Ottoman Islamism throughout its existence. The obsession with rebellion ( fitne ), to which we have often alluded, and the emphasis on justice ( adalet ) is better meant as the restoration of the equilibrium, where order and stability equalled prosperity. The state’s function then was to ensure that restoration, and a return to the security and tranquillity of the flock ( reaya ). Studying bureaucratic language from the nineteenth century, Reinkowski has discerned the creation of a new ‘circle of equity’, which assumed that part of the state’s role in restoring order was to punish and educate ( te’dib ve terbiye ) Ottoman subjects ( tebaa , a neutral term) who had caused the disruption, by creating a new order through discipline and civilization ( inzibat ve medeniyet ). 5 One is reminded of the novel disciplinary code that accompanied the Hüsrev military reforms of 1827. 
 In fact, the imagined stability was never fully achieved, primarily because of financial difficulties. Threatened by a new military order in European armies, the Ottomans were forced to transform a land-based timariot system, which included many Janissaries of the countryside by 1800, into a new, costly standing army. This also meant the necessity of transforming an intricate system of indirect taxation, which they had allowed to fall under the purview of provincial ayan . That process continued for a hundred years, and lay at the base of a majority of the revolts of the post-Janissary empire. 
 Costs increased as technology, especially mobile field artillery and arms and ammunition, became essential to winning wars. The evidence indicates a continued Ottoman investment in the renewal of technology, and the imitation and adoption of new arms and equipment in rapid fashion, but an inability to sustain the manufacturing of such items, again largely due to lack of finances or the misuse of what was available. Concentrating then on maintaining and manning the frontiers of conflict, and the large fortresses we have described, to the west and north, the post-Janissary army neglected the southern and eastern tiers of empire and continued to rely on local tribal affiliations, and natural warrior inclinations of some populations to serve as the frontier forces and later police. By contrast with their Habsburg and Romanov neighbours, after 1700 there was very little effort to settle such groups as frontiersmen, who could and did serve as a reserve for the Habsburg and a first line of defence for the Russians. The preference, as with the Principalities and the Crimea, was for a contractual relationship between the Ottomans and their clients, which for a long time benefited both parties, but it encouraged, in fact often engendered, the continuation of volunteer warrior societies. When the time came to discipline and ‘civilize’ the nomadic and semi-nomadic ethnicities of the peripheries, both for the purposes of conscription and the imposition of the Tanzimat regime, the newly-organised army had neither the manpower nor the resources to do more than restore order temporarily. Imperial aspirations and arrogance at the centre always outran the resources and capabilities of a system crippled by poor financing and a patrimonial household. Indebtedness and disorder contributed to a growing siege mentality, and resulted in an atmosphere of desperation, urgency, conspiracy and anger at the dynasty itself. 
