

 Plate 23    The Mecidiye tabya at Silistre (author’s photograph ). 
 Ottoman forces under Behram Pasha (General Cannon) followed the Russians as they retreated across Moldavia. A fierce battle occurred at Giurgevo on 7 July 1854, but in general the withdrawal occurred in an orderly fashion, although Austrian and Ottoman contingents replacing the retreating Russians squared off in Bucharest in early September. The Ottomans reached İ brail first by the third week of September, but the Austrians entered Jassy ahead of them in the first week of October. Bucharest was divided into Ottoman and Austrian zones of influence. For the remainder of their stay, the Austrian presence was resented. They had to declare martial law to maintain order, and face the disapproval of Britain and France concerning their intentions regarding the long-term status of Wallachia and Moldavia. 6 Peace was within the grasp of all concerned, but the wartime build-up began to exert its own logic. By August 1854, the allied commands required some major demonstration of force to justify the expense and human loss. 
 By that time, the British, French and Ottoman troops numbered some 130,000 at Varna. For over six weeks, they remained in bivouac at the pestilential harbour, as cholera raged among their troops. In a month, 5,000 of the French and 850 of the British soldiers had succumbed. On 21 July 1854, French Commander St Arnaud had decided to send a new unit, called the Spahis d’Orient , under command of Algerian General Yusuf, to Dobruja, along with the 1st Division of French regulars under General Espinasse, to chase remaining Russians from the area. The 2nd and 3rd Divisions were to follow a day or two later. The Spahis were a unit made up of 4,000 ba ş ı bozuks and regular cavalry, recruited from among the Ottomans, to be the advance guard of the French troops. These included Albanians, Kurds, Türkmen and Arabs. The expedition wandered the marshes of Dobruja for almost a month, with 150 dying daily as time went on. The ba ş ı bozuks deserted, raided villages, and died of cholera. In small skirmishes with the Russians, mostly Cossack irregulars, they simply vanished, or demanded compensation for the heads of dead and wounded they brought to General Yusuf. Close to 3,000 died of cholera in that time. Such was the French effort to instruct the Ottomans how to deal with the ba ş ı bozuks . 
 The more famous exploits of General Beatson’s irregular cavalry of the same source, the British ba ş ı bozuks , represent a nadir in the romance between European soldiers-of-fortune and their native armies. Beatson operated from mid-1853 to October 1854, recruiting his ba ş ı bozuks from the Balkans to the Caucasus, with little success. His experience in India made him over-confident of making a fine body of troopers out of undisciplined tribesmen who were tolerated, faute-de-mieux , as Ottoman irregulars, who were ever-present at the edge of the Tanzimat order, and routinely escaped justifiable punishment by commanding officers. Severe, exemplary discipline by British officers had little effect. Frustrated European officers grew to detest the ba ş ı bozuks , and Beatson was finally forced to abandon the project. Stratford Canning exemplifies the attitudes of British officials, rooted still in the romance of the ‘nomad’: ‘even the irregulars submitted with good will to the command of Christian officers and to a degree of discipline which they had not previously undergone. On returning to their respective provinces they expressed so much satisfaction with the good treatment they had experienced in our service that when the Indian Mutiny broke out it would have been easy to raise an auxiliary force from among the population of their creed … The Bashi-Bozuks were never wanting in military courage. The crimes, by which they had earned a bad name, were necessary consequences of ill-usage on the part of their commanders, who cheated them of their pay and let them loose for subsistence upon the countries which they passed through or occupied.’ 7 
 Crimea and Sevastopol 
 Seeking some success in the time that remained of the campaign year, Napoleon III and the British Minister of War, the Duke of Newcastle, decided on the attack on Sevastopol. By late July 1854, the assembled allied officers were ordered to proceed to the Crimea, much to the dismay of seasoned soldiers, who were without detailed maps, charts, or knowledge of the strength of the enemy. Politicians in London were already planning on the disposition of the territories after the fall of Sevastopol: ‘Palmerston thought the Crimea ought to go back to the Ottomans, probably with Georgia, Circassia, the Sea of Azov and the mouths of the Danube. “An adverse critic might say catch and kill your bear before you determine what you will do with his skin, but I think our bear is as good as taken.’’ ’ 8 
 Embarkation from Varna began on 28 August, but loading the ships was a difficulty from the first, and most of the British ships did not sail until 7 September 1854. A total of 3,000 horses were loaded on ships, but 5,000 were left to starve to death. Much of the hospital equipment had to be abandoned, and as the ships delayed in harbour, the bodies of the cholera dead were thrown overboard and floated in the sea around the ships. Among those who were transported to the Crimea were 7,000 Ottoman troops in six battleships, under the command of Ömer Pasha. In the end, the British used 52 sailing ships, 27 steam transports and some of their battleships, carrying 22,000 infantry, 1,000 cavalry, 3,000 engineers and 60 field guns. The French transported 25,000 infantry, 2,800 engineers and 68 field guns, in 200 small vessels in addition to their battleships. It has been reckoned ‘the largest amphibious operation ever attempted until that moment.’ 9 
 In the fall of 1854, European allies confronted one another on the battlefield for the first time in 40 years, in strange, unpredictable terrain. The French are credited with reliable leadership and supply systems, but Napoleon III covertly commanded the French army in the early months of 1855, leading to confusion in the chain of command. Lack of coordination with the navy, which included six Ottoman battleships, and disagreement among the officers in charge of land operations, characterised much of the early days of the campaign. Most historians now agree that the entire enterprise suffered the lack of strategic definitions of war aims, and exposed the limitations of poorly centralised and badly managed auxiliary systems, such as transport and medical care. The Crimea was terra incognita in 1853–54, and the international army brought to bear was drawn from national as well as colonial armies. Misinformation and botched communications abounded, features exposed by the instancy of reporting. It bears repeating that this phase of the war both closed the Napoleonic Age and also opened the imperial surge to the total war of the First World War. It was closely followed by the Indian Mutiny of 1857 and the American Civil War 1861–65, both of which had global consequences. 
 The participation of the Ottomans at Crimea was minimal, first by deliberate policy of the allies, and then by a poor showing at the Battle of Balaklava, on 25 October, when the Ottoman infantry battalions, as well as Tunisians in four other such positions, were stationed on redoubts in a critical place in front of the allied army. After an hour of attack by the Russians, and seeing no allied relief in sight, 500 of them broke and ran as the Russian army bore down on them, abandoning the guns that Cardigan was ordered to recover with his infamous Light Brigade. Ottoman losses stood at 170; the Light Brigade lost 113. 10 
 It was the last such opportunity for the Ottomans to distinguish themselves, as they were branded as cowards and left to peripheral assignments. Thereafter, the Ottoman troops largely sat out the siege of Sevastopol, from late November to early 1855, freezing, starving and dying of various afflictions just as did their French and British allies over the exceptionally brutal winter of 1854–55. The troops were turned into labour battalions, or left to die. The European allies had agreed to feed the Ottoman troops, but could only offer them biscuit, rum and salt pork, leaving the Muslims only the biscuit to eat. ‘Turkish bodies lay in grisly rows until famished comrades could gather the strength to bury them under a few inches of dirt. Each night, wild dogs dug up the bodies and ate their fill. The Turkish surgeon in charge, who had been trained in London and spoke very good English, showed [correspondent] Woods the hospital: “The deadly fetid air which issued from this charnel-house made me involuntarily shrink back from the door with loathing.” The building had previously been used for the Russian prisoners, many of whom had died of cholera, the “hospital” was given to the Turks, but despite “ankle-deep” blood and faeces, it had never been cleaned. Hundreds of starving Turks now lay in this filth without bed, blankets, or even clothing.’ A six-gun Ottoman frigate had been turned into a 300-bed hospital ship, with four surgeons and other medical personnel. When it arrived in the Crimea, it stood at anchor for ten days waiting for a berth in any of the harbours of the allies, but returned empty in the end, having been refused a place to load the sick and dying. 11 Of course, Ottoman officials were just as culpable for the lack of supplies as were the allies, but doubtless prejudice against the ‘cowardly’ Turkish soldiers and sailors also contributed to the miseries of the exceptionally harsh winter. Two important impediments to improving the lot of all were the size of the harbours just described, and the impassability of the roads after their effacement during the rainy, icy winter. 
 In February 1855, the situation changed. Raglan, reduced to perhaps 10,000 effectives in his army, entertained Stratford Canning’s offer to procure an agreement with the Ottomans for an additional 20,000 troops, what became known as the Turkish Contingent, to be paid for and commanded by the British. In February, an Anglo-Ottoman convention was signed to that effect, but the troops, who assembled at Ş umnu, did not arrive in the seat of war until later in the summer. Ömer Pasha’s existing Ottoman force defended Eupatoria (Kozlov), a port north of the Alma River, and defeated a Russian attempt to take the place in February 1855. Nicholas I had ordered the attempt in anticipation of the arrival of the Turkish Contingent, but the Ottoman victory reportedly was a final blow to his spirits. He died on 2 March 1855, and was succeeded by his son, Alexander II (1855–81), who chose to continue the war, rejecting the peace proposals of the allies in Vienna. Ömer Pasha moved 30,000 of his troops, many of them new recruits from Sudan and Syria, to Sevastopol, where they stood idle until 9 April 1855, when he led twelve battalions of infantry in a reconnaissance before Sevastopol. They were made to cover the same route as the Light Brigade of the previous fall, and followed by many observers. Times correspondent Russell noted their drab, dark blue uniforms, gray woollen socks and sheepskin sandals, but observed that they marched well and that their steel was highly polished. The infantry marched up an incline and scattered a few Russian officers and Cossacks, and then were shipped back to their northern outpost at Eupatoria. 12 Perhaps the parade was in recognition of the new convention and a rehabilitation of the ‘Turkish cowards’. At any rate, the Ottomans participated no further in the final months of the siege of Sevastopol. 
 The Caucasus and the Ottomans pre-1853 
