

 Two Turkish prisoners, Mamisch Agha and Bekir Agha, both natives of Erzeroum, undertook to carry the Russian proclamation to the inhabitants of their native city. They were accordingly set at liberty by the Russians, and arrived at Erzeroum in the evening; but finding the lower classes had been induced by the Seraskier to insist on the city being defended, they proceeded to the residence of the Aghan Agha, or civil governor of the town, who called a meeting of the chief people and those who were in favour of a capitulation. The proclamation of Prince Paskievich was then read to them, in which he exhorted the people to put no faith in the promises of the Seraskier, who, he asserted, was on the point of abandoning the city and leaving the inhabitants to suffer like those of Kars and Akhiska; he also added that the Seraskier, by his delays and bad management, had already caused the loss of two armies and the abandonment of the strong pass of Soganlook. As usual in such cases, the rabble were of the same opinion as the last speaker, and the empty tents of the troops who had returned to their homes [deserted] were struck. The Seraskier now appeared really inclined to abandon the town, but was prevented from so doing by the mob, who vehemently reproached him with having destroyed his army, and then wishing to abandon the city. 18 
 By 25 June both Hasankale and Erzurum had capitulated. It was a brilliant campaign for Paskevich, which continued to be the military example for the Russians over the next half-century. 
 In terms of numbers of troops, however, Paskevich was over-extended at that point. While tolerated, even welcomed in Armenian and Kurdish territories, he remained vulnerable to guerrilla tactics all over the territories tenuously under Russian control, but he understood that control of the port of Trabzon was required to secure the territory they had rather easily acquired. On 6 July 1829, he sent two battalions and a detachment of Cossacks and Muslim irregulars to occupy Bayburt, on the road to Trabzon. Confronted with a group of Lazi tribesmen to the north of Bayburt, the Russians were turned back, losing 300 men. Paskevich then marched with his 6,000 men to take Bayburt, and defeated the new Serasker Osman Pasha. Paskevich apprehended his forces’ vulnerability, especially so in the Acar and Laz strongholds around Trabzon and Batum, and as winter approached, began to withdraw his troops back into Georgia. He was accompanied by large numbers of Armenians, who would make Erivan, also acquired during this war, their new home. By capturing Akhaltzikhe, the Russians had a new defensive outpost, which would cripple future Ottoman campaigns around Kars. 
 As we know, Erzurum, Kars and Bayburt were all returned to the Ottomans, as well as Ardahan, in the 1829 Treaty of Adrianople. The frontier was marked at St Nicholas, north of Batum, on the coast. Anapa and Poti went to the Russians, and the Ottomans renounced suzerainty over the Çerkes. Paskevich’s name joined the ranks of Rumiantsev, Suvorov, and Kutuzov, as commanders of the great triumphs over the Turks. Two things Paskevich and the Russian commanders of the Caucasus understood: that control of the Black Sea was of primary importance for control of Anatolia, and that guerrilla action could easily disable dispersed regular forces. The Ottomans must have learned the first lesson as well: in 1853– 54, 1877–78 and 1914 conflicts with the Russians, they controlled the sea, the first time with allies; the second time alone; the third time, in 1914, with the Goeben and Breslau battleships. Lesson Two they never seem to have mastered, or rather, they mastered too well. 19 
 The siege of Kars: the British and the barbarians 
 At the beginning of the war, in fall of 1853, the Ottomans had reinforced Trabzon, Erzurum and Batum, and manned the garrisons, in theory from the Harput headquarters of the the Fourth Army, which existed mostly on paper. In fact, Erzurum remained the pivotal fortress for Transcaucasian defence and supply. In October 1853, Ottoman detachments of 15,000– 20,000 regulars were distributed across Erzurum, Kars, Ardahan and Batum. The Russians, meanwhile, faced the distractions not just of the Danube, but also of Imam Shamil and his Murids, the Muslim rebels of long standing in the Caucasus, who could raise 10,000 men and attack the Russian garrisons, as they did in August of 1853. Defeated, Shamil retreated, but the incursion did reveal Russian vulnerability. Prince Vorontsov commanded some 23,000 men, two divisions, ten regiments of Cossacks, and Georgians, Imeretians and Gurian irregulars with which to defend the Transcaucasus frontier. The fortresses were not in good condition, but the Russians concentrated on field forces, well apprised of Ottoman ineffectiveness in manoeuvring in open battle. 
 As we have seen, the first action of the war belonged to Ahmed Pasha at the frontier of St Nicholas. The Russians withdrew from Poti and surrounding areas, and the Ottomans failed to follow up. At the same time, Ali Pasha attacked Akhaltzikhe, from a high point at Suflis, with 18,000 men. A frontal attack by Commander Andronikov scattered Ali Pasha’s army, and he lost 4,000 men, to 450 Russians. At the beginning of November 1853, Abdi Pasha, with 30,000 men and 40 guns, marched on Aleksandropol from Kars. The Ottoman forces, with gun emplacements on the heights, won the first round but failed to follow up, and reinforcements allowed the Russians to counter the attack in order to withdraw, with 1,000 dead. It was the single opportunity for the Ottoman forces to break the Russian strength in the early days of the campaign, before reinforcements arrived. Cautious Abdi Pasha withdrew to Kars instead, and left Ahmed Pasha in a strong position on the Aleksandropol–Kars road, at Ba ş gedikler, with 48 guns. He had 36,000 men, 20,000 of them regular soldiers, and the rest the usual assortment of irregulars. While their position was strong, the engagement by the Ottomans on 1 December, with superior numbers, resulted in a rout, with the remainder of the force retreating to Kars. Half the artillery and supply trains were lost, and 6,000 men were killed or wounded. The Russians lost fewer, but among them a significant number of senior officers. The shelling of the Ottoman navy at Sinop on 30 November 1853, plus the defeat at Ba ş gedikler, left the Russians masters of the Caucasus and Black Sea ports over the winter, until the allies moved ships into the Black Sea in early 1854. 20 
 Over that same winter, the state of the troops in Kars deteriorated even further because of the rivalries and corruption of pashas Ahmed and Abdi. In February 1854, an Ottoman investigatory mission, headed by Hayreddin Pasha, was sent to Kars to investigate the abuses of command under the two pashas. We know of this and subsequent events largely because every step of the summer of 1854 is detailed by the various British officers who were allies of the Ottomans for the season. Hayreddin ascertained that Ahmed Pasha had been filing fraudulent muster rolls, numbering 30,000 troops, and received munitions and supplies for that number which he sold to various contractors. He had arrangements with local businesses, such as the bakers, to supply bread to the troops. Skimming the funds delivered for bread, the bakers were delivering sub-standard loaves to the troops. Both Hayreddin and General Williams, who arrived later in the year, found the troops in a desperate state, poorly clothed, freezing and starving, largely the result of the venality of the commanders and local businessmen. Hayreddin is reported as humiliating Ahmed Pasha in front of his officers and troops, and sending both Abdi and Ahmed to Istanbul for trial. (Ahmed Pasha was ultimately tried and executed for such malfeasance in 1860.) 
 Hayreddin Pasha ordered the bakers to improve the quality of the bread. On the third day, when the loaves had not improved, Hayreddin forced the contractor to eat the ‘filthy, black coarse crumb’ of five large loaves. Similar efforts were undertaken in Erzurum. 21 When General Williams and his entourage arrived in Erzurum in May, they found substantially little had changed. Williams would spend much of the summer haranguing Istanbul, and pursuing the dismissal of Zarif Mustafa, Governor of Erzurum, who was appointed as Mü ş ir of the Army of Anatolia in spring of 1854. As Governor, Zarif had this to say about mobilising men and supplies the summer before. ‘It was decided to send a division of soldiers to each of Kars, Ard ı han, Beyazid and Batum. The order to bring and collect the reserves [ redif ] came, and my orders to gather irregular soldiers [ ba ş ı bozuk ] were sent out. … A report of the provisions needed by the army was requested, and only five thousand himar [mule load] of wheat was demanded, the commanders saying they would manage the rest themselves. Upon this, the staff officers were invited to a two-night dinner in which it was stressed that they should estimate what they needed, as it was winter, nothing else could be found. They insisted that the five thousand himar would suffice, and they would do the rest by contract. I set out to deliver the requested amount, but understood it would be insufficient. I ordered great quantities from the surrounding towns as a precaution, and warned Ç ı ld ı r, Kars and Beyazid to do the same, and acquire oil and supplies ( zahire ) there. I was ordered by the Minister of War to assist Abdi Pasha in completing the supplies for the army. As it was my duty to the state, I worked very hard in this matter. The artillery was insufficient and the carriages and wheels old and defective, so the repair was undertaken, for which Salih Pasha must also be given credit. In short, I worked so hard, that even Ahmed Pasha regarded me as a rival.’ 22 