 The Ottoman population ranged from 30,000,000 to 40,000,000 in this period, and we have already seen the experimentation with the redif reserve system in place after 1843. Evidence for the Crimean War indicates that a maximum of 250,000–300,000 men was raised by the Ottomans. The irregulars continued to be a source of manpower regularly tapped, but the impact of the ba ş ı bozuk behaviour on local societies tends to exaggerate their actual number. Perhaps not more than 50,000 were utilised in the Crimean War, and likely less than half of that were mobilised in the later decades of the nineteenth century. Ba ş ı bozuks became a significant liability in the Balkans and Anatolia under Abdülhamid II (1876–1909), who created the Hamidiye Kurdish cavalry regiments in the 1890s as a partial remedy to the disorders of the Balkans and elsewhere, setting the stage for a more lethal confrontation between the Kurdish and Armenian communities in eastern Turkey. 
 In 1869, under Hüseyin Avni Pasha, the Ottomans introduced another round of military reforms, which were overtly modelled on the Prussians. Initially the reorganisation was intended to increase the capacity of the Ottoman army for external defence. It was based on the short/long principle described above, a ratio of four years in the regular army and sixteen years in various levels of reserves. Service in the nizamiye was designated as four years, with an additional two years in the active reserve ( ihtiyat ); three years in the first redif , and three years in the second redif ; eight years in the general reserve, or militia. ( mustah ı z ). The army estimated that such a system would produce 702,000 men: 150,000 nizam , 60,000 İ htiyat ; 96,000 men each in redif one and two, and 300,000 Mustahf ı z . An annual intake of 37,500 was expected, chosen by lot from the 21–24 age group. While some have said that the Ottomans raised 750,000 in the war against Russia in 1877–78, that does not square with the 250,000 troops remaining at the end of the war, unless one is willing to accept one-half million dead and wounded. 39 
 The Ottomans were no different than the other powers in Europe in following the Prussian model, except that they were continually hampered by the lack of finances, and a shrinking tax base, preventing them from investing properly in the reformed system. In 1869, the Ottoman army budget was 4,700,000 pounds sterling, of which 3,600,000 pounds were intended for the nizamiye and its overhead alone. The second redif and the Mustahf ı z remained paper forces. 40 The dynasty, under the new Sultan Abdülaziz, who initially pledged to curb palace spending, continued to view state funds as a personal patrimony, in much the same fashion as his predecessor, and the levels of corruption and cronyism continued in the bureaucracy as well as the royal household. In 1861, the financial crisis had come to a head, when the Ottomans were barely able to cover the interest payments they had accrued on loans from Europe made during the Crimean War and after, and could raise no further loans. By 1863–64, with further aid from France and Britain, the Ottomans created the Imperial Ottoman Bank, backed by European financiers, but the fundamental problem remained. 41 
 In short, after the Crimean War, while imperial aspirations may have aimed higher, the fact was that the Ottomans slipped quickly behind their major rivals. Beyond the obvious budgetary problems, significant, major differences lay in the functionality of the army, and in conscription. For the Ottomans it proved impossible to separate internal from external enforcement, even though the zaptiye , or police force, was a product of the post-Crimean reforms. Most European monarchies succeeded to varying degrees in removing the army from such internal disciplinary activities, but the late Ottomans never managed to rid themselves of the need for regular and irregular forces for security purposes. It was not so much a technological gap, which military historians generally emphasise, but an internal security gap and a manpower gap that hindered the evolution of the Ottoman military in the last decades of the nineteenth century. 
 The impact of conscription fell heaviest on the Muslims of the remaining Ottoman territories, and even more intensely on the population of Turkic Anatolia, which grew by perhaps more than 2,000,000 refugees in the latter half of the nineteenth century. The Christian population and at least one quarter of the Muslim population was exempt from service, leaving some estimated 12,000,000 Muslims available for conscription. Attempts such as that in Bosnia, to create special forces of ethnic groups, were repeatedly made in Albania and the tribal areas in Syria and Iraq, but with little success. Revolt inevitably followed. The exemption tax ( bedel ) could produce more revenue than the previous poll tax, which had been abolished in 1846, a large incentive for not conscripting Christians. 42 Some proposals were made by the reformers, among them Ömer Pasha, to enrol Armenians and Bulgarians, but not Greeks or Christian Bosnians, so the proposal went nowhere. Not until 1909, under the Young Turks, is it possible to speak of a universal conscription law, and that was evaded by many. The additional obstacle was the resistance of the Muslim recruits to serve under Christian officers, a problem that persisted into the First World War. 43 