

 Plate 23    Map of fortress of Kars, 1854–55 (Colonel Atwell Lake , Narrative of the Defence of Kars, Historical and Military. London:Richard Bentley, 1857 ). 
 The summer of 1854 proved no different in terms of the Ottoman ability to regroup and take the war to the Russians. The allies chose to concentrate on the Crimea, rather than the Caucasus, as we have seen, which meant another round of Ottoman–Russian fighting in and around Kars before the arrival of Ömer Pasha’s troops. Surprisingly, given the description of the state of the army, new contingents poured into the area. Selim Pasha’s troops, stationed between Batum and Ozurgeti, grew to 40,000, half of whom were regulars. Mü ş ir Zarif Mustafa Pasha had 40,000 nizamiye and 20,000 irregulars at Kars, with 20,000 redifs in Erzurum. The Russians concentrated their forces at Kutaisi (9,000 men), Akhaltzikhe (9,000 men), Aleksandropol (20,000 men) and Erivan (2,000 men). In the first confrontation, in early June 1854, Commander Andronikov forced Selim Pasha and his army back over the frontier, the Çoluk River, to Batum. During June, the army at Kars proceeded with leisure to its advance post at Hac ı veli near Aleksandropol. General Bebutov had 20,000 troops (13,000 infantry, 3,000 regular cavalry, and 4,000 mounted irregulars) at Aleksandropol, but was outnumbered by those of Zarif Pasha at Hac ı veli. Under Zarif’s command were Generals İ smail Pasha (Hungarian Kmety) and Hur ş id Pasha (British–Hungarian Guyon), veterans of the 1848 revolt in Hungary in Ottoman service. The Russians set up camp on a prominence called Karayal Hill and remained there until early August, in sight of the Ottoman encampment at Hac ı veli for over three weeks. The battle plan belonged to Guyon, who aimed at splitting the superior Ottoman forces into three discrete details, which worked to their disadvantage in the end. On the evening of 4 August 1854, a group of ba ş ı bozuks and crack and regular Ottoman riflemen attacked Karayal Hill at dawn, and took the hill, giving them momentary advantage. The battle of Kurudere, as it came to be called, was a fierce one, ‘made up of three separate consecutive actions, in each of which the Turks were defeated. The Turkish nizams , particularly the Syrian battalions, fought with great courage; the fire of the new Turkish rifle battalions was excellent; the new regular cavalry units attacked with boldness and a spirit of sacrifice; and the guns were served competently but with a certain lack of mobility. It was clear to the Russians that the newly organised Turkish army was not yet capable of a war of manoeuvre but might be a serious enemy behind fortifications.’ Most of the army retired to Kars in order, saving a majority of the artillery. The Russians made no further move on Kars. Zarif Pasha lost 8,000 killed and wounded, and an additional 2,000 were made prisoners. Perhaps 10,000 of the ba ş ibozuk returned home (largely Kurds); Bebutov lost 15 per cent (3,000 men) of his force. 23 
 By early September 1854, Colonel Fenwick Williams arrived in Erzurum, head of a British Commission, under orders from Raglan and British Foreign Minister Clarendon. He was accompanied by Captain C.C. Teesdale, his aide-de-camp , who had been given orders to survey the state of the Ottoman army in the Caucasus. Shortly thereafter, Williams moved to Kars, where he was joined in March of 1855 by three more officers: Colonel Atwell Lake, author of Narrative of the Defence of Kars , the best known of the memoirs; Captain Henry Langhorne Thompson; and Captain Humphrey Sandwich, an army surgeon, who served as Williams’s military adviser, and left a journal of his observations. Sandwich eventually headed up a team of some fifty surgeons and pharmacists, both foreign and Ottomans. Colonel Lake, who was assigned the responsibility of rebuilding/building the defences of the fort, described it as an irregular polygon, made of blocks of stone in cement with a double enceinte of walls, and four towers. The citadel itself sat above the town, with a covered passage leading from the citadel to the river. The outer walls of the fortress measured 2,600 yards. In 1855 it lacked a fuller defence system, without outpost on the hills surrounding the town, or a system of redoubts. 24 
 Mü ş ir Zarif Pasha had been dismissed in disgrace after the most recent defeat. He was replaced temporarily by Ş ükrü Pasha in Kars. Williams’s first report to Serasker Ali R ı za Pasha condemned the entire Ottoman general staff for widespread corruption and venality, which included false muster rolls, skimming of accounts, and collusion with local suppliers. As a result, perfectly good soldiers were dying from starvation and a lack of proper clothing. A quick roll call of the actual troops in the fortress revealed that some 10,000 troops registered in the muster rolls were unaccounted for. Allen and Muratoff add that in May 1854 Turkish effectives on the Caucasus frontier had numbered some 140,000; by the following year, that had fallen to 70,000 men. An estimated 20,000 men had deserted, but perhaps as many as 30,000 men had perished because of disease and wretched conditions. 25 
 Williams then began a campaign to punish the culprits and demand the resupply of the frontier with men and equipment, and continued his condemnation of the entire military organisation of the Serasker . He was particularly acute about the problem of old school officers, raised from the ranks, and the new military school graduates. ‘Fourteen of these young men, after completing their studies at the Galata Serai, were sent to this army; they found themselves exposed to every description of insult and degradation; not one of them received a paid appointment in the état-major, and several have, in consequence, disappeared altogether from this army. [I]n short, the officers at present in command, as well as those in subordinate posts, will always endeavor to keep the young cadets out of employ in order that their own promotion may secure for them those illicit sources of peculation on which they at present fatten, at the expense of the unfed and badly-clothed soldiers.’ 26 Such an attack must have gone over extremely well in the War Ministry in Istanbul; nonetheless, Williams was given the rank of ferik in the Ottoman army at the end of 1854. Vas ı f Pasha, known for compliance rather than military experience, was appointed Mü ş ir early in 1855, and the two officers appear to have worked well together during the subsequent siege. Serasker Ali R ı za and Ömer Pasha resisted the demands for trials of the miscreants sent to Istanbul, but a few were ultimately punished. Effective command lay in Williams’s hand. Lacking supplies, and especially horses, he chose not to reorganise a field army, but to fortify Kars as the main defensive barrier to the Russian route to Anatolia. In January 1855, for example, an inspection of the horses within the garrison had led to 700 of them designated for slaughter, as they were unfit for service. ‘Cavalry outpost duty thenceforward became a dead letter.’ 27 The decision was also based on the condition of much of the Kars army, ill with scurvy and malnutrition, but the strategy did mean holding the bulk of the Ottoman forces immobile in the fortress. 
 In May 1855, the Kars garrison amounted to sixteen battalions of nizamiyes , three battalions of Istanbul riflemen, eight battalions of redifs , one of cavalry, and eighty field pieces. The total number was 15,000 men. Additionally, there were 9,000 Lazi and Kurd irregulars. Some 5,000 reserves were in Erzurum, Selim Pasha commanded 15,000 in the area around Batum, and Veli Pasha commanded 14,000 troops, half of them irregulars, in the region of Ele ş kirt, on the Beyazid to Erzurum route. The Russians, under General Muraviev, regrouped their forces around Akhaltzikhe (16,000 infantry, 7,000 cavalry) and Aleksandropol (16,000 infantry, 7,000 cavalry), the latter under command of Muraviev himself. Reserves of 16,000 were stationed at Marani, east of Poti. Neither side was particularly flush with manpower, but by contrast with the previous campaign season the Russians had the advantage, and sufficient forces to press the operation against Kars and Erzurum. 28 
 Lake and Sandwich spent the early summer months building defences and preparing the hospital in Kars, the latter a 2,000-bed facility which provided care superior to that anywhere else during the Crimean War. Ba ş ı bozuks poured into the fortress. Lake had considerable help from the citizens of Kars. On 16 June, the Russians made the first exploratory attack on the fieldworks, to be repulsed with heavy losses. They faced the best troops the reformed Ottoman army had to offer, as acknowledged by Williams himself. Muraviev, fully apprised of the supply difficulties of Kars, operated with a strategy that understood that the fortress would starve by November if not substantially relieved. He remained cautious about approaching Erzurum, ever expecting the relief to come from Trabzon via Erzurum. In fact he had the opportunity to do so, as Veli Pasha fell back even from Hasankale when confronted with Russian advance troops and essentially left the road to Erzurum open, but Muraviev preferred to concentrate his forces on Kars, just as Sevastopol fell and Ömer Pasha was released to take his troops to Mingrelia (Georgia). Throughout August, Kars was gradually invested by the Russians. Williams reported that 8,000 Russian cavalry had effectively cut off their access to supplies. The garrison went on half rations. By 20 September, Muraviev had word that Ömer Pasha had made a first landing with 8,000 troops at Batum, with the intention of making a diversionary attack on Kutaisi and perhaps Tiflis. 
