 Still, the picture is very much complicated by the arrival of the seaborne powers of France and Great Britain. ‘For historians of the Eastern Question, the centerpiece of the struggle has been the problem posed by the Sick Man of Europe, or, to view the situation from the other side, the impediments to modernization through consensus that were exacerbated by the self-serving policies of meddling foreign powers’, 6 but the age of transformation chronicled by this book was much more complicated than foreign interference with sovereign rights. Perceptions of the strategic importance of Eurasia to the British in India turned the Eastern Question into the Great Game, as the remainder of the world was drawn into the international trading system. 
 After 1841, British consuls were to be found in every major port city of the Arab southern tier of the empire where they had not been before. Foreign powers, in effect, established an informal colonial rule over a large part of the Ottoman territories, establishing an international market regime that continues to the present. In 1882 the British occupied Egypt, and turned it into a colony, arguing about the temporary nature of their stay for the next 50 years. The beneficiaries of the new colonial relationship were the non-Muslim communities. The British found themselves contesting territory with a rival colonial power, the Ottomans themselves, as in Yemen at the turn of the century. 
 That contest for the Ottomans centred on loyalty to an ideal, Ottomanism, and played itself out as a religious quarrel in part, with Muslim attacking non-Muslim and vice-versa. The clamour for autonomy and self-determination continued, as it would in the Habsburg and Romanov realms, as radical individualism, and a new world order spread east across Europe to Eurasia. Missionaries of all faiths became instruments of colonial power as well, and stoked the fires of difference with the compliance of the foreign representatives in Istanbul. We have tended to populate this story with Muslim fanatics and barbaric Turks because of the final years of collapse, but in 1918, Ottoman, Habsburg and Romanov houses all fell, with unprecedented violence, and with consequences still unfolding in the successor states of the Middle East and the Caucasus. 