 This prompted Muraviev to revise his strategy, and make an all-out assault on the newly fortified Kars. At dawn of 29 September 1855, hoping for a surprise attack, the Russian forces encountered stiff resistance. ‘[T]he Turks then opened a converging fire upon the head of the column, and though many of the front rank fell, the rest moved up from the rear, pressing forward those in advance, but they could not withstand the deadly fire of the elite of the old soldiers, who deployed, and protected by a breastwork did not fire a ball in vain. This horrid carnage continued until the Russians, stopped by a mound of dead bodies, and dislocated by repeated charges of grape, were brought to a stand-still. The Turks leaping over the breastwork, and led on by the gallant Kméty, finished with the bayonet the utter rout of their assailants. This column left eight hundred and fifty corpses upon a space not exceeding an acre in area. In this attack nearly every Russian superior officer fell.’ By eleven a.m., after seven hours of fighting, they were forced to withdraw. Muraviev had lost 60 per cent of his infantry force, some 8,000 killed and wounded. Those defending Kars, killed and wounded, numbered 1,500 men. Pursuit of the retreating Russians was impossible, as the remaining horses had died or been killed for food. 29 In spite of the victory, Muraviev continued the siege of Kars, which was eventually starved into submission. Repeated entreaties to Veli Pasha in Erzurum were ignored. Selim Pasha, known to be in Erzurum with a small relief force, failed to march to Kars. On 6 November, when 100 a day, including citizens, were dying of famine, Captain Teesdale approached the Russians with the flag of truce, and two days later, the garrison capitulated; 24,000 prisoners, including 4,000 sick and wounded, surrendered finally on 28 November, 1855. Muraviev is justifiably commended for having treated the captured Kars garrison and its commanders well. The siege and its collapse generated great interest in the public, so much so that the defenders were commemorated in numerous paintings created after their release by the Russians, one of which, entitled General Williams and His Staff Leaving Kars , painted by Barker, is now in the National Army Museum in London. 30 No such honour awaited the Ottoman survivors of Kars. 
 Meanwhile the relief force under Ömer Pasha, numbering some 30,000–35,000 men in the end, was crippled by the time of year, the lack of horses, and Ömer’s confidence in the assistance of local Çerkes and Abaza irregulars. He was not prepared for an attack until the beginning of October 1855, when he moved his forces to the right bank of the Ingur River. In a confrontation with the troops of General Bagration, on 5 November, Colonel Simmons, one of numerous British and other foreign officers with Ömer Pasha, defeated the Russian force. The gallantry of the Turkish soldiers, the steadiness of the rifles, and the bravery of the charge was noted by observers with the troops. 31 Ömer Pasha dallied on the left bank of the Ingur River, however, allowing the Caucasian winter to embrace the endeavour. Neither Russian nor Ottoman commander appears to have been particularly effective as November passed, and ‘the Turkish army was submerged in Mingrelian mud.’ The Russian commander burned all remaining supplies for his troops at Marani, which made an attack on the mired Ottomans impossible. An approach to the relief of Kars and Erzurum never happened; over the winter, the Ottomans regrouped in Redut-Kale, and by February 1856, were transported to Batum. Ömer Pasha was back in Istanbul, as the war drew to a close. Within a year, he was appointed Governor of Baghdad. 32 
 Goldfrank has described the Crimean War as ‘a classic case of diplomacy interrupted by warfare,’ largely because the Vienna Conference continued to offer various solutions to the impasse between the Russians and the allies. Protracted negotiations among the allies, as well as the lack of a definitive victory, prevented all sides from overcoming the inertia. In the end, the Sevastopol humiliation and the Kars victory (and, it must be added, the difficulties in the Baltic provinces, once Sweden joined the alliance, untouched in this narrative) sufficiently convinced the Russians to capitulate. The Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856, left six powers in a position to intervene in Ottoman sovereignty over its Christian subjects. The autonomy of Moldavia and Wallachia was guaranteed under Ottoman suzerainty. The Ottomans did recover control of the mouth of the Danube, the single territory the Russians lost, and the fortress of Kars. The treaty of 1841 on the subject of the Dardanelles was renewed; Russia and the Ottomans agreed separately on the neutralisation of the Black Sea, and the number of vessels allowed by either side was severely restricted. 33 
 Debate about winners and losers continues. Most see the Treaty of Paris as an ongoing territorial rearrangement of central Europe, which would make itself felt next in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–77, and play out even further in the 1877–78 Russo-Ottoman War in Bulgaria. Russian humiliation guaranteed a return to many of the same unsolved problems, but first, the imperial army had to undergo several decades of radical reform. Austria’s belligerent negotiations alienated many of her allies, and we have already observed the problems with the Habsburg military system. Keeping the Crimean War out of the Balkans may have ‘cushioned’ the Austrians, but ‘it also led to their own almost unbearable responsibilities for the Balkan ethnic mess.’ 34 While the France of Napoleon III appears to have been the big winner in the Crimea, the next decade would prove otherwise. The human cost: 450,000 Russians, 80,000–95,000 French, 20,000–25,000 British, 2,000 Piedmontese, and possibly 200,000–400,000 Ottomans, was the greatest loss of life between 1815 and 1914. 35 
 Reform and the Concert of Europe 
 In retrospect, the Crimean War put one more nail in the coffin of the three imperial settings that have been the subject of this study. Undoubtedly, 1848 revolutionary fever, and the presence of two armies on the Danube and the Caucasus, had the effect of stimulating further Ottoman unrest and resistance to reforms. Similarly, while Ottoman success on the Danube, and the return of territory, gave them a respite from warfare, Ottoman indebtedness crippled the war recovery and guaranteed the continued semi-colonialism of external financing. Furthermore, the cost of continued autonomy, however subscribed, was a reiteration of promises to reform. The Treaty of Paris was not signed until the Ottomans decreed their commitment to reform in the Hatt-i Humayun , promulgated on 18 February 1856. It was only then that they were assumed to join the Concert of Europe. 
 Sultan Abdülmecid confirmed the equality of his subjects before the law, irrespective of class or religion. All privileges granted to non-Muslims were to be continued. Non-Muslim communities were to be given the opportunity to reaffirm those privileges. Freedom of religion was proclaimed; freedom of access to government offices and the military was declared; mixed tribunals for Muslim–Christian disputes, codification of penal and commercial laws, and direct taxation instead of tax farming all were reaffirmed in this reiteration of intentions. Over the next few decades, the promises made could not all be kept. In effect, the new document was an absolute guarantee of continued resistance, prompting sustained revolts in Damascus, Armenian and Kurdish borderlands, Bosnia, as well as in Albania. Refugees poured into Ottoman territories, from the Crimea and the Caucasus, most settling in Anatolia in the decade after the Crimean War. In spite of that, Istanbul continued to press for reform, such as provincial reorganisation, regular inspection of municipalities and the countryside, and the sorting out of the rights of the millets . 36 
 The post-Crimean War period is known as the era dominated by the bureaucracy headed by Ali and Fuad Pashas, both originally protégés of Re ş id Pasha, who held the offices of Grand Vizier and Foreign Minister Mustafa for over ten years. Both have left small political testimonies as to their understanding of reform. Fuad wrote ‘that the aim of the Ottoman administration should be the absolute equality and fusion of all races. Separatisms based on religious differences should be stifled. To achieve effective quality it will be necessary to institute a new system of justice, and a new system of public instruction.’ Neither felt that the aims at reform contravened Islamic law. Sultan Abdülaziz (1861–76), whose throne speech confirmed the continuation of reforms, also stressed, as had his predecessor, the primacy of shar‘ia law, as the Ottomans reconstrued themselves as Muslim constitutionalists. 37 Not all politicians signed on wholeheartedly, but the reality of survival pressed them into service. Hence, it is possible to see a commitment in Istanbul to the promised equality, which resulted in giving considerable power to local councils and appointees. Such minor improvements occurred against the increasing clamour and resistance of the Muslim populations, whose economic and cultural prominence in the empire continued to slide. The deterioration of relations between Muslim and non-Muslim communities across the empire evinced itself in major riots in Lebanon, Crete and Bosnia– Herzegovina, but outbreaks occurred in many other parts of the empire, such as among Anatolian Armenians and Kurds in eastern Anatolia, with increasing frequency and ferocity after 1856. 
 A turn to the Prussian – 1869 conscription reforms 
 It seems a good place to draw this narrative to a close, for 1856 represents a turning point for the armies of Europe, as well as for the Ottomans. The model for military reform in the decades after 1860 was Prussia. Apart from the Napoleonic period, viewed as exceptional, European armies remained generally small until the 1860s, when conscription of the population became the standard method of mobilising national armies. From 1866 to 1870, the Prussian army expanded from 300,000 to 1,200,000 men. France aimed at 1,000,000, but stood at 500,000 in 1870. The organisation of these huge numbers was predicated on the Prussian ‘short/active’ and ‘long/reserve’ system. In 1874, of a population of 83,000,000, 496,000 men in peace, and 1,600,000 war-time troops were estimated as available for the Russian military. For Austria, with a population of 36,000,000, it was presumed that 300,000 men in peace and 1,000,000 troops in wartime could be raised. Financial considerations had a large role to play in the actual numbers. In the period between 1874 and 1896, Russian and German expenditures for their armies increased by 79 and 75 per cent respectively. The Russians maintained a large army with difficulty, perhaps 750,000 in 1874 with a further reserve of 250,000. 38 
