 We marched at six in the morning of the 22d, and at noon reached Theah, distant from Catieh about a mile and a half. The route thither was very heavy and irregular, insomuch that to perform a distance of fifteen miles we were under the necessity of making two halts. In the vicinity of our encampment there were several fine date-trees. The wells in general contained good water; but in one of them it was black and offensive, like that which is procured at Harrowgate. The Turks asserted that the French had thrown into it a quantity of gunpowder. 
 On our route great numbers of carcases were scattered. We were met by a messenger from Mahomed Pacha, who transmitted the information that Tineh had been taken possession of by a detachment of Turkish cavalry. In abandoning the above place, the French had left behind two guns, and a quantity of barley, and other stores … a great mortality, supposed to be occasioned by the plague, prevailed among the Turks. It was more probably, however, owing to constant fatigues, and the want of a good nourishing diet. 
 The early part of the morning had been clouded over, which rendered the heat less oppressive; but at ten o’clock, when we were within two hours march of our destination, the heat suddenly became so extremely intense, that, to use a vulgar, but expressive phrase, we were literally broiled by the sun as we trod the scorching sands. The appearance of the desert was here, however, much improved: we met with several plants and flowers on our way, together with a few date-trees; and in approaching Theah, found a greater proportion of green shrubs than we had encountered in any other part of the desert. In several of the hollows there was a sufficient degree of moisture to promote vegetation; and in these spots there is no doubt but that good water might be procured with little trouble. The numbers and varieties of the birds which were flying about them, were a strong evidence of the truth of this observation. 
 It appeared that a village had once stood on the site of our encampment, fragments of red bricks, &c. being scattered over the surface of the sands. In the Arabic language also, Theah implies a village; but we could not discover the vestiges of any buildings. The wells were situated beneath a groupe of fine date-trees. It was the intention of the Vizier to halt at this place for two days, to give time for the artillery and stragglers to come up, as well as to allow some repose to his army, which had had to perform a harassing march of nearly seventy miles, in the space of four days, over what was certainly to be considered as the worst part of the desert … 
 On the 25th we rose at half past two in the morning, and at three o’clock the baggage moved off the ground. We were, however, detained until near eight o’clock by some arrangements it was necessary to make for sending off a party of camels to Tineh; and the interval which elapsed hung very heavily on our hands. At ten o’clock we halted for nearly an hour, and reached our ground of encampment at Bir-denedar at two o’clock, after having performed a march of eighteen miles. There were several date-trees on the spot; and the red bricks which lay scattered on the grounds indicated that it had been formerly covered by dwellings. The water which we found at this place was salt, bitter, and of the worst quality. The weather was extremely hot during our march, which, being over a rough and uneven ground, covered with deep and heavy sands, was performed with infinite fatigue. There was, however, a greater abundance of shrubs than we had met with on our preceding marches. Half an hour after we had quitted our late encampment, we passed over a very rough piece of ground, which, being covered with large quantities of saline matter, appeared to have been a salt work. Several pits in which the salt water had been left to evaporate, had been apparently dug out for that purpose, and still contained a quantity of pure and white salt. Many of the date-trees in the vicinity of Catieh lay on the ground, having been cut down by the French for various purposes on their retreat from Syria. 
 In the course of the day’s march the Vizier sent forward a party of Dehlis to prepare a causeway over a river, which had formerly been provided with a capacious stone bridge. To impede the progress of the Ottoman army, the enemy had thrown down this bridge; but the impediment was soon removed by the Dehlis, who effected their purpose in the course of a few hours. The river had apparently been formed by the Nile in its periodical inundation … 
 We rose at two in the morning of the 26th, and set out at five. After a march of two hours and a half, we met with large pieces of water, which had been in several places formed into lakes and rivulets by the overflowing of the Nile. It was brackish, and far from being of a good quality. In this part of the desert there was a great quantity of green brush-wood. The ground was more level, with a less proportion of sand, and the travelling by no means disagreeable. At eight o’clock we halted for half an hour; and at ten o’clock passed the river over which the causeway had been thrown. At eleven o’clock we reached the ground destined for our encampment at Kantara, and found there plenty of good water, together with shrubs and grasses for the cattle. As an abundance of pigeons and ducks were flying, I took my gun and shot several of the former, which were highly acceptable to our mess, we being reduced to the spare diet of bread, coffee, and a little rice. 
 In consequence of the advices which were received of the capture of Rosetta by the combined British and Turkish forces, the Vizier fired a feu de joye and royal salute. 
 We rose at half past two on the 27th, and at five o’clock were on foot. We halted twice, about an hour each time, during our march, and arrived at Salahieh at noon. The latter part of the route was very sandy and laborious. On our approaching Salahieh the quantity of shrubs gradually diminished, and at length totally disappeared, insomuch that we could not procure sticks for fuel to boil our coffee. The aspect of the country which immediately surrounded us was dreary, consisting entirely of an extensive desert plain, or level; but to the westward and northward of Salahieh lay immense woods of date-trees, which extended for several miles. We were encamped to the south of the sort, at the distance of nearly a mile. 
 On the approach of the Grand Vizier to Salahieh, his Highness halted under a grove of date-trees, to arrange the manner in which he should make his public entry, as well as the form of his encampment. The Turkish army afterwards marched in the following order: – First, a line of cavalry, small parties of horsemen riding up and down in front of the line, and firing while on full speed. Next another line of Arnauts, with the led horses of his Highness, and the priests, or imaums, singing hymns. Next followed Colonel Holloway, Major Hope, &c. the Turkish officers of state in succession, and his Highness the Vizier, with his bands of music, and attendants. And lastly, a body of cavalry, Dehlis, closed the rear. 
 Thus had we surmounted a troublesome, fatiguing, and hazardous march across the desert (a distance of about one hundred and fifty miles from Kahnyounes to Salahieh), but not without the loss of many animals, and several men. The lamentable scenes which occasionally presented themselves were truly distressing to a feeling mind. 