

 Notes 
 1   Fatma Müge Göçek, Rise of Bourgeoisie, Demise of Empire: Ottoman Westernization and Social Change (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); Re ş at Kasaba, ‘A time and a place for the non-state: social change in the Ottoman Empire during the long nineteenth century’, in Joel S. Migdal, Atul Kohli and Vivienne Shuh, eds, State Power and Social Forces: Domination and Transformation in the Third World (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 207–30. 
 2   Roderic H. Davison, Reform in the Ottoman Empire 1856–76 (New York: Gordion Press, 1972), 100–1; James J.; Reid, Crisis of the Ottoman Empire: Prelude to Collapse, 1839–78 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 2000), 303–4. 
 3   Mesut Uyar and A. Kadir Varo ğ lu, ‘In search of modernity and rationality: the case of [the] Turkish Military Academy’, unpublished paper. Glen W. Swanson, ‘War, technology and society in the Ottoman Empire from the reign of Abdülhamid II to 1913: Mahmud Ş evket and the German military mission’, in V.J. Parry and M.E. Yapp (eds), War, Technology and Society in the Middle East (New York, Oxford University Press, 1975), 366–85; C. Max Kortepeter, ‘Ottoman military reform during the late Tanzimat (1885–95): The Prussian General von der Goltz and the Ottoman Army’, in V. Milletleraras ı Türkiye Sosyal ve İ ktisat Tarihi Kongresi, Tebli ğ ler (Ankara: Türk Tarih Kurumu, 1900), 174–86. Debates about educated officers and a general staff resonate with the Russian experience after the Crimean War. See Oleg Airapetov, ‘Miliutin contra Moltke: Russia’s refusal to adopt a Prussian-style General Staff’, in Reforming the Tsar’s Army: Military Innovation in Imperial Russia from Peter the Great to the Revolution , D. Schimmelpenninck van der Oye and Bruce Menning, eds (Cambridge: CUP, 2004), 292–303. 
 4    S. Deringil, The Well-Protected Domains (London: I.B. Tauris, 1998), 171. 
 5   Birgit Schaebler, ‘Civilizing others: global modernity and the local boundaries (French/German, Ottoman and Arab) of savagery’, in Birgit Schaebler and Leif Stenberg, eds, Globalization and the Muslim World: Culture, Religion and Modernity (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 2004), 18; Deringil, Well Protected Domains , chapter 2 ; and Maurus Reinkowski, ‘The state’s security and the subjects’ prosperity: notions of order in Ottoman bureaucratic correspondence (19th century)’, in Hakan T. Karateke and Maurus Reinkowski, eds Legitimising the Order: The Ottoman Rhetoric of State Power (Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2005). 
 6   Ann Pottinger Saab, Origins of the Crimean Alliance (Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia, 1977), 161. 



===== FILE: text/part0023.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Guide to further reading 
 T he following discussion of recent works largely in English should serve as an introduction to the extended time frame and complicated story this book covers. The ‘Works Cited’ bibliography contains the complete list of titles utilised in this study, which is naturally informed by the significant work of our Turkish and European colleagues. 
 On the Ottomans 
 General works on Ottoman history must include Osman’s Dream by Caroline Finkel (London: John Murray, 2005; New York: Basic Books, 2006), the latest version of the Ottoman story. Over 600 pages, the book has both political and aesthetic appeal, as it reaches for a holistic (political, social and material culture) view of the empire. As a general study, it is more accessible than that of Colin Imber, who writes entirely from the Ottoman chronicles ( The Ottoman Empire, 1300–1650: The Structure of Power (Palgrave Macmilllan, 2002), and eschews context and analysis. Suraiya Faroqhi’s The Ottoman Empire and the World Around It (London: I.B. Tauris, 2004), is a select social history of the empire, set in its geographical context, with special emphasis on diplomacy, dynastic life, peasants and trade. 
 Dan Goffman and Donald Quataert have each written a study of the Ottomans for the Cambridge series New Approaches to European History . Goffman’s The Ottoman Empire and Early Modern Europe (2002) places the pre-1700 Ottomans squarely among the monarchs of Europe. Quataert’s The Ottoman Empire 1700–1922 (2nd edn 2005) offers glimpses into late Ottoman social history. On Ottoman perceptions of sovereignty, an especially interesting collection covering the entire span of the empire is that edited by Hakan T. Karateke and Maurus Reinkoski, Legitimizing the Order: The Ottoman Rhetoric of State Power (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2005). On the economy, while numerous studies exist in Turkish, Ş evket Pamuk’s The Monetary History of the Ottoman Empire (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000) supplies us with concrete evidence of what he calls the great debasement of the currency under Mahmud II (1808–39), so central to the explanations for the halting recovery of the military after 1826. 
 One of the major questions still surrounding the Ottomans is why they survived. This has been approached in a number of ways by recent work: Gabriel Piterberg takes up the transformation of the state in the seventeenth century in An Ottoman Tragedy: History and Historiography at Play (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003). He joins Karen Barkey’s Bandits and Bureaucrats: The Ottoman Route to State Centralization (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1994) in the study of political relations of the state and its provincial subjects. Both books help us to imagine the construction of the Ottoman official narrative at the centre, as it was challenged by provincial warlords and rebels in the repeated political crises of the middle period. Ariel Salzmann prefers an economic analysis for the same era, constructing a theory of the decentralisation of power and the privatisation of property through life-lease tax farms ( Tocqueville in the Ottoman Empire: Rival Paths to the Modern State (Boston: E.J. Brill, 2004). Her use of Tocqueville provokes a consideration of the Ottoman ancien régime, thus drawing the Ottomans into the larger circle of pre-modern societies, with the French. Her close study is of the city of Diyarbak ı r in present-day. All these works have been influenced by Rifa‘at ‘Ali Abou El-Haj, Formation of the Modern State: The Ottoman Empire, Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries (2nd edn. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 2005), who has argued for normalising the empire, and studying its social evolution as one would other parts of the world. As this book goes to press, the first volume of a projected four volumes of The Cambridge History of Turkey (vol. 3: The Later Ottoman Empire, 1603–89 ), edited by Suraiya Faroqhi, has been published (Cambridge University Press, 2006), which has a number of articles representing the latest work on the Ottoman middle era. 
 Two histories of Istanbul make a good introduction to the court and dynasty itself: Phillip Mansel, Constantinople: City of the World’s Desire, 1453–1924 (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1995), and John Freely, Istanbul: The Imperial City (New York: Penguin, 1998), which is actually more about the Byzantine than the Ottoman city. Two further studies of the period of Süleyman the Magnificent round out our understanding of the nature of Ottoman legitimacy and power: Metin Kunt and Christine Woodhead, eds, Süleyman the Magnificent and his Age (London: Longman, 1995), and Colin Imber, Ebu’s-su Su “ ud: The Islamic Legal Tradition (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997), a study of the Ş eyhulislam of the sixteenth century. 
 Local provincial and urban history of the transitional period of the empire is one of the most vibrant fields in Ottoman history at the moment. Molly Greene, A Shared World: Christians and Muslims in the Early Modern Mediterranean (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), analyses Crete in the context of Venetian–Ottoman contest in the seventeenth century; Dina Rizk Khoury, State and Provincial Society in the Ottoman Empire: Mosul, 1540–1834 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), examines the give-and-take of centre and periphery in Mosul; Rossitsa Gradeva has just published a collection of her articles on Bulgaria under the Ottomans: Rumeli Under the Ottomans, Fifteenth– Eighteenth Centuries: Institutions and Communities (Istanbul: Isis, 2004). The proceedings of the most recent of the Halcyon Days symposia: ‘Provincial elites in the Ottoman Empire,’ edited by Antonios Anastasopoulos (Rethymno: Institute for Mediterranean Studies, 2005), include a collection of articles on local elites’ exercise of power throughout the empire. Bruce Masters, Christians and Jews in the Ottoman Arab World: The Roots of Sectarianism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), addresses the much-vexed debate over minorities and tolerance, in his work on the Catholic communities of Syria. In that vein, the recent Minorities in the Ottoman Empire , edited by Molly Greene, includes an interesting article on eighteenth-century Zagora Greece, and the emergence of the kocaba ş ı class there (Socrates D. Petmezas, ‘Christian communities in eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Ottoman Greece: their fiscal function,’ 71–126. Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 2005). 
 On the truly vexed question of immigration and population, a new collection of articles on Bosnia includes a remarkable record of an exchange among workshop attendees, in response to a talk by Kemal Karpat (among others): ‘The migration of the Bosnian Muslims to the Ottoman States, 1878–1914: an account based on Turkish sources’, International Journal of Turkish Studies 10 (2004), 121–40. 
 On the Ottoman neighbourhood 
 The core of this book deals with the defence of the northern frontiers of the Ottomans from Belgrad to Kars and the period from 1700 to 1870. For an engaging view of the history of the Black Sea, Charles King’s The Black Sea (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004) is very informative. So too is John Stoye’s Marsigli’s Europe 1680–1730 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1993), which narrates the life and Habsburg service of Luigi Ferdinando Marsigli, one of the first to map large parts of the lower Danubian basin. I do not pretend to cover either the Habsburgs or the Romanovs in any detail in this volume, but do make broad comparisons of their difficulties in raising and modernising large armies from diverse populations. A general introduction to the European context is Jeremy Black’s The Rise of the European Powers 1679–1793 (London: Arnold, 1990). Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–48 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994) continues the story. Equally pertinent is Hamish M. Scott, The Emergence of the Eastern Powers, 1756–75 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), which pinpoints the emergence of Russia (and the Eastern Question) prior to the Ochakov crisis at the end of the century. The standard remains M.S. Anderson’s The Eastern Question 1774–1923: A Study in International Relations (New York: St. Martin’s, 1966), reworked but substantially unchanged by A.L. MacFie (London: Longman, 1996). 
