



===== FILE: text/part0024.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Appendix 
 [Excerpts from Travels in Turkey, Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt by William Whittman, Surgeon with the Anglo-Ottoman forces as they crossed the desert from Gaza to Alexandria in 1801.] 
 O n the 28th, at ten in the morning, the army began its march, the baggage having been sent off at a very early hour. Previously to our quitting the ground, further dispatches were received from Sir Ralph Abercrombie and Admiral Lord Keith, the contents of which the Vizier read and communicated at our first halt. We were then six miles distant from Gaza, and had been obliged to cross a river, formed by the late very abundant falls of rain, the waters of which were so high, and the current so strong and impetuous, that the passage was effected by the army with great difficulty, several of the camels, with the baggage, tents, &c. having had a very narrow escape from destruction. The dispatches contained the glorious news of the success of the British troops in Egypt since their landing, detailing the capture of Aboukir, as well as of the three actions which had terminated so favourably to the British arms, and in which the French had lost four thousand men, comprehending that of three of their generals. On our reaching, at five in the afternoon, our new ground of encampment at Kahnyounes, the Vizier fired a royal salute of twenty-one guns, to celebrate the above events; and in the evening, at sun-set, we heard distinctly a discharge of eleven guns, which appeared also to have been fired as a salute by the advanced troops. 
 Our day’s march had been extremely pleasant; and we now occupied a dry and elevated ground, supplying us with excellent water. Kahnyounes is a small village, situated in a plain on the border of the desert. From the rising ground on which the mission was encamped to the eastward, it exhibited a very pleasing appearance, containing not only a handsome mosque, but a ruinous castle, which added greatly to the picturesque effect. The Turks had taken up their position close to the village, the inhabitants of which are exclusively Arabs. The fine plains through which we had passed this day, on our route thither, afforded excellent pasturage for cattle, and contained a greater proportion of grasses and clover than I had seen in any other part of the country. 
 At day-break of the 29th the signal was made to march; and by eight o’clock the whole of the army was in motion, with the most favourable weather for its progress, and a fine refreshing breeze from the westward, to add to the gaiety which the glad tidings we had received had diffused over every countenance. Immediately on our quitting the village we entered on the desert, in which I observed a shrub, resembling our furze bush, shooting up at intervals from beneath the sand. After a march of about two hours, we reached the boundary which separates Asia from Africa. 
 At this place, and in the vicinity of a well, which promised us a supply of good water, we made a halt, and afterwards rode between two columns of Egyptian granite, erected there, we were told, to mark distinctly the limits which define each of these quarters of the globe. Several portions of the same material lay scattered on the ground, apparently connected in past ages with buildings erected on the spot. 
 Our late march was not so dreary and unpleasant as we had reason to apprehend; but we were told that the desert, in proportion as we should penetrate still further, would assume a more dismal and solitary aspect. At one o’clock we arrived at a place called by the Arabs Zaca, or Sheick Sahwych, distant about sixteen miles from Kahnyounes, where, for the first time, we pitched our tents in a desert. We could not complain of the quality of the water we met with, notwithstanding it was blended with a considerable portion of sand. We saw the holes, which were still open, said to be dug by the French for their corn magazines. The desert exhibited an appearance sufficiently barren; but we contrived to pick up a few shrubs for the purpose of cooking. Barley was still so scarce in the camp, that it sold at two piastres and a half, nearly four shillings English the feed. 
 We left Zaca at seven in the morning of the 30th, in the midst of a thick fog, which was extremely disagreeable, and the more so as our tents and baggage had been sent forward very early, insomuch that we could neither shift ourselves, nor procure any shelter on our halts. Our small party, hitherto unprovided with horses, suffered greatly from the intense heat, as well as from the fatigues necessarily attendant on a march over the heavy sands. The Vizier was not an unconcerned spectator of the sufferings to which the troops were thus exposed, and promised to furnish them, on the subsequent marches, either with horse or camels. After a march of nearly sixteen miles, we arrived at El-Arish at one o’clock. In approaching the encampment before that place, the Grand Vizier was met by Taher Pacha, at the head of a large party of the troops, who had been marched out for that purpose. We pitched our tents on a barren sand, at the distance of about half a mile from the sea-shore, to the north of the fortress. Several vessels were lying at anchor, and their crews employed in landing the cargoes of provisions, barley, &c. At El-Arish the barley was sold at forty paras the measure. The Turkish ships of war, lately arrived from Aboukir, were also lying off the port. 
 The troops encamped at El-Arish were healthy, having had no appearance of plague among them for the last fortnight. Shortly after our arrival, I visited Taher Pacha, with whom I took coffee, and who sent to our camp ready dressed provisions, which were highly acceptable. We were supplied with excellent water, furnished by the late heavy rains which had fallen on the mountains. The prospect of the country around us, the surface of which was almost entirely sand, with here and there a few small shrubs growing in tufts, was wretched and dreary. The village of El-Arish, near to the ruins of which of fort was still standing, had been destroyed by the French, who had, when they captured the place, cut down nearly the whole of the date-trees by which it was ornamented. It was situated at the distance of two miles and a half from the sea. Our camp was supplied with oranges, lemons, raisins, dried figs, and other fruits, brought by the merchant-vessels from Cyprus, and the price of which was extravagantly high. With the exception of onions, no vegetables were to be obtained. 
 The Vizier took measures, on the 31st, for the speedy departure of the army from the ground it then occupied. According to the arrangements which had been made at Gaza the troops were in future to march in three divisions. 
 In consequence of demands recently made by the Arnauts, who had had a meeting to debate on their grievances, respecting the future supply to be made to them of water, biscuit, and barley, the Grand Vizier adopted the following regulations for the troops: In the first place, that no other tents or baggage, except such as should be found indispensably necessary, should be carried on the march. Secondly, that all such tents and baggage as should be useless at the moment, should follow the army. And, lastly, that the camels should be employed for the express purpose of carrying the water, barley, and biscuit, together with such tents, and such a proportion of baggage as might be allowed to accompany the army. – I dreaded, I must confess, the consequences of these regulations to our people, who would thus be left without tents to shelter them from the effects of a hot and parching sun, and who were not, like the Turkish troops, inured to the climate, and accustomed to the privations to which the latter had been habituated from an early age. Under these circumstance, which gave rise to bitter and distressing reflections, I lamented the nature of the service in which they were engaged, and the melancholy situation in which I saw them plunged. 
 Two thousand five hundred troops arrived in camp on the evening of the above day. They consisted principally of the Arabs, Avarees, who inhabit the eastern desert, the western parts of which are occupied by the Mograbians. 
 It was finally settled on the 1st of April, that a certain portion of the baggage and tents should be carried with the army; and that the remainder should be left in the charge of a trusty and responsible person, to follow its movements with all convenient dispatch. 
 Taher Pacha, accompanied by Captain Leake, marched on the 2d towards Salahieh, with three thousand men, and three pieces of artillery. Summons to the garrisons of Tineh and Salahieh were delivered to Captain Leake by Colonel Holloway, under the authority of the Grand Vizier. Mahomed Pacha arrived in the encampment from Gaza, with three thousand men, and four pieces of artillery. 
 Much firing among the Turkish troops was heard in the camp on the 3d. It was occasioned by a violent dispute between two companies of Janissaries, the 37th and 65th, who, in the division of a quantity of barley which they had found and appropriated to themselves, had come to hostilities. In this conflict several of them were killed, and many others wounded. It happened that an Arnaut, who was passing by during the affray, received a slight wound. This man made an immediate representation to his corps, that it was the intention of the Janissaries to fall on and butcher the Arnauts without distinction. The effect of this mis-statement was, that the latter had recourse to their arms, and were proceeding to the most alarming measures, which were, however, fortunately prevented by the strenuous interference of the principal Turkish officers in the camp. 
 During the whole of the morning it blew a violent gale, which raised in the air tremendous clouds of sand, extremely harassing to the eyes. At one o’clock there was a hail storm, accompanied by thunder and lightning. In the afternoon the violence of the wind was not abated; but it was attended by heavy showers, which impeded the elevation of the sands: the impulsion they received was, however, so great, that large hillocks were suddenly formed in different parts. The vessels were driven by the gale from El-Arish, so as to subject us to much eventual distress. 
 In the evening I rode to the fort, a square building provided with four towers, one at each of the angles. The French had begun two bastions, which they had not time to finish; and to these Major Fletcher, of the royal engineers, made some additions. Originally, the fort stood in the centre of the village, which was now a heap of ruins. 
 The high winds, and the drifting of the sands, continued to annoy us greatly on the 4th. On the following day there was not merely a scarcity, but an absolute want, of barley in the camp, insomuch that the horses and other animals, deprived of pasturage since our arrival at El-Arish, were left without food. As the blowing weather rendered the return of the vessels driven out to sea impracticable, the Grand Vizier sent to Gaza, about fifty miles distant, for a small supply of barley. 
 Mahomed Pacha, with eight thousand men, and five pieces of artillery, marched on the same day. He was accompanied by Captain Lacey, of the royal engineers, who was invested, previously to his departure, with a pelice. 
 It was officially announced by the Reis Effendi, in the evening, that the Vizier would march forward on the 9th. His Excellency sent twelve horses for the dismounted men belonging to the mission. I was sorry to learn from him that four cases of plague had occurred on the preceding day in the camp. 
