 An individual died of plague on the 6th, within fifty yards of our tents. The indifference of the Turks to this disease was truly surprising. Ibrahim Bey was positively encamped on the burial ground of El-Arish, where the bodies of several thousands of persons, who had fallen victims to that disease during the course of the last six weeks, were interred. His own tent covered a part of the graves! 
 This being the fourth day our unfortunate horses had passed without food, we made strong representation in their behalf, in consequence of which a small proportion of damaged biscuit-dust and decayed rice was issued to them. To such an extremity had these animals been reduced by hunger, that they had eaten their halters, together with the dung, and whatever lay within their reach. Several of them, as well as many of the camels, had perished. Our own situation, reduced as we were to bad biscuit and water, was almost as deplorable. 
 Riley, the person who had been sent with dispatches, returned on the morning of the 7th. He had exchanged his dispatches with an English officer commanding a schooner; but the vessel on board which he had embarked on his return, having been shipwrecked, those he was entrusted to bring back were unfortunately lost. He reported, that the Capitan Pacha had reached Aboukir with ten thousand men; but that Damietta was still in the possession of the French. 
 We were exposed on the 9th to a true kampsin. The heat and closeness of the air were so extremely oppressive, as to induce an extraordinary languor and faintness. The atmosphere was hazy throughout; and the wind blew on the body as if it had passed through the medium of a heated oven. During the continuance of this morbid state of the weather, it was from the south-east, south, and south-west. 
 In the evening several vessels appeared off the coast, but they could not come to anchor, on account of a smart and unfavourable breeze from the south-west. In the mean time the Vizier received a small supply of barley from Gaza. The party by which it was escorted, had, on its return, been attacked by a band of Bedouin Arabs, who had taken several of the mules, and killed one of the people. 
 Five of the above vessels anchored on the 10th, and landed eight hundred Arnauts from Constantinople, together with a supply of corn, which was highly acceptable. 
 Intelligence reached us on the 12th, that Salahiech had been taken possession of by Taher Pacha, and by the troops who had quitted the encampment a few days before. It appeared that on the approach of the Turkish forces, the French, about five hundred strong, had made a precipitate retreat towards Cairo. Previously to their departure, they had destroyed the works in the interior of the place, and set fire to the buildings. 
 A French deserter, who came into camp, and surrendered himself to the Vizier, reported, that he had left Damietta four days before, having travelled alone, and on foot, from Tineh, and remained during three days without water. He represented the French at Damietta as being in such critical circumstances, that they would rejoice at the approach of the Turkish army, to furnish them with a pretext for relinquishing the place. 
 A salute was fired in the camp on the occasion of the capture of Salahieh, an account of which was transmitted over land to the commander in chief of the British forces. 
 During the night we lost the greater part of the camels, together with their drivers, who had fled to the mountains. This unfortunate event was likely to subject the army to great risks, and very serious difficulties, since our speedy departure from El-Arish was thus rendered impracticable. Detachments of cavalry were on the 13th, sent off in their pursuit. Thus, with the above loss, the occasional deprivation of provisions, the plague, and the frequent intestine quarrels among the Turkish soldiery, we were surrounded, in our forlorn situation in the desert, by a train of threatening evils, among which may be enumerated, pestilence, and famine, and battle, and murder, and sudden death. 
 Several vessels anchored in the road. It was reported that a part of those which had been driven off by the late gales, had been wrecked on the adjacent coast. 
 A considerable number of vessels laden with corn came to anchor on the 14th. To enable us to pass the desert with greater ease, it was determined to send the spare tents and heavy baggage by water to Tineh. For this purpose eleven tents, and such of the baggage as was not indispensably necessary to the mission, were embarked on board a Turkish vessel bound to that place, together with gunner Foster, and the whole of the civil artificers, whose services would not be necessary in the interim. Five tents only were retained for the party. The Vizier and principal Turkish officers attended on the beach, to superintend the embarkation of the artillery and stores destined for Tineh, as well as to prevent any confusion which might result from the landing of the barley. After such an interval of distress as had been experienced in the camp, it was natural to presume that the troops would manifest great impatience on the landing of the supplies. 
 The camels which had been carried off by their drivers were still missing. Two hundred, however, of these animals were brought in on the 15th by a sheick, who, after having received a handsome present, set off with his camels and people in the night … 
 An English schooner, commanded by Lieutenant Milne, arrived on the 17th, having on board Major Missett, with dispatches. We learned through this channel that Major McKerras, of the engineers, had been killed, and Major Fletcher made prisoner, in a reconnoitring party on the water, previously to the landing of the British army. A French fleet with seven thousand troops was expected at Alexandria from Toulon. L’Africaine, one of the frigates belonging to this fleet, had been captured by the English frigate the Ph œ be, Captain Barlow. The English, under the command of Colonel Spencer, and the Turks, with the Capitan Pacha, were before Rosetta, which was expected to fall very speedily. 
 An overland dispatch to the two British commanders in chief was sent off by an Arab; and an order transmitted by the Vizier to Mahomed Pacha, to send a body of Turkish cavalry to act with the British army. 
 At six in the morning of the 19th the trumpet was sounded to prepare for the march. In consequence of the scarcity of camels, the Vizier was to move forward with a part only of the Turkish army. For the same reason the party belonging to the mission to march with the Vizier’s detachment, was confined to Colonel Holloway, Major Hope, Mr. Whiteman, secretary, Mr. Pink, draughtsman, myself, a serjeant, and five men. The others were to follow with the remainder of the Turkish army, as soon as beasts of burden could be procured. Strict orders were given to keep a watchful eye over the camel-drivers, in crossing the desert, as there was a possibility of their deserting with their camels – a disaster which would expose the whole of the army to the risk of perishing on its passage … 
 The Vizier quitted the ground of encampment at noon; and at three in the afternoon we followed. Prior to our departure, Major Missett embarked for Aboukir, with answers from the Vizier and Colonel Holloway to the dispatches with which he was charged. 
 After a very agreeable march of two hours along the sea-shore, we arrived at the wells of Messoudieh, the place where the traveller takes his supply of water, before he proceeds to cross the remaining part of the desert. Neither habitation nor inhabitant was to be seen; nor was there so much as the appearance of brush-wood to diversify the surface of the arid sands. It was with difficulty that a few dried vegetables could be raked together to heat a little coffee. By digging wells in the sands to the depth of two or three feet, water was, however, readily procured: and notwithstanding we were so near to the sea-shore, it was good and sweet. As the route from this station to Catieh occupies three days, in the course of which no drinkable water can be procured, it was necessary to make an appropriate provision of this necessary article; and for this purpose we were furnished with the skins of goats properly prepared. The camels and other animals were laden with biscuit, barley, and water, the three essentials for the crossing of the desert. 
 The Reis Effendi, who came up after us with the remainder of the Turkish army, informed us that when the troops commanded by Taher Pacha arrived at Salahieh, they pursued the enemy, several of whom they killed in their slight. Among the pursuers, there were several Moors, who were well mounted, and very expert in the use of their fire-arms, which they discharge with great effect when on full speed. Their chief was unfortunately killed in the attack. 
 At midnight our baggage was sent off under an escort; and at six in the morning of the 20th, we proceeded on our route. At the expiration of two hours and a half we halted for three quarters of an hour; and at half past one reached our new ground of encampment, Barrahcat, where we immediately pitched our tents. This spot had been evidently the bed of a salt lake in past ages, large quantities of marine shells lying scattered on its surface, together with much saline matter. We took the precaution to dig wells; but the water was so salt and brackish as to be unfit for the cattle. On subjecting it to an analysis, I found it to contain a large proportion of common salt. The progress we had made on this day’s march was about fifteen miles; and in pursuing our route we were gratified by the view of the surprising visual deception, which the French term mirage , and which has been described with great ingenuity by Monge, of the French National Institute. It is peculiar to the desert, and presents the distant appearance of water with such an air of truth and reality, that the shadows of the camels who were in advance, seemed to be reflected on the apparent watery surface. To give a more extraordinary effect to the illusion, the bodies of these animals appeared to be narrowed and elongated upwards, so as to give them the appearance of trunks of trees, the branches of which had been lopped off. The most elevated of the distant sand hills represented light clouds; while the smaller ones appeared like ships under a press of sail in the midst of beautiful lakes. This phenomenon was more particularly apparent on the levels, which were in some parts covered with a saline substance, finely crystallized, and very shining and brilliant. A portion of this saline matter I collected for future experiments. 
 We left our ground on the 21st, at between three and four in the morning; and, as it was not yet day-light, were preceded by guides carrying torches. We lost our way, notwithstanding, and were detained for nearly two hours. During this day’s march we made two halts; and at length, at half past four in the afternoon, reached our ground of encampment at Birel-habt, after a very laborious and fatiguing march of thirty miles. Great numbers of skeletons of camels, horses, and other animals were scattered on the route. The earlier part of our march was tolerably agreeable, with the exception of our having lost our way; but during the last nine miles we had to pass over very heavy sands, and an uneven ground. The heat of the weather was at the same time very oppressive … 
