




ating dressing down by royal bureaucrats.3 The central adminis¬
tration moved with equal firmness against one of the most prom¬
inent clerical reformers of the late eighteenth century, Jose Climent,
the bishop of Barcelona. Climent’s impressive pastoral record at
the head of his diocese could not save him from Madrid’s anger
when he fell under suspicion—quite unjustified—of supporting
separatist aspirations in Catalonia. Determined to remove Climent
from Barcelona and also to avoid public scandal, the royal admin¬
istration offered him promotion to a non-Catalan diocese, but the
prelate, true to his principles, refused and resigned his post.4 In
general, however, the Church through its bishops accepted the
increasing use of the ecclesiastical establishment as a royal instru¬
ment. From 1750 on clerics outdid one another in their exaltation
of the Bourbon monarchy, which they compared in Old Testa¬
ment language to the kingship of David and Solomon; in their
view it possessed nearly divine attributes. Francisco Bocanegra,
archbishop of Santiago, was even moved to make the distinctly
untheological statement, “if we imitate our King, we all shall be
perfect.”5
   Enlightened absolutism as it developed after 1750 suffered from
internal contradictions. Absolute monarchy pressed forward to
centralize power, eliminate the archaic, and devise policies capable
of transforming the administration of the State and the economy;
but it would not, indeed could not, tamper with a traditional social
structure dominated by aristocratic and corporate privilege. In
the end, the reforming initiatives of the Bourbons resulted in only
a superficial resolution of national problems, but the utilitarian
spirit with which the Crown and its bureaucracy approached re¬
form influenced the State’s ecclesiastical policies.
   Kings and ministers frequently testified to their Catholicism.
Charles III, the most persistent royal patron of change during
the century, led a personal life of piety. The monarch participated
in the activities of pious associations, such as the Franciscan Third
Order, and alighted from his carriage and knelt on the ground
as willingly as any commoner whenever a priest passed carrying
the Eucharist to the dying. The personal Catholicism of the king
and his ministers was not, however, the religion of elaborate cer¬
emonial and “superstitious” practice so widespread in eighteenth-
century Spain. The public self-flagellation of penitents, the mu-
     The Organization of the Church                                5




sical bands and papier-mache giants dancing about the processions
celebrating liturgical feasts, the indecent Christmas carols sung by
the gypsies of Seville on Christmas Eve before the archbishop—
all were foreign to the more austere Catholicism that the king and
his ministers observed and wished to see spread throughout the
Church.
   The State profited from its control over clerical personnel and
wealth, but it hoped to reform abuses within the Church by elim¬
inating what it saw as superstition, establishing a more rational
ecclesiastical administration, and improving the quality of semi¬
naries—in short, creating a Church more attentive to pastoral
responsibilities. In October 1767 the Council of Castile, the insti¬
tution responsible for internal government of the kingdom, dis¬
patched a circular to the bishops ordering them to curb abuses
and superstition in their dioceses. After 1766 the government of
Charles III encouraged the creation of diocesan seminaries to
improve the lamentable education of the parish clergy, and it
curbed devotional excesses, such as flagellation in penitential
processions. The State intervened directly in ecclesiastical disci¬
pline and religious practice to realize its ideal of a pastoral Church.
   The reforming ministers of Charles III did not intend to con¬
fine the Church to the purely spiritual. Royal bureaucrats pro¬
posed to employ it in the modernization of the kingdom. They
expected the clergy, from bishops to parish priests, to cooperate
with the reforming impulse coming from the Crown. “Public util¬
ity,” declared one of the most enthusiastic clerical advocates of a
civic-minded Church, “is one of the objects of our religion, its
maxims lead to the good of souls and to the happiness and tran¬
quillity of peoples.”6 The clergy were seen as agents of the State
promoting economic development, improving education, building
public works, and, in general, advancing the utilitarian policies
formulated in Madrid. They were to be “the philosopher’s stone
which will enrich towns and villages and make them happy.”7 This
modernizing role for the Church reflected the increasingly secular
emphasis of the Bourbon monarchy, but at the same time it rein¬
forced the ties between Throne and Altar by blurring still further
the already hazy line dividing Church from State. The clergy were
to become a kind of religious civil service closely identified with
the task of national improvement.
  6                               The Organization of the Church