




depending on the size and wealth of individual dioceses. The
Oviedo chapter had thirty-six members, but the wealthy chapter
of Seville numbered over sixty. Canons in richer dioceses enjoyed
handsome revenues that sometimes exceeded those of bishops of
poor sees. Eleven canons of Seville received over 60,000 reales a
year, approximately the salary of a government minister; another
forty received a comfortable 40,000 reales a year. Elaborate styles
of ecclesiastical dress distinguished the canons of one chapter from
those of another. The canons of Zaragoza wore a black cassock
covered by a mantle of violet silk; the canons of Barcelona, a scarlet
cassock covered by a surplice trimmed in ermine. Members of the
chapters fulfilled a variety of responsibilities, which included
chanting the divine office daily in the cathedral and supervising
the elaborate ceremonies of the liturgical year. They also spent
much of their time maintaining the extensive properties and en¬
dowments that belonged to the cathedrals. Possessing an exag¬
gerated sense of their corporate dignity and enjoying revenues of
their own, chapters often jousted with their bishops and the civil
authorities over rights of precedence and the extent of episcopal
control over their affairs.
   The life of eighteenth-century canons left ample time for study
and reflection, although most chose to languish comfortably and
simply perform their modest duties. But from the ranks of canons
came bishops of superior quality. Canons also took an active part
in the reforming efforts of Charles III. Antonio de Paramo, a
canon of the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, traveled widely
abroad, built a fine library and numismatic collection, and studied
natural history. He formed the most admired “cabinet” on that
subject in Santiago, a collection that he donated to the royal eco¬
nomic society of the town. Jeronimo de Roo, dean of the chapter
in Las Palmas during the 1770’s and 1780’s, founded a school of
design, promoted the foundation of an academy of architecture,
and became an active member of the royal economic society, which
had been founded in 1777 with the encouragement of the Crown
to stimulate the economic development of the Canaries.28
   As did the bishops above them, however, canons formed a priv¬
ileged minority within the Church. Although they led lives free
from scandal, and many were men of cultural refinement, they
were even further removed than the bishops from the difficult
     The Organization of the Church                              15




 pastoral work of city and country parishes. The endowments en¬
joyed by many chapters were often held at the expense of the
 parochial clergy. In Cordoba, for example, the cathedral chapter
 had the right to collect and retain the tithes originally destined to
 support the parochial clergy. Toward the end of the century in
 the diocese of Segovia, parish priests received only 28 percent of
 the tithes, even though they formed the most numerous group
 in the clergy. The small body of cathedral canons took about 16
 percent for its share, and the local bishop received 14 percent.29
 Everywhere chapters and diocesan administrations drained re¬
 sources away from the lower clergy.
    The kingdom’s nearly 19,000 parishes formed the strongest as
 well as the weakest link in the Church’s organization. The parishes
 and their priests touched the lives of the population more closely
 than the local bishop, who might make a pastoral visit once a
 decade, or the diocesan canons, who rarely left their cathedral
 towns. In isolated country villages the parish was the center of all
 social life, and the cura presided over the ceremonial recording
 of the basic stages of human existence. To the parish clergy fell
 the awesome task of teaching the elementary truths of religion to
 an illiterate rural population who had little or no contact with the
 educated clerical elite of the cities. In an agrarian society few
 groups in the Church should have been more carefully trained
 and generously treated. In fact, the 22,000 priests with cure of
 souls faced their task with often inadequate pastoral training and
 financial circumstances distinctly inferior to those of bishops and
 canons.
    Eighteenth-century clerics believed that the quality of the clergy
 was one of the gravest problems facing the Church. An examiner
 of candidates for parish appointments in the diocese of Mondo-
 nedo complained of priests who, having been taught to read and
 speak Latin “like parrots,” said Mass “without understanding what
 they were saying.”30 Complaints of priests saying Mass hastily and
 “with little reverence” were common.31 The Jesuit Pedro de Cal-
 atayud, who traveled indefatigably on preaching campaigns through
 the rural villages of central and northern Spain at midcentury,
 has left a devastating indictment of the parish clergy with whom
 he came in contact. He found some who never taught Christian
 doctrine from their pulpits and whose parishes included adoles-
  16                               The Organization of the Church