




kingdom’s 15,000 benefice holders, a group, perhaps, of 5,000.
    Advancement rested on education—more precisely on training
in the theological, philosophical, and law faculties of the univer¬
sities. The clerical elite formed a highly educated group within
Spanish society. Bishops and canons frequently held doctorates
in theology, philosophy, canon law, and even civil law. Progress
through the ranks of the secular clergy depended in part on aca¬
demic accomplishment, for it was critical for the ecclesiastical
careerist to gain admission either to a university faculty or to a
cathedral chapter. Through the Spanish academic procedure known
as oposiciones, candidates for canonries had to pass examinations
in ethics, theology, and canon law.23 Because membership in a
chapter gave access to the most important episcopal recruiting
ground, only candidates with the requisite academic credentials
could hope to win the coveted prize. Priests educated in semi¬
naries, where the quality of education was inferior to that of the
universities, rarely bothered to apply for vacancies. Many secular
clerics received an even more rudimentary education, which ex¬
cluded them completely from any prospect of advancement. The
division of the secular clergy through academic streaming was
complicated by the nobility’s dominance in the kingdom’s clerical
elite. Commoners could become bishops, but the hierarchy was
the preserve of the numerous lesser nobility, who had respectable
but economically modest backgrounds. Bishops and cathedral can¬
ons often came from noble families, which traditionally had sent
their sons into the service of the State and the Church. For cen¬
turies these hidalgo families sought higher education for their
sons to provide them with the academic qualifications for suc¬
cessful ecclesiastical careers.
    The bishops of the eighteenth-century Church did more or less
what was expected of them. They carried out pastoral visits to the
parishes of their dioceses with remarkable diligence in an age
when poor communications and transport made this a burden¬
some task. Bishop Amador Merino Malaguilla of Badajoz visited
all the towns of his diocese at least five times during his tenure
of office.24 Bishops promoted the founding of seminaries and
ecclesiastical conferences to improve the education of the rural
clergy. Many distributed charity to the poor with a largess that
evoked the disapproving wonder of foreign visitors such as Town-
    The Organization of the Church                            13




send, who complained of the bishop of Cordoba, who had given
alms to 7,000 people. This example was not unusual. Bishops
established charity schools to educate the poor, and, following the
directives of the State, they participated actively in the work of
social and economic improvement. Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo
tried to revive the decaying silk industry of his diocesan seat and
established a charity hospice for the poor. Felipe Bertran of Sal¬
amanca created a vocational school to train goldsmiths; the arch¬
bishop of Tarragona, Santiyan y Valdivielso, restored the city’s
ancient Roman aqueduct. Other prelates built bridges and town
gates, planted trees, and in general contributed to the physical
improvement of their diocesan seats.25
   In spite of the personal piety and responsibility of the vast
majority of prelates, there was a fundamental contradiction in the
position of the eighteenth-century bishop. The bishops formed a
privileged minority within the Church and were part of a privi¬
leged social elite in the broader society. Whether personally noble
or not, the eighteenth-century bishop possessed the education,
wealth, and culture that set him apart from the poorer and less
educated clergy of the countryside. Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo
donated generously to charity but also spent lavishly to acquire a
library of rare books. An archbishop of Granada distributed alms
daily to thousands of poor gathered outside his palace gates and
provided wet nurses for 400 children. According to Townsend,
“his bounty to the poor is such, that we can scarcely conceive his
income to equal his expenditure.” Yet the good archbishop also
lived “in some degree of splendor,” with his meals prepared ac¬
cording to the rules of “French cookery” and served on silver
plate.26 The bishops of the eighteenth century did not on the whole
spend wantonly, but they lived comfortably when many of their
clergy did not. The eighteenth-century episcopacy existing within
the traditional social structure of the Old Regime established a
kind of equilibrium between the bishop as pastor and the bishop
as a noble seigneur. But the vast social and cultural differences
between bishops and priests remained a serious weakness in the
eighteenth-century Church.
   Below the bishops stood 2,300 canons in cathedral and colle¬
giate chapters.27 The canons lived in a world as diverse and col¬
orful as any within the Church. Chapters were large or small
            I'-
  14                               The Organization of the Church