




correctly referred not to the Spanish Church but to the Spanish
“churches.” Bishops, for example, rarely came in personal contact
with one another, a circumstance noted by the English traveler
Joseph Townsend in the 1780’s: “the meeting of two prelates is
a phenomenon in Spain, because the moment a minister of the
altar accepts a mitre, he devotes his life wholly to the duties of
his office and confines himself altogether to his diocese.”10 The
“churches” lacked an institutional means of developing an inde¬
pendent stance against either king or pope. The ancient Congre¬
gation of the Churches of Castile and Leon, founded in the reign
of Ferdinand and Isabella, had once represented the financial
interests of the Church in negotiations with the Crown and Rome.
But by the end of the seventeenth century, the institution was no
longer important. Without a collective means of expression and
with an incoherent internal structure, the Church accepted the
direction marked for it by the Bourbon monarchy.
   To foreigners visiting Spain for the first time, the number of
priests, monks, friars, and nuns appeared “prodigious.”11 A mas¬
sive clerical presence was obvious in the major towns. Barcelona
alone had a cathedral, eighty-two churches and chapels, twenty-
six religious houses of men, eighteen of women, two oratories, a
seminary, a tribunal of the Inquisition, and several smaller foun¬
dations. In Valencia 2,610 priests and religious lived in a popu¬
lation of approximately 80,000; in Seville the religious orders were
so numerous that they could marshal 1,600 members to participate
in the processions of Holy Week and Corpus Christi. But the
impression of a nation overrun by priests, friars, and nuns is
misleading. The census of 1797 showed an ecclesiastical popula¬
tion of 182,778 in a total population of 10.5 million. But recent
studies of ecclesiastical demography have noted that this figure
includes a certain number of lay employees of the Church, such
as sacristans and administrators. An adjusted total of 148,409, or
approximately 1.5 percent of the general population, was not
excessive; in some Catholic countries the proportion was higher.12
Although there is little reliable evidence for estimating the size of
the clerical population early in the century, it appears to have
remained stable between 1700 and 1800, with perhaps a slight
decline at the century’s close.
   Within the ecclesiastical establishment the secular clergy num-
     The Organization of the Church                                9




bered 70,840; male religious, 53,098; and nuns, 24,471. But these
figures also must be adjusted. The secular clergy included over
10,000 clerics who had received only minor orders. Many had
entered the Church not to seek ordination but to qualify for ben¬
efices left by pious benefactors. The tendency of both the regular
and secular clergy to concentrate in towns and cities also magnified
the clerical presence, for in a rural and agrarian society the Church
was urban. The secular clergy flocked to the towns, where the
religious orders also preferred to establish their houses; at the
same time country parishes, especially in poor districts, often lacked
priests. The 1797 census reveals that nearly 3,000 parishes lacked
incumbents; the highest vacancy rates were in the impoverished
regions of Galicia, Extremadura, and Soria.13
   Functional and geographic imbalances in the distribution of
clergy further hindered the Church in its pastoral mission. Only
a minority of the secular clergy, approximately 22,000 of a total
of 60,000 ordained priests, were active in parish work as either
rectors or assistants.14 The majority of the secular clergy survived
on benefices, the endowments established by pious benefactors;
chaplaincies in noble households, cathedrals, and hospitals; and
the stipends received for conducting religious services. Many ben¬
efice holders performed liturgical duties and thereby contrib¬
uted to the pastoral life of the Church, but because they, too,
preferred the cities to the countryside, they did little to alleviate
the lack of clergy in rural districts. Benefices attracted priests into
an unseemly careerism that often conflicted with their sacerdotal
character and gave rise to criticism by secular and ecclesiastical
writers. There was no shortage of secular clergy in eighteenth-
century Spain, but their distribution also favored the cities and
often left poor country parishes without priests. The Council of
Castile frequently received desperate requests from rural villages
without clergy. In 1800, for example, three small towns—Cubillos,
Posadina, and Cubillinos—told the council that for twenty years
they had lacked “spiritual nourishment. . . because there was no
income to support a priest in the sacred ministry.”15
   The geographic distribution of the secular clergy with cure of
souls was uneven and already reflected the classic north-south
division between areas where religious practice was more deeply
rooted and those where it was not. On a national scale, there was
  10                                 The Organization of the Church