




one priest with cure of souls for every 497 parishioners. The
regions well staffed with clergy were concentrated in the north
and northeast: Alava, 1:153; Leon, 1:170; Toro, 1:268; Valladolid,
1:345; Aragon, 1:441; and Catalonia, 1:403. Butin the south, the
center of dechristianized Spain in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, the ratio of priests to parishioners was significantly higher:
Cordoba, 1:1,115; Murcia, 1:1,721; and Seville, 1:1,332. The dis¬
parity between southern and northern dioceses arose in part from
the historic development of parochial organizations. Parishes in
the south were extremely large compared with those in the north.
In the administrative region called the kingdom of Seville, 303
parishes served a population of over 750,000. But in Catalonia,
with more than 800,000 inhabitants, there were 2,738 parishes.16
In some southern dioceses parishes could reach gigantic size; in
Cadiz a single parish located in the cathedral served a population
of 57,000, although chapels in monasteries and convents in the
city also provided services.17
   Day-to-day government of the Spanish “churches” rested with
eight archbishops—at Toledo, Seville, Santiago de Compostela,
Granada, Burgos, Tarragona, Zaragoza, and Valencia—and fifty-
two bishops. The bishops were aptly described by Cardinal Lo-
renzana of Toledo as “prelates placed upon a high lookout point”
who combined the duties of “shepherd, citizen, good vassal of the
King and good neighbor.”18 Bishops held responsibility for im¬
plementing in their dioceses directives emanating from the Crown
and, to a lesser extent, those from the papal nuncio in Madrid.
They formed a clerical elite necessary for the orderly functioning
of the Church. The State, recognizing the importance of the bish¬
op’s role, developed elaborate procedures through a chamber of
the Council of Castile to ensure the selection of “men of honor
and reputation” for episcopal office.19
   Eighteenth-century observers and later historians agree that the
quality of the hierarchy, especially during the second half of the
century, was high. Townsend said of the Spanish bishops: “these
venerable men, from all that I could hear and from what I saw
in the near approach to which they graciously admitted me, for
piety, and for zeal, can never be sufficiently admired.”20 The praise
of this perceptive Protestant cleric was echoed later by the French¬
man Alexandre Laborde: “the superior orders of the Spanish
     The Organization of the Church                                11




clergy . . . are, for the most part, exempt from the irregularities
which are charged (not altogether without reason) on the clergy
of other countries.”21 To be sure, there were occasional abuses,
concentrated largely in the first half of the century. The eight-
year-old son of Philip V, Luis de Borbon, received the temporal
administration of the rich archdioceses of Seville and Toledo.
Already a cardinal at fifteen, though unordained, the young prel¬
ate was installed as archbishop of Seville in 1742 with extravagant
ceremony. But such abuses were rare during the reign of Charles
III, when the Camara of Castile suggested to the Crown prelates
of known ability and probity. The most able prelates of Charles’s
reign, Cardinal Francisco Lorenzana of Toledo, Archbishop Fran¬
cisco Fabian y Fuero of Valencia, and Bishop Felipe Bertran of
Salamanca, were perfect examples of what the absolutist State
expected of its bishops.22 Men of culture and education, assiduous
in the fulfillment of their pastoral duties, they were at the same
time prelates who cooperated actively with the Crown’s reforming
policies by establishing schools, seminaries, and even manufac¬
tures.
    The Spanish episcopacy of the eighteenth century, unlike its
counterpart in France, was not an aristocratic preserve. Some
bishops were drawn from wealthy and distinguished noble fam¬
ilies, such as Francisco de Solis Folch Cardona, the son of a gran¬
dee of Spain and a baron in his own right who served as archbishop
of Seville from 1755 to 1775. But the number of prelates from
the great nobility was modest. Episcopal recruitment, however,
was neither democratic nor based on merit and service. For all
practical purposes the kingdom’s 22,000 priests with cure of souls
had little hope of becoming bishops. Whatever the quality of the
episcopacy, the system of recruitment reflected the inequalities of
a social structure in which access to high office, whether in the
State or the Church, belonged to a privileged minority. The sec¬
ular clergy, from whose ranks the vast majority of the bishops
came, was divided into two unequal groups, a small elite who
possessed the most lucrative benefices, and the great mass of clergy,
parish priests, curates, and a large number of clerics without any
living at all. The size of the ecclesiastical establishment is difficult
to establish, but it included the bishops; 2,300 canons in cathedral
and the closely related collegiate chapters; and a minority of the
  12                             The Organization of the Church