)




        Q_ /SC

    *   5^
        15% s
         .c'i'V
         ii*1/
         c . 3-
HARVARD HISTORICAL MONOGRAPHS

Published under the direction
of the Department of History
from the income of the
Robert Louis Stroock Fund

Volume LXXIII
“Begging Friars, Granada,” from John F. Lewis, Sketches of Spain and Spanish
Character made during his tour in that country in the years 1833-1834 (London, n.d.)
--




Church, Politics,
  and Society
   in Spain,
  1750-1874

--




William J. Callahan




  Harvard University Press
  Cambridge, Massachusetts
   and London, England
           1984




        AVE MARIA
Copyright © 1984 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
10 987654321

This book is printed on acid-free paper, and its binding materials have
been chosen for strength and durability.



Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Callahan, William James, 1937-

  Church, politics, and society in Spain, 1750—1874.
  (Harvard historical monographs ; v. 73)
  Includes index.
   1. Catholic Church—Spain—History. 2. Spain—Church
history. I. Title. II. Series.
BX1585.C214 1984             282'.46  83-26503
ISBN 0-674-13125-8 (alk. paper)



 r     *#. »     Mr
For my parents
        Preface




   Few subjects have aroused more controversy in the history of modern
Spain than that of the Church. Intimately involved in the great political
struggles and social conflicts of the twentieth century, it has long been
the focus of polemic on the parts of both defenders and detractors.
Recent advances in the study of the Spanish Church by ecclesiastical
historians, moved by a vigorous spirit of archival inquiry, and by the
new generation of social and economic historians have made possible a
more rational assessment of the Church’s role than could have been
undertaken just a few years ago.
   I am indebted to the staffs of the Archivo Historico Nacional, the
Biblioteca Nacional, the Hemerotecas Municipal and Nacional, and the
Jesuit Library in Madrid for assistance in gathering materials for this
book. Cambridge University Press granted me permission to use portions
of my essay from the volume Church and Society in Catholic Europe of the
Eighteenth Century (ed. W. J. Callahan and D. C. Higgs). Sage Publications,
publishers of the European Studies Review, and the editors of Historical
Reflections allowed me to reproduce parts of my articles from their jour¬
nals. I owe a special debt to Solita and Juan Marichal and to Mercedes
and Trinidad Aboitiz, who provided constant encouragement during my
research and writing. Several colleagues gave me generous assistance
and critical comment, particularly David Higgs, Olwen Hufton, C. C.
Noel, who kindly allowed me to consult his dissertation, J. H. Galloway,
and Paul Grendler. Financial support was provided by the Social Sciences
and Research Council of Canada. I also owe thanks to Eva Hollander
and Sandra McAuslan for their patience in typing the manuscript, to
Hedy Later for preparing the maps, and to Elizabeth Suttell of Harvard
University Press for her expert editorial assistance.
        Contents