




Bishops and Priests

   To improve the efficiency of the Church in its spiritual mission
and to make it an instrument of secular reform would have been
difficult enough had it possessed a simple organization with clearly
marked lines of authority. But the eighteenth-century Church was
a complex institution with an administrative structure determined
more by historical circumstance than by rational planning. The
ecclesiastical map showed a patchwork of unequal divisions.8 The
number of dioceses, sixty by the end of the century, was not
excessive by European standards, but three of the eight archdi¬
ocesan sees—Toledo, Santiago, and Tarragona—were located in
stagnating provincial towns, while Madrid, a city of nearly 200,000
inhabitants and the capital of a world empire, lacked episcopal
status. Barcelona, experiencing an economic and demographic
expansion that established it as the commercial and industrial
center of the kingdom, was only a suffragan diocese to the arch¬
bishopric in the sleepy town of Tarragona. Other towns—Si-
giienza, Calahorra, and Tarazona—had acquired bishops centuries
before, when they were cities of some importance. By the eigh¬
teenth century they were scarcely more than overgrown villages,
but they continued as diocesan seats. Bilbao, already an important
commercial town, would lack a bishop until 1949. The diocese of
Sigtienza provides the most glaring example of acquired historical
right taking precedence over reality. Located in a depopulated
zone of New Castile beyond Guadalajara, the diocesan capital
contained only 4,000 inhabitants in the midst of an impoverished
countryside. Yet it was one of the richer dioceses of the Church.
   Nor was there logic behind the division of the Church’s met¬
ropolitan provinces, each presided over by an archbishop. The
archbishop of Toledo, primate of Spain, headed an ecclesiastical
province of eight dioceses ranging from Valladolid in Old Castile
to Cordoba, Jaen, and Murcia; in contrast, the archbishop of Gra¬
nada had as suffragan bishops only the prelates of Guadix and
Almeria. Differences in territorial size among the dioceses were
accompanied by severe disparities of income. The archbishop of
Toledo enjoyed annual revenues amounting to 3 million reales;
the bishops of Albarradn, Barbastro, Tudela, Tuy, and Valladolid
survived on less than 100,000 reales.
     The Organization of the Church                                 7




    The ecclesiastical map of the eighteenth-century Church de¬
manded rationalization, but the difficulty of overcoming acquired
interests prevented any substantial changes in territorial demar¬
cation of dioceses. Four new sees were established during the
eighteenth century—Santander, Tudela, Ibiza, and Menorca—
but only the first was located in an important town. The effort to
separate Santander from the diocese of Burgos, begun by Philip
II in the sixteenth century, ended only in 1754. The struggle was
so troublesome it left even the reforming Bourbons with little
enthusiasm for the rationalization of diocesan boundaries.
    Unequal territorial divisions and the uneven distribution of
wealth provide glaring examples of the imbalance and confusion
characteristic of the Church’s administrative structure. Bishops
did not exercise supreme authority over their dioceses. They clashed
 frequently with cathedral chapters, the communities of canons
charged with providing liturgical services in episcopal churches.
 The accumulation of privileges from Crown and pope over the
centuries endowed chapters with a quasi-autonomous position in
 relation to their bishops. The unfortunate prelate quarreling with
 his chapter might be unwelcome in his own cathedral. Archbishop
 Yermo y Santivanez of Santiago (1727-1737) suffered the mis¬
 fortune of falling out with his chapter in a dispute over precedence
 on the very day he took possession of his see. In succeeding years
 the unforgiving canons seized every opportunity to frustrate the
 prelate’s administration.9 Further, bishops exercised little or no
 authority, depending on circumstances, over the religious orders.
 Episcopal authority over the great monastic foundations of the
 Benedictines, Cistercians, and Carthusians was nonexistent. The
 great Spanish monasteries, whether Silos in Old Castile or Poblet
 in Catalonia, formed minidioceses for all practical purposes, with
jurisdiction over parishes in the surrounding countryside. The
 bishops’ ability to control the mendicant orders, such as the Fran¬
 ciscans and Dominicans, was greater, but over them too they found
 it difficult to impose their authority.
    In theory, the Spanish Church of the eighteenth century was
 governed by the twin principles of authority and hierarchy. In
 fact, lack of clear jurisdictional lines, maldistribution of ecclesias¬
 tical wealth, and uneven territorial boundaries created an insti¬
 tution without strong cohesion. Eighteenth-century clerical writers
  8                                The Organization of the Church