



                                                                 1
  2                                The Organization of the Church




   The eighteenth-century Church was not the heroic and mystical
Church of the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. It produced
no Saint Teresa of Avila, no Saint John of the Cross, no spectacular
missionary achievements in distant and exotic lands. Even the
Inquisition went about its work with a desultory spirit that would
have shocked the harsh inquisitors of an earlier age. But the Church
of the eighteenth century, though it lacked the vitality of its pred¬
ecessors, continued to be a rich and powerful institution in a nation
where religious practice was deeply rooted and luxuriant in its
variety. Moreover, the Church impressed itself on the fabric of
social life more deeply then than in a later age. Through its re¬
ligious mission it held a nearly magical hold over the peasant
masses, who lived uneducated and isolated in an often unforgiving
natural environment. As supreme moral censor, the Church im¬
posed its standards of conduct on the entire range of society, from
aristocrat to agricultural laborer. Through its control of charity
and education, it exercised a social function that later would be¬
come the prerogative of the State. As a landowner and recipient
of the tithe, the Church possessed the financial resources necessary
to maintain an elaborate ecclesiastical organization touching the
lives of all Spaniards in one way or another. The eighteenth-
century Church was omnipresent; no one escaped its influence.


A Royal Church

   Few nations have seen their national fortunes grow and decline
as spectacularly as Spain did between the late fifteenth and the
eighteenth centuries. The great age of imperial expansion begun
under Ferdinand and Isabella and carried forward by Charles V
and Philip II was followed by a century of military defeat, eco¬
nomic depression, and inadequate political leadership. Although
the succession to the throne of Philip V, the first Bourbon king
of Spain, in 1700 did not immediately transform the kingdom, it
introduced a period of equilibrium that would endure until the
1790’s. The Bourbon monarchs, Philip V (1700-1746), Ferdinand
VI (1746-1759), and Charles III (1759-1788), failed to resolve
the nation’s fundamental problems, but their attempt to reform
antiquated political, social, and economic structures brought Spain
     The Organization of the Church                                3




closer to the more advanced states of Europe than it would be at
any time until the twentieth century. The process of reform, though
begun by Philip V and his ministers, reached its height during
the reign of Charles III. In this silver age of political stability and
modest economic and intellectual progress, the king, assisted by
a competent ministerial bureaucracy, attempted to stimulate eco¬
nomic development, update the curricula of the schools, reform
an archaic and inefficient tax system, and implement measures
designed to bring the kingdom into the modern world.1
   The Church partially owed its preeminence to its historic re¬
lationship with the State. For centuries the secular and ecclesias¬
tical worlds depended on each other and in the process became
so close that even today it is difficult to disentangle them. Church
and monarchy were different aspects of absolute power applied
to the religious and secular worlds. The Church was linked to
Rome by doctrinal ties, but the increasingly weak papacies of Ben¬
edict XIV (1740-1758), Clement XIII (1758-1769), Clement XIV
(1769—1774), and Pius VI (1775-1799) were incapable of exer¬
cising decisive influence over the administration of the Spanish
Church. This was above all a royal Church, molded by the Bour¬
bons to suit their policies. Spanish monarchs had long attempted
to control the Church at the expense of Rome, but it was only in
the eighteenth century that the “Catholic Kings” successfully min¬
imized the power of the papacy in Spain. The victory took the
form of the Concordat of 1753, which bestowed on the Crown
nearly universal patronage over the most important ecclesiastical
benefices, a right hitherto shared in an uncomfortable relationship
with Rome.2 Favoritism and influence played their parts in the
ecclesiastical patronage of the Bourbons, but during the reign of
Charles III the State used its powers to form a clerical establish¬
ment that accepted in large measure the royal vision of the Church’s
role in the reforming program.
   A few bishops were uneasy about the degree of state control,
but Madrid would brook no opposition to its expanding authority
over ecclesiastical affairs. When the aged bishop of Cuenca, Jose
Carvajal y Lancaster, expressed reservations about the changing
balance of the civil-ecclesiastical relationship in 1766, he received
an abrupt summons to the capital, where he was given a humili-
  4                                The Organization of the Church