




the number of novices in 1768.44 The comfortable prosperity of
the regulars disguised inertia, sterile routine, and a lack of intel¬
lectual and spiritual vitality. The decline was most evident in the
great monasteries of the Benedictines, Cistercians, Carthusians,
and Hieronymites. These houses were theoretically devoted to
contemplation and prayer, but more worldly concerns consumed
their energies.
   The Cistercian monastery of Poblet in Catalonia provides an
example of the deterioration of monastic life during the century.
This foundation, possessing extensive properties and seigneurial
rights in the surrounding region, spent so much time enforcing
its claims on the local population through a barrage of lawsuits
that at one point in the early 1770’s it was nearly bankrupt because
of excessive legal costs. Relations between the monastery and the
residents of the neighboring town of Vimbodl, over which Poblet
held jurisdiction, finally became so strained that the monks sent
armed bands including lay brothers with “pistols around the waist”
to threaten the villagers.45 Nor were conditions within the mon¬
astery walls any better. After 1760 the monks divided into warring
factions, which left the house in a state of undeclared civil war.
Disputes arose over the election of abbots and also from periodic
attempts by religious superiors to force the monks to observe the
order’s rules. In 1764 the monastery’s reforming administration
issued a decree revealing the low standard of monastic observance.
It forbade monks from attending bullfights and comedies; from
spending nights outside the monastery; from using silk, silver,
and gold in their dress; and from entering the houses of persons
“of ill repute.”46
    The state of the Carthusian monastery of Santa Marla de las
Cuevas in Seville was no better. Its administration spent gener¬
ously on ecclesiastical decoration and lavish entertainments, as in
 1749 when it regaled the visiting archbishop with “splendid ban¬
quets and agreeable refreshments.” The monastery suffered, too,
from the curse of internal dissension, which became so severe on
occasion that the monks retained a special prison for the recal¬
citrant. But to judge from the frequent reports of escapes, the
holy jail was not effective. And like all monasteries, Santa Maria
engaged in a perpetual round of legal jousting with the city and
     The Organization of the Church                               23




individuals it suspected of encroaching upon its property and
rights.47
   Monasteries contributed to the Church’s pastoral mission in¬
sofar as they often held responsibility for parishes in their vicinity,
but this usually meant that a monastery collected parochial tithes
and paid a miserable salary to a secular clergyman serving as vicar.
There were, however, some bright spots in this bleak picture. The
Premonstratensian monastery of Santa Maria de Belpuig in Cat¬
alonia developed a flourishing intellectual life and produced a
group of capable historians and archivists, such as Jaime Cares-
mar. The Benedictines included one of the great figures in the
intellectual history of eighteenth-century Spain, Benito Feijoo,
and their abbey of Silos in Old Castile imitated in a modest way
the scholarly work of the French monastery Saint Maur.48 More
typical of the intellectual poverty of the monasteries was the case
of Luis Jose de Urebal, a monk at Santa Maria de las Cuevas in
Seville, who spent his life writing thirty-three dreary volumes on
philosophy and theology that never saw the light of day. The
routine, extravagance, and intellectual mediocrity of the monastic
orders served the Church badly. The number of monks was not
great, only 10 percent of the regular clergy, but the enormous
wealth sustaining the kingdom’s monasteries and their small pop¬
ulations added another element of imbalance to the eighteenth-
century Church.
   The nonmonastic orders, particularly the mendicants and the
communities of canons regular—Franciscans, Dominicans, Car¬
melites, Trinitarians, Augustinians, and others—occupied a more
important place in the Church. The Franciscans, though divided
into several branches, formed the largest group within the regular
clergy—over 17,000 members according to the census of 1797—
far exceeding the 4,393 of the second-place Dominicans. Unlike
the monastic orders, the mendicants usually established them¬
selves in cities and towns and carried on active lives of preaching
and teaching.
   Yet it is difficult to assess the role of the mendicants within the
Church or in the broader society. Already in the eighteenth cen¬
tury they were regarded with little favor and considerable hostility
by the elite of the secular clergy and the royal bureaucracy. De-
  24                              The Organization of the Church