




yoked by eighteenth-century bishops for their priests. But the
problem had deeper roots. The parish priest stood at the bottom
of an ecclesiastical ladder heavy with the wealth, prestige, culture,
and education of a privileged minority.
   It is difficult to establish with any precision the financial situ¬
ation of the parish clergy over the kingdom as a whole. Conditions
varied from region to region; they depended in part on the num¬
ber of parishes in a diocese and on the size of parochial endow¬
ments. Within dioceses there also were substantial differences of
income among parishes.
   In some dioceses the general economic prosperity of the Church
between 1750 and 1790 filtered down to the parish clergy. In the
diocese of Segovia parish priests received an average of 982 reales
a year in surplice fees, approximately the yearly wages of an un¬
skilled workman, in addition to their basic source of income, the
tithe. Overall, the incomes of a majority of the diocese’s parochial
clergy compared favorably with those of highly skilled artisans
and minor royal officials in the area.43 Over the kingdom as a
whole, however, the existence of 3,000 parish vacancies, in spite
of a recruiting pool of 60,000 secular priests, suggests that many
parishes, particularly in poorer rural districts, could not offer
sufficient financial rewards to attract clergy, even from a
large body of unbeneficed churchmen desperately in need of
employment.
   In the minds of the civil and ecclesiastical reformers of the
eighteenth century the inadequacy of the parochial organization,
the alienation of parish tithes, and the financial situation of the
parish clergy demanded immediate remedies. Although there were
some attempts to create new and properly endowed parishes, these
often foundered on opposition from within the Church itself.
When the bishop of Cadiz proposed to erect six new parishes in
the city, he aroused the hostility of his canons, who felt that di¬
viding the city’s one parish, located in the cathedral, threatened
to diminish the chapter’s influence over the local clergy. Any sub¬
stantial readjustment of parish structures would have required a
massive transfer of funds from bishoprics and chapters to par¬
ishes, and this the privileged elite dominating the Church would
not accept. The weakness of the parish and of its clergy constituted
     The Organization of the Church                                21




one of the most serious inadequacies of the eighteenth-century
Church.


The Religious Orders

   To compensate for the deficiencies of the parochial clergy, the
Church might have turned to the approximately 50,000 priests
and members of the male religious orders. Distributed in 2,052
houses, according to the census of 1797, the regulars far outnum¬
bered the secular clergy with cure of souls. But their contribution
to the religious mission of the Church was uneven. Like the elite
of the secular clergy, the orders preferred the cities to the coun¬
tryside. The exceptions were the great monastic foundations, such
as the Benedictines and Cistercians, who traditionally established
their monasteries in rural areas. In Andalusia, where the large
size of parishes raised an obstacle to pastoral efficiency, the cities
were filled with monasteries and convents of both men and women.
The regular clergy outnumbered the secular in Seville, where
eighty-four monasteries and friaries occupied a more important
place in the city’s religious life than its thirty parishes. The orders,
moreover, avoided poorer regions, which in turn had the greatest
number of parish vacancies. In Galicia, where 28 percent of
the parishes lacked priests in 1797, the orders composed
approximately 24 percent of the total number of clergy; in
Seville they represented 59 percent. The orders were poorly rep¬
resented in Galicia; the Basque Provinces; and the less wealthy
provinces of Old Castile, Leon, Burgos, and Extremadura; but
they were well represented in Madrid, Cordoba, Murcia,
Seville, and Granada, and along the Mediterranean littoral, espe¬
cially in Catalonia and Valencia. The regular clergy suffered
from the same maldistribution of personnel as its secular
counterpart.
   For the orders the eighteenth century was a period of stability
and prosperity. The seventeenth century had seen a spectacular
increase in recruitment and the proliferation of new houses; the
eighteenth was an era of consolidation and material progress. A
few communities, notably among the Franciscans, were so deluged
by candidates for admission that the order drafted a plan to limit
  22                               The Organization of the Church