




the Jesuits and the subsequent extinction of the order itself by
Pope Clement XIV in 1773 at the instigation of the Spanish court.
   Few orders were more closely identified with Spain than the
Society of Jesus. Founded by a Spaniard, Ignatius of Loyola, and
numbering prominent Spaniards among their early recruits, the
Jesuits became the glory of the Counter-Reformation Church and
one of Spain’s most influential orders. The order’s militancy, com¬
mitment, rigorous recruitment, and training program created a
powerful and effective instrument for the revival of sixteenth-
and seventeenth-century Catholicism. But by the eighteenth cen¬
tury the order had lost much of its earlier elan. The Spanish
Jesuits, numbering fewer than 3,000 on the eve of the expulsion,
suffered from many of the problems troubling other orders.59
Although the educational level of its members was high, the order
produced only a few figures of intellectual distinction, the histo¬
rian and archivist Andres Burriel, the Basque grammarian Man¬
uel de Larramendi, the historian of the Jesuit missions in Paraguay
Pedro Lozano, and the author of the celebrated satirical novel
Fray Gerundio, Jose Francisco de Isla. Theological and philosoph¬
ical studies in the order suffered from the same meaningless and
trivial emphasis on disputation that characterized ecclesiastical
learning elsewhere in the eighteenth-century Church.
   The Jesuits, however, continued to play an important role in
secondary school teaching through 117 colegios and two of the
kingdom’s most distinguished institutions of learning for the no¬
bility: the Colegio Imperial and the Seminario de Nobles in Ma¬
drid. But the order by no means confined itself to education of
the nation’s elite. Along with the Capuchins, the Jesuits provided
the personnel for perhaps the single most important religious
initiative of the century—the vast missionary campaign that saw
clerics, such as the Jesuit Pedro de Calatayud, traverse the king¬
dom in a determined effort to spread knowledge of religious
doctrine to an illiterate and isolated rural population. The Jesuits
also continued their missionary activity in the dominions of the
Spanish Empire, particularly in Paraguay, where their missions
among the Guarani Indians were extraordinarily successful.
   The Jesuits of eighteenth-century Spain were no longer the
tough and disciplined religious shock troops of the sixteenth cen¬
tury, but they were influential. Through their schools they dom-
     The Organization of the Church                              29




inated the intellectual formation of the nation’s social elite; through
their influence at court, where the royal confessor was invariably
a Jesuit, and through their connections with prominent families,
they achieved an envied place in the ecclesiastical establishment.
But they were not popular within the Church. They shared with
the other orders a readiness to enter into combat over theological
and philosophical issues. Jesuits and Augustinians thus struggled
for nearly a century over the questions of free will and predes¬
tination.60 Clerical polemicists delighted in attacking their oppo¬
nents with the vehemence formerly reserved for heretics. But
differences between the Jesuits and other orders were more than
intellectual. The orders resented the influence of the Jesuit royal
confessor over ecclesiastical politics. Father Ravago, the confessor
of Ferdinand VI, acquired extraordinary influence in the murky
world of clerical patronage and created resentment in the process.
Some Jesuits became adept intriguers in court politics during the
early 1750’s with the emergence of the pro-Jesuit marques de
Ensenada as Ferdinand Vi’s most important minister. Ensenada’s
fall from grace in 1754 was a setback, but the king continued to
show his favor to the order.
   The succession of Charles III to the Spanish throne in 1759
opened a dangerous period for the Jesuits, culminating in the
expulsion of 1767. The new monarch, though exemplary in his
personal piety, had absorbed the strong regalist traditions in vogue
in the kingdom of Naples, where he had ruled for twenty-one
years before becoming king of Spain. Charles assembled about
him ministers whose vision of a Spanish royal Church left no place
for the Jesuits. Objections to the order included an alleged attempt
to convert the Paraguay missions into Christian republics free of
royal control; its persistent opposition to one of the king’s favorite
schemes—the canonization of an anti-Jesuit seventeenth-century
Mexican bishop, Palafox; its known sympathy for Ensenada’s re¬
turn to power; and the widespread suspicion, not entirely justified,
that it opposed the vigorous regalism of the king and his new
ministers. All these made the order the decisive religious issue of
the early 1760’s.
   A series of riots in Madrid beginning on Palm Sunday 1766
against a reforming minister, the marques de Esquilache, was the
catalyst. The State accused the Jesuits of fomenting the disorders
  30                              The Organization of the Church