




which was carried out only in 1714, 1725, 1763, and 1781. The
Inquisition’s last victim, Dolores of Seville, provoked inquisitorial
wrath because of her claim that she maintained contact with the
Virgin and had released millions of souls from purgatory.
   The Inquisition’s reduced activity during the second half of the
eighteenth century also reflected the efforts of Charles III and
his enlightened ministers to impose limits on the exercise of in¬
quisitorial authority, which on occasion seemed to threaten that
of the government itself. Although a royal council, the Inquisition
had acquired over time a sense of its own autonomy clearly un¬
acceptable to a monarchy obsessed with the preservation and ex¬
pansion of its own power.
   In 1761 the decision of Inquisitor General Manuel Quintano
Bonifaz to publish a papal bull condemning a Jansenist book with¬
out seeking prior approval from the king provoked a crisis. Charles
III, irritated at seeing a work condemned that he had approved
as king of Naples, exiled the inquisitor general from Madrid and
allowed him to return only after exacting a statement of submis¬
sion. The king followed with a decree (January 18, 1762) forbid¬
ding the publication not only of any papal bull but even of the
edicts of the Inquisition until they received royal authorization.
Although this measure was suspended a few months later, in 1768
the Council of Castile proposed unheard-of restrictions on the
Inquisition’s censoring powers and repeated the terms of the 1762
decree on the publication of its edicts. The crown attorneys (fis-
cales) who commented on the proposal affirmed the absolute right
of the king “to watch over the use which the Inquisition makes
of its jurisdiction, to enlighten it, to reform its abuses, to impose
limitations on it and even to suppress it if this should be demanded
by necessity and public utility.”66
   The audacious proposal of 1768 did not lead, however, to the
severe restrictions on the Inquisition that its authors had in mind.
Charles III, with his characteristic prudence, chose instead to guide
the Inquisition in a more moderate direction through the ap¬
pointment of inquisitors general sympathetic to the reforming
spirit prevalent in the government. The king’s decision to appoint
Felipe Bertran, bishop of Salamanca and a leading episcopal re¬
former, to be inquisitor general in 1774 opened a period of mod¬
eration, particularly in the held of censorship, that would last until
  34                               The Organization of the Church




1790.67 By the mid-1780’s the Inquisition’s reputation had so im¬
proved that even Joseph Townsend, the English clergyman who
visited Spain during these years, could say: “I am inclined to think
that in proportion as light has been diffused in Europe, even
inquisitors have learnt humanity.”68
   It was, paradoxically, during Bertran’s tenure as inquisitor gen¬
eral that the Inquisition aroused itself from its apparent lethargy
to strike a spectacular blow reminiscent of the heady days of old.
The arrest in 1776, trial, and subsequent condemnation of a prom¬
inent royal official, Pablo de Olavide, on a charge of formal heresy
shocked enlightened circles in Spain and Europe. That the former
royal governor of the extensive province of Seville and superin¬
tendent of one of the king’s favorite schemes (the creation of new
settlements in the Sierra Morena) should disappear into the pris¬
ons of the Inquisition for two years without a trace and should
then appear in the peaked cap and smock of the condemned to
hear himself sentenced to eight years of conhnement to a mon¬
astery and the confiscation of his property seemed to herald the
beginning of a new age of inquisitorial fanaticism.
   Sensational as it was, however, the case did not lead to a general
campaign of persecution against the enlightened circles of gov¬
ernment and society with whom Olavide was identified. But it did
reveal that the Inquisition was still capable of baring its teeth. The
charge of formal heresy against Olavide rested on a series of
dubious accusations levied by the numerous enemies he had made
during his tenure in Seville (1769-1776). Although Olavide was
personally devout (witnesses testified that he knelt in prayer beside
his bed each night before retiring), he disliked the extravagant
and superstitious practices he believed were characteristic of Span¬
ish Catholicism. And, what was more dangerous, he did not shirk
from expressing these objections publicly. “Gentlemen,” he once
told a gathering of local noblemen about to spend a vast sum to
decorate a shrine, “you would do far better assisting your neighbor
to use this money to develop agriculture and increase the value
of your properties and thus give sustenance to the poor who are
perishing, that would be good devotion.”69 Olavide’s view of re¬
ligion—that it should emphasize interior spiritual development
rather than external ceremony—was not significantly different
     The Organization of the Church                               35