




as part of a plot to bring about ministerial change, though the
causes of the disturbances are not clear even today, in spite of the
attention they have received from historians. The king named a
special tribunal of the Council of Castile to assess responsibility.
This body, on which five bishops sat, placed the blame squarely
on the Jesuits: “the riot of Madrid was certainly their work with
the purpose of placing the government entirely at its disposition,”
said the archbishop of Burgos, Rodriguez de Arellano.61 There
was no convincing evidence behind the accusation, but regalist-
minded ministers and clerics believed firmly in the theory of Jesuit
conspiracy.
   The Esquilache riots furnished the State with an excuse to elim¬
inate an order that did not conform with its plans for the Spanish
Church. The order’s prestige and suspected political influence
aroused resentment in the government and the ecclesiastical es¬
tablishment. Further, the Jesuits’ principal activities were not the
kind of utilitarian pursuits so highly esteemed by the enlightened
monarchy of Charles III. Classical education provided to a largely
noble elite in the Jesuit schools seemed anachronistic to royal
bureaucrats, who wished to shift the emphasis of Spanish secon¬
dary and university education to the sciences, mathematics, and
economic concerns. Moreover, the Jesuits’ gentler interpretation
of the rigorous precepts of Catholic moral theology did not sit
well with the harsh code of conduct accepted by the king, his
ministers, and the anti-Jesuit faction within the Church. Accusa¬
tions of laxity in resolving problems of moral theology revealed
that the Jesuits were out of touch with the reforming spirit that
had begun to develop in the Church after 1750. This movement,
denounced as “Jansenist” by the Jesuits, received wide support
among the clerical elite of Charles Ill’s royal Church. It vigorously
attempted to curb the excesses of “popular” religion and to impose
on the faithful an austere, puritanical code of morality. The Jes¬
uits’ expressed opposition to the so-called Jansenists made the
order appear to be an obstacle to reform in the Church.
   The Jesuits’ expulsion was welcomed by the hierarchy and the
religious orders. Opportunism and ecclesiastical careerism un¬
doubtedly inclined some clerics to support the State’s action, but
many ecclesiastics believed the Crown was contributing to the
Church’s welfare by expelling the Society of Jesus. Forty-two of
     The Organization of the Church                               31




the kingdom’s bishops supported the expulsion; many published
pastoral letters extolling the king’s initiative. The superiors of the
religious orders also welcomed the expulsion with ill-disguised
satisfaction.
   However, the reaction within the Church and the use to which
Jesuit property and endowments were put by the State reveal that
the motive of the expulsion was not antireligious. The Crown
ordered that the order’s houses and income be used for religious
and educational purposes. The confiscation of Jesuit property
allowed the State to found new seminaries for the improvement
of the parish clergy, to establish new schools under religious aus¬
pices but with more advanced curricula, and to create charitable
institutions under clerical direction.