




the prestige of university faculties in theology and philosophy. By
1800 many seminaries were caught in serious financial difficulties
and were being disrupted again by internal disputes that often
led to disturbances. In Murcia, for example, clerical students rioted
in 1803 against the attempt of the cathedral chapter to intervene
in the seminary’s affairs.
   The civil and ecclesiastical authorities also attempted to raise
the quality of the parish clergy through a system of competitive
examinations, los concursos de curatos, designed to weed out clerics
unsuitable for pastoral work. Developed and refined in the arch¬
diocese of Toledo, the concurso system was extended to all dioceses
by royal order in 1784.38 In theory, the concursos were to recruit
the best-qualified clergy for parish vacancies. Priests throughout
the kingdom with three years’ parish experience could apply, and
the archdiocese sent circulars to the universities of Salamanca,
Valladolid, and Alcala de Henares hoping to attract well-educated
clerics. The examinations were elaborately organized under the
direction of the diocesan vicar general.
   The success of the concurso system varied from diocese to dio¬
cese. In Toledo it functioned with limited success, but in Osma,
according to a complaint of the bishop in 1790, only four of
twenty-one candidates appearing for the competition were judged
competent. The bishop had to appoint eight of the failed candi¬
dates, lamenting that this would be “prejudicial to the parishes
which will be filled with unsuitable ministers and the entire diocese
with ignorance.”39 Even in Toledo the results of the concursos were
disappointing. A survey of the condition of the diocesan clergy
near the turn of the century drew a bleak picture of “absenteeism,
a lack of interest in studies, and concubinage” as well as a general
failure in preaching and catechetical work.40 The concursos, which
in one form or another survived into the twentieth century, also
encouraged ecclesiastical careerism that resulted in constant turn¬
over of clergy hoping to move up from poor parishes to more
comfortable situations. In Toledo the youngest successful candi¬
dates were given the least desirable parishes, which later would
be left vacant as their priests moved up the ecclesiastical ladder,
or would be held by clergymen without the ambition or education
to continue their upward mobility.
     The Organization of the Church                                 19




   The difficulties the Church experienced with some parish priests
were real enough, but it would be unfair to tar the entire parochial
clergy with the brush of negligence and irregular behavior. Priests
in charge of impoverished rural areas far from the vigilant eye
of diocesan authorities were the most likely to engage in improper
activities. The geographic extent and topography of a diocese
helped determine, either favorably or unfavorably, the quality of
its clergy. The vast extent of the Toledo archdiocese, ranging from
Old Castile to Extremadura, La Mancha, and Andalusia, pre¬
sented a handful of diocesan administrators with an impossible
task. Occasional inspections, such as that carried out in the remote
vicarates of Andalusia, never succeeded in reforming clerical hab¬
its developed over years of isolation. Bishops of more compact
dioceses with easier communications were in a better position.
Bishop Jose Climent of Barcelona, a former parish priest himself,
paid special attention to the quality of his parochial clergy through
pastoral visits and supervision of the examination process. Within
the modest territorial limits of his diocese he was able to maintain
close contact with his priests. Although Climent held an austere
view of the qualities required of a priest and quickly censured
those failing to live up to their responsibilities, he believed that
the vast majority of his clerics were faithfully performing their
pastoral duties.41
    It is also evident that the quality of the parish clergy in the cities
and larger towns was far higher than in the countryside. The well-
endowed parishes of urban centers attracted well-educated priests,
 many with doctorates in theology or canon law, who were aware
of their obligations. Francisco Celma, doctor in theology and par¬
ish priest of Cati near Castellon for more than fifty years, provides
an example. Celma enthusiastically promoted devotion to the Eu¬
charist and the Sacred Heart, contributed actively to the town’s
charities, and worked to spread knowledge of doctrine among his
 parishioners through the publication of several popular cate¬
chisms written in Catalan. And he was by no means unusual.42
    The civil and ecclesiastical authorities viewed the problem of
 the parish clergy as one of education and recruitment, hence their
emphasis on seminaries, competitive examinations for parish ap¬
 pointments, and the periodic spiritual conferences so often con-
  20                               The Organization of the Church