




cents who had never received Holy Communion. He met others
who devoted their time to illicit business dealings and still others
who had lived for years with their mistresses and yet dared “to
go from the arms of Venus to the altar.”32 Decades later the vicar
of Ciudad Real stated that in his district “many priests were to be
found who were so stupihed and ignorant that it was a triumph
for them to understand the canon of the Mass.”33
   Serious problems in recruitment and education of the parish
clergy existed, but they were by no means universal, and any
explanation of them must go beyond the ignoble personal moti¬
vations that eighteenth-century critics believed were responsible
for the Church’s difficulties with its priests. A study of the clergy
of the Toledo archdiocese (one of the largest in territory) during
the last years of the Old Regime shows that the problem of neg¬
ligent parish priests was closely linked to the imbalanced financial
and administrative structure of the Church, even at the diocesan
level. The flow of ecclesiastical income from the countryside into
the cities and larger towns that was characteristic of the Church
as a whole also occurred in Toledo. The best-endowed parishes
(a few with incomes higher than some bishoprics) were located in
Madrid, Toledo, and towns where diocesan administrators had
their seats. In contrast, the poorest parishes were in isolated rural
districts in the Montes de Toledo, Extremadura, and La Mancha.
The ecclesiastical authorities believed that 55 percent of the arch¬
diocese’s parishes lacked the minimum income (5,000 reales) judged
necessary for modest sustenance of the parochial clergy.34
   The maldistribution of parish income in the Toledo archdiocese
inevitably meant that the best-qualified clergy moved into cities
and towns, where they would receive a comfortable income and
the possibility of further preferment. The rest of the parochial
clergy were left to struggle with the inadequate revenues provided
by country parishes. And it was there that the most serious abuses
took place, although regional differences existed within the arch¬
diocese. The vicars and visitors responsible for maintaining dis¬
cipline among the rural clergy of Toledo thus found the parish
priests of the Andalusian vicarates of Huescar and Cazorla to be
among the most intractable. An inspection of the vicarates carried
out early in the nineteenth century found numerous priests living
with their mistresses. Others were addicted to gambling and hunt-
     The Organization of the Church                             17




ing; still others engaged in contraband and business dealings. The
inquiry found many priests who even refused to wear clerical dress
as they performed their duties.35
   During the second half of the eighteenth century, the State
undertook several initiatives to remedy abuses and improve the
quality of the parish clergy. In 1766 Charles III issued a decree
designed to encourage the foundation of seminaries on a larger
scale and to improve the standard of instruction in those already
established.36 Seminaries had existed since the time of the Council
of Trent in some dioceses, but they operated under the control
of cathedral canons, who regarded their students as sources of
free labor to arrange chairs, pump organs, and otherwise assist
in the liturgical services of the cathedral to which they were at¬
tached. The seminary of Cadiz even refused to admit candidates
who could not sing well on the grounds that it required good
voices for the cathedral choir. Moreover, these early seminaries
were rent by disputes among different schools of scholastic phi¬
losophy that often made orderly instruction impossible.
   Charles III attempted to reform the seminaries by converting
them into quasi-universities, freeing them from the control of
cathedral chapters, and eliminating contention among philosoph¬
ical schools. Seminary expansion and reform were also designed
to put an end to the training of priests in local Latin schools,
where candidates for the priesthood received a rudimentary ed¬
ucation that scarcely went beyond the catechism and the form of
saying Mass and administering the sacraments. How many clergy
entered the priesthood through Latin schools is difficult to esti¬
mate, although there are indications that the number may not
have been as great as ecclesiastical critics of the time imagined.
Only 18 percent of those applying for parish vacancies in Toledo,
for example, lacked university degrees.37 It is at least certain that
the poorly educated clerics coming from these schools were doomed
to spend their lives in impoverished country parishes.
   Charles Ill’s efforts to increase the number of seminaries were
successful to the extent that ten were founded during his reign.
But the reforms the State promoted failed to improve signihcantly
the educational level of the lower clergy; most of them continued
to acquire whatever knowledge they needed for their ministry in
the traditional manner. Nor were the seminaries able to match
  18                               The Organization of the Church