


The Inquisition

   One institution still occupied a special place within Church and
State, the Inquisition. Founded by Ferdinand and Isabella in 1478,
the Council of the Supreme and General Inquisition, although
established by papal decree, was in fact a royal body whose head
was named by the Crown. Originally created to punish converted
Jews or their descendants (conversos) suspected of secretly observ¬
ing their old faith, the Inquisition gradually expanded its activity
to include censorship and the punishment of heresy; witchcraft;
sorcery; magic; superstitious practices; moral offenses, such as
bigamy and homosexuality; and immorality among the clergy.
The Inquisition of the late fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth
centuries went implacably about its work of enforcing orthodoxy
and morality. With its secret procedures, its ability to confiscate
the property of its victims, and its enormous jurisdictional powers
over laymen and clerics alike, it could act whenever and wherever
it pleased. Its celebrated sixteenth-century victims included an
archbishop of Toledo and primate of Spain, Bartolome Carranza,
who stood accused of Lutheranism; and the poet, theologian, and
mystic Fray Luis de Leon, who spent years in inquisitorial prisons
before being released.
   The terrible force of the Inquisition was not primarily in its
ability to have its victims burned at the stake in the elaborate public
ceremonies of the autos de fe. A recent examination of 50,000 cases
  32                               The Organization of the Church




between 1560 and 1700 shows that only 1 percent of those accused
suffered the ultimate penalty; the incidence of execution was far
higher in the Inquisition’s first twenty years than at any later
time.62 Secrecy coupled with the ability to strike at any moment,
confiscate the property of the condemned, and destroy a career
for even minor offenses conspired to create the pervasive psy¬
chology of fear that lay behind the institution’s ruthless effective¬
ness as a guardian of orthodoxy and morality. So successfully did
the Inquisition instill fear in the population at large that the vast
majority of denunciations it received came not from its agents but
from relatives, friends, and acquaintances of the accused. The
Inquisition did not select its victims capriciously. According to its
own lights it pronounced judgment only after careful examination
of the evidence. Anyone summoned before the Holy Tribunal
might well have trembled with fear and terror, but it was possible
to be absolved. And there were occasional examples of common
sense overriding popular passions, as in Navarra in the early sev¬
enteenth century, when the Inquisition effectively ended Spain’s
witch craze after a searching examination into accusations pro¬
duced by mass hysteria.63
   The history of the Inquisition in the eighteenth century has not
been widely studied, and for good reason. After a flurry of activity
against conversos (often Portuguese merchants who had settled in
Spain between 1720 and 1730), the cases coming before the Holy
Office declined to the lowest levels in its existence. Thus, the
Inquisition of Toledo (one of fourteen provincial tribunals) heard
an average of 200 cases a year during the middle of the sixteenth
century, 30 a year during the early seventeenth century, and only
3 or 4 a year by the end of the eighteenth.64 Moreover, charges
showed a dramatic shift away from the most serious accusations
of Judaism and Protestantism toward those focusing on supersti¬
tion, morality, and erroneous and heretical “propositions” that
fell short of formal heresy. A survey of more than 4,000 cases
taken to the Supreme Council during the eighteenth century shows
that 43.5 percent dealt with “propositions” (compared with 19.4
percent in the seventeenth century) and less than 10 percent dealt
with Judaism and Protestantism (compared with 48.6 percent in
the preceding century.)65 The changing pattern of accusations also
corresponds with the less frequent exaction of the death penalty,
     The Organization of the Church                              33