




tonio Jose Salinas, to appoint provincial administrators if he
believed that the friars in their chapters had elected “unworthy
and useless subjects” to be superiors. Throughout the eighteenth
century the Franciscan province of Santiago de Compostela was
troubled by bitter dissension between friars from Galicia and Cas¬
tile. Similar tension in the order’s province of Extremadura finally
forced it to be divided in two, with the Tagus River as the de¬
marcation line.57 Dissension in the orders became marked as the
century progressed, especially during the 1780’s, when royal ef¬
forts to assert greater control over the regular clergy often began
undeclared civil wars among friars of different factions.
    Moved by a desire to use the ecclesiastical population to advance
its social and economic policies, the enlightened State of the sec¬
ond half of the eighteenth century did not view the orders sym¬
pathetically. Occasional examples of opposition to the Crown’s
reforming policies among the regulars irritated the authorities.
In 1786 in Zaragoza, the Capuchin Fray Diego de Cadiz, the most
celebrated preacher of the day, set off a national uproar by de¬
nouncing the materialism of the local economic society to the
Inquisition. The society, an association of notables interested in
promoting economic development that had been founded with
royal encouragement, immediately appealed to the highest coun¬
cils of government for redress in the midst of acrimonious con¬
troversy. The orders generally pursued a more prudent course,
realizing that the State was always willing and able to interfere in
their affairs. The Carthusian monastery of Las Cuevas in Seville,
for example, made a generous donation to the local economic
society just as Fray Diego was fulminating against its counterpart
in Zaragoza.
    The fundamental objection of the enlightened monarchy to the
regulars arose from the conviction that they were not contributing
to either the spiritual or material improvement of the kingdom.
The emphasis of the orders on “long prayers and the scrupulous
observance of certain exterior ceremonies” led them, in the opin¬
ion of one critic, to ignore “works of piety and mercy,” under¬
takings that would specifically contribute to material as well as
spiritual progress.58 The orders, he believed, should produce ar¬
chitects and engineers to build bridges and roads as well as priests
and teachers.
     The Organization of the Church                             27




   The State, although unhappy with the orders’ failure to con¬
tribute to its utilitarian program, was unable to redefine their role
or to undertake the kind of reform, already advocated by some
critics, that would substantially reduce the number of religious
and redirect their energies into useful educational and charitable
pursuits. Under Charles III the State contented itself with efforts
to assert as much control as possible over the orders. In 1776 the
Crown forced the appointment of a national vicar for the Fran¬
ciscans to limit the authority of the order’s headquarters in Rome.
This measure was extended to the Trinitarians in 1782, the Car¬
thusians in 1784, and the Augustinians in 1786. Royal authority
over the regulars expanded, but it failed to bring about significant
change. Increased governmental control tended to aggravate fac¬
tionalism, as monks and friars fell into the habit of appealing to
the Council of Castile for resolution of internal conflicts.
   The kingdom’s 24,000 nuns fulfilled a different role from that
of their male counterparts. The vast majority of the nuns lived in
contemplative communities. Although there are some examples
of educational and charitable activity among orders of women, in
general active work was not common. Significantly, the Sisters of
Charity, an order involved in hospital and charity work, experi¬
enced the greatest difficulty establishing itself in Spain. The first
community did not appear until the 1780’s, and even then the
order spread slowly. One reason for the lack of active communities
during the Old Regime was the long monastic tradition of the
women’s religious orders in Spain; another reason may have been
the special social function convents played in the structured society
of the Old Regime. Not every convent was a refuge for genteel
women who could not be supported economically in the outside
world, but the activities of the contemplative orders, however harsh
and austere they might have become on occasion, fit into a wide¬
spread mentality that such activities were proper for women and
that employment in hospitals and orphanages—work among the
lowest classes of society—was not.
   The organization of the regular clergy remained unchanged
during the eighteenth century with two exceptions. In 1787 the
State suppressed the Order of San Antonio Abad because it lacked
patients for its leper hospitals, the principal reason for its exis¬
tence. More spectacular was the expulsion from Spain in 1767 of
  28                              The Organization of the Church