




nounced by one critic as “the Pharisees of our time,” the men¬
dicants and the canons regular seemed an excessively numerous
body of clergy contributing little to the pastoral mission of the
Church. Friars appeared to many as propagators of crude reli¬
gious devotion bordering on superstition.49 But this picture is too
simply drawn. The mendicants esteemed education as much as
the secular clergy. Every order maintained colleges and houses of
study for the education of its members and of laymen as well. The
Capuchins, for example, maintained arts colleges in thirty-three
of thirty-nine friaries in their province of Cartagena and in twenty
of their thirty-eight houses in Andalusia.50 Moreover, the foun¬
dations maintained by the mendicants in the university towns of
Salamanca, Alcala de Henares, and Santiago de Compostela were
minifaculties of theology and philosophy; their professors often
competed for chairs in neighboring university faculties. A high
degree of education was as indispensable for advancement in the
orders as in the secular clergy. Most of the administrators (pro¬
vincials) of the Franciscan province of Santiago de Compostela
during the eighteenth century held doctorates in theology, phi¬
losophy, or canon law, and this was the pattern among other
orders as well.51 The intellectual quality of the elite of the men¬
dicants and canons regular was not overpowering, but the orders
produced some figures of distinction, such as the noted Augus-
tinian historian and archivist Enrique Florez.
   The problem of the nonmonastic orders was similar to that of
the secular clergy. An elite of well-educated priests monopolizing
high administrative and teaching posts presided over a more nu¬
merous body of clerics, whose intellectual quality and religious
commitment left much to be desired. Some clerics taught in arts
colleges, novitiates, and theological and philosophical faculties;
others, particularly the “apostolic missionaries,” who moved through
the kingdom in campaigns of popular evangelization devoted
themselves to preaching. But the orders had too many members
to provide full-time pastoral and educational employment for all.
The Franciscan friary of Barcelona, for example, had 150 friars
in residence at the end of the century; another 60 resided in two
smaller houses.52 The orders, moreover, recruited members in¬
discriminately from every social class. A respectable family and
educational background counted a good deal in the internal ca-
    The Organization of the Church                             25




reerism of the regulars, but the orders were willing to accept any
reasonable candidate for admission. In 1750 the Franciscan prov¬
ince of Santiago observed that it had so many friars that “it did
not know where to put them or to find the means to feed them.”53
   With only a minority of their members occupied completely
with pastoral or educational work, the orders sustained the re¬
mainder through the liturgical ceremonies and special devotions
promoted in their churches. The Augustinian community of Agreda
survived by maintaining a small arts college and conducting a
perpetual round of services in the town; processions and novenas
succeeded one another without interruption.54 The Capuchins
everywhere promoted the cult of the Virgen de la Pastora in their
churches; other orders encouraged particular devotions such as
that of the Sacred Heart, which was identified with the Jesuits.
Emphasis on ceremonial and devotional pursuits could not dis¬
guise the fact that the orders did not have enough to do, even
though pastoral needs were near at hand. This produced an at¬
mosphere of routine and religious formalism, as in Cadiz, where
the Capuchins rang matins each morning but stayed comfortably
in their beds. The provincial visitor of the Clerics Minor of An¬
dalusia found that conditions in the houses of the order had slipped
so far below a minimal standard that he forbade the clergy from
coming to choir in silk hats, smoking in the house’s environs,
lending money to laymen, and decorating their cells with English
wallpaper.55 Some attempts were made to revive the waning fervor
and austerity of the orders. Beginning in 1764 the Capuchins
established a series of friaries of “common life,” where the reli¬
 gious observed austere discipline. But such reforming movements
 were rare among the orders of the eighteenth-century Church.56
 In general, their members lived routine existences untouched by
 either great scandal or deep religious commitment.
    The mendicants and canons regular suffered from the same
 internal dissension that made life intolerable in some of the king¬
 dom’s monasteries. Squabbling might be initiated by clerics de¬
 fying their superiors, as in the case of an Oratorian priest in
 Granada accused by the order of spreading “hatred and rancor”
 in his house. Ecclesiastical politics created a more serious problem
 and often disturbed the tranquillity of cloisters. In 1788 the Dis-
 calced Franciscans quarreled over an attempt by the visitor, An-
  26                               The Organization of the Church