




century. The Church, moreover, obtained important social ben¬
efits from its economic function within an Old Regime society. By
providing employment the Church contributed to the mainte¬
nance of social equilibrium in the cities and to the survival of its
own privileged situation.
   The employment provided by bishops, chapters, and monas¬
teries could not, however, resolve a more fundamental problem—
a large population living either in poverty or on its margins. Mas¬
sive poverty arose from the weaknesses of an economy without
sufficient agricultural and industrial productivity to provide for
a constantly expanding population. Though some estimate that
as much as 50 percent of the population was unable to afford
food, shelter, and clothing, accurate assessment is difficult. But
the poor were everywhere, and their presence in both town and
country was an accepted fact of life. The archbishop of Granada
on one occasion in the 1780’s counted more than 5,000 paupers
waiting at his palace gates for the daily distribution of alms. Joseph
Townsend complained of “the multitude of beggars, infesting
every street” in Malaga and the swarms of mendicants roaming
Alicante in search of assistance.12 In Burgos beggars circulating
through the cathedral constantly upset the decorum of services
with their loud appeals for alms.
   Responsibility for poor relief fell primarily upon the Church,
which accepted and fulhlled the obligation with reasonable suc¬
cess. Theology and tradition dictated that the Church should come
to the aid of the impoverished. A vague social contract existed
between the Church and the poor. The former realized that it
was under “rigorous obligation,” according to the archbishop of
Santiago, to help the impoverished; the latter turned naturally to
the Church in times of distress.13 Moreover, the Church enjoyed
surplus revenues, which made it the only social institution capable
of relieving popular misery.
   Churchmen did not speak of relief or public assistance; they
spoke of charity—the distribution of alms to save the souls of
donor and recipient alike.14 The charity dispensed by religious
institutions, however, was very different from the assistance such
groups would provide later. Few religious orders worked directly
in hospitals, orphanages, and asylums. Charitable activity in the
modern sense was not an important concern of either the secular
     Prosperity and Religion                                   49




or regular clergy and certainly not of the orders of nuns. Hospitals
and other charitable institutions operated under ecclesiastical aus¬
pices, but religious personnel rarely worked directly with the un¬
fortunate. The charity of the Old Regime Church was more diffuse
and yet more comprehensive. Bishops, cathedral chapters, mon¬
asteries, and convents distributed food, clothing, and alms—in
many cases on a daily basis—to all who appeared in need.
   How much the Church spent on its charitable efforts is impos¬
sible to say given the fragmented way assistance was distributed.
But there are indications that during the eighteenth century the
charitable expenditures of religious institutions reached an un¬
precedented level. The income of Madrid’s most important char¬
itable group, the Hermandad del Refugio, was six times greater
in 1800 than in 1700, a significant increase, even taking into ac¬
count the effect of inflation.15 In the 1780’s the bishop of Malaga
spent half his annual income on the poor. And an eighteenth-
century account of the charity of the archbishop of Granada de¬
clared: “besides private pensions to families and occasional relief
in seasons of distress, he provides nurses in the country for 440
orphans and deserted children; he sends poor patients to the hot
baths at the distance of eight leagues from Granada, where he
actually maintains fourscore, and he daily distributes bread to the
poor, who assemble at his doors ... In this bounty he is imitated
by forty convents at which are distributed bread and broth without
discrimination to all who present themselves.”16
   Charity served an important purpose during the periodic agrar¬
ian crises, which exposed both urban and rural populations to
widespread misery and hunger. In 1768—69, for example, heavy
rains destroyed the harvest in Galicia and drove the price of grain
to unheard-of levels; thousands of starving peasants filled San¬
tiago de Compostela and besieged the city’s civil and ecclesiastical
authorities for help. A relief effort organized by Archbishop Rajoy
y Losada and the cathedral chapter raised funds to buy eighteen
shiploads of grain in southern France for sale at a subsidized price
to the needy.17 In Seville, during the tenure of Archbishop Del¬
gado y Venegas (1776—1781), the diocesan authorities distributed
23,000 bushels of wheat to peasants whose crops had been ruined
by hailstones.
   The Church fulfilled a similar function in the towns, where no
  50                                       Prosperity and Religion