




previously dominated by a narrow and pedantic scholasticism.
Charles III moved Spanish higher education in a more secular
direction, but even the reformers regarded religious studies as
necessary for the secondary school and university student. More¬
over, the religious orders continued to dominate secondary ed¬
ucation and were still represented on university faculties as the
eighteenth century drew to a close.22


Religions Practice and Reform

   The real strength of the Church lay in its spiritual hold over
the population, from aristocrat to peasant. That Spain was Cath¬
olic in the eighteenth century, at least in a formal sense, seems
beyond dispute. The Inquisition, performing its appointed task
with methodical efficiency, had eliminated religious dissent. To
the casual observer, the influence of the Church appeared to per¬
vade every aspect of life. Peasants and city dwellers set their sched¬
ules on the tolling of church bells; religious processions filled city
streets on the great festivals of the Christian year. The basic stages
of human existence—birth, marriage, and death—were sur¬
rounded by sacramental ritual. Even the pattern of leisure activity
was determined by more than ninety holy days, on which the
population did not have to work.
   Yet the religious condition of Bourbon Spain is not easily es¬
tablished. To assess the quality of faith among a population di¬
vided by deep economic, social, regional, and cultural differences
presents serious difficulties, which students of the question have
never successfully resolved. It is at least possible, thanks to the
efforts of Gabriel Le Bras and other religious sociologists, to use
the incidence of practice—attendance at Sunday Mass, reception
of the sacraments, and so on—as an external sign of conformity
to the Church’s authority. What the level of observance says about
the depth of religious commitment is less certain.
   The few studies of this kind available for the Old Regime tend
to confirm the image of a Catholic Spain at the level of practice
and minimal doctrinal knowledge. A study of evangelical efforts
in New Castile between 1540 and 1650 shows that the Church was
remarkably successful in spreading a basic but highly limited body
of religious knowledge and commitment to practice among the
     Prosperity and Religion                                    53




population as a whole.23 Based on the responses of witnesses in
inquisitorial cases who were asked if they attended Mass regularly,
confessed, and knew certain prayers—such as the Our Father and
the Hail Mary—the study discovered a high degree of religious
ignorance in 1540; only 40 percent of those questioned could meet
the minimal requirements of the Church. By the early seventeenth
century this situation had changed dramatically. Nearly all those
examined knew the basic prayers, attended Sunday Mass, and
confessed regularly. There were, to be sure, some exceptions,
generally itinerant tradesmen and artisans, and it is clear that this
limited religious knowledge was based on rote learning rather
than catechetical techniques concerned with the meaning of doc¬
trine. In spite of these limitations, however, the Christianization
of the urban and rural populations in New Castile had made
significant progress.
   The limited information available for the eighteenth century
suggests a continuation of this pattern. Pastoral registers record¬
ing baptisms in Bilbao between 1724 and 1734 show that the
ceremony took place in the vast majority of cases on the day of
birth—a clear sign of Christianization according to students of
religious practice. Surveys of the Easter Communion obligation
in the Catalan town of Vimbodi in 1772 and in the diocese of
Pamplona in 1801 again indicate that observance was virtually
universal in these rural districts, and a catechetical campaign
launched in the middle of the eighteenth century on Mallorca—
a region known then and now for its Catholicism—shows that
most of the population at least knew the Our Father, the Hail
Mary, and the Ten Commandments.24
   The limited research carried out on religious practice in the
eighteenth century does not permit an accurate map of obser¬
vance. It is likely that external conformity to the basic require¬
ments of the Church was generally high, but it is not yet possible
to perceive the regional and local variations that would make such
a map meaningful, particularly in light of the massive nineteenth-
century dechristianization in the industrial cities and the southern
countryside. There were already in the eighteenth century ten¬
uous signs of urban disaffection with the Church—an early in¬
dication of the dechristianizing process according to religious
sociologists. The English traveler Joseph Townsend noted that in
  54                                       Prosperity and Religion