




Andalusia or in the productive cereal lands around Estella and
Tafalla in distant Navarra. Religious institutions, however, placed
only a small proportion of their property under direct cultivation.
In the diocese of Segovia, for example, the Church cultivated only
26 percent of its land directly; the remainder it leased to private
individuals under a variety of rental arrangements.3 Some culti¬
vation was carried on by monasteries and convents, which were
often models of efficient agricultural management. Laborde thus
admired the fields worked by the Carthusian monks of La Con¬
cepcion near Zaragoza, where “the most attentive cultivation as¬
sists its various products.”4 More impressive still were the gardens
of the Carmelites of Ugarte in Vizcaya, where the friars reclaimed
saline marshlands and planted 6,000 fruit trees deemed so pre¬
cious that a unanimous vote of the community was required to
cut a single one.5
   The land of the Church, whether tilled directly or rented, did
not take the form of large estates, even in Andalusia, the region
of the great latifundia. Institutions rented out their property as
they received it, whether through purchase or donation—hence
the fragmented character of Church property throughout the
kingdom. Only 59 of the 107 religious communities possessing
land in the province of Seville had more than 200 hectares. The
secular and regular clergy between them possessed more than
5,000 separate pieces of rural property, which were rented in turn
to small tenants. Nearly 64 percent of those leasing Church land
in the region rented plots of less than 15 hectares, though there
were a few larger holdings of 125 hectares or more.6 This pattern
of distribution also prevailed elsewhere. The richest friary in To¬
ledo, the Dominican house of San Pedro Martir, received its in¬
come from numerous small farms rented out in the surrounding
countryside.7 Though chapters and monasteries tried to squeeze
as much as possible from their property, the scattered nature of
individual institutions’ holdings prevented the Church from tak¬
ing full advantage of its landed wealth. Institutions maintained a
small army of administrators, lawyers, and rent collectors to keep
their numerous tenants in line, but economies of scale were not
possible.
    Religious institutions also possessed real estate in urban areas.
In cities where the Church dominated economic life, these hold-
     Prosperity and Religion                                  43




ings could reach impressive proportions, as in Toledo, where the
cathedral chapter, monasteries, and convents controlled more than
half the city’s building stock.8 The proportion was not as high in
larger towns, but it was still substantial. In Madrid the Hermandad
del Refugio, the capital’s most important charitable organization
operating under religious auspices, financed its activity from the
rents paid by tenants in the forty buildings it owned in the city.
But urban real estate was less lucrative than rural property. The
necessity of making costly repairs to shoddily constructed build¬
ings as well as the obligation of royal taxes on city property re¬
duced the return on investment to a modest 1—2 percent.9 Few
ecclesiastical institutions were willing to pour money into the im¬
provement of their urban real estate. The return was too low, and
it was next to impossible to evict tenants who fell behind in their
rents. Religious institutions served, indeed, as eighteenth-century
versions of modern slum landlords. The houses they possessed in
Madrid late in the century, four- and five-story tenements in poor
condition, were let out at low rents to servants, washerwomen,
small tradesmen, and unskilled artisans. The return on another
important source of Church income, the interest on loans (censos)
made to individuals and institutions who could offer suitable col¬
lateral, was also modest, from 2.5 to 3.0 percent during the late
eighteenth century.
   Revenues produced by real estate, the tithe, censos, and other
sources can be classified as Church income, but this simply means
the accumulated income of a multitude of ecclesiastical institu¬
tions—bishoprics, monasteries, convents, and charitable and pious
associations. Clerical wealth was fragmented in its origins and its
distribution. The income of the kingdom’s bishops at the end of
the Old Regime thus ranged from the 34,534 reales received an¬
nually by the prelate of Ibiza to the 3,550,874 reales of the arch¬
bishop of Toledo. The distribution of episcopal revenues reveals
the disparities of income not only over the nation as a whole but
within its ecclesiastical provinces (Map 1). The archbishop of San¬
tiago’s revenues of 1,527,176 reales made him one of the wealthi¬
est prelates of the Spanish Church; his neighbor in Tuy, with
97,343 reales, was one of the poorest. With the exception of the
dioceses of Coria in Extremadura, Guadix in Andalusia, and Se-
gorbe in the Levante, the poorest sees were concentrated in Galicia
                                                                                  44