




from that expressed by so-called “enlightened” Catholics else¬
where in Europe and within Spain itself. But to express such views
in an urban society dominated by a conservative clergy and nobility
invited trouble. Olavide, moreover, alienated the local oligarchy
by introducing reforms that sought to eliminate the corrupt deals
made possible through its control of municipal government. Olavi-
de’s most redoubtable enemy, however, proved to be the superior
of the Capuchin friars, who had been brought in to provide re¬
ligious services to the new towns of the Sierra Morena. The gov¬
ernor’s efforts to prevent the friars from introducing what he
believed to be the worst excesses of popular piety led in the end
to the denunciation that destroyed him.
    Given the importance of the accused, the Supreme Council of
the Inquisition quickly assumed jurisdiction over the case. Because
little is known of the discussions in the council, it is difficult to
establish whether its professional inquisitors saw the process against
Olavide as the symbolic weapon that would allow the institution
to recover its old free-wheeling autonomy at a stroke. But the case
could not have proceeded without the support of the inquisitor
general, a churchman known for his moderate views, and the
authorization of Charles III, who was kept fully informed at every
stage. Whether Bertran endorsed prosecution of Olavide out of
conviction or timidity before the pressure of his fellow councillors
is unclear.70 It is equally uncertain whether the king allowed the
case to continue because his own deeply held piety took offense
at the charges against Olavide or because he dared not halt a
process into which the Inquisition threw all its energy. But if the
Inquisition believed that its spectacular initiative would substan¬
tially alter the royal policy designed to curb its excesses, it was
mistaken. Until the end of his reign Charles III continued his
policy of controlling the Inquisition through the appointment of
moderate, reform-minded ecclesiastics to the post of inquisitor
general.
    If the Inquisition failed to capitalize on the Olavide affair as it
had hoped, neither did it face extinction. Cautious to a fault,
Charles III never seriously considered suppression. The historic
relationship between the Crown and the Inquisition, which for
centuries contributed to the latter’s power, was weakened during




                          AVE MARIA UNIVERSITY
  36                               The Organization of the Church




Charles’s rule. However, following the king’s death in 1788 and
the outbreak of revolution in France during the summer of 1789,
the old relationship was reestablished, albeit incompletely and in
somewhat different form.
   The ministers of Charles IV (1788-1808), particularly the conde
de Floridablanca, believed that the French Revolution threatened
the survival of absolute monarchy in Spain. Measures were taken
to isolate the kingdom from the contagion of revolutionary ideas.
The censoring powers of the Inquisition (to which royal officials
had often objected in the past) offered the government a useful
tool in the effort to keep the nation free of subversive opinion.
In 1789 the Spanish ambassador to France advised Floridablanca
that “a secret agreement between the Court and the Inquisition
would be the best way of rooting out this evil.”71 In 1792 the
government and the inquisitor general worked out an arrange¬
ment designed not merely to censor suspected works but to ex¬
clude them entirely from the country through rigorous inspection
at the frontiers and confiscation of books that had already made
their way into the peninsula. The Inquisition threw itself into the
task with unaccustomed fervor. Of all the condemnations of French
books between 1747 and 1807, fully one-half fell in the fifteen
years after the outbreak of the French Revolution. The Inquisition
had always condemned books judged dangerous to faith and mor¬
als, but its censoring role took on a more immediately political
purpose as it sought, according to the inquisitor general, to re¬
move “the difficulties which could result from the introduction of
seditious books and papers.”72
   The revived alliance between an absolute monarchy concerned
with its survival and the Inquisition did not mean that the latter
abandoned its traditional preoccupation with questions of doc¬
trine and morality, nor did it mean that the State gave the In¬
quisition a blank check to do as it wished. The tension characterizing
relations between the government and the Holy Tribunal in the
reign of Charles III did not disappear. By the end of the 1790’s
influential ministers were advocating outright suppression as a
result of new conflicts with the Inquisition. But by then the eco¬
nomic and political difficulties of the monarchy prevented decisive
action. The ambiguous relationship between the Crown and the
    The Organization of the Church                              37