


Consumption and Charity

   The disproportionate share of the national income received by
ecclesiastical institutions allowed the eighteenth-century Church
the luxury of sustaining its archaic organization. In spite of the
limited religious knowledge of much of the urban and rural pop¬
ulation, no thought was given to efficient use of resources for
pastoral needs. Apart from the funds used for physical sustenance
of the clergy, religious institutions spent heavily on building, dec¬
oration, and what was euphemistically called the “splendor of the
cult.”
  The eighteenth century witnessed an orgy of construction by
     Prosperity and Religion                                       47




the secular and regular clergy. Some were massive projects, such
as the great Baroque facade of the basilica of Santiago de Com¬
postela, built between 1738 and 1747, and the cathedral of Cadiz,
begun in 1722. Wealthy monasteries engaged in a round of new
construction or reconstruction of old facilities. The Benedictines
of Silos spent a fortune between 1751 and 1792 constructing a
new church to replace the Romanesque edifice that had served
them for centuries. The Carthusians of Santa Maria de las Cuevas
of Seville at midcentury engaged the most famous craftsmen of
the city to cast a statue of their founder, Saint Bruno, in silver
and poured thousands of reales into the purchase of vestments
and other liturgical ornaments. Enough remained for the mon¬
astery to spend more than 100,000 reales in the same year on
repairs to a stable, a brick kiln, and a barn for livestock. At Santiago
de Compostela the cathedral chapter let out a three-year contract
to a local silversmith for a hundred candelabra. Chapters, espe¬
cially in the wealthier sees, maintained large staffs for the conduct
of services. The cathedral of Toledo employed 237 canons, chap¬
lains, choristers, musicians, and vergers; its staff was second only
to Saint Peter’s in Rome. Even in Avila, a relatively poor diocese,
services in the cathedral were conducted by a staff of more than
a hundred.
    These generous expenditures made the Church one of the king¬
dom’s most important consumers. The preindustrial character of
the economy, with isolated pockets of commerce and manufac¬
turing and an expanding population straining the productive lim¬
its of agriculture, enhanced the Church’s economic role in regions
and cities with many religious institutions. The constant drain of
revenues from countryside to town created by its organization
enhanced the eighteenth-century Church’s urban nature and made
ecclesiastical institutions indispensable to local economies. In the
great cathedral towns of Santiago, Toledo, Tarragona, and Seville,
where industrial and commercial activity was poorly developed,
communities of silversmiths, roofers, carpenters, candlemakers,
and musicians depended on the employment the Church pro¬
vided. Ecclesiastical spending did not flow into the productive
channels of an emerging capitalist economy, but it made the Church
a major force in a traditional economic system that would be
transformed only with the industrial revolution of the nineteenth
  48                                       Prosperity and Religion