




Inquisition would continue until the end of the Old Regime, be¬
cause each institution believed that it needed the support of the
other.



   After the skirmishing of the 1760’s, the organization, personnel,
and institutions of the Caroline Church followed the road that
the king and his ministers had marked for it. The weaknesses
inherent in the structure of the eighteenth-century Church were
disguised by the reforming ecclesiastical policies of the Crown.
An ineffectual papacy offered no serious opposition to the State’s
direction of the Church, and a carefully selected hierarchy ac¬
cepted, sometimes quietly, sometimes enthusiastically, its assigned
role. The Church, in its relations with the Crown and in its internal
life, achieved an equilibrium of sorts. The period 1750-1790 was
one of prosperity, stability, and general calm for the ecclesiastical
establishment. But in the end the equilibrium of the Caroline
Church proved no firmer than that of absolute monarchy.
2    /   Prosperity and Religion, 1750-1790



   In the four decades after 1750 the Spanish Church enjoyed for
the last time a flourishing material prosperity built upon its cen¬
turies-old accumulation of resources. As the wealthiest single in¬
stitution in the kingdom, the Church received the immense revenues
necessary to maintain a public cult of extraordinary variety and
splendor and to play a comprehensive social role in an agrarian
society dominated by ecclesiastical and noble privilege. The end
of that society was not far off, and with its disintegration the
Church found itself deprived for the flrst time in centuries of the
economic base that had sustained it as one of the nation’s fun¬
damental social and religious institutions.



Wealth

   The complex organization of the eighteenth-century Church
rested on solid economic foundations. Through legacies, dona¬
tions, and purchase it had acquired over time the land and ag¬
ricultural income necessary for the prosperity of any institution,
secular or religious, within a predominantly agrarian society. The
variety of the Church’s resources, the complexities of land tenure
in the Old Regime, and the drain on ecclesiastical funds created
by fiscal obligations toward the State make an accurate assessment
of the extent of clerical wealth difficult. There are, however, par¬
tial indications of the immense weight of the Church in the Span¬
ish economy of the time. The only cadastral survey of the period,
carried out in 1749 at the order of the marques de Ensenada,
provides information on the extent of clerical wealth in the twenty-
two provinces of Castile.1 The figures provided are, of course,
approximate given the extraordinary difficulty of gathering the
data, but they show beyond any doubt that the Church was one
of the kingdom’s most powerful economic institutions.


    38
         Prosperity and Religion                                              39




     Ownership of land provided the foundation of ecclesiastical
  wealth. The Church possessed nearly 15 percent of the property
  in the provinces surveyed, although there were significant regional
  variations (Table 1). The proportion of land owned by clerical
  institutions ranged from a low of 5 percent in Galicia to a high
  of 27 percent in Zamora. The presence of the Church as land-
  owner was strongest south of the Guadarrama Mountains, and in
  Salamanca, Palencia, and Zamora in the north. In the provinces
  of Toledo, La Mancha, Extremadura, and Seville the Church pos¬
  sessed at least 20 percent of the land. In the provinces of Old
  Castile and Leon its share of land was somewhat less but still