




scene was more familiar than crowds of the indigent clustered
around monastery and convent doors awaiting the daily ration of
bread and soup. In urban areas pious associations operating under
religious auspices served as primitive versions of modern social
agencies. In Madrid the Hermandad de San Fernando gathered
beggars from the streets and furnished them with food and lodg¬
ing; the Congregation of San Felipe Neri, composed of prominent
members of the nobility, sent its members to work every Sunday
in the city’s charity hospitals; and the Hermandad del Refugio
assisted more than 5,000 people a year between 1750 and 1785
with weekly gifts of alms.18 The Church thus provided eighteenth-
century society with a critical mechanism for the preservation of
social peace. The vagaries of agriculture subject to frequent nat¬
ural disasters, the limitations on production imposed by the in¬
equalities of the land tenure system, and the inadequate base of
urban economies meant that unemployment, distress, and in some
cases hunger were widespread at all times and massive in periods
of economic dislocation. Moreover, these crises occurred with
greater frequency as the century progressed.
   The Church’s charitable role should not be exaggerated. The
assistance distributed by religious institutions was massive, but it
was not well organized or particularly efficient. The fragmentation
of charitable undertakings among a host of institutions prevented
development of a coordinated scheme of relief for the poor. At
best, the Church provided temporary assistance to the numerous
victims of the agrarian economy of the Old Regime. Left by the
State with the principal responsibility for poor relief, the Church
was able to fulhll its charitable role effectively, even in the midst
of recurring agrarian crises after 1748. It did so because rising
agricultural prices paradoxically increased the numbers of those
requiring assistance while endowing religious institutions with the
revenues to provide that help. Ecclesiastical prosperity between
1750 and 1790 allowed the Church to fulhll the terms of its social
contract with the poor. Vast sums were spent on buildings, statues,
vestments, and decoration, but the Church understood that these
expenditures must be accompanied by generous spending on the
impoverished. The vague social contract or trade-off between the
Church and the poor served the interests of the religious estab¬
lishment. The charity practiced by ecclesiastical institutions but-
     Prosperity and Religion                                     51




tressed the Church’s popularity in an age when the social equilibrium
of a traditional society was still sheltered from revolutionary at¬
tack.
    The Old Regime Church contributed far less of its resources
to education than to charity. A well-developed network of Church
schools teaching large numbers of pupils would not appear until
the mid and late nineteenth century. Local primary schools were
numerous enough in the eighteenth century (more than 11,000
in 1797), but they taught few students (approximately 400,000)
relative to the total population of 10 million.19 The Church or,
more precisely, the religious orders paid little attention to ele¬
mentary instruction in country villages. Education in the coun¬
tryside was left in the hands of ill-paid and badly trained
schoolmasters, who were given a miserable wage by local author¬
ities.20 Instruction in the catechism figured prominently in the
curriculum of primary schools, but with little effect, to judge by
clerical complaints about the religious ignorance of the rural pop¬
ulation. The urban character of the Church meant that its insti¬
tutional role in education was greater in the cities and larger towns,
primarily because of the instruction offered by the religious or¬
ders. Secondary education, in the sense of institutions devoted
exclusively to the training of youth (in contrast to the large number
of monastery schools designed to educate religious but also open
to lay students), was dominated by the Jesuits until their expulsion
in 1767. With more than a hundred schools, the Jesuits concen¬
trated their efforts on the education of local elites through in¬
struction that emphasized the Greek, Roman, and Spanish classics
as well as literary and social graces. The Seminario de Nobles of
Barcelona, serving the Catalan elite, maintained two dancing mas¬
ters, three music teachers, and a fencing instructor in addition to
an academic staff. And its students were warned that “they must
not develop friendships . . . with boys of low birth.”21
   The expulsion of the Jesuits gave the State an opportunity to
reform secondary education. New schools, such as the Reales Es-
tudios de San Isidro and the Asturian Institute established by
Gaspar de Jovellanos at Gijon in 1794, developed more secular
and utilitarian curricula, although the teaching of religion re¬
mained an important concern. A similar reform of university ed¬
ucation ordered by Charles III instilled new life into a curriculum
  52                                       Prosperity and Religion