




the Madrid of the 1780’s the resourceful were able to avoid the
Easter Communion obligation by purchasing the certificates of
compliance demanded by the ecclesiastical authorities.25 The cer¬
tificates, bearing no names or signatures, were easily obtained in
the churches, often by prostitutes, who did a brisk trade selling
them to the public.
    There were also signs of decline among the pious associations
or confraternities characteristic of urban social life during the Old
Regime. In Seville, a city known for the number, wealth, and
splendor of its associations, the decline is evident after 1750. The
Confraternity of the Holy Trinity, founded in 1535, ceased par¬
ticipation in the great Holy Week processions for which Seville
was celebrated after 1778, and it was by no means the only ex¬
ample.26 In Gerona toward the close of the century, the city au¬
thorities found so few artisan guilds willing to join religious
processions that they had to order them to appear. Even so, many
guild members fled to the countryside rather than take their tra¬
ditional places in the line of march.27 The decline of the urban
confraternity, although related to many causes—including gov¬
ernment hostility and the deterioration of the guilds’ economic
and social position—signaled, however weakly, a diminution of
religious fervor in the cities.
    It would be premature to suggest that later dechristianization
in an age of rapid city expansion bore any relation to the few
signs of dissatisfaction observed at the end of the eighteenth cen¬
tury, but it may have had some relation to the growth of urban
anticlericalism clearly evident by the revolution of 1820. It would
also be useful to know whether the dechristianization of the An¬
dalusian countryside in the nineteenth century emerged only as
a result of the harsh economic and social conditions prevailing
among the landless of the time, or whether it had deeper historic
roots. It is at least possible that the glaring inadequacy of parish
organization in the south prevented the kind of effective Chris¬
tianization that had taken root in New Castile by 1650. As late as
 1958 and after two decades of intense proselytizing activity in an
age of easy communications, the Church in Franco’s Spain still
found itself unable to minister to isolated villages in Andalusia,
where the clergy scarcely ever appeared.28 The history of de¬
christianization in Spain, however, save for the very recent past,
     Prosperity and Religion                                      55




has not yet been satisfactorily explored. The examination of its
historic origins awaits further research.
   The means the Church used to convey its message to a diverse
and often unlettered population were many. There were, first of
all, the official rituals marking the distinct phases of the liturgical
year and the celebration of the sacraments. The “splendor of the
cult” occupied a far more important place in the ceremonial life
of the Church than would be thought appropriate in a later age.
In wealthy cathedral towns liturgical ceremony reached heights
of costly magnihcence difficult to imagine today. The cathedral
of Seville, for example, contained eighty-two altars on which 500
Masses were said daily. In the course of a single year the cathedral
consumed 24,195 liters of wine, 10,040 liters of oil, and 11,500
kilograms of wax. Its extensive body of canons were assisted by
twenty chanters, two vergers, a master of ceremonies and assistant,
thirty-six choirboys, twenty-three musicians, several music direc¬
tors, nineteen chaplains, and several other salaried priests for a
total staff of 235.29
   The celebrations held in the city in 1761 to mark the procla¬
mation of Mary of the Immaculate Conception as official patroness
of Spain testified to the grandeur of Baroque ritual. For three
days and nights the bells of more than a hundred churches rang
out at regular intervals as thousands of candles illuminated reli¬
gious buildings. A great banner embroidered in gold and silver
hung from the famous tower of the cathedral, the Giralda, while
4,000 candles lit its Gothic facade. On the final day the pious
associations of the city, accompanied by choirs, musical bands, and
hundreds of priests, moved in solemn procession through the
streets carrying a statue of the Virgin with a priceless crown of
gold and jewels.
   The “splendor of the cult” attained its greatest magnihcence in
cathedrals and churches able to pay for it, which meant for all
practical purposes that it was conhned to the cities, although wealthy
monasteries in the countryside also indulged their expensive li¬
turgical tastes. The clergy suffered no embarrassment over con¬
ducting costly services, which were seen as eloquent testimony to
God’s power and majesty.
   A second manifestation of urban religious sentiment used by
the Church served a more didactic purpose. The processions held
  56                                                 Prosperity and Religion