




this meant that the brothers gathered each year, often at a special
altar in a particular church, to celebrate the feast day of their
patron. Membership in the confraternities reflected the social di¬
visions of an urban hierarchical society. The groups were open
in theory to all displaying a sincere religious intent. In fact, entry
into confraternities was often restricted. Thus, in Seville noblemen
belonged to an association of their own, as did lawyers; artisans
gathered in confraternities according to their craft. Each associ¬
ation also possessed a distinctive and colorful form of dress for
use in public ceremonies.
   In spite of their importance in urban social and religious life,
the Spanish confraternities have not received the attention they
deserve. There is no doubt, however, that they provided the Church
with a useful means of focusing religious sentiment among the
population of the cities. The pious associations were not primarily
ecclesiastical institutions. Each conducted its internal affairs with
considerable autonomy, subject only to occasional inspection by
the civil and religious authorities. The corporate autonomy of the
confraternities, particularly in financial matters, attracted the un¬
favorable attention of the reforming president of the Council of
Castile between 1766 and 1773, the conde de Aranda. Supported
by enlightened opinion at court, Aranda ordered a general inquiry
into the state of pious associations because of allegations that many
were wasting their funds on frivolous pursuits or costly religious
services.
   The brunt of Aranda’s attack fell not on associations actively
engaged in charitable work but on those with a primarily devo¬
tional purpose. Reports received from the kingdom’s intendants
confirmed the central government’s view that something had to
be done about the devotional associations. The intendant of Se¬
govia reported to Madrid that in his province the officers of con¬
fraternities spent lavishly from their own pockets and often ruined
themselves in the process because they wished “to outdo their
predecessors in extravagance.” The intendant also observed that
confraternities in his region often competed with one another to
see which could place the greatest number of candles on the altars
of their respective patrons. This competition, he complained, re¬
sulted from “pure vanity” and cost immense sums to import wax
     Prosperity and Religion                                     59




from outside the country.34 The offensive of the enlightened State
against the confraternities did not lead to their suppression. But
Aranda was close to the truth in his perception that many had
strayed from their devotional origins to become little more than
social clubs. The clear signs of decadence by the late eighteenth
century indicated that this traditional form of religious life was
gradually losing its vigor.
   The eighteenth-century Church did not devote to pastoral work
the resources it consumed maintaining the “splendor of the cult.”
Reforming bishops, such as Climent of Barcelona and Bertran of
Salamanca, exalted the parish as the fundamental institution of
popular evangelization. Upon the parish priest fell the primary
obligation of providing “a continuous explanation of Christian
doctrine and of the maxims of the Gospel” to the faithful.35 These
high hopes could not be easily fulfilled, however. The imbalanced
distribution of ecclesiastical wealth and the uneven quality of the
parochial clergy raised serious obstacles to a vital parish life. Com¬
plaints of parish priests who failed to instruct their congregations
even through the Sunday sermon were common. The Jesuit
missionary Father Pedro de Calatayud noted that the clergy of
rural parishes in the districts where he traveled “neither in¬
structed . . . nor drew poor countrymen from their crass igno¬
rance.” Decades later the vicar of Alcaraz in the Toledo archdiocese
declared that “although the number of secular priests is excessive,
the Christian people do not receive the spiritual nourishment
which is necessary.”36 Bishop Bertran of Salamanca felt called
upon to remind his parish priests that the obligation to provide
instruction in doctrine was not simply “a work of supererogation
and a simple counsel” but “a specific and important obligation.”37
Father Calatayud also attacked the assumption he declared was
widespread among the parochial clergy in towns with monasteries
that they had no need to preach because that task was being carried
out by monks and friars.
   This is not to say, though, that parish priests everywhere ne¬
glected their responsibilities. There is evidence that in dioceses
where a town’s parochial clergy formed communities of cabildos
parroquiales roughly similar in structure to cathedral chapters, the
degree of pastoral responsibility was considerably higher. The
  60                                       Prosperity and Religion