




an entire town into a wave of religious exaltation. Thus, Father
Pedro de Calatayud, the most famous missionary of midcentury,
placed his congregations in a receptive mood through an opening
sermon on the words of the prophet Jonas, “In Forty Days Nin¬
eveh will be destroyed,” as he painted a dark picture of the fate
awaiting unrepentant sinners.47 The missionaries, who regarded
themselves as prophets preaching in a wilderness of moral cor¬
ruption, spared their hearers nothing in their threatening ser¬
mons. The Capuchin Fray Diego de Cadiz, described by a
contemporary biographer as “a prophet whose lips were purified
with a burning coal,” preached with such emotion against come¬
dies in Antequera toward the end of the century that those present
shouted spontaneously that they “hated them and wished to de¬
stroy them,” which, indeed, they did at the close of the service by
pulling the local theater to the ground.48 The emotions aroused
by Fray Diego, the most popular missionary preacher of the late
eighteenth century, were so intense that he had to be protected
against the zeal of his admirers, who would have pulled his clerical
habit to shreds in the hope of obtaining a remembrance and future
relic.
   The missions were not simply occasional outbursts of religious
enthusiasm. The missionaries stressed communication of the basic
truths of the faith in their sermons and endeavored to establish
devotions and pious associations where they preached in the hope
of preserving the fervor they had aroused. The Capuchins, for
example, identified with devotion to the Stations of the Cross,
spread the cult throughout the kingdom; the Jesuits established
congregations of the Sacred Heart during their missions. Some
clerics doubted the effectiveness of the missions, and in one sense
they were correct. Though carried on across the length of Spain,
the missions did not bring about a religious transformation. But
they may well have allowed the Church to hold its own, particularly
in those areas, such as Andalusia, where parish structures were
inadequate. The most significant pastoral contribution of the re¬
ligious orders to the eighteenth-century Church lay in the small
groups of missionary clergy who fanned out through rural Spain
in these periodic evangelical campaigns. Thus, the Capuchins alone
preached missions in more than a hundred villages in the arch¬
diocese of Toledo during 1769 and 1770.49
     Prosperity and Religion                                    65




   Civil and ecclesiastical authorities regarded the missions as nec¬
essary for the preservation of the faith, and hence gave them
moral and financial support. But the mentality of the missionaries,
the emotional fervor with which they preached, and their vision
of the world as a morass of moral corruption existed uneasily with
the emphasis of the royal Church’s elite on personal spiritual
development and simple liturgical practice. The missionaries were
if nothing else combative; they believed that their task, in the
words of Fray Diego de Cadiz, was “to expose libertines face to
face.”50 The State, moreover, found it difficult to control the
preaching of the missionaries, who exercised a freedom of expres¬
sion not found elsewhere in the Church. Fray Diego frequently
found himself in difficulty with the authorities for sermons touch¬
ing raw official nerves.51 In Ecija he upbraided a congregation of
stunned municipal councillors for their corruption and neglect of
the needs of the poor; his attack on the economic society of Zara¬
goza came perilously close to an unheard-of questioning of royal
policy.
   The concerns of the missionaries, fervor and repentance, were
far removed from the preoccupations of many bishops with the
State’s projects to modernize Spain. Regarding the material world
as corrupt, the missionaries essentially rejected the secular role
assigned to the Church by the Bourbon monarchy. Father Pedro
de Calatayud thus attacked the commercial practices of the mer¬
chant guild (consulado) of Bilbao, a body highly regarded by the
State, reproaching it for exploiting the peasantry in a dispute that
the Council of Castile finally had to resolve.52 The missionary
mentality, based on a theocratic vision of human existence, would
in the end make the missions an instrument of conservative re¬
action to the reforms promoted by the secular authorities.
   Alongside the official liturgy and clerically promoted devotions
existed a variegated and luxuriant array of religious practices that
largely escaped from ecclesiastical scrutiny. What has been called
“popular” or, most recently, “local” religion is difficult to define
within the context of formal religious belief. In a recent study
William Christian argued that these relatively uncontrolled reli¬
gious customs, observed by all levels of society from peasants to
aristocrats in both town and country, arose from the deep need
for assurance when confronted with the fragility of human exis-
  66                                       Prosperity and Religion