




on certain great feast days of the liturgical year, particularly dur¬
ing Holy Week and on Corpus Christi, attempted to evoke intense
religious feeling among participants and spectators alike through
visual effect. During Holy Week, for example, statues of ex¬
traordinary realism depicting the Passion and death of Christ
conveyed a message of repentance and resurrection that even the
most unlettered onlooker could comprehend. The statues were
carried by members of religious confraternities. Some bore heavy
crosses; others, belonging to the “confraternities of blood,” scourged
themselves as the procession followed its route. Joseph Townsend
has left a detailed description of such a procession in Barcelona
during the 1780’s:

The last supper of Christ with his disciples, the treachery of Judas, attended by
priests, together with the guards, the flagellation, the crucifixion, the taking
from the cross, the anointing of the body and the burial . . . were represented
by images large as life, placed in proper order on lofty stages . . . This procession
was preceded by Roman centurions clothed in their proper armour, and the
soldiers of the garrison brought up the rear. The intermediate space was oc¬
cupied by the groups of images above described, attended by eight hundred
burgesses clothed in black buckram, with flowing trains, each carrying a flambeau
in his hand. Besides these one hundred and four score penitents engaged my
attention . . . These were followed by twenty others, who walked in the proces¬
sion bare footed, dragging heavy chains, and bearing large crosses on their
shoulders . . . immediately after them followed the sacred corpse, placed in a
glass coffin, and attended by twenty-five priests. Near the body a well chosen
band with hautboys, clarinets, French horns and flutes, played the softest and
most solemn music.30

    Not all processions took on this somber, penitential character.
 Their atmosphere varied with the feast being celebrated and often
 with the region. Processions marking the feast of Corpus Christi
 in June were marked by solemnity combined with the airs of a
joyous secular festival. In Seville and Valencia the processions of
 the Corpus were led by papier-mache giants dancing about the
 streets to the vast amusement of the populace, who coined nick¬
 names for their favorite figures. The procession held in Valencia
 to celebrate the city’s patron saint, Vincent Ferrer, blurred still more
 the distinction between the religious and the secular. Eight mobile
 stages, on which were presented scenes from the lives of the Virgin
 and the local patron, were attended by an astonishing array of
 picturesque figures: “two men dressed as Moorish kings, with
     Prosperity and Religion                                    57




great beards and royal crowns on their heads, carried banners, a
great number of children, some dressed as shepherds, others as
sailors, others in a costume which cannot be defined, shook their
tambourines, dancing and leaping about, twelve men dressed in
white, played the castanets ... a great number of others, in white
breeches and waistcoats with red mantles on their shoulders, masks
upon their faces and long white sticks in their hands, repeatedly
throwing the stick[s] into the air.”31
   The elaborate processions characteristic of urban Catholicism
conveyed knowledge of the faith simply and directly to the pop¬
ulation, and for this reason the Church valued them. But there
were aspects of these manifestations of faith that did not sit well
with the ecclesiastical and civil authorities. Public flagellation in
the processions of Holy Week was seen as an example of excessive
zeal that distracted onlookers from contemplating the sacred scenes
passing before their eyes. Clerical pressure finally persuaded the
State to forbid the practice in 1780, although the prohibition was
often ignored. And to many churchmen the joyful character of
other processions seemed to have degenerated into simple fri¬
volity. In 1768 the bishop of Ciudad Rodrigo was so incensed by
the funds a local confraternity spent on bullfights, comedies, meals,
and refreshments during the feast of Corpus Christi that he called
on the government to initiate a general inquiry into the condition
of pious associations in the entire kingdom.32
   The vitality of the procession as an instrument of religious
instruction depended in no small measure on the participation of
the numerous confraternities abounding in every Spanish city.
Seville and its region contained more than a thousand, according
to a survey of the early 1770’s.33 Although such pious associations
were common in medieval Europe, the period of their greatest
growth in Spain corresponded to the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Every confraternity served a religious purpose, for each
took the name of the Lord, the Virgin, or a saint and conducted
services in its patron’s honor during the year. But there were
several distinct types of associations. Some were primarily chari¬
table institutions engaged in the distribution of poor relief; others
served as mutual benefit associations providing minimal health,
unemployment, and burial assistance to their members. The vast
majority, however, were devotional in purpose; in simple terms
  58                                       Prosperity and Religion