




ciscan Antonio Arbiol, or the Promptuario de la theologia moral by
the Dominican Francisco Larraga, were to be found in even the
smallest personal libraries.42 These guides to the proper Christian
life were meant for those with a certain degree of formal edu¬
cation. The texts were invariably long; Arbiol wrote nearly 600
pages; Larraga outdid him with more than 700. Moreover, each
page contained appropriate scriptural citations and references to
theologians and philosophers, which only the formally educated
could comprehend. These works were not directed to the culti¬
vation of spirituality within the great tradition of Spanish religious
writing. They were rather manuals emphasizing in a narrow, le¬
galistic way the obligations of the Christian and the diverse means
by which he might fall from the standard demanded of him. In
a general discussion of the sacraments, for example, Larraga de¬
voted more pages to penance (86) and matrimony (48) than to
the equally important sacraments of the Eucharist (23) and bap¬
tism (18). And for good measure he allotted nearly 200 pages to
the numerous sins that could be committed against each of the
Ten Commandments.
    The norms of conduct expected of the faithful according to
this literature reflected secular as well as religious concerns. Within
the framework of an absolute monarchy and a hierarchical society
dominated by the nobility, it is not surprising that authors em¬
phasized the obligation of submission and obedience to authority.
In his explanation of the fourth commandment Larraga stressed
that respect and obedience must be rendered not only to one’s
parents but also to the ecclesiastical authorities and “to the other
superiors who govern us,” from kings to teachers. This duty was
further linked to the structure of society, for each individual was
bound to observe “the obligations which correspond to his estate
and occupation.”43
    The manuals devoted considerable attention to family life. Here
too the principle of authority was rigorously upheld. Antonio
Arbiol affirmed that “Married women are subject to their
spouses . . . because the man is the head of his wife just as Christ
Our Lord is the head of his Holy Church; . . . thus, women must
be subjected to their husbands in all things.”44 Larraga observed
that the obligation of obedience to the father was so great within
a family that “the son who does not obey his father in matters
     Prosperity and Religion                                    63




involving the government of the household and good customs
commits a mortal sin.”45 On the terrain of morality the manuals
took pains to underline the numerous temptations of the flesh
threatening the stability of the family. This literature, however,
was not exclusively concerned with questions of personal morality.
The manuals invariably exhorted their readers to practice charity
both to save their souls and to preserve a hierarchical society,
which was thought to rest on organic links based on the mutual
obligations of all its members, from king to beggar. How deeply
these manuals influenced their readers is impossible to say. Their
continued popularity throughout the eighteenth century does in¬
dicate that they were being read by a wide public and that they
continued to be useful as a means of communicating knowledge
of doctrine and the Church’s teaching on moral questions.
   An instrument of popular evangelization was also used by the
Church with some success. Since the Council of Trent the Church
throughout Europe had relied on groups of priests, drawn gen¬
erally from the regular clergy, to revive religious fervor and spread
knowledge of basic doctrine through the preaching of popular
missions. The missions of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies produced a number of extraordinary figures, whose instinc¬
tive grasp of mass psychology and communications techniques
made them highly effective preachers. Saint Vincent de Paul (1580—
 1660) and Saint John Eudes in France, and Saint Alphonsus Ligu-
ori and Saint Leonard of Port Maurice (1676-1751) in Italy were
among the most successful practitioners of the missionary art.46
The Spanish Church produced no one of similar magnitude and
organizational skills, but the missions of the eighteenth century
allowed it to instill a measure of religious fervor in a population
whose pastoral needs were often badly served.
   Missionary campaigns carried on by the orders, especially the
Jesuits and the Capuchins, were examples of mass evangelization
that any modern preacher might envy. The missionaries, chosen
for their oratorical skills, planned their activities with care and
precision, first arousing local interest with placards, leaflets, and
processions and then conducting the services of the mission itself.
Continuing from eight to fifteen days, a successful mission pro¬
duced an atmosphere of terror, fervor, and repentance that could
combine into an explosive emotional mixture capable of sweeping
  64                                      Prosperity and Religion