



success of Francisco Celma, the model parish priest of Catf, arose
in part from the vitality of the parochial community to which he
had belonged almost since the day of his ordination.
   The parish could not fulfill the important role envisaged by its
promoters for the simple reason that it did not enjoy a religious
monopoly, save in the smallest villages. Church law required that
the faithful be baptized in their parish and that parishioners re¬
ceive the obligatory Easter Communion in their local church. The
bishops expected congregations to appear for the principal Sun¬
day Mass to receive instruction through the sermon. But there
was nothing to prevent the residents of a town from attending
Mass at the churches and chapels of the religious orders and
confraternities or, in the case of the wealthy urban elite, in the
oratories established in private houses. Cardinal de Borbon of
Toledo complained that the competition of the latter, where re¬
ligious instruction was rarely given, seriously undermined the par¬
ish: “Oratories have been converted into parishes by the indiscreet
devout. They are the cause of much Christian doctrine being
ignored, for their supporters look with indifference if not with
disaffection upon the parishes.”38 In a society abounding in churches,
chapels, and oratories, the task of elaborating effective pastoral
techniques that touched the lives of all parishioners was difficult
if not impossible.
   To encourage popular piety the Church also relied on a variety
of religious devotions. The eighteenth century formed a transi¬
tional period in the history of devotional practice. Alongside the
traditional processions and religious services of the confraterni¬
ties—with their emphasis on external, collective manifestations of
pious sentiment—there existed another world of devotion stress¬
ing the individual and his relationship to God. This formal piety,
unlike certain religious practices that escaped clerical control, was
stimulated and directed by the Church itself. The great propa¬
gators of the new devotions in Europe—notably Saint Alphonsus
Liguori (1696-1787) and Saint Francis de Sales (1567-1622)—
emphasized the spiritual, the personal, and the affective in their
devotions. From the viewpoint of the Church these devotions,
untouched by popular excesses, provided an effective technique
for spreading religion among the masses without the dangers
inherent in totally free expressions of personal piety.
    Prosperity and Religion                                    61




    The new devotions originated outside Spain, particularly in
late-seventeenth-century France, but they soon spread to the Ibe¬
rian Peninsula. The cult of the Sacred Heart, which enjoyed wide
popularity in France through the efforts of Saint Francis de Sales,
Saint John Eudes (1601-1680), and Saint Margaret Alacoque (1647-
 1690), was introduced into Spain by the Jesuit Bernardo de Hoyos
in the early 1730’s.39 The new cult stressed the love of Christ for
men and the necessity of personal spiritual development. It dif¬
fered in many ways from the collective, community-oriented piety
promoted by the traditional religious confraternities. The Jesuits
made the cult of the Sacred Heart their own and worked to spread
it throughout the kingdom.40 Jesuit missionary preachers founded
pious associations known as congregations in the parishes they vis¬
ited. The congregations, unlike the older confraternities, devoted
themselves entirely to spiritual exercises. Thus, the congregation
founded in 1746 at Deva in the Basque Provinces met several
times a year exclusively for devotions to improve the spiritual
condition of its members.41 Although devotion to the Sacred Heart
fell under suspicion with the attack on the Jesuits in the 1760’s,
it received wide support from bishops during the 1740’s and 1750’s
and became the most important new cult in the kingdom. There
were others, such as that of the Virgin as Shepherdess of Souls
promoted by the Capuchins, but none equaled the Sacred Heart
in popularity.
    The spread of the new devotions strengthened the faith among
a population that at best commanded a minimal knowledge of
doctrine. The Church also sought to encourage a basic knowledge
of the faith through the distribution of the old but still popular
catechisms of Gaspar Astete (1599) and Jeronimo Ripalda (1618).
Their effectiveness was limited both by widespread illiteracy, par¬
ticularly in the countryside, and by the absence of any catechetical
technique save the simple memorization of questions and answers.
Although some bishops introduced the more sophisticated cate¬
chism of the abbe Fleury, the Spanish Church failed to produce
an effective catechetical text of its own until the mid nineteenth
century.
  An abundant literature devoted to more detailed exposition of
doctrine and the norms of moral conduct served the kingdom’s
educated minority. Works such as La familia regulada by the Fran-
  62                                        Prosperity and Religion