




sources and allow it to fulfill its pastoral mission more effectively.
The chasm between the reforming ideal and the social reality of
the Church was never bridged.



   The appeal of traditional forms of religious expression and the
organizational weaknesses of the Church prevented the religious
transformation of the kingdom. The Spanish Church arrived at
the end of the reign of Charles III (1788) in the same form and
with the same problems that had troubled it thirty years before.
Its weaknesses—organizational, material, and pastoral—had been
held in check by the quality of civil and ecclesiastical leadership
and by economic circumstances, which had made the four decades
after 1750 perhaps the most prosperous in the history of the
Spanish Church. But in the 1790’s Church and monarchy alike
entered a new and dangerous phase, which over the long term
would transform their places within the social and political order.
3   /   The First Shocks, 1790—1814



   The final decade of the eighteenth century opened a long pe¬
riod of institutional decline for the Spanish Church that would
end in the destruction of its wealth and the constraint of its priv¬
ileges. By 1840 the Church had lost much of its property and was
on the verge of losing the remainder; it had seen the suppression
of the male religious orders and faced a challenge to its interpre¬
tation of social standards and culture from the nineteenth-century
secularizing revolution associated with the rise of liberalism. Be¬
tween 1790 and 1808 the Church saw the erosion of its financial
resources and its once comfortable relationship with absolute
monarchy. It confronted for the first time the danger posed by
revolutionary upheaval, and after 1808 it reeled under the ma¬
terial devastation that followed Napoleon’s intervention in Span¬
ish affairs. The convocation of Spain’s first modern parliamentary
assembly, which met at Cadiz between 1810 and 1813, effectively
ended the absolute monarchy of the eighteenth century. The Cortes
of Cadiz introduced a new political order involving limitations on
royal power, the creation of parliamentary institutions, and the
undermining of social privilege, which the vast majority of church¬
men refused to accept. There thus began the long conflict between
liberalism and the Church that characterized Spain’s nineteenth-
century history. The struggle was not easily resolved, for the Church
emerged from the crisis that began in 1790 with a harsh and
theocratic view of its role in society. This would make its task of
adaptation to new social and political forces impossible over the
short term and painful over the long.



The Church in Crisis, 1790—1808

  The opening of the period of crisis coincided with the death
of Charles III, the most successful architect of the royal Church,


                                                                73
  74                                            The First Shocks




in 1788 and the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789. Both
events would alter the course of Spanish history and exercise a
profound effect on the Church’s future.
   The succession of Charles IV (1788-1808) did not promise
substantial changes in the enlightened absolute monarchy that had
functioned well during the preceding reign. The new king’s lim¬
ited intellectual abilities, indecisiveness, and preference for car¬
pentry and collecting clocks over attending to the affairs of the
State were already well known. But the ministers of Charles III,
particularly the conde de Floridablanca, were kept in office, and
there was every indication that government policy would continue
on the same course. The ministerial stability so prized by Charles
III did not long survive the court intrigues and vacillating char¬
acter of the new king, however. Few periods in Spain’s history
demanded a higher degree of statesmanship than the two tur¬
bulent decades following the accession of Charles IV. The emer¬
gence of an aggressive France during the Revolutionary and
Napoleonic periods and a series of economic and fiscal crises, each
deeper than the preceding, would have tested the survival of the
kingdom’s absolute monarchy in the best of circumstances. The
direction of the State after 1792, however, rested with a royal
favorite, a young ex-officer who had won the favor of the king
and queen. Manuel de Godoy would dominate the kingdom’s
political history, except during the years 1797-1800 until 1808.
Although often ridiculed by his political opponents and blamed
for Spain’s subsequent misfortunes, Godoy possessed a quick if
superficial intelligence that reflected the traditional concerns of
the eighteenth-century royal bureaucrat. His policies were not
very different from his predecessors’, although his opportunism,
lack of administrative experience, and personal greed impeded
the continuation of effective reforms.
    The policy of the State toward the Church appeared to follow
the pattern laid down by Charles III. But the royal Church that
fit so smoothly into the projects of enlightened absolutism began
to suffer new strains. The prudence that had allowed Charles III
to convert the Church into a useful instrument of royal policy
yielded to more direct pressures under Charles IV. Favoritism in
ecclesiastical appointments, though not lacking during the pre-
     The First Shocks                                              75