




eliminate devotion to the Sacred Heart from their dioceses on the
grounds that it detracted from the central object of liturgical
devotion, the Mass.65 The reformers also encouraged biblical study,
and in 1783 the Inquisition took the unheard-of step of allowing
the Bible to be read in the vernacular. This initiative led to the
first complete Castilian translation of the Bible, published in Va¬
lencia between 1790 and 1793 by Father Felipe Scio. The ideal
of the reforming movement was an intellectual religion in which
the faithful understood the truths of the faith, practiced the lit¬
urgy with simplicity, and advanced on the road of personal spir¬
itual perfection.
   The success of ecclesiastical reform was closely tied to the sup¬
port it received from the State during the reign of Charles III. A
close alliance existed between reform and regalism; clerics inter¬
ested in promoting change endorsed expanding royal interven¬
tion in Church affairs even at the level of discipline. Reforming
ecclesiastics welcomed the expulsion of the Jesuits, the royal foun¬
dation of new seminaries, and the intervention of public author¬
ities against the excesses of “popular” religion. Moreover, the
interests of reformers and royal bureaucrats coincided on such
issues as the power of the bishops in relation to the papacy and
episcopal control over the religious orders. But some clerics, Bishop
Climent of Barcelona, for example, feared the consequences of
excessive state control. In general, however, reforming church¬
men looked to the State because they perceived that it alone had
the authority necessary to grapple with both Rome and deeply
entrenched religious custom.
    Between 1750 and 1780 the reforming movement, with its pri¬
marily pastoral and educational emphasis, received broad support
from the elite of the Caroline Church. During the 1780’s, however,
reform began to move toward a more vigorous program, which
envisaged deeper changes within the Church and a sharper chal¬
lenge to papal authority on the issue of episcopal jurisdiction. The
emergence of a new generation of reformers, who exemplified
the vitality of ecclesiastical culture in the 1770’s and 1780’s, and
the influence of the ambitious reforms proclaimed in Italy by the
diocesan Synod of Pistoia in 1786 with the support of Bishop Ricci
and the grand duke of Tuscany, opened new perspectives of
     Prosperity and Religion                                      71




change.66 The new reformers—Archdeacon Palafox of Cuenca;
Antonio Tavira, later a leading reforming bishop; Juan Antonio
Llorente, canon of Valencia; and others—viewed the problems of
the Church in sharper focus and pressed for change more ag¬
gressively. Their hostility to the religious orders and the Inquisi¬
tion as well as their determination to reduce papal authority over
the Spanish Church were viewed with sympathy by the royal bu¬
reaucracy. But by 1790 a growing number of clerics, including
some of the old reformers of the 1760’s and 1770’s, regarded
these views with increasing suspicion.
   Whether in its first or second phase, the reforming movement
of the second half of the eighteenth century shows that a cultural
vitality closely tied to the intellectual currents of the age was pres¬
ent in a select minority of the ecclesiastical establishment. How
deeply reform penetrated through the dense mass of ritual and
popular religious practices is another question. Even the real
achievements of the reformers aroused opposition within the
Church. The decision to allow the reading of the Bible in the
vernacular, for example, was not greeted with uniform enthusi¬
asm by the clergy. “It is unbelievable,” said Canon Joaquin Lo¬
renzo Villanueva, one of the advocates of the reform, that such
“fears and suspicions” should persist among priests who were
afraid of the faithful reading the Scriptures.67
   The reforming movement failed to produce the transformation
its supporters so ardently preached. Although the post-Vatican
II world might view many of the reforming initiatives of the eigh¬
teenth century with approval, the emphases on a more personal,
interior religion, on knowledge of religious truth, and on the
practice of a simple liturgy had little appeal to a population for
whom religion meant emotion and ceremony and rested at a pop¬
ular level on a mixture of faith and folk belief.
   The reforming movement, moreover, emerged from a small,
cultivated clerical elite that owed its very existence to the unjust
and imbalanced structure of the eighteenth-century Church. The
reformers advocated improving the financial lot of the lowly par¬
ish priest, and in general wished to see a reduction in the number
of monks and friars, but they did not propose any fundamental
restructuring of the Church to redistribute personnel and re-
  72                                       Prosperity and Religion