




tence. Death, disease, locusts, droughts, storms, and a variety of
other natural catastrophes gave to all an immediate sense of the
precariousness of the human condition and of life itself.53 Thus
there developed a world of vows, shrines, and religious images
designed not to win the grace necessary for salvation, of which
the theologians spoke, but to protect man from earthly disaster,
bring him good fortune in this life, and secure intercessors for
the life hereafter. Religion at this level served as a protective
talisman, for it rested on a bargain or contract with God, the
Blessed Virgin, and the saints—all of whom were represented in
immediate and physical terms by sacred places, statues, and in¬
tercessory rites.
   Whether “popular” or “local” religion existed as autonomously
from the official liturgy of the Church as Christian suggested is
not entirely clear. It is at least certain that during the eighteenth
century this varied and often extravagant form of religious prac¬
tice persisted. The prospect or fact of natural disasters invariably
resulted in intercessory rites designed to win the support of par¬
ticular saints whose efforts were thought to be efficacious in spe¬
cific calamities. In 1758, when locusts and ants invaded the fields
of Andalusia, the head of Saint Gregory Ostiense, who was es¬
teemed for protection against natural plagues, was brought to the
afflicted regions from distant Pamplona. Representatives from
country towns filled the cathedral of Seville to venerate the sacred
relic and to obtain holy water that had touched the head to sprinkle
on their fields as they returned home. Natural disasters frequently
involved the formal participation of the clergy. When the earth¬
quake of 1755 struck Seville, thousands rushed to the streets
“pleading for confession and mercy” as the clergy organized
processions through the city to persuade the population to repent
in that dark hour which seemed to herald the end of the world.54
Other intercessory rites were designed to win good fortune, as in
Oviedo when thousands of peasants from the surrounding coun¬
tryside filled the cathedral each year for the exposition of a holy
shroud imprinted with the image of Christ. The congregation
raised baskets filled with bread and cakes as high as possible when
the shroud was raised “in the full persuasion that these cakes, thus
exposed, would acquire virtue to cure or to alleviate all diseases.”55
     Prosperity and Religion                                     67




   There was little liturgical purity and even less decorum in the
many examples of popular piety that have come to light. In Tala-
vera de la Reina, for example, a high Mass was sung in a local
church on each of the nine days before Christmas for the town’s
children. They arrived “furnished with whistles ... As soon as the
Mass begins the vaulted roofs of the church resound with the
strong and shrill sound of innumerable whistles; they accompany
the singing of the priests with this disorderly noise at the elevation
of the host, the communion and the prayers at the end of Mass.”56
Such picturesque activities received grudging tolerance from the
Church. But the clergy viewed others with open hostility. The
festival of Las Mondas held in Talavera after Easter evoked in¬
tense clerical opposition. In a ceremony with origins in a remote
and perhaps pagan past, peasants moved through the town car¬
rying “corn, wine, oil, fruits and flowers” and leading “lambs,
sheep, as^es, and hogs” into the church itself, where they were
offered to the Virgin.57 In 1802 the clergy of the town declared
that they would not attend the ceremony, because in their judg¬
ment it was entirely profane and unsuitable from a religious point
of view.58 The authorities of the archdiocese of Toledo took even
more vigorous action to eradicate a custom that had taken root
in the town of Torrijos. At vespers on the feast of San Gil, a bull
was introduced into the parish church and led to the altar as the
priest intoned the Magnificat. The animal was then taken to the
local hospital so patients could kiss the rope with which it had
been led and benefit from its miraculous qualities.59
   The Church had long sought to eradicate or at least control
religious practices it judged superstitious. These efforts became
particularly intense after 1750. Bishop Felipe Bertran of Sala¬
manca summed up the attitude of many of his episcopal colleagues
before customs he believed were irregular and damaging to the
faith. Such practices, he held, were “so opposed to the simplicity
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ” that they threatened “to suffocate
the seed of true and healthy doctrine.”60 Ironically, bishops such
as Bertran and Climent, esteemed for their commitment to pas¬
toral work and numbered among the most enlightened members
of the hierarchy, attacked “popular” religion most vigorously. In
Barcelona Climent worked tirelessly against such practices, as did
  68                                        Prosperity and Religion