




Francisco Lorenzana in Toledo, Francisco Fabian y Fuero in Va¬
lencia, and Bertran in Salamanca.61 These efforts, however, did
not succeed in eliminating customs that had taken deep root in
patterns of local sociability. Climent’s admonitions to parish priests
of churches where “the most horrible abuses” were thought to be
taking place reveal that the clergy was not particularly willing to
reform practices that continued to enjoy wide popularity.62
   The opposition of bishops, such as Bertran and Climent, to
“superstitious” practices was one aspect of the reforming move¬
ment that swept through the elite of the Spanish Church after
1750. The reformers were committed to a purity of belief and
practice incompatible with both the extravagances of the official
cult and the practices of “popular” religion. The reformers, al¬
though labeled Jansenists by their enemies and enlightened Cath¬
olics by recent historiographical admirers, did not constitute a
tightly knit group committed to the realization of a specific pro¬
gram of change within the Church.63 The movement rested on
its supporters’ perception that religious ignorance, superstition,
and moral corruption made Spain Catholic in name only, and that
the problems facing the Church required critical examination and
rational solutions.
   The intellectual origins of the reforming movement were ex¬
tremely diverse, ranging from the Gallican French reformers, no¬
tably Bishop Bossuet and the abbe Claude Fleury, to the Tuscan
reformers gathered around the bishop of Pistoia in the 1780’s,
Scipione de’ Ricci. Many of the ecclesiastics identified with reform
in Spain also looked back to the brilliant humanistic culture that
had developed in the sixteenth century under the influence of
Erasmus. The concerns of these “new humanists” of the eigh¬
teenth century were similar to those of their sixteenth-century
predecessors, whose aversion to the narrow world of scholasticism
and religious formalism they shared. The reforming movement
in the eighteenth-century Church was, moreover, a significant
intellectual phenomenon in the secular culture of the period. Fig¬
ures such as Francisco Perez Bayer, the biblical scholar; Enrique
Florez, the archivist and historian; and others testify to the solidity
of its cultural foundations.
   The reforming movement, although it did not rest on a co-
     Prosperity and Religion                                      69




herent set of philosophical and theological assumptions, did at¬
tempt to study the obvious problems the Spanish Church faced
with a rational and humanistic spirit. The emphasis was not doc¬
trinal but practical and pastoral, hence the wide differences of
opinion that often separated the reformers on specific issues. But
between 1750 and 1785 suggestions for reform in certain areas
received wide support from bishops such as Climent of Barcelona,
Bertran of Salamanca, Lorenzana of Toledo, and Fabian y Fuero
of Valencia as well as from canons in cathedral chapters and priests
holding university chairs. Those pressing for reform formed a
minority of the clerical elite, but their education, intellectual gifts,
and religious commitment produced a vital ecclesiastical culture
that the Spanish Church would never know again.
   The issues attracting the reformers’ attention in the three dec¬
ades after 1750 were primarily pastoral. Prelates, such as Bertran
in Salamanca, painfully aware of the intellectual poverty of their
clergy, worked actively to promote the foundation of new semi¬
naries and urged their priests to participate in periodic spiritual
conferences. The extravagant language and theatrical gestures
common to Spanish preaching until the middle of the century
evoked severe disapproval. The preacher holding a lantern in
front of him in a darkened church to search for lost souls, carrying
chains that he clattered to illustrate the fate of the damned, flut¬
tering a white handkerchief to hold the attention of his congre¬
gation, or using elaborate language incomprehensible to most of
his hearers—all were censured by the reformers. Particularly in
the 1770’s and 1780’s, a reform designed to make sacred oratory
more effective through simplicity of language and gesture was
encouraged.64
   The great enemy of the reformers was what they saw as su¬
perstition and the vast range of popular devotions, which they
believed hindered the faithful from practicing their religion with
the purity the reformers felt it merited. Through their influence
 public flagellation and dancing giants in processions were forbid¬
den, and other devotions were subjected to scrutiny. The reform¬
ers had little use for the new piety embodied in cults such as the
Sacred Heart and the Virgin as Shepherdess of Souls. After the
expulsion of the Jesuits, reforming bishops worked actively to
  70                                      Prosperity and Religion