




ceding reign, became widespread, as evidenced by the large num¬
ber of bishops appointed from Godoy’s native Extremadura and
by his open intervention on behalf of certain monks and friars
for appointment as national vicars of their orders.1 Although Godoy
continued the practice of extending state authority over every
aspect of ecclesiastical life, it became clear that the ideal of a royal
Church took second place to manipulation designed to buttress
the favorite’s personal power.
   Prelates daring to question the State’s expanding hold over the
Church, particularly in ecclesiastical finances, aroused a violent
reaction in Madrid. Symbolic of the changing character of the
relationship between Throne and Altar was the fate of a model
bishop of the royal Church of Charles III. Francisco Fabian y
Fuero as bishop of Puebla (Mexico) had supported the expulsion
of the Jesuits before returning to Spain as archbishop of Valencia
in 1773. Few prelates of the Caroline Church came closer to the
ideal of the cultured, public-spirited, and pastoral bishop. None
was more loyal to Charles Ill’s design for the Church. But even
the Valencian archbishop became uneasy over the demands of
the Crown in the 1790’s. An order issued in 1795 by the city’s
captain general commanding a group of French Ursulines to leave
Valencia provoked an episcopal protest that prompted the wrath
of Godoy. Accused by the Council of Castile of having acted “in
direct contradiction to the orders of His Majesty,” Fabian y Fuero
was forced to resign his see in the midst of a controversy that
showed how far Madrid was prepared to go to eliminate any
challenge to its authority.2
   Prelates such as Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo who showed
concern over the direction of state policy were eased from their
positions. Lorenzana, primate of the Spanish Church since 1772
and, like Fabian y Fuero, a model of the enlightened bishop, found
himself expendable as Queen Maria Luisa and Godoy intrigued
at court to secure the appointment to the Toledo archdiocese
of a member of the royal family, the Infante Luis de Borbon,
whose pliable character contrasted with that of the more de¬
termined incumbent. The eliminations of Fabian y Fuero and
Lorenzana did not provoke widespread opposition within the
Church, but they stimulated an undercurrent of dissatisfaction
  76                                             The First Shocks




among clerics who were growing uneasy over the degree of state
control.
   The aggressive ecclesiastical policies of the State after 1792
served Godoy’s political interests; they also won support from
influential groups in the royal bureaucracy that wished to elimi¬
nate remaining papal control over the Spanish Church and rein¬
force the authority of the bishops. The new regalism of the 1790’s
reflected the growing influence in official circles of the program
of ecclesiastical reform developed at the 1786 Synod of Pistoia.
   The departure of Godoy as principal minister in 1797 and the
installation of the most progressive ministry of the century saw
the State attempt to extend its authority over the Church.3 The
new ministry, dominated by enlightened figures such as Gaspar
de Jovellanos and Mariano Luis de Urquijo, did not intend to
undermine the privileged position of the Church, but it believed
that in certain areas of ecclesiastical policy changes were necessary.
The opposition of conservative ecclesiastics prevented the adop¬
tion of significant reforms, but the new government skirmished
with the Inquisition, and in 1799 it issued a controversial decree
ordering that matrimonial dispensations previously accorded by
Rome should be granted by the bishops.4 The decree, another
unilateral extension of royal authority over the Church, aroused
the apprehensions of leading members of the hierarchy. The arch¬
bishops of Santiago, Burgos, Tarragona, and Valencia saw the
beginnings of a schism between Rome and the Spanish Church
in the government’s action. A few prelates, notably Bishop Tavira
of Salamanca and Cardinal de Borbon of Toledo, supported the
State’s initiative because it reinforced the authority of the epis¬
copacy, but others kept silent. Although the attitude of the bishops
revealed divisions within the Church, for the first time in over
four decades a significant minority of the hierarchy began to look
to Rome as a possible counterweight to the pressures of absolute
monarchy.
   The equilibrium between Throne and Altar was also upset dur¬
ing the 1790’s by the royal treasury’s demands on ecclesiastical
revenues. The government of Charles III had appropriated a
considerable portion of clerical wealth for secular purposes, but
the general prosperity of the Church after 1750 allowed eccle-
     The First Shocks                                            77