




normal relations with the hierarchy. But bishops who had sup¬
ported the rising of 1808 through pastoral letters and donations
fled their dioceses as the French armies advanced in late 1808 and
throughout 1809. Even the eighty-year-old bishop of Segovia, Jose
Saenz, left his diocese in the dead of winter and crossed the snowy
Guadarrama Mountains to escape. Bishop Aguiriano of Calahorra
dressed as a simple priest fled his diocese in a region of intense
military campaigning and moved on foot over back roads toward
Murcia in the south, while Archbishop Muzquiz of Santiago and
Bishop Pedro Quevedo y Quintana of Orense abandoned their
sees in Galicia for Portugal. The steady progress of the French
advance kept the bishops on the move, although most proceeded
in the end either to Cadiz or Mallorca.
   The episcopal exodus prevented normalization of the Church’s
position in regions dominated by French arms, and this included
most of the kingdom by the end of 1809. The new regime tried
unsuccessfully to persuade prelates such as Quevedo y Quintana
to remain in their dioceses and then turned to the few churchmen
sympathetic to the monarchy of Joseph Napoleon. In May-June
1810 the secretary of state, Mariano Urquijo, deposed the bishops
of Osma, Calahorra, Astorga, and Toledo, who had all left their
dioceses to support the national rising. Their nominated replace¬
ments included Fray Miguel de Santander, once auxiliary bishop
to Ramon de Arce in Zaragoza, for Seville; Alfonso Aguado, aux¬
iliary bishop of Madrid, for Calahorra; and Felix Amat, one of
the most distinguished intellectual figures among clerical reform¬
ers, for Osma.
   This policy, however, proved unworkable. The nominee for
Astorga declined; Amat expressed reservations about his appoint¬
ment; and Fray Miguel de Santander, though willing to accept his
elevation to Seville, never occupied the diocese. The fate of Aguado,
one of the few prelates who attempted to take up his appointment,
revealed how little control the government exercised over the
Church, even in regions under its power. From his sanctuary in
the south, the deposed bishop, Aguiriano, was able to maintain
contact with his cathedral chapter through messengers. When the
new prelate arrived in Calahorra, he found a recalcitrant chapter
refusing cooperation and the financial support he needed to live
as well as popular hostility. Recognizing that his position was hope-
  88                                            The First Shocks




less, the new bishop finally abandoned the city. The government
in Madrid, realizing that its policy had been a failure, revoked its
episcopal nominations in the summer of 1811.20
   Joseph Napoleon’s government attempted to come to terms
with the hierarchy, but its policy toward the regular clergy was
openly hostile. From its early days monks and friars had taken an
active part in the resistance against the French. Indeed, no group
was more vehement and determined in its opposition to the new
regime—hence the term frailada, applied by historians to the re¬
sistance of the orders. Throughout the kingdom members of the
regular clergy supported the initial risings of May and June 1808.
In Catalonia the Franciscans served as members of local juntas in
Lerida, Reus, Tarragona, and Gerona. In La Coruna the order
opened its friary to conspirators plotting against the French. In
churches where the Catalan friars preached against the invaders,
congregations became so aroused that they shouted: “Long live
Jesus! Death to anything contrary to his Divine Love!”21
   During the military campaigns of late 1808 and 1809 religious
played a significant part as support troops and soldiers in the
heroic defenses of Zaragoza and Gerona. In the siege of Gerona
the Franciscans, the most numerous order in the city, assumed
defense of the Merced Fort and repulsed numerous attacks. As
the French armies advanced southward, members of the regular
clergy joined the irregular army of guerrillas harassing French
lines. In Baeza the superior of the Franciscan friary and a lecturer
in theology took to the hills and commanded a unit of guerrillas;
in Galicia another member of the order, “Lieutenant” Pego, won
fame for his military exploits.22 The orders also served as effective
instruments of propaganda against the French. A Dominican
chronicler writing shortly after the war thus recalled with satis¬
faction: “in the sacrament of penance and in their sermons, the
friars aroused the greatest hatred against our enemies by showing
that they had violated the religion of our fathers and persecuted
the Church of Jesus Christ.”23
   The new regime was in any event hostile to the orders. The
Spanish ministers of Joseph Napoleon, such as Urquijo, who had
been a member of the reforming government of 1797-1800, shared
the aversion to the regulars already widespread in official circles.
As the French secured their position in 1809, the government
    The First Shocks                                           89