




1804, which were considered the “first sparks of the consuming
fire”—Spaniards had rushed on blindly until the final catastrophe,
for “far from appeasing the anger of God, they acted to provoke
it.” But if Providence had acted to punish, it also offered the
chance of repentance. “The Most High, who is the God of fury
and vengeance, is reaching out anew to Spaniards to convert them,”
declared a preacher stressing a theme repeated over and over
again in the sermons of 1809. Despite all the kingdom’s trials and
tribulations, the war offered an opportunity for spiritual regen¬
eration. For many churchmen the conflict seemed a purifying
instrument that opened the prospect of a new age of morality and
religion linked to a glorious national revival. Preaching in Cervera
in 1809 at a service for the victims of the second of May, Agustfn
Torres told his congregation, “Spain . . . will fix its attention on
the foundations of a new order, generation and century; it will
improve its laws and correct the vices which have led it to the
precipice; ... it will erect a wall of bronze against the greed, vices
and perfidy of our wicked neighbour [France] and will proscribe
its dress, fashions, customs and impiety ... In the midst of most
confused and terrible convulsions, a golden century of prosperity
and grandeur will be born. May God finish this great work.”
    Ideas on sin and repentance, and spiritual and national reno¬
vation inspired the extravagant and violent rhetoric against Na¬
poleon and the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain. Many churchmen
were convinced that Joseph Napoleon and the French army had
to be driven out if the religious and national “revolution” they
preached was to succeed. Clerics were vague about the specific
content of the revolution, but they saw the Church as the directing
force in a great national transformation. Customs were to be re¬
formed, moral corruption extirpated, philosophical dissent sup¬
pressed, and religious values exalted. Society was to be transformed
along theocratic lines so that a repentant nation might fulfill its
destiny as the “chosen people” of the New Testament.


Theocracy and Liberalism, 1810—1813

   Realization of this emotional and messianic vision was not to be
easy. Political circumstances in unoccupied Spain during 1808 and
1809, particularly the weakness of the Junta Central as a national
  92                                             The First Shocks




government, resulted in the convocation in 1809 of Spain’s tra¬
ditional but long dormant parliamentary assembly, the Cortes.
The election of a Cortes to save the nation from the disasters
multiplying on all sides initially won support even from those
committed to the survival of the traditional monarchy. Responses
of ecclesiastical notables to a questionnaire dispatched to the king¬
dom’s civil and religious elite in 1809 revealed strong support for
the summoning of a Cortes. The clerics felt it would prevent what
they considered abuses committed by absolute monarchy under
the influence of Godoy. The bishop of Orihuela stressed the ne¬
cessity of imposing restraints on capricious and arbitrary govern¬
ment through a Cortes in which “all the deputies should possess
entire liberty to speak and petition the King not only with respect
to . . . the reforms necessary in their respective provinces . . . but
also in that which touches upon . . . the Government of the King
and his Ministers.”31
   The ecclesiastical responses also show that the Church expected
the reformed monarchy to free it from the regalist controls im¬
posed by successive Bourbon monarchs—controls that had re¬
duced the bishops to being “deaf and dumb dogs” according to
the prelate of Orihuela.32 Bishops and cathedral chapters also
expressed resentment at the disamortizing legislation of Charles
IV directed against pious and charitable endowments in which
the Church had a large interest. The responses of 1809 were
straws in the wind indicating that the Church had a clear idea not
of the nature of political reform but of what it expected its own
position to be under the new order.
   The later differences between the Church and the Cortes could
only be dimly perceived in 1809, for as the elections took place it
was unclear what specific direction the new assembly would take.
Every group could nourish the hope that the Cortes would satisfy
its wishes. But even before the Cortes met at Cadiz in 1810, de¬
fenders of the Church as a highly privileged corporation within
the framework of absolute monarchy suffered a setback. The Cortes
was not divided into chambers representing the hierarchical es¬
tates of Old Regime society. It took the form of a unicameral
assembly of deputies elected through a complicated system of
indirect voting by a single group of voters. These arrangements
diminished the electoral possibilities of the bishops, only three of
     The First Shocks                                            93