




dealt with the regular clergy. On February 11 Urquijo instructed
religious superiors to dismiss all novices. On August 18 the State
ordered the suppression of monasteries and friaries. In Septem¬
ber monks and friars began to leave their houses, although some,
the Benedictines of Samos and the Franciscans of El Ferrol, sur¬
vived throughout the war. The suppression, however, proved
counterproductive. Living in their residences, monks and friars
could be controlled to a limited extent, but in the autumn of 1809
they moved through the countryside, spreading opposition to the
government in towns and villages. The Franciscans of Montblanch
in Catalonia, according to a contemporary account, “withdrew to
the neighboring hills and fanned the flames of that holy war in
the towns they passed through.” They were imitated by other
friars of the province ousted from their houses.24 And the suppres¬
sion aroused the regulars to new heights of fury against the French.
The prior of the Carmelites in Logrono thus exhorted his friars
to become “religious warriors” prepared to give up their lives “on
the battlefield of a Holy Crusade.”25
   For the majority of the secular and regular clergy, the struggle
against Napoleon was a sacred war, a “Holy Crusade” against an
invader for whom no epithet was too harsh. Churchmen poured
out a stream of violent rhetoric depicting the emperor as worse
than the infidels and heretics of old. He was “the thief of Europe,
the Attila of the present century, the enemy of God and of his
Holy Church,” “the most heretical of all heretics.”26 Spaniards
taking arms in the holy cause under the banner of the Virgin of
the Pillar, officially proclaimed commander in chief of the armies,
were assured of a celestial reward. Preaching in Malaga at a fu¬
neral service for the dead of Bailen, a friar thus addressed the
fallen: “you who have died on the field of battle have flown from
there to be united to God ... to receive the eternal prize in the
home of the just.” For good measure he called upon the Lord to
cover “the arid bones, the corrupted cadavers of the conquerors
of Marengo, Jena and Austerlitz . . . with opprobrium and igno¬
miny.”27 Such rhetorical flights were common between 1808 and
 1813 and revealed the depths of clerical hostility toward Napoleon
and the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain.
   In retrospect, these assaults seem excessive. Whatever the em¬
peror’s own religious convictions, he believed that the Church was
  90                                            The First Shocks




necessary in a stable social order; he had reestablished the link
between Church and State in France after the break imposed by
the Revolution. In Spain Joseph Napoleon realized the impor¬
tance of winning ecclesiastical support. Even the suppression of
the regular clergy, though a radical step, was not moved by an¬
tireligious sentiment. But a realistic perception of the Napoleonic
regime’s attitude toward the Church never entered the minds of
ecclesiastics, who had developed a distinct moral and philosophical
interpretation of the place of France and the French in the mod¬
ern world. For many, the French Enlightenment began the process
of undermining faith, and the excesses against the Church during
the Revolution represented the triumph of corrupt philosophy
and moral license. Bishop Aguiriano of Calahorra put the issue
simply in 1809: “From France all evil, all pestilence, all ruin has
come to us. We should have no communication with that coun¬
try . . . and we must eliminate the French language from our soil
and forbid its teaching.”28 Moreover, churchmen perceived Na¬
poleon’s fundamental indifference to religion and his conviction
that the individual should not be persecuted for his beliefs as long
as the interests of the State were protected. How could “the man
of all religions” be “the conservator of our religion,” asked one
preacher. The Napoleonic commitment to maintain Catholicism
as the only religion in Spain was dismissed as the promise of a
“sophist imposter.”29 Preachers suggested that the new regime
would introduce religious toleration, a prospect they attacked in
no uncertain terms.
   Specific grievances against the French encouraged clerical re¬
sistance, but as Martinez Albiach has shown in his brilliant study
of the ecclesiastical mentality during these years, the attitude of
many churchmen toward Spain’s national crisis reflected a theo¬
logical interpretation of the kingdom’s history. In one sense, Na¬
poleon was only the accidental agent of an impatient deity striking
down a people who refused to repent of their sins. “Spain is
suffering the lash of punishment because it provoked against itself
the terrible hand of God,” stated a preacher in a sermon given in
the cathedral of Valencia in 1809.30
   Long before the war clerics had believed that the nation was
sinking into moral dissolution. Refusing to heed the first signs of
divine wrath—the great epidemics of yellow fever in 1803 and
     The First Shocks                                            91