




whom won election. One of the most influential groups in the
Church, the regular clergy, was excluded entirely; they com¬
plained that they had been denied what “the most lowly of the
populace and the mulattos of America” were given.33 Ecclesiastical
participation in the Cortes, however, was substantial; 97 priests
from the ranks of the secular clergy were elected among the 308
deputies. The majority of the clerical deputies were drawn from
the secondary levels of the ecclesiastical elite—particularly from
the ranks of university professors and cathedral canons, whose
education and prominence had converted them into political not¬
ables in the confusing circumstances of 1808 and 1809.
    The ecclesiastical deputies, however, did not form a monolithic
block. Some of the leading clerical figures identified with eccle¬
siastical reform over the preceding decades won election. Joaquin
 Lorenzo Villanueva, former professor of theology in Salamanca,
 member of the Royal Academy of History, and chaplain of honor
 to Charles IV, won a seat and became a persistent advocate for
 reforming the abuses of the eighteenth-century Church. Diego
 Munoz Torrero, former professor of philosophy and rector of
 the University of Salamanca, emerged early in the sessions as a
 leading partisan of political and ecclesiastical change. But, as the
 later crucial votes on the fate of the Inquisition and liberty of
 expression would reveal, clerical deputies committed to far-reach¬
 ing political and ecclesiastical reform were a distinct minority among
 their fellow clergymen. Priests determined to defend the Church’s
 traditional privileges—Inguanzo, Ostolaza, Canedo, Ros, Agui-
 riano, and others—became the leading opponents of the liberal
 revolution elaborated by the Cortes of Cadiz between 1810 and
 1813.34
    The election of deputies took place in the midst of the French
 offensive that pushed the Spanish army southward throughout
 1809. The resulting confusion as well as the indirect system of
 voting allowed the election of a parliamentary majority that re¬
jected the fundamental principles on which the eighteenth-cen¬
 tury State and society had rested. Formal political parties in the
 modern sense did not exist at Cadiz. The first manifestation of
what came to be known as liberalism arose from a broad and
 sometimes shifting alliance in the Cortes that was willing to sup¬
 port profound change in the traditional order. Deputies drawn
  94                                             The First Shocks




from the civil administration (36.5 percent of the membership)
and the military (13.6 percent) were joined by a minority from
the clergy to form the basis of a liberal majority.35 The political
origins of liberalism at Cadiz arose from diverse sources—the
utilitarian emphasis of state reform during the eighteenth century,
the critical spirit that had swept through educated opinion from
the 1780’s on, the influence of the French revolutionary consti¬
tution of 1791, simple disgust with the performance of absolute
monarchy in its recent history, and more individualist patterns of
economic thought. All these contributed to the creation of a pow¬
erful sentiment in favor of fundamental changes in government
and the development of society.
   The Cortes of Cadiz did not challenge the existence of the
monarchy itself. It early recognized Ferdinand VII as the king¬
dom’s legitimate sovereign. But the assembly undermined the basis
of absolute monarchy and the hierarchical social structure of the
Old Regime through legislation. The Cortes proclaimed the doc¬
trine of national sovereignty, abolished seigneurial and jurisdic¬
tional privileges held by the nobility and the Church, established
the principle of equality before the law, and ended legal privileges
based on social class. In 1812 the Cortes passed a constitution that
severely limited the authority of the executive power vested in the
king and established a clear division of powers, giving the legis¬
lature a dominant voice in the conduct of political affairs.
   The legislation of the Cortes represented the triumph of those
educated groups within Old Regime society that had been ex¬
cluded from direct participation in political power and from the
benefits enjoyed by a small minority of the socially privileged. The
liberal revolution was radical insofar as it dismantled absolute
monarchy and the hierarchical society associated with it; it was
conservative in its determination to avoid creating an open-ended
political system with significant popular participation.
   The relationship of the liberal revolution to the Church would
influence the course of Spanish history into the twentieth century.
In the eyes of generations of clerical apologists, the decisions of
the Cortes on ecclesiastical matters began the erosion of the Church’s
influence. In spite of the brickbats hurled at the liberal deputies
of Cadiz even before the assembly dissolved, nothing was further
from their minds than a program designed to undermine the place
     The First Shocks                                          95