




modern theologians who are furiously combatting the Catholic
Church under the specious pretext of reforming it.” For Bonola,
clerical advocates of reform were co-conspirators with modern
“philosophers” in a subtle plot to undermine the unity and power
of the Church from within.14 The Church had allowed these cor¬
rupt theories to develop, and although Bonola did not provide a
specific plan of action, his implication was clear: reform had to
be eliminated if the Church was to regain the strength and dis¬
cipline necessary to survive the threat to its existence.
   Neither side triumphed in the continuing and increasingly bit¬
ter debate over reform before 1808. The balance of forces shifted
constantly, to the reformers between 1790 and 1792, to the tra¬
ditionalists between 1793 and 1795, to reform again during the
progressive ministry of 1797-1800, and then in the other direc¬
tion with the promulgation of Auctorem Fidei in 1801. Given the
range of opinion in both camps, it is difficult to establish precise
lines of division. The regular clergy and a majority of the hier¬
archy, though circumspect, were either hostile to or at least uneasy
about aspects of the movement for change. Reform drew its strength
less from the hierarchy—in spite of the support of several prelates,
such as Bishop Tavira—than from the secondary levels of the
Church’s elite—cathedral canons, ecclesiastical bureaucrats, and
university professors. They were the cultivated clerical intelli¬
gentsia formed at Salamanca and other universities where the
ideas of Pistoia had exercised a profound intellectual effect since
the mid-1780’s. The mass of the secular clergy, living isolated in
country parishes, scarcely participated in the struggle. Among
those involved, traditionalists composed a clear majority, but the
reformers enjoyed a significant advantage; their ideas on change
and their acceptance of secular intervention in ecclesiastical affairs
won the support, firm or weak depending on prevailing political
circumstances, of the strongly regalist state administration. But
neither side was able to win a total victory by the eve of Napoleon’s
intervention in Spanish affairs.
   The civil war within the Church between 1790 and 1808, the
State’s aggressive regalism, financial demands on ecclesiastical in¬
stitutions, and the militant and theocratic mentality encouraged
by the French Revolution upset the equilibrium that Charles III
had imposed on the Church. The Caroline formula, based on a
  84                                              The First Shocks




high degree of state control designed to promote the enlightened
objectives of absolute monarchy, proved increasingly unworkable
as the kingdom entered a period of political, economic, military,
and diplomatic crisis. By 1808 it was clear that many churchmen
were disenchanted with the monarchy of Charles IV and the gov¬
ernment of Godoy. There was no question of the Church assum¬
ing a direct political role because of its own divisions and the State’s
enormous power over ecclesiastical affairs. But simmering clerical
resentment against the royal favorite and a monarchy whose fiscal
demands and interference were becoming more onerous, as well
as the conviction that Spain was submerged in a morass of spiritual
degradation and libertinism, created a mood of frustration and
suspicion that made the Caroline ideal of a pastoral and public-
spirited Church impossible. For the majority of the clergy, only
lightly touched by the critical introspection of the progressive
elements of the ecclesiastical elite, reform receded before a deep
and primitive sense that the Church was about to enter a final
struggle between Christianity and irreligion.
   In these circumstances there was no possibility of bringing about
either ecclesiastical reform or the spiritual regeneration desired
by both reformers and traditionalists. The fundamental problems
of the Church grew more serious. Between 1790 and 1808, a
period of rampant inflation, the economic situation of the parish
clergy deteriorated significantly. The cura of Boceguillas in Se¬
govia complained that parochial revenues had declined so severely
between 1796 and 1805 that many parish priests of the diocese
lacked the funds “either to feed or dress themselves decently.”15
The clerical elite and the regular clergy, though affected adversely
by the financial demands of the State, survived with their wealth
largely intact; the distance between the upper and regular clergy
and parish priests widened.
   The orders, in fact, experienced an increase in vocations be¬
tween 1800 and 1808.16 This was not, however, accompanied by
any reform of the factionalism and lack of religious commitment
characteristic of the regulars during the eighteenth century. Dis¬
sension within the orders reached epidemic proportions just be¬
fore 1808. Accusations against tyrannical superiors poured into
the Council of Castile from monks and frairs throughout the
kingdom. In 1804, for example, the Franciscans of Ledesma com-
    The First Shocks                                         85