




plained against “an inhuman and despotic” superior whose ar¬
bitrary conduct had left the friary on the verge of open revolt.17
Godoy regarded the problem of the orders as so serious that in
1804 he secured a brief from Pius VII authorizing a general in¬
spection of the regular clergy as a prelude to reform, but nothing
was done. The Spanish Church thus arrived at the critical year
of 1808 with none of its problems solved, some aggravated, and
new ones created.


A New Crusade, 1808—1814

   By 1808 the monarchy of Charles IV had drifted toward the
final stages of disintegration. Years of economic and financial
crisis, widespread dissatisfaction with the French alliance Godoy
had accepted, and mounting resentment against the favorite among
supporters of the heir to the throne, Ferdinand, finally produced
the explosion that ended for all practical purposes the absolute
monarchy of the eighteenth century. Godoy began to fear Na¬
poleon’s intentions. Although French garrisons across northern
Spain were ostensibly stationed to maintain communications with
the Napoleonic army fighting the English in Portugal, they were
not docile guests. Godoy’s suspicion of them led him to transfer
the court to the royal palace at Aranjuez south of Madrid as a
prelude to a further move either to southern Spain or perhaps
to one of the American colonies. Seizing the opportunity created
by the apprehension and confusion surrounding the court’s re¬
moval, supporters of Ferdinand, whose relations with his father
and Godoy had been strained for years, played on popular fears
to provoke a riot. The Tumult of Aranjuez (March 17-19, 1808)
brought about the fall and arrest of Godoy and forced a frightened
Charles IV to abdicate in his son’s favor.
   The accession of Ferdinand VII was welcomed by the Church
save for a few clerics, such as the archbishop of Zaragoza, Ramon
de Arce, who owed his career to the favorite’s influence. Through¬
out the kingdom the clergy held services of thanksgiving for the
new monarch, while denunciations of Godoy for having “de¬
graded and debased” Spain poured from clerical pens.18 But na¬
tional rejoicing was short-lived. Napoleon, whose troops were
established in the important cities of the north and in Madrid
  86                                             The First Shocks




itself, had no intention of accepting Ferdinand as king. Although
the emperor did not name his brother Joseph to the Spanish
throne until June 6, after compelling Charles and Ferdinand to
renounce their rights, it was becoming evident that the French
had arrived to stay.
   Growing resentment against the presence of what was seen as
an army of occupation exploded in the patriotic rising against the
French in Madrid on May 2, 1808. The revolt was easily quelled,
but news of it spread quickly. Juntas de defensa were formed in
numerous cities during May and June to rule, theoretically in the
name of the absent Ferdinand. Although many bishops had ac¬
cepted the change of dynasty with little or no protest, the wide¬
spread nature of the rising moved the ecclesiastical establishment
to active participation. Bishops served as presidents of local juntas
in Cuenca, Santander, Toledo, Seville, Zamora, and other cities,
while in Cadiz, Valencia, Murcia, and Huesca they attended as
members.19 In Santiago de Compostela the local junta was com¬
posed of twenty-one members, including Archbishop Rafael de
Muzquiz as president, a canon of the cathedral as vice-president,
and several other ecclesiastics. The archbishop donated 300,000
reales to the junta, as did prelates of many other dioceses.
   Surprised by unexpected resistance, the recently installed mon¬
archy of Joseph Napoleon seemed doomed when a French army
under Dupont suffered a humiliating defeat at Bailen in Anda¬
lusia on July 19, 1808. The disaster forced the new king to aban¬
don his capital and endangered the French presence in the Iberian
Peninsula. The triumph at Bailen, however, marked the beginning
of a long struggle. Napoleon himself came to Spain to command
his armies, and by December the French has reoccupied Madrid.
In 1809 they pushed southward in a victorious campaign that by
early 1810 left only the city of Cadiz, protected by its natural site,
and the Balearics, guarded by an English fleet, free of French
control. Guerrilla warfare continued, however, in the occupied
zone.
   The 1808 Constitution of Bayonne, the fundamental document
of the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain, proclaimed Catholicism as
the official religion of the State. Napoleon himself appreciated
the importance of not provoking the Church, at least as far as the
secular clergy were concerned. The new regime hoped to establish
     The First Shocks                                           87