




nancial demands had already strained the once comfortable re¬
lationship between Throne and Altar.


Regalism, Revolution, and Reform, 1790—1808

   The mistrust of state policy felt by some clerics was linked to
the serious divisions emerging within the Church over the char¬
acter and direction of the movement for ecclesiastical reform.
During the 1790’s the reformers, supported by elements of the
state bureaucracy, began to press their demands more vigorously.
Progressive clerics for the first time found themselves well placed
to propagate their views and influence government policy. Figures
sympathetic to the reforming cause—Juan Antonio Llorente, sec¬
retary general of the Inquisition and Bishops Antonio Tavira,
Agustfn Abad y Lasierra, and the latter’s brother, Manuel, who
was appointed inquisitor general in 1792—promoted works en¬
dorsing ecclesiastical reform. Theological and philosophical books
recommended by the Synod of Pistoia found an eager audience
in the universities, where antischolasticism became fashionable.8
The reformers’ intellectual offensive, however, was not matched
by practical achievement. No synod similar to Pistoia was ever
held in Spain, although bishops favoring reform introduced mod¬
est changes into their dioceses.
   Determined opposition to the reforming movement appeared
for the hrst time during the 1790’s. Expressions of support for
organizational changes within the Church, particularly those de¬
signed to improve the status of parish priests and reduce the
influence of the religious orders, aroused the suspicions of some
clerics, who perceived a threat to the Church in its traditional
form. The religious backlash of the 1790’s produced the hrst
assault on the reforming movement, although it did not arise
suddenly or inexplicably.
   Martinez Albiach’s study of the eighteenth-century ecclesiastical
mentality has called attention to the pessimism that gripped the
clergy, especially monks and friars, after 1750.9 Both reformers
and traditionalists started from the same perception—that every¬
where about them existed unbelief and immorality. For both Spain
seemed a more pagan than Christian nation. The reformers of
  80                                             The First Shocks




the 1760’s and 1770’s stressed the necessity of pastoral work to
reeducate Spaniards in the faith. To other clerics the task was not
one of education but of rooting out vices they held responsible
for the moral decay of the kingdom. The restoration of the faith
through pastoral work was secondary to purging what the tradi¬
tionalists called “libertinism,” the indulgence of individual pas¬
sions.10 For the early generation of reformers, the seminary, the
sermon, and the Scriptures were weapons in the struggle to revive
the simple faith of early Christianity; but for traditionalists it was
not reason that mattered but rather an emotional, spiritual awak¬
ening preached with the fire of the Old Testament prophets.
Celebrated missionary preachers of the 1790’s, such as Fray Diego
de Cadiz, saw repentance and moral fervor as the key to a national
religious revival. Many reformers attacked “libertinism” as vig¬
orously as any missionary friar. But there was a fundamental
difference. The reforming movement saw institutional reform as
the only means of transforming the Church so that it might con¬
duct its spiritual mission more effectively. For the traditionalists,
on the other hand, the cause of the Church’s difficulties was not
the corruption of ecclesiastical institutions but the moral perversity
of men.
   This vague sense of impending doom grew more intense and
specific after 1790. The radical course of the French Revolution,
especially after the execution of Louis XVI in January 1793, ap¬
peared to many ecclesiastics as the clear sign of the triumph of
libertinism abroad, which had cast down Throne and Altar, the
bulwarks of a Christian society. The vengeful spirit with which
preachers aroused popular emotions against the French, “impious
enemies of God and country,” represented a new phase of the
traditionalist campaign for moral regeneration at home. The dis¬
asters visited on Spain between 1793 and 1808—military defeat,
a weak and incompetent king dominated by a corrupt favorite,
the round of ever more frequent food shortages culminating in
the great hunger of 1803-1805, the devastating epidemics of yel¬
low fever that swept through southern Spain in 1800—all con¬
firmed some clerics’ vision of a world threatened with destruction
by an impatient deity weary of a nation’s moral dissolution.
   In 1800 when Fray Jose Arnau preached in Valencia, which
was threatened by the epidemic already ravaging Cadiz, he told
     The First Shocks                                          81