




siastical institutions to bear that financial burden. Although evi¬
dence suggests that revenues, particularly for institutions receiv¬
ing payments in kind, rose during the last decade of the century,
state financial pressure on the Church increased more rapidly.5
The kingdom’s archaic tax structure, inefficient in the best of
circumstances, could not produce the funds required to support
heavy military spending for the war with revolutionary France.
Spain’s precarious international situation in subsequent years meant
a continuing drain on the treasury for military expenses and pushed
the State close to bankruptcy. Moreoever, a series of agrarian
crises in 1793—1794, 1797—1798, and 1803—1805 created an un¬
favorable economic climate.
    Desperate for new sources of revenue, the State turned to a
variety of expedients, including massive issuance of interest-bear¬
ing notes, the vales reales, and forced loans and special levies im¬
posed on civil and ecclesiastical institutions.6 Bishoprics, cathedral
chapters, monasteries, and convents were expected to contribute
generously to the royal treasury. The outbreak of war with France
in 1793 set off a wave of clerical giving. Initially, ecclesiastical
institutions donated generously in a burst of patriotic fervor. In
 1793 the cathedral chapter of Santiago de Compostela offered
 Charles IV a gift of 2.5 million reales; the archbishop of Seville,
Antonio Marcos de Llanos, donated 750,000 reales and promised
 an additional 300,000 a year for the duration of the conflict. But
 the war and state finances went badly, and in 1795 the royal
 treasury had been so reduced that the king ordered cathedral
 chapters throughout Spain to forward gold and silver ornaments
 not being used for liturgical services to the mints of Seville and
Madrid.
  With the coming of peace, disastrous though it was for Spain,
the financial crisis eased. But it revived again in 1798, when the
kingdom found itself at war with England because of the alliance
with France that had been part of the 1795 settlement. Again the
State turned to the Church for assistance, but ecclesiastics re¬
sponded with less enthusiasm. The chapter of Santiago grumbled
that “it had exhausted its possibilities” when it received the request
for funds, but it raised 500,000 reales for the State and donated
an additional 500,000 to the captain general of Galicia for defense
  78                                            The First Shocks




of the region against possible English attack.7 The State also re¬
sorted to more forceful measures. A decree of 1798 ordered ec¬
clesiastical and charitable institutions to invest certain endowments
in a redemption fund for the vales reales in return for 3 percent
annual interest.
   The insatiable appetite of the royal treasury did not directly
threaten Church property, but conservative churchmen became
apprehensive over the State’s intentions. In 1795 Caspar de Jo-
vellanos published, with the support of Godoy, a Report on an
Agrarian Law that was openly hostile to the Church’s accumulation
of property through entail. Although the proposals of Jovellanos
were never put into effect, they aroused the suspicions of the
Inquisition. It was, however, the fiscal exigencies of 1798 that
forced the State into a drastic action, which—though it did not
attack ecclesiastical property—seemed to establish a dangerous
precedent. On September 15, 1798, Charles IV ordered the sale
of the property of charitable institutions, hospitals, orphanages,
and certain pious foundations at public auction. In theory, the
State did not order an expropriation; the funds realized from the
sale were to be deposited in the vales redemption fund in return
for annual interest. In fact, the weakness of royal finances between
 1798 and 1808 meant that the interest was paid sporadically and
often not at all. The sale of charitable property moved slowly at
first, but progressed rapidly from 1805 on and reached substantial
proportions by 1808.
   Implementation of the 1798 decree affected the charitable
function of the Church. The erosion of revenues and sale of the
property of institutions engaged in poor relief diminished re¬
sources just when economic difficulties increased the number of
poor requiring assistance. However, the distribution of charity
under religious auspices did not disappear; monasteries, convents,
chapters, and bishoprics continued to dispense alms, and some
charitable institutions managed to retain their property. But by
 1800 the traditional system of charity was in crisis; the Church
found it more and more difficult to fulfill the terms of its social
contract with the poor. The royal Church survived intact until the
great upheaval produced by the Napoleonic intervention of 1808.
But by 1800 the State’s aggressive regalism and its pressing h-
     The First Shocks                                          79