




his congregation that the cause of their misfortunes was “the lib¬
erty in vice, the unbelief, the arrogance, the vainglory, the cor¬
ruption of youth, the injustice, the intemperance and the
lasciviousness” reigning in the city.11 Arnau’s appeal for moral
reform led by the clergy was echoed by countless preachers during
these years, and it provides one of the keys to understanding the
Church’s role during this period of national disintegration. Spain
could be saved by purging its own corruption under the direction
of the Church. This was not to be a moderate Church, but one
led by priests who regarded themselves as modern prophets charged
with bringing the people of God back to their senses to recreate
a theocratic society in which religious and moral values were par¬
amount. Preachers dwelt on the comparison between Spaniards
and the stiff-necked people of Israel in the Old Testament: “The
Lord has punished you for your sins. Oh Spain! do you not think
that you are as deserving as Judea of punishment? Have you not
provoked the just wrath of the Lord with your sins and crimes?
This is the cause of your calamities and misfortunes.”12
   The prophetic and theocratic tone of traditionalist thought after
 1793 was incompatible with the plans of the ecclesiastical reform¬
ers for a Church more rationally organized and attentive to pas¬
toral responsibilities. For clerics opposed to change, the Church
and its institutions formed the last line of defense against the
forces threatening to overwhelm Christian Spain. But it was an
aggressive and militant spirit, raising as its symbol the spiritual
patron of Catholic Spain’s long struggle against the Moors, Saint
James, that inspired this view of the Church’s role. The battle to
save Christian Spain from what preachers called the “execrable
philosophy” of the eighteenth century and from the secularism
and “libertinism” propagated by the French Revolution was for
many clerics a modern crusade out of which a morally regenerated
Spain would emerge.
   This crusade was directed not only against the enemy without
but increasingly against one within the Church itself. The more
radical direction of the reforming movement and the rising sus¬
picions of conservative ecclesiastics plunged the Church into a
state of civil war. The first skirmishes between reformers and
traditionalists occurred with the promulgation of the papal bull
Auctorem Fidei (1794) which condemned the propositions of the
  82                                             The First Shocks




Synod of Pistoia. The Inquisition had begun an inquiry into the
orthodoxy of the Spanish version of the Synod’s proceedings pub¬
lished in 1788, but it had taken no action and had virtually dropped
its investigation during the tenure of the reforming inquisitor
general Manuel Abad y Lasierra (1792-1794).13 This changed
with the appointment of Cardinal Lorenzana to the inquisitorial
post in 1794. Lorenzana, in spite of his earlier sympathy for as¬
pects of the reforming movement, was hostile to the program of
Pistoia and urged the Council of Castile to approve the bull’s
publication. Opponents of Auctorem Fidei, however, enjoyed enough
influence to prevent its publication in Spain until 1801. What is
significant about the decade-long conflict over the bull is less the
ecclesiastical and bureaucratic infighting than the fact that it moved
the debate over reform to a polemical stage in which hope of
compromise steadily diminished.
   As controversy intensified between 1793 and 1808, it revealed
the full extent of divisions within the Church. For traditionalists,
the survival of a Catholic society depended on the maintenance
of the institutions and privileges of the Church before the threat
of internal and external enemies. For reformers, who also doubted
the ability of Catholic Spain to survive, the Church needed to
adjust its organization and methods to new realities. No differ¬
ences of doctrine separated the opposing forces. Although the
reformers adopted a more moderate attitude, for example on the
question of censorship, they firmly maintained their commitment
to Catholicism as the official religion of the State. It was a sign of
the widening breach within the Church that the traditionalist
counterattack took the form of an indictment charging the ad¬
vocates of change with heresy.
    In 1798 a Spanish translation of an antireform work originally
published in 1789 by an Italian ex-Jesuit, Rocco Bonola appeared;
his League of Modern Theology with Modern Philosophy provided tra¬
ditionalists with the specific line of attack they would use over and
over again during the next three decades. Bonola attacked what
he called the “new theology” as an expression of the rational,
“secular” philosophy of the eighteenth century, which was bent
on the destruction of the Church and the creation of a “natural”
religion based on reason. He declared that the time had come to
expose “the pernicious doctrines appearing in the books of many
     The First Shocks                                            83