




A Weakened Church, 1808—1814

    The prospect of Ferdinand VII’s restoration led conservative ec¬
 clesiastics to look on the return of the king as the salvation of the
 religious revival they had been preaching. Clerical anger once
 directed against the French was now turned on the liberals of the
 Cortes. Far from being seen as moving the kingdom toward re¬
 pentance and religion, the liberals were accused of being ac¬
 complices in spiritual degeneration. Preaching in La Coruna in
 May 1813, a friar posed a question often repeated in later years:
 “Spaniards! Where do we stand? In a Catholic nation or among
 deserters of the gospels? Our unfortunate nation is covered by
 impious newspapers and other writings designed to rob us of our
 religion in exchange for deceitful liberty.”54
    The campaign against liberalism was as violent and emotional
 as the one against the French—and for the same reasons. The
 new constitutional system and its adherents appeared as obstacles
 to realization of the grand providential design for Spain. Church¬
 men thus exalted Ferdinand VII as an avenging angel who would
 purify the nation of its corruption and allow the Church to pro¬
 ceed with its spiritual revolution. With the arrival of the king,
 declared one preacher: “these philosophers who have declared
 war on the Church, persecuted its ministers, hated friars, cor¬
 rupted morality and shown aversion to its dogmas will no longer
 walk upon the earth.”55 Clerics, however, did not wish to see the
 restoration of a royal Church subject to state control at every level
 of administration and discipline. The Crown had once used the
 Church for its own ends, but the Church proposed to turn the
 tables and manipulate the restored monarchy to create a theocratic
 society. Religious values would be paramount, and the Church
 would function with independence. By 1813 the absent Ferdinand
 appeared as a savior for an angry Church frustrated in its gran¬
 diose plans.
    In March 1814 Ferdinand VII returned from exile in France.
 Once the king perceived that he could count on popular support
 and elements of the army for a coup d’etat, he undid the work
 of the Cortes of Cadiz. His return was everywhere greeted with
jubilation by churchmen expecting a new age of piety. The Church,
  104                                           The First Shocks




however, was ill prepared to undertake a vast movement of spir¬
itual revival. The war had exacted a heavy material toll.
    Unfortunately, there are no studies of the impact of the war
on ecclesiastical finances, but the evidence suggests that it was
enormous. Both sides in the conflict turned to clerical wealth as
a source of revenue. In each zone the government appropriated
most of the tithes of the secular clergy.56 Whatever was left proved
impossible to collect because of military conditions and the re¬
sistance of the peasantry, who easily evaded payment without the
pressure of the agents and lawyers once employed to keep them
in line. Both governments also extracted large amounts from the
clergy. In 1808 the numerous donations of bishops and chapters
to the national rising were followed by the heavy impositions of
the French. In March 1809 the government of Joseph Napoleon
imposed a loan on the secular and regular clergy of Galicia of 10
million reales and followed it with other demands in the spring
and summer. The authorities also seized the gold and silver or¬
naments of the regulars’ churches in Barcelona in the summer of
 1810. Suppression of the religious orders in the French zone forced
abandonment of numerous monasteries and friaries and led to
substantial material destruction.57 Monasteries were converted into
stables, barracks, and munitions dumps or simply allowed to fall
into decay. The destruction, however, was not universal. In Cat¬
alonia some monasteries, such as the Benedictine abbey of San
 Pedro de Besalu, were completely ruined, but another house
 of the order, San Pedro de Comprodon, escaped unscathed.
 Although the regular clergy paid the heaviest price, the en¬
 tire financial structure of the Old Regime Church was under¬
 mined by the war. Declining revenues and the closing of mona¬
 steries led to the collapse of the traditional system of charity and
 prevented the Church from providing employment to urban
 artisans.
    Together with declining resources between 1808 and 1814, the
Church experienced a decline in ecclesiastical population. Accu¬
rate numbers are not available for the period, but one authority
has estimated the loss at more than a third from the figures re¬
ported in the 1797 census. The decline may not have been this
disastrous, but it was nonetheless extensive, particularly among
     The First Shocks                                               105