




the regular clergy. The Dominican province of Aragon lost one-
fourth of its members during the war, with deaths outnumbering
new entrants by two to one. The Franciscans of Andalusia saw
their numbers fall from 1,544 in 1808 to 520 by 1820, with most
of the loss occurring during the war; a similar decline took place
in the order’s province of Cartagena.58 Monasteries and friaries
in Andalusia, an area well populated with religious houses, suf¬
fered more than elsewhere because of the epidemics of yellow
fever that swept through that region and the Mediterranean lit¬
toral as far as Valencia in 1811 and 1812. The Carmelites of
Orihuela were annihilated: “all perished in the epidemic even the
servants who tolled the bells,” recorded the order’s chronicler.59
   There is less precise information on the secular clergy, but they
too suffered losses. In Zamora many parishes had no priest. The
bishop of Lerida declared that in his diocese “the number of
secular priests has declined notably.”60 The demographic crisis
also affected the hierarchy, although for other reasons. The pope’s
refusal to approve the episcopal appointments of either Joseph
Napoleon or the Cortes of Cadiz created twenty-one vacancies by
 1814, and it fell to Ferdinand VII to make the nominations. He
did so by appointing bishops—Arias Tejeiro, Inguanzo, Creus,
Strauch, and others—who were among the most active opponents
of the liberal revolution and were far removed from the model
bishop of the eighteenth-century royal Church. Bishops ap¬
pointed before the war survived, of course, but the king created
a new episcopal generation whose concerns differed from those
of the prelates of Charles III. The new bishops looked to the
regular and secular clergy to be the shock troops of the long-
heralded religious revival, but the clerical army was no longer the
militia of apostles and prophets that had crusaded against the
French and the Cortes of Cadiz. It was a tired, aging, and im¬
poverished force capable of vindictiveness but not of evangeli¬
zation.
   How greatly the war affected traditional patterns of religious
practice is difficult to establish. It is at least clear, though, that for
the first time in centuries pastoral routine and ecclesiastics’ ability
to exercise moral control over their flocks suffered disruption.
The bishops of many dioceses fled from their sees during the
  106                                             The First Shocks




French occupation; parish priests, who generally remained at their
posts, consumed much of their energy trying to survive in difficult
economic circumstances. The suppression of the regulars in Na¬
poleonic Spain brought to an end the missionary campaigns so
important to the Church of the eighteenth century. At the close
of hostilities the bishops were convinced that the weakening of
clerical vigilance caused by the war had led to widespread im¬
morality. The bishops attacked the “relaxation of customs” they
believed to be universal throughout the kingdom. The king him¬
self summed up the moral effects of the war as he saw them in a
royal order of 1815 designed to restore the old standards of con¬
duct. Public scandals caused by “the voluntary separation of mar¬
ried couples and the licentious life of either one or the other
partner, ... by the inobservance of religious feast days, obscene
words, injuries to the ministers of religion, . . . irreverences in the
churches,”—were to be punished by the civil authorities working
with parish priests.61
   The diminished institutional presence of the Church as a result
of the war may have allowed some individuals to indulge in be¬
havior that once would have led to prompt clerical censure. But
ecclesiastical laments about the spread of impiety and immorality
must be taken with a grain of salt. There is no evidence that the
peasant regions of the north, esteemed for their Catholicism, were
inundated by a wave of irreligion and moral depravity. Even Bishop
Arias Teijeiro of Pamplona, one of the most vociferous accusers
of the war’s destructive moral effects, admitted that in his diocese
the population had given repeated proof of “its docility and con¬
stant religion.”62 The reproaches of the clergy in many cases were
directed not against the population as a whole but against the
minority of intellectuals, progressive noblemen, journalists, law¬
yers, and their clerical allies who had made the liberal revolution.
   The liberal deputies of Cadiz proclaimed Catholicism the of¬
ficial religion of the State. Conservative ecclesiastics dismissed this
declaration as a subtle ruse disguising a plot to undermine the
Church and destroy religion. Clerical suspicions were unfounded,
although extreme liberal apologists expressed anticlerical and, in
some cases, vaguely antireligious sentiments. These ideas did not
circulate widely beyond the liberal elite, although there are in-
     The First Shocks                                         107