




dications that in the large cities, Madrid and Barcelona particu¬
larly, anticlerical and skeptical opinion had made progress among
groups such as merchants, government employees, physicians,
military cadets, and a handful of artisans. An inquiry carried out
in 1815 and 1816 by the reestablished Inquisition led to accusa¬
tions of “offenses against religion” against a small number of
persons, including a tailor, a library worker, a physician, a sur¬
geon, two sergeants and a captain in the Cantabrian regiment,
and several others from urban groups sympathetic to the liberal
cause. Most of the accused had done nothing more than make
irreverent remarks about the clergy: “all Capuchins are supersti¬
tious” and “friars beg alms so that they can keep women.” But a
few had expressed skepticism about religious belief: “confession
is useless,” “there is no hell,” “our souls are like those of dogs
which perish with the body.” Such statements scandalized church¬
men and confirmed their view of the growth of irreligion.63 These
cases were not numerous and in any event were confined to the
cities, although they did indicate a drift away from the Church in
urban centers.
   Between 1808 and 1814 the Church also failed to repair the
division between ecclesiastical reformers and traditionalists. Cler¬
ical progressives supporting the limited reforms of the Cortes of
Cadiz aroused the hostility of conservative churchmen. In a pas¬
toral letter of December 1812 the bishops declared that Spain was
not only engaged in a battle against a foreign enemy but also in
an “internal war.” They lashed out against “ecclesiastics who pre¬
sume themselves reformers . . . this class of tonsured philoso¬
phers.”64 And in the same year an apologist of the Old Regime
Church took up the charges laid against reforming clerics by Bo-
nola years before. Priests advocating change within the Church
were accused of participating in a great “philosophical” conspiracy
of secularism, materialism, and libertinism that had arisen first in
France and then elsewhere to destroy Catholicism. This made the
ecclesiastical reformers all the more dangerous. They were, in the
words of one preacher, “rapacious wolves propagating perverse
dogmas, false doctors promising liberty when they are slaves of
corruption.”65
   As the Anglo-Spanish armies freed more of the national ter-
  108                                            The First Shocks




ritory in 1812 and 1813, the civil war within the Church spread
from Cadiz to the liberated areas. In Seville during the autumn
of 1812, reformers led by the cathedral dean, Lopez Cepero,
attacked the friars flocking back to the city as an idle class of
slackers and criticized the excessive riches of monasteries. Con¬
servative clerics replied in kind, accusing the reformers of plotting
“to hang friars and burn inquisitors, thereby ending the misfor¬
tunes of Spain and, as a result, bring enlightenment to the villages,
improve the arts, [and] purify morality under the cover of every
kind of insult to religion and its dogmas.”66