



   The struggle within the Church changed its character during
the war of independence. The reforming movement in its first
and second phases had arisen from a vital clerical culture tied to
the broader intellectual currents of the age. Pressure for reform
came from a vigorous minority in the Church. Reform had always
been tied to state intervention, even during the reign of Charles
III, and this tendency became more pronounced under Charles
IV, as clerical reformers looked increasingly to the State rather
than the Church for support. With the Cortes of Cadiz advocates
of change identified the cause of ecclesiastical reform with the
liberal State, hence the violence of the attacks on churchmen who
supported the modest reforms instituted between 1810 and 1813.
The identification of reform with liberalism, however, signaled
the decline of the movement for change within the Church. The
militant ideology of the conservative Church backed the reformers
into a corner. The bishops and most of the clergy, even those
once vaguely sympathetic to reform, were swept up in the fervor
of the crusade first against the French and then against the liberals.
Enthusiasm for renovation fell by the wayside except among a
diminishing minority who, ironically, turned to the liberal State
to save reform just as traditionalist clergymen looked to Ferdinand
VII to rescue their spiritual revolution. Reform, once a manifes¬
tation of the intellectual vitality of a progressive minority within
the Church, became primarily a political issue caught up in the
conflict between the liberal State and absolutism.
   Few periods were more critical for the development of the
    The First Shocks                                        109




modern Spanish Church than the years between 1808 and 1814.
The material prosperity and relative internal peace of the royal
Church of Charles III eroded under his successor, and events
during the war of independence accelerated institutional decline.
By 1814 the great royal Church of the eighteenth century had
ceased to exist, although some of its external trappings remained.
4    /    The Struggle Intensifies, 1814—1833




   The end of the liberal experiment in 1814 did not resolve the
fundamental constitutional and ecclesiastical questions posed for
the first time at the Cortes of Cadiz. The struggle between lib¬
eralism, determined to mold the Church to fit the demands of a
new secular outlook within the framework of a parliamentary
system, and ecclesiastical interests, as firmly committed to recover
every particle of clerical authority and privilege, continued with
even more intensity. The balance shifted first to the Church, dur¬
ing the initial period of Ferdinand VII’s absolute rule from 1814
to 1820, and then against it during the second liberal revolution
from 1820 to 1823. Although the Church recovered its position
following the second restoration of Ferdinand, political and dy¬
nastic circumstances between 1823 and the king’s death in 1833
finally ended ecclesiastical hopes for the reestablishment of the
Old Regime Church in all its splendor. The clergy, at least the
vast majority, struggled to recreate the past with the same fierce
energy it had directed against the French and the constitutionalists
of Cadiz. But the consensus that had sustained the eighteenth-
century monarchy and the Church itself could not be resurrected.
The Church threw its resources into a losing contest for which it
would pay a heavy price.