



The Church Restored, 1814—1820

   After the return of Ferdinand VII ecclesiastics vied with one
another to exalt the sovereign and his presumed commitment to
a religious restoration. With his accession, said a preacher in the
cathedral of Seville: “religion has triumphed over the horrendous
monster of impiety.” A Carmelite friar declared: “Oh! sweet Fer¬
dinand! . . . our beloved Ferdinand! . . . We owe everything to
Ferdinand . . . Long live the King for the greater brilliance and


    110
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  111




splendor of the Catholic religion!”1 The clergy looked to the king
to realize the theocratic revolution it had been preaching and to
free the Church from its traditional dependence on the State.
During the years of Ferdinand’s enforced exile in France, con¬
servative ecclesiastics were able to embroider their fantasies with¬
out considering whether the king accepted them. Between 1814
and 1820, the first period of Ferdinand’s absolute rule, however,
the king showed that he was his own man, and that he could use
the Church to buttress his own power as effectively as any monarch
before him.
   Few sovereigns were called upon to rule in more difficult cir¬
cumstances.2 The war of independence against the French ended
victoriously, but in 1814 the general condition of the realm bor¬
dered on the catastrophic. The economic and financial decline of
the nation that had begun in the 1790’s accelerated during the war
and continued after its close. Commerce with the overseas empire,
once the foundation of the kingdom’s economy, had collapsed,
and the independence movement in the colonies, although not
yet completely successful, had built a momentum the mother country
was unable to halt. At home the purges, exiles, and prison terms
inflicted on liberals did not eliminate political opposition; several
conspiracies took place between 1814 and 1820. Ferdinand VII
lacked the character and intelligence to dominate the situation,
but he did possess a certain cunning, which enabled him to survive
exile, plotting, and a revolution to die in bed still an absolute
monarch in 1833.
   In 1814 Ferdinand reestablished the administrative institutions
of the eighteenth-century State, but their restoration was more
nominal than real. The political, social, and economic changes of
the preceding two decades made revival of the Old Regime mon¬
archy a difficult if not impossible task, a fact that Ferdinand re¬
alized with the primitive intuition which always saved him from
losing the power he cherished. Between 1814 and 1820, in spite
of the institutional forms of the past, the monarchy of Ferdinand
was a personal, albeit royal dictatorship. The king paid little at¬
tention to the institutions he had restored, relying instead on a
small group of personal advisers. Power rested neither in the
constitutional consensus that had supported the eighteenth-century
monarchy nor in the overwhelming prestige of the royal institu-
  112                                      The Struggle Intensifies