




of religion in Spanish life. Villanueva expressed the sentiments
of the proreform deputies in a motion presented in October 1810:
“we are Catholics and we must give proof ot it.” He moved that
the session should open with the hymn Veni Creator and prayers
to the Holy Spirit.36 Shortly later, a motion worthy of the most
zealous missionary preacher of the eighteenth century was passed.
Proposed by the bishop of Leon, it called for a campaign to im¬
prove public morality in which prostitution and gambling would
be forbidden; it demanded further that women should dress prop¬
erly so “that sins and public scandals” might be avoided.37 More¬
over, Article 12 of the Constitution of 1812 (approved unanimously)
declared without equivocation: “the religion of the Spanish nation
is and will be forever the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, the only
true religion.”38
   In spite of this clear affirmation, conflict with the Church was
inevitable. The liberal reformers and their largely clerical oppo¬
nents in the Cortes expected very different consequences from
the parliamentary process begun in 1810. The Church, long re¬
sentful over the degree of control exercised by the Bourbon State
before 1808, saw in the summoning of a Cortes an opportunity
to secure freedom from government interference while maintain¬
ing the legal and financial privileges it had enjoyed for centuries.
The liberal majority never presented a comprehensive plan of
ecclesiastical reform. Its concerns with expelling the French and
drafting a constitution were more than enough to occupy its time.
However, liberal policies in three important areas—the status of
the Inquisition, the question of liberty of expression, and the
future of the religious orders—posed a direct challenge to clerical
interests determined to defend the privileged Church of the Old
Regime. The question posed at Cadiz and repeated in the later
history of liberal Spain was never whether the Church should or
should not exist, nor whether it should be separated from its
official relationship with the State. The question was whether the
kingdom’s ecclesiastical elite would accept a redehnition of the
Church’s role within a new political society molded by a Catholic,
educated middle class with a more secular and individualistic ide¬
ology than that underlying the old monarchical and hierarchical
order.
   The attitude of the liberal majority—both lay and clerical dep-
  96                                            The First Shocks




uties—in its conflict with the Church did not rest on any new and
radical perception of the Church’s role. Liberal ecclesiastical pol¬
icies can be traced directly to the regalist tradition of the Bourbon
monarchy, which had clearly established the right of the State to
exercise significant control over Church affairs save in the realm
of doctrine. These policies reflected, too, the alliance between
regalism and the movement toward ecclesiastical reform that had
developed within the eighteenth-century Church, particularly after
 1780. Many of the liberal deputies at Cadiz had studied in Spanish
universities during the 1790’s, when the regalist-reform program
as embodied by the Synod of Pistoia was widely considered as a
model of what might be accomplished by effective cooperation
between government and an enlightened clergy.39 The emphases
of Pistoia on pastoral concerns, on the exaltation of the parish
clergy, and on the corresponding diminution of the religious or¬
ders’ role exercised a powerful appeal in a country where serious
problems were evident in all three areas. This is not to say that
practical considerations were lacking among the liberal deputies.
The continued existence of the Inquisition seemed an obstacle to
true national sovereignty, and the property of the religious orders
offered a tempting way out of the financial exigencies created by
the war against the French.
   Whether the Church would accept limited reform imposed by
legislative decree was not entirely clear in 1810. From the begin¬
ning some ecclesiastics were uneasy about the direction of the
Cortes. In October 1810 Bishop Quevedo y Quintana of Orense
refused to take the obligatory oath of loyalty to the Cortes because
of his doubts over whether sovereignty should reside in the nation
rather than in the king. The cardinal primate, Luis de Borbon,
however, warmly accepted this revolutionary decision and swore
the oath in a public session of the assembly. The other bishops in
Cadiz took the oath with a noticeable lack of enthusiasm. Eccle¬
siastical concern deepened with a decree of November 15, 1810,
that appropriated the income of vacant benefices and one-half
the revenues from the tithes of bishoprics, cathedral chapters, and
monasteries. The unease was only somewhat tempered by the
decree’s character as an emergency measure to raise money for
defense.
    Ecclesiastical irritation with the new regime, although evident
     The First Shocks                                           97