




tion itself, but in a combination of forces—conservative elements
in the army, the Church, ambitious politicians, and ideological
zealots who believed the survival of absolute power would serve
their interests.
   Ferdinand was a popular monarch, although in a very personal
way. His aversion to the aristocracy and the elaborate ceremony
of his father’s court, as well as his modest style of life and general
accessibility, kept him from being isolated from his subjects by the
social trappings of the old monarchy. However, the king lacked
a clear vision of what he wished to do with the power that had
become his in 1814. The government’s record between 1814 and
 1820 was a sorry one. But Ferdinand managed to hold together
the disparate forces supporting him until the revolution of 1820
returned the liberals to power.
   The king, realizing that his survival partially depended on the
support of the Church, quickly abrogated the ecclesiastical legis¬
lation of the Cortes of Cadiz. The religious orders were allowed
to reoccupy their houses if they had not already done so. A decree
of July 21, 1814, ordered the restoration of the Inquisition; an¬
other on May 29, 1815, authorized the reestablishment of the
Jesuits.3 In 1814 and 1815 royal orders dealing with the improve¬
ment of moral standards and the necessity of evangelization cam¬
paigns set in motion a vast effort to end what the bishop of Pamplona
called “an era of confusion, disorder and crimes.”4 At royal com¬
mand, bishops organized missions in their dioceses and enlisted
the services of the religious, who sallied forth, according to a
Franciscan chronicler, “with a truly apostolic spirit as they ripped
from the ground most of the seeds which evil genius had sown
in towns and villages.”5 The clergy thundered against the “relax¬
ation of customs” and dissent from the doctrines of the Church,
which they believed had spread during the period of liberal rule.
The realization of the theocratic revolution seemed near at hand,
and ecclesiastics joyfully celebrated the coming triumph. When
the archbishop of Santiago reentered his diocese in 1814 after
having been exiled by the Cortes of Cadiz, he arrived in a solemn
procession including two groups dressed in sinister garb, chained,
and carrying placards labeled “Impiety and Heresy,” “Iniquity
and Persecution.”6
   Ferdinand’s campaign against liberalism and the Church’s de-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  113




termination to destroy what it saw as libertinism provided the
common ground for a new alliance between Throne and Altar.
The revived Inquisition went about its business with a political as
much as a religious purpose. In July 1815 it prohibited a series
of books of no doctrinal significance on the grounds that it was
necessary “to root out as soon as possible every kind of publication
in any way contrary to the doctrine of holy religion and to the
fidelity owed to the Sovereign.”7 The Church showed its loyalty
to Ferdinand more concretely during the abortive liberal risings
of these years. When Brigadier Porlier attempted to induce the
garrisons of Galicia to rebel in 1815, the cathedral chapter of
Santiago donated 50,000 reales to the governor and celebrated a
Te Deum after the revolt’s suppression. In Barcelona a timely gift
from Bishop Pablo de Sichar to the captain general, whose unpaid
troops appeared ready to desert to General Lacy’s revolt, saved
the day for the royalist forces.
    Cooperation between the king and conservative ecclesiastics ex¬
tended to the purging of clerics who had supported or simply
shown sympathy for the reforms of Cadiz. In a decree of May
 1814, Ferdinand ordered that competition for benefices should
be confined to persons free of “dangerous and erroneous” opin¬
ions who had given proof of “their adhesion to healthy princi¬
ples.”8 Cathedral chapters were purged of canons suspected of
supporting liberalism. The most fortunate escaped abroad, but
others, such as Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, one of the most prom¬
inent clerical reformers at Cadiz, suffered the harsher fate of
arrest and imprisonment.9
    Both Throne and Altar profited from the alliance against lib¬
eralism and libertinism, but Ferdinand got the better of the bar¬
gain. The king never intended to install the kind of theocratic
regime clerical visionaries had conjured up during the war of
independence. He had not acquired absolute power to relinquish
it to the Church.10 He insisted on retaining the rights traditionally
held by the Crown over ecclesiastical appointments and revenues.
Ferdinand used his powers of patronage to fill the episcopacy and
cathedral chapters with clerics sympathetic to his rule and hostile
to liberalism. Between 1814 and 1820 the king was presented with
an unrivaled opportunity to exercise his right of appointment. He
named sixty bishops and converted the hierarchy into a responsive
  114                                      The Struggle Intensifies