




in 1810 and 1811, did not grow into outright hostility until 1812
and 1813. The drift from vague disaffection to opposition did not
come from any particular outburst against the Constitution of
1812. The constitution’s affirmation of the Catholic nature of the
State and its designation of four ecclesiastics to sit on the forty-
member Council of State assuaged the clerical establishment. The
bishops of Jaen and Avila issued pastoral letters urging their flocks
to accept the constitution; the archbishop of Santiago ordered a
Te Deum sung in his cathedral to celebrate proclamation of the
constitutional text. Only one bishop openly rejected the consti¬
tution by refusing to take the oath to uphold it. Quevedo y Quin¬
tana of Orense, already suspect in the eyes of the liberal deputies,
provoked them still further by instructing his cathedral chapter
that swearing the oath did not signify approval of the constitution.
The liberal majority, after declaring the bishop “unworthy to be
considered a Spaniard” ordered him dismissed from his post, and
the prelate fled to Portugal.40 Members of the regular clergy took
the oath either reluctantly or not at all. In Catalonia, according
to a Franciscan chronicler, the friars, who believed the constitution
contained provisions “contrary to religion,” made it “an object of
execration and covered it with a hatred which was never extin¬
guished.”41
   Clerical disenchantment with the new regime deepened in the
spring of 1812 in the face of what conservative churchmen saw
as unbridled discussion in books, newspapers, and pamphlets of
the fate of the kingdom. Ecclesiastics supporting the restoration
of absolute monarchy were scandalized by the liberty of political
debate. In March 1812 the bishops resident in Cadiz complained
to the Cortes of “the scandalous torrent of pernicious opinions”
appearing in the local press.42 Clerical anger intensified in the
following month with the publication of a biting satire against the
Church written by the librarian of the Cortes. The bishops living
on Mallorca issued a pastoral letter calling the book “impious,
blasphemous, sacriligious, impure” and heretical “in spirit and
letter”; other churchmen called on the Cortes to take action against
the author.43 The decision of the Cortes in favor of legislation
establishing freedom of the press, although with certain limits,
further alienated defenders of the Old Regime Church.
   The decisive break between the majority of the Cortes and the
  98                                              The First Shocks




kingdom’s ecclesiastical elite occurred over the question of the
Inquisition.44 Hostility toward the Holy Tribunal was not new.
Reform-minded ecclesiastics of the eighteenth century had dis¬
liked its ability to operate outside episcopal jurisdiction; secular
reformers, such as Gaspar de Jovellanos, saw the Inquisition as
an obstacle to cultural progress. But the inertia of the absolute
monarchy under Charles IV as well as the State’s increasing re¬
liance on the Inquisition as a kind of political police kept the
institution alive. The enormous disruption created by the French
occupation in most of the kingdom by early 1810 destroyed the
 Inquisition as a functioning body over the national territory. The
liberal deputies of Cadiz could be grateful to the French for having
destroyed the institutional power that time and time again had
allowed the Inquisition to act with a high degree of autonomy and
 resist measures designed to weaken its authority.
     No longer having to fear inquisitorial reprisal, the liberal ma¬
jority at Cadiz was free to debate whether the Holy Tribunal
 should be fully restored upon the conclusion of hostilities. A par¬
 liamentary commission presented a report advocating abolition to
 the full Cortes in April 1812. Clerical deputies defending the
 Inquisition attacked the proposal at every turn; twenty-two bish¬
 ops and thirty-two cathedral chapters petitioned the Cortes for a
 restoration. The arguments advanced by the Inquisition’s foes
 were many and varied. In a long speech on January 9, 1813, the
 assembly’s most brilliant orator, Agustin Argiielles, stated them
 all. He rejected the argument that the Inquisition was necessary
 to preserve religion because the faith had survived without dif¬
 ficulty for fifteen centuries before the fateful decision of Ferdi¬
 nand and Isabella. He maintained that the Cortes had every right
 to decide on the Inquisition’s fate because it had originally been
 imposed on Castile by Crown and papacy without consulting the
 Cortes. He attacked its intolerance against the conversos of an ear¬
 lier age and called it an institution that had won “the universal
 hatred of enlightened man.” But for Argiielles the question of
 the Inquisition was more straightforward. “The Government of
 the nation is not a theocracy,” he declared, and the Cortes, “using
 the right inherent in its sovereign authority,” could decide “to
 abolish or not the Tribunal of the Inquisition.”45 The Cortes could
 not permit, in effect, the existence of a state within a state. In the
     The First Shocks                                          99