




members and declared that no order should have more than one
establishment in any given town. And mindful of the orders’ role
in opposition to the new constitutional order, Cano urged that no
monastery or convent be reestablished until its political conduct
had been examined and legal proceedings begun against “the
treasonous.”49
   A special committee on reform of the regular clergy presented
its report to the full Cortes in 1813. It called for limits on the
number of convents of women (350) and monasteries (60) and
stipulated that the number of houses of the nonmonastic orders
such as the Franciscans should depend on the size of a town’s
population and the quantity of its secular clergy. The report broke
new ground in the long debate over the role of the regulars by
forbidding authorized religious houses from acquiring new prop¬
erty. It went further by recommending that the property of the
suppressed foundations under the plan “be used for the benefit
of the State until the Cortes should decide that it is convenient to
arrange the appraisal and sale of said property.”50
   Political circumstances during 1813 prevented the Cortes from
addressing the committee’s proposal. The Cortes dealt with the
regulars, who expected to recover their property and revenues as
the French abandoned the country, on a piecemeal basis. The
authorities found it difficult to carry out the terms of a law passed
September 13, 1813, that ordered sale of the property of mon¬
asteries and convents in a ruinous state as a result of the war.
Efforts to prevent the reoccupation of religious houses, whether
ruined or not, failed with few exceptions as the regulars began to
return to their residences, often in defiance of government offi¬
cials. The reestablishment of religious communities soon led to
disputes between the returning regulars and the residents of cities
and towns, who resented the reimposition of monastic rights and
dues from which they had been free for years. The municipality
of Ripoll thus protested to the Cortes against the return of the
Benedictines to their monastery in the town. It objected partic¬
ularly to the order’s intention to resume collection of the tithe.51
These disputes were common in 1813 and were examples of rising
feeling against the regulars, which would surface later with a
vengeance.
  102                                            The First Shocks




   Proposals for the reform of the secular clergy did not receive
the same attention given to those focusing on the regulars. Yet
suggestions were advanced that would figure in the programs of
later liberal governments. The Asturian deputy Calello, after not¬
ing “the poverty and misery of most parish priests,” urged the
abolition of surplice fees (the charges exacted for baptisms, mar¬
riages, funerals, and so on) and the redirection of tithes away
from the ecclesiastical elite to the parochial clergy.52 Calello fur¬
ther urged a fundamental parish reorganization that would guar¬
antee every parish priest a decent income and would provide
improved religious services to the population. Discussion also took
place in the Cortes and in the press about the necessity of a thor¬
ough reform of Church financing. One deputy suggested that the
State had every right to use the Church’s immense wealth for the
public good “because Jesus Christ himself said that his kingdom
was not of this world.” Several liberal political writers went further
and advocated the sale of Church property to reduce the national
debt, although on condition that other means be found to pay the
clergy. Such suggestions never reached the stage of serious par¬
liamentary discussion, but their mere appearance led to clerical
counterattacks. The Cortes had no right “to rob God Himself,”
declared one defender of the Church.53
   The achievements of the Cortes of Cadiz in ecclesiastical affairs
were essentially negative. The destruction of the Inquisition and
of the Church’s traditional right to control intellectual life as well
as the uncompleted reform of the regulars predominated over
those aspects of the old regalist-reform program that looked to
improve the quality of the kingdom’s religious life. Liberal dep¬
uties at Cadiz, such as Villanueva, did not abandon their concerns
for improving religion in Spain, but the fierce resistance of de¬
fenders of the Old Regime Church made comprehensive reform,
both organizational and moral, an impossible task. It was only
after liberal governments in succeeding decades had broken the
institutional back of the privileged eighteenth-century Church that
the ecclesiastical establishment accepted a limited degree of in¬
ternal reform. The struggle would be long and difficult and would
leave a legacy of bitterness toward the liberal State among many
clerics that would endure into the twentieth century.
     The First Shocks                                           103