




heated debates other liberal deputies expressed their views bluntly.
The conde de Toreno declared, “the very name of the Inquisi¬
tion . . . must be erased from among us.”46
    In the end it was the belief of the liberal deputies that the
Inquisition was incompatible with the new constitutional order
that justified abolition. The bishop of Calahorra sought to counter
this argument by alleging that Article 12 of the constitution sup¬
ported the Inquisition’s survival because it was an institution en¬
gaged in protecting religion. In an increasingly embittered
atmosphere the crucial vote was taken on January 22, 1813. Of
the 150 deputies present, 90 voted for abolition, 60 against. Of
the ecclesiastical deputies in the chamber, 32 voted against the
motion, only 11 in favor, a clear sign of diminishing clerical sup¬
port for the regime.47
    The bishops deluged the Cortes with letters of protest, although
most grudgingly fulfilled an order of February 23 commanding
that the decree of abolition be read from the pulpit of every
church. But the foot-dragging of the archbishop of Santiago, who
delayed until May and then refused to announce the abolition in
his diocese, led the Cortes to order his arrest and eventually con¬
demn him to exile. From Portugal the bishop of Orense forbade
his chapter from publishing the decree, but the authorities acted
vigorously in that case too, arresting the entire chapter and rip¬
ping the bishop’s edict from church doors. The bishops of San¬
tander, Oviedo, and Astorga chose to abandon their dioceses rather
than publish the decree of abolition. There was also resistance
among the regular clergy, one of whom declared that he would
leave his church in the middle of Mass rather than announce the
decree to his congregation. In the end the Cortes broke the re¬
sistance of conservative churchmen, but at the price of strength¬
ening clerical hostility against the liberal constitutional system.
   The suppression of the Inquisition angered the traditionalist
clerical elite, which had come to look upon its restoration as in¬
dispensable to the realization of the religious revolution of which
it dreamed. The abolition of the Holy Tribunal did not, however,
threaten the organization and wealth of the Old Regime Church.
The Bourbon State had always taken its share of ecclesiastical
revenues and had even ventured onto the dangerous ground of
disamortization under Charles IV. But the vast property holdings
  100                                            The First Shocks




of the secular and regular clergy were left untouched. The cir¬
cumstances of the war against the French created an entirely new
situation. The suppression of monasteries, friaries, and convents
by the government of Joseph Napoleon in occupied Spain raised
the question of what ought to be done with their property as more
of the national territory was freed from the enemy. For the Cortes
the question took on immediate urgency because of the desperate
condition of state finances.
   These fiscal considerations, moreover, were joined for the first
time to pressures for the reform of the regulars. Criticism of the
religious orders had long figured in the program of ecclesiastical
reformers. But eighteenth-century suggestions for change fo¬
cused on reducing numbers, directing religious into socially useful
pursuits such as education and charity, and improving the quality
of religious life in monasteries and convents. No royal official or
clerical reformer dared to suggest that reform should include
massive closing of religious houses and the sale of their property
for the benefit of the State.
   Any suggestion that the reform of the regulars should be tied
to dispositions relative to their property was rejected out of hand
by conservative deputies. Simon Lopez, later to serve as arch¬
bishop of Valencia, summed up the unalterable opposition of the
Church to any changes in this area: “As far as the few or many
properties of the regulars are concerned, it is no business of Your
Majesty [the Cortes] to dispose of them . . . these are ecclesiastical
possessions, dedicated to the cult, consecrated to God . . . they are
the possessions of God.”48 In spite of the efforts of traditionalist
deputies to halt discussion of the question, extensive debate took
place in parliamentary committees during 1811 and 1812 about
a comprehensive program of reform for the regulars. The ar¬
guments that had been used by advocates of reform for decades
were again brought forward. Manuel Cano, who served as the
secretary of grace and justice for the Cortes, argued that the
number of religious should be tied closely to the kingdom’s pas¬
toral, educational, and charitable needs. Orders not meeting this
utilitarian test, particularly the purely monastic foundations and
the mendicants, were clearly to suffer. Cano also advocated the
suppression of religious houses with fewer than twelve professed
     The First Shocks                                          101