




composed of the most recalcitrant friars, were dispatched to Cuba.
   The second liberal revolution and its ecclesiastical policies deep¬
ened the antagonisms within the Church that had existed since
Cadiz. In Lerida the cathedral chapter divided between the priests
who avidly supported the constitutional regime and those who
continued to place their confidence in absolute monarchy. Among
the liberal canons were Antonio Forriol, who was accused in the
later royalist reaction of having shouted “Constitution or death!”
from the cathedral pulpit, and Martin Laguna, whose ardent de¬
fense of the constitution in a local periodical led to his exile in
1824.40 On the other side stood Canon Domingo Cossio, who was
exiled to Avila by the liberal authorities, and Doctor Jose Vidal,
former administrator of the diocese, who was arrested in February
1823 along with Bishop de Renteria. In Barcelona the liberal cause
received support from several ex-members of the religious orders
who had taken advantage of the legislation authorizing seculari¬
zation. Eudaldo Jaumeandreu, an ex-Augustinian, accepted a chair
established by the local junta de comercio for the explanation of
the constitution; Alberto Pujol, a former Carmelite, published a
political catechism “to instruct the Catalans in the rights, privileges
and advantages which the Political Constitution of the Spanish
Monarchy provides.”41 Apart from a handful of prelates, such as
Gonzalez Vallejo, the liberal cause won little support among the
bishops, however. Occasionally, the government could rely on the
adherence of lesser diocesan authorities, as in Tarragona where
the vicar general of the archdiocese condemned the regency of
Urgel as a “criminal insurrection” designed to “change the actual
system of government which the entire nation has embraced.”42
   But the situation of ecclesiastics committed to liberalism became
untenable with the destruction of Church property and the exe¬
cutions carried out in Catalonia by increasingly undisciplined troops.
The execution of more than fifty priests in the diocese of Bar¬
celona—including the bishop of Vich, Raimundo Strauch, who had
been arrested for his proabsolutist views—along with wide-spread
indiscriminate violence—such as the sacking of the cathedral of
Solsona by liberal soldiers in June 1823—deprived priests still loyal
to the regime of whatever remained of their credibility. Even Felix
Amat, the grand old man of the reforming movement and its
leading intellectual exponent for two decades, finally welcomed the
  128                                    The Struggle Intensifies




return of Ferdinand VII to power as the only way of ending the
disorders characteristic of the liberal revolution’s later stages.43
   The conflict between the Church and the liberal State rein¬
forced the bishops’ tendency to look to Rome for defense. Al¬
though Pius VII had urged moderation on the hierarchy following
the revolution of 1820, he vigorously attacked the ecclesiastical
legislation of the Cortes. Prelates, such as Pedro de Inguanzo of
Zamora, maintained close contacts with the papacy, which was
increasingly seen as one of the few bulwarks of a Church under
siege.44 The regalism of the episcopacy during the eighteenth
century became a thing of the past. The rancors and jurisdictional
disputes that had once inspired an anti-Roman attitude among
bishops disappeared before the much graver threat posed by the
liberal State.
   In April 1823 an invasion mounted by the French with the
approval of the European powers put an end to the liberal ex¬
periment. The regime, weakened by divisions within its ranks and
unable to reestablish its authority in the face of continued mob
action and military indiscipline, succumbed virtually without a
struggle. The French army moved easily through the kingdom
and was welcomed by a population weary of anarchy and violence.
The conservative Church, which had resisted the Napoleonic in¬
vasion with fervor, looked to the “100,000 sons of St. Louis” as
saviors. In Santiago the cathedral chapter, although nearly bank¬
rupt, donated 30,000 reales to help finance the campaign against
the liberals; when the French arrived in the city, the canons sent
a special delegation to receive the commander with expressions
of gratitude. The rapid triumph of the invasion led quickly to the
reestablishment of Ferdinand VII’s absolute power. The Church
again looked to the king to restore its traditional place within
Spanish society, but events between 1820 and 1823 had given the
Church a shock as shattering as the one it had received during
the war of independence.