




the material survival of religious forced to leave their residences
by voting pensions to monks and friars who wished to be “secu¬
larized,” that is, to become members of the secular clergy. And
to a considerable extent the reform went a long way toward re¬
solving the problems it was designed to address. Regions such as
Asturias and Galicia, where the numbers of monasteries and fri¬
aries were small, lost fewer houses than Andalusia, where one-
half of the numerous religious communities suffered closure.34
But the process was not always logical. Subsequent legislation or¬
dered the suppression of monasteries and friaries in towns with
fewer than 400 inhabitants, thereby depriving many small com¬
munities of religious and educational services.
   The reform of the regulars and other legislation—the abolition
of the special judicial exemptions of the clergy, for example—
altered the Church’s position, but the changes fell within the mod¬
erate limits acceptable to the deputies of 1812, who occupied gov¬
ernment ministries until March 1821. Their influence, however,
declined progressively before the pressure of young, urban rad¬
icals, or exaltados, who demanded more far-reaching political re¬
form. The growing influence of the radicals was expressed through
a vigorous press, political clubs known as “patriotic societies” and,
on occasion, mob violence manipulated with considerable skill. All
these created a climate of instability that undermined the fragile
liberal consensus and made any accommodation with the Church
impossible on the basis of the reforms already carried out. Eccle¬
siastical legislation in the autumn of 1820 left the bishops angry
but disoriented and unsure of a course of action. Even the reform
of the regulars failed to evoke a massive episcopal reaction, save
for a few representations sent to the Cortes, such as that of the
archbishop of Valencia, Arias Teijeiro, who was promptly expelled
from the kingdom for his temerity. Between a conservative Church
resentful of the changes imposed on it and the liberal State sus¬
picious of clerical sincerity an atmosphere of mutual exasperation
developed by the end of 1820 that could not be dissipated.
   Growing political instability throughout 1821 and early 1822
as well as urban violence encouraged by the exaltados made the
new ministry formed in March 1821 ineffective from its begin¬
ning. Harassed by radicals and street violence on the left and by
the intrigues of the king and his supporters on the right, the
  124                                      The Struggle Intensifies




second liberal government staggered from crisis to crisis without
a sense of direction. It lacked a clear policy with respect to the
Church other than to expel prelates it judged subversive—those
of Cadiz, Ceuta, and Malaga—and to fill important ecclesiastical
positions with liberal clerics. But its nominations of Jose d’Espiga
for Seville, Diego Munoz Torrero for Guadix, Felix Torres Amat
for Barcelona, and Manuel Abad y Queipo for Tortosa—all known
for their support of moderate ecclesiastical reform—were refused
by Pius VII, although the pope approved one reformer, Antonio
Posada Rubin de Celis, for the bishopric of Cartagena. Failing to
fill episcopal vacancies with its own men, the State used pressure,
including mob violence and the threat of force, to compel cathe¬
dral chapters to elect interim diocesan administrators well dis¬
posed to the regime. In Orihuela the direct intervention of the
city’s mayor and council caused the chapter to retract its first
choice and elect a canon sympathetic to liberal views. In Oviedo
the presence of armed men at the electing chapter was sufficient
to persuade the canons to choose a progovernment administrator.
    Open resistance by ecclesiastics to the liberal State began in
1821 on a limited scale. Jeronimo Merino, an ex-parish priest in
the province of Burgos whose guerrilla exploits against the French
in the war of independence had earned him a canonry in Palencia
from a grateful Ferdinand VII, took to the hills against the liberals.
However, massive clerical participation in armed opposition to the
regime did not begin until 1822. The election of a more radical
Cortes in that year destroyed whatever possibility remained for
an accommodation with the Church.
    The declining influence of the reformers who had inspired the
ecclesiastical changes of 1820 left initiative on Church matters
with a group of exaltado clerics, including Juan Antonio Llorente,
an old reformer of the 1790’s whose views had become more
extreme.35 The new Cortes decided to take up the question of a
sweeping reform of the Church. After forbidding bishops to or¬
dain priests until the question had been resolved, the assembly
named a commission with a substantial representation of parish
priests to draft a general plan for the clergy. The proposals, pre¬
sented in January 1823, went far beyond the reform of 1820.36
They called for radical restructuring of the dioceses to accord
with provincial boundaries, reduction of the pope’s role in epis-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                   125