




copal appointments to that of an adviser, abolition of the tithe,
and creation of a special tax to pay the clergy’s salaries. The reform
plan was never passed by the Cortes, because of opposition to the
scheme and perhaps because of a tacit recognition that changes
so radical would do the regime little good in what had become a
civil war between liberalism and its opponents.
   The radical drift of the liberal revolution in 1822 as well as the
obvious insincerity of the king, who was doing everything possible
to bring down the constitutional system, led to a series of uprisings
against the regime from Galicia to Catalonia. The most ambitious,
an invasion into northwestern Catalonia financed and encouraged
by the conservative government of Louis XVIII of France, began
successfully by capturing the city of Urgel in the summer of 1822.
The royalists were unable to follow up their initial victory, al¬
though sporadic fighting continued in the countryside for a year.
   Royalist revolts did not pose an immediate danger to liberal
military dominance, but they won extensive support from con¬
servative churchmen, particularly intransigent opponents of the
regime living in exile in France, and from disaffected members
of the regular clergy angry over their treatment by the liberal
State. Two ecclesiastics known for their commitment to absolut¬
ism—Juan de Cavia Gonzalez, bishop of Osma; and Victor Saez,
canon of Toledo and ex-confessor of Ferdinand VII—formed
part of the five-member regency council established in Urgel in
August 1822 to rule in the name of the king, who was by then a
virtual prisoner in Madrid.
   The ceremony proclaiming the regency revealed the extent of
clerical support for the campaign to restore absolute monarchy.
Canons of the Urgel cathedral chapter attended, carrying their
ceremonial cross and religious standards, while a large group of
friars wearing swords on their clerical dress looked on. Priests,
particularly from the regular clergy, did not hesitate to take arms
against the liberals in Catalonia; over 100 perished in the royalist
assault on the city of Cervera. An ex-Trappist lay brother, Antonio
Maranon, terrorized rural districts with a band of unruly troops
exhorted into battle with the cry: “Long live the King and Religion!
Death to the Constitution!”37 For every friar who took up arms,
many more gave the royalist cause their support through preach¬
ing. The Franciscans of Catalonia later boasted that they had
  126                                     The Struggle Intensifies




pronounced “constant invectives against triumphant impiety” when
they preached during the war against liberalism.38 The active par¬
ticipation of ecclesiastics in the revolts of 1822—1823 revealed how
deeply the conservative Church was committed to the restoration
of absolutism.
   Clerical involvement in royalist rebellions moved the liberal
State, increasingly under the influence of its most radical elements,
to reprisals. The executions, burnings, and sackings of religious
institutions, and the general harassment of the clergy during 1822
and 1823 were not carried out on a massive scale nor did they
occur throughout the country. But the attacks on the persons and
property of the clergy represented the first example in modern
Spanish history of a violent anticlericalism. Liberal exasperation
was greatest in Catalonia, where the Church was suspected of
conspiring with the royalists of Urgel.
   In Barcelona the Franciscans were accused of hiding arms and
signaling from their windows to royalist agents. The authorities
carried out periodic searches for arms in the order’s friaries
throughout the region, even opening tombs in Lerida. Between
September and November 1822 the friars’ position grew more
precarious. Not daring to venture onto the streets, they heard
cries of “traitor,” “enemies of the nation,” “death,” and “let them
die and be drawn and quartered.”39 Individual friars judged most
suspect by the authorities were arrested; others fled rather than
await whatever fate was in store for them. The friars of Horta
thus abandoned their friary on October 16. The buildings, in¬
cluding the church, were set on fire after their departure. The
monks of the great monastery of Poblet, one of the few monastic
houses allowed to remain open after the 1820 legislation on the
regular clergy, left on November 26. Local residents, long re¬
sentful of the monks’ financial exactions, then invaded the mon¬
astery, burned the choir and organ, and carried off everything of
value including the locks on the doors.
   The campaign against the regular clergy culminated in the
suppression on November 25 of all friaries and monasteries in
Catalonia. By that time hundreds of religious had already aban¬
doned their houses. Those remaining either adopted the status
of secular priests or went into exile. Two boat loads of Franciscans
from Barcelona were sent to Malaga and Cartagena; another two,
     The Struggle Intensifies                                    127