


A Church Besieged, 1820—1823

  The economic decline of the Church, only partially halted be¬
tween 1814 and 1820, accelerated during the period of liberal
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     129




rule. The Cortes elected in 1820 did not carry out a thorough
restructuring of Church financing, although it received petitions
from peasant proprietors asking for an end to the “slavery” of
the tithe. In 1821 the Cortes ordered the tithe reduced by one-
half and set a salary scale for the secular clergy designed to reduce
expenditures on the upper levels of the ecclesiastical establish¬
ment. The reform was intended to redistribute income from bish¬
ops and canons to the parish clergy. It was in accord with liberal
exaltation of parish priests as a civic and religious elite engaged
in educating a rural population in public and spiritual virtues.
Parish priests were “the natural educators of the people,” said a
liberal periodical in 1820. They would plant “the seeds of virtue”
among their flocks by assisting the poor, explaining the law, and
teaching the constitution.45 The reform of 1821 attempted to re¬
solve an obvious problem, and it promised a political return by
appealing to the group that had suffered most from the in¬
equalities of the Old Regime Church.
   The hopes raised by financial reform and discussion of other
projects to improve the status of parish priests were quickly dis¬
appointed. The “half-tithe” (medio diezmo) did not yield what was
necessary to pay clerical salaries. In rural districts the pattern of
tithe evasion established during the war of independence contin¬
ued. Moreover, the 300-ducats-a-year salary established for parish
priests still left them badly paid relative to the ecclesiastical elite,
and there is evidence that in some dioceses—Palencia and Oviedo,
for example—the real income of the parochial clergy declined
substantially between 1820 and 1823. Diocesan revenues based on
the half-tithe continued their downward spiral. By 1823 the in¬
come of Toledo, once the most opulent diocese of the Spanish
Church, had fallen by one-half, compared with 1800. The reve¬
nues of the cathedral chapter of Avila declined to their lowest
level since 1764.46 The financial reform of 1821 irritated the ec¬
clesiastical elite of bishops and canons, who saw their incomes
reduced and were resentful, in any event, of special levies, such
as the 2 million reales demanded by the authorities from the
chapter of Santiago in 1820. Nor did the reform satisfy the parish
clergy, whose situation was as bad as ever.
   In spite of declining revenues the secular clergy at least retained
  130                                     The Struggle Intensifies




ownership of the rural and urban property on which its survival
depended. The regular clergy was less fortunate. The 1820 re¬
form of the regulars provided for the sale of the property of
suppressed monasteries and friaries, with the proceeds to relieve
the State’s desperate finances. The disamortization ordered in
1820 represented the straightforward reaction of a government
that saw the wealth of the orders as a convenient remedy to its
own fiscal crisis; it also reflected liberal belief in economic indi¬
vidualism as opposed to the collective ownership of land by the
traditional corporations of Spanish society. Although the State
had auctioned off the property of charitable institutions and re¬
ligious endowments of certain types during the reign of Charles
IV, it had not directly attacked the property of either the secular
or regular clergy.
   Between 1820 and 1823 the government seized monastic prop¬
erty and began to sell it to individual buyers in a preview of the
massive disamortization after 1835. Unfortunately, sale of the reg¬
ulars’ property after 1820 has not been studied extensively, but
it is known that the State realized over 700 million reales from
public auctions.47 In 1821 alone the State disposed of the property
of forty monasteries, including cloisters, churches, and ancillary
buildings. Not all the holdings of the suppressed houses were sold,
however. Some monastic buildings were taken over by local and
military^ authorities for use as hospitals, barracks, asylums,
and the like. The property of other religious communities—
particularly of the mendicants, who depended less on tithes
and rental income for financing—was often judged unattractive
by prospective buyers, who offered less than the official
appraisal values. Difficult economic and political conditions kept
the sale of Church property within limits during the liberal re¬
gime, but it established the guidelines for a similar policy that
later would destroy the economic base sustaining the religious
orders.
   The origins of the deeply rooted hostility against the clergy and
ecclesiastical institutions that has so troubled modern Spain have
not been satisfactorily explored. The proverbial anticlericalism
characteristic of sectors of Spanish society in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries is difficult to explain as a simple, fixed phe¬
nomenon unrelated to political, economic, and social transfor-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     131