




 mations. The term anticlericalism itself is a catchall that contributes
 little to understanding the distinct and changing anticlericalisms
 of Spain’s recent history. At least as far back as the sixteenth
 century, an anticlericalism of sorts developed from the critique of
 the regular clergy by literary satirists and from the questioning
 of certain aspects of the Church’s economic role. But criticism of
 the Church was cautiously expressed and, in any event, confined
 to a small group of writers and bureaucrats. A popular anticler¬
 icalism also occasionally appeared in violent form in rural areas
 that were dominated by great monastic foundations with extensive
jurisdictional and financial rights over the surrounding country¬
 side. Chronic and sometimes extreme tension was common enough
 between monasteries and local inhabitants during the eighteenth
 century and left a residue of bitterness in the wake of lawsuits
 and occasional armed confrontations. The rural anticlericalism of
 the eighteenth century, limited in geographic extent and episodic,
 did not pass to the cities, where the charitable, educational, and
 economic activities of the regular and secular clergy ameliorated
 the lot of the masses and made the Church a necessary social
 institution.
     During the first quarter of the nineteenth century the prestige
 and popularity of the Church and the clergy began to wane. The
 Church’s inability to play its traditional social role, as well as the
 political struggle between absolutists and liberals in which clerics
 were deeply involved, contributed to this process. But it was not
 until the second liberal regime that hostility against the Church
 spread so extensively that it assumed broader significance. The
 anticlericalisms of the past surfaced again and with a vengeance.
 A flood of satires, more pointed than their predecessors, ridiculed
 aspects of ecclesiastical life. One of the most popular, written by
 a priest, Salvador Minano Bedoya—Political Laments for a Poor Little
Idler Accustomed to Live at Someone Else’s Expense (1820)—ridiculed
 priests living off the tithe as freeloaders whose demands were
 ruining the peasantry. In Minano’s work as in others, monks and
 friars—“the fat fathers” as one author described them—were sub¬
ject to particularly intense criticism as parasitic loafers contrib¬
 uting nothing to society.48 The satires of the liberal period appealed
 not to a restricted and cultivated elite but to a broader audience
of intellectuals, reforming clerics, lawyers, bureaucrats, army of-
   132                                     The Struggle Intensifies




ficers, journalists, and others supporting the liberal cause. Min-
ano’s work, for example, went through several editions.
   Political circumstances between 1820 and 1823 lay behind the
popularity of these satirical attacks on the Church. Similar works
in the eighteenth century made fun of the foibles and shortcom¬
ings of the clergy, but they dared not question the position of an
institution enjoying immense prestige and royal favor. By 1820
the consensus that once protected the Church no longer existed.
The Church had become the focus of political controversy. Lib¬
erals resented the support it had given to Ferdinand VII, and
they questioned the retention of its social and economic privileges
in the new society.
   It should be stressed, however, that at no point did liberal opin¬
ion envisage a campaign against either religion or the idea that
Spain must be a Catholic State. In 1821 a decree of the Cortes
left no doubt on this score. “Anyone who conspires ... to establish
any other religion in . . . the Spains or that the Spanish nation
should abandon its profession of the Catholic, Roman and Ap¬
ostolic Religion will be persecuted as a traitor and will suffer the
death penalty.”49 As at Cadiz liberals sought to adapt the Church
to new political and social conditions while leaving intact its po¬
sition as the official religion of the nation. Even the most radical
liberals, the exaltados who formed the revolutionary patriotic so¬
cieties, tried “to reconcile religion and the Constitution.”50 Dis¬
cussion on ecclesiastical reform in the Madrid club, one of the
most active, took an essentially moderate course designed to show,
according to one orator in 1820, “that the liberals are the true
Christians,” while the opponents of change are “the enemies of
Jesus Christ.”51
   Both liberal moderates and extremists wished to remodel the
Church in their own image—to create a Church with a public-
spirited clergy, a kind of religious civil service to spread knowledge
and progress to the illiterate masses, a Church to contribute to
economic improvement rather than drain the kingdom of its pro¬
ductive capabilities. The obstinacy of the hierarchy and many
clerics in clinging to their memory of the privileged Church of
the eighteenth century should not have surprised liberal opinion,
and perhaps it did not. But successive liberal governments did
not know how to deal with the Church’s refusal to accept this new
     The Struggle Intensifies                                   133