




but with nothing like the passionate debate that had taken place
in 1813. Even the clerical leadership reacted with unusual torpor.
The bishop of Tortosa, Manuel Ros de Medrano, a committed
supporter of absolutism at Cadiz, informed his diocese that the
suppression of the Holy Tribunal should not be interpreted as a
blow against the faith because Catholicism had survived in Spain
for centuries before the Inquisition’s creation. His argument was
similar to that advanced by the liberal Arguelles in the parlia¬
mentary debate of 1813. The archbishop of Toledo and primate
of Spain, Luis de Borbon, whose moderation had earned him the
enmity of Ferdinand VII, went further and welcomed abolition
because it reinforced episcopal authority within the Church.
    Tension developed between the civil and ecclesiastical author¬
ities over the State’s insistence that all members of the secular and
regular clergy should take an oath to uphold the constitution and
that the parish clergy should explain it to their congregations
during Mass. Most of the hierarchy swore the oath, though with¬
out enthusiasm, as did the superiors of the religious orders. Cirilo
de la Alameda, the general of the Franciscans, told his friars that
they must accept “the new principles of the new government.”23
Two bishops, Pedro Inguanzo of Zamora and Alonso Canedo of
Malaga, resisted but ceded in the end before the counsel of the
papal nuncio, Giacomo Giustiniani.24 The nuncio’s moderation
reflected the attitude of Pius VII, who published a brief on April
30 urging the Spanish Church to preserve its tranquillity before
the political changes. But members of the regular clergy and some
parish priests were not as cooperative. Among the Franciscans of
Catalonia news of the revolution’s triumph so shocked some friars
that they took to their beds in fits of melancholy; the able-bodied
absented themselves from their friaries on the day the oath was
to be administered or kept silence when the fatal words of loyalty
were pronounced.25 The issues of the oath and the teaching of
the constitution from the pulpit, however, were only irritants in
a generally calm situation.
   Ecclesiastical prudence in the face of changing political circum¬
stances was also dictated by the reemergence of the liberal Church.
Partisans of reform along the lines of the Synod of Pistoia, such
as Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, Felix Amat, Jose d’Espiga, and
others, returned from retirement, exile, or imprisonment to lead
  120                                     The Struggle Intensifies




discussion on the Church’s fate. The basic outline of reform had
changed little since the 1790’s. Advocates of change still looked
to the civil authorities and an alliance between Constitution and
Altar to impose reform on the Church. Issues such as the size and
role of the regular clergy, improvement in the status of the parish
priest, and reduction of papal authority in favor of the bishops
formed the core of the reforming program, as they had for three
decades. Reform received limited support from the episcopacy.
Some prelates—the cardinal primate, Luis de Borbon; Pedro Gon¬
zalez Vallejo, the former bishop of Mallorca deposed by Ferdinand
VII; and the auxiliary bishop of Madrid, Luis Lopez del Cas-
trillo—favored change, but the majority of the episcopacy re¬
mained firm in its opposition. As before, the strength of the
reformers was concentrated in the secondary levels of the eccle¬
siastical elite, among cathedral canons and university professors.
With the election to the Cortes of fifty-four priests, including the
leading figures of the reforming movement, a moderate program
of ecclesiastical renovation seemed close to realization.
   The issue of Church reform surfaced in the Cortes scarcely a
week after its opening. Clerical deputies called for legislation to
improve the economic condition of the parish clergy, who lived
“in shameful misery” compared with the “unmeasured opulence”
of the clerical elite.26 On August 20 the Cortes named a parlia¬
mentary committee to draft reform legislation for the Church.
Although some lay deputies sat on the committee, it was domi¬
nated by priests long identified with reform, such as Villanueva,
Diego Munoz Torrero, Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo, and others. They
worked for four months to produce a plan of reform that would
“conciliate the decorum of our holy religion and the necessary
endowment of its ministers” with “the kingdom’s state of pov¬
erty.”27 The committee produced a series of legislative proposals
that represented a common-sense compromise which recognized
political and financial reality while attempting to buttress the po¬
sition of the parish clergy. It made clear at the outset that its
projects would guarantee to “the ecclesiastical ministry in all its
ranks that it would be assisted and provided for by the Spanish
people, as it has been until now.”28 In one set of proposals the
committee recommended that the enormous disparities of income
among the kingdom’s bishops be eliminated through a simplified
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  121