




illations to recover income in a time of general economic stag¬
nation may well have contributed to the popular hostility to the
orders, which would take violent form between 1820 and 1823.
   Caught between economic problems and the political cunning
of Ferdinand VII, the Church was as far from realizing its dreams
in 1820 as in 1814. Clerical hopes outstripped the reality of the
Church’s position in Fernandine Spain. The persecution of reli¬
gious and political dissent was no doubt satisfying, but it was not
the great spiritual revolution expected from the restoration of the
“Desired One” to the throne.
   The weaknesses of the eighteenth-century Church remained,
whether in the form of an archaic organizational framework or
the imbalanced distribution of material resources. Conservative
ecclesiastics displayed some interest in reform, but their obsession
with the danger of a liberal revolution and the purging of re¬
formers within the Church meant for all practical purposes the
abandonment of any prospect for change. One of Ferdinand’s
earliest actions had been to secure a brief from Pius VII revoking
the authorization of 1804 that had ordered a general inquiry into
the state of the regular clergy as a prelude to necessary reform.
In 1816 the bishop of Jaen complained to the king of “the la¬
mentable state of monastic observance” he had found after an
inspection of the monasteries and convents of his diocese. The
state of the secular clergy seemed no better to the bishop of Ca-
lahorra, who issued a scathing indictment of his priests in the
same year. Some had earned “public infamy” for living with their
housekeepers or female servants; others were “drunkards and
dealers at fairs and markets.” Although the bishop admitted that
only a minority of the clergy were guilty of such conduct, he
claimed that many of their better-living fellows said Mass “without
devotion or any awareness of what they were doing” and were
“idlers . . . who never took a spiritual book in hand, nor even knew
that such works existed.”18
   The economic difficulties of ecclesiastical institutions also un¬
dermined the Church’s traditional social role. Bishops, chapters,
and monasteries gradually resumed distribution of charitable as¬
sistance, but on a reduced scale. Limited resources meant that the
massive charity efforts of the eighteenth century were no longer
possible. Moreover, the number of vocations between 1814 and
    The Struggle Intensifies                                   117




1820, especially among the regular clergy, failed to replace the
losses suffered during the war. By 1820 the bishops were la¬
menting the crisis in recruitment as one of their gravest problems,
although the pastoral problems could have been resolved through
efhcient use of existing personnel.19 And within the Church the
purge of reforming clerics did not eliminate sympathy for change.
The reformers, although silenced, did not disappear, and they
would emerge again with the triumph of the liberal revolution.
By 1820 the Church had failed to resolve its problems in spite of
the alliance between Throne and Altar. A conservative ecclesias¬
tical leadership produced no new initiatives and tied the fate of
the Church to the fortunes of Ferdinand VII.