




system of episcopal salaries that would depend on the size and
importance of each diocese. It called for a reduction in the number
of cathedral canons and urged that one-half the places in chapters
be reserved for parish priests with at least twelve years’ parochial
service.
   The committee directed particular attention to improving the
condition and income of the parish clergy. Its recommendations,
far more complete than anything discussed at Cadiz, sought to
endow parish priests with what the reformers believed to be their
rightful place within the organization of the Church. The com¬
mittee thus called for a restructuring of the parochial system to
create parishes that reflected the size of local populations; it pro¬
posed the elimination of benefices unconnected to pastoral work;
and it suggested a range of salaries to provide the parish clergy
with decent incomes. The proposals attached equal importance
to improving the quality of the parochial clergy. Parish priests’
obligation to teach knowledge of the faith to their congregations
was stressed. The committee also stipulated that in the Balearic
Islands, Catalonia, Valencia, Navarra, and the Basque Provinces
parish priests and their assistants would be required to know and
speak the languages of their regions.29
   The parliamentary committee on ecclesiastical reform ad¬
dressed the fundamental problems arising from the imbalanced
organizational structure of the Old Regime Church. Its proposals
were not radical or extreme, but their acceptance by the kingdom’s
bishops and endorsement by the papacy were doubtful. Some of
the committee’s recommendations, such as that on the parish clergy,
eventually became law. The initiative for implementing the law’s
provisions, however, rarely came from the Church itself. In Bar¬
celona, for example, municipal authorities undertook to ration¬
alize the organization of parishes. New parishes were created to
serve districts that had been badly served; some parishes in dis¬
tricts with too many churches were suppressed. The reform won
at worst the open hostility of the diocesan administrators, at best
their unenthusiastic tolerance.30
   The tense but workable spirit of accommodation between a
conservative Church and the liberal State began to sour when, on
August 15, 1820, the Cortes ordered the suppression of the Jesuits
and the sale of their property to benefit the public treasury. The
  122                                     The Struggle Intensifies




Jesuits had not recovered their old preeminence, but their special
loyalty to the king, whom they regarded as a savior, and the tra¬
ditional hostility of progressive opinion sealed their fate.31 The
radical elements of the liberal press began attacking the order in
the spring, and the first signs of the popular anticlericalism that
characterized urban society in nineteenth-century Spain surfaced
against the Jesuits. Cries of “Death to the Jesuits!” were heard on
the streets of Madrid; members of the order venturing out were
insulted by angry crowds.32 Although the Cortes treated ex-mem-
bers of the order more gently than had Charles III, allowing them
to remain in the kingdom with government pensions, the suppres¬
sion elicited an angry protest from Pius VII and moved the Church
closer to a break with the new regime.
    The Cortes of 1820 also took up the question of reforming the
regular clergy. A parliamentary committee including Bishop Cas-
trillo produced a legislative proposal for the full Cortes in Sep¬
 tember. There was nothing particularly new in the project, which
 reflected many of the ideas that had circulated at Cadiz. But the
 proposal went beyond earlier suggestions for reform in calling
 for the suppression of all monasteries (that is the foundations of
 the strictly monastic orders, such as the Benedictines and Cister¬
cians) save eight to be reserved for monks unable to become sec¬
 ular priests because of age or infirmity. Opposition to the
 monasteries arose from the widespread belief that these com¬
 munities, devoted to contemplation and prayer, contributed noth¬
 ing to the pastoral or economic benefit of the kingdom. The
 nonmonastic orders, particularly the mendicants, were treated
 more leniently. Friaries with more than twenty-four ordained priests
 were to survive, although a prohibition on reception of novices
 would assure their eventual demise. The committee’s proposal
 received overwhelming endorsement from the Cortes (107 dep¬
 uties in favor, 32 against) and became law.33
    The ley de monacales became another source of dissension be¬
 tween the liberal State and most of the ecclesiastical leadership.
 But the reform of 1820 did not envisage total suppression of the
 regular clergy. It represented an attempt to rationalize the dis¬
 tribution and numbers of both religious houses and their mem¬
 bers. By 1822, 801 monasteries and friaries had been closed. But
 860 continued to function. The Cortes, moreover, tried to assure
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  123