




protector of his personal power.11 The appointment of Fray Rafael
de Velez, author of a celebrated defense of the alliance between
the Church and Crown, to the bishopric of Ceuta in 1817 sym¬
bolized the new episcopacy completely identified with the interests
of the absolutist State. Although the average age of the new prel¬
ates was sixty-three, Ferdinand appointed a number of younger
bishops on whom he could count in the future, and he turned
increasingly to the regular clergy, whose antiliberalism was pro¬
verbial, as an episcopal recruiting ground.12 The personal quality
and educational level of the hierarchy was not far below the
eighteenth-century standard, but the direct use of royal patronage
on a massive scale for an immediate political purpose endowed
the Church for a generation with an episcopacy ill prepared to
grapple with ecclesiastical problems.
   The clergy expected the restored monarchy to rebuild the eco¬
nomic foundations on which the eighteenth-century Church’s
prosperity had rested. There are few studies of ecclesiastical wealth
for this period, but the evidence suggests that the decline which
had begun early in the century was irreversible. The agricultural
and commercial depression, which had deepened during the war,
continued unabated; the State was close to bankruptcy. Revenues
from the tithe, dependent on a flourishing agriculture, did not
reach prewar levels. Moreover, peasant evasion of the tithe con¬
tinued in spite of the efforts of civil and ecclesiastical authorities.
An inquiry of 1817 in the diocese of Cartagena revealed such
deep hostility to the tithe among the peasantry that collection
agents dared not press their demands too aggressively. Peasant
resistance could be broken, declared one collector, only if the State
made examples of the recalcitrant through vigorous judicial ac¬
tion.13 A similar pattern of resistance prevailed among those owing
money to the Church through the loans known as censos. The
Church received virtually nothing from this source during the
war and found it difficult to reestablish its claims after 1814 be¬
cause of the complexity of these financial arrangements. No overall
figures document the decline in wealth, but the income of the
kingdom’s bishoprics fell from 52,042,000 reales in 1802 to
34,274,279 by 1820.14
   The Church’s financial problems were aggravated by the de¬
mands of the State. The desperate condition of the royal treasury
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  115




 forced the king to turn to ecclesiastical revenues as extensively as
 had both his father and the Cortes of Cadiz. In 1815 Ferdinand
 appropriated the income of benefices held by absentee clerics and
 forbade bishops from granting pensions on their incomes so that
 any surplus could be assigned to the treasury. In 1817 the king
 imposed a special levy of 30 million reales on the secular and
 regular clergy to be paid over a six-year period. The financial
 pressure of the Crown on the archdiocese of Santiago was so great
 that 60 percent of its revenues between 1814 and 1820 went into
 the State’s coffers. Royal policy in other areas also affected the
 financial situation of ecclesiastical institutions. In 1814, for ex¬
 ample, Ferdinand’s suppression of feudal baronies in Catalonia
led to a decline in income among the great monastic houses of
 the region such as Poblet, which depended in part on the payments
 from the surrounding countryside over which it exercised juris¬
diction. The subjects of Poblet welcomed the abolition of the mon¬
astery’s rights with jubilation and for good measure refused to
pay the tithe and other obligations they had traditionally paid to
the monks.15
    Economic conditions and the financial demands of the State
also affected the regular clergy. Josep Fontana’s study of monastic
revenues in Menorca and Catalonia between 1814 and 1820 has
called attention to the crisis suffered by religious houses forced
to consider selling some of their property to raise badly needed
income.16 Whether the crisis was general among the communities
of religious is less certain. In Catalonia monasteries dependent
on the tithe and other payments in kind were caught in difficult
circumstances. But the mendicant orders, particularly the Fran¬
ciscans, the most numerous in the region, fared better. When the
provincial chapter met in 1818 it noted with satisfaction that “in
only six years the province had been restored to a very flourishing
condition” and that the extensive material damage suffered dur¬
ing the war had been entirely repaired.17 Even the Carthusian
monastery of las Cuevas in Seville, which had seen its fertile,
irrigated gardens destroyed during the war, managed to secure
enough income to rebuild its ruined church and enjoy a brief
prosperity between 1818 and 1820. Although the recovery of the
orders was uneven, resources committed to rebuilding as well as
the pressures exerted by monasteries and convents on local pop-
  116                                    The Struggle Intensifies