


Christ or the Constitution, 1820—1823

   Repression and the ineptness of the liberal opposition allowed
the king to cling to power, but the government’s lack of coherent
policies, the continued deterioration of the State’s finances, and
the persistence of unfavorable economic conditions, combined
with frustration among officers of the expeditionary army Fer¬
dinand assembled to recover Spain’s disintegrating American em¬
pire, finally produced the revolution that restored the Constitution
of 1812. Discontent among young officers and the rank and hie,
reluctant to abandon their quarters in the province of Cadiz for
the bloody battlefields of Venezuela and New Granada, combined
with the conspiratorial activity of the masonic lodges that had
proliferated both in the army and in the city of Cadiz to launch
the second liberal revolution of the nineteenth century.
   On January 1, 1820, the young commander of the regiment of
Asturias, Rafael de Riego, proclaimed the restoration of the Con¬
stitution of 1812 and attempted to rally the officers and men of
the expeditionary army to the revolutionary cause. The rising
initially followed the same dismal course that had led to the failure
of earlier attempts to restore the liberal regime, but the king’s
indecisiveness, the opportunism of his high command, and the
spread of the revolution to other regions—particularly Zaragoza
and Barcelona—forced the monarch, anxious to preserve his throne
at any cost, to announce on March 7 that he would accept the
constitution. Two days later Ferdinand took the oath to the con-
  118                                      The Struggle Intensifies




stitution he had refused to accept in 1814, and on March 22 a
provisional government called for elections to a new Cortes, which
would meet on July 9.
   The success of the revolution of 1820 caught the Church by
surprise. Only the bishop of Cadiz, Francisco Javier Cienfuegos,
came forward to condemn the conspirators and to assure his flock
that their loyalty to the king would be rewarded with “peace and
tranquility in this life and eternal life in the next.”20 The sudden
triumph of the revolution, the king’s decision to accept the con¬
stitution, and the appointment of a moderate liberal ministry dom¬
inated by former members of the Cortes of Cadiz led the hierarchy
to view the new regime with something less than the hostility that
might have been expected. In April, May, and June the bishops
published pastoral letters urging the faithful to “observe the law
of Jesus Christ, to trust in the constituted authorities,” and to live
“beneath the sweet empire of the Constitution,” while diocesan
authorities everywhere ordered the celebration of Te Deums.21
   The abrupt about-face of a Church that had lavished praise on
absolute monarchy was understandable. Ferdinand VII’s accept¬
ance of the new order deprived the Church of the ideological
ammunition it had once fired against liberalism. Moreover, the
spring and early summer of 1820 corresponded in some respects
to the situation in 1809 and 1810 before the meeting of the Cortes
of Cadiz. A moderate government ruled, and the direction of the
new Cortes was as yet unclear. But the substantially different
political circumstances of 1820 ensured that the Cortes would be
able to undertake a more comprehensive program of reform than
had been possible ten years before. The revolutionary government
held firm control over the national territory, and the liberals’
superior political tactics gave them a dominance in the assembly
they had not enjoyed at Cadiz. The stunning and sudden success
of the revolution as well as the opposition of upholders of absolute
monarchy to participation in the new regime reduced the tradi¬
tionalist representation in the Cortes.22 The eloquent defenders
of the old order who had directed steady fire against reform at
Cadiz were missing in the parliament of 1820.
   It was not clear in the early days of the revolution how far the
new regime would go in its efforts to reform the Church. On
March 9 the government decreed the abolition of the Inquisition,
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  119