




role. As a result a political anticlericalism developed, which took
the form of rhetorical attacks on the Church in parliamentary
debates and a press campaign that grew in intensity as the liberal
experiment followed a more radical course. Liberals looked to
 public opinion to force the Church to mend its recalcitrant ways.
    The unrest of local populations, irritated by the financial and
jurisdictional demands of monasteries, surfaced again during the
 period of liberal rule. The sacking of the Cistercian monastery of
 Poblet in November 1822 and the invasion of the Carthusian
 house of Santa Maria de las Cuevas near Seville by a crowd that
 “profaned” the Church “with irreverent excesses” are examples
 of the “monastic,” rural anticlericalism of the past.52 Popular re¬
 action to monasteries depended on local conditions and the nature
 of the exactions they imposed. Smaller foundations with modest
 resources that performed real services for isolated peasants often
 won their affection, as in Batuecas, where a small community of
 fifteen monks, “the principal source of religious information, of
 spiritual assistance, and of medicinal relief,” was so esteemed by
 the shepherds of the district that they petitioned for the monas¬
 tery’s survival after the 1820 decree of suppression.53 Hostility
 directed against the monasteries was still sporadic and uneven in
 extent, but it was expressed more violently than ever before. More¬
 over, it reflected the deep antagonism between the corporate
 property characteristic of Old Regime society and the interests of
 local peasants.
     Between 1820 and 1823 resurgent popular opposition to and
 violence against monastic foundations represented the settling of
 decades-, perhaps centuries-old rural scores. The appearance of
 a distinctly popular urban anticlericalism, however, was new. We
 know little of its nature, its geographic extent, or the social back¬
 ground of its adherents. There is no study similar to that of George
 Rude on the urban masses during the French Revolution. Few
 areas of research would be more useful for an understanding of
 the urban lower classes’ contribution to Spanish revolutionary pol¬
 itics between 1820 and 1873. It is at least clear that the remarkable
 docility characteristic of urban populations during the eighteenth
 century gave way by 1820 to a mood of unrest and agitation in
 which hostility toward the Church was prominent. The crowds
 that surged through the inquisitorial prisons of Barcelona and
  134                                      The Struggle Intensifies




Madrid in March 1820 scattering papers and freeing inmates, the
threats and insults directed against the Jesuits and the regulars
in both cities, as well as occasional physical attacks—such as that
inflicted on a Franciscan friar in the town of Mora who was dragged
through the streets by an enraged mob and hurled into the river
Ebro in 1822—reveal how the situation had changed. The cry
“Death to the friars!” entered the vocabulary of the urban masses.
   The new anticlericalism of the cities, however, was neither uni¬
versal nor indiscriminate. It was most visible in Madrid, the center
of the nation’s political life, where the attitudes of liberal politi¬
cians could hlter down to the streets through pamphlets, broad¬
sheets, and simple word-of-mouth propaganda. But it was also
important in Barcelona, where feeling against the Church ran
high because of royalist activity in the region.
   The specific contours of violent, urban anticlericalism in liberal
Spain before 1874 remain to be studied. But it is at least clear
that the declining charitable capabilities of the Church, the long
and painful crisis of city economies after 1808, and the gradual
conquest of the urban masses by liberalism destroyed the social
contract that had protected the Church during the eighteenth
century. Although it is tempting to see the historic origins of the
massive anticlerical outbursts of the twentieth century in the vio¬
lence of 1820—1823, the assassinations of the regular clergy that
took place in Madrid and Barcelona in 1834 and 1835, and the
episodic attacks occurring after the revolution of 1868, violent
anticlericalism in liberal Spain developed within a narrower con¬
text than did its counterpart in the twentieth century. The most
serious attacks took place early in the period, during the second
liberal revolution and at the beginning of the third (1834-1835),
and they focused largely on the regular clergy and its property.
Once the issue of the regulars was resolved with the suppression
of most of the male orders in 1836, urban violence against the
Church declined noticeably. There was little during the govern¬
ment of General Espartero (1840-1843) and even less under the
revolutionary government of 1854 to 1856.
   Violence against the Church in the cities reflected the state at
any given moment of the conflict between liberalism and abso¬
lutism. Attacks on the Church generally increased when the strug¬
gle was going badly for the liberals and decreased when their
     The Struggle Intensifies                                135