




lished statements praising the young queen throughout the au¬
tumn of 1833.7
   The adhesion of the clerical establishment to Isabella arose in
part from a profoundly conservative mentality, which would allow
no questioning of the succession established by a legitimate sov¬
ereign. But it also developed from many bishops’ sincere convic¬
tion that only Isabella’s succession could prevent the horrors of
civil war. “To recognize, love and obey the Queen,” said Pedro
Martinez de San Martin, bishop of Barcelona, “was the only way
to assure the peace, the unity, the felicity, the mutual love which
we owe to one another . . . and so necessary for the prosperity of
states, particularly our beloved country which is unfortunately
divided into diverse opinions and parties.”8 On the practical side,
the continuation of Cea Bermudez in office soothed a clergy un¬
easy about the future. But there were early signs of clerical par¬
ticipation in the Carlist rising that began in October. The priestly
veteran of two previous campaigns against liberalism, Jeronimo
Merino, immediately joined the revolt. He assisted at the cere¬
mony in Aranda that proclaimed the pretender as Charles V, as
did several Franciscans from a nearby friary in Aguilera. Even
the papal nuncio admitted in December that clerics were partic¬
ipating in the rising.9 Yet the prevailing tendency among the clergy
was to wait uneasily on events.
   The government of Martinez de la Rosa (January 1834-June
 1835) rested on an alliance between the Crown and the moderate
elements of liberalism—the landowners, merchants, prosperous
lawyers, and noblemen committed to restoration of a parliamen¬
tary regime dominated by an enlightened elite. Its fundamental
constitutional document, the Estatuto Real of April 1834, provided
for a narrow franchise designed to exclude the exaltados who had
taken control of the revolution of 1820. But oligarchic liberalism
proved unworkable. The proliferation of the exaltado press, al¬
lowed by the government itself, and the eventual return to political
life of the radicals combined with military failure against the Carl-
ists to undo the settlement of 1834 and move the revolution in a
more extreme direction.
   The ecclesiastical policy of the oligarchic liberals resembled that
of 1820; it emphasized reform of the regular clergy, improvement
in the economic condition of parish priests, and elimination of
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   149




“superstition” from the Church. The most influential advocate of
reform, the minister of justice, Nicolas Garelli, believed from his
experience as a member of the commission that had drafted the
ley de monacales in 1820 that the government had erred then by not
seeking the Church’s cooperation. Having been burned once by
clerical reaction to its legislation, the government approached the
problem in 1834 with greater caution and, from a tactical point
of view, some common sense. In April it appointed a royal com¬
mission, the Real Junta Eclesiastica, composed of ten bishops and
four laymen to study the question of the regulars.10 Garelli, how¬
ever, did not intend to rush headlong into reforms. The com¬
mission was instructed to gather statistical information on the
orders before drafting a comprehensive plan of reform. The com¬
mission went about its work thoroughly and gathered the most
accurate statistics on the regulars since the census of 1797.
    If political events had not undermined oligarchic liberalism, the
government would have reduced the number of religious houses
to the same extent as in 1820. Whether the Church would have
accepted such a reform is doubtful. The government appointed
bishops to the commission known for their “sincere adhesion to
legitimacy.” They included the handful of liberal prelates who
had previously supported reform: the bishop of Sigtienza, Manuel
Fraile; the bishop of Astorga, Felix Torres Amat; the bishop of
Cartagena expelled by Ferdinand VII, Antonio Posada Rubin de
Celis; and Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo, who had been ousted from the
diocese of Mallorca in 1823. Although the commission survived
until 1836, the disintegration of the government in 1835 revealed
that a limited reform of the regulars would not satisfy either the
Church or liberal exaltados. Ecclesiastical change based on reform
of the orders was either too much or too little. It satisfied no one.
    An ecclesiastical policy based on a cautiously implemented re¬
form might have succeeded in 1820; it was swept aside by events
in 1834 and 1835. For the government restraint became difficult
beginning in the spring of 1834 as friars and monks joined the
Carlist rising. Monasteries and convents in isolated mountain areas
of the Basque Provinces, Navarra, Galicia, Toledo, Cuenca, and
Andalusia furnished food, supplies, and quarters to passing Carl¬
ist bands. The wealthy monastery of Sobrado in Galicia was said
to have donated 22,000 reales to local Carlist troops; similar ac-
  150                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church