


Throne and Altar, 1823—1833

   The conservative Church welcomed the restoration of Ferdi¬
nand VII to absolute power. As in 1814 the king hastened to
satisfy the Church by annulling liberal ecclesiastical legislation,
allowing the regulars to reoccupy their houses, and appointing
his ex-confessor, Victor Saez, a clerical ultra of the first order, to
an influential ministry. Saez quickly commanded that devotions
to the Blessed Sacrament be held throughout the kingdom to
appease divine wrath for the injuries inflicted on the Church dur-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     137




ing liberal rule. He also dispatched missionary friars to preach
against what he saw as erroneous and heretical opinions. On the
surface the situation appeared similar to that of 1814; in fact, the
measures taken to appease the Church did not satisfy a growing
body of intransigent clerics. The illusion that once led ecclesiastics
to trust Ferdinand to inaugurate a golden age of religion had long
since dissipated. Instinctively, churchmen realized that the king
had cleverly used them for his own ends; they did not intend
allowing him to play the same game again. Moreover, clerical
participation in two years of conspiracy and armed revolt against
the liberal State gave some ecclesiastics a taste for political intrigue
that they did not abandon when their cause triumphed.
    The vague, theocratic hopes that had inspired the Church in
its crusade against the Cortes of Cadiz gave way to a more straight¬
forward objective—the eradication of liberalism from Spanish soil.
Royalist periodicals under clerical influence demanded that all
“apostles of irreligion” should leave the country and that civil and
ecclesiastical posts should be held only by the “truly Catholic.”55
The Church set about purging liberal sympathizers from its ranks.
Bishops such as Gonzalez Vallejo and Rubin de Celis were sent
packing, and cathedral canons turned on colleagues who had sup¬
ported liberalism. In Oviedo the canons accused Domingo So-
moza, the diocese’s administrator during the liberal regime and
a prominent exaltado cleric, of being guilty of “perversion”; they
stripped him of his canonry and benefices. Miguel de Riego, an¬
other canon of Oviedo and brother of the hero of 1820, suffered
the same fate; in Badajoz the chapter purged one of its members
for criticizing the king and displaying “implacable hatred” against
the Inquisition. The purge even reached down to the parish clergy;
in San Roque in Cadiz the parish priest was ousted simply for
having baptized a child with the name “John of the Constitution.”56
    Conservative ecclesiastics and the king shared an aversion for
liberalism, hence the campaign of repression carried out by Church
and State against dissidents. But the Church, or at least its most
ultra representatives, who had learned a thing or two about po¬
litical pressure and manipulation during the liberal period, were
determined to force Ferdinand VII to conform entirely to their
demands. Their campaign centered on restoring the Inquisition.
Even before the liberal regime’s end, the bishops living in exile
  138                                     The Struggle Intensifies