




cusations were directed against the Benedictine monastery of Ona
in the Burgos Mountains and the Capuchins of Casares in the
Ronda hills of Andalusia. The extent of support varied enor¬
mously. In some cases religious provided help because they had
no choice. “Let those live whom God wishes,” said the superior
of a Dominican priory in the Santander Mountains when he learned
that he had just given supplies to a group of Carlists.11 Other
houses were more deeply implicated. The Franciscans of Bilbao
were rumored to have manufactured 2 million cartridges for the
Carlist army.
   The contribution of the regulars to the rising, however, should
not be exaggerated. Although the regions where Carlism enjoyed
considerable military success between 1833 and 1839—a long swath
running from the Basque Provinces through Navarra and moun¬
tainous Aragon to the hills of Catalonia—were known then as now
for their Catholicism, there were relatively few monasteries and
friaries in these districts of small, peasant proprietors. The urban
character of the Old Regime Church came to haunt the regulars,
for the cities were firmly under liberal control. Revuelta Gonzalez
in his study of the religious orders has shown that the vast majority
of the regulars, though sympathetic to the cause of Carlism, re¬
mained passive and fearful as they awaited the fate the liberal
State was preparing for them. The secular clergy was also rep¬
resented in Carlist ranks. At the end of 1834 the governor of
Logrono drew up a list of clerical conspirators including twenty-
five secular priests as well as fifteen monks and friars. Although
only a minority of the regular clergy actively supported Carlism
and seculars were as deeply implicated, liberal opinion, which had
not forgotten the orders’ earlier defense of absolutism, concen¬
trated its hostility against them. In March 1834 Martinez de la
Rosa ordered the closing of all religious houses left vacant by the
desertion of at least a sixth of their residents to the rebellion. This
led to the suppression of fifty, such as the Capuchin house of
Pamplona, which the authorities found empty on the morning of
August 6 after the friars had carried off sacred vessels, vestments,
small statues, and supplies during the night.
   The closing of abandoned or subversive monasteries and fri¬
aries affected an insignificant number of the kingdom’s 1,940 male
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  151




religious houses, but it irritated clerical opinion. Legislation mak¬
ing novices liable for military service and suspension of appoint¬
ments to canonries and other benefices without pastoral functions
also aroused ecclesiastical tempers. The archbishop of Seville, as
early as January 1834, wrote that the new government’s policies
“presaged a fatal future for the Spanish Church.”12 But during
its first six months in office, the ministry of Martinez de la Rosa
moved with such caution that no comprehensive plan of Church
reform was either drafted or implemented. Measures taken against
the rebel clergy were limited in character and imposed by political
circumstances as even the papal nuncio, Francesco Tiberi, rec¬
ognized when he informed Rome that the “perversity and malice”
of some priests had moved the “Catholic, pious and just Queen”
to take action against some regulars.13
   The political strategy of the liberal elite controlling the gov¬
ernment proved as unworkable as it had been fourteen years
earlier. Ecclesiastical reform was postponed because the ministry
feared that the Church would desert en masse and contribute to
the victory of Carlism. The relationship of the Church to Carlism
is a complex topic as yet inadequately studied, but it is clear that
while Carlism was identified with the Church, the Church was not
exclusively identified with Carlism. Charles V proclaimed his in¬
tention to respect the organization and privileges of the Old Re¬
gime Church. His propaganda dwelt on the Catholic nature of
his monarchy and the persecuting character of the liberal State.
Perhaps a decisive majority of the clergy sympathized with the
objectives of Carlism, but this did not mean they actively partic¬
ipated in the struggle against liberalism. The Church, with its
resources and personnel concentrated in the liberal cities, lacked
the freedom of action to contribute in any practical way to the
triumph of a movement that failed to establish itself outside its
northern, rural strongholds. Relations between the Church and
the liberal regime would deteriorate rapidly after 1835, but even
then, in spite of clerical rhetoric, the Church could do nothing
other than survive as well as possible and await better times. With
a sense of the possible, the episcopacy did not rush to identify
itself with Carlism even in the most difficult moments. Prelates
such as Joaquin de Abarca, later Charles V’s chief minister, were
  152                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church