




Table 4. Revenues of selected episcopal households, 1813—1827 (in reales).

                                  Revenues in the year-

City            1813           1815          1823          1826        1827

Granada       1,786,897                    834,666                   528,153
Jaen          1,106,093                    873,815        535,104
Malaga                       1,404,497     759,819        674,722

   Source: Christian Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols au dix-huit-
ieme siecle (1650—1830),” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 10 (1974), 196.




tween friars and their superiors troubled many convents, as in
Almagro, where in 1833 the prior appealed to the civil authorities
for assistance in restoring order after discovering one of his nov¬
ices carrying a pistol under his habit.65
   Nor did any fundamental changes in the situation of the secular
clergy occur. The episcopacy continued to be dominated by a
clerical minority of well-educated prelates, but they had less in¬
tellectual breadth than their predecessors of the eighteenth cen¬
tury. Pedro de Inguanzo, named archbishop of Toledo and primate
of Spain in 1824, was typical of the members of the Fernandine
hierarchy. An able canon lawyer and polemicist, Inguanzo de¬
voted himself primarily to defense of the Church’s rights and
support of Ferdinand VII rather than to the cultural and social
projects common under the Caroline bishops.
   The clerical elite of cathedral canons and university professors
produced few figures to recall the public-spirited and cultivated
clergy of the eighteenth century. One of the handful of distin¬
guished intellectual figures in the Church of the 1820’s was Felix
Torres Amat, nephew of the celebrated Jansenist intellectual. Torres
Amat undertook a new translation of the Bible, held membership
in the Royal Academy of History and other learned societies, and
gathered a fine collection of Catalan books and manuscripts in
Barcelona. The fate of his translation of the Bible, however, re¬
veals the intellectual decline of the clergy. Although Torres Amat
devoted years to his work, he had to struggle against the oppo¬
sition of the archbishop of Toledo, Inguanzo, and the papal nun¬
cio, Giustiniani, to the translation’s publication. Only the financial
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     143




assistance of Anglican friends in London allowed the work to
appear between 1833 and 1835 after numerous delays.66
   There was no indication that the condition of the lower clergy
had improved as the reign of Ferdinand VII drew to a close. In
1831 the papal nuncio, Francesco Tiberi, reported to Rome that
ignorance and moral irregularities were still common among the
secular clergy.67 Moreover, the fundamental problems of the
eighteenth-century Church remained—the imbalanced distribu¬
tion of resources, a large number of benehced clergy who did no
pastoral work, and the reluctance of priests to accept posts in poor
rural districts.
   In 1824 the Church turned again to traditional pastoral meth¬
ods to maintain its religious position. The reestablishment of the
regulars allowed the missions to resume. Although some mission¬
aries compared favorably with the great figures of the eighteenth
century, notably the Franciscan Fray Jose de Areso, the missionary
effort was no longer an effective instrument of popular evange¬
lization. The increasingly political character of preaching as well
as the lack of religious vitality and commitment in the orders
reduced the missions to formal exercises, which contrasted with
the emotional fervor of both priests and congregations during the
eighteenth century.
   Within the ritual life of the Church, the old chasm between
extravagant ceremonial and the practices of “popular” religion
persisted. In spite of declining ecclesiastical wealth, cathedrals still
held Masses of Baroque splendor. A visitor to Toledo in 1830
thus marveled at the “heavenly” music of the high Mass, sung to
the accompaniment of “a variety of bassoons, viols, and violins
and a powerful choir of voices.” At the shrine of Begona in the
Basque Provinces, the clergy still went to the portico of the church
at the beginning of every thunderstorm to sprinkle the sky with
holy water.68 Devotionalism encouraged by the Church—partic¬
ularly the cult of the Sacred Heart, which began to develop into
the nineteenth century’s most popular devotion—suffocated the
modest efforts of eighteenth-century reformers to create a sim¬
pler, more interior faith. The Scriptures, although available in
various vernacular editions, were not widely read, even by the
clergy.69 The combination of popular religion and devotions pro-
  144                                     The Struggle Intensifies