




moted by the Church completely dominated forms of religious
expression and would do so well into the twentieth century.
    Between 1823 and 1833 the Spanish Church enjoyed for the
last time the privileges and power it had accumulated over the
centuries, despite their diminution over the preceding four dec¬
ades. In retrospect, these years can be seen to have formed a brief
interlude in the struggle between a Church determined to pre¬
serve its institutional position within the State and society and new
political forces bent on modifying the Church to conform to their
ideology and economic principles. It was in the end an unequal
struggle. With its material resources depleted and its intellectual
and spiritual vitality sapped, the Church had few inner resources
to sustain it in the long conflict with liberalism. Increasingly po¬
liticized and factionalized, it continued to place its hopes on the
survival of absolute monarchy, whether that of Ferdinand VII or
the more extreme version propounded by supporters of Charles.
Both would prove incapable of saving the Church from the rev¬
olution imposed on it by a triumphant liberalism.
5   /   The Destruction of the Old Regime
        Church, 1833-1843



   Upon the death of Ferdinand VII in 1833 the struggle between
the Church and liberalism entered its decisive phase. Although
Spanish liberals were divided into factions whose commitment to
reform ranged from moderate to extreme, they were agreed at
least on the necessity of redefining the Church’s position within
a new political and social order. There was no question of allowing
the eighteenth-century Church to transfer its privileges intact into
a society with political, economic, and intellectual assumptions so
different from those that had characterized absolute monarchy.
In the end the conflict between liberalism and the Church was an
uneven contest, which the latter could not hope to win. By 1843
the institutional base of the Old Regime Church had been largely
dismantled. And in response to the changes imposed by the State,
the Church began to acquire a new character that in one form or
another would survive until the ferment produced in Spain by
the reforms of the Second Vatican Council.
   Between the death of Ferdinand VII in September 1833 and
the departure into exile in July 1843 of General Espartero, whose
radical policies seemed to threaten the survival of the Church, a
battered ecclesiastical organization collapsed before a final liberal
assault. Institutions, functions, and intellectual assumptions that
had long sustained the Church disappeared before a new wave
of reforms. For Catholic apologists the events of this decade pro¬
vided convincing evidence of a “great undertaking to decatholicize
Spain.”1 But the struggle between the Church and liberalism was
too complex to allow for easy generalizations. The kingdom re¬
mained officially Catholic even in the most radical phase of the
extended liberal revolution. The Constitution of 1837 proclaimed:
“the religion of the Spanish nation is the Catholic and Roman.”2
But in this still confessional State, monks and friars were mur-