


                                                               145
  146                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




dered, priests assaulted, churches and monasteries sacked, and
dioceses left without bishops. Yet the faith continued to be prac¬
ticed, and successive governments accepted financial responsibility
for support of the parochial clergy. At the height of legislation
seen by many churchmen as a direct attack on Catholicism itself,
a provincial governor of Toledo imposed fines and prison sen¬
tences on citizens failing to fulfill the Easter Communion obli¬
gation, while the bishop of Cadiz secured funds to complete the
city’s enormous Neoclassic cathedral, which had stood unfinished
for forty years.3
   This apparent confusion arose from a simple fact; the issue
between 1833 and 1843 was not Catholicism or anti-Catholicism.
No politician suggested the separation of Church and State or
advocated a campaign to destroy religion. Longares Alonso, in his
recent study of the liberal press in Barcelona during the 1830’s,
noted that atheistic or openly irreligious sentiments rarely found
their way into local newspapers.4 For Spanish liberals, religion was
as important to the progress of the new society as for traditionalists
committed to the old social order. Liberalism and Catholicism
would remain identified, though admittedly in a difficult rela¬
tionship, for over a century until the Second Republic disasso¬
ciated the Church from the State for the first time in the nation’s
history. Liberal opinion demanded that the Church adjust to the
needs of a changing society dominated by an emerging bourgeoi¬
sie, a society secular in its concerns and committed to the doctrines
of economic individualism and human progress.
   Liberalism rejected the theocratic ideology of the Old Regime
Church, with its mingling of the sacred and the secular, and re¬
sented the Church’s economic structure and judicial privileges.
Clerical support for absolutism intensified liberal determination
to eliminate the Church as a source of political opposition, but
this was to be accompanied by an effort “to reduce . . . be¬
liefs ... to the grave and mysterious simplicity of primitive Chris¬
tianity, to the contemplation of divine morality and the progressive
development of its perfections.” The Church, then, was to be
confined to a purely spiritual and vaguely philanthropic role in
which religion was “pure, peaceful and perfect,” a natural com¬
plement to a secular society in control of its own destiny.5 Conflict
inevitably arose between these opposing interpretations of the
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 147




Church’s place within Spanish society. The traditional ecclesiasti¬
cal order, though deeply scarred by the battles of 1810-1813 and
1820—1823, yearned for a return to the glories, wealth, privileges,
and piety of the past.


Gradual Reform and Carlism, 1834—1835

   The dynastic preoccupations of Ferdinand VII, who had twice
saved the Church from revolution, opened the way to liberalism’s
triumph. The arrangements for Isabella’s orderly succession rested
on the ability of the queen regent, Maria Cristina, and the chief
minister, Francisco Cea Bermudez, to continue the moderate ab¬
solutism of Ferdinand’s later years. These hopes were quickly
frustrated. The monarch’s death on September 29, 1833, stimu¬
lated reforming demands from within the regime by aristocrats,
courtiers, generals, and bureaucrats wishing to broaden the base
of the Crown’s support to avoid a return to the popular radicalism
of the early 1820’s. Cea Bermudez’s obstinate refusal to contem¬
plate changes weakened the government, but the decisive blow
came from another source, the general rising in diverse parts of
the peninsula of those supporting the dynastic claims of the king’s
brother, Charles. The government’s failure to dominate the revolt
endangered the fragile succession of Isabella II and forced the
queen regent to turn to the moderate liberals of 1812 for the
support that would destroy Carlism and save the throne. In Jan¬
uary 1834 Maria Cristina called a former deputy at Cadiz to head
the government, Francisco Martinez de la Rosa. The third liberal
revolution within a quarter of a century had begun.6
   With few exceptions, the hierarchy recognized the young prin¬
cess as heiress to the throne in a long ceremony at the church of
the Hieronymites in Madrid in June 1833. The crusty archbishop
of Toledo, Pedro de Inguanzo, who had fought many an absolutist
battle, refused to attend on the grounds of health, although he
later took the oath of loyalty under pressure. The most prominent
episcopal absentee, Joaquin de Abarca, bishop of Leon and a
fervent supporter of the pretender, had fled his diocese for the
mountains of Galicia. From there he urged his fellow prelates to
refuse their loyalty to Isabella in a letter promptly burned by most
of the bishops receiving it. Superiors of the religious orders pub-
  148                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church