



cause was prospering. This may explain the lack of violence be¬
tween 1854 and 1856, when the Church’s threat was not perceived
as serious, and the presence of violence, although with nothing
like the virulence of 1822-1823, following the outbreak of the
Carlist War in 1872. Although the occasional violence against
the Church in the cities reflected the inchoate resentment of the
urban masses against an apparently powerful economic insti¬
tution, it arose more directly from the political struggle between
liberalism and ecclesiastical interests. In the twentieth century
hostility to the Church in the cities had deeper roots in the re¬
action of the dispossessed against the excesses of a conservative
social order arising from the development of an industrialized
economy.
   Clerics themselves perceived that the Church was losing influ¬
ence; hence their frequent attacks on the cities as “modern Bab-
ylons.” Whether hostility toward the Church indicated the spread
of dechristianization in large urban areas is less clear, although
evidence suggests that this may have been the case, at least in
Madrid, where the desertion of men from religious services was
being noted by observers.54 The development of popular anti¬
clericalism in the cities between 1820 and 1823 was limited, but
it signaled a significant change in the Church’s relationship to
urban populations. The eighteenth-century Church had been urban
in a rural society, but by the 1820’s the Church began to turn
slowly away from the cities and large towns toward a more reliable
Catholic countryside. The foundations were already being laid for
the divorce between the Church and the cities, which would be
as significant for the nineteenth-century Church as the isolation
of its eighteenth-century predecessor from the rural world had
been.
   By 1823 the reforming movement that had developed in the
Church decades before was a spent force. The moderate clerical
reformers of 1820, nourished in the vital ecclesiastical culture of
the late eighteenth century, were an aging group incapable of
producing a second generation to carry on the struggle. The death
of Felix Amat in 1824 deprived them of their last figure of in¬
tellectual significance, and absolutist purges did the rest. A few
reformers lingered on, Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo and Antonio Po¬
sada Rubin de Celis, for example, to reappear after 1835, but the
  136                                      The Struggle Intensifies




religious and intellectual atmosphere that had allowed the move¬
ment to flourish had dissipated long since.
   The reformers of 1820 looked to the liberal State to transform
the Church so that they might realize their lofty, moral vision of
the institution. By the end of 1820 their hopes lay in ruins because
of their own miscalculations about the reform of the regulars, the
growing antagonism between conservative ecclesiastics and the
Cortes, and, not least, the radical direction of the liberal revolu¬
tion. By 1822 the question for liberal exaltados and the minority
of clerics supporting them was no longer the purification of the
Church so that it might fulfill its spiritual mission more effectively,
but the domestication of an institution refusing to cooperate with
the State. Caught between the recalcitrance of the conservative
Church and the frustration of liberal politicians, the reforming
ideal that had inspired a select and cultivated clerical minority
since the 1780’s was doomed.
   The declining influence of the ecclesiastical reformers at least
clarified the problem of the Church for both liberals and the
ecclesiastical leadership. By 1823 neither side accepted the idea
of reform that had emerged from within the royal Church of the
late eighteenth century. The alliance between the regalistic policies
of the old monarchy and the liberalism of a new political elite had
obscured, if anything, the problem of a Church intent on pre¬
serving its traditional situation in a time of rapid political change.
The ground was clear for a straightforward conflict between a
Church that was increasingly ultramontane in its sympathies and
allied with Ferdinand VII and the diverse currents of liberal
opinion determined to force it into line.