




had petitioned Pius VII for revival of the Holy Tribunal as the
“strongest bulwark of the faith.”57 An intransigent royalist press
under clerical influence insistently demanded the reestablishment
of the Inquisition during the summer and autumn of 1823. The
dismissal of Saez in December and a royal proposal drafted under
French pressure for a limited amnesty in 1824 aroused the ap¬
prehension of the ultras, who redoubled efforts to force the king
into line. A letter the bishop of Urgel sent to Ferdinand in January
1824 reveals how aggressive and independent the conservative
Church was becoming. Bishop Bernardo Frances Caballero de¬
nounced the monarch for timidity in not having restored the
Inquisition and accused the new ministry, composed of more mod¬
erate figures than the deposed Saez, of being masons and Jan-
senists in disguise.
   During 1824 Church opposition to even the slightest concession
to the vanquished liberals became more threatening. “Do not for¬
get what Isaiah said,” declared the bishop of Leon, “you should
not have union with the impious even in the grave.” Secret royalist
societies in which ecclesiastics were represented proliferated. Al¬
though historians previously doubted the existence of these so¬
cieties, Tejada has proven through the use of police records that
they formed the nucleus of conspiratorial activity designed to
bring the government under their control.58
   Societies in Madrid, Valencia, Murcia, Tortosa, Barcelona,
Oviedo, Extremadura, Granada, and Jaen included prominent
churchmen. The intendant general of police in Valencia reported
to Madrid that the administrator of the archdiocese, Jose Maria
Pujol, and members of the religious orders—such as Fray Serafino
de Penaquilla, a Capuchin known for his preaching abilities—
were engaging in conspiratorial activity. In Murcia the cathedral
dean, Bias Ostolaza, an ex-traditionalist deputy at Cadiz, was
implicated; in Tortosa the bishop and many of the canons were
involved. The appearance of these “apostolic juntas” as well as of
a group of intriguers in Madrid, who suitably named themselves
the Society of the Exterminating Angel, created a climate of ag¬
itation and coercion not unlike that with which the liberals had
pressured Ferdinand VII between 1820 and 1823.
   The activity of these conspiratorial groups did not pose a serious
threat to the government, however. Police spies, including some
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  139




ecclesiastics such as Canon Solera in Madrid, kept the king fully
informed of what was transpiring. Suspected clerics, like the gen¬
eral of the Franciscans, Fray Cirilo Alameda, later cardinal and
archbishop of Toledo, were closely watched by the authorities. An
attempted ultra rising at Manresa in 1825 was easily quashed, as
was a more serious revolt, la guerra de los agraviados, in rural Cat¬
alonia two years later.
   The ultra Church, frustrated by the king’s refusal to reestablish
the Inquisition and deal as severely as possible with dissenters,
began to turn in 1825 toward the king’s brother and heir to the
throne, Charles. The unimaginative and reactionary prince had
won clerical approval by voting in the Council of State to rees¬
tablish the Inquisition. To what extent Charles was involved in
the widespread intrigues of the mid-1820’s is not entirely clear,
but the authorities suspected that conspirators in Madrid main¬
tained contact with him through Cirilo Alameda using the cover
of Franciscan friaries. How much support the clerical ultras had
within the Church is also difficult to establish. The papal nuncio,
Giustiniani, and Rome counseled Spanish ecclesiastics to follow a
policy of moderation, and many did so though they continued to
support royal absolutism. In fact, a division took place within the
conservative Church between a minority of bishops, canons, and
friars who were deeply involved in efforts to impose their will on
the king and a “silent” majority who were as docile as ever to
governmental authority. The ultras had a following among the
parish clergy in certain regions, notably Catalonia, where the
memory of liberal attacks on the Church was still fresh, and Cuenca,
where a government circular to the bishop urging civil peace was
read “through gritted teeth” by local priests according to police
reports.59
   Confronted by aggressive clerics, Ferdinand VII did not have
the luxury available to him in 1814 to deal with a Church un¬
equivocally committed to the maintenance of his absolute power.
The king, aware of clerical complicity in the risings of 1825 and
1827, mistrusted the ultras and regarded their campaign to re¬
establish the Inquisition as a threat to the Crown’s independence.
He could not, however, afford to alienate the segment of the
Church most hostile to liberalism by a policy of repression against
ecclesiastical extremists. Ferdinand chose instead to follow a dan-
  140                                    The Struggle Intensifies