




gerous but shrewd course—balancing the respective interest groups
supporting his regime. He hemmed and hawed on the Inquisition,
occasionally leaning in favor of reestablishment but in the end
successfully resisting ultra pressure on the question.
    The king was faced with a more difficult problem beginning in
 1824, episcopal inquisitions organized without Madrid’s approval
in Valencia, Tarragona, and Orihuela. These “Juntas of Faith,”
operating with the sanction of local authorities and eventually with
 the tacit but grudging approbation of the central government,
were designed to secure, according to Simon Lopez, the arch¬
bishop of Valencia, “correction, salutary penitences, retractions
and the return of a thousand who have repented to the bosom
of the Church.”60 The juntas never enjoyed official standing, but
 they went about their work with inquisitorial thoroughness. The
junta of Valencia sentenced a liberal canon to ten years’ impris¬
onment after forcing him to denounce the constitution as “de¬
 testable, sacrilegious, [and] contrary to divine and human law.”61
    The independent action of the juntas troubled the king, who
unsuccessfully ordered their dissolution in 1825. The junta of
Valencia continued and in 1826 secured the execution of a liberal
school teacher, Cayetano Ripoll. Although the central government
through the minister of justice had no choice but to approve the
sentence, Madrid knew very little of the judicial process until it
was nearly completed. Moreover, the government’s police officials
increasingly resented the juntas’ autonomy and raised obstacles
to their operation. The king, fearing that the juntas could be as
dangerous to him as the Inquisition, kept them from spreading,
and by 1827 those already established had ceased to function.
Their brief existence, however, revealed the delicacy of the po¬
litical balance in the mid-1820’s.
    Until his death in 1833 Ferdinand successfully frustrated ultra
hopes for the establishment of a totally repressive regime. Al¬
though the king occasionally had to recognize their strength, as
he did following the attempted liberal rising of 1830, he relied
on moderate ministers—such as Francisco de Cea Bermudez—
who, though committed to absolutism, fell within bureaucratic
traditions much like those of the Old Regime monarchy. Ferdi¬
nand’s suspicions of ultra intentions lay behind his moderate di¬
rection during his later years. The birth of a daughter, the future
    The Struggle Intensifies                                  141




Isabella II, in 1830 to the elderly monarch and his young wife,
Maria Cristina of Naples, reinforced these tendencies. The king’s
resolve, encouraged by the queen’s insistence, to secure the acces¬
sion of Isabella, setting aside Charles’s claims, created an atmos¬
phere of political intrigue at the court. Partisans of Charles and
Isabella struggled to influence Ferdinand’s decision. The king
vacillated under intense ultra pressure, but in the end held to his
original intention. The need to broaden the base of support for
Isabella’s controversial succession led to the beginnings of an un¬
certain and tentative policy of accommodation, designed to per¬
suade liberal opinion to support a more moderate royal absolutism
against Charles’s ultra tendencies.
   Between 1824 and 1830 the Church experienced a recovery
similar to that of 1814-1820. The religious orders repossessed
their property from purchasers, who were unceremoniously ex¬
pelled from their holdings.62 But there were indications that nei¬
ther the secular nor the regular clergy could recover their
prerevolutionary prosperity. Christian Hermann has noted the
catastrophic decline in income suffered by certain episcopal
households (Table 4). The continuing crisis of agriculture as well
as the destruction of buildings between 1820 and 1823 placed
monasteries and convents in economic difficulties from which they
never recovered. Wealthy foundations, such as the monastery of
Guadalupe, were forced to sell property to survive. The friaries
of the mendicants, which depended heavily on pious donations
to meet expenses, were caught in even more difficult circumstan¬
ces. The Minims of Andalusia found themselves so hard-pressed
that they refused to accept novices who could not pay for their
own food and lodging.
   There are indications that some monasteries and friaries re¬
versed the long downward trend in recruitment, but overall the
orders’ demographic decline continued.63 Statistics gathered in
1835, before the final dissolution of the regulars, set their number
at 30,906, a loss of more than 3,000 since 1820 and of over 18,000
since the census of 1787.64 Declining numbers, however, did not
reverse the deteriorating quality of religious life. Superiors con¬
stantly lamented departures from the norms of conventual prac¬
tice, and the chronic factionalism that had characterized the orders
since the eighteenth century continued unabated. Disputes be-
   142                                          The Struggle Intensifies