




the former accepted a seat in the Senate in 1837. The liberal
prelates did not necessarily accept all the measures the State im¬
posed to reform the Church, but they represented the vestiges of
the old alliance of Constitution and Altar from 1810 and 1820
between liberal politicians and reforming ecclesiastics. The re¬
forming bishops of the 1830’s were few in number, however; they
were aging figures from an earlier time who were given a nearly
impossible task. Torres Amat thus tried to convince Rome that
the real state of affairs in the Spanish Church had been obscured
“because of the exaltation of dominant passions which blind rea¬
son.”35 The bishop of Astorga defended the measures taken against
the regulars and attacked the fanaticism, superstition, and ig¬
norance of the Spanish as the causes of the nation’s difficulties.
But Torres Amat’s long identification with attempts to reform the
Church with State support rendered him suspect in Rome’s eyes
as “an instrument of the Government for ecclesiastical innova¬
tions.”36
   Blocked by Rome from appointing new bishops for vacant
dioceses, the State turned to a device that rekindled the civil war
which had ravaged the Church between 1810-1813 and 1820-
 1823. Cathedral chapters traditionally enjoyed the right to elect
diocesan governors until new incumbents had been approved by
the State and the papacy. The government instructed chapters to
elect as governors those priests whose episcopal nominations were
being refused by Rome. “Her Majesty the Queen Regent invites
and exhorts . . . the chapter ... to name as governor of this miter
its bishop-elect D.N. . . . and it is the pleasure of H.M. that the
chapter should proceed to this election as soon as possible.”37
Although Gonzalez Vallejo, who benefited from this measure by
being elected governor of the archdiocese of Toledo after the
death of Inguanzo, defended the procedure, it provoked a storm
of protest within the Church. Critics alleged that force was used
to compel chapters to elect administrators desired by the govern¬
ment.38 The revived civil war within the Church also reached the
diocesan level. In Astorga, Torres Amat clashed frequently with
a cathedral chapter sympathetic to Carlism and expelled a third
of his seminary students, who were accused of trying to set the
seminary on fire as part of a Carlist plot to seize control of the
city.39
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   165




   The rapid dissolution of the orders served the liberals well in
a tactical sense, for it removed the possibility, however remote, of
any threat from this source. Ex-friars and monks scrambled for
a living. Some found employment as parish priests and assistants,
but the majority depended on the modest pensions from the State,
and these were paid infrequently, like “a bone thrown to a dog”
according to a petition sent to the Cortes in 1840.40
   The parish clergy were only slightly better off. Although the
State’s financial arrangements for the clergy in 1837 took different
forms, none of them was effective; clerical incomes fell drastically.
In the diocese of Jaca, the secular clergy—from bishop to parish
priests—received only 37 percent of the amount theoretically as¬
signed by the government for their salaries in 1837. The average
revenue of a parish priest in the diocese between 1836 and 1839
ranged from nothing to 1,300 reales in a time when a minimum
clerical salary was set at 3,000. Over the short term, the misery
of the parochial clergy threw the Church into such disarray that
no coherent opposition to the State’s policies could arise. Nearly
half of the parishes of the Tarragona archdiocese lacked priests
by 1840. In poor villages of the Toledo archdiocese, some clergy,
deprived of any income, abandoned their parishes, leaving the
population without religious services. In many dioceses parish
priests remained on duty, working at secular occupations while
attending to their congregations as best they could.41
   The Spanish Church had suffered dislocation after 1808 and
1820, but had not lost its militant spirit. In the 1830’s it reeled
under shocks so disruptive that it thought not of victory but of
survival. The Church’s disarray prevented a significant movement
of opposition to the State’s ecclesiastical policies. Few bishops pro¬
tested the suppression of the Jesuits in 1835. Only the aged arch¬
bishop of Seville, Francisco Xavier Cienfuegos, pleaded with the
queen regent for the order’s survival. The decree suppressing the
regulars evoked episcopal protests, but even these representations
to the Crown, respectful in tone and legalistic in argument, lacked
the fire and theocratic vision of earlier defenses of the orders.
   Between 1810-1814 and 1820-1823 the Church struggled vig¬
orously against liberalism. After 1834 it looked not to itself but
to Rome for protection. Relations between Pope Gregory XVI
(1831-1846) and the liberal State had been tense since Martinez
   166                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church