




July 25 decree. The policy of moderate ecclesiastical reform was
irrelevant. Revolutionary events had closed the vast majority of
the kingdom’s friaries and monasteries by September, when To-
reno recognized political reality and stepped aside for the great
hope of the radicals, Mendizabal.


Domestication of the Church, 1835—1840

   Juan Alvarez Mendizabal (1790-1853) took power in the midst
of revolutionary agitation in the country, a worsening situation in
the civil war with the Carlists, and severe hscal problems that had
burdened the nation with enormous debts. He represented the
hopes of the exaltados, who demanded a fundamental revision of
the Estatuto Real in the direction of the Constitution of 1812;
reform of taxation, particularly through elimination of the tithe;
and profound changes in the administration of justice and the
organization of provincial and municipal governments. The pro¬
gram of Mendizabal sought to obliterate the vestiges of Old Re¬
gime privilege that Martinez de la Rosa and Toreno had tried to
eliminate through a slow legislative process. The political unrest
of 1834 and 1835, moreover, had made evolutionary reform from
above directed by a narrow political elite chosen by a highly re¬
stricted body of voters impossible.
   Mendizabal shrewdly saw that the character of liberal politics
itself was changing from the struggle of parliamentary factions to
a more complex conflict of interest groups at both the local and
national levels. The old ideal of liberal unity still found its ad¬
herents, however. Martinez de la Rosa indignantly rejected the
suggestion that he belonged to any party.20 In fact, the differences
among the liberal factions on such issues as freedom of the press,
jury trial, civil rights, and taxation policy, as well as greater political
awareness in the country as a whole created the circumstances
 that favored the appearance of the two great parties of liberal
 Spain.21 Mendizabal saw the importance of presenting a compre¬
 hensive program of reform that would win the support of parlia¬
 mentary exaltados and at the same time respond to the intense
politicization that had taken place at the local and regional levels.
By the end of the decade, according to a history of liberal Spain
written shortly afterward, “the militant factions” had taken on
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  159




“their exclusivistic denominations: the more ardent defenders of
the revolution were called progresistas, its more moderate and slow
[defenders] were given the name of moderados.”22
   Martinez de la Rosa hoped to resolve the problem of the reli¬
gious orders that had preoccupied liberal opinion since Cadiz with
a compromise that would have lowered the number of foundations
while reducing the national debt through sale of suppressed mon¬
asteries and friaries. Neither the prime minister nor his supporters
objected in principle to the sale of the orders’ holdings. But the
government’s solution, embodied in the recommendations of the
Real Junta Eclesiastica, continued to rest on a combination of
reform of the regulars with partial disamortization. The exaltado
press of 1834 and 1835 made clear that it wished to go further.
One writer suggested that the dissolution of the regulars would
be “very useful and necessary.”23 Another declared that the sale
of the orders’ property would allow the liberal regime to build up
a body of supporters tied to it by self-interest; yet another argued
that the vast, unworked lands of the Church raised obstacles to
agricultural progress.
   It fell to Mendizabal, himself a believer who never doubted that
the liberal State should be Catholic, to break the connection be¬
tween reform and disamortization. A decree of October 11, 1835,
suppressed the kingdom’s monasteries save for a handful, such
as El Escorial and Poblet, which were allowed to remain open
temporarily; another of February 19, 1836, ordered the sale at
public auction of the property of the suppressed communities to
beneht the public treasury. On March 8 the government dealt the
final blow to the millennial history of the orders in Spain. In a
decree of fifty-seven articles, the State argued from a premise
dear to the liberal mind. “The force of civilization is no less ir¬
resistible than that of time,” the decree declared, as it ordered the
suppression of all religious communities of men save for three
seminaries in Valladolid, Ocana, and Monteagudo responsible for
training missionaries for Spain’s colonies; the houses of the teach¬
ing Order of the Pious Schools (Piarists); the hospitalers of the
Order of St.John of God; and a small number of friaries providing
clergy for Spanish churches in the Holy Land.24 The orders of
women, untouched by liberal legislation between 1820 and 1823,
were treated more gently, perhaps because of the assumption that
  160                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church