




unusual; most bishops at odds with the liberal State preferred
prudent exile to a journey to the northern mountains of the Carlist
domain.
   The situation of the Church in absolutist Spain was not as com¬
fortable as Carlist apologists maintained. Charles V might attend
Mass and participate in processions giving testimony to his Ca¬
tholicism, as he did when he visited the Jesuits of Loyola in 1835,
but the reality of the Church’s position was harsher. The Carlist
kingdom of the north desperately required financial resources
and did not hesitate to appropriate parish tithes in areas under
its control. Nor did the Church escape the violence inevitable in
a relatively undisciplined army. The religious press complained
about the depredations of Carlist troops as bitterly as it did about
liberal exactions: “the advocates of Charles,” said a Catholic paper,
“did not recognize any limits, any subordination or discipline,” as
they moved through the rural districts of the archdiocese of Tar¬
ragona “trampling upon the unfortunate inhabitants.”14 The ec¬
clesiastical leadership, by avoiding direct support of the Carlist
cause, implicitly recognized that, whatever the movement’s ideo¬
logical appeal, it could not guarantee the Church’s institutional
survival.
    The government of 1834 overestimated the extent to which the
Church could contribute to a Carlist victory, and it underestimated
the strength of a new generation of liberal exaltados. The radi¬
cals—drawn from the less affluent sectors of the middle classes,
lawyers, journalists, minor government employees, and others—
demanded a less restrictive constitution, a total reform of the
Church, and economic policies less favorable to an oligarchy dom¬
inated by landowners and financial and commercial interests. The
exaltados were committed, however, as firmly as their liberal op¬
ponents to the principle of private property. But unlike them,
they were prepared to use extraparliamentary methods to achieve
their political goals. Secret societies, masonic lodges, a forceful
and flamboyant press, manipulation of lower class discontent
through mob violence, and resort to military intervention—all had
a place in the exaltado arsenal. To realize his objective of political
stability administered by the liberal elite, Martinez de la Rosa
desperately required victories over the Carlists. His generals, foiled
by the brilliant tactics of Colonel Zumalacarregui in the north, did
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  153




not produce them, and liberal politics entered a turbulent period
of municipal revolution, popular rioting, and exaltado ascend¬
ancy.
   Hopes for a limited ecclesiastical reform came to an end on a
hot summer day in 1834. On July 17 rioting mobs in Madrid left
seventy-eight Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans, and Mercedarians
dead and their residences devastated. Never in Spanish history
had there been such a savage, collective attack on the clergy. For
generations of clerical historians, July 17 was the “day of infamy”
initiating the violent anticlericalism of the nineteenth and twen¬
tieth centuries. Whether the attack on the regulars resulted from
a carefully planned conspiracy by the exaltados is unclear to this
day. Martinez de la Rosa believed that his extremist opponents
had fomented the riots through the secret societies, using their
influence in the city’s militia. The most recent study of the events
of July 17, by Revuelta Gonzalez, argues for the idea of a radical
conspiracy instead of “spontaneous combustion.” The truth may
lie somewhere between.
   Conditions in Madrid on the eve of the rioting formed an ex¬
plosive mixture ready for ignition. In the oppressive heat of the
summer rising food prices aroused popular resentment; rumors
of impending Carlist attacks heightened tension, and the appear¬
ance in the city for the first time of the dreaded disease of the
nineteenth century, cholera, created a mood of terror. To the
high cost of bread, fear of attack, and the pervasive presence of
death must be added an intense atmosphere of political propa¬
ganda and intrigue. The fatal link of death and misery with the
regulars took the form of a rumor that monks and friars allied
to Carlism were poisoning the wells, and that this had caused the
epidemic ravaging the city. On the afternoon of July 17, crowds
drawn from the lower classes, but with the significant participation
of urban militiamen, gathered in three of Madrid’s squares, the
Plaza Mayor, the Puerta del Sol, and the Plazuela de la Cebada.
At the cry “Poison! poison! Death to the Jesuits! Death to the
friars!” the mobs converged on the Jesuit church of San Isidro
and the adjoining Colegio Imperial.15
   Scenes of bloodletting and violence followed that no conspiracy
could have planned. The crowd invaded the Jesuit house and
murdered fourteen priests, including several who had escaped to
  154                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church