




the streets only to be identified immediately because they wore
hats in the heat to disguise their tonsures. Religious objects were
smashed and the bones of saints kept in reliquaries were ground
into dust as the mob surged through the buildings. After sacking
the Colegio Imperial, the crowd moved to other religious houses.
The same scenes were repeated at the Dominican priory of Santo
Tomas, although most of its friars escaped at news of the earlier
assault. The Franciscans of San Francisco were less fortunate;
forty perished in a’ferocious attack that saw some stabbed, some
drowned in the wells, some hanged, and others hurled to their
deaths from the rooftops where they had taken refuge. On the
streets women danced a macabre ballet in stolen religious vest¬
ments. The bloody scenes did not end until well into the night.
    During the rioting the authorities were less than vigorous. The
captain general of Madrid, present for an extended time in the
Colegio Imperial, failed to take action, and a sizable contingent
of troops outside San Francisco watched the destruction passively.
But a small band of soldiers succeeded in saving the Carmelite
friary from assault. The paralysis of the local military and police
may have reflected simple confusion and indecision rather than
complicity. The government of Martinez de la Rosa condemned
the violence; dismissed the captain general, provincial governor,
and superintendent of police; and took steps to preserve public
order in the days following the rioting. Neither the government
nor the liberal press attached particular importance to the matanza
de losfrailes. Liberals of both camps saw the rioting as a regrettable
breakdown of law and order and a lapse from the norms of civ¬
ilized behavior but as an event somewhat understandable given
the state of popular passions.
    The disturbances of July 17 resembled the traditional urban
riot of the eighteenth century rather than later attacks on the
clergy and Church property. Arising from a popular mood of
resentment and fear, the rioting took the form of a brief, violent
outburst, which died down more of its own accord than through
official intervention. The local character of the disturbances, the
absence of any statement of goals, and the terrible savagery of
the assaults make it dubious that July 17 represented a radical
conspiracy to bring about a political revolution at the expense of
the regular clergy, although liberal exaltados were willing to ex-
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   155




ploit popular animosities. But these events marked a turning point
in the history of the Spanish Church. Although the royal com¬
mission charged with drafting a moderate reform of the regulars
continued its work, the possibility of implementing such a policy
was remote in the face of the indifference or hostility of liberal
opinion and the fury of popular feeling against monks and friars.
July 17 revealed beyond a shadow of a doubt that the esteem the
orders had once enjoyed among the urban lower classes was a
thing of the past. It was only a question of time before the final
assault would begin against this bulwark of the Old Regime Church.
   Between July 1834 and Martinez de la Rosa’s departure from
office in June 1835, political stability became increasingly difficult
to sustain. A limited electoral franchise failed to keep the radicals
from winning substantial representation in the Cortes elected under
the terms of the Estatuto Real. Exaltado criticism of the government
in parliament and the press grew more intense in the face of a
deteriorating military situation. Popular riots in Zaragoza in April
 1835 against Archbishop Frances Caballero, known for his ab¬
solutist views, provided a reminder of the continuing danger from
the urban crowd. The ministry’s inability to control the country
and the Cortes became evident in the spring 1835 parliamentary
debate over the fate of the property of the regulars that had been
sold to private purchasers between 1820 and 1823 and returned
to the orders by Ferdinand VII in 1824. The government’s proj¬
ect, to compensate the purchasers with state bonds and delay a
final decision on the property until the Real Junta Eclesiastica
presented its recommendations, initiated furious debate. The issue
went beyond the disposition of the property holdings involved in
the disamortization of 1820-1823. It signified nothing less than
the fate of the orders.
   The radicals, assisted by some ex-deputies of 1812, such as
Agustin Argiielles, quickly took the offensive. Their attack on the
orders was unrelenting. Martinez de la Rosa’s argument that re¬
form must come with “firm and measured steps, although they
appeared slow,” was swept aside by a torrent of criticism.16 The
regulars, said a radical deputy, were only state employees, and
the government could dispose of their jobs and property as it
wished. Deputies contrasted the “useful citizens” who had pur¬
chased clerical property with the idle monks and friars and goaded
  156                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church