




women who had spent their lives cut off from the world in con¬
templative communities could not adapt easily to a secular life.25
The State agreed to pay modest pensions to the religious being
expelled from their houses, and it took measures to open eccle¬
siastical appointments to former religious who became members
of the secular clergy.
   Mendizabal’s motives were straightforward, and he established
them clearly in the decree of October 11. The monasteries were
“useless and unnecessary . . . for the spiritual assistance of the
faithful”; their vast property holdings were “prejudicial” to the
kingdom; and it would serve “the public convenience ... to place
these in circulation to increase the resources of the State and open
new sources of wealth.”26 In the decree of February 19, Mendi-
zabal spelled out the benefits—fiscal, economic, and political—
that he expected to flow from the disamortizing legislation. It
would open “a most abundant source of public felicity, giving new
life to moribund wealth, removing obstacles to the channels of
industry and the circulation [of wealth]”; and it would create “a
copious family of proprietors . . . whose existence will rest prin¬
cipally on the complete triumph of our actual institutions.”27
   The sale of the regulars’ property proceeded slowly at first.
Prospective buyers may have feared the fate suffered by the pur¬
chasers of 1820—1823 upon the collapse of the liberal regime. But
by 1837 such fears had given way to a feverish desire to buy. By
the beginning of 1839 more than 15,000 separate parcels had
been sold at auction for 792,459,390 reales.28 The sales of 1836-
 1839 formed the first stage of an extensive process that would
last until 1860. It would later include the sale of the property of
the secular clergy, municipal common lands, and the holdings of
charitable institutions.
   The massive transfer of wealth away from the Church and other
corporations possessing property acquired during the Old Regime
profoundly affected the development of both the economy and
society. Mendizabal’s hopes of creating a body of property owners
whose interests were linked to the survival of the liberal State were
realized. The removal of property from the “dead hands” of the
Church also made possible the more efficient exploitation of land
and the later commercialization of agriculture within a modern
market economy. The disamortization did not resolve the State’s
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   161




fiscal problems, however, and over the long term it created social
problems as serious as those it was designed to solve. Critics of
the time noted that the auction process limited purchasers to those
with sufficient capital, thereby excluding the peasantry and land¬
less agricultural workers. The purchase of Church property by
the urban middle classes substituted one form of unbalanced land-
holding for another. Its social consequences would reach into the
twentieth century.
   The suppression of the male religious orders and the subse¬
quent sale of their property undermined one of the fundamental
institutions of the Old Regime Church. Although the number of
regulars had declined significantly since the late eighteenth cen¬
tury and the internal problems of the orders had not disappeared,
their elimination deprived the Church at a stroke of its most active
evangelizers, educators, and propagandists. The vacuum left could
not easily be filled by a secular clergy ill prepared to assume ex¬
panded responsibilities. The disappearance of most of the male
orders, moreover, allowed the liberal State to extend its authority
over two areas, charity and secondary education, in which the
regulars had played a decisive role during the eighteenth cen¬
tury.29
   The long-term effects of the suppression and disamortization
of 1835-1839 would influence Church-State relations well into
the twentieth century. The Church retained a bitterness over de¬
struction of the orders that would lead to persistent efforts to
bring about their restoration. These had limited success during
the 1850’s and 1860’s, when a handful of orders received gov¬
ernment authorization to reestablish themselves. After 1874 suc¬
cessive governments allowed the orders to return on a massive
scale but in circumstances that made the problem of the regulars
as serious in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as
it had been during the Old Regime. Post-1874 conservative min¬
istries refused to recognize any financial obligation to the restored
orders, insisting that they should be entirely self-sufficient. This
policy, reflecting the residual liberalism of the new Liberal-
Conservative party of Canovas del Castillo, meant that the revival
of the regulars depended on massive donations from the urban
Catholic upper classes, which saw the orders as a bulwark against
social revolution. No study has been done of the financing of the
  162                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church