




regulars after 1874 by the conservative nobility and bourgeoisie,
but there is no doubt that it was extensive enough to recreate,
albeit in a slightly different form, the imbalanced distribution of
resources between the regulars and the parish clergy that had
characterized the Church before 1836.30 The regulars, moreover,
quickly resumed their traditional role as ecclesiastical shock troops
combating secularism, liberalism, freemasonry, socialism, repub¬
licanism, and Protestantism, thereby reviving the bitter contro¬
versy over the orders that had seemed to be resolved once and
for all by Mendizabal.
   Between 1834 and the successful progresista revolution of Sep¬
tember 1840, the two families of Spanish liberalism struggled for
dominance in an atmosphere of popular agitation, intense political
debate, and military intervention. Political instability during these
years arose in part from the failure of the progresista and mode-
rado parties to reach agreement on how far the revolution should
go. It also came from the nature of the parties themselves. Each
was clear enough about its objectives, at least in relation to those
of the opposition. But internal coherence and discipline were miss¬
ing in both parties. Each represented a parliamentary and elec¬
toral alliance of diverse groups that cooperated uneasily in the
unstable political maneuvering of the late 1830’s.31 The inability
of the parties to reach even a minimal constitutional accord and
the factionalization afflicting both moderados and progresistas
burdened liberal Spain with a damaging political liability for which
it would pay dearly. The political struggle tilted in favor of the
moderados in May 1836, only to reverse direction shortly after¬
ward as the progresistas resorted to the tried and true formula
of urban disturbance and revolutionary conspiracy to regain power.
   Once the problem of the regular clergy had been resolved (even
the moderados were unwilling to reverse the sale of the orders’
property), the issue of ecclesiastical reform receded before the
debate on the nation’s political future. Government ecclesiastical
policy focused on the domestication of the Church through leg¬
islation designed to punish churchmen opposing the regime and
create a Church organization subordinate to the State. During the
radical Calatrava ministry (August 1836-August 1837), the State
deprived bishops absent from their dioceses for political motives
of their incomes and ordered that clerics caught opposing the
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  163




government’s military plans be treated as conspirators. Ecclesias¬
tics were forbidden to leave their customary places of residence
without the consent of their bishop and the local governor. To
reduce the size of the clergy, long a fond aspiration of liberalism,
the government reaffirmed legislation suspending the provision
of benefices and forbidding bishops from ordaining more priests.
A radical reform of the secular clergy presented to parliament in
 1837 was, however, rejected by the queen regent and fell by the
wayside as the moderados returned to power.
   The liberal State did not directly attack the property of the
secular clergy, but it established absolute control over its finances
through legislation declaring such holdings “national.” A decree
of July 29, 1837, undermined one of the Church’s traditional
sources of income by abolishing the tithe, although the govern¬
ment undertook to pay the salaries of the clergy.32
   Between 1834 and 1840 the organization and direction of the
Church were thrown into confusion. The deadlock between the
papacy and the liberal State prevented the appointment of new
bishops to replace the twenty-five who died during these years.
Eleven prelates fled into exile; four others were confined with
limited freedom of movement to their dioceses. For all practical
purposes only eleven of the kingdom’s sixty dioceses were being
administered by their bishops as 1840 drew to a close, and all eight
of the metropolitan sees were vacant because of the death or exile
of their incumbents.33 In these circumstances the few bishops still
governing their sees scarcely knew where to turn. “Observing the
furious interference of the revolution, they were usually ignorant
of how they could salvage the ship of the Church in the midst of
such shocks,” said Bishop Romo Gamboa of the Canaries, one of
the few prelates to remain in his diocese.34
   The liberal State sought to win support in the Church by nom¬
inating prelates favorable to liberalism. It named Pedro Gonzalez
Vallejo to the primatial see of Toledo, although the pope refused
to approve the appointment, and it nominated Antonio Posada
Rubin de Celis for the archbishopric of Valencia. The regime was
also able to rely on the support of Felix Torres Amat who, curi¬
ously, had been named bishop of Astorga by Ferdinand VII shortly
before the latter’s death. Both Torres Amat and Gonzalez Vallejo
served as members of the Real Junta Eclesiastica in 1834-1835;
  164                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church