




ceremonial. The project stopped short of a complete denial of a
link with the papacy, although many churchmen regarded the
plan as schismatic. The long tradition of Spanish regalism, once
widely supported within the Church itself, had come full circle.
The Church was to be reformed not by the alliance of Constitution
and Altar that the liberals of 1810 and 1820 had espoused, but
by the State alone.
   The regency’s undertaking to pay decent salaries to the secular
clergy according to an equitable and fixed scale promised to rem¬
edy the imbalanced distribution of resources characteristic of the
Old Regime Church. In return, the government exacted a heavy
price. On September 2, 1841, parliament passed a law ordering
sale of the secular clergy’s holdings, with the proceeds to service
the national debt. The liberal State had possessed effective control
over Church finances for some time. But the regency’s decision
to dispose of the seculars’ property represented a significant break
with the policies of the past. Liberal idealization of the role of
parish priests had saved the secular clergy until this time from
the fate of the religious orders.
   Clerical support for Carlism during the 1830’s as well as eccle¬
siastical resistance to government reform of the Church may have
diminished the old enthusiasm for the seculars. But the State left
no doubt that it was moved primarily by fiscal considerations.
Interest on a large foreign debt had gone unpaid for months.
The regency, said the minister of finance, “could not lose a single
moment proclaiming to the face of the world that the most sacred
as well as the most imperious obligation of the Spanish nation is
the payment of interest due or about to fall due. . . . The honor
of the entire nation,” he declared, was at stake.46 The disamortiz-
ing legislation was passed by the Cortes without extensive discus¬
sion. Prospective buyers rushed forward to take advantage of a
new round of public auctions. By the end of the year nearly 10,000
parcels had been sold for 320 million reales. Sales continued at a
brisk level until the summer of 1844. By the time they were halted,
62 percent of the secular clergy’s property had been sold. Al¬
though some Church property remained by the mid-1840’s, the
massive sales, which had yielded more than 3 billion reales, broke
the back of the imposing structure of ecclesiastical wealth that had
sustained the Church for centuries.47
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   169




   The State also attempted to take firm control of the ecclesiastical
administration. Priests aspiring to clerical appointments needed
to possess a certificate of loyalty (atestado) from the local governor
attesting to “their good conduct and adhesion to the legitimate
government.”48 Working in cooperation with the ministry of grace
and justice, the principal governmental agency responsible for
clerical reform, the elite of the liberal Church attempted to purge
politically unacceptable priests. Gonzalez Vallejo, the ex-bishop
of Mallorca placed in charge of the Toledo archdiocese in 1836,
removed most of the parish priests of the diocesan capital and
several officials of its administration for being “little devoted to
the actual institutions of the kingdom.”49 In Valencia the admin¬
istrator of the diocese suspended all priests from hearing confes¬
sions who could not produce loyalty certificates, an example imitated
by his counterpart in Lugo, where thirty-four churchmen lost their
canonical licenses to preach and hear confessions because they
lacked the atestado.
   The government acted vigorously to punish priests whose ser¬
mons questioned state policy. Local authorities maintained con¬
stant vigilance over preaching, as in Leon where an ex-Franciscan
was arrested after giving a sermon in the cathedral “alarming the
consciences of the faithful” and censuring “the conduct of the
supreme government of the Regent.”50 Three bishops protesting
the ecclesiastical reforms—Juan Diaz Merino of Menorca, Pablo
Garcia Abella of Calahorra, the Judas Romo Gamboa of the Ca¬
naries—were hauled before the courts. At a local level the activities
of the clergy were subject to close scrutiny. The parish priests of
Romanones in Guadalajara thus complained that they could not
travel the three and a half leagues to the provincial capital’s market
“because here there is much vigilance.”51
   Between 1841 and 1843 the State—using the instruments of
power at its command, supported by a minority of proregime
priests, and facing a leaderless clerical opposition—seemed on the
verge of completely implementing its ecclesiastical plans. The cre¬
ation of a national Church, however, was decisively checked by a
spontaneous and widespread campaign of civil disobedience among
the clergy hostile to the government’s program. The sudden re¬
covery of the Church from its mood of fatalistic resignation arose
from a grass roots movement among the parochial and cathedral
   170                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church