




de la Rosa took office. The pope, alleging the necessity of a neutral
 stance between Isabella II and Charles V, refused to recognize
 either claimant, thereby irritating the government and creating
 an impasse over the appointment of bishops to vacant sees.42 The
 suppression of the Jesuits led to a strong papal protest, and a
 further deterioration of relations between Madrid and Rome
 prompted the withdrawal of the nuncio in August 1835. Liberal
 ecclesiastical legislation in 1836 produced the final rupture. On
 February 1 the pope spoke to a secret consistory of cardinals and
justified the break in diplomatic relations with a sharp attack on
 the progresista government. Gregory XVI could do little to protect
 the Church, but his decisiveness strengthened the bond between
 Rome and Spanish ecclesiastics that had been developing since
 1810. Henceforth, predicted a supporter of the Church, Catholic
 Spaniards must look to the “Vicar of Christ” who “will comfort
 the weak and console all, stimulating them to maintain themselves
 firm in their faith and to defend themselves against the diabolic
 spirit of the revolutionary government of Madrid.”43 Rome had
won another battle in the war for control of the Church.


The Liberal versus the Roman Church, 1840—1843

   At the end of the decade pressure on the Church began to ease.
The return of the moderados to power and the end of the Carlist
War in 1839 produced an uneasy atmosphere of conciliation. The
government dealt with the Church in a less heavy-handed manner
and reestablished the tithe, primarily to save its own bankrupt
finances rather than to pay ecclesiastical expenses. But the mode¬
rados succumbed again to revolution in September 1840.
   The revolution, the most successful progresista rising until 1868,
rested on the old alliance of radical parliamentary and municipal
politicians, local militias, and the urban lower classes. But a new
force in the turbulent political world of liberal Spain, the military,
gave the revolution its backbone and allowed it to survive until
1843. The hero of the final Carlist campaigns, General Baldomero
Espartero, an immensely popular figure supported by officers and
soldiers of the army that had ended the civil war, seized the ini¬
tiative—which forced the resignation of the government and the
abdication of the queen regent—and eventually installed himself
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   167




as regent. The revolution was not a simple military coup d’etat,
nor was the regency a purely personal dictatorship. The new re¬
gime allowed political institutions to function with relative free¬
dom and depended for its survival on the continuing support of
radical politicians, the army, and the urban masses.44 By its very
nature the alliance was too unstable and the interests of its con¬
stituent groups too diverse to permit permanent consolidation of
the revolution.
   The regime, although vaguely populist in character, lacked a
coherent program of revolutionary action. The regent never con¬
templated economic or social changes to benefit the urban masses
who had supported the September rising. But the State had clear
plans for the Church. Between 1841 and 1843 the government
attempted to realize the progresista vision of a national Church
subordinate to the civil authorities. The movement to create a
Church in the service of liberalism reached its logical conclusion.
   In May 1841 the minister of grace and justice presented the
most ambitious reform project yet advanced. The proposals re¬
flected the long-held liberal view that the organization of the Span¬
ish Church required overhaul. The State called for redrawing of
the ecclesiastical map to alter boundaries that had remained un¬
changed for centuries. Two new archdioceses were created, Ma¬
drid (designated as the primatial see) and Barcelona. Toledo, seat
of the primate since Visigothic times, was relegated to the status
of a simple diocese. Seventeen dioceses located in small and un¬
important towns were suppressed in favor of thirteen new sees in
larger population centers—including Ciudad Real, Alicante, Soria,
Vitoria, La Coruna, and Guadalajara.
   All collegiate churches staffed by the secular clergy were to be
closed. The State also reduced the size of the clerical elite by
eliminating over 3,000 canonries and chaplaincies in cathedral
chapters and ordered a parish reorganization that required elim¬
ination of at least 4,000 of the kingdom’s 19,000 parishes. The
number of priests with cure of souls was set at 22,000, all to receive
fixed salaries according to a schedule ranging from 2,000 to 8,000
reales for the parochial clergy and 50,000 to 90,000 reales for the
hierarchy.45 A proposal submitted to the Cortes in January 1842
exalted the apostolic mission and authority of the bishops and
limited contacts between the Church and Rome to the purely
  168                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church