




clergy. The hierarchy, decimated by deaths and exile and domi¬
nated by a handful of bishops sympathetic to the regime, could
not provide leadership. But protests among parish priests were
ignited by a discourse of Gregory XVI on the condition of the
Spanish Church (March 1, 1841). The pope attacked the course
of liberal legislation since 1834, imposed canonical sanctions on
those responsible for it, and spoke harshly of the clergy cooper¬
ating with the State.52 The papal speech did not directly incite
open resistance, but its publication in the Catholic press evoked
a deep, emotional reaction among the mass of the lower clergy,
who had hitherto been on the margins of the debate concerning
civil authority over the ecclesiastical order.
    The battle cry “Rome is our end! Rome is our hope!” swept
 through the Church.53 Priests across the length and breadth of
 the kingdom, in cities and remote country villages, flooded Cath¬
olic journals with fervent expressions of support for the papal
 interpretation of recent events. The parochial clergy, for so long
 the silent and uncertain element in the struggle to control the
 kingdom’s ecclesiastical organization, spoke forcefully in favor of
 papal supremacy and a Church in control of its own destiny.54
 The unexpected outpouring of support for Rome and the deep
 hostility of the majority of the clergy to the progresista design for
 the Church revealed beyond a doubt that the regalism of the past
was dead. The clergy, declared a Catholic review, “prefers poverty,
jail, exile, expatriation, every humiliation, before denying its faith,
before separating itself from Rome, before consenting to the di¬
 vision of the seamless tunic of Jesus Christ.”55
    The revolt of the clergy focused on resistance to liberal bishops
and diocesan administrators. Incidents between the progovern¬
 ment clergy and the “Roman” opposition multiplied following the
 papal statement of March 1841. Forty-three priests were arrested
 in Toledo for refusing to give up their licenses to preach and hear
confessions; thirty curas of the Alcarria district were taken to court
 for having supported Gregory XVI’s declaration. The ecclesias¬
 tical governor of the archdiocese of Zaragoza, Manuel La Rica,
engaged in a conflict with his chapter—still loyal to the exiled
 archbishop—so bitter that he carried the dispute to the courts
and secured the exile of all the canons to the Balearics for eight
years. Members of the collegiate chapter of Daroca suffered a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 171




similar fate for daring to question La Rica’s right to his office.
 Five parish priests of Miranda del Ebro were arrested and accused
of having given “subversive counsel to the faithful in the act of
sacerdotal confession.” In the village of Requejo in Astorga, the
 cura was exiled from his parish and his property confiscated for
 having read Gregory XVI’s address to his congregation.56 Exile,
trial, and imprisonment failed to break clerical resistance. Priests
hostile to the liberal Church did not always express their senti¬
ments as dramatically as did those of Toledo and Alcarria, but
they often gave silent albeit no less forceful manifestations of
opposition. In Malaga, for instance, the newly appointed diocesan
administrator arrived at the cathedral for the customary reception
by the local clergy only to find it shuttered and empty. Even the
lowly bell ringer refused to appear to sound the chimes of wel¬
come.
   The resilience of a clergy deprived of episcopal leadership, cast
upon its own resources, and subject to intense pressure from the
State, marked a significant development in the evolution of the
modern Church. It should be remembered that the regency’s pol¬
icies were not directed to the destruction of religion, nor even to
the separation of Church and State. The regent, personally devout
to the point of superstition, and the ministers of justice most
intimately involved with ecclesiastical reform—Alonso and Be¬
cerra—stressed the importance of religion in the progresista State.
The organization, finances, and social role of the Church were to
be different from the ecclesiastical order of the Old Regime, but
the regent and his ministers were as fully committed to the con¬
tinued existence of an official Church as Ferdinand VII had been.
   The bishops and priests to whom the regency looked to direct
the Church found themselves in a difficult, ultimately impossible
position. The liberal clerical elite formed a rump church domi¬
nated by a handful of elderly bishops first appointed between
1820 and 1823 and by a group of younger priests—such as Miguel
Golfanguer, successor to Gonzalez Vallejo as governor of the To¬
ledo archdiocese in 1842, and Manuel La Rica, the diocesan ad¬
ministrator of Zaragoza. The liberal bishops were not the ogres
their clerical opponents pictured them to be. Although committed
to realizing the old ideal of ecclesiastical reform in alliance with
the State, they rejected out of hand the accusation often levied
  172                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church