




the ministry with accusations of timidity before the power of the
orders accused of rebellion and treason. “The clergy, gentlemen,
as a class, is fighting the principles of liberty in every nation, and
it is combating them in Spain,” said the prominent deputy, An¬
tonio Alcala Galiano. The regulars were compared to “a robust
plant which extends its branches through all Spain,” a plant that
could not be trimmed but must be deprived of “the water which
irrigates and feeds it.”17 The ministry’s project suffered a humil¬
iating defeat. The prime minister’s days in office were numbered.
    The brief ministry of the conde de Toreno (June-September
 1835) represented a final, desperate effort to preserve the dom¬
inance of the liberal elite. Toreno hoped to win at least the ac¬
quiescence of the radicals through a policy of concessions—namely,
the restoration of clerical property to the purchasers of 1820-
 1823, the suppression of the Jesuits, and the appointment of a
reputed financial wizard and exaltado sympathizer, Juan Alvarez
Mendizabal, to the ministry of finance.18 Toreno, however, still
clung to the basic premises of his predecessor’s ecclesiastical policy.
The Real Junta Eclesiastica finally produced its long-awaited rec¬
ommendations, which were a good deal more moderate than the
 1820 legislation on the religious orders. The commission rec¬
ommended the decree, and the queen regent formally assented
to it, appropriately enough on July 25, the feast of Saint James,
patron of Spain. It suppressed male monasteries and friaries con¬
taining fewer than twelve religious and ordered the sale of their
property with the proceeds to be used to reduce the national debt.
The Junta Eclesiastica envisaged the closing of 892 houses; the
remainder would survive. The decree, however, was not worth
the paper it was written on. A radical revolution had already begun
in the provinces that sealed the fate of both the ministry and its
ecclesiastical policy.
    The provincial risings of July-August 1835, beginning in Za¬
ragoza and spreading to Catalonia, Valencia, Andalusia, Old Cas¬
tile, and Galicia, were directed in their initial stages against the
regular clergy.19 The revolutionary movement, resting on an un¬
easy alliance of urban mobs, militiamen, and local radicals, quickly
became an attack on the government itself as Madrid lost control
of entire regions. The disturbances in Zaragoza (July 5-6) fol¬
lowed the same course as the matanza de los frailes in Madrid a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                     157




year earlier; three friaries were sacked and burned. From Aragon
the antireligious wave swept into Catalonia. The Carmelite house
of Riudoms was assaulted on the twenty-third, the celebrated Car¬
thusian monastery of Scala Dei on the twenty-fifth, and Poblet a
few days later. Barcelona, with its twenty-six friaries and 800 re¬
ligious, provided a natural focus for radical and popular discon¬
tent. On July 25 the attacks began. The victims were not as numerous
as in Madrid during the previous year; friars escaped through
sewers, on ropes from the rooftops of their burning residences,
or simply disguised as civilians. Confronted with violence, the
authorities could do nothing other than take nearly 300 religious
under protective custody in the fortress of Montjuich. Through¬
out Catalonia monasteries and friaries were abandoned either
under the pressure of municipal authorities or because the terror-
stricken religious themselves sought permission to leave. For all
practical purposes the religious houses of men were empty by the
first of August.
   Although the wave of violence was directed primarily against
the regulars, the secular clergy also suffered. Parish priests began
to abandon their churches in some towns. The archbishop of
Tarragona, fearing for his life as the attacks reached his diocesan
seat, fled to a ship in the harbor, although not before a mob
threatened to hurl him into the sea and seized trunks containing
his episcopal regalia. Flaving failed to detain the prelate, the rioters
contented themselves by parading about the town in his miters
and capes. There too the government authorities were impotent
before the fury of the revolutionary crowds.
   Urban risings elsewhere were less violent but no less damaging
to the regulars. The revolutionary juntas formed in many cities
by local exaltado politicians after the initial manifestations of pop¬
ular discontent demanded the expulsion of all religious from their
houses. In August the junta of Valencia ordered suppression of
all monasteries and friaries in the provinces of Valencia, Alicante,
Castellon, Murcia, and Albacete. This pattern was repeated in
Malaga, Cadiz, Salamanca, Valladolid, Zamora, and throughout
Galicia. Only in a few areas—Burgos, Logroho, Soria, Palencia,
Leon, Asturias, Santander, and Ciudad Real—was the govern¬
ment able to maintain a semblance of authority and proceed with
a more limited closing of religious houses under the terms of the
   158                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church