




reales to passing beggars, the distribution of bread and soup at
episcopal gates, and the administration of hospitals, orphanages,
and other institutions. Religiously inspired poor relief had not
functioned well since at least 1800, but it received the coup de
grace after 1834. Liberal opinion had little use for the apparently
chaotic and indiscriminate distribution of alms by ecclesiastics. A
royal order (July 1, 1836) established local commissions to assume
responsibility for aiding the poor, and charitable institutions, such
as hospitals, fell directly under government control as charity be¬
came public assistance. For churchmen the change seemed a scan¬
dalous departure from the centuries-old norms of a Christian
society. In spite of clerical laments, however, removal of eccle¬
siastical institutions from their decisive place in poor relief was
another step in the liberal policy of reducing the Church to an
exclusively pastoral function.
   To what extent the collapse of the material and social foun¬
dations of the Old Regime Church affected levels of religious
practice between 1834 and 1843 is difficult to assess because there
are few studies of observance. Churchmen compared their situ¬
ation to that of the persecuted Christians of ancient Rome. “Nero,
Tiberius and Domitian could not have been worse,” said a Catholic
periodical of Espartero.72 The disintegration of the traditional
ecclesiastical organization diminished the Church’s ability to pro¬
vide religious services on an eighteenth-century scale. Monaster¬
ies, convents, and their churches were closed and either sold to
speculators, who often pulled them down in favor of new resi¬
dential and commercial construction, or converted them to public
use. The urban concentration of the regulars meant that their
disappearance inevitably reduced the number of churches open
for services in the cities. In Madrid, for example, the number fell
from 100 to 70 within five years.
   By destroying the orders the State shifted the entire burden of
ministering to the population to parish priests. But the geographic
distribution of the parochial clergy widened the gap between well-
served areas—Old Castile, Leon, Aragon, the entire Cantabrian
coast—and the chronically understaffed dioceses of Andalusia
and Extremadura, where traditionally a small body of priests ad¬
ministered large parishes and depended on the religious orders
for pastoral assistance. The disappearance of the regulars in Se-
  180                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




ville, Cordoba and Jaen, where they had once formed at least half
the clerical population, placed the secular clergy under pressure
that could have been relieved only by creation of new parishes
and recruitment of priests to fill them. This was not done, and
the imbalances inherent in the southern Church’s infrastructure
were magnified.
   Forms of religious expression central to the life of the Old
Regime Church were compromised by both legislation and the
clerical establishment’s poverty after 1834. The disappearance of
the orders—the most important agents of popular evangelization
as well as the most avid propagators of devotions, such as the
Sacred Heart and the Stations of the Cross—threw the burden of
sustaining faith on a secular clergy ill prepared for the task. More¬
over, the emergence of a highly individualistic society ensured the
decline of the collective manifestations of religious sentiment that
had characterized the eighteenth-century Church. The old con¬
fraternities, reflections of the traditional social categories of a hi¬
erarchical order, were transformed into simple associations of
pious individuals. Social changes had already made the cofradias
superfluous in the old sense, but the State accelerated their decline
by ordering the sale of their property in May 1841 along with
that of the secular clergy. Thus, the governor of Salamanca sup¬
pressed the confraternities of that city in May 1842. The devout
continued to pay homage to their patrons, but they did so as
private citizens willing to donate the funds necessary for services.
   Religious processions, however, did not disappear during the
decade of liberal revolution. They survived because the State wished
them to. An impoverished Church could no longer afford its taste
for religious spectacle. But the progresistas were as committed to
the great processions of Holy Week and Corpus Christi as the
absolutist monarchs of old. Municipalities willingly donated the
necessary funds, as in Cuenca where the authorities gave 20,000
reales in March 1842 for the traditional rites of Holy Week. Es-
partero presided over the Corpus Christi procession in Madrid
in June 1841.73 This attitude, so different from later anticlerical
manias against processions, reflected the government’s commit¬
ment to the Church it was attempting to create. Religious proces¬
sions, in which the National Guard and army invariably participated,
had been transformed from displays of ecclesiastical wealth and
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                    181