




to remove themselves entirely from partisan politics. And he be¬
lieved that political controversy focusing on the Church could only
be eliminated through a formal agreement between the liberal
State and the papacy. The suggestion for a negotiated settlement
to establish the place of the Church within a regime that for good
or ill dominated the country implied abandonment of historic
claims to the ecclesiastical riches and privileges of the past—claims
upon which some clerics continued to insist.65
   The realism of Balmes found a counterpart in the attitude of
some members of the hierarchy. Bishop Romo Gamboa of the
Canaries declared in 1843: “reason dictates that prescinding from
rights which have been swept away forever, and submerged ... at
the bottom of the sea, we should content ourselves with saving
those which, floating to the beaches, are still capable of being
saved ... we find ourselves with certain losses which it is impos¬
sible to re-establish without new sacrifices.” Like Balmes, Romo
Gamboa believed that only realistic negotiations between the lib¬
eral State and the papacy would be able “to assure the future of
the Church.”66
   Such a settlement seemed impossible as long as the Espartero
regency survived. But the regency proved no more durable than
the governments preceding it; in July 1843 it fell. The revolution
began as a general movement of protest against a government
increasingly isolated from its own supporters and unpopular be¬
cause of its economic and fiscal policies. Division within the mil¬
itary and progresista ranks made the success of the rising possible.
A series of local disturbances, usually initiated by dissident radicals
and some partisans of a republic, were soon dominated by the
more conservative liberal bourgeoisie, who for the first time suc¬
ceeded in turning the provincial revolution to its advantage.
   Clerics participated in the revolutionary juntas of Tarragona,
Tortosa, Gerona, Valencia, and Teruel. Elsewhere the clergy did
nothing “to block the march of the national rising nor lend support
to the insolent Regent.”67 Espartero’s fall was greeted with ill-
disguised enthusiasm by the clergy. In Seville Canon Manuel Lopez
Cepero preached a violent sermon exulting in the failure of “the
miserable little tyrant, the bastard fungus of fortune.”68 Clerical
expectations that a new day had arrived for the Church rose with
the measures taken by provincial juntas to reverse the regency’s
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  177




ecclesiastical legislation. In July the juntas of Tarragona, Teruel,
Lugo, Santiago, Palencia, Caceres, and Mallorca abolished the
hated certificates of loyalty; others suspended the sale of the sec¬
ular clergy’s property.
   During the summer of 1843 the groundwork was laid for the
compromise between the Church and a bourgeoisie fearful of
social revolution that would give nineteenth-century Spanish Ca¬
tholicism its distinctive character. For if the Church had become
aware of the advantage of working within the liberal State, the
latter’s more conservative elements began to see the Church as a
bulwark of stability and order within a turbulent society. Under
the banner “Mother of God, Liberatrix of Spain,” the revolution¬
ary junta in Valencia affirmed its loyalty to the Constitution of
1837, the guarantor of “the religion of our ancestors, the throne
of our kings and the liberty of our persons.”69 To the cry “Long
live religion and liberty!” the junta added an appeal for measures
to provide financial support for the clergy and a concordat to end
the long estrangement of official Spain from Rome. The circum¬
stances were present for an accommodation between liberalism
and the Church. The process of adjustment would take longer
than a euphoric clergy expected in 1843, but it had begun.