




of the controversial certificates of loyalty, government affirma¬
tions of its commitment to pay clerical salaries, and the reestab¬
lishment of the ecclesiastical marriage tribunal, the Rota—also
created a climate of opinion favorable to more substantial changes.
    The accession to power in May 1844 of the strong man of
 moderado politics, General Ramon Narvaez, opened the way for
 more concessions to the Church. Narvaez, a “daring, energetic,
obstinate and iron-nerved soldier of fortune,”5 by no means en¬
joyed the total support of the moderado political factions. But his
 toughness and determination together with his prestige among
conservative generals allowed the government to implement a
 vigorous policy along a broad front including the Church.6 In
 spite of progresista hostility and some grumbling among mode¬
 rado politicians, the State suspended the sale of the secular cler¬
 gy’s property that summer. As the government consolidated its
 position, it acted more decisively. In April 1845 it ordered the
 return of all property as yet unsold. And a new constitution in
 1845, going beyond the terms of the charter of 1837, affirmed
 that “the religion of the Spanish nation is the Apostolic Roman
 Catholic religion. The State binds itself to maintain the cult and
 its ministers.”7 Such measures were welcomed by clerical opinion,
 but the State did not give all its cards away. Until a definitive
 settlement with Rome, the government continued to apply the
 restrictions imposed during the 1830’s on ordinations and parish
 appointments. Nor was it prepared to oust the proregency dioc¬
 esan administrators who had taken office under Espartero, al¬
 though some resigned their posts voluntarily.
     Both moderado and clerical opinion recognized that only a
 formal agreement with the papacy could end the deadlock be¬
 tween the liberal State and the Church. Less than a month after
 taking office, the Narvaez government sent a diplomatic agent to
 Rome to negotiate with Gregory XVI on the following basis: (1)
 papal recognition of Isabella II as the kingdom’s legitimate sov¬
ereign; (2) suspension of sale of the property of the secular clergy
and the female orders; and (3) recognition of the pope’s role in
episcopal appointments subject to the traditional right of royal
 patronage stipulated in the Concordat of 1753.8 The anxiety of
both sides to reach agreement led to the rapid conclusion of ne¬
gotiations. By January 1845 the convenio worked out between the
  190                                   The Conservative Church




papal secretary of state and the Spanish representative in Rome
was being discussed in Madrid. Although the agreement met the
State’s original terms, a new provision authorizing the reestab¬
lishment of the male religious orders at an “opportune” time aroused
controversy in the cabinet. Further, rumors of the convenio, which
had been negotiated secretly without reference to parliament, pro¬
voked the ire of both moderado and progresista newspapers, as
well as that of moderados resentful of the government’s heavy-
handed tactics and covert diplomacy. Although the ministry might
have forced acceptance of the agreement, parliamentary and press
uproar following publication of the convenio’s text in The Times of
London revealed that the government underestimated the extent
of opposition, even among its own supporters, to a definitive set¬
tlement with the Church. Faced with open hostility to other aspects
of its policy, particularly in the area of tax reform, the Narvaez
ministry elected prudence by refusing to sanction the convenio.9
   The government’s unwillingness to ratify the convenio of 1845
irritated Catholic opinion, but it did not end the modus vivendi
worked out between the secular and ecclesiastical authorities. The
election of a new pope in 1846 again raised hopes for a settlement.
Pius IX, whose moderately liberal views were regarded with sym¬
pathy by the government in Madrid, showed his good intentions
by recognizing Isabella as queen of Spain in 1848 and by agreeing
to cooperate in filling episcopal vacancies. Negotiations for the
long-awaited concordat were finally resumed, as before in secrecy
so extreme that a Catholic paper complained that “neither the
clergy nor even the illustrious prelates of the Church . . . know
what it will contain.”10 The complex and at times difficult nego¬
tiations were finally concluded during the ministry of Juan Bravo
Murillo on March 16, 1851. Rome and Madrid had reached an
agreement that would determine the place of the Church within
Spanish society for generations.
   The concordat’s terms were received with open hostility by the
progresistas, discreet reserve by the moderados who always feared
being tarred with the brush of ultramontanism by the opposition,
and quiet acquiescence by clerics.11 Few were enthusiastic in their
support of a document that offered neither startling innovations
nor the prospect of a certain end to the difficulties between the
civil and ecclesiastical authorities. The settlement of 1851 was a
     The Conservative Church                                    191