




the Faith, fearing that its ostensible purpose, the support of for¬
eign missions, would allow the clergy to meet together for sub¬
versive activities) slowly began to learn the techniques of survival
in a world of parliaments, newspapers, political debate, and pop¬
ular agitation. Realizing that no savior waited in the wings, the
Church began to use the weapons of liberalism, which it had for
so long feared and attacked, for its own defense. Only in 1840,
for example, did a truly effective Catholic press emerge.
   The Church had previously used newspapers and journals, as
after 1824, but the early press, filled with triumphalist and long-
winded tracts against liberalism, served a totally polemical pur¬
pose. The new press—La Revista Catdlica of Barcelona, El Catolico
of Madrid, and La Cruz of Seville—had a different character.
Through publication of the State’s ecclesiastical legislation, de¬
tailed news of government harassment, and simple letters to the
editor, the Catholic press provided an isolated clergy with a sense
of unity and purpose. El Catolico thus defied the government by
publishing Gregory XVI’s address of March 1841 and launched
a distinctly modern campaign to elicit expressions of support from
the parish clergy. The torrent of replies from cities, distant towns,
and villages illustrated the force of the new journalism. The priests
of Puebla de Sanabria in Astorga wrote to the paper, whose very
existence had been unknown to them a few weeks before, that it
had inspired them to speak out and write an endorsement of the
papal statement.62 The emerging press also produced a breed of
tough, aggressive journalists as skilled in the struggle to win public
opinion as their liberal counterparts. The Catholic press could not
match liberal journals in either numbers or circulation, but more
than any other force it inspired resistance to the grand design for
a state Church.
   The shattering of the Carlist illusion also forced the Church to
reassess its traditional identification with absolutism. The dream
of a theocratic society resting on the alliance of Throne and Altar
never entirely disappeared, but between 1840 and 1843 the Church
perceived that its own self-interest was not necessarily that of
absolute monarchy. Defense of the faith became the rallying cry
of ecclesiastics who realistically assessed the situation of the Church
in a liberal State. El Catolico, in the significant issue of February
26, 1841, published a proposal for formation of a Catholic As-
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                      175




sociation, revealing the new tendency within the Church to secure
its position in the existing political order. The association was to
have a single purpose: “to defend the Catholic religion which is
designated as the religion of the Spains in the fundamental code
of the nation,” and to do so “by the means authorized by law.”
The project envisaged a voluntary association of a million mem¬
bers organized through the efforts of the parish clergy and di¬
rected by the newspaper’s editors. The proposal reflected a shrewd
awareness of the transformation of the nation’s political life. The
Church must see to its own interests by building an organization
capable of mobilizing public support to influence government pol¬
icy.
   Although the plan was intelligent in its perception that the
Church must struggle as an interest group in the arena of parlia¬
ment and public opinion, it was ahead of its time. Not for another
quarter-century would anything resembling the Catholic Associ¬
ation come into being. But the revolt of the clergy in 1841 and
 1842 was an example of the new, realistic tactics. Devoid of any
advocacy of Carlism, the clerical reaction to the scheme for a state
Church represented in a limited way an ecclesiastical strategy that
in one form or another would survive until 1931.
   The new realism of the Church during the early 1840’s arose
not only from a pragmatic reaction to the events of the Espartero
regency. One group of clergy came to realize that the wealth and
privileges of the past could not be restored. The movement owed
a great deal to the most brilliant intellectual figure of the nineteenth-
century Church, the young Catalan priest Jaime Balmes (1810—
 1848). Philosopher, social thinker, journalist, and political essayist,
Balmes possessed the historical sense to see that the struggle of
liberalism against absolutism in the form of Carlism marked a
decisive stage in the nation’s history. It was a conflict “between
the old society and the new; between the society of beliefs and
religious customs . . . and a society of innovation and the devel¬
opment of material interests.”63 Balmes had no use for the pro-
gresistas or the moderados; he regarded the former as being moved
by destructive passion; the latter he saw as “detestable.”64 Although
his proposal for a Catholic-Monarchical party rising above the
divisions between Carlists and supporters of Isabella II was im¬
practical given the circumstances of the time, he urged the clergy
  176                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church