




called the construction of a theater in the town “most prejudicial
to the decorum of the religion which the Spanish profess.” There
is no evidence that the nation was being submerged by the de¬
pravity clerics believed they saw about them. What they were la¬
menting was the collapse of the controls used for centuries by
Throne and Altar to preserve the purity of faith. Obsessed since
the middle of the eighteenth century with the danger of “liber¬
tinism”—the wanton expression of individual tastes and pleasures
beyond clerically defined moral standards—the Church saw in
liberal social and intellectual expression “a rebellion against God
and against human society.”80
    Political circumstances forced the Church into a pragmatic reas¬
sessment of its role in the liberal State; ecclesiastical perceptions
of economic and social changes after 1834, however, strengthened
its traditional foreboding view of what was happening to Spanish
society. Church leaders had no choice but to yield the theocratic
ambitions that had dominated clerical thinking since at least 1808.
But clerics had not abandoned the moral and philosophical prin¬
ciples that provided the rationale for earlier attempts to convert
absolute monarchy into an instrument for creating the kingdom
of God on earth. A new political order had come into being, and
the Church proposed to use it to realize its aspirations. To do so
in new economic, social, and intellectual conditions would be no
easier than before. Indeed, the process would create problems
and controversies that have survived to this day.
6    /    The Conservative Church, 1844—1868



   With the collapse of the Espartero regency in 1843 the liberal
balance of power shifted from the progresistas to the moderados,
who monopolized the government until 1868 save for the inter¬
lude between 1854 and 1856. Although committed to maintaining
the political, economic, and social gains made at the expense of
the hierarchical order of the past, the moderado program re¬
flected the basic conservatism of its supporters. Fearful of the
popular radicalism exploited by the progresistas, the moderados
wished to slow the pace of change and consolidate a regime to be
dominated by a small elite chosen by a restricted body of electors.
Above all, the moderados wished to enjoy the economic benefits
of possessing power and to avoid a revolution demanding wider
participation in the political process and redress of popular griev¬
ances. The progresistas were no less terrified of social revolution,
but their willingness to use lower-class unrest to further their
objectives made them suspect in moderado eyes.
   Moderado dominance of government between 1844 and 1868
provided the Church with an opportunity to recover from the
shocks it had suffered since 1834. The moderados saw the Church
as a useful ally in the struggle against radicalism and possible
revolution; ecclesiastics, abandoning their commitment to abso¬
lutism, saw the possibility of employing the conservative-liberal
State to recoup their losses. But the accommodation between the
moderados and the Church was essentially a marriage of conven¬
ience. A tense and difficult union in the best of times, it did not
resolve the fundamental problem of the Church’s relationship to
the new political and social order.