




grandeur into manifestations of the unity between Church and
State in the new social and political order.
    In spite of clerical laments that irreligion was leading society to
its ruin, there is no convincing evidence that a massive desertion
from the Church occurred between 1834 and 1843. The disrup¬
tion of the ecclesiastical organization, the effects of the Carlist
War in some regions, and the Church’s general poverty may have
accelerated the slippage of practice in the cities and magnified the
weaknesses of the Church in areas where faith rested on uncertain
foundations, but no massive drift into dechristianization took place.
One of the few statistical studies of religious practice for the pe¬
riod, an analysis of the number of persons fulfilling the Easter
Communion obligation in the parish of Santiago El Real in the
city of Logrono in La Rioja, shows that the rate of observance
changed only marginally between 1828 and 1843. The proportion
of nonobservants was uniformly low, ranging between 1.0 percent
and 6.0 percent of the parochial population falling under the
obligation, with the higher percentages being reached in only two
years (1836, 6.0 percent and 1841, 4.5 percent). The Logrono
statistics cannot be used to generalize about the kingdom as a
whole, but they are significant given the extremely large number
of parishioners failing to fulfill the Easter duty during the last
third of the nineteenth century (in 1887 the nonobservants formed
58.3 percent of the total). The statistics reveal that dechristiani¬
zation made rapid progress in the city during the century, but it
is clear that this transformation had not yet begun between 1834
and 1843.74
    The matanza de los frailes in 1834 and 1835 combined with the
dismantling of the structure of the Old Regime Church led to the
myth, assiduously promoted by ecclesiastics, that unbridled anti¬
clericalism fostered by the State was threatening the survival of
religion itself. But liberalism, either in its progresista or moderado
version, had no such intention, and in fact there was a noticeable
decline of anticlerical violence once the question of the religious
orders was resolved and the Carlist revolt ended. Between 1840
and 1843, years of revolutionary upheaval and economic unrest,
few physical attacks were made on ecclesiastical buildings or the
clergy. Incidents did continue to occur which revealed that the
Church was still losing ground in the cities. In Tarragona a group
  182                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




of youths invaded the cathedral on Wednesday of Holy Week in
1842; they threw the service into confusion by breaking into “noisy
and disorderly sounds”; in Cadiz masked figures attired in litur¬
gical garments appeared on the streets during carnival “to ridicule
the august ceremonies of our religion,” according to the Catholic
press. In Madrid drunken revelers attending the Christmas mid¬
night Mass scandalized the devout with their irreverent singing
and general conduct. But if these incidents revealed a lack of
respect for religion unthinkable a half-century before, they did
not constitute a violent, frontal assault on the Church. Moreover,
the progresista authorities intervened energetically to curb such
excesses. Even the Catholic press had to praise the intervention
of the municipal officials of Tarragona for having “punished se¬
verely the disturbers of public tranquility” and caused “the mys¬
teries of our religion to be respected.”75
    As an institution with its roots deep in a noble, agrarian, and
absolutist past, the Church fared badly at liberal hands; as a re¬
ligious body it survived better than ecclesiastical observers be¬
lieved. Clerics bemoaned the effects of the liberal decade. But by
maintaining the link between Church and State—indeed by en¬
couraging religious observance—successive governments, whether
moderado or progresista, provided the means for the Church to
adapt to changing political and social circumstances with some
success. This pattern would survive with one exception until 1931.
    Whether a religious revival took place after 1840, as churchmen
of the time maintained, is unclear. The Catholic press gloried in
publishing reports of massive attendance at services during the
regency. The lack of statistical evidence on religious practice makes
it impossible to establish the accuracy of these claims. It is clear,
however, that the Church, deprived of its traditional educational,
charitable, and seigneurial functions, began to redefine the sig¬
nificance of observance. Eighteenth-century practice, the collec¬
tive manifestation of the pious sentiments of a hierarchical society,
gave way to a religion of testimony, to individual professions of
faith promoted by a Church believing itself the victim of perse¬
cution. The faithful no longer attended services or participated
in the processions of Holy Week as members of artisan guilds or
noble confraternities, but as individuals testifying to belief in a
Church under siege: “What a victory against unbelief! What a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                     183