


A New Church, 1834—1843

   By 1843 the framework of the eighteenth-century Church had
collapsed under the weight of liberal reform. The religious orders
of men had disappeared with few exceptions; many dioceses lacked
bishops, and the number of cathedral canons fell from 1,738 to
1,079 because of the State’s refusal to fill benefices unconnected
to pastoral work. The parochial clergy maintained its strength at
approximately the eighteenth-century level, with nearly 25,000
priests engaged in the cure of souls.70 This did not mean that
overall the number of clerics increased, for the ex-regulars pro¬
vided a pool of manpower for the parishes. In addition, 10,000
priests from the suppressed orders survived on government pen¬
sions. The effective clerical personnel of the Church composed
no more than a third of the number of priests reported in the
last censuses of the Old Regime. In this respect the liberal State
achieved one of its objectives. The decline in priestly numbers
  178                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




was not, however, accompanied by a more rational distribution of
resources and personnel. Southern dioceses continued to be badly
understaffed compared with the northern, and the suppression
of parishes decreed by the State, though begun in some dioceses—
Valladolid, Salamanca, and Toledo—did not lead to the ration¬
alization of parish size and resources the authorities desired.71
Moreover, the destruction of the orders and the reduced numbers
of the clerical elite accentuated the shift from the urban Church
of the Old Regime to the rural Church of the nineteenth century.
The parish clergy, profoundly conservative, devoted to Rome, and
concentrated in an isolated countryside, became the dominant
group within clerical ranks. The demographic and organizational
transformation of the Church after 1834 contributed to a reo¬
rientation of the ecclesiastical mentality that would create serious
difhculties in a later period of industrial growth and urbanization.
   The destruction of the religious orders, the penury of the sec¬
ular clergy, and liberal legislation ended the charitable and edu¬
cational activities vital to the social role of the Old Regime Church.
Clerical influence over education rested on the secondary schools
maintained by the regulars. On the whole the orders were not as
deeply involved in primary teaching. Village schools were nu¬
merous in the Old Regime and catechetical instruction obligatory,
but the latter was the responsibility of the parish priest, who
appeared for perhaps an hour a week to put the pupils through
the rudimentary memory questions of the catechism. The schools
of the orders catered to local elites, although Ferdinand VII had
attempted to direct the regulars into elementary teaching. The
quality of these schools varied enormously—from the classical
education of the Jesuits and the modern instruction given by the
Piarists to that provided in smaller towns, where lay students sat
side by side with friars pursuing their clerical studies in arts courses.
The general quality of the orders’ schools declined during the
first third of the nineteenth century, but they continued to educate
the small minority dominating intellectual, political, and social life
until the disamortization of Mendizabal.
   By destroying the orders and reducing the income of the secular
clergy, the liberal State also diminished the Church’s traditional
charitable function. The charity of the Old Regime, widespread
and diffuse in character, included a priest’s donation of a few
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  179