




triumph for religion!” said the correspondent of La Cruz of mas¬
sive attendance at services in the town of Vinaroz.76 The liberal
ideal of a Church reduced largely to the spiritual and pastoral
had triumphed. But it also destroyed any possibility of a Church
in the service of liberalism, for in religious observance the Church
found an effective weapon against the regime’s ecclesiastical re¬
forms.
    Having learned the rules of the new politics and preserved a
sense of identity by developing a defensive mentality, the Church
could not adapt as easily to the emergence of a society with new
norms of economic behavior and sociability. The liberal revolution
of 1834-1843 was primarily political in character. Although the
old society of orders, hierarchical and seigneurial, was effectively
dismantled, the social base of liberal Spain rested on a landowning
oligarchy of aristocrats and a conservative urban bourgeoisie eager
to lay its hands on the spoils of Church property. To them must
be added a sprinkling of Catalan industrialists, prospering from
the growing cotton textile industry of Barcelona, and Madrid fin¬
anciers and speculators. The oligarchy was more open than the
noble society of the past. Aristocrats, generals, bankers, mer¬
chants, and manufacturers mingled in salon, parliament, literary
society, and business in a fashion unthinkable a few years before.
The new social order was as profoundly conservative as the one
it replaced, but its undisguised acquisitiveness, its penchant for
ostentatious display, and its secular cultural tastes clashed with an
ecclesiastical mentality deeply rooted in the quasi-medieval, scho¬
lastic interpretation of social organization that had long domi¬
nated clerical thinking.
   For churchmen imbued with an ideal of society organized around
the subordination of individual interest to the collective good and
the pervasive influence of religion in every aspect of life, forms
of liberal sociability seemed shocking departures from standards
of Christian civilization. Even Balmes, the most perceptive ob¬
server of what was happening to the Church in the early 1840’s,
lamented the disappearance of an idealized Catholic Spain where
“religion, piety, faith, and hope . . . filled the streets, squares, and
byways” of the kingdom in favor of a society “occupied with its
industrial progress, its mercantile circulation, its hunger for gold,
its thirst for pleasure, its ostentatious luxury, its dissipation, its
  184                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




scientific and literary vanity, its political delirium and its refined
egoism.”77 For clerics still attached to the anticapitalist and cor-
poratist social preoccupations of the Old Regime Church, the sale
of ecclesiastical property, the destruction of traditional charity,
and the emphasis on economic development were signs of a society
in the midst of dissolution. Thus, a Catholic periodical com¬
plained: “What license! In the capital of Spain we constantly see
in the press these announcements: Money to Loan. Money lent
at moderate interest.” Another lamented that “in Madrid, the
capital of Catholic Spain, . . . commerce continues on its daily course
even on Sundays and feast days” in the name of “utility and prog¬
ress,” thus delivering the nation to “the most ferocious customs”
calculated to make Spaniards “as barbarous and slavish as the
English.”78
   For the Church the sale of the regular and secular clergy’s
property provided the supreme example of a society dominated
by acquisitive passion, hence the frequent denunciations of the
purchasers as “infamous egoists” who built “colossal fortunes” at
ecclesiastical expense.79 In fact, the infrastructure of the national
economy had not changed dramatically by 1843. Still agrarian
save for a developing Catalonia and a handful of manufacturing
towns scattered across the kingdom, Spain maintained its prein¬
dustrial character. The most significant change was the sale of
ecclesiastical property, which left a legacy of resentment that would
survive through generations of churchmen. Moreover, the con¬
nection between the sale and the freewheeling economic activities
of the liberal State reinforced clerical hostility toward a developing
capitalist society.
   Nor did the Church contemplate the proliferation of newspa¬
pers, literary reviews, theaters, and other cultural institutions of
the new society with anything less than horror. Although the State
retained the power of censorship, it deprived the bishops of the
authority to impose legal sanctions on offending works other than
through purely canonical means. The relatively free expression
of ideas after 1834 led to what many churchmen considered a
wave of antireligious and indecent publications. Reports from local
correspondents poured into the Catholic press alleging that the
nation was being swept by a wave of libertinism that “attacks re¬
ligion and is opposed to good customs.” In Santiago the clergy
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  185