


Recovery and Resentment, 1844—1854

   The failure of progresista ambitions to create a liberal clergy
as well as moderado fears of revolution produced an accommo-


    186
     The Conservative Church                                    187




dation between Church and State that would endure save for brief
periods until the proclamation of the Second Republic in 1931.
The successful uprising against Espartero in July 1843 heightened
Catholic expectations for “a new era, one of hope and consolation
for the Spanish Church.”1 These aspirations were not immediately
fulfilled. The provisional government, representing an uneasy
coalition of moderados and progresistas disenchanted with the
regency, dared not alienate its supporters on the delicate issue of
halting the sale of the secular clergy’s property. The suspension
of auctions by some local juntas during the summer so threatened
the government’s stability that on August 7 the prime minister,
J. M. Lopez, ordered that the sales should continue. The State’s
action irritated clerical opinion, which had expected an immediate
transformation of the Church’s position in the new political cir¬
cumstances. The government’s unwillingness to take decisive ac¬
tion led the Catholic press to pose the question: “will the moderado
party have enough nerve ... to repair the infinite evils which the
Church has suffered in ten years ... of revolution and upheaval?”
   Political developments rather than strong nerves finally made
possible the easing of tensions between Church and State. The
disintegration of the coalition of 1843 and the emergence of an
exclusively moderado government in 1844 opened a long period
of conservative rule. The new order suffered from serious weak¬
nesses: the exclusion of the opposition from acquiring power
through parliamentary means, a narrow electoral franchise de¬
nying the vast majority of the population any voice in the political
process, an imperfectly developed party system encouraging fac¬
tionalism even within moderado ranks, and a monarch, Isabella
II (“she has a great deal of willfulness, but no will of her own,”
said a contemporary observer), with both the constitutional pre¬
rogative and the disposition to be drawn into the intrigues gen¬
erated by a turbulent political system.2 The moderados preserved
their hegemony by creating the strongly centralized State that in
one form or another would survive until the 1970’s and by re¬
sorting to force to repress dissent. Provincial radicalism and lower-
class unrest were held in check; political life was controlled through
the manipulation of elections and restrictive press laws. Successive
moderado governments, however, carried out certain important
reforms, such as codification of the criminal law and creation of
  188                                     The Conservative Church




a relatively efficient tax system. In the end, the inflexible political
character of the regime and the narrow social base on which it
rested caused its collapse, but for more than two decades it was
strong enough to impose its model of government on the king¬
dom.
   For the moderados, intent on excluding the progresistas from
power and determined to preserve the gains made from destruc¬
tion of the old social order, an accommodation with the Church
seemed tactically sound. The failure of the regency’s ecclesiastical
policy and the prestige of the papacy among Spanish clerics re¬
vealed that a unilateral settlement of the problems between Church
and State was out of the question. Moreover, the moderados, who
had profited handsomely from the sale of ecclesiastical property
and continued this policy for fully a year after the 1843 revolution,
could contemplate halting the process because the best holdings
had been auctioned to private purchasers.3 An arrangement with
the Church also promised clerical support for the regime and an
undermining of Carlism in regions where it enjoyed popularity.
For the Church the necessity of a settlement was even more ob¬
vious. In 1846 twenty-nine of the kingdom’s sixty-one dioceses
lacked bishops because of the impasse between the State and Rome
over episcopal nominations; the number of capitular clergy had
fallen drastically, and the irregular support provided by successive
governments for the priests and the maintenance of church fabrics
had left an impoverished clergy and deteriorating ecclesiastical
buildings.
   In early 1844 the State embarked on a deliberate policy of
improving civil-ecclesiastical relations. A royal order of January
 19, designed “to bury ... all the quarrels, aggravations and re¬
criminations which might serve as obstacles to a new era of be¬
neficence and reparation,” authorized the return from exile of
two aged prelates once known for their intransigent defense of
absolutism—Cardinal Cienfuegos of Seville and Archbishop Velez
of Santiago.4 Subsequent decrees allowed other exiles to resume
the administration of their dioceses. In March Cardinal Cienfue¬
gos and the bishops of Calahorra and Plasencia were invited to
visit the queen at the royal palace. The bishops knelt and kissed
the royal hand in a traditional ceremony symbolizing the hier¬
archy’s acceptance of Isabella II. Other measures—the abolition
     The Conservative Church                                  189