




against them of advocating a break with Rome. Moreover, their
views on public morality and the condition of the kingdom’s in¬
tellectual life were identical to those of their clerical foes. No
bishop, for example, attacked “the prideful impiety” and “the
absurd and delerious” rationalism of the times as vigorously as
Felix Torres Amat.57
   The situation of ecclesiastical reformers whose ideas went back
to the “Jansenism” of the eighteenth century and the attempts at
change undertaken at Cadiz was untenable; it became clear that
reform would be brought about not by the alliance of Constitution
and Altar but by diplomatic agreement between the State and the
papacy. Although bishops such as Torres Amat believed that a
concordat with Rome would resolve the problem of the Church
in liberal Spain, the hostility they evoked in Rome prevented them
from playing a role in the process. Torres Amat’s controversial
pastoral letter of 1842 defending the “Jansenist” views of his dis¬
tinguished uncle led to a papal prohibition on its publication and
a long campaign of harassment that followed the aged prelate to
his deathbed.58 The rising prestige of Rome among the rank and
hie of the clergy also undermined the already tenuous position
of the liberal clerical elite, as did its failure to persuade the regency
to put ecclesiastical finances on a sound basis. The aggressive
conduct of diocesan governors appointed under state pressure
further alienated the liberal clergy from the mass of their fellow
clergymen. The liberal ecclesiastical reformers of 1834-1843, in¬
tellectually mediocre with few exceptions, identified too closely
with a government seen as repressive by most of the clergy, and
unable to bring about any amelioration in the Church’s material
condition, could not extend their influence over the Church as a
whole. Their failure made impossible the creation of a Church
intimately allied to the liberal State.
   The regency’s inability to resolve the chronic problem of Church
finances eliminated what little hope remained of winning support
among the lower clergy. In return for suppression of the tithe
and sale of the secular clergy’s property (the “sacking of the pat¬
rimony of Jesus Christ,” according to ecclesiastical critics),59 the
State undertook to pay clerical salaries. The method of raising
and paying the necessary funds varied between 1840 and 1843
but rested on a combination of surplice fees paid by parishioners
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 173




for marriages, funerals, and baptisms and a national Church tax,
the latter amount being set by Madrid but its assessment left in
the hands of local authorities. The difficult situation of the na¬
tional treasury as well as cumbersome bureaucratic procedures
slowed transfer of funds to the diocesan commissions charged
with paying parish priests. Delays were aggravated by the resist¬
ance of provincial and municipal authorities to the tax. In 1842
the provincial government of Barcelona complained to Madrid
that the tax was “oppressive and unnecessary” and that only those
benefiting personally from the services of the clergy should be
expected to pay it.60 Municipal governments often took matters
into their own hands by refusing to levy the tax. Complaints poured
into the Catholic press from aggrieved priests throughout the
kingdom; one alleged that “all the municipalities of the region
are asleep and look with the greatest indifference on the fulfill¬
ment of the law on financing the cult and the clergy.” A priest in
rural Galicia reported the situation had reached such desperate
straits in his town that “we do not know, if anyone will even give
us a mouthful of bread.”61 Espartero’s inability to honor the gov¬
ernment’s pledge to the clergy deepened cynicism and destroyed
what little confidence remained in liberal politicians among parish
priests.
   The Church recovered from the confusion and uncertainty of
the six years preceding 1840 because circumstances forced a fun¬
damental readjustment of its relationship to the political power.
Few ecclesiastics believed that Carlism had the capacity to destroy
liberalism and restore the old alliance of Throne and Altar. But
as long as the rebellion continued, a faint hope lingered that the
union of absolutism and religion might sweep to a final, apoca¬
lyptic victory. Carlism’s defeat in 1839 ended that illusion. Sym¬
pathy for the Carlist cause continued among the clergy—particularly
in regions such as the Basque Provinces where the interests of the
Church were identified with the defense of local traditions—but
in general the ecclesiastical commitment to Carlism receded before
reality. The liberal State had triumphed and imposed on the na¬
tion a new set of institutions.
   Between 1840 and 1843 a Church deprived of episcopal lead¬
ership and any means of collective expression (the regency even
forbade the recently established Society for the Propagation of
  174                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church