




the law of May 1, 1855. It was the most ambitious disamortization
of the nineteenth century, which included not only religious hold¬
ings but the property of educational and charitable institutions as
well as municipal common lands.35 Ecclesiastical property com¬
posed only about a third of the holdings made available for public
auction. Although the law exempted the residences and adjoining
gardens of bishops and parish clergy in addition to the property
of the Piarists, whose work in education had won progresista es¬
teem, it led to the sale of most of the Church’s remaining property,
nearly 25,000 separate plots, which brought the treasury over 300
million reales. Clerical reactions to another disamortization were
vigorous. The bishop of Osma wrote directly to the Cortes and
defended “the right of the Church ... to possess property” and
cited the “anathemas hurled by canon law against those who try
to disturb it in its possessions or to seize its goods violently.”36
Other bishops passively resisted by refusing to cooperate with
government officials examining ecclesiastical land titles before the
public auctions.37
   A deterioration in relations between Church and State followed
the legislation of early 1855. In July the papal charge d’affaires
left Madrid for Rome, although not until he had said Mass in the
chapel of El Escorial before Isabella II and the court. He prayed
for the victims of the cholera epidemic then ravaging the country
and, appropriately, for the clergy who had perished in 1834 under
the assault of “popular fanaticism.”38 The government followed
with a note to Spanish embassies abroad for distribution to the
states to which they were accredited affirming that “the Govern¬
ment of the Queen, who is honored with the title of Catholic, has
not ceased being Catholic for a single instant, nor has it given the
least offense to the dogmas of religion and the most sacred doc¬
trines of the Church” and throwing the blame for the crisis on
the papacy. Pius IX, who had long since abandoned his liberal
sympathies, riposted by claiming that Spain had violated the con¬
cordat and given “new injuries to the Church and its rights.”39
The conflict with Rome led the State to close the ecclesiastical
marriage tribunal and to press its reforming demands, such as
parish reorganization, more aggressively; the authorities began to
enforce the order to suspend priestly ordinations until such re¬
forms were carried out. In Oviedo government officers entered
     The Conservative Church                                   201




the cathedral after an ordination ceremony, marched the new
priests off in a body, and seized the certificates attesting to their
new status.40
   Progresista ecclesiastical legislation and the break with Rome
signaled the beginning of another wave of persecution for Catholic
opinion. But the Church suffered less between 1854 and 1856
than during the revolution of 1834-1843. The State continued
to finance the Church, although the 124 million reales appropri¬
ated for 1855 was less generous than the subvention provided by
the moderados in 1851.41 The progresista government sold clerical
property and denied ecclesiastical institutions the right to own
land and buildings in the future, but it allowed the Church to
receive gifts and bequests as long as these were converted into
interest-bearing treasury notes. The Church, however, saw the
exile imposed on the bishops of Barcelona and Osma and a royal
order of May 1855, occasioned by a flurry of Carlist agitation in
the north, that commanded the removal from their parishes of
priests “designated as dangerous by the civil authorities,” as a re¬
turn to the harassment of the early 1840’s.42
   These measures were exceptional, however. The State had the
sense to see that the Church did not pose a threat to its survival.
Most bishops either kept silent or affirmed their loyalty to Isabella
II. In a circular to his diocese the bishop of Badajoz protested
that his criticism of government policy was not moved by lack of
respect for the constituted authorities nor by a spirit contrary “to
obedience of the law and the loyalty and love which all display to
Her Majesty the Queen.”43 The civil authorities did not repeat the
regency purges of clergy unsympathetic to their aims. Churchmen
smarted under constant barrages from the progresista press, vig¬
orously expressed criticism that showed the continuing strength
of anticlericalism among the politically aware. But the sentiments
expressed in newspapers and often in parliamentary sessions did
not translate into a revival of the popular and violent anticleri¬
calism that had led to physical attacks on Church property and
priests during the mid-1830’s. Agitation among the industrial
working class of Barcelona, though frequent during the two years
of progresista rule, was not directed against the Church but against
a regime with economic and financial policies plainly opposed to
workers’ interests. The Catholic press lamented displays of what
  202                                   The Conservative Church