


Revolution to Revolution, 1854—1868

   The clerical ambitions so vociferously expressed during the
spring of 1854 were curbed by a summer revolution that even¬
tually restored Espartero to power.26 Moderado political domi¬
nance collapsed because of the severe internal divisions that had
developed among its supporters since 1851. Isabella’s taste for
power, encouraged by her mother and a camarilla of the most
conservative politicians, produced a succession of ministries gov¬
erning in semiauthoritarian fashion in defiance of parliament and
the broad currents of moderado opinion. Discontented moderado
politicians and generals, of whom the most prominent was Leo-
poldo O’Donnell, allied with cooperative progresistas to topple
this thinly disguised royal dictatorship through a confusing series of
military encounters of no great consequence combined with pop¬
ular agitation in Madrid and Barcelona. In spite of the participa¬
tion of the lower classes of the kingdom’s two largest cities, the rev¬
olution soon lost its popular character. The new regime, though
committed to a modest expansion of the electoral franchise and a less
authoritarian constitution, rested still on a narrow liberal elite, whose
main concerns were protection of private property, promotion of
economic development, and avoidance of social revolution.
   The revolution of 1854 was primarily a political upheaval car¬
ried to a successful conclusion without massive violence. In Ma¬
drid, the site of the most serious disorders, four days of popular
rioting culminated in the sacking and burning of the queen moth¬
er’s palace and the houses of several ministers. Churches and
     The Conservative Church                                    197




ecclesiastical buildings escaped untouched. There was no recur¬
rence of the popular anticlericalism that had set monasteries to
the torch in 1834 and 1835.27
   But the Church would not emerge unscathed from the hands of
the new government. In the midst of the revolutionary events
of July 1854, provincial juntas took action anticipating the policy of
the Constituent Cortes to be elected in the autumn. The junta
of Burgos, after accusing the Jesuits of “fanaticizing spirits,” or¬
dered them to leave the city within two days; the junta of Seville
demanded that the archbishop dismiss officials of the diocesan
administration who had shown themselves “opposed to the na¬
tional rising.”28 Other measures followed from the provisional
government, in which a veteran of the ecclesiastical wars of the
early 1840’s, Jose Alonso, sat as minister of grace and justice. The
government expelled the Hieronymites from the monastery of El
Escorial in September, only a few months after they had unpacked
their bags, and ordered that no parish vacancies should be filled
until the parochial reorganization so long demanded by liberal
reformers was carried out. The fundamental question of the place
of the Church within the new regime, however, awaited the elec¬
tion of a new parliament in October.
   In these circumstances there was little possibility of the Church
conserving the advantages bestowed by its accommodation with
the moderados. La Cruz suggested that a Catholic Electoral Union
should be formed to contest the elections on a program of “de¬
fending the Catholic religion and sustaining the dispositions of
the last Concordat.”29 This suggestion for the creation of a political
party committed to the defense of the Church’s interests, a dream
of clerical apologists well into the twentieth century, did not pros¬
per then, nor would it later, because of the antagonism between
Catholics who accepted the liberal State and those who did not.
Moreover, the terms of the electoral franchise worked against the
election of deputies favoring the ecclesiastical status quo. The
electorate of approximately 700,000, though significantly larger
than the minority allowed to vote before the revolution, was too
small to permit the election of pro-Church deputies in regions
known for their religious observance—the Basque Provinces, Na¬
varra, and Old Castile—where a vastly enlarged electorate would
  198                                     The Conservative Church