




ranks to yield to ecclesiastical pressure except in a haphazard way.
During the early 1850’s churchmen poured out a stream of articles
and pastoral letters railing against the continued existence of Spain’s
tiny Protestant minority, the corruption of social customs, and the
unwillingness or inability of the civil authorities to curb the op¬
position press from questioning the theocratic ideology vigorously
promoted by the episcopacy. In a circular to the clergy of the
archdiocese of Toledo dated March 1, 1854, the vicar general
lamented “the excesses . . . and the frightening relaxation of cus¬
toms spreading through all classes . . . like gangrene” and ex¬
pressed disappointment at government inaction, because the State
alone had the “coercive force” to compel “the rebels” to fulfill
their obligations toward Church and society.23
   Ecclesiastical resentment exploded in the winter of 1853-54
during the last stages of the first period of moderado government,
following announcement of the publication of a literary series
under the title “The Library of the Free Man.” It included works
by Rousseau, Lamennais, and others the Church condemned. Jose
Domingo Costa y Borras, the bishop of Barcelona, took the lead
in promoting an aggressive campaign against the series and the
progresista press, which published excerpts of some of the of¬
fending works in spite of ecclesiastical authorities’ censure. A stri¬
dent public controversy, embarrassing to a semiauthoritarian
government beset by internal divisions, followed. Although the
State tried to restrain clerical intemperance by summoning Costa
y Borras to Madrid and forbidding the publication of ecclesiastical
condemnations of the books to prevent the conflict from fueling
the fires of opposition discontent, controversy continued.
   The dispute was more than a debate over a specific issue; it
provoked a clerical indictment of society and, by implication, of
the moderado State’s refusal to heed ecclesiastical demands for
the creation of a rigid Catholic culture and standards of conduct
reminiscent of the Old Regime. In the midst of the struggle, Costa
y Borras issued a pastoral letter, perhaps the most long-winded
in the history of the Spanish Church, that won the endorsement
of the Catalan bishops.24 The prelates of Catalonia fulminated
against Protestantism, secular culture, religious toleration, liberty
of expression, and “theatres, dances, cafes,” and sundry other
evils. The sentiments expressed by the Catalan episcopacy were
  196                                      The Conservative Church




not immediately political. The bishops vehemently denied the ac¬
cusation of Carlism hurled against them by the opposition press.
The controversy revealed, however, the still ambiguous nature of
the relationship between the Church and the moderado State.
And it showed that the Church intended to push its case aggres¬
sively. “Catholic Spain is passing through a religious crisis more
serious than ... in previous years” claimed La Cruz. Costa y Borras
called on Catholics to embark upon a “holy crusade, peaceful and
inoffensive, in favor of virtue and religious truth.”25 The battle
lines for a long struggle were falling into place.