




arose from the glaring weaknesses of moderado politics: a queen
who increasingly showed that she was her father’s daughter in the
desire for personal power; the lack of an effective party system,
which created an opposition hostile to the monarch and the po¬
litical order; and the continuing importance of praetorian poli¬
ticians such as O’Donnell and Narvaez. In the end all led to the
breakdown of the moderado State.
    In spite of ministerial changes the Church prospered between
1856 and 1868. The ecclesiastical legislation of the progresistas
was undone by the Narvaez ministry between 1856 and 1857. The
government halted the sale of Church lands and passed a law on
public instruction (the Moyano Law) in 1857 recognizing the im¬
portance of religion in education at all levels. The accession of
O’Donnell in 1858 aroused clerical apprehensions, but the new
ministry reached a settlement with the papacy on the sale of ec¬
clesiastical property in 1859, and its imperialist adventures in In¬
dochina and Morocco evoked enthusiasm among churchmen, who
regarded these expeditions as new crusades. (The joint French-
Spanish campaign in Cochin China in 1858 was described as “a
war of religion” designed “to conquer the holy liberty of preaching
the gospel.”)49
    The Church’s ability to function within the kaleidoscope of
liberal politics during the hnal decade of the moderado State
benefited directly from clerical ascendancy over Isabella II. The
queen, whose private life alternated between illicit amours and
religious devotion, regarded the Church as one of the bulwarks
of her personal power. The appointment in 1857 of the arch¬
bishop of Santiago (Cuba), Antonio Claret, as royal confessor
brought close to the throne a shrewd and intelligent cleric, the
supreme example of the theocratic apoliticization characteristic of
the mid-nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Spanish Church.50
Claret, a former domestic missionary and religious propagandist
who had revolutionized popular evangelization techniques, ac¬
cepted a post at court believing that providence had called him
to a charge from which he could advance the welfare of the Church.
Although progresistas, Democrats, and Republicans saw Claret as
a sinister gray eminence, the confessor’s influence was circum¬
scribed by political reality. He could not, for instance, prevent
recognition of the kingdom of Italy in 1865, a move that threat-
     The Conservative Church                                     205




ened the remnants of Pius IX’s temporal power. But his position
at court gave him considerable influence over episcopal appoint¬
ments and the authorization of new religious orders.
   Claret, though personally loyal to Isabella and hostile to Carlist
adventurism, believed himself above partisan politics (“I have never
involved myself in factions nor political parties, but have occupied
myself with my ministry”), but his deep disdain for political life
was itself a form of politics.51 “Spain is like a gamblers’ table,” he
once remarked, “the gamblers are the two parties; . . . the moving
force of all politics is nothing more than ambition, pride and
greed.” Claret saw that the moderado State could be used to aid
the Church in its mission, which he conceived in theocratic terms
worthy of the Middle Ages, but in the end he expected little from
the moderados. “Spanish politics is to be compared to an elephant
hunt in which the hunters first dig a hole; others cover it so that
the elephant will not see it . . . and when it has fallen into the trap,
others arrive and give it a good whack; finally, the last to arrive
on the scene pull it from the hole and lead it with ropes where
they wish, . . . since the elephant always recognizes those who have
done it a favor. This last is what is being done to Religion in Spain
by the political parties, if we except the Catholic [those committed
to a narrow defense of ecclesiastical interests]. The Republican
party is the one which digs the hole; the liberal [progresista] covers
it and prepares the trap, then whacks the Church while, finally,
the conservative [moderado] . . . ties it with deceitful ropes.”
   The ecclesiastical elephant stepped more adroitly than Claret
believed. Between 1856 and 1868 the institutional recovery in¬
terrupted by the revolution of 1854 resumed. The Jesuits, as re¬
silient as ever, possessed twenty-five houses by 1863. The moderado
State, although willing to authorize new religious foundations,
continued to limit the introduction of male religious orders. But
the Redemptorists, later prominent in the great missionary cam¬
paigns of the early twentieth century, established their first Span¬
ish house at Huete in 1864; the Order of Saint John of God, well
known for its work in hospitals during the eighteenth century,
began its modern history at Barcelona in 1867. The Benedictines,
expelled from their monasteries during the 1830’s, were allowed
to reoccupy the famous Marian shrine of Montserrat in Catalonia,
which was raised to the status of a full abbey in 1862. The growth
  206                                    The Conservative Church