




it saw as government-inspired anticlericalism—the prohibition of
religious processions in Seville and Lebrija, for example—but on
other occasions the authorities cooperated with the Church. The
governor of Huelva thus took action against residents of the
mountain town of Jabugo who had refused to remove their hats
as a procession passed through the streets. Although the Church
was affected adversely by the sale of its remaining property hold¬
ings and by measures against the religious orders, its position
within both State and society was not fundamentally altered. The
 progresistas undertook no new or spectacular initiatives in eccle¬
 siastical reform.
    The events of 1854-1856 were perceived in a different light
by churchmen and Catholic apologists. The State’s legislation was
 seen as another example of the rising sea of corruption, materi¬
 alism, and rationalism threatening to engulf the nation. “The days
 of danger have arrived, the black flag of persecution has been
 raised; war has been declared against God, against Christ and
 against His mother. The hour of the Lord’s battle has arrived,”
 declared La Cruz.44 The Church of the 1830’s struggled to survive,
 that of the early 1840’s to defend itself; the Church of the 1850’s
 saw itself called to combat. “Today,” said the bishop of Avila, “it
 is not possible to be silent knowing what the apostles of impiety
 are doing to extend their prejudicial works.”45 In a mood remi¬
 niscent of the messianic prophetism that had swept through the
 Church following the French Revolution and the Napoleonic in¬
 tervention, clerics preached their harsh message convinced, like
Jose Domingo Costa y Borras, that religion “is the only thing
 capable of bowing the necks of men who have generally forgotten
 or are ignorant of their duties.”46
    The most conservative members of the hierarchy, such as Costa
 y Borras and Horcos Sanmartm of Osma, gave the pastoral letter
 a new dimension. Their admonitions moved from theocratic gen¬
 eralities to denunciations of specific newspapers questioning epis¬
copal pronouncements on censorship and moral standards. Catholic
journals, such as La Cruz and El Catolico, gloried in defying the
 government. Both were hauled into court for publishing state¬
 ments the authorities regarded as provocative. Not all bishops
were as forthright as the prelates of Barcelona and Osma, but
 many inundated the civil authorities with requests for state action
     The Conservative Church                                  203




against those who had offended the Church through their state¬
ments or conduct. The new spirit of combat reached down to the
lower clergy. In the province of Lerida the governor began judicial
proceedings against parish priests refusing baptism to the children
of parents who had not fulfilled their Easter Communion obli¬
gation.47 The principal legacy of the bienio progresista for the
Church—one that would make its presence felt until the mid¬
twentieth century—was the deepened conviction that the clergy
must enter into a new struggle, exerting pressure on the State to
meet clerical demands and engaging in what was regarded as a
necessary and heroic effort to defeat the enemy through polemical
combat.
   Internal divisions, particularly the disaffection of O’Donnell
and the centrist moderados who had supported the revolution of
 1854, brought the period of revolution to an end. Between this
change in July 1856 and the “Glorious” Revolution of September
 1868, a measure of political stability was achieved. A short-lived
moderado government was followed by a ministry of Liberal Union
(1858—1863) led by O’Donnell, who attempted to create a broadly
based coalition. Although this “long” ministry governed with a
spirit of political tolerance and pragmatism, it had come into being
because of the failure of both moderados and progresistas to cre¬
ate a constitutional regime based on effective party politics. The
Liberal Union was itself an amalgam of factions engaged in con¬
stant struggle for influence. As time passed the inevitable tensions
within the coalition grew stronger and ensured its collapse. O’Don¬
nell saw clearly enough that the union had not resolved the fun¬
damental dilemma of liberal politics—its inability to devise a
mechanism for the peaceful transfer of power from government
to opposition. His suggestion for a way out of the impasse—his
resignation and the formation of a progresista government while
he led a party of loyal opposition—foundered on the implacable
hostility of the queen toward a progresista ministry.48
   The resignation of O’Donnell in 1863 opened a new period of
instability marked by the return of Narvaez to power (1864-1865),
a final and desperate attempt to create a workable Liberal Union
(1865), and, finally, the installation of a semidictatorial regime
(1866-1868) with Narvaez serving as prime minister until his death
in the spring of 1868. The ministerial shifts of the mid-1860’s
  204                                   The Conservative Church