




of female orders engaged in charitable and social work continued.
Established congregations, such as the Piarists in Catalonia, opened
more convents, and new orders, often of local origin—such as the
Dominicans of the Annunciation (Vich, 1858) and the Daughters
of Our Lady of Sorrows and Saint Philip Neri (Seville, 1859)—
spread throughout the kingdom.
   The Church also pursued its evangelizing work with renewed
determination through the publication and distribution of thou¬
sands of catechisms and aggressive missionary campaigns. More¬
over, the ecclesiastical authorities, assisted by a combative Catholic
press, urged the State to take firm action against Spain’s Protes¬
tants. Between 1860 and 1863 provincial governors in Andalusia,
the center of Spanish Protestantism in the nineteenth century as
it had been in the sixteenth, subjected dissenters to a persecution
recalling the rigors of the Inquisition. One of the victims, Manuel
Matamoros, became a hero to Protestant Europe when he was
sentenced to eight years of hard labor for having opened a church
in Granada.52
   In spite of the benefits secured by the Church from the mode-
rado State, particularly after 1865, Catholic opinion became in¬
creasingly resentful of a society refusing to fit into a theocratic
mold. Bishops and Catholic laymen committed to the realization
of old dreams rushed onto the battlefield of polemic prepared to
strike their enemies with words and harass them with deeds. The
ranks of Catholic apologists included figures, such as the deeply
conservative Candido Nocedal and the Carlist Antonio Aparisi,
whose ability at polemic in parliament and the press made them
effective rhetorical champions in the bruising propaganda wars
carried on without respite between defenders of narrowly con¬
ceived ecclesiastical interests and advocates of new intellectual cur¬
rents.
   Controversy followed controversy. In 1857 the inaugural lec¬
ture given in the Universidad Central of Madrid by the philoso¬
pher Julian Sanz del Rio, advocating a secular and scientific system
of education, provoked a bitter public dispute.53 The degree of
ecclesiastical influence over education remained a sore point for
ecclesiastics in spite of the Moyano Law and Article 3 of the con¬
cordat, both of which churchmen considered to be virtually ig¬
nored. In 1863 the bishops began a public campaign for “the
     The Conservative Church                                       207




 greater Christianization of public teaching and the direct, preven¬
 tive and continuous intervention of the Spanish episcopacy in
 plans of study, textbooks and . . . with respect to any books . . . which
 could offend Religion and the traditional customs of the coun¬
 try.”54 In 1865 the Catholic press, led by the pro-Carlist El Pen-
samiento Espanol, began a successful campaign for the dismissal of
 university professors who had not directly questioned religious
 dogma but whose commitment to the free expression of ideas
 shocked the theocratic sensibilities of conservative Catholic think¬
 ers derisively labeled “neocatholics” by their opponents.
    Episcopal censures of books judged “immoral, dissolute and
 incompatible with all social order” multiplied. The bishops of the
 metropolitan province of Valencia believed that such publications
 were being “introduced in a fabulous way even into the smallest
 towns.” In 1863 state authorization of Victor Hugo’s Les miserables
 aroused episcopal resentment both for its contents, thought hostile
 to religion, and because the government had dealt “a serious blow
 to the essential rights of the episcopacy” by refusing to heed cler¬
 ical censures.55 Ecclesiastical frustration with the moderado State
 deepened with the publication of Pius IX’s celebrated indictment
 of secularism and liberalism, the Syllabus of Errors, in 1864 (even
 Narvaez initially refused to allow its publication). Although Car¬
 dinal Primate Alameda and other bishops were reluctant to defy
 the government by publishing the Syllabus in Spain, they even¬
 tually did so under the pressure of a determined episcopal faction
 led by the archbishop of Burgos, Fernando de la Puente y Primo
 de Rivera. The hesitant bishops at least succeeded in limiting
 publication to a Latin version printed in diocesan bulletins.56 The
 recognition of the kingdom of Italy by the last government of
 Liberal Union in 1865 further antagonized Catholic opinion and
 led to disenchantment with Isabella II, who was suspected, not
without justification, of agreeing to the recognition to save her
shaky throne.57
    The Church chose to nibble at the moderado hand feeding it
just at the moment when the survival of the regime itself came
into doubt. The hierarchy knew enough not to break with Isabella
II, although segments of Catholic opinion sympathetic to Carl-
ism—increasingly vociferous during the 1860’s—were prepared
to consume the dynasty and the liberal State at a single sitting. As
  208                                    The Conservative Church