




as fundamentally corrupt. The objectives of the moderado State
were more practical. The moderados were willing to placate the
Church within limits as one of the many interest groups sup¬
porting the regime, but they had no intention of allowing the
Church to dictate public policy. The Concordat of 1851 amelio¬
rated the tense relations between Church and State prevailing
before 1844, but it laid the groundwork for a continuing struggle
over the Church’s determination to install its vision of the kingdom
of God on earth in a secular and economically changing society.
    The moderado accommodation with the Church diminished a
possible threat to the survival of the regime, but it moved the
clergy into more immediate involvement in the turbulent world
of liberal politics. Churchmen no longer worried about survival
as they had done during the decade of revolution between 1834
and 1843. The Concordat of 1851 recognized the Church as an
official interest group along with the landowners, industrialists,
bankers, and generals already forming the backbone of the mode¬
 rado State. Within the framework of unstable and factionalized
 party struggles, a strong and meddlesome royal power, and the
give and take of the struggle to influence public opinion through
the press, the Church was ready to advance its fortunes through
the mechanisms of the new political order.
    The Concordat of 1851 accelerated the institutional recuper¬
ation that had begun in 1844. The Catholic press observed with
satisfaction what it believed to be signs of a religious revival.
From Pontevedra in Galicia came a report of a notable increase
in “religious enthusiasm,” and a correspondent in Cordoba noted
 “the marvelous turn of events” that had seen “indifference” turn
 to “fervor, devotion and care for the cult.”19 At the level of eccle¬
siastical organization, the normalization of relations between Church
and State allowed vacancies to be filled in both parishes and ca¬
thedral chapters, the latter still decimated on the eve of the con¬
cordat’s signing. The government’s decision in 1852 to authorize
a Jesuit seminary to train missionaries for the colonies in the old
Jesuit college at Loyola permitted the order to resume its activities
in Spain. The order staffed several diocesan seminaries at the
invitation of local bishops and provided the vanguard for a new
campaign of domestic missions.20 Jesuit missionaries moved through
Catalonia, Andalusia, and the Basque Provinces during the early
  194                                   The Conservative Church




1850’s in the most ambitious effort at popular evangelization since
the late eighteenth century.
   The concordat did not bring about a massive reintroduction of
the male religious orders, whose members numbered only 1,683
in 1860. But the State permitted the selective reestablishment of
certain houses, such as that of the Hieronymites in the monastery
of El Escorial in the spring of 1854. More substantial was the
development of orders of women engaged in charitable and ed¬
ucational work. The moderado State deliberately encouraged fe¬
male orders engaged in charity and teaching, perhaps in tacit
recognition of its own inadequate efforts in the realm of public
assistance. The Sisters of Charity, though present in Spain since
the late eighteenth century, expanded their activities at midcen¬
tury; they were often invited by municipal and provincial au¬
thorities to staff local hospitals, asylums, and orphanages. Between
 1844 and 1854 several new orders of women were established—
the educational orders of the Sacred Heart (1846) and Jesus and
Mary (1850)—while other congregations engaged in active work
expanded. The feminine branch of the Order of Pious Schools
(Piarists), particularly active in Catalonia, increased its convents
from two in 1843 to seven, with new houses being established in
Sabadell (1846), Igualada (1849), Vendrell (1850), Masnou (1852),
and Gerona (1853).21 The recovery of the Church was also evident
in the revival of the liturgical ceremonial, last seen in its glory
during the days of absolutism. Services held in Seville during the
spring of 1854 to mark the beatification of three Jesuits would
have satisfied the most demanding eighteenth-century partisan of
Baroque liturgy as processions, sermons, illuminations, and fire¬
works succeeded one another in a dazzling display.22
   In spite of the regularization of the Church’s position between
 1844 and 1854 and obvious signs of institutional recuperation, the
ecclesiastical leadership and the confessional press were anything
but content. It became evident that the religious and moral trans¬
formation that clerical opinion expected from the alliance with
the moderado State was not to be realized. The moderados made
their gestures toward the unbending theocratic demands of the
clergy (the penal code of 1848 called for jail terms and fines on
those daring “to mock the mysteries or sacraments of the Church”),
but they had too many troubles from divisions within their own
     The Conservative Church                                     195