




practical arrangement designed to regularize the position of the
Church within the liberal State. At first glance it offered conces¬
sions to both sides. Pius IX accepted the sale of Church property
carried out until that time, confirmed the traditional rights of the
Crown in episcopal appointments, endorsed the principle of par¬
ish reorganization, and authorized a modest revision of diocesan
boundaries.12 The State formally accepted responsibility for suste¬
nance of the secular clergy and church fabrics, recognized the
right of the bishops to exercise their pastoral functions inde¬
pendently, committed itself to the support of seminaries, author¬
ized the Church to hold property, and consented to a limited
reestablishment of religious orders of men in an ambiguous clause
soon to arouse controversy.13 Article 1 affirmed that Catholicism
“to the exclusion of any other cult continues being the only religion
of the Spanish nation,” and that it was to enjoy “all the rights and
prerogatives” corresponding to it “according to the law of God
and the sacred canons.” Article 2 declared that teaching at all
educational levels must conform to the “purity of the faith’s doc¬
trine.”14
   In spite of the rhetoric of Article 1 and progresista outrage at
certain provisions of the concordat—particularly those involving
religious orders and education—the moderado State played a
shrewd hand in its dealings with the papacy. The concessions made
to the Church were neither substantial nor costly. The Catholic
press pointed out that the affirmations of Articles 1 and 2 were
illusory, because they were not accompanied by specific recom¬
mendations for implementation.15 Moreover, the government’s
declaration of its willingness to support the Church financially was
only a restatement of intentions made by every liberal ministry
since 1834. The terms of the financial settlement (an annual budget
for culto y clero of approximately 153 million reales), although
more generous than the expenditures of Espartero on the Church,
fell short of the 265 million reales clerics thought necessary to
meet the cost of ecclesiastical salaries and the upkeep of churches.16
In addition, papal recognition of the traditional patronage rights
of the Crown gave the State significant leverage in its relations
with the Church. Rome also accepted a reduction in the number
of capitular clergy and a limited degree of internal reorganiza¬
tion—reforms demanded by liberal reformers since the Cortes of
  192                                     The Conservative Church




Cadiz. Finally, papal acceptance of the sale of Church property
put to rest the fears of liberal supporters who had acquired ec¬
clesiastical holdings since 1834.
   The settlement of 1851 did not allow the moderados to fulfill
the old hope of a Church in the service of liberalism. Interna^
reform of the Church was to take place with the cooperation of
the ecclesiastical authorities, hence the dilatory pace of parish
reorganization and the creation of new dioceses. And opposition
to the liberal political order by no means disappeared among the
clergy and those committed to Carlism. The moderados, however,
could count on a hierarchy loyal to Isabella II with few exceptions,
and they maintained control over the mechanisms of finance and
patronage necessary to keep the Church in line.
   Certain provisions of the concordat, particularly those recog¬
nizing the right of ecclesiastical institutions to own property, brought
immediate advantages to the Church. But the principal benefit of
the settlement rested less on specific concessions than on the cre¬
ation of a legal framework allowing the Church to function nor¬
mally for the first time since 1834. The clergy was not happy with
an agreement worked out secretly between Rome and Madrid.
Objections were soon voiced to its financial terms, particularly
those establishing low salaries for the rural clergy.17 Such reser¬
vations were justified. In spite of a rhetorical campaign carried
on by figures such as Donoso Cortes—a conservative Catholic
thinker, writer, and orator—that advocated the alliance between
Church and State against the danger of revolution, both sides
expected different consequences to flow from the agreement of
 1851.18 Fear of revolutionary agitation provided a weak ideological
glue incapable of binding the secular and ecclesiastical authorities
to a specific program of action.
   If the official Church accepted Isabella II as queen and the
liberal regime as the established political order, it also believed
that the affirmation of Spain’s Catholicism in the concordat de¬
manded that the State take initiatives in the fields of religious
dissent, education, social customs, and censorship that would re¬
store the nation to a new age of piety and morality. The Church
expected as much from the liberal State as it had demanded of
Ferdinand VII. The ecclesiastical and secular authorities were to
function as supreme moral censors to purge a society regarded
     The Conservative Church                                    193