




the regime plunged deeper into political impasse from 1865 on,
the Church was incapable of forming a united front to maintain
the gains won since 1844. In the midst of resentments and frus¬
trations, the ecclesiastical leadership continued to place its hopes
on the willingness of a discredited monarch and a widely disliked
semiauthoritarian government to realize the old clerical dream of
a pious, Catholic Spain. The Carlists, divided into several factions,
were agreed on the necessity of restoring an absolutist and theo¬
cratic state; Catholics belonging to the political groups opposed
to the small clique of moderados governing the nation between
1866 and 1868 resented clerical support for the existing govern¬
ment. Divisions within Catholic ranks reduced the Church to being
a bystander as the moderado State entered its death throes, al¬
though loud clerical and Carlist rhetoric might lead to the opposite
conclusion. The dictatorial ministry of Narvaez rested on little
save a small circle of extremely conservative politicians and a queen
desperate to keep her throne. Under the impact of economic
depression, intense political opposition, and military intervention,
the regime finally succumbed in September 1868. The “Glorious”
Revolution opened a six-year period of upheaval that soon led
the Church to regard the years between 1856 and 1868 as a re¬
gretted silver age.
7   /   Church and Society, 1844-1868



   The definitive triumph of Spanish liberalism over royal abso¬
lutism after 1833 not only transformed the political organization
of the kingdom, it also ensured the demise or decline of institu¬
tions that had been essential to the hierarchical order of the eight¬
eenth century. The Church faced the task of adapting both to a
new political reality and to a society hostile to the traditional role
of religious institutions under the absolute monarchy. The re¬
sponse to this challenge—whether in the form of the reaction to
social problems in town and country, the intellectual defenses
mounted against the progress of secular culture, or the elaboration
of new pastoral techniques to solidify belief in a time of change—
created an institution very different from the Church of the Old
Regime.



The Organization of the Church, 1844—1868

   In spite of the transformation of the Church’s relationship to
the State after 1834, the ecclesiastical organization varied little
from that of the Old Regime. Although the Concordat of 1851
envisaged a limited rationalization of diocesan boundaries, only
three new dioceses were created—Vitoria (1861), Ciudad Real
(1875), and Madrid (1885). A stipulation that dioceses in small
provincial towns should be amalgamated with sees in larger cities
was only partially fulfilled, although successive governments tried
to move a reluctant Church to action. As late as 1902 a proposal
to suppress the diocese of Tortosa provoked a popular demon¬
stration after placards appeared urging the local inhabitants to
protest this threat to municipal pride. The reluctance of the arch¬
bishops of Toledo to lose Madrid delayed the creation of a diocese
there for more than a quarter of a century.1
   The liberal State, even in periods of moderado rule, continued