




have benefited proclerical candidacies. Some progresistas and the
small party of Democrats toyed with the idea of universal suffrage,
but set their theories aside fearing a Carlist electoral success. A
few deputies ready to defend the Church were elected, notably
Tomas Jaen from Navarra and the sharp-tongued Candido No-
cedal, a moderado from Pontevedra. But the new assembly was
dominated by the progresistas allied to a sprinkling of reform
moderados led by O’Donnell, who became minister of war.
   The revolutionary coalition proved as unstable as any govern¬
ment before it. It was not without accomplishment during the two
years of its existence, particularly in economic policy, but its
grander projects, such as the implementation of a new constitu¬
tion, were never realized as internal factionalism, the poor quality
of leadership, and the watchfulness of an intriguing queen finally
led to the disintegration of the progresista government.
   The policies of the new regime had a familiar ring. The Jesuits
were as usual the first to suffer. The State closed the missionary
college in Loyola in the heart of the Carlist domain and removed
the order to Mallorca, where presumably it could be kept from
mischief. Bishops were instructed to proceed with the task of
reorganizing parishes in accord with population size (one of the
terms of the 1851 concordat), and convents with fewer than twelve
nuns were ordered closed. In December 1854 the authorities,
stung by clerical criticism of their ecclesiastical policies, felt their
regalist oats by forbidding the publication of Pius IX’s bull pro¬
claiming the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, an order im¬
mediately defied by El Catdlico of Madrid, which published the
document in the midst of acrimonious controversy with the pro¬
government press. The State struck early against episcopal cen¬
sorship by ordering bishops to refrain from publishing censures
until their requests had received government approval. This, too,
was defied; the archbishop of Santiago, for example, condemned
as “impious” a book by Francisco Pi y Margall, a future leader of
Spanish republicanism.30
   These conflicts were minor compared with the furor generated
by the clauses on religion in the proposed constitution. There was
no question either in the commission charged with drafting the
constitutional project or in parliament of separating Church and
State. The progresistas and their allies were as loathe as the mode-
     The Conservative Church                                     199




rados to let the Church escape from their vigilance. The consti¬
tutional text reaffirmed the Catholicism of the State, albeit by the
back door: “The nation is obliged to maintain and protect the cult
and the ministers of the Catholic religion which the Spanish pro¬
fess.” The following sentence, however, provoked controversy:
“But neither Spaniards nor foreigners can be persecuted for their
opinions or beliefs as long as these are not manifested by public
acts contrary to religion.”31 Although there was considerable sym¬
pathy for a firm statement of religious toleration among pro-
gresistas and Democrats (an amendment establishing liberty of
conscience and full toleration was defeated by only 138 to 72
votes), the majority elected the path of discretion. The deputies
feared that anything more substantial would encourage a revival
of Carlism and political machinations by the queen, who had ex¬
pressed firm opposition to breaking the Church’s religious mo¬
nopoly on the day before the constitutional debate opened.32
   For clerical opinion, obsessed with the danger of Protestantism
since its appearance in Spain in the 1830’s under the influence of
the English Bible societies, any suggestion of concessions was a
red flag certain to arouse a vitriolic reaction. Thirty-three bishops
sent representations to the Cortes asking that “Catholic unity” be
preserved; the confessional press lamented parliamentary action
as a violation of the concordat and a betrayal of the nation’s her¬
itage. One conservative and proclerical paper predicted that Prot¬
estants “would form numbers superior to those of the Catholics
and that Catholicism would be ruined legally in Spain” as a result
of the legislation.33 In fact, recognition of the right to hold private
religious beliefs was a modest concession giving formal sanction
to what had been practiced under moderado and progresista gov¬
ernments for two decades. Moreover, passage of the controversial
text did not lead the authorities to turn a blind eye to Protestant
evangelization; in Seville, for example, the governor issued “the
most severe orders to repress with a strong hand” the sale of books
by religious dissenters.34
   The passions aroused by the constitutional discussions had
scarcely cooled when debate opened in March on a proposed law
to resume sale of the remnants of the secular clergy’s property.
The progresistas, determined “to finish the work undertaken by
don Juan Alvarez Mendizabal of glorious memory,” easily passed
  200                                   The Conservative Church