




moved the clergy to more rhetorical paroxysms than the economic
changes that had produced wealth in abundance for the kingdom’s
elite. Clerical hostility to the economic order through the 1850’s
 reflected in part the sour-grapes resentment of the Church against
 liberals, whether moderados or progresistas, who had profited from
 the sale of ecclesiastical property. But it went deeper. The Church
continued to adhere to an organic view of human society derived
 from a centuries-old scholastic tradition. Such a philosophy de¬
 manded that the individual curb his natural acquisitive passions
 for the common good. It required that the rich restrain their taste
 for luxurious living in order to help the poor through charity.
What churchmen saw about them was a consumer society, ad¬
 mittedly confined to a minority, which defied this traditional view
of social organization.
    Antolin Monescillo expressed the prevailing sentiments of
churchmen concerning the profound changes taking place before
 their eyes: “Mathematics, the natural sciences, discoveries, ma¬
chines, the invention of steam and its application to every kind
 of industry serve only to enrich entrepreneurs to the prejudice
of the working classes, to encourage tyrannical egoism, ... to
 form a feudalized aristocracy enemy of the poor when religion
 does not enter into progress.”41
    Another clergyman stressed the corrosive effects of acquisi¬
 tiveness on the population as a whole: “There is not only avarice
 among the great but also among the rich, not only among the rich
but also among the poor who, deprived of temporal goods, burn
with desire to have them; there is avarice among those who have
jobs, among merchants and artisans . . . There is no estate in which
 in one form or another the avaricious cannot be found.”42
    The ingrained hostility of the Church to the burgeoning cap¬
italism of the mid-nineteenth century contributed to the chronic
tension between it and the liberal State, even when the latter was
controlled by its more conservative elements. The alliance between
ecclesiastical interests and liberalism could never develop into any¬
thing more than a tactical arrangement until the Church was will¬
ing to accept the social transformation brought about by economic
change. It never did so completely, but by the 1860’s a process of
uneasy accommodation with the new economic system was under
     Church and Society                                          227




way that would develop still further after the revolutionary period
between 1868 and 1874.
   In one sense the Church’s stubborn adherence to its traditional
interpretation of society allowed the clergy to see the destructive
social effects of economic change with some clarity. Already in
1840 Jaime Balmes had warned of the dangers that would flow
from a disamortization excluding the peasantry. Balmes also saw
that relations between workers and employers in his native Cat¬
alonia were changing in a fundamental way as traditional artisan
enterprises gave way to a factory system in the first stages of Spain’s
industrial revolution. Balmes himself witnessed the earliest con¬
flicts between capital and labor during the Espartero regency,
developments “most alarming to the eyes of every thinking man.”
Balmes concluded that one of the causes “of this evil” was that
men had discovered “the means of producing and increasing this
production indefinitely, without at the same time having found
the art of distributing its products in a convenient way, and with¬
out having established a system capable of confronting the press¬
ing necessities which the excessive multiplication [of production]
has brought with it.”43 The triumph of industrial capitalism and
the impoverishment of a working class forced to work long hours
under iron discipline scarcely spread beyond the borders of Cat¬
alonia during the 1840’s and 1850’s, but there the Church first
confronted the social problem that would be crucial to its later
history.
    The moderado ministries ruling the country since 1844 re¬
pressed the Catalan industrial workers’ attempts to come together
in associations designed to protect their interests. The progresista
revolution in 1854 gave the workers an opportunity to organize
in support of their demands, although, in fact, the progresistas
were no better disposed toward the workers than the moderados.
Indeed, the revolutionary government quickly repented of its early
tolerance of working-class associations. The spread of labor unrest
in the early months of 1855 evoked a harsh reaction from Madrid,
which suspended the workers’ associations and confiscated their
funds. This led, in turn, to the first general strike in Spanish
history, which took place in the industrial towns of Catalonia on
July 2.
  228                                          Church and Society