




rebel forces during the second Carlist war.14 Bishops known for
their opposition to the regime were relegated to unimportant
sees—Caixal to Urgel, Pedro Lagiiera to Burgo de Osma, Cosme
Marrodan to Tarazona, and Pedro Casas Souto to Plasencia—and
were denied promotion to larger dioceses. Although the modera-
dos abandoned the progresista tactic of trying to create a pro¬
liberal hierarchy by force, they preferred candidates known for
their support of the regime. But the disintegration of the liberal
Church left few suitable candidates; one was Miguel Salva, a man
of letters and historian, named bishop of Mallorca in 1851.15 The
range of choice was limited, therefore, to those candidates, often
of deeply conservative views, who accepted the liberal State as the
established political order. Episcopal appointments thus reflected
the ambiguities of the Church’s position in Isabelline Spain.
   The mid-nineteenth-century hierarchy resembled the episco¬
pacy of the eighteenth century, but more in its vices than its vir¬
tues. The bishop continued to live in a world apart from that of
his parochial clergy. Although episcopal revenues had declined,
a prelate enjoyed an income twenty times that of the urban priest,
forty times that of the rural cura. For all practical purposes parish
priests stood little chance of penetrating the barriers of education
and influence that excluded them from episcopal nominations.
Social class, namely noble status, was no longer an important con¬
sideration in recruitment, largely because of the disappearance of
the lesser nobility, which had furnished the majority of the epis¬
copacy during the Old Regime. There were some bishops of aris¬
tocratic birth, but the proportion of prelates drawn from the clases
modestas increased substantially according to the recent analysis of
recruitment carried out by Cuenca Toribio.16 In spite of the hi¬
erarchy’s more open character, excessive educational qualifica¬
tions reminiscent of those prevailing during the eighteenth century
favored candidates with advanced degrees in theology and canon
law. Membership in a cathedral chapter or, increasingly, in di¬
ocesan administration formed the cursus honorum indispensable
for fulfillment of episcopal ambitions.17
   The bishops were as highly educated, at least in a formal sense,
as their Old Regime counterparts, but, having been trained in the
conservative setting of the Fernandine university, they lacked the
intellectual vitality of the episcopacy of the Caroline Church. Bishop
     Church and Society                                         217




Salva of Mallorca—fluent in English, French, and Italian, active
in the royal economic society of the island, and responsible along
with Martin Fernandez de Navarrete for the publication of a fun¬
damental collection of texts (Coleccion de documentos ineditos para la
historia de Espana) still used by historians—was an isolated survivor
of the broader ecclesiastical culture of a vanished era.
   The career of one of the new bishops of the Isabelline Church,
Antolin Monescillo (1811 — 1897), reveals how far the episcopacy
had drifted from the eighteenth-century model. Ordained at the
height of the liberal revolution, in 1836, Monescillo went succes¬
sively to the bishoprics of Calahorra (1861), Jaen (1865), Valencia
(1877), and Toledo (1892). His career in the Church came about
because of the liberal social changes, which made it possible, through
the disappearance of the lesser nobility, for the son of poor peas¬
ants to attain the episcopacy. Monescillo’s ascent was also a result
of his abilities as an ecclesiastical politician who knew how to profit
from the uncertainties of the Church’s situation under liberalism.
He appreciated the importance of journalism and its effect on
public opinion from the beginning of his career. He first came to
prominence as a young priest for his editorial crusades in Toledo
against Miguel Golfanguer, the diocesan administrator appointed
during the Espartero regency.18 Forced into exile because of his
involvement in the campaign against Golfanguer, Monescillo re¬
turned to Spain when Narvaez took power and began his rise in
the Church with canonries in Granada and Toledo while contin¬
uing his journalistic efforts, particularly as a contributor to La
Cruz, which his longtime friend and Carlist supporter Leon Car-
bonero y Sol edited and published.
   In spite of his association with La Cruz, which was openly Carlist
in its sympathies, Monescillo remained a firm supporter of Isabella
II, whom he repeatedly praised in pastoral letters, journalistic
articles, and official representations during his years as bishop of
Calahorra and Jaen. Along with loyalty to the queen, Monescillo’s
ideology rested on hostility to government interference in Church
affairs even during periods of moderado rule, absolute devotion
to the Holy See, and intransigent opposition to religious toleration
as well as to the secular intellectual trends of the day. Thus, he
participated in the episcopal campaign against Victor Hugo’s Les
miserables in 1863 and defied the Narvaez government by pub-
  218                                          Church and Society