




Collection of “Peter’s Pence,” an annual donation sent to the pope,
in the diocese of Vitoria rose from 8,788 reales in 1862 to 864,392
in 1868; a fund-raising campaign for the cathedral of Zaragoza
produced 7 million reales between 1863 and 1872.10 Although a
complete study of ecclesiastical wealth following the liberal re¬
forms is yet to be made, there is some evidence that by 1868 the
Spanish Church had weathered its fiscal storms.
   Along with changes in the configuration of the religious pop¬
ulation and ecclesiastical wealth, other transformations made the
Church a very different institution from its eighteenth-century
predecessor. The disappearance of traditional sources of wealth,
as well as the complementary relationship between Crown and
episcopacy characteristic of the royal Church of the eighteenth
century, forced the hierarchy to descend from the “high lookout
point” described by Charles Ill’s archbishop of Toledo to a more
limited held of action. Bishops no longer enjoyed the autonomous
revenues that had allowed them to build bridges, establish voca¬
tional schools, and indulge in other secular benefactions. The
liberal State was ofhcially Catholic, but its financial arrangements
for the Church as well as its unwillingness, even in periods of
moderado rule, to accept the corpus of theocratic assumptions
promoted by the bishops left the latter constantly restless and
frustrated, dreaming always of return to an idealized Catholic
Spain of the past. Chronic dissatisfaction with liberal policies con¬
verted the episcopacy into an ecclesiastical lobby using the pres¬
sure tactics common to any politicized society to persuade the
government to accept its vision of Spain’s future.
   The bishops found their role circumscribed from the ample
episcopal responsibilities of an earlier age, but they saw their au¬
thority within the Church considerably expanded. And they did
not shrink from declaring their determination to exercise their
powers to the full. “Place the Cross of Jesus Christ at the gate of
the sacred held of the Church,” declared Bishop Costa y Borras
of Barcelona, “the bishops shall guard it without ever letting any¬
one penetrate it save those who come, whatever their situation,
to humble themselves before an offended God ... If any audacity
of word or deed is found within, it shall be excluded with supreme
and unanimous authority.”11 The disappearance of most of the
male religious orders eliminated the exempt jurisdictions enjoyed
     Church and Society                                       215




by monasteries and convents during the Old Regime as well as
the difficulties of exercising episcopal control over a large pop¬
ulation of friars. The Concordat of 1851, moreover, represented
a limited victory for the bishops, for the moderado State, while
keeping ecclesiastical finances and patronage in its hands, aban¬
doned the regalist tradition of interfering in the internal life of
the Church. After 1860 the government permitted the convoca¬
tion of diocesan synods for the first time in decades to allow bish¬
ops to remedy “abuses . . . and the corruption of customs”
introduced into ecclesiastical discipline.12
   The reinforcement of episcopal authority brought advantages
to the liberal State. Both moderados and progresistas relied on
the hierarchy to restrain the Carlists and the closely related neo¬
catholics from using the Church to challenge the very existence
of the regime. Bishops, Carlists, and neos often joined in de¬
nunciations of government policy, but in the end the hierarchy
maintained its loyalty to the Isabelline monarchy, whatever its
misgivings.
   The decimation of the episcopacy between 1834 and 1843 per¬
mitted the creation of a new hierarchy beginning in 1847. The
appointment process, based on procedures outlined in the Con¬
cordat of 1753, rested on royal nomination of three candidates
to the pope, who selected one. But as Cuenca Toribio has shown,
being chosen a bishop was far from simple. Political circumstances
and the influence of ministers, deputies, the papal nuncio, and
others entered into the complex game of selection before the
ministry of grace and justice produced a list of names for royal
consideration. After 1857, under the influence of Antonio Claret,
Isabella II assumed greater responsibility for the final choice, as
“she listened to the interior inspiration which she asks from God
in order to know whom she should choose.”13
   The queen’s selections were far from inspired. Episcopal ap¬
pointments fell generally to churchmen whose principal qualifi¬
cations were loyalty to the sovereign or who were perceived as
not being openly hostile to the liberal State. There were occasional
exceptions. Fray Cirilo de Alameda, a Franciscan and old absq-
lutist conspirator of the 1820’s, was named to the archbishopric
of Toledo in 1857; a handful of Carlist prelates filtered through
the screen, such as Jose M. Caixal, later episcopal chaplain to the
  216                                          Church and Society