




   In the absence of Bishop Costa y Borras of Barcelona, who had
been summoned to Madrid by an irritated progresista govern¬
ment, it fell to the bishop of Vich, Antonio Palau, to publish a
pastoral letter, widely reproduced in the press, that expressed the
Church’s position on the course of events. Palau refused to enter
into an analysis of the causes of the conflict; he urged the workers
to “return to work ... to your factories where with the honored
work of your hands you can gain sustenance for your families. If
in spite of all you cannot satisfy all your necessities; . . . religion
will console you promising the most abundant felicities in the life
to come.”44 Whether Palau was simply naive or urged resignation
on the workers because he feared social revolution is unclear. But
by 1858, when he had succeeded to the see of Barcelona, he sang
a different tune. He told the rich of his diocese: “Your pride will
cause the disbelieving masses to rise up; your banquets will irritate
the appetite of the naked and hungry crowds, and neither laws,
courts, gallows nor armies will be sufficient to contain the outburst
of the unbridled multitude.”45
   Confronted with social conflicts of unfamiliar intensity and
character, the Church was unsure what course it should follow.
Clerical dislike of the capitalist extravagance and arrogance of the
new society was sincere enough. But churchmen were even more
frightened by the prospect of a social revolution directed against
private property. As early as 1840 the Catholic press vigorously
attacked the utopian socialist doctrines making their way into Spain.46
These denunciations were repeated with increasing insistence
during the 1850’s and 1860’s. Antonio Palau, along with his warn¬
ing to the rich, also admonished the workers of Barcelona against
“the golden dreams of modern Utopians,” who pretended to es¬
tablish “a perfect equality of fortunes among all men.”47
   If at one level the clergy perceived the serious social problem
created by economic change, at another it failed to see that grow¬
ing class consciousness among industrial workers alienated from
the institutions of the liberal State contained dangerous implica¬
tions for the Church itself. Having allied itself to the new political
order, however reluctantly, and operating with an ingrained re¬
spect for authority, the Church in the end came down on the side
of law and order against possible revolution. The ecclesiastical
response to social unrest was little more than the worn-out formula
     Church and Society                                          229




of charity, although Balmes had seen the necessity of some kind
of mutual benefit associations for workers. Thus, Costa y Borras
told the faithful of Barcelona in 1852: “the sacred books recom¬
mend and prescribe almsgiving, and this . . . can only be practiced
if there are rich and poor to a greater or lesser degree.”48
   The Church at midcentury dwelt on the importance of char¬
ity as fully as its eighteenth-century predecessor. Clerics re¬
proached the liberal State for having “beheaded charity” by
depriving the Church of the wealth that had once allowed it to
help the poor.49 In spite of the ink poured from clerical pens on
this issue, the Church lacked the resources to furnish significant
assistance to the victims of economic change. The charitable ac¬
tivities of religious groups, such as the Sisters of Charity and the
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul, introduced to Spain in 1849,
could not equal the massive and diffuse charity of the Old Regime.
The Church failed to see that the problem itself had changed.
Charity appeared meaningless in a society in which economic
grievances were keenly felt and class consciousness was rising. It
might be argued that the nature and rapidity of the social trans¬
formation of Catalonia between 1840 and the late 1850’s was such
that no clerical initiative in the realm of social policy would have
succeeded.50 In any event, no such initiatives were undertaken.
In the end the Church was puzzled by a society in ferment. As a
result, it fell between two stools. Its dream of a return to the charity
of the past was impractical; its horror of radical social forces made
it a defender of private property and the existing social order in
an economic system the clergy fundamentally disliked.
    The triumph of liberalism also transformed the role of the
Church in education. The nearly complete destruction of the male
religious orders during the 1830’s swept away the vast majority
of the regulars’ schools save those of the Piarists, whose progres¬
sive methods won the admiration of even liberal reformers. And
the decline of the ecclesiastical faculties in the universities, par¬
ticularly those of theology and canon law (the latter were abolished
in 1842) considerably diminished the once formidable religious
character of higher education.
    Although liberal educational legislation was not especially co¬
herent and changed in accord with political circumstances, the
three fundamental laws governing education before 1868—the
  230                                             Church and Society