


The Church and the New Society

   Liberal ecclesiastical policies after 1834 made it impossible for
the Church to play the pervasive social and cultural role it had
had in the eighteenth century. The sale of clerical property, the
near disappearance of the male orders, and the assumption by
the State of activities once the preserve of religious institutions
set the midcentury Church adrift. The economic developments
  224                                          Church and Society




churchmen deplored during the 1840’s followed an even more
expansive course beginning in 1854. Between 1855 and 1868,
5,000 kilometers of track were laid down in a frenetic railway
boom equal to the capitalist excesses of more advanced countries.
Banks, trading companies, and factories flourished in a heady
atmosphere of uncontrolled speculation. The transfer of agricul¬
tural lands from the Church and municipalities, whatever its social
consequences for peasants without the resources to participate in
the disamortization, pushed agriculture in a more capitalist di¬
rection. More land was placed under cultivation to meet the de¬
mands of an expanding population and international' markets.
Spain’s midcentury economic revolution was, however, incom¬
plete. The kingdom remained agrarian in character; industrial
development was confined largely to Catalonia and the Basque
Provinces; agriculture was only imperfectly modernized.
   But economic changes further transformed society. The new
elite of bankers, financiers, industrialists, generals, and large land-
owners consolidated its position during the 1850’s and 1860’s.
Flamboyant and extravagant, the new rich did not shrink from
displaying their wealth with as much bravado as any eighteenth-
century aristocrat. But if the alliance of capitalism and liberalism
made fortunes, it also created paupers. The sale of Church and
common lands to those with money to buy them reduced the vast
landless population of Andalusia and Extremadura to even greater
misery, for the new proprietors managed their holdings with ruth¬
less efficiency compared with religious institutions. Even in re¬
gions of peasant ownership, a lack of capital spread the ubiquitous
curse of moneylending at exorbitant rates of interest. In the cities,
particularly Madrid and Barcelona, population growth and the
decline of traditional artisan trades created a new class of poor.
But the condition of workers in industrial centers, such as Bar¬
celona (over 100,000 were employed there in the textile industry
in 1861), was no better. Working-class discontent exploded in
Catalonia in serious form for the first time between 1854 and
 1856, and thereafter it became a constant feature of social life.
Resentment among the landless of the south, already manifested
in a series of local revolts in 1840, became more intense after
 1855.36 Risings in the province of Seville in 1857 and at Loja in
     Church and Society                                         225




1861 revealed the full extent of the rural poor’s hostility to the
society liberalism had created.
   The pragmatism with which the Church adjusted to political
reality vanished when it confronted an expansive capitalism and
secular culture existing beyond the reach of clerical supervision.
In the eyes of churchmen, liberalism had created a society out of
control in which individual passions were allowed to run riot at
the expense of morality and religion. Whether moderados or pro-
gresistas governed the country made no difference. In a sermon
preached in the cathedral of Valladolid in 1847 with the moderado
ministry of Narvaez in power, Canon Garcia Mazo began with a
Latin text from Saint Paul, “dies mali sunt,” as he painted a picture
of unrelieved moral corruption in Spanish society. “Faith nearly
extinguished, charity frozen or deadened offers nothing more to
our eyes than Christians without souls and without life. The times
are obscured by clouds of vice and the dark mists of error.”37
Antonio Claret expressed the same sentiments more directly in
1857: “the world is evil, very evil.”38
   The pervasive sense of being surrounded by corruption lay
behind the chronic tensions that characterized interactions be¬
tween the Church and the liberal State beyond the level of simple
civil-ecclesiastical relations. Ecclesiastics were exasperated by what
they perceived to be the moderado State’s refusal to take the steps
necessary “to save the nation from a sure and inevitable ruin.”39
Bishop Costa y Borras’ frequent clashes with both moderado and
progresista governments during the 1850’s over liberty of expres¬
sion and public morality provide the most spectacular examples
of the struggle between this theocratic vision and the realities of
the new society. A polemicist of the first order, the bishop of
Barcelona provoked official wrath in a series of incidents in which
he gave “the voice of alert. . . against the torrent of evil doctrines
emerging from the press, against evil books, obscene pictures,
immoral theatrical presentations and dances.”40 The bishop took
the extreme step on one occasion of having an episcopal order
forbidding a certain play posted on the church doors of Barcelona.
The provincial governor responded promptly by sending the local
police to cut the posters down with their swords.
   During the late 1840’s and 1850’s, few aspects of liberal society
  226                                         Church and Society