




at the cost of naming teachers who were “inferior to the other
candidates in literary attainments.”31
   The cura also needed the cooperation of the local authorities
to carry out one of his most important functions, that of “pastoral
vigilance.” The cura vigilante was encouraged to move “continually
through all the parish . . . examining everything well, houses, tav¬
erns, shops, schools, dance halls, etc., attempting to ascertain what
is being said in such places, what is being done or not done, sure
in the conviction that in all he will find abuses to correct and
scandals to reprove.” As the supreme moral censor of his parish,
the priest was urged to do everything within his power to remove
occasions of temptation for his congregation. He should forbid
dancing completely if possible; if not, he should at least eliminate
those dances that “carried the greatest danger of perversion.” He
must act to prevent flirting among youth, “the greatest danger
which can be presented to human weakness,” and he must attack
at every turn “the impurity which has come to be the ordinary
sauce of conversations” among the young.32 The cura was also
expected to fulfill a variety of pastoral responsibilities—teaching
the catechism, conducting religious services with decorum,
preaching with care and thoughtfulness, visiting the sick, and
assisting the poor.
   The negative aspects of the parish priest’s life were treated with
circumspection by Father Planas. Yet his veiled warnings to his
clerical readers rested on his observations of actual problems. The
cura was warned that “he could not abandon his parish without
abandoning the most sacred of his duties,” a reference to priests
who absented themselves from their congregations for personal
gain and comfort or to seek advancement. Planas admonished
churchmen who became involved in political controversy or the
personal quarrels of their parishioners, the former almost cer¬
tainly directed against clerical involvement in the constant and
bruising polemic between Carlists and the supporters of liberal¬
ism. He also emphasized the necessity of upright moral conduct.
The cura must not support relatives in his residence, “for parish¬
ioners do not look favorably upon this, . . . because they think,
and at times they are right, that these are rewarded with the goods
of the Church.” “Gossip becomes general, and discontent reaches
its height,” Planas maintained, when the cura spends much of his
     Church and Society                                        223




time advancing the fortunes of his relatives. The priest was warned
to exercise special care in the selection of a housekeeper. He
required a woman who was “religious and discreet” both to avoid
scandal and to avoid interference in parish administration, “for
nothing is more of an affront for an ecclesiastic than to allow
himself to be dominated by a woman.”33
    The ideal parish priest necessarily stood aloof from the com¬
munity to which he was assigned. He was to take every precaution
to avoid the gossip and innuendos endemic to the isolated rural
village. The cura was to fulfill a lofty spiritual mission, yet he
required the support of the politically and socially influential. It
was a difficult life, one “of dangerous loneliness” in which there
were times when “not even the devil will call at his door,” as a
later authority on the parish clergy expressed it.34 Personal iso¬
lation made boredom an ever-present risk for priests whose nar¬
row education deprived them of intellectual support in the midst
of an often unlettered peasantry. It led also to the cases, cited
with vehemence by anticlerical writers, of priests maintaining li¬
aisons with women. How extensive this problem was is impossible
to say, but the problem existed, as it had for centuries. Thus,
Father Juan Villada, the parish priest of Cardenadijo in Burgos
in the late 1880’s, declared that he had been living with his house¬
keeper for twenty-six years and that the situation was not un¬
common among the rural clergy of his day.35 Given the dearth of
knowledge on the parish clergy of the mid-nineteenth century,
it is impossible to provide a detailed profile of its role within the
Church. There were certainly regional differences between, for
example, Andalusia with a religiously indifferent population and
the more devout countryside of the north. It is at least clear that
the lot of the parish priest was anything but easy.