




lishing the text of the Syllabus of Errors in his diocesan bulletin.19
Yet in the midst of the polemics in which he was constantly in¬
volved, Monescillo remained a nimble politician. He had no par¬
ticular enthusiasm for the government of Liberal Union (1858-
1863), which he believed had not gone far enough in recognizing
the Church’s claim to be the nation’s supreme moral censor, but
he behaved respectfully toward it. He felt more at home with the
moderado ministry of Narvaez, although he was by no means
completely satisfied with it.20 As a bishop Monescillo was consci¬
entious enough, but his real interests lay elsewhere—as a polem¬
icist, publicist, and lobbyist seeking to defend and advance the
fortunes of the Church within the liberal political order. In him
were combined the pragmatism and ideological intransigence
characteristic of the Church’s position in Isabelline Spain.
   The majority of bishops at midcentury were graduates of the
ecclesiastical faculties of the universities, but they supported one
of the most significant changes in the Isabelline Church—the shift
of priestly education from universities to diocesan seminaries.
During the eighteenth century the kingdom’s clerical elite flocked
to the universities rather than to seminaries, which they regarded
as second-rate institutions reserved for a socially inferior lower
clergy. During the decade of liberal revolution, students began to
abandon the universities for seminaries. After discovering that
theological students in the former numbered only 300, with nearly
as many professors, in 1845 the moderados ordered suppression
of the faculties of Barcelona, Granada, Salamanca, Santiago, and
Valencia, leaving open only Madrid, Oviedo, Seville, Valladolid,
and Zaragoza. The Concordat of 1851, by assuring state support
for seminaries, sealed the fate of a centuries-old tradition of the¬
ological education in the universities. In 1852 the government
ordered the closing of faculties surviving the 1845 suppression.21
Few changes were more enthusiastically welcomed by the bishops,
who saw the universities as centers of moral and intellectual dec¬
adence threatening to impressionable clerical students. The Church
must begin sacerdotal education, said the rector of the seminary
of Seville, “by separating the young from the corruption of the
world.”22
   The triumph of the seminary served another purpose; it rein¬
forced the authority of the bishops over their clergy. By bestowing
     Church and Society                                       219




complete authority over seminaries on the hierarchy, the concor¬
dat gave the bishops a measure of control over their priests they
had never enjoyed before. Bishops imposed regulations for the
governance of seminaries that reached draconian proportions.
The bishop of Cuenca, for example, forbade parents from visiting
 their sons save in the presence of a seminary official. Nor would
 the episcopacy tolerate opposition to its administration. In 1858,
when the seminarians of Segovia rebelled against a harsh regimen,
 the bishop expelled sixty-three, leaving behind a corporal’s guard
 of only seven students.23
    The physical separation of seminarians from the world about
 them accentuated the clergy’s intellectual isolation. Although an
 1852 reform of clerical education introduced the sciences into the
curriculum, the course of study, taught in Latin, was narrowly
 ecclesiastical in focus.24 If students were made aware of the ex¬
 istence of a secular culture apart from the theocratic preoccu¬
 pations of the Church, it was only as a dangerous threat to the
 survival of the faith. The seminary revolution of the mid-nine¬
 teenth century resolved one of the problems of the Old Regime
 Church by providing a standardized education for all candidates
 for holy orders. But even this advantage was compromised by the
 introduction of the camera breve, an abbreviated course of study
designed to produce as many priests as possible within a short
time. The camera breve occasionally produced capable priests, such
as Cardinal Sancha, the archbishop of Toledo at the end of the
century, but more often it graduated poorly educated clerics doomed
to spend their lives in rural parishes and abandon any hope of
advancement.25
    Nor did the reform eliminate the social distinctions character¬
istic of the eighteenth-century clergy. The distinction became sim¬
pler and more brutal—between students who could pay tuition
 fees and those who could not. The latter, known as sopistas or
famulos, earned their keep by serving as janitors and waiters in
the seminaries; they developed, understandably, a keen sense of
social inferiority. In the end the seminary reform of the Isabelline
Church created as many problems as it solved. Culturally narrow
and weak on pastoral training (as late as 1913 seminarians in
Madrid received scarcely any instruction in preaching tech¬
niques),26 the seminary produced generations of priests facing the
  220                                          Church and Society