




cans, Jesuits, Augustinians, and Dominicans, who were allowed to
establish a small number of houses to train priests for Cuba, Puerto
Rico, and the Philippines. Even the progresistas set aside their
customary hostility to the orders on the assumption that they
contributed to the maintenance of Spanish rule in the remnants
of the colonial empire. By 1860 male religious numbered only
 1,683, distributed in sixty-two houses. The orders, aside from the
Jesuits whose domestic missions contributed to renewed efforts
at popular evangelization, did not play an important part in the
mid-nineteenth-century Church’s recovery. The expansion of the
orders after 1874 in more favorable conditions from an eccle¬
siastical point of view (by 1923 the male orders contained 17,210
members) would make the regular clergy as burning an issue in
the twentieth century as in the nineteenth.7
    Of all groups within the Church none survived better than the
religious orders of women. The 1860 census reported a total of
 18,817 nuns, compared with 22,000—25,000 estimated for the
later years of Ferdinand VII’s reign. Although the majority of
nuns belonged to cloistered communities devoted to prayer and
contemplation—activities regarded as socially useless by the sec¬
ular reformers who destroyed the male orders on these grounds—
the liberal State, even during periods of progresista rule, treated
nuns more gently than male religious. To force women from
convents where they had passed their lives isolated from the world
offended the humanitarian sentiments of the liberals, who at their
most radical did little more than close smaller houses and restrict
the admission of novices in the hope that such measures would
bring about the eventual disappearance of the female orders.
    The moderados encouraged communities such as the Sisters of
Charity, whose services were required to staff hospitals, asylums,
orphanages, and old-age homes falling under state administration
after the poor relief reform of the 1830’s. Between 1854 and 1868
the order expanded from 887 members to 1,657.8 The develop¬
ment of the Sisters of Charity, along with the appearance of other
active communities—such as the Little Sisters of the Poor, intro¬
duced into Spain for the first time at Barcelona in 1863—was not,
however, extensive enough to alter the traditional monastic char¬
acter of the female orders.
  The Church emerging from the ordeal of liberal revolution
     Church and Society                                        213




also differed from its eighteenth-century predecessor in the extent
and nature of its material resources. Abolition of the tithe and
sale of the regular and secular clergy’s property undermined the
twin pillars that had supported the finances of the Old Regime
Church. Although ecclesiastics regarded disamortization as a fatal
blow, the Church may not have suffered as catastrophically as
clerical lamentations would suggest, at least as far as the secular
clergy were concerned, leaving aside the fluctuations in income
caused by political instability. By assuming responsibility for sal¬
aries and the maintenance of church fabrics, the liberal State might
well have saved the Church from the consequences of the long
deterioration in traditional sources of income evident since the
1790’s.
   The Church of 1860 was poorer than the Church of 1760 but
not so badly off compared with the Church of 1830 given the
shrinking of the ecclesiastical establishment after 1834. Between
 1829 and 1833 the annual income of the secular clergy averaged
253 million reales. The budget of culto y clero in 1851 provided
 153 million reales, which rose to nearly 180 million on the eve of
the revolution of 1868.9 Although the decline in revenue was
substantial, it must be placed in the context of the Old Regime
Church’s heavy expenditures on building and decoration as well
as on charitable activities later administered by the State. With its
range of activity constricted largely to the religious sphere after
 1834, the Church did not require such enormous resources, how¬
ever much churchmen lamented their passing. And there were
advantages to state financing. The Church could rely with some
assurance during periods of stability on regular payments from
the treasury in contrast to the extreme fluctuations of income
inherent in the old system’s dependence on levels of agricultural
production.
   Ecclesiastics resented the refusal of the liberal State, always
watchful of its purse strings under both moderado and progresista
governments, to subsidize nonpastoral activities. To supplement
their income they turned to private donations, a development that
later would have serious consequences through the identification
of clerical and middle-class interests. How extensively the pros¬
perous contributed to the Church before 1868 is difficult to es¬
tablish. But the process was clearly under way by the 1860’s.
  214                                         Church and Society