


                                                                209
  210                                         Church and Society




to insist on a reduction in the number of parishes. The authorities
were less concerned with devising a rational parochial organiza¬
tion than with the financial savings anticipated from parish re¬
form. According to the Concordat of 1851 the number of parishes
in a given town had to correspond to population size. Thus, Sala¬
manca’s twenty-four parishes in a city with 15,000 inhabitants
were to be reduced to three according to the formula set out in
a royal directive of 1854. Reductions in the number of parishes
were begun in many dioceses, but local bishops resisted through
effective foot-dragging techniques. In Salamanca, for example,
the diocesan authorities spun out negotiations through successive
governments in an effort to strike a better deal. Only in 1868 was
agreement reached with the ministry of Narvaez, which consented
with great reluctance to a compromise establishing the number
of parishes in the city at six. The reform was not carried out, in
fact, until the 1880’s.2
   The concordat also met liberal demands to the extent that the
extreme differences of wealth among the bishops disappeared in
favor of a salary scale established according to the importance and
size of dioceses. The archbishop of Toledo, as incumbent of the
primatial see, received the largest salary, 120,000 reales; the arch¬
bishops of Seville and Valencia received 100,000; the income of
the remaining prelates ranged from 70,000 to 90,000 reales.3 A
reduction in the number of cathedral canons satisfied a long-held
liberal aspiration to diminish the size of a clerical elite whose
contribution to pastoral work seemed questionable. Although re¬
duced in size, the capitular clergy continued to exist as a class
apart within the ecclesiastical establishment through eligibility re¬
quirements that excluded the vast majority of the parish clergy.
Successive governments well into the twentieth century believed
that the Church had not gone far enough with internal reform.
But by abandoning any pretension to state-inspired reorganiza¬
tion, a price the moderados willingly paid in 1851, the authorities
had to depend on the goodwill of both Rome and the bishops to
carry out changes neither wished to implement, laying the ground¬
work for later controversy.
   Between a demographic low point during the Espartero re¬
gency and the revolution of 1868, the ecclesiastical population
grew moderately. The census of 1860 reported a secular clergy
     Church and Society                                         211




of 42,765 (approximately 4,000 more than in the early 1840’s).
The increase was reflected in seminary enrollments, which rose
from 16,077 in 1853 to 24,376 in 1862. The functional role of
the seculars, moreover, differed from the eighteenth-century pat¬
tern, in which only a minority of priests were engaged in the cure
of souls. A decline in the size of the capitular clergy and in the
number of priests holding benefices (the effect of liberal legislation
and the loss of Church property) created a clerical population
devoted in the vast majority to parish work. In spite of the overall
reduction in priestly numbers during the first decades of the nine¬
teenth century, then, the ratio of clergy with pastoral responsi¬
bilities to the general population improved dramatically. There
was one priest for every 1,745 persons in the archdiocese of Seville
in 1768, but only a minority of the clergy were engaged in the
cure of souls; by 1859 there was one clergyman active in pastoral
work for every 428. This proportion was repeated for other dioceses,
although in some cases the change was less spectacular.4 Church¬
men would have been loathe to admit it, but the liberal revolution
forced a reorientation of clerical activities in a pastoral direction.
   Other problems, however, remained. Disparities in parish size
from one region to another continued. Average parochial pop¬
ulations in Andalusia (7,493 in Cadiz; 2,594 in Seville; 3,090 in
Cordoba) contrasted with those of the smaller parishes of the
north (458 in Oviedo, 618 in Santiago, 488 in Salamanca).5 The
State’s financial commitment to support the parish clergy did not
allow for the support of all ordained priests. In 1860 only two-
thirds were eligible for government salaries, continuing the cen¬
turies-old problem of a floating population of clerics whose con¬
duct often gave rise to scandal. As late as 1885 the first bishop of
Madrid tried to curb the activities of unsalaried clergy moving
from church to church in quest of Mass stipends, a reform that
so enraged one unemployed and unstable cleric that he assassi¬
nated the prelate on Palm Sunday in 1886.6
   In spite of ecclesiastical pressure for a general restoration of
the male religious orders, the liberal State, whether in moderado
or progresista hands, refused to authorize expansion beyond a
handful of orders including the Piarists, an educational order
surviving the suppression of the 1830’s; the Oratorians and Vin¬
centians, authorized by the Concordat of 1851; and the Francis-
  212                                        Church and Society