




challenges of changing social, political, and economic conditions
with inadequate preparation.
   Parish priests, perennial victims of the unequal distribution of
resources within the Church, found that their position at the bot¬
tom of the ecclesiastical ladder had changed scarcely at all as a
result of the Concordat of 1851. They had heard, said a group
of rural clergymen from Galicia, “a mysterious voice telling them
continuously: your ills will end; a new concordat will drag you
from the abjection to which Providence has submitted you to prove
your virtue and constancy.”27 But there was no mystery in the
financial arrangements worked out between Madrid and Rome.
Parish salaries ranged from a minimum of 2,200 reales for rural
curas to a maximum of 10,000 for the highest paid urban clergy.
In an age when the average yearly income of an industrial worker
was estimated at 2,827 reales and the minimum thought necessary
for a modest clerical style of life was 4,300 a year, the vast majority
of the clergy did not prosper. Of the 19,820 priests eligible to
receive government salaries in 1851, over 11,000 received under
3,500 reales; 3,706 reached the watershed figure of 4,300; 2,042
exceeded 5,500; and only 1,268 attained incomes of 7,000 reales.28
   For the parochial clergy, the Concordat of 1851 was a deception
leading to bitter protests, such as that sent to the papal nuncio by
a group of priests from Santiago de Compostela, and criticism in
the Catholic press. The papacy’s failure to insist on more equitable
treatment of parish priests in comparison with the generous terms
meted out to the clerical elite perpetuated the social evils not
uncommon among the clergy of the eighteenth century—the con¬
stant pressure on resentful parishioners to pay stipends for ser¬
vices such as baptisms, marriages, and funerals as well as the
temptation to engage in business activities—which inevitably aroused
local hostility. And the continuation of the eighteenth-century
system of competitive examinations to fill parish vacancies (con-
cursos de curatos) contributed at worst, according to one clerical
critic, to spreading “envy, avarice, ambition, detraction and de¬
nunciation” among priests and at best to a constant drain of the
most qualified clergy from poorer to richer parishes.29
   Financial disadvantages aside, the prospect of a priestly career
appealed to well-off peasant families in certain dioceses—Leon,
Burgos, Pamplona, Solsona, Barcelona, Valencia, and Orihuela—
     Church and Society                                          221




with the best record of seminary recruitment in the mid-nineteenth
century. The opportunity to secure an education in a world lack¬
ing decent rural schools and to enter an occupation endowed with
modest social prestige made a clerical career seem attractive to a
conservative peasantry. Moreover, it was not a difficult goal to
attain. An analysis of seminary registrations revealed that virtually
all students who began their studies survived to ordination, a
commentary in itself on the lack of intellectual selectivity in re¬
cruitment.30
   In spite of the increasing importance of the rural clergy in the
nineteenth-century Church, little is known of the mentality and
personal circumstances of parish priests. Until studies of their role
and influence were undertaken with particular reference to re¬
gional differences, it is possible to assess their position only in
general terms. It is clear that the life of the rural cura was far
from comfortable. Poorly paid in relation to his superiors, an
outsider in a closely knit community, a representative of distant
civil and ecclesiastical authorities, an educated man in the midst
of an often illiterate peasantry, the parish priest faced the difficult
task of establishing himself as an effective force.
   A manual written by Father Juan Planas on the organization
and administration of parishes at midcentury provides some clues
to the problems and pitfalls facing the cura. The parish priest was
first of all to confine himself to the spiritual direction of his con¬
gregation, “for the material interests of the parishioners have not
been entrusted to you by God.” Yet the cura depended of necessity
on the support of the local notables raised up by decades of liberal
social and economic change to carry out his pastoral mission. He
was to treat rich and poor alike, but he was bound to cooperate
with the powerful and influential in his village: “the parish priest
should live in good intelligence and harmony with the most no¬
table personalities of the town,” for “to repress scandal ... a slight
sign from the mayor or some other proprietor serves better at
times than all the efforts ... of the cura” The priest specifically
required the support of local notables represented on the junta
of studies controlling primary education. According to law the
parish priest sat ex officio on the junta. He was urged to use his
influence to persuade his fellow board members to choose “the
most moral and religious” for appointment to teaching posts, even
  222                                         Church and Society