




toleration organized an ambitious and highly successful campaign
for a protest petition to be presented to parliament. Although the
provincial and local authorities who had come to power with the
revolution of 1868 did their best to discourage the collection of
signatures, the results were impressive given the organizational
problems involved; 2,837,144 people signed the petition. Analysis
of the geographic distribution of the signatures reveals that in
1869 the regional character of Spanish Catholicism was already
in place (see Map 2). There are, to be sure, anomalies in the 1869
results, and it should be remembered that the number of signa¬
tures gathered in a given province depended on the efficiency of
local organizers. The cartography of the petition campaign, how¬
ever, shows the lowest levels of support in Andalusia, Extrema¬
dura, and La Mancha. The two provinces standing at the very
bottom of the list, Albacete and Malaga, were both located in the
south. The greatest levels of support were in Old Castile—Sala¬
manca, Avila, Valladolid, Zamora, Burgos—Santander; Leon; the
Basque Provinces, particularly Vizcaya; Navarra; Aragon; and the
Balearic Islands. The Mediterranean littoral produced mixed re¬
sults, with a strong showing in Alicante (perhaps because of the
Catholic hinterland around Orihuela) and Valencia. The Catalan
provinces did less well but were by no means among those with
the lowest level of response. The support provided by the province
of Madrid, seat of the national capital, placed it near the bottom
of the list.
   The cartography of the 1869 campaign shows an interesting
and surprising resemblance to the map of religious practice drawn
in 1972.85 In spite of the massive demographic and economic
changes after 1950, the latter shows a clear line of division running
approximately through the center of the Iberian Peninsula along
the Guadarrama Mountains. Regions below the line—New Castile,
Extremadura, La Mancha, Andalusia, and the Mediterranean lit¬
toral save for rural Valencia and Orihuela—record the lowest
levels of observance. Areas above the line—Old Castile, Leon, the
Basque Provinces, and Aragon—show a high level of practice.
The correspondence between the 1869 and 1972 maps is not
exact. Catalonia, for example, had clearly slipped over the course
of the century, save for the high rate of practice observed in the
dioceses of Solsona and Vich. But the rough north-south division
           Church and Society                                               243




 2. Geographic distribution of signatures in the petition campaign of 1869 against
ious liberty.
  244                                        Church and Society




evident in 1869 was still clearly visible more than a century later.
The Church was strongest in areas of large peasant populations
who had reasonable security of land tenure and lived in numerous
small villages with a strong sense of communal life. It was weakest
in the great latifundia lands of Extremadura, La Mancha, and
Andalusia, where a rural proletariat lived in desperate economic
circumstances. And already by 1869 the weakness of the Church
in metropolitan centers was becoming evident.
   The results of the 1869 petition campaign provide a general
overview of the strength of the Church in the kingdom as a whole.
They do not provide guidance on the equally important question
of differences within regions. Such local variations were certainly
important, between, for example, an industrialized Barcelona
and the more Catholic Catalan hinterland. Until detailed re¬
gional studies of religious practice are undertaken, no adequate
cartography of nineteenth-century Catholicism can be drawn. The
limited study of observance in the province of Logrono carried
out for the period illustrates the importance and necessity of re¬
search in this Held. It reveals that by the end of the century de-
christianization had made rapid progress among the poorly paid
workers in the expanding vineyards that engaged in a market-
oriented wine trade; among railway workers along the Zaragoza
and Bilbao line, which opened for traffic in 1861; and among
industrial workers in small industrial towns such as Munilla, En-
ciso, and Haro.86 The regions of the province where traditional
agriculture conducted by a secure peasantry persisted—the dis¬
tricts adjacent to Alava and Navarra—were untouched by the drift
away from the Church. The statistics gathered by Saez de Ocariz
for the parish of Santiago el Real in Logrono suggest that the
critical period for the spread of declining observance occurred
between 1867 and 1875.87 The percentage of those who did not
fulfill the Easter Communion obligation, which hovered between
5 percent and 10 percent during the early 1860’s, rose dramati¬
cally beginning in 1867. (Table 5)
   The limited example of a single parish cannot be applied to
the kingdom as a whole. The chronology and pace of dechris-
tianization certainly varied depending on social and economic cir¬
cumstances, the degree of industrialization and urban growth,
changes in agriculture, the condition of rural workers, and other
       Church and Society                                              245