




Law on Primary Education (1838), and the Laws on Public In¬
struction (1845 and 1857)—did not seek to eliminate religion from
state schools.51 All three laws, reflecting moderado concern with
the importance of religious teaching as a foundation of civic and
moral conduct, included religion as a mandatory subject at every
level. Primary school students received instruction in the cate¬
chism and religious history and marched in a body, at least in
 theory, to attend Sunday Mass under the watchful eye of the local
 schoolmaster. Secondary school students in the state institutos of
 1850 were obliged to take a course in “Religion and Morality” in
 four of their five years of instruction. Moreover, the Church en¬
joyed a limited supervisory role over state schools. Parish priests
 served as members of local school boards under the terms of the
 1838 law, and teachers hoping for appointments had to produce
certificates of good conduct signed by their curas. After 1845 the
 State tolerated a modest expansion of private Church schools staffed
by the religious orders. After 1851 moderado governments rec¬
 ognized diocesan seminaries as secondary schools qualified to pre¬
 pare students for university entrance.
    The Church did not fare badly at liberal hands in education,
 particularly during periods of moderado rule. The Concordat of
 1851 and the Moyano Law of 1857 recognized the Church’s gen¬
 eral right of supervision over education, although both were vague
 about how this was to be exercised. Between 1857 and the revo¬
 lution of 1868 the Church waged a persistent and ultimately suc¬
cessful campaign to exert greater control over instruction. Changes
 introduced just before the collapse of the moderado State in 1868
 gave the Church a greater role in the authorization of school texts
 and more substantial representation on provincial and local school
boards.52 Clerical objectives were straightforward. The Church
 wished absolute freedom to establish schools of its own, and it
 demanded the right to supervise curricula and teacher recruit¬
 ment in the state schools. Although the liberal State made sub¬
 stantial concessions to the Church in education, ecclesiastical interests
 were never satisfied with these arrangements.
    Clerical discontent arose from the State’s insistence, whether it
was in moderado or progresista hands, on its right to control
education at every level, from university to primary school. The
 University Law of 1845, passed when the moderado government
     Church and Society                                         231




of Narvaez was in full flood, established the highly centralized
university system that in one form or another survived through
the 1970’s. In spite of concessions made to the Church in partic¬
ular aspects of educational policy, clerical interests resented a sys¬
tem in which their plans for a rigidly Catholic instruction depended
ultimately on the suffrance of the civil authorities.
   Hostility to the state monopoly of education was closely linked
to clerical fears that schools would be used to propagate secular¬
izing ideas opposed to the Church’s still essentially theocratic vi¬
sion of the organization and purpose of human society. Julian
Sanz del Rio’s inaugural lecture in the Universidad Central in
1857 confirmed the worst fears of Church defenders. Sanz del
Rio, an intellectual of little originality who had taken up the views
of the minor German philosopher Karl Krause, expounded the
philosophy of his mentor, a “curious blend of subjective mysticism
and vague modernism,” from his university chair.53 Although Sanz
del Rio tried to avoid an open confrontation with the Church, his
views were immediately attacked as “pantheistic” by a chorus of
Catholic detractors. That a university professor taught such a
philosophy from an official post in a centralized state university
system outraged the Church. The Catholic apologist Orti y Lara
warned his readers that unless steps were taken to put an end to
the “freedom of the chair” in universities the Church stood to lose
future generations for the faith. The philosophy of Sanz del Rio,
he maintained, was “the fountain from which the future teachers of
Spanish youth would have to drink. What more powerful enemy
is being prepared against the Catholic faith!”54 The polemic ini¬
tiated in 1857 raged on for a decade, until the purge of university
professors undertaken by Narvaez in 1867. The conflict revealed
again the fundamental ambiguity of the Church’s position within
the secular State liberalism had created.