




regions of the north and to enlist the support of the more con¬
servative elements of liberalism in the cities. But the Church’s
inability to perceive, much less face, the serious social problems
created in town and country foretold the massive losses that were
not far off. Clerical responses to religious indifference and unbe¬
lief did not differ substantially from those made to the dislocating
effects of the French Revolution and the work of the Cortes of
Cadiz. Ecclesiastical energies were not directed to reforming the
Church from within but to blaming an array of external forces
for attempting to “decatholicize” Spain—the liberal State for hav¬
ing sold Church property, politicians for disregarding the Church’s
theocratic admonitions, and intellectuals for advocating cultural
innovation.
   The Church’s failure to perceive the necessity of changes deeper
than those provided by devotionalism, “popular” religion, and
new forms of religious propaganda would prove costly in the long
run. Between 1843 and 1868 the Church enjoyed a breathing
space created by its accommodation with the liberal State and the
inchoateness of radical social forces. Anticlericalism, although al¬
ready a stock-in-trade of some politicians and intellectuals, had
not yet been translated into the popular violence of a later period.
(The bloody events of 1834 and 1835 were not repeated.) But,
unable to take advantage of the respite, the Church entered the
revolutionary period beginning in 1868 ill prepared to encounter
the most secular and radical of Spain’s nineteenth-century political
and social upheavals.
8    /    From Revolution to Restoration, 1868—1874




   Between the revolution of 1868 and the restoration of the Bour¬
bon monarchy in 1874 the Church faced the most serious threat
to its privileged situation since the 1840’s. Clerical identification
with the discredited moderado State exposed the Church to a
revival of the more extreme ecclesiastical policies associated with
the progresistas and later to a project (under the First Republic) to
separate Church and State for the first time in the nation’s history.
The Church’s difficulties were magnified by the outbreak of an¬
other Carlist revolt in 1872 and by chronic social disorders in town
and country. In spite of organizational disruption and some an¬
ticlerical violence, the Church survived this new onslaught in bet¬
ter condition than ecclesiastical laments of the time would suggest.
Moreover, for the first time some clerics, whether from the con¬
servative or revived liberal Church, began to question the wisdom
of maintaining constitutional ties to the State. In the end, the
establishment of a reformed version of moderado government,
which promised a restoration of some, though by no means all,
ecclesiastical privileges, swept aside clerical reservations. The Church
entered again into an alliance with the civil authorities that would
last, at least in terms of ecclesiastical policy, until the Second Re¬
public disestablished this historic union.