




opment of religiosity in the liberal era. The destruction of the
regular clergy during the 1830’s ended for the time being the
Church’s long missionary history, although much of the fire and
brimstone of popular evangelization had vanished before the death
of Ferdinand VII. Without the front-line troops provided by the
orders and preoccupied with the struggle to survive, the Church
could do little to marshal its evangelistic forces.
    In 1841 Antonio Claret, still a young and unknown secular
priest in rural Catalonia, received the title of apostolic missionary
from Rome and began to preach in Catalan throughout the coun¬
tryside. Although Claret followed the time-honored techniques of
generations of missionaries, using processions, sermons, and pious
devotions, he believed that traditional methods, though they aroused
temporary religious enthusiasm, were insufficient to conquer the
masses “in a more efficacious and lasting way.”65 For Claret, mis¬
sions must form part of a more comprehensive program of evan¬
gelization involving permanent catechetical instruction, parochial
schools, parish libraries, and charitable associations, such as the
Saint Vincent de Paul Society.
    In Claret’s eyes, the more sophisticated purpose of the modern
mission required a team approach involving a high degree of
coordination and functional distribution of responsibilities. Claret
applied his ideas on popular evangelization through the formation
during the late 1840’s of an effective team with himself as director
of missions; Francisco Coll, another indefatigable missionary, as
director of spiritual exercises; and Jose Caixal.66 Caixal’s title, di¬
rector of propaganda, revealed how much Claret had learned
about the necessity of abandoning the messianic preaching of the
traditional mission in favor of modern methods of influencing
opinion. From Caixal came the idea of distributing massive quan¬
tities of religious books, simply written and cheaply produced.
Claret welcomed the suggestion, believing that only such a large-
scale effort could counter the effect “of the evil and pestilential
books” distributed by the “impious.”67 Between 1848 and 1866
the publishing house Claret established printed 2,811,100 books;
 1,509,600 pamphlets; and nearly 5,000,000 posters and broad¬
sheets. Claret’s adaptation of the mission and his appreciation of
the importance of religious propaganda within the new society of
liberal Spain provided the Church with an instrument of popular
     Church and Society                                         237




evangelization that to some extent compensated for the near dis¬
appearance of the proselytizing religious orders.
   The resurgence of the missions, particularly after 1851, arose
from the determination of the Isabelline bishops to deal with
“immorality and indifference” through direct combat.68 The epis¬
copacy could rely on the members of the restored male orders,
who threw themselves into the work of popular evangelization
with an enthusiasm that made up for their limited numbers. The
missionaries, of whom the Jesuits were the most important, made
a point of living austerely. The Jesuits active in Seville in 1858
took pains to move on foot from parish to parish, rejecting offers
to ride in carriages, and they tailored their activities to the social
situations of their congregations. Services in the parish of San
Bernardo—with a population of agricultural workers, bullfight¬
ers, and employees of the famous Seville tobacco factory—began
at five in the morning rather than the usual eight so that “without
ignoring their material occupations, the residents could devote
themselves to the care of their souls.”69
   The missions still followed the traditional formula. They usually
opened with a procession of children intoning the hymn “The
Mission Calls You” in an effort to touch adult sensibilities. Missions
generally lasted for two weeks; included Masses, sermons, devo¬
tions such as the rosary, and confessions; and ended with a general
Communion. Preachers were not above using sensationalism in
the old flamboyant style. An earthquake in Seville in October 1858
in the midst of a round of missions was seen as a divine admonition
against “the faults and crimes of which this society, today more
corrupt than ever, is filled.” The clergy used the natural disaster
to warn the inhabitants to repent. But missionaries in this period
paid more attention to catechetical instruction than their prede¬
cessors had. In the little town of Mairena del Alcor near Seville, for
example, the Jesuits preaching the mission enlisted thirty laymen
to teach catechism to both children and adults; a house in each
street was set aside for this purpose. Wherever they went mis¬
sionaries also distributed “little books” on the truths of religion
written “in language which even the most rude and ignorant can
understand.”
   The Church believed that the missions provided the best means
of realizing “a complete moral and religious restoration” that would
  238                                         Church and Society