



Revolution and the Church, 1868—1869

   At a ceremony held in the royal palace early in 1868 Isabella
II received from the papal nuncio the Golden Rose, traditionally
bestowed by popes on monarchs contributing to the progress of
the faith. Conferral of the papal decoration symbolized the com¬
fortable relationship between Rome and Madrid as the era of the
semiauthoritarian moderado State drew to a close. The glitter of


    248
     From Revolution to Restoration                                 249




ritual, however, could not disguise the growing unpopularity of
the sovereign and her ministers before rising public criticism and
conspiratorial activity. The forces opposing Isabella, a disparate
grouping of Liberal Unionists, progresistas, and Democrats en¬
couraged by Carlists and Republicans, finally coalesced in Sep¬
 tember to launch the military revolt and popular local risings that
sealed the queen’s fate. After the defeat of loyal government troops
at Alcolea on September 28, Isabella abandoned her summer res¬
 idence in the Basque Provinces to take refuge in France; she was
 followed by the architect of her ecclesiastical policy, Antonio Claret.
    The revolution of 1868 was launched by the coalition of liberal
 generals and urban radicals responsible for Spain’s major political
 upheavals since 1834. But the contribution of local revolutionary
juntas to the success of the 1868 rising led the provisional gov¬
ernment, whose dominant personalities were Generals Francisco
 Serrano of the Liberal Union and Juan Prim of the progresistas,
 to accede to demands for a broad democratic program including
 universal suffrage, freedom of the press, and freedom of asso¬
ciation. The troublesome question of who, if anyone, should oc¬
cupy the democratic throne was left aside for the moment, but
 those in power were determined that it should not be given to a
 Bourbon. From its inception the new regime was beset by severe
internal difficulties, which in the end caused its collapse and paved
 the way for proclamation of the First Republic in February 1873.
Tension among the partners in the governmental coalition con¬
stantly threatened its stability. Only the forceful and determined
leadership of Prim, a popular and astute politician, warded off
disintegration. Prim’s assassination on a Madrid street in Decem¬
ber 1870 just days before the arrival of the new king, Amadeo of
Savoy, stimulated the divisive tendencies of the coalition parties
and began the process of political fragmentation that made a
republic possible.
    The regime also had to contend with a deep economic crisis,
made all the worse by the strain of efforts to break the colonial
revolt that had broken out in Cuba in 1868. And from the begin¬
ning the new government faced opposition from the Carlists, con¬
fident at last that their hour was near. Carlist armed agitation
began in isolated fashion in 1869 and developed into a full-scale
revolt in 1872. The Republicans were no less restive. Resentful of
  250                               From Revolution to Restoration