




the bishop of Guadix threatened to suspend priests saying “hasty
Masses lacking in devotion,” that is, Masses said in less than twenty
minutes.60 The problem had scarcely changed four decades later.
Ramon Sarabfa a well-known Redemptorist missionary of the early
twentieth century, recalled the impoverished parish life of the
small Asturian town where he had grown up in the early 1880’s.
Sunday after Sunday passed without anyone receiving Commun¬
ion. Sermons were preached only twice a year, on Corpus Christi
and the feast of Saint Martin, the village patron.61 Revived devo-
tionalism thus filled a liturgical vacuum and marked the character
of the Spanish Church for generations.
   By 1868 an immense range of devotions appealed to every
religious taste. Older cults, such as those of the Sacred Heart and
the Eucharistic Forty Hours, took on new life, as did that of the
rosary, largely through the efforts of Antonio Claret, who pro¬
moted it with great enthusiasm. By 1860 it was not uncommon to
hnd entire congregations telling their beads during Mass.62 Pro¬
clamation of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception by Pius
IX in 1854 reinvigorated the Marian devotion that had been part
of the Spanish Church’s tradition for centuries. Pious groups com¬
mitted to the cult of the Virgin multiplied; the Devotion to the
Heart of Mary organized by Claret and the Court of Mary founded
by Ramon Garcia Leal with over 50,000 members by 1865 are two
examples. In addition, specific religious celebrations—the “Flow¬
ers of Mary” held during May and ceremonies marking Saturday
as the day of the Virgin—attained great popularity. Marian de¬
votions from abroad, such as the Virgin of Lourdes, quickly made
their way into Spain and attracted the attention of the devout.63
Devotions to individual saints also flourished in the new atmos¬
phere.
   A pious visitor to Madrid on a single day (September 7, 1851)
could satisfy his religious needs by choosing from a bewildering
array of devotions: the Forty Hours in the parish of Santa Maria;
the novena of Jesus Nazareno in the church of the same name;
a service in honor of the Sacred Heart in the church of the Salesian
nuns with full orchestra; or novenas to the Most Pure Heart of
Mary (San Cayetano), Our Lady of Mercy (San Sebastian), and
the Virgin of Guadalupe (San Millan). At San Sebastian the novena
began with solemn Mass at ten in the morning followed by the
     Church and Society                                        235




Stations of the Cross and the rosary at 4:45 with sermon. The day
ended with a solemn service in which the Salve Regina was cele¬
brated with full musical accompaniment. Devotional associations,
such as the Archconfraternity of Our Lady of Grace and Our
Lady of Carmen, held special ceremonies for their members. On
the following day, a novena to Our Lady of Zarza began in the
chapel of the convent of San Pascual, and another service to the
Sacred Heart opened in the oratory of the Santisimo Sacra¬
mento.64
    The mid-nineteenth-century revival of piety was encouraged
by the Church. Scruples that led some eighteenth-century bishops
to restrain cults were set aside in favor of an effort to spread them
like seeds thrown upon the fields. The devotionalist resurgence
has not been adequately studied, but it may explain the Church’s
ability to survive as a popular institution during this period. To
the peasantry, for whom religion warded off disaster and secured
good fortune, the intercessionary aspects of devotion comple¬
mented rituals of traditional “popular” religion, which often had
little to do with formal belief. Moreover, the character of these
devotions, individual acts of piety directed toward a specific pur¬
pose and requiring little intellectual effort, made them easy to
understand. And their individualist emphasis may have appealed
even to the educated middle classes of moderado persuasion. De-
votionalism’s concern with the relation of the individual rather
than the collectivity to the divine provided a convenient means
for the man who had bought Church property to prove his reli¬
gious worth with ease of conscience and to overcome Catholic
social thought and its medieval, corporate preoccupations with
personal acts of piety. Revived devotionalism may have been one
of the bridges leading the more conservative elements of liberalism
not back to the Church, because they had never left it, but toward
more emotional forms of religious practice. The growth of per¬
sonal devotions owed something to the individualistic character
of the new society, as liberalism and Catholicism came together
again in curious alliance.
    The increasing acceptance of “popular” religion by the official
Church, the revival of devotionalism, and the reintroduction of
the missions traditionally used by the ecclesiastical authorities to
preserve faith among the population, contributed to the devel-
  236                                          Church and Society