




“bring morality to the people, and extinguish the hatreds . . . which
the passions of parties and families sustain and propagate.” They
would thus lead to “that good faith, those Christian and gentle¬
manly customs which have been the characteristics of our nation¬
ality.”70 At least over the short term, the missions enjoyed some
success. In 1851 the clergy of Catalonia congratulated itself on
the “happy results” of the missionary campaign just concluded in
the region; in 1858 more than 20,000 received Communion dur¬
ing the missions of Seville. And in 1866 Jesuit preachers carried
off one of their most impressive evangelical triumphs with a series
of missions in the Basque Provinces. Reports from parish priests
of small towns and villages recorded nearly universal participation
in the services; in Zaldivia, for example, 2,500 people received
Communion, while only 6 residents did not.71
   The success of the missions arose in part from the support they
received from moderado notables, the prosperous men of prop¬
erty dominating local governments. At a mission in Organa in
Lerida, the preachers were received by a delegation of “clergy,
municipal councillors and the most select part of the population,”
and this pattern was repeated elsewhere.72 There were solid rea¬
sons for moderado support of the missions. The absolutist tirades
that had been a stock in trade for the missionaries of the 1820’s
and early 1830’s yielded to sermons teaching respect for the gov¬
ernment and warning against social unrest. The missions of Se¬
ville, declared La Cruz in 1858, “had destroyed in their foundation
the antisocial ideas that had spread in Andalusia. Charity was
inculcated in the rich, resignation in the poor. All were led to the
faithful observance of the Commandments, to love of God . . . and
respect for the clergy and submission to the constituted authori¬
ties.”73 Bishop Costa y Borras similarly praised missions, “because
only the salutory influence of religion can make the Catalan char¬
acter docile and governable and avoid insurrections.”74 For the
moderados, obsessed with the danger of social revolution, the
preaching of submission from missionary pulpits offered a sooth¬
ing remedy. At Eibar in the Basque Provinces, factory owners
allowed their workers to attend a mission without loss of pay;
Isabella II, upon being urged to dispatch more troops to repress
the peasant rising at Loja in 1861, was said to have remarked:
     Church and Society                                         239




“you are mistaken. Soldiers are not required in Loia. Missions
are.”75
   Claret’s dream of broadening the base of popular evangeliza¬
tion was partially realized by 1868. A revived interest in religious
instruction led to the publication of new catechisms to replace the
texts used for centuries. Garcia Mazo’s Catecismo explicado (1837),
Claret’s work of the same title (1848), and Costa y Borras’ Cate¬
cismo de la doctrin cristiana (1858) replaced the rote memorization
of questions and answers with clear and simple exposition. Claret,
for example, abandoned the traditional technique of organizing
a catechism around the Ten Commandments in favor of one re¬
volving around the themes of faith, hope, charity, and good works.76
Each section was preceded by an engraving to illustrate the brief
explanation following. The new catechisms were easy to compre¬
hend and for the first time attached importance to the explanation
of doctrine. Claret also recognized the necessity of making cate¬
chisms available to non-Castilian readers. His own text in its Cat¬
alan version was already into its third printing by 1850.
   In addition, a new devotional literature, which differed sub¬
stantially from that produced during the eighteenth century,
flourished. The excessively detailed texts of the Old Regime, larded
with scriptural citations, were replaced by short and straightfor¬
ward works with an almost exclusive emphasis on private devo¬
tions. Garcia Mazo’s Diario de lapiedad (1839) stressed the importance
of individual acts of piety, the rosary, confession, Communion,
visits to altars, and the Blessed Sacrament.77 Concern with the
collective expression ofreligious sentiment so important to the
earlier literature had virtually disappeared. Claret’s contribution,
the Camino recto y seguro para llegar al cielo (1843), was an instant
success; it would become the most widely published work of its
kind in the history of Spanish devotional writing. Claret, too,
emphasized the quest for salvation as an individual affair. The
sense of mutual obligation, albeit within the framework of a hi¬
erarchical society, typical of similar works in the eighteenth cen¬
tury found no place in the Camino recto. Claret’s advice to workers
must have been welcomed by the new liberal society: “Do not waste
time”; “Do not cause expenses or damage to your employers”;
“Work with all diligence and exactitude.”78 The emphasis of the
  240                                          Church and Society