




new devotional literature on specific acts of piety as well as the
publishing success of works such as the Camino recto reveal again
that the Church was able to adapt its propaganda techniques to
the individualistic society created by liberalism.
   The individualistic emphasis of devotionalism found its coun¬
terpart in the proliferation of voluntaristic religious associations
very different from those of the Old Regime. During the eight¬
eenth century lay participation in the life of the Church had been
channeled through corporate groups reflecting the divisions of a
hierarchical society. The voluntaristic associations spreading through
the Spanish Church after 1840 were open in theory to all with a
sincere commitment to religion and good works. These societies
covered a wide range of charitable and educational activity. The
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul devoted its attention to assisting
the impoverished; the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, founded
at Madrid in 1842, provided religious instruction in hospitals,
prisons, and orphanages. The new voluntarism also made it pos¬
sible for women to take a much more active role. In 1858 a group
of women, drawn largely from the ranks of the nobility, founded
the capital’s first Sunday schools and thereby began one of the
most successful catechetical initiatives of the nineteenth-century
Church. Escuelas dominicales were established in large numbers
throughout the country.79
    In addition, countless devotional associations were founded.
Thus, Francisco Coll, the celebrated missionary of the 1840’s,
established throughout rural Catalonia a number of such associ¬
ations—the Congregation of Minerva, devoted to the cult of the
Blessed Sacrament; the Congregation of the Unworthy Slaves of
Jesus in the Sacrament; the Confraternity of the Most Holy Ro¬
sary; and the Congregation of the Virgin of Sorrows.80 The pro¬
liferation of voluntaristic groups within the Church arose in part
from the institution’s recovery from its paralysis of the 1830’s.
But it also developed from the widespread appeal of associations
stressing individual works of piety and charity. Such an emphasis
fit neatly into the mentality of the politically liberal but socially
conservative elite dominating Spanish society during the middle
years of the century.
   Popular religion, devotionalism, improved evangelization tech¬
niques, and the increasing importance of voluntaristic associations
     Church and Society                                          241




allowed the Church to adapt to the configuration of liberal society
with surprising ease, clerical laments about the corruption of the
times notwithstanding. But how successful was the Church in
maintaining its religious influence? The question is no easier to
answer for the mid-nineteenth century than for the eighteenth.
Studies of religious practice are, if anything, more difhcult to find
for the later period. It is at least clear that sometime between 1850
and 1900 a process of accelerated dechristianization left Spanish
Catholicism with a highly regional character. There were abun¬
dant signs of losses in the south by the 1880’s. Visiting the town
of Villanueva del Rosario in February 1886, the bishop of Malaga
found a population in which “indifference and even apostasy”
had made deep inroads.81 The missions of the “Apostle of An¬
dalusia,” Francisco Tarfn, in 1889 revealed as gloomy a picture.
In the parish of San Roque in Seville, with 16,000 inhabitants,
only 30 appeared for the first service of the mission. In Andujar,
Tarfn found “estrangement from the Church”; in the mining town
of Linares, a “focal point of corruption and perversion,” the mis¬
sionary was chased along the streets by young boys who shouted
curses and threw stones.82
   There is similar impressionistic evidence for the decline of re¬
ligious observance in cities with a growing working class. The Cat¬
alan priest Josep Gatell, recalling the religious state of Barcelona
around 1850, believed it was still “a Christian town” in which
“factories closed a half-hour before the celebration of the last Mass
during which our churches were filled with men in their workers’
shirts.” But for Gatell, “the day arrived when this people, who
until then appeared Catholic, abandoned religious practices little
by little.”83 The dechristianizing aspects of the modern city, so
frequently observed by religious sociologists, were already being
noted by Bishop Palau of Barcelona in 1858: “Who can doubt
that people from all parts of the world, of all religions . . . flow to
the great centers of manufacturing and commerce, and com¬
municate . . . their religious indifference.” Of his own diocese, Palau
remarked: “the faith has grown languid, charity has gone cold
[and] religious sentiment has grown weak.”84
   In spite of the lack of serious study on nineteenth-century de¬
christianization in Spain, there are some partial indications of the
religious state of the kingdom. In 1869 opponents of religious
  242                                         Church and Society