


Was Spain Catholic?

   Whether a religious revival took place after 1843 is unclear in
spite of the obvious signs of the Church’s institutional recovery.
Until socioreligious studies of the incidence and quality of ob¬
servance are available, a definitive assessment of the extent of a
“spiritual” recovery cannot be made. But the Church produced a
  232                                         Church and Society




successful amalgam of religious devotions and evangelization tech¬
niques that appealed to broad sections of the population, from
the peasantry to the urban bourgeoisie. On the surface religious
life at midcentury appeared similar to that of the Old Regime.
The folkloric customs of “popular” religion—placatory in nature
and connected to the fears and preoccupations of an uneducated
peasantry—continued in the forms of local shrines, pilgrimages,
and rites designed to evoke intercession to remedy specific ills.
The nineteenth-century traveler could still describe folk beliefs
depicted by visitors to the peninsula a century before: the Murcian
peasant who believed “that no disease can affect him or his cattle
if he touches them with the cross of Caravaca, which angels brought
from heaven,” the hermit of Manresa who showed tourists the
cave in which Saint Ignatius Loyola did penance and sold them
the dust “of its pulverized stones” to cure a variety of infirmities,
and those who went to the shrine of Santa Engracia in Zaragoza
hoping to be cured of scrofula by the smoke of its holy lamps.55
    During the eighteenth century the practices of “popular” reli¬
gion evoked the disapproval of bishops and Inquisition alike. For
the clerical elite of the Caroline Church, the excesses of “popular”
religion appeared an obstacle to their ideal of a simple, interior
Christianity. With a certain intuitive brilliance the nineteenth-
century Church realized that the appeal of primitive beliefs had
deep roots that could be turned to advantage. “Popular” religion,
once rejected or at best tolerated as a necessary evil, entered fully
into the life of the Church. Extraordinary claims of miraculous
happenings that once would have led to inquiries by the Inquis¬
ition were given credence in clerical circles. In 1853 the official
bulletin of the Toledo archdiocese referred approvingly to the
excited crowds flocking to the funeral of a pious woman in An-
tequera, “the little saint,” whose fame was such that the congre¬
gation, believing in her miraculous powers, struggled to touch the
body with their handkerchiefs. Six months later the bulletin re¬
ported with similar confidence on the appearance of a dead uncle
to his nephew in the small town of Villanueva de Alcolea in Tor-
tosa.56
  Although the ecclesiastical authorities followed the usual pro¬
cedure of canonical inquiry in these cases, they were more dis¬
posed to accept claims than their eighteenth-century predecessors,
     Church and Society                                         233




and for a straightforward reason. Years of liberal criticism of the
“superstitious” character of Iberian Catholicism elicited the op¬
posite reaction from churchmen, who saw in these occurrences a
divine confirmation of the Church’s mission. Thus, a report from
Valencia in 1854 of a miraculous cholera cure in a man who had
drunk water from a well at the house of Saint Vincent Ferrer pro¬
voked a controversy between the local liberal press and the clergy.
A priest challenged the miracle’s journalistic detractors to drink
part of a glass of water from the well while he drank the rest,
assuring his foes that they would die from an attack of the disease
and he would escape unharmed.57 “Popular” religion had become
acceptable testimony to faith.
   The triumphal sweep of devotionalism in religious practice also
extended the appeal of the midcentury Church. Cults associated
with the divine in various manifestations were as old as Christianity
itself, but the appearance in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies of devotions emphasizing the personal and sentimental as¬
pects of petitioning for divine intercession differed from the
corporate, community-oriented devotions of earlier periods. These
“new” devotions, directed and spread by the Church largely through
the religious orders, had already attained popularity in Spain, but
they suffered a setback with the extinction of the regular clergy.58
Yet the liberals also created the conditions necessary for the de¬
votions’ recovery by destroying the hierarchical society around
which Old Regime religious life revolved. Cofradias continued to
exist, but they lacked social meaning. The great processions of
Holy Week and Corpus Christi did not disappear, but they were
no longer miniature collective expressions of an entire society.
Many had become popular spectacles designed, said one critic in
 1858, “to satisfy curiosity . . . and to serve for recreation and dis¬
traction.”59
   The official liturgy of the Church offered little competition to
devotionalism. Cathedral services were as grandiose as ever and
were often conducted with full orchestras and operatic singing
that paid little attention to religious significance. The parish lit¬
urgy was in an even more dismal state. The official ecclesiastical
bulletin of Toledo published a series of articles describing each
and every gesture the priest should make during Mass, an indi¬
cation that some clerics lacked even this basic knowledge. In 1858
  234                                         Church and Society