




positive good and endorsing democratic institutions, liberal priests
anticipated the stand taken by progressive groups within the Span¬
ish Church nearly a century later following the Second Vatican
Council.
   The prospect of reestablishing the liberal Church as an effective
force was remote. Clerics taking the oath to the constitution were
reviled by their colleagues. Two canons in Cordoba (where the
chapter refused to celebrate an anniversary Mass for the dead of
the battle of Alcolea) were totally ostracized by their fellows and
subjected to sarcastic comments even from the choirboys. But the
greatest obstacle to reform from within the Church was the in¬
difference of the government. With a few exceptions, the State
did not attempt to repeat the tactic of forcing appointment of
bishops and canons sympathetic to its aims, nor did it listen to the
pleas of liberal priests for improvements in the career opportun¬
ities and financial situation of the lower clergy. Parish priests,
declared La Armonia, hoped for “a more open horizon”—by which
it meant access to canonries, bishoprics, and other positions still
monopolized by a small elite—lest their “knowledge be buried in
a small village and their expectations of life murdered.”24 But the
government paid no heed. A reform project presented by the
minister of grace and justice, Montero Rios, in March 1870 passed
over the institutional discrimination still as much a part of the
Church as during the eighteenth century. Moreover, the govern¬
ment, by reducing the budget for culto y clero and by falling into
arrears in its payments to the lower clergy, repeated the mistake
of the 1830’s and early 1840’s by alienating the one group within
the Church that might have become a natural ally.
    No one within the Church was more disillusioned than the
liberal clergy. The State, they held, was in a position “to fulfill the
promises which it had made over fifty years ago with priests
who . . . continued being loyal to the flag of progress.” But with
what result? “Has the importance of cathedral chapters been re¬
duced?” “Has [the State] attempted to increase their [the clergy’s]
salaries?” To these questions posed by La Armonia came the reply:
the government has not responded “in any way to the necessities
of this suffering and working clergy.”25
    Resentment among conservative priests unhappy with the di¬
rection of the government grew with the introduction of an ex-
  260                              From Revolution to Restoration




tensive body of secularizing legislation. In this respect post-1868
governments went beyond the initiatives of previous revolutionary
regimes. Abolition of the ecclesiastical fuero (the right of priests
to be tried in Church rather than state courts) and creation of
civil registers to record births, deaths, and marriages—a function
previously exercised by the clergy—irritated ecclesiastical opinion.
But these measures were pinpricks compared to 1870 legislation
establishing civil marriage and assigning the administration of
cemeteries to the State. Although churchmen reproached the na¬
tional government for replacing canonical marriage as the only
legal form with “public concubinage,” the initiative for breaking
the Church’s monopoly frequently came from municipalities.26
Already in the autumn of 1869 radical town councils were allowing
civil marriages; in a village of Almeria, for example, a couple knelt
before the mayor and received his “benediction” according to an
enraged Catholic press.
   The spread of civil marriage from 1870 onward and the attempt
of the authorities to control cemeteries provoked attacks from the
hierarchy and resistance from the parish clergy, as incidents mul¬
tiplied that added a new dimension to popular anticlericalism.
Priests refused to allow those married civilly to stand as godparents
at baptisms or to receive Christian burial. The clerical argument
that civil marriage removed those who had entered it from the
ranks of the faithful was not appreciated in small towns and vil¬
lages where baptisms and funerals were ritualistic rites of passage
for the entire community. In one town after the cura refused to
baptize a child because the godparents had been married civilly,
an indignant crowd invaded the parish house and threatened to
murder the priest if he did not carry out the ceremony. In another
town a cleric would not baptize a child whose parents declared
they wished General Prim to be the godfather. In Huelva a parish
priest provoked controversy by declaring that “he could not admit
into his church the body of a man who during his life never
entered it” and who had married civilly. An angry family appealed
to the municipal authorities, who seized the keys to the cemetery
and then “took the body with great ceremony and solemnity”
through the streets to the burial place.27 The multiplication of
such conflicts embittered the clergy against the regime and led to
     From Revolution to Restoration                               261