




the promonarchist provisional government, they directed steady
fire against it while zealots in Cadiz and Malaga revolted even
before the Cortes elected by universal suffrage met in early 1869.
In addition, the revolution opened a Pandora’s box of social agi¬
tation in the industrial cities and the southern countryside. Unrest
was too sporadic to threaten social revolution, but it contributed
to the climate of instability, sometimes verging on anarchy, that
characterized the democratic monarchy during its short existence.
   The rapidity with which the September revolution was accom¬
plished (only ten days separated the initial rising and the battle
of Alcolea) prevented any large-scale assault on a Church iden¬
tified closely with the Isabelline monarchy. But the action of local
revolutionary juntas showed that the Church was not forgotten.
The Jesuits, perennial first victims of revolution, were ousted from
their residences in several towns. In Oviedo the junta closed the
diocesan seminary; in Vich the authorities expelled priests be¬
longing to an order founded by the now vilified Claret. Local
measures against the Church, however, varied according to the
strength of urban radicalism. The junta of Seville, one of the most
extreme, closed six of the city’s churches and assigned some to
revolutionary groups for political purposes. The sight of the re¬
publican flag hanging from the high altar of the church of the
Minims left the local clergy fuming. But in other cities—Carta¬
gena, Murcia, and Lorca, for example—the juntas acted with mod¬
eration toward the Church.
    The autumn of 1868 also saw the resurgence of the popular
anticlericalism previously held in check by the moderado State.
Although the Catholic press dwelt on “sacrileges and attacks”
directed against the Church in the weeks following the revolution,
the incidents reported did not reveal massive violence against
either the clergy or ecclesiastical buildings. Occasional acts of vio¬
lence did occur, such as the assassination of a Claretian priest in
La Selva in Tarragona early in October, but this was an isolated
event. More common were flamboyant manifestations of defiance
designed to provoke clerical anger. In some towns revolutionaries
fired their guns at religious statues; in others groups of radicals
invaded church services and intimidated the faithful by shouting
political slogans. In Salamanca a small band wearing the red hats
of revolution entered a church and scandalized those present by
     From Revolution to Restoration                               251




smoking cigars and proclaiming “vivas” to liberty.1 Although not
a serious threat, popular anticlericalism, always emotional and
easy to arouse, showed that the issue of the Church could still
provoke a reaction among the urban lower classes.
   The first measures taken by the provisional government against
the Church in October 1868 seemed familiar manifestations of
the vigorous regalism associated with the radical elements of lib¬
eralism since 1820. Successive decrees suppressed religious com¬
munities introduced since 1837, forbade the legally authorized
orders from owning property, and announced a reduction in the
number of convents by one-half save those belonging to the Sisters
of Charity and other congregations engaged in teaching and hos¬
pital work. As usual the Jesuits received special treatment. A de¬
cree of October 12 ordered them to leave their residences within
three days and expropriated their wealth for the benefit of the
State. The government declared that it was acting to punish the
Church for its intimate ties with the Isabelline monarchy. Religious
communities, a decree asserted, “formed an integral and principal
 part of the shameful and oppressive regime which the nation has
just overthrown with so much glory.” It was, therefore, “necessary
and urgent” to deal with them “to consolidate . . . the revolution
and construct new institutions.”2 The reaction of the hierarchy to
these attacks was surprisingly moderate, although some prelates,
notably Bishop Monescillo of Jaen, complained of “a cabinet filled
with a malign fever and suspicious of the Church.” But Manuel
Garcia Gil, archbishop of Zaragoza, considered events with more
equanimity and urged his clergy not to become disturbed or dis¬
couraged. He counseled his priests to avoid political activity, be¬
cause it “contributed nothing to piety,” and to devote their attention
“to conciliate, attract, win and save souls.”3
   The provisional government faced the task of elaborating a
long-term ecclesiastical policy. Opinion on what ought to be done
with the Church varied among and within the parties of the ruling
coalition. Republican demands for an outright separation of Church
and State received little support. The coalition partners continued
to adhere to the liberal tradition that the State should maintain
official ties with the Church, but they also nourished the hope
that the ecclesiastical establishment could be persuaded to aban¬
don its theocratic preoccupations and its willingness to support
  252                                 From Revolution to Restoration