




    From the beginning the association declared that it had no other
purpose than to defend the interests of the Church. This theo¬
retical neutrality, although regarded as desirable by the pope and
the bishops, really arose from the divisions within the organization
among moderados, the more extreme neocatholics, and the Carl-
ists, who wished “to see Charles VII sit on the throne of his ances¬
tors.”8 At a meeting in early January the junta superior of the
association prudently declared that it would not propose candi¬
dates for the coming elections. Local associations, however, did
not always follow these instructions. Over a thousand members
filled a hall in Toledo and nominated Antolin Monescillo, bishop
of Jaen, the fierce neocatholic Candido Nocedal, and the conde
de Cedillo to stand for the province. Where the directives of the
association were observed, ad hoc Catholic-Monarchist associa¬
tions were formed to present candidates. The avowedly political
character of the latter, as well as the obvious hostility of the As¬
sociation of Catholics to the revolutionary government, soon led
to clashes with supporters of the regime. In Tortosa a crowd of
Liberal Unionists and progresistas surrounded a meeting of
Catholic-Monarchist electors and forced them to desist from nomi¬
nating candidates; conservative defenders of the Church awoke
in the morning to find gallows painted on their doors.9
    Incidents between defenders of the ecclesiastical status quo and
supporters of the government multiplied with the approach of
the elections. The shouts and whistles of proregime sympathizers
disrupted a Catholic-Monarchist meeting in Barcelona; a group
of liberals armed with sticks invaded a similar meeting in Toledo.
To the cries of “Long live liberty!” and “Long live Charles VII!”
the two bands waged a pitched battle in the hall. During the days
set aside for the elections further clashes took place. In Palencia
Catholic opponents of the regime ran a gauntlet of progresistas
and Republicans uttering threats and shouting “neos, priests and
sacristans do not have voting rights” before they could reach the
polling station.10 Harassment of Catholic-Monarchist candidates
and voters was bitterly attacked by the Catholic press, but it con¬
tributed little to the overwhelming victory of the government par¬
ties. Neither the Association of Catholics nor the ad hoc Catholic-
Monarchist groups possessed the organization and resources that
     From Revolution to Restoration                             255




would have allowed them to struggle on equal terms with their
opponents.
   The electoral results further inflamed relations between the
government and defenders of the pre-1868 Church. The junta
superior of the Association of Catholics issued an intemperate
statement declaring its intention “to struggle in hand to hand
combat against the impious revolution” and accusing advocates of
religious liberty of being “renegades” who were not truly Span¬
ish.11 A more violent reaction took place in Burgos on January
25. A Carlist mob invaded the cathedral cloister and assassinated
the provincial governor to the cry of “Long live religion and
Charles VII!” After stabbing the governor innumerable times, the
crowd dragged the bloody and half-naked body down the church
steps and abandoned it in the cathedral square. The authorities
arrested the dean and several other canons on suspicion of com¬
plicity, although they were later released for lack of evidence.
News of the Burgos assassination set off anticlerical demonstra¬
tions. In Madrid a crowd proclaiming “priests have murdered the
governor of Burgos,” rushed to the residence of the papal nuncio
and toppled the pontifical crest on its facade, and the government
press attacked the Church with particular ferocity. The brutal
violence of the event in Burgos, however, checked the rising pas¬
sions of proclerical forces. The Catholic press, taken aback by the
savagery of the murder, condemned it, and the archbishop of
Burgos issued an emotional appeal for calm and respect for the
authorities.12