




   The Church expected little from the government. “Let us not
entertain illusions,” said a clerical journal, “the civil power is no
longer Catholic.”32 Ecclesiastical rhetoric notwithstanding, the State
had not lost its Catholic character. The Supreme Court, for ex¬
ample, upheld a judgment imposing a two-and-one-half-year prison
sentence on a godfather for shouting: “In the name of the Father,
Son, Holy Spirit and the Federal Republic,” as a priest attempted
to pronounce the customary words of the baptismal ritual.33 And
amicable relations between the Church and local officials were
sometimes possible. Bishop Joaquin Lluch of Salamanca con¬
ducted the affairs of his diocese so skillfully that not a single
religious building was closed during the stormy years of revolu¬
tion.34 Nor did the difficult relationship between Church and State
prevent a pilgrimage in October 1872 to the shrine of Our Lady
of the Pillar in Zaragoza attended by more than 60,000. The old
association of liberalism with the Church survived, though in bat¬
tered form.


The Republic and the Church, 1873—1874

    The disintegration of the coalition of 1868, the unpopularity
of King Amadeo, the failure to break the Carlist rebellion, as well
as social and economic difficulties combined to end the democratic
monarchy. In 1872 ministry succeeded ministry as fragmentation
of the parties made stable government impossible. By February
1873 the king, recognizing that he was personally unpopular and
had lost the confidence of the politicians, decided to abdicate. On
February 11 he did so, leaving the Cortes responsible for deciding
any change in the form of the State. The deputies, having tried
one constitutional experiment and lacking enthusiasm for a Bour¬
bon restoration, turned to a republic as the only solution to their
dilemma.
    Proclamation of the First Republic on February 11 was greeted
with an indifferent shrug by much of the clergy and the Catholic
press. Even the prospect of separating Church and State evoked
little more than ritualistic protests. “How can anyone speak of
separation?” asked a clerical periodical, when “it is already an
accomplished fact.”35 The bishops contemplated the republic with
a suspicious neutrality best expressed by Archbishop Monzon Martin
  264                               From Revolution to Restoration




of Granada: “the Church does not reject in principle any of the
known forms of government including the republican,” although
he added the proviso, as long as “the laws of God and the Church”
are respected.36 Among some defenders of the old ecclesiastical
order, there was a curious uncertainty over the meaning of the
republic. In Medina Sidonia, for example, a proclerical city coun¬
cil, upon receiving the news sent “an attentive letter” to the clergy
of the town inviting them “to the proclamation of the Catholic,
Roman and Apostolic Republic.”37
    Successive republican ministries, although committed to the
separation of Church and State, felt no scruples about using the
same regalist tools employed by preceding governments in their
relations with the ecclesiastical authorities. The unilateral abolition
of the medieval military orders with their network of parishes
outside the control of local bishops provoked an early conflict with
the Church. An order of the ministry of grace and justice on May
23 instructing provincial governors to assess the value of churches
led to widespread clerical protests. Although the State claimed
the measure was designed only to provide information necessary
for financial negotiations with the Church, this was insufficient to
calm a rising wave of extraordinary rumors: that the government
intended to sell the churches in a new disamortization; that Cath¬
olics would be forced to ransom their parish churches or else see
them demolished; that the State intended to use the churches as
collateral for a loan to be floated in Germany.38
    In spite of the tension produced by these conflicts, the Church
was less central to republican concerns than to those of previous
governments. Republicans believed that they had a simple and
direct solution at hand, the separation of Church and State. And
they had enough troubles of their own to be unduly preoccupied
by the ecclesiastical question. Severe internal disagreements on
the exact nature of the republic’s constitutional structure (how
federal should it be?) prevented the formation of stable ministries.
In less than a year the republic had four presidents. The outbreak
of a revolt in the summer of 1873 designed to establish virtually
independent republican city-states (cantons) and a succession of
Carlist military victories made surviving more important to the
central government than resolving the problem of the Church.
    The Church and the republic shared an uneasy common ground
     From Revolution to Restoration                              265