




campaign would appeal to the different currents of Catholic opin¬
ion united only by their commitment to uphold the Church’s priv¬
ileged situation. The success of the petition (2,837,144 signatures)
in the face of considerable opposition testified to the strength of
 proclerical forces in certain regions. In one Old Castilian town
 municipal councillors adhering to the government parties pri¬
vately threatened members of the local Association of Catholics
but dared not ban the gathering of signatures lest “they appear
as Jews to the people.”15
    The petition, suitably bound and tied with ribbons, was osten¬
 tatiously carried to the Cortes in carriages, but it failed to affect
 the outcome of the parliamentary debate. Republican support for
 the constitutional provision establishing toleration enlarged the
already substantial support for the measure among the coalition
 partners. Castelar’s emotional and eloquent speech on April 12
 in defense of religious liberty (“Great is the religion of power, but
 the religion of love is greater; great is the religion of implacable
justice, but the religion of merciful pardon is greater”) evoked
 thunderous applause from the chamber, which overwhelmingly
approved the constitutional text on May 5.16
    Parliamentary action in favor of toleration was a foregone con¬
clusion, but news of the final vote provoked an outpouring of
 resentment among ecclesiastics and defenders of religious unity.
The pro-Carlist, Catholic newspaper El Pensamiento Espanol, made
 the announcement on a front page bordered in black; bishops
ordered services of atonement in the churches. These ceremonies
 (over a thousand were conducted by mid-June) became militant
testimonies to faith and a form of protest against the government.
At a service attended by hundreds of Madrid’s notables in the
church of the Carmen, the patriarch of the Indies asked the con¬
gregation to take an oath: “Do you swear by God and these Holy
Gospels to believe, observe and sustain the profession of faith
which you have heard?” The congregation replied with “a unan¬
imous cry, ‘Yes, yes, until death!’ ”17 The authorities regarded
these services as provocations; in some cities they prevented them
from being held. In Madrid they ordered the arrest of a noted
preacher whose fiery sermons led aroused congregations to cry:
“Let the heretics die who voted for the liberty of cults!”18 Religious
ceremonies of reparation against toleration led inevitably to coun-
  258                              From Revolution to Restoration




terdemonstrations by supporters of the government; in Oviedo
youths invaded a procession and shouted “indecent” slogans at
the bishop, whom they struck before being restrained.
   The introduction of religious toleration led to a marked dete¬
rioration in relations between the civil and ecclesiastical authori¬
ties. In Soria the governor could not find a single priest to sing a
Te Deum upon the proclamation of the constitution. A govern¬
ment order in 1870 commanding bishops and priests to take an
oath of loyalty to the constitution met a hostile reception. The
parish clergy of Barcelona refused the oath on the grounds that
they could not give their “adherence to the undermining of our
Church”; only 24 of the 189 parish priests of the diocese of Al-
meria swore the oath, although eleven of the cathedral’s thirty-
eight canons did so.19
   The higher proportion of capitular clergy supporting the con¬
stitution arose from the modest revival of the liberal Church after
three decades of silence. Priests openly favoring the government
were few in number, perhaps only 2,000 of the kingdom’s more
than 40,000 clergy.20 They included at least one bishop, Andres
Rosales of Almeria, who refused to imitate many of his episcopal
colleagues in their hostility toward the constitutional oath. In a
pastoral letter Rosales justified his moderation by declaring that
he did not wish “to throw more wood on the fires of discord
burning in this unfortunate country.” He criticized his episcopal
brethren for encouraging “resentment and great confusion” by
refusing to take the oath. The duty of the bishops, he maintained,
did not involve “taking on the very grave responsibility of fo¬
menting the disobedience of their subjects toward the existing
powers.”21 Most of the bishops, however, remained firm in their
rejection of the constitutional oath.22
   The majority of liberal priests were drawn from the ranks of
clergy in cathedral chapters and parishes. Through their journal,
appropriately named The Harmony of Catholicism and Liberty (La
Armonia), they defended the Cortes for its action in favor of re¬
ligious liberty: “the Spanish Cortes have not committed a her¬
esy . . . but have rather consecrated an eminently Christian
principle”; they argued that the defense of Catholic Spain could
be achieved only if the clergy would “confirm our brothers in faith
through instruction and example.”23 By defending toleration as a
     From Revolution to Restoration                                259