




owners insisted that the parish priest bless the redistribution in a
formal ceremony. Even in Alcoy, where revolutionaries inspired
by the First International put the houses of prominent residents
to the torch and assassinated others, the parish priest of Santa
Maria, Manuel Benlloch, remained in the city at the height of the
disturbances assisting the victims without ever being troubled.46
 In the end there was no danger that either the cantonalist revolt
or social unrest would lead to revolution. But the Church wel¬
comed the suppression of both by the central government. This
did not mean reconciliation with the republic, but churchmen
were not ungrateful for its protection of the existing social order.
    The most serious physical attacks on the Church during 1873
 did not take place in Andalusia and the Levante, where social and
 political revolution threatened, but in the battle zones of the north.
 Carlist military victories in the Basque Provinces, Navarra, and
 Catalonia provoked the same violent reaction among troops and
 supporters of the government that had characterized the war of
 the 1830’s. The second great Carlist rebellion, feeding on peasant
 resentment at the centralizing policies of successive governments
 in Madrid and on the disgust created by the religious legislation
 of the democratic monarchy, broke out in 1872 under the personal
 direction of the young and dashing pretender Charles VII. De¬
 fense of religion again formed one of the cornerstones of Carlist
 propaganda. The pretender’s brother told the troops under his
 command: “in you is represented the glorious traditions of Cath¬
 olic Spain,” when “the religion of our fathers is oppressed.”47
 Carlist soldiers, often without regular uniforms, entered battle
 with a badge of the Sacred Heart on their chests bearing the words:
 “Halt enemy, the Heart of Jesus is with me.”48
    The identification of Carlism with militant Catholicism won the
 revolt support among the parish clergy of the north. Several curas
joined the rebellion at its beginning. The most feared, Manuel de
 Santa Cruz, the parish priest of Hernialde, gained an unfavorable
 reputation even among his compatriots with his guerrilla exploits
and cold-blooded tactics. Although assiduous in the daily reading
of his breviary, Santa Cruz felt no scruples at having twenty pris¬
oners shot without benefit of confession.49 Only a minority of the
clergy, of course, took arms, but priests in the north sympathized
with the rebellion and contributed what they could to its success.
  268                              From Revolution to Restoration




When Charles VII visited the sacred town of the Basques, Guer¬
nica, in August 1873, he was received by the local clergy in cere¬
monial splendor and led into the church for the singing of a Te
Deum; a well-known Capuchin preacher, Esteban de Adoain, in¬
terrupted the mission he was giving in Lastaola to exhort Carlist
troops demoralized by a surprise attack.50
   The hierarchy maintained its usual caution before the rebellion.
Some bishops, such as Landeira of Cartagena, hoped for the triumph
of Charles VII, but few lent the rising active support save for
Caixal of Urgel, who became chaplain general to the pretender’s
armies. Events would reveal the prudence of episcopal circum¬
spection. The second rebellion stood little more chance of success
than the first, and for similar reasons. Although Carlist outbreaks
occurred in other regions—near Cuenca, Orihuela, in the south¬
ern hills, and in Galicia—the movement rested still on the narrow
base of the northern peasant provinces, which had a strong sense
of grievance against Madrid. It was no more successful in breaking
the hold of the central government over the cities than four dec¬
ades before. It suffered, too, from serious internal divisions, in¬
cluding the opposition of a significant body of Carlist opinion to
armed insurrection itself.
   Successive Carlist victories in the spring and summer of 1873
exasperated opponents of an absolutist restoration and deepened
hostility toward the clergy in regions where military operations
were being carried on. At Elgueta in Guipuzcoa the authorities
arrested all the town’s parish priests who were suspected of con¬
spiring with the enemy.51 Anticlerical passions rose most fiercely
in Catalonia because of the character of the war there. The Carlists
failed to take the large cities—Barcelona, Tarragona, Gerona—
but they operated with considerable success in the countryside
and against the smaller valley towns of the interior from bases in
the Catalan hills.52 Both sides moved over the same terrain and
took, lost, and recaptured towns in an atmosphere conducive to
mutual reprisals.
   Political conflict within anti-Carlist ranks added more fuel to
the fires of popular resentment against the clergy. Extremist fed¬
eral Republicans and revolutionaries of the First International
challenged the authority of the national government in Barcelona
and seemed on the verge of establishing an independent canton
     From Revolution to Restoration                             269