


Church, State, and Secularization, 1869-1873

    With the opening of the Cortes on February 11, 1869, public
attention shifted to parliamentary discussion of a new constitution.
The poor electoral showing of advocates of the 1851 ecclesiastical
settlement left the resolution of the Church question in the hands
of the government parties, faced by a vigorous Republican op¬
position. Defense of clerical interests fell to three churchmen who
had won election: the polemical bishop of Jaen, Antolin Mones-
cillo; the more moderate archbishop of Santiago, Miguel Garcia
Cuesta; and an intransigent canon of Vitoria, Vicente de Man-
  256                               From Revolution to Restoration




terola. The ecclesiastical deputies presented their case as best they
could in a chamber that was not about to heed their arguments
in any case. The tone of debate was remarkably civil; there were
few savage anticlerical onslaughts save for the speech of the Re¬
publican deputy Suner y Capdevila, who shocked the Cortes and
provoked services of reparation in the churches by calling the
doctrine of the Trinity nothing more than a “gabble.”
   From the beginning the Republicans pressed for the formula
“a free Church in a free State,” meaning the separation of the
civil and ecclesiastical orders, the end of government financing of
the Church, and the corresponding termination of the State’s
traditional regalian rights. Although the Republican leaders,
Francisco Pi y Margall and Emilio Castelar, argued forcefully for
the separation of Church and State, the coalition parties were not
yet ready to break with liberal tradition. After considerable dis¬
cussion they agreed on a constitutional provision similar to that
in the draft constitution of 1856. The text avoided an explicit
statement of the confessionality of the State but committed the
government to pay clerical salaries and provide for the mainte¬
nance of churches.13
   With the preservation of its official relationship with the State,
the Church had little cause for complaint. Indeed, it fared better
than might have been expected in the days following the Septem¬
ber revolution. But this modest gain was forgotten in the midst
of the emotional reaction aroused by parliamentary discussion of
the principle of religious liberty. In spite of the insignificant size
of Spain’s Protestant minority, churchmen saw the prospect of
toleration as certain to destroy Catholicism, endanger society, cor¬
rupt families, and lead to a host of other ills. Defenders of the
ecclesiastical status quo were unable to organize satisfactorily to
contest the elections, but they galvanized themselves to prevent
the Cortes from accepting religious liberty. The Association of
Catholics launched a massive petition campaign on the grounds
that deputies would be moved “not by faith, religion nor by the
fear of God but only by the fear of public opinion.”14 The faithful
were urged to sign because the petition deliberately did not refer
to “a republic or a monarchy, nor to this or that person; it speaks
only of religion.” By divorcing the lobbying effort from the div¬
isive issue of the Carlist pretender, the association assured that its
     From Revolution to Restoration                               257