




increased tension between priests and residents of local commu¬
nities.
   Religious liberty and the secularizing tendencies of the govern¬
ment created a climate of ecclesiastical opinion hostile to a work¬
able accommodation with the State. The Constitution of 1869 had
left the task of elaborating the specific terms of the relationship
between the civil and ecclesiastical orders to the ordinary parlia¬
mentary process. A reform project presented to the Cortes in
March 1870 by the minister of grace and justice, Montero Rios,
offered the Church an arrangement not unreasonable given the
political circumstances. In return for modest internal reforms,
such as parish participation in the nomination of curas and the
integration of the territory of the old military orders into existing
dioceses, the State offered to abandon its traditional right to in¬
tervene in the Church’s internal affairs except for the right of
patronage over appointments financed by the government. The
project provided for the ownership of property by the Church
subject to expropriation only in cases of “public utility” through
the courts and with proper indemnization. It also offered an an¬
nual budget of approximately 130 million reales for clerical sal¬
aries and church maintenance. Although these terms were not
ideal from an ecclesiastical point of view (the budget of cultoy clero
was 50 million reales less than in 1868), they partially satisfied
clerical ambitions for freedom from government interference and
preserved the State’s commitment to finance the Church, albeit
in reduced form. The bishops, however, objected to the proposals.
Cardinal Garcia Cuesta of Santiago complained of the financial
terms and the planned participation of parishioners in the selec¬
tion of their priests; the bishop of Osma called the provisions
“execrable . . . pernicious and lamentable.”28 The scheme was also
opposed by the Republicans and the more radical elements of the
governmental coalition, and it came to nothing.
   Tension affecting relations between Church and State after the
revolution of 1868 did not lead to the nearly complete break that
had occurred during the 1830’s and early 1840’s. With the papacy
embroiled in the final stages of its struggle with the kingdom of
Italy and in the work of the First Vatican Council, there was little
Pius IX could do to help the Spanish Church. Relations between
  262                               From Revolution to Restoration




Rome and Madrid were not easy, but they at least survived at a
minimal level.29 Moreover, it was far from clear to the ecclesiastical
leadership what course should be taken to reassert the Church’s
position. By nature cautious, the hierarchy avoided committing
itself to the Carlist cause after sporadic outbreaks of rebellion in
1869. A majority of the bishops responded favorably to a gov¬
ernment order of March 1869 requiring them to take action against
priests who were “preaching a war without truce” against the
State.30 The minister of grace and justice, Manuel Ruiz Zorilla, a
radical progresista known for his anticlerical views, even con¬
gratulated the prelates who “had responded worthily and satis¬
factorily” to the State’s order, although he initiated judicial
proceedings against Garcia Cuesta of Santiago and two openly
Carlist bishops, Caixal of Urgel and Lagiiera of Osma, for their
defiant replies.31 Given the extreme division of opinion among
Catholics willing to defend the pre-1868 status of the Church on
the issue of the Carlist pretender, the hierarchy could not afford
to compromise its position by supporting Charles VII. The gov¬
ernment continued to support the Church financially, although
it fell into arrears paying the clergy, and it seemed the only force
capable of restraining the outbreaks of disorder that appeared to
threaten social revolution.
    During the final year and a half of the democratic monarchy
(July 1871-February 1873), relations between the civil and eccle¬
siastical authorities became more difficult. With the collapse of
the governmental coalition in the summer of 1871, power alter¬
nated between the progresista faction headed by Ruiz Zorilla and
that led by Praxedes Sagasta. In general, progresista ministries
adopted a harsher attitude on ecclesiastical resistance than had
previous governments. In January 1872 the State attempted to
break clerical hostility toward civil marriage by declaring that chil¬
dren born to couples married only in a religious ceremony would
be regarded as legally illegitimate; in March the minister of grace
and justice announced the reimposition of the exequatur, the right
of the State to approve all papal bulls and briefs before their
publication in Spain. And the transformation of what had been
an ineffective Carlist revolt into dangerous rebellion in April 1872
increased government suspicions against the clergy in mountain¬
ous zones of the Basque Provinces, Navarra, and Catalonia.
     From Revolution to Restoration                               263