




semiauthoritarian governments disposed to uphold its privileges.
The Church, said Eugenio Montero Rios, a devout Catholic and,
as minister of grace and justice in 1870, the author of a plan of
ecclesiastical reform, might have a brilliant future but this would
depend “on the acceptance on its part of the great principles and
political rights which form the patrimony of free peoples.”4
    The patrimony to which the Church was expected to subscribe
was considerably larger than the one it attacked so vehemently in
1854. On October 25 the provisional government issued a man¬
ifesto to the nation affirming rights, such as freedom of the press
and association, unpalatable to the ecclesiastical elite. But the gov¬
ernment struck a harsher blow by declaring its intention to intro¬
duce religious liberty. Although the manifesto asserted that the
proposal would improve the Church by encouraging it to attend
to its pastoral responsibilities, it left no doubt that the project arose
from “a protest against the theocratic spirit introduced with such
insidious persistence in the essence of our institutions by the pre¬
vious regime.”5 Acceptance of the principle of religious liberty
represented a significant departure from the identification of po¬
litical reform with the maintenance of “Catholic unity” since the
Cortes of Cadiz a half-century before.
    The willingness of the ruling coalition to abandon a basic tenet
of Spanish liberalism arose primarily from the leftward drift of
the progresista party since the revolution of 1854. The progre-
sistas, who had then turned aside proposals for religious liberty,
took a harder line on the issue of the Church, because they re¬
sented its support for the semidictatorial moderado State of the
1860’s and because they feared the danger on the left from the
Democrat and Republican parties, both committed to the creation
of a purely secular State. The conversion of the great progresista
parliamentarian Salustiano de Olozaga to the cause of religious
liberty after having opposed it in 1854, ensured its acceptance.
The October manifesto proposed a second change certain to arouse
clerical opposition: “freedom of education is another of the cardinal
reforms which the revolution has demanded” to counter “the un¬
bridled and blind reaction against spontaneous manifestations of
human understanding” taking place before 1868.
    Clerical protests against the October manifesto soon appeared
in print, although the intensity of episcopal sentiment was not
     From Revolution to Restoration                              253




uniform. Miguel Garcia Cuesta, the archbishop of Santiago, re¬
stated in restrained language the traditional case against religious
liberty while accepting the use of universal suffrage in the coming
elections and declaring that he did not intend “to condemn any
form of government.”6 Bishop Lagiiera of Osma, a prelate known
for his Carlist sympathies, bred a rhetorical shot reminiscent of
an earlier era when he accused the provisional government of
wishing “to undermine the unity of religion by introducing false
religions and laying the foundations of temples which will not be
dedicated to the true God.” Manuel Garcia Gil of Zaragoza showed
the same common sense he had displayed in an earlier pastoral
letter. Although he lamented the government’s actions, he saw no
point in levying accusations against the authorities. Deprived of
the support of the State, the Church must depend on its own
inner resources to survive. The Church “lives and will live its own
life . . . although all governments abandon it.” He urged his clergy
to concentrate their efforts on evangelization to remedy “the great
ignorance of religion [existing] among a great part of the popu¬
lation.”
   The Church’s place in the new order would not be determined
by episcopal protests to the authorities. On December 6 the pro¬
visional government called elections in mid-January to choose
deputies for a Constituent Cortes. It was symbolic of the changes
that had taken place since 1843 that defense of the pre-1868
ecclesiastical settlement fell primarily to laymen. In December a
group of Catholic notables linked to the conservative moderados
and the Carlists established the Association of Catholics in Spain
“to propagate and defend the doctrines, institutions and social
influence of the Church, particularly its liberty and the Catholic
unity of Spain . . . through peaceful means and under the pro¬
tection of the law.”7 The association, modeled on similar bodies
in Belgium and Germany, won episcopal and papal approval and
spread to twenty-eight cities, including Barcelona, Seville, Segovia,
Santiago, Salamanca, and Palma de Mallorca. Local associations
were invariably dominated by men of substance holding deeply
conservative political views. In Palma, for example, a wealthy land-
owner, Fausto Morell, served as president; other notables, such
as merchants, manufacturers, and landowners, filled the remain¬
ing offices.
  254                              From Revolution to Restoration