




of self-interest before the pressures for autonomy generated by
extremist partisans of federalism, who were also regarded as rabid
anticlericals, although not always with justification. The federal
principle won general acceptance from Spanish Republicans, but
the question of how it was to be applied provoked disagreement.39
Local politicians, drawn generally from the ranks of the lesser
urban bourgeoisie, wished a degree of independence that would
have reduced the national government to a figurehead. Even be¬
fore the outbreak of the cantonalist revolt in July 1873, church¬
men contemplated the actions of certain municipalities and signs
of republican anticlericalism with deep unease. In Seville youths
dropped red dye into the holy water fonts of the churches so the
faithful would emerge with brows tinted the color of revolution;
in Cadiz a musical band irritated Catholic opinion by striking up
the march of Garibaldi outside a chapel where a solemn benedic¬
tion was taking place. The republican municipality of Cadiz, one
of the most anticlerical, ordered the demolition of the Candelaria
convent to provide work for the unemployed and changed tra¬
ditional religious street names to those of the republican litany—
Voltaire, Fourier, Garibaldi, Mazzini, Juarez, and Lincoln.40
   As long as the apostle of federalism Francisco Pi y Margall
continued as president of the republic, the restless forces of local
autonomy were partially restrained. But Pi’s departure from office
in mid-July because of the factionalization of republican politics
was followed by declarations of virtual independence by cities and
towns from Salamanca to Cadiz. The emergence of the cantons
threatened the already weak authority of the central government,
under the presidency of Nicolas Salmeron, and led to outbursts
of anticlericalism in Cadiz, Malaga, Sanlucar de Barrameda, Jerez,
and Cordoba. In Cadiz the cantonal government, formed into a
committee of public safety in imitation of the French Revolution,
prohibited the teaching of religion in the schools in favor of “uni¬
versal morality,” abolished religious orders in the city “since cel¬
ibacy is a state contrary to nature,” proclaimed the immediate
separation of Church and State, and took possession of churches
and parish archives.41 Gold and silver objects from the churches,
particularly the great monstrance of the cathedral, were put up
for sale at public auction. At Sanlucar the revolutionaries expelled
the Piarists and closed parish churches; in Malaga the canton
  266                               From Revolution to Restoration




suppressed convents and ordered the bishop to vacate his palace.
    News of these events was reported with horror by a Catholic
press that saw the cantonal movement as nothing less than irre¬
ligious Jacobinism bent on the destruction of the Church. In fact,
anticlericalism was not synonymous with cantonalism. In Sala¬
manca the authorities maintained good relations with the Church;
in Cartagena, the canton to survive longest, priests were able to
walk the streets in clerical dress even during the siege of the city
maintained by the central government. In Granada the committee
of public safety released the archbishop from jail, where he had
been placed by an overzealous militiaman, with effusive apolo¬
gies.42 Even in the radical cantons there was little direct physical
violence against the clergy.43 The central government had no sym¬
pathy for the anticlerical excesses of some cantons, perhaps be¬
cause it wished to avoid giving Carlism another propaganda stick
with which to beat the regime. The minister of grace and justice
during the presidency of Pi y Margall assured the bishop of Ma¬
laga: “the government of the Republic is completely divorced from
the measures taken by the municipality; it understands and la¬
ments the trouble to which you have been put.”44
    If Church and State agreed on the necessity of ending the
cantonalist rebellion, they concurred no less in their hostility to¬
ward the social disorders sweeping the southern countryside. The
seizure and distribution of land by a dispossessed peasantry seemed
to herald the terrible day of revolution so long predicted by
churchmen and just as feared by republican politicians in Madrid.
With the rising of the textile workers of Alcoy on July 9, clerical
fears of impending disaster deepened.45 The Catholic press was
filled with tales of violence in Alcoy and what was seen as the
wanton seizure of property by peasants in the southern provinces.
Although there was a dose of anticlericalism present in the dis¬
turbances, they were not directed primarily against the Church.
It possessed little agricultural property and the economic situation
of the clergy, many of whom had not received salaries in three
years, made the Church less attractive as an object of popular
resentment than the monasteries had been during the 1830’s.
    Agitation focused more on the liberal bourgeoisie, who had
profited from the acquisition of ecclesiastical lands. In at least one
town, Morera in Badajoz, peasants seizing property from land-
     From Revolution to Restoration                                267