




with a distinctly radical character. During a series of disturbances
between March and July, the partisans of revolution invaded re¬
ligious services shouting anticlerical slogans and occupied some
churches.53 A number of priests abandoned their parishes and
sought protection on ships lying in the city’s harbor. The Catholic
press believed that the disorders would lead to even worse ex¬
cesses, assassinations, church burnings, and the like, but forces
loyal to the national government were able to maintain control of
the situation and prevent widespread physical attacks on the clergy
and on ecclesiastical buildings. There was no repetition of the
bloody events of 1835.
   At Reus the republican authorities acted with similar vigor and
took possession of the town’s churches upon hearing that a mob
was about to seize them. At Graus a revolutionary crowd set one
church ablaze, but even there the republican city council, domi¬
nated by moderates, earned the praise of the Catholic press for
bringing the disturbances to an end.54 Restraint was less evident
among the soldiers, the “Volunteers of the Republic,” actively
engaged in armed conflict with Carlist forces. In the districts near
Igualada, the plains of Molins de Rey and Vendrell, troops as¬
sassinated three priests and harassed others with frequent searches
of churches and parish houses. By midsummer many clergy had
abandoned their posts and taken refuge in France.55 Although
anticlerical violence in Catalonia led to clerical denunciations,
moderate Republicans had no interest in encouraging a massive
wave of attacks on the Church, because such a campaign might
well get out of hand, given the revolutionary exaltation of extre¬
mists, and redound to the benefit of Carlism. The ecclesiastical
leadership in Catalonia realized that a break with the republic in
favor of Charles VII would expose the Church to even greater
danger. Neither the Church nor moderate Republicans could af¬
ford the luxury of completely antagonizing each other.
   The turbulent events of the summer of 1873 did not prevent
the introduction of the long-awaited proposal for separating Church
and State. While Pi y Margall still held office, the government
presented its project for a new constitution providing for sepa¬
ration (Article 35). On August 1 (under the presidency of Sal-
meron), the minister of grace and justice brought forward a draft
law spelling out the State’s intentions in greater detail. The re-
  270                              From Revolution to Restoration




public’s plan for ending the historic union between the civil and
ecclesiastical orders was not the radical, anticlerical document
that critics perceived it to be. The State renounced its powers over
ecclesiastical patronage and the other regalian privileges Spanish
governments had enjoyed for centuries in ecclesiastical matters.
It recognized the right of the Church to conduct its affairs “with
complete independence” and to hold property subject to the gen¬
eral laws of the nation; it agreed to continue the pensions paid to
nuns under the terms of the Concordat of 1851 and to honor
legal contracts already made for the repair of churches. Although
Article 37 of the proposed constitution forbade any state financial
support for the Church, the draft law was ambiguous on this point,
perhaps deliberately, declaring simply that further legislation would
be introduced. The Church was also assured that all buildings
being used for religious purposes would continue to be so em¬
ployed, although those declared artistic monuments were to fall
under the supervision of the government.56
   The announcement of legislation proposing separation pro¬
voked an immediate reaction from clerics, who called it a plan “to
erect persecution of the Church into a system of government.”57
But the Church stood to gain something from separation—free¬
dom from the state interference under which ecclesiastics had
chafed for generations. The prospect of losing financial sup¬
port was disturbing, but the irregularity of payments since 1868
had already forced the Church to rely on its own fund-raising
efforts.
   Clerical opinion attacked the proposed law on separation, but
for the first time in the history of the Spanish Church it also began
to question the utility of the traditional connection with the State.
The exhortation of Archbishop Garcia Gil of Zaragoza in 1868
for the Church to rely on its own resources and devote its energies
to pastoral work in a time of revolutionary upheaval was received
with greater sympathy by ecclesiastics disenchanted with the slim
benefits the Church had derived from its ties to the government.
A conservative and anti-Carlist periodical widely read by the par¬
ish clergy declared: “the faith has lost much ground among us.
To reconquer it, we do not need the civil power in any
way . . . Society needs apostles, and apostles are sent by God not
by governments.” Even an avowedly pro-Carlist newspaper in
     From Revolution to Restoration                              271