




tution of 1876 affirmed the confessionality of the State and re¬
duced religious toleration to narrow limits; the government
undertook to honor the financial commitment made in the Con¬
cordat of 1851 for support of the clergy, and it freed the Church
from the restrictions imposed after 1868 on establishment of new
schools. The restored monarchy also sought papal support by
improving diplomatic relations with Rome in 1875.64
    But Canovas had no intention of yielding to clerical pressure
for full recovery of the privileges the Church had enjoyed before
1868. Although the Church had official status and the new con¬
stitution provided for nineteen episcopal seats in the Senate, Ca¬
novas sought to reduce the clergy’s direct political influence by
excluding them from the more influential Congress of Deputies.
The State retained its traditional powers over ecclesiastical finance
and patronage and generally resisted demands for the persecution
of Spain’s tiny Protestant minority. Moreover, the restoration po¬
litical settlement permitted the emergence of a two-party system,
which made a policy of wholesale concessions to the Church im¬
possible. The two parties, eventually known as Liberal and Liberal-
Conservative, lacked the internal unity and political honesty nec¬
essary for long-term stability, but they were agreed at least on
preserving the principal gains nineteenth-century liberalism had
made at the expense of the old absolutist order. Canovas mis¬
trusted the more democratic program of the Liberals but re¬
mained committed to the idea of a constitutional, parliamentary
regime. And he recognized the necessity of winning Liberal sup¬
port to guarantee its survival. As the political heirs of the pro-
gresistas, the Liberal party, under its brilliant and opportunistic
leader Praxedes Sagasta (1827-1903), viewed the Church with
considerable suspicion. But both parties followed similar eccle¬
siastical policies based on the need to conciliate the Church within
the limits of a constitutional and parliamentary state based on
nineteenth-century liberal principles. Successive restoration gov¬
ernments pursued a delicate policy designed to balance ecclesiast¬
ical demands for greater privileges against the political realities
of the new regime.
    The attempt of Canovas to neutralize the Church as a political
force and to win its support for a socially conservative but polit-
     From Revolution to Restoration                              275




ically liberal government was only partially successful. Clergy and
laity attached to Carlism or to the neoabsolutist Integralism of
Ramon Nocedal remained firmly opposed to the restored consti¬
tutional monarchy. As the architect of the new system, Canovas
was mercilessly pilloried by the Carlist and Integralist press until
his assassination in 1897. The enormously successful pamphlet
(over sixty editions had appeared by 1960) Is Liberalism a Sin?
published in 1884 by a Catalan priest, Sarda y Salvany, symbolized
the hostility of the most traditional elements of Spanish Catholi¬
cism toward the restoration State.65
   The ecclesiastical leadership, however, had long since learned
the necessity of compromise. With few exceptions the hierarchy
supported the regime. The bishops welcomed the restoration of
the male religious orders, state financial support, and a political
system that appeared to offer protection against the danger of
social revolution. Yet the attitude of the official Church remained
as ambiguous as it had been toward the moderado State of the
 1840’s and 1850’s. The Church resented the refusal of successive
restoration ministries to increase substantially the budget for culto
y clero; it complained bitterly of the government’s failure, even
when Canovas was in office, to enforce strictly the constitutional
provisions against public manifestations of Protestantism, and it
regarded the State’s unwillingness to repress intellectual dissent
in favor of religious orthodoxy as either betrayal or weakness.66
    In spite of the hierarchy’s support for the constitutional mon¬
archy, the Church was as determined as ever to bring about a new
golden age of religion and morality. It viewed the advantages
secured from the restoration State as insufficient and pressed
relentlessly for more concessions in the realms of education, fi¬
nance, censorship, and public morality. Although the ecclesiastical
leadership recognized the benefits obtained from the State, it did
not fully appreciate how closely the survival of its privileged sit¬
uation was linked to the delicate political balance of the restora¬
tion. The deaths of Canovas and Sagasta stimulated the inherent
factionalism of the two governing parties. And the rise of Catalan
regional sentiment coupled with the growing strength of Repub¬
licans and Socialists after 1900 undermined still further the fragile
consensus that had allowed the constitutional monarchy to func-
  276                               From Revolution to Restoration