



   The Church suffered disruption between 1868 and 1874. The
number of vocations declined, sixteen dioceses lacked bishops by
1873, and ecclesiastical finances had fallen into disarray because
of the near bankruptcy of successive governments. Yet clerical
laments about the devastating effects of “revolution” must be taken
with a grain of salt. When the clergy spoke of “persecution,” they
were referring as much to the impact of secularizing legislation
as to actual interference with the Church’s religious mission. No
government between 1868 and 1874 endorsed a national policy
of antireligious harassment and violence. Physical attacks on ec¬
clesiastical buildings and priests did occur in local settings but
were not universal. Religious services were conducted normally
     From Revolution to Restoration                             273




in most dioceses throughout the period; few bishops were exiled
from their sees. There are even examples of new religious houses
being established, particularly by the orders of women engaged
in charitable work. The Little Sisters of the Poor founded two
convents (Huesca and Salamanca) in 1872; the Sisters of Charity
opened a house in Valladolid during the republic.62 And in spite
of the collapse of state financial support, the Church was able to
compensate partially for the loss of income through direct con¬
tributions of the faithful.63 The Church fared less well than during
the 1854-1856 revolution but far better than in the decade 1833—
 1843.


Toward New Conflicts

   The political system designed by the constitutional architect of
the Bourbon restoration, Canovas del Castillo, would endure until
it was overthrown by General Primo de Rivera in 1923. Its eccle¬
siastical policy would survive until 1931, when the Second Re¬
public separated Church and State for the first time in Spanish
history. Canovas created what was essentially a more open and
flexible version of the moderado State in its less authoritarian
moments. The ability of the monarch to interfere in politics was
minimized; a mechanism was found to guarantee the opposition
a chance to hold power, thus denying the army the leverage that
had made it a political force. Moreover, the regime respected
within certain limits traditional liberal rights, such as freedom of
the press, and avoided on the whole the excesses committed against
intellectual dissent characteristic of its pre-1868 predecessor. Al¬
though the restoration settlement suffered from internal weak¬
nesses that eventually would cause its disintegration, it offered a
workable system to a nation exhausted by six years of war and
constitutional experimentation.
   The success of the restoration over the short term rested on its
ability to attract support from those opposed to republicanism,
Carlism, and social agitation. Canovas saw the necessity of reach¬
ing an accommodation with the Church to undercut the appeal
of the Carlists and to strengthen the forces of order and stability
on which the regime depended. The Church appeared to profit
handsomely from the State’s policy of conciliation. The Consti-
  274                              From Revolution to Restoration