




Madrid asserted: “we Catholics must have nothing to do with the
government; we must conduct ourselves only by the laws of the
Church, and we ourselves must carry out the separation of
Church and State.”58
   This flirtation with reality created by the possibility of “a free
Church in a free State” did not develop into a serious affair.
Improved relations with the fourth and last president of the re¬
public, Emilio Castelar, removed any temptation for the Church
to venture on its own. The sudden twists and turns of factionalized
republican politics brought Castelar to power in September 1873.
His eloquent defense of religious liberty in April 1869 had not
endeared him to Catholic opinion. But he was the least anticlerical
of the republic’s presidents, and his determination to break the
last remnants of the cantonalist revolt as well as to crush social
agitation calmed a Church uneasy about the danger of revolution.
There were points of strong tension between the civil and eccle¬
siastical authorities, but the draft law on separation remained un¬
passed as Church and State stayed united during the republic’s
short history.
   Castelar hoped to win support for the regime by opening ne¬
gotiations with the papacy to fill the numerous episcopal vacancies
that had occurred since 1868. The successful outcome allowed
the president of the republic to do what King Amadeo had never
been able to do. Both the Catholic and opposition press expressed
irritation at the unlikely sight of a president engaged in the busi¬
ness of negotiating episcopal appointments with Rome. “Castelar
has turned himself into a sacristan,” complained one newspaper.59
Castelar’s suggestions included some of the ablest figures of the
late-nineteenth-century episcopacy: Victoriano Guisasola, later as
archbishop of Toledo one of the few Spanish bishops to appreciate
the extent of the working class’s alienation from the Church; Cef-
erino Gonzalez, a Dominican intellectual responsible for reviving
the study of the philosophy of Saint Thomas Aquinas; and Joaquin
Lluch, recommended for the diocese of Barcelona, who had shown
as bishop of Salamanca that it was possible for the Church to
conduct itself with moderation in a time of political change. Even
a hostile Catholic press had to admit that Castelar had suggested
priests “worthy for their virtue and orthodoxy.”60
   Castelar’s attempt to create a conservative republic acceptable
  272                                From Revolution to Restoration




in some measure to the Church and to the classes fearful of rev¬
olution foundered, however, on the divisions within republican
ranks as well as on the failure to end the Carlist rebellion and the
Cuban war. When a political crisis forced the president’s resig¬
nation on January 3, 1874, the captain general of Madrid, Pavia,
executed a mini—coup d’etat, ending the republican experiment.
As a result of this upheaval, a government of national union
emerged, still nominally republican and supported by many par¬
tisans of the discredited democratic monarchy. The new regime
continued efforts to conciliate the Church. It issued a statement
declaring that the “State . . . cannot ignore nor offend the Church.”61
The undisguised conservative nature of the new government,
however, could not save it from its own constitutional uncertainties
(should it be a unitary republic or again attempt a monarchical
solution?) nor from growing sympathy within the army for a Bour¬
bon restoration in the person of Isabella’s son, Alfonso. Political
support for a restoration in a nation exhausted by six years of rev¬
olution and war was also forming through the astute efforts of a
centrist moderado, Antonio Canovas del Castillo (1828-1897).
Although Canovas was opposed to installing Alfonso through yet
another military intervention, the rising on December 29, 1874,
by a young general, Martinez Campos, in the name of Alfonso
XII forced the issue. The interim republic, to which its own sup¬
porters were not committed, collapsed easily. A Bourbon sat again
on the Spanish throne.