


                                                                      307
  308                                  Harvard Historical Monographs




obvious importance, although a recent study on the priests of Toledo
in the early nineteenth century by Leandro Higueruela del Pino partially
remedied this deficiency. Nor is there an adequate general study of the
Church’s role in education. And work on the charitable function of the
Church, so crucial to its position within Old Regime society, is just be¬
ginning.
   The contribution of social and economic historians, who are indiffer¬
ent to the religious aspects of the Church’s history, has been useful. But
their work has focused largely on the period before the sale of eccle¬
siastical lands beginning in 1836. The question of Church wealth after
that, so controversial in the great anticlerical battles of the twentieth
century, has been generally ignored. Historians of pronounced secular
views tend to be uninterested in the Church save in a limited economic
and social context that is frequently Marxist. But it is unlikely that any
convincing study of nineteenth-century anticlericalism can be written
without the contribution of historians of popular movements willing to
explore the radicalization of the urban masses that was clearly taking
place during the first four decades of the century. The history of the
Spanish Church, then, offers abundant opportunities for further work
to historians of different outlooks—whether of the right, left, or center.
   The following is a brief, select bibliography designed to call attention
primarily to recent literature on the Spanish Church.

Bibliography and General

   Two standard bibliographies, B. Sanchez Alonso, Fuentes de la historia
espahola e hispanoamericana, 3rd ed., 3 vols. (Madrid, 1952) and the bib¬
liographic periodical Indice Historico Espahol (1953-1976), continue to be
useful, although the historian interested in the Church will find more
manageable bibliographic information following each entry in the Dic-
cionario de historia eclesiastica de Espaha, 4 vols. (Madrid, 1972—1975) as
well as the bibliographic essay in Vicente Carcel Orti, ed., La Iglesia en
la Espaha conte?nporanea, 1808-1975 (Madrid, 1979), xxv—xxxvii. Jose
Manuel Cuenca Toribio and Jesus Longares Alonso have surveyed recent
periodical literature in Bibliografia de historia de la Iglesia (Valencia and
Cordoba, 1976).
   There are few good general histories of the Spanish Church. Of sev¬
eral nineteenth-century attempts the best is Vicente de la Fuente, Historia
eclesiastica de Espaha, 6 vols. (Madrid, 1873-1875). An attempt to remedy
this deficiency has been undertaken by the Biblioteca de Autores Cris-
tianos under the direction of R. Garda Villoslada. Volume 5 of this
general history (Carcel Orti, ed., cited above) contains essays on the
Church since 1808 by several authors. Inevitably in a collective work the
     Harvard Historical Monographs                                   309