




restableciendo las ordenes militares,” April 11, 1874, in La Cruz (1874), 636-
640.
      62. J. M. Amenos, “El fomento de vocaciones eclesiasticas en Espana dur¬
ante la segunda mitad del siglo XIX,” Seminarios, 1 (1955), 61; La Espana Catolica,
April 20, 1875; El Pensamiento Espanol, November 11, 1873.
      63. Fund-raising efforts often followed the model devised by the bishop
of the Canaries, Bernardo Martinez. Parish juntas formed by the cura and four
laymen sought long-term subscriptions payable on a monthly basis from the
faithful. “Obra para el sostenimiento del culto y clero, creada por el Sr. Obispo
de Canarias,” May 4, 1873, in La Cruz (1873), 677—683. The success of these
efforts varied from region to region. In Jaen, located in the dechristianized
south, they produced so little that the diocesan authorities believed they would
have to close the cathedral; but in Toledo the results of a subscription campaign
based on the Canaries model “completely fulfilled expectations”; some parishes
contributed more than was necessary. El Pensamiento Espanol, October 10, 1874;
El Consultor de los Parrocos, October 1, 1873.
      64. The process of adjusting Church-State relations, however, was not
without difficulties, which have been described in detail in the recent study of
Maria F. Nunez, La Iglesiay la restauracion, 1875—1881 (Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
1976); and by G. Barberini, “El articulo 11 de la Constitucion de 1876: La
controversia diplomatica entre Espana y la Santa Sede,” Anthologica Annua, 9
(1961), 279-412.
      65. Felix Sarda y Salvany, El liberalismo especado? 2nd ed. (Barcelona, 1884).
      66. See, for example, the complaints about inadequate state financing from
two bishops of the early-twentieth-century Church, Antolin Lopez Pelaez, arch¬
bishop of Tarragona, El presupuesto del clero (Madrid, 1910); and Enrique Reig
y Casanova, archbishop of Toledo, Presente y porvenir economico de la Iglesia en
Espana (Madrid, 1908).
      67. Jose de los Perales y Gutierrez, El problema religioso en Espana (Madrid,
1909), 97.
      68. Bruno Ibeas, “Nuestro Cristianismo,” Espana y America, 12, no. 3 (1914),
514.
Bibliographic Essay




   The literature dealing with the Spanish Church from the eighteenth
century to the present is extensive. On the whole the history of the
Church has been written by clergymen or laymen sympathetic to its
religious mission. Histories of dioceses and religious orders, episcopal
biographies, and works on the state of civil-ecclesiastical relations dom¬
inate traditional writing on the subject. Its quality varies from simple
hagiographies or polemics to documented institutional studies, such as
Lopez Ferreiro’s fine history of the diocese of Santiago de Compostela.
The quality of historical writing from within the Church has improved
dramatically in the past two decades with the emergence of a new gen¬
eration of ecclesiastical historians. Their publications are characterized
by solid archival work and a new spirit of self-criticism made possible,
perhaps, by the liberating effects of the Second Vatican Council. The
books of Antonio Mestre Sanchis, Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Vicente
Carcel OrtI, Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, and others quickly come to mind.
The study of the Church has also benefited from attention by social and
economic historians, who are less interested in it as a religious institution
than as an essential part of the broader society and economy. The work
of Gonzalo Anes on the eighteenth-century economy, Pablo Fernandez
Albaladejo on Guipuzcoa, Angel Garcia Sanz on Segovia, and a number
of scholars who have studied the disamortization process of the nine¬
teenth century has made possible a more complete analysis of the Church’s
economic role within Spanish society.
   In spite of the progress these studies represent, this division of re¬
search has left important gaps in our knowledge. Research originating
within the Church, whether done by clerics or laymen, still tends to
follow the path of traditional ecclesiastical history, with heavy emphases
on the relations between Church and State, episcopal biographies, and
the development of institutions. The study of popular religion—which
Catholic sociologists of religion have developed successfully in France,
Italy, and Poland—has scarcely appeared in Spain, apart from several
studies of contemporary religious practice and William Christian’s fine
examination of popular beliefs in a region of northern Spain. Little has
been done on the social history of the lower clergy in spite of their