




emphasis varies from piece to piece, but in general the essays concentrate
on the political struggle between the Church and liberalism in the nine¬
teenth century and on the great social and political conflicts of the twen¬
tieth century. Two studies on more precise themes, Juan Saez Marin,
Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola contemporanea, 1768-1868 (Madrid, 1975)
and Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Sociologta de una elite de poder de Espana
e Hispanoamerica contemporaneas: Lajerarquia eclesiastica, 1789—1965 (Cor¬
doba, 1976), provide overviews of ecclesiastical demography and the
hierarchy respectively.

The Old Regime Church

   The best general descriptions of the organizational, social, and eco¬
nomic structure of the eighteenth-century Church are to be found in
Antonio Dominguez Ortiz, La sociedad espanola en el siglo XVIII (Madrid,
 1955) and Sociedad y Estado en el siglo XVIII espahol (Madrid, 1976). A
survey of the eighteenth-century Church is W. J. Callahan, “The Spanish
Church,” in Church and Society in Catholic Europe of the Eighteenth Century,
ed. W. J. Callahan and D. C. Higgs (Cambridge, 1979), 34-50. Both
Richard Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton, 1958),
and Jean Sarrailh, L’Espagne eclairee de la seconde moitie du XVIIIe siecle
(Paris, 1954), devote considerable attention to the relationship of the
Church to the Spanish Enlightenment. C. C. Noel focuses on the op¬
position within the Church to the reforming tendencies of the Bourbon
State in two fine articles: “Opposition to Enlightened Reform in Spain:
Campomanes and the Clergy, 1765-1775,” Societas, 3, no. 1 (1973), 21—
43; and “The Clerical Confrontation with the Enlightenment in Spain,”
European Studies Review, 5, no. 2 (1975), 103—122. The struggle between
the Bourbons and Rome for control of the Spanish Church has been
considered in detail by Rafael Olaechea, Las relaciones hispano-romanas en
la segunda mitad del siglo XVIII, 2 vols. (Zaragoza 1965).
   The reforming movement in the late-eighteenth-century Church has
produced an abundant literature. Emile Appolis, Les jansenistes espagnols
(Bordeaux, 1966), provides a general treatment of the so-called Jansenist
movement within the framework of a reforming spirit in eighteenth-
century Catholicism. In a short but interesting study Maria Giovanna
Tomisch, El jansenismo en Espana (Madrid, 1972), analyzes the doctrinal
and philosophical content of Spanish Jansenism. This theme is treated
in greater detail by Joel Saugnieux, Le jansenisme espagnol du XVIII siecle:
Ses composantes et ses sources (Oviedo, 1976). The same author’s biography
of a leading Jansenist reformer, Un prelat eclaire: Don Antonio Tavira y
Almazan, 1737-1807 (Toulouse, 1970), offers a case study of reform in
action at the diocesan level. Saugnieux has also studied the reform of
   310                                   Harvard Historical Monographs




 sacred oratory to which the Jansenists attached great importance: Les
jansenistes et le renouveau de la predication dans I’Espagne de la seconde moitie
 du XVIIIe siecle (Lyon, 1976). Antonio Mestre Sanchis has studied an
 earlier reformer in Ilustracion y reforma de la Iglesia: Pensamiento politico-
 religioso de Don Gregorio Mayansy Siscar, 1699—1781 (Valencia, 1968). The
 controversy over the Jesuits, so closely connected to the issues of regalism
 and ecclesiastical reform, has produced an extensive literature, of which
 there is a general review in the perceptive introduction of Jorge Cejudo
 and Teofanes Egido to Pedro Rodriguez de Campomanes, Dictamen fiscal
 de expulsion de los Jesuitas de Espana, 1766—1767 (Madrid, 1977).
     In spite of an abundance of literature on ecclesiastical institutions
 during the eighteenth century, much remains to be done. There are few
 good diocesan histories. Antonio Lopez Ferreiro’s massive history of the
 archdiocese of Santiago, Historia de la Santa A. M. Iglesia de Santiago de
 Compostela, 11 vols. (Santiago, 1898-1909), still has few competitors for
 completeness and faithfulness to documentary sources. Episcopal biog¬
 raphies are slightly more numerous, but on the whole not satisfactory
 save for the recent study of Cardinal Lorenzana, one of the key figures
 in the Caroline Church, by Luis Sierra Nava-Lasa, El Cardenal Lorenzana
y la Ilustracion (Madrid, 1975), and the biography of Bishop Tavira by
 Saugnieux (cited above). The recent biography of Jose Climent, one of
 the leading reformers of the reign of Charles III, is based on solid
 research although rather uncritical of its subject: Francesc Tort Mitjans,
 El Obispo de Barcelona: Josep Climent i Avinent, 1706—1781 (Barcelona, 1978).
     The important topic of episcopal recruitment has been largely ne¬
 glected save for the brief treatments of Dominguez Ortiz and Cuenca
 Toribio (cited above), although C. C. Noel’s forthcoming study on the
 subject should remedy this deficiency. Recent work on the capitular
 clergy has produced a more complete view of the role of cathedral canons
 in the eighteenth-century Church. Juan Ramon Lopez-Arevalo’s Un ca-
 bildo catedral de la Vieja Castilla: Avila (Madrid, 1966) provides a detailed
 account of an Old Regime chapter. There is a good general history of
 eighteenth-century seminaries: Francisco Martin Hernandez and Jose
 Martin Hernandez, Los seminarios espanoles en la epoca de la Ilustracion
 (Madrid, 1973). The condition of the secular clergy below the level of
 the ecclesiastical elite has been largely ignored. Leandro Higueruela del
 Pino’s short pamphlet summarizing his doctoral thesis, El clero de la
 diocesis de Toledo durante el pontificado del Cardenal Borbon (Madrid, 1973),
 provides one of the few glimpses of the social and cultural condition of
 the parish clergy. A more complete view is given in the same author’s
 monograph on the subject: El clero de Toledo desde 1800 a 1823 (Madrid,
  1979).
     Harvard Historical Monographs                                     311