

I  should  not  have  troubled  you   with  this  application,  had 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  11 

the  information  in  this  Office  enabled  me  to  supply  it  at  all  in 
a  satisfactory  manner ;  but,  although  the  whole  has  originated 
in  letters  from  this  Office,  the  orders  are  formed  in  such  general 
terms  as  to  give  but  an  imperfect  view  of  the  subject,  at  least, 
for  my  object. 

I  should  rather  wish  to  see  the  whole  of  the  means  fur- 
nished in  Portugal  brought  into  one  point  of  view,  that  I 
might  confer  with  you  upon  the  explanations  which  it  may  be 
advantageous  to  have  brought  into  view  before  the  Court  of 
Inquiry,  as  far  as  it  can  with  propriety  be  done,  to  repel  any 
suggestion  of  deficiency  of  equipment ;  although  the  conduct  of 
Grovernment  cannot  be  considered  as  matter  of  inquiry  before 
the  Court,  yet,  as  in  the  mode  of  their  receiving  the  informa- 
tion which  they  will  have  a  right  to  call  for,  for  the  immediate 
duty  with  which  they  are  charged,  injurious  impressions  may 
be  guarded  against,  I  am  anxious  that  this  object  should  not  be 
neglected,  as  well  for  the  sake  of  the  Government  in  general  as 
of  myself  individually  ;  specially  responsible,  as  I  must  con- 
sider myself,  for  the  detailed  sufficiency  and  execution  of  the 
expedition. 

From  what  I  can  learn,  I  do  not  apprehend  that  any  of  the 
parties  will  rest  the  explanation  of  their  conduct  on  the  inade- 
quacy of  the  means  with  which  they  were  furnished  by  Go- 
vernment J  but  it  is  better  to  be  prepared  for  such  a  case, 
should  it  arise. 

I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  November  12,  1808. 
My  dear  Lord — I  enclose  a  letter  which  I  have  received 
from  General  Brenier,  the  object  of  which  is  (to  save  you  the 
trouble  of  reading  it)  to  claim  for  the  officers  who  are  taken  in 
Portugal  the  advantage  of  the  19th  Article  of  the  Convention, 
under  which  he  supposes  that  they  have  a  claim  to  be  set  at 
liberty.     As  for  himself,  he  says  that,  notwithstanding  the 


12  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

claim,  he  is  willing  to  be  considered  as  exchanged  for  General 
Abercromby  ;  but,  as  he  says  that  the  French  Government 
must,  by  this  time,  have  received  the  oflfer  of  the  exchange, 
and  have  not  taken  advantage  of  the  means  afforded  by  the 
frequent  communication  by  messengers  to  decline  it,  he  begs 
you  now  to  consider  it  as  accepted,  and  not  oblige  him  to  wait 
during  the  ten  weeks  during  which  it  was  first  settled  that  he 
should  wait  for  their  answer. 

I  imagine  there  is  no  ground  for  the  claim  of  release,  under 
the  19th  Article  of  the  Convention  ;  and,  as  for  the  exchange, 
I  conclude  that,  if  you  was  to  allow  Brenier  to  go  before  the 
ten  weeks  would  elapse,  the  French  Government  would  inform 
you  that  the  exchange  could  not  be  allowed  ;  that  Abercromby 
would  still  be  considered  a  prisoner  by  them,  and  that  you 
must  keep  Brenier.  He  also  wishes  to  go  by  Calais  when  he 
does  go.  Let  me  know  what  answer  I  shall  give  him  upon 
these  points. 