

Arthur  Wellesley. 

It  is  said  that  Spencer  would  not  like  to  accept  any  mark 
of  the  King's  favour  at  present ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  I 
shall  be  able  to  prevail  with  him. 


14  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut-General  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Draft.  Stanmore,  November  19,  1808. 

Dear  Sir — If  you  have  not  left  town,  Mr.  Cooke  will  com- 
municate to  you  the  despatches  received  this  day  from  Sir 
Harry  Burrard.  You  will  observe  he  has,  at  the  instance  of 
the  Regency,  sent  two  regiments  to  Oporto  by  sea.  As  all 
disturbance  is  at  an  end  there,  I  hope  the  necessity  of  con- 
tinuing a  British  force  at  Oporto  will  be  but  temporary. 

It  appears  to  me  desirable  that  the  Portuguese  Govern- 
ment should,  as  early  as  possible,  charge  itself  with  the  police 
of  their  own  great  towns,  particularly  Lisbon  and  Oporto,  and 
that  the  British  troops  should  occupy  the  fortresses.  I  trust 
you  will  be  enabled,  with  six  regiments  of  infantry  and  the 
regiment  of  cavalry  which  I  propose  to  send  you  as  soon  as 
circumstances  will  permit,  to  do  every  thing  that  British  troops 
ought,  under  certain  circumstances,  to  be  charged  with  in 
Portugal,  including  the  garrisons  of  Elvas  and  Almeida. 

If  you  find  Oporto  continues  quiet,  I  should  hope  one  of  the 
regiments  might  be  brought  down  to  Lisbon  immediately,  and 
the  other  as  soon  as  the  Portuguese  Government  can  make  the 
necessary  arrangements  for  relieving  them.  It  is  equally  im- 
portant to  them  and  to  us  that  the  tranquillity  of  their  country 
should  not  rest  in  appearance  upon  British  troops. 

BeHeve  me,  &c..,  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Brighton,  November  22,  [1808]. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  congratulate  you  on  the  success  of 
the  militia  volunteering  in  Ireland,  which,  certainly,  upon  the 
whole,  has  worked  more  favourably  than  either  in  England  or 
Scotland,  and  leaves  us  no  room  to  doubt  that,  before  the  ex- 
piration of  the  twelve  months,  either  out  of  the  old  or  the  new 
men,  we  shall  have  derived  the  full  quota  authorized  to  enter 
into  the  line. 


1808.]  LORD    CASTLEREAGH.  15 

I  observe,  by  a  letter  from  Sir  G.  Littlehales  to  my  brother, 
that  the  progress  hitherto  made  in  the  new  levies  in  Ireland 
is  not  so  satisfactory,  notwithstanding  the  various  facilities  that 
you  have  afforded  the  counties  for  raising  men.  As  I  conclude 
that  few,  if  any,  will  proceed,  in  the  first  instance,  to  a  ballot, 
which,  by  the  by,  is  the  only  complete  and  perfect  security  for 
obtaining  the  number  required ;  and  as  the  period  for  com- 
pleting the  levy  is  limited  to  six  months,  I  wish  to  submit  to 
your  consideration  whether  it  would  not  be  desirable  now  to 
name  the  time,  that  every  county  should  peremptorily  proceed 
to  a  ballot  for  any  men  then  deficient.  The  effect  of  this,  I 
should  think,  would  be  that  this  notice  would  operate  as  a 
stimulus,  during  the  interval,  to  exertion ;  and  that,  by  order- 
ing them  to  have  a  list  previously  prepared,  sufficient  time 
might  still  remain,  by  the  process  of  ballot,  to  obtain  the  men, 
and  thereby  prevent  the  counties  having  the  penalties  levied 
upon  them,  for  default,  before  the  expiration  of  the  time  allowed 
by  Act  of  Parliament  for  the  termination  of  the  levy.  You 
can  best  judge  what  period  may  be  most  advisable  to  fix,  in 
this  point  of  view.  I  should  conceive  it  ought  not  to  be  post- 
poned beyond  the  1st  of  January. 