

Yours,  my  dear  Wellesley,  &c., 

Oastlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 

Downing  Street,  November  25,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — I  send  you  two  letters  received  yesterday 
from  Corunna,  stating  the  defeat  of  Blake'^s  army,  but  in  so 
loose  a  manner,  as  to  leave  us  altogether  without  the  means  of 
extracting  either  the  extent  or  nature  of  the  disaster  ;  and  it  is 
singular  that  we  have  no  later  intelligence  from  General  Leith 
than  a  letter  of  the  11th. 

As  Sir  D.  Baird  so  pressingly  demands  instructions,  it  ap- 
peared to  the  Cabinet  advisable  to  direct  him,  in  the  only  case 
in  which  it  is  possible  to  give  him  from  hence  any  instructions, 


16  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808 

to  go  with  his  army  to  Portugal,  and  not,  in  the  event  of  his 
being  obliged  to  re-embark,  to  bring  it  immediately  home. 

As  the  next  intelligence  may  possibly  be  of  an  important 
nature,  we  hope  it  may  not  be  inconvenient  to  you  to  afford  us 
your  assistance  on  Tuesday  next. 

I  am,  my  dear  lord,  yours  very  truly, 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 

Stanmore,  November  26,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — The  only  communications  received  by  me 
from  the  army,  with  respect  to  supplies,  have  been  transmitted 
through  Colonel  Neville  for  your  information.  Sir  John 
Moore  appears  to  have  directed  a  supply  of  ammunition  for  the 
troops  advancing  from  Portugal  to  be  moved  forward  with 
Sir  D.  Baird''s  corps  from  Corunna,  which  demand  appears  to 
have  induced  Sir  D.  Baird  to  desire  an  increased  supply  to  be 
sent  out ;  but  I  have  not  received  any  direct  requisition  from 
Sir  John  Moore ;  but,  in  one  of  his  letters,  he  stated  Corunna 
as  the  port  through  which  he  should  look  hereafter  to  receive 
his  supplies. 

I  have  given  directions  that  the  Transport  Board  should 
provide,  as  early  as  possible,  the  necessary  tonnage  for  the  600 
artillery  horses ;  in  this  number  I  suppose  the  300  before  or- 
dered, and  for  which  tonnage  has  already  been  set  apart,  are 
included.  The  transports  for  the  300  horses  were  reported 
to  me  yesterday  as  ready.  My  intention  was  to  embark  a 
regiment  of  cavalry  in  the  next  ships  that  should  come  for- 
ward ;  if  you  deem  the  artillery  service — that  is,  the  sending  the 
additional  800  horses — the  more  pressing  of  the  two,  it  shall 
have  the  precedence  ;  if  not,  I  should  propose  to  provide  for  it 
immediately  after  the  first  regiment  of  cavalry  is  embarked. 

We  have,  at  present,  between  Portsmouth  and  Falmouth, 
tonnage  for  about  4,000  horses,  only  requiring  to  be  overhauled 
after  their  voyage,  and  to  bo  reforaged.     The  tonnage  for  any 