

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley/  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  November  14,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — After  I  saw  you  on  Saturday,  I  spoke  to 
Colonel  Gordon,  and  he  agreed  entirely  in  opinion  with  me 
that  it  was  expedient  to  recommend  General  Spencer  to  the 
King  at  an  early  period  for  some  mark  of  his  Majesty ""s  favour  ; 
but  he  promised  to  speak  to  the  Duke  of  York  upon  the  sub- 
ject. 

I  have  always  been  of  opinion  that  I  should  not  bo  able  to 
convince  the  public  of  the  goodness  of  my  motives  for  signing 
the  Armistice ;  and  the  late  discussions  in  Middlesex  and 
elsewhere,  and  the  paragraphs  in  the  newspapers,  which,  after 
all,  rule  every  thing  in  this  country,  tend  to  convince  me  that 
it  is  determined  that  I  shall  not  have  the  benefit  of  an  ac- 
quittal, and  that  the  news-writers  and  the  orators  of  the  day 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  13 

are  determined  to  listen  to  nothing  in  my  justification.  I  am, 
therefore,  quite  certain  that  the  Government  will  not  be  able 
to  recommend  for  any  mark  of  the  King''s  favour,  to  which 
they  might  otherwise  think  me  entitled. 

If  this  turns  out  to  be  true,  the  Ministers  will  be  obliged 
to  recommend  that  a  mark  of  the  King's  favour  should  be  con- 
ferred on  General  Spencer,  and  not  on  me,  although  both  were 
employed  on  the  same  service  ;  and  this,  after  an  inquiry  will 
have  been  held,  in  which  my  conduct  will  have  been  investi- 
gated. They  will  be  obliged  to  adopt  this  line,  notwithstand- 
ing that  I  hope  they  will  be  convinced  of  the  propriety  of  my 
conduct  and  the  goodness  of  my  motives  in  every  instance : 
or  they  must  determine  not  to  confer  on  General  Spencer 
those  marks  of  the  King's  favour  which  his  services  un- 
doubtedly merit. 

I  have  no  doubt  of  the  alternative  which  the  Ministers  will 
be  inclined  to  adopt  ;  I  am  convinced  that  Spencer  himself 
will  urge  them  not  to  think  of  him,  if  the  King's  favour  cannot 
be  extended  to  me ;  and  thus  he  will  lose  what  he  so  well  de- 
serves. I  am  convinced  that  this  will  be  the  result  of  any 
further  delay. 

I  wish,  therefore,  that  you  would  immediately  recommend 
Spencer  for  what  you  think  he  ought  to  have.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  of  his  merit  on  every  ground,  and  nobody  can  with 
reason  complain  that  an  injustice  is  done  to  me,  because  even 
my  most  sanguine  friend  cannot  think  that  I  am  in  a  situation 
to  receive  any  mark  of  his  Majesty's  favour.  I  wish  that  you 
would  turn  this  subject  over  in  your  mind,  and  you  will  dis- 
cover that  great  difficulties  will  be  avoided  by  adopting  imme- 
diately the  measure  which  I  most  earnestly  recommend. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 