

Quant  aux  autres  interets  a  demeler  entre  la  France  et 
PAngleterre,  c'est  aux  Gouvernemens  a  s'en  entendre.  II  ue 
sera  pas  difficile  d'y  parvenir,  si  Pun  et  Pautre  veulent  sinc^re- 
ment  rendre  a  PEurope  un  repos  dont  elle  a  tout  besoin,  et 
apres  lequel  elle  soupire  depuis  si  long-temps,  et  si  inutile- 
ment. 


8  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Lord  Castlereagk  to  the  Right  Hon,  E,  E^/der,  Judge 
Advocate  General, 

St.  James*8  Square,  Thursday  night,  November  10,  1808. 

My  dear  Ryder — I  enclose  for  your  consideration  a  draft  to 
Sir  David  Dundas,  written  upon  the  supposition  that  a  previous 
demand  from  the  Court,  which  I  still  continue  to  consider  as  an 
important  preliminary,  will  impose  a  duty  so  difficult  and  im- 
portant upon  me,  as  to  justify  what,  if  voluntarily  performed, 
might  well  be  deemed  no  venial  offence. 

Among  the  endless  perplexities  and  conflicting  duties  and 
difficulties  of  this  delectable  little  military  adventure  of  mine, 
which,  I  conclude,  belong  to  the  Bed  of  Roses,  on  which  I  was 
supposed  to  compliment  our  predecessors  as  reclining,  I  really 
cannot  discover  a  less  thorny  escape.  If  your  judgment  ap- 
proves, I  shall,  without  hesitation,  expose  my  old  limbs  to  be 
scratched  and  torn  in  this  path,  without  searching  for  a  better 
one  in  the  forest. 

I  enclose  also  for  your  perusal  my  private  letter  to  Dalrymple, 
of  which,  at  my  desire,  he  has  enclosed  me  a  copy. 

I  shall  hope  to  see  you  at  one  to-morrow,  at  the  Office : 
pray  ask  Gordon,  en  chemin,  if  Sir  David  has  his  materials  to 
work  upon.  Yours  sincerely,         Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  David  Dundas. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  November,  1808. 

Sir — In  compliance  with  the  desire  signified  to  me  in  your 
letter  of  [blank],  I  have  obtained  his  Majesty"'s  gracious  per- 
mission to  lay  the  accompanying  instructions  and  correspon- 
dence before  the  Board  of  General  Officers  assembled  in  pur- 
suance of  his  Majesty "'s  Warrant  of  the  [blank]. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  in  his  letter  of  [blank],  has  signified  to 
me  that  he  should  deem  it  essential  to  the  explanation  of  his 
conduct  with  respect  to  the  Convention  of  Cintra,  to  enter  into 
an  extended  view  of  circumstances  collaterally  bearing  upon 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH,  9 

that  transaction.  I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  in  justice  to  him 
undertake  to  select  such  parts  only  of  the  papers  in  question  as 
might  otherwise  appear  to  me  the  material  and  proper  docu- 
ments to  be  produced.  Under  these  impressions,  I  have  thought 
it  my  duty  humbly  to  solicit  his  Majesty''s  gracious  permission 
to  lay  the  whole  of  the  instructions  and  correspondence  con- 
nected with  the  late  expedition  to  Portugal  before  the  Board, 
leaving  it  to  their  wisdom  and  discretion  to  make  such  use  of 
them  as  the  nature  of  the  case  and  the  ends  of  justice  may 
appear  to  them  to  require. 