

VOL.  VII.  B 


2  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

You  will,  of  course,  take  the  necessary  steps,  through  the 
King's  Minister,  for  obtaining  their  concurrence  to  your  moving 
with  the  corps  which  you  have  rendered  disposable,  which,  I 
believe,  under  the  late  treaty,  by  which  we  are  bound  to  keep  a 
given  amount  of  force  in  Sicily,  is  necessary,  in  order  to  enable 
you  to  carry  with  you,  on  service,  an  adequate  proportion  of 
your  army. 

It  may  also  be  necessary  that,  during  your  absence,  some 
additional  vigilance  should  be  exerted  with  respect  to  the  local 
force  within  the  island.  You  will  also  suofsest  to  Lord  Collino^- 
wood  the  importance  of  keeping  up  the  naval  defences,  as  far 
as  the  relative  situation  of  the  enemy  may  appear  to  him  to 
require  it. 

Since  I  last  wrote.  Sir  John  Moore''s  army  has  been  put  in 
motion  towards  Spain ;  they  move  by  Almeida  and  Ciudad 
Rodrigo.  Sir  David  Baird,  with  his  corps,  has  landed  at 
Corunna,  after  a  favourable  passage  of  four  days  from  Falmouth, 
and  is  advancing  towards  Valladolid,  where  the  whole  will 
assemble,  consisting  of  35,000  infantry  and  nine  regiments  of 
cavalry.  The  enemy,  between  40  and  50,000  strong,  are  con- 
centrated in  Biscay  and  Navarre,  expecting  reinforcements : 
they  are  encircled  from  Saragossa  by  Milapo,  Lagrono,  Frias, 
and  Bilbao,  by  the  various  provincial  armies,  which  exceed  in 
number  100,000  men,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  they  medi- 
tate an  attack  before  the  French  reinforcements  are  actually  on 
the  line  of  operations. 

I  conclude  you  will  bring  your  small  corps  of  cavalry  with 
you.  I  shall  endeavour  to  repair  the  losses  sustained  by  the 
detachment  of  the  20th  in  Portugal,  so  that  it  may  be  in  a 
state  to  join  you  in  the  south  of  Spain.  It  was  my  intention 
to  have  sent  it  on  to  Sicily ;  but,  as  it  has  been  roughly  handled 
in  the  action  of  the  21st,  I  deem  it  more  advisable  to  leave  it 
at  Lisbon  till  I  know  more  of  your  movements. 
Believe  me,  &c., 

Oastlereagh. 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  O 

Lard  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Stuart. 
Draft,  Downing  Street,  November  4,  1808. 

Dear  Sir — I  think  it  right  to  apprise  you  that  it  appears,  by 
the  return  of  our  messenger  from  Paris,  that  Buonaparte  had 
left  that  capital  for  Bayonne.  As  his  reinforcements  were  ex- 
pected to  have  reached  the  frontier  about  this  time,  his  object  no 
doubt  is  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  army,  and  attempt 
the  conquest  of  Spain. 

The  division  of  the  French  army  nearest  Erfurth  has,  it  is 
said,  been  put  in  motion  towards  Catalonia.  I  trust  your 
corps  may  embarrass  their  advance.  If  you  find  them  in 
great  force  on  your  arrival,  you  will  regulate  your  movements 
accordingly.  I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 