


Memorandum  on  Ranh  between  the  Spanish  and  English  Officers 

in  Spain. 

November  8,  1808. 

Some  decision  must  be  come  to  upon  the  subject  of  rank,  as 
the  British  and  Spanish  officers  must  be  expected,  on  various 
occasions,  to  serve  together  upon  the  same  outposts  or  line  of 
duty ;  and  it  must  be  exactly  defined  in  what  manner  the  com- 
mand is  to  be  respectively  assumed.  There  does  not  appear  to 
me  any  alternative  but  that  the  officers  of  each  army  must  roll 
together,  according  to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions, 
without  reference  to  the  powers  from  whom  such  commissions 
are  derived,  whether  regal  or  provincial,  provided  such  com- 
missions are  acknowledged  by  the  Supreme  Government. 

The  British  being  an  auxiliary  force,  it  must  necessarily  be 
under  the  command  of  the  Spanish  Commander-in-Chief,  if  a 
Generalissimo  is  appointed.  The  British  General  must  be 
therefore  liable,  in  that  case,  to  receive  orders  from  the  stafi"  of 
the  Spanish  General,  as  emanating  directly  from  himself;  but 
no  orders  can  be  given  to  the  British  Army  but  through  its 
own  General. 

It   must  be  clearly  understood  that  the   British  force   is 

B  2 


4  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

intended  as  a  field  army,  and  it  is  not  to  be  separated  into  de- 
tachments, nor  is  any  detachment  to  be  made  from  it  but  with 
the  entire  concurrence  and  by  the  express  orders  of  its  own 
General. 

The  British  force  is  not  to  be  employed  in  the  garrisoning 
of  any  place  or  places,  whereby  a  material  diminution  would 
be  made  of  its  effective  strength,  nor  is  it  to  be  occupied  in 
sieges  without  the  particular  consent  of  its  General ;  but  it  is 
to  be  kept  together,  as  far  as  the  circumstances  of  the  war  will 
permit,  for  the  express  purpose  of  opposing  the  enemy  e7i  pleine 
campagne. 

Whenever  the  British  General  shall  have  occasion  to  make 
any  proposition  to  or  hold  any  communication  with  the  Spanish 
Government,  he  shall  correspond  with  it  through  the  medium 
of  the  British  Minister  at  Madrid,  and  all  communications  from 
the  Spanish  Government  shall  be  made  through  the  same 
channel :  but  it  must  be  explicitly  defined  that  the  British 
General  cannot  be  placed  in  any  manner  under  the  control  of 
the  British  Minister,  or  receive  any  orders  from  him,  though 
he  must  be  in  constant  and  intimate  correspondence  with  him, 
as  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  cannot  have  a  competent 
knowledge  of  military  affairs,  to  give  a  decisive  opinion  upon 
any  such  matters  that  the  Spanish  Government  or  officers  may 
refer  to  him.  No  proposition,  therefore,  either  from  the  Spanish 
Government,  or  the  British  Minister,  as  emanating  either  from 
himself  or  from  the  Supreme  Junta,  shall  be  considered  as  in 
any  manner  binding  on  the  British  General ;  he  taking  care  to 
make  a  full  answer  to  any  such  proposition,  and  making  known 
his  reasons  for  dissenting  therefrom. 