

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple. 
Draft.  Coombe  Wood,  November  6,  1808. 

Sir — However  desirous  I  may  feel  to  pay  attention  to  appli- 
cations proceeding  from  you,  and  which  have  for  their  object 
the  elucidation  of  the  subject  which  the  Court  of  Inquiry  has 
been  directed  to  investigate,  yet  I  trust  you  will  permit  me  to 
protest  as  well  against  the  propriety  of  founding  official  inquiries 
upon  the  anonymous  and  unauthorized  paragraphs  which  daily 
appear  in  the  public  prints,  as  against  the  supposition  that  his 
Majesty's  Ministers  possess  an  influence  over  any  newspaper, 
which  can  justify  any  individual  in  attributing  to'  them  either 
a  knowledge  or  approbation  of  the  sentiments  which  may  be 
found  therein. 

Had  any  letters  been  addressed  to  me  explanatory  of  the 
Convention  of  Cintra,  which  appeared  to  me  proper  to  be  com- 
municated to  you,  I  should  have  felt  it  my  personal  duty  (as 
in  a  recent  instance)  to  have  put  you  in  possession  of  them, 
without  solicitation  on  your  part. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  November  11,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — I  send,  for  your  consideration,  two  drafts 
to  Sir  John  Moore,  together  with  a  memorandum  of  the  Duke 


10  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

of  York's,  on  the  subject  of  Military  Command,  which,  you  will 
observe,  has  been  adopted  as  the  basis  of  these  instructions. 

Being  unwilling  to  ask  you  to  come  up  to  town  if  it  can  be 
avoided,  I  have  communicated  these  drafts  to  such  of  our  col- 
leagues as  are  in  London,  reserving  a  final  decision  upon  them 
till  Tuesday,  if  you  should  have  any  suggestions  to  propose. 
As  far  as  they  have  been  considered,  they  have  met  with  their 
approbation. 

We  have  not  had  any  intelligence  from  our  army  later  than 
the  18th  of  last  month,  which,  I  believe,  you  saw.  There  is 
a  letter  from  General  Leith  of  the  31st,  which  has  been  pro- 
ductive of  numerous  reports  of  battles,  but  contains,  in  truth, 
nothing  but  the  advance  of  Blake's  army  to  Zarnosa,  being  a 
few  leagues  in  front  of  Bilbao,  towards  Durango. 

If  the  temper  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  is  to  be  estimated  by 
the  selection  of  intelligence  given  in  the  Court  Gazette,  the 
conferences  at  Erfurt  do  not  appear  to  have  rendered  it  more 
accommodating  to  France.  In  one  received  to-day,  they  have, 
for  the  first  time,  given  the  account  of  Dupont''s  surrender,  and 
the  victory  of  Vimeira,  in  detail.         I  am,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  November  11,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — In  order  that  Sir  John  Moore  and  Sir  John 
Cradock  may  be  the  better  enabled  to  judge  what  requisitions 
it  may  be  necessary  for  them  to  make  for  carrying  on  the 
public  service  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  I  should  be  much  obliged 
to  you  to  let  me  have  a  detailed  specification  of  all  the  advance 
supplies,  including  men,  guns,  ammunition,  &;c.,  similar  to  a 
paper  I  received  from  you  with  respect  to  the  Copenhagen 
equipment,  which  have  been  furnished  by  the  advance  for  the 
service  of  the  British  army  sent  to  Portugal,  and  subsequently 
for  the  force  sent  to  Corunna. 