

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

R.  Ryder. 

Mr.  Cooke  to  Colonel  Nemlle. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  4,  1809. 

Dear  Sir — As  5000  men  are  embarking  for  Corunna,  and 
do  not  carry  out  with  them  artillery,  it  may  still  be  necessary 
that  they  should  be  furnished  with  spare  ammunition  and  the 
proper  quantity  of  tumbrils.  Lord  Castlereagh  has  directed 
me  to  desire  that  you  will  mention  this  to  Lord  Chatham,  and 
his  lordship,  if  he  thinks  right,  could  furnish  Major-General 
Sherbrooke,  who  has  charge  of  the  corps,  with  a  power  to  apply 
to  the  Ordnance  Store-keeper  at  Portsmouth  for  the  articles  he 
may  find  necessary.  Believe  me,  &c., 

E.  Cooke. 


Lcyrd  Castlereagh  to  the  Hon.  R.  Ryder. 

Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  Friday  evening. 

Dear  Ryder — In  addition  to  my  official  letter,  I  send,  for 
your  private  information.  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple's  letter  and  my 
answer.  When  his  paper  is  read,  you  will  be  enabled  to  inform 
me  whether,  from  the  nature  of  the  reference,  it  is  necessary 
for  me  to  make  any  explanation  to  the  Board  why  the  letter  of 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGIT.  25 

the  20tli  is  not  before  them.  It  is  a  letter  altogether  relating 
to  our  future  operations  in  Spain,  and  unfit  to  be  produced ; 
and,  as  it  appears  to  me,  wholly  unnecessary  to  Sir  Hew, 
1st,  for  the  reasons  I  have  stated,  and,  2ndly,  because  he  did 
not  receive  it  till  after  the  Convention  was  ratified. 

I  shall  be  very  grateful  if  you  will  enable  Cooke  to  send  me 
to  Stanmore  a  hint  of  anything  material  that  may  occur. 

I  am,  &ic.,  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Dublin  Castle,  January  9,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — As  the  Board  of  Inquiry  have  made  their 
Report,  it  is  now  necessary  for  me  to  determine  what  I  am  to 
do.  I  am  very  desirous  to  avoid  to  take  any  step  which  can 
embarrass  the  King's  Government,  and  particularly  in  refe- 
rence to  this  country ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  join 
the  army,  if  it  should  remain  on  service  in  Spain,  within  a 
limited  time. 

I  shall  say  nothing  about  the  Report  of  the  Board  of  Inquiry ; 
but  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  take  the  opinion  of 
the  King''s  Ministers,  and  let  me  know  what  line  they  propose 
to  take  respecting  it  in  Parliament.  Do  they  mean  to  con- 
sider it  as  conclusive,  and,  on  that  ground,  to  justify  it  and 
all  the  measures  of  which  the  Report  approves ;  or  do  they 
mean  to  leave  the  whole  question  to  be  scrambled  for  as  it  may 
suit  those  who  choose  to  mix  in  the  scramble  ? 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  January  11,  1809. 
Your  Majesty''s  confidential  servants  being  of  opinion  that 
no  time  should  be  lost  in  bringing  the  Spanish  Government  to 
a  declaration  whether  they  will  accept  the  co-operation  of  your 