


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  17 

supplies  of  ammunition  or  stores,  which,  in  the  absence  of 
requisitions,  it  may  appear  to  you  prudent  to  forward  to  Co- 
runna,  can  be  instantly  supplied  upon  your  orders  being  sig- 
nified to  the  Transport  Board  through  Colonel  Neville. 
I  am,  my  dear  lord,  very  truly  yours, 

Castlereagh. 

Report  from  Brigadier-General  the  Honourable  Charles  Stewart 
to  Lieutenant-General  the  Hon.  J.  Hope, 

Naval  del  Re,  December  13,  1808. 

Sir — You  are  apprized,  by  my  letter  of  yesterday,  that  I 
deemed  it  expedient  to  proceed  to  this  place  instead  of  Carpio, 
in  order  more  effectually  to  cover,  according  to  your  orders, 
the  right  division  of  the  array.  On  my  arrival  in  the  evening, 
with  the  18th  Dragoons,  I  received  information  that  a  party 
of  French,  consisting  of  about  50  infantry  and  30  cavalry, 
had  arrived  from  Valladolid  at  Rueda,  with  the  intention  of 
carrying  from  thence  a  large  quantity  of  cotton,  to  the  amount 
of  3,200  arobas,  which  General  Junot  intended  to  send  as  his 
plunder  from  Lisbon  to  Bayonne  ;  but  which  had  been  arrested 
in  its  progress  by  General  Cuesta,  at  the  commencement  of 
hostilities  in  Spain,  and  had  been  warehoused  at  Rueda.  The 
party  above  alluded  to  had  put  seventy  cars  in  requisition,  to 
accomplish  their  purpose. 

Under  such  information,  I  deemed  it  my  duty  to  prevent  the 
execution  of  the  enemy's  design  ;  and  I  detached  Lieut.-Colonel 
Jones,  with  eighty  men,  to  Rueda,  with  orders  not  to  commit 
the  cavalry  in  the  town,  but  to  surround  it,  and  to  place  him- 
self especially  between  Rueda  and  Valladolid,  and  report  the 
result  to  me.  Not  hearing  from  him  so  soon  as  I  expected,  I 
proceeded  myself  with  fifty  men,  and  found  that  he  had  exe- 
cuted my  orders  with  the  same  ability  as  on  all  occasions. 
And,  as  my  aide-de-camp.  Captain  Dashwood,  had  entered  the 
town  in  disguise  as  a  Spaniard,  I  was  enabled  to  ascertain  the 
post  where  the  infantry  was  and  their  advanced  piquet. 

VOL.  VII.  C 


18  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

To  cut  off  the  latter,  I  detached  a  small  party  under  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Otway,  which  succeeded  perfectly,  while  Lieut.-Colonel 
Jones  and  a  dismounted  party,  with  their  rifles,  and  dragoons 
on  the  road  to  support  them,  entered  the  place  ;  and,  after  a 
brisk  fire  for  a  few  minutes,  succeeded  in  surprising  the  enemy's 
post.  I  have  the  pleasure  to  add  that  we  have  brought  in 
thirty  prisoners ;  their  number  killed  I  have  not  been  able 
yet  to  ascertain,  it  being  nearly  dark  during  the  skirmish.  I 
have  to  regret  the  loss  of  one  man  killed  and  two  dangerously 
wounded,  and  four  horses  killed.  Some  French  horses  and 
mules  taken  make  up  for  the  latter  loss.  The  seventy  cars 
embargoed  by  the  French  will,  I  hope,  transport  hither  to-day 
the  cotton  alluded  to,  for  the  further  disposal  of  which  and  of 
the  prisoners  I  shall  wait  your  orders.  I  have  left  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Otway  with  fifty-six  men,  to  cover  the  removal  of  the 
former. 