


26  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Majesty's  army  in  the  South  of  Spain,  admitting  a  British 
force  into  Cadiz,  humbly  recommend  to  your  Majesty  that  the 
force  under  Major-General  Sherbrooke  should  proceed  direct 
to  Cadiz  for  this  purpose,  proceeding  on  to  Gibraltar,  in  case 
Mr.  Frere  should  notify  to  the  Major-General  that  their  ser- 
vices have  been  declined  by  the  Central  Government. 


Sir  John  Moore  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Corunna,  January  13,  1809. 

My  Lord — Situated  as  this  army  is  at  present,  it  is  im- 
possible for  me  to  detail  to  your  lordship  the  events  which 
have  taken  place  since  I  had  the  honour  to  address  you  from 
Astorga,  on  the  31st  of  December.  I  have,  therefore,  deter- 
mined to  send  to  England  Brigadier-General  Charles  Stewart, 
as  the  officer  best  qualified  to  give  you  every  information  you 
can  want,  both  with  respect  to  our  actual  situation,  and  the 
events  which  have  led  to  it. 

Your  lordship  knows  that,  had  I  followed  my  own  opinion, 
as  a  military  man,  I  should  have  retired  with  the  army  from 
Salamanca — the  Spanish  armies  were  then  beaten.  I  was 
sensible,  however,  that,  had  the  British  been  withdrawn,  the 
loss  of  the  cause  would  have  been  imputed  to  their  retreat. 
It  was  for  this  reason  that  I  made  the  march  to  Sahaofun  :  as 
a  diversion,  it  succeeded.  I  brought  the  whole  disposable  force 
of  the  French  against  this  army,  and  it  has  been  allowed  to 
follow  it  without  a  single  movement  being  made  to  favour  my 
retreat. 

The  people  of  the  Gallicias,  though  armed,  made  no  attempt 
to  stop  the  passage  of  the  French  through  their  mountains. 
They  abandoned  their  dwellings  at  our  approach ;  and  drove 
away  their  carts,  oxen,  and  everything  that  could  be  of  the 
smallest  aid  to  the  army.  The  consequence  has  been  that  our 
sick  have  been  left  behind ;  and,  when  our  horses  or  mules 
failed,  which,  on  such  marches,  and  through  such  a  country, 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEKEAGH.  27 

was  the  case  to  a  great  extent,  baggage,  ammunition,  stores, 
and  even  money,  were  necessarily  destroyed  or  abandoned. 

In  front  of  Villa  Franca,  the  French  came  up  with  the 
reserve,  with  which  I  was  covering  the  retreat  of  the  army. 
They  attacked  it  at  Oalcabiles.  I  retired,  covered  by  the  95th 
Regiment,  and  marched  that  night  to  Hererias,  and  from  thence 
to  Nogales  and  Lugo,  where  I  had  ordered  the  different  divi- 
sions which  proceeded  to  halt  and  collect.  At  Lugo,  the 
French  again  came  up  with  us.  They  attacked  our  advanced 
posts  on  the  6th  and  7th,  and  were  repulsed  in  both  attempts, 
with  little  loss  on  our  side. 

I  heard  from  the  prisoners  taken  that  three  divisions  of  the 
French  army  were  come  up,  commanded  by  Marshal  Soult. 
I  therefore  expected  to  be  attacked  on  the  morning  of  the  8th. 
It  was  my  wish  to  come  to  that  issue.  I  had  perfect  confidence 
in  th'e  valour  of  the  troops ;  and  it  was  only  by  crippling  the 
enemy  that  we  could  hope  either  to  retreat  or  to  embark  un- 
molested. I  made  every  preparation  to  receive  the  attack,  and 
drew  out  the  army  in  the  morning,  to  offer  battle.  This  was 
not  Marshal  Soult''s  object.  He  either  did  not  think  himself 
sufficiently  strong,  or  he  wished  to  play  a  sure  game,  by 
attacking  us  on  our  march,  or  during  our  embarkation.  The 
country  was  intersected,  and  his  position  too  strong  for  me  to 
attack  with  an  inferior  force.  The  want  of  provisions  would 
not  permit  me  to  wait  longer.  I  marched  that  night ;  and,  in 
two  forced  marches,  bivouacking  for  six  or  eight  hours  in  the 
rain,  I  reached  Betanzos  on  the  10th  instant. 