

Mr.  Frere  and  Major-General  Sherbrooke  will  transmit  to 
you  the  earliest  intelligence  of  the  result,  for  the  direction  of 
your  conduct  under  the  instructions  you  have  received. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Moore. 

Downing  Street,  January  14,  1809. 

Sir — A  French  Bulletin,  No.  16,  was  sent  into  this  country 
from  Boulogne,  purporting  to  be  an  official  publication  made 
by  the  Government  of  France.  In  this  paper  it  is  stated, 
"  The  English  fly  on  every  side  :  the  division  of  Lasalle  has, 
however,  fallen  in  with  sixteen  of  them,  who  have  been  put  to 
the  sword.    They  were  stragglers,  or  such  as  had  gone  astray.'** 

His  ^Majesty  cannot  overlook  this  account,  descriptive, 
according  to  the  obvious  sense  of  it,  of  the  murder  of  some 
unresisting  stragglers  of  his  army ;  although  his  Majesty  is 
disposed  to  disbelieve  a  transaction,  however  officially  recorded, 
which  is  so  utterly  repugnant  to  the  usual  laws  of  war,  and  to 
every  principle  of  humanity.  His  Majesty,  therefore,  desires 
that  you  will  take  the  earliest  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth 
of  the  fact  so  recorded,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it 
was  perpetrated — if  perpetrated  at  all. 

If  it  shall,  upon  investigation,  appear  to  be  founded,  I  am 
to  desire  that  you  will  cause  a  protest  to  be  made  by  you  to 
the  nearest  head-quarters  of  the  French  army,  and  that  you 
will  take  such  measures  as  shall  appear  to  you  most  expedient 
for  the  protection  of  the  troops  under  your  orders,  against 
conduct  so  barbarous  and  disgraceful.  Castlereagh. 


30  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  H.R.H.  the  Commander-in-Chief. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  18,  1809. 

Sir  —  The  proceedings  of  the  Board  of  General  Oflficers 
appointed  by  his  Majesty  to  inquire  into  and  report  upon  the 
Armistice  and  Convention  lately  concluded  in  Portugal,  which 
were  communicated  to  me  by  the  Judge- Advocate  General,  at 
the  desire  of  your  Eoyal  Highness,  for  the  information  of  his 
Majesty's  Ministers,  having  been  fully  considered,  I  have 
received  the  King*'s  commands  to  transmit  to  your  Royal 
Highness  the  decision  which  his  Majesty  has  taken  upon  the 
review  of  these  proceedings,  a  copy  of  which  your  Royal  High- 
ness will  receive  enclosed  ;  and  I  am  to  desire  that  your  Royal 
Highness  will  be  pleased  to  cause  the  necessary  communication 
to  be  made  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  accordingly. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  January  21,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  having  brought  the  despatch  received 
from  Lieutenant-General  Sir  John  Moore,  under  the  considera- 
tion of  your  Majesty ""s  confidential  servants,  they  beg  leave 
humbly  to  recommend  to  your  Majesty  that  the  orders  sent  to 
Sir  John  Moore  with  respect  to  the  disposal  of  his  army,  in 
the  event  of  his  re-embarkation  from  Gallicia,  should  be  ren- 
dered so  far  discretionary,  as  to  leave  it  to  that  officer  to  decide, 
according  to  the  state  and  condition  of  his  troops,  whether  they 
can,  with  advantage  to  your  Majesty ""s  service,  be  immediately 
employed  in  the  execution  of  those  orders,  or  must  return 
home  to  be  refitted  and  prepared  for  service. 