

At  Lugo,  I  was  sensible  of  the  impossibility  of  reaching 
Viofo,  which  was  at  too  o^reat  a  distance,  and  offered  no  advan- 
tages  to  embark  in  the  face  of  an  enemy.  My  intention  then 
was  to  have  embarked  at  the  peninsula  of  Betanzos,  where  I 
hoped  to  find  a  position  to  cover  the  embarkation  of  the  army, 
in  Ares  or  Redes  Bays ;  but,  having  sent  an  officer  to  recon- 
noitre it,  by  his  report  I  was  determined  to  prefer  this  place. 

I  gave  notice  to  the  Admiral  of  my  intention,  and  begged 


28  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

that  the  transports  might  be  brought  to  Corunna.  Had  I 
found  them  here  on  my  arrival  on  the  11th,  the  embarkation 
would  easily  have  been  effected ;  for  I  had  gained  several 
marches  on  the  French.  They  have  now  come  up  with  us ; 
the  transports  are  not  arrived ;  my  position  in  front  of  this 
place  is  a  very  bad  one  ;  and  this  place,  if  I  am  forced  to  retire 
into  it,  is  commanded  within  musket-shot;  and  the  harbour 
will  be  so  commanded  by  cannon  on  the  coast,  that  no  ship 
will  be  able  to  lie  in  it.  In  short,  my  lord,  General  Stewart 
will  inform  you  how  critical  our  situation  is. 

I  find  I  have  been  led  into  greater  length  and  more  detail 
than  I  thought  I  should  have  had  time  for.  I  have  written 
under  interruptions,  and  with  my  mind  much  occupied  with 
other  matter.  My  letter,  written  so  carelessly,  can  only  be 
considered  as  private ;  when  I  have  more  leisure,  I  shall  write 
more  correctly.  In  the  mean  time,  I  rely  on  General  Stewart 
for  giving  your  lordship  the  information  and  detail  which  I 
have  omitted.  I  should  regret  his  absence,  for  his  services 
have  been  very  distinguished ;  but  the  state  of  his  eyes  renders 
it  impossible  for  him  to  serve ;  and  this  country  is  not  one  in 
which  cavalry  can  be  of  much  use. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  John  Moore. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  14,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive  enclosed  the  orders  which  have  been 
transmitted  to  Major-General  Sherbrooke,  now  ready  to  sail 
from  Portsmouth  ;  also  instructions  from  his  Majesty's  Secre- 
tary of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  Mr.  Frere,  directing  him 
to  ascertain,  without  loss  of  time,  the  sentiments  of  the  Spanish 
Government  upon  the  proposed  concert  in  the  South  of  Spain, 
the  necessary  preliminary  to  which  must  be  that  we  should 
have  the  free  use  of  Cadiz,  with  a  participation  in  the  garrison 
thereof,  as  the  only  fortified  position,  under  the  protection  of 
which  our  army  can  be  assembled  with  advantage,  and  upon 
which  it  may  retire  in  case  of  disaster. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  29 

His  Majesty  trusts  that  his  motive  for  this  demand  cannot 
be  misunderstood.  The  last  despatches  from  you  and  from 
Mr.  Frere  render  it,  in  the  judgment  of  his  Majesty^s  Govern- 
ment, necessary  that  no  time  should  be  lost  in  obtaining  a  de- 
cision on  a  point  of  such  importance ;  and,  on  these  grounds. 
General  Sherbrooke's  corps  has  been  ordered  to  proceed  direct 
to  Cadiz. 