

Although  this  has  been  merely  a  little  outpost  afiair,  I  can- 
not help  assuring  you,  for  the  information  of  the  Commander 
of  the  forces,  that  I  have  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the 
zeal,  spirit,  and  intelligence,  of  those  officers  and  men  I  had  the 
honour  to  command. 

The  French  arms  and  cartridges  were  distributed  among 
the  peasants,  and  I  am  pleased  to  add  that  they  manifested 
every  disposition  to  assist  us. 

Charles  Stewart,  Brigadier-General. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Earl  of  Chatham. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  Wednesday,  December  14,  1808. 

My  dear  Lord — The  Moniteurs  to  the  11th  are  in  town, 
—  nothing  from  the  right  of  the  French  army.  That  of 
the  6th  gives  the  11th  and  12th  Bulletins,  dated  Miranda  del 
Douro.  You  will  best  judge  what  the  extent  of  Castanos** 
defeat  was  ;  but  it  appears  to  me  that  both  his  wings  have 
got  off  in  a  better  or  worse  state,  his  right  having  fallen  back 
upon  Saragossa,  his  left  towards  the  centre  of  Spain. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  19 

We  have  nothing  from  the  westward.  The  importance  of 
having  a  corps  disposable  for  Cadiz,  as  Moore  may  possibly 
retain  his  position  on  the  frontier  of  Portugal,  and  not  have 
the  means  of  detaching  without  much  delay  to  Cadiz,  has  in- 
duced the  Cabinet  to  detain  a  sufficiency  of  troop  tonnage,  to 
send  the  5,000  men  under  orders,  if  they  shall  see  occasion 
upon  the  next  accounts ;  and  I  have  settled  with  the  Duke  to 
assemble  the  regiments  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Eamsgate  pier, 
whence  they  can  get  down  Channel  more  easily  than  from  the 
River.  The  service  of  this  corps  may  be  the  more  pressingly 
important  at  Cadiz,  as  Cradock  will  probably,  under  the  requi- 
sition from  Madrid,  have  sent  every  thing  to  reinforce  Moore. 

It  is  hardly  fair,  after  your  late  visit  to  town,  to  express  a 
wish  that  you  could  be  present  next  Tuesday ;  but,  as  the 
consideration  of  this  question  may  arise  out  of  our  first  de- 
spatches, and  it  is  also  thought  desirable  by  Cabinet  that  we 
should  make  up  our  minds  whether  some  measure  should  not 
be  proposed  immediately  on  the  meeting  of  Parliament,  for 
strengthening  an  array,  incessantly  exposed,  as  it  must  be,  if 
it  remains  either  in  Spain  or  Portugal,  to  a  considerable  reduc- 
tion of  its  numbers.  I  should  be  very  glad  if  you  could  make 
it  convenient  to  attend.  I  am,  &ic., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Colonel  Sir  George  Smith. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  December  18,  1808. 

Sir — Under  the  reverses  the  Spaniards  have  sustained,  and 
the  position  the  enemy  now  occupies  at  Madrid,  I  consider  it 
of  much  importance  to  have  a  confidential  officer  stationed  at 
Cadiz,  who  knows  the  leading  individuals,  and  can  keep  our 
naval  and  military  officers  in  that  quarter  informed  of  the 
events  that  are  passing  in  that  important  place. 