


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Without  date.     Endorsed,  January,  1809. 
Lord  Castlereagh  humbly  submits  to  your  Majesty  the  sub- 
stance of  intelligence  received  from  Lord  Paget,  who  reached 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  Bl 

town  this  evening,  at  nine  o''clock.  General  Hope's  despatch 
was  forwarded  by  a  gun-brig  not  yet  arrived.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh,  in  laying  before  your  Majesty  this  unofficial  Report  of 
the  heavy  loss  your  Majesty's  service  has  sustained,  in  the  fall 
of  so  brave  and  distinguished  an  officer  as  Sir  John  Moore, 
has  to  assure  your  Majesty,  from  Lord  Paget's  authority,  that 
the  conduct  of  your  Majesty's  troops  in  action  was  most  ex- 
emplary, and  such  as  to  uphold,  in  the  highest  degree,  the 
reputation  of  your  Majesty's  arms. 


Lard  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  David  Baird, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  January  24,  1809. 

Sir — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  despatch 
of  the  18th,  stating  the  complete  repulse  and  defeat  of  the 
enemy  on  the  16th,  at  every  point  of  attack  on  his  Majesty's 
army  in  the  position  which  had  been  selected  by  Lieutenant- 
General  Sir  John  Moore,  near  Corunna,  and  enclosing  a  detailed 
Report  from  Lieutenant-General  Hope  of  the  action,  and  of  the 
subsequent  embarkation  of  the  army. 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Majesty  to  convey  to  you  the  satis- 
faction his  Majesty  feels  in  this  additional  instance  of  the 
superior  discipline,  firmness,  and  valour,  which  distinguish  his 
army,  wherever  brought  into  engagement  with  the  enemy,  and 
which  reflects  high  honour  on  the  officers  who  command  the 
troops  ;  and  I  am  particularly  commanded  to  desire  that  you 
will  convey  to  Lieutenant-General  Hope  and  the  General 
Officers  of  the  army  that  his  Majesty  entertains  a  just  sense  of 
their  intrepid  and  meritorious  exertions  in  supporting  the  glory 
of  the  British  arms  in  the  battle  of  Corunna ;  and  you  will 
also  convey  to  the  rest  of  the  officers,  non-conmiissioned  officers, 
and  soldiers  his  Majesty's  acknowledgments  of  their  brave  and 
spirited  conduct  on  that  occasion. 

His  Majesty  feels  the  strongest  regret  for  the  loss  of  so 
distinguished  and  meritorious  an  officer  as  Lieutenant-General 


32  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Sir  John  Moore,  which  he  considers  as  a  national  loss ;  and 
whilst  his  Majesty  sensibly  regrets  the  circumstance  which 
compelled  you  to  quit  the  field  early  in  the  action,  when  you 
were  displaying  your  accustomed  valour  in  leading  the  troops 
into  action,  it  affords  his  Majesty  satisfaction  to  have  observed 
that  your  despatch  is  signed  with  your  own  hand,  which  his 
Majesty  considers  as  a  circumstance  encouraging  the  hope  of 
recovery. 