


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Lord  Castlereagh  begs  leave  humbly  to  acquaint  your  Ma- 
jesty that  he  has  received  from  Spain  three  boxes  addressed  to 
your  Majesty,  containing  books,  of  which  the  Bishop  of  Leon 
solicited  your  Majesty's  acceptance  some  time  since.  The 
boxes  have  been  detained  for  a  length  of  time  at  Gihon.     Lord 

VOL.  VII.  D 


34  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Castlereagli  humbly  requests  to  receive  your  Majesty's  com- 
mands with  respect  to  their  disposal. 
St.  James's  Square,  February  8,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Beresford. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  15,  1809. 

Sir — The  Portuguese  Government  having  solicited  that  a 
British  General  Officer  should  be  appointed  to  command  and 
organize  their  army,  T  am  to  acquaint  you  that  his  Majesty  has 
been  gracionsly  pleased  to  select  you  for  this  important  service. 

You  will,  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty's  command,  proceed 
without  delay  to  Lisbon,  where,  on  your  arrival,  you  will  re- 
port yourself  to  the  Commander  of  the  forces  under  Sir  John 
Cradock,  who  will  be  informed  of  the  object  of  your  mission. 
When  the  Portuguese  troops  take  the  field,  you  will,  of  course, 
act  under  his  orders  ;  but,  in  conducting  the  other  details  of 
your  command,  you  will  consider  yourself  as  in  the  Portuguese 
service  ;  communicating,  however,  constantly  with  the  Com- 
mander of  the  forces,  and  using  your  best  endeavours  to  carry 
his  views  with  respect  to  the  common  exertions  and  means 
of  defence  into  effect. 

I  enclose  a  letter  from  Mr.  Secretary  Canning  to  his  Ma- 
jesty *'s  Minister  at  Lisbon,  Mr.  Villiers,  who  is  instructed  to 
present  you  to  the  Regency,  and  to  promote  those  arrange- 
ments which  you  may  consider  necessary  to  the  effectual  exe- 
cution of  your  orders.  Mr.  Villiers  will  also  be  charged  with 
the  arrangement  of  any  pecuniary  advances  which  the  service 
may  require.  A  due  proportion  of  British  officers  will  be  ap- 
pointed to  assist  you  ;  and  a  supply  of  arms,  to  the  extent  of 
10,000  stand,  has  been  for  some  time  embarked,  and  waits  only 
for  a  wind  to  sail  from  Portsmouth  to  the  Tagus. 

I  enclose  a  copy  of  an  Instruction  to  Sir  John  Cradock, 
relative  to  your  command,  and  to  the  officers  accompanying 
you  on  the  present  service,  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  will  afford 
you  all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  Castlereagh. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  35 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieut. -General  Sir  John  Cradock, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  15,  1809. 

Sir — In  compliance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Portuguese  Go- 
vernment, his  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  permit 
Major-General  Beresford  to  take  the  chief  command  of  the 
Portuguese  army,  with  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General  in 
that  army.  The  General  will  be  accompanied  by  a  certain 
number  of  officers,  who  will  each  have  one  step  of  rank  in  the 
British  army,  giving  up  their  present  regimental  commissions. 