

It  is  intended  that  these  officers  should  serve  and  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  Portuguese  corps  as  Major-General  Beresford 
may  direct.  Should  affairs  assume  a  favourable  aspect,  it  may 
be  expedient  considerably  to  increase  the  number  of  these 
officers ;  but,  at  present,  only  a  few  are  sent  :  and  I  have  to 
request  you  will,  in  consequence,  afford  to  Major-General 
Beresford,  from  the  force  under  your  orders,  such  assistance 
in  officers  as  you  can  conveniently  give.  It  must,  however, 
be  left  to  your  discretion  to  judge  how  far  the  numbers,  from 
the  prospects  in  Portugal,  should  be  increased  or  limited. 

I  enclose,  for  your  information,  a  copy  of  the  Instructions 
which  I  have  given  to  Major-General  Beresford,  by  his  Ma- 
jesty ""s  command.  Castlereagh. 


Major-General  Leith  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 
10,  Cork  Street,  Burlington  Gardens,  February  24,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — The  non-arrival  of  my  papers  in  London, 
and  misinformation  as  to  the  time  of  discussing  the  Spanish 
war  in  the  House  of  Commons,  have  prevented  my  writing 
some  memoranda  on  the  subject  of  the  conversation  which  I 
had  in  St,  Jameses  Square :  I,  however,  think  that  the  project 
of  landing  an  army  of  between  30  and  40,000  men  to  the 
eastward  of  Santoha,  or  at  Santander  and  Santona,  except  in 
detached  and  successive  corps,  not  exceeding  10,000  each,  and 
carrying  with  them  every  individual  article  they  should  require, 

d2 


36  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

if  not  impossible,  at  least  attended  with  such  difficulties  and 
dangers  as  scarcely  to  come  within  the  scope  of  calculation,  as 
a  military  operation  to  be  undertaken  with  a  view  to  act  in  the 
rear  of  an  enemy  equally  numerous  in  Biscay. 

Hasty  Memoranda, 

No  naval  commander  of  experience  would  trust  a  fleet  of 
Transports,  except  in  the  summer  season,  to  the  eastward  of 
Santona  ;  and  even  so  far  to  the  eastward,  if  they  should  miss 
Santander  or  Santona,  with  a  fair  wind  blowing  strong,  they 
run  the  greatest  risk  of  being  wrecked  on  the  Spanish  or  French 
coast.  Single  men-of-war  find  it  difficult  enough  to  weather 
those  shores,  and  the  communication  between  the  coasts  of 
Biscay  and  Gruipuscoa,  and  even  the  eastern  parts  of  Santander 
(Province),  in  all  of  which  there  is  no  port  except  Passage, 
without  capacity  for  a  fleet,  and  no  anchorage  of  safety,  is  so 
precarious,  that  no  dependence  could  be  placed  on  disembarking 
stores  of  any  kind,  or  of  keeping  up  any  intercourse  whatever 
between  the  shore  and  shipping. 

But,  suppose  an  army  of  40,000  men  fairly  on  shore  in 
Guipuscoa,  how  are  they  to  be  fed  or  equipped  ?  Biscay  and 
Gruipuscoa,  before  they  were  exhausted  by  the  long  continuance 
of  the  enemy  in  those  provinces,  never  fed  their  own  popu- 
lation, which  was  actually  starving  in  the*  month  of  October. 
Was  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pyrenees  that  the  British  army 
was  to  find  equipment  for  40,000  men  ;  poor,  mountainous, 
and  drained  of  all  military  resources  as  those  countries  had 
been  in  equipping  every  French  corps  which  had  entered 
Spain,  as  it  necessarily  passed  that  way  ?  Was  it  to  act  on 
the  circumference,  while  the  enemy  was  at  liberty  to  follow  the 
radius  of  a  circle,  either  to  attack  the  British  or  Spanish  army 
as  he  might  choose,  without  a  possibility  of  their  reciprocally 
communicating  or  aiding  each  other,  that  the  former  was  to  be 
placed  between  France  and  its  army,  if  the  thing  had  not  been, 
in  the  first  instance,  almost'  chimerical  ?     In  short,  it  appears 