

Under  these  circumstances,  I  have  to  acquaint  you  that  his 
Majesty ""s  pleasure  is,  that  you  do  take  immediate  steps  for 
ordering  both  Major-General  Sherbrooke  (if  the  orders  above 
referred  to  shall  not  have  reached  him  before  his  arrival  at 
Cadiz)  and  Major-General  Mackenzie''s  corps  to  join  you  forth- 
with in  Portugal,  unless  they  shall  have  been  actually  re- 
ceived into  Cadiz  in  the  manner  before  directed.  The  40th 
Regiment  may  be  ordered  to  march  from  Seville  to  Gibraltar, 
to  reinforce  that  garrison. 

As  it  is  the  King''s  determination  to  use  every  exertion  to 
strengthen  the  defences  of  Portugal,  with  this  view  you  are 
authorized  to  avail  yourself  of  the  support  of  the  troops  above 
stated,  and  you  will  endeavour  to  draw  every  aid  from  the 
exertions  of  the  Portuguese,  to  whom  Mr.  Villiers  will  be 
directed  to  afford  such  pecuniary  aid  as  may  assist  them  in 
rendering  their  army  capable  of  service  in  the  field. 

Ycrii  will  take  the  necessary  measures  for  rendering  your 
army  effective  for  field  service.     Maintain  yourself  as  long  as 


809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  39 

possible  in  Portugal.  Should  you  be  compelled  to  embark, 
you  will  proceed,  with  the  troops,  as  before  directed,  to  Gi- 
braltar, there  to  wait  further  orders,  considering  yourself,  how- 
ever, as  still  authorized  to  land  your  army  at  Cadiz,  if  required 
to  do  so  by  the  Spanish  Government,  through  Mr.  Frere. 
Castlereagh. 

Memorandum  concerning  the  Defence  of  Portugal. 

BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

March  7,  1809. 

I  have  always  been  of  opinion  that  Portugal  might  be 
defended,  whatever  might  be  the  result  of  the  contest  in  Spain  ; 
and  that,  in  the  mean  time,  the  measures  adopted  for  the 
defence  of  Portugal  would  be  highly  useful  to  the  Spaniards 
in  their  contest  with  the  French.  My  notion  was  that  the 
Portuguese  military  establishments,  upon  the  footing  of  40,000 
militia  and  30,000  regular  troops,  ought  to  be  revived,  and 
that,  in  addition  to  these  troops,  his  Majesty  ought  to  employ 
an  army  in  Portugal,  amounting  to  about  20,000  British  troops, 
including  about  4,000  cavalry.  My  opinion  was  that,  even  if 
Spain  should  have  been  conquered,  the  French  would  not  have 
been  able  to  overcome  Portugal  with  a  smaller  force  than 
100,000  men ;  and  that,  so  long  as  the  contest  should  con-? 
tinue  in  Spain,  this  force,  if  it  could  be  put  in  a  state  of  ac- 
tivity, would  be  highly  useful  to  the  Spaniards,  and  might 
have  eventually  decided  the  contest. 

It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  military  establishments  of 
Portugal  could  not  be  revived,  without  very  extensive  pecu- 
niary assistance  and  political  support  from  this  country ;  and 
the  only  mode  in  which  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  safe,  or  even 
practicable,  to  give  this  assistance  and  support,  or  to  interfere 
at  all,  in  a  military  way,  in  the  concerns  of  Portugal,  was  to 
trust  the  King's  ambassador  at  Lisbon  to  give  or  to  withhold 
such  sums  as  he  might  think  necessary  for  the  support  of 
military  establishments  only,  and  to  instruct  him  to  see  that 