

I  am  further  commanded  to  desire  that  you  will  signify  to 
Lieutenant-General  Hope  that  his  Majesty  is  not  only  fully 
impressed  with  a  sense  of  his  able  and  judicious  conduct,  when 
he  succeeded  to  take  the  command  in  action,  but  that  he  con- 
siders the  arrangements  made  by  him  for  the  immediate  em- 
barkation of  the  troops  as  highly  meritorious. 

The  conspicuous  skill  and  celerity  with  which  this  arduous 
service  was  carried  into  execution  by  the  efforts  of  his  Majesty's 
navy,  under  the  command  of  Rear-Admiral  de  Courcy,  is  a 
pleasing  proof  that  the  same  spirit  equally  actuates  both  de- 
partments of  service  in  the  cause  of  their  Sovereign  and  their 
country.  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  [January  24,  1809]. 

Tuesday  morning,  2  a.m. 

Lord  Castlereagh  has  the  satisfaction  of  humbly  submitting 
to  your  Majesty  the  accompanying  despatches,  communicating 
the  meritorious  services  and  the  safe  re-embarkation  of  your 
Majesty''s  army  from  Corunna.  The  Honourable  Captain 
Gordon  left  the  whole  fleet  at  sea  on  the  18th,  all  well,  with  a 
fair  wind,  steering  for  the  Channel. 

Your  Majesty  will  observe  that  Sir  David  Baird'^s  despatch  is 
signed  with  his  own  hand,  and  the  report  of  the  prospect  of  his 
recovery  is  favourable.  Sir  John  Moore  lived  to  be  informed 
of  the  fate  of  the  day,  and  seemed  only  apprehensive,  from  the 
degree  of  strength  he  retained,  that,  being  assured  of  this  fact, 
the  close  of  his  life  might  be  unnecessarily  protracted. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  33 

Lord  Oastlereagh  humbly  hopes  your  Majesty  will  approve 
of  proposing  to  the  House  of  Commons  to  address  your  Majesty 
to  direct  a  monument  to  be  erected  to  the  memory  of  this 
distinofuished  and  meritorious  officer. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  January  25,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  in  submitting  to  your  Majesty  Lieu  tenant- 
General  Hope'*s  letter,  and  a  report  from  Captain  Bowen,  agent 
for  transports,  on  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at  Corunna, 
begs  permission  humbly  to  observe  that  any  inconvenience 
that  arose  from  the  empty  store  and  forage  ships  not  having 
been  supplied  with  provisions  did  not  result  from  there  not 
having  been  with  the  army  a  due  proportion  of  victuallers,  but 
from  a  distribution  not  having  been  previously  made  into  those 
ships,  which  are  seldom  used  for  the  reception  of  troops. 

A  large  fleet  of  empty  transports,  with  some  additional 
victuallers,  sailed  from  Portsmouth  on  the  14th  for  Corunna. 

Lord  Castlereagh  hopes  your  Majesty  will  pardon  his  enter- 
ing into  this  detail ;  but  he  is  anxious  your  Majesty  should  be 
persuaded  that,  whilst  your  Majesty's  troops  have  been  engaged 
in  their  late  arduous  and  trying  services,  there  have  been  no 
exertions  omitted  on  the  part  of  your  Majesty's  servants,  in 
contributing  to  their  comforts,  and  in  keeping  them  largely 
provided  with  every  article  of  supply  from  home,  which  could 
be  made  available,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  service  in 
which  the  army  was  engaged. 