


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  37 

altogether  so  impracticable  a  measure,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to 
ask  the  solution  of  the  other  numerous  difficulties  to  be  con- 
sidered. 

With  regard  to  the  other  parts  of  the  war  of  which  I  had  a 
knowledge,  your  lordship,  of  course,  well  knows  that  every  aid, 
in  the  way  of  money  and  supplies  of  all  kinds,  was  most  libe- 
rally given  ;  and  that  the  Provinces  and  Generals  expressed, 
on  many  occasions,  their  gratitude  for  the  manner  in  which 
their  wants  were  provided  for  by  the  British  Government,  of 
which  I  have  many  written  proofs  among  my  papers.  Had 
not  a  plan  of  operations  the  most  disjointed  and  absurd  led  the 
Spanish  Generals  latterly  to  expose  unnecessarily  their  armies 
to  famine  and  defeat,  there  ought  to  have  been  a  formidable 
army  concentrated  (no  matter  how  far  they  had  retreated,  pro- 
vided they  had  judiciously  and  in  proper  time  fallen  back)  to 
nave  met  and  been  supported  by  the  British  army,  instead  of 
the  entire  dissolution  of  Blake's  army,  (which  consisted  of 
50,000  men)  before  they  were  supported,  by  his  want  of  judg- 
ment, in  his  ultimate  operations  on  the  frontiers  of  Biscay. 

Although  your  lordship  is  so  well  acquainted  with  and  can 
so  ably  handle  the  subject,  I  should  have  felt  much  gratifica- 
tion if  the  arrival  of  my  papers  had  enabled  me  to  state,  as  they 
forcibly  struck  me  on  the  spot,  many  circumstances  which  bore 
upon  the  question  of  the  war  in  the  northern  provinces  :  as  it 
is,  I  have  now  neither  time  nor  materials  to  do  more  than  to 
address  this  hasty  and  imperfect  letter,  which,  at  least,  how- 
ever, affords  me  the  means  of  assuring  your  lordship  of  the 
great  respect  and  esteem  with  which  I  always  am,  my  dear 
lord,  your  most  faithful  servant, 

James  Leith. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  February  27,  1809. 

Sir — Immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  the 
12th  and  14th  instant,  from  Lisbon,  by  which  it  appears  that 


38  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

the  services  of  the  corps  detached  by  you  under  the  orders  of 
Major-General  Mackenzie  have  been  declined  at  Cadiz,  In- 
structions were  sent  to  Major-General  Sherbrooke,  v^^hich  I 
hope  may  find  him  at  Cork,  or  meet  him  at  sea,  directing  him 
to  proceed,  with  his  armament,  at  once  to  the  Tagus  instead  of 
Cadiz. 

As  the  Spanish  Government  has  not  thought  fit  to  accede 
to  the  arrangements,  which  were  stated  to  you  in  my  letter  of 
the  14th  January,  as  the  preliminary  conditions  on  which 
alone  the  British  army  could  be  assembled  for  service  in  the 
south  of  Spain,  his  Majesty  feels  that  there  no  longer  remains 
any  military  consideration  on  which  he  should  narrow  the 
means  which  can  be  applied  to  the  defence  of  Portugal,  for  the 
purpose  of  directing  them  to  a  more  remote  point  of  the  Penin- 
sula, unsupported  by  any  secure  position,  from  which  the 
British  army  might  advance,  or  on  which  it  might  retreat,  if 
pressed  by  a  superior  enemy. 