

I  understand  that  the  British  army  now  in  Portugal  consists 
of  20,000  men,  including  cavalry.  It  should  be  made  up 
20,000  infantry  at  least,  as  soon  as  possible,  by  additions  of 
riflemen  and  other  good  infantry,  which,  by  this  time,  may 
have  been  refitted  after  the  campaign  in  Spain.  The  reinforce- 
ments may  follow  as  the  troops  may  recover  from  their 
fatigues. 

The  first  measures  to  be  adopted  are  to  complete  the  army 
in  Portugal  with  its  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  to  horse  the  ord- 
nance as  it  ought  to  be.  As  soon  as  this  shall  be  done,  the 
General  and  Staff"  Officers  should  go  out ;  as  it  may  be  de- 
pended upon  that,  as  soon  as  the  newspapers  shall  have  an- 
nounced the  departure  of  officers  for  Portugal,  the  French 
armies  in  Spain  will  receive  orders  to  make  their  movements 
towards  Portugal,  so  as  to  anticipate  our  measures  for  its 
defence.    We  ought,  therefore,  to  have  everything  on  the  spot, 


42  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

or  nearly  so,  before  any  alarm  is  created  in  France  respecting 
our  intentions. 

Besides  the  articles  above  enumerated,  30,000  stand  of 
arms,  clothing,  and  shoes,  for  the  Portuguese  army,  should  be 
sent  to  Lisbon  as  soon  as  possible. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Hill. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  12,  1809. 

Sir — lam  to  convey  to  you  the  King'^s  commands,  that,  so  soon 
as  the  troops  placed  under  your  orders  are  embarked  and  ready 
for  sea,  you  do  proceed  without  loss  of  time  to  the  Tagus,  there 
to  place  yourself  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant -General 
Sir  John  Oradock,  Commander-in-Chief  of  his  Majesty's  forces 
in  Portugal. 

Three  hundred  artillery  horses  are  to  accompany  your 
corps.  The  necessary  proportion  of  artillerymen  and  guns 
have  already  been  sent  to  Portugal.  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Hill. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  12,  1809. 

Sir — I  trust  the  occasion  may  not  have  arisen.  I  think  it 
right,  however,  to  inform  you  that  Sir  John  Cradock''s  orders, 
in  the  event  of  being  compelled  to  evacuate  Portugal,  are  to 
proceed  with  his  forces  either  to  Gibraltar  or  Cadiz.  In  the 
above  case,  you  will  lose  no  time  in  forming  a  junction  with 
that  officer,  wherever  he  may  be.  Castlereagh. 


The  Hon.  Charles  Stewart  to  Major-General  Hill. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  13,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  directed  by  Lord  Castlereagh  to  acquaint  you 
that  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  have  ordered 
the  Tribune  and  Africaine  frigates  to  proceed  from  Plymouth 
to  Cork,  to  convey  the  troops  under  your  command  to  the 
Tagus.     The  general  officers  will  be  accommodated  in  these 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  43 