


40  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

the  revenues  of  Portugal,  whatever  they  might  be,  were,  in  the 
first  instance,  applied  to  the  same  objects.  By  the  operation  of 
these  powers  and  instructions,  it  is  probable  that  he  would  have 
had  a  complete  control  over  the  measures  of  the  Portuguese 
Government,  and  we  might  have  expected,  by  this  time,  to 
have  in  the  field  an  efficient  Portuguese  army. 

As  it  was  not  possible,  however,  to  adopt  those  measures  at 
that  time,  and  as  the  attention  of  the  Government  has  neces- 
sarily been  drawn  to  other  objects,  it  was  probable  that  the 
military  establishments  of  Portugal  have  made  but  little  pro- 
gress ;  and,  in  considering  of  the  extent  of  British  force  re- 
quired for  the  defence  of  that  country,  and  of  the  other 
measures  to  be  adopted,  the  small  extent  of  the  Portuguese 
force,  and  the  probability  of  an  early  attack  by  the  enemy, 
must  be  considered,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the 
continuance  of  the  contest  in  Spain,  and  the  probability  that  a 
very  large  French  force  will  not  be  disposable,  in  a  very  short 
period  of  time,  for  the  attack  on  Portugal. 

I  would  still  recommend  the  adoption  of  the  political  mea- 
sures above  suggested,  with  a  view  to  the  revival  of  the  mili- 
tary establishments  in  Portugal.  It  is  probable  that  the 
expence  of  these  measures  will  not,  in  this  year,  exceed  a 
million  sterling.  But  if  they  should  succeed,  and  the  contest 
should  continue  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  benefit  which  will 
accrue  from  them  will  be  more  than  adequate  to  the  expence 
incurred. 

The  British  force  employed  in  Portugal  should,  in  this  view 
of  the  question,  not  be  less  than  30,000  men,  of  which  number 
4  or  5,000  should  be  cavalry,  and  there  should  be  a  large 
body  of  artillery.  The  extent  of  force  in  cavalry  and  artillery 
above  required  is  because  the  Portuguese  military  establish- 
ments nmst  necessarily  be  deficient  in  these  two  branches,  and 
British  or  German  cavalry  and  artillery  must  be  employed 
with  the  Portuguese  infantry. 

Tl^e  whole  of  the  army  iu  Portugal,  Portuguese  as  well  as 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  41 

British,  should  be  placed  under  the  command  of  British  officers. 
The  Staff  of  the  army,  the  Commissariat  in  particular,  must 
be  British  ;  and  these  departments  must  be  extensive  in  pro- 
portion to  the  strength  of  the  whole  army  which  will  act  in 
Portugal,  to  the  number  of  detached  posts  which  it  will  be 
necessary  to  occupy,  and  with  a  view  to  the  difficulties  of  pro- 
viding and  distributing  supplies  in  that  country. 

In  reo-ard  to  the  detail  of  these  measures,  I  recommend  that 
the  British  army  in  Portugal  should  be  reinforced,  as  soon  as 
possible,  with  some  companies  of  British  riflemen  ;  with  8,000 
British  or  German  cavalry  ;  that  the  complement  of  ordnance 
with  that  army  should  be  made  »S0  pieces  of  cannon,  of  which 
two  brigades  of  9-pounders ;  that  these  pieces  of  ordnance 
should  be  completely  horsed  ;  that  20  pieces  of  brass  12- 
pounder  ordnance,  upon  travelling  carriages,  should  be  sent  to 
Portugal,  with  a  view  to  the  occupation  of  certain  positions  in 
that  country  ;  that  a  corps  of  engineers  for  an  army  of  60,000 
men  should  be  sent  there,  and  a  corps  of  artillery  for  60  pieces 
of  cannon. 