

I  trust  the  change  now  proposed  may  not  be  unacceptable  to 
your  feelings :  I  am  very  solicitous  indeed  they  should  be  con- 
sulted to  the  utmost  extent  which  considerations  of  duty  will 
permit ;  and  I  am  sure,  whatever  shade  of  preference  your 
own  mind  might  feel  with  respect  to  the  labour  of  service 
allotted  to  you  at  the  present  moment,  you  will  liberally  in- 
terpret the  weighty  considerations  which  compel  the  King''s 
Ministers  to  meet  the  difficulties  of  the  times  in  the  manner 
which  may  not  only  best  provide  for  the  respective  objects  con- 
fided to  their  care,  but  in  the  mode  which,  from  adventitious 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  45 

circumstances,  may  conciliate  public  impression  with  respect  to 
their  measures. 

In  proposing  to  you  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  I  feel  that  it 
is,  in  the  first  instance,  transferring  you  to  a  less  active  scene ; 
but  the  time  may  not  be  very  distant  when  the  picture  may  be 
reversed,  and  the  eyes  of  the  country  be  turned,  as  they  were 
in  the  year  1 782,  to  Gibraltar,  as  the  point  of  contest  between 
the  two  powers,  where  as  much  solid  service  may  be  rendered, 
and  as  much  personal  glory  acquired,  as  at  the  head  of  an  army. 

It  is  with  this  view,  and  under  a  conviction  that,  if  Spain  is 
conquered,  Gibraltar  will  be  seriously  attacked,  that  the  com- 
mand is  offered  to  you  ;  and  it  is  done  so  under  a  conviction 
that  this  trust  cannot  be  placed  in  better  hands  ;  and  his  Ma- 
jesty has  very  graciously  authorized  me  to  intimate  to  you  that 
he  proposes  to  give  you  the  local  rank  of  General  at  Gibraltar. 

I  should  much  wish  that,  in  proceeding  to  Gibraltar,  you 
could  take  Seville  in  your  way.  Your  being  enabled  to  com- 
municate with  Mr.  Frere  and  the  Central  Government  might 
lay  the  foundation  of  future  facilities  in  conducting  the  many 
delicate  and  important  duties  that  must  devolve  upon  you  in 
the  command  in  Gibraltar.  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary 
to  direct  this  measure  in  my  Instructions  :  I  wish  to  leave  it  as 
a  suggestion  in  your  hands,  to  decide  on  as  you  may  judge  best 
for  the  King's  service. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  30,  1809. 

Sir — In  the  present  state  of  affairs  in  the  south  of  Spain,  it 
appearing  to  the  King's  Ministers  indispensably  necessary  that 
an  officer  of  high  rank  and  experience  should  be  entrusted  with 
the  chief  command  at  Gibraltar,  as  well  to  communicate  with 
the  Spanish  Government  upon  military  affairs  as  to  be  charged 
with  the  defence  of  that  most  important  fortress,  in  the  event 
of  the  enemy  making  himself  master  of  that  part  of  Spain,  I 
am  to  acquaint  you   that   his  Majesty  has   been  graciously 