

ships.  His  lordship  trusts  that  every  exertion  will  have  been 
made  by  you  to  have  the  troops  and  artillery  horses  embarked, 
and  that  every  thing  will  be  in  a  state  of  readiness  to  proceed 
to  sea  very  soon  after  the  frigates'"  arrival. 

Charles  Stewart. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Your  Majesty"'s  confidential  servants  having  had  under  their 
consideration  the  amount  of  force  (in  infantry,  amounting  to 
about  18,000  men)  which  will  be  assembled  in  Portugal  upon 
the  arrival  of  Major-General  Hiirs  corps  from  Cork,  and 
the  return  of  Major-General  Sherbrooke  and  Major-General 
M^Kenzie's  from  Cadiz,  are  humbly  of  opinion  that  it  may  be 
expedient  to  order  three  regiments  of  cavalry,  for  which  the 
necessary  tonnage  is  prepared,  to  proceed  immediately  to  the 
Tagus  from  hence. 

They  further  beg  leave  humbly  to  propose  to  your  Majesty 
that  Sir  J.  Cradock  should  be  appointed  to  succeed  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  in  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  and  that  the  chief 
command  in  Portugal  should  be  entrusted  to  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley. 

In  submitting  the  latter  appointment  to  your  Majesty's 
approbation,  your  Majesty's  servants  have  not  been  unmindful 
of  the  inconvenience  that  might  arise,  in  case  of  any  conside- 
rable increase  of  this  force,  from  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  being 
so  young  a  Lieutenant -General.  But,  as  any  material  increase 
of  the  army  in  Portugal  cannot  be  at  present  looked  to  as  pro- 
bable, either  from  the  state  of  the  regiments  at  home,  or  the 
immediate  circumstances  of  the  war,  they  humbly  conceive 
that  your  Majesty's  service  (without  prejudice  to  the  claims  of 
the  distinguished  officers  in  your  Majesty's  army  who  are  his 
seniors  in  rank)  may  have  the  benefit  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley 's 
being  employed  where  he  has  had  the  good  fortune  of  being- 
successful,  and  that  it  will  remain  open  for  your  Majesty's 
future  consideration  to  make  a  different  arrangemeDt  of  the 


44  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

command,  if,  under  all  the  circumstances,  it  shall  appear  to 
your  Majesty  proper  to  confide  it  to  a  general  officer  of  higher 
rank. 

Downing  Street,  March  26,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  John  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  March  30,  1809. 

My  dear  Oradock — In  communicating  to  you  the  arrange- 
ment which  has  been  determined  upon,  with  respect  to  the  two 
commands  in  the  Peninsula,  at  present  of  importance,  I  cannot 
but  feel  much  personal  solicitude  that  the  decision  which  the 
King''s  Ministers  have  come  to  upon  this  subject  may  not  be 
unacceptable  to  you. 

It  would  neither  be  kind  nor  manly  in  me  not  to  avow  that 
the  advice  they  have  felt  it  their  duty  to  offer  to  the  King  on 
the  present  occasion  has  been  dictated  by  the  peculiar  value 
they  are  disposed  to  attach  to  Sir  A.  W.'s  services  gene- 
rally, and  particularly  in  Portugal.  You  will  believe  me 
sincere  when  I  assure  you,  with  respect  to  yourself,  in  addition 
to  much  personal  confidence,  they  feel  very  strongly  indeed ; 
with  respect  to  the  whole  of  your  conduct  in  Portugal,  which, 
in  times  and  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  difficulty,  has  in 
every  instance  met  with  their  unqualified  approbation,  and,  I 
can  truly  say,  fulfilled  every  wish  and  expectation  I  had  or 
could  have  formed,  when  you  were  selected  for  the  command. 