


46  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

pleased  to  select  you  for  this  service,  than  which,  in  the  event 
supposed,  none  can  be  of  more  signal  importance  to  his  Ma- 
jesty ""s  interests. 

It  is  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that  you  do  proceed,  without 
delay,  to  Gibraltar,  there  to  assume  the  chief  command  of  the 
garrison ;  and  you  will,  on  your  arrival  there,  open  such  com- 
munication with  the  Spanish  Government,  through  Mr.  Frere, 
and  with  the  provinces  in  the  south  of  Spain,  as  may  enable 
you  to  keep  his  Majesty's  Government  regularly  informed  of 
the  operations  carrying  on,  and  the  measures  by  which,  in  your 
judgment,  the  enemy's  designs  may  be  counteracted. 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Majesty  to  signify  to  you  his 
Majesty's  most  gracious  approbation  of  your  services  in  Por- 
tugal. Every  part  of  your  conduct  has  been  guided  not  less 
by  prudence  and  judgment  than  by  the  most  marked  zeal  for 
his  Majesty's  service ;  and  his  Majesty  is  persuaded  that  the 
same  temper  and  generous  fulfilment  of  the  spirit  of  your 
Instructions,  which  has  so  honourably  distinguished  the  whole 
of  your  late  proceedings  in  Portugal,  will  continue  to  actuate 
your  conduct  at  all  times  in  the  discharge  of  your  military 
duties. 

His  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  order  Lieutenant-General 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  proceed  to  Portugal,  to  take  upon 
him  the  chief  command  of  the  army  now  assembling  there  ;  and 
his  Majesty  leaves  it  to  your  discretion  to  decide,  according  to 
the  events  in  progress,  whether  you  will  await  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley's  arrival,  or  assume  the  command  at  Gibraltar,  leaving 
the  temporary  charge  of  the  force  in  Portugal  in   the  senior 

oflScer  on  the  Staff. 

Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  2,  1809. 

Sir — His  Majesty  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  nomi- 
Date  Lieutenant-General  Sir  J.  Cradock  to  the  chief  command 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  47 

at  Gibraltar,  has  thought  fit  to  select  you  to  replace  that  officer 
in  the  command  of  his  Majesty's  forces  in  Portugal. 

You  will  receive  enclosed  a  return  of  the  troops,  either 
actually  arrived,  or  under  orders  for  Portugal ;  and  it  is  his 
Majesty's  pleasure  that  you  do  proceed  without  delay  to  Lisbon, 
in  execution  of  these  orders,  which  I  am  now  to  convey  to  you 
by  his  Majesty's  command.  Your  attention  will  be  directed, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  prepare  and  equip  the  British  army  for 
the  field.  You  will,  in  the  next  place,  direct  your  utmost 
exertion  to  the  bringing  forward  the  Portuguese  army,  and 
rendering  it  capable  of  co-operating  with  his  Majesty's  troops. 
In  furtherance  of  the  latter  object,  in  addition  to  the  arrange- 
ments already  made,  you  will  make  such  requisitions,  from 
time  to  time,  either  to  the  Portuguese  Government,  or  to  the 
Government  at  home,  as,  upon  communication  with  General 
Beresford,  you  may  deem  requisite  for  rendering  the  Portu- 
guese troops  fit  for  service. 