

Dear  Sir — Permit  me  to  renew  the  subject  of  supplying  the 
army  in  Portugal  as  early  as  possible  with  such  a  proportion 
of  light  troops  as  our  means  will  admit  of.  The  critical 
situation  of  the  British  army  in  that  country,  the  importance 
attached  to  this  species  of  force  by  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  and 
the  assurances  he  received  before  he  left  England  that  a  corps 
of  this  description  should  follow  him  without  delay,  will,  I  am 


1809.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  61 

persuaded,  justify  me  with  you  for  pressing  this  subject  again 
upon  your  attention,  and  with  an  earnest  request  that  such  an 
arrangement  as  may  be  within  our  power  to  make  with  a  view 
to  this  object  may  be  accelerated. 

Believe  me,  dear  sir,  with  great  regard. 

Your  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Oastlereagh. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Villa  Franca,  April  29,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  write  in  the  chance  that  this  letter  may 
still  find  the  packet  at  Lisbon,  to  inform  you  that  I  have 
received  a  very  bad  report  indeed  of  the  state  of  the  artillery 
horses,  lately  arrived  from  England  with  the  heavy  dragoons, 
being  very  old,  diseased,  and  out  of  condition.  I  shall  receive 
it  officially  probably  in  a  day  or  two,  when  I  shall  transmit  it 
to  England.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  it  proper  to  acquaint 
you  with  the  state  of  these  horses,  and  to  recommend  that,  for 
that  reason,  as  well  as  because  it  would  be  very  desirable  to 
attach  a  troop  of  horse  artillery  to  so  large  a  body  of  cavalry 
as  we  shall  have,  that  a  troop  of  horse  artillery  should  be  sent 
out.  Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  13,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  a  light  brigade,  consisting 
of  the  battalions  stated  in  the  margin,^  are  ordered  for  imme- 
diate embarkation,  to  join  your  army  in  Portugal. 

The  officer  in  command  of  this  brigade  will  receive  direc- 
tions, in  pursuance  of  the  suggestion  contained  in  your  letter 
marked  "  Private,"  of  the  24th  ult.,  to  call  off  Aveiro  and  the 
Mondego  river  for  orders. 

^  The  1st  battalions  of  the  43rd,  52nd,  and  95th  Foot,  of  1,000  men 
each. 


62  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

I  am  further  to  inform  you  that  orders  have  been  given  for 
sendino:  to  Portugal  the  men  who  have  volunteered  from  the 
Militia  into  the  regiments  under  your  command,  completing, 
as  far  as  circumstances  will  permit,  the  several  battalions  to 
their  full  establishment.  An  additional  quantity  of  forage  has 
been  ordered  for  the  cavalry,  upon  the  requisition  of  Sir  John 
Cradock. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  13,  1809. 