

Such  is  the  present  actual  state  of  the  armies  of  Spain ;  and 
it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  Marshal  Ney  now  occupies 
Coruiia,  Ferrol,  and  Santiago,  with  12,000  troops;  and  Oporto 
is  occupied  by  9,000  men  under  Soult,  who  is  opposed  by  the 
Portuguese  General  Silveira,  with  about  13,000  men;  while 
there  is  in  Lisbon  an  English  army  of  1 7,000  men,  at  least. 

In  an  intercepted  letter  from  Joseph  to  Marshal  Victor,  are 
the  following  expressions :   "  General  Sebastiani  must  employ 


54  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

himself  in  disarming  the  people,  and  putting  down  the  spirit 
of  insurrection  in  La  Mancha,  without  attempting  any  attack 
upon  the  Sierra  Morena,  until  your  Excellency  shall  have 
forced  Cuesta,  whom  you  will,  however,  not  attack,  until  you 
have  been  joined  by  the  division  of  Lapisse,  nor  without  an 
understanding  with  Marshal  Soult,  who  is  at  Oporto."*"* 

Under  such  circumstances,  it  does  not  require  much  military 
knowledge  to  decide  how  to  act.  Cuesta  ought  to  be  strictly 
forbidden  making  any  attack  upon  the  enemy ;  and  in  the 
mean  while,  an  active  and  intelligent  person  should  be  de- 
spatched, with  the  plans  of  the  enemy,  to  the  English  army  at 
Lisbon,  to  whom  he  should  propose  either  to  march  against, 
and  (with  the  assistance  of  the  Portuguese)  to  destroy  Soult ; 
or,  with  their  whole  force,  to  march  upon  Elvas  and  Badajoz, 
and  threaten  the  enemy's  flank  from  these  points. 

Should  Soult  be  conquered,  Ney  is  lost ;  for,  with  his  commu- 
nication with  Castillo  cut  ofi"  by  Romana,  the  whole  country  in 
insurrection,  and  his  flank  threatened  by  Silveira,  he  would  be 
compelled  to  surrender  at  discretion.  What  would  be  the  fate 
of  Victor  and  Sebastiani  ?  Providence,  which,  with  a  protect- 
ing arm,  has  favoured  us  since  the  commencement  of  our  revo- 
lution, could  never  present  us  with  a  fairer  opportunity  for 
destroying  the  armies  of  our  foe,  and  particularly  while  the 
events  in  Germany  must  prevent  his  receiving  any  reinforce- 
ments from  France. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  want  of  firearms  is  great,  and  must 
be  remedied.  England,  whose  friendly  assistance  we  have  ex- 
perienced from  the  commencement,  can  alone  aid  us  with  the 
same  promptitude  and  activity.  Cadiz  is  the  most  convenient 
port  for  the  armies  of  Estremadura  and  La  Mancha,  Cartha- 
genafor  Murcia,  Tortosa  for  Aragon,  and  Tarragona  for  Cata- 
lonia, Vigo  for  Galicia,  and  Gijon  for  the  Asturias. 

Above  all,  it  is  necessary  to  support  the  patriotic  spirit  of 
the  people  of  La  Mancha  and  of  the  capital,  which,  according 
to  intercepted  letters,  becomes  every  day  better  and  better.    On 