


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  55 

this  account,  we  ought  not  to  relinquish  our  ideas  concerning 
that  province.  And  while  in  the  position  Cuesta  now  occupies, 
he  does  not  require  so  numerous  a  cavalry,  it  might  he  im- 
portant to  increase  that  arm  of  the  army  of  La  Carolina  to  the 
number  of  4,000  horse,  which,  accompanied  by  a  proportionate 
force  of  infantry  and  artillery,  might  make  a  powerful  diver- 
sion in  La  Mancha. 

The  memorable  retreat  of,  and  that  spirit  of  enthusiasm  and 
confidence  inspired  by,  the  worthy  General  (Duke  of  Albu- 
querque) who  commanded  on  that  day,  point  him  out  as  the 
proper  person  to  be  placed  at  the  head  of  this  proposed  expe- 
dition. With  this  powerful  diversion  in  La  Mancha,  it  would 
be  necessary  that  the  English  should  co-operate  by  other  strong 
demonstrations,  which  they  could  do  with  great  facility. 

Were  the  English  to  land  at  Vigo  the  forces  which  they 
have  embarked  at  Portsmouth,  the  fate  of  Galicia  would  be 
more  completely  decided  than  ever,  and  consequently  the  fate 
of  Portugal,  Asturias,  Leon,  nay,  even  Castille  itself.  On  the 
other  hand,  what  is  the  use  of  the  English  army  in  Sicily  ? 
A  powerful  fleet  is  quite  sufficient  to  prevent  a  landing  of  the 
enemy  on  that  island.  And  if  the  Sicilian  army  (English) 
could  be  immediately  conveyed  to  Catalonia,  to  co-operate  with 
Reding,  I  do  not  conceive  how  the  enemy  could  resist,  when 
attacked  at  so  many  points,  and  by  forces  so  considerable. 

Such  are  my  ideas  on  the  actual  state  of  afiairs.  I  have  not 
the  presumption  to  imagine  that  they  are  the  most  correct  and 
indisputable  ;  but  I  can  affirm  that,  in  drawing  up  this  memo- 
rial, I  have  had  no  other  object  than  the  public  good,  by  un- 
deceiving those  who  consider  that  all  is  lost,  and  thus  diffuse 
universal  despair,  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  our  misfortunes. 


Lord  Ca^tlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  11,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that,  upon  a  full  consideration  of 
the   state  of    affairs   in    Portugal,   as   communicated   in  the 


56  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

despatches  received  up  to  the  24th  ult.,  inclusive,  from  Lisbon, 
it  does  not  appear  to  his  Majesty^s  Government  expedient  that 
any  alteration  should  take  place  in  the  measures  in  progress 
for  reinforcing  the  British  army  in  that  country. 

Should  the  British  army  be  unfortunately  compelled  to  eva- 
cuate Portugal,  his  Majesty,  notwithstanding  the  late  refusal 
to  admit  his  troops  into  Cadiz,  is  nevertheless  prepared  to 
renew  that  offer  on  the  same  conditions.  And,  in  the  event 
of  its  acceptance,  it  is  the  King's  pleasure  that  the  whole  force 
now  in  Portugal,  including  the  cavalry,  should  be  disembarked 
at  Cadiz,  from  thence  to  be  employed  in  such  manner  as  may 
appear  to  you  expedient  for  the  support  of  the  common  cause. 