

Should  this  proposal  of  generous  and  disinterested  aid  be 
again  declined  by  the  Government  of  Spain,  it  is  his  Majesty ""s 
intention  (unless  you  receive  orders  to  the  contrary)  that,  after 
reinforcing  the  garrison  of  Gibraltar  to  8,000  British  infantry, 
the  detailed  arrangements  of  which  you  will  concert  with  Sir 
John  Cradock,  you  do  return  home  with  the  remainder  of  the 
force.  A  copy  of  these  instructions  will  be  sent  to  Mr.  Frere, 
through  whom,  in  the  above  contingency,  you  will  make  the 
offer  hereby  directed  to  the  Central  Government. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  11,  1809. 

Sir — Brigadier-General  Stewart,  on  his  arrival  in  town,  has, 
in  obedience  to  your  orders,  communicated  to  me  your  very 
honourable  feelinofs  of  disinclination  to  interfere  with  Sir  John 
Cradock's  command  in  Portugal,  in  the  event  of  finding  that 
officer  engaged  in  active  operations  in  the  field.  Should  the 
case  exist,  which  you  have  represented  as  by  no  means  impro- 
bable from  the  movements  the  enemy  is  making  towards  Por- 
tugal, his  Majesty  trusts  that  the  same  feelings  of  zeal  for  his 
service,  which  induced  this  suggestion  on  your  part,  will  deter- 
mine you  to  place  yourself  under  the  orders  of  Sir  John 
Cradock  till  his  Majesty^s  furtlier  pleasure  is  known.     And  I 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  57 

have  no  doubt  that  every  communication  which  you  may  have 
with  Sir  John  Cradock,  on  this  point,  will  be  conducted  on 
both  sides  by  considerations  only  of  what  may,  at  the  moment, 
be  most  for  the  advantage  of  his  Majesty's  service. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Portsmouth,  April  12, 1809. 

My  dear  Lord — Charles  arrived  this  morning,  and  we  intend 
to  endeavour  to  sail  this  afternoon,  notwithstanding  that  the 
wind  is  contrary.  As  it  is  possible,  however,  that  it  may 
prevent  us  from  getting  out,  I  take  the  opportunity  of  the 
return  of  the  messenger  to  draw  your  attention  again  to  the 
orders  which  you  have  last  sent  me,  in  respect  to  my  leaving 
the  command  in  the  hands  of  Sir  John  Cradock. 

It  occurred  to  me,  when  I  read  the  accounts  of  the  state  of 
affairs  in  Portugal  up  to  the  25th  of  March,  that  it  might  be 
expedient  that  Sir  John  Cradock  should  continue  to  exercise 
the  command  after  I  should  arrive  at  Lisbon,  even  if  no  event 
should  have  occurred ;  and  I  certainly  considered  that  I  could 
not  with  propriety  assume  the  command  if  he  had  been  in  any 
manner  successftil.  The  question  whether  it  is  expedient  or 
not  that  I  should  assume  the  command  will  become  difficult 
only  in  case  no  event  should  have  occurred  ;  and  the  difficulty 
will  consist  in  its  being  one  personal  to  the  two  parties  most 
interested  in  it,  and  resting  entirely  upon  a  consideration  of 
the  personal  qualifications  and  means  of  bringing  the  army 
through  the  difficulties  in  which  it  is  supposed  they  will  be 
involved.  The  decision  of  this  delicate  question  must,  in  a 
great  measure,  rest  with  me,  and  I  hope  that  I  have  fairness 
and  firmness  to  decide  it  according  to  the  best  of  my  judgment. 
But  I  acknowledge  that  I  think  I  shall  find  the  difficulty  of 
making  the  decision  much  increased  by  having  in  my  posses- 
sion the  orders  sent  to  me  last  night ;  and  I  could  prefer  to  let 
the  decision  on  the  question  rest,  as  indeed  it  must  in  any 
case,  upon  my  private  judgment. 