


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  5,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive  enclosed  a  list  of  transports  now  in 
Portugal,  or  under  orders.'  As  it  is  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance that  a  greater  number  should  not  be  detained  abroad  than 
you  deem  indispensably  necessary  to  the  security  of  your  army, 
in  the  event  of  its  being  obliged  to  re-embark,  I  am  to  desire 
that  you  will,  immediately  on  your  arrival,  cause  a  careful 
survey  to  be  made  of  the  whole,  sending  home  the  least  effec- 
tive, and  to  as  great  an  amount  as  you  may  deem  consistent 
with  the  above  object. 

*  This  list  enumerates  83  transports,  carrying  17,980  tons. — Editor. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  51 

A  regiment  of  cavalry  being  under  orders  to  join  you  from 
Ireland,  yon  will  lose  no  time  in  sending  tonnage  for  the  recep- 
tion of  800  horses  from  the  Tagus  to  Cork. 

You  will  report  your  opinion,  according  to  the  state  of 
affairs  in  the  Peninsula,  what  further  reduction  may,  in  your 
judgment,  be  made  from  time  to  time  in  the  transport  tonnage 
attendant  on  the  army,  the  expense  of  which,  more  especially 
the  horse  transports,  presses  severely  on  the  public  finances  at 
the  present  moment. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Lord  Castlereagh,  in  submitting  for  your  Majesty ""s  appro- 
bation Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  Instructions,  in  the  present  state 
of  the  campaign  in  Portugal,  and  the  peculiar  circumstances 
of  the  command,  hopes  your  Majesty  will  not  disapprove  of 
his  humbly  soliciting  your  Majesty's  permission  to  order  that 
officer  to  proceed  immediately  on  service,  without  having  pre- 
viously had  it  in  his  power  to  pay  his  duty  to  your  Majesty. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  8,  1809. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Portsmouth,  April  10,  1809,  ^  past  10  a.m. 
My  dear  Lord — Your  letter  from  Stanmore  arrived  about  half 
an  hour  ago,  from  which  I  should  judge  that  you  are  not  aware 
that  we  are  detained  by  an  order  from  the  Admiralty  to  the 
Surveillante,  not  to  sail  till  fui-ther  orders.  This  order  appears, 
by  a  letter  from  Pole  to  me,  to  have  been  sent  down  at  the 
suggestion  of  Cooke.  Pray  let  me  know  as  soon  as  possible 
what  we  are  to  do.  Ever  yours,  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Memorial  on  the  State  of  Spain,  hy  a  Spanish  Officer. 

April  10,  1809. 
Few  persons  in  Europe,  or  even  in  Spain  itself,  can  speak 
upon  the  affairs  of  this   country  with  that  impartiality  and 

e2 


52  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

truth,  which  are  necessary  to  completely  understand  them. 
There  are  some  who,  filled  with  fears  and  the  terror  of  losing 
their  property,  believe  that  the  fate  of  Spain  is  already  de- 
cided, and  that  she  must  submit  to  the  yoke ;  while  others, 
inspired  with  enthusiasm  for  the  holy  cause  which  we  defend, 
view  every  occurrence  in  too  favourable  a  light.  It  is  proper 
to  adopt  a  middle  course  between  these  two ;  and,  while  we 
persuade  ourselves  that,  while  it  is  impossible  that  we  should 
be  conquered  so  long  as  we  possess  valour  and  fortitude,  we 
must  not  conceal  the  misfortunes  which  have  continually 
attended  our  armies  ever  since  the  battle  of  Baylen. 