

Something  might  be  said  about  the  operations  during  the 
winter,  and  particularly  of  those  armies  under  La  Eomana 
and  Sir  J.  Moore ;  but  neither  the  brevity  of  this  memoir  will 
allow  of  the  discussion  of  matters  which  have  already  passed, 
nor  could  such  discussion  produce  anything  but  soreness  and 
exasperation.  Let  us  draw  a  veil  over  those  unfortunate  mis- 
understandings between  the  Generals,  which  prevented  them 
from  deriving  those  advantages  that  might  have  been  ex- 
pected from  the  very  considerable  forces  which  they  com- 
manded in  a  country  that  offered  so  many  advantages  for 
defence.  We  will  only  speak  of  the  positions  which  our  armies 
actually  occupy,  that,  from  these  data,  we  may  calculate  with 
accuracy  what  may  be  done  under  present  circumstances. 

Cuesta''s  army  is  posted  on  the  heights  of  Monasterio  and 
Santa  Olaya,  which,  on  being  joined  by  3,000  from  Granada, 
and  1,200  from  the  Canaries,  will  amount  to  30,000  men,  of 
whom  6,500  are  cavalry.  Opposed  to  this  army  is  that  under 
Marshal  Victor,  which  has  already  been,  or  is  to  be,  joined  by 
5,000  men  under  General  Lapisse,  who  was  at  Alcantara. 

The  army  of  Vanegas,  amounting  to  16,000  men,  and  1,500 
cavalry,  occupies  the  gorges  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and  is 
opposed  to  the  army  of  Sebastiani,  which  cannot  exceed 
12,000  men. 

I  am  totally  uninformed  of  the  force  under  Reding  in  Oata- 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  53 

Ionia;  but,  taking  into  consideration  the  little  progress  that 
the  French  have  made  in  that  province,  notwithstanding  they 
are  in  possession  of  all  the  strong  places,  which  were  delivered 
up  to  them  by  the  infamous  Godoy,  (Prince  of  the  Peace)  it 
may  be  supposed  that  the  French  forces  are  about  equal  to  those 
of  Reding, 

General  Blake  has  united  the  command  of  the  kingdoms  of 
Valencia,  Murcia,  and  Aragon,  and  has  assumed  the  command 
of  a  division  of  the  latter,  which  was  before  under  the  Mar- 
quess of  Lanzas,  and  amounted  to  10,000  men.  We  know 
that  the  disposable  force  of  Valencia  positively  amounted  to 
23,000  soldiers. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  southern  parts  of  Galicia  are  in 
a  state  of  complete  insurrection,  and  that,  according  to  the 
latest  advices,  the  same  spirit  pervaded  the  whole  of  that 
country. 

The  Marquess  of  Romana,  with  what  force  I  know  not, 
after  having  attacked  and  made  prisoners  a  French  regiment 
in  Villa  Franca  del  Bierzo,  had  proceeded  towards  the  moun- 
tains of  Leon,  where  he  was  to  be  joined  by  the  reinforcements 
of  Asturias,  which  had  on  foot  a  force  of  30,000  men  in  arms. 
By  the  positions  which  the  General  (Romana)  has  taken  up, 
all  communication  between  the  French  in  Galicia  is  cut  off 
from  Madrid  ;  and,  although  this  important  operation  has  not 
yet  been  actually  carried  into  effect,  yet  it  may  be  inferred 
that  the  enemy  has  not  a  large  disposable  force  in  Castillo  to 
oppose  to  Romana. 