


58  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

The  only  possible  inconveniences  which  can  result  from  my 
want  of  these  official  orders  are,  that  General  Cradock  may 
be  inclined  to  refuse  to  remain  in  command  of  the  army,  and 
that  his  remaining  in  command  would  be,  in  fact,  an  official 
irregularity.  But  it  must  be  recollected  that,  if  he  is  likely 
to  refuse  the  command  in  this  case,  he  would  keep  it  unwil- 
lingly in  the  other ;  and,  in  respect  to  the  official  irregularity, 
I  conceive  that  it  would  be  remedied  by  both  of  us  stating  to 
the  Secretary  of  State  our  opinion  that,  upon  my  arrival,  we 
considered  it  expedient  that  he  should  retain  the  command. 

I  wish,  upon  the  whole,  not  to  have  these  despatches ;  and, 
as  we  may  be  detained,  I  beg  you  to  reconsider  the  necessity 
of  leaving  them  with  me.  If  we  should  be  able  to  sail,  or  if 
you  should  decide  to  leave  them  in  my  possession,  you  may 
depend  upon  it  that  I  will  endeavour  to  decide  upon  the  deli- 
very of  them,  or  otherwise,  according  to  the  best  of  my  judg- 
ment. Pray  send  down  the  messenger  as  soon  as  you  can,  in 
case  I  should  be  detained. 

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Welleslei/. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  13,  [1809]. 
My  dear  Wellesley — I  consider  that  you  have  the  most 
entire  discretion  to  abstain  from  making  any  communication 
to  Sir  J.  Cradock  under  the  instructions  sent  you,  which  were 
framed  only  with  a  view  of  giving  a  regular  sanction  to  any 
arrangement  with  respect  to  command,  which,  under  peculiar 
circumstances,  you  and  Sir  J.  Cradock  might,  upon  personal 
communication,  deem  best  for  the  King's  service.  They  were 
not  meant  to  encourage  any  unnecessary  alteration  of  the  former 
orders  to  Cradock  to  deliver  over  the  command  to  you — they 
were  not  intended  to  force  Sir  J.  Cradock  to  continue  in  a 
temporary  command,  under  circumstances  unpleasant  to  hie 
own  feelings— they  were  merely  calculated  to  give  the  King'^s 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  59 

sanction  to  a  suspension  of  the  former  orders  to  Sir  J.  Cradock, 
which  he  might  otherwise  consider  obligatory^  if  the  circum- 
stances should  induce  you  to  propose,  and  him  to  concur  in,  the 
propriety  of  such  a  suspension.  It  certainly  did  appear  to  the 
King's  Government  that,  if  such  an  arrangement  once  took 
place,  the  moment  when  it  should  cease  and  the  former  arrange- 
ment revive  was  a  point  of  so  much  delicacy,  that  it  was 
hardly  fair  to  leave  it  to  the  parties  concerned  to  settle,  and 
that  a  point  of  this  nature,  hanging  upon  circumstances,  might 
be  productive  of  much  embarrassment  to  both.  It  was,  there- 
fore, decided  that,  in  the  event  of  your  determining  to  leave  the 
command  with  Cradock,  he  should  continue  to  exercise  it  till 
he  received  iui*ther  orders  from  home. 