

Sir — Upon  the  fall  of  Madrid,  and  the  retreat  of  the  Spanish 
armies  into  the  south  of  Spain,  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to 
signify,  through  his  Minister  to  the  Central  Government  of 
Spain,  that  his  Majesty  was  ready  to  send  an  auxiliary  army, 
to  sustain  the  Spanish  efforts  in  that  quarter,  provided  the 
British  troops  were  assured  of  the  port  and  fortress  of  Cadiz, 
as  a  secure  point  of  retreat,  in  case  of  disaster  in  the  field. 

The  Government  of  Spain  not  having  thought  fit  to  accede 
to  this  preliminary  and  indispensable  condition,  and  having 
actually  declined  to  permit  the  British  troops,  under  Major- 
Generals  Sherbrooke  and  Mackenzie,  who  were  sent  as  the 
advanced  guard  of  the  British  army,  to  land  at  Cadiz,  his 
Majesty  does  not  feel  that  he  can,  in  justice  to  the  safety  of 
his  own  troops,  again  employ  an  auxiliary  army  in  Spain,  till 
the  Spanish  Government  and  nation  shall  cease  to  entertain 
those  feelings  of  jealousy,  which  are  equally  inconsistent  with 
their  own  interest  and  the  effectual  prosecutiou  of  the  war. 

You  will  therefore  understand  that  it  is  not  his  Majesty's 
intention,  in  authorizing  you  to  co-operate  with  the  Spanish 
armies  in  the  defence  of  Portugal  and  of  the  adjacent  Spanish 
provinces,  that  you  should  enter  upon  a  campaign  in  Spain 
without  the  express  authority  of  your  Government ;  and,  in 
any  concert  you  may  form  with  the  armies  of  Spain,  you  will 

vol..  VII.  E 


50  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

cause  it  to  be  understood  that  it  is  to  be  confined  to  the  specific 
object  in  view ;  and  that  the  service  of  your  army  (under  the 
orders  you  have  received)  cannot  be  employed  in  general  opera- 
tions in  Spain,  as  the  force  under  Sir  John  Moore  was  intended 
to  have  been,  without  a  previous  arrangement  being  settled  to 
that  effect  between  the  two  Governments. 

Should  the  enemy  penetrate  in  force  towards  Cadiz,  it  is  not 
improbable  that  the  reluctance  of  the  Spanish  Government  to 
admit  a  British  force  into  Cadiz  may  yield  to  the  sense  of  im- 
mediate danger.  Should  such  a  change  of  sentiment  take  place, 
every  effort  should  be  made  to  assist  in  the  preservation  of 
that  important  place ;  and  I  am  to  convey  to  you  the  King"'s 
commands  that,  in  case  Mr.  Frere  should  at  any  time  notify 
to  you  the  actual  consent  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  admit 
a  British  garrison  into  Cadiz,  you  do  detach  an  adequate  force 
immediately,  notifying  to  me  the  amount  of  such  force,  that 
measures  may  be  adopted  for  supporting  the  corps  so  detached, 
and  for  replacing  it  in  Portugal. 

Should  you  receive  a  requisition  to  the  above  effect  from  the 
Governor  of  Cadiz,  or  other  competent  authority,  you  are 
authorized  to  act  without  waiting  for  a  communication  through 
the  British  Minister.  Castlereagh. 