

Where  there  is  no  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  substance, 
my  wish  would  certainly  have  been,  in  the  execution  of  a  sug- 
gestion entirely  proceeding  from  yourself,  to  have  conformed 
implicitly  to  your  feelings  upon  it.  On  the  subject  having 
been  brought  under  the  consideration  of  Government,  the 
Cabinet  having  felt  themselves  called  upon  to  form  an  opinion 
upon  it,  and  that  opinion  having  been  submitted  to  the  King, 
I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  now  propose  a  reconsideration  of  it, 
without  considerable  delay  and  inconvenience ;  and  I  persuade 
myself,  from  the  terms  in  which  your  letter  is  expressed,  that, 
under  these  circumstances,  you  would  not  wish  the  question  to 
be  revived,  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

St.  James's  Square,  April  14,  [1809]. 
Dear  Wellesley — The  accounts  are  very  unfavourable  from 
Portugal,  but  not  such  as  to  induce  the  King's  Government  to 
make  any  alteration  in  the  course  they  are  pursuing.  The 
only  additional  instruction  that  occurs  is  to  avoid  the  appear- 
ance of  being  a  second  time  refused  at  Cadiz.  With  this  view, 
we  think  it  desirable  that  the  army  should  rendezvous  at 
Gibraltar,   rather  than  in   Cadiz   Bay.      The  troops  can   be 


60  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

landed  there,  if  necessary  for  their  health  and  accommodation, 
either  within  or  without  the  fortress.  We  shall  also  have 
time  to  send  you  any  further  instructions  that  circumstances 
may  point  out,  before  your  arrangements  can  be  completed  for 
breaking  up  the  army. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  April  14,  1809. 

Sir — Should  you,  in  execution  of  my  orders  of  the  11th  inst., 
have  occasion  to  proceed  with  the  whole  of  your  force  to  the 
southward,  before  the  determination  of  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment as  to  your  reception  is  ascertained,  it  is  the  King''s  plea- 
sure, in  that  case,  that  you  do  repair,  in  the  first  instance,  to 
Gibraltar,  and  not  to  Cadiz,  unless  previously  assured  of  being 
admitted.  As  it  is  material,  however,  that  the  intentions  of 
the  Spanish  Government  should  be  known  without  delay, 
Mr.  Frere  will  be  directed  to  press  for  a  decision  on  this 
point,  in  order  that  his  Majesty's  Government  may  know  how 
far  they  are  to  consider  the  force  now  in  Portugal  as  required 
for  service  in  Spain,  or  disposable,  in  the  event  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  Portugal,  for  other  services.  Mr.  Frere  will  communi- 
cate to  you,  for  your  guidance  in  the  execution  of  the  orders 
you  have  received,  the  result  of  his  inquiries. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Bight  Hon.  Sir  L>.  Dundas. 
Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  April  28,  1809. 