

I  have  also  ordered  all  the  battalions  now  in  Portugal  to  be 
completed  to  their  full  establishment,  as  far  as  we  have  the 
means  at  home  of  doing  so.  The  23rd  and  Commissariat 
horses  will  proceed  from  Cork,  according  to  your  directions ; 
and  both  the  cavalry  and  light  brigade  will  be  directed  to  call 
at  Aveiro  and  Mondego  for  orders. 

As  Cradock,  in  his  last  despatch,  speaks  of  the  difficulty  of 
foraging  the  cavalry,  I  have  directed,  in  addition  to  the  hay 
which  sailed  about  the  same  time  as  you  did,  and  which  was. 


64  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

I  believe,  equal  to  five  weeks'  consumption  for  6,000  horses, 
a  supply  for  the  same  number  of  horses  for  a  month  to  be  sent. 
We  calculate  that,  including  what  is  proceeding  from  Cork 
and  the  Shannon,  you  have  oats  for  a  like  number  for  three 
months.  There  was  an  order  issued  some  time  since,  directing 
a  statement  of  supplies  on  hand  and  deficiencies  every  fort- 
night. I  should  be  glad  you  would  see  this  order  complied 
with. 

Your  brother**s  appointment  to  Spain  has  given  great  satis- 
faction; and  every  hope  is  formed  from  your  joint  exertions. 
I  fear  Austria  has  begun  the  campaign  under  ver}^  unfavourable 
auspices ;  but  our  information  as  yet  does  not  warrant  despon- 
dence. 

In  addition  to  the  officers  already  sent  from  hence,  and  those 
which  Cradock  has  permitted  to  serve  under  Beresford,  receiving 
a  step  of  rank  in  the  Portuguese  service,  Sir  David  has  pro- 
mised me  to  forward  immediately  thirty  more  selected  from  the 
army  at  home,  who  go  upon  the  same  terms,  retaining  their 
regimental  commissions. 

Muskets  are  a  scarce  article,  as  you  know;  but,  in  propor- 
tion as  prospects  brighten  in  Portugal,  the  motive  for  making 
every  effort  will  be  felt  and  acted  upon. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellesley,  yours,  &c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 

Draft.  St.  James's  Square,  May  16,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  send  you  such  suggestions  as  have 
occurred  to  us  on  Argenton''s  projet,  which  you  will  modify  as 
you  think  best.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  army  is  the 
true  instrument  with  which  to  destroy  Buonaparte'*s  power, 
and  that,  if  that  game  could  be  played  with  any  solid  prospect 
of  success,  it  is  beyond  all  others  the  best ;  but  we  have  never 
yet  seen  the  disposition  exist  to  any  extent,  and  we  must 
therefore  act  cautiously,  and,  without  throwing  out  of  our  hands 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  65 

such  a  weapon  (if  it  really  exists),  try  to  avoid  the  difficulties 
of  Conventions  on  disputable  grounds.  Is  it  not  suspicious 
that  Argenton,  coming  with  a  proposal,  should  expose  himself 
to  all  the  eclat  of  a  journey  to  Lisbon,  where  his  arrival  became 
notorious,  and  the  news  of  which  must  meet  him  at  Oporto  ? 