


70  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troop  of  horse  artillery  will  embark  about  190  horses.  You 
will  give  your  own  orders  to  the  convoy  with  respect  to  the 
point  of  debarkation  in  Portugal.  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  25,  1809, 

Your  Majesty's  confidential  servants,  upon  a  foil  considera- 
tion of  the  efforts  making  by  the  enemy  to  reinforce  their  army 
in  Gallicia  by  a  corps  of  from  12  to  15,000  men  detached  from 
Arragon  {^ia  Burgos)  for  that  purpose,  and  the  critical  situa- 
tion in  which  the  British  army  may  be  placed  in  Portugal,  if 
it  should  be  threatened  by  a  force  of  equal  strength  with  itself 
on  each  of  its  flanks,  beg  leave  humbly  to  submit  to  your 
Majesty's  consideration  the  expediency  of  reinforcing  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  to  the  extent  of  5,000  infantry,  exclusive  af 
the  light  brigade  now  under  orders  for  Portugal. 

Your  Majesty's  servants  humbly  conceive  that  a  corps  of 
this  extent  may  be  drawn  from  the  regiments  now  stationed  in 
Ireland  and  the  islands  of  Jersey  and  Guernsey,  without  im- 
properly reducing  the  respective  garrisons,  and  without  breaking 
in  upon  the  large  disposable  force  at  present  in  Great  Britain, 
so  as  to  interfere  with  the  execution  of  any  service  to  which  it 
might  be  in  your  Majesty's  contemplation  to  apply  it. 

They  are  induced  the  rather  to  recommend  this  arrangement 
for  your  Majesty's  sanction,  as,  in  whatever  proportion  it  may 
operate  to  render  the  position  of  the  British  army  secure  in 
Portugal,  it  will  enable  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  place  at  the 
disposal  of  Government  a  considerable  proportion,  if  not  the 
whole,  of  the  transport  tonnage,  which  is  now  detained,  at  a 
heavy  expense,  in  the  Tagus,  and  without  the  assistance  of 
which  Lord  Castlereagh  apprehends  it  will  be  extremely  diffi- 
cult, in  the  present  state  of  the  commercial  marine  of  the 
country,  to  provide  the  means  of  rendering  any  considerable 
proportion  of  the  force  at  home  moveable  in  the  course  of  this 
campaign.  


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  71 

His  Majesty's  answer. 

Windsor  Castle,  May  26,  1809. 
The  King  acquiesces  in  the  arrangement  proposed  by  Lord 
Castlereagh  for  sending  a  further  reinforcement  to  the  army 
assembled  in  Portugal,  under  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  of  5,000 
infantry.  George  R. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  25,  1809. 

Upon  referring  to  my  instructions  to  you  of  the  8rd  April, 
and  the  course  that  operations  may  take,  should  Victor  retire 
upon  your  moving  towards  the  Tagus,  I  have  received  his 
Majesty''s  commands,  in  order  that  you  may  be  enabled  the 
better  to  co-operate  with  the  Spanish  armies  against  the  com- 
mon enemy,  to  authorize  you  to  extend  your  operations  in 
Spain  beyond  the  provinces  immediately  adjacent  to  the  Por- 
tuguese frontier,  provided  you  shall  be  of  opinion  that  your 
doing  so  is  material,  in  a  military  point  of  view,  to  the  success 
of  your  operations,  and  not  inconsistent  with  the  safety  of 
Portuojal.  Castlereagh. 