

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 

Dear  Wellesley — Accept  my  congratulations  and  thanks  for 
what  you  have  already  accomplished,  and  my  best  wishes  for 
your  future  success  and  personal  glory.  I  am  doing  what  I 
can  to  promote  it  by  strengthening  you  from  hence,  and  shall 
press  everything  forward  as  much  as  possible.  If  you  want 
another  regiment  of  cavalry  n^ery  much,  send  transports  for  800 
horses  to  Cork,  in  which  I  will  send  you  the  1st  Dragoons, 
unless  events  should  require  us  to  give  it  another  destination. 
The  Transport  Board  have  directed  Fleetwood  to  place  himself 
under  your  orders,  and  to  execute  all  your  arrangements.  I 
hope  Craufurd  is  going  down  Channel  to-day.    Two  transports 


72  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

have  received  damage  at  Dover,  which  will  render  it  necessary 
for  them  to  call  at  Portsmouth.  The  transports  for  the  horse 
artillery  are  not  arrived  at  Ramsgate. 

I  shall  do  what  I  can  for  Stanhope ;  but,  in  the  present 
temper  of  the  times,  you  will  easily  believe  that  promotion 
against  regulation  cannot  be  attempted. 

Ever  sincerely  yours, 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 

Sir — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  de- 
spatches of  the  12th  instant,  stating  your  successful  commence- 
ment of  the  campaign  in  Portugal.  His  Majesty  commands 
me  to  express  his  entire  satisfaction  in  the  decision  and  the 
celerity  of  your  operations,  the  excellence  of  your  dispositions, 
and  the  vigour  of  your  attacks,  by  which  you  have  been  enabled 
to  defeat  the  enemy  in  three  actions,  to  pass  the  Douro  in  his 
presence,  to  recover  Oporto,  and  to  force  the  army  under  Mar- 
shal Soult  to  retire  with  much  loss,  and  abandon  great  part  of 
their  ammunition  and  artillery. 

You  will  make  it  known  to  the  officers  and  troops  under 
your  command  that  the  conspicuous  valour  and  intrepidity 
they  have  displayed  is  highly  satisfactory  to  his  Majesty. 
The  conduct  of  the  1st  battalion  of  the  Bufis,  commanded 
first  by  Lieutenant-General  Paget,  and  afterwards,  when 
he  was  compelled  to  leave  the  field,  by  Major-General  Hill, 
reflects  the  highest  credit  on  that  corps,  and  the  officers  who 
led  them. 

Whilst  his  Majesty  is  sensible  to  the  loss  his  service  must 
sustain  by  the  absence  from  duty  which  the  wound  received 
by  Lieutenant-General  Paget  must  necessarily  occasion,  he 
feels  great  satisfaction  to  learn  that  there  is  a  fair  prospect  of 
his  speedy  recovery.  Castlereagh. 


1809.] 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 


73 


Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  26,  1809. 