

Sir — Having  received  a  private  letter  from  Lieutenant- 
General  Beresford,  expressing  a  strong  wish  that  he  may  have 
the  assistance  of  an  additional  number  of  British  officers  to  aid 
in  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese  army,  I  am  to  acquaint 
you  that,  exclusive  of  the  twenty-four  officers  who  are  allowed 
to  transfer  their  services  to  the  Portuguese  army,  receiving  in 
the  British  army  one  step  of  permanent  rank,  as  a  compensa- 
tion for  relinquishing  their  regimental  commissions,  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief has  received  the  King's  pleasure  for  permitting 
such  officers  belonging  to  the  regiments  now  in  Portugal  as 
were  permitted  by  Sir  J.  Cradock,  or  may  receive  your  per- 
mission to  that  effect,  to  do  duty  with  the  Portuguese  army 
till  further  orders,  receiving  therein  one  step  of  rank,  with  the 
pay  thereto  belonging. 

As  it  has  appeared  to  his  Majesty's  Government  that  the 
number  of  officers  which  you  may  be  enabled  to  spare,  without 
prejudice  to  the  efficiency  of  your  army,  may  be  inadequate  to 
General  Beresford's  wants,  I  have  signified  to  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  his  Majesty's  pleasure  that  thirty  officers,  from  the 
regiments  at  home,  may  be  forthwith  sent  to  Portugal,  to  be 
employed  upon  the  like  terms  as  those  detached  from  your 
army,  under  General  Beresford's  orders. 

The  requisition  made  by  General  Beresford  for  an  increased 
supply  of  arms  and  clothing  has  been  forwarded  to  Mr.  Secre- 
tary Canning,  whose  province  it  is  to  receive  his  Majesty's 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  63 

commands  upon  all  aids  to  be  granted  to  the  Government  of 
Portugal.  Oastlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
Draft.  London,  May  13,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  have  waited  with  much  impatience 
for  the  first  accounts  from  Portugal  after  your  arrival,  and 
rejoice  to  find  that  none  of  the  embarrassments  which  we  had 
so  much  reason  to  apprehend,  with  respect  to  the  state  in  which 
you  were  likely  to  find  the  army,  have  occurred. 

It  is  highly  satisfactory  to  me  to  observe  that  you  are  likely 
to  get  your  army  assembled,  with  a  large  proportion  of  the 
cavalry,  before  you  are  pressed  by  the  enemy,  and  that  you 
will  have  been  enabled  to  originate,  instead  of  conduct,  a  cam- 
paign, the  nature  of  which  had  been  decided  for  you. 

I  regret  that  it  has  not  been  in  my  power  sooner  to  accom- 
plish your  wishes  with  respect  to  the  light  brigade.  I  have 
pressed  the  subject  almost  daily ;  and,  to  do  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  justice,  no  exertion  has  been  wanting  on  his  part ; 
but  the  effects  of  the  late  campaign  in  Spain  have  operated  so 
deeply,  that  it  is  only  by  a  selection  of  men  from  both  the  first 
and  second  battalions,  that  we  have  been  enabled  to  prepare 
this  brigade  for  service.  They  are,  however,  now  promised 
for  the  24th.  We  embark  the  1st  of  the  43rd  at  Harwich, 
and  the  1st  of  the  52nd  and  95th  at  Deal.  Each  of  the  three 
battalions  will  go  out  1,000  strong. 