

We  have  not  any  intelligence  from  the  Continent  since  I 
wrote  last,  nor  has  there  been  any  firing  on  the  opposite  coast, 
where  the  battle  of  the  23rd  was  celebrated  on  the  28th.  We 
may,  therefore,  hope  that  no  further  disaster  of  importance  had 
occurred  down  to  the  10th. 

The  L'Orient  squadron,  of  three  sail  of  the  line  and  two 
frigates,  finding  Martinique  in  our  possession,  has  taken  shelter 
at  the  Saintes,  where  Cochrane  is  blockading  them,  having 
sent  to  Beckwith  for  a  corps  to  reduce  the  island.  If  we  should 
get  this  detachment,  Martinique  will  have  done  well  for  us. 
The  movement  of  the  Brest  fleet  having  been  ordered  for  the 
express  purpose  of  liberating  this  squadron,  to  proceed  to  Mar- 
tinique, they  have  a  large  supply  of  provisions,  but  no  troops 
on  board. 

The  detachment  ordered  to  Portugal  are  about  2,000  men : 
the  light  brigade,  3,000,  embarks  the  24th.  I  have  written  to 
Lord  C[hatham]  for  the  troop  of  horse  artillery. 

I  am,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  16,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  27th  ult.,  from  Lisbon,  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  That  which  relates  to 
the  communication  received  from  Captain  Argenton  has  occu- 
pied the  immediate  attention  of  his  Majesty ""s  Government. 
They  are  fully  impressed  with  the  important  consequences 
which  might  be  expected  to  flow  from  the  revolt  of  any  con- 
siderable part  of  the  French  army  at  the  present  moment, 
which,  if  it  should  be  followed,  would  afford  the  surest  means 

VOL.  VII.  F 


66  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  dissolving  the  power  against  which  we  are  now  contending ; 
but,  in  proportion  as  they  feel  all  the  importance  of  this  view 
of  the  subject,  they  cannot  disguise  from  themselves  the  doubts 
that  must  attach  to  the  proposition,  in  point  of  sincerity;  the 
obstacles  that  stand  in  the  way  of  its  successful  execution; 
and,  finally,  to  the  difficulties  which  present  themselves  at  the 
outset,  in  reconciling  the  measures  to  be  taken  with  our 
present  relations  with  the  Governments  of  Spain  and  Portugal. 
With  this  general  view  of  the  subject,  I  am  to  signify  to  you 
his  Majesty's  approbation  of  the  caution  with  which  you  have 
received  the  overture  alluded  to ;  and  I  am  to  desire  that  you 
will  continue  to  observe  the  same  prudent  line  of  conduct, 
taking  care  that  any  arrangement  which  you  may  adopt  with 
the  French  army,  so  far  as  it  aflfects  the  interests  of  Spain  or 
Portugal,  shall  be  made  subject  to  the  ratification  and  concur- 
rence of  their  respective  Governments. 

With  the  above  restriction,  his  Majesty  is  pleased  to  confide 
to  your  discretion  to  decide,  according  to  circumstances,  on  the 
spot,  by  what  course  the  objects  his  Majesty  has  in  view  can 
best  be  promoted.  You  will  not  fail  to  hold  in  mind  that 
nothing  short  of  the  most  unequivocal  proofs  of  determination 
to  turn  their  arms  against  Buonaparte  could  induce  the 
Spaniards  to  permit  a  French  army  (more  especially  one  which 
has  acted  in  the  manner  Soulfs  corps  is  reported  to  have  done 
in  Gallicia)  to  retire  unmolested  through  Spain,  with  the 
power  to  change  its  purpose,  at  any  moment,  on  its  march  to 
take  up  new  and  perhaps  more  advantageous  positions,  or  even 
to  concentrate  themselves  with  other  corps,  the  better  to  prose- 
cute their  operations  in  other  parts  of  Spain.  The  same  diffi- 
culty, on  the  part  of  the  Portuguese,  will  attach  to  any  arrange- 
ment, by  which  the  British  shall  charge  themselves  with  the 
protection  of  troops  which  have  so  recently  committed  the  ut- 
most excesses  within  their  territory;  and  we  must  not  also 
lose  sight  of  the  just  dissatisfaction  which  Austria  would  feel, 
if  facilities  were  given  for  the  transfer  of  a  great  proportion  of 