

His  Majesty''s  Government  can  have  no  objection  to  the 
principle  of  the  measure :  they  are  only  anxious  that  it  should 
be  duly  guarded  in  its  provisions,  so  as  not  to  involve  them  in 
any  embarrassments  with  those  powers  with  whom  they  are 
acting.  Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  22,  1809. 

Sir — By  the  accompanying  return,  it  appears  that  there  is 
now  assembled  or  assembling  in  Portugal  tonnage  for  5,654 
horses.  The  arrangements  in  progress  at  home,  with  a  view 
to  the  operations  of  the  ensuing  campaign,  make  the  immediate 
return  to  England  of  transports  for  3,000  horses  an  object  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  his  Majesty''s  service.     With  this 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  69 

view,  orders  will  be  immediatel  j  sent  to  the  officer  commanding 
his  Majesty's  naval  forces  in  the  Tagus  to  prepare  a  division 
of  the  above  amount,  and  to  despatch  them  to  Portsmouth  so 
soon  as  he  receives  your  authority  for  so  doing.  You  will  be 
enabled  to  judge  from  the  aspect  of  affairs  how  far  this  im- 
portant aid  to  the  public  service  can  be  afforded. 

The  residue  of  this  description  of  tonnage  may  for  the 
present  remain  at  your  disposal ;  and  you  are  also  at  liberty 
to  retain  a  sufficiency  of  troop  ships  to  receive,  with  the  aid  of 
the  navy,  the  whole  of  the  British  army,  should  a  re-embarka- 
tion, contrary  to  our  present  hopes,  become  necessary. 

I  do  not  make  this  order  peremptory;  but,  unless  when  you 
receive  it  you  should  have  reason  to  consider  that  a  crisis  is 
approaching,  I  attach  so  much  importance  to  this  resource 
being  placed,  without  delay,  at  my  disposal,  that  I  should  wish 
you  to  order  the  transports  off  without  a  moment's  loss  of 
time,  as  much  depends  on  their  arrival  being  accelerated. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  22,  1809. 

Sir — The  light  brigade,  under  Brigadier-General  Sir  R.  Crau- 
furd,  will  embark  at  Harwich  and  Deal  on  the  24th  instant. 
The  Brigadier- General  will  be  directed  to  join  you  by  the 
shortest  route,  calling  off  Oporto,  Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  suc- 
cessively, for  intelligence  of  your  movements,  or  any  orders 
you  may  have  despatched  to  meet  him  at  either  of  those 
places. 

A  troop  of  horse  artillery  will  also  embark  about  the  same 
time  from  Ramsgate  with  similar  orders ;  and,  in  case  you 
should  consider  a  second  troop  requisite  for  the  service  of  your 
army,  the  Master-General  of  the  Ordnance  will  direct  the 
troop  now  in  Ireland,  with  300  additional  artillery  horses  of 
the  best  description,  to  be  held  in  readiness  at  Cork,  to  be 
embarked  so  soon  as  you  send  tonnage  to  receive  them.     The 