

Sir — I  am  to  acquaint  you  that,  in  addition  to  the  light 
brigade,  which  has  embarked,  and,  I  hope  sailed,  under  the 
orders  of  Brigadier- General  Craufurd,  his  Majesty  has  ordered 
the  seven  regiments  of  infantry  enumerated  in  the  margin  ^  to 
proceed  immediately  to  Portugal,  to  reinforce  your  army.  The 
three  first  are  now  stationed  at  Jersey  and  Guernsey,  and  will 
go  by  a  separate  convoy,  with  instructions  to  call  off  Oporto, 
Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  successively,  for  your  orders.  The 
remaining  four  battalions  will  assemble  and  embark  at  Cork. 

When  the  service  will  admit  of  your  sending  home  the  two 
battalions  composed  of  detachments,  it  is  my  wish  they  should 
return  to  their  regiments ;  but  I  am  disposed  to  leave  the 
moment  at  which  this  shall  be  done  to  your  discretion  ;  as  also 
when  the  detachment  of  the  20th  Light  Dragoons  shall  proceed 
to  the  Mediterranean ;  only  pointing  out  the  inconvenience 
that  arises  from  troops  being  long  suffered  to  remain  in  this 
dispersed  state,  and  trust  that  it  will  not  be  unnecessarily 
delayed. 

Steps  have  been  taken  for  collecting  a  remount  for  the 
cavalry,  to  the  numbers  required  in  your  letter  of  the  [blank], 
and  for  purchasing  a  number  of  aged  horses  for  the  regiments 
actually  on  service.  Hay  for  one  month,  for  6,000  horses,  is 
embarked  and  embarking  for  the  use  of  your  cavalry.  I  should 
be  glad  to  know  your  fiirther  wishes  on  the  subject  of  forage. 


^  34th, 

2nd  battalion 

693 

47th, 

do. 

730 

39th, 

do. 

603 

5th, 

do. 

718 

28th, 

do. 

725 

42nd, 

do. 

723 

88th, 

do. 

779 

4,951 


74  LETTEES  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

The  Master- General  of  the  Ordnance,  adverting  to  the  pro- 
portion of  artillery  now  in  Portugal,  and  the  two  troops  of 
horse  artillery  under  orders  (one  immediately  to  proceed  from 
hence,  the  other  to  he  held  in  readiness  at  Cork,  till  transports 
are  sent  from  Portugal  to  receive  it),  does  not  conceive  it 
necessary  that  any  further  detail  of  artillery  should  accompany 
the  infantry  now  going.  The  800  additional  artillery  horses, 
which  you  are  authorized  to  send  for  to  Cork,  will  render  all 
your  brigades  completely  moveable  and  efficient. 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  J.  Cradock. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  2,  1809. 

My  dear  Cradock  —  I  have  delayed  my  answer  to  your 
letters,  written  on  your  departure  from  Lisbon,  till  I  could  be 
assured  that  it  would  find  you  at  Gibraltar.  Your  wish  to 
return  has  been  so  strongly  conveyed  to  me  by  your  friends 
here  and  by  Lady  Theodosia,  that  I  can  have  no  other  desire 
than  to  fulfil  your  request.  You  have  done  every  thing  that 
honour  and  duty  could  require  from  you  towards  the  service  and 
towards  the  Government.  Whatever  is  most  satisfactory  to 
your  own  feelings  it  is  only  necessary  for  me  to  be  assured  of, 
to  feel  it  incumbent  on  me  to  promote ;  and,  in  this  sense,  I 
have  most  cheerfully  advised  the  King  to  leave  your  return  in 
your  own  hands.  If  I  have  not  entered  into  the  extent  to  which 
some  of  your  friends,  whose  judgment  upon  such  a  point  may 
be  more  correct  than  mine,  have  felt  upon  the  nature  of  your 
command  at  Gibraltar,  I  am  aware  you  will  believe  that  it  has 
not  proceeded  from  indifference  to  your  military  character  or 
reputation. 