

The  King's  commands,  as  thus  conveyed,  differ  from  what 
were  understood  to  be  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment, I  believe,  by  the  late  Commander  of  the  Forces  in  Por- 
tugal, and  from  his  practice  and  from  that  which  I  have  fol- 
lowed since  the  command  has  devolved  upon  me.  He  understood 
that  the  officers  who  should  be  allowed  to  serve  with  the  Por- 
tuguese troops  from  the  regiments  of  the  army  in  this  country 
were  to  stand  in  the  same  situation,  and  were  to  accept  their 
appointments  in  the  Portuguese  service  upon  the  same  con- 
ditions with  the  officers  first  appointed  in  England,  to  serve 
with  the  Portuguese  troops ;  and  he,  and  I,  since  the  command 
has  devolved  upon  me,  have  allowed  officers,  of  whose  names  I 
lately  transmitted  you  lists,  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops 
on  those  conditions. 

As  but  few  officers  have  applied  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 
troops,  even  with  the  advantage  of  receiving  one  step  of  British 
promotion,  I  should  doubt  whether  any  would  be  willing  to 

by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gordon,  Quartermaster- General,  no  doubt  to  Lord 
Castlereagh,  though  he  is  not  named : — 

"  My  dear  Lord — The  enclosed  leads  to  a  minute  detail,  but  I  under- 
stood you  wished  to  see  what  had  been  said. 

"  Yours,  most  respectfully,  J.  W.  Gordon. 

"July  14,  1809." 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  77 

serve  in  this  manner,  upon  the  advantage  now  held  out  to 
them  of  receiving  one  step  of  Portuguese  rank,  which  can  he 
but  local  and  temporary,  together  with  the  pay  of  the  Portu- 
guese rank  in  which  they  should  be  employed,  if  you  had  not 
transmitted  me  a  list  of  the  names  of  thirty  oflBcers  who  are 
willing  to  be  so  employed,  upon  the  terms  held  out  to  them 
in  this  list :  however,  I  beg  to  observe  that  it  contains  the 
names  of  some  oflBcers  now  in  Portugal,  who  will  refuse  to 
serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops  on  the  terms  proposed.  One 
of  them,  indeed.  Captain  Fordyce,  of  the  81st  Foot,  who  is 
Brigade-Major  to  Major-General  Hill,  and  who  has  been 
recommended  as  an  officer  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops, 
upon  the  more  advantageous  terms,  (which  it  was  imagined 
here  that  it  was  intended  we  should  hold  out)  has  desired  that 
he  may  not  be  employed  with  the  Portuguese  troops,  and  that 
he  may  not  be  considered  as  having  expressed  a  wish  to  be  so 
employed,  unless  he  should  receive  one  step  of  promotion  in 
the  British  army,  and  that  this  promotion  should  be  notified  to 
the  army  in  this  country.  I  am  convinced  that  no  officers  in 
this  country  will  oflfer  their  services  upon  the  terms  which,  I 
now  understand,  are  to  be  held  out  to  them. 