


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  67 

the  French  force  now  in  Spain  to  contend  against  Iier  in  Ger- 
many. 

On  the  other  hand,  although  every  proposition  of  this  nature 
must  be  received  with  distrust  (and  the  present  is  not  free  from 
some  features  of  strong  suspicion  in  the  mode  of  bringing  it 
forward),  yet  it  is  impossible  to  contend  that  a  case  may  not 
arise,  which  might  render  it  politic  for  you  to  endeavour  to 
reconcile  the  difficulties  of  such  a  measure,  great  as  they  are, 
with  the  principles  upon  which  your  conduct  towards  the 
powers  with  whom  we  are  acting  in  concert  must  necessarily 
be  governed. 

I  am,  however,  persuaded  that,  whatever  means  you  may 
have  of  prosecuting  military  advantages  against  Soult,  you 
will  not  forego  them  for  any  other  species  of  advantage,  except 
upon  the  strongest  grounds  ;  that  you  will  not  encourage  those 
officers  who  profess  a  disposition  to  revolt  to  expect  your 
countenance  and  intervention  with  the  Allies,  unless  they  are 
prepared  to  give  you  every  pledge  of  their  sincerity,  by  com- 
mitting themselves  at  once  in  the  most  unqualified  and  irre- 
vocable manner  against  their  own  Government,  and  by  sub- 
mitting it  to  your  discretion  to  direct  how  their  concert  with 
the  other  French  armies  in  Spain  shall  be  conducted,  and 
their  future  plans  arranged  with  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
Governments. 

Till  such  measures  can  be  agreed  upon,  they  must  consent 
to  occupy  such  cantonments  as  you  may  assign  to  them,  not 
attempting  to  march  forward  into  Spain,  without  the  express 
consent  of  the  Spanish  Government  having  previously  been 
obtained ;  and,  as  an  indispensable  preliminary,  you  will  re- 
quire the  surrender  into  your  hands  of  their  General  and  other 
officers  not  engaged  in  the  measure ;  adopting  such  further 
measures  of  precaution  with  respect  to  artillery,  ammunition, 
&;c.,  as  you  may  think  fit. 

I  have  not  attempted  to  do  more  than  point  your  attention 
to  the  outline  of  the  policy,  on  which  it  appears  to  his  Majesty's 

F  2 


68  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Government  expedient  that  you  should  act,  wishing  to  leave 
to  your  own  judgment  the  fullest  latitude. 

The  plan  announced  by  Captain  Argenton  is  so  crude  and 
undigested  at  present,  so  full  of  hazard  and  difficulty  in  the 
execution,  and  so  formidable  in  prospect  to  those  who  embark 
in  it,  as  not  to  justify  any  sanguine  expectations  that  it  is 
likely  to  take  effect  on  the  larger  scale.  The  disposition,  how- 
ever, of  the  army  in  which  it  originated  (if  truly  represented), 
may  render  it  less  formidable  as  an  antagonist  in  the  field. 
Should  Soult  retire  his  corps  so  far  to  the  northward  as  to 
preclude  you  from  following  him,  and  that  you  should  see  no 
prospect  of  being  enabled  to  bring  him  to  a  decisive  action,  the 
encouragement  of  such  a  spirit  of  revolt,  if  it  really  exists  in 
his  army,  may  be  the  best,  perhaps  the  only  means  of  dis- 
embarrassing yourself  of  a  corps,  which  would  probably  again 
return  to  the  southward  so  soon  as  you  moved  to  the  eastward. 
If  such  should  be  the  case,  and  the  presence  of  your  army  is 
deemed  by  those  who  may  be  engaged  in  this  design  material 
to  protect  and  facilitate  their  revolt,  it  will  remain  for  you  to 
profit  by  that  disposition,  under  such  stipulations  as  you 
think  best. 