

For  both  I  must  always  feel  the  utmost  solicitude,  and  shall 
be  happy  to  avail  myself  of  any  occasion  of  marking  it.  As 
we  shall  probably  soon  meet,  I  shall  only  assure  you  of  tlie  re- 
gard and  esteem  with  which  I  am,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  75 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  6,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  15th,  J  8th,  and  20th,  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  His  Majesty  has 
been  pleased  to  express  his  gracious  approbation  of  the  whole 
of  your  conduct  during  the  late  arduous  service  on  which  you 
have  been  engaged.  The  rapidity  of  your  movements  to  the 
northward,  if  not  attended  with  the  complete  reduction  of 
Soult's  corps,  has,  it  is  to  be  presumed,  for  a  length  of  time, 
disqualified  the  remains  of  his  army  from  acting  offensively 
against  Portugal,  and  left  you  at  liberty  to  prosecute  opera- 
tions against  Victor. 

The  decision  and  skill  with  which  the  British  army  has  been 
led,  and  the  animated  bravery  displayed  by  the  officers  and 
troops  in  the  passage  of  the  Duero,  cannot  fail  to  confirm  the 
confidence  which  they  are  entitled  to  feel  in  their  own  supe- 
riority over  the  enemy,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  future  suc- 
cesses. The  result  of  the  present  operation,  under  the  relative 
circumstances  of  the  two  armies,  has  in  no  respect  fallen  short 
of  what  might  have  been  expected  from  the  talents  of  the 
General  and  the  gallantry  of  the  troops. 

Your  determination  not  to  follow  Soult's  army  further  to  the 
northward,  but  to  return  towards  the  eastern  frontier  of  Por- 
tugal, to  watch  and  repel  the  enemy^s  advance  on  the  Tagus, 
has  been  entirely  approved  by  his  Majesty. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Sir  David  Dundas.^ 

Thomar,  June  7,  1809. 
Sir — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
despatch  of  the  13th  of  May,  relative  to  the  appointment  of 
officers  in  his  Majesty'^s  service  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 

^  On  the  envelope  of  this  letter  there  is  the  following  note,  addressed 


76  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  under  Marshal  Beresford.  It  appears  to  be  his  Majesty''s 
intention  that  the  number  of  officers  who  should  receive  one 
step  of  British  promotion  on  being  permitted  to  serve  with  the 
Portuguese  troops  should  not  exceed  twenty-four,  and  that 
thirty  officers,  who  were  to  be  sent  from  England  to  serve  with 
the  Portuguese  troops,  and  all  who  should  be  appointed  from 
the  army  in  Portugal,  for  the  same  duties,  should  continue  to 
hold  in  the  British  army  the  commissions  which  they  had 
hitherto  held ;  and  to  be  allowed  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese 
troops,  with  one  step  of  advanced  Portuguese  rank,  and  the 
pay 'of  the  Portuguese  commission  in  which  they  should  serve 
with  the  Portuguese  army. 