

The  four  regiments  from  Cork,  viz.,  the  5th,  28th,  42nd, 
and  88th,  are  ordered  to  call  off  the  coast  for  your  instructions, 
particularly  at  Mondego.  The  brigade  from  the  islands,  viz., 
the  34th,  39 th,  and  58th,  will  proceed  to  the  Tagus ;  the  rea- 
son for  which  is  that  the  34th  and  39th  have  a  considerable 
number  of  men,  clothing,  &;c.,  which  are  to  embark  at  Ports- 
mouth, on  the  20th,  to  join  them.  Till  these  arrive,  they  will 
not  be  as  efficient  as  they  ought  to  be,  and  I  have  promised 
that  you  will  detain  them  at  Lisbon  till  the  whole  is  put 
together.  The  34th  was  reported  you  at  693  ;  it  will  now  be 
completed  by  Militia  to  1000.  The  39th,  I  understand,  will 
also  be  augmented,  probably  to  800.  When  these  are  arrived, 
you  will  have  as  large  a  force  as  we  can  for  the  present  spare 
you,  or  indeed  (including  Portuguese)  as  we  can  find  the 
means  of  paying;  specie  being  here  at  the  lowest  possible  ebb. 
What  do  you  now  reckon  the  Portuguese  force  at,  distinguish- 
ing what  is  in  British  pay  ? 

The  Continental  prospects  have  much  improved  since  I 
wrote  last.  The  battle  of  Aspern,  the  details  of  which  have 
not  yet  been  received,  has,  by  Buonaparte's  own  admission, 
thrown  him  back  a  month  in  his  campaign ;  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  its  moral  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  Continent, 
as  well  as  of  the  Austrian  army,  will  be  even  more  important 
than  the  reduction  it  has  caused  in  his  ranks.     The  prospect 

g2 


84  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  something  being  done  against  the  enemy  in  the  North  is, 
from  this  circumstance  as  well  as  others,  so  much  increased, 
that  we  shall  be  anxious  to  receive  whatever  transport  equip- 
ment you  can  spare  us. 

Huskisson  will  write  to  you  on  the  subject  of  money.  A 
considerable  sum  is  on  its  way  to  the  Tagus ;  but  so  great  is 
the  pressure,  that  I  have  to  recommend  your  drawing  all  pos- 
sible aid  both  from  Cadiz  and  Gibraltar — in  short,  wherever  a 
bill  upon  England  can  be  realized. 

Gordon  will  explain  the  difficulties  that  are  felt  at  the  Horse 
Guards  to  give  rank  to  all  the  officers  who  have  joined  Beres- 
ford.  I  am,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  13,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  31st  ultimo,  from  Coimbra^ 
have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 

In  reply  to  that  which  requests  a  supply  of  different  articles 
for  the  use  of  your  army,  I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  directions 
have  been  given  for  forwarding  to  Portugal  the  supplies  therein 
named. 

In  order  to  prevent  any  future  want  of  so  important  an 
article  as  shoes,  50,000  instead  of  80,000  pair  will  be  sent. 
The  bread  will  be  forwarded  as  speedily  as  possible ;  but  it  has 
been  deemed  advisable  that  half  the  quantity  mentioned  in 
your  despatch  should  be  in  the  shape  of  flour. 