

With  respect  to  Captain  Prior,  of  the  5th  West  India  Regi- 
ment, Lord  Castlereagh  is  informed  that  it  is  thought  advi- 
sable to  keep  the  Black  corps  as  efficient  as  possible  in  their 
complement  of  officers,  and  that  Captain  Prior  received  his 
appointment  under  the  assurance  that  he  would  immediately 
proceed  to  join  his  regiment.  Castlereagh. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  27,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — The  money  for  which  I  have  been  waiting 
arrived  here  on  Sunday,  and  the  army  has  marched  forward. 
Our  advanced  guard  will  enter  Spain  at  Zarza  Mayor  on  the 
2nd  of  July. 

The  French  retired  from  Almaraz,  on  the  road  to  Madrid, 
on  the  24th  ;  and  General  Cuesta  was  at  Almaraz  on  the 
same  day,  and  was  making  arrangements  to  cross  the  river 
Tagus.  Sebastiani  was  retiring  towards  Toledo.  He  was,  on 
the  22Dd,  at  Madrigoes,  and  Vanegas  at  Villasta,  on  the 
Zancara. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  I  could  not  march  ten  or  twelve  days 
ago  ;  but,  just  to  show  you  the  uncertainty  of  all  communi- 
cations in  this  country,  and  probably  the  deficiencies  of  our 
Commissariat,  I  mention  that  the  money  which  arrived  on  the 
15th  at  Lisbon,  and  was  sent  off"  immediately,  did  not  arrive 
here  till  late  on  the  25th.  It  is  the  same  with  every  thing 
else.  On  the  day  I  determined  to  move  into  Spain,  from 
Abrantes,  I  ordered  every  thing  that  would  be  required  for  the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  91 

army,  and  I  have  not  had  occasion  to  add  to  or  alter  the 
original  order.  And  yet  the  articles  ordered  are  not  yet  ar- 
rived, notwithstanding  that  there  is  a  water  communication  to 
Lisbon,  and  officers  and  others  come  up  in  five  days.  I  be- 
lieve much  of  this  delay  and  failure  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
ignorance  and  inexperience  of  our  Commissariat,  much  to  the 
want  of  money,  and  to  our  discredit  in  Portugal,  on  account  of 
our  large  and  long  owed  debts,  and  something  to  the  uncertainty 
and  natural  difficulties  of  all  the  communications  in  Portugal. 
We  shall  not  go  into  Spain  quite  so  strong  as  I  could  wish  ; 
but,  when  Oraufurd's  brigade  will  arrive,  I  think  we  shall  have 
nearly  20,000,  rank  and  file,  of  infantry,  and  about  3,000  of 
cavalry.  I  will  desire  that  a  weekly  statement  may  be  sent  to 
your  lordship,  that  you  may  see  how  we  really  stand,  for  I  ob- 
serve that  it  is  frequently  imagined  in  England  that  armies  are 
much  stronger  than  they  really  are,  and  expectations  are  formed 
which  cannot  be  realized.  It  is  a  most  difficult  task  to  keep 
up  numbers  in  this  country  and  climate,  particularly  of  cavalry. 
The  brigade  of  heavy  cavalry,  which  has  not  yet  done  a  day's 
duty,  is  obliged  to  leave  here  nearly  100  horses;  and  that 
brigade,  which  has  been  to  the  northward,  is  so  much  reduced, 
that  they  are  happy  to  take  110  of  the  Irish  Commissariat 
horses  as  a  remount.  I  hope,  therefore,  that  you  will  send  us 
the  remount  as  soon  as  possible. 