

Notwithstanding  the  pains  that  I  take,  of  which  there  will 
be  ample  evidence  in  my  Orderly  Books,  not  a  post  or  a  courier 
comes  in,  not  an  officer  arrives  from  the  rear  of  the  army,  that 
does  not  bring  me  accounts  of  irregularities  committed  by  the 
soldiers  who  have  been  left  behind  on  the  march,  having  been 
sick,  or  having  straggled  from  their  regiments,  or  who  have 
been  left  in  hospitals. 

We  have  a  Provost  Marshal  and  no  less  than  four  assist- 
ants. I  never  allow  a  man  to  march  with  the  baggage,  never 
leave  an  hospital,  without  a  number  of  officers  and  non-commis- 
sioned officers  proportionate  to  the  number  of  soldiers  j  and 
never  allow  a  detachment  to  march,  unless  under  the  command 
of  an  officer ;  and  yet  there  is  not  an  outrage  of  any  descrip- 
tion which  has  not  been  committed  on  a  people  who  have  uni- 
formly received  us  as  friends,  by  soldiers  who  have  never  yet 
for  one  moment  suffered  the  slightest  want  or  the  smallest 
privation. 

In  the  first  place,  I  am  convinced  that  the  law  is  not  strong 
enough  to  maintain  discipline  in  an  army  upon  service.  It  is 
most  difficult  to  convict  any  prisoner  before  a  regimental  Court- 
Martial ;  for,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  the  soldiers  have  little  regard 
for  the  oath  administered  to  them ;  and  the  officers,  who  are 
sworn  "  well  and  truly  to  try  and  determine,  according  to  their 
emdencei  the  matter  before  them,"  have  too  much  regard  to 
the  strict  letter  of  that  administered  to  them.  This  oath  to 
the  members  of  a  regimental  Court-Martial  has  altered  the 
principle  of  the  proceedings  of  that  tribunal.  It  is  no  longer  a 
Court  of  Honour,  by  the  hands  of  which  a  soldier  was  certain 


1 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  87 

of  receiving  punishment,  if  he  deserved  it ;  but  it  is  a  Court  of 
Law,  whose  decisions  are  to  be  framed  according  to  the  evi- 
dence principally  of  those  on  whose  actions  it  is  constituted  as 
a  restraint. 

But,  admitting  the  regimental  or  detachment  Court-Martial, 
as  now  constituted,  to  be  a  control  upon  the  soldiers  equally 
efficient  with  that  which  existed  under  the  old  constitution  of 
a  Court- Martial,  which  my  experience  tells  me  it  is  not,  I 
should  wish  to  know  whether  any  British  army  (this  army  in 
particular,  which  is  composed  of  second  battalions,  and  there- 
fore but  ill  provided  with  officers)  can  afford  to  leave  with 
every  hospital,  or  with  every  detachment,  two  captains  and 
four  subalterns,  in  order  to  be  able  to  hold  a  detachment  Court- 
Martial.  The  law,  in  this  respect,  ought  to  be  amended ;  and 
when  the  army  is  on  service  in  a  foreign  country,  any  one, 
two,  or  three  officers,  ought  to  have  the  power  of  trying  cri- 
minals, and  punishing  them  instanter,  taking  down  all  proceed- 
ings in  writing,  and  reporting  them  for  the  information  of  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  on  their  joining  the  army. 