

No  time  will  be  lost  in  forwarding  an  additional  proportion 
of  hay ;  but,  as  there  is  already  a  large  supply  which  waits 
only  for  a  fair  wind  to  proceed  to  Portugal,  I  trust  no  incon- 
venience will  arise,  if  the  whole  additional  quantity  required — 
3,000,000  pounds — be  despatched  at  different  and  successive 
periods,  on  account  of  the  great  extent  of  tonnage,  which  would 
otherwise  bo  occupied  at  once  on  this  service. 

The  same  remark  will  also  apply  to  the  oats,  of  which  a 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  85 

considerable  quantity  has  sailed  lately  from  Ireland,  but  pro- 
bably had  not  arrived  when  your  letter  was  written. 

The  necessity  of  sending  out  money  has  been  represented  to 
the  Treasury,  and  your  wish  will  be  complied  with,  as  far  as 
the  means  exist.  

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — My  correspondence  with  General  Cuesta  has 
been  a  very  curious  one,  and  proves  him  to  be  as  obstinate  as  any 
gentleman  at  the  head  of  an  army  need  be.  He  would  not  alter 
his  position,  even  to  ensure  the  safety  of  his  army,  because  he 
supposed  that  this  measure  might  be  injurious  to  himself  j  not- 
withstanding that  this  alteration  would  have  been  a  part  of  an 
operation  which  must  have  ended  in  the  annihilation  of  Victor''s 
army,  if  he  stood  our  attack,  or,  in  his  retreat  through  the 
mountains  to  Arche  Bispo,  with  the  loss  of  all  his  cannon  and 
baggage,  if  he  went  away.  I  hope  I  acted  right  in  giving 
way ;  more  particularly  as  the  operation  was  to  be  carried  on 
in  Spain ;  and  the  argument  urged  to  me  was  that  the  safety 
of  Cuesta^s  army  depended  on  my  compliance.  The  best  of 
the  whole  story  is,  that  Cuesta,  in  a  letter  of  the  27th  of  May, 
which  I  did  not  receive  till  after  I  had  written  to  him  to  pro- 
pose my  plan  of  operations,  proposed  to  me  the  same  plan, 
with  very  little  alteration. 

I  hope  that,  notwithstanding  Colonel  Roche's  delays,  and 
the  partiality  which  the  Admiral  has  for  the  employment  of 
the  horse  transports  on  all  services,  the  horse  transports  will 
have  arrived  in  time.  It  is  desirable  that  all  the  transports, 
for  horses  as  well  as  infantry,  should  have  a  thorough  clean- 
ing ;  for  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  former,  in 
particular,  are  infected. 

Ever,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


86  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Abrantes,  June  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  cannot  with  propriety  omit  to  draw  your 
attention  again  to  the  state  of  discipline  of  the  army,  which  is 
a  subject  of  serious  concern  to  me,  and  well  deserves  the  con- 
sideration of  his  Majesty's  Ministers. 