

D.  DuNDAS,  Commander-in-Chief. 

Horse-Guards,  July  10,  1809. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Major-General  Lighthurne. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  9,  1809. 

Sir — I  am  to  signify  to  you  his  Majesty^s  pleasure  that  you 
do  proceed  with  the  regiments  named  in  the  margin,^  now  in 
Ireland,  to  Portugal,  to  join  the  army  under  the  command  of 


5th  Foot 

2nd  Battalion 

28th     „ 

do. 

42nd    „ 

do. 

88th     „ 

do. 

VOL.  VII. 


82  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lieutenant-General  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley.  You  will  call  off 
Oporto,  Aveiro,  and  Mondego,  successively,  in  case  the  Lieu- 
tenant-General should  have  left  at  either  of  those  places  in- 
structions for  the  guidance  of  your  proceedings. 


The  Hon.  F.  Robinson  ^  to  Major-  General  Lighthurne. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  June  10,  1809. 

Sir — Referring  to  Lord  Castlereagh''s  Instructions  to  you,  I 
am  directed  by  his  Lordship  to  acquaint  you  that,  as  there  is 
little  prospect  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  being  engaged  in  ope- 
rations in  the  north  of  Portugal  at  the  time  that  you  may  arrive 
off  that  coast,  his  Lordship  desires  you  will  omit  calling  off 
Oporto,  if  your  doing  so  is  likely  to  occasion  much  loss  of 
time,  but  that  you  do  proceed  without  delay  to  Aveiro  and 
Mondego,  where,  and  particularly  at  the  latter  place,  you  will 
probably  find  Instructions  for  your  guidance. 

F.  Robinson. 

Similar  letters  sent  the  same  day  to  Brigadier-General 
R.  Craufurd  and  to  the  officer  commanding  the  Royal  Artillery 
embarking  at  Ramsgate. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  London,  June  11,  1809. 

Dear  Wellesley — It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  the  uncertainty 
of  all  military  combinations,  which  depend  on  maritime  move- 
ments, to  state  that  Craufurd''s  Brigade  is  still  in  port,  having 
been  ready  since  the  24th  of  last  month.  It  went  to  sea  from 
the  Downs,  but  was  driven  into  Portsmouth.  As  the  trans- 
ports going  to  Cork  and  the  Islands  to  receive  the  seven  regi- 
ments ordered  from  thence  were  also  blown  into  Falmouth  and 
other  ports  to  the  westward,  I  fear  the  23rd  must  have  suffered 
from  the  late  gales  from  the  southward. 

Since  I  last  wrote,  I  have  ordered  a  Veteran  Battalion  to 
^  Now  Earl  of  Ripen. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  83 

Madeira,  to  relieve  the  1 1th  Regiment,  which,  heing  a  first 
Battalion,  of  1000  strong,  will  be  an  acquisition  to  your  army.. 

By  the  enclosed  Return,  I  conclude  you  will  have  35  bat- 
talions of  infantry,  exclusive  of  the  two  battalions  of  detach- 
ments when  the  1]  th,  now  under  orders,  joins  you.  The  propor- 
tion of  second  battalions  is  larger  than  I  could  wish ;  but  this 
you  may  mend  by  taking  the  48th,  57th,  and  61st,  from  Gi- 
braltar, and  replacing  them  with  the  three  least  serviceable  of 
your  army.  I  shall  be  satisfied  if  the  garrison  is  composed  of 
3,000  men,  of  which  the  two  Veteran  Battalions  now  there 
may  be  taken  for  1000. 