

As,  however,  his  Majesty's  commands,  as  conveyed  in  your 
letter  of  the  13th  of  May,  recognise  the  principle  of  a  British 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  79 

officer  holding  advanced  Portuguese  rank,  and  consequently  a 
local  temporary  superior  commission  to  those  held  by  his 
seniors  in  the  British  service,  I  think  it  proper  to  delay  to  give 
any  decision  upon  these  complaints,  and  to  refer  the  following 
points  for  your  consideration  and  that  of  his  Majesty's  ser- 
vants : 

1st.  Are  officers  in  the  Portuguese  service  to  rank  with 
officers  in  his  Majesty''s  service,  according  to  the  dates  of 
their  several  commissions  ? 

2ndly.  If  they  are,  is  it  intended  that  officers  of  the  British 
army,  who  have  been  or  shall  be  appointed  to  serve  with  the 
Portuguese  troops,  shall  serve  with  a  Portuguese  commission 
of  the  same  rank  with  that  which  they  hold  in  the  King's 
service,  or  with  a  Portuguese  commission  of  a  superior 
rank? 

3dly.  If  with  a  Portuguese  commission  of  a  superior  rank, 
in  what  manner  is  the  relative  rank  of  these  officers  to  be 
settled  with  the  rank  of  officers  senior  to  them  in  the  British 
service,  although  junior  in  reference  to  their  Portuguese  com- 
missions I 

4thly.  If  officers  belonging  to  the  British  army  in  Portugal 

are  not  to  serve  with  the  Portuguese  troops,  with  advanced 

Portuguese  commissions,  what  other  encouragement  is  to  be 

held  out  to  them,  to  induce  them  to  accept  of  this  employment  ? 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Marginal  Observations,  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  {Sir  David 

Dundas). 

It  is  understood  that  a  British  officer  employed  in  tho  Portu- 
guese service  receives  one  step  of  Portuguese  rank  on  his 
entrance  into  that  service :  that  is,  a  British  Captain,  if  em- 
ployed in  the  Portuguese  army,  receives  a  Portuguese  commis- 
sion as  Major.  In  this  capacity  of  Portuguese  Major,  he 
must,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  be  considered  as  a  Portu- 


80  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

guese  officer,  rankin2;  with  other  Portuguese  officers  according 
to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions. 

It  is  also  clearly  understood  that  Portuguese  officers,  when 
serving  or  co-operating  with  British  officers,  rank  with  them 
according  to  the  dates  of  their  respective  commissions,  a  Cap- 
tain with  a  Captain,  a  Major  with  a  Major,  a  Lieut.-Colonel 
with  a  Lieut.-Colonel.  This  being  the  case,  it  follows  that  a 
British  officer,  acting  with  the  Portuguese  army,  under  a  Por- 
tuguese commission^  must  be  considered,  to  all  intents  and  pur- 
poses, as  a  Portuguese  officer,  without  any  reference  whatever 
to  his  British  rank,  which  British  rank  lies  dormant,  (though 
progressive  in  the  British  army)  so  long  as  he  is  employed 
under  a  Portuguese  commission. 