

As  for  the  other  incitement  to  officers  to  do  their  duty 
zealously,  there  is  no  such  thing.  We,  who  command  the 
armies  of  the  country,  and  who  are  expected  to  make  exertions 
greater  than  those  made  by  the  French  armies,  to  march,  to 
fight,  and  to  keep  our  troops  in  health  and  in  discipline,  have 
not  the  power  of  rewarding  or  of  procuring  a  reward  for  a  single 
officer  in  the  army ;  and  we  deceive  ourselves  and  those  who 
are  placed  under  us,  if  we  imagine  we  have  that  power,  or  if 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  89 

we  hold  out  to  them  that  they  shall  derive  any  advantage 
from  the  exertion  of  it  in  their  favour. 

You  will  say,  probably,  in  answer  to  all  this,  that  British 
armies  have  been  in  the  field  before,  and  that  these  complaints, 
at  least  to  the  same  extent,  have  not  existed ;  to  which  I 
answer,  first,  that  the  armies  are  now  larger,  their  operations 
more  extended,  and  the  exertion  required  greater  than  they 
were  in  former  periods ;  that  the  mode  of  carrying  on  war  is 
different  from  what  it  was  ;  secondly,  that  our  law,  instead  of 
being  strong,  in  proportion  to  the  temptation  and  means  for 
indiscipline  and  irregularity,  has  been  weakened ;  and  that  we 
have  not  adopted  the  additional  means  of  restraint  and  punish- 
ment adopted  by  other  nations  and  our  enemies,  although  we 
have  imitated  them  in  those  circumstances  which  have  in- 
creased and  aggravated  our  irregularities ;  and,  finally,  that  it 
is  only  within  late  years  that  the  Commanders-in-Chief  abroad 
have  been  deprived  of  all  patronage,  and  of  course  of  all  power 
of  incitement  to  the  oflBcers  under  their  command. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  I  look  for  this  patronage,  to  gratify 
my  own  favourites  ;  but  I  declare  most  solemnly  that,  if  I  had 
it  to-morrow,  there  is  not  a  soul  in  the  army  whom  I  should 
wish  to  promote,  excepting  for  services  performed. 

I  have  thought  it  proper  to  draw  your  attention  to  these 
subjects ;  which,  I  assure  you,  deserve  the  serious  considera- 
tion of  the  King*'s  Ministers.  We  are  an  excellent  army  on 
parade,  an  excellent  one  to  fight :  we  are  bad  in  quarters,  when 
campaigning. 

Ever,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagli  to  the  Che'Galier  de  Souza  CouUinho. 
Draft.  June  20,  1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  presents  his  compliments  to  the  Chevalier 
de  Souza  Couttinho,  and  has  the  honour  to  acknowledge  his 
letters  of  the  13th  and  15th  instant. 


90  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  has  taken  an  opportunity  of  communi- 
cating with  the  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  subject  of  them, 
and  finds  that  he  does  not  think  it  proper  to  permit  any  addi- 
tional British  officers  to  proceed  to  Portugal  with  permanent 
rank  in  the  Portuguese  army,  under  the  circumstances  of  their 
services  being  at  present  required  with  the  corps  to  which 
they  respectively  belong. 