

It  is  not  possible  for  the  two  services  to  be  carried  on  together 
under  any  other  arrangement  with  respect  to  the  rank  of  their 
several  officers  than  that  above  mentioned ;  and  it  must,  there- 
fore, remain  with  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  united  British 
and  Portuguese  army  to  determine  as  to  the  number  and  elegi- 
bility  of  officers  to  be  lent  to  the  Portuguese  service  ;  and  the 
Commander-in-Chief  of  his  Majesty ""s  army  cannot  recommend 
to  the  King  that  the  number  of  British  officers  with  permanent 
rank  and  promotion,  when  employed  in  the  Portuguese  service, 
should  be  extended;  and  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  number, 
twenty-four,  is  already  too  large — such  a  promotion  bearing 
hard  upon  that  part  of  the  British  army  whose  service  in  dis- 
tant possessions  precludes  them  from  being  advantaged  by  it; 
and,  in  fact,  it  operates  as  a  very  extensive  and  partial  promo- 
tion to  the  army  employed  in  Portugal  alone. 

Besides  this,  as  officers  must  be  obtained  upon  the  spur  of 
the  occasion  for  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese  army,  this 
brevet  promotion  is  granted  of  necessity  to  young  men,  who, 
though  deserving,  have,  by  no  means,  those  claims  which 
attach  to  the  majority  of  the  army ;  and  consequently,  the 
major  part  of  the  most  deserving  officers  in  the  army  would  be 
passed  over,  and  become  thereby  dissatisfied  with  their  situation. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  81 

To  Question  1 .  This  has  been  the  invariable  practice  in  all 
united  armies. 

To  Question  2.  If  a  British  officer  serves  with  the  Portu- 
guese army,  under  a  Portuguese  commission,  which  it  is  sup- 
posed he  must  do,  to  render  his  services  effectual,  he  becomes 
a  Portuguese  officer^  m  toto,  and  no  reference  is  to  be  made  to 
his  British  commission. 

To  Question  8.  Answered  above. 

To  Question  4.  His  Majesty  permits  his  officers  to  serve  in 
the  Portuguese  army  on  the  following  terms,  viz. : 

Lieutenant,  Captain,  Major,  Lieutenant-Colonel,  may  serve 
in  the  Portuguese  army,  retaining  their  situations  in  the 
British  army,  and  with  one  step  of  rank  in  the  Portuguese 
army,  or  such  other  promotion  therein  as  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  in  Portugal  and  the  Portuguese  Regency  may  direct, 
senior  to  that  which  they  held  in  the  British ;  their  British 
commission  remainino:  dormant,  though  their  rank  in  the 
British  service  would  be  progressive.  Thus,  if  the  senior  Cap- 
tain of  the  1st  Regiment  of  Foot  was  serving  as  a  Major  in 
the  Portuguese  army,  and  the  Majority  of  the  1st  Regiment 
was  to  fall  vacant,  his  pretensions  to  succeed  to  such  Majority 
would  be  strengthened,  according  to  the  character  he  supported 
under  the  Portuguese  commission. 