

Besides  this  improvement  of  the  law,  there  ought  to  be  in 
the  British  army  a  regular  Provost  establishment,  of  which  a 
proportion  should  be  attached  to  every  army  sent  abroad.  All 
the  foreign  armies  have  such  an  establishment ;  the  French, 
their  Gendarmerie  nationale^  to  the  amount  of  thirty  or  forty, 
with  each  of  their  corps  ;  the  Spaniards,  their  Police  militaire^ 
to  a  still  larger  amount ;  while  we,  who  require  such  an  aid 
more  than  any  of  the  other  nations  in  Europe,  (I  am  sorry  to 
say)  have  nothing  of  the  kind,  excepting  a  few  sergeants,  who 
are  taken  from  the  Line  for  the  occasion,  and  who  are  probably 
not  very  fit  for  the  duties  which  they  are  to  perform. 

Then  the  authority  and  duties  of  the  Provost  ought  in  some 
manner  to  be  recognised  by  the  law.  By  the  custom  of  the 
British  armies,  the  Provost  has  been  in  the  habit  of  punishing 
on  the  spot,  even  wath  death,  (under  the  orders  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief) soldiers  found  in  the  act  of  disobedience  of 


88  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

orders,  of  plunder,  or  of  outrage.  There  is  no  authority  for 
this  practice,  excepting  custom,  which,  I  conceive,  would 
hardly  warrant  it ;  and  yet  I  declare  that  I  don^t  know  in 
what  manner  the  army  is  to  be  commanded  at  all,  unless  the 
practice  is  not  only  continued,  but  an  additional  number  of 
Provosts  are  appointed. 

There  is  another  branch  of  this  subject  which  deserves 
serious  consideration.  We  all  know  that  the  discipline  and 
regularity  of  all  armies  must  depend  on  the  diligence  of  the 
regimental  officers,  principally  the  subalterns.  I  may  order 
what  I  please,  but,  if  they  don't  execute  what  I  order,  or  exe- 
cute it  with  negligence,  I  can't  expect  that  British  soldiers  will 
be  orderly  or  regular.  There  are  two  incitements  to  men  of 
this  description  to  do  their  duty  as  they  ought — the  fear  of 
punishment,  and  the  hope  of  reward.  As  for  the  first,  it  can- 
not be  given  individually  ;  for,  I  believe,  I  should  find  it  very 
difficult  to  convict  any  officer  of  doing  this  description  of  duty 
with  negligence,  more  particularly  as  he  is  to  be  tried  by 
others  probably  guilty  of  the  same  ofience.  But  these  evils  of 
which  I  complain  are  committed  by  whole  corps,  and  the  only 
way  in  which  they  can  be  punished  is  by  disgracing  them  by 
sending  them  into  garrison,  and  reporting  them  to  his  Majesty. 
I  may  and  shall  do  this  by  one  or  two  battalions,  but  I  cannot 
venture  to  do  it  by  more,  and  then  there  is  an  end  to  the 
fear  of  this  punishment,  even  if  those  who  received  it  were 
considered  in  England  as  disgraced  persons,  rather  than 
martyrs. 