

The  doubt  I  have  pressed  upon  the  Commander-in-Chief  is, 
whether  we  shall  accomplish  our  object  under  the  limitation 
imposed.  I  certainly  feel  that  I  have  no  right  to  press  upon 
him  more  than  that  the  number  of  officers  required  should  be 
furnished.  Provided  the  service  can  be  carried  on,  it  is  for 
him  to  judge  how  they  can  be  given  with  the  least  prejudice 
to  the  efficiency  or  permanent  interests  of  the  army.  Sir 
David  seems  to  be  very  peremptory  that  officers  enough  will 
be  found  to  serve  in  the  Portuguese  army  on  the  terms  he 
offers ;  and  he  supports  his  assertion  by  stating  that  he  found 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  99 

no  difficulty  in  obtaining  the  number  of  officers  asked  for  from 
among  the  corps  at  home,  and  entertains  no  doubt  that  he  can 
replace  any  who  choose  to  return  to  their  regiments,  upon  find- 
in  of  their  rank  not  confirmed. 

It  is  now  unfortunate  that  permanent  rank  was  given  at  all : 
to  take  up  a  principle  which  we  could  not  follow  up  has  pro- 
duced discontent  by  the  force  of  contrast ;  and  I  also  cannot 
but  regret  that  an  expectation  given  to  a  number  of  officers 
by  a  person  in  General  Beresford's  situation  should  not  be 
confirmed ;  but,  as  it  certainly  was  done  without  authority,  I 
do  not  feel  that  I  can  press  on  the  Commander-in-Chief,  on 
that  ground  merely,  to  do  what  he  considers  would  be  unjust 
and  prejudicial  to  the  army.  I,  therefore,  hope  you  will  make 
the  best  of  his  decision,  and  that,  if  you  want  more  officers, 
you  are  entitled  to  call  upon  us  to  find  them. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellesley,  yours,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Extract  of  a  General  Order. 

Head  Quarters,  St.  Amand,  April  10,  1794. 

^ajor-General  Abercromby  reported  yesterday  to  his  Royal 
Hifyhness  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  two  men  of  the  14th 
Regiment  had,  during  the  preceding  evening,  attempted  to  rob 
the  house  of  a  countryman,  and,  in  the  course  of  the  attempt, 
they  had  murdered  the  woman  of  the  house,  and  that  a  child 
had  been  also  so  much  wounded  that  there  was  little  prospect 
of  its  living. 

His  Royal  Highness  feels  himself  called  upon,  by  every  tie 
of  justice,  of  humanity,  and  duty,  to  punish,  by  a  signal  act  of 
severity,  the  perpetrators  of  so  horrid  a  fact.  Under  this 
impression,  he  did  not  hesitate  a  moment  to  order  the  Provost 
to  proceed  to  the  spot,  and,  by  the  instant  execution  of  the 
off'enders,  to  put  a  stop  to  conduct,  of  which  too  many  in- 
stances have  occurred  lately  to  leave  his  Royal  Highness  any 

H  2 


100  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

doubt  of  the  necessity  of  an  immediate  and  vigorous  inter- 
position. 