

I  enclose  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  I  have  written  to  the 
Admiral,  from  which  you  will  observe  that  you  will  have 
home  the  ships  in  the  Tagus  of  all  descriptions  excepting  5,000 
tons  of  infantry  coppered  transports  ;  and  I  purpose  to  keep 
horse  transports  for  300  horses,  (when  returned  from  Ireland) 
in  case  I  should  have  occasion  to  move  horses  by  sea. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

I  will  send  you  a  return  of  our  actual  strength  by  every  op- 
portunity. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  the  Hon.  Admiral  Berkeley. 
Copy.  Castel  Branco,  June  30,  1809. 

Sir — His  Majesty''s  principal  Secretary  of  State  having  inti- 
mated to  me  the  wish  of  his  Majesty  that,  if  I  should  not 
require  their  services,  I  should  send  home  the  transports  now 
in  the  Tagus,  I  have  the  honour  to  inform  you  that  it  is  my 
opinion  that  all  the  transports  now  in  the  Tagus  may  be  sent 
home  without  inconvenience,  with  the  exception  of  5,000  tons 
of  transports  for  infantry,  of  the  coppered  ships. 

I  some  time  ago  gave  directions  to  the  commanding  offi- 
cer of  the  artillery  and  to  the  Commissary-General  to  have 
disembarked  from  the  Ordnance  store-ships,  victuallers,  &ic., 
and  put  in  store  at  Lisbon,  all  the  Ordnance  and  military  stores, 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  95 

provisions,  forage,  &c.,  which  were  in  those  ships,  and  de- 
stined for  their  departments  respectively  ;  and  I  have  called 
upon  these  gentlemen  this  day  to  let  me  know  what  progress 
has  been  made  in  the  execution  of  those  orders. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  all  the  store-ships  and  victuallers, 
as  soon  as  their  contents  will  be  disembarked,  may  be  sent  home, 
as  well  as  the  transports,  to  which  I  have  above  referred. 
I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  July  11,  1809. 

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  dates  and  numbers  mentioned 
in  the  margin ^  have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 
His  Majesty  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  approve  of  the 
whole  of  your  proceedings,  as  communicated  in  those  de- 
spatches, and  hopes  the  arrival  of  the  reinforcements  will  have 
enabled  you  to  act  with  effect,  in  concert  with  General  Cuesta, 
against  the  enemy. 

The  scarcity  of  specie  is  become  the  subject  of  much  anxiety. 
The  supply  sent  out  by  the  Rosamond  and  Niobe  (which  left 
this  country  early  in  June)  of  dollars,  doubloons,  and  Portugal 
gold,  to  the  amount  of  about  ^230,000  sterling,  arriving  so 
immediately  after  that  you  received  from  Cadiz,  will  have 
relieved  your  wants  for  the  present ;  but,  as  there  is  not  more 
than  c£*100,000  which  can  now  be  sent  from  hence,  in  addition 
to  what  you  have,  till  dollars  arrive  from  South  America  (the 
period  of  which  is  uncertain),  it  becomes  a  subject  of  the  most 
serious  consideration  for  you  to  concert  with  the  Commissary- 
General  how  you  can  realize  the  funds  necessary  for  your  army 
in  the  Peninsula  by  Bills  on  England. 