

The  first  division  of  Horse  Transports  has  arrived,  and 
ftirnishes  a  very  seasonable  supply  for  the  expedition  under 
equipment.  A  long  continuance  of  north-easterly  wind  has 
^  June  7th,  11th,  14th,  17th. 


96  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

delayed  the  second.  I  trust  the  state  of  affairs  in  Spain  and 
Portugal  will  now  admit  of  your  sending  home  all  the  trans- 
ports, of  every  class  and  description,  which  are  not  indispen- 
sably required  for  the  local  services  of  your  army. 


Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  A  rthur  Wellesley, 

Downing  Street,  July  17,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley — I  have  communicated  your  letter  on 
the  discipline  of  the  army  to  the  Judge-Advocate,  Attorney 
and  Solicitor-General.  They  feel  all  its  importance,  and  have 
desired  time  to  confer  together  upon  it.  I  have  also  conversed 
upon  it  with  Sir  D.  Dundas,  who  seems  quite  clear  upon  the 
practice,  in  all  times  past,  of  summary  punishment  for  ma- 
rauding, when  armies  have  been  in  the  field  on  actual  service. 
He  says  it  was  done  by  the  Duke  of  York,  an  instance  of  which 
I  enclose ;  by  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby  ;  by  many  others ;  and, 
in  the  last  campaign,  by  Moore — in  short,  he  thinks,  by  all 
commanders,  who  felt  it  necessary  to  the  discipline  of  their 
army  ;  and  he  has  no  conception  that  any  army,  more  parti- 
cularly a  British  one,  can  go  on  without  it. 

You  will  observe,  in  the  enclosed  precedent,  that  the  exe- 
cution is  ordered,  not  upon  the  view  of  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  or  the  Provost  Marshal,  but  upon  the  report  of  another 
General  Officer  that  such  an  offence  had  been  committed. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  such  a  practice  always  has  existed,  and 
has  never  been  questioned  when  exercised  to  repress  gross 
breaches  of  discipline  in  the  progress  of  a  campaign  ;  but,  as 
this  extraordinary  remedy  is  supposed  to  arise  out  of  and  to  be 
alone  justified  by  the  necessity  of  the  case,  it  does  not  appear 
that  the  mode  and  circumstances  under  which  it  is  to  be 
exercised  have  ever  been  defined  with  any  precision.  It  is 
that  extreme  remedy  which  never  can  be  made  the  subject  of 
enactment,  and  will,  therefore,  probably  always  remain  to  be 
measured  by  the  conscientious  sense  of  its  necessity  operating 
at  the  moment  on  the  judgment  of  the  officer  who  authorizes 


1809.1  I^ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  97 

it  ;  and  I  know  of  no  other  protection  he  has  for  such  exercise 
of  authority  than  precedent,  and  the  disposition  all  reasonable 
men  would  feel  to  support  him,  were  it  questioned. 

As  far  as  I  can  collect  any  principle,  it  seems  to  be  most 
clearly  justifiable,  when  inflicted  instanter  on  the  commission 
of  the  offence,  and  when  the  proofs  are  of  a  nature  to  place  the 
guilt  of  the  party  beyond  all  doubt.  Where  time  has  inter- 
vened, and  the  offenders  been  committed  to  custody,  where  the 
guilt  is  to  be  collected  from  the  evidence  rather  than  from  the 
view,  there  the  intervention  of  a  Oourt-Martial  seems  the 
preferable  course. 