


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  93 

guese  force  which  I  have  received.^  Of  this  number  we  pay  for 
20,000  men,  I  believe,  .^480,000  or  .£'500,000  per  annum.  My 
behef  is  that  the  Portuguese  Government  cannot  go  on  unless 
Great  Britain  will  assist  them  with  a  million. 

The  Portuguese  army  is  not  yet  in  a  state  of  discipline,  or 
organized  as  it  ought  to  be  for  service.  I  have  settled  with 
Beresford  that  he  shall  collect  all  that  part  of  it  not  required 
for  garrisons  in  a  camp  on  the  most  exposed  frontier,  for  the 
double  purpose  of  watching  the  enemy's  movements  and  dis- 
ciplining his  officers  and  troops.  If  he  can  get  them  together 
for  two  or  three  months,  they  will  be  a  fine  army,  and  prO' 
bably  very  useful;  but,  in  order  to  effect  this  object,  they 
must  be  kept  clear  of  the  desultory  operations  of  Romana  and 
the  other  Spanish  chiefs  in  Gallicia.  Besides  these  troops, 
called  Regulars,  there  is  an  army  of  militia,  amounting,  I  be- 
lieve, to  30,000  men,  divided  into  battalions  of  1,000  each. 
We  propose  to  discipline  the  whole  of  these  by  600  at  a  time, 
in  reliefs  of  200  each ;  and,  when  the  whole  are  disciplined, 
to  call  out  the  whole  in  camps  of  8  or  10,000  men,  at  a  season 
of  the  year  in  which  the  country  can  spare  the  labours  of 
the  men,  and  perfect  them,  and  then  send  them  all  to  their 
homes  till  they  shall  be  wanted. 

I  conceive  that,  exclusive  of  militia,  the  Portuguese  army 
will  be  50,000  men  when  complete ;  and  the  question  is,  in 
what  way  this  force  ought  to  be  employed.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  that  part  of  the  Portuguese  force  which  is  not  re- 
quired for  internal  purposes  ought  to  be  employed  against  the 
common  enemy  in  Spain,  if  that  addition  of  force  is  likely  to  be 
of  any  avail.  But  if  circumstances  should  bring  the  contest 
in  Spain  to  that  state,  that,  notwithstanding  all  our  efforts, 
the  enemy  should  still  be  superior  to  us  in  the  field,  I 
should  then  doubt  the  expediency  of  marching  the  Portuguese 

*  This  return  of  the  force  of  the  Portuguese  army,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Marshal  Beresford,  exhibits  a  total  of  58,489,  including  22,341 
militia. — Editor. 


94  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  beyond  their  own  frontier.  These  doubts  turn  upon  a 
view  of  the  military  operations  which  it  would  be  expedient  to 
adopt  in  that  case  throughout  the  Peninsula  ;  which,  I  think, 
should  be  founded  upon  strong  reserves  in  parts  of  Spain  as 
well  as  Portugal,  by  means  of  which  the  contest  would  be  in- 
definitely prolonged,  even  if  it  should  ever  be  in  the  enemy*'s 
power  to  make  the  conquest.  They  are  also  founded  upon  my 
apprehension  that  great  length  of  time  will  elapse  before  we  can 
make  the  Portuguese  sufficiently  good  troops  to  retire  before  a 
superior  enemy,  and  my  opinion  that  they,  as  well  as  we, 
might  be  lost  before  we  could  re-enter  the  frontier  of  Portugal. 