

Tbe  two  men  were  executed  this  morning,  at  the  head  of 
the  brigade. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Talavera,  August  1,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — My  public  letter  will  give  you  some  idea  of 
my  situation.  It  is  one  of  some  embarrassment ;  but  I  think 
I  shall  get  the  better  of  my  embarrassments,  I  hope  without 
fighting  another  desperate  battle,  which  would  really  cripple  us 
so  much  as  to  render  all  our  efforts  useless.  I  certainly  should 
get  the  better  of  every  thing  if  I  could  manage  Cuesta,  but  his 
temper  and  disposition  are  so  bad,  that  that  is  impossible. 

Vanegas'  movement  will  probably  relieve  our  front.  I  think 
it  probable  also  that  the  French  will  not  like  to  press  through 
the  Passo  de  Bafios,  having ^Beresford's  army  in  their  rear,  and 
a  victorious  army  in  their  front ;  and  indeed  that  front  would 
be  quite  secure,  if  I  could  prevail  upon  General  Cuesta  to  rein- 
force his  troops  at  Bejar,  so  as  to  secure  that  point,  as  I  under- 
stood it  already  was. 

We  are  miserably  supplied  with  provisions,  and  I  don't 
know  how  to  remedy  this  evil.  The  Spanish  armies  are  now 
so  numerous,  that  they  eat  up  the  whole  country ;  they  have 
no  magazines,  nor  have  we,  nor  can  we  collect  any,  and  there 
is  a  scramble  for  every  thing. 

I  think  the  battle  of  the  28th  is  likely  to  be  of  great  use  to 
the  Spaniards  ;  but  I  don't  think  them  yet  in  a  state  of  disci- 
pline to  contend  with  the  French  ;  and  I  prefer  infinitely  to 
endeavour  to  remove  them  from  this  part  of  Spain  by  manoeuvre 
to  the  trial  of  another  pitched  battle.  The  French,  in  the  last, 
threw  their  whole  force  upon  us ;  and,  although  it  did  not 
exactly  succeed,  or  will  not  succeed  in  future,  we  shall  lose 
great  numbers  of  men,  which  we  can  but  ill  afford  ;  and  we 
cannot  attempt  to  relieve  ourselves  from  the  weight  of  the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  101 

attack,  by  bringing  forward  the  Spanish  troops,  owing  to  their 
miserable  state  of  discipline,  and  their  want  of  officers  properly- 
qualified.  The  troops  are  entirely  incapable  of  performing  any 
manoeuvre,  however  simple ;  they  would  get  into  irretrievable 
confusion,  and  the  result  would  probably  be  the  loss  of  every 
thing. 

I  have  received  your  lordship's  letter  of  the  11th  of  July, 
for  which  I  am  much  obliged  to  you.  I  hope  that  your  expe- 
dition will  succeed.  I  guessed  the  point  to  which  it  was 
directed. 

I  understand,  from  your  letter  of  the  11th,  that  you  intend 
that  we  should  take  the  accoutrements  in  the  Hannah. 
Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 