

I  have  not  found  any  one  who  doubted  that  it  would  be 
clearly  competent  for  the  General  commanding  to  punish  with 
death,  upon  his  own  mew  of  the  guilt ;  but  whether  he  can  dele- 
gate such  a  power  to  his  Provost  Marshal  seems  more  ques- 
tionable. The  Commander-in-Chief  thinks  he  can,  according 
to  the  usages  of  war. 

As  soon  as  Ryder  returns  to  town,  I  propose  having  a  meet- 
ing between  the  military  and  the  legal  authorities,  and  shall  send 
you  the  result.  What  I  have  stated  in  this  letter  you  will 
consider  as  not  more  than  what  I  have  been  able  to  collect  in 
conversation.  There  seems  much  difficulty  in  treading  back 
our  steps  on  the  mode  of  constituting  Courts- Martial.  I  much 
regretted  the  innovation  in  the  Mutiny  Act  at  the  moment ; 
as  it  was  obvious  it  was  relinquishing  to  theory  and  reasoning 
what  you  could  hardly  ever  hope  to  resume  by  force  of  argu- 
ment from  an  Assembly  not  composed  of  professional  men. 
On  this  part  of  the  subject  we  are  helpless  till  Parliament  re- 
assembles, and,  even  then,  I  cannot  look  forward  with  much 
confidence  to  the  system  being  restored. 

This  consideration  does  not  alter  the  grounds  materially  on 
which  the  summary  exercise  of  punishment  is  to  be  justified. 
It  certainly,  however,  renders  it  the  more  indispensable,  and 
in  so  far  it  may  fairly  be  considered  as  one  feature  more  in  the 
necessity  that  warrants  it.     The  only  additional  part  of,  the 

VOL.  VII.  H 


98  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

question,  upon  which  it  may  be  necessary  in  this  preliminary 
communication  to  say  a  word,  is  that,  whatever  increase  of  the 
Provost  establishment  you  may  find  requisite  will  be  cheer- 
fully sanctioned,  and  I  conclude  you  can  be  at  no  loss  for  proper 
instruments  on  the  spot  to  employ. 

I  find  Sir  David  has  written  to  you  upon  the  relative  rank 
of  officers  in  the  British  and  Portuguese  armies.  In  point  of 
principle  and  reasoning,  he  appears  to  me  to  be  right,  that  our 
army  has  no  business  to  inquire  into  any  other  commission 
than  that  under  which  the  officer  is  serving  in  the  regiment  to 
which  he  is  posted.  It  may  be  a  question  of  prudence  with 
the  Oommanders-in-Ohief  of  both  armies  what  degree  of  en- 
couragement should  be  held  out  to  secure  the  supply  of  officers 
you  i»ay  require  ;  and  there  may  be  the  same  motive  as  in 
any  other  promotion  for  attending  to  the  claims  of  old  officers, 
if  the  preference  is  really  one  that  can  amount  to  a  grievance 
when  the  senior  officer  is  passed  over  ;  but,  having  determined 
on  the  extent  of  the  encouragement  to  be  given,  (which  none 
can  allege  to  be  taken  too  high,  when  it  carries  permanent 
advancement  with  it  in  our  own  service)  I  am  very  much 
inclined  to  think,  with  Sir  David,  that  you  can  consider 
the  officer  so  serving  in  no  other  light  than  you  would  any 
other  Portuguese  officer  of  the  same  rank,  and  that  his  being 
still  in  the  British  service  cannot  be  suffered  to  affect  the 
question. 