


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  103 

you  did  not  suspend  your  operations  without  justifiable  grounds ; 
and,  3rdly,  that  your  reinforcements  had  not  joined  you. 

I  saw  Lord  William  Bentinck  yesterday :  he  will  proceed 
to  join  you  in  a  few  days.  I  believe  you  will  have  Lowry 
Cole  in  Murray's  room. 

I  have  had  my  conference  with  the  Attorney-General 
and  Ryder,  on  Martial  Law.  They  do  not  enable  me  to 
say  much  in  addition  to  my  former  letter.  They  seem  fully 
impressed  with  the  persuasion  that  the  power  of  summary 
punishment,  even  to  death,  must  reside  in  the  commanding 
officer  of  an  army  in  the  field,  but  in  what  precise  mode,  or 
under  what  particular  circumstances  to  be  exercised,  they  can 
give  no  opinion.  They  consider  that  the  necessity  of  the  case 
can  only  be  the  rule,  and  that  the  power  must  be  regulated  by 
the  conscientious  sense  of  the  commander,  and,  of  course,  upon 
his  responsibility.  They  admit  that  this  is  a  painful  duty,  and 
of  some  hazard  to  an  officer  to  undertake  ;  but  they  say,  at  the 
same  time,  that,  to  be  effectual,  it  must  be  both  summary  and 
arbitrary^  and  that  it  is  impossible,  in  this  Constitution,  that 
such  a  power  should  be  entrusted,  a  priori^  to  any  man.  All 
they  can  say,  with  respect  to  the  safety  of  having  recourse  to 
the  exercise  of  such  extraordinary  means  of  repressing  disorders 
is,  that  they  have  reason  to  believe  that  such  powers  have 
been  in  very  general  use  in  the  field ;  and  that  they  know  of 
no  instance  in  which  the  acts  so  done  in  the  face  of  the  army, 
for  the  preservation  of  its  discipline,  have  ever  been  subse- 
quently questioned.  The  only  practical  suggestion  they  have 
enabled  me  to  ofi"er  on  your  letter  is,  that  the  Mutiny  Act 
allows  three  officers  to  sit '  on  detachment  Court-Martial,  if 
more  cannot  be  had. 

The  6th  Regiment  of  Dragoons  now  with  you  have  only 
250  horses  at  home  fit  for  service.  These  are  ordered  to 
assemble  at  Portsmouth  for  embarkation. 

Ever,  my  dear  Wellington,  yours  very  sincerely, 

Castlereagh. 


104  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  King. 

Downing  Street,  August  17,  1809. 
The  splendid  services  of  your  Majesty ""s  army  in  Spain 
have  induced  your  Majesty's  confidential  servants  humbly  to 
submit  to  your  Majesty  the  propriety  of  a  general  order  being 
issued  by  your  Majesty'*s  Commander-in-Chief  to  the  army,  sig- 
nifying the  sense  which  your  Majesty  is  graciously  pleased  to 
entertain  of  the  conduct  of  your  troops  in  Spain  upon  the  late 
occasion.  They  also  beg  leave  to  submit  to  your  Majesty  that 
the  commanders  of  corps  should  receive  the  same  distinction 
which  your  Majesty  was  pleased  to  signify  your  intention  of 
conferring,  in  the  instances  of  the  action  of  Vimeira  and 
Corunna. 