


His  Majesty's  Answer. 

Windsor  Castle,  August  18,  1809. 

The  King  approves  of  Lord  Castlereagh''s  proposal,  that  a 

general  order  should  be  issued  to  the  army  on  the  occasion  of 

the  late  victory  in  Spain,  and  that  medals  should  be  conferred 

on  the  commanding  oflSicers  of  corps  engaged  on  the  27th  and 

28th  of  July. 

George  R. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

TruxQlo,  August  21,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — My  despatches  of  this  date, will  give  you 
an  unpleasant  account  of  our  situation  in  this  country,  than 
which  nothing  indeed  can  be  worse.  We  want  every  thing, 
and  can  get  nothing  ;  and  we  are  treated  in  no  respect  as  we 
ought  to  be,  and  hardly,  I  might  almost  say,  as  friends.  Y\\ 
just  give  you  one  instance  that  has  occurred  this  day.  In  this 
town,  there  are  two  deputies  of  the  Junta ;  one  Monsieur  de 
Calvo,  a  member  of  the  Government ;  the  other,  Lazaro  des 
Torres,  employed  with  the  British  army,  and  supposed  to 
carry  with  him  suprenie  powers  in  all  parts  of  Spain.     Some 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  105 

sick  had  been  removed  here,  -who,  by  accident,  had  not  been 
taken  care  of  in  the  arrangement  made  at  Taraigo  for  removing 
the  sick ;  and  I  wanted  six  carts  to  remove  them,  for  which  I 
applied  last  night  to  these  deputies,  but  in  vain ;  and  I  have 
been  obliged  to  remove  them  in  the  best  way  I  could.  And 
yet.  Monsieur  de  Calvo  declared  in  writing,  on  the  19th,  that  he 
had  means  of  transport  in  sufficient  quantities  at  his  command 
here,  to  forward  supplies  to  the  British  army  and  its  detach- 
ments from  hence  daily,  some  of  them  being  at  thirty  miles 
distance,  and  the  quantity  to  be  carried  daily  being  100,000 
pounds.  In  the  same  manner,  no  assistance  whatever  was 
given  to  our  wounded  when  they  passed  to  Elvas. 

Just  to  show  the  difference  in  a  country  in  which  good-will 
compensates  for  the  deficiency  of  means,  I  mention  that 
General  Leite  at  Elvas,  having  heard  that  our  wounded  were 
going  there,  prepared  for  their  reception,  and  the  preparations 
were  actually  made,  when  the  officer  whom  I  sent  to  him  with 
my  letters  arrived  to  make  the  preparations. 

In  the  same  manner,  stores,  which  were  written  for  to 
Lisbon  on  the  8th  of  this  month,  will  be  at  Elvas  on  the  26th; 
and  yet  Lisbon  is  farther  from  us  than  Seville  is,  and  the 
means  of  transport  in  that  country  not  so  abundant  by  one- 
half  as  in  Spain. 

However,  I  acknowledge  that  I  go  with  regret,  and  I  wish 
that  I  had  been  able  to  stay  a  little  longer.  Not  that  I  think 
I  could  have  done  much  good,  for  I  am  convinced  that  we 
should  not  have  been  able  to  resume  the  offensive.  Our  own 
cavalry  and  artillery  are  very  low  indeed ;  Cuesta^s  army  is 
much  weakened ;  I  understand  that  it  has  lost  10,000  men 
since  it  crossed  the  Tagus,  although  not  500  in  action.  Whole 
corps,  officers  and  all,  have  disbanded,  and  gone  off. 