

Ever,  my  dear  lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Castel  Branco,  June  30,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  received  your  letter  of  the  11th  yesterday. 
I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  reinforcements  you  have 
sent,  and  you  may  depend  upon  it  that  I  will  make  the  best 
use  of  them  in  my  power  when  they  shall  arrive  ;  but  none 
are  arrived  yet,  excepting  the  23rd  Dragoons.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  say  how  we  shall  stand  in  point  of  numbers  when  these 


92  LETTEES  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

troops  will  arrive  till  I  shall  see  a  return  of  their  numbers. 
But  nothing  is  more  fallacious  than  a  return  such  as  that 
which  you  have  sent  me.  It  contains  an  enumeration  of  no 
less  than  11  battalions  not  arrived,  of  two  gone  to  Gibraltar, 
and  of  two  (the  detachments)  ordered  home,  and  the  20th 
Dragoons,  ordered  and  gone  by  this  time  to  Sicily  :  and  it 
omits,  on  the  other  hand,  two  battalions,  the  61st  and  48th, 
arrived  from  Gibraltar. 

The  mischief  of  these  returns  is  that  they  never  convey 
an  accurate  notion  of  the  strength  of  the  army.  According 
to  your  account,  I  have  35,000  ;  according  to  my  own,  I  have 
only  18,000 ;  and  the  public  will  not  be  satisfied  either  with 
you  or  me,  if  I  don*'t  effect  all  that  35,000  men  can  effect.  In- 
cluding officers,  who  ought  to  be  counted,  I  make  no  doubt 
that  before  long  I  shall  have  more  than  35,000  men ;  but,  from 
all  these  returns,  a  deduction  of  ten  in  the  hundred  ought 
always  to  be  made  for  sick  ;  and  then  you  might  expect  to 
come  nearly  to  the  mark. 

I  enclose  an  extract  of  the  last  return  I  have  seen  of  Victor's 
army,  which  shows  the  comparative  numbers  of  effectives  and 
total.  I  hope  that  our  effectives  will  never  be  so  much  re- 
duced in  comparison  with  our  total  as  that  is  :^  but  surely  it 
must  be  admitted  that,  if  our  army  is  now  to  be  called  23,000, 
and  hereafter  to  be  called  35,000,  rank  and  file,  the  French 
army  opposed  to  us  ought  lo  be  called  44,000.  And  yet 
neither  you  nor  I  will  be  forgiven  by  those  who  will  see  your 
return,  if  I  don't  now  perform  deeds,  which  might  with  justice 
be  required  from  35,000  men. 

If  I  am  to  have  the  5  7th  from  Gibraltar,  you  should  send  an 
order  to  the  Governor,  and  that  corps  to  Portugal,  in  exchange 
for  one  which  I  shall  send  to  Gibraltar  to  relieve  it.' 

I  enclose  you  an  abstract  of  the  last  return  of  the  Portu- 

^  The  return  in  question  states  the  total  amount  of  the  French  corps 
to  be  44,358,  of  whom  29,321  were  present  under  arms. — Editor. 
'  Done.     Note  by  Lord  Castlereagh. 