

Sir — Your  despatches  of  the  15th  and  24th  ultimo  have 
been  received  and  laid  before  the  King.  I  am  commanded  to 
signify  to  you  his  Majesty's  entire  approbation  of  your  pro- 
ceedings, as  stated  in  those  despatches. 

The  considerations  which  determined  you  to  decline  under- 
taking any  further  operations,  till  the  wants  of  your  army 
shall  be  fully  and  satisfactorily  supplied,  and  every  arrange- 
ment made  which  may  appear  to  you  necessary  for  the  protec- 
tion of  your  army  against  similar  embarrassments  in  future, 
has  received  his  Majesty's  entire  approbation. 

I  am  happy  to  acquaint  you  that  the  course  of  measures 
you  have  adopted  for  affording  aid  to  the  Spaniards,  and  the 
reasons  which  have  influenced  your  determination,  are  consi- 
dered to  have  been  throughout  in  strict  conformity  to  the 
spirit  of  your  instructions ;  and  I  have  only  to  recommend  a 
perseverance  in  the  same  line  of  conduct. 


102  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 

Sir — You  will  receive,  herewith,  enclosed,  copies  of  two 
despatches  addressed  by  Mr.  Secretary  Canning  to  the  Mar- 
quess Wellesley.  The  sentiments  of  his  Majesty's  Govern- 
ment on  the  present  state  of  the  war,  and  the  campaign  in  the 
Peninsula,  are  brought  so  fully  under  your  consideration  in 
that  despatch,  that  I  have  only  to  recommend  it  to  your  seri- 
ous consideration,  and  to  request  that  you  will  convey,  with  as 
little  delay  as  may  be  consistent  with  due  deliberation,  your 
opinion  on  the  several  important  questions  therein  proposed  to 
his  Majesty''s  Ambassador  in  Spain ;  transmitting  to  me,  for 
the  information  of  his  Majesty''s  Government,  duplicates  of 
your  correspondence  on  the  subject  with  his  Excellency. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 

Downing  Street,  August  12,  1809. 

My  dear  Wellesley^I  send  by  a  messenger  the  official 
despatch  on  the  subject  which  I  opened  to  you  in  my  last 
private  letter.  You  will  receive  the  fullest  approbation  of  your 
proceedings  with  Cuesta.  In  order  to  do  any  good  even  to 
Spain,  we  must  take  care  of  our  own  army.  You  are  always 
ready  to  make  an  effort  when  an  adequate  object  presents 
itself;  but,  rely  upon  it,  whenever  you  feel  it  right  to  play  a 
more  cautious  game,  we  shall  be  disposed  to  give  you  full  credit 
for  adequate  motives,  and  I  am  confident  the  country  will  do 
so  also. 

I  have  sent  you  the  latest  intelligence  from  the  army  in  the 
Scheldt.  They  have  had  constant  gales  of  wind,  which  have 
retarded  very  much  the  naval  movements.  You  will  perceive 
that,  notwithstanding  the  delicacy  of  giving,  either  to  the 
e?iemy  or  the  public,  the  case  as  between  ourselves  and  an  ally, 
we  have  thought  it  right  to  publish  enough  of  your  letter  to 
mark,  1st,  that  the  battle  was  not  postponed  by  you  ;  2nd,  that 