

His  Majesty  has  commanded  me  to  signify  to  you,  in  the 
most  marked  and  especial  manner,  his  gracious  sense  of  your 
personal  services  on  this  ever -memorable  occasion  ;  not  less  dis- 
played in  the  glorious  result  of  the  battle  itself,  than  in  the 
consummate  ability,  valour,  and  military  resource,  with  which 
the  many  difficulties  of  this  arduous  contest  were  met  and 
provided  for  by  your  tried  experience  and  judgment. 

The  conduct  of  Lieutenant-General  Sherbrooke,  second  in 
command,  has  entitled  him  to  the  King's  entire  approbation. 
His  Majesty  has  observed  with  satisfaction  the  manner  in 
which  he  led  on  the  troops  to  the  charge  with  the  bayonet — a 
species  of  attack  which,  on  all  occasions,  so  well  accords  with 
the  dauntless  character  of  British  soldiers. 

His  Majesty  has  noticed,  with  the  same  gracious  approba- 
tion, the  conduct  of  the  several  general  and  other  officers.  All 
have  done  their  duty — most  of  them  have  had  occasions  of 
eminently  distinguishing  themselves — the  particular  instances 
of  which,  as  reported  by  you,  have  not  escaped  his  Majesty's 
attention. 

In  signifying  to  the  officers  of  the  army  in  public  orders  his 
Majesty's  approbation  and  thanks,  it  is  his  Majesty's  pleasure 
that  they  be  extended  in  the  most  distinct  and  particular 
manner  to  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  men.  On  no 
occasion  have  they  displayed  with  greater  lustre  the  inestimable 
qualities  which  they  possess  as  soldiers  ;  nor  have  they,  on  any 
former  occasion,  more  nobly  sustained  the  military  character 
of  the  British  nation. 


108  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

In  acknowledging  the  services  of  the  brave  army  under  your 
command,  his  Majesty  cannot  refrain  from  those  expressions 
of  sorrow  and  regret  with  which  his  royal  mind  has  been 
affected  at  observing  the  great  number  of  gallant  oflficers  and 
men  who  have  fallen  in  the  battle  of  Talavera.  His  Majesty ""s 
paternal  feelings  derive  their  best  consolation  on  this  occasion 
from  the  persuasion  that  bravery  so  distinguished,  and  exer- 
tions so  heroic,  cannot  but  have  obtained  for  their  country  the 
most  important  and  lasting  advantages ;  and  that,  whilst  the 
security  and  glory  of  his  own  empire  have  been  confirmed  by 
the  achievements  of  his  troops,  his  Majesty  trusts  that  their 
efforts  will  not  prove  unavailing,  under  the  favour  of  Divine 
Providence,  in  defence  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Spanish 
nation. 

His  Majesty  has  directed  a  medal  to  be  distributed  to  the 
general  and  other  officers  commanding  corps,  in  commemora- 
tion of  the  victory  of  Talavera,  and  has  further  commanded 
that  his  royal  approbation  of  the  services  of  his  gallant  troops 
in  Spain  should  be  published  in  general  orders  to  the  whole  of 
the  British  army. 