

The  officers  of  this  army  have,  to  a  man,  quitted  the  Por- 
tuguese service  since,  as  I  said  they  would ;  and  there  is  not 
an  officer  who  has  joined  it  from  England  who  would  not  quit 
it  if  we  would  allow  them.  But  here  we  keep  them.  So  much 
for  that  arrangement. 

The  subject  upon  which  particularly  I  wished  Beresford  to 
report  was  the  state  of  the  Portuguese  army  in  respect  to  its 
numbers.  The  troops  have  latterly  deserted  to  an  alarming 
degree,  and,  in  fact,  none  of  the  regiments  are  complete.  The 
Portuguese  army  is  recruited  by  conscription,  constitutionally 
very  much  in  the  same  manner  as  the  French  army ;  but  then 
it  must  be  recollected  that,  for  the  last  fifty  years  nearly,  the 
Portuguese  have  never  left  their  province,  and  scarcely  ever 
their  native  town,  and  their  discipline  and  the  labours  and 
exertions  required  from  them  were  nothing.  Things  are  much 
altered  lately,  and,  notwithstanding  that  the  pay  has  been  in- 
creased, I  fear  that  the  animal  is  not  of  a  description  to  bear 
up  against  what  is  required  of  him ;  and  he  deserts  most  terribly. 
'  Of  Portugal. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  115 

The  military  force  stationed  in  the  provinces  enabled  the 
civil  Government  to  carry  into  execution  the  conscription  ; 
but,  under  present  circumstances,  the  military  force  is,  upon 
principle  as  well  as  from  necessity,  removed  to  a  distance  ;  the 
civil  Government  has  been  so  frequently  overthrown  in  all  parts 
of  Portugal  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist ;  and  there  is 
another  circumstance  which,  I  am  afraid,  cramps  its  operations, 
particularly  those  operations  which  are  to  put  a  restraint  upon 
the  people,  and  that  is,  that  they  are  all  armed  ;  and  they 
defy  the  civil  magistrate  and  the  Government,  who  order  them 
to  march  as  conscripts,  whose  authority  is  unsupported  by  a 
sufficient  military  force.  I  am  therefore  very  apprehensive 
that  Beresford  will  find  it  impossible  to  fill  his  ranks.  How- 
ever, as  I  said  before,  I  should  wish  Government  to  delay  to 
make  up  their  minds  upon  this  part  of  the  subject,  till  I  shall 
be  enabled  to  send  them  Beresford's  report,  for  which  I  have 
called. 

The  next  point  on  this  subject  is,  supposing  the  Portuguese 
army  to  be  rendered  efficient,  what  can  be  done  with  it  and 
Portugal,  if  the  French  should  obtain  possession  of  the  re- 
mainder of  the  Peninsula  l  My  opinion  is,  that  we  ought  to 
be  able  to  hold  Portugal,  if  the  Portuguese  army  and  militia 
are  complete.  The  difficulty  upon  this  whole  question  lies  in 
the  embarkation  of  the  British  army.  There  are  so  many 
entrances  into  Portugal,  the  whole  country  being  frontier,  it 
would  be  very  difficult  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  penetrating  ; 
and  it  is  probable  that  we  should  be  obliged  to  confine  our- 
selves to  the  preservation  of  that  which  is  most  important — 
the  capital.  It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  bring  the  con- 
test for  the  capital  to  extremities,  and  afterwards  to  embark 
the  British  army.  You  will  see  what  I  mean  by  a  reference 
to  the  map.  Lisbon  is  so  high  up  the  Tagus,  that  no  army 
that  we  could  collect  would  be  able,  at  the  same  time,  to  secure 
the  navigation  of  the  river  by  the  occupation  of  both  banks 
and  possession  of  the  capital.     One  of  the  objects  must,  I  fear, 