

If  we  could  have  fed  and  got  up  the  condition  of  our 
horses,  we  might  probably,  after  some  time,  have  struck  a 
brilliant  blow  upon  Soult  at  Placencia,  or  upon  Mortier  in  the 
centre ;  but,  till  there  should  be  a  force  in  the  centre  of  Spain 


106  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

capable  of  keeping  in  check  Ney's  corps,  and  probably  Soult's, 
or  of  alarming  Joseph  for  Madrid,  or  till  we  could  put  a  force 
in  Bafios  on  which  we  could  depend,  we  could  not  hope  to 
make  any  progress  with  the  offensive  in  this  quarter.  The 
Marquess  de  Romana,  who  alone  has  numbers,  has  neither 
cavalry  nor  artillery,  and  cannot  venture  to  quit  the  moun- 
tains ;  and  he,  I  understand,  was  still  at  Corunna  on  the  5th, 
and  we  could  depend  upon  nothing  to  keep  Ney,  and  eventually 
Soult,  out  of  Estremadura,  after  what  I  have  seen  of  the 
Spanish  troops,  excepting  British. 

I  will  not  now  answer  your  letter  respecting  the  discipline 
of  the  army,  notwithstanding  that  I  am  more  than  ever  con- 
vinced that  something  is  necessary  to  be  done.  But  I  believe 
the  Government  is  not  sufficiently  strong,  and  the  times  will 
not  admit  of  doing  this  andlnany  other  good  things. 

Believe  me,  my  dear  Lord,  yours  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Lord  Gastlereagh  to  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  21,  1809. 

Sir — Your  letters  of  the  dates  referred  to  in  the  marofin^ 
have  been  received  and  laid  before  the  King. 

That  of  the  29tli  of  July,  which  reports  the  result  of  an 
attack  on  the  combined  British  and  Spanish  armies  near  Tala- 
vera  de  la  Reyna,  on  the  27th  and  28th  ultimo,  by  the  united 
corps  of  Victor,  Sebastian i,  and  the  troops  from  Madrid,  has 
been  received  by  his  Majesty  with  the  utmost  interest  and 
satisfaction. 

The  nature  of  the  position  occupied  by  the  Spanish  army, 
and  the  deliberate  purpose  of  the  enemy  to  direct  his  whole 
efforts  against  the  troops  of  his  Majesty,  as  it  has  thrown 
upon  the  British  army  nearly  the  entire  weight  of  this  great 
contest,  has  afforded  them  an  opportunity  of  acquiring  for 
themselves  the  immortal  glory  of  having  vanquislicd  a  French 
'  July  29,  August  1,  and  August  1. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  107 

army  of  more  than  double  their  numbers,  not  in  a  short  and 
partial  struggle,  but  in  a  battle  obstinately  contested  on  two 
successive  days,  not  wholly  discontinued  throughout  the  inter- 
vening night,  and  fought  under  circumstances  which  brought 
the  mass  of  both  armies  into  close  and  repeated  combat. 

The  King,  in  contemplating  so  glorious  a  display  of  the 
valour  and  prowess  of  his  troops,  has  commanded  me  to  declare 
his  royal  approbation  of  the  conduct  of  his  whole  army. 