


110  LETTEBS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

numerous  than  that  of  the  French  in  the  Peninsula ;  hut  you 
will  observe  that  all  the  cavalry  is  now  in  the  south ;  and  Ro- 
mana^s  army,  which  it  is  most  important  to  bring  forward  (as, 
unless  it  is  brought  forward,  the  allies  can  make  no  impression 
on  the  French  to  the  southward),  has  neither  cavalry  nor 
artillery,  and  cannot  quit  the  mountains.  Neither  has  the 
Duque  del  Parque  more  than  one  regiment,  or  Blake  more  than 
the  same  number. 

I  come  now  to  the  description  of  the  troops,  and  here,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  that  our  allies  fail  us  still  more  than  they  do  in 
numbers  and  composition.  The  Spanish  cavalry  are,  I  be- 
lieve, almost  entirely  without  discipline.  They  are,  in  ge- 
neral, well  clothed,  armed,  and  accoutred,  and  remarkably  well 
mounted,  and  their  horses  are  in  good  condition  —  I  mean 
those  of  Eguia^s  army,  which  I  have  seen.  But  I  have  never 
heard  any  body  pretend  that,  in  any  one  instance,  they  have 
behaved  as  soldiers  ought  to  do  in  presence  of  the  enemy,  ex- 
cepting the  King''s  regiment  in  the  battle  of  Talavera.  They 
make  no  scruple  of  running  off ;  and,  after  an  action,  are  to  be 
found  in  every  village  and  every  shady  bottom  within  fifty 
miles  of  the  field  of  battle. 

The  Spanish  artillery  are,  as  far  as  I  have  seen  of  them, 
entirely  unexceptionable,  and  the  Portuguese  artillery  excellent. 

In  regard  to  the  great  body  of  all  armies,  I  mean  the  in- 
fantry, it  is  lamentable  to  see  how  bad  that  of  the  Spaniards 
is,  and  how  unequal  to  a  contest  with  the  French.  They  are 
armed,  I  believe,  well ;  they  are  badly  accoutred,  not  having 
the  means  of  saving  their  ammunition  from  the  rain ;  not 
clothed  in  some  instances  at  all ;  in  others,  clothed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  make  them  look  like  peasants,  which  ought,  of 
all  things,  to  be  avoided  ;  and  their  discipline  appears  to  me 
to  be  confined  to  placing  them  in  the  ranks  three  deep,  at  very 
close  order,  and  to  the  manual  exercise.  It  is  impossible  to 
calculate  upon  any  operation  with  these  troops.  It  is  said 
that  sometimes  they  behave  well ;  though,  I  acknowledge,  I 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  Ill 

have  never  seen  them  behave  otherwise  than  ill.  Basse- 
rona^s  corps,  which  was  supposed  to  be  the  best  in  Cuesta^s 
army,  and  was  engaged  on  our  left  in  the  mountains,  in  the 
battle  of  Talavera,  was  kept  in  check  throughout  the  day 
by  one  French  battalion.  This  corps  has  since  run  away 
from  the  bridge  of  Arzo  Bispo  ;  leaving  its  guns,  and  many  of 
the  men,  according  to  the  usual  Spanish  custom,  throwing  away 
their  arms,  accoutrements,  and  clothing.  It  is  a  curious  cir- 
cumstance respecting  this  affair  at  Arzo  Bispo,  (in  which  Soult 
writes  that  the  French  took  thirty  pieces  of  cannon)  that  the 
Spaniards  ran  off  in  such  a  hurry  that  they  left  their  cannon 
loaded  and  unspiked ;  and  that  the  French,  although  they 
drove  the  Spaniards  from  the  bridge,  did  not  think  themselves 
strong  enough  to  push  after  them ;  and  Colonel  Walton, 
whom  I  sent  in  with  a  flag  of  truce  on  the  10th,  relating  to 
our  wounded,  found  the  cannon  on  the  road,  abandoned  by  the 
one  party,  and  not  taken  possession  of,  and  probably  not  known 
of,  by  the  other  ! 