

Before  I  quit  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  may  be  satisfactory 
to  you  to  know  that  I  don''t  think  matters  would  have  been 
much  better,  if  you  had  sent  your  large  expedition  to  Spain 
instead  of  the  Scheldt.     You  could  not  have  equipped  it  in 


1809.]  LOED  CASTLEKEAGH.  113 

Grallicia  or  any  where  in  the  north  of  Spain.  If  we  had  had 
60,000  men,  instead  of  20,000,  in  all  probability,  we  should 
not  have  got  to  Talavera  to  fight  the  battle,  for  want  of  means 
and  of  provisions.  But  if  we  had  got  to  Talavera,  we  could 
not  have  gone  further,  and  the  armies  would  probably  have 
separated  for  want  of  means  of  subsistence,  probably  without 
a  battle,  but  certainly  afterwards.  Besides,  you  will  observe  that 
your  40,000  men,  supposing  them  to  be  equipped  and  means  to 
exist  of  feeding  them,  would  not  compensate  for  the  deficiency 
of  numbers,  of  composition,  and  of  efficiency  in  the  Spanish 
armies  ;  and  that,  supposing  they  had  been  able  to  remove  the 
French  from  Madrid,  they  would  not  have  removed  them  from 
the  Peninsula,  even  in  the  existing  state  of  the  French  force. 

I  now  come  to  another  branch  of  the  subject,  which  is  Por- 
tugal itself.  I  have  not  got  from  Beresford  his  report  upon 
the  present  and  the  probable  ftiture  state  of  the  Portuguese 
army,  and  therefore  I  should  wish  to  be  understood  as  writing 
upon  this  part  of  the  subject  liable  to  corrections  from  him. 

My  opinion  is,  and  always  has  been,  that  the  mode  of  apply- 
ing the  services  of  the  English  officers  to  the  Portuguese  army 
has  been  erroneous.  I  think  that  Beresford  ought  to  have  had 
the  temporary  assistance  of  the  ablest  officers  the  British  service 
could  afibrd  ;  that  these  officers  ought  not  to  have  been  posted 
to  regiments  in  the  Portuguese  army;  but,  under  the 
title  of  Adjutants  to  the  Field-Marshal,  or  any  other,  they 
ought  to  have  superintended  discipline,  military  movements, 
and  arrangements  of  all  descriptions,  wherever  they  might  be. 
Fewer  officers  would  then  have  answered  his  purpose,  and  every 
one  given  to  him  would  have  been  useful ;  whereas  many  (all 
in  the  inferior  ranks)  are,  under  existing  arrangements,  useless. 
Besides  this,  tho  selection  of  the  officers  sent  out  to  Portugal 
for  this  service  has  been  unlucky,  and  the  decision  on  the 
questions  which  I  sent  to  England  on  the  7th  of  June  has  been 
made  without  reference  to  circumstances  or  to  the  feelin<rs  of 
the  individuals  on  whom  it  was  to  operate,  and  just  like  every 

VOL.  VII.  I 


114  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

other  decision  I  have  ever  seen  from  the  same  quarter,  as  if 
men  were  stocks  and  stones.  To  this  add  that  rank  (Portu- 
guese rank,  I  mean)  has  been  given  in  the  most  capricious 
manner.  In  some  instances,  a  man  not  in  the  army  at  all  is 
made  a  Brigadier-General ;  in  others,  another,  who  was  the 
senior  of  the  Brigadier-General,  when  both  were  in  the  army, 
is  a  Lieutenant- Colonel ;  then  a  junior  Lieutenant-Colonel  is 
made  a  Brigadier-General,  his  senior  a  Colonel,  and  his  senior  a 
junior  Colonel ;  and  there  are  instances  of  juniors  being  preferred 
to  seniors  in  every  rank.  In  short,  the  Prince  Regent^  is  a  de- 
spotic prince,  and  his  commissions  have  been  given  to  British 
officers  and  subjects  in  the  most  arbitrary  manner  at  the  Horse 
Guards  ;  and  the  answer  to  all  those  complaints  at  the  Horse 
Guards  imist  be  uniform.  Nobody  has  any  right  to  complain  ; 
the  Prince  Regent  has  a  right  to  give  to  anybody  any  commis- 
sion he  pleases,  bearing  any  date  he  chooses  to  assign  to  it. 