

I  2 


116  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

be  given  up ;  and  that  which  the  Portuguese  would  give  up 
would  be  the  navigation  of  the  Tagus,  and,  of  course,  one 
means  of  embarkation.  However,  I  have  not  entirely  made  up 
my  mind  upon  this  interesting  point  5  I  have  a  great  deal  of 
information  upon  it,  but  should  wish  to  have  more  be- 
fore I  can  decide  it.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  that  Go- 
vernment should  look  to  sending  back  at  least  the  cop- 
pered transports,  as  soon  as  the  grand  expedition  will  have  done 
with  them,  and  as  they  receive  positive  intelligence  that 
Napoleon  is  reinforcing  his  armies  in  Spain  ;  for  I  think  that 
you  may  depend  upon  it  that  he  and  his  marshals  must  be 
desirous  of  revenging  upon  us  the  different  blows  we  have 
given  them,  and  that,  when  they  come  into  the  Peninsula, 
their  first  and  great  object  will  be  to  get  the  English  out. 

I  think  the  first  part  of  my  letter  will  give  you  my  opinion 
respecting  one  notion  you  entertained,  viz.,  that  the  Spaniards 
might  be  induced  to  give  the  command  of  their  armies  to  a 
British  Commander-in-Chief.  If  such  ofier  should  be  made 
me,  I  shall  decline  to  accept  it,  till  I  should  receive  his  Ma- 
jesty'*s  pleasure ;  and  I  strongly  recommend  to  you,  unless 
you  mean  to  incur  the  risk  of  the  loss  of  your  army,  not  to  have 
any  thing  to  do  with  Spanish  warfare  on  any  ground  what- 
ever, in  the  existing  state  of  things. 

In  respect  to  Cadiz,  the  fact  is  this,  that  the  jealousy  of  all 
the  Spaniards,  even  of  those  most  attached  to  us,  respecting 
Cadiz,  is  so  rooted  that,  even  if  the  Government  should  cede  that 
point,  (and  in-  their  present  difficulties  I  should  not  be  surprised 
if  they  were  to  cede  it)  to  induce  me  to  remain  in  Spain,  I 
should  not  think  any  garrison  which  this  army  could  spare  to 
be  safe  in  the  place.  If  you  should  take  Cadiz,  you  must 
lay  down  Portugal  and  take  up  Spain.  You  must  occupy 
Cadiz  with  a  garrison  of  from  15,000  to  20,000  men,  and  you 
must  send  from  England  an  army  to  be  employed  in  the  field 
with  the  Spaniards,  and  make  Cadiz  your  retreat  instead  of 
Lisbon.     You   ought,   along  with  Cadiz,  to  insist  upon   the 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLESEAGH.  117 

command  of  the  armies.  I  think  you  would  certainly  be  able, 
in  that  case,  to  get  away  your  troops,  secure  the  Spanish  ships, 
&c.  But  you  see,  from  the  facts  in  the  commencement  of  this 
letter,  how  little  prospect  you  have  of  bringing  the  cx)ntest  to 
the  conclusion  for  which  we  all  wish. 

I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  will  send  us  the  remount  horses 
and  any  regiment  of  dragoons  that  is  to  come,  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. The  best  thing  to  do  then  probably  would  be  to  draft 
the  horses  of  one  of  the  regiments  to  complete  the  others,  and 
send  that  regiment  home  dismounted.  It  would  be  very  desi- 
rable also  to  send  us  600  or  700  sets  of  horse  appointments. 
Ever  yours,  my  dear  lord,  most  sincerely, 