

Arthur  Wellesley. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Viscount  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  August  26,  1809. 

Sir — I  feel  myself  most  highly  gratified  in  obeying  his  Ma- 
jesty"'s  gracious  commands,  to  acquaint  you  that,  in  order  to 
mark  his  distinguished  sense  of  your  services  in  the  several 
engagements  you  have  conducted  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  and 
particularly  in  the  late  action  at  Talavera,  against  a  superior 
enemy,  his  Majesty  has  been  pleased  to  confer  upon  you  the 
dignity  of  a  peerage,  by  the  style  and  title  of  Baron  Douro 
of  Wellesley,  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  and  of  Viscount 
Wellington  of  Talavera,  and  of  Wellington  in  the  said  county. 

I  sincerely  offer  to  your  lordship  my  congratulation  upon  a 
distinction  so  well  calculated  to  perpetuate  the  well-earned 
fame  of  yourself  and  the  gallant  army  under  your  command, 
whose  exemplary  courage  and  discipline  have  drawn  upon  them 
the  warm  applause  of  their  Sovereign,  and  the  admiration  of 
their  country. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Badajoz,  September  4,  1809. 
My  dear  Lord — I  have  received  your  letters  of  the  12tli, 
and  I  am  happy  to  find  that  the  King^s  Ministers  approved  of 


118  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

my  conduct  up  to  the  24th  of  July.     I  hope  that  they  will 
approve  of  my  subsequent  measures. 

I  send  you  by  this  occasion  a  copy  of  a  correspondence 
which  I  have  had  with  Lord  Wellesley,  which  will  give  the 
Government  my  opinion  upon  the  points  referred  for  his  and 
mine,  in  Mr.  Canning^s  despatches  of  the  12th.  They  are 
nearly  to  the  same  purport  with  my  last  letter  to  you.  There 
is  only  one  point  in  that  letter  which  I  wish  to  alter,  and  that 
relates  to  the  garrison  required  for  Cadiz.  Upon  further  in- 
quiry, I  find  that  there  are  means  in  Cadiz  of  putting  in  se- 
curity from  a  coup  de  main,  by  the  inhabitants,  4,000  or  5,000 
men ;  and  I  should  think  that  number  sufficient  to  give  us  a 
footing  there,  of  which  we  might  take  further  advantage,  by 
throwing  in  more  troops  if  we  should  find  it  expedient. 
Ever  yours,  my  dear  lord,  most  sincerely, 

Arthur  Wellesley. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  12,  1809. 

Dear  Wellington — I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  early 
and  very  satisfactory  reply  to  my  private  letter.  I  ventured 
to  communicate  it  unofficially  to  the  Cabinet ;  and,  in  com- 
pliance with  your  suggestion,  I  shall  lose  no  time  in  ordering 
an  increase  of  your  tonnage  in  the  Tagus.  About  10,000 
tons  of  copper  troop-ships  are  directed  to  proceed  to  Lisbon, 
now  ready  at  Portsmouth,  and  the  quantity  required  for  the 
reception  of  the  whole  army  may  be  completed,  as  soon  as  the 
transports  return  from  the  Scheldt. 