

This  practice  of  running  away  and  throwing  off  arms,  ac- 
coutrements, and  clothing,  is  fatal  to  every  thing,  excepting  a 
re-assembly  of  the  men  in  a  stata  of  nature  ;  who.  as  regularly 
perform  the  same  manoeuvre  the  next  time  an  occasion  offers. 
Nearly  2,000  ran  off,  on  the  evening  of  the  27th,  from  the 
battle  of  Talavera,  not  100  yards  from  the  place  where  I  was 
standing,  who  were  neither  attacked  nor  threatened  with  any 
attack,  and  who  were  frightened  only  by  the  noise  of  their  own 
fire.  They  left  their  arms  and  accoutrements  on  the  ground ; 
their  officers  went  with  them  ;  and  they  and  the  fugitive 
cavalry  plundered  the  baggage  of  the  British  army  which  had 
been  sent  to  the  rear.  Many  others  went,  whom  I  did  not 
see. 

When  a  nation  has  devoted  itself  to  war,  as  this  nation 
has  by  the  measures  it  has  adopted  in  the  last  two  years,  it 
is  surprising  that  so  little  progress  has  been  made  in  the 
composition  of  the  officers  of  the  army,  and  that  the  business 


112  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

of  an  army  should  be  so  little  understood.  They  are  really 
children  in  the  art  of  war ;  and  I  cannot  say  that  they  do 
any  thing  as  it  ought  to  be  done,  except,  as  I  have  said, 
running  away,  and  assembling  again  in  a  state  of  nature. 

I  really  believe  that  much  of  this  deficiency  of  numbers, 
composition,  discipline,  and  efficiency,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
existing  Government  in  Spain.  They  have  attempted  to 
govern  the  kingdom  in  a  state  of  revolution  by  an  adherence  to 
old  rules  and  systems,  and  with  the  aid  of  what  is  called  en- 
thusiasm. And  this  last  is,  in  reality,  no  aid  to  accomplish 
any  thing,  and  is  only  an  excuse  for  the  irregularity  with  which 
every  thing  is  done,  and  for  the  want  of  discipline  and  subor- 
dination of  the  armies.  People  are  very  apt  to  believe  that  en- 
thusiasm carried  the  French  through  the  Revolution,  and  was 
the  parent  of  those  exertions  which  have  nearly  conquered  the 
world  ;  but,  if  the  subject  is  nicely  examined,  it  will  be  found 
that  enthusiasm  was  the  name  only,  but  that  force  was  the  in- 
strument, under  the  system  of  terror,  which  brought  forward 
those  great  resources  which  first  stopped  the  allies  ;  and  that  a 
perseverance  in  the  same  system  of  applying  by  force  every 
individual  and  every  description  of  property  in  the  country  to 
the  service  of  the  army  has  since  conquered  Europe. 

After  this  statement,  you  will  judge  for  yourselves  whether 
you  will  employ  any  and  what  strength  of  army  in  the  support 
of  the  cause  of  Spain.  Circumstances  with  which  you  are  ac- 
quainted have  obliged  me  to  separate  myself  from  the  Spanish 
army ;  and  I  can  only  tell  you  that  I  feel  no  inclination  to 
join  in  co-operation  with  them  again  on  my  own  responsibility, 
and  that  I  shall  see  my  way  very  clearly  before  me  indeed 
before  I  do  so  ;  and  I  do  not  recommend  you  to  have  any  thing 
to  do  with  them  in  their  present  state. 