

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Merida,  August  25,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  received  by  Mr.  Hoey,  on  the  day  before 
yesterday,  your  letter  of  the  4th  of  August;  and,  having  for 
some  time  past,  turned  my  mind  very  seriously  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  points  to  which  it  relates,  I  am  not  unpre- 
pared to  give  you  an  opinion  upon  them.  The  information 
which  I  have  acquired  in  the  last  two  months  has  opened  my 
eyes  respecting  the  state  of  the  war  in  the  Peninsula,  and  Til 
just  state  a  few  facts,  which  will  enable  you  and  the  King'*s 
Ministers  to  form  your  own  opinions  upon  it. 

I  calculate  the  French  force  in  the  Peninsula  now  to  consist 
of  about  125,000  men  :  of  this  number  about  70,000  are  in 
this  part  of  Spain ;    St.  Cyr's  corps,  about  20,000  men,  en- 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  109 

gaged  in  the  siege  of  Gerona;  -Suchet's,  about  14,000,  in  Aragon  ; 
and  the  remainder  are  employed  in  different  garrisons,  such  as 
Avila,  &c*,  and  in  keeping  up  the  communication  with  France  ; 
all  of  which,  if  necessary,  are  disposable  for  the  field.  These 
125,000  men  are  exclusive  of  the  garrisons  of  Pampeluna, 
Barcelona,  &c. 

These  troops,  you  will  observe,  are  all  in  Spain,  and  against 
this  force  the  Spaniards  have  under  Vanegas  and  Eguia,  late 
Cuesta"*s  army,  about  50,000  men ;  Romana,  the  Duque  del 
Parque,  and  every  thing  to  the  northward,  about  25,000; 
Blake  may  have  got  together  again  about  5  or  6,000  ;  and 
I  believe  there  is  nothing  in  Aragon  and  Catalonia,  excepting 
armed  population.  Thus  the  Spaniards  have  not,  at  the  end 
of  eighteen  months  nearly  after  the  commencement  of  the 
revolution,  above  80,000  men,  of  which  the  composition  and 
qualities  will  be  found  still  more  defective  than  the  numbers 
are  deficient,  to  carry  on  the  contest  with  the  French,  even  in 
their  present  strength.  To  these  numbers  add  all  the  troops 
we  can  bring  into  the  field  at  present,  which  are  about  25,000 
men,  and  about  10,000  Portuguese,  and  you  will  see  that  the 
allies  are,  at  this  moment,  inferior  in  point  of  numbers  only  to 
the  enemy  in  the  Peninsula.  However,  in  this  account  of  the 
troops  of  the  allies,  I  don't  reckon  many  garrisons  and  towns 
occupied  by  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese,  nor  do  I  reckon  the 
French  garrisons  :  I  count  only  those  men  on  both  sides  who 
can  be  brought  into  the  field  to  fight. 

In  respect  to  the  composition  of  these  armies,  we  find  the 
French  well  supplied  with  troops  of  the  different  descriptions 
and  arms  required,  viz.,  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry,  heavy 
and  light.  Cuesta's  army  had  about  7,000  cavalry,  Vanegas' 
about  3,000 ;  and  there  may  be  about  2,000  more  cavalry  dis- 
tributed throughout  Spain.  The  English  have  about  2,500 
cavalry  left,  and  the  Portuguese  may  have  5  or  600.  Pro- 
bably, if  all  this  cavalry  were  efiicient,  and  could  be  divided  as 
it  ought  to  be,  it  might  be  sufficient,  and  might  be  found  more 