

Should  the  defence  of  Portugal  be  persevered  in,  troop-ships 
capable  of  withdrawing  the  men  of  the  army  may  possibly  be 
kept  there,  although  not  without  a  heavy  expense — say  40,000 
tons,  at  an  expense  of  about  i?50,000  a  month ;  but  I  should 
apprehend  it  quite  impossible  to  think  of  retaining  in  the  ser- 
vice tonnage  for  the  horses,  unless  with  a  view  to  an  immediate 
evacuation,  the  monthly  expense  of  each  horse  not  being  less 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  119 

than  rit?10.  The  Government  will,  therefore,  probably,  have 
to  make  up  their  mind,  in  the  event  of  the  army  continuing 
indefinitely  in  Portugal,  to  leave  the  horses  to  their  fate,  that 
is,  to  be  put  to  death,  should  you  be  forced  to  retire. 

In  addition  to  the  general  report  which  Mr.  Canning's  de- 
spatch to  Lord  Wellesley  will  bring  before  the  Government, 
on  the  conduct  of  the  war  in  the  Peninsula,  it  has  been  deemed 
advisable  to  call  for  a  distinct  report  on  the  question  of  Por- 
tugal, with  a  view  to  the  deliberate  consideration  of  that  im- 
portant branch  of  the  subject. 

Believe  me,  dear  Wellington,  &;c., 

Castlereagh. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 

Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 
My  Lord — The  King  having  been  pleased  to  nominate 
Lieut.-General  Sherbrooke  to  be  a  Knight  Companion  of  the 
Most  Honourable  Order  of  the  Bath,  the  insignia  of  which 
order  are  now  forwarded  to  him,  I  have  received  his  Majesty's 
command  to  desire  that  your  lordship  will  avail  yourself  of  the 
first  opportunity  to  invest  him  therewith  in  a  manner  suitable 
to  the  occasion. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington. 

Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 
My  Lord — Your  lordship's  despatches  of  the  dates  stated  in 
the  margin^  have  been  received,  and  laid  before  the  King. 

I  am  commanded  to  signify  to  your  lordship  his  Majesty's 
approbation  of  the  conduct  you  have  pursued,  as  therein  de- 
tailed. The  considerations  which  have  influenced  your  deter- 
mination to  fall  back  on  the  frontier  of  Portugal  not  only 
appear  to  have  warranted  that  decision,  but  to  have  rendered 
it  indispensable  for  the  supply  of  the  army ;  and,  if  the  Spanish 
Government  have  to  regret  the  loss  of  your  support,  they  can 
^  August  2nd,  8th,  and  four  of  the  21st. 


120  LETTEKS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

only  attribute  it  to  their  own  want  of  resources,  or  to  their 
inability  to  call  them  forth. 

The  judgment  which  marked  your  determination,  at  the 
critical  moment  the  step  was  taken,  to  retire  behind  the  Tagus ; 
the  success  and  ability  with  which  your  retreat,  encumbered 
with  the  wounded,  has  been  conducted,  through  a  country 
diflScult  in  itself  and  destitute  of  supplies  ;  and  the  determi- 
nation you  have  shown  to  regulate  your  operations  with  as 
much  attention  to  the  safety  and  health  of  your  troops,  as  to 
their  reputation  and  glory,  have  received  his  Majesty''s  entire 
approbation. 