

Gibraltar,  March  24,  1808. 
By  information  from  Madrid,  dated  the  8th  and  11th,  Murat 
was  at  Bayonne,  and  Buonaparte  had  not  left  Paris.     It  ap- 
pears, by  an  enclosed  Proclamation  of  the  Count  of  Espeleta, 
that  the  people  were  impatient  under  the  French  innovation. 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  131 

It  has  been  supposed,  from  the  seizure  of  Barcelona  and  Pam- 
peluna,  and  the  entry  of  so  many  columns  of  French  troops, 
that  Buonaparte  meant  to  possess  himself  of  Biscay,  Navarre, 
and  Catalonia ;  but  a  Proclamation  from  Murat,  declaring  that 
the  strictest  friendship  subsisted  between  the  two  countries, 
had  tended  to  restore  public  credit. 

French  troops  are  stated  to  be  approaching  Malaga  and  the 
camp  of  St.  Eoque ;  but  Sir  Hew  considers  these  reports  to 
be  founded  more  on  the  probability  of  the  facts  than  on  actual 
intelligence. 

Gibraltar,  March  26, 1808. 

The  Prince  of  Peace  has  been  banished,  in  consequence,  it 
is  said,  of  his  correspondence  with  Admiral  Valdez  about  the 
sailing  of  the  Carthagena  squadron.  It  is  rumoured  that  the 
Prince  has  endeavoured  to  escape  with  his  guards,  and  that 
an  action  ensued,  in  which  60  men  were  killed  and  the  Prince 
wounded.  A  detachment  of  the  Imperial  and  one  of  the 
Empress''s  guards,  and  some  seamen  of  the  Imperial  guard,  had 
passed  through  Madrid. 

Gibraltar,  March  31,  1808. 

States  that  from  the  13th  to  the  19th  of  March,  Madrid 
was  filled  with  scenes  of  insurrection  and  violence,  which  ter- 
minated in  the  abdication  of  Charles  IV.,  and  succession  of 
Ferdinand  VII.  Some  blood  was  shed,  and  many  houses  of 
persons  attached  to  the  Prince  of  Peace  were  burnt.  The 
Duke  of  Infantado,  and  the  nobles  lately  banished  or  im- 
prisoned, surround  the  new  monarch.  Buonaparte's  opinion 
on  these  events  is  not  yet  pronounced,  and  no  allusion  is  made 
in  the  details  of  them  to  French  influence. 

The  Grand-Duke  of  Berg  was  advancing  on  the  13th  from 
Burgos  to  Madrid.  On  the  18th  he  was  waiting  for  definite 
orders  whether  he  should  enter  Madrid  on  his  route  to  Cadiz, 
of  which  he  would  give  previous  notice,  as  well  as  of  the  views 
of  the  Emperor,  whom  he  expected  in  person  in  four  or  five 
days.     Encloses  copies  of  the  Proclamations  and  decrees. 

K  2 


132  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  April  8,  1808. 

Buonaparte  was  not  expected  immediately  at  Madrid,  and 
his  sentiments  on  the  late  revolution  were  not  received.  The 
Grand-Duke  of  Berg,  with  30,000  men,  was  on  the  1st  of 
April  in  the  vicinity  of  Madrid. 

Encloses  an  extraordinary  Gazette,  in  which  the  King  has 
explained  the  mysterious  business  of  his  imprisonment.  A 
French  officer,  said  to  be  Murat^s  aid-de-camp,  has  passed 
through  Algesiras  from  Cadiz,  in  his  way  to  Madrid.  It  is 
said  that  French  troops  are  pressing  towards  Andalusia,  pro- 
bably to  secure  the  fleet  in  Cadiz. 