126  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Memorandum  upon  Operations  in  Spain, 

BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

If  the  French  retire  with  a  view  to  evacuate  Spain,  no 
effort  on  our  part  can,  in  point  of  time,  be  made,  either  to 
harass  or  cut  off  their  retreat. 

If  Spain  is  evacuated,  the  Spaniards  will  have  to  form  their 
Government  and  their  army.  They  cannot,  for  the  present, 
think  of  moving  into  the  south  of  France,  and  will  probably 
limit  their  military  efforts  to  the  occupation  and  defence  of  the 
Pyrenees. 

If  the  Spaniards  do  not  act  offensively  against  France  in 
that  quarter,  the  British  army  cannot  separately  enter  upon 
operations. 

The  same  disposition  to  throw  off  the  French  yoke  may 
probably  show  itself  in  Italy,  and  we  be  invited  to  co-operate. 
The  scene  is  too  remote  to  admit  of  our  acting  with  the  gross 
of  our  army  in  that  quarter.  It  may  be  a  question,  according 
to  circumstances,  whether  the  disposable  corps  in  Sicily  should 
be  somewhat  more  or  less  strong ;  but  the  object  must  be  to 
bring  home  the  mass  of  our  force,  and  to  look  to  its  employ- 
ment nearer  home. 

Till  the  abandonment  of  Spain  by  the  French  is  indisputably 
established,  we  are  bound,  on  every  ground,  to  assume  the 
reverse ;  and  it  is  our  duty  to  make  every  exertion  that  is 
calculated  to  accelerate  their  expulsion,  and,  if  possible,  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  their  reduction,  in  case  their  retreat  shall 
be  protected. 

Supposing  the  French  have  retired  from  Madrid,  as  the 
natural  province  of  our  army  is  to  avoid  an  extended  line  of 
operations,  in  separation  from  our  fleet  and  its  supplies  by  sea,  it 
seems  obviously  to  belong  to  the  Spanish  armies  of  the  southern 
and  western  provinces  to  press  the  French  in  front,  and  on 
their  left  flank,  whilst  we,  in  co-operation  with  the  northern 
and  eastern  provinces,  menace  their  right  flank  and  rear. 


1809.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  127 

In  order  that  the  army  of  GaUicia  may  be  enabled  to  advance 
into  the  open  country,  and  form  the  left  of  the  Spanish  army 
which  is  to  press  the  French  in  front,  the  cavalry  in  Portugal, 
and  three  of  the  five  regiments  under  orders  at  home,  should 
be  directed  to  join  Blake'*s  army — a  brigade  of  British  infantry 
to  be  attached  to  this  cavalry  as  a  reserve  for  their  protection. 

Whilst  the  armies  of  Andalusia,  Valencia,  Estramadura, 
and  Gallicia,  are  moving  to  occupy  the  enemy  in  front,  a 
British  corps  of  10,000  infantry,  with  two  regiments  of  cavalry 
to  be  detached  from  home,  to  animate  and  support  the  Astu- 
rias,  to  encourage  Biscay  and  Navarre  to  rise,  and  to  act  upon 
the  French  lines  of  operation,  viz.,  those  of  Vittoria  and  Pam- 
peluna,  in  concert  with  the  Aragonese.  This  corps  to  be  rein- 
forced from  Portugal,  as  early  and  to  whatever  extent  force 
can  be  spared  from  that  country. 