

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Viscount  Wellington. 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 

My  Lord — I  am  to  signify  to  you  his  Majesty''s  pleasure 
that  you  dismount  and  send  to  England  the  weakest  of  your 
regiments  of  cavalry,  transferring  the  horses  to  others  most  in 
want  of  them.  I  am  to  acquaint  you  that  the  1st  Regiment 
of  Dragoons,  or  Royals,  sailed  from  Cork  for  Lisbon,  about 
the  beginning  of  this  month,  to  join  the  army  under  your 
command. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington, 
Draft.  Downing  Street,  September  14,  1809. 

My  Lord — As  the  return  of  the  British  army  to  Portugal 
will  afford  you  an  opportunity  of  turning  your  undivided  atten- 
tion to  the  defence  of  that  kingdom,  I  have  to  request  that 
you  will,  as  early  as  possible,  transmit  to  me,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  his  Majesty's  Government,  a  full  report  upon  that  sub- 
ject, stating  your  opinion  of  its  defensibility,  with  what  force, 
British  and  Portuguese,  and  at  what  annual  expense. 

You  will  consider  the  question  of  maintaining  Portugal  in 
the  distinct  cases,  first,  of  the  utmost  effort  the  enemy  can  be 
expected  to  make  against  it  by  any  probable  disposition  of  the 
military  force  now  in  the  Peninsula ;  secondly,  of  the  French 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  121 

force  being  largely  reinforced,  should  a  peace  in  Germany  leave 
Buonaparte  at  liberty  to  turn  his  efforts  in  that  direction. 

You  will  also  state  your  opinion  upon  the  practicability  of 
embarking  the  British  army  in  the  Tagus,  (regard  being  had  to 
its  local  circumstances)  in  the  event  of  its  being  obliged  to  fall 
back  for  that  purpose  in  the  presence  of  a  superior  enemy. 
And,  further,  you  will  suggest  such  measures  as  may  appear 
to  you  necessary  to  be  adopted  within  the  country,  either  with 
a  view  to  its  defence,  or  which,  in  the  event  of  its  evacuation 
by  the  British  army  becoming  necessary,  should  precede  such 
an  evacuation,  with  a  view  to  the  interests  of  the  Prince 
Regent,  and  to  the  counteraction  of  the  designs  of  the  enemy; 
and,  in  the  former  alternative,  you  will  state  at  what  expense, 
and  within  what  period  of  time,  the  measures  you  would 
recommend  for  placing  Portugal  in  an  adequate  state  of  de- 
fence could  be  carried  into  effect. 


Lord  Castlereagh  to  Lord  Wellington, 

Downing  Street,  September  23,  1809. 

My  Lord — I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your 
lordship*'s  two  letters  of  the  4th  of  September ;  the  one  con- 
taining your  reasoning  for  adopting  the  measure  of  falling  back 
on  the  frontier  of  Portugal,  and  your  correspondence  with  Lord 
Wellesley  on  that  subject;  and  the  other,  the  information  you 
had  received  of  the  enemy''s  probable  intentions  upon  Ciudad 
Rodrigo,  and  your  design  of  endeavouring,  if  possible,  to  pre- 
vent their  success. 