

You  have  already  received  a  signification  of  the  King's 
approbation  with  regard  to  the  measures  you  are  pursuing  for 
retiring  upon  Portugal,  and  I  am  to  express  the  confidence  his 
Majesty  feels  that  you  will  not  neglect  any  consistent  oppor- 
tunity of  defeating  the  enemy's  views,  and  of  obstructing  his 
designs  upon  that  kingdom,  which  you  shall  find  within  the 
power  of  the  forces  you  may  command. 


122  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Remarks  on  the  Defence  of  Portugal. 

FROM  THE  PORTUGUESE. 

The  preceding  plan  is  admirable,  but  it  will  not  be  found 
practicable  to  execute  it  entirely,  for  the  following  reasons.  In 
the  above  Memoir,*  the  General,  its  author,  considers  all  the 
fortresses  of  the  frontier  of  the  first  order,  as  well  as  of  the 
second,  as  being  in  a  state  of  defence,  notwithstanding  the 
greatest  part  of  them  is  reduced  to  a  heap  of  ruins,  as  appears 
from  the  survey  which,  in  the  year  1790,  Count  d''Aeynhausen 
made  of  the  northern  provinces  of  this  kingdom.  Excepting 
Almeida,  in  Beira,  and  Valen9a,  in  Minho,  no  other  fortress  is 
capable  of  defending  itself ;  and  even  those  two  labour  under 
so  many  inconveniences,  and  are  so  extensive  as  to  require  a 
very  considerable  number  of  troops  to  garrison  them.  Those 
of  Alentejo  are  not  in  a  much  better  condition.  But  Elvas, 
with  its  appendages,  Almeida,  and  Valen9a,  in  Minho,  to  make 
any  resistance,  necessarily  require  competent  garrisons,  com- 
posed of  troops  of  the  line  and  militia.  The  three  latter  may 
justly  be  called  the  keys  of  the  kingdom.  As  to  Campo- 
mayor,  Aronches,  Castello  de  Vide,  and  Monte  Alvao,  they 
must  also  be  preserved,  in  order  to  keep  up  the  communication 
between  the  two  armies  of  Beira  and  Alentejo,  as  well  as 
between  Elvas  and  Abrantes,  which  is  the  chief  depot  of  am- 
munition and  provisions  for  the  above  armies. 

To  remedy,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  the  inconveniences 
alluded  to,  I  am  of  opinion — 

1 .  That  the  plan  of  the  General  in  question,  with  regard  to 
the  distribution  of  our  troops  in  the  northern  provinces  and 
Alentejo,  ought  to  be  adopted. 

2.  That  the  three  principal  fortresses,  Elvas,  Almeida,  and 
Valen9a,  in  Minho,  be,  without  loss  of  time,  furnished  with 
the  necessary  provisions  and  ammunition,  especially  firewood 

*  The  Memoir,  with  the  plan  referred  to  in  this  paper,  has  not  been 
found. 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  123 

and  oak  timber,  as  the  country  does  not  produce  these  two 
requisites,  and  as  they  can  be  procured  only  with  difficulty. 

Nota  bene.  The  garrisons  of  the  above  fortress  require  also 
provisions  for  only  two  months,  unless  particular  circumstances 
should  render  a  larger  supply  necessary. 