

Supposing  20,000  men  can  be  drawn  from  Portugal,  the 
enemy,  unless  his  reinforcements  are  immense,  greater  than  he 
could  possibly  move  or  subsist  in  such  a  country,  deprived  of 
all  suppHes  by  sea,  could  never  maintain  himself  either  at 
Burgos  or  behind  the  Ebro,  while  a  British  corps  of  80,000 
men,  aided  by  the  Asturians,  &c.,  were  upon  his  right  flank 
and  rear,  and  the  accumulated  armies  of  Spain  pressed  him  in 
front. 

The  point  in  the  north  of  Spain  to  which  the  British  troops 
should,  in  the  first  instance,  be  directed,  may  admit  of  some 
doubt — the  more  to  the  eastward,  the  more  menacing  to  the 
enemy ;  but,  until  the  troops  from  Portugal  can  be  positively 
reckoned  upon,  too  advanced  a  position  must  not  be  taken  up. 

There  are  three  points  of  debarkation  for  consideration  :  St. 
Andero,  Gijon,  and  Corunna.  The  first  and  last  are  good 
harbours.  The  port  of  Gijon  hardly  affords  accommodation 
for  a  large  fleet.  Corunna  is  rather  too  much  retired  for 
the  purposes  proposed.  It  is  to  be  well  weighed  whether  St. 
Andero  is  too  near  the  enemy,  whether  it  is  defensible  against 
superior  numbers,  and  what  description  of  retreat  it  affords. 


128  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Supposing  the  French  in  force  at  Burgos,  and  that  the 
Spanish  armies  of  Gallicia  and  the  southern  provinces  are  in 
their  front,  they  must  be  very  strong  to  risk  detaching  a  corps 
into  a  mountainous  country,  of  strength  sufficient  to  dispost 
the  Asturian  army,  supported  by  10,000  British  troops;  the 
distance  of  St.  Andero  from  Burgos  being  100  miles. 

If  this  is  true  with  respect  to  10,000  men,  the  argument  is 
stronger,  if  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  the  corps  may  soon 
be  reinforced  from  Portugal.  If  the  French  cannot  success- 
fully attack  this  corps  without  weakening  themselves  in  front, 
and  consequently  exposing  themselves  to  immediate  destruc- 
tion, they  must  retire  ;  and,  if  they  have  not  taken  their  mea- 
sures for  doing  so  in  time,  pressed  as  they  would  be  on  all 
sides,  and  embarrassed  by  the  armed  peasantry  in  the  Pyrenees, 
they  may  find  it  impossible  to  defile,  with  so  large  a  force, 
through  the  gorges  of  the  mountains,  in  presence  of  an  enemy, 
without  losing  a  great  proportion  of  their  army. 

The  policy  of  the  war,  supposing  the  enemy  not  to  be 
capable  of  acting  off'ensiyely  towards  Portugal,  seems  to  be  to 
strengthen  the  North,  to  render  that  invulnerable,  which  must 
be  conquered,  before  the  enemy  can  establish  any  sure  footing 
in  Spain;  and,  having  first  provided  for  its  security,  to  make 
it  the  basis  from  whence  ofi'ensive  operations  may  be  carried 
on  against  the  enemy's  line  of  operations. 