

Gibraltar,  April  8,  1808. 

He  has  seen  a  Spaniard  whom  he  believes  to  be  in  the  con- 
fidence of  General  Castanos,  and  from  whom  he  has  learned 
that  a  conspiracy  had  existed  (with  the  Prince  of  Peace,  under 
French  influence,  at  the  head)  to  induce  the  late  King  to  fly 
from  Madrid,  under  the  notion  of  emigrating  to  South  Ame- 
rica, in  doing  which  he  was  to  be  intercepted,  and  the  Prince 
of  Peace  was  to  proceed  to  Mexico,  and  assume  that  Govern- 
ment. Godoy,  however,  had  been  himself  betrayed  by  those 
in  whom  he  confided,  but  who  secretly  communicated  with  the 
Prince  of  Asturias;  and,  in  his  first  attempt  to  alarm  the 
King,  and  induce  him  to  fly,  under  the  pretext  that  Madrid 
was  in  insurrection,  he  was  denounced  as  a  traitor,  in  a  Council 
which  had  been  held  to  forward  his  own  views,  by  the  Mar- 
quess of  Cavallero.  Murat,  on  his  arrival,  was  unprepared 
for  the  change,  and  unauthorized  to  acknowledge  the  new  Go- 
vernment :  and  Godoy,  in  confinement,  had  shown  an  anxiety 
to  be  informed  of  Murat''s  arrival,  which  was  considered  as  the 
proof  of  an  understanding  between  them.  The  new  King''s 
advisers  seem  to  have  been  prepared  for  the  event ;  and  the 
throne  is  surrounded  by  persons  whose  political  abilities  have 
been  long  sanctioned  by  public  opinion.  The  nation  seems 
preparing  to  support  the  new  monarch.  Catalonia,  Arragon, 
and  Valencia,  have  offered  to  raise  and  maintain  150,000  men  ; 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  133 

and  when  the  suspicions  of  the  perfidy  of  the  French  shall 
be  confirmed  by  future  acts,  it  is  thought  they  will  be  over- 
whelmed by  an  enraged  population.  Already  the  populace  of 
Madrid  have  forced  the  French  Generals  to  remit  punishments 
on  the  soldiers  for  acts  of  insubordination.  It  is  not  true  that 
Murat  has  detached  any  part  of  his  army,  which,  it  is  plain, 
he  cannot  at  present  venture  to  do.  Buonaparte'*s  visit  to 
Madrid  is  no  longer  talked  of. 

From  the  same  source.  Sir  Hew  learns  that,  had  the  Prince 
of  Asturias  been  constrained  to  fly,  he  would  have  taken  re- 
fuge at  Algesiras,  and  thence  have  passed  over  to  Gibraltar, 
relying  on  the  generosity  of  the  King  of  England,  and  the 
personal  consideration  subsisting  between  the  British  com- 
manding officer  and  General  Castanos.  It  appears  obvious 
that  the  intention  of  the  French  to  seize  Geuta  and  blockade 
Gibraltar  was  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  off  the  retreat  of  the 
Spanish  royal  family  ;  and  Sir  Hew  trusts  that  the  Spanish 
Government  will  place  Ceuta  and  the  other  fortresses  on  the 
coast  in  hands  they  can  fully  rely  on. 

Gibraltar,  April  15,  1808. 

Doubts  still  subsist  at  Algesiras  as  to  the  designs  of  the 
French,  though  a  more  favourable  construction  (however 
founded)  seems  to  be  put  on  them.  Sir  Hew  will  receive  by 
signal  the  earliest  information  of  the  result. 