


1808.J  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  129 


SUPPLEMENT 


TO 


OPERATIONS  IN  PORTUGAL  AND  SPAIN. 


NO.  L 
PRECIS  OF  CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  SIR  H.  DALRYMPLE, 

RELATING  TO  SPANISH  AFFAIRS. 

Gibraltar,  January  3,  1808. 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  states,  from  private  intelligence,  that 
at  the  Spanish  head-quarters  a  very  considerable  French  force 
is  expected  to  be  assembled  in  that  vicinity.  It  appears  that 
troubles  were  to  be  expected  at  Tangier,  and  that,  in  less  than 
a  month,  the  operations  would  commence.  It  is  said  that 
Buonaparte  has  desired  the  ports  of  Morocco  to  be  shut  against 
us,  which  the  Emperor  has  refused  ;  and  that  orders  have  been 
sent  from  Madrid  to  the  Commandant  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Gibraltar  to  prepare  covering  for  120,000  men ;  the  cork 
woods  near  St.  Roque  to  be  cut  down  for  fascines,  and  an  em- 
bargo laid  on  all  vessels  at  Cadiz,  fit  for  gun-boats,  of  which 

200  are  to  be  equipped. 

Gibraltar,  January  16,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  the  actual  state  of  Spain,  and  of  the 
general  rumour  that  French  troops  will  be  brought  against 
him,  he  has  called  upon  Sir  Charles  Holloway  (Commanding 
Royal  Engineer)  for  a  report  on  the  state  of  the  defences, 
which  he  encloses,  as  also  an  estimate  of  the  expence  of  con- 
structing the  batteries  therein  recommended  by  Sir  Charles, 
amounting  to  ^6*39 6  3^.  S^d. 

^  Governor  of  Gibraltar. 

VOL.  VII.  K 


130  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  February  9,  1808. 
He  has  learned  that  Buonaparte  is  expected  at  Madrid  on 
the  20th  February ;  that  no  French  troops  had  entered  that 
capital,  and  that,  up  to  the  18th,  not  above  70,000  in  all  had 
passed  the  Spanish  frontier.  He  believes  that  at  Algesiras  no 
immediate  attempt  is  expected  on  Gibraltar;  but  that,  if 
French  troops  come  to  that  coast,  a  design  such  as  described 
by  Lord  Strangford  may  be  in  contemplation,  of  which  it  is 
not  yet  necessary  to  apprize  General  Castanos.  The  popu- 
lation of  Gibraltar  certainly  gives  encouragement  to  such  a 
project. 

Gibraltar,  February  19,  1808. 
Encloses  General  Junot''s  Proclamations,  by  which  it  would 
appear  that  Portugal  is  annexed  to  France.  Heavy  contri- 
butions have  been  exacted  from  the  inhabitants,  particularly 
the  clergy.  The  lower  classes  are  resorting  in  great  numbers 
to  Gibraltar,  where  they  prove  burdensome,  from  the  want 
both  of  space  and  of  the  means  of  maintaining  them.  He  has 
not  heard  of  more  than  71,000  French  as  having  entered  Spain 
and  Portugal. 

Gibraltar,  March  12,  1808. 
The  French  have  seized  the  citadel  of  Pampeluna  by  perfidy, 
and  have  occupied  Barcelona.  The  Duke  of  Infantado  and 
the  Archdeacon  of  Toledo  (who  had  been  tutor  to  the  Prince 
of  Asturias)  have  been  banished ;  and  beds  are  preparing  at 
Seville  for  160,000  soldiers,  of  whom  60,000  are  for  the  camp 
at  St.  Roque.  It  is  reported  that  Tunis  is  the  place  fixed  on 
for  the  junction  of  the  French,  Spanish,  and  Russian  squa- 
drons. 