

Buonaparte's  journey  to  Madrid  has  been  delayed  by  sick- 
ness, or  under  that  pretext.  The  Infant  Don  Carlos  left 
Madrid  on  the  5th  to  meet  him  ;  and  it  is  stated  that  he  will 
proceed  to  Paris,  if  necessary,  for  that  purpose.  His  suite  is 
small,  and  one  of  Murat's  aid-de-camps  is  in  it. 

Gibraltar,  April  28,  1808. 

From  a  private,  authentic  source,  as  well  as  partly  from 
Mr.  Hunter  at  Madrid,  he  states  that  56,000  French  were 
actually  in  or  near  that  capital,  and  24,000  more  were  ex- 
pected— that,  from  a  quarter  connected  with  Government,  a 
desire  had  been  expressed  to  Mr.  Hunter  to  know  whether  a 


134  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

supply  of  arms  could  be  got  from  Sir  H.  Dairy mple,  if  wanted  ; 
that  Mr.  Hunter  answered  that  he  could  make  no  reply  to 
unauthorized  insinuations,  bnt  would  faithfully  communicate 
every  overture  made  to  him  in  a  regular  form ;  that  the  King 
of  Spain  was  arrived  at  Burgos,  and  was  every  where  received 
with  enthusiasm ;  that  he  had  afterwards  departed  from  Vit- 
toria ;  that  Buonaparte  arrived  at  Bayonne  on  the  15th ;  that 
a  violent  fermentation  prevailed  in  Spain  against  the  French. 
He  encloses  a  copy  of  a  communication  from  Count  Espeleta, 
Commandant  at  Barcelona,  to  the  General  of  Division  Duheme  ; 
also  the  answer  to  some  queries  sent  by  Sir  Hew^s  desire  to 
the  person  from  whom  the  private  intelligence  has  been  received. 

Gibraltar,  April  30,  1808. 
Encloses  the  substance  of  intelligence  received  from  Alge- 
siras  dated  the  28th,  by  which  it  appears  that,  on  the  20th, 
an  interview  took  place  on  the  frontier  between  Buonaparte  and 
Ferdinand  VII.,  when  the  former  agreed  to  acknowledge  the 
latter,  and  to  grant  him  the  administration  of  Portugal  till  a 
peace,  Spain  acceding  to  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  and 
furnishing  50,000  men.  It  appears  further  that,  in  conse- 
quence of  Murat  having  sent  a  Proclamation  to  be  printed  in 
the  name  of  Charles  IV.,  an  angry  correspondence  took  place 
between  him  and  the  Government,  when  Murat  intimated  that, 
if  his  orders  were  not  complied  with,  he  should  level  Madrid 
with  the  ground.  The  arrival  of  the  treaty  between  Buona- 
parte and  Ferdinand  VII.  put  an  end  to  this  altercation ;  but 
the  populace  endeavoured  to  set  fire  to  the  houses  of  Infantado 
and  Escoiquiz,  and  were  much  exasperated  with  the  treaty, 
and  with  the  delivering  up  of  Godoy  to  the  French.  It  was 
reported  that  the  late  King  and  Queen  were  voluntarily  going 
to  France,  escorted  by  20,000  French,  who  were  at  Aranjuez. 

Gibraltar,  May  7,  1808. 
Encloses  further  accounts  received  from  the  same  private 
source,  which  state  that  the  French  continued  to  enter  Spain 