

3.  The  fortresses  of  Campo-mayor,  Aronches,  Cast  ell  o  de 
Vide,  and  Monte  Alvao,  need  not  be  provisioned  with  any 
particular  care. 

4.  In  order  to  concentrate  the  largest  possible  number  of 
troops  in  the  three  armies  of  Alentejo,  Beira,  and  Minho,  the 
frontier  fortresses  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  objects  of  secondary 
consideration. 

5.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces  ought,  without  delay, 
to  examine  and  report  on  the  actual  condition  of  the  regiments 
of  the  line  and  militia,  their  appointments  and  barracks,  and 
whether  they  are  in  a  state  to  take  the  field  at  a  moment's 
warning. 

6.  That  the  Generals  of  the  different  provinces  should,  in 
anticipation,  form  the  regiments  of  the  line  and  the  militia 
into  brigades,  each  brigade  consisting  of  one  regiment  of  the 
line  and  of  two  of  militia,  so  that  they  may  fight  in  conjunction, 
but  by  no  means  separately,  as  General  Dumouriez  advises, 
there  being  many  reasons  for  adopting  the  method  just  men- 
tioned, and  particularly  this — that  the  militia  is  ignorant  of 
the  general  and  indispensable  rules  of  field  service ;  add  to 
which,  that  both  kinds  of  troops  will  fight  with  more  confi- 
dence and  emulation,  which,  in  the  end,  must  lead  to  very 
happy  results. 

7.  That  the  necessary  orders  ought  immediately  to  be  given 
for  forming  competent  parks  of  artillery  for  the  above  three 
armies,  and  that  the  two  principal  ought  to  be  at  Abrantes, 
and  that  of  Minho  at  Oporto. 

8.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces  ought  to  make  out 
lists  of  all  the  beasts  of  burden  in  their  respective  districts, 
that  they  may  be  distributed  among  the  different  regiments 


124  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

a  few  (lays  before  the  march  begins  ;  and  that,  when  wanted, 
they  are  to  be  sent  to  the  above  depots. 

N.B.  These  beasts  are  to  be  provided  with  straw  and  barley 
on  account  of  the  Royal  Treasury,  and  their  drivers  with 
ammunition-bread :  the  latter  are  also  to  receive  one  crusade 
per  diem  for  each  beast  of  burden.  This  provision  is  of  the 
utmost  necessity,  that  the  drivers  may  remain  with  the  armies, 
and  be  subject  to  military  laws  in  the  event  of  desertion,  or  the 
commission  of  some  crime. 

9.  That,  if  circumstances  and  time  permit,  twelve  companies 
of  horse-artillery  ought  to  be  formed,  each  of  sixty  men,  fur- 
nished with  four  6-pounders  and  two  howitzers  ;  two  of  these 
companies  to  be  attached  to  the  army  of  Minho,  six  to  that  of 
Beira,  three  to  that  of  Alentejo,  and  one  to  the  defence  of 
Algarve;  the  whole  in  conformity  to  General  Dumouriez"'s  sug- 
gestions. 

10.  In  each  regiment  of  the  line,  as  well  as  militia,  a  certain 
number  of  men  ought  to  be  instructed  in  the  working  of  their 
field-pieces. 