

11.  That,  conformably  to  the  ideas  of  the  same  General, 
head  telegraphs  and  corresponding  telegraphs  ought  to  be 
established  in  Valen9a,  Monforte,  Miranda,  Almeida,  Guarda, 
Abrantes,  Elvas,  Beira,  and  Faro,  as  well  as  signals  by  means 
of  fire,  smoke,  and  flags,  especially  upon  the  coast,  and  above 
the  principal  passes  of  the  mountains,  beginning  from  the 
Minho,  and  extending  to  the  mouth  of  the  Guadiana.  These 
telegraphs  are  of  the  greatest  use,  not  only  in  any  enterprise 
against  the  enemy,  but  for  the  purpose  of  apprizing  us  of  their 
movements. 

12.  That  immediately  large  depots  of  provisions  ought  to 
be  established,  such  as  wheat,  millet,  barley,  and  straw,  for 
80,000  men,  and  four  months. 

13.  That  there  be  likewise  formed  magazines  of  wine,  brandy, 
oil,  vinegar,  dried  cod,  bacon,  and  cheese.  The  principal  maga- 
zines ought  to  be  in  Lisbon,  Oporto,  Abrantes,  and  Lamego ; 


1809.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  125 

those  of  the  second  class  at  Estremoz,  Thorn ar,  Guarda,  and 
Ponte  de  Lima.  Without  these  steps,  all  the  rest  would  be 
fruitless. 

14.  That  the  Generals  of  the  provinces,  immediately  after 
the  declaration  of  war,  and  when  the  enemy  is  near  at  hand, 
force  all  peasants  and  inhabitants  of  frontiers  to  convey  into 
the  interior  and  into  places  of  security,  not  only  their  cattle, 
but  such  provisions  as  are  not  wanted  for  immediate  use. 

15.  That  the  same  Genei-als  raise  immediately  in  their  re- 
spective provinces  companies  of  sixty  men  each,  and  consisting 
of  such  persons  as  are  best  acquainted  with  the  roads,  that 
they  may  serve  as  guides  to  the  armies. 

16.  As  we  have  no  other  light  troops  in  our  army  than  the 
Legion,  flank  companies  must  be  formed  both  from  the  troops 
of  the  line  and  the  militia ;  they  must  constitute  separate 
corps  attached  to  the  three  armies,  and,  destined  for  that  ser- 
vice exclusively,  must  be  under  the  command  of  proper  officers. 


List  of  the  National  Troops, 

Infantry  of  the  Line          .... 

43  Regiments  of  Militia,  when  complete    . 

Artillery           .         .          .          . 

The  Legion      .         .         . 

Cavalry   . 

80,000 

83,600 

5,000 

1,500 

4,000 

Deduct  for  garrisons  of  the  chief  fortresses  . 

74,100 
15,000 

Remain  for  military  operations  .  .  .59,100 
In  this  number  are  not  comprehended  the  train-bands,  and 
others  capable  of  doing  duty  on  posts  of  advice,  and  in  interior 
and  marine  forts.  As  to  the  navy,  they  will  combine  their  ope- 
rations with  those  of  the  military  in  the  defence  of  sea-ports, 
and  assist  them  in  any  other  way  that  may  contribute  to  attain 
the  general  object  in  view. 


