

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Major-General  Spencer, 
acknowledging  Sir  Hew's  of  the  12th  of  June,  and  stating 
that  it  would  be  imprudent,  with  his  corps  of  4  or  5,000  men, 
to  join  the  Spanish  army,  were  they  even  equipped  for  the 
field,  being  ignorant  of  Castanos'  operations,  and  of  the  means 
of  supplying  the  corps  in  the  way  which  would  be  necessary. 
He  thinks  he  should  be  usefully  employed  by  making  diver- 
sions, and,  if  he  should  find  any  French  corps  pushing  to- 
wards the  coast,  frustrating  their  views.  He  adds  that  the 
Spaniards  preserve  a  jealousy  relative  to  his  landing,  and 
thinks  they  would  relax  in  their  exertions  were  he  to  join  them. 
General  Spencer  further  states  that  his  approach  has  already 
checked  tlie  French  corps  pushing  to  join  Dupont,  which  has 
now  fallen  back  from  Elvas  to  Mora,  68  miles. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  141 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  a  correspondence  with  General  Spencer,  Don 
Eusebio  de  Herrera,  and  Captain  Whittinghara,  on  the  pro- 
posal of  Greneral  Spencer's  landing.  Also  a  letter  from  Sir 
Charles  Cotton,  stating  the  advantages  that  would  arise  from 
General  Spencer's  joining  him  off  the  Tagus,  which  Sir  Hew 
has  in  consequence  authorized  General  Spencer  to  do,  subject 
to  Lord  Collingwood's  approval. 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Government  of  Valencia,  request- 
ing that  a  letter  enclosed  may  be  transmitted  to  the  Marquess 
of  Romana,  and  expressing  confidence  that  speedy  means  will 
be  taken  to  transport  the  corps  under  his  command  to  a 
Spanish  port. 

Gibraltar,  June  19,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham  of  General 
Castahos'  operations,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  Spanish 
army  had  been  greatly  reinforced,  and  had  taken  up  a  very 
favourable  position. 

Gibraltar,  June  20,  1808. 
Encloses  the  translation  of  a  letter  received  by  Mr.  Viale, 
from  Madrid,  stating  that  the  new  King,  Joseph  Napoleon, 
has  issued  three  decrees  from  Bayonne,  confirming  the  nomi- 
nation of  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Kingdom  to  the  Grand- 
Duke  of  Berg,  and  also  confirming  the  councils  and  other  tri- 
bunals, and  the  corps  of  Body  Guards. 

Sir  Hew  adds  the  report  of  a  victory  by  the  Portuguese  and 
Spaniards  over  the  French  garrison  at  Almeyda. 

Gibraltar,  June  25,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  4th  of 
June.  He  encloses  two  despatches  from  Captain  Whittingham, 
enclosing  General  Spencer's  letter  to  General  Castanos,  an- 
nouncing'his  intention  to  proceed  to  the  Tagus  with  the  Spanish 
General's  •  answer. 


142  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  has  received  notice  from  the  Count  of  Castro  Marin  that 
the  province  of  Algarve,  in  Portugal,  has  declared  against  the 
French.  The  Count  has  requested  arms  and  ammunition,  of 
which  Sir  Hew  could  only  furnish  him  with  a  very  small  pro- 
portion. 