

Gibraltar,  June  30,  1808. 

Encloses  a  patriotic  paper  published  at  Valencia,  and  gives 
some  account  of  the  leading  characters  of  the  Junta  at  Seville, 
as  well  as  of  the  views  of  that  body,  which  he  has  obtained  from 
Major  Cox. 

Gibraltar,  July  4,  1808. 

Encloses  a  despatch  from  Major  Cox,  at  Seville,  stating  the 
unwillingness  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  permit  the  Bri- 
tish forces  to  occupy  Ceuta,  and  enclosing  a  correspondence 
he  has  had  with  Father  Gil,  relative  to  the  conduct  of  the 
Spanish  agent  in  Tangier. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

States  that  a  Minister  has  arrived  from  Sicily,  to  protest 
against  the  late  renunciations  in  Spain,  and  to  assert  his 
Sicilian  Majesty ""s  claim  to  the  succession.  Encloses  the  Pro- 
test and  a  letter  from  the  Marquess  de  Circello  to  Admiral 
Thornborough,  introducing  to  him  the  Chevalier  Roberto  (the 
Sicilian  Minister),  and  explaining  the  object  of  his  mission. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

Encloses  copies  of  a  correspondence  between  Major  Cox  and 
Father  Gil,  with  other  papers,  illustrating  the  temper  and 
character  of  the  Junta  of  Seville,  and  displaying  the  jealousy 
which  prompts  the  exclusion  of  the  British  troops  from  the 
Spanish  fortresses,  which,  in  Sir  Hew'*s  opinion,  has  been  in- 
creased, if  not  occasioned,  by  the  urgency  we  have  displayed 
on  this  point. 

Gibraltar,  July  17,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  two  despatches  of  the 
28th  June.      He  has  reinforced  General  Spencer  with  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  143 

6th  Eegiment  of  foot,  and  a  strong  detachment  of  artillery : 
the  former  he  can  continue  to  spare  from  the  garrison,  but  not 
the  latter,  which  he  has  directed  General  Spencer  to  send  back. 
The  guns  were  not  equipped  for  the  field,  and,  therefore, 
rather  impeded  than  helped  the  corps.  He  cannot  venture  to 
send  a  second  regiment  from  Gibraltar,  unless  reinforced  by  a 
second  Veteran  Battalion. 

Gibraltar,  July  20,  1808. 

Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham,  showing 
the  movements  of  Castaiios'  army,  and  its  relative  situation  to 
that  of  the  French,  under  Dupont,  on  the  17th  July  :  and  also 
stating  that,  on  the  16th  July,  an  action  took  place  on  the 
Guadalquivir  near  Mengibar,  between  General  Reding,  with 
8,000  men,  and  a  French  force  of  5,000,  including  a  regiment 
of  cuirassiers,  which  terminated  in  the  defeat  of  the  French 
with  great  loss.  General  Reding,  however,  was  obliged  to 
abandon  the  advantages  he  had  gained,  and  retire  to  Men- 
gibar, for  want  of  provisions.  It  appeared,  by  an  intercepted 
letter,  that  Dupont  was  in  great  want  of  provisions,  and  ex- 
pected reinforcements. 