

Sir  Hew  also  encloses  a  letter  from  the  President  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville  to  General  Spencer,  informing  him  that  Ge- 
neral Castanos  concurs  with  him  in  the  expediency  of  his  join- 
ing the  British  army  in  Portugal,  General  Castanos'  army 
being  sufficiently  strong  to  meet  the  enemy  opposed  to  it. 

Gibraltar,  July  24,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Report  from  Captain  Whittingham,  containing 
the  details  of  a  complete  victory  obtained  on  the  19th  by  Ge- 
neral Castanos  over  Dupont  and  Wedel.  Also  a  letter  to 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  from  General  Castanos,  expressing  the 
satisfaction  he  has  received  from  Captain  Whittingham's  ser- 
vices. 

Gibraltar,  July  28,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatches,  Nos.  24,  25, 


144  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  26,  and  has  taken  measures  to  circulate  in  Spain  the  King''s 
Speech  and  the  Orders  in  Council  touching  the  affairs  of  that 
country. 

Mr.  O'Ryan  has  been  sent  to  Gibraltar  by  the  Junta  at 
Seville,  to  negociate  a  loan,  but  without  success.  Sir  Hew 
encloses  two  letters  from  Major  Cox  on  this  subject ;  he  will 
endeavour  to  raise  100,000  dollars  for  the  immediate  use  of  the 
army.  He  encloses  a  printed  letter  from  the  Count  de  Tilly 
to  the  Junta  at  Seville,  on  the  victory  of  Baylen. 

Gibraltar,  July  30,  1808. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  Lord  Collingwood,  recommending 
that  0^^20,000  should  be  raised,  if  possible,  for  the  use  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville  ;  and  states  that  he  has,  in  consequence  of 
this  letter  and  the  failure  of  Mr.  0''Ryan''s  attempt  to  negociate 
a  loan,  advertised  for  money,  but  the  sum  offered  does  not  yet 
amount  to  ^^20,000  ;  specie  being  scarce,  and  the  Exchange 
consequently  very  disadvantageous  to  the  public. 

Gibraltar,  August  2,  1808. 

He  has  drawn  Bills  on  the  Treasury  for  .£'13,620,  to  make 

an  advance,  by  Lord  Collingwood^s  desire,  to  the  Government 

of  Andalusia,  to  answer  the  most  pressing  wants  of  the  army, 

and  has  sent  the  above  sum  to  his  lordship  by  the  Espoir  brig. 

Gibraltar,  August  8,  1808. 
Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatch  of  the  15tli  July, 
communicating  his  appointment  to  the  chief  command  of  the 
forces  in  Portugal  and  Spain.  He  will  proceed  to  join  the 
army  as  soon  as  the  necessary  arrangements  are  completed. 
Transports  are  preparing  for  the  42nd  Regiment,  which  he 
means  to  carry  out  with  him.  He  has  had  a  demand  from 
Catalonia  for  arms  and  stores,  which  he  has  complied  with  in 
part.  He  represents  that  province  to  have  become  an  im- 
portant point,  and  that  it  is  in  want  of  every  thing. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  146 

Gibraltar,  August  9, 1808. 
Encloses  the  extract  of  a  letter  from  Major  Oox,  stating 
that  doubts  have  arisen  in  the  Junta  at  Seville,  whether  the 
terms  granted  to  General  Wedel  ought  to  be  carried  into  exe- 
cution ;  also  Sir  Hew's  answer  to  Major  Cox,  expressing  his 
surprise  that  the  question  should  have  arisen. 