


NO.  II. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL  SPENCER, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

H.M.S.  Antelope,  off  Tagus  Bay,  February  29,  1808. 
States  that  he  arrived  off  the  Tagus  on  the  26th.  He  has 
communicated  with  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  who  agrees  with  him 
that  their  hostile  attempts  are  impracticable,  occupied  as  the 
Tagus  and  forts  are  by  1 6,000  French,  making  altogether  in 
Portugal  86,000  French  and  20,000  Spaniards.  The  in- 
habitants have  been  disanned  by  Junot,  and  reduced  to  sub- 
jection J  and,  severely  as  they  feel  the  French  yoke,  they  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  147 

in  no  material  want  of  provisions.  The  Russian  ships  (eight 
sail  of  the  line)  were  ready  for  sea,  with  a  Portuguese  line-of- 
battle  ship  and  a  frigate.  The  Russian  Admiral  has  inti- 
mated to  Sir  Charles  Cotton  that,  when  he  receives  orders 
from  his  Emperor,  he  shall  not  scruple  to  venture  out  of  the 
Tagus.  The  French,  it  appears,  are  marching  a  formidable  army 
into  Spain.    General  Spencer^s  troops  are  in  perfect  health. 

Off  Cape  Espartel,  March  10,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  tedious  passage  from  the  Tagus,  but  expects 

to  be  at  Gibraltar  in  the  course  of  the  day.     Encloses  a  list 

(received  from  Sir  Charles  Cotton)  of  the  troops  and  transports 

which  arrived  at  Gibraltar  on  the  l7th  January — 2,280  rank 

and  file. 

Gibraltar,  March  13,  1808. 

He  arrived  there  on  the  10th.  Encloses  the  reports  of 
Captain  Usher,  R.N.,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Browne,  relative 
to  Ceuta,  with  other  papers  on  the  same  subject,  and  states 
that,  in  consequence,  with  the  unanimous  opinion  of  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple,  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  and  other  officers  assembled 
with  them,  he  has  thought  it  his  duty  to  relinquish  an  attack 
upon  that  fortress. 

Gibraltar,  March  13,  1808. 

Agreeably  to  his  instructions,  he  has  determined  to  remain 
at  Gibraltar,  with  the  British  force  under  his  orders,  a  detach- 
ment of  the  Staff  corps,  and  a  part  of  the  artillery.  The  four 
regiments  of  the  King's  German  Legion,  the  rest  of  the  artillery, 
and  the  recruits  for  the  regiments  at  Sicily  and  Malta,  he  has 
directed  to  proceed  without  delay  for  their  destination,  under 
Brigadier-General  M'Farlane. 

Encloses  a  list  of  the  victuallers  he  has  forwarded  to  General 
Beresford. 

Gibraltar,  March  18,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  confirming  the  impossibility  of  carrying 
Ceuta  by  a  coup  de  main.  The  reinforcements  (nearly  6,000 
men)  are  nearly  ready  to  sail  for  Sicily. 

l2 


148  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Gibraltar,  March  27,  1808. 
The  reinforcements  for  Sicily  sailed  on  the  20th,  and  the 
victuallers  for  Madeira  will  proceed  immediately. 