

Gibraltar,  August  10,  1808. 

States  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans  and  the  second  Prince  of 
the  Two  Sicilies  have  arrived  at  Gibraltar,  with  the  view  of 
establishing  the  residence  of  the  latter  at  that  place,  for  the 
avowed  purpose  of  negociating  for  the  Regency  of  Spain.  Sir 
Hew,  having  represented  to  them  the  impropriety  of  this 
measure,  has  agreed  to  communicate  the  whole  matter  to  Lord 
Collingwood,  for  his  opinion  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time,  the 
Prince  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  land. 

Encloses  a  letter  on  this  subject  from  Sir  Alexander  Ball, 
with  a  correspondence  between  him  and  Mr.  Drummond,  and 
a  letter  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans. 

Gibraltar,  August  11,  1808. 

He  has  succeeded  in  convincing  the  Duke  of  Orleans  of  the 
necessity  of  his  going  to  England,  to  communicate  with  his 
Majesty'*s  Ministers  on  the  proposed  plan.  He  encloses  a 
letter  which  he  addressed  to  Prince  Leopold,  disclosing  the 
terms  upon  which  he  can  be  permitted  to  reside  in  the  garrison. 

The  evacuation  of  Madrid  has  not  been  in  consequence  of 
any  defeat,  but  for  the  purpose  of  concentrating  the  French 
force. 

Gibraltar,  August  12,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  further  conference  with  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 

on  the  proposed  attempt  to  obtain  the  Regency  of  Spain  for 

Prince  Leopold,  and  encloses  a  Declaration  from  the  Junta  at 

Seville,  which  the  Duke  interprets  as  favourable  to  that  project. 

-     The  Duke  of  Ascoli,  Adjutant  to  the  King  of  Naples,  whom 

VOL.  VII.  L 


146        LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF       (1808. 

it  had  beeu  proposed  to  send  to  England,  having  strongly  ob- 
jected to  that  measure,  has  been  permitted  to  land,  and  to 
remain  with  the  Prince,  on  condition  that  he  would  not  com- 
municate the  despatches  which  he  brought  for  the  Spanish 
Government, 

Gibraltar,  August  26,  1808. 

Major-General  Drummond  encloses  a  copy  of  despatches  re- 
ceived from  the  Junta  of  Valencia,  announcing  that  the  French 
have  raised  the  siege  of  Saragosa  and  fled  to  Tudela ;  but 
stating  also  that  the  enemy  has  received  a  considerable  rein- 
forcement in  Catalonia,  which  places  in  imminent  danger  the 
garrisons  of  Girona,  Bosas,  and  Hostalrich,  where  the  inha- 
bitants are  chiefly  unarmed.  The  Government  of  Valencia 
solicit  an  immediate  supply  of  arms  to  be  sent  to  Tarragona, 
which  General  Drummond  is  unable  to  furnish  ;  but  requests 
that  he  may  have  the  means  of  doing  it,  and  suggests  the  pro- 
priety of  making  Gibraltar  a  depot  for  arms,  stores,  &;c.,  in 
large  quantities,  to  be  distributed  as  exigencies  may  require. 

General  Drummond  was  left  in  the  command  of  the  fortress 
on  the  13th  of  August  by  Sir  Hew  Dairy mple,  and  has  re- 
ceived Lord  Oastlereagh's  despatches,  Nos.  24,  25,  and  26,  of 
the  6th  July. 