

H.M.S.  Minorca,  Gibraltar  Bay,  May  14,  1808, 
In  consequence  of  a  communication  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple 
from  Rear- Admiral  Purvis,  he  is  under  weigh  with  the  troops 
to  proceed  off  Cadiz,  to  co-operate  with  the  Rear-Admiral  in 
any  enterprise  likely  to  benefit  the  service. 

H.M.S.  Atlas,  off  Cadiz,  May  29,  1808. 

Having  joined  the  Rear-Admiral  on  the  15th,  the  first  step 
they  took  was  to  make  known  their  sentiments  and  disposition 
to  the  Spaniards,  and  endeavour  to  open  a  private  communica- 
tion with  the  Spanish  officers  at  Cadiz.  Encloses  copies  of 
their  proclamation  for  the  former  purpose,  and  of  their  letters 
to  the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  the  Marquess  of  Socorro  (Solano)  to 
obtain  the  latter.  They  have  studiously  avoided  any  specific 
proposition  which  might  commit  the  British  Government.  No 
answers  have  been  received ;  but  there  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  the  proclamation  has  been  favourably  received  by 
the  people,  who  are  highly  exasperated  against  the  French, 
and  would  receive  the  English,  if  there  was  a  Spaniard  of 
influence  to  head  and  lead  them. 

To  facilitate  the  means  of  communication,  the  Admiral,  at 
his  request,  has  anchored  the  transports  near  the  shore,  under 
the  protection  of  the  in-shore  squadron.  He  has  at  length 
received  a  note  from  the  Marquess  de  Socorro,  who  does 
not  appear  to  feel  himself  strong  or  bold  enough  to  oppose  the 
views  of  the  French,  and  seems,  with  the  rest  of  the  Spanish 
nobility,  to  prefer  security  and  submission  to  the  danger  of  an 
honourable  resistance. 

H.M.S.  Atlas,  May  29,  1808. 

States  that,  from  the  information  which  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple 
has  received,  concerning  the  dispositions  of  the  Spaniards,  he 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  149 

conceived  that  an  opportunity  would  ofter  for  our  taking  pos- 
session of  the  French  squadron  at  Cadiz.  But,  though  the 
British  proclamation  has  been  favourably  received  by  the 
people,  there  is  reason  to  suspect  the  intentions  of  Socorro, 
who,  however,  has  lost  by  his  late  conduct  much  of  his  popu- 
larity.    He  is  still  without  the  detachment  from  Sicily. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  6,  1808. 
Reports  that,  on  the  30th  May,  (when,  from  the  unfavourable 
complexion  of  things,  he  was  preparing  to  return  to  Gibraltar) 
two  deputies  arrived  from  Seville,  to  know  if  the  British  Com- 
manders were  disposed  to  afford  that  co-operation  and  assistance 
which  had  been  proffered  in  their  public  address.  On  receiving 
strong  assurances  of  the  affirmative,  the  deputies  returned, 
having  informed  the  British  Commanders  that  a  Supreme 
Council  had  been  constituted  at  Seville,  in  the  name  of  Ferdi- 
nand VII.,  for  the  four  provinces  of  Seville,  Andalusia,  Va- 
lencia, and  Cordova ;  also,  that  Socorro,  in  consequence  of  a 
proclamation  he  had  issued,  and  of  his  being  considered  as 
gained  over  to  the  French  interest,  had,  on  the  28th,  fallen  a 
sacrifice  to  the  people  of  Cadiz. 