

That  General  Castaiios  has  no  doubt  of  the  concurrence 
of  General  Pena,  who  commands  the  province  of  Anda- 
lusia, and  of  Don  Ventura  Escalante,  Captain  General  of  Gra- 
nada— 

That,  with  respect  to  Ceuta,  nothing  is  to  be  apprehended 
from  the  French,  nor  at  Minorca  or  Majorca ;  and  that  at 
Barcelona,  though  the  French  were  numerous,  the  Spaniards 
were  unanimous — 

That,  of  the  nobles  whom  Murat  had  ordered  to  go  to 
Bayonne,  only  the  young  grandees  have  gone  ;  that,  if  the 
royal  family  be  destroyed,  the  throne  would  be  prepared  for 
the  Archduke  Charles  ;  and  a  British  frigate  is  requested  to 
be  kept  in  readiness  to  bring  him  from  Trieste. 

Sir  Hew  adds,  that  a  copy  of  this  Report  has  been  trans- 
mitted to  Lord  Collingwood,  and  will  be  sent  to  Admiral 
Purvis  ;  and  he  encloses  another  paper  just  received,  as  he 
believes,  from  General  Castaiios  himself,  urging  the  co-operation 
of  the  British,  but  using  at  present  reserve  and  disguise,  and 
stating  that  the  French  in  Guipuscoa  having  taken  posses- 
sion of  the  royal  fabric  of  Plasencia,  carrying  to  France 
30,000  stand  of  arms,  he  should  wish  to  commence  by  making 
reprisals,  to  revenge  that  outrage.  They  have  disarmed  all 
the  towns  they  occupy ;  and  within  Madrid  have  33,000  men 
with  cannon,  and  all  the  squares  and  gates. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  137 

Gibraltar,  May  13,  1808. 
Encloses  a  Madrid  Gazette,  containing  Proclamations  from 
the  Duke  of  Berg,  who  has  assumed  the  Regency  in  the  room  • 
of  Don  Antonio.     It  does  not  appear  how  the  latter  has  been 
disposed  of;  but  the  youngest  brother  has  repaired  to  Bayonne. 

The  system  of  severity  seems  to  have  broken  the  spirit  of 
the  people  of  Madrid,  and  in  other  parts  the  tone  is  consi- 
derably lowered.  Cadiz  being  in  an  unquiet  state,  General 
Spencer'^s  corps  is  preparing  to  join  the  Admiral,  to  take  advan- 
tage of  circumstances. 

Gibraltar,  May  30,  1808. 

Encloses  some  Madrid  Gazettes,  containing  a  series  of  offi- 
cial publications,  which  terminate  in  announcing  the  exclusion 
and  banishment  of  the  royal  family.  The  late  King  has  left 
Bayonne  for  the  interior  of  France.  He  encloses  also  two 
Diaries,  containing  some  political  essays,  which  have  caused  a 
great  sensation  in  Spain.  Buonaparte  has  summoned  the 
Cortes  to  meet  him  at  Bayonne  on  the  15  th  of  June,  to  obtain, 
it  is  supposed,  their  sanction  to  the  succession  of  his  family  to 
the  throne. 

Gibraltar,  May  31,  1808. 

He  has  received  notice  from  Algesiras  of  the  declaration  of 
a  Council  of  Government  at  Seville,  in  the  name  of  Ferdi- 
nand VII.,  that  the  Spanish  cockade  and  scarf  are  to  be  worn 
by  all  Spaniards,  and  vigorous  measures  carried  into  execution. 
General  Castaiios  has  received  instructions  from  this  new  Go- 
vernment, which  he  proposes  to  obey. 