

Sir  Hew  has  been  requested  to  facilitate  the  conveyance  of 
the  acts  of  the  new  Government  to  Barcelona  and  Minorca, 
which  he  intends  to  do. 

Gibraltar,  June  2,  1808. 

Encloses  an  official  communication  which  he  has  received 
from  General  Castafios,  with  overtures  of  amity  between  Great 
Britain  and  Spain.  The  pecuniary  resources  of  the  provinces 
seem  considerable  ;   and  in   Andalusia  alone  300,000  armed 


138  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

men  are  expected  to  come  forward.  The  enthusiasm  is  general, 
led  on  by  men  of  influence,  and  kept  up  by  the  clergy.  The 
.  proceedings  of  the  Junta  are  marked  with  vigour.  A  Spanish 
officer  of  rank  has  already  been  shot  publicly  at  Seville.  The 
same  spirit  prevails  in  Valencia.  It  is  believed  that  Murat 
has  retired  from  Madrid.  He  has  consented  that  the  commu- 
nication between  Gibraltar  and  Spain  should  be  opened  upon 
such  restrictions  as  should  be  agreed  upon  between  General 
Castanos  and  himself,  and  to  send  Captain  Dalrymple  to  Se- 
ville, to  treat  with  the  Government  on  matters  relating  to  the 
common  cause.     He  encloses  a  copy  of  his   instructions  to 

Captain  Dalrymple. 

Gibraltar,  June  7,  1808. 

He  has  received  demands  from  several  places  for  small  arms 
and  cartouch-boxes  for  the  infantry,  and  pistols  and  sabres  for 
the  cavalry,  but  had  none  in  the  stores.  Whatever  could  be 
obtained  from  privateer-owners  or  individuals  would  be  fur- 
nished. Suggests  that  there  should  be  an  ample  supply  of 
moulds  for  the  arms  sent  out.  He  expects  to  be  called  on  for 
gunpowder,  which  he  shall  not  hesitate  to  supply,  requesting  it 
may  be  replaced  from  home.  Through  the  intervention  of 
Mr.  Viale,  General  Castanos,  by  Sir  Hew''s  authority,  has  ne- 
gociated  a  loan  of  42,000  hard  dollars,  on  the  security  of  the 
Junta  at  Seville,  and  without  interest  or  premium.  Sir  Hew 
expresses  a  high  sense  of  Mr.  Viale's  services. 

Gibraltar,  June  9,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatches  of  the  25th 
May.  Has  communicated  with  Lord  Collingwood,  who  agrees 
with  him  in  thinking  that  they  should  be  ready  to  grant,  but 
be  very  cautious  as  to  the  assistance  they  press,  or  even  offer. 

He  has  despatched  Captain  Whittingham  to  General  Cas- 
tanos, to  receive  accounts  of  the  proceedings  of  the  army,  and 
discuss  questions  that  may  arise ;  and,  being  unable  to  dis- 
pense with  Captain  Dalrymple's  assistance,  will  send  Major 
Cox  to  Seville. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  139 

Encloses  the  copy  of  a  despatch  he  forwarded  to  General 
Spencer  upon  receiving  his  Majesty^s  commands,  also  the 
official  publications  at  Valencia,  and  the  translation  of  a  letter 
to  the  present  commandant  at  Algesiras,  Don  Juan  Ordonez, 
from  a  friend,  relating  to  the  proceedings  in  other  parts. 