


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  135 

with  ammunition  and  warlike  stores,  insulting  and  injuring  the 
inhabitants  ;  that  at  Madrid  the  populace  were  much  incensed 
against  Murat ;  and  that  it  was  thought  the  conferences  at 
Bayonne  would  end  soon,  there  having  been  some  movements 
in  France  and  in  the  North. 

In  a  subsequent  letter  from  Algesiras,  dated  the  5th  of  May, 
it  is  stated  that  Napoleon  does  not  acknowledge  Ferdinand  VI I. , 
insisting  that  Charles  IV.  shall  be  reinstated  ;  that  the  old 
King  and  Queen  continue  their  route  to  Bayonne,  where  the  rest 
of  the  royal  family,  the  nobility,  bishops,  merchants,  &c.,  are  to 
be  assembled ;  and  that  the  members  of  the  present  Govern- 
ment resist  transferring  the  Regency  to  Murat,  who,  it  is  said, 
will  appoint  himself  Regent  by  proclamation. 

Gibraltar,  May  8,  1808. 

A  conference  has  taken  place  between  General  Castanos' 
confidential  secretary  and  Mr.  Viale,  a  merchant  of  Gibraltar, 
through  whose  means  Sir  Hew  has  hitherto  received  his  intel- 
ligence, and  Mr.  Viale's  report  of  the  result  is  enclosed,  by 
which  it  appears— 

That  there  was  an  insurrection  on  the  2nd  at  Madrid,  which 
was  quelled  the  same  evening — 

That  it  was  apprehended  Murat  would  attempt  by  force  to 
possess  himself  of  the  Regency,  in  which  case  the  Province 
would  arm  with  the  regulars  and  inhabitants,  and  the  General, 
at  their  head,  would  move  to  Sierra  Morena,  to  check  the  pro- 
gress of  the  French,  and  prevent  their  getting  out  on  that  side 
of  the  mountains  ;  and  that,  if  the  other  provinces  should 
concur,  the  General  would  ask  assistance,  and  even  enter  into 
a  formal  written  convention. 

That  the  insolent  and  sanguinary  Proclamation  by  Murat, 
on  the  8rd,  was  likely,  if  followed  up,  to  lead  to  more  serious 
insurrections  :  in  that  on  the  2nd  there  was  much  slaughter ; 
the  French  had  the  worse,  and  Murat  had  declared  he  would 
try  the  Spaniards  concerned  by  a  military  commission,  punish 
them  with  death,  and  destroy  every  house  where  a  French 
soldier  had  been  killed — 


136  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

That,  if  Buonaparte  attempted  to  put  an  end  to  the  dynasty 
of  the  Bourbons,  they  would  concert  timely  measures  to  secure 
South  America — 

That  to  a  proposal  made  by  Mr.  Viale  for  our  being  put  in 
possession  of  the  French  fleet  at  Cadiz,  it  was  answered  that, 
so  soon  as  the  nation  should  consider  itself  to  be  at  war  with 
the  French,  the  Spanish  fleet  would  sail  to  South  America, 
with  the  Infante  Don  Francisco,  under  escort  of  British  ships, 
if  it  should  then  be  agreed  upon  ;  and  that  the  other  British 
ships  might  enter  Cadiz,  and  rely  on  the  support  of  the 
Spaniards  towards  taking  them  away — 