

He  likewise  encloses  a  letter  from  General  Don  Eusebio 
Herrera,  respecting  troops  for  service  in  the  interior,  with  his 
answer,  stating  that  he  has  no  authority  to  furnish  them  for 
such  a  purpose,  but  would  suffer  them  to  replace  an  equal  number 
of  Spaniards  in  garrison  or  port  duty,  and  would  send  an  officer 
to  Seville,  to  communicate  with  the  Junta  on  the  sort  of  aid 
which  can  be  afforded. 

Gibraltar,  June  10,  1808. 

Encloses  the  translation  of  a  letter  which  he  has  received 
from  the  Junta  at  Valencia,  requesting  that  he  would  direct 
the  captains  of  all  English  vessels  to  suspend  acts  of  hostility 
on  that  coast  against  Spanish  vessels,  and  that  he  would  send 
arms  and  ammunition.  Sir  Hew  encloses  also  his  answer, 
stating  that  he  fwill  communicate  the  former  request  to  the 
Vice-Admiral ;  but  that,  with  regard  to  the  latter,  he  has  few 
equipments  for  service  in  the  field,  and  has  already  promised 
most  of  them  to  General  Castaiios.  He  urges  a  further  supply 
of  arms,  and  of  cavalry  appointments. 

Gibraltar,  June  14,  1808. 
States  that  General  Dupont  has  defeated  the  Spanish  post 
at  Alcolea,  and  obtained  possession  of  Cordova.  General 
Castanos,  who  is  appointed  Captain- General  of  Andalusia,  had 
his  head-quarters  on  the  10th  at  Carmona.  He  is  much  in 
want  of  camp  equipage,  of  which  Sir  Hew  can  furnish  him  with 
enough  for  3,000  men  ;  but,  as  that  falls  very  short  of  what  is 
required,  he  requests  an  immediate  supply.  He  has  also  re- 
ceived a  request  for  arms  from  the  Supreme  Council  of  Granada. 

Gibraltar,  June  14,  1808. 
Encloses  a  detail  of  the  services  upon  which  Captain  Whit- 


140  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tingham  has  been  employed  since  he  joined  Castaiios.  He  has 
sent  General  Castaiios  tents,  and  requests  a  supply  for  20,000 
as  soon  as  possible. 

Gibraltar,  June  18,  1808. 
Encloses  letters  from  Carthagena  and  Granada,  with  a 
printed  declaration  from  the  latter,  by  which  it  is  evident  that 
Granada  does  not  acknowledge  the  Junta  of  Seville  to  be 
supreme.  He  also  encloses  a  letter  from  Don  Eusebio  Her- 
rera,  who  has  sent  a  person,  in  the  name  of  the  Junta,  to  nego- 
ciate  a  loan,  for  which  purpose  further  powers  and  the  detail 
of  the  proposed  security  are  promised.  Sir  Hew  furnished 
the  officer  from  Granada  with  a  supply  of  arms,  and  has  sent 
2,000  barrels  of  powder  to  the  army  of  Seville.  It  is  said, 
that  from  20  to  30,000  men  are  already  in  the  field  to  cover 
Valencia,  against  which  place  it  is  believed  that  Marshal 
Moncey  is  advancing  from  Madrid  with  14,000  French. 
Murat  remains  entrenched  at  Buen  Retiro.  Dupont  is,  by  the 
activity  of  the  peasantry,  believed  to  be  deprived  of  all  com- 
munication and  of  the  means  of  reinforcement. 