

The  Supreme  Council  of  Seville  have  applied  for  a  frigate, 
to  convey  their  Commissioners  to  England.  He  will  sail  im- 
mediately against  the  French  corps  at  Tavira ;  Lord  Colling- 
wood  approving  of  the  measure.  He  encloses  the  proposals  of 
the  French  Admiral  Rossilly  to  quit  the  Bay,  with  the  answer 
of  Governor  Morla,  that  nothing  but  an  unconditional  surrender 
can  be  accepted. 

H.M.S.  Windsor  Castle,  off  Ayamonte,  June  17,  1808. 
The  French  squadron  surrendered  on  the  14th,  when  the 
Spanish  colours  were  flying  in  all  the  ships.  He  has  not 
received  the  particulars.  .  His  movement  to  Ayamonte  has 
been  successful.  The  French  are  retiring  in  every  direction 
towards  Lisbon,  except  some  small  parties  occupying  the  forts 


154  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  posts  in  the  south  of  Portugal.  The  Portuguese  are  rising 
in  all  parts,  encouraged  by  the  appearance  of  the  British ;  and 
the  Spanish  frontier  on  the  Guadiana  is  effectually  secured. 

Off  Ayamonte,  June  17,  1808. 

The  French  corps  has  retired,  leaving  only  2  or  800  men  at 
Villa  Real,  and  very  small  detachments  at  Castro  Marin, 
Tavira,  and  Faro.  About  4,000  men  are  collected  at  Mora, 
twenty  leagues  from  Ayamonte.  A  considerable  body  of 
Spanish  troops  have  escaped  from  the  French,  and  are  on  their 
way,  through  Portugal,  towards  Ayamonte.  He  has  supplied 
the  Spaniards  at  Ayamonte  with  200  stand  of  arms.  It  was 
proposed  to  him  to  dislodge  the  French  at  Villa  Real ;  but,  as 
they  had  a  secure  retreat  to  the  forts  at  Castro  Marin,  which 
could  not  be  taken  without  landing  guns,  and  consequently 
occasioning  delay,  he  did  not  think  it  worth  while. 

The  Portuguese  are  universally  desirous  to  oppose  the 
French,  but  are  without  arms,  which  General  Spencer  is  not 
able  to  supply.  Sir  C.  Cotton  has  requested  him  to  proceed 
off  Lisbon,  which  he  is  desirous  to  do,  if  Lord  CoUingwood 
should  approve  it. 

H.M.  Brig  Scout,  off  Lagos. 

The  information  of  the  forced  renunciation  of  the  Crown  of 
Spain  by  Charles  IV.,  Ferdinand,  and  all  the  royal  family,  in 
favour  of  Buonaparte,  has  excited  a  general  feeling  of  indigna- 
tion, though  some  of  the  upper  classes  appear  to  temporize,  as 
if  they  dreaded  the  consequences  of  resistance.  The  Council 
of  Seville  have  assumed  an  independent  authority,  in  the  name 
of  Ferdinand  VII.,  whom  they  have  proclaimed  King,  and 
have  formally  declared  war  against  France,  appealing  to  the 
Spanish  nation  to  support  them.  Their  supremacy  has  been 
acknowledged  by  several  other  provinces,  though  each  Council 
assumes  a  separate  authority  in  its  own  district. 

In  Andalusia,  from  15  to  20,000  regular  troops  and  60,000 
peasants  are  in  arms.     Castanos  is  appointed  Coramandor-in- 