

He  has  begun  to  disembark  in  the  Mondego  River,  where 
the  landing  is  attended  with  some  difficulties,  and  would  be 
impossible  without  assistance  from  the  country.  If  either 
General  Spencer  or  the  reinforcements  from  home  should  arrive 
(which  is  probable)  before  the  troops  are  landed,  he  will  com- 
mence his  march.  He  has  issued  5,000  stand  of  arms  for  the 
Portuguese  regulars,  who  are  to  co-operate  in  the  attack  on  the 
French. 

Camp  at  Lavaos,  August  8,  1808. 

States  that  General  Spencer  arrived  in  Mondego  Bay  on  the 
night  of  the  5th  August,  followed  by  part  of  his  corps  on  the 
6th,  and  the  remainder  on  the  7th :  the  whole  have  disem- 
barked. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh'*s  letter  of  the  21st  July ; 
he  had  already  given  orders  for  apprizing  all  vessels  coming 
from  England  that  the  army  was  landing  in  Mondego  Bay. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  161 

He  proposes  to  commence  his  march  on  the  10th,  and  en- 
closes the  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  left  to  he  delivered  to 
Sir  H.  Burrard,  communicating  what  he  had  learned  of  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Spain  and  Portugal.  In  this  enclosure,  (of 
which  he  has  sent  a  copy  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple)  he  states 
that  the  enemy's  force  in  Portugal,  as  far  as  he  can  form  an 
opinion,  is  from  16  to  18,000  men,  of  which  about  500  are  in 
Almeida,  the  same  number  in  Elvas,  6  or  800  in  Peniche,  and 
16  or  1,800  in  the  province  of  Alentejo ;  the  remainder,  dis- 
posable for  the  defence  of  Lisbon,  are  in  the  forts  of  St.  Julian 
and  Cascaes,  in  the  batteries  along  the  coast,  and  in  the  old 
citadel,  where  the  enemy  have  added  works. 

About  2,000  of  the  disposable  force  have  been  detached, 
under  General  Lhomenie,  principally,  as  Sir  Arthur  believes, 
to  watch  his  movements,  and  are  now  at  Alabasa ;  4,000  men, 
under  General  Loison,  were  sent  to  Alentejo  on  the  26th,  to 
disperse  the  Portuguese  insurgents ;  to  force  a  Spanish  corps 
of  2,000,  advanced  to  Evora,  to  retire  ;  and  thus  to  add  to  the 
force  destined  to  defend  Lisbon  the  French  troops  stationed  ia 
Alentejo.  At  all  events,  Loison''s  corps  will  return  to  Lisbon  ; 
and  the  disposable  strength  of  the  enemy  will  be  about  14,000 
men,  of  which  8,000  must  be  left  in  the  garrisons. 

Sir  Arthur  proceeds  to  acquaint  Sir  H.  Burrard  that  Du- 
pont  surrendered  on  the  20th  July;  that  on  the  14th  the 
Spaniards  received  a  check  at  Rio  Seco ;  that  he  understands 
there  has  since  been  an  affair  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bene- 
vente ;  that  the  enemy  had  been  beat  off  from  Saragossa  and 
Valencia,  and  are  reported  to  have  been  cut  off  in  Catalonia, 
where  Barcelona  is  blockaded.  He  adds,  that  it  is  obvious 
that  the  insurrection  against  the  French  is  general ;  that  the 
latter  cannot  carry  on  their  operations  by  means  of  small 
corps ;  and  that,  from  their  inactivity  and  their  misfortunes, 
he  imagines  they  cannot  collect  a  force  large  enough  to  oppose 
the  insurgents,  or  cannot  carry  on  their  operations  with  armies 
so  numerous  without  magazines. 