

OffCadiz,  June  10,  1808. 

The  Spaniards  seem  unanimous  in  resisting  the  French. 
At  Barcelona  they  have  surrounded  the  French  corps,  and  all 
the  coast  is  in  arms.  In  the  southern  quarter,  they  have 
assembled  more  than  60,000,  including  15,000  regulars,  the 
whole  already  armed,  and  forming  into  battalions  :  their  head- 
quarters are  at  Cormona,  the  advanced  guard  at  Ecija,  but  an 
irregular  corps  is  still  more  in  advance,  and  has  had  a  skirmish 
with  the  French  advanced  corps  near  Cordova. 

The  French,  under  Dupont,  are  said  to  be  16,000:  they 
crossed  the  Sierra  Morena  without  opposition,  and  have  reached 
Cordova.  The  Spaniards  have  requested  General  Spencer  to 
march  to  Xeres,  but  he  does  not  feel  himself  justified  to  do 
this,  either  by  his  instructions,  or  the  strength  and  equipments 
of  his  corps.  It  has  since  been  proposed  that  he  should  pro- 
ceed to  Ayamonte,  as  a  French  corps  is  assembling  at  Tavira, 
with  the  probable  intention  of  continuing  their  route  along  the 
coast,  until  they  can  land  in  the  rear  of  the  Spanish  troops  de- 
fending the  Guadiana  (about  6,000),  and  either  turn  them,  or 
effect  a  junction  with  Dupont.  General  Spencer  proposes  to 
proceed  against  this  corps  immediately,  which  does  not  exceed 
5,000.  General  Spencer's,  including  the  6th  regiment  and  the 
detachments  from  Sicily,  amount  to  4,500. 

The  Spaniards  think  themselves  fully  capable  of  defending 
Cadiz,  provided  there  is  an  open  communication  from  the  sea. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  153 

In  addition  to  the  60,000  stand  of  arms  before  mentioned,  they 
will  want  40,000.  There  is  likely  to  be  a  want  of  provisions. 
Four  Commissioners  are  named  for  England,  but  made  known 
to  the  British  Commanders.  In  a  PS.,  he  adds  that  Brigadier- 
General  Nightingale''s  brigade  is  under  weigh  for  Ayamonte. 
The  negociation  still  continues,  and  hostilities  may  commence 
airain.     Lord  Oollino:wood  has  arrived. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  12,  1808. 

The  French  squadron,  five  sail  of  the  line  and  a  frigate, 
having  placed  themselves  in  a  defensive  position  in  the  Channel 
leading  to  the  Caraccas,  out  of  the  reach  of  the  works  of  Cadiz, 
and  having  refused  to  listen  to  any  terms,  were  attacked  on 
the  9th  at  3  a.m.,  by  the  Spanish  gun  and  mortar  boats,  and 
the  batteries  erected  for  this  purpose  on  the  Isle  of  Leon,  and 
near  Fort  Louis.  The  firing  continued  till  next  day,  when 
the  French  hoisted  a  flag  of  truce ;  but  the  terms  proposed 
being  inadmissible,  the  Spaniards  intend  to  recommence  hostili- 
ties with  an  additional  battery  to  the  eastward  of  St.  Louis. 
The  British  Commanders  would  have  co-operated,  but  the 
Spaniards  declined  their  ofier. 