

Puerto  Santa  Maria,  July  13,  1808. 

The  deranged  finances  of  the  Government  at  Seville  having 
compelled  them  to  resolve  on  dismantling  the  ships,  General 
Spencer  applied  for  pecuniary  aid  for  them  to  Lord  Colling- 
wood  and  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  who  did  not  think  proper  to 
give  it  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  required.  General 
Spencer,  however,  having  held  out  expectations  of  relief  to  the 
Spaniards,  considered  himself  pledged  to  advance  fifteen  days' 
pay  for  their  navy,  which  he  has  accordingly  done. 

He  has  been  pressed  by  General  Castaiios  to  place  his  corps 
at  Xeres,  to  support  the  Spanish  army,  in  case  of  a  defeat. 
This  he  has  consented  to ;  but  the  exhausted  state  of  the 
country  presents  obstacles  to  the  proposed  movement.  He 
will  not  march  without  cannon;  and  Andalusia  has  been 
drained  of  horses  to  supply  the  Spanish  army.  He  has  resolved 
not  to  move  beyond  Xeres,  and  will  take  with  him  only  two 
regiments,  with  four  light  companies,  and  some  artillery, 
leaving  the  remainder  ready  to  support  General  Morla. 

It  is  believed  that  Dupont  has  been  reinforced  by  5,000  men ; 
but  Castanos  has  25,000  regulars,  besides  many  thousands  of 
peasantry.  The  sum  he  has  advanced  to  Morla  is  40,000 
hard  dollars. 

Bulwark,  off  Cadiz,  July  22,  1808. 

Castanos,  by  repeated  attacks  on  Dupont,  has  reduced  him 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  157 

to  ask  for  terms,  which  have  been  refused.  As  these  successes 
have  removed  Greneral  Spencer's  doubts  with  respect  to  the 
propriety  of  his  leaving  that  country,  he  has  communicated  to 
the  Junta  his  intention  of  joining  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  if  they  did 
not  think  his  departure  prejudicial  to  them.  The  Junta  having 
assented,  as  well  as  Lord  Oollingwood,  he  has  embarked  all 
the  troops,  who  are  under  sail. 

The  conduct  of  the  troops  at  Santa  Maria  gained  the  good- 
will of  the  inhabitants.  He  adds,  in  a  PS.,  that  Castanos  will 
march  to  Madrid,  joined  by  the  Valencian  army. 

Bulwark,  ofFCascaes,  August  2,  1808. 

He  has  arrived  off  Cascaes  with  the  whole  of  his  force,  and 

they  are  beating  up  to  join  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  at  Figuera. 

He  is  proceeding  in  the  Nautilus,  to  meet  Sir  Arthur,  without 

delay,  leaving  the  troops  under  Brigadier-General  Nightingale. 


NO.  III. 
PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  A.  WELLESLEY, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

On  board  H.M.S.  Crocodile,  Corunna,  July  21,  1808. 

States  that,  having  adverted  to  the  tenour  of  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  instructions  of  the  80th  June,  he  quitted  the  fleet,  as 
soon  as  it  was  clear  of  Ireland,  and  arrived  at  Corunna. 

From  several  conferences  with  the  Junta  of  Gallicia,  he 
learns  that  the  whole  of  Spain,  except  Navarre  and  Biscay,  is 
in  arms  against  the  French,  who  have  been  defeated  in  many 
places.  This  information  is  not  official,  but  is  contained  in 
private  letters  which  are  not  doubted. 