

VOL.  vn.  M 


162  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

The  whole  of  Portugal,  except  the  neighbourhood  of  Lisbon, 
is  in  insurrection  against  the  French,  but  their  means  of  re- 
sistance are  less  powerful  than  in  Spain,  having  suffered  more 
from  the  enemy.  In  the  northern  parts,  the  Portuguese  have 
about  10,000  men  in  arms,  of  which  5,000  are  to  march  with 
the  British  to  Lisbon.  The  remainder,  with  about  1,500  Gal- 
licians,  are  to  blockade  Almeida  and  protect  Oporto.  The  in- 
surrection is  general  in  Alentejo  and  Algarve,  to  the  southward, 
Entre  Minho  e  Duero,  Tra  los  Montes  and  Beira,  to  the  north  : 
but  they  can  do  nothing  for  want  of  arms. 

He  acquaints  Sir  Harry  Burrard  with  his  reasons  for  land- 
ing in  Mondego  Bay,  and  states  that  he  has  desired  Brigadier- 
General  A  eland,  on  his  arrival,  to  proceed  along  the  coast  to 
the  southward,  in  order  to  attack  Peniche,  if  it  be  found  neces- 
sary ;  and,  if  not,  to  join  the  fleet  off  the  Tagus,  with  a  view 
to  disembark  near  the  Rock. 

Head- Quarters  at  Caldas,  August  16,  1808. 
He  marched  from  Lavaos  on  the  10th,  and  was  joined  at 
Lynga,  on  the  12th,  by  5  or  6,000  Portuguese,  under  General 
Bemardin  Freire,  who,  he  is  concerned  to  state,  have  accom- 
panied him  no  further.  The  General  and  other  Portuguese 
officers  wished  the  British  Commissariat  to  support  their  troops 
from  the  British  stores  during  the  campaign,  which  Sir  Arthur 
had  declared  to  them  to  be  impossible.  Before  he  advanced, 
they  requested  him  to  secure  a  magazine  at  Lynga,  which  had 
been  formed  for  the  British  troops.  This  was  done,  but  he 
received  no  supply  from  it,  as  it  was  kept  entire  for  the  Portu- 
guese. Some  extraordinary  messages  were  sent  on  the  subject 
of  the  supplies  ;  and,  the  next  morning,  when  the  Portuguese 
troops  were  to  have  marched  at  an  appointed  time,  General 
Freire  proposed  to  detach  the  Portuguese  troops,  unless  Sir 
Arthur  would  feed  them ;  under  the  pretext  of  the  probable 
want  of  supplies  on  the  road  which  Sir  Arthur  proposed  to 
take,  and  their  great  plenty  on  the  other  road,  where,  too, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  163 

tha  Portuguese  might  be  in  a  situation  to  cut  off  the  retreat 
of  the  French  from  Lisbon,  ^ir  Arthur,  in  reply,  pointed  out 
the  danger  and  inefl&ciency  of  this  plan,  requesting  Freire  to 
send  him  1,000  infantry,  all  his  cavalry  and  light  troops, 
whom  Sir  Arthur  engaged  to  feed,  and  either  to  join  with  the 
remainder,  or  keep  in  the  rear  in  safety.  Freire  has  sent  1,400 
infantry  and  260  cavalry ;  but  has  announced  that  he  perse- 
veres in  his  proposed  pk,n  for  the  remainder;  though  Sir 
Arthur  has  since  informed  him  that  he  has  found  resources  in 
the  country  adequate  to  subsist  all  the  troops.  This  conduct 
of  General  Freire  Sir  Arthur  attributes  to  apprehensions  that 
the  combined  force  is  not  sufficiently  strong  for  the  enemy. 