

The  following  day,  the  deputies  returned,  inviting  a  con- 
ference of  accredited  British  officers  on  shore  with  members  of 
the  Supreme  Council.  The  British  Commanders  desired  pre- 
viously to  stipulate  that  the  French  flags  in  the  harbour  should 
be  struck,  the  crews  made  prisoners  of  war,  and  the  ships  taken 
possession  of,  for  the  future  disposal  of  the  British  and  Spanish 
Sovereigns ;  to  which  it  was  replied  that  this  seizure  must  be 
the  consequence,  and  not  the  price,  of  an  alliance  with  Great 
Britain,  and  that  the  appearance  of  British  officers  on  shore 
would  be  attended  with  the  happiest  effects. 

On  this,  the  Commanders  thought  it  right  to  appoint  Cap- 
tain Sir  John  Gore,  R.N.,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir  George 
Smith,  to  be  the  bearers  of  any  propositions  that  might  be  made 
to  them.     These  officers  were  received  on  shore  with  general 


150  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

respect,  and  with  the  acclamations  of  the  people :  and,  after  a 
long  conference,  they  returned  with  proposals,  a  copy  of  which 
is  enclosed. 

The  proposals  have  for  their  objects — 1.  The  revival  of  the 
peace  of  1782  [1783].  2.  The  assistance  of  Great  Britain 
against  the  common  enemy.  3.  The  protection  of  vessels  sent 
with  intelligence  from  Spain  to  the  colonies.  4.  The  security 
of  Spanish  vessels  against  the  British.  5.  The  reduction  of 
the  French  squadron  as  soon  as  peace  is  confirmed.  6.  The 
appointment  of  plenipotentiaries,  to  arrange  the  details. 

These  propositions  appearing  to  the  British  Commanders  to 
involve  important  national  questions,  they  convened  a  council 
of  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  who  agreed  that  other  propo- 
sitions (also  enclosed)  should  be  submitted  in  answer  to  those 
received  from  Spain.  The  British  propositions  state :  1.  That 
the  Commanders  are  not  authorized  to  receive  propositions  as 
the  basis  of  a  peace,  but  will  convey  to  England  such  Spanish 
Commissioners  as  may  be  selected  to  treat  for  one.  2.  That 
the  AdmiraFs  instructions  prevent  him  from  acceding  to  more 
than  a  partial  armistice,  which  he  grants  on  condition  that 
British  vessels  shall  have  ingress  and  egress  at  Cadiz,  with  all 
commercial  advantages,  and  allowing  Spanish  coasters  to  navi- 
gate from  and  to  Cadiz,  with  provisions  and  merchandize,  but 
not  naval  or  military  stores,  which  must  be  admitted  under  a 
special  communication.  3.  That  passports  will  be  given  for 
feluccas  conveying  officers  and  intelligence  to  the  colonies,  to 
counteract  the  views  of  the  common  enemy.  4.  That  imme- 
diate steps  must  be  taken  to  reduce  or  destroy  the  French 
squadron  and  making  the  crews  prisoners  of  war ;  and  that  all 
French  privateers,  &;c.,  shall  be  excluded  from  the  Spanish 
ports. 