

On  board  the  Donegal,  off  Mondego  River,  August  1,  1808. 

Encloses  despatches  which  he  received  on  the  25th  July 
from  General  Spencer,  who  had  landed  at  Puerto  Santa  Maria, 
and  had  determined  to  remain  in  Andalusia.  After  consulting- 
Sir  C.  Cotton,  Sir  Arthur  thought  it  proper  to  order  General 
Spencer  to  embark  and  join  him,  unless  he  should  be  engaged 
in  any  operation  which  it  might  be  unsafe  to  relinquish. 
General  Spencer  being  in  great  distress  for  money.  Sir  Arthur 
has  authorized  him  to  draw  upon  England  for  c£^100,000.  He 
encloses  copies  of  his  letters  to  General  Spencer,  stating  that 
the  orders  he  has  given  have  been  occasioned  by  the  positive 
directions  of  his  Majesty's  Ministers  that  he  should  make  an 
attack  on  the  French  troops  in  the  Tagus ;  and  he  has  since 
learned  that  Dupont  was  defeated  and  surrendered  on  the 
20th ;  consequently,  the  assistance  of  General  Spencer''s  corps 
in  that  quarter  could  no  longer  be  necessary. 

In  consequence  of  the  information  he  has  received  concern- 
ing the  enemy''s  forces  in  Portugal,  he  is  induced  to  delay  the 
commencement  of  his  operations  till  the  arrival  of  the  rein- 
forcement from  England,  or  of  General  Spencer.  The  enemy''s 
position  near  the  Tagus  appears  so  strong,  that  an  attack  there 
is  impracticable,  without  making  a  diversion  to  the  northward. 
Cascaes  Bay  cannot  be  approached  without  silencing  the  forts 
and  works,  which  the  shipping  seem  scarcely  able  to  do.  From 
Cascaes  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Roca,  there  are  small  bays, 
where  small  bodies  of  men  could  be  disembarked  in  moderate 


160  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

weather,  but  the  surf  would  render  ^the  landing  of  stores  pre- 
carious, and  the  vicinity  of  the  enemy,  joined  to  the  want  of 
resources  in  the  country,  would  increase  the  embarrassment. 
These  considerations,  added  to  the  advantages  to  be  calculated 
from  the  co-operation  of  the  Portuguese  troops,  have  induced 
him  to  decide  on  a  landing  to  the  northward. 

No  place  to  the  north  of  Lisbon,  nearer  than  Mondego,  would 
answer  for  landing,  except,  perhaps,  Peniche ;  but  the  fort  on 
that  peninsula  is  strong  and  well  garrisoned ;  and  the  ordnance 
and  ammunition  mentioned  in  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the 
30th  June  are  not  yet  arrived. 

He  considers  the  possession  of  the  city  and  harbour  of  Lis- 
bon as  his  immediate  object.  The  forts  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Tagus  must  first  be  attained ;  those  of  Cascaes  and  St.  Julian 
must  be  attacked  with  heavy  ordnance,  which  it  is  obvious  the 
enemy  will  not  allow  until  driven  from  the  field.  He  there- 
fore prefers  attacking  the  enemy'^s  line  of  defence  from  the 
heights  to  the  northward  of  Lisbon,  which  is  likely  to  bring 
the  contest  to  the  issue  of  a  battle  in  the  field. 