


1808.]  '  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  155 

Chief.  The  defeat  of  17,000  peasants  by  Dupont  at  the  bridge 
of  Alcolea  has  made  them  look  up  to  the  regulars,  who  are,  in 
general,  in  good  order,  and  well  equipped.  They  have  a  pro- 
portion of  near  4,000  cavalry  and  a  large  quantity  of  artillery, 
as  Seville  has  a  foundry  and  large  depot.  Many  small  de- 
tachments of  the  enemy  have  been  cut  off.  Dupont  has  pushed 
to  Cordova,  where  he  is  strengthening  himself.  The  Morena 
passes  have  been  occupied  by  5,000  Spaniards,  the  road  broken 
up,  and,  it  is  supposed,  all  communication  cut  off. 

Proclamations  are  circulated  by  the  Spaniards,  inviting  the 
Portuguese  to  join  in  their  cause.  The  latter  have  already 
risen  at  Faro,  where  they  have  taken  or  destroyed  200  French, 
and  have  seized  the  arms  and  ammunition,  which  the  French 
had  collected  in  a  depot,  as  well  as  40,000  dollars. 

Considering  the  Spanish  frontier  on  the  Guadiana  secure  for 
the  present,  he  will  proceed  to  the  Tagus :  he  has  written 
letters  (of  which  he  encloses  copies)  to  Castaiios  and  the  Council 
of  Seville,  acquainting  them'  with  his  motives  for  this  determi- 
nation. 

H.M.S.  Hibernia,  off  Lisbon,  June  24,  1808. 

On  his  arrival  off  Lisbon,  he  learned  from  Sir  C.  Cotton  that 
the  Portuguese  are  in  a  ripe  state  to  throw  off  the  Freijch 
yoke ;  but  the  French  force,  concentrated  at  Lisbon  and  the 
neighbourhood,  is  very  considerable,  and  fully  capable  of 
resisting  a  much  larger  force  than  he  could  land.  He  has  de- 
termined, with  Sir  C.  Cotton's  concurrence,  to  return  with  the 
troops  to  Ayamonte;  and,  if  he  finds  the  frontiers  quiet,  to 
proceed  to  Cadiz,  to  act  as  circumstances  may  require. 

H.M.S.  Scout,  off  St.  Lucar,  June  26,  1808. 
Ayamonte  is  perfectly  quiet.  The  Portuguese  are  in  pos- 
session of  Villa  Real  and  Castro  Marin,  where  the  French  have 
surrendered.  The  whole  province  of  Algarve  is  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Portuguese.  He  has  announced  his  return  to  Cas- 
tanos  and  the  Council. 


156  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Puerto  Santa  Maria,  July  3,  1808. 
-  General  Morla  having  offered  him  barracks  at  Porto  Santa 
Maria,  he  has  landed  there.  Morla  has  stated  to  him  that  he 
shall  look  to  his  assistance  to  defend  Cadiz,  in  the  event  of  any 
misfortune  happening  to  Castanos"*  army.  With  this  view,  he 
will  remain  on  shore,  but  will  not  advance  into  the  interior,  as 
his  corps  is  too  small  and  insufficiently  equipped  for  field 
operations.  The  French  are  said  to  have  been  completely  de- 
feated near  Saragossa ;  and  Dupont  is  reported  to  have  retired 
to  Andujar,  much  in  want  of  supplies,  while  Castanos  is 
marching  to  give  him  battle. 