

These  proposals  were  accordingly  despatched  to  the  Supreme 
Council,  whose  answer  is  not  yet  received,  but  is  expected  to 
be  satisfactory.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Spanish  General  at 
Cadiz  is  preparing  to  attack  the  French  squadron  with  batteries, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  151 

which  are  nearly  completed,  and  Admiral  Purvis  has  been 
requested  to  anchor  his  ships  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and 
give  assistance,  if  necessary ;  but  the  aid  of  the  British  troops 
in  the  batteries  has  been  declined.  Sir  George  Smith  is  to 
remain  at  Cadiz,  to  communicate  between  the  Spanish  and 
British  Generals. 

OflFCadiz,  June6,  1808. 

Encloses  proclamations  and  papers,  marking  the  general 
disposition  of  the  Spanish  people  to  resist  the  French.  He 
adds  that  a  most  respectable  form  of  government  has  been 
temporarily  established  at  Seville,  according  to  laws  of  the 
nation  on  occasions  like  the  present,  and  at  the  instigation  of 
the  people  themselves,  who  appear  to  pay  due  obedience  to  it. 
He  learns  that  there  is  at  present  no  want  of  money ;  but  that 
some  pieces  of  ordnance,  50  or  60,000  stand  of  arms,  and  a 
large  supply  of  ammunition,  are  indispensable.  200,000  men 
are  said  to  be  in  arms,  in  the  different  provinces,  and  are  taking 
up  the  positions  thought  to  be  the  most  eligible.  It  is  intended 
to  act  on  the  defensive  as  much  as  possible,  confining  their 
oiFensive  operations  to  cutting  off  the  enemy's  supplies  and 
small  detachments. 

It  has  been  hinted  to  him  that  it  might  be  advantageous  for 
a  British  force  to  advance  to  Seville,  and  to  act  with  the 
Spanish  troops  ;  he  has  determined,  however,  not  to  venture 
into  the  interior,  but  to  confine  his  co-operation  to  the  gar- 
risoning of  Cadiz  (if  called  upon),  till  he  shall  receive  orders 
from  home.  Sir  Hew  Ualrymple  suggests  a  diversion  at  the 
Tagus,  but  General  Spencer  thinks  it  his  indispensable  duty  to 
remain  off  Cadiz  till  the  Spanish  and  French  squadrons  are 
secured  from  the  enemy,  or  till  all  hopes  of  that  object  are  at 
an  end. 

He  thinks  the  objects  on  his  present  station  too  important 
to  be  relinquished  for  Minorca,  which,  if  the  former  succeed, 
must  be  gained  as  a  natural  consequence.  Brigadier-General 
Nightingale  and   Sir  George  Smith  concur  in  this  opinion ; 


152  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

but  he  will   keep  himself  prepared  for  the  latter  object,   if 
necessary. 

It  is  reported  that  10,000  French  have  entered  Estremadura, 
and  that  a  similar  force  has  passed  the  Sierra  Morena — 4,000 
are  also  said  to  be  marching  for  Portugal.  The  Spaniards 
have  already  assembled  85,000  at  and  near  Seville.  General 
Castafios  has  moved  to  Ecija  with  1 5,000  men  from  St.  Rocq, 
Algesiras,  and  a  part  of  the  garrison  of  Ceuta :  he  commands 
the  advanced  corps  to  be  opposed  to  the  French.  The  highest 
enthusiasm  animates  all  classes. 