

The  jealousy  subsisting  between  the  northern  and  southern 
provinces  is  likely  to  present  many  obstacles  to  this  plan, 
which  would  be  warmly  supported  by  the  northern  provinces, 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  171 

where  the  people  are  proud  of  having  first  taken  up  arms,  and 
are  more  warlike  and  industrious  than  the  southern  inhabit- 
ants, as  well  as  more  attached  to  the  English. 

The  present  revolution  is  the  work  of  the  common  people, 
excited  by  the  Spaniards,  and  brought  into  some  system  by 
the  priests ;  and  Baron  Decken  thinks  that  the  Church  alone 
can  keep  the  people  in  order.  The  nobles  are  opposed  to  the 
Church,  and  suspected  by  the  people.  The  Bishop  is  of  a 
mild  and  afiable  disposition,  without  great  knowledge  or  talents 
for  business ;  but  appears  to  be  the  best  person  to  be  at  the 
head  of  the  Government.  Religious  motives  alone  can  actuate 
the  Portuguese,  as  they  have  no  attachment  to  their  royal 
family,  and  no  constitution  to  defend.  Nothing  can  be  done 
in  Portugal,  if  their  Government  be  not  supported  and  directed 
by  England ;  with  which  view  the  Baron  recommends  that  a 
Minister  of  great  experience  should  be  sent  from  England. 
The  Portuguese  might  contribute  in  a  great  measure  to  the 
defence  of  Spain ;  but,  unless  forced  by  Great  Britain,  they 
will  form  no  regular  troops,  under  pretence  that  they  cannot 
pay  them :  their  revenues  will  go  to  the  Church,  as  well  as  the 
money  from  England  j  and  Portugal  will  require  British  troops 
to  protect  its  own  Government  against  the  disaffected.  The 
Prince's  return  will  be  no  remedy,  but  may  even  increase  the 
evil.  These  dangers  may  be  averted  by  the  presence  and  ex- 
ertions of  a  British  Minister,  which  would  be  more  effectual 
than  the  influence  of  a  military  commander,  whose  interference 
might  wound  the  pride  of  the  nation,  and  irritate  the  monks. 

Oporto,  August  28,  1808. 
Alentejo  and  Algarve  have  sent  deputies  to  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  to  whose  authority  a  part  of  Estremadura  has  likewise 
submitted ;  and  the  whole  kingdom  seems  to  acknowledge  this 
temporary  Government,  except  Lisbon  and  St.  Ubes.  Those 
towns  are  still  in  possession  of  the  French ;  but  the  Bishop  is 
convinced  that  Lisbon,  when  evacuated,  will  oppose  the  Oporto 


1  72  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Government,  and  will  be  supported  by  the  members  of  the 
former  Regency,  who  are  anxious  to  resume  their  power,  for 
which  they  have  already  taken  steps.  Baron  Decken  thinks 
the  opposite  parties  might  be  reconciled  by  adding  to  the  pre- 
sent temporary  Government  such  of  the  members  of  the  Re- 
gency as  have  preserved  their  loyalty  and  the  confidence  of 
the  people.  To  this  the  Bishop  will  not  object,  if  it  be  pro- 
posed by  the  British  General.  Baron  Decken  has  therefore 
proposed  to  the  British  General  to  make  known,  by  a  Publi- 
candum  to  the  Portuguese,  as  soon  as  Lisbon  is  in  our  hands, 
that  he  will  consider  the  temporary  Government  at  Oporto  as 
the  lawful  Government  of  the  kingdom  till  the  Prince"'s  plea- 
sure be  known ;  adding  to  it  the  following  four  members  of  the 
former  Regency :  Don  Francisco  de  Noronha ;  Francisco  da 
Cunha ;  the  Montiro  Mor ;  the  principal  Castro.  These  four 
have  been  pointed  out  by  the  Bishop  as  faithful  to  their  sove- 
reign. The  Bishop  should  be  considered  President,  which  is 
less  objectionable,  as  the  President  of  the  former  Regency  is 
in  France. 