

The  enemy  appeared  at  8  p.m.,  in  large  bodies  of  cavalry  on 
the  left,  upon  the  heights  on  the  road  to  Lourinha.  Their 
attack  began  in  several  columns  upon  the  whole  of  the  troops 
on  these  heights,  to  which  the  brigades  of  Generals  Ferguson, 
Nightingale,  Bowes,  and  Acland  had  been  moved  on  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  enemy  in  that  quarter.  On  the  left,  the  eneray, 
having  advanced  close,  notwithstanding  the  fire  of  the  riflemen, 
were  driven  back  by  the  bayonet.  On  the  right,  they  were  also 
repulsed  by  the  bayonet ;  and  they  were  attacked  on  the  flank 
by  Brigadier-General  Acland's  brigade  and  the  artillery  on 
the  heights.  At  length,  after  a  desperate  contest,  the  enemy 
was  driven  back  in  confusion,  with  the  loss  of  seven  pieces  of 
cannon  and  many  prisoners.  The  detachment  of  the  20th 
Light  Dragoons  pursued,  but  the  enemy's  cavalry  was  greatly 
superior  in  number. 

The  attack  upon  the  heights  had  been  supported  by  a  large 
body  of  cavalry  with  great  impetuosity,  but  which  were  gal- 
lantly repulsed  by  General  Ferguson's  and  the  other  brigades 
on  that  position,  and  six  pieces  of  cannon  were  taken,  with 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  167 

many  prisoners.     The  enemy  afterwards  attempted  to  recover 
a  part  of  tlie  artillery,  but  was  again  forced  to  retire. 

The  whole  French  force  appeared  to  be  employed  in  this 
action,  under  Junot  in  person.  The  enemy  was  certainly 
superior  in  cavalry  and  artillery ;  has  lost  thirteen  pieces  of 
cannon,  twenty-three  ammunition  waggons,  one  general  officer 
(Breni^re)  wounded  and  made  prisoner,  and  a  great  number 
of  officers  and  soldiers,  killed,  wounded,  and  taken.  Not  more 
than  half  the  British  army  was  actually  engaged.  Sir  Arthur 
bestows  great  praises  on  the  troops,  General  Officers,  and 
Staff.  He  encloses  a  return  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing ; 
and  adds  that  he  has  learned  that  a  French  General  Officer,  sup- 
posed to  be  General  Thiebault,  has  been  found  dead  on  the  field. 


NO.  IV. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  BRIGADIER- GENERAL  BARON 

DECKEN, 

ON  THE  AFFAIRS  OF  PORTUGAL. 

Oporto,  August  18,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oporto  on  the  17th.  He  has  seen  the  Bishop, 
who  requests  that  money  and  arms  may  be  sent  to  Oporto ; 
30,000  stand  of  arms  being  required  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
provinces  Entre  Minho  y  Douro,  Tra  los  Montes,  Beira,  and 
Estremadura ;  and  also  requests  that  2,000  British  troops  be 
sent  without  delay  to  Oporto,  to  protect  the  temporary  Govern- 
ment against  the  French  and  the  French  party  there,  which 
the  Bishop  represents  to  be  very  strong.  Baron  Decken  has 
represented  to  the  Commander  of  the  British  forces  that,  by 
forming  militia  at  Oporto  and  in  the  province  of  Entre  Minho 
y  Douro,  it  would  be  easy  to  defend  the  passes,  as,  in  the  pre- 
sent circumstances,  the  French  could  not  send  a  large  force 
thither ;  but,  to  remove  the  Bishop"*s  fears  respecting  the  dis- 
position of  the  inhabitants,  he  has  recommended  the  sending  a 
small  garrison  of  British  troops  to  Oporto. 