

He  marched  from  Lynga  on  the  13th,  reached  Alcoba^a  on 
the  14th,  which  the  enemy  had  abandoned  the  preceding  night, 
and  arrived  on  the  15th  at  Calda^.  The  enemy,  4,000  in 
number,  were  posted  ten  miles  from  thence,  at  Borica,  and 
they  occupied  with  their  outposts  Obidos,  three  miles  from 
Caldas,  of  which  Sir  Arthur  dispossessed  them,  by  detaching 
four  companies  of  riflemen,  of  the  60th  and  95th  Regiments. 
They  made  a  trifling  resistance,  retired,  and  were  pursued  for 
three  miles,  where  they  were  reinforced  by  a  superior  body  of 
the  enemy ;  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  Major-General 
Spencer  was  enabled  to  effect  the  retreat  of  the  riflemen  to 
Obidos,  of  which  they  keep  possession  ;  the  enemy  having  re- 
treated entirely  from  the  neighbourhood.  In  this  affair,  Lieu- 
tenant Bunbury,  of  the  95th,  was  killed,  and  the  Honourable 
Captain  Pakenham  slightly  wounded. 

Besides  the  corps  of  4,000  men,  commanded  by  Laborde 
and  Lhomenie,  retiring  in  front  of  the  army  by  the  sea-road  to- 
wards Lisbon,  there  is  another  of  5,000  at  Rio  Major,  under 
Loison,  likely  to  retire  by  the  great  Lisbon  road,  and  to  join 
the  former  near  Lisbon,  with  whatever  troops  can  be  spared 
from  the  defence  of  the  fortifications.  Loison's  corps  is  under- 
stood to  have  suffered  in  its  operations  against  the  Spanish 
troops  and  the  insurgents  in  Alentejo. 

M  2 


164  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

At  Alcoba^a,  Captain  Malcolm  landed  a  supply :  he  is  now 
off  Peniche. 

Head-Quarters  at  Caldas,  August  16,  1808. 

Encloses  copies  of  letters  which  he  has  received  from  Mr. 
Stuart  and  Colonel  Doyle,  from  Corunna,  and  of  letters  which 
he  has  in  consequence  written  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard,  to  be 
delivered  on  his  arrival.  The  letters  from  Corunna  state  that 
Cuesta,  having  quarrelled  with  General  Blake,  after  the  battle 
of  Rio  Seco,  had  gone  with  all  the  cavalry  (600  men)  to  San- 
tander,  where  he  was  endeavouring  to  organize  the  peasants ; 
while  Blake  had  established  himself  near  Astorga.  Santander, 
being  evacuated  by  the  French,  was  taken  possession  of  by  the 
Asturians  on  the  15th.  Bessi^res,  reinforced,  had  advanced  to 
Benevente,  from  whence  he  detached  4,000  men  to  Leon, 
which  capitulated  on  the  21st.  His  object  seemed  to  be  either 
to  advance  on  Astorga  and  attack  Blake,  or  to  push  on  to- 
wards Portugal,  in  order  to  join  the  corps  at  Almeida,  and 
extricate  Junot. 

Castarios  had  proposed  to  Blake  that  he  should  march  for- 
ward to  Madrid ;  but,  in  the  present  state  of  his  army,  (con- 
sisting of  23,000  men,  chiefly  recruits,  and  badly  armed)  that 
seems  impracticable.  The  Asturians  have  received  stores  and 
money  from  Government,  but  are  not  going  on  as  could  be 
wished,  owing  to  their  disputes  at  home  and  with  the  other 
:provinces  and  Juntas.  It  is  added  by  Colonel  Doyle,  who 
encloses  a  statement  of  the  disposition  and  force  of  the  Gal- 
lician  army,  that  he  understands  the  army  of  Estremadura  has 
a  large  body  of  cavalry,  which  he  wishes  to  join  Blake,  sup- 
posing it  no  longer  wanted  in  Estremadura  or  Portugal,  and 
that  the  French  have  been  beaten  at  Valencia,  and  have  lost 
2,000  men.  General  Moncey  being  wounded. 