


174  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

1.  A  corps  of  observation,  consisting  of  Militia,  8,800, 
Line,  2,634;  commanded  by  Brigadier  Bacellar,  blockading 
Almeida,  and  defending  Tras  os  Montes.  But  of  the  troops 
of  the  line  only  small  divisions  have  joined,  and  the  corps 
actually  consists  of  about  5,000  men,  badly  armed  in  general. 
2.  Principal  army  in  Estremadura,  commanded  by  Mareschal  de 
Campo  Bernardin  Freire  d'Andrade,  to  consist  of  15,902  men; 
but,  as  many  of  the  regiments  have  not  yet  joined,  the  whole 
army  at  present  does  not  exceed  8,000.  S.  Eeserve,  destined  for 
the  ulterior  defence  of  the  country,  and  to  reinforce  either  the 
corps  of  observation,  or  the  army  of  Estremadura.  This  reserve 
is  to  consist  of  10,400  Militia,  under  Brigadier  Parreirar,  but 
the  number  armed  does  not  exceed  600,  who  belong  to  diflferent 
regiments  of  Militia,  and  are  in  garrison  at  Oporto. 

The  want  of  money,  officers,  arms,  clothing,  and  accoutre- 
ments, has  occasioned  much  delay  and  irregularity  in  orga- 
nizing the  troops,  which  has  gone  on  slowly  from  the  time  that 
it  became  doubtful  whether  the  Bishop  was  to  remain  at  the 
head  of  the  Government.  The  officers,  too,  who  are  superin- 
tending the  formation  of  the  army,  have  neglected  to  send 
proper  reports  to  the  Bishop.  Nothing  can  be  done  till  the 
Regency  is  established,  and  a  certain  plan  made  out.  He  has 
not  yet  been  able  to  obtain  any  correct  information  respecting 
the  artillery  and  ammunition. 

Oporto,  September  20,  1808. 

Brigadier-General  Anstruther  has  arrived  at  Oporto,  from 
Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  to  propose  to  the  Bishop  that  he  should 
be  appointed  President  of  the  Regency. 

Encloses  the  Report  of  Captain  Heiliger,  whom  Baron 
Decken  had  sent  to  examine  the  provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes 
and  Entre  Minho  y  Douro.  The  former  province  Captain 
Heiliger  describes  to  be  defended  by  two  chains  of  mountains 
running  from  north  to  south,  and  by  the  Tamega,  which  forms 
the  frontier  of  Gallicia,  and  lias  a  deep  channel.  The  roads 
are  generally  uneven  and  narrow,   passable  only  by   mules. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  175 

The  province  is  destitute  of  fortresses,  but  seems,  from  its 
situation,  to  be  capable  of  an  easy  defence,  for  which  purpose 
Captain  Heiliger  offers  a  plan. 

The  few  cavalry  which  Captain  Heiliger  saw  in  the  two  pro- 
vinces were  tolerably  mounted,  but  indifferently  armed  and 
accoutred.  The  Militia  were,  the  greater  part  of  them,  neither 
armed  nor  clothed ;  and  the  volunteers  wear  their  peasant'*s 
dress,  armed  partly  with  guns,  partly  with  pikes.  Magazines 
are  established,  and  commissaries  appointed  to  supply  them. 
The  breed  of  horses  is  indifferent  in  both  provinces  ;  the  mules 
good  and  easy  to  procure.  Bullocks  are  generally  used  for 
draught,  and  may  be  easily  supplied :  those  of  Tras  os  Montes 
are  of  most  excellent  quality.  There  are  good  sheep,  swine,  and 
goats,  in  abundance. 