

Head-Quarter8  at  Villa  Verde,  August  17,  1808. 
States  that   Laborde,   having  continued  in  his  position  of 
Role9a,  an  eminence  with  a  plain  in  its  front,  at  the  end  of  a 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  165 

valley,  and  closed  to  the  southward  by  mountains  having  four 
or  five  passes,  which  were  covered  by  the  enemy,  he  deter- 
mined to  attack  him  that  morning.  Laborde's  force  consisted 
of  at  least  6,000,  with  five  pieces  of  cannon ;  and  there  was 
reason  to  believe  that  Loison  (who  was  at  Rio  Mayor)  would 
join  him  in  the  course  of  the  night.  Sir  Arthur  formed  three 
columns,  and  moved  from  Obidos  at  7  in  the  morning.  The 
enemy,  on  the  advance  of  the  British,  retired  into  the  moun- 
tains with  great  celerity  and  little  loss.  They  were  at- 
tacked with  great  impetuosity,  made  a  desperate  defence, 
but  were  at  length  driven  from  all  their  positions.  They 
effected  their  retreat,  however,  in  good  order,  owing  to  Sir 
Arthur's  want  of  cavalry,  and  to  the  difficulty  of  bringing 
troops  and  cannon  with  celerity  up  the  passes  of  the  moun- 
tains. The  enemy's  loss  has  been  very  great,  including  three 
pieces  of  cannon.  Only  the  5th,  9th,  and  29th,  the  riflemen 
of  the  95th  and  60th,  and  the  flank  companies  of  Major- 
General  HilPs  brigade,  were  actually  engaged.  Their  numbers 
were  by  no  means  equal  to  the  enemy's,  and  their  conduct  de- 
serves the  highest  commendation.  He  expresses  his  acknow- 
ledgments for  the  support  he  has  received  from  Generals 
Spencer,  Ferguson,  Hill,  Nightingale,  and  Fane,  as  well  as 
other  officers ;  and  laments  the  loss  of  the  Hon.  Lieut-Colon6l 
Lake,  who  had  gallantly  distinguished  himself. 

Head- Quarters,  Lourinha,  August  18,  1808. 

Having  heard  that  Brigadier-General  Anstruther  was  off 
Peniche,  with  the  victuallers  and  store-ships,  he  has  ordered 
him  to  land,  and  has  moved  to  Lourinha,  to  protect  his  landing 
and  facilitate  the  junction. 

Loison  joined  Laborde  the  preceding  night  at  Torres  Vedras, 
and  they  are  stated  to  be  marching  towards  Lisbon.  He  also 
hears  that  Junot  has  arrived  at  Torres  Vedras,  with  a  small  corps 
from  Lisbon,  and  concludes  that  the  whole  French  force  will 
be  assembled  between  Torres  Vedras  and  the  capital  in  the 
course  of  a  few  days. 


166  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Vimiera,  August  21,  1808. 

Reports  that  the  enemy  had  attacked  him  at  Vimiera  that 
morning — describes  Vimiera  to  be  in  a  valley,  through  which 
runs  the  river  Maceira ;  at  the  back  and  to  the  west  and  north 
a  mountain,  which  touches  the  sea  on  the  west,  and  is  sepa- 
rated by  a  deep  ravine  on  the  east  from  the  heights  over  which 
the  road  passes  from  Lourinha  to  Vimiera.  The  greater  pari 
of  the  British  infantry  was  posted  on  this  mountain  with  eight 
pieces  of  artillery.  Brigadier-General  Fane,  with  his  riflemen, 
and  Brigadier-General  Anstruther's  brigade,  with  artillery, 
were  posted  on  a  hill  on  the  east  and  south  side  of  the  town, 
commanded  by  the  mountain,  and  commanding  all  the  neigh- 
bouring ground  to  the  south  and  east.  The  cavalry  and 
reserve  were  in  the  valley,  between  the  hills  on  which  the  in- 
fantry stood,  both  flanking  and  supporting  Brigadier-General 
Fane's  advanced  guard. 