

Oporto,  August  24,  1808. 

Encloses  a  report  from  the  General  commanding  the  Portu- 
guese troops  with  the  British  army,  detailing  the  proceedings 
up  to  the  19th  August,  including  the  attack  made  by  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  on  the  enemy,  on  the  17th. 

There  is  a  great  want  of  communication  with  Spain.  The 
Bishop  learns  that  the  French  have  been  reinforced  at  Burgos, 
and  possess  Valladolid ;  and,  fearing  that  an  army  might  ap- 
pear on  the  frontiers  before  the  French  at  Lisbon  have  surren- 
dered, he  has  desired  Baron  Decken  to  request  that  some 
British  troops  should  attack  Almeida,  which  he  considers  as 
the  key  to  the  province  of  Beira.  He  also  wishes  Abrantes  to 
be  occupied,  and  detachments  sent  from  thence  to  cut  ofi"  the 
communication  of  the  French  between  Lisbon  and  Elvas. 
Baron  Decken  has  persuaded  the  Bishop  to  send  an  officer  to 
the  Spanish  armies,  and  establish  a  mail  between  Braganza 
and  Oporto. 

The  Bishop  is  less  anxious  for  British  troops  at  Oporto, 
from  being  convinced  of  the  great  risk  the  French  would  run, 
in  advancing  so  far,  of  being  cut  off  by  the  British,  and  also 
from  considering  the  strength  of  the  mountains  separating  the 
provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes  and  Entre  Minho  y  Douro. 

From  the  confusion  which  prevails  in  the  temporary  Govern- 
ment at  Oporto,  Baron  Decken  has  found  it  impossible  to  ob- 
tain a  correct  knowledge  of  the  Portuguese  force.    The  Bishop 


170  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

has  permitted  him  to  make  proposals  for  a  re^^ular  distribution 
of  the  principal  branches  of  Government,  including  particularly 
a  War  Office.  By  a  printed  edict  of  the  Bishop,  the  regular 
force  of  the  three  northern  provinces  is  to  consist  of 

Infantry  of  the  line,  8  regiments,  each  .  1,659 
Battalions,  Light  Infantry,  4  .  .  .  .  846 
Cavalry,  4  regiments 453 

Making  a  total  of 18,468  troops. 

These  are  old  regiments,  which  have  been  garrisoned  in  the 
three  provinces ;  but  many  of  the  officers  are  gone  to  the 
Brazils,  and  others,  with  many  privates,  have  entered  the 
corps  raised  by  the  French,  so  that  two-thirds  are  new  levies. 
Sir  John  Moore  arrived  on  the  21st  at  Figueras,  where  his 
landing  is  delayed  until  mules  or  draught  bullocks  are  sent 
from  Oporto,  for  which  the  Baron  is  using  every  exertion.  In 
a  PS.  he  adds  that  intelligence  has  been  received  from  Coimbra 
of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley''s  victory  on  the  21st. 

Oporto,  August  26,  1808. 

The  Bishop  of  Oporto  has  signified  that,  if  the  British 
Government  should  wish  him  to  remain  at  the  head  of  affairs 
till  the  pleasure  of  the  Prince  Regent  be  known,  he  could  only 
accept  it  under  condition  of  remaining  at  Oporto,  where,  in 
that  case,  the  rest  of  the  temporary  Government  must  remain, 
even  after  the  French  have  been  forced  to  evacuate  the  country. 
This  the  people  at  Lisbon  will  most  probably  oppose ;  but  the 
Bishop  is  persuaded  that  the  people  at  Oporto  will  not  suffer 
him  to  depart  from  thence,  and  thinks  that  Lisbon,  when  the 
French  leave  it,  will  be  in  too  much  confusion  for  the  seat  of 
Government.  If  his  proposals  be  adopted,  he  wishes  that 
deputies  from  the  other  provinces  should  be  sent  to  Oporto. 