

The  confusion  likely  to  prevail  at  Lisbon  offers  a  fair  pre- 
tence for  fixing  the  temporary  Government,  in  the  first  instance, 
at  Oporto.  The  Bishop  sees  the  necessity  of  placing  a  British 
garrison  at  Lisbon ;  but,  wishing  the  feelings  of  the  people  to 
be  wounded  as  little  as  possible,  he  urges  the  placing  some 
Portuguese  troops  in  garrison  there,  under  a  Portuguese  ofiicer, 
who  would  receive  his  orders  from  the  British  military  Governor, 
but  might  direct  the  police  of  the  city ;  and  he  might  likewise 
organize  the  military  force  of  Estremadura.  The  Bishop  is 
convinced  that  the  Government  cannot  exist  without  the  sup- 
port of  British  troops,  and  hopes  that  6,000  men  will  be  left 
till  the  Portuguese  troops  are  organized. 

Oporto,  September  9,  1808. 
He  has  received  a  letter  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  expressing 
some  apprehension  of  the  nature  and  tendency  of  his  communi- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  173 

cations  with  the  Bishop  of  Oporto.  He  observes  that  he  has 
never  been  considered  by  the  Bishop  as  an  official  character ; 
that  the  latter  has  assumed  more  power  than  he  had  before  the 
Baron's  arrival ;  and  that  the  Bishop's  willingness  to  resign 
the  Government  is  the  best  proof  that  the  communications 
between  him  and  the  Baron  have  not  been  of  a  nature  to 
interfere  with  any  plans  which  Sir  Hew  may  wish  to  adopt  for 
the  Government  of  Portugal. 

Baron  Decken  requests  to  be  recalled.  The  Bishop  wishes  to 
give  him  the  direction  of  the  organization  of  the  Portuguese 
troops,  but  this  he  is  desirous  to  decline,  feeling  his  situation 
in  Portugal  extremely  unpleasant. 

Oporto,  September  10,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  a  letter  which  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  has 
received  from  Sir  Hew,  the  former,  conceiving  that  Sir  Hew 
could  not  do  otherwise  than  fix  the  seat  of  Government  at 
Lisbon,  wishes  to  resign  his  share  in  it,  but  will  use  his  in- 
fluence as  a  Bishop  to  support  the  measures  of  the  Govern- 
ment which  Sir  Hew  may  establish. 

Baron  Decken  regrets  the  Bishop's  resignation,  but  thinks 
that  the  Bishop  himself  is  not  dissatisfied  with  the  removal  of 
the  responsibility  attached  to  his  situation.  The  latter  has 
sent  an  officer  to  Sir  Hew  with  his  proposals  respecting  the 
Regency.  The  Baron  thinks  that  the  people  of  Oporto  and 
the  northern  provinces  will  be  displeased  with  the  Bishop's 
resignation.  Some  commotion  has  already  taken  place  at 
Oporto,  and  the  Bishop  has  taken  strong  measures  to  stop  it. 

Oporto,  September  13,  1808, 
Encloses  a  statement  of  the  establishment  and  organization 
of  the  Portuguese  troops.  ]^y  this  the  whole  force,  exclusiv^e 
of  artillery,  is  stated  to  be :  Infantry  of  the  Line,  18,272 ; 
Light  Infantry,  3,384;  Cavalry,  1,812  ;  Militia,  19,200  ;  and 
this  force,  supposed  to  be  fit  for  service,  was  to  be  divided  into 
three  parts,  viz. : — 