

The  country  is  better  calculated  for  defensive  than  offensive 
warfare ;  it  is  mountainous,  but  Entre  Minlio  y  Douro  is  well 
cultivated  and  peopled.  Tras  os  Montes  is  rocky,  thinly 
peopled,  and  indifferently  cultivated.  The  valleys  are  well 
wooded.  The  lower  orders  and  clergy  are  much  attached  to 
the  old  Government.  The  noblesse  are  chiefly  absent  in  the 
Brazils,  or  at  Lisbon,  and  seem  little  interested  in  the  cause  of 
the  country.  The  climate  is  colder  than  in  the  South,  though 
healthy.  The  winter  sets  in  in  November,  and  is  attended  with 
heavy  rains,  which  make  the  roads  nearly  impassable.  Both 
provinces  abound  with  water. 

Oporto,  September  25,  1808. 

The  Bishop  of  Oporto,  having  been  informed  by  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  that  he  has  been  elected  a  member  of  the  Regency, 
has  thought  it  his  duty  to  accept  the  appointment ;  he  appre- 
hends that  the  members  of  the  new  Regency  will  be  against 
him ;  but  flatters  himself  that  he  shall  have  Sir  Hew'*s  support, 
if  necessary,  especially  if,  after  some  time,  he  should  wish  to 
resign,  which  he  thinks  probable.  The  Bishop^s  appointment 
will  have  a  great  effect  towards  reconciling  the  inhabitants  of 
the  North  to  the  new  Regency. 


176  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

London,  November  25,  1808. 
Encloses  an  estimate  of  the  expense  of  a  Portuguese  army 
of  10,000  men  for  365  days,  including  pay  to  officers  and  men, 
and  of  the  number  of  rations  required  for  men  and  horses. 
The  former  he  calculates  would  amount  to  d£^l  18,443  145.  l^d. 
sterling.  Encloses  also  some  military  memorandums  respecting 
Portugal,  under  the  following  heads  : — 

1 .  Organization  of  the  Portuguese  army :  with  respect  to 
which  he  thinks,  from  the  jealousy  already  excited,  the  British 
Government  ought  to  interfere  as  little  as  possible.  The  Por- 
tuguese Government  intends  to  form  the  army  on  the  same 
establishment  as  it  was  before  ;  but  he  thinks,  considering  their 
wants,  it  would  be  advisable  to  reduce  the  regiments  to  half 
the  number.  He  recommends  a  subsidy  for  that  part  only  of 
the  Portuguese  troops  which  will  act  in  Spain.  He  believes 
the  revenues  of  Portugal  (which  have  always  been  carefully 
concealed)  could  maintain  25,000  regulars  and  30,000  militia; 
and  he  recommends  that,  if  money  be  granted  to  them,  it 
should  not  be  under  the  head  of  levy  money,  or  for  equipping, 
arming,  and  clothing  the  soldiers,  but  merely  for  subsistence  to 
those  who  have  taken  the  field. 

2.  Co-operation  of  the  Portuguese  troops  in  Spain :  which 
he  proposes  should  be  effected  by  sending  10,000  men  imme- 
diately to  Catalonia,  in  English  transports,  to  land  at  Tarra- 
gona. He  points  out  the  particular  regiments  which  are  in 
sufficient  forwardness  for  this  service,  and  mentions  Brigadier 
D.  Miguel  Pereira  Forjas  as  the  best  officer  to  command  them. 
He  thinks  the  Portuguese  themselves  would  prefer  serving  in 
Catalonia  to  any  other  part  of  Spain,  many  of  them  having 
formerly  served  there,  and  he  believes  they  would  rather  serve 
with  Spanish  troops  than  with  British. 