

3.  Arrangements  to  be  made  for  the  defence  of  Portugal. 
He  thinks,  while  a  British  army  is  in  Spain,  4,000  British 
troops,  including  some  cavalry,  would  he  sufficient  for  Portugal. 
Our  foreign  troops  would  answer  for  the  purpose,  but  should 


1808.]  LOUD  GASTLEREAGH.  177 

be  commanded  by  a  British  General  officer  of  hi<^h  rank,  sta- 
tioned at  Lisbon.  The  appointment  also  of  a  British  Minister 
at  Lisbon  might  do  away  the  prevailing  idea  that  England 
intends  to  treat  Portugal  as  a  colony.  The  British  troops 
should  chiefly  occupy  Lisbon,  and  the  forts  on  the  Tagus. 
The  fortresses  of  Almeida  and  Elvas  should  be  put  in  a  state 
of  defence.  As  the  provinces  of  Tras  os  Montes  and  Entre 
Minho  y  Douro  can  be  defended  by  an  irregular  force,  the 
Militia  there  should  be  formed  and  armed  immediately. 

4.  Supplies  to  be  drawn  from  Portugal  for  the  British  army 
in  Spain.  Under  this  head,  Baron  Decken  observes  that  bul- 
locks, mules,  horses,  &c.,  can  be  largely  supplied,  as  well  as 
drivers ;  and  a  corps  of  pioneers  and  artificers  might  be  easily 
formed ;  also,  he  believes,  one  of  pontoneers.  The  northern 
provinces  might  furnish  some  cattle  and  Indian  com. 


NO.  V. 
PRECIS  OF  CORRESPONDENCE  FROM  LORD  COLLINGWOOD, 

RELATING  TO  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  17,  1808. 
States  that,  on  receivins:  intelligence  from  Sir  Hew  Dal- 
rymple  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  Spain,  he  left  the  squadron  off 
Toulon,  under  Vice-Admiral  Thornborough,  and  arrived  at 
Cadiz  on  the  11th,  where  he  received,  on  the  17th,  Lord  Castle- 
reagh's  two  letters,  of  the  4th  of  June,  addressed  to  Eear- 
Admiral  Purvis.  Since  the  temper  of  the  nation  has  ceased 
to  be  doubtful,  the  Spanish  leaders  have  altered  their  tone 
with  respect  to  the  surrender  of  the  French  ships  to  us,  which 
they  mentioned  in  their  earlier  communications.  The  French 
Admiral  drew  them  up  in  the  channel  of  the  Caraccas,  hoping 
that  a  part  of  the  French  army  might  make  its  way  down  to 
the  Island  of  Leon.  On  the  8th  and  9th,  they  were  bombarded, 
and  on  the  14th  struck,  when  the  Spanish  flag  was  hoisted. 

VOL.  VII.  N 


178  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

The  country  seems  to  be  unanimous  in  resisting  the  French, 
who  are  said  to  be  exceedingly  embarrassed  by  the  want  of 
communication  between  their  armies.  Lord  Collinowood  states 
the  present  form  of  Government  in  Spain  to  be  very  defective. 
The  Juntas  appear  to  be  independent  of  each  other,  and  at 
present  their  correspondence  is  difficult. 

Lord  Collingwood  has  informed  the  Spanish  chiefs  that  it 
was  his  Majesty's  command  that  every  aid  should  be  given 
them  to  repel  the  French,  and  desired  them  to  point  out  how 
the  British  forces  could  be  most  useful  to  them.  The  proposal 
for  landing  our  troops  at  or  near  Cadiz  had  before  been  rejected ; 
and,  as  jealousy  and  apprehension  with  respect  to  our  views 
appeared  to  exist  on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards,  Major-General 
Spencer  had  acceded  to  a  proposal  of  theirs  to  go  to  Ayamonte, 
to  be  ready  to  act  as  circumstances  might  require. 