

The  Bishop  further  requests  that  4,000  British  troops  might 


168  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

be  sent  to  Coimbra,  to  which  Baron  Decken  has  answered  that 
this  must  depend  on  the  plan  of  operations  formed  by  the 
British  General,  who  would  no  doubt  protect  as  much  of  the 
country  as  possible. 

The  utmost  confusion  prevails  with  respect  to  military 
arrangements,  and  he  doubts  whether  he  shall  be  permitted  to 
interfere  in  forming  a  system  of  order. 

Oporto,  August  18,  1808. 

Relates  a  conversation  which  he  has  had  with  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  in  which  the  latter  confidentially  communicated  his 
intention  of  resigning  the  government  into  the  hands  of  the 
Regency  established  by  the  Prince  Regent  on  his  leaving  Por- 
tugal, and  requested  Baron  Decken  to  make  his  resolution 
known  to  the  British  Government  and  the  British  Command- 
ing Officer  in  Portugal.  The  Baron,  however,  has  reason  to 
believe  that  the  Bishop  would  not  dislike  to  keep  the  govern- 
ment in  his  hands,  if  it  could  be  done  by  the  interference  of 
the  British  Government. 

Oporto,  August  19,  1808. 

States  that  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  does  not  appear  to  have 
certain  intelligence  of  Spain,  but  supposes  Joseph  Bonaparte 
to  have  returned  to  Paris.  With  respect  to  Portugal,  it  is 
understood  that  6  or  700  French  are  at  Almeida,  (a  fortress 
requiring  a  garrison  of  3,000)  and  are  observed  by  6,000  Por- 
tuguese militia ;  that  1,000  French  are  at  Abrantes,  observed 
by  1,500  Spaniards  at  Castel  Branco ;  that  2,500  French  are 
at  Elvas,  the  most  important  post  in  Portugal ;  and  that  the 
rest  of  the  French,  said  to  consist  of  10,000  men,  are  at  Lis- 
bon, their  advanced  posts  extending  from  Peniche  to  Santarem. 
Almeida  and  Abrantes  seem  occupied  with  a  view  to  facihtate 
Bessi^res^  movement  to  their  assistance.  The  French  at  Lis- 
bon can  retire  on  Elvas,  which  Junot  is  likely  to  do ;  from 
thence,  however,  his  junction  with  the  army  at  Burgos  will  be 
difficult,  Estremadura  being  in  arms.  Badajoz  is  stated  to  be 
strongly  occupied  by  the  Spaniards. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  169 

The  Bishop  believes  the  French  to  have  retired  to  Burgos 
with  a  view  to  concentrate  their  forces,  and  receive  reinforce- 
ments from  France,  and  that  they  will  soon  advance.  Junot's 
position  is  very  strong,  and  the  Baron  fears  he  will  be  rein- 
forced. Some  Portuguese,  chiefly  of  the  nobility,  who  have 
been  arrested  for  being  friendly  to  the  French,  are  to  be  sent 
to  the  Brazils.  Out  of  10,000  Portuguese  troops  raised  by 
the  French,  only  1,600  are  said  to  have  reached  Paris.  The 
rest  have  deserted,  and  have  chiefly  joined  the  Spaniards. 