

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  28,  1808. 
States  that  the  Portufjuese  have  risen  ao^ainst  the  few  French 
remaining  at  Faro,  who  surrendered  without  much  opposition. 
A  Junta  has  been  formed  at  Faro,  of  which  the  Bishop  is  pre- 
sident ;  they  have  requested  troops  and  arms  from  Lord  Col- 
lingwood,  who  encloses  their  letter  and  his  answer,  in  which 
he  has  referred  them  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple.  Major-General 
Spencer,  having  gone  on  to  Lisbon  before  the  troops  found  the 
enemy  in  such  force  as  made  any  attempt  upon  them  hope- 
less, has  therefore  returned,  and  part  of  the  transports  are 
gone  to  water  at  Cadiz. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  3,  1808. 
States  that  Major-General  Spencer,  having  consulted  with 
the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  had  settled  that  all  the  troops  should 
go  into  that  port,  and  such  as  could  have  barracks  be  landed  at 
Port  St.  Mary,  where  the  General  will  wait  until  Sir  A.  Wel- 
lesley'*s  arrival.  The  Spaniards  seem  equally  averse  to  our 
holding  any  important  garrison,  or  taking  the  field  with  them  : 
and,  on  learning  that  Lord  Collingwood  intended  to  propose 
that  their  fleet  should  join  his  Majesty's  squadron  whenever 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  should  render  it  necessary,  they 
ordered  their  ships  to  the  upper  part  of  the  harbour,  and  began 
to  dismantle  them.     On  this  subject,  he  encloses  letters  from 


182  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Father  Gil  and  the  Governor  of  Cadiz,  and  from  himself  to 
Major  Cox,  the  Governor,  and  the  President  Saavedra.  Lord 
Collingwood  attributes  this  extraordinary  movement  not  to 
their  want  of  funds  to  maintain  their  navy  (which  the  Governor 
assigns  as  the  reason),  nor  to  any  want  of  confidence  in  us,  but 
to  a  feeling  that  they  are  not  acknowledged  as  the  Supreme 
Council  of  the  nation.  They  refer  Lord  CoUingwood  to  the 
Commander  at  Carthagena,  to  whom  he  has  written  a  letter,  of 
which  he  encloses  a  copy. 

He  transmits  a  paper  from  Badajoz,  giving  an  account  of  a 
battle,  said  to  have  been  fought  on  the  16th  June  near  Sara- 
gossa,  in  which  the  French  army  in  that  quarter  is  said  to 
have  been  annihilated.  He  encloses  a  letter  from  the  Em- 
peror of  Morocco's  Minister,  and  has  not  much  hope  of  being 
able  to  purchase  the  horses  required,  as  the  Mahometan  reli- 
gion forbids  them  to  be  sold  to  Christians.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, that,  if  Ceuta  could  be  given  up  to  him,  (of  which  Lord 
CoUingwood  sees  no  prospect)  the  Emperor  would  furnish  not 
only  horses,  but  whatever  else  his  country  produced. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  7,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  General  Morla,  with  intelligence  of 
the  success  of  the  army  and  peasantry  of  Catalonia  and  Va- 
lencia, who  have  repulsed  the  army  under  Marshal  Moncey, 
with  great  loss,  and  routed  General  Legi  near  Barcelona.  The 
inhabitants  of  Roussillon  have  joined  the  Catalonians.  Dupont 
expects  reinforcements  at  Anduxar,  but  General  Castafios 
means  to  attack  him,  and  has  requested  that  General  Spencer 
should  take  a  position  at  Xeres,  which  he  means  to  do  with 
part  of  his  forces.  The  want  of  horses  prevents  his  moving 
the  whole.  He  encloses  two  intercepted  letters  from  Junot  at 
Lisbon,  one  to  Buonaparte,  the  other  to  Murat :  he  thinks 
they  were  meant  for  deception,  and  that  Junot  is  about  to 
abandon  Lisbon,  either  for  Madrid,  or  to  reinforce  Dupont. 