

Enclosed  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Lord  CoUingwood,  con- 
taining an  application  from  the  Supreme  Junta  of  Arragon  for 
stores,  money,  and  a  corps  of  10  or  15,000  men,  to  which  he 
has  returned  for  answer,  that  he  has  been  t)bliged  to  employ 
the  troops  in  another  direction. 

Encloses  copies  of  two  letters,  «Sz:c.,  from  Lord  W.  Bentinck 
to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  dated  Madrid,  the  2nd  of  October, 
containing  the  particulars  of  several  communications  which  he 
has  had  with  the  Spanish  Government  and  General  Castanos, 
on  the  expediency  of  concentrating  the  British  force,  their  line 
of  march,  general  system  of  co-operation,  &;c. 

Encloses  also  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Stuart  to  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple,  dated  Aranjuez,  September  25th,  recommending 
his  using  every  endeavour  to  retard  the  execution  of  the  capi- 
tulation concluded  with  the  French,  as  far  as  it  regards  the 
departure  of  Junot^s  army,  and  assigning  his  reasons. 

Lisbon,  October  8,  1808. 

Is  making  every  exertion  to  detach  20,000  men,  with  the 
]  8th  and  German  Light  Dragoons  and  a  proportion  of  artillery, 
under  the  command  of  Sir  John  Moore,  to  whom  he  has  trans- 


192  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

ferred  the  superintendence  of  this  service,  and  directed  him  to 
correspond  with  Lord  Castlereagh.  He  will  consider  his  com- 
mand in  future  as  confined  to  Portugal,  and  obey  his  instruc- 
tions with  regard  to  the  remainder  of  the  troops,  and  the 
detachment  of  the  20th  Light  Dragoons.  It  is  probable  that 
Sir  John  Moore  will  move  the  whole  of  his  armament  by  land, 
with  the  exception  of  some  ordnance  and  other  heavy  stores. 

Lisbon,  October  8,  1808. 
Expresses  great  satisfaction  with  the  appointment  of  Sir 
John  Moore  to  the  command  in  Spain.  Laments  that  the 
cessation  of  hostilities  was  never  communicated,  until  the 
account  of  it  went  home  with  the  ratification  of  the  Conven- 
tion, and  then  in  general  terms,  without  explanatory  reasons. 
He  has  taken  up  his  head-quarters  at  Lisbon,  for  the  purpose 
of  facilitating  an  intercourse  with  the  Regency  and  other  lead- 
ing persons,  from  whom  he  experiences  more  cordiality  than  he 

did  at  first. 

Lisbon,  October  15,  1808. 

Transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  and  its  enclosures,  which  he 
has  received  from  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  by  which  it  appears  that, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  garrison  of  Almeida  at  Oporto,  great  dis- 
satisfaction was  expressed  by  the  populace  at  the  French  troops 
having  their  arms ;  in  consequence  of  which,  and  a  suspicion 
that  they  had  Portuguese  property  and  Church  plate  concealed 
in  their  baggage,  they  were  attacked  by  the  mob,  and  plun- 
dered, in  despite  of  the  English  escort,  consisting  of  200  men; 
that  the  effects  which  had  not  been  searched  by  the  mob  were 
embarked  and  inspected  by  a  deputation  of  Portnguese  magis- 
trates, but  nothing  found ;  that  some  few  church  ornaments, 
however,  being  contained  in  the  remainder,  the  populace  assem- 
bled in  arms,  to  the  amount  of  12,000  men,  with  artillery, 
and,  threatening  to  sink  the  vessels,  obliged  the  Frenchmen 
who  had  been  embarked  in  the  night  [to  submit  ?]  and  plun- 
dered the  transports  even  of  their  provisions,  and  of  the  cloth- 
ing of  the  master  and   men  ;    that  the  French   troops  were 