


190  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  pass  the  mountains.  Now,  the  Junta  only  style  themselves 
the  Supreme  Junta  of  Government,  "  Spain  and  the  Indies" 
beins:  left  out. 


NO.  VI. 
PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  HARRY  BURRARD. 

Audacious,  St.  Helen's,  July  29,  1808. 

He  has  not  yet  decided  whether  he  shall  proceed  in  a  light 
vessel  to  Oporto,  or  send  thither  a  confidential  person  to  col- 
lect information. 

Audacious,  off  Falmouth,  August  8,  1808. 

The  convoy  has  been  prevented  from  proceeding  any  further 
by  contrary  winds.  One  of  the  horse  transports  has  been  so 
much  damaged  by  a  Jamaica-man,  as  to  be  obliged  to  put  into 
Plymouth,  with  thirty-six  artillery  horses  and  their  drivers, 
which,  together  with  the  1st  brigade  of  German  Artillery,  and 
the  detachment  of  the  36th  reported  to  have  been  sent  into 
Portsmouth,  he  is  anxious  may  be  ordered  to  follow  as  soon  as 
possible. 

Off  Macera,  to  southward  of  Peniche,  August  20,  1808. 

Mentions  his  having  quitted  the  Audacious,  and  proceeded 
in  the  Brazen  to  Oporto  and  Mondego,  and  thence  to  Macera, 
opposite  to  which  anchorage  he  learns  that  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley  is  arrived.  Brigadier- General  Acland's  brigade  is  pre- 
paring to  land,  and  Sir  Harry  has  no  doubt  that  the  Audacious 
and  convoy  have  arrived  at  Mondego.  He  means  to  be  with 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  in  the  evening. 

Macera,  August  21,  1808. 

This  despatch  is  accompanied  by  a  report  from  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley,  containing  a  detailed  account  of  the  action,  which, 
Sir  Harry  states,  had  commenced  with  the  enemy  previous  to 
his  arrival  in  the  field  of  battle.  He  observes  that  Sir  Arthur'^s 
disposition  rendered  it  quite  unnecessary  for  him  to  direct  any 
alteration,  and  bears  testimony  to  the  great  spirit  and  good 
conduct  displayed  by  his  Majesty''s  troops  on  this  occasion. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  191 

Lisbon,  October  7,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  letters,  copies  of  which  are  enclosed,  from 
Lord  William  Bentinck,  he  is  preparing  to  march  20,000  men 
to  the  north  of  Spain  in  three  divisions :  one  large  column  of 
infantry  through  Ooimbra,  Almeida,  andCiudad  Rodrigo,  upon 
Burgos,  under  Sir  John  Moore  ;  the  cavalry  and  artillery  to 
join  General  Hope,  already  on  the  route  to  Elvas  ;  and  Lieu- 
tenant-General Fraser's  division  by  a  middle  route,  if  supplies 
can  be  furnished. 

In  consequence  of  an  application  from  Don  Joze  Elola, 
deputy  from  Catalonia,  he  has  granted  him  a  warrant  for 
6^*25,000,  one-half  of  which  he  had  received  in  dollars,  and  the 
other  in  bills,  and  has  proceeded  with  them  to  Cadiz.  The 
Catalonians  have  also  been  furnished  with  13,000  stand  of 
arras. 