

N  2 


180  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  encloses  a  Proclamation,  issued  by  the  Captain- General 
of  the  Baleares  Islands,  and  a  deposition  of  the  master  of  a 
Spanish  packet  from  Barcelona,  describing  the  attack  of  the 
French  there  by  the  populace  and  a  few  regulars. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  25,  1808. 

Encloses  a  list  of  requisitions  of  cloth,  linen,  horses,  and 
mules,  which  he  has  received  from  the  Governor  of  Cadiz  and 
the  President  of  the  Junta,  He  will  send  an  officer  to  com- 
municate with  the  Emperor  of  Morocco's  Minister,  in  order  to 
obtain  a  license  for  purchasing  horses,  and  will  pay  for  them 
when  bought. 

Dupont's  army  is  reduced  to  great  extremity ;  the  Spanish 
army  advanced,  but  their  head-quarters  are  still  at  TJtrera.  The 
appearance  of  the  troops  off  Ayamonte  had  a  good  effect  j 
200  muskets  were  given  from  the  ships  ;  and  the  few  French 
left  in  the  small  forts,  being  abandoned,  surrendered  to  the 
peasantry. 

The  winds  have  been  unfavourable  to  General  Spencer 
getting  round  Cape  St.  Vincent.  Sir  C.  Cotton  still  urges 
that  measure.  Lord  Collingwood  encloses  a  letter  he  has 
received  from  General  Castanos  on  the  subject  of  the  employ- 
ment of  our  army,  with  his  lordship"'s  answer,  in  which  he  lays 
great  stress  on  the  advantages  to  be  expected  from  General 
Spencer's  appearance  off  Lisbon.  He  has  ordered  ships  off 
Barcelona  to  cut  off  the  communication  with  France  by  sea, 
and  expects  that  the  troops  left  in  Monjuich  will  surrender. 
Two  Spanish  vessels  have  sailed  for  Rio  de  la  Plata  and  La 
Vera  Cruz  with  despatches.  As  vessels  from  America  are  still 
exposed  to  capture,  he  has  requested  the  Governor  of  Cadiz  to 
use  precaution  for  preventing  the  risk,  as  well  as  to  prevent 
vessels  sailing  from  the  Canaries. 

26th  June.  The  Sabrina  sloop  has  sailed  with  three  officers 
for  the  Caraccas  and  Carthagena ;  also,  a  manifesto  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  colonies.     Lord  Colling\^'ood  encloses  one  of 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  181 

them,  with  a  political  tract  published  at  Cadiz.  The  Volon- 
taire  is  gone  to  Barbary,  for  the  license  for  the  horses  and 
mules.  He  forwards  more  letters  to  the  Marquess  de  Romana 
and  his  officers,  for  whom  the  Spaniards  express  great  anxiety. 
Transmits  a  copy  of  the  proposals  made  by  Vice- Admiral 
Thornborough  to  the  Governor  of  the  Ealeares,  with  the 
answer,  and  a  copy  of  a  letter  to  the  latter  from  Lord  Colling- 
wood.  Also  a  letter  from  Major  Cox,  stating  that  the  proposed 
movement  of  the  British  troops  to  Lisbon  was  approved  by  the 
Junta,  and  detailing  the  proceedings  of  the  Spanish  army 
against  Dupont,  who  was  attempting  to  recross  the  Sierra 
Morena. 