

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  12,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Supreme  Council  (received  from 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEHEAGH.  183 

Cadiz),  stating  that  the  want  of  money  and  stores  was  the 
only  reason  for  dismantling  their  ships,  which,  in  consequence 
of  Lord  Collingwood's  letter,  they  have  now  resolved  to  be 
fitted,  depending  on  the  assistance  of  England  to  do  it.  Lord 
Collingwood  is  satisfied  with  the  stop  put  to  the  dismantling 
of  them  until  affairs  are  more  advanced  ;  as  he  thinks  the  ex- 
pence  of  maintaining  them  will  be  more  than  adequate  to  their 
services. 

The  southern  provinces  are  importunate  for  arms,  ammu- 
nition, and  money.  In  the  North,  the  armies  are  active  and 
successful :  the  pass  of  Figueras  is  in  possession  of  the 
Spaniards.  The  French  hold  Barcelona,  but  their  reinforce- 
ments have  been  cut  off.  He  will  apply  for  two  of  the  Spanish 
ships  at  Minorca,  to  join  in  sustaining  our  frigates  on  that 
coast.  General  Spencer,  for  want  of  horses  to  draw  his  cannon, 
has  not  advanced  beyond  Port  St.  Mary ;  and  General  Morla 
does  not  seem  anxious  that  he  should  do  so. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  15,  1808. 

The  demand  for  arms,  &c.,  being  every  where  urgently 
made,  he  has  directed  the  ships  on  the  eastern  coast  to  supply 
them  as  far  as  they  can,  and  has  written  to  Sir  Alexander  Ball 
for  2,000  muskets,  and  to  the  Governor  of  Majorca  to  employ 
the  forges  in  the  islands  in  making  pikes  for  the  peasantry  of 
Valencia  and  Catalonia.  By  the  best  accounts,  it  seems  that 
the  enemy  in  the  whole  Peninsula  do  not  exceed  60,000,  about 
40,0000  having  fallen. 

General  Spencer,  with  part  of  his  forces  intended  for  Xeres, 
is  still  at  Port  St.  Mary  ;  the  rest  on  board  the  transports. 
By  late  accounts,  it  appears  that  Figueras  is  not  absolutely  in 
possession  of  the  Spaniards,  but  expected  to  be  so. 

He  has  sent  Sir  C.  Cotton  a  communication  from  Mr. 
Brande  at  Magdalene  Islands,  that  the  French  Government 
had  seized  on  all  Russian  vessels  in  Italy  ;  that  the  two  Rus- 
sian ships  at  Toulon  were  unrigged  in  the  inner  harbour  ;  and 


184  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

that  a  report  was  current  in  Italy  of  hostilities  between  Kussia 
and  France.  And  he  has  proposed  to  Sir  C.  Cotton  to  open 
a  correspondence  with  Admiral  Siniavin,  giving  hini  this  in- 
formation. 

On  the  11th,  General  Castaiios  was  preparing  to  attack  the 
enemy  the  next  day.  Some  of  his  officers  have  been  arrested, 
and  sent  to  Seville.  The  war  is  supported  by  the  common 
people,  instigated  by  the  clergy.  Amongst  the  higher  orders 
there  are  many  doubtful  characters.  The  Marquess  de  la  Solana, 
just  before  his  death,  convened  a  council  of  nine  general  officers 
at  Cadiz,  who  (except  one)  gave  their  opinion  that  no  resist- 
ance should  he  made  to  the  French.  General  Morla  was  of 
the  number,  as  well  as  some  who  are  now  in  Castaiios''  army. 