

Dupont  and  some  French  officers  have  been  brought  to 
Port  St.  Mary's,  to  embark :  the  mob  attacked  them,  and 
took  away  their  plunder.  Dupont,  after  being  wounded  in  the 
head,  escaped  to  a  Spanish  ship. 

A  number  of  Spanish  vessels  are  said  to  have  sailed  from 
the  Bay,  with  Joseph  Buonaparte's  despatches  to  the  different 
colonies,  bearing  Spanish  colours,  but  with  an  eagle  instead  of 
the  lion. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  President  Saavedra,  stating  that 
the  Junta  knew  nothing  of  PrinceJ  Leopold's  voyage  to  Gi- 
braltar. Lord  Collingwood  has  seen  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  who 
expressed  his  desire  to  stay  there  to  support  the  views  of  Prince 
Leopold ;  but,  Lord  Collingwood  having  stated  to  him  that 


1808.1  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  189 

it  was  impossible  any  propositions  could  go  to  Spain  from  the 
ships  or  garrison  without  the  directions  of  his  Majesty's 
Government,  at  the  same  time  representing  the  impolicy  and 
inutility  of  making  any  such  proposals  to  a  provincial  Junta, 
the  Duke  seemed  satisfied  with  this  reasoning,  and  resolved  to 
proceed  to  England. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  OastlereagVs  letter  of  the  28th  July, 
received  by  the  vessel  which  has  brought  Mr.  Consul  Duff  and 
the  money  for  the  Spanish  Government  at  Seville.  He  had 
already  written  to  General  Morla,  recommending  him,  in  order 
to  reduce  the  expences,  that  the  ships  should  be  dismantled, 
which  the  Governor  meant  to  do.  He  believes  that  the  trans- 
ports already  sent  will  be  sufficient  for  embarking  Sir  John 
Stuart's  troops. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  16,  1808. 

He  has  been  informed  by  Major  Cox  that  General  Reding 
had  proceeded  to  the  northward  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  and 
that  Castaiios  meant  to  go  to  Madrid,  to  meet  Cuesta  and  the 
Valencian  General,  and  with  them  settle  some  plan  of  general 
operation. 

The  French  force  has  increased  in  Arrasfon,  and  Lord  Collins:- 
wood  has  great  apprehensions  for  Catalonia,  where  there  is  a 
great  want  of  cannon,  which  the  Junta  of  Seville  and  Governor 
of  Cadiz  will  not  supply.  He  learns  from  Major  Cox  that, 
Granada  having  refused  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the 
Junta  of  Seville,  it  had  been  determined  by  a  majority  of  the 
latter  that  the  army  of  Andalusia  should  be  sent  to  Granada, 
to  reduce  it  to  obedience  ;  but  General  Castanos  (who  was 
present,  though  not  a  member)  warmly  and  resolutely  refused 
to  employ  his  army  against  the  subjects  of  the  King,  or  for 
carrying  on  a  civil  war  between  the  provinces  ;  asserting  that 
it  was  not  the  army  of  Andalusia,  but  part  of  the  army  of 
Spain,  assembled  to  expel  the  invaders  of  their  country.  Be- 
fore the  debate,  it  was  said  that  the  Andalusian  army  was  not 