

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  11,  1808. 

States  that  Cuesta  has  beat  the  French  in  an  action  which 
lasted  four  days,  ending  on  the  18th  July.  Joseph  Buona- 
parte arrived  at  Madrid  on  the  20th,  and  quitted  it  on  the  31st, 
with  all  the  French  there  and  those  attached  to  them,  and  with 
such  valuable  effects  as  were  portable.  On  the  8rd  August, 
Castanos  received  a  message  from  Grouchy,  the  French  com- 
mandant, wishing  him  to  occupy  Madrid,  preserve  order,  and 
protect  the  French  sick.  Don  Pedro  Cevallos,  who  returned 
from  Bayonne  with  Joseph  Buonaparte,  remains  at  Madrid, 
and  has  proposed  the  assembling  of  the  Cortes. 

The  French  have  left  the  cannon  uninjured  at  Madrid,  and 
are  marching  towards  Segovia,  perhaps  to  join  Bessieres.  At 
Seville  and  Cadiz  there  is  abundance  of  cannon,  but  no  dis- 
position to  send  them  to  Valencia  or  Catalonia,  where  they  are 
much  wanted.  Lord  Collingwood  pressed  this  on  General 
Morla  without  effect. 

The  Junta  of  Seville  have  disavowed  claiming  any  supe- 
riority in  an  Address  which  is  enclosed.  He  has  given  Ge- 
neral Morla  passports  for  the  French  Admiral  and  some  other 
officers.  The  General  has  also  applied  for  two  ships  of  war, 
to  go  to  the  West  Indies  for  money. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  14,  1808. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  has  informed  him  that  the  Duke  of 
Orleans,  with  Prince  Leopold  of  Sicily,  has  arrived  at  Gibraltar, 
with  a  view  to  make  some  proposal  to  the  Junta  of  Seville  as 


188  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  a  Regency.  Fearing  that  this  intelligence  might  counte- 
nance suspicions  unfavourable  to  the  British  Government,  he 
has  written  to  the  President  of  the  Junta  at  Seville  and  the 
Governor-General  of  the  province,  announcing  that  the  arrival 
of  the  Princes  was  unexpected  by  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  and 
himself;  and  requesting  to  know  whether  it  was  in  consequence 
of  any  correspondence  of  the  Junta  with  the  Court  of  Palermo. 

He  encloses  General  Morla's  answer,  stating  that  he  is  un- 
informed on  the  subject,  but  is  inclined  to  doubt  that  the  Junta 
had  any  knowledge  or  share  in  the  step  which  the  Princes 
have  taken.  Lord  Collingwood  has  been  informed  by  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  (in  his  way  to  Portugal)  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans 
is  to  proceed  to  England,  and  the  Prince  to  return  to  Palermo 
as  soon  as  a  ship  is  appointed  to  convey  him :  but,  as  some  of 
the  Queen  of  Sicily ""s  councillors  are  in  the  suite  of  the  latter, 
Lord  Collingwood  is  not  without  fear  that  they  will,  from 
Gibraltar,  make  proposals  to  the  Junta. 

General  Eeding,  with  the  army  of  Granada,  is  said  to  have 
advanced  towards  Madrid,  and  the  Andalusian  army  to  have 
three  weeks'  leave  of  absence,  to  recover  from  the  fatigues  of 
the  campaign  at  their  houses. 