

Lord  Collingwood  has  opened  a  communication  with  Minorca 
and  Majorca.  The  Spaniards  had  nearly  12,000  men  in  those 
islands,  of  whom  a  large  portion  had  passed  over  to  join  the 
army  in  Catalonia,  under  a  convention  made  by  Vice-Admiral 
Thornborough. 

The  French  have  drawn  some  of  their  troops  from  Portugal 
to  Spain :  they  have  not  more  than  6,000  men  in  the  former, 
where  the  people  are  animated  in  proportion  as  the  French 
force  is  lessened.  Sir  C.  Cotton  has  already  pointed  out  the 
advantage  to  be  derived  from  General  Spencer's  appearance  on 
that  coast;  and  there  is  no  indication  of  much  zeal  in  the 
Russians  towards  their  allies. 

Off  Cadiz,  June  17,  1808. 

States  that  the  Deputies  from  the  Supreme  Council  at 
Seville  have  embarked  for  England ;  that  he  has  urged  that 
despatch  vessels  should  be  sent  to  the  Governors  of  the 
Colonies,  with  intelligence  of  recent  events,  for  which  purpose 
he  has  kept  a  sloop  of  war  in  readiness ;  that  the  Council 
allows  the  necessity  of  this;  but  there  is  still  some  delay, 
which  Lord  Collingwood   attributes  to  their   correspondence 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  179 

with  the  other  provinces  not  being  yet  fully  established.  He 
encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Bradford,  who  had  been  sent  by 
Major-General  Spencer  to  the  Spanish  head-quarters,  giving 
an  account  of  the  armed  force  in  that  neighbourhood,  which 
consists  of  12,000  regulars  and  three  regiments  of  peasantry; 
stating  also  that  the  arrival  of  the  English  at  Ayamonte  has 
had  the  best  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  people. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  June  19,  1808. 

States  that  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  and  Major-General  Spencer 
having  both  approved  of  the  proposal  that  the  latter  should 
proceed  to  Lisbon,  he  has  appointed  convoy  for  the  transports 
whenever  the  General  determines  to  go,  and  will  take  measures 
for  informing  the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  reinforcement 
coming  from  England  of  this  proceeding. 

General  Morla  and  General  Herrera  have  applied  to  him  for 
passports  for  a  ship  of  the  line  and  frigate,  to  carry  quicksilver 
to  America,  which  he  will  grant.  He  has  also  granted  pass- 
ports without  limit  to  vessels  conveying  supplies  along  the 
coast,  line-of-battle  ships  excepted. 

States  that  a  Spanish  gentleman,  who  had  gone  on  shore  at 
Cadiz  for  information,  received  an  impression  not  very  favour- 
able to  the  talents  of  the  persons  composing  the  Junta.  There 
being  no  accounts  from  Biscay,  and  unfavourable  ones  from 
Catalonia,  (Barcelona  being  totally  subdued),  much  anxiety 
prevails  at  Seville.  Their  wants  are  very  great.  The  Supreme 
Council  have  requested  a  loan  from  Gibraltar,  a  subsidy  of  fifty 
or  sixty  millions  of  reals,  and  a  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition, 
of  which  they  are  almost  destitute.  There  is  still  a  backward- 
ness in  sending  their  despatches  to  America.  The  Governor 
of  Cadiz  has  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Marquess  de  Romana, 
commanding  in  the  North  of  Germany,  which  Lord  Collingwood 
forwards,  noticing  that  the  Spaniards  express  great  hopes  that 
their  troops  in  that  quarter  may  be  in  such  a  situation  as  to 
enable  British  vessels  to  embark  them. 