

He  has  told  the  Junta  that  he  will  aid  them  in  fittins:  their 
transports,  but  cannot  allow  them  to  pass  on  the  sea  without 
instructions  from  home.     He  has,  moreover,  observed  that,  as 


186  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

they  have  not  the  means  of  sending  the  enemy  to  Rochefort, 
the  obligation  to  do  it  ceases. 

The  Spanish  army  will  not  proceed  immediately  to  Madrid, 
for  want  of  arrangements  and  equipage,  particularly  canteens. 
He  encloses  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  General  Morla,  relative  to 
the  conveyance  of  the  troops  ;  also  a  plan  of  the  position  of  the 
Spanish  and  French  forces,  when  the  latter  surrendered. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  29,  1808. 
Mentions  that  he  has  heard  that,  after  Dupont's  surrender, 
General  Castanos  proposed  to  the  Count  de  Tilly  to  advance 
and  get  possession  of  Madrid,  in  co-operation  with  the  Gal- 
lician  army,  and  to  procure  the  Cortes  to  be  assembled,  and 
a  Council  of  Government  formed  for  Spain  ;  but  that  the 
Count  de  Tilly  opposed  this,  suggesting  that  their  care  should 
be  Andalusia  and  Portugal,  and  leave  the  rest  of  Spain  to  take 
care  of  themselves,  without  embarrassing  themselves  with 
Cortes  or  Princes.  Castanos  desired  Captain  Whittingham  to 
mention  this  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  ;  Lord  CoUing-wood  not 
liking  to  write  on  the  subject. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  4,  1808. 
States  that  his  objections  to  the  transporting  of  the  French 
troops  had  been  well  received  by  the  Spaniards,  who  were 
glad  that  a  difficulty  was  started.  A  council  of  general 
officers  is  assembled  at  Seville,  to  arrange  future  proceedings. 
He  learns  from  Admiral  Martin  that  the  eastern  provinces 
are  in  great  want  of  arms,  and  the  French  maintain  themselves 
in  Catalonia,  and  have  relieved  Figueras.  A  great  part  of  the 
garrison  of  the  Balearic  Islands  had  passed  over  to  tJie  Conti- 
nent, and  the  Marquess  de  Palacio  was  gone  to  command  in 
Catalonia.  He  has  received  from  Gibraltar  about  55,000 
dollars,  which  he  shall  supply  to  the  Spanish  Governor. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  August  6,  1808. 
He  believes  the  Spaniards  are  satisfied  as  to  the  views  of 


]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  187 

the  British  Government.  He  hopes  that  the  supply  of  arms 
for  Catalonia  and  Valencia  will  be  sent  direct^  as  their  wants 
are  urgent.  The  Emperor  of  Morocco  has  refused  the 
Spaniards  mules  as  well  as  horses.  The  Dey  of  Algiers  has 
applied  for  naval  stores,  but,  as  his  ships  are  to  cruise  against 
those  provinces  which  we  are  protecting,  Lord  Collingwood  has 
recommended  the  Consul  civilly  to  represent  that  we  have 
not  the  means  of  furnishing  what  he  requires.  The  Phoebe 
frigate  is  ordered  to  receive  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple. 