

Encloses  a  copy  of  an  application  from  the  merchants  for  a 
packet  between  Cadiz  and  England,  and  some  papers  relating 
to  Valencia,  and  the  instructions  to  Eear-Admiral  Martin  for 
supplying  arms  to  the  Valencians,  &c. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  17,  1808. 

States  that  he  has  assured  the  southern  provinces  they  may 
expect  supplies  of  money,  arms,  and  ammunition,  and  suggests 
that  a  person  should  be  appointed  to  manage  his  accounts  with 
the  Treasury. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  21,  1808. 

States  that  Dupont  and  12,000  men  have  surrendered  as 
prisoners  of  war  on  the  26th. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  24,  1808. 

Gives  further  particulars  of  Dupont^s  surrender,  as  well  as 
of  the  capitulation  of  General  Bedel  and  5,000  men,  about  to 
reinforce  Dupont.  The  latter  are  to  be  sent  to  Rochefort  in 
Spanish  vessels,  carrying  away  their  arms.  Mentions  a  re- 
port that  Admiral  Valdez  has  been  murdered  by  the  people  in 
his  way  to  Madrid ;  and  encloses  a  list  of  the  persons  who 
composed  the  Marquess  de  Solana'*s  council,  noticed  in  his 
letter  of  the  15th. 


1808.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  185 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  25,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the  7th  of  June, 
and  replies  to  his  instructions  on  the  subject  of  occupying  an 
island  in  the  Archipelago,  and  of  entering  the  Black  Sea. 
Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Whittingham,  detailing  the 
operations  against  Dupont  and  Bedel,  with  the  terms  on  which 
they  respectively  capitulated ;  also  a  letter  from  Captain 
Stewart,  on  Turkish  affairs. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  25,  1808. 

From  the  delay  likely  to  take  place  before  supplies  of  money 
can  arrive  from  England,  he  has  been  induced  to  request  Sir 
Hew  Dairy mple  to  raise,  ^20,000  at  Gibraltar,  for  the  Go- 
vernment of  Seville. 

Ocean,  July  25,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  the  Junta  of  Seville,  with  one  written 
in  July,  1805,  by  the  Prince  of  Peace,  to  the  Governor  of  the 
Spanish  settlement  of  Melilla,  in  Africa,  proposing  to  support 
a  chief,  called  Ali  Beck,  in  his  rebellion  against  the  Emperor 
of  Morocco.  Lord  Collingwood  also  encloses  a  copy  of  his 
letter  to  Major  Cox,  suggesting  the  good  policy  of  avoiding 
measures  which  would  make  an  enemy  of  the  Emperor. 

Ocean,  off  Cadiz,  July  29,  1808. 

He  had  understood  that  only  Bedel's  division  was  to  be  car- 
ried to  France  ;  but  now  it  appears  that  all  the  French,  above 
16,000,  are  to  go;  BedeFs  division  keeping  their  arms.  He 
encloses  a  copy  of  the  capitulation,  and  comments  on  the  im- 
policy of  its  terms.  It  has  caused  much  agitation,  and  he 
understands  that  the  Junta  at  Seville  disapprove  of  it  entirely, 
though  they  do  not  think  it  proper  to  make  such  declaration. 
He  transmits  an  extract  of  a  letter  on  this  subject  from  Major 
Cox,  enclosing  a  confidential  letter  on  this  subject. 