

Encloses  also  a  report  from  Brigadier-General  Anstruther, 
of  the  evacuation  of  the  fortress  of  Almeida,  which  was  taken 
possession  of  by  the  British  troops  in  the  name  of  the  Prince 
Regent,  and  afterwards  delivered  over  to  a  corps  of  Portuguese, 
under  the  command  of  Major-General  Botetho. 

Lisbon,  October  27,  1808. 

Reports  that  Sir  John  Moore  has  left  Lisbon,  and  that  the 
only  part  of  his  army  remaining  are  the  Buffs  and  the  50tli, 
who  will  march  in  a  few  days.     Great  difficulties  have  been 

o  2 


196  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

experienced  in  procuring  mules,  owing  to  the  want  of  power 
and  inclination  on  the  part  of  the  magistrates,  in  consequence 
of  which  it  was  necessary  to  resort  to  coercion. 

Tranquillity  having  been  restored  at  Oporto,  he  had  altered 
his  intention  of  sending  General  Stewart  with  a  brigade  to  that 
place  ;  but,  finding  the  Regency  extremely  urgent  that  he 
should  do  so,  he  proposed  to  send  thither  by  sea  the  82nd  and 
97th  Regiments,  with  a  German  brigade  of  light  6-pounders  ; 
and  he  transmits  a  copy  of  a  note  announcing  this  determina- 
tion. The  Bishop  of  Oporto  has  not  yet  arrived  at  Lisbon. 
Sir  Robert  Wilson,  who  has  conducted  himself  extremely  well, 
represents  him  to  be  attached  to  the  British  interest.  Mr. 
Secretary  Freire  has  represented  the  absolute  inability  of  the 
Government  to  enforce  the  separation  of  the  Oporto  (native) 
garrison  from  that  city ;  but  that  leave  of  absence  and  fur- 
loughs would  be  granted,  and  the  corps  of  chasseurs  allowed  to 
remove  to  Viana. 

Mr.  Freire  having  hinted  to  Colonel  Donkin  the  probability 
that  the  Regency  would  apply  for  money,  alluding,  at  the 
same  time,  to  the  aids  granted  to  Spain,  the  Colonel  replied 
that  the  cases  were  widely  different ;  that  Sir  Harry  Burrard 
could  not  take  upon  himself  any  such  responsibihty  ;  and  that 
the  Portuguese  Government  had  better  at  once  address  them- 
selves to  his  Majesty's  Ministers  in  England.  Sir  Harry  ob- 
serves that  the  resources  of  the  country  are  adequate  to  its 
expenses ;  but  that  the  Government  is  so  embarrassed  by  its 
own  weakness,  that,  unless  a  Minister  is  sent  out  from  England, 
with  powers  to  excite  the  present  rulers  to  a  more  decisive  line 
of  conduct,  they  are  not  likely  to  be  of  any  service  to  the  in- 
terests of  Europe. 

He  has  received  an  application  from  the  Junta  of  Estrema- 
dura  for  a  loan  of  one  million  of  dollars,  with  equipments, 
clothing,  and  arms,  to  an  amount  nearly  equal.  He  has 
referred  the  deputies  who  made  the  application  to  Madrid,  and 
in  the  mean  time  has  granted  them  a  loan  of  20,000  dollars 