


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  193 

afterwards  disembarked  without  arms,  and  put  into  the  Fort 
of  St.  John  for  security ;  and  that  the  English  convoy  is  not 
suffered  to  put  to  sea,  the  Government  possessing  no  power  to 
restrain  the  populace. 

Sir  Harry  transmits  a  note,  containing  the  particulars  of  an 
interview  which  he  has  had  with  the  Marquess  des  Minas  and 
Mr.  Freire,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs :  by 
which  it  appears  that  certain  symptoms  of  dissatisfaction  had 
previously  existed  among  the  Portuguese  troops,  in  consequence 
of  having  their  pay  lowered  to  what  it  had  been  before  the 
arrival  of  the  French,  which,  they  urged,  was  contrary  to  the 
promise  made  them  when  they  took  up  arms..    He  observes, 
that  they  made  this  claim  with  arms  in  their  hands,  and  that 
the   Government,  being  either  intimidated,  or  convinced,  at 
length  have  asjreed  to  comply  with  it,  although  their  determi- 
nation has  not  yet  been  made  known  to  the  army.     He  is  of 
opinion,  however,  that  the  insurrection  was  instigated  by  some 
dangerous  people   in  the  Junta,  in  which   it  appears,  by  a 
minute  (enclosed)  of  a  conversation  between  Colonel  Donkin 
and  Mr.  Freire,  that  the  Bishop  is  suspected  of  intriguing,  to 
establish  a  separate  interest  at  the  expense  of  the  Regency,  to 
which  he  is  believed  to  be  unfriendly,  from  having  refused  to 
join  it.    The  translation  of  a  letter  is  enclosed  from  the  Bishop 
to  Sir  Harry,  in  which  the  former  is  considered  to  write  in  the 
style  of  an  independent  Government  on  the  subject  of  the  cap- 
ture of  some  Portuguese  vessels  by  the  Barbary  cruisers;  like- 
wise a  copy  of  Sir  Harry's  answer,  expressing  a  wish  that  he 
should  proceed  to  Lisbon,  to  take  his  share  in  the  Regency, 
with  the  view  to  the  restoration  of  order,  which  he  considers 
absolutely   necessary,    even   at   the  expense  of  delaying  the 
march  of  the  army  into   Spain.     Sir  Harry  has  despatched 
General  Beresford  to  Oporto,  with  directions  to  march  thither 
the  whole  of  the  six  battalions  now  on  their  route  to  Almeida, 
in  case  of  necessity.     He  will  also  be  followed  by  a  detach- 
ment of  the  troops  destined  to  remain  in  Portugal,  consisting 
VOL.  VII.  o 


194  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

of  the  40th,  45th,  and  97th  Eegiments,  and  a  brigade  of  artil- 
lery, to  act  according  to  circumstances. 

He  transmits  papers,  containing  the  particulars  of  several 
communications  which  he  has  had  with  the  Regency,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  issue  of  an  edict,  directing  foreign  corn  to  be 
considered  as  merchandize,  &c.,  which  effected  such  a  consider- 
able deterioration  in  the  value  of  the  Spanish  dollar,  that 
great  dissatisfaction  was  manifested  by  his  Majesty's  troops, 
who  were  subjected  thereby  to  distress,  and  serious  conse- 
quences were  apprehended.  It  appears,  however,  that  the 
representations  which  he  made  were  productive  of  the  desired 
effect ;  that  an  edict  was  issued,  declaring  the  value  of  the 
dollar  to  be  45.  6d. ;  and  that  the  matter  has,  in  consequence, 
been  amicably  adjusted. 