

assembled,  and  an  edict  was  issued  to  enforce  due  obedience  to 
their  authority.  The  French  are  in  consequence  to  have  their 
arms  restored,  and  all  property  which  is  not  Portuguese,  and 
they  are  about  again  to  embark. 

Major  Raymondo,  whose  conduct  he  thinks  more  indiscreet 
than  criminal,  has  behaved  much  better,  but  Sir  Robert  does 
not  think  it  prudent  that  he  should  be  suffered  to  remain  in  the 
province. 

Sir  E.  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard, 

Coimbra,  October  20,  1808. 

Reports  his  arrival  at  Coimbra,  and  states  that  the  order  for 
increasing  the  pay  of  the  soldiers,  and  for  repealing  that  which 
diminished  the  value  of  foreign  specie,  has  restored  quiet,  and 
that  he  does  not  think  there  is  any  immediate  necessity  for  the 
presence  of  a  British  garrison  at  Oporto.  He  suggests,  how- 
ever, that  the  removal  of  the  Bishop  to  Lisbon  is  very  desirable  ; 
recommends  occupying  the  northern  provinces  by  troops  from 
the  South,  as  the  regulars  of  Oporto,  &;c.,  are  identified  with 
the  inhabitants,  with  whom  they  will  make  common  cause, 
particularly  under  the  commander  who  is  expected,  and  who 
possesses  neither  the  respect  of  the  people,  nor  the  love  of  the 
troops,  and  against  whom  the  Bishop''s  partisans  will  always  be 
active.  He  has  hitherto  been  obliged  to  procure  supplies  for 
the  hospital,  fee,  by  personal  favour,  and  has  written  to  Mr. 
Erskine  on  the  subject  of  money,  which  he  recommends  may  be 
sent  into  the  Duero  by  some  ship  of  war.  Authority  to  draw 
bills  is  of  no  use,  as  there  is  no  negociation  with  Lisbon,  and 
drafts  on  England  bear  a  discount  of  from  10  to  14  per  cent. 

He  has  enlisted  for  general  service,  and  without  bounty,  200 
Swiss  from  the  garrison  of  Almeida. 

Colonel  Bathurst  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  21,  1808. 
Reports  his  arrival  at  Oporto,  where  he  found  every  thing 
quiet ;  but  he  understands  that  the  plunder  of  the  French  was 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  201 

only  the  outward  and  plausible  pretence  of  the  late  commotion. 
The  whole  of  the  Portuguese  regular  troops  took  a  part ;  and 
it  does  not  appear  that  any  of  their  officers  attempted  to  pre- 
vent them.  He  found  the  Bishop  surrounded  by  guards,  and 
thinks  he  is  too  fond  of  this  description  of  pomp  and  ceremony 
to  abandon  it  for  the  more  humble  station  he  would  fill  at 
Lisbon — having  sent  a  special  sort  of  ambassador  to  the  Prince, 
at  the  Brazils,  with  the  supposed  view  of  securing  to  himself 
the  situation  of  Viceroy  ;  having,  moreover,  assumed  the  power 
of  granting  military  rank,  and  given  Sir  Robert  Wilson  that 
of  Brigadier-General. 

Colonel  Bathurst  observes  that  the  clergy  in  general  have 
taken  the  most  active  part  in  the  late  revolution,  and  have  ac- 
quired an  influence  which  they  wish  to  retain :  that  the  no- 
bility are  so  weakened  by  the  absence  of  those  who  emigrated 
with  the  Prince,  that  they  can  scarcely  maintain  their  ground ; 
and  that  there  appears  to  be  a  disposition  in  Oporto  and  that 
quarter,  said  to  be  fomented  by  the  Bishop  and  his  friends, 
very  hostile  to  the  Regency.  He  suggests  that  a  few  British 
troops  might  possibly  prevent  any  further  disturbance,  and 
thinks  the  Portuguese  Legion  may  be  as  well  completed  at 
Lisbon  as  at  Oporto ;  but  is  not  aware  that  British  artillery 
can  be  of  any  use  there. 