

His  object  has  been  to  select  for  commissions  young  men  of 
education,  who  speak  English,  and  are  connected  with  Eng- 
land ;  and,  with  a  few  exceptions,  he  believes  he  has  secured 
the  elite  of  Portugal,  but  still  wants  two  Lieutenant-Colonels 
and  several  Captains,  and  solicits  Sir  Harry  Burrard''s  nomi- 
nation to  the  vacant  commissions. 

States  the  reason  why  he  should  be  loth  to  wave  the  right 
invested  in  him,  as  Chief  of  the  corps,  and  expresses  a  wish  to 
remove  it  from  Oporto,  as  soon  as  it  is  complete,  to  Viana. 
Applies  for  a  medicine-chest  and  surgical  instruments,  omitted 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  205 

to  be  sent  out  with  the  stores,  and  is  anxious  for  a  British 
Commissary,  Paymaster,  and  Surgeon,  to  be  attached  to  the 
Legion. 

Observes  that  the  corps  is  to  have  full  Portuguese  pay,  and 
that  50,000  additional  dollars  have  been  sent  out  for  its  pre- 
sent expences.  He  trusts  that  the  etapes  will  not  be  deducted, 
and  states  that  the  fidelity  of  the  Legion,  and  its  co-operation 
with  the  British,  may  be  depended  on  ;  and  that,  whilst  they 
feel  a  military  spirit  distinct  from  the  Portuguese  army,  they 
begin  to  pride  themselves  on  a  martial  system,  which  has  been 
introduced  without  any  rude  innovation. 

As  it  is  not  possible  to  procure  any  money  under  11  ^  dis- 
count, he  has  applied  to  the  Bishop  and  General  Freire  for 
d£^l 0,000  of  the  money  sent  out  from  England,  on  condition 
of  depositing  Treasury  bills  to  that  amount,  and  the  discount, 
but  not  to  be  negociated  until  the  British  Government  has  the 
option  of  repaying  the  above  sum  at  Oporto,  or  to  the  Portu- 
guese ambassador  in  England.  He  expects  that  these  pro- 
posals will  be  accepted,  and  suggests  that  an  application  may 
be  made  to  the  Eegency  for  20  or  d£'30,000  more,  on  the  same 
conditions.  He  is  making  arrangements  for  the  reception  of 
the  British  troops,  whose  quarters  will  be  in  the  town  and  a 
convent ;  but  the  regiments  of  Oporto  occupy  San  Oviedo,  and 
cannot  be  moved. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  If,  Burrard. 

Oporto,  November  7,  1808. 

The  Bishop  has  ordered  <^  10,000  to  be  issued  on  the  terms 
proposed  in  the  preceding  letter,  and  there  remains  in  the 
Treasury  about  <£^40,000  of  the  money  sent  out  from  England, 
which  he  thinks,  by  proper  management,  may  be  obtained  for 
the  use  of  the  British  on  similar  conditions.  The  Bishop  pro- 
poses to  set  out  for  Lisbon  within  a  fortnight. 

General  B.  Freire  ofiered  to  draw  <£*5,000  from  his  chest,  in 
case  the  Bishop  had  refused  to  advance  the  whole  ^10,000, 


206  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [18C8. 

the  greater  part  of  which  will  be  sent  to  Brigadier- General  An- 
struther.  Sir  Robert  states  that  the  barracks  will  be  ready 
for  the  British  troops,  and  that  he  has  been  obliged  to  draw 
for  <£*600.  He  trusts  that  an  arrangement  will  be  made  with 
the  Regency  that  the  Legion  may  be  under  the  orders  of 
Sir  H.  Burrard,  as  it  will  be  impossible  to  conduct  its  disci- 
pline, if  subject  to  the  interference  of  the  Portuguese  Generals. 