

Major-General  Beresford  to  Sir  H,  Burrard, 

Oporto,  November  4,  1808. 
He  has  inspected  Sir  Robert  Wilson's  Legion,  which  is 
about  to  undergo  a  medical  examination,  and  to  be  established 
according:  to  a  reijular  standard  as  to  acje  and  size.  It  now 
consists  of  the  skeletons  of  three  battalions  of  infantry  and  one 
company  of  artillery ;  but  he  has  recommended  Sir  Robert  to 
complete  one  of  the  battalions  in  the  first  instance,  and  so  each 
in  succession.  Without  questioning  the  propriety  of  forming 
this  corps,  the  General  observes  that  his  Majesty''s  orders  have 
been  acted  upon  at  a  very  considerable  expence,  which  will  be 
entirely  lost  if  a  stop  is  put  to  its  completion ;  besides  that  it 
would  be  disgusting  to  the  Bishop,  who  considers  it  a  measure 
of  his  own  promoting.  He  thinks,  moreover,  that  it  might  be 
made  very  useful,  by  the  assistance  of  an  additional  number  of 
English  ofiicers,  but  that  it  would  be  better  without  cavalry  or 
artillery,  the  former  of  which  he  has  desired  Sir  Robert  Wil- 
son to  postpone  raising.  The  latter  is  already  formed,  and 
proceeding  in  discipline.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  there 
would  not  be  so  much  objection  to  the  Legion,  on  the  part  of 
the  Regency  and  other  persons  of  consideration,  if  the  choice 


204  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [180S, 

of  the  officers  were  not  so  independently  left  to  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  who,  however,  wishes  his  recommendations  to  pass 
through  Sir  H.  Burrard,  and  their  commissions  are  signed  by 
the  Regency.  He  has  sanctioned  Sir  Robert's  taking  what 
recruits  he  can  to  complete  the  battalion. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  November  4,  1808. 

He  is  putting  his  corps  under  British  regulations,  and  has 
drafted  about  SO  men :  5  feet  3  inches  to  be  the  future  stan- 
dard. The  artillery  company  is  completed  and  well  disci- 
plined in  gunnery,  the  greater  part  being  old  soldiers,  who 
were  sent  from  England,  and  commanded  by  a  very  valuable 
officer.  Only  a  few  officers  of  cavalry  have  been  nominated. 
He  trusts  the  Regency  will  grant  permission  for  600  men  who 
are  at  Viana,  and  not  attached  to  any  regiment,  to  join  his 
corps,  and  that  he  shall  also  be  allowed  to  receive  such  men  of 
the  Marquess  d''Alora"'s  Legion  as  choose  to  enter,  in  which 
case  it  would  be  immediately  completed. 

States  that  the  appointment  of  officers,  according  to  the  Por- 
tuguese regulations,  always  passes  through  the  Chief  of  the 
Corps ;  but  that  he  has  always  considered  this  an  honorary 
power,  having  constantly  received  the  Bishop'^s  private  nomi- 
nation before  he  officially  presented  the  promotions  ;  and  their 
patents  are  signed  by  the  Bishop  and  the  Junta. 