


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGII.  197 

in  bills,  with  2,000  stand  of  arms,  ammunition,  &c.  ;  and  he 
transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  deputies 
to  this  effect. 

States  that  there  are  three  brigades  of  artillery  on  shore 
without  horses,  and  recommends  that  a  detachment  of  light 
cavalry  may  be  sent  to  Portugal. 

Transmits  an  application  from  the  chaplains  of  the  army,  to- 
other with  an  opinion  of  Mr.  Commissary  Erskine  thereon, 
and  recommends  that  they  may  not  be  subjected  to  any  deduc- 
tion from  their  pay.  Recommends,  also,  that  a  claim  made 
by  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  Major-Generals  Murray  and  Fergusson, 
and  Brigadier-General  Nightingale,  for  bat,  baggage,  and  forage 
money,  may  be  complied  with. 

He  regrets  that  the  Regency  have  refused  to  accede  to  a 
proposal  from  Colonel  Donkin,  for  establishing  a  line  of  com- 
munication between  the  British  armies  in  Spain  and  Portugal, 
by  means  of  Portuguese  dragoons. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Acknowledges   Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of  the  29th  ult., 
and  will  set  out  for  EnMand  as   soon  as  Bri2:adier-General 
Stewart  or  Major-General  Mackenzie  shall  arrive  at  Lisbon, 
to  take  the  command  of  the  troops. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Returns  thanks  for  the  obliging  manner  in  which  Lord  Castle- 
reagh  has  addressed  him  in  his  private  letter  of  the  29th  ult. 

Lisbon,  November  14,  1808. 
He  is  fearful  that  Brigadier-General  Stewart  will  not  return 
to  Lisbon  for  a  week  to  come,  when  he  will  embark  for  England, 
and  will  reserve,  until  his  arrival,  any  other  communication, 
except  submitting  a  report  from  the  Deputy  Commissary- 
General  ;  on  which  he  observes  that  a  conversation  was  held 
by  Mr.  Secretary  Freire,  who,  in  a  very  high  and  peremptory 
manner,  declared  that  the  Regency  could  not  deliver  over  or 
return  the  stores  therein  mentioned,  without  danger  of  starving  : 
and  he  has  every  reason  to  believe  that  they  do  not  mean  to 


198  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  •  [1808. 

allow  them  to  be  the  property  of  the  British  Grovemment. 
He  states  that  there  is  a  prospect  of  fair  weather ;  that  tlie 
army  is  proceeding  on  its  march  to  Spain  ;  that  the  convales- 
cents are  recovering  rapidly,  and  the  sick  decreasing. 


NO.  VII. 

ABSTRACT  OF  PAPERS  RELATING  TO  TRAISTSACTIONS 

IN  PORTUGAL, 

PREVIOUS  TO  SIR  H.  BURRARD'S  DEPARTURE,  AND  TRANSMITTED 

BY  HIM  TO  LORD  CASTLEREAGH  SINCE  HIS  RETURN  TO  ENGLAND,  BUT 

UNACCOMPANIED  BY  ANY  OFFICIAL  LETTER. 

Sir  R.  Wilsoji  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  11,  1808. 

States  the  arrival  and  embarkation  of  the  garrison  of  Al- 
meida, and  gives  an  account  of  an  insurrection  of  the  populace, 
in  consequence  of  having  discovered  in  their  baggage  some  silk 
and  velvet  belonging  to  the  churches.  It  appears  that  the 
rioters  were  joined  by  the  artillery,  and  went  the  length  of 
pointing  their  guns  at  a  boat  which  was  conveying  some  of  the 
baggage  on  board,  where  they  have  insisted  on  its  being 
searched ;  and  Sir  Robert  is  apprehensive  that  they  will  not 
be  satisfied  without  disarming  the  French,  and  is  under  some 
fear  for  the  lives  of  the  people  in  the  ships. 