

He  observes  that  the  order  to  reduce  the  pay  has  united  the 
soldiery  and  the  people,  and  that  the  views  of  both  seem  to  be 
to  transfer  the  seat  of  Government  to  Oporto ;  that  the  pre- 
sence of  3,000  British  infantry  and  200  cavalry  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  preserve  tranquillity ;  that  the  removal  of  the 
Bishop  and  of  Major  Raymondo,  who  is  a  popular  favourite, 
and  who  ordered  the  opening  of  the  trunk  in  which  the  velvet, 
&c.,  were  found,  being,  besides,  a  man  of  extremely  bad  cha- 
racter, is  very  desirable. 

Sir  Robert  speaks  highly  of  the  conduct  of  his  corps  on  the 
occasion  ;  and  transmits  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  written 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  199 

to  Brigadier- General  Perreira,  commanding  the  troops,  stating 
that  he  has  no  objection  to  make  any  arrangement  that  may- 
satisfy  the  public,  notwithstanding  there  may  be  some  deviation 
from  the  articles  of  the  Convention ;  but  that  the  lives  of  the 
French  must  be  considered  as  a  sacred  deposit,  and  that  any 
hostile  attempt  on  the  vessels  under  the  British  flag  must  be 
considered  as  a  violation  of  the  alliance  with  Great  Britain. 

Sir  R.  Wilson  to  Mr.  Canning. 

Encloses  a  copy  of  the  preceding  letter,  and  giving  a  further 
account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  rioters,  who,  assisted  by  the 
regular  troops  and  artillery,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances 
of  the  Bishop,  the  Governor,  the  magistrates,  and  British  offi- 
cers, compelled  the  French  to  disembark  without  their  arms 
and  baggage,  and  plundered  the  vessels  of  every  kind  of  pro- 
perty whatever.  Every  thing  is  now  quiet,  and  the  Bishop, 
who  has  conducted  himself  extremely  well  throughout  the 
business,  has  promised  that  every  public  and  private  satisfac- 
tion shall  be  made. 

Sir  Robert  expresses  his  intention  to  obtain  the  removal  of 
Major  Raymondo,  and  to  gain  every  information  respecting 
the  leaders  of  the  mob ;  but  is  confident  that  the  British  must 
abandon  the  country,  or  send  thither  3,000  men,  with  some 
cavalry.  He  states  that  the  French  behaved  with  great  pro- 
priety, and  are  sensible  that  every  possible  exertion  was  made 
by  the  British  for  their  protection  and  safety. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Oporto,  October  13,  1808. 
Enclosing  a  copy  of  the  preceding  letter,  and  stating  that 
the  mob  appeared  again  in  arms,  and,  in  the  most  tumultuous 
manner,  were  proceeding  to  further  acts  of  plunder,  when  the 
Marquess  of  Valladares  arrived,  with  1,500  Spaniards,  by 
whose  assistance,  and  that  of  the  British  troops  and  Portuguese 
Legion,  the  populace  were  again  quieted.     The  Government 


200  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 