

He  represents  the  difficulty  of  procuring  waggons ;  as  the 
officers  who  have  received  orders  for  the  purpose  from  the 
Regency  do  not  consider  themselves  authorized  to  enforce 
them ;  he  fears,  therefore,  that  the  baggage  of  the  army  must 
remain  on  the  ground,  for  want  of  conveyance,  unless  the 
system  of  pressing  waggons  is  resorted  to,  which  he  does  not 
think  advisable,  as  it  will  only  serve  to  demonstrate  the  weak- 
ness of  the  Government. 

He  has  desired  General  Beresford  to  make  a  report  upon 
Sir  Robert  Wilson'^s  corps,  which  does  not  appear  to  be  ap- 
proved by  the  Regency ;  and  he  shall,  therefore,  direct  it  to 
be  discontinued,  unless  the  objections  to  it  are  counterbalanced 
by  much  advantage.  The  General  states  that  sickness  has  been 
very  prevalent  among  the  British  troops,  and  in  some  cases 
fatal.  He  has  sent  the  3rd  and  50th  Regiments,  with  Sir  John 
Moore,  in  lieu  of  the  40th,  which  is  in  a  very  sickly  state ; 
the  above  to  be  replaced  from  the  division  expected  at  Corunna. 
He  has  just  been  informed  that  the  Regency  have  ordered 
General  Bernardin  Freire  to  go  to  his  Government  at  Oporto, 
and  to  take  the  command  of  the  troops,  and  that  they  have 
written  a  strong  letter  to  the  Bishop,  to  invite  him  again  to 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  196 

come  and  head  the  Regency.  He  observes  that  the  General  is 
suspected  of  not  being  a  well-wisher  to  the  English,  and  that 
the  Bishop  is  vain  and  easily  led. 

States  that  it  has  been  thought  best  to  compress  all  the 
ordnance  and  provision  stores,  now  in  many  bottoms,  into  as  few 
as  will  hold  them  ;  and  he  thinks  it  would  be  most  advisable 
to  have  them  afloat.  He  laments  that  it  has  been  thought 
right  to  charge  the  allowances  granted  for  bat,  baggage,  and 
forage- money,  with  the  income-tax,  and  encloses  a  memorial, 
signed  by  himself  and  Sir  John  Moore,  on  the  subject.  He 
transmits  a  plan  delivered  by  General  Beresford  to  the  Regency, 
for  re-organizing  the  Portuguese  army,  but  does  not  believe  it 
has  been  acted  upon.  He  urges  the  great  importance  of  send- 
ing out  a  British  Minister  to  Portugal,  and  states  that  there 
is  good  reason  to  believe  that  there  is  a  strong  French  party  in 
Lisbon  and  its  neighbourhood,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the 
country. 

Lisbon,  October  18,  1808. 

Transmits  the  minute  of  a  conversation  between  Colonel 
Donkin  and  Secretary  Freire,  on  the  subject  of  the  riot  at 
Oporto,  together  with  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  containing  a  detailed  report  of  this  affair,  and  recom- 
mending the  General  to  send  thither  a  corps  of  3,000  infantry 
and  200  cavalry  to  preserve  tranquillity.  Sir  Robert  also 
strongly  recommends,  by  any  fair  means,  the  removal  of  the 
Bishop  and  Major  Raymundo,  who  commands  the  fort. 