

Sir  Charles  Cotton  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard. 

Informing  him  that  the  French  troops  composing  the  garri- 
son of  Almeida  were  so  completely  plundered  of  all  their  efi*ects 
by  the  Portuguese,  that  it  has  rendered  them  susceptible  of 
contagion  and  disease. 

Dr,  Thompson  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

October  29,  1808. 
An  inspection  report  of  the  French  sick  and  wounded  on 
board  two  transports,  amounting  to  148,  whom  he  has  supplied 
with  the  necessary  medicines,  &;c.,  and  recommends  that  they 


202  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

may  be  allowed  the  use  of  bedding  and  a  proportion  of  soft 
bread. 

Captain  Grant  to  Sir  Harry  Burrard. 

Mary  Transport,  November  3,  1808. 
Stating  that  100  of  the  French  troops  on  board  are  dead  or 
dying ;  tliat  they  are  in  want  of  every  thing ;  and  praying 
immediate  assistance,  particularly  that  some  of  the  sick  may 
be  removed  on  board  of  another  vessel. 

Major-General  Beresford  to  Sir  H.  Burrard, 

Oporto,  November  3,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oporto  on  the  81st  ult.,  and  on  the  2nd  in- 
stant had  an  interview  with  the  Bishop,  who  expressed  a  strong 
disinclination  to  join,  or  to  have  any  communication  with  the 
Regency,  stating  that  several  proposals  which  he  had  made 
had  never  been  noticed  by  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  who  had  not 
acknowledged  the  Government  of  Oporto,  and  that  the  advice 
which  he  had  given  for  continuing  the  Government  of  the 
kingdom  at  Oporto  had  been  treated  with  silence  and  contempt. 

General  Beresford  enters  into  a  detail  of  the  arguments 
he  offered  to  convince  the  Bishop  of  the  impracticability  of 
such  arrangement,  and  to  induce  him  to  join  the  Regency, 
which  he  reluctantly  consented  to  do  in  the  course  of  a  month ; 
but  dwells  much  upon  the  opposition  he  shall  meet  with,  and 
the  little  service  he  shall  be  able  to  perform.  He  has  given 
public  notice,  however,  of  his  intention  to  proceed  to  Lisbon ; 
but  General  Beresford  believes  that  his  object  in  postponing 
his  departure  for  so  long  is  the  hope  that  arrangements  may  be 
made  in  the  mean  time  for  placing  him  at  the  head  of  the  Govern- 
ment. The  General  observes  that  the  Bishop  is  fully  devoted 
to  the  common  cause,  and  that,  notwithstanding  he  is  actuated 
by  personal  vanity,  ambition,  and  local  prejudice,  he  possesses 
an  energy  which  is  much  wanting  in  the  Regency ;  that  he 
has  an  unbounded  influence  at  Oporto,  where  nothing  is  done 
which  is  known  to  be  disagreeable  to  his  Excellency,  even  by 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  203 

the  populace,  who  are  still  ripe  for  insurrection,  and  are  kept 
in  a  state  of  hostility  to  the.  Regency  by  some  secret  means, 
which  he  fears  are  not  greatly  discouraged  by  the  Bishop.  He 
does  not,  however,  think  his  Excellency  would  wish  any  other 
effects  to  result  from  their  present  temper  than  this  show  of 
affection.  Under  these  circumstances,  he  is  of  opinion  that  it 
would  be  most  desirable  that  the  Bishop  should  proceed  to 
Lisbon,  and  that  a  pressing  letter  from  Sir  Harry  Burrard  and 
Mr.  Stuart  would  hasten  his  departure.  He  moreover  strongly 
recommends  the  removal  of  the  Portuguese  troops  from  Oporto, 
and  the  arrest  of  the  principal  movers  of  the  late  insurrection, 
particularly  of  Senhor  Raymondo,  the  Governor  of  Fort 
St.  John. 