

Sir  H.  Burrard  to  Colonel  Kemmis. 

Lisbon,  November  1,  1808. 
Instructs  him  to  take  the  command  of  the  garrison  of  Elvas  ; 
to  maintain  the  best  understanding  with  the  inhabitants  and 
with  General  Liste,  the  Governor,  under  whose  orders  he  is  to 
appear  to  act  to  a  certain  extent ;  to  avoid  interfering,  with  the 
British  troops,  in  domestic  broils,  as  much  as  possible ;  but  to 
support  the  Government,  if  called  upon  so  to  do ;  to  occupy 
Fort  La  Lippe  with  the  40th  Regiment,  and  not  to  evacuate 
it  without  orders  ;  and  to  make  confidential  reports  of  the  state 
of  the  province  and  its  neighbourhood. 

Colonel  Donhin  to  Mr.  Freire. 

Lisbon,  November  1,  1808. 

Pointing  out  the  necessity  of  acquainting  General  Beresford 
with  the  nature  of  the  instructions  sent  to  General  B.  Freire, 
on  the  subject  of  the  late  disturbances  at  Oporto.  Apprizing 
him  that  three  British  regiments  have  been  ordered  to  Oporto, 
and  the  40th,  with  a  detachment  of  artillery,  is  about  to  pro- 
ceed to  Elvas,  where  it  will  be  provisioned  either  by  a  British 
Commissary,  from  Lisbon,  or  by  the  Portuguese  Commissary 
in  Alentejo,  the  account  to  be  settled  between  the  two  Govern- 
ments. 

Informing  him  that  the  heaviest  complaints  have  been  made 
of  the  disinclination  of  the  magistrates  to  forward  the  British 
troops  on  their  march,  and  particularizes  the  misconduct  of 
the  Juiz  de  Mora  of  Alcoentra ;  transmitting  a  memorial  from 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  207 

the  Vicar  of  the  Convent  of  Santa  Cruz,  at  Coimbra,  who  has 
given  every  possible  assistance  to  the  army,  and  recommend- 
ing that  it  may  be  compUed  with. 

Colonel  Donkin  to  Mr.  Freire. 

Lisbon,  November  5,  1808. 
Transmitting  a  demand  from  the  officer  commanding  the 
French  troops  in  the  Tagus  for  the  restitution  of  the  arms, 
military  chest,  and  personal  property,  stated  to  have  been 
taken  from  the  late  garrison  of  Almeida,  while  marching 
through  Oporto  ;  and  requesting  that  the  same  may  be  com- 
plied with. 

Mr.  Freire  to  Colonel  Donkin. 

Lisbon,  November  6,  1808. 
Informs  him  that  orders  have  been  given  to  inquire  into  the 
circumstances  of  this  demand. 

Mr.  Commissary  Bawlings  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Lisbon,  November  9,  1808. 
Representing  that  a  quantity  of  stores,  belonging  to  the  gar- 
rison of  Almeida,  and  for  which  he  had  given  receipts  to  the 
French  Commissary-General,  had  been  removed  without  the 
least  intimation,  by  the  order  of  the  Portuguese  Government, 
having  forcibly  broken  open  the  lock  of  a  door  where  part  of 
them  were  secured. 

Sir  H,  Burrard  to  Mr,  Bawlings. 

Lisbon,  November  15,  1808. 
Informing  him  that  he  had  referred  the  above  complaint  to 
the  Regency,  and  would  send  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  his 
Majesty''s  Ministers. 