

It  appears  that  the  conversation  passed  on  to  the  circum- 
stance of  the  removal  by  the  Portuguese  Government  of  the 
stores  transferred  by  the  French  garrison  of  Almeida  to  the 
British  Commissary,  which  Mr.  Freire  justified,  on  the  ground 
of  their  having  been  pillaged  from  the  Portuguese  by  the 
French ;  and,  asking  whether  the  English  were  come  to  live 
upon  them,  and  make  them  die  with  hunger,  stated  that  with 
the  stores  in  question  they  could  not  feed  their  army,  in  order 
to  pay  which  the  Regency  were  obliged  to  beg  a  subscription 
with  hats  in  their  hands. 

Colonel  Donkin  apprized  Mr.  Freire  that  Sir  H.  Burrard 
would  probably  demand  the  restitution  of  the  stores,  which 
Mr.  Freire,  after  renewing  his  picture  of  the  extreme  distress 
of  the  Government,  hoped  he  would  not  do,  as  it  would  lead  to 
the  most  unpleasant  discussions  between  the  two  countries. 

Colonel  Donkin  then  asked  whether,  if  Sir  H.  Burrard 
should  give  up  the  claim  above  mentioned,  the  British  troops, 
who  are  sufi"ering  extremely  for  want  of  bedding,  would  be  sup- 
plied with  paillasses,  and  whether  the  barracks  would  be  put 
into  repair,  for  want  of  which  their  health  is  equally  injured  ; 
to  which  Mr.  Freire  answered,  that  the  Portuguese  Govern- 
ment would  do  everything  that  they  could — that  they  considered 
the  British  army  their  own,  and  were  equally  interested  in  its 
well-being  ;  that  the  barracks  were  repairing  in  some  places, 
and  that  furniture,  such  as  tables,  &c.,  would  be  put  into  them 
as  soon  as  possible ;  that  paillasses,  however,  were  a  heavy 
expense,  which  they  would  meet  if  they  could  afford  it ;  but 
that,  when  payments  were  made  on  the  part  of  the  French  by 
VOL.  VIT.  P 


210  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  Commissioners  for  settling  the  Convention,  the  debts  of 
the  great  contractors  were  discharged,  while  those  of  the  smaller 
ones,  such  as  would  furnish  paillasses,  were  left  unpaid,  and 
they  are  ruined ;  that,  consequently,  they  cannot  work  with- 
out ready  money,  of  which  the  Portuguese  Government  have 
none  to  advance. 

Colonel  Donkin  states  that  he  did  not  very  well  know  what 
answer  to  make  to  these  observations,  and,  therefore,  merely 
reminded  Mr.  Freire  that  there  were  500  ready-made  paillasses 
in  store.  These  Mr.  Freire  promised  should  be  issued  imme- 
diately ;  but,  the  order  having  been  given  for  that  purpose  to 
Mr.  Forjas,  the  Minister  for  the  War  Department,  who  is 
remarkable  for  his  inattention  to  all  applications  from  the  Eng- 
lish, Colonel  Donkin  observes  that  none  had  been  delivered 
ten  days  after,  and  adds  that,  unless  they  are  supplied  by  the 
Portuguese  Government,  it  will  be  necessary  to  purchase  at 
least  10,000  for  the  troops,  who  will  perish  without  them.  He 
concludes  by  observing,  that  he  parted  with  Mr.  Freire  with 
much  less  cordiality  than  usual,  after  a  long  and  unpleasant 
interview,  in  which  it  was  manifest  that  that  Minister  meant 
to  make  a  formal  declaration  of  the  feelings  of  his  Government 
as  well  as  his  own. 