

General  Oraufurd's  brigade  and  the  Guards  have  arrived  at 
Benevente,  and  Sir  J.  Moore  at  Valladolid. 

Corunna,  December  31,  1808. 

He  has  received  a  letter  from  Sir  J.  Moore,  referrino*  to  an 
application  made  to  Lord  Castlereagh  for  light  transports  to 
be  sent  to  Vigo,  and  observes  that  the  light  horse  transports 
which  came  out  under  convoy  of  the  Venus  to  Vigo,  to  the 
number  of  27,  have  been  sent  back  ;  but  that  there  are  10  sail 
of  the  line  at  Vigo,  which  will  afford  considerable  additional 
accommodation  to  the  infantry. 

The  want  of  specie  is  likely  to  be  felt  very  sensibly  at  Co- 
runna, and  it  is  doubtful  how  far  the  money  intended  to  be 
landed  at  Oporto  can  be  conveyed  in  time  to  the  present  posi- 
tion of  the  army.  Admiral  De  Courcy  has  sent  an  order  for 
bringing  the  o^  100, 000  sterling,  whicli  came  out  under  convoy 
of  the  Venus,  to  Corunna,  provided  it  appears  to  be  destined 
for  the  army  in  Spain  :  but  General  Broderick  fears  the  order 
will  arrive  too  late,  and,  therefore,  directed  bills  to  be  drawn 
on  the  Paymaster- General  for  as  much  money  as  could  be 
raised  at  or  below  5s.  per  dollar,  from  which  he  has  not  been 
able  to  procure  much  more  than  ^^4,000.  He  had  hoped  for 
authority  to  dispose  of  part  of  the  sum  consigned  to  Mr.  Frere ; 
but  letters  have  arrived  from  liis  Excellency,  directing  it  to  be 
delivered  over  to  the  use  of  the  army  under  the  Marquess 
Romana. 


220  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

NO. IX. 
PRECIS  OF  LETTERS  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL  LEITH, 

RELATING  TO  SPANISH  AFFAIRS. 

Gihon,  August  31,  1808. 

States  that  he  arrived  on  the  23r(l  at  Santander,  where  he 
found  Major  Roche,  who  had  arrived  at  the  same  time. 
Regrets  that  an  earlier  supply  of  arms,  money,  &c.,  had  not 
been  given  to  the  Biscayans,  who  seem  well  disposed  to  throw 
off  the  French  yoke  ;  to  which,  indeed,  ^vith  very  slender 
means,  they  have  shown  some  resistance  at  Bilbao.  At  that 
town  (which  is  open  and  unfortified)  they  lost  from  5  to  700, 
and  the  French  300.  The  importance  of  arming  the  Asturias, 
Las  Montafias  de  Santander,  Biscay,  and  Guipuscoa,  is  very 
great,  though  he  thinks  that,  in  the  two  latter,  which  are  oc- 
cupied by  the  enemy,  nothing  can  be  done  at  present.  He  has 
expressed  to  the  Deputies  of  those  two  provinces  the  wishes  of 
Great  Britain  to  assist  them ;  but  has  recommended  them  to 
act  with  great  circumspection,  so  as  not  to  bring  down  the 
French  unavailingly  on  their  heads.  He  furnishes  them  with 
vessels  for  their  return,  and  passports  against  British  cruisers. 

The  enemy  left  but  1,000  men  in  Bilbao,  after  the  attack, 
in  consequence,  probably,  of  Palafox's  success  at  Saragossa,  (of 
which  he  encloses  an  account  in  an  Extraordinary  Gazette)  or 
the  re-occupation  of  Burgos  on  the  21st ;  but  it  appears  that 
some  part  of  the  corps  has  returned  to  Bilbao,  where,  on  the 
26th,  they  were  reported  to  have  between  3  and  4,000  men. 