

Mr.  Ferguson  to 

Lisbon,  November  4,  1808. 
An  inspection  Report  of  the  Deputy  Inspector  of  Hospitals, 
containing  an  account  of  the  state  of  the  transports  in  the 
Tagus,  having  on  board  the  French  troops,  in  the  greater  part 
of  which  it  is  represented  that  pestilence  is  making  the  most 
dreadful  ravages,  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  discipline, 
cleanliness,  and  even  common  attentions. 

Sir  H.  Burrard  to  Lieut. -Colonel  Trant. 

Lisbon,  November  7,  1808. 
Instructions  to  renew  the  investigation  of  the  claims  on  dis- 
puted property,  under  the  Convention  of  the  30th  of  August. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  211 

Lieut-Colonel  Trant  to  Sir  H.  Burrard. 

Lisbon,  November  16,  1808. 
Relative  to  a  claim  made  by  a  division  of  Spanish  troops  to 
some  cotton  avowedly  belonging  to  the  French,  by  whom  it 
was  seized  in  the  province  of  Alentejo,  during  the  existence  of 
the  French  Government  in  Portugal ;  but  against  which  de- 
mand Mr.  Freire  protests,  on  the  ground  of  its  belonging  to 
the  Portuguese  Government. 


NO.  VIIL 

PRECIS  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  MAJOR-GENERAL 

BRODERICK. 

Corunna,  August  28,  1808. 
Reports  his  arrival  on  the  preceding  day  at  Corunna,  where 
he  found  that  the  Junta  of  the  province  had  established  itself 
at  Lui^o,  with  the  view  of  concertino^  measures  with  the  De- 
puties  from  Leon  and  Asturias.  He  represents  General  Blake's 
anxiety  for  cavalry,  of  which  he  has  not  more  than  from  130 
to  200  dragoons  with  his  army,  and  there  is  not  yet  a  sufficient 
cordiality  of  co-operation  between  the  different  provinces  to 
enable  him  to  supply  the  deficiency.  General  Broderick  ob- 
serves that  there  is  no  disinclination  to  receive  succours,  whe- 
ther of  infantry  or  cavalry,  but  considers  it  most  desirable  that 
the  requisition  should  come  from  General  Blake  himself,  in 
which  he  hopes  to  induce  him  to  include  the  former.  He  is  of 
opinion  that  infantry,  in  the  proportion  of  two-thirds  of  the  num- 
ber of  cavalry,  would  enable  the  British  troops  to  act  indepen 
dently  on  any  probable  emergency.  He  has  directed  Captain 
Kennedy  to  ascertain  the  different  calibres  of  the  Spanish  ar- 
tillery, and  to  communicate  the  same,  and  if  possible  to  pro- 
cure a  set  of  rings  through  which  they  prove  the  shot.  He 
proposes  to  set  out  for  Astorga  on  the  next  day. 

Lugo,  September  1,  1808. 
The  provinces  have   been   induced  to  send  deputies  to  a 

p2 


212  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

General  Assembly,  to  be  convened  probably  at  Ocana,  but 
with  the  express  exception  of  Madrid  as  the  place  of  meeting. 
General  Blake  has  proceeded  in  person  to  Leon,  and  has  sent 
forward  a  part  of  his  army,  but  his  head-quarters  remain  for 
the  present  at  Astorga.  No  deputies  have  been  yet  sent  or 
named  by  the  Asturias  ;  and  the  General  fears  that  there  is 
more  noise  and  clamour  than  effective  execution  in  that  pro- 
vince. 