

Lisbon,  November  9,  1808. 
Minute  of  a  Conversation  between  Colonel  Donkin  and  Mr. 
Secretary  Freire,  to  whom  the  former  made  an  application  for 
the  release  of  a  Mr.  Baretto,  a  merchant  of  Lisbon,  who  had 


208  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

been  imprisoned  by  the  Regency  on,  as  he  alleged,  the  ground 
of  his  having  illuminated  his  house  on  the  arrival  of  Junot, 
and  of  having  shown  himself  a  partisan  of  the  French.  Some 
papers  are  enclosed,  to  prove  that  this  accusation  is  not  well 
founded :  but  Colonel  Donkin  observes  that  he  principally  rested 
his  appHcation  on  a  claim  made  by  Mr.  Baretto  on  the  pro- 
tection of  England,  under  the  I7th  Article  of  the  Convention 
of  the  SOth  of  August ;  but  that  Mr.  Freire  inveighed  against 
that  instrument  in  a  very  high  tone,  and  in  the  most  un- 
qualified terms,  declaring  that  it  had  given  over  the  Port.u- 
guese  bound,  and,  as  it  were,  into  the  hands  of  the  French, 
towards  whom  it  had  been  fulfilled  with  scrupulous  exactness, 
while  they  had  been  stripped  and  insulted  in  all  possible  ways  ; 
that  it  had  never  been  communicated  officially  to  the  Govern- 
ment, and  that  they  were  not  bound  to  acknowledge  it ;  com- 
plaining of  the  style  of  a  letter  written  by  Brigadier- General 
Cameron  on  the  subject ;  and,  having  intimated  that  the  Gene- 
ral Officer  was  not  entitled  to  interfere  in  matters  relating  to 
the  Government,  declaring  that  nothing  should  induce  him  to 
consent  to  the  release  of  Mr.  Baretto. 

Colonel  Donkin  proceeds  to  observe  that  Mr.  Freire  took 
occasion  to  remark  more  than  once  that  England  had  come 
forward  with  her  usual  generosity  to  relieve  her  old  ally  from 
slavery,  and  had  expelled  the  enemy  ;  that  the  Portuguese  felt 
every  possible  gratitude ;  but  trusted  that  she  did  not  mean  to 
trample  upon  them  by  a  Convention  which  exposes  them  to 
the  cruellest  insults,  and  which  has  been  favourably  executed 
towards  the  French,  even  by  "  connivance,""  while  they  have 
experienced  all  its  severity ;  that  Mr.  Freire  declared,  more- 
over, in  the  most  violent  manner,  that  he  would  rather  have 
died  under  their  late  slavery  than  suffer  such  indignities  from 
a  friend. 

Being  anxious  to  discover  the  true  feelings  of  the  Govern- 
ment, Colonel  Donkin  states  that  he  did  not  interrupt  Mr. 
Freire,  for  whom  he  was  willing  to  make  every  allowance,  more 


1808]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  209 

particularly  as  the  Portuguese  had  been  cruelly  pillaged,  and 
the  Convention  did  not  put  a  stop  to  the  French  system  of 
extortion,  which  was  carried  on  after  the  30th  of  August.  He 
thinks,  however,  that  what  he  said  evidently  amounted  to  a 
declaration  that  the  Regency  are  determined  to  emancipate 
themselves  from  British  influence,  and  to  act  as  an  indepen- 
dent Government. 