

General  Broderick  regrets  that  the  leaders  in  the  Councils 
persist  in  employing  General  Cuesta  in  the  command  of  the 
corps,  which  should  communicate  immediately  with  the  right 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  215 

of  Blake's  army,  as  no  cordiality  can  subsist  between  these 
Generals. 

Reynosa,  September  26,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  3 1st  of 
August,  and  states  that  the  explanation  contained  in  it  per- 
fectly coincides  with  the  ideas  he  had  formed  of  his  mission, 
except  that  he  had  not  conceived  that  there  would  be  any  ob- 
jection to  his  stating  directly  the  wants  of  the  corps  with  which 
he  may  have  occasion  to  commnnicate.  He  is  fully  aware  of 
the  necessity  of  some  central  point  of  application,  but  is  afraid 
that  some  inconvenience  will  arise  from  the  General  with  whom 
he  may  have  to  communicsfte  being  able  to  procure  supplies  by 
other  means  than  those  of  the  British  General  Officers  com- 
missioned to  attend  them. 

He  has  only  lately  received  any  communication  from  Sir 
John  Doyle,  but  has  sent  him  instructions,  and  expects  to 
meet  him  at  Madrid,  whither  he  is  going  for  a  few  days,  with 
the  view  of  extending  his  means  of  intelligence,  which  he  finds 
extremely  limited  at  the  head- quarters  of  the  Gallician  army. 
He  gives  some  account  of  the  position  of  Blake's  army,  the 
head-quarters  of  which  are  advanced  to  Frias ;  mentions  his 
having  written  to  press  Major-General  Leith  to  forward  the 
10,000  Asturians,  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  Bilbao,  until 
the  arming  of  the  Biscayans  is  completed ;  observes  that  the 
arrival  of  the  liberated  Spanish  troops,  who  are  all  veterans, 
in  the  northern  provinces,  will  constitute  a  very  preponde- 
rating force  ;  but  that  such  numerous  bodies,  assembled  in  a 
quarter  from  which  the  French  have  designedly,  perhaps, 
drawn  much  of  their  subsistence,  will  render  supplies  very 
precarious,  unless  special  means  are  taken  to  secure  them.  He 
has,  therefore,  suggested  to  General  Blake  the  necessity  of 
establishing  magazines  on  the  coast,  and  has  requested  Mr. 
Stuart  to  recommend  a  similar  measure  to  the  high  authorities 
at  Madrid.  He  points  out  Bilbao  as  the  most  convenient  port 
for  communication  in  future. 


216  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Corunna,  October  29,  1808. 

He  did  not  receive  Lord  Castlereagh's  instructions  to  pre- 
pare for  Sir  David  Baird's  army,  until  after  it  had  arrived  at 
Corunna ;  but  states  that  Captain  Kennedy,  to  whose  reports 
he  refers,  had  taken  every  previous  step  for  this  purpose,  which 
the  shortness  of  the  passage  of  the  troops  would  allow.  He 
observes  that  the  embarrassments  which  at  first  impeded  their 
disembarkation  have  subsided,  and  that  the  Junta  shows  the 
greatest  disposition  to  provide  for  their  accommodation  on  their 
route,  and  that  all  classes  of  individuals  expressed  their  joy  on 
their  arrival. 