

With  respect  to  the  province  of  Las  Montanas  de  Santander, 
he  has  learned  from  the  Bishop  that  five  millions  of  reals 
would  be  necessary  to  be  advanced  to  it ;  that  there  was  no 
immediate  want  of  arms  or  ammunition,  but  money  was  indis- 
pensable. This  demand  appearing  to  General  Leitli  large  and 
unnecessary,  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop,  requesting  to  be  informed 
of  the  nature  of  the  proposed  expenditure,  (of  which  letter,  as 
well  as  of  the  Bishop''s  answer,  he  encloses  a  copy)  and  subse- 
quently agreed  to  pay  down  25,000  liard  dollars  only,  stipu- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  221 

lating,  at  the  same  time,  for  the  progress  of  the  armament, 
and  for  the  immediate  circulation  of  a  proclamation,  which  he 
encloses.  He  observes  that,  on  his  landing,  he  found  the  state 
of  the  public  mind  very  lukewarm  ;  the  military  force  not 
exceeding  700  men,  badly  appointed;  reports  continually 
arriving  of  the  intended  approach  of  the  enemy ;  and  tlie 
Government  principally  in  the  hands  of  the  Bishop,  an  active 
and  apparently  firm  man,  but  without  method,  and  sur- 
rounded by  ecclesiastics.  The  frontiers,  hitherto  protected  by 
6,000  Asturians,  under  General  Ballasteros  at  Reynosa,  were 
threatened  to  be  exposed  by  the  return  of  those  troops  to  their 
own  province — 2,000  had  actually  withdrawn.  He  could  not 
obtain  any  information  at  Santander,  of  the  state,  strength, 
and  position  of  the  enemy ;  but,  having  despatched  his  aid-de- 
camp. Captain  Hay,  to  General  Ballasteros,  he  has  received 
from  the  latter  a  report,  (which  he  encloses)  stating  that  the 
enemy,  30  or  40,000  in  number,  occupy  all  the  country  be- 
tween Itaxo  and  Bilbao,  laying  waste  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Spanish  advanced  posts ;  also  describing  the  positions  occupied 
by  General  Ballasteros^  troops.  He  encloses  also  a  sketch  of 
the  roads  from  Santander  to  Reynosa. 

Having  employed  Captain  Birch  of  the  Engineers  to  exa- 
mine the  port  of  Santander,  with  a  view  to  the  operations  of  a 
British  force,  he  encloses  his  instructions  and  Captain  Birches 
report,  which  gives  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  it,  and  repre- 
sents the  batteries  to  be  in  a  very  bad  state.  There  is  another 
post  twenty  miles  to  the  eastward,  called  Santona,  which  is 
reckoned  the  best  in  North  Spain ;  and,  considering  it  of  great 
importance,  he  has  sent  Captain  Birch  thither. 

Being  informed  by  Colonel  Doyle  that  15,000  British  troops 
were  to  land  at  Gihon,  he  left  Santander  (where  every  thing 
was  in  train  of  preparation)  on  the  27th,  and  arrived  on  the 
SOth  at  Gihon.  The  new  modelling  of  the  Junta  at  the  latter 
place  will  prevent  him,  for  a  few  days,  from  setting  out  for 
Oviedo ;  but  he  has,  in  the  mean  time,  written  to  the  Com- 