

Reynosa,  September  10,  1808. 

Reports  his  arrival  at  Reynosa,  the  head-quarters  of  Ge- 
neral Blake,  who,  by  having  reached  that  position,  has  over- 
come all  the  difficulties,  which  rendered  a  reinforcement  of 
cavalry  so  essential  to  his  movements,  and  to  which  he  is  con- 
sequently more  indifferent.  General  Broderick  represents  the 
plains  of  Leon  and  Castillo  as  calculated,  in  a  remarkable  man- 
ner, for  the  operations  of  cavalry,  and  how  much  the  common 
cause  has  been  injured  by  the  needless  retreat  and  inactivity  of 
General  Cuesta,  with  the  united  assistance  of  whose  corps  and 
the  army  of  Arragon  he  has  no  doubt  that  General  Blake 
would  have  driven  the  French  from  their  present  position. 
He  states  that  the  French  have  6,000  cavalry,  very  finely 
mounted. 

General  Blake  means  to  take  up  a  position  between  Bilbao 
and  Vittoria,  in  the  hope  of  accomplishing  the  liberation  of 
Arragon,  Alava,  and  Biscay.  He  has  applied  for  an  advance 
of  ^11,000,  and  General  Broderick  has  taken  upon  himself 
the  responsibility  of  recommending  his  being  furnished  with 
that  sum  from  on  board  the  frigate  off  St.  Ander,  on  condition 
of  its  being  returned  into  the  general  stock,  out  of  the  funds  in 
the  liands  of  the  Junta  of  Corunna.  He  requests  Lord  Cas- 
tlereagh''s  instructions  for  his  conduct  on  fixture  occasions  of  a 
similar  nature. 

General  Blake  has  also  applied  for  12,000  pouches  and  belts, 
(the  new  levies  being  obliged  to  carry  their  ammunition  in  their 
pockets)  together  with  40,000  great  coats.     General  Broderick 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  213 

represents  the  latter  to  be  absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Spanish 
army  is  not  allowed  blankets,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  the 
war  will  be  carried  on  without  going  into  winter-quarters. 

The  first  division  of  Castanos'  army,  consisting  of  11,000 
men,  has  proceeded  nearly  halfway  between  Madrid  and  Sara- 
gossa,  on  its  road  to  Soria.  Ouesta's  army  will  be  in  communi- 
cation with  the  left  of  this  force;  and  General  [Colonel]  Doyle 
is  gone  to  Saragossa,  to  induce  the  army  in  that  quarter  to 
combine  its  operations  with  the  above. 

General  Broderick  suggests  that  the  port  of  St.  Ander  will 
be  much  more  convenient  for  communication  than  that  of  Co- 
runna  or  Gihon.  He  represents  the  army  to  be  advancing  in 
numbers  and  discipline,  but  has  more  faith  in  the  good  will 
than  the  manoeuvring  even  of  the  Spanish  troops  of  the  line. 

PS.  Some  prisoners  just  brought  in  state  the  French  to 
be  only  30,000  strong,  cavalry  included ;  that  Burgos  is 
occupied  by  800  French,  and  that  Lasalle  is  ready  to  quit 
the  town,  keeping  his  mules  constantly  harnessed  to  bring  off 
his  cannon.  Captain  Birch  is  ordered  to  St.  Ander,  to  forward 
the  arms  to  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa. 