

Having  determined  on  hiring,  as  the  most  efficient  as  well 
as  economical  mode  of  providing  mules  for  the  army,  he  has 
suggested  the  following  terms  to  the  different  officers  employed, 
viz.,  16  to  18  reals  per  day  for  mules  of  burden  in  general,  20 
for  those  carrying  ammunition,  and  24  for  draught  mules,  at 
the  rate  of  20  to  the  dollar.  The  purchase  of  horses  and  of  a 
small  proportion  of  mules  will  come  in  aid  as  a  secondary 
means  of  supply. 

General  Broderick  states  that  the  hurry  with  which  he  was 
obliged  to  pass  through  the  country,  to  join  the  army  of  Gal- 
licia,  prevented  him  from  furnishing  any  information  respecting 
its  nature  and  resources. 

Corunna,  November  4,  1808. 

Forwards  a  despatch  from  Lieut.-Colonel  Doyle,  and  gives 
some  account  of  an  action  between  Blake's  army  and  the  ad- 
vanced guard  of  the  French,  near  Zornosa,  in  which  the  latter 
were  driven  back  with  some  loss.  There  is  a  jjood  deal  of 
desertion  in  Blake''s  army,  from  which  the  young  recruits  are 
returning  home,  discouraged  by  the  hardships  of  the  campaign. 
The  French,  moreover,  have  so  completely  exhausted  Bilbao 
and  the  neighbourhood  by  their  exactions,  that  the  Spanish  troops 
begin  to  feel  a  want  of  provisions,  and  Admiral  de  Courcy  has 
taken  measures  for  forwarding  to  that  port  a  portion  of  those 
destined  for  the  use  of  the  army  of  the  Marquess  Romana. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  217 

States  that  Sir  D.  Baird  has  directed  him  to  remain  at 
Corunna,  to  superintend  the  disembarking  of  troops  from  Eng- 
land, to  forward  stores,  and  to  communicate  with  the  Com- 
mander of  the  forces  ;  but  trusts  he  shall  be  allowed  to  resume 
his  former  station,  as  soon  as  the  cavalry  have  been  forwarded 
towards  the  frontier.  Captain  Kennedy  has  been  appointed 
to  act  under  him  in  the  same  service  at  Corunna,  as  Assistant 
Deputy  Quartermaster-General. 

Corunna,  November  15,  1808. 
Eeports  state  that  the  French  have  advanced  beyond  Burgos, 
and  have  cut  to  pieces  a  corps  of  4,000  Spaniards.  The  whole 
of  Sir  D.  Baird's  army  have  left  Corunna,  except  a  part  of 
the  10th  Light  Dragoons.  Sir  John  Moore  was  at  Ciudad 
Rodrigo  on  the  12th,  setting  out  for  Salamanca. 

Corunna,  November  22,  1808. 
He  gives  some  account  of  several  actions  between  Blake^s 
army  and  the  French  on  the  81st  of  October,  and  on  the  5th, 
8th,  10th,  and  11th  of  November;  when,  after  various  success 
and  considerable  loss  on  both  sides,  the  former  was  obliged  to 
retreat  with  not  more  than  7  or  8,000  men.  The  Marquess  of 
Romana  was  at  Santander,  and  expected  to  collect  about  35,000 
men  from  the  remains  of  Blake's  army,  the  militia  of  the  pro- 
vince, the  Asturian  reserve,  and  his  own  dismounted  cavalry. 