

R,eynosa,  September  17,  1808. 
He  complains  of  a  great  want  of  communication  on  the  part 
of  General  Blake,  from  whom  he  cannot  procure  frank  state- 
ments, even  of  his  wants.  He  attributes  this  reserve  to  a  wish 
of  the  Junta  of  Corunna,  on  whom  the  General  is  dependent, 
to  avoid  an  examination  into  the  funds  remainins:  in  their 
hands,  as  they  are  desirous  that  the  provinces  which  are  the 
seat  of  war  should  bear  the  expenses  of  it,  and  that  these,  in 
their  turn,  should  refer  demands  for  money  to  those  provinces 
which  have  received  subsidies  from  Enoland.  He  thinks  it 
right  to  add  that  he  has  received  the  utmost  personal  civility 
from  the  General,  whom  he  does  not  suspect  of  having  any 
designs  which  he  is  afraid  of  bringing  into  view ;  but,  under 
all   circumstances,  thinks  it  would  be  extremely  desirable  to 


2  14  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

get  the  remaining  money  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Provincial 
Junta,  and  to  throw  the  whole  subsidy  into  some  common 
fund,  to  be  distributed  under  authority  to  the  different  armies, 
as  occasion  may  require.  In  any  event,  he  thinks  it  would  be 
derogatory,  as  well  as  useless,  to  prosecute  the  objects  of  his 
mission  any  further,  unless  the  General  affords  him  the  means 
of  more  confidential  intercourse. 

The  army  is  on  its  march  to  Bilbao,  and  the  provinces  of 
Biscay  and  Guipuscoa  will  probably  be  in  arms  in  a  few  days. 
General  Blake  has  informed  him  that  he  depends  chiefly  on 
the  country  through  which  he  passes  for  supplies  ;  but  that  he 
has  been  promised  biscuit  from  Corunna  and  Ferrol,  with  which 
he  means  to  establish  magazines  near  St.  Ander.  Being  in- 
duced, however,  by  his  conversation,  to  suspect  that  he  places 
great  dependence  on  the  frigate  off  that  port,  General  Bro- 
derick  thought  it  right  to  explain  that  something  very  far  short 
of  a  day''s  supply  to  his  army  might  produce  a  famine  on  board 
the  frigate.  He  is  waiting  for  a  communication  from  the  Ge- 
neral of  the  situation  of  his  head-quarters,  in  order  to  join  him, 
but  has  endeavoured  in  vain  to  procure  from  him  the  positions 
he  means  to  occupy  during  his  march. 

Traspaderne,  September  22,  1808. 

He  has  had  a  more  satisfactory  conference  with  General 
Blake,  of  whose  intended  movements  he  gives  a  general  outline. 
He  is  posted  along  the  Ebro,  where  he  is  waiting  for  the  4th 
division  of  his  army  now  at  Bilbao,  which  place  they  have  en- 
tered after  a  three  hours'*  attack.  In  consequence  of  the  want 
of  cavalry,  he  means  to  await  the  attack  of  the  French,  who 
are  strong  in  force,  and  have  reconnoitred  his  posts.  The 
Asturian  army,  10,000  strong,  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
St.  Ander,  on  its  march  to  support  that  point. 