

On  the  subject  of  Lord  Oastlereagh's  secret  despatch  of  the 
27th,  he  refers  to  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  he  has  written  to  Sir 
Hew  Dalrymple,  or  officer  commanding  in  Portugal,  describing 
the  state  of  the  armies,  and  urging  him  to  despatch  all  his  dis- 
posable force  of  cavalry,  horse  or  car  artillery,  and  light  infantry, 
to  move  on  Palencia,  where  they  will  receive  such  intelligence 
as  will  enable  them  to  give  the  most  effective  co-operation. 

In  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa  there  is  again  a  prospect  of  resist- 
ance, and  he  encloses  applications  for  assistance  from  those 
provinces,  which  have  induced  him  to  embark  for  Santander, 
with  7,500  stand  of  arms,  borrowed  from  the  Junta  of  Oviedo, 
and  other  stores.  He  has  also  written  to  Admiral  de  Courcy, 
General  Broderick,  and  Mr.  Stuart,  requesting  25,000  stand 
of  arms,  with  stores,  to  be  sent  off"  Santander  with  all  speed. 

From  Castro,  he  learns  that  the  French  intend  to  maintain 
and  strengthen  themselves  from  the  Ebro  to  that  place,  and 
to  post  troops  along  the  whole  coast  of  Biscay ;  but  General 
Leith  hopes  they  will  not  reach  Santon?,,  relative  to  which  post 
he  encloses  a  memorandum  from  Captain  Digby,  of  H.M.S. 
Cossack,  representinfi:  it  in  favourable  terms,  and  as  a  much 


I 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  227 

better  port,  both  for  men-of-war  and  transports,  than  San- 
tander,  being  easier  of  access,  having  more  water  and  better 
anchorage.  General  Leith  recommends  the  sending  of  the 
Spanish  troops  from  the  North,  to  rendezvous  off  Santander, 
where  their  landing,  should  no  previous  disaster  occur  to  the 
province,  would  be  of  infinite  importance,  and  where  the  ac- 
commodations are  very  good,  and  provisions  easily  obtained. 

He  recommends  that  shoes,  stockings,  hats,  surgical  instru- 
ments, drums,  and  camp  equipage,  should  be  sent  from  England 
instead  of  money ;  and  represents  that  the  governments  of 
those  provinces  are  most  anxious  for  British  troops. 

Gihon,  September  16,  1808. 

Encloses  letters  from  General  Broderick,  Captain  Birch,  and 
Captain  Doyle.  The  first,  from  Reynosa,  requests  the  supply 
of  one  million  of  reals  to  General  Blake,  to  enable  him  to 
undertake  the  liberation  and  organization  of  Biscay  and  Gui- 
puscoa.  The  second  adds,  that  15,000  stand  of  arms  are  also 
wanted  for  this  service;  and  Captain  Doyle  details  the  intended 
movements  of  the  Asturian  army,  and  the  measures  necessary 
to  be  pursued,  in  case  a  British  force  should  arrive,  who  are 
recommended  to  disembark  at  Guotaria.  Under  these  circum- 
stances. General  Leith  represents  the  support  of  the  Spanish 
army  from  the  North,  or  a  British  corps,  to  be  most  material. 
Santander  affords  a  good  point  of  debarkation  ;  and  he  has 
already  noticed  the  merits  of  Santona. 