

He  has  written  to  the  President  of  the  Junta  of  Leon  and 
Castillo,  to  whom  250,000  hard  dollars  were  transmitted  by 
Mr.  Hunter ;  but  no  account  has  been  received  of  the  expen- 
diture, or  of  their  army,  if  they  have  any. 

He  strongly  represents  General  Blake's  want  of  cavalry, 
from  which  he  has  already  suffered  greatly,  having  in  vain 
solicited  those  with  Cuesta's  army,  amounting  to  about  1,500. 
He  therefore  recommends  that  a  force  of  British  cavalry 
should  be  sent  to  Ooruna  without  delay.  He  will  be  at  Llanes 
when  the  Asturians  assemble,  and  will  try  to  spur  them  to 
exertion.  Two  of  the  Junta  have  been  sent  as  deputies  to 
Ciudad  Real  from  Asturias :  those  from  Leon  and  Gallicia 
have  also  set  out ;  and  he  has  urged  the  Junta  of  Cantabria 
to  send  theirs  without  delay. 

He  encloses  a  secret  communication  from  the  Bishop  of  San- 
tander, relative  to  the  prospect  of  the  escape  of  Ferdinand  VII. ; 
but  General  Leith  thinks  that,  if  this  were  practicable,  the 
indiscretion  of  some  persons  at  Santander  has  already  put  the 


224  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [180S. 

enemy  on  his  guard.  He  has,  however,  requested  assistance 
for  this  purpose  from  the  squadron,  and  the  Iris  frigate  has 
accordingly  sailed  from  Gihon  for  the  coast  of  France. 

In  a  PS.,  dated  September  8th,  General  Leith  states  the 
arrival  of  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  the  French  in  Portugal ; 
and  that  he  learns  from  Captain  Carroll  that  the  Gallician  army 
is  in  motion,  and  will  be  at  Reynosa  on  the  7th  or  8th.  He 
adds  the  report,  which  he  considers  doubtful,  of  a  victory  by 
Palafox  near  Calahorra,  and  mentions  that  the  enemy  have 
increased  the  garrison  of  San  Sebastian  to  3,000  men  who  are 
provisioned  for  three  months. 

Gihon,  September  13,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh's  despatch  of  the  23rd  of 
August,  with  its  enclosures,  by  Captains  Lefebre  and  Jones, 
and  of  the  31st,  by  Captain  Pasley.  Encloses  a  letter  fi-om 
Major  Roche  at  Leon,  by  which  it  appears  that  a  new  Junta 
had  been  formed  there,  in  consequence  of  the  extreme  unpo- 
pularity of  the  late  President  Valdez ;  that  this  new  Junta 
had  annulled  the  acts  of  the  former;  that,  part  of  the  250,000 
dollars  advanced  by  the  British  Government  being  yet  unap- 
propriated, the  new  Junta  had  desired  Major  Roche's  sanction 
to  their  laying  hands  upon  it,  which  measure  he  declined  giving 
any  opinion  upon,  not  wishing  to  interfere  between  the  two 
parties;  but  he  recommends  that  no  further  advance  should  be 
made  to  them  ;  that  there  are  about  9,000  men  in  arms  within 
the  province,  3,000  of  whom  were  drilling  iat  the  capital,  and 
the  remainder  divided  between  the  armies  of  Blake  and  Cuesta; 
that  Blake''s  army,  33,000  strong,  chiefly  of  what  they  call 
troops  of  the  line,  marched  on  the  2nd  towards  Burgos,  which 
was  evacuated  by  the  enemy  on  the  2nd  or  3rd  of  September ; 
that  15,000  men,  under  Cuesta,  are  at  Valladolid  ;  and  that  an 
extensive  combined  operation  is  forming  at  Madrid  by  a  council 
of  war,  at  which  Castanos,  Cuesta,  and  Palafox,  are  assisting. 