

Encloses  the  Madrid  Gazette  Extraordinary,  in  which  the 
General  Government  is  announced.  He  has  prevailed  on  the 
Biscayans  to  send  Deputies,  which  has  also  been  promised  by 
the  Bishop  of  Santander. 

Santander,  October  4,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh''s  letter  of  the  1 4th  Sep- 
tember. He  has  already  arranged  to  send  certain  quantities  of 
biscuit,  rum,  and  salt  pork,  to  the  Gallician  army.  He  under- 
stands that  the  enemy  has  not  above  12,000  men  in  Bilbao, 
and  that  Ney  is  gone  again  towards  Durango.  The  left  of  the 
Gallician  army  has  its  advanced  posts  at  La  Errera,  a  league  in 
front  of  Valmaseda :  the  main  body  of  the  4th  division  still  at 
Nava,  a  league  behind  Valmaseda. 

Santander,  October  5,  1808. 

He  has  taken  the  necessary  means  to  supply  the  Gallician 
army,  for  the  present,  with  rum,  biscuit,  and  salt  meat.  Sug- 
gests that  no  local  allotment  of  money,  &c.,  should  hencefor- 
ward be  made  in  the  rear ;  as  the  armies  near,  and  on  the  line 
of  operations,  on  whom  the  fate  of  the  campaign  depends,  in- 
dispensably require  supplies.  By  his  own  and  Mr.  Hunter''s 
exertions,  the  wants  of  the  Gallician  army  have  been  in  some 
measure  relieved,  principally  by  advancing  to  them  money  which 
had  been  promised  to  Asturias ;  for  which  step,  under  present 
circumstances,  he  trusts  he  shall  stand  excused. 


1808]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  231 

The  first  division  of  the  Asturian  army  has  arrived  at  Torre 
la  Vega,  four  leagues  from  Santander.  The  whole  column  of 
10,000  is  to  proceed  to  Yillarcayo,  behind  the  Gallician  right, 
where  Greneral  Leith  will  attend  to  their  wants,  being  near  the 
line  of  operations.  The  regiment  of  Laredo  will  take  care  of 
the  country  from  Valmaseda  and  Nava  to  Castro  Urdiales, 
near  which  the  predatory  parties  of  the  enemy  have  pushed, 
and  from  whence  the  powder  landed  near  Bilbao  was  rescued 
with  difficulty. 

He  has  received  despatches  from  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple,  dated 
the  7th  September ;  the  advanced  guard  was  at  Almeida,  and  as 
Sir  Hew  had  not  received  his  letters,  he  is  still  at  a  loss  as  to 
any  aid  from  Portugal  advancing  towards  Palencia.  The  officers 
of  his  staff  show  the  utmost  zeal  and  activity.  The  baggage  of 
Captains  Lefebvre  and  Jones  fell  into  the  enemy^s  hands  at 
Bilbao,  where  there  are  now  supposed  to  be  not  more  than 
1,500  French,  who  cannot  long  subsist  there.  The  retreat 
from  Bilbao  was  very  orderly  and  quiet. 

Having  insisted,  before  he  advanced  another  shilling,  that 
the  Bishop  and  Junta  should  name  Deputies  to  the  General 
Government,  they  have  appointed  M.  Cevallos  the  Minister,  a 
native  of  that  province,  and  the  Marquess  Cillezudos. 