

Santander,  October  16,  1808. 
The  army  of  the  Marquess  de  Eomana  is  safely  landed  at 
Santander,  except  the  troops  on  board  of  three  transports,  who 
landed  at  Ribadio,  and  are  marching  through  Asturias.  They 
amount  to  8,671  non-commissioned,  and  rank  and  file,  are  very 
fine  troops,  and  their  arrival  is  of  great  importance.  The 
cavalry  are  unfortunately  without  horses.  He  requests  horses 
and  saddles  for  2,500  men.  He  has  been  able  completely  to 
arm  the  infantry,  and  supply  the  army  with  money,  and  he 
is  expecting  the  arrival  of  orders  for  their  movement  from  the 
Supreme  Junta  at  Madrid.  The  Gallician  army  has  again 
occupied  Bilbao.     No  action  of  moment  has  yet  taken  place 


232  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

between  the  armies,  but  their  position  must  speedily  produce 
something  of  interest. 

Santander,  October  18,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  addressed  to  Lord  Castlereagh  by  Captain 
Carroll,  dated  Bilbao,  ISth  October,  stating  that  that  town  was 
re-captured  on  the  preceding  day  by  the  vanguard  and  4th 
division  of  the  army  of  Grallicia.  The  enemy,  who  occupied 
the  town,  (nearly  5,000)  retreated  at  two  in  the  morning  of 
the  12th  towards  Durango,  before  any  part  of  the  troops  could 
come  up  with  them.  Few  of  the  enemy,  if  any,  were  killed  in 
the  pursuit ;  but  a  lieutenant,  sergeant,  and  fourteen  privates 
were  taken — also,  several  stragglers.  The  Spanish  troops  were 
joyfully  received  by  all  ranks  of  people :  there  cannot  now  be 
any  impediment  to  the  immediate  arming  of  the  province. 
The  French  have  been  guilty  of  extreme  cruelty  at  Bilbao : 
two  sick  Spanish  soldiers,  who  had  been  left  there,  were  publicly 
shot,  by  order  of  General  Merlin. 

General  Leith,  on  learning  that  Bilbao  was  re-occupied, 
wrote  to  the  Lords  of  Biscay,  acquainting  them  that  he  was 
proceeding  to  Bilbao,  with  arms,  ammunition,  and  money.  He 
will  expedite  the  march  of  the  Marquess  of  Romana"'s  army, 
and  complete  the  arrangements  for  the  reception  of  a  British 
corps.  He  thinks  that  hiring  mules  of  burden  or  draught  will 
be  the  best  mode  of  fulfilling  Lord  Castlereagh's  instructions 
on  that  subject,  the  purchase  being  very  expensive.  He  has, 
therefore,  made  arrangements  for  procuring  1,000  mules,  at 
from  1 7  to  25  reals  a  day,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  service 
required  of  them. 

He  encloses  a  letter  from  Colonel  Murray,  in  answer  to  his 
letter  from  Oviedo  to  Sir  Hew  Dalrymple.  Colonel  Murray 
states  that  the  great  distance,  the  natural  difficulties  of  the 
intervening  countries,  and  the  advanced  season,  must  oppose 
great  obstacles  to  the  arrival  in  Biscay  of  any  reinforcements 
from  Lisbon  ;  but  every  exertion  will  be  made  to  prepare  the 
army  for  so  long  a  march. 