

After  firing  a  few  guns,  the  Spanish  column,  perceiving  the 
enemy's  superiority,  retired  by  Soroza,  and  made  good  their 
retreat.  General  Leith  remained  with  the  column  till  it 
reached  Valmaseda,  from  whence  he  set  off  to  General  Blake's 
head-quarters  at  Quincoas.  He  found  that  Major- General 
Broderick  was  gone  to  Madrid.  Blake  was  very  communicative 
to  General  Leith,  who  received  a  most  favourable  impression 
of  his  abilities,  coolness,  and  intelligence.  Blake  stated  the 
enemy's  forces  (exclusive  of  those  in  Catalonia)  at  from  40  to 
45,000,  of  which  from  5  to  6,000  are  cavalry. 

Portago,  when  attacked  at  Bilbao,  appears  to  have  been 
io^norant  of  the  situations  of  the  other  divisions  of  Blake's 
army,  supposing  them  to  be  at  a  greater  distance  from  him  than 
they  actually  were ;  and  Ney,  by  quitting  his  position  to  cut 
off  the  4th  division,  (in  which  he  miserably  failed)  left  the 
right  and  left  wing  of  the  French  army  disjointed,  and  tlie 
latter  exposed  to  the  combined  attack  of  Palafox,  Castaiios, 
and  Cuesta,  whose  effective  force  amounts  to  43,000  men,  while 
that  under  Moncey  cannot  exceed  17,000.  As  soon  as  Ney's 
movement  was  known,  an  express  was  sent  to  the  Spanish 
armies,  to  press  Moncey,  and  not  to  lose  sight  of  him.  Blake 
keeps  some  battalions  to  figure  on  his  right,  while  he  concen- 
trates himself  behind  the  mountains  of  Castillo  and  Biscay, 
keeping  well  to  his  left,  in  order  to  draw  the  enemy  as  far  from 
a  junction  between  his  right  and  left  as  possible,  to  give 
better  opportunity  for  striking  a  decided  blow  on  his  left. 

Blake  intercepted  Buonaparte's  despatches  from  Paris  to 
King  Joseph,  with  one  from  the  Commandant  at  Bayonne  to 
Jourdan,  stating  that,  from  the  10th  of  October  to  the  10th 
of  November,  from  60  to  66,000  infantry,  and  from  7  to  8,000 
cavalry,  would  enter  Spain  by  the  route  of  Vittoria ;  while, 
from  another  intercepted  despatch,  it  appears  that  St.  Cyr  is 
marching  with  reinforcements  by  the  side  of  Eoussillon  and 
Cataluna. 

The  Spanish  soldiers,  although  without  great  coats,  blankets, 


230  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

brandy,  or  covering  over  their  heads  of  any  sort,  endure  the 
extreme  severity  of  the  winter  without  suffering  much :  they 
live  temperately,  and,  in  marching,  are  very  superior  to  our 
soldiers.  He  urges  the  sending  blankets,  clothing,  tents,  «Sz;c., 
from  England  without  delay,  as  well  as  rum ;  and  he  has 
again  sent  expresses  to  the  oflScer  commanding  at  Lisbon, 
requesting  him  to  send  everything  disposable  from  that  quarter 
with  the  greatest  speed :  400  barrels  of  powder,  aground  when 
Ney  occupied  Bilbao,  have,  by  great  exertions,  been  saved. 
He  wishes  for  two  or  three  armed  luggers,  or  small  vessels,  to 
attend  him  on  the  coast. 