


222  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

mander- in-Chief,  recommending  that  Ballasteros  should  be 
reinforced.  He  learns  that  12,000  Gallicians  and  Asturians 
are  advancing  upon  Burgos,  and  that  Palafox  will  attack  the 
enemy  on  the  side  of  Navarre  from  Arragon. 

Suggests  the  expediency  of  requiring  detailed  information 
relating  to  the  future  expenditure  of  money  advanced  to  the 
Governments,  and  that  clothing,  shoes,  hats,  &c.,  whenever 
required  by  them,  should  be  sent  from  Britain. 

Oviedo,  September  8,  1808. 

He  arrived  at  Oviedo  on  the  31st,  and  was  received  with  the 
greatest  respect.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  gratitude  of  the 
province  towards  the  British. 

Mentions  that  Mr.  Hunter  had  stated  that  he  also  was 
appointed  to  communicate  with  the  Junta  equally,  in  a  civil 
capacity ;  but  observes  that  no  such  instructions  appear  to 
have  been  received  by  that  gentleman  from  Mr.  Canning;  and 
represents  that  much  inconvenience  would  result  from  a  joint 
mission,  though  he  is  desirous  of  taking  every  opportunity  of 
consulting  with  Mr.  Hunter,  of  whom  he  speaks  in  high  terms. 

In  reply  to  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  President  of 
the  Asturian  Junta,  he  has  received  a  letter,  which  he  encloses, 
informing  him  that  the  junction  of  the  provinces  of  Spain  will 
take  place  on  the  10th  of  September,  at  Ciudad  Real ;  de- 
scribing also  the  internal  government  of  Asturias  as  divided 
into  58  districts,  and  stating  that  it  has  now  under  arms 
16,000  men,  (all  recruits,  except  700)  and  to  be  increased  to 
24,000,  when  means  arrive  from  England  for  supplying  their 
wants.  Of  this  force,  it  has  been  agreed  that  10,000  are  to 
serve  out  of  the  principality ;  the  rest  are  thought  necessary 
to  preserve  its  internal  tranquillity.  The  President  concludes 
by  representing  the  great  urgency  of  a  supply  of  clothing, 
tents,  and  money. 

General  Leith  has  not  been  able  to  induce  the  Government 
to  reinforce  the  troops  at  Reynosa,  which  would  defeat  another 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  223 

operation,  which  they  consider  more  important,  that  of  sup- 
porting with  10,000  Asturians  the  advance  of  the  GalHcian 
army  under  Blake  towards  Burgos  ;  for  which  purpose  the 
Asturians  are  to  assemble  at  Llanes,  which  General  Leith  does 
not  think  an  advantageous  position,  but  states  that  it  is  too 
late  to  effect  any  alteration. 

The  Bishop  of  Santander  has  pressed  him  for  a  further 
supply  of  money,  but  without  detailing  the  nature  of  the  ex- 
penditure; and  he  has  been  informed  privately  that  the  Bishop 
has  been  paying  off  the  debts  of  the  province,  incurred  by  a 
former  feeble  attempt  at  arming.  He  will  endeavour,  without 
giving  offence,  to  prevent 'such  proceedings  in  future,  and  has 
sent  the  Junta  25,000  hard  dollars.  He  encloses  his  corre- 
spondence with  the  Bishop  on  the  subject ;  also  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Dickenson,  relative  to  the  furnishing  of  provisions  for  the 
troops  at  Santander,  on  which  General  Leith  does  not  think 
any  thing  necessary  to  be  done  at  present. 