

He  encloses  also  extracts  of  letters  from  Mr.  Stuart,  at  Val- 
ladolid,  and  other  persons,  by  which  it  appears  that  Cuesta  is 
moving  to  Segovia ;  that  Castafios  sends  his  cavalry  to  Burgos, 
and  the  rest  of  his  army  to  Arragon  ;  that  recruits  are  levying 
throughout  the  country,  and  the  French  retreating ;  that  the 
enemy^s  force  is  believed  to  amount  to  about  33,000  infantry, 
and  6,000  cavalry ;  and  that  20,000  men  in  the  province  of 
Santander  can  be  supplied  with  provisions.  He  has  proposed 
to  Mr.  Hunter  to  send  to  Blake  100,000  of  the  hard  dollars 

q2 


228  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

intended  for  Asturias,  and  has  shipped  for  Santander  all  the 
arms  and  stores  he  conld  procure.  Suggests  the  expediency  of 
the  packets  going  to  Santander ;  the  communication  from  the 
line  of  operations  by  Gihon  being  circuitous.  Requests  afield 
telegraph  for  the  coast,  and  shoes  and  clothing  for  the  Asturian 
and  Cantabrian  armies. 

Head- Quarters,  Gallician  Army,  Quincoas,  October  1,  1808. 

The  wind  being  unfavourable,  he  set  out  for  Santander  by 
land,  having  previously  instructed  Major  Roche  and  other 
officers  to  examine  by  different  routes  the  roads  and  communi- 
cations in  Asturias  and  Gallicia.  On  arriving  at  Santander, 
he  learned  that,  on  the  20th  of  September,  the  4th  division  of 
the  Gallician  army,  under  the  Marquess  Portago,  (near  5,000 
infantry,  four  pieces  of  artillery)  took  possession  of  Bilbao, 
where  the  enemy  amounted  to  1,500  men;  there  was  little 
firincr,  and  no  material  loss. 

General  Leith,  on  this,  proceeded  to  Bilbao,  where,  in  con- 
junction with  the  Spanish  General,  he  proposed  a  secret  meet- 
ing with  the  Lords  of  Biscay ;  but  the  unsettled  state  of  the 
province,  still  menaced  by  the  enemy,  prevented  an  effectual 
arming  of  the  peasantry.  He  sent  out  officers  to  obtain  intel- 
ligence, who  reported  that  the  Spanish  outposts  were  extremely 
well  posted,  and  that,  without  being  fully  apprized  of  his 
approach,  the  enemy  could  not  attack  Bilbao.  Reports,  how- 
ever, having  been  received  that  the  French  were  advancing  in 
force,  General  Leith,  in  conjunction  with  the  Spanish  General, 
(who,  he  complains,  has  treated  him  with  too  little  confidence 
and  respect)  made  dispositions  to  cover  the  town  for  a  time, 
on  the  principal  approaches,  as  well  as  so  untenable  a  position 
against  a  superior  force  might  permit ;  and,  if  the  enemy  should 
prove  as  strong  as  was  reported,  the  reserve  to  cover  the 
retreat  of  the  column  after  dark. 

The  enemy  (who  proved  to  be  from  1 1  to  1 2,000  strong, 
of  which    1,500  were  cavalry)  approached  in  three  columns. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  229 