

General  Leith  has  endeavoured,  without  effect,  to  establish 
a  correspondence  with  General  Palafox.     He  lias  succeeded  in 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  225 

putting  the  Asturian  head-quarters  in  motion.  The  Captain- 
General  and  Staff  have  set  out  for  Llanes. 

He  transmits  a  return  of  the  army  of  Asturias,  which 
amounts  to  16,802  men.  He  has  no  doubt  that,  if  necessary, 
and  if  they  could  be  paid,  it  might  be  increased  to  35,000. 
He  transmits  also  answers  to  the  Memorandum  of  Instructions 
entrusted  to  him  by  Lord  Castlereagh,  thirty-one  in  number. 

He  encloses  Captain  Birch"'s  report  concerning  the  port  of 
Santona,  with  a  plan,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  peninsula 
of  Santona  is  a  very  strong  position,  and,  with  some  labour, 
might  be  made  capable  of  defence  by  a  very  few  men ;  and 
that  the  harbour  is  very  good,  even  for  line-of-battle  ships  ; 
but  the  advantages  and  resources  afforded  by  the  peninsula  are 
not  to  be  compared  with  those  of  Santandero,  and  the  anchor- 
age is  not  entirely  protected. 

He  also  transmits  letters  from  Captains  Birch  and  Carroll  at 
Reynosa.  The  latter  states  the  present  strength  of  Blake's 
army  at  30,000  infantry,  100  dragoons,  36  pieces  of  artil- 
lery ;  but  three-fourths  of  this  army  are  new  raised  pea- 
sants. The  army  has  hitherto  been  inactive  for  want  of 
cavalry,  which  Cuesta,  from  private  pique  towards  Blake,  has 
refused  to  furnish.  This  want  prevented  Blake  from  attacking 
Bessi^res  in  his  retreat  from  Astorga  and  Leon  to  Burgos. 
Captain  Carroll  adds,  that  Blake''s  object  is  to  advance  towards 
Miranda,  there  to  occupy  a  favourable  position,  and  thus  cut 
off  communication  with  France,  cover  Biscay  and  Guipuscoa, 
facilitate  the  arming  of  the  peasants,  and,  when  joined  by 
10,000  Asturians,  (as  promised)  to  distract  with  a  formidable 
force  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  and  co-operate  with  Castanos' 
army  in  offensive  operations.  The  wants  of  this  army  are 
stated  to  be  many,  and  there  is  a  scarcity  of  bread ;  but,  as 
corn  is  abundant,  this  will  soon  be  remedied.  Captain  Carroll 
informs  General  Leith  that  Brigadier- General  Doyle  is  at 
Madrid,  with  the  Duke  of  Infantado,  making  arrangements 
for  forming  a  general  council      The  French  army  is  believed 

VOL.  VII.  Q 


226  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

to  be  40,000  strong,  a  reinforcement  of  8,000  having  arrived 
from  France.    Marshal  Ney  has  superseded  Bessi^res. 

General  Leith  also  encloses  a  sketch  from  the  map,  showing 
the  positions  of  the  armies,  some  extracts  of  letters  received 
from  spies,  and  an  extract  from  a  Madrid  letter  of  the  7th, 
noticing  the  movement  of  the  Andalusian  army  to  support 
Palafox.  Castellar^s  army,  late  Cuesta''s,  is  said  to  be  in 
motion  towards  Valladolid.  He  has  no  doubt  that  Asturias 
would  be  capable  of  defending  itself,  if  its  army  and  population 
were  armed  and  organized  ;  but  defers  sending  regular  answers 
to  Lord  Castlereagh''s  despatch  of  the  26th  on  this  subject,  till 
he  can  collect  more  perfect  information.  On  one  point,  how- 
ever, he  speaks  with  decision :  that  the  port  of  Gihon  is  one 
of  the  worst  possible,  and,  after  the  present  season,  would 
expose  a  fleet  of  transports  to  the  greatest  danger. 