


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  233 

He  also  transmits  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  Captain  Birch 
at  Yalmaseda  head-quarters,  who  states  that  Cuesta  is  gone  to 
Madrid,  whither  he  had  been  called  by  the  Deputies,  who,  It 
is  said,  are  displeased  with  his  conduct  towards  M.  Baldeis ; 
and  it  is  reported  that  another  commander  will  be  appointed  to 
his  division,  which  has  marched  under  General  Gia  for  Ber- 
langen,  on  its  way  to  the  Ebro.  The  head-quarters  of  the 
Andalusian  and  Valencian  armies  are  at  Soria  and  Taragona : 
that  of  Arragon  had,  on  the  29th  September,  its  advanced 
corps  near  Langueira,  which  is  on  the  river  of  Arragon,  opposite 
to  Pampeluua.  The  Valencian  army  will  be  at  Alfarro,  Corella, 
and  Tudela,  on  the  7th  or  8th ;  and  the  Andalusians  at  the 
same  time  at  Calahorra  and  Lodosa :  the  army  of  Leon  and 
Castille  follows  the  march  of  the  latter,  and  is  to  file  from 
Calahorra  to  Logrono  on  the  11th.  Their  ulterior  movements 
are  not  fixed  on,  for  want  of  a  Commander-in-Chief:  their 
present  positions  appear  to  Captain  Birch  to  be  too  much 
extended.  He  learns  the  force  of  the  armies  to  be — Arragonese, 
22,000;  Valencians,  18,000;  Andalusians,  10  or  12,000,  in- 
cluding 1,000  cavalry;  Castilians,  the  same  number,  with  12 
pieces  of  artillery.  He  learned  at  Burgos  that  the  army  of 
Estremadura  was  on  its  march  to  Madrid.  He  has  just  heard 
that  Castanos  commands  the  Andalusian  and  Castilian  armies. 

General  Leith  again  represents  the  disadvantages  experienced 
by  the  Spanish  armies  for  want  of  cavalry.  He  has  made 
great  exertions  to  collect  for  them  supplies  from  all  parts,  ad- 
verting only  to  their  real  necessities,  and  not  to  the  provinces 
to  which  they  belonged.  Before  he  has  granted  any  succours 
to  the  provinces,  he  has  stipulated  for  their  sending  Deputies 
to  the  General  Junta ;  but  no  provision  has  yet  been  made  by 
the  Central  Assembly  for  the  army  or  provinces,  nor  does  he 
at  present  know  whether  they  have  the  means  :  until  they  have, 
the  absolute  wants  of  the  armies  must  be  supplied  from  the 
British  purse  and  stores  with  economy  and  method. 

He  complains  that   Mr.  Hunter,  without  his  authority,  has 


234  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

offered  to  the  Central  Government  the  stores  which  arrived  in 
the  Fortuna  transport.  He  does  justice  to  Mr.  Hunter's 
character  and  motives,  but  doubts  the  expediency  of  his  acting 
in  a  diplomatic  capacity,  and  represents  that,  in  the  present 
instance,  his  interference  has  kept  back  the  stores  from  the 
army,  by  whom  they  were  much  wanted.  He  urges  the  expe- 
diency of  his  being  immediately  furnished  with  means  to  supply 
the  smaller  but  scarcely  less  urgent  wants  of  the  provinces, 
especially  Biscay.  If  the  difficulty  of  finding  Spanish  specie 
be  great,  he  has  no  doubt  that  letters  of  credit  on  Spain  could 
be  obtained,  or  money  might  be  obtained  there  by  bills  on  the 
Treasury.  He  again  notices  the  want  of  small  vessels  for  co- 
operation and  despatch. 