

Major  Roche,  whom  he  had  sent  to  ascertain  the  routes  from 
Leon  to  Coruna,  and  thence  back  by  Oviedo,  has  been  diverted 
from  this  object  by  a  journey  to  Oviedo,  whence  he  has  been 
despatched  by  Lord  W.  Bentinck,  to  conduct  the  British  army 
on  its  route  from  Portugal. 

Santander,  October  19,  1808. 

He  recommends  the  sending  of  supplies  in  kind  as  far  as 
possible,  not  only  because  the  articles  are  extremely  bad  in 
Spain,  but  to  encourage  our  own  exports,  and  prevent  a  drain 
of  specie.  Suggests  that  large  supplies  of  oak  timber  might  be 
had  from  Asturias,  Santander,  and  Biscay,  for  the  supply  of 
Great  Britain.  He  has  also  communicated  on  this  subject 
with  the  Procurador-General  of  Asturias,  who  has  undertaken 
to  export  any  quantity  required.  At  the  port  of  Riba  de  Sella, 
there  is  enough  for  three  ships  of  the  line,  which  he  could  send 
to  England,  if  desired.  He  has  been  applied  to  for  sending 
back  the  transports  returning  to  England,  freighted  with 
Spanish  wool.  Suggests  that  a  person  might  be  confidentially 
sent  to  survey  the  ship-timber. 

Santander,  October  31,  1808. 

He  has  been  occupied  since  the  18th,  by  making  arrange- 
ments for  Sir  John  Moore's  army,  furnishing  supplies  for  Blake 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  235 

and  the  province  of  Biscay,  and  by  the  daily  expectation  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Marquess  of  Romana. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereagh^s  despatches,  two  of  the 
25th  and  two  of  the  26th  September,  with  the  copy  of  one  to 
Major-General  Broderick,  all  received  through  Sir  David  Baird. 
He  has  been  much  embarrassed  by  the  non-arrival  of  the 
Marquess  of  Romana,  who,  as  he  has  been  given  to  understand, 
will  be  appointed  Commander-in-Chief.  Not  the  slightest  notice 
was  taken  by  the  Government  of  the  arrival  of  Romana^s 
army,  no  supplies  sent,  nor  any  instructions.  General  Leith 
supplied  their  wants,  keeping  them  in  good  humour  with  their 
own  Government ;  and  the  army,  though  without  any  regular 
authority,  has  been  placed  at  Blake^s  disposal. 

He  learns  from  Sir  John  Moore  that  he  is  making  every 
exertion  to  move  20,000  men  forward  to  the  north  of  Spain. 
The  convoy  of  transports  has  just  sailed  from  Santander,  for 
Coruna;  200  mules  had  been  collected,  and  ordered  from 
Santander,  for  Sir  D.  Baird's  army:  he  has  also  taken 
measures  in  Asturias.  M.  Assiotti  is  too  ill  for  the  fatigues 
of  service. 

He  encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Lefebvre,  dated  Bilbao, 
25th  October,  stating  that  the  Lords  of  Biscay  have  applied 
for  assistance,  urging  their  want  of  provisions,  both  for  the 
army  and  the  people ;  that  the  province  is  making  great  exer- 
tions for  supplying  Blake^s  forces  :  that  a  General  Junta  is  to 
assemble  on  the  28th,  to  select  Deputies  for  the  Central 
Government,  and  to  make  arrangements  for  arming  the  pro- 
vince; when  money  will  be  required,  as  well  as  arms  and 
ammunition. 