


242  '         LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  forts  of  Oaecaes,  St.  Julien's,  St.  Bugio,  were  yesterday 
evacuated  by  the  French  troops,  and  taken  possession  of  by 
ours.  His  want  of  local  information  had  great  weight  in  de- 
ciding his  opinion  in  favour  of  expelling  the  French  by  a  Con- 
vention, which  the  late  defeat  had  induced  them  to  solicit  in 
preference  to  continuing  hostilities ;  in  which  case  the  enemy 
could  have  consumed  much  valuable  time,  by  a  protracted  de- 
fence of  the  strong  places  they  occupied. 

When  the  suspension  was  agreed  on,  doubts  were  enter- 
tained whether  Sir  J.  Moore''s  army  could  land,  and,  if  landed, 
whether  it  could  be  supplied  with  provisions  from  the  sliipping 
in  its  present  exposed  situation.  During  the  negociation,  Sir 
J.  Moore''s  force  was  landed ;  but  the  fear  of  the  latter  diffi- 
culty was  confirmed.  Sends  his  despatch  by  Captain  Dal- 
rymple,  who  can  give  further  information. 

Cintra,  September  3,  1808. 

Soon  after  the  suspension  of  arms  was  agreed  on,  Sir  Hew 
Dalrymple  learnt  that  the  Portuguese  were  offended  that  the 
Provisional  Government  of  Oporto  had  not  been  adverted  to  in 
the  transaction.  He  stated  to  General  Freire  that  he  con- 
ceived the  Convention  to  be  a  military  measure  of  the  Com- 
manders of  adverse  armies,  without  reference  either  to  the 
British  or  French  Government.  He  encloses  correspondence 
on  the  subject,  containing  the  alleged  grounds  of  complaint. 

Soon  after  his  arrival,  he  received  from  Sir  Arthur  Wel- 
lesley  a  communication  between  Sir  C.  Cotton  and  the  Junta 
of  Oporto,  respecting  the  re-establishment  of  the  Regency  at 
Lisbon.  Encloses  copy  of  correspondence  with  Brigadier- 
General  Decken  on  the  subject.  In  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of 
Oporto,  he  merely  adverts  to  the  re-establishment  of  the  Re- 
gency, but  waves  any  opinion  of  it.  On  a  general  view  of  the 
subject,  he  thinks  no  plan  so  good  as  restoring  the  Regency 
of  the  Prince  Regent,  with  some  improvements.  The  Bishop 
of  Oporto  seems  a  worthy  man,  but  easily  worked  upon. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  243 

There  exists  a  petty  intrigue  at  Oporto,  to  make  that  the 
seat  of  Government,  and  to  perpetuate  the  power  of  the  Junta. 
It  appears,  from  conversation  with  M.  de  Pinto,  that  the 
Junta  of  Oporto  is  as  ready  to  relinquish  the  province  of 
Algarve  as  the  Junta  of  Seville  is  to  adopt  it.  The  latter 
would  have  no  objection  to  Alentejo  into  the  bargain. 

Except  one  letter  from  Castaiios,  which  he  encloses,  he  has 
had  no  intelligence  from  Spain  since  he  left  Gibraltar.  He 
intends  to  communicate  with  Oastanos  and  the  Andalusian 
army,  and  will  arm  and  send  off  the  Spaniards  about  to  be 
released  by  the  Convention. 