

In  making  these  suggestions,  Sir  Hew  holds  in  view  the 
very  army  he  now  commands  :  It  will  require  some  littlQ  time 
to  settle  in  Portugal,  and  he  thinks  it  would  be  inexpedient  to 
make  any  considerable  detachment  from  thence,  whilst  there 
remains  any  chance  of  the  French  moving  forward,  with  effect ; 
besides  which,  from  the  present  disposition  of  the  transports, 
it  would  take  some  time  to  make  any  considerable  embarkation. 
To  consider  his  a  mere  army  of  observation  destined  for  the 
defence  of  the  country  would,  he  thinks,  be  an  unfortunate  ne- 
cessity, which  ought  to  be  avoided. 

He  is  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  northern  provinces 
of  Spain  to  give  a  decided  opinion  upon  the  operations  which 
might  be  undertaken  in  that  quarter.  He  thinks  that  10,000 
men  and  a  proportion  of  cavalry  might  soon  arrive  there  from 
England,  and  shortly  after  10,000  from  his  army  might  join 
them ;  when  the  affairs  in  Portugal  are  settled,  10,000  more 
might  follow,  and  the  remainder  might  be  left  to  maintain  the 
internal  tranquillity  of  that  country.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  the  French  will  remain  long  at  Burgos ;  and  the  fate  of 
Bilboa  and  of  Biscay  proves  that  their  officers  will  be  sensible 
of  any  movement  threatening  that  quarter. 

He  proposes  sending  Lord  William  Bentinck  to  Madrid,  to 
communicate  with  Castanos  and  the  Generals  in  command  of 
the  Spanish  forces. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 

Acknowledges  Lord  Castlereaglfs  despatch,  enclosing  Ge- 
neral Freire'*8  report  to  the  Junta  of  Oporto,  and  the  commu- 
nications between  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Portuguese 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  247 

Minister.  Now  that  he  is  more  fully  apprized  of  the  enemy^s 
strength  and  resources  than  he  was  on  landing  in  Portugal, 
Sir  Hew  does  not  hesitate  to  state  that,  in  his  opinion,  the 
advantages  gained  by  the  Convention  greatly  counterbalance 
those  which  would  have  been  derived  from  a  perseverance  in 
hostilities. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 

He  has  sent  Lord  William  Bentiuck  to  Madrid,  to  ascer- 
tain the  feelings  and  views  of  the  Spanish  nation,  their  incli- 
nation and  power  to  give  the  necessary  aids  to  the  advance  of 
a  British  army  into  Spain,  an  accurate  description  of  the 
country  likely  to  become  the  seat  of  war,  and  other  circum- 
stances connected  with  the  proposed  employment  of  the  force 
under  his  command. 

In  the  present  unsettled  state  of  affairs,  he  cannot  form  a 
precise  opinion  as  to  the  amount  of  the  force  it  may  be  neces- 
sary to  leave  in  Portugal,  to  support  the  Regency  to  be  esta- 
blished in  the  name  of  the  Prince  Regent ;  and  he  conceives 
it  to  be  a  matter  worthy  the  attention  of  his  Majesty's  Go- 
vernment whether  that  Regency  is  to  be  supported  by  a  British 
force.  If  the  Juntas  are  sincere  in  their  professions  of  loyalty, 
no  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  whilst  the  French  are  checked 
in  Spain.  In  the  mean  time,  British  influence  and  British 
interference  seem  to  be  objects  of  jealousy  to  all  parties. 