

Head -Quarters,  Ocyras,  September  11,  1808. 

Encloses  extract  of  a  letter  from  Colonel  Whittingham,  con- 
taining intelligence  and  a  request  from  Castanos  for  a  body  of 
British  cavalry.  He  is  surprised  to  find  there  is  an  idea  that 
he  has  a  sufficient  force  of  cavalry  to  enable  him  to  detach 
2,000  to  Madrid,  when  his  whole  force  does  not  amount  to  that 
number,  and  is  not  sufficient  for  the  services  of  his  army  in 
the  field. 

Encloses  letters  from  Valencia,  strongly  painting  the  wants 
and  distresses  of  the  patriots  in  that  part  of  Spain.  By  a 
deputy  from  Arragon,  whom  Lord  Collingwood  saw,  it  ap- 
pears that  this  province,  like  almost  every  other,  thinks  of  no 
wants  but  its  own,  without  reference  to  the  forming  a  Central 
Government  for  the  Spanish  nation.  The  Junta  of  Seville  are 
employed  in  useless  discussions,  and  betraying  great  jealousy 
at  every  measure  likely  to  produce  a  Government  for  the 
nation,  and  to  extinguish  their  own  power.  Their  deputies  to 
the  General  Junta  are  not  men  of  respectability.  Count  Tilly 
is  notoriously  the  contrary.  Sir  H.  Dairy mple  doubts  whe- 
ther the  pecuniary  advance  made  by  Mr.  Duff  to  the  Junta  of 
Seville  was,  under  present  circumstances,  well  applied. 

The  Council  of  Castille,  soon  after  the  exclusion  of  the 
French  from  Madrid,  declared  itself  against  them,  and  wrote 

R  2 


244  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808, 

a  letter,  which  he  encloses.  The  Junta,  from  the  misconduct 
of  some  of  the  individuals  composing  the  Council  of  Castille, 
argue  the  dissolution  of  the  body  itself,  from  which,  if  pro- 
perly constituted,  the  kingdom  would  find  a  resource  against 
anarchy  and  the  exorbitant  pretensions  of  the  Juntas. 

By  comraunciations  he  has  received  from  Colonel  Doyle, 
dated  the  23rd  and  24th  of  August,  it  appears  that  arms  and 
money  had  been  landed  at  Bilboa ;  that  the  insurrection  in 
Bilboa  was  in  great  forwardness,  14,000  already  enrolled,  and 
a  reinforcement  expected  from  the  Asturians  ;  and  that  certain 
important  passes  had  been  occupied.  He  also  mentions  the 
evacuation  of  Burgos.  By  a  later  communication,  however, 
from  Colonel  Doyle,  it  appears  that  the  French  had  fallen 
heavily  upon  Burgos,  putting  many  to  the  sword.  Ney  and 
Soult  are  to  command  in  Spain.  No  doubt  but  that  the  French 
have  received  reinforcement. 

Head-Quarters,  Da  Funda,  September  12,  1808. 

Since  his  last  letters,  he  has  been  much  occupied  in  enforcing 
the  provisions  of  the  Convention,  (some  of  which  the  French 
seem  inclined  to  infringe)  and  in  making  arrangements  for  the 
establishment  of  a  Regency  after  the  French  are  gone.  The 
establishment  of  a  Regency  will  be  a  matter  of  much  delicacy. 
The  Council  of  Regency  left  by  the  Prince  is  not  so  much  con- 
nected with  French  interest  as  has  been  represented  to  his 
Majesty\s  Government.  The  patriotism  of  the  Marquess 
d'Abrantes,  the  President,  is  questioned ;  two  of  the  other 
four  are  respectable  men ;  and  the  other  two,  although  they 
acted  in  the  French  Government,  are  respectable  men,  and 
highly  esteemed  even  now  by  their  colleagues. 