

The  Supreme  Junta  of  Seville  is  to  be  believed  in  its 
solemn  declaration  to  the  Spanish  nation  of  the  3rd  of  August. 
"  The  Portuguese  provinces  of  Algarve  and  Alentejo  have 
joined  in  placing  themselves  under  our  protection,  and  the 
Canary  Isles  have  sent  us  a  deputy  for  the  same  object.*"     The 


1808.1  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  245 

Junta  of  Oporto,  which  claims  the  superiority  over  every  other 
part  of  Portugal,  (not  including  Algarve)  seems  to  act  on  the 
same  principle  as  the  other  Juntas.  Their  formation  was  by 
the  acclamation  of  the  people,  and  their  principles  are  revo- 
lutionary. He  understands  that  the  favourite  plan  is  to  esta- 
blish this  Junta  at  Oporto,  to  rule  the  kingdom,  with  the  ad- 
dition of  some  members  from  the  former  Regency,  whom  it  is 
proposed  to  summon  to  Oporto.  He  does  not  know  whether 
any  of  these  parties  will  accept  the  Regency  on  the  only  foot- 
ing he  can,  under  his  instructions,  confer  it.  He  has  no  means 
of  acquiring  information  respecting  the  characters  and  political 
views  of  the  several  persons  of  weight  in  Portugal ;  yet  very 
shortly  some  definitive  resolution  must  be  taken  and  acted 
upon.  He  disapproves  of  the  conduct  of  the  Junta  of  Oporto, 
and  thinks  their  project  of  a  form  of  Government  is  inadmis- 
sible, as  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  the  Prince  Regent,  and 
subjecting  the  nominal  Regency  to  the  unconstitutional  in- 
fluence of  a  body,  which,  though  withdrawn  from  view,  avow- 
edly continues  to  exist. 

Da  Funda,  September  12,  1808. 

Sir  A.  Wellesley,  being  indisposed  to  the  mission  proposed 
to  him,  General  Leith  and  two  able  assistants  have  been  sent 
to  report  on  the  local  situation  of  the  Asturias,  and  the  ad- 
vantages which  might  be  derived  from  a  British  corps  acting 
on  that  coast. 

He  is  of  opinion  that  the  whole  of  the  force  under  his  command 
ought  to  be  placed  in  cantonments  during  the  approaching  rains, 
in  such  situations  as  may  enable  them  to  assemble  and  march 
beyond  the  frontiers  of  Portugal  into  Spain,  to  co-operate  with 
the  Spanish  armies  against  the  enemy''s  front.  The  march  of 
the  army  must,  of  course,  depend  on  the  disposition  of  the 
Spaniards,  as  to  its  appearance  and  their  means  of  supplying 
such  an  army  in  the  field.  Whether  the  aid  of  a  British  force 
will  be  necessary  to  oppose  the  French  army  in  front  will 
depend,  not  only  on  the  numbers,  but  on  the  union  and  dis- 


246  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

cipline  of  the  Spanish  armies  ;  and,  according  to  these  con- 
siderations, the  Spaniards  will  manifest  more  or  less  desire  to 
have  a  British  force  united  to  them,  particularly  if  it  is  under- 
stood to  be  so  considerable  as  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
measures  pursued.  He  thinks  Castafios"'  request  for  a  small 
corps  of  cavalry,  though  impracticable  in  the  execution,  was 
made  from  the  best  motives. 