

Another  letter  from  Captain  Lefebvre,  also  enclosed,  dated 
Bilbao,  26th  October,  states  that  he  had  been  at  Blake's  head- 
quarters ;  that  the  General  expected  a  happy  result  from  the 
meeting  of  the  Junta  on  the  28th ;  that  he  pressed  for  supplies, 
and  approved  of  leaving  the  arms  for  the  present  at  Castro ; 
that  the  Asturians  are  on  Blake's  right,  and  in  movement,  sup- 


236  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

posed  to  be  covering  Bilbao ;  that  Blake  considers  the  troops 
at  Sautander,  from  the  North,  were  not  a  part  of  his  army, 
and  would  therefore  decline  giving  orders  to  them,  conceiving 
the  Bishop,  the  Count  de  San  Roman,  and  General  Leith, 
responsible  for  them. 

General  Leith  also  encloses  a  bulletin,  dated  Bilbao,  the 
2oth  of  October,  by  which  it  appears  that  skirmishes  had  taken 
place  at  Zornosa,  but  nothing  decisive.  General  Leith  adds 
that,  on  the  26th,  the  French  retreated  from  Zornosa,  without 
making  opposition  to  Blake,  who  established  his  head-quarters 
there,  while  the  enemy  concentrated  himself  towards  Durango. 
Reinforcements  have  since  arrived  under  Marshal  Lefebvre,  to 
the  amount  of  8  or  10,000. 

Santander,  November  7,  1808. 

Encloses  a  letter  from  Captain  Carroll,  dated  Valmaseda, 
2nd  November,  describing  an  attack  made  on  the  31st  October 
by  the  enemy,  who  had  received  very  considerable  reinforce- 
ments, and,  by  means  of  their  superior  numbers,  forced  the 
Gallicians  to  retreat,  which  they  did  with  great  regularity. 
Captain  Carroll  speaks  in  high  terms  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Spaniards,  whose  numbers  did  not  exceed  17,000,  while  he 
estimated  those  of  the  enemy  at  28,000.  The  retreating  army 
arrived  at  Bilbao  on  the  night  of  the  31st.  No  return  has 
been  made  of  the  killed  and  wounded,  which  must  have  been 
considerable  on  both  sides.  In  a  postscript  to  this  letter,  dated 
the  night  of  the  2nd  November,  on  the  heights  over  Valmaseda, 
Captain  Carroll  fears  the  retreat  of  the  Spaniards  is  cut  off, 
and  adds,  they  must  cut  their  way  through. 

General  Leith,  having  heard  that  4,000  of  the  enemy'*s 
cavalry  had  entered  Vallarcayo,  has  concerted  with  Brigadier 
Caro  (Romana''s  brother)  and  Count  Villa  Nueva  de  la  Baroa 
every  measure  of  resistance  and  reconnaissance  which  their 
scanty  means  will  afford.  He  learns  from  the  Commandant  of 
Reynosa  that  his  communication  with  Blake''s  head- quarters 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  237 

was  open  on  the  6th.  He  has  taken  every  measure  to  prevent 
Blake's  army  from  starving. 

The  fleet  of  chasse-marees^  which  he  had  sent  first  to  Castro, 
and  subsequently  to  Bilbao,  arrived  at  the  latter  on  the  day  of 
Blake's  retreat.  General  Blake  sent  Captain  Lefebvre  thither, 
to  encourage  the  province  to  give  the  army  and  people  the 
supplies  of  food,  and  prevent  their  premature  expenditure  for 
undefined  purposes,  while  Blake's  army  stood  in  danger.  The 
Biscayans  have  proved  sensible  of  the  exertions  of  the  British 
Government ;  and  the  arms  and  provisions  in  vessels  in  the 
river  have  been  all  saved  from  the  enemy.  He  is  embarrassed 
in  his  endeavours  to  supply  Blake's  army  by  the  secrecy 
which  that  General  observes  with  regard  to  his  movements. 
He  was  preparing  to  send  2  or  300  mules  to  the  British  army, 
when  Blake's  pressing  wants  made  it  necessary  to  change 
their  destination.  Unless  Blake  was  in  co-operation  with  the 
army  on  the  side  of  Navarre,  which  must  have  been  badly 
planned,  ill  executed,  or  defeated,  General  Leith  knows  not 
what  could  induce  him  to  expose  himself,  without  cannon,  to 
famine  and  superior  numbers:  he  suspects  his  position  was  too 
extended.  He  suggests  that  a  British  Commissariat  and 
Medical  staff  should  be  established  for  the  Spanish  armies. 