

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 
Count  Tilly  proposed  to  march  a  division  of  Castahos*'  army 
to  force  the  Government  of  Granada  to  acknowledge  the  supre- 
macy of  Seville.  This  violent  measure  was  stopped  by  the 
firmness  of  Castanos,  who  said  that  no  part  of  the  army  of  Spain 
entrusted  to  his  command  should  become  the  vile  instrument 
of  civil  war.  This  Junta  refused  the  application  of  the  Cata- 
lans for  artillery,  which  they  could  easily  have  spared.  Sir 
Hew  thinks  it  will  be  prudent  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  on  their 
proceedings. 


248  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Prayeas,  September  19,  1808. 

The  conduct  of  the  Supreme  Junta  of  Seville,  in  the  appli- 
cation of  the  supplies  from  England,  evidently  proves  that  they 
have  lost  sight  of  the  common  cause  in  pursuing  their  indi- 
vidual interests  :  instead  of  directing  their  efforts  to  the  re- 
storation of  their  legitimate  sovereign  and  established  form  of 
Government,  they  are  endeavouring  to  fix  the  permanency  of 
their  own,  and  to  separate  its  interests  from  those  of  other  parts 
of  Spain.  They  threaten  to  withhold  from  Oastafios  the  means 
of  subsisting  his  army  if  he  advances  beyond  the  limits  pre- 
scribed by  them.  If  other  provinces  follow  this  example,  the 
cause  of  Spain  is  ruined,  and  the  triumph  of  the  enemy  com- 
plete. 

To  remedy  these  evils,  Sir  Hew  proposes  that  the  money 
intended  for  the  supply  of  the  Spanish  armies  should  be  en- 
trusted to  some  individual  of  consequence,  in  the  confidence 
of  his  Majesty's  Government,  who  might  see  that  all  pecuniary 
aids  were  applied  to  the  right  purpose,  and  not  employed  for 
the  individual  interest  of  any  particular  Junta. 

Considerable  connexion  subsists  between  the  Junta  of  Seville 
and  that  of  Spanish  Estremadura.  The  army  of  the  latter 
still  surrounds  Elvas,  notwithstanding  the  termination  of  hos- 
tilities in  Portugal.  The  Spaniards  were  actually  bombarding 
the  French  garrison  in  Fort  La  Lippe,  when  the  British  ar- 
rived to  take  possession  of  it.  Sir  Hew  has  expostulated  on 
this  subject  with  the  General  commanding  at  Badajoz,  and 
hopes  to  bring  him  to  reason,  but  fears  it  will  be  more  difficult 
to  persuade  him  to  march  upon  Madrid. 

September  20,  1808. 
The  Bishop  of  Oporto  declines  taking  a  distinguished  place 
in  the  Regency,  on  the  ground  of  feeling  the  necessity  of  re- 
maining at  Oporto,  and  endeavouring  to  support  the  autho- 
rity of  Government  in  the  northern  provinces.  A  deputy 
from  the  Junta  held  nearly  the  same  moderate  language  as  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  249 

Bishop ;  and,  finding  that  the  Princess  Kegency  was  likely  to 
be  restored,  with  the  exception  of  those  members  who  had 
forfeited  the  confidence  of  the  nation,  he  signified  his  appro- 
bation of  the  measure ;  and,  although  Sir  Hew  thinks  he  was 
instructed  to  do  so,  he  did  not  press  that  the  Junta  should  par- 
ticipate with  the  British  Government  in  the  act  of  replacing 
the  power  of  the  Regency. 