

On  the  rumour  of  the  Bishop's  resigning  the  Government, 
commotions  took  place  in  Oporto,  and  were  apprehended  in 
other  parts  of  the  northern  provinces,  but  these  will  soon  sub- 
side, if  the  Junta  is  sincere  in  its  declaration  of  attachment  to 
the  lawful  sovereign. 

Lieut.-General  Hope's  division  has  been  ordered  into  Lisbon, 
to  protect  the  embarkation  of  the  French,  and  he  has  been  di- 
rected to  communicate  with  Don  Francisco  de  Noronha  and 
Don  Francisco  de  Cunha,  the  only  two  members  left  by  the 
Prince  who  were  altogether  unexceptionable. 

The  Count  de  Castro,  Marin  or  Monteiro  Mor,  having  been 
requested  to  repair  to  Lisbon,  to  explain  certain  doubtful  parts 
of  his  conduct,  at  first  excused  himself,  on  pretence  of  ill  health, 
but  has  since  met  Lieut.-General  Hope  and  the  other  two 
noblemen,  after  which  Sir  Hew  published  a  proclamation,  call- 
ing to  take  upon  themselves  the  functions  of  Government,  till 
the  will  of  the  Prince  Regent  should  be  known,  the  following 
noblemen  :  The  Count  de  Casto  Marin,  or  Monteiro  Mor,  Don 
Francisco  Xavier  de  Noronha,  Francisco  de  Cunha  e  Menezes, 
Joao  Antonio  Salter  de  Mendo9a,  and  Don  Miguel  Pereira 
Forjaz  Coutinho.  To  this  Government  the  inferior  jurisdic- 
tions and  tribunals,  the  constituted  and  legal  authorities  of 
the  kingdom,  and  all  persons  of  every  description,  were  by  the 
Proclamation  required  to  pay  all  deference  and  submission. 
The  Regency  then  met,  and  proceeded  to  complete  the  num- 
bers by  the  election  of  the  Bishop  of  Oporto  and  the  Marquess 
de  las  Minas.  Sir  Hew  does  not  know  how  far  the  Bishop  and 
Junta  will  be  pleased  with  what  has  been  done  ;  but,  whatever 


250  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

may  be  their  professions,  he  suspects  that  the  power  which  they 
have  assumed  will  not  be  cheerfully  relinquished. 

Prayeas,  September  16,  1808. 
He  has  not  yet  been  able  to  select  a  confidential  oflScer,  to 
send  into  Catalonia.  Should  one  be  found,  he  requests  to  be 
informed  what  pay  and  allowances  are  to  be  attached  to  the 
situation ;  also  how  Major  Cox  and  Captain  Whittingham 
are  to  be  paid.  By  some  mistake,  Mr.  Markland  has  not  yet 
proceeded  to  Valencia  as  Consul :  he  speaks  highly  of  his 
abilities,  and  expects  much  useful  information  from  him. 

Prayeas,  September  20,  1808. 

By  letters  from  Lord  William  Bentinck  at  Seville,  it  appears 
that  he  has  communicated  with  Governor  Don  Jonas  Morla  ; 
whose  conversation  proves  him  to  be  a  true  Spaniard.  He 
strongly  represented  the  necessity  of  a  Central  Government, 
and  of  the  appointment  of  a  Commander-in-Chief.  He  feared 
these  desirable  objects  would  be  retarded  by  private  interests, 
and  recommended  the  interference  of  British  influence  as  most 
likely  to  produce  union  among  the  Spaniards,  and  represented 
the  orreat  advantages  which  would  attend  the  march  of  a  13ri- 
tish  army  into  Spain. 