

Leon,  November  25,  1808. 
The  Marquess  of  Romana,  with  the  remains  of  Blake's  army, 
had  made  a  further  retreat  to  Leon  through  the  Asturias. 

November  28,  1808. 
In  consequence  of  an   order  from  Sir  John  Moore,  he  has 
joined  the  division  of  the  British  army  under  Sir  D.  Baird, 
acting  as  a  Major-General  and  in  the  command  of  a  brigade. 

Lugo,  December  10,  1808. 
Reports  the  death  of  M.  Assiotti,  Deputy  Commissary 
General,  on  the  27th  November.  Recommends  Mr.  White, 
one  of  M.  Assiotti''s  clerks,  to  be  appointed  Assistant- Com- 
missary, and  fears  that  another  of  the  clerks  has  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  Santander,  with  ^^3,000,  and  letters 
for  General  Leith,  some  of  them  probably  from  Lord  Castle- 
reagh.     He  understands,  also,  that  a  packet  has  been  cap- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH,  *  241 

tared,  but  that  the  letters  were  sunk.  In  conveying  away  the 
Bishop  and  his  retinue  from  Santander,  no  vessel  was  left  there 
to  warn  British  vessels  of  the  change,  which  precaution  had 
before  been  observed.  He  is  still  in  correspondence  with  Ro- 
mana,  and  has  received,  for  the  use  of  his  army,  ^£^60,000  in 
bills  on  the  Treasury. 


NO.  X. 

ABSTRACT  OF  DESPATCHES  FROM  SIR  HEW  DAL- 
RYMPLE  TO  LORD  CASTLEREAGH, 

FROM  THE  TIME  OF  HIS  TAKING  THE  COMMAND  OF  THE  ARMY 
IN  PORTUGAL. 

Cintra,  September  3,  1808. 

Sir  Hew  Dalrymple  landed  in  Portugal,  and  took  the  com- 
mand of  the  army  on  the  22nd  of  August,  the  day  after  the 
battle  of  Vimiera,  when  the  enemy  sustained  a  signal  defeat. 
A  few  hours  after  his  arrival.  General  Kellermann  came  in 
with  a  flag  of  truce  from  the  French  Oommander-in-Chief,  to 
propose  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  in  order  to  conclude  a  Con- 
vention for  the  evacuation  of  Portugal  by  the  French. 

He  encloses  the  articles  first  agreed  on  and  signed  by  Sir 
Arthur  Wellesley  and  General  Kellermann ;  but,  as  one  of 
those  relating  to  the  disposal  of  the  Russian  fleet  in  the  Tagus 
was  objected  to  by  the  British  Admiral,  it  was  finally  agreed 
that  Lieut. -Colonel  Murray  and  General  Kellermann  should 
proceed  to  the  discussion  of  the  remaining  Articles,  and  finally 
concluded  a  Convention  for  the  evacuation  of  Portugal  by  the 
French,  subject  to  the  ratification  of  the  respective  Com- 
manders-in-Chief. After  much  discussion,  a  Convention  was 
signed,  and  the  ratifications  exchanged  on  the  30th. 

Orders  were  sent  to  the  Bufis  and  42nd  to  land  and  take 
possession  of  the  forts  on  the  Tagus,  in  order  to  gain  anchorage 
for  shipping  without,  exposed  on  a  dangerous  coast,  and  to 
secure  a  communication  with   the  victuallers.     Accordingly, 

VOL.  VII.  R 