

Head- Quarters,  Army  of  the  Left, 

Cabexon,  November  16,  1808. 

It  appears  that  Blake^s  army  had  a  severe  and  unsuccessful 
action  on  the  7th,  in  the  valley  on  the  Bilbao  side  of  Valma- 
seda.  They  retreated  to  Espinosa  de  los  Monteros  almost  in 
a  state  of  famine,  but  their  wants  were  partially  relieved  by  the 
supplies  which  General  Leith  had  forwarded.  Had  they,  after 
the  affair  of  the  5th,  retreated  towards  Burgos  by  Reynosa, 
these  disasters  would  have  been  avoided,  and  their  communi- 
cation with  the  British  army  and  the  mass  of  the  kingdom 
preserved. 

On  the  10th,  they  were  again  attacked  at  Espinosa:  the 
action  recommenced  on  the  11th,  and  the  Asturians  on  the 
left  gave  way  without  resistance,  which  enabled  the  enemy  to 
occupy  the  heights,  and  occasioned  a  panic,  which  led  to  the 
total  defeat  and  dispersion  of  the  army.  The  loss,  which 
must  have  been  great,  is  not  yet  known.  The  Division  of  the 
North,  under  the  Count  de  San  Roman,  behaved  most  gal- 
lantly.    The  Count  received  a  mortal  wound. 

On  receiving  this  account  on  the  12th,  General  Leith  re- 
embarked  the  stores,  and  the  transports  sailed  on  the  13th  for 
Coruna.  He  set  off  on  the  12th,  with  the  Marquess  of  Ro- 
mana,  towards  Reynosa.  Blake,  on  the  12th,  without  noticing 
the  action,  apprized  Romana  that,  after  a  Council  of  War,  the 
troops  had  been  ordered  towards  the  country  of  Leon,  by  Sal- 
daiia ;  but,  on  the  1 3th,  hearing  that  the  Estremadurans  had 
been  defeated  at  Burgos,  he  retreated  ft-om  Reynosa  by  Soto, 
sending  part  of  his  artillery  towards  Santander.  He  had  not 
with  him  more  than  4  or  5,000  men,  and  those  in  utter  con- 
fusion. The  night  march  of  the  13th  completed  their  dissolu- 
tion ;  and  the  naked,  starved,  and  dispirited  remnants  of  the 
army  retired,  in   their  own  way,  towards  Asturias.     Romana 


240  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

sent  for  Blake,  who  came  to  the  head- quarters  at  Henedo  on 
the  15th.  The  Marquess  has  taken  pains  to  re-establish  order, 
making  0  viedo  and  Leon  the  points  of  rendezvous  for  the  fugitives. 
General  Leith  states  the  force  to  be  collected  not  less  than 
18,000  :  few,  if  any,  have  thrown  away  their  arms.  The  dis- 
aster he  attributes  to  the  injudicious  exposure  of  the  army  to 
diflBculties  and  famine,  and  the  misconduct  of  the  officers  of 
the  new  levies  :  the  men  were  capable  of  every  thing,  under 
proper  arrangement.  He  has  acquainted  Sir  J.  Moore  and 
Sir  D.  Baird  with  what  has  occurred. 

Head -Quarters,  San  Vincente  de  la  Barquera, 

November  17,  1808. 
The  Marquess  of  Romana  removed  to  Barquera  from  a  re- 
port that  4,000  French  infantry,  with  some  cavalry,  occupied 
Cartes,  intending  to  pursue  the  discomfited  army.  The  chasse- 
marees  are  at  Barquera  with  provisions.  Every  exertion  is 
making  to  rally  the  broken  army.  He  encloses  a  sketch  of  the 
route  of  the  army. 