

The  most  powerful  Caciques,  he  observed,  might  readily 
be  excited  to  take  arms  against  the  Spaniards.  In  the  northern 
provinces,  many  of  their  native  princes  still  pride  themselves 
on  being  of  the  race  of  Montezuma,  and  entertain  an  insuper- 
able aversion  to  them.  He  is  decided  in  his  opinion,  from  his 
knowledge  of  this  country  and  disposition  of  the  natives,  that 
a  few  well  instructed  emissaries  would  render  more  essential 
service  than  any  military  force  unaided  by  such  coadjutors.  In 
every  quarter  the  antipathy  to  the  Spaniards  is  universal,  and, 
since  the  suppression  of  the  Jesuits^  their  Government  is  deprived 
of  the  only  medium  of  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  natives. 
The  conquest,  he  added,  might  be  said  to  be  already  effected 
to  our  hands  :  nothing  remained  for  us  but  to  take  possession. 

The  peninsula  of  California  he  represents  as  a  barren  soil, 
but  the  port  of  Loretto,  which  the  Manilla  ships  always  make 
in  their  passage  to  Acapulco,  is  of  much  consequence. 

The  Jesuits  of  Rome  are  now  reduced  to  the  habit  of  secular 
priests.  The  Duke  de  Grimaldi,  Ambassador  of  Spain,  has 
enjoined  a  very  strict  attention  to  be  directed  to  the  conduct 
of  those  from  Peru  and  Mexico,  ordering  that  they  should 


1779.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  265 

appear  in  person  from  time  to  time,  at  his  palace  in  the  Piazza 
di  Spagna.  The  present  Pope  is  known  to  be  well-affected  to 
the  Jesuits,  and  supposed  secretly  to  favour  their  general  re- 
establishment  ;  but  the  Court  of  Madrid  ijiaintains  an  ascen- 
dency in  the  Vatican,  and  even  constrained  the  Pope  to  create 
the  Spanish  Nuncio,  Palavicini,  a  Cardinal,  and  afterwards 
Secretary  of  State,  much  against  the  Pope^s  inclination. 

Yesterday  (September  10),  the  Duke  de  Grimaldi  had  an 
audience  of  the  Pope,  and  delivered  a  sharp  remonstrance 
against  the  permission  lately  granted  by  the  Court  of  Rome 
to  the  Jesuits  in  Russia  and  Poland  to  found  a  Noviciate — a 
circumstance  considered  as  a  dawning  of  the  general  re- 
establishment  of  the  Order. 

Should  it  be  deemed  necessary  to  come  to  a  more  explicit 
communication  with  these  Jesuits,  it  will  appear  but  equitable 
to  assure  to  them  at  least  an  equivalent  to  their  little  pensions, 
and  an  asylum,  in  the  event  of  a  discovery  of  any  negociation 
with  them.  A  few  of  them,  such  as  Don  *  *  *,  fcc,  receive 
liberal  allowances  from  their  families  and  connexions  in  Spain, 
&c.,  and  are  enabled  to  support  a  respectable  appearance  in 
Rome.  The  multitude  are,  nevertheless,  restricted  to  their 
narrow  pensions  of  six  Roman  crowns  per  month,  and  their 
mass  (only  one  paul  per  diem)  in  addition. 