


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  255 

4th  September,  acknowledging  it,  ought  not  to  be  produced, 
as  also  his  letter  to  Lord  Castlereagh  of  the  12th  September, 
containing  his  opinion  on  the  further  prosecution  of  the  war. 
Upon  these  opinions  he  acted,  and  he  considers  it  material  to 
prove  to  the  Court  that  he  communicated  his  sentiments  to 
Government  at  that  early  period. 

London,  November  2,  1808. 
He  has  received  from  Mr.  Cooke  a  copy  of  the  draft  of  a 
Warrant  for  a  Court  of  Inquiry.  He  fears  that,  according  to 
the  Warrant,  the  Court  will  not  feel  itself  bound,  or  even 
authorized,  to  enter  into  the  measures  he  pursued  for  establish- 
ing the  Regency.  This  subject  appears  to  him  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  moti'ces  which  induced  a  party  in  Portugal  to 
raise  a  clamour  against  him.  He  trusts  it  will  be  clearly  un- 
derstood that  the  steps  he  took  to  carry  the  provisions  of  the 
Convention  into  execution,  and  to  avail  himself  of  the  advan- 
tages it  was  intended  to  produce,  are,  under  the  authority  of 
the  Warrant,  fit  subjects  for  inquiry. 

'  London,  December  23,  1808. 

The  extract  from  the  letter  from  the  Junta  of  Oporto  to  the 
Chevalier  de  Souza  was  not  enclosed  in  Lord  Castlereaf!:h''s 
letter  of  the  4th  September.  When  this  document  was  com- 
municated to  Sir  Hew,  on  his  arrival  in  England,  it  was  his 
intention  to  produce  it  before  the  Court,  and  expose  the  fallacy 
of  the  statements  it  contains,  at  the  same  time  explaining,  by 
his  correspondence  with  Brigadier-General  Decken,  the  motives 
which  possibly  actuated  the  Junta  of  Oporto  in  the  hostility  of 
which  he  has  experienced  the  effects.  He  now  encloses  a  con- 
tinuation of  his  correspondence  with  Brigadier-General  Decken, 
in  order  to  explain  the  real  views  of  the  Junta  of  Oporto,  so 
entirely  at  variance  with  their  public  professions.  The  asser- 
tion contained  in  the  letter  above  alluded  to,  that  the  Junta 
had  thought  fit  to  make  similar  observations  on  the  armistice 
to  the  British  General,  is  (as  far  as  relates  to  him)  unfounded. 


k 


256  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

He  believes  that  Sir  A.  Wellesley  is  the  English  General 
alluded  to,  and  he  encloses  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the  Bishop 
of  Oporto  to  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  dated  24th  August,  containing 
such  observations  as  it  was  then  thought  fit  to  avow.  When 
these  observations  are  contrasted  with  those  addressed  two 
days  before  to  the  Chevalier  de  Souza,  and  when  the  views  on 
the  subject  of  the  Regency,  as  stated  by  Brigadier-General 
Decken,  are  compared  with  the  sentiments  expressed  to  Bri- 
gadier-General Anstruther,  as  mentioned  in  a  letter  from  him 
enclosed,  Sir  Hew  thinks  a  just  estimate  may  be  made  of  the 
degree  of  credit  which  ought  to  be  attached  to  representations 
from  that  quarter.  Finding  that  these  documents  cannot, 
with  propriety,  be  produced  in  Court,  he  requests  Lord  Castle- 
reagh  will  lay  them  before  the  King. 