

Rome,  June  18,  1779. 
*  *  *  *  Governor,  or  principal  officer  commanding  at  Arica, 
in  Peru,  in  correspondence  with  his  brother,  an  ex-Jesuit  at 
Rome,  informs  him  of  a  great  insurrection  at  Mexico — "  that, 
after  forcing  the  Viceroy  to  retire,  they  had  burned  the  King's 
warehouses  of  tobacco,  to  the  amount  of  seven  millions  of 
piastres;  that  all  the  provinces  of  Peru  also  were  in  the  highest 
degree  disgusted  with  the  Spanish  Government;  that  at  Arica 
they  had  paid  the  assessments  of  the  present  year  with  great 
discontent,  openly  protesting  against  any  similar  impositions 
in  future." 

This  account  is  confirmed  by  several  letters  received  from 
Old  Spain,  which  mention  the  late  arrival  of  a  King's  ship  at 
Cadiz  from  the  Spanish  West  Indies  ;  and  that  all  communi- 
cation between  the  ship  and  shore  is  prohibited.  It  is  well 
known  this  ship  brings  a  confirmation  of  the  above  intelligence. 

The  King  of  Naples  read,  at  his  table,  a  letter  he  had 
received  from  his  father,  dated  the  18th  of  May,  complaining 
of  "  the  haughtiness  of  Great  Britain,  which  would  compel 
him  speedily  to  declare  war  against  her." 

Rome,  July  7,  1779. 
The  number  of  ex-Jesuits  now  settled  in  the  Papal  terri- 
tories is  computed  at  near  2,000 ;  they  are  in  general  subsist- 


1779]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  261 

ing  upon  email  pensions  of  six  Roman  crowns  per  month, 
which  are  paid  to  them  by  the  Ministers  of  the  different  States 
where  they  originally  professed :  to  a  man,  they  bear  impla- 
cable animosity  to  the  Court  of  Spain.  The  most  violent  are 
the  ex-Jesuits  from  Peru  and  Mexico.  They  are  in  general 
descended  of  old  Spanish  settlers,  who  have  intermarried  with 
the  principal  American  families,  and  many  are  of  great  consi- 
deration. This  class  comprehends  some  hundreds,  who  are 
anxiously  in  expectation  of  a  favourable  period,  which  may 
facilitate  their  return  to  their  native  country.  It  may  be  pre- 
sumed that  such  men  might  prove  essential  instruments  in 
effecting  a  reduction  of  New  Spain,  having  an  entire  influence 
on  their  countrymen,  who  universally,  both  in  Peru  and 
Mexico,  are  predisposed  to  revolt. 

Every  Jesuit  with  whom  I  have  conversed  on  this  subject 
concurs  in  this  opinion,  but  my  chief  information  is  derived 
from  *  *  *,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  life  an  officer  in  the 
Neapolitan  service,  but  afterwards  professed  a  Jesuit,  and  was 
Secretary  to  the  General  of  the  Order,  who,  on  the  abolition, 
was  imprisoned,  and  died  in  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo.  He  is 
a  universal  scholar,  and  perfect  master  of  the  system  of  Spanish 
policy  in  the  government  of  their  American  colonies.  His 
brother,  whom  I  have  mentioned  in  a  former  letter,  is  Governor 
of  Arica,  and  commands  the  King's  troops  in  the  northern 
provinces  of  Peru,  and  is  known  here  to  be  very  ill  affected 
to  the  Spanish  Government.  He  intimates  in  his  letters  to 
his  brother  that,  from  the  excessive  imposts  on  the  Spanish 
colonists,  as  well  as  on  the  native  Peruvians,  they  were  on  the 
eve  of  a  revolt — that  by  his  influence  they  had  been  induced, 
within  his  districts,  to  pay  the  assessment  of  the  last  year,  but 
they  avow  resistance  to  any  future  attempt  to  tax  them  in  the 
same  excess. 