

Of  all  the  mortifications  he  has  experienced,  none  has  given 
him  so  much  concern  as  the  impression  his  Majesty  seems  to 
have  taken  on  the  subject  of  the  removal  of  the  Portuguese 
property.  He  conceives  the  immediate  matter  of  his  recall,  if 
considered  separately  from  the  share  he  had  in  the  Convention, 
can  only  be  attributed  to  his  not  having  given  earlier  notice 
of  the  signature  of  the  armistice.  On  this  head  he  confesses 
his  error ;  but  each  day  held  out  so  near  a  prospect  of  final 
arrangement,  that  he  was  insensibly  betrayed  into  a  delay, 
which  he  cannot  altogether  justify. 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  257 


STATE  OF  THE  SPANISH  COLOISIES 
IN  AMERICA. 

1779—1809. 

Among  the  Papers  in  this  Section  will  be  found 
some  which  prove  that  the  idea  of  withdrawing  the 
Colonies  of  Spam  from  their  dependence  on  the 
mother-country,  and  thus  depriving  her  of  the  vast 
resources  which  they  furnished  when  she  was  at  war 
with  Great  Britain,  had  occurred  to  various  intel- 
ligent minds,  long  before  it  was  entertained  by  our 
Government.  The  communications  on  this  subject 
from  Mr.  Hippisley,  with  which  it  opens,  date  so  far 
back  as  the  year  1779,  during  the  administration  of 
Lord  North,  and  there  is  one  from  the  pen  of  Sir  Ralph 
Abercromby,  which  could  scarcely  have  been  written 
later  than  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  last  century. 

The  most  zealous  advocate,  however,  for  the  politi- 
cal emancipation  of  those  Provinces  was  Don  Fran- 
cisco de  Miranda,  a  native  of  Caracas,  who,  from  in- 
timate acquaintance  with  the  grievous  nature  of  the 
yoke  imposed  upon  them,  laboured  with  untiring 
perseverance  to  effect  the  liberation  of  his  countrymen 
from  the  galling  oppression  in  which  they  were  held. 

From  his  Letters,  which  are  numerous,  we  learn 
that,  prior  to  the  discussions  with  Spain  relative  to 
Nootka  Sound  in  1789  and  1790,  he  had  solicited  aid 

VOL.  VII.  s 


258         LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 

from  Mr.  Pitt  towards  the  execution  of  plans  for  ac- 
complishing the  one  grand  pui-pose  of  his  life :  but 
having,  at  the  commencement  of  the  first  war  of  the 
French  Kevolution,  obtained  high  miHtary  rank — he 
was  second  in  command  in  the  army  under  Du- 
mouriez — it  appears  not  improbable  that  a  distrust 
of  his  political  principles  may  have  deterred  our 
Ministers  from  entering  heartily  into  those  schemes 
to  which  he  so  frequently  called  their  attention.  It 
is  not  surprising,  indeed,  that,  after  opposing  with  all 
their  might  that  reckless  spirit  of  democracy,  which, 
in  the  Old  World,  had  covered  France  with  blood 
and  ashes,  and  St.  Domingo,  in  the  New,  with  deso- 
lation and  anarchy,  they  should  hesitate  about  ex- 
tending its  influence  to  the  Colonies  of  Spain.  Ac- 
cordingly, no  sooner  had  the  entire  Spanish  nation 
acknowledged  Ferdinand  YII.  for  its  sovereign,  than 
the  efforts  of  the  British  Cabinet  were  exerted  to  pre- 
serve to  the  Spanish  monarchy  its  vast  American 
possessions,  not  to  break  them  up  into  independent 
Republics. 