

By  a  letter  from  Major  Cox,  it  appears  that  he  thinks  the 
Junta  have  discovered  that  they  were  in  a  wrong  course,  and 
have  resolved  to  change  it.  A  conspiracy  has  been  formed 
against  the  lives  of  some  of  the  members.  Cuesta  had  dis- 
solved the  Supreme  Junta  of  Leon,  and  threatened  that  of 
Salamanca :  he  considers  his  authority  as  paramount  within 
his  command,  having  been  appointed  by  the  King. 

The  Junta  of  Seville  have  now  declared  that  Doyle's  bills 
shall  be  paid ;  that  Castaiios  shall  be  supplied  with  money  ; 
and  that  he  is  at  liberty  to  proceed  upon  his  own  judgment, 
and  to  act  according  to  circumstances,  without  consulting  their 
deputy  at  the  Central  Junta. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  251 

Sir  Hew  has  heard  from  Mr.  Stuart  at  Madrid,  who  states 
the  necessity  of  a  British  force,  to  control  the  parties,  and 
wishes  that  the  Spaniards  released  at  Lisbon  may  be  sent  to 
join  Blake  and  a  body  of  Portuguese  to  Rosas,  and  that  General 
Galluzo  may  be  ordered  to  march  from  Badajoz  into  Castillo. 

The  French  army  has  sailed,  except  the  garrisons  of  Al- 
meida and  La  Lippe :  the  latter  General  Galluzo  has  hitherto 
prevented  from  marching,  to  prove  his  disapprobation  of  the 
Convention.  The  French  have  been  taught  to  know  the  mean- 
ing  of  the  article  relating  to  property,  and  much  plunder  has 
been  restored. 

The  army  is  in  high  order.  As  the  rains  are  setting  in, 
Sir  Hew  proposes  to  canton  it,  but. it  will  be  ready  to  proceed 
when  orders  arrive.     He  has  been  attentive  to  supplies. 

Benefice,  September  29,  1808. 

In  obedience  to  the  orders  he  has  received,  Sir  Hew  will  re- 
turn to  England  as  soon  as  he  can  prepare  the  documents 
which  will  be  indispensably  necessary  to  enable  him  to  fulfil, 
in  a  satisfactory  manner,  the  object  for  which  he  is  recalled. 
He  has  communicated  to  the  Admiral  the  order  for  putting  on 
shore  the  French  troops,  in  the  event  of  the  third  division  not 
having  sailed,  or  having  put  back. 

Benefice,  September  30,  1808. 

In  consequence  of  letters  from  Mr.  Stuart  and  Captain 
Whittingham,  and  similar  applications  from  Castaiios  and 
Galluzo,  Sir  Hew,  after  having  communicated  his  intention  to 
Sir  Harry  Burrard,  has  directed  the  Spaniards  lately  prisoners 
to  be  embarked  for  Rosas,  with  10,000  stand  of  arms.  He 
has  taken  no  step  with  the  Regency  relating  to  detaching  the 
Portuguese  troops  to  Catalonia,  as,  in  the  present  state  of  the 
army,  no  very  efiective  corps  could  be  spared  for  that  purpose. 

He  learns  from  Colonel  Graham,  who  had  been  sent  to 
Badajoz,  to  endeavour  to  induce  Galluzo  to  raise  the  siege  of 
Elvas,  that  he  has  succeeded  in  the  attempt ;  but  that  the  fine 