

It  formerly  was  the  policy  of  Spain  to  send  drafts  from 
veteran  regiments,  to  maintain  the  government  of  their  colonies 
in  America.     The  Duke  de   Grimaldi,  (now  Ambassador   at 


262  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779. 

Borne)  when  Minister  in  Spain,  first  discontinued  this  usage, 
and  embodied  new  regiments  for  the  American  service,  con- 
sisting chiefly  of  Flemings  and  other  foreigners,  the  greater 
part  of  whom,  from  time  to  time,  have  deserted  to  the  interior 
of  the  country,  where  they  have  connected  themselves  with 
the  natives,  and  are  ready  to  co-operate  in  any  attack  on  the 
Spanish  Government.  The  Prince  of  Quito  can  command  a 
considerable  force,  and  is  stated  to  be  an  implacable  enemy  to 
the  Spanish  Government. 

Memorandum  of  a  Conversation  with  Don  *  *  *. 

Rome,  August  4,  1779. 

His  situation  for  many  years,  both  in  Old  and  New  Spain, 
afforded  great  opportunities  of  being  well  informed  on  this  sub- 
ject. At  the  Havannah  his  advice  was  often  solicited  by  the 
Government.  Velasques,  who  so  bravely  defended  the  Moro, 
was  his  intimate  friend,  and  died  in  his  arms.  He  is  much 
respected  in  Rome,  and  lives  in  habits  of  great  intimacy  with 
the  chief  prelates  of  the  Government.  He  was  several  years 
an  Inquisitor,  both  in  Old  and  New  Spain,  chiefly  at  Mexico. 

I  have  communicated  with  many  other  principal  Mexican 
ex- Jesuits,  who  entirely  concur  with  Don  *  *  *.  "He  says 
that  the  Havannah  is  now  much  richer  than  when  taken  by 
the  English — that  the  fortifications  are  strengthened,  and,  in 
his  opinion,  an  attack  from  the  same  place  as  before  must 
prove  abortive — that  the  Spaniards  were  much  surprised  that 
the  English  had  not  made  their  attack  on  the  south  side, 
which,  in  that  event,  must  have  surrendered  in  a  short  time, 
and  that,  at  present,  if  an  attack  was  made  in  that  quarter, 
the  garrison  must  soon  submit,  as  any  number  of  troops  the 
Spaniards  can  keep  there  will  always  be  inferior  to  what  the 
extent  of  the  fortifications  requires." 

The  inhabitants  of  the  Havannah,  he  observed,  were  origi- 
nally well  inclined  to  submit  to  the  British  Government,  but 
the  conduct  of  Lord  A e  had  greatly  disgusted  them  by 


1779.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  263 

exacting  from  the  clergy  nearly  <£^200,000  as  a  nominal  free 
gift — that  a  similar  measure,  on  any  future  attempt  on  the 
Spanish  settlements,  would  prove  to  be  highly  impolitic — that, 
on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  wise  on  the  part  of  the  English, 
if  any  such  attempt  was  to  be  in  contemplation,  to  endeavour 
to  ejfface  the  former  impression,  by  having  it  well  understood 
that  no  exaction  from  the  clergy  should  be  permitted. 