

London,  November  4,  1808. 
Requests  Lord  Castlereagh  will  allow  him  to  have  copies  of 
some  letters  alluded  to  in  the  Morning  Post,  as  having  been 
addressed  to  his  Majesty "'s  Ministers.  He  considers  that  these 
documents  may  be  of  the  greatest  consequence  in  the  elucida- 
tion of  the  business  before  the  Court  of  Inquiry. 

London,  November  5,  1808, 
Encloses  a  letter  which  Major-General  Beresford  had  ad- 
dressed to  him,  dated  5th  October,  stating  that  in  an  interview 
with  Mr.  Cipriano  Robino  Freire,  very  satisfactory  explana- 
tions took  place  on  the  subject  of  intercourse  with  the  Regency, 
and  of  their  intentions  and  wishes.  He  expressed  from  their 
Excellencies  the  greatest  readiness  to  attend  to  the  representa- 
tions of  the  British  Commander-in-Chief.  General  Beresford 
attributes  the  cold  and  distant  intercourse  which  has  hitherto 
taken  place  to  the  person  through  whom  that  intercourse  has 
till  now  been  carried  on. 

London,  November  7,  1808. 
If  there  is  no  objection  to  his  request,  he  wishes  for  a  copy 
of  the  Despatch  from  the  Junta  of  Oporto  to  the  Chevalier  de 


254  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

Souza,  referred  to  in  the  Note  of  that  Minister  to  Mr.  Can- 
ning, dated  8rd  September. 

London,  November  10,  1808. 
Encloses  copy  of  a  private  letter  from   Lord  Castlereagh, 
recommending  to  his  particular  attention  the  talents  and  expe- 
rience of  Sir  A.  Wellesley,  and  acknowledges  with  thanks  the 
receipt  of  a  copy  of  the  French  engineer  Vincent'*s  Report. 

London,  November  14,  1808. 
The  paper  enclosed  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  General  Spen- 
cer, dated  off  Lisbon,  24th  June,  stating  that,  on  his  arrival, 
he  consulted  with  Sir  0.  Cotton  on  the  advisability  of  an  attack 
on  Lisbon.  It  appearing  from  the  report  of  some  intelligent 
Hanoverian  deserters  that  the  French  force  (20,500)  was  fiilly 
capable  of  resisting  a  much  larger  force  than  could  be  brought 
against  them,  Major-General  Spencer,  with  the  advice  of  Sir 
C.  Cotton,  determined  to  return  to  the  corps  he  had  lefl  under 
General  Nightingale,  which  he  expected  to  join  next  day,  to 
the  southward  of  Cape  St.  Vincent.  He  then  proposes  to  re- 
turn immediately,  with  the  troops,  to  Ayamonte,  and,  on 
finding  the  frontiers  secure,  to  proceed  to  Cadiz,  there  to  act 
according  to  the  instructions  he  may  receive. 

London,  November  16,  1808. 
[Addressed  to  Mr.  Ryder,  and  by  him  enclosed  to  Lord  Castlereagh.] 

Specifies  the  papers  which  he  requests  Lord  Castlereagh  will 
cause  to  be  laid  before  the  Court  of  Inquiry. 

London,  November  18,  1808. 
Acknowledges  receipt  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  of  the  1 7th,  and 
perfectly  coincides  in  the  propriety  of  not  producing  before  the 
Court  some  parts  of  the  correspondence.  He  has  found  it 
necessary  to  mention  in  his  Narrative  the  full  powers  and 
assurances  of  support  contained  in  Lord  Castlereagh's  letter  of 
20th  August,  and  wishes  to  know  whether  his  letter  of  the 