

The  misguided  policy  of  Ferdinand,  and  the  exe- 
crable barbarities  and  perfidies  practised  by  the 
commanders  of  the  royal  troops  sent  to  quell  the 
discontents  of  the  Americans,  thwarted  the  friendly 
intentions  of  our  Ministers,  and  inflamed  those  dis- 
contents to  such  a  degree,  as  to  dissever  the  Colonies 
from  Old  Spain,  and  to  induce  the  adoption  of  repub- 
lican forms  in  them  all. 

Miranda  himself  ultimately  became  a  victim  to  the 
faithlessness  of  his  royalist  antagonists.    After  several 


LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  259 

attempts,  the  failure  of  wliicli  disappointed  his  too 
sanguine  expectations  of  support  from  his  country- 
men of  the  Caracas,  he  at  length,  in  1810,  succeeded 
in  planting  the  banner  of  freedom  in  that  province. 
In  the  following  year,  the  congress  of  that  and  six 
adjoining  provinces,  assembled  at  Venezuela,  set  the 
example  to  all  the  rest  of  Spanish  America,  by  pro- 
claiming them  a  federative  Republic. 

Miranda  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  army,  with 
dictatorial  authority ;  but,  discouraged  by  the  unpro- 
mising state  of  the  affairs  of  the  infant  Republic,  and 
the  successes  of  the  Royalists,  he  concluded  a  Conven- 
tion with  their  General,  Monteverde,  with  the  appro- 
bation of  the  Executive  Council,  surrendering  to  him 
La  Guayra,  Caracas,  Barcelona,  and  Cumana;  while 
he  was,  on  his  part,  promised  a  complete  amnesty,  free 
permission  to  emigrate,  and  the  introduction  at  Ca- 
racas of  the  constitution  given  by  the  Spanish  Cortes. 
This  Convention  Monteverde  most  treacherously  vio- 
lated, by  seizing  Miranda,  and  sending  him  a  prisoner 
to  Old  Spain.  There  he  was  consigned  to  the  most 
dismal  of  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  at  La 
Caraca,  near  Cadiz,  w^here  he  died,  after  a  rigorous 
confinement  of  four  years. 

In  this  Section  will  also  be  found  various  plans  ema- 
nating from  the  fertile  mind  of  General  Dumouriez, 
among  which  will  be  particularly  remarked  those  re- 
lating to  his  favourite  project  of  founding  with  one 
of  the  Spanish  provinces  a  kingdom  for  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  (Louis  Philippe) ;  and,  from  a  paper  written 
by  the  Prince  himself  on  Mexico,  that  country  was 

s2 


260  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779- 

no  doubt  selected  for  constituting  the  proposed  mo- 
narchy, under  the  protection  of  Great  Britain.  The 
information  respecting  Mexico,  obtained  from  other 
sources,  seems  to  indicate  that  this  project  was  not 
deemed  unworthy  of  consideration.  Had  it  been  car- 
ried into  execution,  how  different  might  perhaps  be 
at  this  day  the  condition  of  the  American  kingdom, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  European  Republic ! 


Extracts  of  Letters  addressed  to  Lord  Loughborough^  and  com- 
municated to  the  Secretary  of  State^  1779. 