


252  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

body  of  troops  under  his  command,  whom  he  wishes  to  lead  to 
Catalonia,  are  destitute  of  many  necessary  equipments.  Sir 
Hew  has,  therefore,  under  the  pressure  of  the  moment,  ordered 
that  the  supply  may  be  furnished  to  him  from  the  supposed 
stores  in  Elvas. 

Benefice,  October  3,  1808. 

By  letters  from  Major  Cox,  at  Seville,  the  violent  conduct 
of  Cuesta,  in  arresting  the  deputies  from  Castille  and  Gallicia, 
on  their  way  to  the  Central  Junta,  appears  to  have  excited 
great  alarm,  which  is  likely  to  produce  very  serious  conse- 
quences. The  Juntas  of  Castille,  Leon,  and  Gallicia,  have 
united.  Cuesta  is  suspected  of  being  a  traitor,  and  it  is  thought 
the  Council  are  in  league  with  him. 

London,  November  2,  1808. 

In  answer  to  Lord  Castlereagh'*s  inquiries  respecting  the 
state  and  situation  of  the  hostages  for  securing  the  execution  of 
the  Convention,  states  that  Colonel  Donkin,  from  the  British 
army,  and  Colonel  La  Roche,  from  the  French,  were  at  the 
head- quarters  of  the  respective  armies,  forming  a  part  of  the 
families  of  the  Commanding  Officers.  On  the  embarkation  of 
the  French,  General  Loison  sent  back  Colonel  Donkin,  when 
Colonel  La  Roche  was  permitted  to  depart.  It  never  was  un- 
derstood that  Colonel  Donkin  was  to  accompany  the  French 
army,  or  that  Colonel  La  Roche  was  to  remain  with  us  after  its 
departure. 

London,  November  3,  1808. 

In  reply  to  Lord  CastlereagVs  letter  of  yesterday,  he  states 
that,  during  the  negociation  of  the  Convention  ratified  at 
Torres  Vedras,  he  wrote  to  Lieut.-Colonel  Murray,  observing 
that  some  of  the  Articles  were  so  framed  as  to  make  him  re- 
sponsible for  what  it  might  not  be  in  his  power  to  fulfil :  for 
instance,  that  respecting  persons  taken  by  the  Spaniards ;  and 
that  therefore  his  acquiescence  must  be  understood  to  mean  his 
using  all  the  influence  he  possessed  in  their  behalf.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  engagement,  he  took  an  early  opportunity  of 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  253 

applying  to  Castafios,  Galluzo,  and  the  Junta  of  Gallicia,  in 
favour  of  the  persons  alluded  to.  The  Junta  of  Gallicia  pro- 
mised to  release  some  persons  of  this  description,  and  to  restore 
them  their  property,  provided  the  Spaniards  detained  by  the 
French  had  been  treated  in  the  same  manner.  He  cannot  say 
whether  these  people  were  released  or  not ;  but  he  thinks  the 
Junta  would  at  once  release  the  property  of  their  prisoners,  if 
desired. 

He  never  heard  that  the  French  General  knew  of  any  per- 
sons such  as  are  alluded  to  in  this  Article,  except  those  in  Gal- 
licia, and  does  not  know  whether  the  non-combatants  taken 
in  Portugal  were  released,  as  he  had  not  received  any  re- 
port on  that  subject  when  he  left  Lisbon. 