

But  of  all  the  objects  that  ought  to  claim  our  attention,  the 

^  This  paper,  which  is  not  dated,  is  shown  by  the  above  paragraph  to 
have  been  written  during  the  occupation  of  Egypt  by  the  French,  conse- 
quently, between  1798  and  1800.  We  shall,  therefore,  not  err  much  in 
placing  it  under  1799. 


270  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

liberation  of  South  America  from  the  dominion  of  Spain 
seems  to  stand  first ;  it  can  only  be  accomplished  while  we  are 
still  at  war  with  Spain,  and  if  it  should  be  happily  effected,  it 
would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  negociation  at  a  peace. 

It  should  be  undertaken  without  any  view  to  conquest,  to 
exclusive  commerce,  or  to  plunder.  Every  port  in  South 
America,  and  the  whole  trade  of  that  extensive  Continent, 
should  be  declared  free,  and  laid  open  to  every  nation  in  the 
world.  Every  country  would  feel  interested  in  it,  Spain  and 
Portugal  excepted:  Great  Britain,  however,  from  her  enter- 
prise, from  her  capital,  and  from  her  industry,  would  in  reality 
possess  nine  parts  in  ten  of  this  great  commerce.  A  market 
would  be  equally  opened  for  British  and  for  East  India  com- 
modities. In  a  short  time,  the  Brazils,  which  would  follow 
the  fate  of  the  Spanish  settlements  in  South  America,  and  the 
other  countries  now  under  the  dominion  of  Spain,  would  pro- 
duce more  sugar,  cotton,  and  indigo,  than  all  of  our  West 
India  Islands,  which  we  retain  at  a  great  expense,  and  which 
are  frequently  the  source  of  wars. 

Should  Great  Britain  decline  at  this  time  to  undertake  this 
great  enterprise,  some  other  nation  will  attempt  it,  on  princi- 
ples less  liberal  and  less  advantageous  to  the  happiness  of 
South  America  and  to  the  world  at  large. 

The  present  state  of  that  country  gives  us  reason  to  believe 
that  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  accomplish  this  object.  The 
Creole  Spaniards  and  Indians  are  oppressed  beyond  measure : 
no  office  can  be  held  in  that  part  of  the  world  but  by  a  native 
of  Old  Spain ;  and  the  restrictions  on  trade  are  severe  in  the 
extreme.  Justice  is  venal,  and  extortion  commonly  practised 
by  all  in  power.  The  clergy,  who  have  great  influence  over 
an  ignorant  and  superstitious  people,  are  in  general  natives  of 
New  Spain,  and  consequently  would  favour  a  revolution.  It 
seems  only  necessary  that  we  should  remove  the  Spanish  force, 
declare  to  the  people  what  our  intentions  are,  and  the  Spanish 
Government  would  fall  to  the  ground. 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  271 

Two  expeditions  should  be  fitted  out :  one  to  proceed  to  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  from  thence  to  the  River  Plate ;  the 
other  should  rendezvous  at  Barbadoes  or  the  Gulf  of  Paria, 
and  should  act  on  the  provinces  of  Oaraccas  and  Venezuela. 