


278  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

dence,  is  equally  without  the  power  of  breaking  its  chains,  or 
of  carrying  on  war. 

And  what  sacrifices  are  required  of  England,  in  order  to 
effect  so  great  a  work  ?  Your  Excellency  knows  as  well  as  I 
do — thanks  to  the  horror  inspired  by  the  Spanish  Government 
throuo-hout  the  whole  Continent  of  America — thanks  to  the 
imprudent  conduct  of  the  Court  of  Madrid,  which  has  com- 
pletely succeeded  in  irritating  the  minds  of  the  people  by  new 
impositions  and  new  taxes — thanks  to  Fortune,  who  has  placed 
nearly  all  the  arms  in  the  hands  of  Americans,  and  to  the 
number  of  discontented  who  are  known  to  be  among  the  regular 
troops  in  the  country — and  thanks  to  the  general  confusion 
which  would  certainly  prevail  in  all  the  measures  which  the 
Government  might  adopt  for  continuing  the  subjugation  of 
America — that  you  may  be  confident  that  all  that  is  necessary 
are  four  or  six  thousand  stand  of  arms,  as  many  uniforms  (if 
they  can  conveniently  be  procured),  a  few  pieces  of  field 
artillery,  a  small  quantity  of  ammunition,  about  two  hundred 
regular  troops,  in  addition  to  the  Spanish  Americans  who  may 
be  collected  here  from  the  Costa  Firma,  and  two  frigates  for  a 
few  days  only,  to  co-operate  with  the  troops  in  the  first  attacks. 
The  above  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  the  success  of 
the  expedition,  and  to  overturn  the  colossal  dominion  of  the 
Spanish  Government,  which  is  ready  to  fall  from  its  own 
weakness. 

This  is  the  assistance  which  I  ask  in  the  name  of  my  country, 
for  such  would  be  her  wishes  if  it  were  possible  for  her  to  mani- 
fest them ;  and  it  may  be  proper  for  me  to  add,  with  the  view 
of  further  promoting  the  success  of  this  great  undertaking, 
that,  in  such  a  case,  I  might  immediately  be  authorized  to 
enter  into  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  and  that  I  should  not  fail 
to  regard  it  as  my  first  duty,  as  it  would  bo  the  first  interest 
of  my  country,  to  represent  to  America  the  necessity  of  being 
just  and  generous,  and  of  continuing  to  deserve  by  an  intimate 
alliance  the  protection  of  that  great  nation,  if  her  object  is  to 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  279 

avoid  a  long  war,  and  to  fix,  at  this  moment,  her  destinies  for 
ever.  Manuel  Gual. 


EXTRACTS  FROM  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  AUDIENCIA,  OR  SUPREME 
TRIBUNAL  OF  THE  CARACAS. 

Opinion  of  the  Audiencia  respecting  a  proposal  for  re-conquering 
the  Island  of  Trinidad, 

May  10,  1797. 

A  most  secret  letter  has  been  laid  before  the  Audiencia, 
dated  the  9th  instant,  from  the  President,  Governor,  and 
Captain-General,  enclosing  two  papers,  signed  on  the  27th  of 
March  last,  by  the  French  Pardo  (man  of  colour),  John 
Basilio  Constant,  an  inhabitant  of  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  and 
a  secret  letter  from  the  Governor  of  Cumana,  dated  the  4th  of 
April  last,  all  proposing  the  re -conquest  of  that  Island,  upon 
the  supposition  of  the  English  Government  there  being  ab- 
horred, and  of  the  number  of  discontented  Spaniards,  French, 
and  Germans  in  the  Island  being  much  superior  to  that  of  the 
garrison,  upon  which  the  President  desires  to  hear  the  opinion 
of  the  Audiencia. 