

I  am  acquainted  with  a  Mexican  Spaniard,  now  living  with 
Don  *  *  *^  who,  within  a  few  months  of  his  professing  him- 
self a  Jesuit,  surrendered  into  the  Treasury  of  the  Order  a 
property  nearly  equal  to  iJ40,000,  which  had  devolved  to  him 
from  his  family.  He  is  now  reduced  to  a  pittance  in  common 
with  the  lowest  of  his  Order. 

I  am  persuaded  that  many  of  these  Jesuits,  conversant  with 
the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  languages,  would  very  cheerfully 
expose  themselves  to  any  hazard  in  embarking  for  the  Conti- 
nent of  America,  under  an  assurance  of  a  free  exercise  of  their 
religion  being  secured  to  them.  Possibly  one  or  two  of  them 
might  be  found  serviceable  in  England  to  be  consulted  with. 


266  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1779. 

previous  to  the  arrangement  of  any  expedition  that  might  be 
formed. 

Rome,  November  28,  1779. 

In  the  apprehension  of  a  probable  rupture  with  Spain,  it 
occurred  to  me  that  any  authentic  information  relative  to  the 
state  of  the  Spanish  Colonies  might  prove  of  consequence ;  and, 
as  no  intelligence  whatever  could  be  so  interesting  as  that 
derived  from  the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  Jesuits,  I  made  such 
inquiry  as  seemed  to  throw  most  light  on  the  subject.  I  knew 
that  the  Papal  State  was  the  only  country  in  Europe  where 
such  information  could  be  obtained,  as,  since  the  general  aboli- 
tion of  the  Order,  it  had  afforded  an  asylum  to  the  ex- Jesuits 
of  every  nation.  I  had  long  lived  in  habits  of  particular  inti- 
macy with  those  I  have  before  named :  I  therefore  reasonably 
flattered  myself  that  I  had  the  means  of  procuring  the  most 
satisfactory  information  more  unsuspectedly  than  any  person 
who  had  not  antecedently  lived  in  equal  habits  of  communica- 
tion with  them.  No  person  in  a  public  character,  or  being  less 
in  their  confidence,  could,  without  great  suspicion  at  that  period^ 
have  commenced  an  intercourse  with  them. 

During  my  long  residence  in  Rome,  I  had  been  introduced 
to  many  other  ex- Jesuits  who  had  possessed  considerable  influ- 
ence in  the  Spanish  Colonies,  and  were  violently  incensed  at 
their  treatment.  I  was  therefore  led  to  believe  that,  should 
hostilities  commence  with  Spain,  they  might  be  used  as  effi- 
cient instruments  in  rendering  essential  services  to  Great 
Britain.  Some  corps  of  Irish  Catholics  might  be  embodied 
with  great  advantage  for  such  an  expedition. 

The  Abbate  B  *  *  *,  who  has  been  lately  appointed  by  the 
Pope  to  one  of  the  Catholic  Bishoprics  in  Ireland,  has  been 
many  years  resident  here,  as  agent  for  the  Irish  Catholic 
Bishops  and  clergy.  He  is  now  on  his  route  for  London,  and 
is  well  attached  to  the  British  Government.  I  have  found  him 
always  extremely  cordial  in  his  communications,  and  have 
written  to  Brummell,  desiring  him  to  give  him  a  private  iutro- 