

VOL.  VII.  T 


274  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

If  the  Right  Honourable  Minister  should  think  proper  to 
have  a  conference  on  the  subject  with  General  de  Miranda,  he 
will  do  himself  the  honour  to  wait  on  him  at  any  time  he  may 
think  convenient,  and  will  communicate  to  him  any  informa- 
tion in  his  power  relative  to  this  important  object. 

He  takes  this  opportunity  of  making  his  acknowledgments 
for  the  kind  interference  which  Mr.  Dundas  (at  the  instance  of 
a  friend)  was  so  good  as  to  employ  on  his  behalf,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  obtaining  a  passport  for  the  United  States  of  A  merica. 
He  will  always  remember  it  with  gratitude  and  respect. 

London,  September  30,  1799. 
Queen  Charlotte  Row,  No.  9.  Marylebone  New  Road. 

[Translation,  No.  1.] 
Don  Manuel  Gual  to  General  Miranda. 

Puerto  Espana,  Island  of  Trinidad,  July  12,  1799. 

My  dear  Friend — I  would  not  write  to  you,  if  it  were  possible 
for  me  to  come  and  see  you — Miranda,  if  the  ingratitude  which 
you  have  experienced  from  mankind,  if  a  love  of  study  and 
retirement  (as  I  have  seen  related  of  you  in  a  public  paper), 
have  not  rendered  you  forgetful  of  these  delightful  regions,  and 
if  the  pure  glory  of  becoming  the  deliverer  of  your  country — as 
the  American  people  wish  but  for  one — do  you  come  and  be 
that  one.  Miranda,  I  feel  no  other  ambition  than  to  see  this 
noble  enterprise  accomplished,  nor  desire  a  greater  honour 
than  to  serve  under  your  orders. 

I  enjoy  at  this  moment  the  distinction  of  being  proscribed 
by  the  Spanish  Government  as  the  author  of  the  revolution 
attempted  at  Caracas  in  the  year  1797.  Persecuted  at  Cura9oa, 
and  reclaimed  in  all  the  islands  neutral  or  friendly  to  the 
Spanish  Government,  I  came  to  seek  the  protection  which  I 
found  was  offered  to  us  in  the  Proclamations  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  this  place. 

The  paper  annexed  (No.  1)  will  convey  to  you  an  idea  of 
the  facility  of  an  enterprise  which  would  astonish  all  the  world, 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  275 

and  prove  the  glory  and  honour  of  Americans,  thanks  to  the 
hatred  which  the  Spanish  Government  inspires.  In  the  other 
(No.  2),  you  will  se6  what  are  my  wishes.  I  there  speak  to  a 
people  attached  to  their  religion,  and  anxiously  desiring  their 
independence.  Do  you  be,  if  not  the  chief,  at  least  the  agent, 
of  your  unfortunate  country,  in  carrying  into  eff'ect  the  majestic 
work  of  its  deliverance;  which,  in  order  to  be  accomplished, 
only  requires  to  be  begun.  You  need  not  entertain  a  doubt  of 
success.  The  smallest  assistance  at  the  outset  would  be  suffi- 
cient, and  it  might  be  obtained  in  these  islands  by  a  simple 
order  from  the  English  Ministers. 