

Monte  Video  is  the  principal  port  and  rendezvous  for 
shipping  in  the  River  Plate,  and  is  situated  on  the  left  bank 
of  that  great  river  :  Buenos  Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  country, 
is  situated  on  the  right.  One  or  two  line-of-battle  ships,  and 
as  many  frigates,  are  commonly  stationed  at  Monte  Video,  and 
two  battalions  of  Spanish  infantry  at  Buenos  Ayres,  for  the 
defence  of  that  country.  Of  the  force  at  Monte  Video  little 
is  known. 

The  approach  to  Buenos  Ayres  by  water  can  only  be  made 
in  vessels  of  a  small  draught,  on  account  of  the  shoals.  The 
climate  is  good,  and  the  country  abounds  in  provisions.  Roads 
have  been  opened  across  the  country  to  Chili  and  Peru,  and 
European  commodities  are  carried  over  land  into  those  pro- 
vinces, which  are  paid  for  in  specie,  and  brought  from  Buenos 
Ayres  to  Europe. 

The  expedition  against  the  Terra  Firma  should  act  in  the 
rivers  Oronoque  and  Guarapichi,  and  against  La  Guayra  and 
Portocabello.  The  above  mentioned  rivers  give  an  opening 
into  the  province  of  Cumana. 

La  Guayra  is  the  port  of  St.  Juan  de  Leon,  of  the  Caraccas  ; 
it  covers  the  approach  to  that  great  capital,  and  is  strongly 
fortified  to  the  sea:  a  landing,  however,  may  probably  be^ 
effected  to  the  right  or  left  of  La  Guayra,  particularly  at  the 
small  river  Tuy  ;  and,  if  the  batteries  to  the  sea  can  be  turned, 
(which  they  probably  may)  this  fortress  would  soon  fall,  and 
.consequently  the  capital  of  the  province. 

Portocabello  is  said  to  be  a  place  of  considerable  strength, 
but  probably,  like  La  Guayra,  it  is  not  equally  strong  on  the 
land  side  as  on  the  water.  It  may  admit  of  a  doubt  whether, 
in  carrying  on  these  operations,  we  should  do  more  than  block- 
ade these  fortresses,  taking  it  for  granted  that,  as  soon  as  the 


272  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

revolution  had  taken  effect,  they  would  surrender :  but  it  is  to 
be  apprehended  that  a  people,  who  possess  so  little  energy  as 
the  Creole  Spaniards,  would  not  venture  to  adopt  so  decided 
a  measure  as  throwing  off  the  Spanish  yoke,  until  they  have 
their  enemies  removed,  and  British  garrisons  in  La  Guayra 
and  Portocabello. 

If  a  revolution  could  be  set  fairly  on  foot  in  the  principal 
settlements  on  the  coast,  it  would  spread  with  rapidity  into  the 
interior  of  the  country.  Emissaries  would  be  sent  to  propa- 
gate the  news  of  the  joyful  event,  and  to  assure  them  that 
the  British  troops  should  not  quit  the  country  till  relieved 
from  the  Spanish  yoke,  and  until  a  new  government  of  their 
own  should  be  established.  All  that  would  be  required  on  the 
part  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  first  instance,  would  be  to  furnish 
them  with  arms  and  ammunition,  and  to  assist  them  in  framing 
a  form  of  government,  best  suited  to  the  genius  and  temper  of 
the  people. 