

Much  information  and  many  details  will  be  necessary  before 
these  undertakings  can  be  set  on  foot.  Captain  Mc  Douall,  of 
the  Ganges,  who  was  an  Admiral  in  the  Portuguese  service 
when  Portugal  endeavoured  to  establish  a  colony  at  St.  Sacra- 
ment, certainly  knows  the  navigation  of  the  River  Plate,  and 
among  the  Spanish  prisoners  now  in  England,  with  a  little 
address,  some  of  them  may  be  found  who  can  give  pretty 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  River  Plate  and  of  the  coasts  of 
.Terra  Firma;  and  General  Miranda  is  still  in  London. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Picton,  the  Commandant  of  Trinidad, 
was  instructed,  in  July,  1797,  to  procure  every  possible  infor- 
mation relative  to  the  neighbouring  provinces  of  Cumana,  th& 
Caraccas,  and  Venezuela :  and  Colonel  Maitland  might  be 
directed  to  go  to  Trinidad  to  arrange  with  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Picton  the  plan  of  operations. 

The  province  of  Guyana  is  already  nearly  in  our  posses- 
sion :  there  remains,  however,  in  the  possession  of  the  French 
the     small    island    of    Cayenne,    and     some    inconsiderable 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  273 

plantations  on  the  main  land.  It  may  be  necessary  to  root  out 
the  French,  by  removing  the  garrison  and  the  French  settlers 
in  this  island,  and  by  a  total  destruction  of  the  fort  and  the 
adjacent  town. 

To  ensure  the  success  of  this  grand  enterprise,  a  very  con- 
siderable force  (not  less,  probably,  than  12,000  men)  would 
be  required :  were  it  to  fail,  the  unfortunate  natives  would  be 
left  to  the  merciless  revenge  of  their  cruel  masters,  and  many 
of  them  would  end  their  days  on  the  scaffold,  or  in  the 
mines.  The  diflSculty  seems  to  be  to  find  a  sufficient  dis- 
posable force ;  this,  however,  may  be  procured,  provided  the 
general  principles  on  which  this  enterprise  is  founded  shall  be 
approved  of. 

Nothing  has  been  said  of  Mexico.  Unless  the  Americans 
were  to  co-operate,  we  have  not  a  sufficient  force  to  favour  a 
revolution  in  that  part  of  the  Spanish  settlements ;  the  proba- 
bility, however,  is  that  the  same  spirit  would  prevail  through 
that  great  continent. 

General  Miranda  to  the  Bight  Hon.  Henry  Dundas. 

D.  Francisco  Miranda  presents  his  respectful  compliments 
to  the  Right  Honourable  Henry  Dundas.  He  has  the  honour 
to  send  him  copies  and  translations  of  the  enclosed  papers, 
which  he  received  three  days  ago ;  and  as  the  importance  of 
the  subject  is  perfectly  obvious,  he  will  only  say  a  few  words 
respecting  the  person  who  writes  them. 

D.  Manuel  Gual  is  the  eldest  son  of  D.  Matheo^Gual,  who 
commanded  at  La  Guaira  when  Admiral  Knowles  attacked 
that  place  in  the  year  1743.  He  is  a  native  of  Caracas,  has 
served  in  the  regular  infantry  of  that  province,  and  enjoys 
great  popularity  in  the  country,  being  descended  from  a  noble 
and  rich  fauiily  at  La  Guaira.  General  de  Miranda  knew  him 
intimately  in  his  youth,  and  has  been  informed  since  that  time 
that  he  has  become  a  man  of  distinguished  abilities  and  conse- 
quence in  the  country. 