

In  the  memoranda  which  I  gave  Mr.  S ,  on  his  depar- 
ture for  Calcutta,  I  mentioned  the  conversations  I  had  been 
honoured  with  by  Lord  North  on  this  subject — the  confirma- 
tion of  the  revolt  in  Peru,  &;c.,  received  by  the  capture  of  the 
Corunna  packet,  and  the  intelligence  brought  by  Captain  Mac- 
dowall,  who  had  been  despatched  by  Commodore  Johnston, 
with  a  Jesuit,  to  the  Eio  Janeiro. 

This  intelligence  has  been  further  confirmed  by  Sir  Thomas 
Mills,  whose  information  is  derived  immediately  from  the 
Viceroy  of  the  Brazils,  purporting  that  Peru  was,  at  the  last 
moment  of  advice,  in  a  state  of  revolt  that  threatened  the 
entire  subversion  of  the  Spanish  Government.  I  need  not 
suggest  to  you,  sir,  that  the  rebellion  is  of  a  nature  that  cannot 
be  expected  speedily  to  terminate,  or,  if  crushed  for  the 
moment,  the  Spaniards  can  have  any  security  against  its 
revival,  whenever  the  least  encouragement  is  held  out  to  the 
original  revolters. 

My  first  communication  (June,  1779)  to  Lord  Lough- 
borough was  previous  to  our  rupture  with  Spain.  Colonel 
FuUarton's  overtures,  in  the  beginning  of  the  following  year 
(January,  1780),  preceded  by  some  months  my  return  from 
Italy.  At  that  period  we  had  no  communication  on  the  sub- 
ject :  our  information  was   drawn  from  different  sources,  but 


1799.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  269 

has  received  the  most  irrefragable  confirmation  from  a  variety 
of  facts,  supplying  weight  and  credit  to  each  other. 

J.  Cox  HiPPlSLEY. 

N.B.  The  preceding  letter  was  accompanied  by  Colonel 
Fullarton's  opinion  (dated  May,  1781),  prepared  for  a  Council 
of  War  between  St.  Jago  and  the  equinoctial,  and  his  Propo- 
sitions for  an  Expedition  to  South  America  by  India,  dated 
June  3,  1780,  laid  before  the  Cabinet  by  Lord  North,  and 
approved. 

On   the  Liheratmi  of  South  America  from  the  Dominion  of 

Spain. 

BY  SIR  R.  ABERCROMBY. 

The  people  of  Great  Britain  in  general  take  little  share  in 
the  affairs  of  foreign  nations.  The  balance  of  power  is  a  sub- 
ject they  do  not  understand  ;  and  they  are  little  interested  in 
any  thing  that  does  not  tend  to  the  security  and  extension  of 
commerce,  and  the  dominion  of  the  sea. 

To  keep  up  the  spirits  of  the  nation,  and  to  engage  it  heartily 
in  the  further  prosecution  of  the  war,  it  seems  necessary  that 
every  military  enterprise  we  shall  undertake  shall  be  directed 
to  such  objects  as  shall  tend  to  secure  to  us  or  to  enlarge  the 
sources  of  our  commerce  and  wealth. 

With  this  view  it  has  occurred  that  the  removal  of  the 
French  from  Egypt  should  be  effected  before  a  negociation  for 
peace  should  take  place  :  to  allow  it  to  remain  in  their  posses- 
sion would  threaten  the  security  of  our  dominions  in  the  East ; 
at  any  rate,  were  the  cession  of  it  to  become  an  object  of  discus- 
sion at  the  peace,  a  considerable  degree  of  weight  would  be  given 
to  it  in  the  general  scale,  and  concessions  would  be  demanded 
of  more  consequence  than  we  would  be  inclined  to  grant. ^ 