


1781.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.   .  267 

duction  to  Lord  North.  I  profited  here  of  his  introduction  to 
several  Mexican  Jesuits,  who  confirmed  every  thing  I  have 
hitherto  communicated. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Mr.  Corneille  (late  GoTernor  of  St. 
Helena)  to  Mr,  Hippisley. 

November  ,  1781. 
I  recollect  Governor  Johnston's  conversation  with  me  on 
the  South  American  business,  and  perfectly  remember  his 
telling  me  of  having  despatched  the  Shark  sloop,  commanded 
by  Captain  Macdowjall,  somewhere  near  Madeira,  in  March 
last,  to  the  Rio  Janeiro,  with  a  Jesuit,  taken  by  a  Glasgow 
privateer  in  a  Spanish  ship  bound  to  Spain — that,  in  conse- 
quence of  some  intelligence  in  the  hands  of  Lord  Hillsborough 
of  South  America  being  in  a  state  of  revolt  against  the 
Spanish  Government,  it  was  thought  this  Jesuit  might  be  a 
proper  person  for  encouraging  the  same  ....  Mr.  Johnston 
expressed  great  satisfaction  on  receiving  Captain  Macdowall's 
packet,  wherein  he  mentioned  the  safe  landing  of  the  Jesuit, 
with  further  particulars — that  several  of  the  Spanish  provinces 
were  then  in  a  state  of  revolt,  and  that  a  general  dissatisfac- 
tion ran  through  the  whole  coasts  of  Chili  and  Peru,  wishing 
to  shake  oif  the  Spanish  yoke.  The  name  of  a  particular  chief 
thus  in  arms  was  therein  mentioned  as  the  principal  leader  of 
the  revolters,  who  was  very  formidable  to  the  Spaniards. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  Warren  Hastmgs^  Esq.^  (then  Governor- 
General  of  Bengal)  from  Mr.  Hippisley. 

Fort  St.  George,  August  11,  1782. 
Colonel  Fullarton,  on  his  departure  for  the  command  of 
Trincomalee,  very  anxiously  expressed  his  wishes  that  the 
accompanying  papers  might  be  submitted  to  your  perusal. 
In  apology  for  the  Colonel  and  myself,  it  is  incumbent  on  me 
to  say  that  I  have  been  drawn  into  this  communication  from 
having  mentioned  to  him  that  the  extracts  of  my  correspond- 


268  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1782. 

ence  with  Lord  Loughborough  had  the  good  fortune  to  have 
received  some  share  of  your  notice.  Colonel  Fullarton,  con- 
scious of  the  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  object,  ex- 
pressed a  desire  that  his  own  ideas  and  specific  propositions  to 
Government  on  the  same  subject  might  at  least  have  equal 
advantage  with  my  little  labours  ;  and  he  has  also  requested 
me  to  say  that,  if  the  situation  of  India  under  your  auspices 
should  permit  the  revival  of  an  enterprise  against  the  Spanish 
settlements,  he  would  then  hope  for  the  honour  of  paying  his 
personal  respects  to  you,  and  submitting  to  your  judgment  the 
detail  of  many  incidental  circumstances  which  had  originally 
been  arranged  for  the  expedition. 