

The  credit  I  enjoy  among  my  countrymen,  increased  by  the 
persecution  I  now  experience  from  the  tyrannical  Government 
of  Spain  (which  seeks  to  secure  me  dead  or  alive),  may  render 
my  persecuted  person  of  some  utility.  Whether  it  be  as  an 
agent  or  as  chief  that  you  may  think  proper  to  act,  should  you 
have  an  idea  that  I  can  be  of  service,  you  may  communicate 
your  wishes  to  me  through  the  medium  of  Mr.  Picton,  Go- 
vernor-General of  this  Island.  You  may  send  your  answer  to 
this  letter  through  the  same  channel,  as  he  will  always  be 
acquainted  with  the  place  of  my  residence. 

Our  enterprise  failed  only  from  this  circumstance.  In  my 
absence  from  Caracas,  the  Government  discovered  our  plan 
through  the  imprudence  of  a  simpleton.  Many  persons  were 
immediately  arrested,  and  the  most  active  measures  were  im- 
mediately taken  both  at  La  Guaira  and  at  Caracas ;  so  that, 
finding  our  combinations  defeated,  I  was  obliged  to  make  my 
escape  with  the  view  of  seeking  succours  in  English  colonies, 
for  the  hopes  of  my  countrymen  are  still  alive.  This  is,  in  a 
few  words,  an  account  of  the  miscarriage  of  our  attempt,  since 
which  the  desire  of  independence  has  only  increased.  That 
you  may  come,  I  again  repeat  it,  and  have  the  glory  of  esta- 
blishing it,  is  the  ardent  wish  of  your  most  sincere  and  earliest 
friend  and  fellow-countryman, 

Manuel  Gual. 
T  2 


276  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

[Translation,  No.  2.] 
Memorial  of  Manuel  Gual^  'presented  to  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  Windward  Islands,  through  the  medium 
of  General  Picton,  Gomrnor  of  Trinidad. 

Trinidad,  May  2,  1799. 

Sir — The  Abbe  Eaynal,  after  haviog  spoken  of  the  unfortu- 
nate expedition  of  Admiral  Anson  against  the  empire  of  Peru, 
proceeds  thus : — "  Tant  d'obstacles  a  Tenvahissement  de  TAme- 
rique  Espagnole  avaient,  dit-on,  fait  naitre  en  Angleterre, 
durant  les  derni^res  hostilites,  un  syst^me  etonnant.  Le  projet 
de  cette  puissance,  alors  maitresse  de  toutes  les  mers,  etoit  de 
s'^emparer  de  La  Vera  Cruz,  et  de  s'y  fortifier  d"*une  mani^re 
redoutable.  On  n'aurait  propose  au  Mexique  un  joug  etranger, 
pour  lequel  on  lui  connaissait  trop  d^eloignement.  Le  plan 
etait  de  le  detacher  de  la  m^tropole,  de  le  rendre  arbitre  de 
son  sort,  et  de  le  laisser  maitre  de  se  choisir  un  Souverain,  ou  de 
se  former  en  Republique.  Comme  il  n''y  avait  point  de  troupes 
dans  le  pays,  la  revolution  etait  assuree,  et  elle  se  serait  egale- 
ment  faite  dans  toutes  les  provinces  de  ce  vaste  Continent,  qui 
avaient  les  memes  motifs  de  la  desirer,  les  memes  facilites  pour 
Texecuter.  Les  efforts  de  la  cour  de  Madrid  pour  recouvrir 
ses  droits  devaient  etre  impuissants,  parceque  la  Grande 
Bretagne  se  chargeait  de  les  repousser,  a  condition  que  les 
nouveaux  Etats  lui  accorderaient  un  commerce  exclusif,  mais 
infiniment  raoins  defavorable  que  celui  sous  lequel  ils  avaient 
si  long  tems  g^mi." — Li  v.  8. 