

Five  days  after  this  opinion  was  given,  a  Proclamation  was 
issued  by  the  King  of  England,  granting  a  free  trade  between 
all  the  Colonies  and  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  and  permitting  the 
produce  of  the  latter  to  be  imported  into  England  on  the  same 
footing  as  that  of  the  other  British  colonies,  plantations,  and 
islands,  in  the  West  Indies,  as  more  fully  appears  by  the  docu- 
ment No.  4.* 

On  the  8th  of  April,  the  Minister  Dundas  wrote  to  Colonel 
Picton,  Governor  of  the  Island  of  Trinidad,  the  despatch 
No.  5,2  with  instructions  as  to  the  most  proper  system  to  be 
observed  for  drawing  every  possible  advantage  from  that  island 
in  a  political  as  well  as  a  commercial  way ;  informing  him  that 
he  (the  Minister)  had  been  assured  that  the  neighbouring 
Spanish  provinces  on  the  Continent  of  America  were,  in  a  great 
degree,  disaflfected  towards  the  Spanish  Government,  and  de- 
sirous of  being  relieved  from  an  oppressive  system  of  monopoly 
and  forced  restriction ;  in  consequence  of  which,  it  would  be 
very  serviceable  that  he  (Governor  Picton)  should  encourage 
the  inhabitants  of  Trinidad  as  much  as  possible  to  continue 
their  intercourse  with  the  Spanish  settlements ;  that,  notwith- 
standing it  could  only  be  kept  up  in  a  contraband  and  secret 
way,  if  the  facilities  afforded  by  the  local  situation  were  im- 
proved by  the  dispositions  and  wishes  of  tlie  parties,  it  would 

'  This  is  a  copy  of  the  King's  Order  in  Council. 

*  This  is  an  exact  translation  of  Mr.  Dundas's  despatch. 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  28B 

^ot  be  in  the  power  of  the  Spanish  Government  to  prevent  its 
extension,  so  highly  beneficial  to  the  commercial  interests  of 
England,  and  advantageous  to  the  inhabitants  of  New  Spain, 
at  present  dependent  upon  an  oppressive  monopoly  for  their 
supplies  from  Europe ;  with  which  view  the  King  of  England 
had  issued  the  above-mentioned  Proclamation,  which  Governor 
Picton  is  ordered  to  publish  at  Trinidad ;  and  to  encourage  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Spanish  settlements  to  resist  the  oppressive 
authority  of  the  Spanish  Government,  by  assuring  them  that 
measures  have  been  taken  to  support  them  by  means  of  the 
British  naval  force,  and  to  supply  them  with  arms  and  ammu- 
nition, merely  to  enable  them  to  maintain  their  commercial 
independence,  without  any  desire  on  the  part  of  the  King  of 
England  to  acquire  any  right  of  Sovereignty  over  them,  or  to 
interfere  in  their  civil,  religious,  or  political  rights,  unless  they 
themselves  should,  in  any  degree,  solicit  his  protection. 

The  Minister  Dundas  transmitted  these  documents  to  the 
Governor  of  Trinidad,  with  another  despatch  of  the  8th  of  April 
(No.  6^)  ;  and  the  latter,  in  consequence  of  these  instructions, 
drew  up  and  caused  to  be  printed  the  paper  No.  7,^  which 
should  be  attended  to,  for  he  therein  uses  every  means  to 
excite  your  Majesty's  faithful  subjects  in  these  provinces  to 
an  insurrection. 