

The  Governor  of  Cumana,  who  has  transmitted  these  papers, 
which,  he  says,  were  found  on  board  a  small  vessel,  captured 
on  the  coast  of  that  province,  in  a  despatch  accompanying 
them  (No.  8),  expresses  an  opinion  that  they  will  not  make 
the  impression  the  English  wish  for ;  but  the  Audiencia  think 
otherwise,  especially  since  the  discovery  of  the  papers  enclosed 
in  the  Representation  (No.  233),  which  were  found  in  the  house 
of  the  conspirator  Don  Manuel  Gual,  and  in  which  are  to  be 
observed  all  the  spirit  and  force  of  those  transmitted  by  the 
Minister  Dundas,   and  of  that  printed  by  the   Governor  of 

^  This  is  an  exact  translation  of  Mr.  Dundas's  despatch. 
^  Governor  Picton's  Proclamation,  dated  June  26,  1797. 


284  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

Trinidad,  who  has  circulated  them  in  different  parts,  without 
our  beino;  able  to  prevent  it,  or  to  discover  where  they  are,  not- 
withstanding all  the  measures  taken  for  the  purpose  by  the 
Audiencia. 

Among  the  proceedings  of  the  Audiencia  of  Caraccas  relative 
to  the  matter  of  the  intended  Insurrection  in  that  country,  there 
is  a  copy  of  a  secret  letter,  dated  May  9,  1797,  addressed  to 
that  tribunal,  by  the  President  and  Captain-General,  trans- 
mitting to  them,  for  their  consideration  and  opinion,  a  royal 
order  (which  is  not  copied)  from  the  Court  of  Spain,  which  the 
letter  states  to  be  dated  December  24,  1796,  and  to  contain 
the  plan  of  the  Court  of  London  for  an  expedition  against 
New  Spain,  and  the  measures  taken  by  the  famous  Spaniard 
Miranda ;  on  which  subject  the  Audiencia  is  of  opinion  that  an 
exact  description  of  Miranda's  person  should  be  transmitted  to 
all  officers,  civil  and  military,  with  the  strictest  orders  to  arrest 
him  whenever  he  should  be  discovered  on  any  part  of  the  coast, 
as  well  as  every  foreigner  who  should  appear  in  the  least 
suspicious. 

N.B.  These  papers  have  been  transmitted  to  me  from  the 
late  Governor  of  Trinidad,  General  Picton,  who  vouches  their 
authenticity. 

Memorandum  for  the  consideration  of  the  Cabinet. 

Downing  Street,  October  3,  1799. 

I  wish  his  Majesty''s  servants  seriously  to  consider  the  ac- 
companying letter,  with  its  enclosure.  Nobody  can  wish  at 
present  to  see  any  part  of  the  habitable  world  set  adrift  on  any 
revolutionizing  system  :  but  it  is  our  duty  to  consider  well 
how  far  that  is  entirely  in  our  power  to  decide  one  way  or 
other. 

From  what  has  passed  with  America,  in  the  transactions 
which  we  have  had  with  them  relative  to  St.  Domingo,  I  am 
afraid  they  don't  look  to  future  consequences  with  the  same 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEEEAGH.  285 