

The  advantages  which  this  country  would  derive  from  a  suc- 
cessful issue  are  incalculable  ;  nor  is  it  possible  to  trace  them 
in  either  a  commercial  or  political  point  of  view,  though  it  may 
be  fair  to  assert,  that  the  annual  export  from  that  country  to 
Spain,  under  all  the  disadvantages  of  a  most  arbitrary  and 
oppressive  Government,  are  fifty  millions  of  dollars  a  year 
(the  last  Return  from  Cadiz  made  in  65) ;  and  if  this  was 
only  to  be  diverted  from  its  present  channel,  without  calcu- 
lating on  the  additional  operation  of  bringing  it  to  this  country, 
I  can  scarce  venture  an  opinion  on  the  effect  which  such  a  cir- 
cumstance would  have  in  France  as  well  as  Spain,  who  can 
only  be  esteemed  the  intermediate  agent  to  that  Republic  for 
her  Colonies  in  South  America. 

It  must  be  evident  to  every  person  who  possesses  a  know- 
ledge of  the  geographical  situation  of  that  great  continent,  its 
population  and  resources,  that  any  permanent  influence  of 
Great  Britain,  whether  fixed  by  absolute  conquest,  or  conquest 
in  the  first  instance,  followed  up  by  successful  political  intrigue, 
(which  I  contend  is  authorized  by  all  usages  of  war)  must  offer 

VOL.  VII.  u 


290  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1803. 

the  greatest  commercial  advantages,  not  only  to  this  country, 
but  to  our  possessions  in  India,  by  opening  a  direct  trade  on 
each  side  of  the  Continent,  and  drawing  all  the  wealth  of 
Spanish  America  from  our  enemies,  which  has  always  been 
their  principal  support  in  every  war  with  Great  Britain. 

Without  entering  into  the  very  detailed  advantages  of  eman- 
cipating that  country,  it  may  be  proper,  in  addition  to  those 
stated,  to  calculate  on  its  eventually  annihilating  the  navy  of 
Spain,  by  cutting  off  its  greatest  nursery  for  seamen  and  its 
principal  sources  for,  foreign  timber ;  for  if  Spain  is  once  con- 
fined to  its  European  navigation  and  commerce,  she  will  not 
be  long  considered  a  maritime  power.  Her  Colonies,  also, 
both  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  are  so  particularly  depen- 
dent on  the  intercourse  they  enjoy  with  the  great  Continent, 
that  they  must  sensibly  feel  any  alteration  in  that  Government. 

The  points  which  offered  the  fairest  promise  for  military 
establishments  in  the  South  Sea  were  Baldivia,  Valparaiso, 
Lima,  Panama,  and  Acapulco ;  and,  at  the  time  Sir  Archibald 
Campbell  consulted  me,  I  was  not  fully  competent  to  give  an 
opinion  beyond  that  of  the  navigation  from  both  countries,  and 
to  which  points  the  armaments  from  each  ought  to  be  directed ; 
but,  during  the  late  war,  when  I  had  some  slight  knowledge  of 
General  Miranda''s  project,  I  certainly  did  press  on  Mr.  Dun- 
das's  attention  the  very  great  importance  of  Rio  de  la  Plata, 
from  its  particular  situation,  its  immediate  intercourse  with 
Chili,  from  whose  coast  it  is  not  350  leagues,  and  its  presenting 
the  most  probable  point  for  the  enemy — I  mean,  France — not 
only  to  take  possession  of,  but  to  furnish  supplies  to  counteract 
all  our  operations,  and  this  certainly  with  great  facility,  if  he 
once  had  possession  of  the  Brazils  ;  and  I  do  think,  if  we  could 
previously  occupy  Buenos  Ayres,  it  would  make  any  attempt 
of  France  on  the  Portuguese  Settlements  a  serious  considera- 
tion. Mr.  Dundas  appeared  so  fully  convinced  of  the  impor- 
tance of  this  point,  that  he  assured  me  he  should  adopt  it  as  one 
in  the  enterprise,  when   it  was   undcrtakoii.  wliirli  ho  oxpectrd 