


1803.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  291 

would  be  immediately  the  case  ;  and  I  should  have  instruc- 
tions to  go  there  from  the  Red  Sea  with  an  adequate  military 
force  for  the  purpose. 

Taking  up  Buenos  Ayres  as  a  principal  point  very  much 
removes,  in  my  mind,  the  necessity  of  looking  to  any  situation 
in  the  Pacific  to  the  southward  of  Lima,  if  even  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  go  there  ;  but  Buenos  Ayres  must  be  considered 
on  the  earliest  moment  of  a  probable  rupture  with  Spain,  as 
the  attention  of  the  enemy  will  be  called  to  that  station  in  pre- 
ference to  any  other. 

The  great  object,  however,  of  the  expedition,  and  from  which 
it  is  to  derive  its  principal  spring,  is  the  possession  of  the 
Caraccas,  which  has  already  been  given  in  military  detail  by 
General  Miranda,  who,  from  the  advices  and  intercourse  with 
that  province  and  his  family  connexions,  calculated  on  being 
able  to  collect  an  army  of  15  to  20,000  men,  increasing  as  he 
proceeds  to  the  provinces  of  Santa  Fe  and  Quito,  and  ulti- 
mately establishing  a  powerful  and  permanent  post  on  the 
Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  opening  an  immediate  communication 
with  the  Indian  expeditions  and  Indian  commerce  which  ought 
to  accompany  the  armaments  from  that  country  to  the  Pacific 
Ocean. 

The  inhabitants  may  be  considered  under  four  heads  :  the 
positive  Spaniard,  the  Creolian  Spaniard,  the  Mulattoes,  and 
the  Indians.  The  Mulattoes  are  much  connected  with  the 
Creolian  Spaniards,  who  have  ever  been  notoriously  the  most 
dissatisfied  race  in  that  country  with  the  existing  Government, 
even  as  much  so  as  the  Indians,  who  are  its  natural  enemy. 

General  Miranda's  intelligence  and  correspondence  with  that 
country  is  so  well  known  to  Government,  that  I  need  not 
quote  any  particular  circumstance,  to  prove  how  natural  it  is 
that  a  desire  of  emancipation  should  generally  obtain,  parti- 
cularly in  the  interior  provinces.  I  have  been  long  in  the 
habit  of  strict  and  confidential  intimacy  with  the  General,  and 
I  have  not  seen  any  thing,  either  in  his  papers  or  the  mode  of 

u2 


292        XETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF        Ll«03. 

carrj'ing  his  project  into  effect,  but  marks  the  strongest  com- 
mon sense,  which  never  fails  to  carry  with  it  the  most  pointed 
and  satisfactory  conviction. 

The  military  force  required  by  Miranda  for  the  operation  on 
the  northern  side  of  Terra  Firma  is  a  regiment  complete :  two 
companies  of  artillery,  and  two  squadrons  of  dismounted 
cavalry.     The  list  is  already  with  Mr.  Vansittart. 

The  naval  force  should  probably  be  three  forty-fours  on  two 
decks,  arme  en  flute,  one  of  the  armed  Indiamen,  two  smaller 
vessels,  and  a  bomb ;  but  if  this  interferes  with  the  arrange- 
ment at  the  Admiralty,  Mr.  Davison  has  offered  to  furnish, 
at  his  own  expense,  three  or  four  Indiamen  ;  one  large,  to 
mount  fifty  guns ;  three  smaller,  to  mount  thirty- six  ;  and 
two  cutters,  as  tenders  ;  the  bomb  to  be  supplied  by  Govern- 
ment, who  is  only  required  to  secure  Mr.  Davison  against  the 
failure  of  the  expedition,  by  capture  or  otherwise.  He  is  satis- 
fied, from  his  confidence  in  Miranda,  and  the  view  of  success 
which  he  has  held  out  to  him,  to  take  the  advantages  promised 
by  the  General  as  a  remuneration  for  his  advances,  and  he  will 
engage  to  have  everything  ready  in  six  months. 