


/ 


1799.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  281 

most  to  be  attended  to — the  reduction  of  Cumana,  Guyana, 
and  Maracaybo,  in  none  of  which  places  would  any  resistance 
be  found,  but  quite  the  reverse ;  and  that  the  same  would  pro- 
bably happen  in  regard  to  Caraccas,  as  appears  by  the  docu- 
ment No.  2.1 

Upon  this,  and  perhaps  some  other  information,  the  opinion 
No.  3  2  ^as  formed  in  London  on  the  SOth  of  March  last,  ex- 
pressing that  the  principal  advantages  that  the  English  would 
derive  from  the  possession  of  Trinidad  were  the  excluding 
Spain  from  a  station  which  would  have  afforded  her  the  means 
of  destroying  the  English  West  India  Islands  and  their  trade ; 
the  unlimited  liberty  of  carrying  on  trade  with  the  provinces 
of  Caraccas  and  Cumana,  the  most  fertile  of  all  the  Spanish 
territory  in  America,  especially  having  the  advantage  of  pos- 
sessing Demerara ;  whence  it  may  be  said  with  truth  that  there 
is  not  a  point  between  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  the  mouth 
of  the  River  of  the  Amazons,  where  British  manufactures  may 
not  be  imported ;  that  the  most  important  object  is  that  the 
communication  of  the  English  with  the  Spanish  provinces 
should  be  with  a  view  to  encourage  their  discontent  against  the 
Spanish  Government,  and  to  give  every  kind  of  assistance  to 
the  disaffected ;  that  the  province  of  Caraccas  and  all  the  addi- 
tional territory  included  in  the  privilege  of  the  Guipuscoan 
Company,  between  which  and  Trinidad  a  constant  and  direct 
communication  was  kept  up,  is  said  to  be  the  most  disaffected 
part  of  Spanish  America;  that  the  jealousy  of  Spain  on  this 
subject  was  so  great,  that  the  possession  of  Demerara  by  the 
English  was  one  of  the  principal  complaints  against  them,  and 
taken  up  as  a  cause  of  the  war ;  that  this  point  is  considered 
as  affecting  the  existence  of  the  Spanish  Empire  in  America ; 
that,  at  any  rate,  the  English  should  endeavour  to  make  them- 

^  This  document  is  entitled  "  Mr.  Duff's  Communication  respecting 
the  Island  of  Trinidad." 

^  This  document  is  entitled  "  Minute  respecting  Trinidad."  In  the 
margin  it  is  called  "  Mr.  Dundas's  Instructions." 


282  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1799. 

selves  feared  by  their  enemies,  and  bring  them  to  a  peace,  by- 
giving  instructions  immediately  to  the  Governors  of  Demerara 
and  Trinidad  to  use  their  utmost  efforts  to  open  commercial 
and  political  communication  with  the  neighbouring  provinces 
of  Spanish  America ;  and  that  it  would  be  very  useful,  for  the 
purpose  of  exciting  an  alarm  at  Madrid,  to  open  the  port  of 
Trinidad  to  all  nations,  particularly  to  vessels  from  all  parts  of 
the  Continent  of  America,  both  North  and  South ;  and  to  allow 
those  from  Spanish  America  to  pass  and  repass  freely  from 
Trinidad,  granting  them  passports  without  fee. 