


288  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1803, 

General  Miranda,  during  a  period  of  four  years,  has  soli- 
cited the  assistance  of  his  Majesty's  G-ovemment  towards  effect- 
ing this  object,  asserting  that  the  emissaries  of  the  French 
were  employed  to  encourage  the  people  to  look  to  the  lie- 
public  of  France  for  their  liberation,  and  that  there  was  reason 
to  apprehend,  if  we  did  not  speedily  take  measures  to  direct 
the  revolutionary  spirit  that  prevailed  in  those  countries  into  a 
proper  course,  it  would  be  perverted  by  the  French  to  their  own 
purposes,  and  would  terminate  in  effectually  excluding  the 
manufactures  of  Great  Britain  from  the  markets  of  South 
America. 

This  information  given  by  General  Miranda  has  been  con- 
firmed by  accounts  collected  through  a  variety  of  channels, 
and  particularly  by  Brigadier-General  Picton,  Governor  of 
Trinidad,  all  concurring  in  opinion  that,  from  the  disposition 
of  the  inhabitants  to  shake  off  their  present  Government,  and 
the  weakness  of  the  Spanish  force  that  could  be  brought  in 
support  of  it,  a  plan  of  operations  might  be  concerted  and  exe- 
cuted by  a  very  small  body  of  troops,  by  which  a  decisive  blow 
might  be  struck  at  the  resources  of  the  enemies  of  this  country, 
the  views  of  the  French  Government  counteracted,  and  the 
advantages  of  an  extensive  commerce  secured  to  the  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland. 

For  this  purpose,  it  is  proposed  to  send  General  Miranda 
immediately  to  the  West  Indies,  and  to  instruct  General  Trigge 
to  consult  with  him  upon  the  measures  to  be  pursued,  in  order 
to  effect  the  important  objects  that  have  been  stated. 


Secret  Paper  on  South  America^  sent  by  Sir  Hom^'Popham  to 

Mr.  Secretary  Yorke. 
Copy.  London,  November  26,  1803. 

The  Continent  of  South  America  has  naturally  engaged  the 
attention  of  this  country  in  every  probable  rupture  with  Spain, 
and  in  the  year  1 790  it  was  so  seriously  taken  up,  that,  if  hos- 
tilities had  commenced,  I  have  little  doubt  but  an  armament 


1803.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  289 

of  considerable  magnitude  would  have  sailed  to  that  country  ; 
for  Sir  Archibald  Campbell,  who  expected  the  command,  con- 
sulted me  on  the  occasion,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  co- 
operation from  India,  and  all  the  previous  measures  necessary 
to  be  adopted,  that  no  time  might  be  lost  when  the  enterprise 
was  actually  decided  on. 

This  subject  has  since  been  frequently  agitated  ;  and,  as  I 
officially  knew  that  I  was  to  have  had  the  honour  of  directing 
one  part  of  an  expedition  to  that  country  during  the  late  war, 
I,  in  course,  lost  no  opportunity  of  informing  myself  on  every 
point  at  all  connected  with  an  operation  of  such  importance. 
It  is  a  topic  that  has  occasionally  occupied  the  attention  of  the 
ablest  statesmen  for  a  series  of  years ;  and,  from  the  result  of 
the  discussions  which  it  must  have  undergone  in  the  Cabinet, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  policy  and  expedience  of  the 
measure. 