

caution  as  we  do  ;  and,  if  they  can  any  where  open  to  them- 
selves a  new  market,  they  will  overlook  all  other  considerations. 
Indeed,  from  circumstances  that  have  come  under  my  obser- 
vation, I  have  reason  to  apprehend  they  are  not  without  such 
views  in  "regard  to  South  America. 

Under  these  circumstances,  I  wish  it  to  be  considered  by  his 
Majesty'*s  Ministers,  whether  it  is  best  for  us  to  do  nothing, 
and  let  it  take  its  course,  or  if  we  ought  so  far  to  interpose,  and  to 
be  a  party  in  the  business,  as  to  prevent,  as  far  as  we  can,  the 
whole  mischief  that  may  be  done,  if  this  immense  empire  is  to 
be  permitted  to  revolutionize  itself  without  guidance  or  con- 
trol, or  any  direction  given  to  their  endeavours  for  independence. 

Henry  Dundas.* 

I  have  a  very  strong  opinion  that  we  ought  not  by  any 
means  to  engage  in  the  projects  of  General  Miranda,  or  in 
those  of  the  Government  of  the  United  States  of  America,  on 
this  subject.  It  ought  to  be  a  very  clear  and  certain  prospect 
of  good  to  be  done  by  such  measures,  that  should  induce  us  to 
extend  the  spirit  of  revolutions,  and  to  involve  in  that  system 
the  whole  Continent  of  South  America.  G. 

October  5,  1799. 
Every  one,  I  suppose,  will  have  a  great  distrust  of  the 
projects  of  General  M.,  and  not  any  great  confidence  in 
those  of  the  United  States  of  America.  It  is,  in  fact,  from 
the  horror  of  a  revolution  conducted  by  either  one  or  the 
other,  and  the  apprehension  that  such  an  attempt  will  not- 
withstanding be  made,  that  I  cannot  but  join  with  Mr.  D.  in 
thinking  the  subject  well  worthy  of  consideration,  however 
strong  the  objections  to  which  every  measure  of  the  sort  must 
be  liable. 

^  On  the  same  paper  with  Mr.  Dundas's  Memorandum  are  recorded 
the  opinions  of  two  of  his  colleagues  in  the  Cabinet — Lord  Grenville, 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs ;  and  Mr.  Windham,  Secretary  of  State  for 
the  War  Department,  as  inferred  from  the  initials  attached  to  them. 


286  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1801. 

Might  not  some  use  be  made  of  the  danger  which  Spain  is 
thus  threatened  with  to  prevent  the  evil,  to  detach  Spain  from 
France,  and  to  give  to  those  Colonies  a  constitution  (under 
the  Spanish  Government)  with  which  they  should  be  better 
satisfied,  and  of  which  we  might  be  the  guarantee  ? 

W.  W. 

Opinion  of  Lord  Pelham  on  the  same  subject, 

September  27,  1801. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  expedition  against  Spanish  South 
America  requires  more  consideration  than  I,  at  least,  have 
been  able  to  o:ive  to  it.  The  information  contained  in  this 
box  is  not  so  recent  as  could  be  wished.  If  the  paper, 
with  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby's  name  at  the  top  of  it,  contains 
his  opinion,  it  would  seem  that  12,000  men,  instead  of  8,000, 
are  necessary  for  such  an  enterprise ;  and  I  most  entirely 
agree  with  the  great  man  in  the  opinion  that  no  enterprise  of 
the  kind  should  be  undertaken  without  a  superior  force. 
The  example  of  Buonaparte  in  Egypt,  in  Italy,  and  now, 
in  his  preparations  for  invading  England,  is  not  to  be  dis- 
regarded. 