

The  idea  of  liberating  South  America  is  certainly  not  a 
new  one  to  me  ;  but  I  think  it  one  of  those  great  measures, 
the  consequences  of  which  must  have  so  very  extensive  an 
influence  that  I  cannot  venture  to  give  my  consent  to  making 
the  attempt  without  a  further  discussion,  and  without  knowing 
the  principles  and  ulterior  views  of  those  with  whom  I  am 
to  embark  in  the  enterprise.  It  might  be  the  means  of  shut- 
ting us  completely  out  of  Europe — an  extremity  we  may  be 
driven  to,  and,  therefore,  it  might  be  wise  to  look  to  it.  But 
I  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  we  should  engage  in  an  en- 
terprise that  may  accelerate  it  by  throwing  Spain  still  more 
into  the  hands  of  France.  It  is  impossible  to  support  the 
independence  of  Old  Spain,  and  be  admitted  to  a  participation 
of  the  trade  in  New  Spain  ?  Pelham. 


1801.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  287 

Note  sent  in  circulation  in  September^  1801. 

The  measures  whicli  have  been  in  contemplation  with  re- 
spect to  South  America  having  been  postponed  on  account  of 
the  state  of  the  negociation  with  France,  it  becomes  neces- 
sary, under  present  circumstances,  to  call  the  attention  of  his 
Majesty's  confidential  servants  to  that  subject ;  and  more  espe- 
cially as  the  augmentation  of  the  French  forces  in  Spain,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  wishes  of  the  Spanish  Government,  and  after  the  ob- 
ject for  which  they  were  originally  sent  is  declared  to  have  been 
accomplished,  cannot  fail  to  create  a  suspicion  that  the  Chief 
Consul  is  endeavourino:  to  efiect  that  which  was  in  vain  at- 
tempted  by  Louis  XIV.,  viz.,  the  consolidation  of  the  power 
and  resources  of  France  and  Spain  under  the  same  Govern- 
ment. 

But,  even  if  France  should  be  disposed  to  sufier  Spain  to 
exist  as  a  nominal  kingdom,  the  cession  of  liouisana  already 
obtained,  and  the  demand  made  on  Portugal  of  the  country 
bordering  on  the  Amazon  River,  sufficiently  disclose  the  inten- 
tions of  the  French  Government  with  respect  to  the  inter- 
mediate provinces,  if  not  the  whole  Continent  of  South  Ame- 
rica, to  excite  the  most  serious  apprehensions  on  the  part  of 
this  country. 

With  a  view  of  counteracting  projects,  the  operation  of  which 
might  prove  so  prejudicial  to  the  trade  we  have  lately  opened 
with  South  America,  and  which  might  ultimately  tend  to 
throw  all  those  resources  into  the  hands  of  France,  it  would 
appear  advisable  to  advert  to  the  information  which  has  been 
received  with  regard  to  the  provinces  upon  the  coast,  situated 
between  the  River  Orenoco  and  the  Gulf  of  Venezuela,  and 
to  consider  whether  it  may  not  be  expedient  for  the  Govern- 
ment of  this  country  rather  to  promote  the  disposition  of  the 
inhabitants  of  those  provinces  to  assert  their  independence, 
than  to  hazard  the  consequences  of  their  becoming  subjects  to 
the  French  Government. 