

An  equipment  from  the  Admiralty  is  always  to  be  preferred 
to  any  other ;  but,  in  the  present  case,  it  is  proposed  that  the 
ships  offered  for  this  service  shall  be  commanded  by  officers  in 
the  navy  regularly  appointed  in  each  class  by  commissions 
from  the  Admiralty.  It  must,  however,  be  a  satisfaction  to 
see  that  an  individual  merchant  shall  have  sufficient  zeal,  en- 
terprise, and  resources,  to  furnish  ships  for  such  an  expedition, 
and  it  will  establish  the  possibility  of  recourse  for  an  auxiliary 
marine  on  future  occasions,  probably  of  more  necessity  than 
the  present  instance. 

I  trust  it  will  appear  evident  of  how  much  importance  to  the 
success  of  this  vast  undertaking  is  even  one  day ;  for,  if  the 
enemy,  either  from  France  or  Spain,  is  able  to  land  a  Euro- 
pean force  on  the  coast,  and  by  any  immediate  sacrifices  or  con- 
cessions to  the  natives  obtain  their  favour,  the  enterprise  from 


1806]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  293 

this  country  may  have  the  greatest  difficulties  to  encounter ; 
but,  taking  it  well  concerted,  promptly  executed,  and  politically 
managed,  I  know  of  no  project  which  presents,  in  all  its  dif- 
ferent forms,  such  prospects  as  the  one  in  question. 

Take  a  review  of  the  various  channels  of  commerce  which  it 
opens  to  Great  Britain — properly  appreciate  the  ruin  which  it 
promises  to  entail  on  a  great  European  maritime  power — calcu- 
late on  the  universal  popularity  such  an  expedition  is  likely  to 
be  attended  with — and  then  see  what  is  required  to  carry  it 
into  execution. 

A  merchant,  seeing  the  probability  of  success  (and  which  is 
a  good  criterion  to  form  a  judgment  of  the  impression  it  will 
have),  offers  to  furnish  all  the  ships  to  Government  without 
any  expense,  only  requiring  a  security  against  capture  by  the 
enemy,  or  failure  by  their  superior  means.  The  General  asks 
for  1,500  men,  which,  I  contend,  is  only  a  loan  of  men  from 
the  present  establishment  for  a  few  months ;  for,  the  moment 
the  expedition  sails  and  that  it  can  be  made  public,  issue  letters 
of  service  for  a  Mexican  legion,  and  you  will  have  2,000  re- 
cruits in  a  few  weeks. 

If  there  still  exists  a  doubt  of  a  war  with  Spain,  and  which 
is  not  likely  to  be  solved  for  some  time,  can  any  eventual  ser- 
vice which  would  be  likely  to  employ  the  ships  in  question 
authorize  an  order  to  Mr.  Davison  for  their  being  prepared, 
that  the  service  may  be  so  much  advanced  when  it  is  ripe  for 
execution  ? 


On  the  Attack  of  Mexico  from  the  Eastern  Side. 

BY  WILLIAM  JACOB. 

July  11,  1806. 
In  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  the  regular  sea-breezes,  or  trade- 
winds,  prevail  from  March  to  September,  varying  their  direc- 
tisn  from  north-east  to  south-east :  the  north  winds  generally 
blow  from  September  to  March.  In  the  latter  end  of  October, 
the  whole  of  November  and  December,  and  the  beginning  of 