

The  populace,  once  armed,  were  told  that  they  had  a  right 
to  oppose  the  tyrannical  Government  which  they  had  endured 
under  former  Viceroys,  and  which  was  worse  under  the  pre- 
sent. By  this  the  mob  was  urged  into  a  complete  state  of 
revolution ;  and,  if  the  King  had  re-established  the  Viceroy, 
God  was  pleased  that  the  King  approved  the  resolution  of  the 
Audiencia,  and  this  resolution  was  taken  under  the  critical 
circumstance  of  the  enemy  being  near  the  town. 

The  Viceroy  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  received  within 
the  walls  of  Monte  Video,  and  his  reception  ruined  that  place. 
The  English  took  the  defenceless  town  of  Maldonado.  Monte 
Video  demanded  from  Buenos  Ayres  troops  to  retake  it.  Here 
they  thought  that  this  application  was  a  treachery  instigated 
by  the  Viceroy,  who,  they  were  afraid,  (such  was  the  opinion 
of  the  public)  in  case  the  King  should  not  approve  of  the  reso- 
lution of  the  Audiencia,  might  have  orders  to  deliver  to  the 
English  the  two  towns  of  Buenos  Ayres  and  Monte  Video. 
The  troops  were  refused,  in  consequence  of  which,  the  Cabildo 
of  Monte  Video,  approved  by  the  Viceroy,  sent  to  Buenos 
Ayres  to  raise  recruits.  The  flag  was  hoisted  in  the  great 
square.  The  populace  was  against  this  step ;  and,  if  the  re- 
cruiting officers  had  not  hidden  themselves,  they  would  have 
been  assassinated.  This  is  one  of  the  causes  of  the  loss  of 
Monte  Video. 

Two  English  brigs  had  cut  off  the  navigation  of  the 
Uruguay.  The  officers  of  the  navy,  with  their  commander, 
Don  Juan  Gutierrez  de  la  Concha,  took  no  pains  upon  the 
subject.  The  Cabildo  of  this  town,  observing  their  indifference 
in  regard  to  those  small  armed  vessels,  and  their  activity  in 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  307 

taking  merchantmen  coming  from  London,  in  the  persuasion 
that  Buenos  Ay  res  was  yet  in  the  hands  of  their  nation,  wrote 
to  Don  Santiago  Liniers,  insistinoj  on  Mr.  Concha  and  his  officers 
coming  to  their  station  off  Monte  Video,  adding,  that  Buenos 
Ayres  had  seamen  of  sufficient  intellio;ence  to  fit  out  the  men-of- 
war  and  act  against  the  enemy,  the  Cabildo  engaging  to  pay 
the  King  for  them,  in  case  of  loss  in  any  w^ay  whatever. 
Liniers  answered,  declining  to  comply  with  this  order,  because 
the  blow  was  at  his  intimate  friend  Concha.  The  Cabildo  in- 
sisting, Liniers  answered  roughly,  saying  that  those  officers 
were  of  his  own  corps,  and  that  it  was  his  duty  to  support 
them ;  and  that,  if  the  Cabildo  insisted  on  its  resolution,  he 
would  march  with  them.  The  reply  to  this  was,  that  he  might 
march  if  he  pleased ;  and,  as  one  w^ord  brings  another,  the 
Cabildo  reproached  him  with  the  scantiness  of  his  military 
knowledge  and  many  other  defects.  This  discussion  became 
so  warm,  that,  at  last,  Liniers  took  the  prudent  step  of  speak- 
ing to  the  Bishop,  in  order  to  have  all  the  papers  destroyed ; 
and  this  prelate  succeeded  in  leaving  things  as  they  were  be- 
fore. Liniers  promised  that  the  officers  of  the  navy  should 
act ;  and  they  really  came  out  and  fought  with  the  brigs  ;  and, 
though  they  could  not  take  them,  they  frightened  them  at 
least,  and  one  sunk  soon  after  the  action.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, the  English  decided  to  attack  Monte  Video,  and 
landed  there.  The  Governor  gave  notice  of  it  to  Liniers  ;  but 
he  was  quite  insensible  to  every  thing ;  and  it  was  observed 
that,  in  the  most  critical  moments,  when  the  correspondence 
was  very  frequent,  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  going  in  the 
night  out  of  the  fort,  where  he  was  living  at  the  time ;  and  in 
one  instance  he  kept  the  Cabildo  and  the  Audiencia  waiting, 
because  he  was  not  to  be  found  to  open  the  despatches  of  that 
Governor,  and  that  he  was  in  a  kind  of  stupor.  Hence  the 
public  began  to  doubt,  and  to  be  diffident  of  the  advantages  of 
the  defence  formed  to  his  hands. 