


294  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

January,  the  north  wind  blows  with  great  violence,  so  as  to 
render  an  attempt  to  land  a  force  on  that  coast  extremely 
hazardous :  in  July,  August,  and  September,  the  time  of  the 
periodical  rains,  it  is  very  unhealthy  on  the  coast ;  and,  from 
these  considerations,  the  best  time  obviously  is  for  the  fleet  to 
rendezvous  at  Jamaica  the  beginning  of  January,  from  whence, 
in  less  than  a  month,  they  would  arrive  on  the  coast  of  Mexico, 
and  be  ready  to  commence  their  operations  in  the  month  of 
February,  the  most  favourable  period  of  the  whole  year,  for 
the  wind  is  then  usually  a  fresh  breeze  in  the  morning,  between 
north-east  and  south-east ;  and  in  the  evening,  the  land  wind 
from  the  west  prevails,  at  which  time  there  is  little  or  no  surf 
on  the  beach,  and  troops  may  be  landed  with  ease  and  safety 
on  any  part  that  may  be  deemed  most  favourable. 

To  determine  the  number  of  troops  which  the  conquest  of 
Mexico  would  require,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  a  view  of  the 
force  there,  which  can  oppose  an  invading  army  ;  and,  first,  the 
only  fortified  place  is  Vera  Cruz,  with  the  fort  of  St.  Juan  de 
Ulloa  opposite  to  it.  This  city  is  not  calculated  to  stand  a 
regular  siege :  the  walls  are  not  surrounded  by  a  ditch ;  there 
are  no  casemates  for  the  troops,  no  bomb-proof  magazine,  and, 
on  the  west  and  north  sides,  the  houses  of  the  suburbs  are  close 
to  the  glacis;  besides  which,  as  the  merchants  have  their 
depots  here,  a  few  shells  would  ensure  the  surrender. 

The  castle  of  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa,  opposite  the  town,  has 
seventy  cannon  mounted  on  the  walls,  some  18,  and  others 
24-pounders,  but  the  carriages  are  in  bad  condition  -,  a  dry 
ditch  surrounds  the  outwork,  and  on  the  north-east  side  the 
glacis  is  stockaded,  but  neither  the  magazine  nor  casemates 
are  bomb-proof.  There  is  no  other  fortified  place  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Mexico,  except  Perote,  which  is  distant  120  miles,  and 
to  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  attend  more  minutely  in  the 
review  of  the  road  to  the  capital. 

In  considering  the  military  bodies  in  the  kingdom  of  Mexico, 
1  think  it  needless  to  take  further  notice  of  the  Militia  than  to 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  295 

state  that,  though  the  number  on  paper  is  upwards  of  50,000, 
yet  they  cannot  be  assembled  for  want  of  arms,  as  there  were 
not  twenty  thousand  muskets  in  all  the  arsenals  when  the  pre- 
sent war  began  ;  and,  further,  such  was  the  discontent  among 
the  inhabitants  when  they  were  last  attempted  to  be  assembled, 
that  it  is  fair  to  presume  they  would  be  more  dangerous  to 
the  Government  than  to  the  invaders,  were  the  same  attempt 
to  be  made  again.  The  Spanish  printed  account  in  the  Guido 
de  los  Foresteros  makes  the  establishment  of  the  regular  army 
for  Mexico  amount  to  5,417  infantry,  1,160  cavalry,  and  368 
artillery,  but  this  includes  the  garrison  of  the  Havana,  which 
takes  at  least  one-third  of  the  infantry,  and  one-fifth  of  the 
cavalry.  This  account,  besides,  professes  to  give  not  the 
actual  number  of  effective  men,  but  the  establishment  when 
complete,  which  is  never  the  case  with  the  Spanish  Colonial 
regiments. 