

If  the  marines  and  seamen  of  the  squadron  were  landed 
near  Vera  Cruz,  and  were  enabled  completely  to  blockade  it, 
the  army  might  very  advantageously  be  landed  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  river  Antigua,  six  leagues  from  Vera  Cruz,  and 
march  immediately  for  Rincanada,  by  which  two  days"*  march- 
ing would  be  spared  them,  and  the  risk  and  danger  of  crossing 
a  deep  river,  150  yards  wide,  will  be  avoided,  as  well  as  the 
hindrance  which  may  occur  should  the  enemy  remove  all  the 
craft  to  the  north  side  of  the  river ;  and.,  even  were  that  not 
the  case,  if  all  the  craft  were  employed,  it  would  be  a  tedious 
operation  to  convey  a  numerous  army  with  so  few  boats  as  are 
to  be  found  there. 

At  Rio  de  Antigua  is  plenty  of  provisions,  both  fish  and 
beef,  with  vegetables,  such  as  are  usually  found  in  the  tropical 
climates.  The  water  is  abundant  and  good.  The  road  to 
Rincanada,  three  leagues  distant,  is  very  rocky :  it  winds 
round  the  hills  with  a  gentle  ascent,  is  from  12  to  15  yards 
wide.  To  Casa  di  Posta,  the  road  is  very  stony,  and  a 
continual  gradual  ascent ;  to  Plazier,  is  a  constant  ascent,  and 
through  a  country  yielding  only  very  good  water.  It  continues 
the  same  to  within  one  mile  of  Bonavista,  when,  having  reached 
a  high,  level  country,  every  production  is  most  abundant. 

Through  this  well  cultivated  country,  the  road  gradually 
mounts  to  Xalapa,  one  of  the  most  beautiful,  healthy,   and 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  299 

plentiful  spots  in  the  New  World.  This  city  contains  40,000 
inhabitants,  who  are  well  provided  with  all  the  necessaries  of 
life  from  the  surrounding  country.  It  is  the  place  where  the 
merchants  of  Vera  Cruz  have  the  residences  of  their  families, 
and  it  contains  a  considerable  number  of  people  of  the  first 
rank.  It  is  two  days^  journey  from  Vera  Cruz  for  those  who 
travel  in  litters,  and  would  be  an  excellent  place  to  refresh  an 
army  after  the  fatigue  of  ascending  the  mountains.  It  has  no 
fortifications,  and  consequently  could  make  no  resistance. 

From  Xalapa  to  Soldado  and  Jolla,  though  not  the  steepest, 
is  the  worst  part  of  ihe  road,  being  full  of  enormous  rocks, 
which  no  carriage  can  pass.  The  country,  however,  is  very 
fruitful,  and  the  climate  very  healthy ;  and  thus  continues  to 
Las  Vigas,  where  all  the  difficulty  of  the  march  terminates ; 
for  from  tliis  place  to  the  capital  the  road  is  excellent,  which 
carriages  of  all  kinds  travel  with  great  rapidity,  and  the  road 
for  two  hundred  miles  is  a  gradual  ascent. 

Las  Vigas  is  a  large  village,  containing  about  4,000  inha- 
bitants, and  the  whole  country  from  thence  to  Perote  is  well 
peopled  and  well  cultivated.  There  is  usually  a  battalion  of 
the  Veteran  Infantry  doing  duty  in  the  three  towns  of  Xalapa, 
Las  Vigas,  and  Perote.  The  castle  of  Perote  is  a  quadran- 
gular fort,  has  a  narrow,  double,  dry  ditch,  a  glacis,  stockaded, 
but  no  bomb-proof  casemates  or  outworks.  It  has  24  cannon, 
18-pounders,  but  the  carriages  are  very  old.  One  company  of 
artillery  is  stationed  here.  In  this  fortress  the  royal  treasure 
is  deposited,  until  vessels  arrive  at  Vera  Cruz  to  convey  it  to 
Old  Spain ;  and  sometimes,  during  a  war^  twenty  millions  of 
coined  dollars  have  been  kept  within  its  walls.  At  present, 
there  must  be  nearly  that  amount,  which  peace  would  convey 
to  the  treasury  of  France. 