

3 

.       2 

.       2 

Ventorrillo 

.         . 

4 

Town  of  St.  Martin 

•         •         • 

.       4 

Venta  del  grand  Puente  nuebo 

,      4 

Casas  Viejas    . 
Venta  del  Rio  Frio 

. 

.       2 
.       3 

Casas  de  las  Barrancas  de  Juanes 
Venta  de  Cordova    .... 
Chalco 

.       3 

.       2 
.       2 

Pueblo  de  Yndios    . 

. 

.       2 

Venta  de  Penon 

... 

.       2 

City  of  Mexico 

. 

.       2 

97 


A  new  road  was  begun  about  nine  years  ago  from  Mexico 


302  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

to  Vera  Cruz.  It  is  finished,  according  to  the  above  route,  as 
far  as  the  town  of  Amozoque,  and  thereby  taking  a  different 
direction  from  the  present  road,  will  render  the  whole  passable 
for  wheel  carriages ;  but  the  present  war  has  suspended  the 
work. 

Private  Annotations^  addressed  to  his  Excellency  the  Minister  of 

War,  on  the  first  Arrival  of  the  English,  under  Major-General 

Beresford,  at  Buenos  Ayres. 

Buenos  Ayres,  August  1,  1806. 

His  Excellency,  M.  Abascal,  being  appointed  Viceroy  of 
Lima,  was  obliged  to  take  his  passage  through  Portugal,  and, 
having  arrived  at  Rio  Janeiro,  gave  notice  from  thence  to  the 
Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  Viceroy  of  the  province  of  the  River 
Plata,  that  there  was  at  that  time  an  English  convoy,  whose 
destination  was  unknown,  taking  in  fresh  provisions  in  the  Bay 
of  All  Saints.  This  news  obliged  the  Viceroy  to  go  to  Monte 
Video,  taking  with  him  all  the  regular  troops  composing  the 
garrison  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  leaving  only  one  company  of 
grenadiers  and  the  invalids. 

A  few  days  afterwards,  advice  was  received  from  Rio 
Janeiro,  purporting  that  the  English  expedition  had  gone  to 
take  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Upon  this  notice,  the  Viceroy 
returned  to  this  capital,  leaving  all  his  forces  at  Monte  Video. 
The  Viceroy  never  thought  that  the  town  could  be  attacked, 
and  always  neglected  it.  Not  many  days  afterwards,  it  was 
known,  through  the  same  channel,  that  the  English  were 
masters  of  the  Cape. 

Acquainted  with  this  success,  four  greedy  merchants  and 
not  a  few  of  the  citizens,  disgusted  with  the  Government  of  the 
Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  wrote  to  the  English  General,  inform- 
ing him  of  the  defenceless  state  in  which  the  Viceroy  had  left 
the  town,  and  invited  him  to  come,  on  the  assurance  that  he 
would  be  very  well  received.  The  Generals  Sir  Home  Pop- 
ham  and  William  Carr  Beresford  did  not  hesitate  in  coming. 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  303 

They  knew  from  the  English  merchants,  who  have  been  here 
under  the  name  of  Americans,  that  they  had  many  friends  here, 
and  consequently  made  their  appearance  with  their  small  army 
in  the  Bay  of  Barragan.  There  they  received  accurate  informa- 
tion of  the  state  of  this  town,  and,  various  points  where  they 
might  land  being  indicated  to  them,  they  chose  that  of  Quisme. 