


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  297 

with  more  than  usual  rigour,  and  a  small  squadron  should  be 
cruising  between  Cape  Catoche  and  Cape  Antonio,  by  which 
means  all  communication  of  our  designs,  as  well  as  all  succour, 
would  be  precluded. 

It  would  be  desirable  that  our  own  people  at  Jamaica  should 
be  misled  with  respect  to  the  point  of  attack ;  and  it  would  be 
easy  to  make  an  opinion  prevail  that  the  force  was  destined  to 
occupy  Carthagena,  or  to  force  a  passage  across  the  Isthmus  of 
Panama ;  and,  by  engaging  a  few  pilots  for  the  first,  or  guides 
for  the  second  place,  we  should  favour  the  deception,  and 
greatly  facilitate  the  real  design. 

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  take  a  large  supply  of  provisions, 
because,  as  soon  as  the  army  has  reached  Xalapa,  it  will  be  in 
a  very  abundant  country,  well  stocked  with  cattle,  and  well 
supplied  with  vegetables.  Wheaten  flour  is,  however,  by  no 
means  plentiful ;  and  a  supply  for  a  month  (after  the  landing) 
of  that  article  should  be  sent  with  the  expedition.  If  any  cir- 
cumstance should  occur  to  prolong  the  stay  of  the  army  near 
Vera  Cruz,  or  to  prevent  its  reaching  the  fertile  country,  a 
good  supply  of  cattle  might  be  obtained,  by  means  of  the  ship- 
ping, from  the  vicinity  of  Campeche,  or  the  banks  of  the  river 
Grijalva. 

As  there  is  no  fortress  but  that  of  St.  Juan  de  Ulloa  which 
would  require  to  be  attacked  with  heavy  artillery,  and  as  the 
ships'  guns  could  be  used  there,  no  other  artillery  but  field- 
pieces  would  be  necessary. 

The  common  mode  of  travelling  from  Mexico  to  Vera  Cruz 
is  on  horseback,  or  in  litters  resembling  sedan-chairs,  which 
are  carried  by  two  mules,  one  before  and  the  other  behind,  and 
the  long  poles  which  support  the  chairs  are  fastened  to  their 
sides.  By  the  same  mode,  merchandize  of  all  kinds  is  carried 
over  the  mountains,  and  the  same  method  must  be  adopted  in 
transporting  artillery. 

If  it  should  be  deemed  necessary  to  take  Vera  Cruz  and 
St.  Juan  d'UUoa  before  proceeding  to  the  capital,  the  army 


298  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

should  be  landed  in  the  Bay  of  Pampanos,  one  mile  to  the 
southward  of  the  town,  where  the  beach  is  hard,  and  the  water 
so  deep,  that  the  frigates  might  approach  near  enough  to  the 
shore  to  cover  the  landing.  The  force  in  Vera  Cruz  and 
St.  Juan  de  Ulloa  is  usually  two  battalions  of  Veterans,  each 
containing  eight  companies  of  fusileers  and  one  of  grenadiers : 
each  company  consists  of  65  men,  when  complete  ;  4  companies 
of  Militia,  of  65  men  each;  2  companies  of  Artillery,  of  100 
men  each.  The  whole  are  commanded  by  Don  Joseph  Davila, 
who  is  Governor  of  Vera  Cruz,  who  has  seen  little  or  no  mili- 
tary service,  and  is  deemed  a  man  of  no  talents. 