

The  citizens  of  Buenos  Ayres  received  every  day  precise  in- 
telligence of  his  marches :  they  called  for   Liniers  with  the 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  305 

greatest  earnestness ;  but  he,  doubtful  of  the  success  of  the 
proceeding,  wrote  to  the  Cabildo  that  the  expedition  would 
miscarry,  and  that  he  thought  it  better  to  re-embark.  This 
letter  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Cabildo.  That  body  replied 
that  he  might  return  if  he  pleased,  but  that  he  ought  to  under- 
stand that  the  re-conquest  was  unavoidable,  and  that,  if  he  was 
deficient  in  troops,  he  could  have  them  by  thousands  as  soon 
as  he  should  take  possession  of  the  suburbs  of  the  town.  At 
length,  Liniers  advanced  and  took  possession  of  the  Mataderos 
de  Miserere,  and  a  party  of  Catalanes  that  he  brought,  under 
the  name  of  Mignones,  without  orders,  and  merely  of  their 
own  motion,  attacked  the  Retiro,  garrisoned  by  60  English, 
and  defeated  and  killed  them  all.  This  success  gave  great 
courage  to  every  man,  and  the  mob  began  to  show  itself  in 
arms.  Liniers  came  to  Retiro.  Beresford  was  beaten,  and 
obliged  to  surrender  at  discretion.  After  this,  by  dark  means 
a  capitulation  was  made,  written  with  gold,  which  seduced 
Liniers  by  the  brightness  of  the  precious  metal,  (so  it  is  said) 
and  with  the  pretext  of  being  for  no  other  object  but  that  of 
exculpating  himself  with  his  nation.  When  Beresford  made 
use  of  this  capitulation,  Liniers  perceived  his  incautious  facility, 
and,  being  censured  by  the  Cabildo,  endeavoured  to  clear  him- 
self by  means  of  a  public  paper. 

When  Beresford  knew  that  it  was  difficult  to  defend  the 
town,  he  offered  independence ;  but,  having  been  answered  that 
it  was  too  late,  he  resolved  to  sack  the  town  and  to  embark  ;  but 
he  had  no  time,  and  only  plundered  the  house  of  the  Colonel 
of  Militia,  Asenenaga,  in  the  great  square  near  the  fort. 

The  higher  class  of  citizens  incited  the  lower  to  oppose  the 
entry  of  the  Viceroy  into  Buenos  Ayres ;  and,  to  succeed  the 
better,  they  persuaded  them  to  raise  Liniers  to  the  military 
command.  This  was  done,  and  it  was  declared  at  a  meeting 
of  the  Audiencia  on  the  14th  of  August,  1806,  two  days  after 
conquest.  By  this  all  the  blades  of  the  guillotine  were  blunted, 
and  all  the  ropes  of  the  gallows  broken. 

VOL.  VII.  X 


306  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

The  same  higher  class  of  the  citizens,  afraid  of  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  Viceroy  by  the  Court  of  Madrid,  roused 
Liniers,  and,  with  a  view  to  defending  the  town,  showed  him 
the  way  of  raising  troops.  It  would  be  foreign  to  these  re- 
marks to  detail  the  operations :  suffice  it  to  say  that  it  began 
about  the  middle  of  September. 