

When  the  Governor  was  reduced  to   extremity,  the  enemy 

x2 


308  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

having  opened  the  trenches,  he  demanded  some  assistance. 
This  orave  rise  to  some  meetings.  At  length,  it  was  decided 
that  Liniers  should  go,  with  2,000  men,  of  the  new  militia,  and 
all  the  regulars,  who  were  no  more  than  700,  to  the  succour 
of  the  place.  Four  days  after  this  arrangement,  Don  Pedro 
Arce  sailed  with  the  regulars,  and  landed  on  the  north  side  : 
he  marched  to  Monte  Video,  and  arrived  there  the  day  before 
the  English  took  it  by  storm.  Liniers  agreed  to  go,  on  con- 
dition that  his  command  should  be  independent  of  the  Viceroy''s. 
The  Audiencia  declined  ;  but  at  last  they  gave  him  a  despatch, 
closed  and  sealed,  to  his  Excellency,  telling  Liniers  that  there 
was  the  royal  resolution  of  his  independent  command,  with 
which  he  embarked  three  days  after  the  sailing  of  Arce.  No 
sooner  had  he  landed  than  he  sent  the  despatch  to  the  Viceroy, 
and  his  Excellency,  copying  a  supplicatory  letter  from  the 
Audiencia,  answered  that  he  would  not  consent  to  his  being 
independent.  He  received  this  answer  at  his  first  station,  after 
a  march  of  eight  leagues,  and  from  thence  he  was  about  to 
return  to  Buenos  Ayres,  leaving  behind  him  the  2,000  men, 
with  the  intention  of  remonstrating  with  the  Audiencia  upon 
the  deception  ;  but,  before  he  embarked,  he  received  a  letter 
from  the  Viceroy,  informing  him  that  the  enemy  was  in  pos- 
session of  Monte  Video.  This  ambitious  and  haughty  act  is 
one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  loss  of  that  town.  Many 
others  will  be  found  when  this  loss  shall  become  the  subject 
of  a  trial  by  a  court-martial. 

These  proceedings  of  Liniers  induced  the  Audiencia  and  the 
Cabildo  to  send  secretly  for  Don  Bernardo  Velasco,  Governor 
and  Intendant  of  Paraguay,  in  order  to  invest  him  with  the 
command  of  the  town  and  to  get  rid  of  Liniers  :  but  shortly 
before  his  arrival.  Colonel  Don  Xavier  Elio  presented  himself 
in  Buenos  Ayres.  This  gentleman  was  commander  of  the 
fields  [?]  at  Monte  Video,  and  enjoyed  some  military  reputation. 
The  Audiencia  and  Cabildo  decided  to  place  him  by  the  side  of 
Liniers,  and  avoid  the  scandal  of  his  separation.    Accordingly, 


1806.]  LOUD  CASTLEREAGH.  309 

he  was  made  Major- General ;  but,  on  the  arrival  of  Velasco, 
he  was  sent  to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  as  commander  of  a 
corps  of  observation ;  and,  being  defeated  by  the  EngUsh  near 
Colonia  del  Sacramento,  that  corps  was  given  up,  and  Elio  re- 
turned to  Buenos  Ayres.  As  for  Velasco,  he  had  the  sub- 
inspection  and  was  made  Major-General,  so  that  every  one  had 
employment. 