

The  incautious  Viceroy  was  persuaded  that  this  squadron 
consisted  of  nothing  but  merchant-ships,  which  had  come  for 
the  smuofirlino:  trade.  Mr.  Santia2:o  Liniers,  who  commanded 
at  that  time  the  port  of  La  Cressenada,  made  the  Viceroy  still 
more  easy  by  writing  to  him  that  this  little  squadron  was  a 
trifling  affair,  unworthy  of  any  concern.  The  Viceroy  was 
perfectly  quiet,  till  the  English  began  to  land  on  the  23rd  of 
June  o/the  last  year,  1806 ;  and  they  soon  took  possession  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  with  no  more  troops  than  2,000  men,  on  the 
27th  of  the  same  month,  without  loss,  and  without  the  least 
resistance.  General  Beresford,  when  in  full  possession  of  the 
place,  said,  "  I  never  thought  it  to  be  true  that  there  were  not 
more  regular  troops  in  the  town  than  one  company  of  gre- 
nadiers ;  but  I.  see  that  I  was  not  deceived." 

The  English  had  been  invited  under  the  persuasion  that 
they  would  declare  the  independence  of  Buenos  Ayres ;  but 
those  who  had  so  calculated  were  mistaken.  Beresford  called 
himself  conqueror,  saying  that  the  fort  and  the  city  were  sur- 
rendered by  capitulation.  He  was  several  times  urged  with 
energy  on  the  subject  of  the  independence,  but  obstinately  re- 
fused it,  and  by  a  proclamation  declared  the  King  of  Great 
Britain  the  sovereign  of  Buenos  Ayres.  After  this  proclama- 
tion, the  very  same  persons  who  called  him  hither  took  the 
resolution  to  drive  him  out  ignominiously  with  their  house- 
brooms,  and  from  that  time  they  began  to  think  of  re-conquest. 
For  this  purpose,  the  Cabildo  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  Monte 
Video  to  send  a  corps  of  six  or  eight  hundred  men  to  protect  it 
against  the  resentment  of  the  English  General,  if  its  proceed- 
inijs  should   come  to  his   knowledge.     The  Governor  would 


304  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

ha^ve  come  himself,  but  was  prevented  by  the  Cabildo  of  Monte 
Video ;  in  consequence  of  which  circumstance,  and  various 
recommendations,  he  appointed  Don  Santiago  Liniers  com- 
mander of  the  expedition,  composed  of  about  1,000  men,  with 
whom  he  began  his  march. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  Viceroy.  His  Excellency  left  the 
town,  and  went  to  Castros  Hill,  about  three  leagues  distant, 
followed  by  Don  Pedro  de  Arce,  Sub-Inspector-General,  Don 
Manuel  de  Gutierrez,  and  many  others.  The  Viceroy  went  to 
the  town  of  Cordova,  160  leagues  from  this,  and  ordered  that 
place  to  be  reckoned  the  capital  of  the  Viceroyalty ;  adding, 
that  it  was  his  intention  to  send  for  troops,  in  order  to  the  re- 
conquest  of  Buenos  Ayres. 

The  Viceroy,  when  in  Cordova,  had  the  imprudence  ^to  open 
the  public  correspondence  between  Peru  and  Lima,  to  learn 
what  was  the  opinion  of  his  person  in  Buenos  Ayres.  There 
was  not  a  letter  in  which  he  was  not  considered  as  a  traitor,  a 
coward,  and  a  man  ignorant  of  all  military  principles.  He  was 
extremely  irritated  at  this  discovery,  and  his  lady  threatened 
with  gallows  and  guillotine  the  citizens  of  Buenos  Ayres, 
(naming  many)  which  menaces  were  to  be  put  in  execution  as 
soon  as  the  Viceroy  should  be  re-established  in  his  authority, 
either  by  re-conquering  the  town,  or  by  exchanging  it  at  the 
general  peace.  All  those  threats  and  impertinent  speeches 
came  daily  from  Cordova  to  this  town,  (the  correspondence 
was  very  expensive)  where  it  was  decided  not  to  receive  him 
in  his  former  command,  at  any  rate ;  and,  knowing  that  he 
was  coming  with  5,000  inexperienced  and  raw  troops,  the  citi- 
zens forwarded  the  re-conquest  of  the  town,  and  called  eagerly 
for  Liniers,  who  soon  passed  the  port  of  Los  Conchas,  where 
he  received  an  order  from  the  Viceroy  to  stop  from  the  re- 
conquest  without  his  presence,  for  which  purpose  he  was  on 
inarch  already.    But  Liniers  did  not  obey  this  order. 