

In  pursuing  two  objects  of  such  legitimate  advantage,  we  are 
only  bound  to  restrain  our  efforts  so  far  as  not  unnecessarily  to 
incur  the  responsibility  of  having  involved  that  country  in 
anarchy  and  confusion.  The  danger  of  such  a  result  must  be 
in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  the  change  which  will  be  requisite 
to  produce  the  object  aimed  at;  namely,  the  separation  of  that 
Continent  from  its  indirect  subjugation  to  France,  and  the 
establishment  within  it  of  a  local  government,  by  which  the 
interests  of  the  inhabitants  may  be  better  consulted  than  they 
now  are.  If  it  were  possible,  without  dissolving  the  frame  of 
the  Government,  without  destroying  the  monarchy  which  now 
exists,  to  commit  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Sovereign  to 
other  hands,  and  that  the  Prince  on  the  throne  should  live 
amongst  his  subjects,  and  have  no  longer  any  motive  to  sacri- 
fice their  interests  to  the  supposed  advantages  of  any  other 
portion  of  his  empire,  so  far  as  we  can  hope  to  effect  any  change 

VOL.  VII.  Y 


322  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

of  Government,  without  destroying  the  elements  of  autlioritj, 
such  a  transfer  of  power  does  not  appear  impracticable  or  objec- 
tionable, and  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  a  variety  of  indul- 
gences which  might  be  connected  with  such  a  change,  and 
which  would  interest  the  people  in  its  support. 

The  means  of  creating  and  supporting  a  military  force  would 
enable  the  Government,  without  taxation,  to  strengthen  itself, 
and  speedily  to  dispense  with  the  presence  of  a  British  army. 

If  the  change  could  be  brought  about  on  these  principles,  it 
ought  to  be  our  policy  to  support  the  pretensions  of  some 
member  of  the  Bourbon  family,  as  naturally  connected  with 
that  Monarchy,  rather  than  any  Prince  more  immediately 
connected  with  our  own  Crown. 

The  similarity  of  religion  would  render  him  more  acceptable 
to  those  of  Spanish  extraction.  Not  being  too  near  in  the 
succession  to  the  Crown  of  France,  if  established  in  Spanish 
America,  there  would  be  little  jealousy  of  the  regal  power  being 
again  merged  in  that  of  a  distant  State.  The  native  Americans 
might  perhaps  incline  rather  to  a  frame  of  government  more 
resembling  that  of  North  America,  in  which  their  numbers 
might  have  more  influence ;  but  between  such  a  system  and 
the  present  Spanish  authority  they  could  not  hesitate. 

The  practicability  of  such  an  attempt  must  be  extremely 
dubious  ;  but,  in  searching  for  some  middle  measure,  as  a  com- 
promise between  the  extreme  principles  which  have  been  above 
stated,  it  has  occurred  as  worth  considering,  whether  some 
attempt  should  not  be  made  to  sound  the  dispositions  of  the  in- 
habitants, to  state  to  them  the  principles  upon  which  we  should 
be  alone  disposed  to  co-operate  with  them  in  rendering  them 
independent,  and  to  try  whether  a  concurrence  might  not  be 
obtained,  with  a  view  to  such  a  rational  system  of  government  as 
we  might,  without  disgrace,  profess  our  determination  to  protect. 