

Early  in  November,  Brigadier-General  Craufurd  proceeded, 
with  about  4,000  men,  to  establish  a  similar  military  occu- 
pancy on  the  western  coast  of  South  America,  in  the  province 
of  Chili ;  but  without  any  precise  object  of  attack  in  view. 

It  also  appears  that  subsequently  some  progress  had  been 
made  in  arranging,  though  not  in  executing,  an  operation 
against  Mexico,  in  which  a  force  of  about  8,000  men  (assembling 
at  Jamaica),  under  the  command  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  was 
to  be  landed  in  the  vicinity  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  to  proceed,  in 
co-operation  with  a  corps  of  about  8,000,  then  to  debark  from 
India  on  the  opposite  coast,  to  establish  a  military  occupancy, 
upon  similar  principles,  in  that  rich  and  populous  kingdom. 

It  appears  that,  when  the  British  troops  first  landed  at 
Buenos  Ayres,  they  only  met  with  a  nominal  resistance :  they 
were  feebly  opposed  for  two  days  by  the  militia  of  the  country ; 
but,  so  soon  as  possession  was  taken  of  the  town,  the  inhabitants 
submitted  with  apparent  cheerfulness.  The  Governor  having 
fled,  the  Cabildo,  composed  of  the  leading  natives,  being  the 
chief  local  authority,  concerted  measures  for  preserving  order, 
&c.,  with  great  apparent  cordiality,  with  the  British  Com- 
manders, and  even  took  steps  in  concert  with  the  latter  for 
recovering  by  force  a  considerable  treasure  which  the  Spanish 
Governor  had  carried  off  with  him. 

It  is  stated  by  Sir  Home  Popham  and  other  officers,  that 
the  people  became  early  inquisitive  whether  the  English  troops 


1807.]  I^ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  317 

came  there  to  aid  them  in  throwing  off  the  Spanish  yoke.  The 
smallness  of  our  force  persuaded  them  at  first  that  our  only 
purpose  in  coming  there  must  be  to  support  the  views  of  the 
inhabitants,  and  not  to  attempt  any  conquest  on  our  own  part, 
with  means  apparently  so  inadequate.  This  point  was  pressed 
to  a  distinct  explanation  ;  but  neither  General  Beresford  nor  Sir 
Home  Popham  felt  themselves  authorized  to  hold  any  other 
language  than  that  of  taking  possession  in  the  King^^s  name, 
till  his  further  pleasure  should  be  known. 

The  principal  officers  of  the  Spanish  Government,  who  had 
retired  on  the  approach  of  the  British  force,  having  assembled 
troops  from  Monte  Video  and  also  a  proportion  of  the  militia 
of  the  country,  found  the  population  of  Buenos  Ayres,  thus 
disappointed  in  their  expectations,  ready  to  co-operate  in  our 
expulsion ;  and  the  corps  under  General  Beresford  was,  in  the 
course  of  a  month,  after  they  had  thought  themselves  securely 
established,  compelled  to  surrender. 

A  reinforcement  of  about  1,900  men,  very  ill  provided, 
soon  arrived  from  the  Cape,  but  not  in  time  to  support  General 
Beresford  :  they  were  too  weak  to  undertake  any  effectual  ope- 
rations to  recover  Buenos  Ayres,  or  take  Monte  Video,  and 
were  obliged  to  establish  themselves  at  Maldonado,  a  very 
defective  port,  there  to  await  reinforcements  from  England. 
In  this  position  they  continued  from  the  month  of  October  till 
January ;  during  which  period  the  Spanish  Government, 
having  this  unequivocal  proof  of  our  determination  to  renew 
the  attack,  was  enabled  to  arrange  their  measures  of  defence. 