

An  artillery  officer  of  militia  was  made  flag  officer  in  the 
fort  (I  know  not  his  name).  Agustini  ordered  him,  on  the 
day  of  the  attack,  to  be  ready  to  strike  the  colours  when  he 
ordered  it.  The  officer  answered,  that  the  orders  he  had  re- 
ceived from  the  commander  of  the  fort  were  not  to  strike  unless 
the  action  was  lost.  Agustini  said,  that  on  the  bulwark  no- 
body had  to  command  but  himself.  The  officer  replied  that 
there  was  yet  time  to  discuss  this  matter  with  the  commander. 
I  do  not  say  that  there  was  any  malice  in  Agustini :  it  might 
be  the  effect  of  ignorance,  but  it  would  be  very  remarkable  in 
an  experienced  officer. 

Excepting  a  few  persons,  all  detest  the  English  Govern- 
ment, and  are  decided  to  perish  fighting  against  it.     But  all, 


314  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

all  are  inclined  to  independence,  and  the  reason  they  give  for 
it  is  the  despotism  under  which  they  have  suffered.  They 
complain  that  the  Court  of  Madrid  rewards  and  punishes 
according  to  the  information  of  the  Viceroys,  obtained  by 
intrigues,  and  despises  the  complaints  of  the  injured  and  the 
merits  of  the  subjects ;  and  that  this  evil  cannot  be  cured  but 
by  independence,  as  the  only  recourse  against  the  will  of  the 
man  who  holds  the  supreme  authority  at  so  great  a  distance  : 
and  since  the  20th  of  last  July  they  speak  with  freedom,  in 
consequence  of  the  statement  of  Liniers,  in  which  he  speaks  of 
the  Viceroy.  This  statement  is  in  the  hands  of  everybody, 
and  they  say  that  it  is  full  of  misrepresentations,  and  the 
public  openly  assert  that  there  are  many  lies  in  it  j  and  it  is 
supposed  that  the  relation  sent  to  Spain  is  of  the  same 
tenour.  The  public  had  already  shown  its  opinion  by  pas- 
quinades on  Liniers'  having  selected  as  deputies  to  the  Court 
of  Spain  M.M.  Perison  and  Altolaguirre,  the  former  of 
whom  is  brother  of  a  woman  to  whom  he  is  paying  his  ad- 
dresses, and  the  latter  uncle  of  his  deceased  wife.  They  speak 
freely  of  the  recommendations  which  they  suppose  to  have 
been  obtained  by  means  of  such  a  woman. 

A  Lieutenant-General  as  a  Viceroy  is  the  only  one  who 
can  set  to  rights  this  great  disorder,  and  restrain  an  armed 
populace  with  a  prudent  energy.  With  great  grief  of  heart  I 
see  this  country  violently  disturbed,  and  I  think  it  is  necessary 
to  accelerate  the  arrival  of  a  Viceroy  by  the  way  of  Portugal. 


Memorandum  for  the  Cabinet^  relative  to  South  America. 
[by  lord  castlereagh.] 

Draft.  Downing  Street,  May  1,  1807. 

The  late  despatches  from  Monte  Video  having  rendered  it 
necessary  to  forward,  with  the  least  practicable  delay,  supplies 
of  provisions  and  military  stores  to  that  quarter.  Lord  Castle- 
reagh deems  it  of  importance,  before  any  instructions  are  trans- 
mitted to  the  officers  in  command  for  the  ftiture  direction  of 