

A  person  came  from  Rio  Grande  (a  Portuguese  settlement) 
with  despatches  for  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  from  one  of 
his  correspondents  in  Rio  Janeiro ;  and  one  of  the  idle  crea- 
tures of  Buenos  Ayres  spread  about  the  news  that  the  French 
and  Spanish  fleets  had  arrived  at  Santa  Cathalina,  with  11,000 
troops ;  and  that  the  General  of  this  army  sent  an  officer  with 
the  King's  orders  and  the  public  correspondence.  This  impo- 
sition went  to  the  north  side  of  the  river,  whence  it  returned 
in  a  very  circumstantial  letter  from  an  officer  of  easy  belief. 
This  was  enough  to  intimidate  the  conspirators.  One  of  them 
discovered  himself  and  discovered  others,  who  were  arrested 
immediately.  Under  these  circumstances,  Beresford,  Packe, 
Peiia,  and  Padilla,  arrived  in  town,  and,  as  the  plot  was  known, 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  311 

they  ran  away  to  Monte  Video.  Many  declarations  were  taken 
on  the  subject,  and  the  criminals  were  sent  to  Chili  on  the 
English  approaching  this  town.  The  truth  is,  that  many 
letters  from  people  of  this  town  have  been  intercepted,  which 
were  addressed  to  the  English,  and  which  will  be  preserved  by 
the  magistrates,  to  be  made  use  of  in  better  times. 

Had  I  delivered  these  remarks  verbally,  I  should  perhaps 
have  been  asked  from  what  cause  arises  this  ardent  desire  of  a 
change  of  Government.  In  order  that  the  Court  of  Spain  may 
take  the  best  means  for  curing  this  evil,  which  spreads  now  more 
than  ever  to  all  the  Colonies,  for  it  is  certain  that  the  people 
of  this  town  and  all  those  of  Peru  know  that  they  are  not  in 
want  of  any  thing  for  defending  the  town  and  all  its  depen- 
dencies from  the  English,  French,  or  Spaniards,  and  even  from 
legions  of  devils,  and  that  they  alone  know  how  to  defend 
themselves,  without  chiefs  or  military  officers  to  direct  them, 
as  they  have  just  done,  I  shall  say,  in  a  few  words,  it  arises 
from  the  despotic  Government  established  in  this  capital. 

It  is  publicly  stated,  and  had  been  experienced,  with  grief 
and  ruin  to  some  persons,  that  the  Assessor  Don  Juan  de 
Almagro,  and  the  Secretary  Don  Manuel  Gallegos,  both  mar- 
ried here,  have  formed  the  plan  of  gaining  the  Viceroy  (a  thing 
very  easy,  from  the  authority  of  their  employments),  and  act 
as  persons  not  responsible,  the  Viceroy  being  the  man  who 
puts  his  signature.  They  behave  themselves  as  if  they  were 
atheists.  Their  relations  and  those  in  their  interest  alone 
obtain  favourable  decisions  ;  and  they  make  game  of  the  com- 
plaints preferred  by  the  injured  to  the  court  of  Madrid,  and 
augment  their  persecutions.  When  this  is  the  case,  they  re- 
fiite  the  most  just  complaints  by  false  informations,  which, 
upon  the  word  of  a  Chief,  seduced  by  the  hypocrisy  of  these 
men,  produce  their  effect  against  the  innocent  or  against  the 
unjustly  persecuted.  This  is  the  public  opinion — I  never  ap- 
proach either  of  them — and  once  only  I  went  to  the  Secretary's 
office  for  a  passport  to  go  upon  some  commission  for  the  King''s 