

What  with  the  loss  of  the  Monte  Video  river,  the  disgrace 
of  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte,  and.  the  populace  who  were 
armed,  with  the  power  in  their  hands,  there  soon  arose  an 
outcry  for  his  deposition  :  the  mob  conceiving  that  the  oidores 
did  nothing  but  what  the  Viceroy  desired.  An  open  meeting 
of  the  Cabildo  was  summoned ;  but,  an  oidor  opposing  this 
proceeding,  the  mob  shouted,  "  Down  with  the  Audiencia ! 
death  to  the  oidores  !*"  insomuch  that  the  oidor  was  obliged  to 
make  his  escape  by  a  private  door.  It  was  impossible  to  avoid 
the  suspension  of  the  Viceroy,  the  Marquess  de  Sobremonte. 
The  oidor  Don  Manuel  de  Velasco  went  to  the  other  side  of 
the  river,  accompanied  by  a  sufficient  force,  to  intimate  the 
decree  to  the  Viceroy  ;  and,  having  brought  him  to  this 
side,  he  confined  him  in  a  country-house  near  the  town. 
Hence,  all  the  authorities  were  left  loose  and  without  suppoi-t, 
and  the  Viceroy  without  the  superiority  and  high  representa- 
tion of  his  dignity.     Bad  example  ! 

With  a  view  to  prevent  thenceforward  this  scandalous  dis- 
order, the  Audiencia  ordered  that  no  person  should  keep  arms 
in  his  house,  but  that  they  should  be  deposited  in  the  quar- 
ters. This  produced  another  popular  commotion  ;  it  was  ne- 
cessary to  repeat  the  order  ;  and  this  was  another  instance,  as 
bad  as  the  preceding. 

Don  Santiago  Liniers  has  the  misfortune  of  not  having 
learned  the  science  of  choosing  honest  and  capable  people  to  be 
about  his  person  ;  neither  has  he  the  strength  of  mind  neces- 
sary to  get  rid  of  the  bad  people  who  surround  him.  Instead 
of  taking  for  his  secretary  Don  Jose  Barrera,  chief  clerk  in  the 


310  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1806. 

Secretary's  office,  an  honest  man,  if  ever  there  was  one,  and 
very  conversant  with  the  affairs  of  the  viceroyalty,  with  the 
experience  of  thirty  years  in  the  said  office,  (the  Regent  of  the 
Audiencia  took  him  for  himself)  he  chose  Don  Saturino  Peiia, 
a  native  of  this  town,  who  knows  nothing  else  but  to  write  a 
good  hand,  and  is  a  consummate  rogue.  This  man,  associ- 
ated with  a  certain  Padillo,  a  native  of  Cochabamba,  a  person 
in  similar  circumstances,  made  himself  chief  of  a  conspiracy. 
Very  good  secretary  had  Liniers,  on  whom  the  defence  of  the 
town  could  depend  ! 

A  considerable  number  of  rich  people  took  it  into  their 
heads  to  make  a  revolution,  in  order  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of 
the  Spanish  Government,  and  to  establish  the  independence  of 
the  country.  They  gained  some  officers  of  the  new  militia : 
they  named  General  Beresford  and  Colonel  Packe  at  the  head 
of  the  conspirators.  Peiia  spoke  to  the  Alcalde,  Don  Martin 
Alzaga,  to  persuade  the  Cabildo  to  join  in  the  plot.  This 
Alcalde  answered  with  caution,  and  let  him  go  to  Luxan  to 
bring  Beresford  and  Packe,  with  the  intention  of  arresting  them 
all  on  their  arrival.  This  was  not  necessary,  for  a  trifling 
event  dissipated  the  conspiracy.  This  happened  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner. 