


1807.]  I'ORD  CASTLEREAGH.  315 

their  conduct,  that  the  Cabinet  should  review  the  principles 
upon  which  this  service  has  been  undertaken ;  in  order  that 
they  may  determine  whether  it  should  be  hereafter  prosecuted 
on  the  same,  or  with  any,  and  what  modification. 

Upon  a  perusal  of  the  correspondence  in  the  ofiice,  it  does 
not  appear  that  any  original  purpose  prevailed  in  the  Councils 
of  the  late  Government,  to  commence  operations  in  South 
America ;  or  that,  when  commenced  by  the  expedition  against 
Buenos  Ayres,  they  ever  came  to  any  very  precise  determina- 
tion with  respect  to  the  principles  upon  which  they  were  to  be 
carried  on. 

In  Mr.  Windham's  letter  of  the  [blank],  any  intention  of 
countenancing  an  immediate  change  in  the  constitution  of  the 
Settlement  is  disclaimed ;  the  purposes  of  the  expedition  are 
confined  to  a  mere  military  occupation,  and  the  assurances  to 
be  given  to  the  inhabitants  limited  to  a  declaration  that  his 
Majesty  would,  upon  a  peace,  be  disposed  to  attend  to  their 
interests,  as  far  as  possible. 

It  appears  that  the  late  Ministers  were  so  little  intent  upon 
this  object,  and  so  little  prepared  to  embark  in  it  upon  any 
fixed  system  of  permanent  policy,  that  although,  as  early  as 
the  ]  0th  of  July,  they  ordered  a  detachment  to  be  prepared 
for  Buenos  Ayres,  yet  they  suffered  above  three  months  to 
elapse  after  they  received,  on  the  24th  of  June,  the  notification 
of  Sir  Home  Popham  having  proceeded  against  Buenos  Ayres, 
before  they  despatched  any  reinforcements  to  support  him,  or 
sent  him  any  instructions  whatever  for  the  direction  of  his 
conduct ;  and  they,  in  like  manner,  suffered  the  officers  in 
command  in  the  West  Indies,  whilst  Miranda's  expedition 
against  the  Caraccas  was  in  progress,  to  remain  in  total  igno- 
rance of  their  intentions ;  the  consequence  of  which  appears  to 
have  been  that  this  operation,  unsupported  by  any  effective  aid, 
proceeded  from  a  British  port,  with  just  enough  of  co-operation 
on  our  part  to  mix  us  in  the  policy  and  failure  of  the  effort,  but 
without  any  adequate  prospect  of  rendering  it  successful. 


316  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

In  this  state  things  continued  till  the  news  of  the  capture  of 
Buenos  Ayres  arrived  in  September.  The  popularity  of  this 
acquisition,  and  the  disposition  of  the  commercial  interest  to 
take  advantage  of  it,  appears  first  to  have  determined  the 
Government  to  follow  up  this  object.  Brigadier-General 
Achmuty  accordingly  proceeded,  on  the  ISth  of  October,  with 
2,900  men,  to  the  River  of  Plate,  but  without  instructions  to 
hold  out  any  particular  hopes  to  the  inhabitants,  or  to  aim  at 
more  than  a  commercial  intercourse,  under  the  protection  of  a 
military  occupation. 