


312  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [18C6. 

service.  They  thought  themselves  not  very  secure  among  the 
people,  and  took  their  precautions.  The  Assessor,  soon  after 
the  meeting  of  the  14th  of  August,  1806,  left  the  town,  and 
went  to  shelter  himself  under  the  Viceroy  ;  and,  when  he  was 
told  that  his  employment  was  suspended,  he  went  to  his  country- 
house,  about  100  leagues  from  this  town.  And  the  Secretary 
never  came  more  to  his  office,  and  retired  to  a  villa.  Notwith- 
standing this,  the  populace  once  cried,  "  Death  to  Gallegos  V 

I  cannot  imagine  any  other  remedy  for  the  cure  of  this  evil 
than  that  of  re-establishius:  the  ancient  mode  in  regard  to  those 
employments — that  is  to  say,  when  every  Viceroy  and  every 
Captain-General  chose  their  assessors  and  secretaries,  whose 
authority  ended  with  that  of  the  Viceroy  or  Captain-General, 
and  those  who  are  actually  employed  to  be  sent  out  of  the 
capital,  or  to  have  a  retiring  pension  assigned  them. 

Many  other  causes  of  discontent  exist ;  but  the  shortness  of 
these  notes  and  the  sailing  of  the  packet  prevent  me  from  de- 
tailing them  and  pointing  out  their  remedies.  I  shall,  how- 
ever, say  that  there  is  not  a  man  of  any  judgment  or  prudence 
but  considers  the  transactions  which  have  occurred  in  this 
town,  from  the  reconquest  to  this  day,  as  previous  dispositions 
to  its  independence.  In  order  to  arrange  the  Government, 
there  is  much  danger,  and  it  is  necessary  to  proceed  with  great 
circumspection.  The  people  know  already  that  they  want 
not  a  military  Chief,  as  they  once  thought  when  they  were 
threatened  with  this  invasion.  They  have  experienced  that, 
for  their  defence,  Liniers  and  the  collection  of  regular  Colonels 
were  of  no  use.  They  look  on  them  with  contempt  when  any 
military  question  is  in  agitation ;  and  really,  they  never  did 
any  thing  but  plunder  ;  and  they  saw  that  Don  Martin  Alzaga, 
Alcalde  of  the  first  election,  arranged  the  defence  of  the  town 
under  the  circumstances  of  all  the  military  chiefs  having  been 
beaten.  I  conclude  these  observations  with  the  following  re- 
mark :  In  order  that  the  Government  of  Buenos  Ayres  may 
be  settled,  it  is  indispensable  for  his  Majesty  to  send  as  Viceroy 


1806.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  313 

a  Lieutenant-General,  skilful,  prudent,  sagacious,  and  of  o^reat 
integrity. 

I  shall  add  another  proof  of  the  desire  of  the  rich  people  for 
a  change  of  Government.  There  is  no  doubt  that  they  were 
in  intelligence  with  the  enemy.  The  artillery  of  the  batteries 
of  the  Residencia,  Retiro,  and  Recoleta,  was  found  nailed  up ; 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  nailed  up  on  the  2nd  of  July. 
The  Alcalde  Alzaoja  has  charo;ed  with  this  fault  Don  N.  Sam- 
pera,  captain  of  artillery  of  the  militia,  to  whose  care  the  said 
batteries  were  consigned;  and  he  acknowledged  that  he  did 
nail  the  guns  ;  but,  being  asked  by  whose  orders,  he  said  nothing 
more.  Alzaga  will  not  leave  this  matter  so  quiet.  So  Ve- 
lasquez, to  whose  care  the  stores  at  the  Retiro  were  entrusted, 
made  his  escape  on  the  morning  of  the  general  attack  of  the 
town  :  he  left  the  stores  locked  up,  and  not  a  tool  to  open  the 
doors.  Being  asked  why  he  left  the  ammunition  shut  up,  he 
answered,  that  Don  Francisco  Agustini,  commander  of  the 
artillery,  ordered  him  to  lock  up  the  doors,  and  Agustini  was 
not  in  the  Retiro  on  the  morning  of  the  attack.  He  has  been 
three  days  in  prison,  but  is  already  free .  In  the  fort  were  also 
fqund  three  guns  nailed  up,  on  the  days  of  landing.  This  can- 
not be  done  without  much  sold. 