

Upon  the  reduction  of  Monte  Video,  General  Achmuty,.with 
a  garrison  of  about  4,500  men,  did  not  consider  himself  as 
competent  to  undertake,  until  reinforcements  should  arrive, 
any  further  operation  for  the  reduction  of  the  town  or  province 
of  Buenos  Ayres.  Some  disposition  to  desert,  in  consequence 
of  the  great  temptation  in  money,  &c.,  held  out  to  the  men, 
and  the  intrigues  of  the  priests,  had  shown  itself  among  the 
troops.    About  twenty  men  deserted  from  Maldonado,  and  were 


318  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

found  acting  as  soldiers  among  the  Spanish  garrison  of  Monte 
Video  (several  of  whom,  however,  are  stated  to  have  been  Pro- 
testants). The  General  further  expresses  considerable  anxiety 
about  his  supplies,  in  consequence  of  the  means  which  the  enemy 
liad,  by  their  numerous  cavalry,  of  confining  his  intercourse  with 
the  interior.  He  estimates  the  enemy's  force  outstanding  in 
the  field  at  about  8,000  men,  the  greater  part  of  which,  it  is 
probable,  would  retire  for  the  defence  of  Buenos  Ayres. 

Early  in  January,  upon  information  being  received  that 
Buenos  Ayres  was  retaken,  the  Fly  sloop  was  despatched  to  St. 
Jago  with  orders  to  General  Oraufurd  not  to  proceed  to  Chili, 
but  to  Eio  Janeiro,  there  to  join  General  Achmuty,  and  to  co- 
operate with  him  in  the  recovery  of  Buenos  Ayres,  with  its 
dependencies.  Before  the  Fly  arrived  at  St.  Jago,  Brigadier- 
General  Craufurd,  afraid  of  his  supplies  being  exhausted  by 
waiting  any  longer  for  Admiral  Murray,  had  sailed  on  the  3rd 
or  4th  of  January  for  the  Cape,  there  to  refresh,  and  afterwards 
to  proceed,  touching  at  New  South  Wales,  to  Chili.  Admiral 
Murray  arrived  at  Porto  Praya  seven  days  after  Brigadier- 
General  Craufurd  had  sailed,  and  followed  him  to  the  Cape. 
The  Fly  arrived  three  days  later  than  Admiral  Murray,  and 
proceeded  to  the  same  destination. 

As  General  Craufurd  was  encumbered  with  transports,  little 
doubt  can  remain  that  both  Admiral  Murray  and  the  Fly 
would  join  him  at  the  Cape,  and  consequently  that  his  force 
would  proceed  to  the  Plata ;  but,  allowing  two  months  for  the 
voyage  from  Porto  Praya  to  the  Cape,  and  from  eight  to  ten 
weeks  for  his  passage  from  the  Cape  to  South  America,  it  is 
not  to  be  expected  that  he  could  arrive  in  the  Plata  before  the 
middle  of  May,  soon  after  which  time  about  1,600  men,  sent 
out  in  March  with  General  Whitelocke,  may  also  be  expected 
to  have  arrived.  The  force  which  will  then  be  assembled  under 
General  Whitelocke  may  be  estimated  at  nearly  10,000  men, 
exclusive  of  General  Beresford'^s  corps  of  1,100  men,  now 
prisoners,  which  may  probably  he  recovered. 