


MEMOIR  OF  THE  MOSQUITO  TERRITORY. 

In  the  years  1805  and  1806,  having  the  command  of  his 
Majesty ""s  naval  forces  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  extending 
from  the  province  of  Yucatan  to  the  extent  of  the  Mosquito 
Shore,  I  had  many  opportunities  of  remarking  and  reflecting 
on  the  importance  of  the  latter  country.  In  this  pursuit  I 
was  very  ably  assisted  by  a  reverend  gentleman  who  resided 
there  many  years,  when  it  was  formerly  in  our  possession, 
and  who,  as  respects  his  general  knowledge  of  men,  manners, 
and  things,  is  excelled  by  no  one  in  the  settlement  of  Hon- 
duras. 

In  the  several  conversations  I  had  with  this  gentleman,  he 
requested  me,  in  conjunction  with  many  others,  to  commit  to 
writing  my  own  observations  and  reflections,  as  well  as  their 
local  knowledge  of  the  importance  of  the  acquisition  of  that  ex- 
tensive territory  and  traffic  ;  all  which  was  solemnly  tendered 
to  me  by  two  of  the  Mosquito  Princes,  deputed  for  that  pur- 
pose by  the  king  of  the  country,  whose  crown  is  hereditary. 
They  were  willing,  in  the  capacity  of  plenipotentiaries,  to 
swear  fealty  to  the  Crown  of  Great  Britain,  and  off'ered  lands 
and  possessions  to  all  that  were  recommended  by  me,  who 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  325 

would  come  and  settle  among  them,  only  requiring  in  return 
protection  and  friendship.  On  those  conditions  they  were 
christened :  one  after  the  military,  the  other  after  the  naval 
commandant.  I  gave  them  assurances  that,  on  my  return  to 
England,  I  should  lay  their  propositions  and  wishes  before  the 
King^s  Government  and  the  merchants  of  Great  Britain  ;  and 
they  then  departed  to  their  own  country,  much  gratified  with 
the  hope  of  having  the  English  again  among  them. 

In  commencing  my  memoir,  I  am  not  fearful  that  my  zeal 
for  this  unhappy  and  neglected  country  can  carry  me  beyond 
the  bounds  of  rigid  truth ;  knowing,  as  I  do,  that  my  descrip- 
tion must  fall  very  far  short  of  the  actual  fact,  both  as  to  the 
produce  of  the  country,  and  the  good  disposition  and  sincere 
afiection  of  its  inhabitants  towards  the  British  nation. 

The  Mosquito  Shore  extends  from  the  Point  of  Castile,  or 
Cape  Honduras,  being  the  south  point  of  Truxillo  Bay,  to  the 
northern  branch  of  the  river  Nicaragua,  called  St.  Juan's,  on 
the  southward,  being  182  leagues  of  shore.  A  chain  of  lofty 
mountains  runs  diagonally  from  Point  Castile  to  St.  Juan''s, 
and  serves  as  a  strong  barrier  between  the  Spanish  and  the 
Mosquito  territories.  The  area  of  the  latter,  which  is  one-third 
larger  than  the  kingdom  of  Portugal,  forms  an  irregular  tri- 
angle, of  which  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  makes  the  apex. 