

No  country  enjoys  more  advantages  from  water-carriage ; 
as,  besides  nineteen  rivers  navigable  for  small  craft  up  to  the 
very  interior,  a  chain  of  lagoons  line  the  coast,  accessible  at 
the  mouths  of  the  different  rivers.  The  climate  is  mild  for 
those  latitudes  ;  and,  being  continental,  not  near  so  warm  as 
the  islands  in  the  same  parallel.  The  soil  is  so  rich,  that,  until 
three  or  four  seasons  of  rattoon  canes  have  in  some  decree 
impoverished  the  land,  no  sugar  can  be  produced.  The  first 
growths  rise  to  the  great  height  of  sixteen  or  eighteen  feet, 
and  several  inches  in  diameter,  which  naturally  impoverishes 
the  saccharine  juices.  This  fact  must  sufficiently  prove  the 
great  fertility  of  the   soil  in  producing  maize,  Indian  corn, 


326  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  11807- 

cotton,  indigo,  coffee,   and  provisions,  which  far  exceeds  any 
thing  known  in  the  West  India  Islands. 

Endless  tracts  of  pine  ridges  would  supply  an  inexhaustible 
fund  of  tar  and  turpentine,  the  trees  being  so  redundant  with 
those  liquors  that,  when  put  into  the  deepest  rivers,  they  in- 
stantly sink.  The  savannahs,  or  plains,  afford  the  richest 
pasturage.  The  rivers  and  sea-coast  are  exceeded  by  no 
country  for  the  great  abundance  of  all  sorts  of  fish,  and  which 
are  caught  with  the  greatest  facility.  Many  of  the  rivers,  by 
washing  the  sand  in  fine  sieves,  furnish  the  native  globules  of 
pure  gold.  Gold  mines,  and  those  very  rich,  have  been  here 
discovered.  I  shall  particularly  mention  one  at  Alprapayer, 
which  might  have  been  of  infinite  benefit  to  those  concerned, 
had  honesty  in  the  conducting  it  been  as  proportionably 
attended  to  as  the  mine  was  rich. 

The  woods  have  an  inexhaustible  variety  and  great  quanti- 
ties of  game,  and  plenty  of  poultry  is  every  where  to  be  found : 
the  former  is  delicious  in  its  flavour,  and  the  latter  is  easily  to 
be  obtained.  Medicinal  gums  and  drugs  are  plentifully  dis- 
persed all  over  the  country ;  there  are  the  tono,  or  elastic 
gum  ;  gum  copal,  balsam  of  capivi ;  sarsaparilla,  of  the  finest 
quality,  &c.  It  abounds  also  with  mahogany,  cedar,  zebra  or 
palinarotta  wood,  with  many  other  kinds  useful  for  every  pur- 
pose of  husbandry,  the  erection  of  buildings,  &c.  There  is 
also  plenty  of  large,  beautiful  deer,  antelopes,  buffaloes,  moun- 
tain cows,  &c.  The  coast  affords  a  superabundance  of  turtle 
from  the  middle  of  April  to  the  end  of  September,  both  by 
nets  and  on  the  beach,  of  the  very  best  quality,  together  with 
the  liawksbill  turtle,  from  whose  back  the  tortoiseshell  is  pro- 
duced. In  short,  take  the  Mosquito  Shore  in  all  points  of 
view,  it  far  surpasses  every  part  of  the  West  Indies. 