

Truxillo  harbour,  being  the  northernmost  extreme  of  the 
Mosquito  Shore,  is  a  noble,  large  bay,  where  are  the  commodi- 
ous harbours  of  little  and  big  Puerto  Novo,  and  where  large 
vessels  may  lie  in  perfect  safety.     This  bay  abounds  with  fish. 


1807]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  327 

game,  wood,  and  excellent  water.  Luke's  Key,  or  Island,  lies 
at  the  entrance  of  Truxillo  Bay ;  the  islands  of  Bonacca, 
Helum,  Morat,  and  Rattan,  with  Barbareith,  lie  off  Truxillo. 
Rattan  and  Bonacca,  on  account  of  the  goodness  of  the  soil, 
the  salubrity  of  the  air,  the  pureness  of  the  water,  and  the 
convenience  of  very  fine  harbours,  and  fish,  wild  hogs,  cocoa- 
nuts,  &c.,  with  which  they  abound,  are  proverbially  called  in 
that  country  the  garden  of  the  West  Indies,  and  the  key  to 
Spanish  America  and  New  Gibraltar. 

Cape  Gracias  a  Dios  is  a  noble,  extensive  harbour,  where 
Commodore  Parry  anchored,  in  the  year  1782,  with  his 
squadron,  consisting  of  a  50-gun  ship  and  some  heavy  frigates. 
This  bay  is  open  to  no  winds  but  a  south-east.  The  Cape 
Keys  lies  off  this  place,  abounds  with  turtle  all  the  year  round. 
Distant  from  thence  about  fifteen  leagues  is  Pearl  Key  Lagoon, 
which  has  small  keys  all  round,  and,  lying  off  it,  form  good 
anchorage.  Bluefields  has  a  bar;  at  high  water,  there  is 
sixteen  feet  over  it.  When  inside,  it  forms  a  noble  basin  of 
water,  capable  of  holding  a  thousand  sail  of  shipping.  It  may 
be  proper  in  this  place  to  observe  that,  on  account  of  the 
number  of  fresh  water  rivers  emptying  themselves  into  the 
harbours  on  the  Mosquito  Shore,  none  but  copper-bottomed 
vessels  ought  to  be  employed  in  them,  or  even  in  navigating 
those  seas.  There  is  another  river,  which  lies  under  False 
Cape  northerly,  called  Crouch  river,  where  there  is  from  nine 
to  eleven  feet  of  water  over  its  bar. 

The  soundings  along  the  Mosquito  Shore  are  very  regular  ; 
you  are  to  stand  no  nearer  than  five  fathoms,  nor  more  than 
ten  to  twelve  off  from  Potock  to  the  Cape.  Off  False  Cape 
there  is  a  dangerous  shoal,  called  Cape  Bank ;  and  there  is  a 
chain  of  reefs  and  keys,  with  passages  between,  towards  the 
Cape.  The  north  extreme  commences  at  Carratasco  reef,  nearly 
abreast  of  Potock,  which  reef  makes  in  the  form  of  a  half 
circle  towards  the  sea,  and  three  keys  a  good  distance  further 
out.     The  best  book  of  directions  for  the  Bay  and"  Mosquito 


328  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

Shore  is  EarPs,  which,  if  there  is  no  error  in  the  publisher,  is 
from  his  own  actual  observations,  and  in  most  instances  has 
been  found  sufficiently  correct.  As  Bluefield's  Blufi*  fully 
commands  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  a  small  force  stationed 
there  would  keep  off  a  great  and  numerous  enemy. 