

The  illiberal  policy  of  Spain  towards  her  transatlantic  pos- 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  333 

sessions  is  well  known,  but  it  is  not  equally  understood  that  the 
system  can  now  no  longer  be  kept  up,  and  that  nothing  what- 
ever can  protract  the  existence  of  Spanish  America  under  its 
present  Government.  The  power  of  Spain  over  America  is 
decreasing  every  day  ;  for  that  country  is  unable  to  furnish  the 
means  of  supporting  the  trade  ;  Spain  cannot  send  the  troops 
required  both  to  keep  the  inhabitants  in  subjection,  and  to 
repel  the  invasion  of  a  foreign  enemy  :  in  fact,  she  reigns  over 
America  only  by  the  suflerance  of  other  powers,  and,  above  all, 
by  that  of  Great  Britain.  The  proprietors  in  Spanish  Ame- 
rica are  all  natives  ;  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  Viceroys, 
Governors,  and  a  few  officers,  the  whole  force  of  the  country  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  inhabitants  themselves.  This  is  one  of 
the  principal  causes  that  render  it  impossible  for  the  King  of 
Spain  to  go  on  with  the  system  that  he  has  hitherto  pursued 
in  the  Government  and  administration  of  that  country.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  evident  that,  the  moment  he  relinquishes 
that  system,  he  must  also  relinquish  the  sovereignty  of  his 
American  dominions ;  and  the  time  is  actually  come  when 
he  can  maintain  that  sovereignty  no  longer ;  it  must  be  super- 
seded— the  thing  is  unavoidable ;  but  it  may  be  superseded 
in  various  ways  ;  and,  as  I  have  said,  the  object  of  this  Memoir 
is  to  prove  that  a  due  sense  of  her  dignity  and  real  interests 
must  induce  Great  Britain  to  take  the  lead,  and  avert  the 
great  dangers  that  would  attend  an  event  of  so  much  magni- 
tude and  political  importance,  were  it  to  take  a  wrong  turn,  by 
adopting  such  measures  as  will  direct  this  revolution — for  such 
only  can  it  be  termed — into  the  channel  that  alone  can  con- 
duct it  to  a  fortunate  termination,  in  a  manner  at  once  honour- 
able, easy,  and  of  incalculable  advantage  to  her  resources  and 
power.  Therefore,  the  question  is,  not  whether  the  Conti- 
nent of  Spanish  America  and  its  appendages  can  remain  any 
longer  in  that  state  of  comparative  nullity  to  which  it  has 
been  confined  till  the  present  time,  nor  whether  its  separation 
from  Spain  can  or  ought  to  be  prevented  ;  but   the  real  ques- 


334  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

tion  is  this — What  course  shall  the  important  event  of  the 
revolution  of  that  country  take? — what  country  shall  next  reap 
the  immense  harvest  which  it  now  offers  ! — and  what  country 
shall  derive  from  it  the  means  of  striking  a  blow  at  their  ad- 
versaries'* power  ?  Shall  it  be  France,  or  shall  it  be  Great 
Britain  I  Such  is  really  the  question,  on  the  decision  of  which 
may  rest  the  fate  of  the  world. 