


330  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

last  drop  of  their  blood,  rather  than  subject  themselves  to  their 
authority,  or  recognise  them  as  friends. 

On  the  Mosquito  Shore  were  eleven  tribes  of  Indians  inhabit- 
ing different  districts,  viz.,  the  Patooks,  Ramas,  Cocorracks, 
Woolways,  Tonglaws,  Uticaws,  Towacaws,  Parramacaws, 
Poyers,  Mosquito  Sambais,  and  Samboes.  The  Patook  men 
were  extirpated  by  Spanish  perfidy,  the  particulars  of  which 
act  of  atrocity  are  too  well  known  and  notorious  to  render  it 
necessary  to  detail  them  here.  The  Ramas  inhabit  the  most 
southern  part  between  St.  Juan's  and  Bluefields,  and,  at  vari- 
ous periods  of  the  year,  carry  on  a  considerable  traffic  with  the 
Spaniards.  It  would  be  very  desirable  to  make  friends  of 
these  people,  as,  through  their  country,  a  passage  might  easily 
be  found  to  the  rich  cities  of  Leon  and  Grenada.  The  Cocor- 
racks are  denominated  wild  and  tame,  to  distinguish  the  civi- 
lized from  the  uncivilized.  The  Woolways,  aback  of  Pearl 
Key  Lagoon  and  Brangman's  Bluff,  with  the  Tonglaws,  Uti- 
caws, Towacaws,  Parramacaws,  and  Poyers,  from  Wankis 
River  to  the  Great  Rocks,  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  interior. 
These  six  nations  form  a  barrier  between  the  Spaniards  and 
the  whole  of  the  Mosquito  territory. 

The  Mosquito  Samboes  inhabit  the  coast  from  Bluefields  to 
Tibuppy,  under  the  orders  of  two  of  their  own  chiefs,  called 
the  Admiral  and  the  Governor.  They  were  ever  considered 
the  best  tribes  of  Mosquito  men,  from  their  industry,  good 
order,  and  quiet  disposition  ;  but  they  were  not  liked  by  the 
Samboes,  who,  some  years  ago,  with  their  late  murdered 
king  at  their  head,  extirpated  nearly  the  whole  of  them,  and 
hung  their  chiefs.  The  Samboe  race  of  Mosquito  men  inhabit 
the  country  from  Sandy  Bay  to  Polock,  tolerably  numerous, 
rather  indolent,  most  of  their  labour  being  performed  by  their 
wives.  There  is  no  mode  of  ascertaining  their  numbers  ;  but, 
from  many  circumstances,  it  might  be  inferred  that  500  men 
might  be  induced  to  follow  an  army  without  injury  to  their 
own  country.     They  are  particularly  useful  as  woodsmen,  and 


1807.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  331 

skilful  in  hunting,  striking  fish,  managing  bateaux  canoes, 
dories,  pitpans,  &c.,  either  on  rapid  rivers,  or  in  high  surf- 
beaches.  They  entertain  an  idea  that,  in  whatever  services 
their  relations  or  friends  may  lose  their  lives,  or  die,  such  must 
be  paid  for,  and  it  has  been  regularly  demanded,  even  in  battle. 
When  satisfactory  answers  have  not  been  given,  they  have 
been  known  to  retreat  in  the  most  dangerous  and  disorderly 
manner ;  as,  on  the  contrary,  if  they  had  been  promised  pay- 
ment, they  might  have  materially  assisted  in  defeating  the 
Spanish  dragoons  in  the  plain  of  either  Wutigulpha  or  Mati- 
gulpha.  Those  people  worship  evil  spirits,  giving,  as  a  reason 
for  doing  so,  that  good  ones  will  do  them  no  harm,  and  they 
are  afraid  the  evil  ones  will.  Among  the  worst  is  the  Wool- 
saw — the  Devil.  Immediately  on  any  of  their  people  dying, 
they  desert  the  habitation,  and  build  themselves  a  new  settle- 
ment. 