

The  pirates  who  anciently  infested,  in  a  peculiar  manner, 
the  American  seas,  appear  to  have  been  the  first  of  our  coun- 
trymen who  were  acquainted  with  the  Mosquito  Shore.  The 
difficulty,  or  rather  impossibility,  at  that  time  of  large  vessels 
pursuing  them  into  the  rivers,  on  account  of  the  shifting  bars, 
and  sometimes  the  shallowness  of  the  water,  rendered  them 
safe  harbours ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  lagoons,  running 
from  twenty,  thirty,  and  fifty  leagues  withinside  the  beach, 
afforded  them  proper  retreats  for  victualling  and  refitting. 
Here  arose  the  necessity  of  friendly  intercourse  with  the 
Indians,  which,  in  process  of  time,  extended  to  a  commercial 
communication,  productive  of  benefit  to  both  parties :  and 
hence  originated  among  the  natives  the  first  knowledge  of 
arms. 

After  the  pirates  were  extirpated  from  these  parts,  succeeded 
the  unhappy  English  sufferers  who  escaped  from  Spanish 
cruelty  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  seeking  here  an  asylum  ; 
and,  as  they  fled  from  an  enemy  to  whom  the  Mosquito  In- 
dians have  an  unconquerable  and  hereditary  aversion,  added  to 
their  good  opinion  of  the  English,  they  were  received  as  their 
brethren,  lands  assigned  to  them,  and  a  colony  established.  From 
this  small  colony  they  took  their  first  hints  of  establishing  a 
police ;  and  this  era  marks  the  first  dawning  of  civilization. 
The  warmest  friendship  subsisted  between  them.  So  fraught 
were  they  with  the  ideas  of  English  honour,  probity,  and  jus- 
tice, and  the  dignity  of  a  British  king,  that,  in  the  year  1687, 
the  then  Mosquito  king,  with  the  full  consent  of  his  tribes, 
made  a  formal  and  voluntary  cession  of  the  Mosquito  Shore  to 
the  King  of  England ;  and,  although  the  Indian  crown  is 
hereditary,  yet  no  public  act  of  his  was  acknowledged  valid 


1807.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  329 

until  his  title  was  recognised  and  ratified  by  the  Governor  of 
Jamaica,  or  the  Superintendent  of  the  Shore,  acting  under  the 
Governor  of  that  island.  The  late  King  George,  who  was 
murdered  by  his  own  subjects  at  Black  River,  was  crowned  Chief 
of  the  Mosquito  Shore,  at  the  chief  settlement.  Black  Kiver, 
by  Captain,  afterwards  Colonel,  Laurie,  in  March,  1777,  where 
a  fort  had  been  erected  at  the  end  of  the  war,  in  1763 ;  and, 
with  a  single  company  of  the  49th  Regiment,  assisted  by  the 
Indians,  the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  Spaniards  was  so  quelled, 
that  the  colony  was  in  a  state  of  perfect  safety. 

Lord  Halifax,  at  that  time,  by  letter  declared  that  the  Mos- 
quito shore  was  a  British  settlement ;  and  Lord  Dartmouth, 
in  the  year  1775,  ordered  a  legislative  council  to  be  chosen 
there.  In  consequence  of  the  Governor  of  Jamaica's  commis- 
sion, a  Court  of  Common  Pleas  was  established  in  1776; 
hence  it  was  deemed  a  part  of  the  British  territories,  and  in 
commissions,  «Szic.,  joined  with  Bonacca  and  Rattan,  as  depending 
on  and  annexed  to  the  government  of  Jamaica.  However  matters 
may  now  be  contradicted,  it  is  certain  that,  in  Lord  Hills- 
borough's administration,  a  particular  commission  did  actually 
pass  through  his  office,  erecting  this  Government  independent  of 
Jamaica,  in  the  person  of  the  Superintendent  and  Council.  It 
was  afterwards  revoked  ;  lest,  as  it  was  alleged,  it  might  give 
umbrage  to  the  Governor  of  that  island,  who  afterwards,  con- 
struing (it  is  supposed  through  error)  the  1 7th  Article  of  the 
Treaty  of  Versailles  into  an  acknowledgment  of  a  Spanish 
territorial  right,  directed  the  fort  at  Black  River  to  be  razed, 
caused  the  ordnance  to  be  conveyed  to  Jamaica,  and  ordered 
off  the  detachment  of  British  soldiers  conmianded  by  Colonel 
Laurie.  Thus  were  the  Mosquito  Indians  abandoned,  and  of 
course  all  control  over  the  acts  and  proceedings  of  their  Go- 
vernment resigned  by  England.  From  that  time  up  to  the 
present,  the  natives  have  themselves  defended  the  coast,  and 
successfully  resisted  the  attacks  of  their  hereditary  and  impla- 
cable enemies  the  Spaniards,   resolved,  to  a  man,  to  shed  the 