

The  French  may  secure  the  disposal  and  command  of 
Spanish  America,  at  a  much  cheaper  rate  than  is  generally  be- 
lieved. A  few  important  and  well  known  garrisons  on  the 
Spanish  shores  would  give  them  the  command  of  the  whole 
Continent  and  of  its  resources  :  indeed,  the  acquisition  of  Loui- 
siana would  have  been  sufficient  to  ensure  them  the  conquest 
of  the  whole ;  but,  be  that  as  it  may,  the  subjection  of  the 
coast  of  Spain  to  the  French  Government  is  too  complete  to 
allow  one  doubt  that,  whenever  France  chooses  to  put  gar- 
risons into  the  principal  forts  of  Spanish  America,  the  King 
of  Spain  will  submit  to  her  demands.  It  is  well  known,  also, 
that  small  expeditions  may  at  all  times  escape  the  vigilance 
even  of  British  cruisers  ;  and  if  once  the  French  obtain  posses- 
sion either  of  Vera  Cruz,  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  or  the 
Rio  de  la  Plata,  or  the  Brazils,  they  will  soon  revolutionize  the 
whole  country  in  their  own  way.  The  commanders  of  the 
French  army  of  St.  Domingo,  should  there  be  any  part  of  it 
left,  may  likewise,  and  will  probably,  be  employed  to  such  pur- 
poses. The  blockade  of  St.  Domingo  can  never  be  depended 
upon,  on  account  of  the  winds  and  currents  of  those  seas  ;  be- 
sides, tlie  distance  from  St.  Domingo  to  Vera  Cruz  is  a  very 
short  one,  since  both  wind  and  stream  are  constantly  favourable, 
and  the  French  would  always  have  it  in  their  power  to  take 
shelter  in  a  friendly  harbour,  all  along  the  coast  of  Cuba. 

If  a  French  force  is  once  landed  on  the  Spanish  American 
Continent,  the  business  is  settled;  and  Moreau,  Massena, 
Augereau,  or  any  such  person,  will  soon  be  Consul  of  Mexico 
or  Peru,  and  assist  the  favourite  system  of  upstarts,  by  direct- 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  335 

in^::  the  orreat  streno-th  and  resources  of  those  countries  aojainst 
the  British  Empire  and  the  whole  system  of  regular  govern- 
ments. Revolutionary  governments  can  never  be  sufficiently 
secure  at  home  to  indulge  their  subjects  in  the  encouragement 
of  industry  and  trade,  and  in  an  increase  of  their  wealth  by 
fair  means  ;  they  know  no  other  way  of  acquiring  wealth  but 
that  of  conquest  and  devastation. 

Jamaica  and  the  other  islands  are  objects  neither  remote 
nor  difficult  of  access,  in  consequence  of  the  constant  regularity 
of  the  currents  and  winds,  and  of  the  numerous  shoals  that 
have  rendered  it  utterly  impracticable  to  destroy  the  French 
privateers  in  those  seas.  We  have  all  read  of  Flibustiers 
and  Buccaneers ;  but  on  what  an  enlarged  scale  would  this 
buccaneering  system  be  carried  on,  if  the  resources  and  popu- 
lation of  Spanish  America  were  allowed  to  be  at  the  command 
and  disposal  of  the  modern  freebooters,  and  to  be  combined 
under  the  influence  of  France,  and,  by  her  activity,  with  the 
seeds  of  revolution  and  disorganization  now  existing  in  the 
West  Indies  ! 