

The  degree  in  which  the  resources  of  South  America  have 
operated  in  the  last  seventeen  years,  to  exclude  the  Bourbons 
from  the  throne  of  France,  would  make  it  a  natural  object  of 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  323 

policy  to  the  family  to  lend  themselves  to  an  arrangement 
which  should  effectually  cut  off  that  hostile  supply ;  and 
were  such  an  enterprising  individual  as  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
with  their  concurrence,  to  undertake  it,  the  object  might 
perhaps  be  accomplished,  and,  in  that  case,  must  prove  bene- 
ficial to  us. 

In  the  event  of  his  being  deemed  a  proper  person  to  look  to, 
he  might,  in  the  first  instance,  embark  in  it  only  as  a  military 
man,  governing  himself  afterwards  according  to  circumstances. 
A  great  number  of  French  officers  could  be  easily  prevailed  on 
to  embark  with  him.  It  is  probable  Miranda  might  be  induced 
to  follow  his  fortunes  ;  Dumouriez  certainly  would ;  and  we 
might  thus  obtain  the  means  of  expeditiously  creating  a  native 
force,  which  would  render  the  operation  comparatively  easy 
to  us. 

As  things  formerly  stood,  one  should  hesitate  much  in 
planting  any  thing  like  French  power  in  any  part  of  the  globe 
from  which  we  could  exclude  it;  but,  looking  at  the  mode,  the 
degree,  and  the  circumstances,  under  which  it  would  in  this 
case  exist,  the  corrections  and  checks  it  would  have  on  the 
spot,  its  separation  from  France,  at  least  whilst  France  shall 
continue  under  its  present  frame  of  government,  and  the  neces- 
sary dependence  and  intercourse  which,  for  a  great  length  of 
time,  it  must  have  with  us,  it  seems  an  instrument  which 
might  be  used  at  present  with  greater  prospects  of  advantage 
than  danger. 

The  determination  whether  we  ought  to  prosecute  the  object 
of  South  America  seriously  and  upon  system  may  perhaps,  in 
a  considerable  degree,  depend  on  the  turn  things  shall  take  in 
the  next  three  months  on  the  Continent.  Lord  Oastlereagh 
has  thought  he  ought  not,  however,  to  delay  bringing  some- 
thing in  sufficient  detail  before  the  Cabinet,  to  invite  a  general 
consideration  of  this  delicate  and  important  question.  His 
own  mind  is  by  no  means  settled  on  this  point,  and  he  begs  to 
be  understood  as  not  so  much  submitting  opinions  to  his  col-r 

Y  2 


324  LETTEHS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

leagues,  as  throwing  out  such  ideas  as  may  serve  to  provoke 
discussion. 

He  certainly  does  entertain  a  very  strong  persuasion  that  the 
policy  upon  which  we  are  now  acting  will  be  productive  of 
little  commercial  or  political  benefit,  and  must  be  felt  as  a 
great  waste  of  our  military  means.  He  is,  therefore,  desirous 
that  the  Cabinet  should  come  to  a  decision  as  early  as  possible 
of  the  views  and  plan  on  which  (finding  the  scheme  thus 
begun  by  their  predecessors)  they  are  disposed  to  recommend 
that  it  should  be  followed  up.  Till  this  is  done,  it  is  difficult 
to  submit  for  their  approbation  any  instructions  for  the  conduct 
of  the  officers  charged  with  that  service. 