

^  There  were  not  500  Spanish  soldiers  in  the  island  of  Cuba  in  1798 
and  1799,  and  there  were  upwards  of  2,000  Mexican  soldiers. 


344  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1S07. 

not  think  Mexico  threatened  by  the  great  armament  of  1799, 
they  will  be  still  more  led  astray,  when  the  armament  intended 
against  them  is  so  inconsiderable  as  the  one  now  proposed ; 
and  therefore  it  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  that  it  should  be 
kept  here  a  profound  secret. 

Lastly,  there  is  another  consideration  of  great  moment, 
which  is  the  difficulty  and  danger  the  Spaniards  have  in 
assembling  the  Mexican  militia.  The  population  is  too  great. 
The  militia  was  assembled  in  spring  1 798  by  the  then  Viceroy, 
Marquess  de  Brancforte,  and  they  amounted  to  about  60,000 
men ;  but  such  was  the  ferment  and  agitation,  that  he  dared 
not  collect  them  in  large  bodies,  and  was  obliged  to  disband 
them  in  the  greatest  hurry.  He  then  retired  to  a  small  camp 
volantf  not  trusting  himself  to  reside  as  usual  in  the  city  of 
Mexico,  where  he  never  appeared  without  being  surrounded  by 
a  numerous  and  well  selected  body  of  guards. 

Should  this  plan  be  adopted,  I  most  readily  offer  to  his 
Majesty's  Government,  as  well  as  to  the  Prince,  who  may  be 
intended  as  the  future  sovereign  of  Mexico,  my  personal  as- 
sistance and  services.  I  shall  rejoice  if  the  knowledge  I  may 
possess  of  that  country  enables  me  to  be  useful  upon  this  inte- 
resting occasion.  Notwithstanding  the  relationship  between 
the  King  of  Spain  and  myself,  on  the  one  hand,  his  conduct 
towards  my  mother,  my  brothers,  and  myself,  on  the  other, 
the  line  he  has  adopted  towards  all  the  Jacobin  Governments, 
including  the  present  usurper  of  the  throne  of  France,  make 
it  not  only  lawful  but  honourable  for  me  to  engage  in  any  hos- 
tility against  his  Government ;  and  I  own  it  would  be  a  grati- 
fication to  me  to  be  employed  actively  against  a  sovereign  of  a 
country  whose  policy  it  has  always  been  to  show  the  greatest 
enmity  to  my  family  since  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  or,  in  other  words,  since  the  accession  of  the  Duke  of 
Aujou,  Philip  the  Fifth,  to  the  throne  of  Spain. 


1807.]  LOKD  CASTLEREAGH.  345 

ON  THE  ESTABLISHMENT   OF   NAVAL  STATIONS, 

AND  SURVEY  OF  THE  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 

BY  GENERAL  DUMOURIEZ. 

PREMIERE    SECTION. 
STATIONS  NA VALES. 

Le  syst^me  de  guerre  maritime  d'une  puissance  navale  aussi 
formidable  que  FAngleterre,  attaquee  par  la  ligue  de  toute 
TEurope,  est  d'interrompre  la  communication  de  ce  Continent 
avec  les  trois  autres,  poui*  forcer  ses  ennemis  par  leur  privations 
a  sentir  la  necessite  de  rouvrir  leurs  ports  a  notre  commerce, 
a  attribuer  leur  besoins  et  leurs  calamites  au  Tyran  qui  les 
egare  et  qui  les  ruine,  et  a  revenir  a  nous  qui  pouvons  seuls  les 
aider  a  sortir  de  leur  esclavage. 