

Besides,  I  have  no  doubt  that  great  bodies  of  auxiliary 
troops  might  be  procured  in  Spanish  America,  and  might  be 
advantageously  employed  to  relieve,  to  a  still  greater  extent, 
Britain  from  the  burden  of  furnishing  garrisons  for  America. 

Great  as  these  advantages  may  appear,  there  are  others  of 
less  magnitude,  but  of  no  less  importance,  in  the  present  crisis. 
The  diminution  of  the  importance  of  the  Spanish  empire  is  one 
of  them.  Spain  is  and  will  remain  totally  dependent  on  France  ; 
the  loss  of  America  will  deprive  her  of  the  remains  of  her  former 
greatness  ;  and  the  consequences  of  this  change,  even  within 
her  own  confines,  must  be  very  injurious  to  France,  who  has 
at  present  the  command  of  her  resources  and  power.  When 
Spain  loses  America,  the  loss  will  be  complete  and  irrecover- 
able :  no  negociation,  no  treaty,  can  restore  that  sovereignty  to 
her.  There  is  for  Spain  no  chance  of  trade,  no  chance  of  com- 
mercial connexions  with  her  former  possessions,  as  there  was 
for  Great  Britain  after  the  loss  of  her  Colonies,  nor  can  there 
be  any  comparison  between  the  two  situations ;  since,  in  the 
one  instance,  colonies  established  by  Britain  herself  were  lost ; 
whereas,  in  the  other,  Spain  would  only  be  deprived  of  a 
country  she  had  formerly  conquered.  Spain,  confined  in  her 
European  dominions,  would  fall  a  prey  to  all  kinds  of  embar- 
rassments and  difficulties  :  her  sources  of  revenue  being  dried 
up,  she  will  be  unable  to  support  her  expensive  court,  her 
navy,  and  even  her  army. 

If  any  event  can  give  to  Spain  a  due  sense  of  her  present 

z2 


340  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

state  of  degradation,  and  restore  her  to  her  former  energy,  it 
is  the  loss  of  America.  After  that  event,  the  interests  of 
France  and  Spain  will  become  daily  more  clashing.  Spain 
will  have  no  money  to  bribe  French  rulers,  and  they  will  find 
her  a  burdensome  and  useless  ally. 

The  means  of  carrying  this  enterprise  into  execution  are, 
first,  to  give  a  solemn  pledge  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Con- 
tinent of  Spanish  America  that  it  is  not  intended  either  to  con- 
quer their  country,  or  to  subject  it  to  any  European  sovereign  ; 
that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  from  a  due  sense  of  the  impossibility 
of  any  European  sovereign  governing  their  country,  under 
the  present  circumstances,  that  Britain  is  induced  to  interfere 
in  her  affairs  ;  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  subjection  of  Spain  to 
France,  and,  on  the  other,  the  ascendency  of  Britain  over  the 
seas,  makes  it  impossible  for  the  King  of  Spain,  or  any  other 
European  sovereign,  to  govern  them,  and  to  protect  them 
against  their  natural  enemies  ;  that  the  command  Britain  lias 
over  the  seas  covers  them  against  any  attack  from  Europe ; 
that  the  only  object  of  her  interference  in  their  affairs  is  to 
preserve  them  from  the  impending  danger  of  anarchy  and 
French  oppression,  to  which  they  must  otherwise  be  abandoned, 
through  the  treachery,  or  at  least  the  impotence,  of  the  Spanish 
Government ;  that  that  would  be  equally  injurious  to  them- 
selves and  to  Britain,  since  they  would  be  ransacked  and  plun- 
dered, whilst  the  wealth  and  resources  wrested  from  them  would 
be  turned  against  herself,  who  is  the  only  power  that  can  assist 
them  in  carrying  on  their  trade,  either  in  time  of  war  or  time 
of  peace ;  that,  to  attain  the  proposed  object,  it  is  the  intention 
of  the  King  of  Great  Britain  to  establish  in  their  country  re- 
gular monarchical  Governments,  in  the  person  of  a  prince  or 
princes  to  reside  in  their  country,  who  should  pledge  themselves 
to  the  forfeiture  of  their  American  sovereignties,  if  they  ceased 
to  reside  in  America,  or  if  they  assumed  any  European  sove- 
reignty. It  would  be  also  necessary  for  such  a  prince  to  pledge 
himself  that  the  interior  government  and  administration  of  the 