


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  341 

country  should  be  altered  as  little  as  possible.  He  should  pro- 
mise freedom  of  cultivation  of  trade,  and  of  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations  indiscriminately ;  though  under  the  usual  re- 
strictions of  Custom-House  duties,  &c.  Ample  security  should 
also  be  given  on  the  score  of  religion. 

Secondly,  the  prince  intended  to  be  the  sovereign  of  Mexico 
should  be  sent  there  with  a  force  comparatively  small,  but  suffi- 
cient to  take  post  on  the  coast,  to  protect  his  person,  and  to 
assist  his  operations  in  the  manner  that  shall  be  hereinafter 
explained. 

It  is  not  for  me  to  suggest  what  prince  Great  Britain  ought 
to  present  to  the  Mexicans.  This  important  investiture  must 
rest  with  the  King  and  his  Government,  to  bestow  as  in  old 
feudal  times.  There  are  many  princes  who  might  be  thought 
of,  and  no  doubt  some  might  be  found  in  his  Majesty \s  family 
who  are  equal  to  this  enterprise,  and  capable  of  rendering  this 
great  service  to  their  Royal  Father,  to  their  country,  and  to 
the  great  cause  of  royalty  now  at  stake,  by  opposing  the  pro- 
pagation of  republican  principles,  and  by  founding  in  America 
an  hereditary  monarchy,  whose  interests  would  ever  be  con- 
genial to  those  of  Great  Britain. 

The  adoption  of  such  measures,  at  a  time  when  the  inhabit- 
ants of  South  America  are  ready  to  grasp  at  any  thing  to  ob- 
tain a  change  from  their  present  situation,  would  probably 
meet  with  their  unanimous  concurrence.  It  is,  however,  cer- 
tain that,  should  they  be  left  to  themselves,  they  would  fall 
into  Jacobinism,  and  a  revolution  would  then  take  place  on 
the  basis  of  those  principles  ;  and  this  is,  above  all,  what  must 
be  prevented  by  Great  Britain.  The  proposal  I  have  above 
suggested,  coming  from  Britain,  supported  by  her  powerful 
resources,  will  open  to  them  an  easy  road  to  the  grand  object 
they  have  at  heart— namely,  to  become  independent  of  Spain  ; 
to  obtain  a  Government  of  their  own ;  free  trade,  free  cultiva- 
tion, and  a  free  disposal  of  their  property.  It  is  probable  they 
will  prefer  what   is  certain,  immediate,   and  easily  attained, 


342  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

(although  it  may  not  comprise  all  they  wish  for)  to  what  is 
distant,  difficult,  and  at  least  very  uncertain,  in  the  execution. 

Besides,  the  bulk  of  the  people  will  be  aware  that  they  can 
pass  from  their  present  state  to  the  proposed  one,  without  any 
convulsion,  and  without  exposing  themselves  to  the  excesses  of 
the  lower  classes,  who  are  very  numerous  in  Mexico,  that  city 
containing  upwards  of  200,000  inhabitants.  The  Nobles  will 
be  glad  to  have  a  Court,  at  which  they  can  shine,  and  to  have 
a  sovereign  interested  in  keeping  up  their  rank  and  superiority 
over  the  other  orders  of  society.  They  are  too  proud  to  ac- 
knowledge any  one  of  themselves  to  be  their  sovereign,  and 
therefore  a  foreign  prince  must  be  sent  there,  to  allay  their 
mutual  jealousies  and  Jjretensions.  The  Clergy  could  be  as 
easily  reconciled  to  the  new  order  of  things ;  and,  in  fact, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  they  w^ould  accept  it  with  as  much 
alacrity  and  as  much  unanimity  as  it  is  possible  to  expect  from 
the  passions  prevalent  among  mankind. 