

It  is  proposed  that  the  first  enterprise  should  be  directed 
against  Mexico,  in  preference  to  any  other  place,  for  various 
reasons :  first,  because  it  is  the  most  vulnerable  point ;  it  is 
the  most  populous  country,  and  it  is  also  that  part  where  the 
strongest  disposition  will  be  found  to  that  order  of  things  which 
it  is  the  interest,  and  no  doubt  the  wish,  of  Great  Britain  to 
maintain  and  defend.  The  Mexican  nobles  are  the  most  an- 
cient in  Spanish  America ;  they  went  over  under  the  reigns  of 
Charles  the  Fifth  and  Philip  the  Second ;  whereas,  those  of 
Caracas  and  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota  and  of  the  other  provinces 
went  over  at  a  much  later  period,  and  at  a  time  when  many 
could  pass  for  nobles  without  being  really  such.  It  seems, 
therefore,  advisable  to  attempt  the  enterprise  first  at  that  place, 
where  it  appears  easy  to  accomplish  it,  and  also  most  easy  to 
direct  it  into  a  proper  channel.  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  that 
the  first  outset  must  determine  the  success  of  the  whole.  If 
the  revolution  commences  upon  the  principles  of  democracy, 
the  whole  of  the  Continent  will  fall  at  once  into  that  system  of 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  343 

delusion  and  disappointment ;  but  if  it  commences  upon  the 
principles  of  monarchy,  it  is  also  more  than  probable  that  the 
other  provinces  will  likewise  follow  that  example ;  and,  at  all 
events,  it  will  be  much  easier  to  compel  them  to  do  so. 

2ndly.  Mexico  is  the  key-stone  of  the  arch :  when  that  is 
removed,  all  the  other  parts,  being  unconnected,  must  fall  to 
pieces.  It  commands  both  seas,  and  facilitates  every  operation 
which  it  may  be  thought  advisable  to  undertake  afterwards. 
Besides,  there  is  another  consideration  of  great  moment  in 
favour  of  Mexico,  w^hich  is  that,  Mexico  once  carried,  the 
Havannah  must  fall,  and  perhaps  even  without  firing  a  shot ; 
since  it  is  from  Mexico  alone  that  Cuba  is  and  can  be  supplied 
with  soldiers,  money,  and  ammunition.  Even  supposing,  what 
I  do  not  admit,  that  the  Havannah  should  resist  after  the  fall 
of  Mexico,  it  must  be  confessed  that  a  prodigious  assistance 
would  be  derived  from  that  kingdom  for  the  conquest  of  Cuba, 
which,  I  hope  and  trust,  would  ever  after  remain  a  British  island. 

Srdly.  Should  the  Spaniards  hear  of  an  expedition  against 
their  possessions  in  America,  Mexico  is  not  the  point  which 
they  would  consider  threatened,  and  it  is  not  in  Mexico  they 
would  prepare  for  defence.  I  can  support  this  assertion  by  the 
most  direct  proof.  I  was  in  the  Havannah  in  1 799,  when 
the  great  expedition  against  Holland  was  fitting  out  in  this 
country.  The  Court  of  Spain  mistook  the  object,  and  imme- 
diately sent  orders  to  Cuba,  Porto  Rico,  and  La  Guayra,  to 
prepare  for  an  attack.  The  Governors  of  those  places  were 
then  authorized  to  go  to  any  expense  they  deemed  necessary, 
and  accordingly  they  did  it  to  an  immense  amount,  though  not 
any  where  in  the  most  judicious  manner ;  and  the  Court  of 
Spain  was  so  far  from  apprehending  an  attack  upon  Mexico,  at 
least  in  the  first  instance,  that  they  gave  orders  to  the  V  iceroy 
of  Mexico  to  send  to  the  Havannah  all  the  troops,  recruits, 
and  ammunition,  he  could  spare. ^     If  the  Court  of  Spain  did 