

VOL.  VII.  z 


338  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807 

of  things  would,  therefore,  reduce  the  Americans  to  be  mere 
carriers  of  goods  for  Great  Britain,  and  consequently  their 
trade  would  always  be  limited  to  the  extent  allowed  by  her. 
The  trade  of  Spanish  America  thus  possessed  by  Great  Britain 
would  also  supply  her  with  all  sorts  of  timber  for  the  construc- 
tion of  her  ships,  and  chiefly  with  those  valuable  sorts  of  wood 
hitherto  unemployed  by  any  nation  except  the  Spaniards 
themselves.  It  is  to  these  sorts  of  wood  that  the  durability  of 
their  ships  of  war  is  to  be  ascribed.  Cedar,  now  so  scarce, 
mahogany,  and  various  other  kinds  of  timber,  equally  valuable, 
although  not  equally  well  known,  might  then  be  procured  in 
any  quantity,  at  a  cheap  rate.  This  would  be  equally  advan- 
tageous to  trade,  as  these  sorts  of  wood  are  the  finest  for  arti- 
cles of  furniture. 

Copper  and  hemp  might  also  be  procured,  the  former  imme- 
diately, and  in  great  abundance.  The  cultivation  of  the  latter 
might  be  easily  encouraged,  and  in  a  very  short  time  be  car- 
ried to  any  extent  by  Britain.  These  supplies  from  Spanish 
America  would  enable  Britain  to  support,  without  any  embar- 
rassment, the  interruption  or  loss  of  the  Baltic  trade,  should 
that  event  ever  take  place  hereafter.  The  produce  of  the  gold 
and  silver  mines,  which  is  now  an  article  of  trade,  would  then 
be  at  the  disposal  of  Britain. 

It  is  out  of  my  power  to  calculate  the  consequences  of  such 
events.  They  must  evidently  be  productive  of  prodigious  ad- 
vantages to  Britain.  She  would  then  be  placed  almost  be- 
yond the  reach  of  hostile  projects  in  Europe ;  and,  this 
becoming  daily  more  and  more  evident,  her  importance  would 
rise  in  proportion,  and  she  would  then  be  enabled  to  take  in 
continental  transactions  that  part  which  becomes  her  power 
and  rank.  Of  what  consequence  would  it  then  be  to  shut  all 
the  harbours  of  Europe,  when  she  is  possessed,  for  the  con- 
sumption of  her4)roduce,  of  such  an  emporium  as  America ! 
Who  could  ever  cherish  a  hope  of  wresting  from  her  the  com- 
mand of  the  seas,  when  her  empire  in  Asia  and  America  would 


1807.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  339 

be  placed  beyond  the  possibility  of  attack  ;  and,  when  the 
trade  and  resources  of  these  countries  would  amply  afford  the 
means  of  supporting  the  burdens  of  her  naval  and  military 
establishments  ?  The  security  of  the  British  Empire  in  America 
would  also  enable  Great  Britain  to  reduce  her  establishment 
in  that  part  of  the  world,  and  this  would  afford  the  means  of 
considerably  increasing  her  disposable  force  in  Europe,  and 
diminishing  greatly  the  loss  of  men  she  has  hitherto  suffered 
from  the  West  India  climate  ! 