

Besides,  regular  Governments  are  always  found  to  act  re- 
specting alliances  upon  the  real  interests  of  the  countries  over 
which  they  preside;  and  these  are,  in  our  days,  with  regular 
Governments,  stronger  motives  than  the  ties  of  blood  or  con- 
sanguinity ;  and  no  doubt  the  interest  of  America  is  an  oftensive 
and  defensive  alliance  with  Great  Britain. 

The  advantages  which  Britain  will  derive  by  rescuing  Ame- 
rica from  the  clutches  of  Jacobinism,  and  by  establishing  in 
those  countries  regular  Governments  on  a  solid  basis,  will  be 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  337 

easily  perceived  and  briefly  enumerated.  In  the  first  place, 
it  would  deprive  the  enemies  of  Britain  of  all  means  of  attack 
against  the  British  possessions  in  America.  After  the  loss  of 
his  continental  possessions  in  America,  the  King  of  Spain  will 
be  unable  to  preserve  either  Cuba  or  Porto  Eico.  He  can 
neither  garrison  them,  nor  pay  the  expenses  of  their  Govern- 
ment. These  islands  would  fall  under  the  dominion  of  Britain, 
and  these  acquisitions  would  secure  to  her  the  command  of  the 
whole  archipelago  of  the  West  Indies,  and  render  her  empire 
in  America  as  invulnerable  as  it  is  in  India,  and,  perhaps,  still 
more  so. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  the  commercial  advan- 
tages that  Great  Britain  would  derive  from  this  important 
change  in  the  Government  of  Spanish  America  ;  still  I  must 
be  permitted  to  say  that  they  appear  to  be  such  as  to  exceed 
all  calculation.  It  would  throw  the  whole  of  the  West  India 
trade  into  the  hands  of  Britain  ;  it  would  render  the  trade  of  the 
eastern  coasts  of  the  United  States  entirely  subservient  to  that 
of  Great  Britain  ;  and  the  supplies  of  corn,  timber,  &;c.,  from 
the  Spanish  continent  would  establish  such  a  competition  in 
the  market  as  to  render  their  trade  completely  dependent  on 
the  will  of  Britain.  This  would  compel  them  to  sue  for  her 
alliance,  and  to  purchase  it  at  almost  any  price.  I  do  not 
speak  here  of  Louisiana,  and  the  countries  upon  the  banks  of 
the  Mississippi :  there  must  be  a  rivalship  between  these  and  the 
eastern  States,  which  will  daily  increase  their  dependence  upon 
Great  Britain.  The  trade  of  Spanish  America  would  also  fall 
upon  Britain  :  whatever  the  Americans  may  do,  no  article  of 
their  produce  can  find  a  market  in  this  country,  as  neither 
corn,  timber,  nor  any  article  produced  by  the  [Jnited  States, 
is  deficient  in  Spanish  America.  This  country  is  even  so  well 
supplied  with  all  these  articles  as  to  be  able  to  furnish  a  large 
proportion  of  them  for  the  West  India  congumption  and  at  a 
cheaper  rate.  The  inhabitants  of  that  country  require  only 
for  their  own  use  dry  goods  and  British  produce.     The  nature 