


Memorandum  relative  to  Spanish  America. 
BY  LORD  CASTLEREAGH. 

[1^0  date.] 

The  liberation  of  South  America  must  be  accomplished 
through  the  wishes  and  exertions  of  the  inhabitants  ;  but  the 
change  can  only  be  operated,  in  the  first  instance,  either  speedily 
or  with  safety  to  those  who  may  be  disposed  to  concur  in  it, 
imder  the  protection  and  with  the  support  of  an  auxiliary 
British  force  ;  the  principles  upon  which  it  is  sent  being,  how- 
ever, from  the  first,  distinctly  declared. 

This  force,  with  a  view  to  Mexico,  should  not  be  less  than 
10,000  men.  It  should  assemble  at  Jamaica  in  October,  so  as 
to  be  prepared  to  land  on  the  Spanish  Main  by  the  1  st  of 
December.  A  small  force  at  Trinidad,  to  give  the  impulse  at 
the  same  time  to  the  Caraccas,  might  be  advantageous.  The 
officer  who  is  to  command,  or  some  other  confidential  person, 
should  precede  the  troops.  His  early  departure  may  be  mate- 
rial to  superintend  preparations,  communications  with  the 
interior,  &ic.  The  corps  to  be  composed  two-thirds  of  British, 
and  one- third  of  the  Black  West  India  Regiment:  the  British 
troops  to  be  selected  from  those  corps  that  have  been  seasoned 
to  a  tropical  climate,  replacing  them  by  others.  The  following 
arrangement  is  suggested  for  assembling  the  force  required. 

VOL.  vn.  c  c 


386  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

The  four  regiments  in  reserve  at  Gibraltar,  under  Major- 

General  Spencer,  to  be  ordered  on  this  service — one  regiment 

from  Madeira,  replacing  it  by  the  4th  Veteran  Battalion  from 

Ireland,  1,061   strong.     A  battalion  of  the   60th  is  now  on 

passage  from  the  Cape  to  the  West  Indies,  where  we  have,  at 

this  moment,  (exclusive  of  5,000  men  at  Jamaica,   and  the 

battalion  of  the  60th  on  passage  from  the  Cape)  19,422  men — 

the  usual  force  in  that  quarter  not  exceeding  15  or  16,000 

men.     If  3,000  men  are  sent  out  from  hence  in  the  autumn 

to  the  West  Indies,  four  Black  and  three  European  regiments 

may  be  drawn  from  thence.     The  numbers  will  then  stand  thus ; 

Four  regiments  from  Gibraltar   .         .       4,000 

One  ditto,  from  Madeira    .         .         .       1,000 

Four  Black  regiments         .         .         .       4,000 

Three  European         ....       3,000 

12,000 
Cavalry  dismounted  ....  1,200 
Artillery 


13,200 
If  war  with  America  should  cease  to  be  apprehended,  three 
regiments  more,  or  3,000  men,  may  be  drawn  from  thence. 
The  4,000  men  to  be  sent  from  home  will  be  replaced  by  the 
usual  annual  draft  of  fifteen  men  per  company  from  the  Irish 
Militia,  the  vacancies  in  which  will  again  be  filled  up,  as  here- 
tofore, without  ballot,  and  at  a  low  bounty.  The  force  for 
home  defence  will  then  stand  as  at  present.  Should  reinforce- 
ments be  required  for  North  America  or  the  East  Indies,  they 
can  be  furnished.  It  will  in  that  case  dnly  remain  to  be  deter- 
mined, according  to  the  circumstances  of  tlie  moment,  whether 
Sir  John  Moore'^s  corps  (which  cannot  be  considered  as  sepa- 
rated from  our  system  of  home  defence)  shall  be  recalled. 