


Account   of  the   Second  Attack   of  Buenos  Ayres. 
BY  DON  BERNARDO  VELASQUEZ,  INTENDANT  OF  PARAGUAY.* 

Buenos  Ayres,  July  12,  1807. 
My  dear  Buonaventura — I  do  not  know  if  a  letter  will  reach 
your  hands  which  I  wrote  to  you  about  a  month  ago,  and 
which  was  delivered  to  a  naval  oflficer,  who  went  disguised  by 
land  to  embark  for  Europe  in  one  of  the  ports  of  Brazil.  Since 
war  was  declared  against  the  English,  this  river  has  been  con- 
tinually blockaded  by  their  vessels ;  and  if  we  have  rarely  any 
opportunity  to  write  to  Europe,  I  have  not  been  able  to  avail 
myself  of  it,  because  I  have  been  500  leagues  from  this  capital. 
In  the  letter  entrusted  to  the  naval  officer,  I  gave  you  notice 

*  From  Lord  Castlereagh's  Memorandum  on  Cabinet  Measures  re- 
specting South  America  (see  vol.  viii.,  p.  98),  it  appears  that  this  Nar- 
rative was  one  among  other  letters  from  Spanish  officers  then  recently 
intercepted,  and  that  the  writer  was  second  in  command  under  General 
Liniers  at  Buenos  Ayres.  The  paper,  by  the  same  writer,  giving  details 
of  the  occupation  of  that  city  by  General  Beresford  (introduced  at  p.  302), 
no  doubt  formed  part  of  the  same  capture ;  and  these  communications 
were  probably  translated  by  some  Spaniard  in  this  country,  so  imperfectly 
acquainted  with  English,  that  it  has  been  necessary  to  take  great  liberties 
with  his  language  before  it  could  be  presented  to  the  public. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  397 

that  the  English  took  possession  of  Monte  Video  on  the  Srd  of 
February,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  this  loss,  the  people  of 
Buenos  Ayres,  who  ascribe  to  Sobremonte  all  their  misfor- 
tunes, cried  against  him  and  against  the  Audiencia,  and  the 
latter,  being  intimidated,  decreed  the  suspension  of  Sobremonte 
from  all  kind  of  command.  The  10th  of  March,  I  received  at 
the  Assumption  the  official  declaration  of  the  said  suspension, 
and  an  order  from  the  Royal  Audiencia,  in  which  they  stated 
that  the  defence  of  the  capital  was  depending  on  my  coming 
here.  This  order,  I  think,  was  not  communicated  to  Liniers 
at  the  time,  and,  it  seems,  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him, 
when  he  knew  of  it  afterwards. 

By  the  same  Audiencia  I  was  made  Sub-Inspector  and 
Major-General  of  all  the  troops,  an  employment  which  gave 
me  very  unpleasant  moments,  because  the  military  regimen  is 
entirely  abandoned  here,  because  it  is  impossible  to  enforce  it  in 
corps  without  chief  officers,  and  consequently  without  subordina- 
tion. Luckily,  they  have  undertaken  with  emulation  the  ma- 
nagement of  the  arms,  evolutions,  and  continual  exercise  in  firing. 

The  English  in  Monte  Video  received  succours  as  well  from 
the  Cape  as  from  Europe.  On  the  28th  ultimo,  more  than 
seventy  sail  appeared  before  this  capital,  and  on  the  29th  they 
made  good  their  landing  about  twelve  or  thirteen  leagues  to 
the  south  of  this  capital.  On  the  1st  we  went  to  meet  them 
with  our  battalions  of  Volunteers,  whose  strength  was  not 
5,000  men,  infantry,  and  1,500  cavalry,  and  a  competent  corps 
of  artillerymen,  for  the  service  of  40  pieces  of  light  artillery. 