

During  General  Miranda's  residence  here,  I  have  enjoyed 
much  of  his  private  society,  and  I  have  received  occasionally 
confidential  communications  from  him,  touching  the  important 
enterprise  he  has  so  long  had  in  contemplation.  I  should  by 
no  means  do  justice  to  him,  did  I  let  pass  the  present  opportu- 
nity of  mentioning  to  your  Lordship  the  undeviating  proofs  of 
zeal  and  anxiety  he  has  evinced  for  the  honour  and  success  of 
his  Majesty's  arms,  as  well  as  for  the  welfare,  prosperity,  and 
glory,  of  the  British  Empire,  towards  which  both  his  heart 
and  mind  are  as  strongly  bent  as  those  of  the  most  loyal  and 
faithful  of  his  Majesty's  subjects. 

I  trust  that  the  many  months  of  uncomfortable  state  of 
suspense  that  he  passed  here  will,  in  some  degree,  find  a 
compensation  by  the  information  he  has  thereby  been  en- 
abled to  acquire  of  the  precise  situation  of  matters  on  the 
neighbouring  Continent,  and  of  which  he  may  hereafter  avail 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  .  405 

himself  with  advantage  to  the  general  object  of  his  ultimate 
wishes. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.,     T.  HiSLOP. 

The  Honourable  A,  Cochrane  Johnstone  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Tortola,  jN'ovember  15,  1807. 

My  Lord —  I  cannot  avoid  taking  the  liberty  of  introducing 
to  your  Lordship  the  bearer  of  this — General  Miranda ;  be- 
cause I  am  confident  that  the  adoption  of  his  plan  for  giving 
freedom  to  South  America  would  be  the  means  of  producing 
such  a  commercial  intercourse  with  our  country  as  would  enable 
us  to  view  with  indifference  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  France 
against  England.  No  peace  should  be  made  with  that  country 
till  this  great  national  object  was  accomplished. 

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  much  respect,  &;c., 

A.  Cochrane  Johnstone.. 


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

London,  January  10,  1808. 

My  Lord — The  emancipation  of  South  America  has  been  a 
subject  introduced  by  me,  and  received  by  the  English  Ministers 
as  far  back  as  the  year  1790,  under  the  promise  of  granting 
their  independence  on  the  same  conditions  that  France  and 
Spain  did  with  the  English  Colonies  in  North  America  ;  when 
the  Convention  with  Spain  about  Nootka  Sound  put  an  end  to 
the  measures  adopted  at  that  period,  for  putting  this  plan  into 
execution.     (See  Note  A.) 

France  undertook  it  soon  after,  in  the  year  1793,  with  the 
view  of  giving  them  an  absolute  independence  in  the  same 
manner ;  but  the  exaggerated  doctrines  propagated  at  that 
moment  by  the  anarchical  party  in  France  put  a  stop  to  it, 
through  my  own  persuasion  and  efforts :  demanding  further 
explanations  about  the  real  state  of  St.  Domingo,  that  I  appre- 
hended would  have  contaminated  the  South  American  Continent, 
and,  instead  af  bringing  liberty,  would  have  introduced  anarchy 