


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  403 

The  rest  of  the  year  is  delicious.  In  the  winter,  after  dinner, 
I  ride  :  I  alight  about  a  league  from  the  town ;  I  take  the 
musket,  and  in  a  short  time  I  kill  no  less  than  half  a  dozen 
partridges.  Some  of  my  companions  make  good  game  of 
pigeons,  ducks,  and  several  other  kinds  of  birds.  The  river  is 
prodigiously  abundant  in  fish.  Commonly,  some  vessel  is  at 
anchor  at  about  200  paces,  in  sight  of  my  house.  I  order  to 
carry  a  chair  there  in  the  afternoon,  when  I  do  not  ride.  From 
thence,  with  the  greatest  easiness,  I  throw  the  line,  and  catch 
monstrous  fishes.  These  are  the  amusements  of  the  after- 
noons ;  the  mornings  are  occupied  more  seriously. 

A  Iready  my  head  is  fatigued.  Tell  whatever  you  please  to 
your  amiable  partner  and  my  respected  friend,  without  for- 
getting the  little  Charles,  whom  I  consider  as  a  little  man  of 
courage.  I  do  not  know  what  I  can  say  to  Pepe — you  shall 
see  him — A  Dieu.  Yours  always,  Bernardo. 


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

27,  Grafton  Street,  Fitzroy  Square,  January  3,  1808. 
My  Lord — After  a  boisterous  passage  of  forty-four  days 
from  Tortola,  I  arrived  at  Portsmouth  in  the  frigate  Alexan- 
dria ;  and  having  obtained  the  necessary  passports  and  passes 
of  the  Custom-House  for  my  equipage  and  suite,  I  proceeded 
to  London,  where  I  arrived  on  Friday  evening. 

I  had  the  honour  to  call  on  your  Lordship  this  morning,  to 
deliver  the  enclosed  despatches  from  Governor  Hislop,  of  Tri- 
nidad, and  from  Mr.  Cochrane  Johnstone,  M.P.  Having 
some  important  communications  besides  to  submit  to  his  Ma- 
jesty's Ministers,  I  should  be  very  glad  to  know  when  it  will 
be  convenient  for  your  Lordship  to  receive  me. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c.,     Fran,  de  Miranda. 

General  Hislop  {Governor  of  Trinidad)  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Trinidad,  October  20,  1807. 
My  Lord — The  important  object  which  General  Miranda's 

d  d2 


404  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

visit  to  this  island  originally  had  in  view,  and  from  a  conside- 
ration of  the  knowledge  which  his  Majesty's  Ministers  have 
thereof,  1  have  deemed  it  proper  to  apprize  your  Lordship  of 
the  resolution  which  he  has,  in  the  present  situation  of  public 
affairs,  adopted  of  departing  from  hence  for  England  without 
further  delay,  he  having  done  me  the  honour  of  consulting 
with  me  on  the  expediency  thereof,  and  my  opinion  on  that 
measure  perfectly  coinciding  with  his,  however  earnestly  it 
were  to  have  been  wished  that  he  had  previously  received  his 
letters  which  the  second  August  packet  ought  to  have  brought 
him.  It  is,  notwithstanding,  to  be  feared  that  he  will  have  to 
leave  them ;  as  the  packet  has  been  arrived  at  Barbadoes  these 
seventeen  days  past,  we  fear  tliere  is  no  boat  there  to  bring 
down  our  mail ;  and,  it  being  intended  that  the  convoy  with 
with  which  he  goes  shall  leave  this  on  the  23rd  instant  for 
Tortola,  he  has  taken  a  passage  in  a  ship  bound  to  Bristol, 
and  is  anxious  that  he  may  not  be  detained  there  under  the 
Alien  regulations,  conceiving  that  his  earliest  presence  in  Lon- 
don may  be  of  consequence. 