


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  399 

into  the  town  a  good  many  prisoners,  in  crowds  of  40,  50,  100, 
and  more,  carried  by  our  skirmishing  parties.  In  short,  at 
8  o''clock,  p.m.,  or  a  little  after,  the  firing  ceased,  for  want  of 
enemies.  At  this  moment,  we  numbered  1,800  prisoners,  155 
officers,  among  them  one  General  and  some  Colonels. 

At  sunset  on  the  6th,  an  English  officer  came  to  speak  to 
Liniers.  He  made  some  propositions,  of  which  some  were 
accepted,  some  were  modified  or  refused,  and  some  dictated 
to  him.  The  amount  of  them  is,  that  the  hostilities  will  be 
stopped  from  that  moment  in  the  river  Plata ;  that,  on  both 
sides,  there  should  be  a  mutual  restitution  of  prisoners,  and 
those  to  be  embarked  in  the  space  of  ten  days,  carrying  with 
them  the  arms  they  had  actually — that,  in  two  months,  the 
town  of  Monte  Video  was  to  be  restored  in  the  same  state  it 
was  in  at  the  time  it  was  taken.  This  last  proposition  was 
very  hard  to  the  enemy  :  however,  he  was  obliged  to  accede  to 
it  after  a  defeat  so  astonishing,  which  cost  him  1,080  odd  men 
killed,  a  great  number  of  wounded,  little  less  than  2,000  pri- 
soners ;  155  officers,  and  a  great  many  missing.  In  short, 
in  nine  hours,  an  English  army  of  from  9  to  10,000  men,  ac- 
cording to  the  statement  of  all  the  prisoners,  was  destroyed  by 
5,000  citizens.  I  assure  you  that  I  cannot  find  in  the  natural 
order  of  things  a  sufficient  cause  of  so  unexpected  and  happy 
an  event,  which  cannot  be  ascribed  but  to  a  decided  favour  of 
Heaven. 

In  the  very  few  meetings  in  which  the  defence  of  the  capital 
was  discussed,  my  opinion  was  always  (considering  the  troops 
we  had)  not  to  expose  them  in  the  open  field,  and  that  we 
could  not  receive  any  benefit  from  them  but  in  the  ditches  and 
clefts  which  surround  the  town,  and  in  the  streets.  Many 
proofs  we  have  of  the  advantages  resulting  from  such  positions, 
though  taken  in  indispensable  cases.  It  is  a  point  of  faith,  that 
if  the  English  had  attacked  us  in  the  plain,  on  the  1st,  when 
we  came  to  give  them  battle,  we  should  have  clothed  in  mourn- 
ing all  tliis  America ;  we  should  have  been  destroyed,  without 


400  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

being  able  to  preserve  a  single  man,  because  we  had  on  our 
back  an  impenetrable  river.  I  never  thought  that  we  should 
pass  to  the  other  side  of  this  river ;  and  when  we  marched  to- 
wards it,  I  thought  it  was  with  the  idea  of  having  it  as  a  bul- 
wark on  our  front.  I  say  that  I  take  as  a  point  of  faith  that 
we  should  have  been  destroyed  completely;  and  I  repeat 
it  again,  because  it  is  also  a  point  of  faith  that  these  troops, 
without  being  sheltered,  cannot  stand  a  second  volley  of 
shot. 