

We  drew  up  our  troops  in  order  of  battle,  at  the  distance  of 
three  quarters  of  a  league  from  here,  and  the  following  day  we 
saw  the  enemy  passing  in  front  of  us,  and  turning  in  search  of 
an  easy  passage  over  the  Riachuelo,  a  small  river,  which  was 
behind  us,  with  the  intention  of  coming  directly  to  the  capital. 
Knowing  his  idea,  we  changed  our  position,  and,  repassing  the 
bridge,  which  was  behind  us,  we  marched  quick  to  receive  them 
at  the  entrance  of  the  town. 


398  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807- 

I  arrived  there  with  only  a  battalion  of  Vizcaynos,  one  of 
Arribefios,  and  a  squadron  of  hussars,  with  six  pieces  of  the 
light  artillery.  At  the  same  time,  Liniers  arrived  there. 
Hardly  were  those  pieces  established  on  a  small  hill,  called  the 
yard  of  the  Matadero,  or  del  Miserere,  when  at  a  short  dis- 
tance a  column  of  the  enemy  was  observed  coming  towards  that 
point  through  the  hedges  of  prickly  pear,  from  a  wood  all 
about  the  capital.  The  artillery  for  some  time  made  a  very 
good  fire  of  grape-shot,  near  the  enemy  ;  but  he,  having  gained 
by  the  protection  of  the  hedges  of  prickly  pear  an  advantageous 
post,  directed  upon  us,  without  being  observed,  a  good  many 
volleys  of  musketry,  which  obliged  our  troops  to  abandon  that 
point  —  after  having  succeeded,  however,  by  this  manoeuvre 
in  stopping  the  enemy,  who  would  undoubtedly  have  taken 
possession  of  the  town  that  very  evening,  if  our  arrival  at  the 
Matadero  had  been  delayed  by  half  an  hour.  All  that  you 
shall  hear  different  in  a  comma  from  this  simple  statement,  do 
not  believe. — Let  me  go  on. 

The  nights  of  the  2nd,  3rd,  and  4th,  were  employed  in  put- 
tins:  in  each  of  the  entrances  of  the  streets  leadino;  from  the 
Great  Square  towards  the  fields,  two  heavy  guns,  the  troops 
on  the  terraces  of  the  same  streets,  and  in  opening  ditches  at 
150  yards  from  the  Square.  Another  part  of  the  troops  was 
destined  to  skirmish  in  the  cross-lanes. 

The  5th,  the  enemy  attacked  the  town  in  three  columns,  by 
the  north,  south,  and  west,  dividing  themselves  between  the 
eight  streets  which  lead  to  the  Square.  At  6  o'^clock  began  an 
infernal  fire,  as  well  from  the  artillery  as  from  the  musketry  of 
the  terraces.  This  produced  all  the  effect  which  ought  to  be 
expected  from  so  advantageous  a  situation,  where  the  soldier 
could  load  his  musket  undiscovered,  and  was  to  be  seen  only 
at  the  moment  of  charging.  The  last  terraces  garrisoned  with 
musketry  were  distant  not  more  than  400  paces  from  the 
Square,  and  at  this  distance  every  Englishman  was  killed  in 
the  streets.     After  a  few  hours'*  firing,  there  began  to  come 