

On  the  side  of  the  English  there  has  been  very  little  skill, 
and  no  combination  whatever.  They  did  not  attack  us,  when 
they  could  have  destroyed  us  in  the  field,  and  after  that  they 
attempted  the  rash  undertaking  of  forcing  the  town  when  its 
entrances  were  garrisoned  as  I  have  said.  If  their  three 
columns  had  maintained  and  fortified  themselves  in  the  points 
they  took  on  the  entrance  of  the  town,  without  firing  a  mus- 
ket, in  less  than  four  days  we  should  have  been  obliged  to  de- 
liver to  them  our  arms,  because  we  had  no  provisions  in  the 
town  to  feed  the  troops  and  inhabitants,  and  it  was  very  easy 
for  the  enemy  to  prevent  the  entering  of  500  bullocks  which 
were  slaughtered  every  day  to  feed  the  people.  But,  fortu- 
nately, they  came  persuaded  that  here  there  was  not  any  re- 
sistance to  meet  with,  and  in  this  persuasion  they  began  to 
plunder,  without  any  discipline,  and  in  the  most  atrocious  and 
barbarous  manner  killing  several  citizens  of  both  sexes  and  of 
all  ages.  By  these  means,  spreading  themselves  about  in  small 
parties,  they  were  taken  by  our  soldiers.  Our  people — that  is 
to  say,  the  country  people — have  also  resorted  to  plunder,  and 
the  soldiers  profit  by  the  robberies  of  the  prisoners. 

Many  are  the  mournings  worn  by  the  inhabitants  of  this 
capital,  in  consequence  of  the  action  of  the  5th  instant.  But  its 
memory  will  rest  for  ever,  on  account  of  the  complete  defeat  of 
a  strong  expedition,  composed  of  select  troops,  of  wliich  their 
own  officers  said  that  they  were  not  only  the  best  of  England, 
but  of  all  the  world.     They  are  mistaken. 


1807.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  401 

The  number  of  vessels  richly  laden,  which  were  waiting  for 
the  surrender  of  this  capital,  is  very  great.  They  did  expect 
to  land  their  merchandize,  whose  value,  it  is  stated,  amounts 
to  more  than  twelve  or  fourteen  millions  of  dollars.  It  is  not 
a  little  disappointment  to  go  back  to  London  with  their 
cargoes. 

I  have  not  yet  made  any  question  about  my  return  to  Para- 
guay, notwithstanding  that  I  think  I  shall  do  it  in  a  very 
short  time.  My  stay  here  during  the  present  Government 
cannot  produce  to  me  but  disgust,  because  I  cannot  see  with 
indifference  the  disorganization  of  this  capital  in  all  its  branches. 
This  is  the  25th. 

Since  ten  or  twelve  days,  I  feel  myself  almost  good  for  no- 
thing, and  unable  to  take  the  pen.  Thank  God  that  the  vessel 
destined  to  carry  the  correspondence  had  been  detained  more 
than  I  thought,  and  what  deservedly  interesting  news  !  All 
my  disease  seems  to  be  no  more  than  a  cold ;  but  I  have  suf- 
fered a  painful  illness,  and  even  at  this  day  I  feel  myself  very 
much  incommoded,  owing  to  so  many  cold  and  damp  nights  I 
have  to  pass  in  the  open  air. 