

Let  us  come  back  again  to  the  defence  of  the  capital,  whose 
news  will  be  very  much  celebrated  in  Spain,  and  will  make  noise 
in  all  the  provinces  of  the  world,  as  one  of  the  most  memorable 
military  achievements  of  these  times.  We  cannot  form  any 
other  idea  of  it,  if  we  consider  ten  thousand  Englishmen,  well 
armed,  and  commanded  by  Generals  and  a  great  number  of 
officers,  in  whose  countenances,  at  least,  there  appears  a  martial 
spirit,  have  been  defeated  by  five  thousand  citizens  (the  num- 
ber of  muskets  in  Buenos  Ayres  at  that  time  was  not  above 
that)  in  such  a  manner  that  they  were  obliged  to  restore  so 
important  a  town  as  Monte  Video.  I  cannot  know  in  what 
expressions  the  King  will  be  informed  of  this  transaction.  In 
such  cases  as  this,  there  are  sometimes  injurious  exaggerations. 
If  they  relate  of  heroism,  of  courage  from  the  town-militia, 
besides  that  they  are  very  credible  by  the  result,  the  Govern- 

VOL.  VII.  D  D 


402  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1807. 

ment  will  be  deceived,  and  may  disregard  the  security  of  these 
provinces,  trusting  to  the  valour  and  the  patriotism  of  the 
citizens.  If  it  was  my  province  to  give  my  opinion  on  the 
subject,  I  would  say  that  they  have  shown  their  patriotism 
and  their  love  for  their  sovereign,  and  that  they  have  shaken 
off  with  courage  the  yoke  which  the  English  were  to  impose 
upon  them :  but  that,  notwithstanding  this  behaviour,  I  am  of 
the  opinion  that  half  the  number  of  troops  which  attacked  this 
capital  would  make  themselves  masters  of  it,  supposing  the 
same  defenders,  equally  armed  and  disciplined — a  thing  which 
cannot  subsist  long,  because  it  is  necessary  that  all  the  people 
give  up  their  arms,  in  order  to  attend  to  their  own  private 
business.  I  never  can  consider  as  an  instance,  which  can  give 
any  rules  of  defence,  this  which  we  have  made  so  complete  of 
this  capital.  I  will  rather  say  that  ten  thousand  English 
sheep  came  to  present  their  throats  to  the  knife ;  and,  in  a 
word,  I  could  say  that  the  River  Plata,  the  key  to  so  vast  and 
rich  dominions,  is  defenceless,  incapable  of  resisting  a  small 
force,  and  that  in  all  its  provinces  there  is  not  to  be  found  a 
military  man.  This  is  the  state  of  the  Viceroy alty,  and  Peru 
is  the  same,  and  miracles  are  not  to  be  found  every  day.  If 
the  war  continues,  if  the  English  undertake  another  trial 
against  Buenos  Ayres,  and  if  from  Spain  cannot  come  troops 
to  defend  it,  we  must  give  it  up. 

Nothing  have  I  told  you  about  my  Paraguay,  and  now  I 
have  not  time  nor  head  to  explain  the  motives  of  satisfaction  I 
have  in  that  country  ;  being  the  foremost,  the  blind  obedience, 
particular  esteem  and  respect,  shown  to  me  by  every  class  of 
that  people.  Nothing  is  wanting  there  for  the  service  of  a 
regular  table.  There  are  many  and  well  assorted  shops.  The 
Government  House  is  very  good  ;  the  salary  is  ^4,600,  enough 
to  satisfy  a  person  who,  like  me,  only  wishes  for  a  commodious 
existence.  The  climate  is  excellent :  it  is  true  that,  in  the 
months  of  December,  January,  and  February,  we  feel  strong 
heats,  though  I  fancy  not  so  great  as  in  some  days  in  Madrid. 