


406  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  coufusiou.  The  retreat  of  the  French  annies  from  the  Low 
Countries,  that  followed  soon  after,  put  an  absolute  stop  to  it. 

As  soon  as  Spain  abandoned  the  Coalition  and  renewed  her 
connexion  with  France,  I  turned  my  views  again  towards 
England,  and  soon  after  quitted  the  army  of  the  Republic. 
At  my  arrival  in  London,  in  1798,  the  British  Government, 
under  the  same  Ministry  of  Mr.  Pitt,  renewed  the  negociations, 
with  the  intention  of  putting  the  same  plans  in  execution, 
assisted  by  the  co-operation  of  the  United  States  of  North 
America,  that  were  invited  to  furnish  a  land  force  of  10,000 
men ;  while  Great  Britain  would  have  found  the  money  and 
ships  necessary  for  carrying  into  execution  this  grand  operation. 
The  President  Adams  disappointed  us,  however,  on  this  occa- 
sion, and  the  subject  was  postponed. 

In  the  beginning  of  1801,  during  Mr.  Addingion's  admini- 
stration, the  same  negociations  were  renewed ;  the  projects  of 
Government  to  be  recommended  to  the  people  of  South  Ame- 
rica and  the  military  operations  were  combined  and  agreed ; 
and  the  expedition  was  on  the  point  of  sailing,  when  the  pre- 
liminaries of  the  Peace  of  Amiens  put  a  stop  to  it.  The  ope- 
ration, of  course,  was  again  suspended,  until  an  opportunity 
should  occur  to  put  them  in  execution  at  a  future  period. 

On  the  declaration  of  war  against  France  in  1803,  the  same 
plans  were  resumed,  and  preparations  made  by  the  Admini- 
stration for  the  purpose  of  carrying  them  into  execution,  the 
moment  that  a  declaration  of  war  against  Spain  should  take 
place.  This  event  occurred  in  1804,  during  Mr.  Pittas  third 
[second]  Administration ;  when  preparations  were  immediately 
resumed,  and  an  extensive  and  detailed  plan  was  arranged  with 
Lord  Melville  and  Sir  Home  Popham  for  the  same  purpose. 
(See  Note  B.) 

These  measures,  however,  were  suspended  by  the  manoeuvres 
of  France  and  by  Russian  intrigue,  when  the  pressure  of  the 
South  American  exiles  from  the  provinces  of  Caraccas  and 
Santa  F^,  residing  in  the  United  States  of  America  and  in 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  407 

the  Island  of  Trinidad,  forced  me  to  quit  this  place,  and  to 
attend  to  their  call,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  some  assistance 
from  the  United  States  of  America  (which  were  at  that  time 
expected  to  be  involved  in  a  war  with  Spain,  on  account  of  the 
differences  respecting  Louisiana),  having,  previous  to  my  de- 
parture, obtained  permission  and  assurances  from  Great  Britain 
of  being  supported,  in  case  of  success,  in  our  independence, 
agreeably  to  our  primitive  stipulations. 

The  failure  of  this  attempt  was  owing  not  only  to  the  bad 
faith  of  the  agents  of  the  American  Government,  who  betrayed 
the  secret  to  our  enemies,  but  to  the  infamous  and  treacherous 
conduct  of  the  American  officers,  entrusted  with  the  direction 
of  the  ships  composing  the  expedition.     (See  Note  C.) 