

T  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  the  highest  consideration  and 
respect,  &;c.,  Fran,  de  Miranda. 

Note  A. 
Note  delivered  to  Mr,  Pitt^  at  his  request^  desiring  to  know  what 
were  Don  Francisco  de  MirandcCs  views^  soon  after  the  Con- 
tention with  Spain,  about  Nootka  Sound, 

London,  January  28,  1791. 
Sir — My  only  views  now  are,  as  they  always  were,  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  and  liberty  of  my  own  country — South 
America — excessively  oppressed;  and,  in  so  doing,  to  offer 
also  great  commercial  advantages  to  England,  as  stated  in  the 
proposal  presented  on  the  5th  of  March,  1790. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  413 

Upon  these  principles,  I  should  be  very  happy  to  oiFer  and 
continue  my  services  to  England ;  that,  in  pursuing  the  advan- 
tages already  obtained  by  the  last  Convention,  some  judicious 
arrangements  may  be  made,  so  as  to  forward  and  bring  to  matu- 
rity, at  some  fiiture  period,  the  same  generous  and  benevolent 
plan  above-mentioned,  for  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  South 
America,  and  for  the  grandeur  and  opulence  of  this  nation. 

Very  few  individuals  of  the  ex- Jesuits,  natives  of  Chili  and 
Mexico,  now  exiled  and  ill  used  in  Italy,  might  be  of  very 
great  service,  both  for  the  purpose  of  directing  the  new  settle- 
ments and  commercial  intercourse  to  be  formed  between  the 
English  and  the  natives  upon  the  granted  coasts  of  South 
America,  and  for  establishing  some  communications  with  the 
great  Spanish  towns  on  that  Continent,  by  means  of  their  own 
relations  and  friends. 

My  intention  being  purely  patriotic,  with  the  view  only  of 
offering  services  to  my  country,  and  promoting  the  interests 
and  advantages  of  Great  Britain,  as  perfectly  compatible,  ser- 
vices should  not  be  requested  from  me  against  Spain  with  any 
other  motive  ;  it  being  a  point  of  delicacy  with  me,  though 
authorized  by  the  rights  of  nations  and  the  example  of  great 
and  virtuous  men,  in  modern  and  ancient  times. 

Francisco  de  Miranda. 

Note  B. 
General  Miranda  to  the  Right  Hon.  William  Pitt. 

Grafton  Street,  ce  13  Juin,  1805. 
Monsieur — La  demande  que  j'ai  eu  Thonnour  de  vous  sou- 
mettre  par  Sir  Evan  Nepean,  tendante  a  vous  demander  la 
permission  de  partir  incessamment  pour  la  Trinidad,  n'a  pour 
objet  que  de  me  reunir  a  des  compatriotes  qui  se  trouvent 
actuellement  dans  cette  isle,  et  qui  attendent  avec  la  plus  vive 
impatience  mon  arrivee,  pour  donner  la  main  a  Toeuvre  impor- 
tante  de  leur  emancipation  quails  sont  tout-pret  de  commencer 
par  eux-memes ;   voyant  que  les  secours  promis  par  T  Angle- 


414  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

terre  souffrent  un  delai  trop  long,  tandis  que  le  moment  actuel 
est  a  leur  avis  le  plus  propice  qu'on  sauroit  en  sauhaiter. 