

Let  me  be  permitted  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  actual  state 
of  the  trade  between  South  America  and  the  mother-country, 
carried  on  under  the  American  flag,  through  the  exclusive 
interest  of  the  Intendants  and  Governors  of  those  provinces. 
It  appears,  by  a  voluminous  correspondence  lately  intercepted 
in  a  packet  from  Europe,  and  in  my  possession,  that  the  pro- 
ductions of  South  America  are  now  cheaper  in  Spain  than  they 
ever  were  in  times  of  peace  ;  and  that  the  people  of  South 
America,  as  well  as  the  European  Spanish  merchants,  complain 
very  highly  about  it. 

The  specie  and  money  transactions  also,  between  Mexico, 
the  Havanna,  Carthagena,  &c.,  are  chiefly  carried  on  by  the 
American  merchants,  which  immense  profits  have  turned  them 
from  friends  to  be  enemies  of  our  independence.  They  will 
not  be  brought  back,  I  presume,  to  our  friendship  and  interest, 
till  they  shall  see  themselves  deprived  of  that  immense  trade 
that  they  now  almost  exclusively  enjoy. 

In  times  when  crime,  usurpation,  and  vice  are  upon  the 
throne,  and  virtue  is  seen  oppressed  almost  everywhere  on  the 
Continent,  let  me  be  allowed  to  say  a  few  words,  in  answer  to 
some  illiberal  insinuations  that,  I  find,  have  been  thrown  to 
the  public.  My  personal  views  and  interest  will  be  highly 
gratified,  and  my  labours  perfectly  rewarded,  when  I  shall  see 
the  people  of  those  provinces  enjoying  a  sufficient  portion  of 


412  LETTERS  AXD  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

rational  civil  liberty,  and  a  solid,  permanent  form  of  Govern- 
ment that  will  preserve  it  and  promise  them  happiness.  The 
situation  of  a  private  citizen  then  will  be  to  me  not  only  a  con- 
genial and  eligible  one,  but  of  a  good  example,  I  hope,  to 
others,  by  showing  that  the  true  character  of  a  patriot  consists 
in  being  submissive  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  a  useful 
member  of  the  society  to  which  he  belongs. 

I  have  gone  rapidly  and  with  brevity  through  the  narration 
and  statement,  presuming  that  the  annexed  documents  (par- 
ticularly the  plan  presented  to  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord  Melville  in 
1804)  will  supply  the  deficiencies ;  and  I  have  to  apologize  to 
your  lordship  for  the  unavoidable  delay,  my  papers  not  having 
come  to  hand  till  Thursday  last. 

The  documents  I  have  now  by  me  are  numerous  and  inte- 
resting ;  but  the  apprehension  of  being  diffuse  and  tedious  has 
made  me  select  a  few  only,  leaving  the  others  for  the  inspection 
of  any  confidential  person  that  your  lordship  shall  think  proper 
to  appoint  for  their  examination.  For  the  sake  of  brevity  and 
despatch  I  have  also  transmitted  some  originals,  whose  preser- 
vation being  absolutely  necessary  to  me,  I  request  your  lord- 
ship will  have  the  goodness  of  returning,  after  the  inspection 
of  his  Majesty ""s  Ministers. 