

It  was  always  my  intention  to  give  to  you  the  sole  and  com- 
plete control  of  the  Leander  and  all  the  property  in  her,  to  cut 
and  do  with  them  as  you  might  think  proper  to  ensure  your 
success.  I  have  taken  on  myself  the  chance  of  the  expedition. 
Should  it  fail,  I  engaged  to  take  no  compensation.  Should 
you  be  successful,  our  contract  is  not  on  paper,  but  more  deeply 
engraven  in  the  breasts  and  honour  of  both  parties. 

Depend  upon  it,  I  will  never  forsake  the  cause  I  have  once 
espoused,  and  think  honourable  and  just.  All  the  little  energy 
I  possess  shall  be  devoted  to  you,  and  I  have  it  in  my  power 
to  interest  such  strong  friends  as  will  enable  me  completely  to 
fulfil  your  views.  I  shall  be  governed,  in  a  great  measure,  in 
my  future  conduct  by  the  accounts  I  am  now  waiting,  with  the 
greatest  anxiety,  to  receive  from  you. 

Your  sincere  friend,         Samuel  G.  Ogdem 

Colonel  Smith  to  General  Miranda. 

New  York,  August  15,  1806. 
My  dear  Friend — By  the  enclosed  letter,  you  will  notice 
the  solicitude  of  Mr.  Barker  to  be  with  you  :  his  family  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  419 

respectable,   and  his  appearance  and   manners   much  in  his 
favour. 

We  have  been  severely  persecuted  since  your  departure.  The 
Administration,  under  the  influence  of  the  French  Minister, 
absolutely  were  determined  to  sacrifice  me,  deprived  me  of  an 
office  worth  ^6,000  a-year,  and  instituted  a  suit  which,  after 
putting  me  to  immense  expense,  and  themselves  to  a  much 
greater,  they  were  foiled  in,  by  the  unanimous  verdict  of  a  jury, 
as  you  will  observe  in  the  enclosed  paper.  When  the  verdict 
of  Not  Guilty  was  given,  the  whole  Court  burst  into  loud  ap- 
plause, and  the  country  at  large  rejoice  and  wish  you  prosperity. 
Grod  bless  you!  Yours  truly,  W.  S.  Smith. 

Note  D. 
Rear-Admiral  the  Honourable  Sir  Alexander  Cochrane^  to 
General  Miranda. 
Northumberland,  Carlisle  Bay,  Barbadoes,  June  9,  1806. 
Sir — Whereas  you  have  represented  to  me  that,  in  carrying 
into  effect  the  expedition  under  your  command,  you  have  met 
with  some  difficulties  from  the  defection  of  the  force  you  ex- 
pected to  join  you  at  St.  Domingo ;  and,  conceiving  it  may  be 
mutually  advantageous  to  Great  Britain  and  the  provinces  of 
South  America,  which  you  are  about  to  attempt  to  liberate 
from  the  dominion  of  Spain ;  and  having  received  your  state- 
ment of  the  various  plans  that  have  from  time  to  time  been  in 
agitation  between  you  and  the  British  Ministry,  in  all  which 
the  same  object  has  been  kept  in  view ;  but,  from  particular 
circumstances  incident  to  the  moment,   they  have  not  been 
carried  into  eff'ect — in  consideration  thereof,  and  judging  that 
I  may  thereby  promote  what  seems  to  have  commanded  the 
attention  of  the  British  Government,  I  agree  to  support  your 
landing  in  any  part  of  America  between  Trinidad  and  the  coast 
opposite  to  the  Island  of  Aruba,  with  such  a  naval  force  as  I 
can  afford,  which  will  be  at  least  a  sloop  of  war  and  two  brigs, 
'  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  Islands  Station. 