


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  417 

son,  &;c.,  remain  covered  with  the  disapprobation  of  the  inde- 
pendent people  of  America,  and  the  disgrace  brought  on  them 
by  their  unjust  proceedings. 

I  have  heard,  with  great  regret,  my  dear  friend,  the  great 
disappointments  and  disasters  you  have  met  with,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  unjustifiable  and  highly  reprehensible  conduct  of 
the  two  Lewises.  I  can  easily  conceive  all  you  must  have 
suffered  in  consequence  of  those  two  men,  and  no  one  more 
heartily  reprobates  their  conduct,  as  represented  to  me,  than 
myself.  I  trust,  however,  notwithstanding  those  transient  dis- 
appointments, there  is  an  all-wise  Providence,  that  will  guide 
your  footsteps  to  the  wished-for  point,  and,  as  your  cause  is 
that  of  liberty  and  patriotism,  that  you  may  arrive  at  the 
climax  of  your  wishes. 

New  York,  September  6,  1806. 

A  few  days  since,  the  former  commander  of  the  Leander 
(Captain  Thomas  Lewis)  returned  here  a  perfect  vagabond  and 
outcast  from  society.  His  brother,  J.  Lewis,  also  returned 
here  from  St.  Domingo,  in  the  ship  Emperor,  making  a  very 
bad  voyage  from  St.  Domingo  about  a  month  since.  I  have 
now  heard  from  themselves  all  that  could  be  offered  in  their 
defence,  for  their  extremely  unjustifiable  and  improper  conduct 
in  regard  to  you.  It  is  impossible  it  can  be  more  entirely  dis- 
approved of  by  you  than  it  is  by  me. 

When  I  think  how  much  you  must  have  suffered  from  the 
ignorance  and  villany  of  Thomas  Lewis,  it  really  makes  my 
blood  boil  with  indignation.  I  could  scarcely  have  believed 
any  man  capable  of  conduct  so  base  and  infamous.  His  brother, 
Jacob  Lewis,  is  also  unpardonable  for  having  deceived  you,  and 
not  joining  you  in  the  Emperor,  after  having  solemnly  promised 
you  to  do  so ;  and  even  starting  from  Port  au  Prince  with  that 
intention,  when,  lo !  a  newspaper,  saying  the  Colonel  and  my- 
self were  prosecuted  by  the  Government,  induces  him  to  turn 
back  and  abandon  one  of  the  most  laudable  enterprises  ever 
undertaken  by  man.     The  very  reasons  which  caused  him  to 

VOL.  vn.  E  E 


418  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

return  would  have  induced  me  to  persevere.  Suffice  it  to  say 
my  confidence  has  been  completely  destroyed  in  those  men. 
I  consider  the  conduct  of  Thomas  Lewis  of  the  most  infamous 
kind,  and  that  of  Jacob  Lewis  arising  from  pusillanimity  and 
want  of  judgment. 

I  have,  in  my  own  mind,  my  dear  General,  little  doubt,  not- 
withstanding all  these  past  provocations  and  disappointments, 
but  that  your  heroic  perseverance  in  the  cause  of  liberty  will  lead 
to  the  wished-for  goal  of  success.  The  people  of  this  country 
will  rejoice,  and  are  almost  unanimously  in  your  favour.  Even 
the  President  himself,  although  a  low  and  petty  policy  induced 
him  to  prosecute  Smith  and  myself,  in  his  heart,  I  am  sure, 
wishes  your  success ;  and  I  am  not  without  hopes  may  yet, 
seeing  their  past  errors,  be  induced  to  act  a  dignified  part  in 
regard  to  your  views,  and  shake  off  the  fetters  continually  bound 
round  them  by  the  French  and  Spanish  Ministers. 