

These  apprehensions  are  greatly  increased  by  seeing  180 
French  troops  already  established  at  the  capital  of  Caraccas, 
while  Old  Spain  appears  to  be  in  the  hands  and  possession  of 
France.  In  this  alarming  situation  for  that  country,  I  have 
come  here  to  claim  from  his  Majesty ""s  Ministers  that  assistance 
so  long  ago  and  so  repeatedly  promised,  of  supporting  their 
independence  ;  as  it  is  natural  for  them  to  suppose  that  orders 
from  Spain  will  soon  arrive  calculated  to  promote  the  Gallic 
interest,  and  the  submission  of  the  whole  province  to  their  new 
masters,  if  measures  are  not  soon  adopted  in  the  country  for 
an  effectual  and  successful  opposition. 

This  step,  in  my  opinion,  would  be  absurd  in  the  highest 
degree,  were  the  inhabitants  of  those  provinces  to  venture,  un- 
supported and  unprepared,  to  contend  with  France  and  Spain 
united,  without  an  efficient  maritime  and  land  support.  In  which 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  409 

case,  I  should  imaj^ine  it  more  prudent  on  their  part  to  make 
the  best  terms  and  arrangements  with  France,  rather  than  to 
make  themselves  the  victims  of  French  rapine  and  conquest. 

This  very  same  distressing  circumstance  I  conceive  to  be  in 
favour  of  the  independence  now ;  as  dangers  and  difficulties 
must  always  unite  men  ;  and  I  do  not  perceive,  by  what  I 
know  of  the  province  at  the  time  I  quitted  Trinidad,  that  there 
is  any  difference  in  opinion  for  emancipation,  if  independence  is 
fairly  and  openly  offered  to  them,  and  the  delicate  point  of 
their  religion  respectfully  attended  to.  The  late  events  at 
Buenos  Ayres  are  certainly  unfavourable,  as  they  encourage 
the  agents  of  Government  to  oppose  resistance,  and  the  strangers 
in  the  country  to  aspire  to  those  high  and  supreme  situations 
that  Liniers  and  his  followers  have  obtained  in  another  quarter; 
for  which  purpose  I  should  think  that  the  force  to  be  employed 
now  to  ensure  this  operation  ought  to  be  greater  than  any  we 
have  mentioned  yet. 

The  population  of  the  Colombian  Continent  is  considered  by 
the  best  authorities  not  to  exceed  twenty  millions,  nor  to  be 
less  than  fifteen,  disseminated  over  four  grand  divisions. 

1,  Mexico  and  Guatimala,  as  far  as  the  Isthmus  of  Panama, 
seven  millions;  2,  Santa  Fe,  Caraccas,  and  Quito,  four  millions ; 
8,  Peru  and  Chili,  four  millions ;  4,  Buenos  Ayres  and  Tucu- 
men,  three  millions.  The  total  mass  of  this  mixed  population 
appears  to  be  chiefly  composed  of  native  Indians,  free  people  of 
colour,  slaves,  and  whites.  The  Indians  and  slaves,  it  is  sup- 
posed, compose  two  thirds ;  the  people  of  colour  and  the  whites 
the  other  third  part.  By  this  statement,  that  appears  to  me 
the  most  probable,  it  is  evident  that  each  of  these  departments 
or  divisions  is  susceptible  of  having  a  separate  Government 
on  a  substantial  basis  in  point  of  territory  and  population. 