

I  don't  perceive,  from  the  information  I  have  been  able  to 
collect  these  twenty  years  past,  that  the  people  of  the  country 
have  shown  a  predilection  for  any  particular  form  of  Govern- 
ment.   All  their  wishes  have  tended  to  obtain  an  independence 


410  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

from  Europe,  and  to  preserve  in  the  change  the  solid  and 
essential  principles  of  civil  liberty,  such  as  the  Swiss  and  Dutch 
people  have  enjoyed  for  many  centuries,  with  universal  happi- 
ness and  respectability. 

I  do  not  believe  that  this  point  would  be  difficult  to  settle  by 
persimsioii,  as  the  people  are  mild  and  uncorrupt  yet ;  but,  if 
compulsion  was  to  be  employed,  in  any  manner  whatever,  the 
result  would  be  opposition  and  intestine  divisions.  When  we 
consider  the  great  advantage  that  they  possess,  in  having  a 
uniform  and  general  code  of  good  laws,  one  and  the  same  lan- 
guage, one  and  the  same  religion,  one  and  the  same  form  of 
administration,  the  difficulty  of  changing  without  convulsions 
is  greatly  diminished  and  little  to  be  apprehended.  Depons, 
in  his  judicious  and  accurate  observations  on  Terra  Firma, 
remarks  that  the  Cabildos,  or  municipal  organization  of  the 
civil  Government  of  South  America,  are  the  most  popular  and 
best  calculated  to  administer  and  govern  the  country.  (See 
Depons,  torn.  2,  art.  Cabildos.     Paris,  1806.) 

The  department  of  Oaraccas,  Santa  Fe,  and  Quito,  may  be 
called,  from  the  similarity  of  its  position  and  physical  structure, 
the  Switzerland  of  South  America — totally  separated  from 
Mexico  by  the  Isthmus  of  Panama ;  from  Peru  by  the  Cordil- 
lera of  the  Andes;  and  from  the  Brazils  by  the  immense 
rivers  Amazons  and  Orinoco  :  a  circumstance  that  will  remove 
any  apprehensions  about  interfering  in  the  arrangements  that 
may  now  take  place  at  the  Brazils. 

If  we  meet  with  success  in  this  province,  and  the  regulations 
immediately  introduced  are  wise  and  acceptable  to  the  people, 
we  may  expect  to  see,  in  a  very  short  time,  the  imitation  in 
Mexico,  through  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  Guatimala ;  in 
Peru,  through  Quito ;  and  ultimately  at  Buenos  Ayres, 
through  Peru  and  Chili. 

The  land  and  naval  force  that  I  conceive  sufficient  to  carry 
into  execution  this  plan,  beginning  with  the  province  of  Caraccas, 
is  10,000  men  of  all  arms,  and  a  competent  naval  force  to  co- 


]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  411 

operate  with  it — leaving  the  military  details  of  this  operation 
for  another  Memoir,  which  I  shall  be  immediately  in  readiness 
to  submit  to  your  lordship. 

The  greatest  danger  I  at  this  moment  apprehend  is  the 
arrival  of  some  French  Chief  in  this  province,  with  a  military 
force  and  a  set  of  intriguers  well  calculated  to  delude  the  simple 
South  Americans,  as  they  probably  have  done  by  this  time  at 
Buenos  Ayres.  To  avoid  such  peril  and  dangers,  celerity  in 
the  execution  of  the  plan  is,  I  should  conceive,  the  most  essen- 
tial and  material  point ;  as  that  country  is  in  the  utmost 
danger  at  this  moment. 