

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  &c., 

J.  D.  R.  Gordon. 

STATE  OF  MEXICO. 

New  Vera  Cruz  is  the  principal  sea-port  in  the  Gulph  of 
Mexico.  The  number  of  its  inhabitants  is  computed  to  be 
between  11  and  12,000,  one  third  of  which  are  Spanish  Creoles 
and  Europeans ;  the  remainder  are  of  all  the  various  castes 
between  blacks  and  whites.  They  are  considered  to  be  the 
most  wealthy  people  in  the  world  in  times  of  peace,  as  Vera 
Cruz  is  the  key  of  all  the  commerce  of  Mexico  and  Europe ; 
but  in  time  of  war  this  wealthy  population  labours  under  the 


18Q8.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  429 

greatest  distress,  as  they  have  at  that  time  very  little  commu- 
nication with  Europe ;  and,  being  so  contiguous  to  our  pos- 
sessions in  the  West  Indies,  are  greatly  annoyed  by  our  crui- 
sers on  that  station.  They  are  also  heavily  oppressed  by  the 
tyranny  of  their  civil  government,  which  authorizes  the  troops 
to  have  so  much  power  over  them  that  they  treat  them  with 
the  greatest  contempt,  and  insult  them  on  every  occasion.  The 
lower  class  of  people  in  particular  are  frequently  subject  to 
their  attacks  in  the  streets,  and  have  forcibly  taken  from  them 
such  articles  as  they  may  be  carrying  to  and  from  the  market. 
The  battalion  of  troops,  called  el  Batallon  fixo  de  Vera  Cruz, 
is  composed  of  1,020  pardoned  convicts.  Their  oflScers  give 
them  a  good  example ;  for,  when  Mr.  Edward  Watson,  of  his 
Majesty'^s  ship  Fortune,  was  a  prisoner  among  them,  they 
robbed  him  of  ^^45.  These  braw  officers  are  not  admitted 
into  any  genteel  society,  but  are  looked  upon  with  horror. 
They  have  likewise  200  regular  artillerymen,  and  100  militia. 
The  former  are  continually  employed  in  the  artillery  services 
of  the  city,  and  in  keeping  in  order  and  packing  up  the  artillery 
stores  that  are  conveyed  to  Acapulco  and  San  Bias,  where 
great  part  of  them  are  embarked  for  Monterey,  the  capital  of 
the  Spanish  settlements  on  the  coast  of  California,  to  defend 
them  against  the  wild  Indians.  The  latter  are  employed  in 
the  small  garrisons  along  the  coast.  They  have  also  300  black 
soldiers,  who  guard  the  city  jail.  They  have  between  eleven 
and  twelve  hundred  cavalry,  called  the  Provincial  Dragoons  of 
Vera  Cruz,  who  are  composed  of  the  labourers  and  farmers 
within  20  or  25  miles  of  the  city  :  there  are  only  200  of  them 
on  duty  at  a  time,  the  remainder  being  engaged  in  their  own 
family  concerns. 

Vera  Cruz  is  one  mile  in  length,  and  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
in  breadth  :  it  has  a  slio;ht  stone  wall  round  it  full  of  small 
embrasures  for  musketry,  and  seven  round  towers  from  12  to 
15  feet  high,  containing  each  five  embrasures  for  ordnance. 
The  fort  of  Santiago,  on  the  south-east  angle  of  the  wall,  is 