


430  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  only  fort  of  the  seven  that  is  mounted  with  cannon.  It 
has  four  gates,  one  of  which  towards  the  sea  goes  out  to  the 
pier,  and  has  a  strong  guard  to  prevent  contraband  trade. 

On  the  south-west  angle  of  the  city  are  the  cavalry  and  in- 
fantry barracks,  which  can  contain  7,000  troops.  On  the 
south-east  angle,  between  fort  Santiago  and  fort  St.  Catherine, 
lies  the  Artillery  Ground,  with  the  artillery  storehouses,  and 
opposite  to  them  the  Artillery  Barracks,  with  accommodation 
for  500  men.  Adjoining  the  wall  towards  the  sea  are  the 
Treasury  Offices,  and  the  Arsenal,  or  Naval  Storehouse,  which 
is  well  supplied. 

The  city  has  a  cathedral  and  seven  convents,  the  riches  of 
which  were  conveyed  up  the  country  to  Xalapa,  on  the  12th 
of  March,  1807,  as  it  was  reported  that  there  was  a  small 
expedition  fitting  out  at  Jamaica,  for  the  purpose  of  attacking 
Vera  Cruz.  At  the  same  time,  the  Viceroy  gave  very  strict 
orders  to  the  merchants  to  take  the  same  precaution  with  all 
their  effects  ;  but,  as  their  removal  would  have  been  attended 
with  much  expense,  his  orders  were  not  complied  with.  His 
Excellency  therefore  declared  in  the  royal  Audiencia  that  no 
blame  could  be  attached  to  him,  should  they  be  totally  ruined. 

The  city  is  abundantly  supplied  with  all  sorts  of  provisions 
from  the  adjacent  country ;  it  produces  nothing  of  itself,  being 
situated  on  a  sandy  beach.  It  is  bounded  on  three  sides  by 
high  banks  of  sand,  which  would  afford  great  shelter  to  a  be- 
sieged army.  The  place  is  scantily  supplied  with  good  water, 
which  has  induced  the  inhabitants  to  have  large  cisterns  con- 
structed in  their  houses  to  receive  the  rain-water  in  the  rainy 
season,  which  supplies  them  in  the  dry  season. 

The  city  is  defended  principally  by  the  Castle  of  San  Juan 
de  Ulloa,  which  is  situated  on  a  small  island,  one  mile  distant, 
close  by  which  a  first-rate  ship  of  war  can  be  moored,  as  the  Spa- 
niards have  fixed  very  strong  brass  rings  in  the  rock  under  the 
castle  for  that  purpose.  This  famous  fortress  contains  213  pieces 
of  artillery,  of  various  calibres,  from  nine  to  thirty -six  pounders  ; 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  431 

but  their  carriages  are  in  a  very  rotten  and  decayed  state.  It 
is  garrisoned  by  only  400  men,  and  is  abundantly  supplied  with 
artillery  stores  of  every  kind,  independently  of  brass  and 
copper  bars  to  the  value  of  three  milKons  of  dollars.  Three 
seventy-fours  would  be  a  sufficient  force  to  make  it  surrender 
in  a  very  short  time.  The  south,  the  west,  and  north-west 
batteries  are  50  feet  in  height ;  the  west  and  north  north-west 
.1 4  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  water ;  but  I  could  not  obtain 
the  height  of  the  east,  east  south-east,  and  south-east  batteries. 
These  batteries  are  constructed  on  arches,  and  their  base- 
ments are  formed  for  store-houses,  barracks  for  troops,  accom- 
modations for  the  officers,  and  Hkewise  dungeons  for  prisoners. 
These  basements  are  not  very  strong  ;  and  when  there  is  any 
artillery  exercises,  the  whole  Castle  is  materially  affected.  It 
is  supplied  every  morning  with  fresh  provisions  from  Vera 
Cruz,  excepting  when  the  heavy  north-west  gales  prevail  and 
prevent  all  intercourse  with  the  city ;  consequently,  the  gar- 
rison at  that  time  experiences  much  inconvenience.  It  is  sup- 
plied with  water,  by  means  of  a  very  large  cistern,  which  fills 
during  the  rainy  season,  that  begins  from  the  middle  of  June 
to  the  middle  of  July,  and  ends  in  September.  Some  of  the 
most  distinguished  families  of  the  city  are  likewise  supplied 
with  water  from  this  cistern. 