


426  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

should  be  in  open  warfare  at  that  particular  time,  or  should 
have  concluded  a  peace  they  never  meant  to  keep  longer  than 
might  suit  their  convenience.  The  character  of  these  Indians 
is  bad,  and  they  must  never  be  trusted  but  with  great  caution  ; 
but  their  detestation  of  the  Spaniards  would  naturally  lead 
them  to  favour  the  English ;  and,  in  return  for  the  most 
trifling  articles  of  English  manufacture,  particularly  of  glass 
and  steel,  they  would  furnish  the  camp  with  a  superabundance 
of  cattle,  and  with  horses  sufficient  to  mount  any  body  of 
cavalry. 

The  march  to  the  city,  through  an  open  country,  offers  no 
difficulty :  nor  is  it  possible  the  Spaniards  should  collect  any 
force  capable  of  impeding  the  progress  of  the  English  army. 
The  expedition  should  sail  for  the  River  of  Plata  in  the 
month  of  September,  so  as  to  arrive  there  about  the  month  of 
December,  the  beginning  of  the  dry  season. 

The  same  detail  is  entered  into  with  regard  to  the  second 
part  of  the  expedition  destined  against  the  kingdom  of  Chili, 
and  also  with  regard  to  the  third  part,  intended  to  land  on  the 
coast  of  Atacama,  or  at  the  ports  of  lea  or  Arica,  and  to  act 
against  the  centre  of  Peru,  so  as  to  attack  nearly  at  the  same 
time  the  two  extremities  of  the  Government  of  the  vice- king  of 
Buenos  Ayres.  The  attack,  however,  upon  the  kingdom  of 
Chili  is  not  considered  as  absolutely  necessary  to  the  success 
of  the  other  expeditions. 


Mr.  J.  D.  B,  Gordon  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

3,  Beaufort  Buildings,  Strand,  January  26,  1808. 
My   Lord — In  compliance  with  your   Lordship^s   request, 
stated  in  your  letter  of  the  1 7th  December  ultimo,  I  have  en-   , 
closed  for  your  perusal  a  description  of  the  country  between  ^' 
New  Vera  Cruz  and  Mexico,  in  New  Spain,  with  an  account 
of  several  of  the  principal  towns,  military  force,  points  of  de- 
fence, manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants,  &ic.,  accom- 


1808.]  LOED  CASTLEREAGH.  427 

panied  with  plans  of  the  country  as  high  up  as  the  city  of 
Puebla,  together  with  a  plan  of  the  city  and  harbour  of  New 
Vera  Cruz.  These,  with  the  description  I  have  mentioned, 
I  was  enabled  to  obtain  during  a  residence  of  six  years  in 
Mexico  and  the  adjacent  country,  where  I  was  sent  for  the 
purpose  of  instructing  myself  in  the  language,  and  receiving  the 
principal  part  of  my  education  :  for  which  purpose  I  was  thir- 
teen months  in  an  Apostolic  College,  under  the  care  of  the 
principal  guardian,  recommended  by  the  Count  de  la  Cortina 
(a  private  correspondent  of  the  late  ever  to  be  lamented  Mr. 
Pitt).  This  guardian  particularly  instructed  me  in  the  nature 
of  their  religion,  and  in  the  art  of  pleasing  and  gaining  the 
friendship  of  the  inhabitants ;  and,  when  I  travelled  up  the 
country,  he  and  the  Count  de  la  Cortina  were  my  protectors, 
and  furnished  me  with  presents  to  give  to  the  Indians. 