

The  coast  above  and  below  Monte  Video  is  very  low,  flat, 
and  of  easy  access  for  a  disembarkation  in  boats  or  small  ves- 
sels.    The  garrison  consists  of  one  battalion  of  the  fixed  regi- 

*  This  paper,  without  date  or  name,  is  evidently  by  a  foreigner  well 
acquainted  with  the  subjects  of  which  it  treats. 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  423 

ment  of  infantry  of  Buenos  Ay  res,  of  a  regular  regiment  of 
dragoons,  and  of  a  regiment  of  disciplined  militia,  called  volun- 
teers, composed  of  cavalry  and  infantry.  This  force  is  in  part 
distributed  in  detachments  in  the  environs. 

MALDONADO. 
More  to  the  eastward,  on  the  same  side  of  the  river,  about 
twenty  leagues  before  you  come  to  Monte  Video,  is  situated 
Maldonado.  It  contains  about  3  or  4,000  souls  ;  and  in  the 
port,  which  only  admits  of  small  vessels,  is  the  island  of  Gor- 
riti.  The  garrison  consists  of  360  men  of  the  militia  of  the 
country.  All  along  this  coast  a  disembarkation  in  small  ves- 
sels could  be  made  without  danger. 

BUENOS  AYRES. 

Buenos  Ayres,  the  capital  of  the  vice-kingdom  of  its  name, 
is  situated  on  the  south  coast  of  the  Eiver  de  la  Plata,  at  about 
60  leagues'  distance  from  the  Cape  of  San  Antonio,  and  about 
40  leagues  from  Monte  Video.  In  front  of  Buenos  Ayres,  the 
river  is  nearly  1 2  leagues  broad  ;  but  the  water  is  so  shallow  as 
only  to  admit  of  small  vessels,  at  least  without  great  danger. 
The  city  is  about  three  miles  broad,  and  nearly  the  same  in 
length.  The  ground  upon  which  it  stands  is  flat,  and  elevated 
above  the  bed  of  the  river  20  or  25  feet,  to  which  you  descend 
by  a  variety  of  issues,  formed  by  a  continuation  of  the  streets 
to  the  water's  edge. 

Upon  the  side  fronting  the  river  is  the  only  fortification, 
and  which  is  called  "  II  Fuerte  ;"  being  a  sort  of  small  citadel, 
the  usual  residence  of  the  vice-king,  and  the  depository  of  the 
royal  treasure.  This  fortification,  which  is  very  ancient,  and 
formed  of  brick,  is  a  regular  square,  with  four  bastions  and 
curtains,  and,  from  the  salient  angle  of  one  bastion  to  another, 
about  40  toises.  The  artillery  consists  of  40  or  50  pieces  of 
241b.  The  population  of  Buenos  Ayres  is  not  less  than 
60,000  souls,  including  nearly  10,000  blacks. 


424  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF 

The  forces  are  as  follows  : — 


[1808. 
Horse.       Foot.      Total. 


Buenos  Ayres 


Monte  Video 

Frontera, 

Colonia, 

Maldonado 


The  fixed  regiments, 
called  Veterans,  but 
in  fact  composed 
mostly  of  natives, 
and,  consequently, 
unused  to  real  ser- 
vice      1,527     1,800    3,327 

Disciplined  Militia     .       720     1,010     1,730 

A  regiment  of  dra- 
goons         800  800 