

The  harbour  is  not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  width  at  the 
entrance,  with  sufficient  depth  of  water,  eleven  to  twelve 
fathoms,  but  gradually  decreasing  as  you  approach  the  castle, 
close  to  which  it  is  eight  and  nine  fathoms  in  depth.  No  ship 
can  lie  nearer  to  the  town  than  half  a  mile,  as  the  water 
rapidly  decreases  in  depth  from  that  distance,  and  at  low  water 
there  is  little  more  than  one  fathom  close  to  the  wharf  or  quay. 
It  is  sheltered  from  the  north-west  winds  by  the  point  of  Del- 
gado,  which  forms  with  the  city  the  Bay  of  Bergara,  where 
the  water  is  so  shallow,  that  none  but  vessels  of  small  draught 
can  enter  it.  Point  Homos,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile 
south-east  of  the  city,  forms  another  bay,  having  a  narrow 


432  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

and  intricate  passage  from  the  harbour,  and  being  interspersed 
with  shoals,  which  render  the  navigation  dangerous.  In  enter- 
ing the  harbour,  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  assistance  of  pilots 
belonging  to  the  city. 

Old  Vera  Cruz  is  situated  fifteen  miles  north-west  of  New 
Vera  Cruz,  close  to  the  north  bank  of  the  river  Antigua,  four 
miles  from  its  junction  with  the  sea.  It  contains  between  2  and 
3,000  inhabitants,  consisting  chiefly  of  mulattoes,  with  a  few 
European  families  and  some  Creoles.  Those  of  the  lower 
class  are  chiefly  employed  in  the  business  of  agriculture  in  the 
neighbourhood,  and  in  the  making  of  bricks,  which  are  mostly 
sent  down  the  river  Antigua,  and  along  the  coast  of  New  Vera 
Cruz,  in  flat-bottomed  boats  (which  the  Spaniards  call  pira- 
guas) during  the  summer  months,  when  the  weather  is  serene. 
In  winter,  the  intercourse  between  the  two  cities  by  water  is 
entirely  interrupted,  owing  to  the  great  surf  along  the  coast. 
No  other  vessels  but  these  flat-bottomed  boats  can  navio^ate 
this  passage,  as  the  water  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Antigua 
is  not  more  than  four  feet  in  depth.  All  the  traffic  carried  on 
by  New  Vera  Cruz  with  Mexico  and  other  inland  towns  passes 
through  the  city,  and  is  conveyed  across  the  river  Antigua  in 
large  canoes ;  it  is  carried  forward  to  and  from  Mexico  on 
mules,  which  are  chiefly  used  here  as  beasts  of  burden.  This 
part  of  the  country  abounds  also  in  horses,  but  they  are  of 
a  small  breed,  yet  capable  of  enduring  much  fetigue,  and  are 
chiefly  employed  for  agricultural  purposes. 

In  this  city  are  very  commodious  barracks,  which  are  occu- 
pied by  some  artillerymen  and  a  detachment  of  provincial 
cavalry  from  New  Vera  Cru2 :  these  barracks  are  capable  of 
containing  3,000  men  and  900  horses. 

The  river  Antigua,  on  the  bank  of  which  this  city  is  seated, 
derives  its  source  from  Mount  Orisaval,  a  considerable  distance 
up  the  country  ;  it  is  not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  width  at 
its  junction  with  the  sea,  and  is  navigable  no  higher  tlian  Old 
Vera  Cruz  ;  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  below  which  is  situated 