


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAOTT.  433 

on  the  river  a  small  fort,  mounted  with  three  pieces  of  cannon 
only. 

Between  Antigua  river  and  New  Vera  Cruz,  is  a  fine,  firm-, 
sandy  beach,  well  calculated,  with  the  assistance  of  flat- 
bottomed  boats,  for  the  disembarkation  of  an  army  of  15  or 
20,000  men,  with  the  greatest  facility,  provided  the  wind  was 
moderate  ;  but,  when  it  blows  fresh  from  the  north-west, 
(which  is  the  only  strong  wind  that  prevails  in  this  country) 
it  would  prevent  boats  from  approaching  the  shore. 

The  lower  class  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  have  not 
the  smallest  idea  of  patriotism,  but  are  entirely  guided  by 
motives  of  interest ;  and,  were  Europeans  wishing  to  gain  their 
affections,  no  better  mode  could  be  adopted  than  that  of  making 
them  presents  of  such  articles  as  ribbons,  silk  stuffs,  small 
crucifixes,  silk  stockings,  linens,  and  such-like  European  manu- 
factures ;  and,  if  these  things  are  offered  them  for  what  they 
conceive  to  be  a  cheap  rate,  they  are  almost  as  well  pleased  as 
by  getting  them  without  purchase. 

In  case  of  an  army  having  once  made  good  a  landing  in 
this  countrj^,  it  may  be  necessary  to  say  something  on  the 
important  subject  of  the  religion  of  the  people;  as  a  knowledge 
of  that  subject,  and  an  acquiescence  in  the  forms  of  their  devo- 
tion, are  the  principal  objects  to  be  attended  to  for  gaining  their 
esteem  and  affection. 

They  are  of  the  Roman  Catholic  persuasion,  but  have  no 
idea  of  the  principles  of  their  religion,  and  are  entirely  guided 
by  enthusiasm  and  attachment  to  the  outward  signs  of  their 
faith,  such  as  hearing  mass,  crossing  themselves,  counting  their 
beads,  and  attending  their  processions  through  the  streets ; 
and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  greater  the  art  displayed  in 
giving  beauty  and  gracefulness  to  the  image  of  the  saint  used 
in  the  procession,  the  warmer  is  their  enthusiasm ;  yet,  without 
the  least  reverence  for  the  virtues  of  the  saint  whom  they  are 
worshipping,  they  are  entirely  engrossed  by  the  attractions  of 
his  representation.     Their  priests  are  men,  whose  good  offices 

VOL.  vn.  F  F 


434  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

should  be  particularly  courted  by  the  leaders  of  a  European 
army,  as  they  have  such  an  ascendency  over  the  laity,  that, 
were  their  affections  once  gained,  those  of  the  latter  would 
immediately  follow.  The  means  that  I  should  recommend  in 
preference  for  gaining  the  good-will  of  the  priests  would  be, 
first,  to  be  very  attentive  to  their  conversations  on  religion, 
and  by  no  means  to  interrupt  them  at  that  time,  but  to  listen 
with  the  utmost  patience,  and  even  to  give  them  hopes  that  at 
some  future  period  you  may  become  a  convert ;  secondly,  to 
be  much  in  their  society,  riding  out  with  them,  and  at  their 
houses,  and  inviting  them  to  come  to  you  in  return,  making 
them  presents,  and  also  receiving  theirs,  with  seeming  marks 
of  esteem  and  affection,  as,  in  this  country,  they  have  not  the 
least  idea  of  being  averse  to  lay  themselves  under  an  obliga- 
tion ;  and,  were  they  even  loaded  with  presents  of  the  greatest 
value,  they  would  accept  of  them  all,  and  consider  them  as 
merely  so  many  marks  of  attention  and  kindness ;  thirdly,  to 
attend  as  often  as  possible  their  religious  ceremonies,  and  to 
show  great  outward  devotion  at  that  time,  and,  while  in  their 
cathedrals  and  convents,  to  be  always  silent  and  uncovered, 
as  nothinor  tends  to  alienate  their  affections  so  much  as 
the  smallest  disrespect  or  contempt  for  the  forms  of  their  re^ 
ligion. 