

Alexander  Cochrane. 

General  Miranda  to  Bear-Admiral  the  Hon.  Sir  Alexander 

Cochrane, 

Barbadoes,  June  9,  1806. 

Sir — Having  deliberately  perused  the  foregoing  proposals,  I 
hereby  bind  and  oblige  myself,  as  far  as  my  authority  can  ex- 
tend, to  see  the  same  carried  into  execution,  and  that,  to  all 
intents  and  purposes,  the  same  shall  be  ratified  and  made 
binding  on  those  provinces  that  may  become  independent  of 
Spain.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &;c., 

Fran,  de  Miranda., 

Captain  George  Dundas^  R.N.^  to  General  Miranda, 

Elephant,  off  Aruba,  September  22,  1806; 
Sir — I  am  honoured  with  your  note  delivered  to  me  by- 
Colonel  Smith,  and  am  sorry  that  your  dispositions  in  regard 
to  returning  to  Trinidad  should  in  any  respect  have  altered 
since  I  had  the  honour  of  conferring  with  you  on  the  subject 
yesterday.  From  what  at  that  time  passed,  I  naturally  con- 
cluded your  Excellency  had  seen  in  a  proper  point  of  view  the 
necessity  of  immediately  quitting  this  place,  and  returning  with 
the  expedition  to  Trinidad.  In  consequence,  I  have  wrote  to 
the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  and  also  to  Sir  Alexander 
Cochrane,  informing  them  of  such  your  resolution. 


422  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

I  am  sorry  to  add  farther  that,  should  your  Excellency  not 
be  willincr  speedily  to  quit  this  place,  the  British  naval  force 
must  be  altogether  withdrawn  ;  and  that  it  will  not  be  in  my 
power  to  issue  any  farther  supply  of  provisions  than  what  are 
now  granted  for  merely  carrying  the  expedition  to  some  port  of 
safety.  That  port  appeared  in  your  opinion  of  yesterday  to  be 
best  found  in  Trinidad. 

The  vessel  for  England  might  remain  till  to-morrow ;  but  I 
am  truly  anxious  to  despatch  the  schooner  to  Admiral  Coch- 
rane this  eveninor. 

o 

I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  with  much  regard,  your  Ex- 
cellency''s,  &c.,  George  Dundas. 


RIVTER  DE  LA  PLATA.* 

The  excellent  maps  which  have  been  published  in  Spain 
and  copied  in  this  country  leave  nothing  to  be  said  as  to  the 
breadth,  shape,  soundings,  &c.,  of  the  River  de  la  Plata. 

The  city  of  Monte  Video  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  the 
river,  at  the  distance  of  about  35  leagues  from  the  Cape  of 
Santa  Maria,  at  the  foot  of  a  very  gentle  declivity,  which  falls 
from  the  interior  towards  the  coast.  Its  population  consists  of 
7  or  8000  souls.  It  is  the  only  port  for  ships  of  the  line  in 
the  river,  but  the  entrance  is  difficult,  and  requires  a  very  ex- 
perienced pilot.  The  fortifications  consist  in  an  irregular  wall, 
two  bastions  on  the  side  of  the  river,  and  a  citadel  with  four 
bastions  on  the  land  side  towards  the  north.  At  the  entrance 
of  the  port  there  are  some  exterior  batteries,  which  used  to  be 
mounted  with  forty  or  fifty  pieces  of  cannon,  but  they  have 
always  been  considered  as  much  too  low. 