

A  body  of  disciplined 

volunteers     ...       720        690     1,410 


>  Cavalry  and  infantry 


Total  of  forces  in  or  near  Buenos  Ayres 

Force  of  the  horse  militia  of  the  provinces  adjacent  and 
under  the  Government  of  Buenos  Ayres,  but  at  great 
distances  from  each  other,  principally  belonging  to 
the  Paraguay  and  Tucuman — most  excellent  horse- 
men, but  without  discipline 


THE  ATTACK  ON  BUENOS  AYRES. 


1,924 


3,767    3,500    9,191 


9,191 


9,000 


18,191 


The  force  destined  to  the  attack  on  Buenos  Ayres  should 
consist  of  12  to  14,000  men,  and  be  composed  as  follows  : — 

Battalion  Infantry 10,000 

Light  Infantry  and  flying  Artillery  .         .         .       2,000 

Dismounted  Light  do.  ....       2,000 


Total,     14,000 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  425 

A  stand  of  arms  for  20,000  infantry  and  10,000  cavalry,'  so 
that  a  native  force  might  be  immediately  and  properly  or- 
ganized. The  fleet  supporting  the  attacking  army  should 
have  a  larger  proportion  than  usual  of  frigates  and  small 
vessels. 

The  first  disembarkation  and  attack  might  certainly  take 
place  at  Monte  Video,  as  is  evident  from  what  has  been  already 
said ;  but,  in  case  of  any  tolerable  resistance,  time  would  be 
lost,  and  the  vice-king  of  Buenos  Ayres  completely  on  his 
guard  :  it  might,  therefore,  be  more  advisable  to  direct  the 
first  operations  against  the  capital. 

The  shallowness  of  the  water  opposite  to  Buenos  Ayres  not 
permitting  the  approach  even  of  small  vessels,  the  nearest 
point  where  vessels  of  14  or  16  guns  might  cover  the  disem- 
barkation of  the  troops  in  boats  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from 
the  city,  at  a  sort  of  bay  called  La  Recoleta,  where  the  shore 
is  of  easy  access,  and  the  country  forms  part  of  the  before 
mentioned  plain  upon  which  Buenos  Ayres  stands. 

About  eight  leagues  before  you  arrive  at  the  city,  you  have 
the  Bay  of  Barragan,  where  frigates  can  anchor,  and  which 
would  undoubtedly  be  an  excellent  place  of  disembarkation,  if 
the  ground  over  which  you  must  advance  were  not  at  times, 
after  great  rains,  so  boggy  as  to  be  absolutely  impassable. 
The  best  place  of  disembarkation  would,  however,  indubitably 
be  about  26  leagues  from  the  city,  in  the  Bay  of  Barrombon, 
if  the  namgation  of  the  south  channel  of  the  river  can  he  recon- 
noitred and  fully  understood. 

In  the  dry  season,  which  begins  in  the  month  of  December 
and  ends  with  the  month  of  February,  there  is  no  obstacle  of 
consequence  to  impede  the  march  of  the  army  to  Buenos 
Ayres,  as  the  rivers  which  cross  this  part  of  the  country  and 
enter  into  la  Plata  are  either  dry  or  fordable  without  difficulty. 
The  peculiar  advantage  of  this  disembarkation  is  that  it  would 
take  place  in  the  flat  country,  occupied  by  the  Indians,  called 
Pampas,  the  constant  enemies  of  the  Spaniards,  whether  they 