


General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh, 

Grafton  Street,  May  16,  1808. 

My  Lord — Give  me  leave  to  trouble  your  lordship  once 
more  upon  a  subject  so  interesting  to  our  countries,  and  so  near 
my  own  heart,  that  I  should  consider  it  a  blameful  neglect  on 
ray  part  if  I  was  to  conceal  from  you,  at  this  critical  moment, 
the  smallest  thought  or  apprehension  that  might  lead  to  the 
preservation  of  South  America,  or  to  the  success  of  the  plans, 
the  execution  of  which  we  have  now  in  hand. 

The  late  eventful  occurrences  in  Spain,  by  which  that  coun- 
try is  not  only  taken  possession  of  by  the  armies  of  France, 
but  the  whole  monarchy  absolutely  delivered  to  the  ruler  of 
Europe,  are  so  materially  interesting,  and  connected  with  the 
execution  of  our  plans  for  the  emancipation  of  South  America, 
that,   if   we  do   not   avail  ourselves   of   this  grand  and  pro- 


442  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

vidential  opportunity,  we  may  have  hereafter  to  lament  it  for 
ever. 

We  have  now,  in  fact,  every  circumstance  in  our  favour,  if, 
with  celerity  and  magnanimity,  we  appear  before  the  South 
American  provinces,  offering  them  assistance  for  emancipation, 
rational  liberty,  and  independence :  but  if,  through  the  activity 
of  our  enemies  and  unforeseen  accidents,  they  arrive  there 
before  us,  with  some  plausible  scheme  and  intrigues  suitable  to 
their  interest  and  private  views,  then  the  best  digested  and 
most  judicious  plans  may  be  defeated,  or  in  a  great  measure 
checked  and  spoiled. 

Nothing  but  delay,  I  conceive,  my  lord,  may  ruin,  at  this 
moment,  our  preconcerted  plans  ;  therefore,  I  should  take  the 
liberty  of  submitting  to  you,  if  the  measure  of  leaving  behind 
us  some  part  of  the  intended  co-operating  force  (to  join  soon 
after)  would  not  be  even  a  preferable  thing,  for  the  sake  of 
anticipating  the  pernicious  views  and  schemes  of  our  enemies, 
than  to  expose  the  whole  of  our  operations  to  be  defeated  by  a 
fatal  delay. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  your  lordship''s  penetration,  as  well  as 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  great  experience  and  judgment,  must 
have  foreseen  these  circumstances  and  difficulties ;  but,  as  I 
said  before,  I  do  present  them  to  your  lordship,  at  this  eventful 
crisis,  feeling  anxious  for  the  safety  of  the  New  World,  as  well 
as  for  the  happiness  of  Great  Britain  and  mankind  in  general. 
I  have  the  honour  to  remain,  &;c., 

Fran,  de  Miranda. 


Lord  Melville  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Dnnira,  June  8,  1808. 
My  dear  Lord — Agreeably  to  your  desire,  I  return  you  the 
papers  which  came  in  your  packet  of  yesterday ;  and,  agree- 
ably to  my  promise  of  yesterday,  shall  send  you  what  occurs 
to  me  on  the  re-perusal  of  your  letter.  I  cannot  undertake  to 
send  you  any  thing  methodical,  and  you  must  be  contented  to 