

As  to  the  question  more  immediately  under  consideration,  I 
own  I  am  very  sanguine  in  my  expectations  of  success  in 
effecting  a  separation  of  Spanish  America  from  the  mother 
country,  if  the  measure  is  planned  with  wisdom,  and  the  exe- 
cution is  attempted  with  a  due  attention  to  the  feelings  and 
prejudices  of  the  people  with  whom  we  have  to  deal.  And, 
in  this  view,  it  is  certainly  a  point  of  radical  importance  to 
discharge  from  our  thoughts  and  to  disclaim  every  idea  of 
establishing  in  our  persons  another  European  sovereignty  in 
the  Spanish  Colonies  in  America.  One  of  the  great  topics  we 
must  endeavour  to  enforce  on  their  minds,  is  the  oppression 
they  have  suffered  under  the  yoke  of  Old  Spain ;  and  we 
should  urge  any  such  topics  with  a  very  bad  grace,  if  we  did 
not  convince  them  that  we  had  no  such  plan  in  our  own  con- 
templation, when  we  come  forward  professing  ourselves  as  their 
deliverers  from  the  yoke  under  which  they  had  so  grievously 
groaned.  Above  all,  it  will  require  the  utmost  caution  to  per- 
suade them  that  we  have  no  plans  against  their  religion.  If 
we  are  not  credited  in  this  respect,  we  shall  have  the  whole 
strength  of  the  country  against  us.  The  great  body  of  the 
people  are  bigoted  and  in  the  hands  of  their  clerg}^,  and  any 
thing  like  a  meditated  attack  against  their  religious  prejudices 
would  operate  as  a  watchword  of  union  against  us. 

When  I  was  in  your  office,  I  had  occasion,  in  official  in- 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  445 

structions  to  Governor  Picton,  as  Governor  of  Trinidad,  to 
inculcate  those  sentiments.  The  document  is  probably  in  your 
Office.  The  subject  was  brought  to  my  recollection  last  spring, 
when  I  was  in  London,  by  a  communication  made  to  me  by 
General  Miranda.  A  despatch  of  mine  to  Governor  Picton 
appears  to  have  been  captured,  and,  as  I  learned,  indirectly 
through  him,  he  found  the  terms  of  my  despatch  translated 
into  the  Spanish  language,  and  dispersed  throughout  the 
Spanish  provinces  as  an  incitement  to  revolt  against  the 
Spanish  yoke.  This  is,  at  least,  a  proof  that  the  manner  in 
which  I  instructed  Colonel  Picton  to  address  them  was  con- 
genial to  their  own  feelings  and  prejudices.  I  have  no  other 
copy  of  it ;  and  therefore  you  will  be  so  good  as  return  it  to 
me  ;  but  perhaps  it  may  be  desirable  for  you  to  read  the  com- 
munication made  to  me  by  Miranda,  and  with  that  view  I  send 
it  to  you  under  a  separate  cover. 

The  force  you  have  appropriated  for  the  emancipation  of 
Spanish  America  seems  respectable ;  and  I  should  flatter  my- 
self that,  with  the  aids  we  are  naturally  entitled  to  expect,  it 
may  be  adequate  to  its  object.  If  I  was  necessarily  called 
upon  to  decide  finally  on  the  alternative  you  put,  where  the 
most  beneficial  exertions  could  be  made  on  the  Spanish  posses- 
sions in  America,  I  should  be  obliged  to  decide  in  favour  of  an 
attack  on  the  province  of  Mexico,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately, 
as  preparatory  thereto,  on  Mobile,  Pensacola,  New  Orleans,  or 
such  other  positions  as  would  give  us  the  undoubted  command 
of  the  Mississippi.  By  having  those  positions,  you  would  secure, 
in  the  most  efficient  way,  your  conquest  of  Mexico ;  and,  that 
secured,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  means  of  diffusing  through 
the  whole  of  Spanish  America  a  spirit  of  revolt  are  almost 
certain,  and,  in  doing  so,  we  are,  at  the  same  time,  adminis- 
tering most  substantially  to  the  commercial,  and,  of  course,  to 
the  maritime  interests  of  Great  Britain. 