

One  of  the  most  remarkable  plants  which  this  country  pro- 
duces is  called  maguey^  from  the  root  of  which  is  extracted  a 
liquor  called  pulque^  which  is  used  throughout  this  country  as 
much  as  malt  liquor  is  in  England.  It  intoxicates  those  who 
drink  to  excess ;  it  is  mild  in  its  nature,  though  somewhat 
acid.  There  is  brought  into  the  city  of  Mexico  every  morning 
as  much  of  this  pulque  as  is  worth  ^$^10,000,  and  the  revenue 
thence  arising  to  the  King  is  immense ;  for  instance,  a  noble- 
man, the  Marquess  de  Valle  Ameno,  with  whom  I  was  in 
habits  of  friendship,  sent  from  his  estate  every  morning  as 
much  of  this  beverage  as  was  sold  for  ;^100,  out  of  which  the 
King  received  ^84  for  duty,  of  which  extortion  he  bitterly 
complained. 

When  the  root  of  this  plant  is  not  disturbed  by  extracting 
the  pulque,  but  is  suff'ered  to  grow  to  maturity,  it  becomes  a 
soft  tree,  about  ten  feet  high,  the  substance  of  which  is  manu- 
factured by  the  Indians  into  a  kind  of  hemp,  of  which  they 
make  cordage,  sewing  thread,  &c.  This  is  the  most  predomi- 
nant plant  in  the  country,  and  produces  the  greatest  revenue 
of  any,  except  tobacco.  The  revenue  arising  to  the  King  from 
the  mines  and  the  commerce  with  Old  Spain  I  apprehend  is 
already  known  in  England. 

The  native  inhabitants  of  Mexico  differ  greatly  in  disposi^ 


438  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tion  and  manner  from  those  of  Peru  and  Chili.  Those  of 
Mexico  are  of  a  mild,  soft,  innocent  disposition,  bordering  on 
extreme  indifference ;  and  the  great  dread  they  are  held  in  by 
those  Spaniards  who  are  their  governors  renders  them  ex- 
ceeding cowardly.  They  bear  a  rooted  hatred  towards  the 
Spaniards,  which  arises  from  the  severity  of  their  treatment ; 
and  the  Spaniards  do  not  fail  to  take  advantage  of  the  mild- 
ness of  their  disposition,  to  exercise  with  greater  severity  that 
tyrannical  authority  which  they  hold  over  them.  Were  they 
freed  from  this  tyranny  and  treated  with  kindness,  they  might 
become  useful  mechanics  and  excellent  soldiers,  possessing,  as 
they  do,  considerable  natural  abilities. 

The  natives  of  Peru  and  Chili  are  of  a  more  bold  and  fierce 
disposition  than  those  of  Mexico,  which  makes  them  far  less 
submissive  to  their  governors  ;  consequently,  they  are  treated 
by  them  with  less  severity,  as  the  nature  of  the  Spaniards  is 
to  use  that  authority  which  they  hold  over  inferiors  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  according  as  they  find  their  dispositions. 

Leaving  Old  Vera  Cruz,  the  next  place  on  the  road  to 
Mexico  that  engages  our  attention  is  Paso  de  Varas.  This 
place,  twelve  miles  distant  from  the  former  city,  is  one  of  tlie 
four  points  of  defence  which  the  Viceroy  has  established  in 
this  country :  it  is  a  small  village,  situated  in  the  middle  of  a 
fine  plain,  spacious  enough  for  the  review  of  a  large  army,  and 
the  fittest  position  for  a  European  army,  after  it  has  made 
good  a  landing.  It  is  sixteen  miles  from  the  coast,  but  an 
invading  army  will  easily  reach  this  station  before  that  of  the 
Mexicans  could  be  brought  to  oppose  it ;  as  the  news  of  the 
approach  of  an  enemy ""s  fleet  could  not  reach  the  Viceroy  at 
Mexico  in  less  than  two  days,  and  four  more  would  elapse 
before  he  could  arrive  with  the  army  at  this  point.  The 
Spanish  army  always  lies  at  Xalapa,  which  is  only  forty-eight 
miles  from  the  coast,  and  under  the  command  of  a  Major- 
General,  who  receives  intelligence  of  an  enemy ""s  approach  by 
the  same  messenger  who  passes  through  that  town  on  his  way 