

With  such  impressions  on  my  mind,  animating  and  enlivening 
the  future  prospects  of  my  country,  I  must  urge  you  to  give 
at  least  a  candid  and  patient  hearing  and  consideration  to  all 
that  Mr.  Williamson  shall  lay  before  you.  I  know  that  he 
has  had  much  communication  with  Mr.  Canning,  and  the 
confidential  men  in  his  Office.  I  know  not  whether  the  clear- 
ness of  his  head,  the  accuracy  of  his  information,  and  the 
acuteness  of  his  understanding,  have  made  the  same  impres- 
sion on  them  they  have  on  me,  and,  to  my  knowledge, 
made  on  Mr.  Pitt ;  but  it  is  my  earnest  wish  that  you  should 
not  form  your  opinion  at  second  hand.  Converse  with  him ;  hear 
all  he  has  to  communicate ;  and  then  form  your  own  opinion. 

I  have  said,  if  I  was  obliged  to  decide  on  the  alternative 
you  put,  I  should  give  the  preference  to  the  establishment  of 
our  power  in  Mexico  over  an  expedition  directed  to  an  esta- 
blishment at  Monte  Video;  but  it  will  be  with  much  reluctance 
if  I  am  obliored  to  abandon  this  last.  I  have,  ever  since  I  read 
the  fatal  despatch  of  Whitelocke,  after  his  disaster  at  Buenos 
Ayres,  mourned  over  the  wanton  loss  of  Monte  Video  and  the 
command  of  the  Eiver  Plata ;  and  ever  since  the  fortunate 
emigration  of  the  royal  family  of  Portugal  to  the  Brazils,  aiid 
our  consequent  influence  in  that  part  of  the  world  took  place, 
I  have  flattered  myself  that  the  naval  and  military  force  to  be 
kept  at  the  Brazils  would  almost  necessarily  lead  to  the  re- 
establishment  of  our  power  at  the  mouth  of  the  Plata.  I 
cannot  bring  myself  to  abandon  that  expectation.  I  know  not 
whether  we  have  any,  and  to  what  extent  of  nulitary  force  at 


448  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

the  Janeiro  to  aid  the  Portuguese.  If  we  have  not,  we  cer- 
tainly should ;  and  the  largeness  of  the  destined  force  for  the 
coast  of  Spain,  I  should  think,  would  admit  of  a  detachment 
of  it  to  the  Brazils.  It  is  equally  the  interest  of  the  Portur 
guese,  as  our  interest,  to  prevent  the  River  Plata  falling  into 
the  hands  of  France ;  and  I  should  think  such  an  effort  per- 
fectly within  our  joint  exertion,  under  the  protection  of  a 
British  squadron. 

You  say  nothing  in  your  letter  of  a  naval  force  being 
destined  for  the  purposes  of  Spanish  America,  in  addition  to 
what  may  be  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  Brazils ;  but 
I  should  certainly  consider  that  a  very  inadequate  provision 
was  made  for  the  purposes  of  Spanish  America,  if  there  was 
not  a  squadron  appropriated  both  for  the  mouths  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  the  River  Plata. 

Many  other  topics  crowd  in  upon  me  in  the  contemplation 
of  this  subject,  on  which  I  would  wish  to  enlarge.  Indeed,  the 
discussion  is  endless;  but  I  feel  myself  exhausted,  and  my  head 
oppressed,  so  that  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  stopping. 