

F  F  2 


436  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

tion  from  the  Pope,  the  bare  mention  of  which  is  to  them 
more  terrible  than  the  idea  of  any  torture  that  could  be  in- 
flicted upon  them.  Besides,  they  have  no  sense  whatever  of 
independence,  but  consider  themselves  bound  to  submit  to 
whatever  is  imposed  upon  them  by  their  rulers.  This,  added 
to  a  stupidity  inherent  in  their  nature,  renders  them  the  most 
subservient  and  time-servino:  people  on  the  face  of  the  globe. 

Much  of  this  stupor  and  extreme  indifference,  which  governs 
all  their  actions,  arises  in  a  great  degree  from  the  terror  they 
are  held  in  by  the  Inquisition,  which  keeps  a  strict  watch  over 
them ;  but,  were  they  released  from  that  abject  slavery  in 
which  they  are  kept  by  this  tribunal,  and  were  suffered  to  have 
a  free  intercourse  with  civilized  nations,  they  would  show  them- 
selves to  be  a  people  not  void  of  those  qualifications  which 
would  render  their  services  acceptable  and  very  useful. 

The  system  which  the  Spaniards  have  adopted  to  extract 
their  revenue  from  this  country  has  also  been  very  offensive 
to  the  nobility  and  the  enlightened  classes  of  the  people ;  for 
instance,  no  Mexican  nobleman  or  gentleman  of  independent 
fortune  is  suffered  to  travel  into  any  foreign  country,  not  even 
to  Old  Spain  itself,  without  the  permission  of  his  Catholic 
Majesty,  in  order  that  no  money  may  be  spent  out  of  his  own 
dominions. 

The  Kinor  holds  also  an  exclusive  ri^jht  in  the  sale  of  to- 
bacco,  colours  for  paint,  gunpowder,  sulphur,  saltpetre,  and 
stamped  paper ;  and  if  an  individual  is  detected  in  the  sale  of 
any  of  these  articles,  he  is  liable  to  suffer  death  for  the  offence, 
if  the  quantity  he  has  sold  is  great,  and,  if  it  is  trivial,  he  will 
be  compelled  to  undergo  ten  years'  slavery  in  chains. 

These  articles,  which  are  manufactured  by  the  King  alone, 
are  kept  for  sale  in  Mexico,  in  warehouses  which  the  Spaniards 
call  estan^os^  or  places  of  monopoly.  The  royal  manufactory 
of  tobacco  is  a  very  extensive  fabric,  wherein  are  employed 
900  men  and  women.  There  is  also  in  the  capital  of  each 
province  one  of  these  estancos  for  tlie  same  purpose,  which  are 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  437 

supplied  from  those  at  Mexico ;  but  in  every  small  town 
throughout  the  different  provinces  are  to  be  found  various 
estanqiiillos^  or  small  shops,  for  the  sale  of  tobacco  and  snuff", 
all  belonging  to  the  King,  and  they  are  supplied  monthly  with 
a  certain  quantity  from  the  royal  manufactory  at  Mexico ;  the 
money  arising  from  the  sale  of  which  they  must  also  return 
monthly  to  the  same  place;  and  the  persons  employed  by  the 
King  to  sell  the  tobacco  in  these  shops  are  paid  only  one 
dollar  for  every  hundred  they  receive  for  the  sale  of  the  to- 
bacco. The  amount  of  the  profits  arising  to  the  King  annually 
from  the  sale  of  tobacco  and  the  other  articles  is  computed  to 
be  not  less  than  five  millions  of  dollars. 