

This  fortress  is  famous  for  the  immense  sums  of  money  that 
have  been  deposited  in  it  in  times  of  war,  but  at  present  it  is 
rendered  still  more  so,  as  there  has  been  less  money  exported 
from  the  country  during  this  war  than  at  any  former  period. 
It  contained,  when  I  left  Mexico,  the  sum  of  45  miUions  of 
dollars,  besides  some  silver  and  a  few  gold  bars.  To  give  an 
idea  of  the  strength  of  this  castle,  I  need  only  mention  that 
the  Viceroy  satirically  said  of  it,  that  ^'  he  could  take  it  with 
the  domestics  of  his  own  family  alone.''''  All  the  spare  arms  of 
the  country,  which  amount  to  a  considerable  number,  are  also 
deposited  here,  and  contribute  to  render  the  possession  of  this 
eastle  a  most  important  object  to  a  European  army,  for,  that 
being  taken,  the  whole  country  would  immediately  submit,  as 
there  is  no  other  obstruction  to  prevent  an  invading  force  from 
advancing  to  Puebla  and  Mexico  ;  and  I  can  assert  with  the 
greatest  confidence,  my  lord,  that  an  English  army  of  15,000 
men,  having  a  due  proportion  of  cavalry,  commanded  by  an 
able  general,  whose  humanity  and  good  address  are  not  inferior 
to  his  skill  in  the  field,  would  conquer  this  country  with  the 
greatest  ease. 

I  repeat  this,  my  lord,  as  my  firm  belief;  and,  were  my 
services  required  as  an  aide-de-camp,  I  would  engage,  from  my 
loc^l  knowledge  of  the  country  and  the  nature  of  its  inhabit- 
ants, and  also  possessing  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  lan- 
guage, to  give  the  Commander  such  assistance  as  would  render 
him  competent  to  overcome  every  obstacle  and  difficulty.     I  do 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  441 

not  mean  that  15,000  men  would  be  required  to  conquer  the 
^lexican  army  ;  one  half  of  that  number  would  be  sufficient 
for  the  purpose ;  but  the  respect  or  awe  which  an  army  of 
15,000  men  would  produce  in  the  native  inhabitants  would 
make  them  cling  to  the  English;  and,  having  once  experienced 
their  friendship  and  good  treatment,  they  would  readily  form 
an  attachment  which  would  continue  and  increase,  as  they 
became  mutually  acquainted  with  each  other. 

The  road  from  New  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico  is  inferior  to  none 
in  the  universe ;  it  is  wide  enousfh  for  six  carriages  to  2:0 
abreast,  and  the  materials  of  which  it  is  made  are  hard  and 
durable  ;  consequently,  the  baggage  and  other  appurtenances  of 
an  army  can  be  conveyed  with  great  facility.  That  part  of 
the  road  between  New  Vera  Cruz  and  Perote  was  constructed 
under  the  orders  of  the  present  Viceroy,  and  was  begun  in  the 
year  1803.  The  road  from  Old  Vera  Cruz  to  La  Ventilla, 
where  it  joins  the  other,  is  very  bad  in  the  rainy  season ;  yet 
it  is  passable  enough  for  carriages. 