


1808.]  LOKD  CASTLEKEAGH.  439 

to  Mexico ;  but,  in  the  absence  of  the  Viceroy,  this  officer  is 
not  authorized  to  take  the  field  with  the  army,  or  to  act  with 
it  in  any  other  way  than  in  its  own  defence.  The  main  body 
of  the  army,  stationed  at  Xalapa,  amounts  to  about  10,000 
men. 

The  four  principal  points  of  defence  established  by  the 
Viceroy  are  Paso  de  Varas  ;  La  Rinconada,  situated  on  a  rising 
ground,  seventeen  miles  from  Paso  ;  Lanceros,  twelve  miles 
further ;  and  the  castle  and  plain  of  Perote,  sixteen  miles 
from  Lanceros.  In  this  castle  are  deposited  45  millions  of 
dollars,  and  all  the  spare  arms  in  the  country  :  it  is  mounted 
with  72  pieces  of  cannon.  These  four  places  are  situated  on 
the  road  between  Old  Vera  Cruz  and  Mexico.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  a  fixed  battery  or  other  obstruction  on  the  whole 
way  between  those  two  cities. 

The  town  of  Xalapa,  situated  close  to  the  foot  of  Mount 
Perote,  is  computed  to  contain  between  12  and  14,000  inhabit- 
ants. Here  are  barracks  for  cavalry  and  infantry,  capable  of 
accommodating^  11,000  men:  they  were  constructed  durina: 
my  residence  in  the  country.  The  climate  is  between  tempe- 
rate and  frigid ;  and  the  town  is  abundantly  supplied  with 
excellent  water  from  Mount  Perote.  The  wealthy  class  of 
the  inhabitants  derive  their  support  from  agriculture  and 
commerce,  and  the  lower  class  are  employed  chiefly  as  mecha- 
nics and  in  husbandry ;  they  are  the  cleanliest  and  most  civi- 
lized people  in  the  whole  country ;  as,  in  former  times,  the 
fleet  that  annually  arrived  from  Europe  sent  its  merchandize 
to  this  town,  where  a  fair  was  held  for  the  disposal  of  it,  where 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  adjacent  country  assembled  to  make 
purchases,  and  consequently  had  an  opportunity  of  observing 
and  imitating  the  manners  of  the  Europeans.  Xalapa  has  a 
large  cathedral,  in  which  are  deposited  the  plate  and  gold  of  all 
the  churches  along  the  coast,  several  other  small  churches,  and 
a  convent. 

Seven  miles  beyond  Xalapa,   going  round  the  foot  of  the 


440  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

mountain  to  Perote,  is  situated  the  villasje  of  Burras,  where 
the  climate  in  winter  is  extremely  cold  ;  and  seven  miles  from 
Burras,  at  the  foot  of  the  north-west  side  of  the  mountain,  is 
the  small  town  of  Perote,  in  which  there  is  nothing  worthy  of 
remark  but  the  castle,  a  place  of  no  considerable  strength, 
though  mounted,  as  I  have  said,  with  72  pieces  of  cannon.  It 
is  surrounded  by  a  ditch,  in  which  1  never  saw  any  water, 
crossed  by  a  drawbridge  close  to  the  gate,  which,  when  drawn 
up,  unites  itself  with  the  gate,  and  doubles  its  strength. 