


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  443 

receive  the  loose  and  floating  ideas  which  have  passed  through 
my  mind  in  the  course  of  a  restless  night. 

I  wish  Parliament  had  been  up  before  you  had  begun  the 
execution  of  projects  so  deeply  important ;  for  the  prepara- 
tions of  necessity  give  rise  to  speculations,  all  of  which  are 
used  by  factious  men  as  instruments  of  mischief  to  their 
country,  and  as  the  means  of  obstructing  its  operations  being 
attended  with  success. 

As  your  lordship  has  not  distinctly  explained  the  grounds 
or  information  on  which  his  Majesty  has  been  induced  to  send 
the  force  from  Gibraltar  and  Ireland  to  the  coast  of  Spain,  any 
suggestions  I  offer  on  that  subject  must,  of  course,  be  very 
vague  and  inconclusive. 

My  general  impression  is  that,  if  you  proceed  on  any  such 
information  or  communication  with  Spain,  as  induces  us  to 
confide  in  a  co-operation  to  get  into  our  possession  the  fleets  of 
Spain,  Russia,  or  France,  now  in  the  ports  of  Spain,  the  plan 
is  a  meritorious  one,  and  the  success  would  be  attended  not 
only  with  great  eclat,  but  with  very  beneficial  consequences ; 
but  if,  without  any  such  specific  object,  you  have  been  tempted 
by  any  general  speculations  of  a  disaffection  in  the  minds  of 
the  Spaniards,  against  either  their  own  Government  or  the 
Government  of  France  erected  there,  it  is  impossible  for  me 
not  to  entertain  the  most  serious  apprehensions,  if,  with  a  view 
to  any  such  co-operation,  a  considerable  body  of  British  troops 
should  be  landed  and  carried  into  the  interior  of  Spain.  If  it 
turns  upon  a  question  of  numbers,  the  population  of  Spain, 
animated  by  a  proper  spirit,  is  adequate  to  work  its  own  deli- 
verance. If  they  cannot  rouse  themselves  to  a  spirit  suffi- 
ciently vigorous,  and  adequate  to  the  circumstances  of  their 
situation,  I  cannot  conceive  any  substantial  good  or  any  decisive 
effects  that  can  be  accomplished  by  a  body  of  British  troops 
comparatively  small,  when  we  consider  the  magnitude  of  the 
object  to  be  accomplished.  And,  in  addition  to  this,  you  will 
never  forget  the  facility  with  which   any  numbers  of  French 


444  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

troops  may  be  poured  into  the  provinces  of  Spain  ;  and  we  all 
know  enough  of  the  temper  and  animosity  of  Bonaparte  to 
Great  Britain,  not  to  feel  that  there  is  no  sacrifice  he  would 
not  risk  of  his  own  troops,  if  he  saw  a  reasonable  prospect  of 
bringing  any  serious  disaster  upon  a  considerable  body  of 
British  force.  Indeed,  independent  of  the  gratification  of  his 
own  rancour,  he  would  judge  wisely  in  acting  so ;  for,  if  such 
a  disaster  was  to  befal  any  considerable  body  of  British  troops 
engaged  in  such  an  enterprise,  it  would  have  the  worst  effects 
on  the  feelings  of  this  country,  and  bring  complete  discredit 
on  the  councils  of  his  Majesty. 