

I  remain,  &c.,  Melville. 

PS.  Of  course,  if  there  is  any  thing  in  the  idea,  it  must 
have  occurred  to  yourself;  but,  as  it  strikes  me,  I  may  as  well 
mention  it.  I  suppose  that  no  persons  can  be  more  horrified 
at  what  is  now  passing  in  Spain  than  their  clergy.  Will  it 
not  be  possible  to  get  hold  of  some  of  them,  and  send  them 
out  as  emissaries  to  Spanish  America,  to  persuade  the  inhabit- 
ants of  those  provinces  that  we  have  no  plans  against  their 
religion  ?  On  the  same  errand,  would  it  be  impossible  to  avail 
ourselves  of  a  few  well-affected  Roman  Catholic  Clergy  from 
Ireland  ?  M. 

General  Miranda  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Grafton  Street,  August  19,  1808. 
My  Lord — Since  Sir  Arthur   Wellesley''s  departure  from 
this  capital  in  June  last,  I  have  had  no  communication  with 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  449 

your  lordship  upon  the  political  affairs  of  South  America, 
nor,  indeed,  did  I  wish  to  call  your  lordship's  attention,  ab- 
sorbed, as  I  conceived,  in  the  affairs  of  Portugal  and  Spain. 

In  the  mean  time,  however,  I  have  received  various  letters 
and  verbal  communications  relative  to  the  province  of  Oaraccas, 
through  Trinidad  and  the  West  India  islands,  that  I  thought 
sufficiently  important  to  communicate  to  your  lordship ;  but, 
unfortunately,  upon  calling  on  General  Charles  Stewart  ^  for 
this  purpose,  I  found  him  so  much  pressed  and  engaged  at  the 
moment  of  his  departure  for  Spain,  that  I  could  not  fulfil  my 
wishes. 

This  I  the  more  regretted,  as  your  lordship  must  be  aware 
that,  after  the  communications  which,  with  your  lordship's 
and  Sir  Arthur's  approbation,  I  have  made  since  January  last 
to  my  correspondents  in  Trinidad  and  Caraccas,  they  would 
be  extremely  anxious  for  further  advice  from  me,  on  the  sub- 
ject of  which  I  was  desirous  of  consulting  Greneral  Stewart. 
Not  having  been  so  fortunate  as  to  have  an  opportunity  of 
doing  so,  and  feeling  the  necessity  of  writing  before  the  sailing 
of  the  packet,  it  appeared  to  me  the  best  advice  I  could  give 
them,  in  the  present  most  critical  state  of  affairs,  both  with 
respect  to  the  uncertainty  of  events  in  Spain,  and  to  the 
various  sentiments  and  interests  prevailing  in  America,  would 
be  to  open  a  direct  communication  by  authorized  persons  with 
the  British  Government,  in  order  to  concert  with  it  such  mea- 
sures as  circumstances  might  require,  without  listening  to  the 
Juntas  of  Madrid,  Oviedo,  &;c.,  whose  interests  were  opposite ; 
but  the  Cabildos  to  assume  the  Government  of  the  country  them- 
selves, having  present,  among  other  official  papers,  his  Majesty's 
Speech  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  the  late  Order  in 
Council  relative  to  the  Spanish  nation  ;  which  documents  re- 
garded also  our  American  interests,  and  gave  an  idea  of  the 
views  of  the  British  Government  towards  their  mutual  com- 
mercial interests  with  our  opulent  establishments  in  South 
^  Then  Under-Secretary  of  State. 