

There  is  another  view,  in  which  securing  "the  positions  I 
have  stated  at  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  appears  to  me  to^ 


446  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

be  of  deep  importance,  not  only  for  the  conquest  of  Mexico, 
but  as  connected  with  the  establishment  of  a  permanent  and 
solid  connexion  with  the  United  States  of  North  America.  I 
can  never,  in  my  contemplation  of  this  subject  of  Spanish 
America,  lay  out  of  my  consideration  the  ultimate  state  of 
North  A  merica.  If  he  is  not  already  known  at  your  Office, 
which  I  think  he  probably  is,  let  me  entreat  you  to  desire 
Alexander  Hope  to  bring  about  a  communication  between  you 
and  Mr.  Charles  Williamson,  with  whom  Mr.  Pitt  and  myself 
have  been  in  almost  unremitted  confidential  communication, 
since  our  first  connexion  with  him  began,  at  the  time  of  our 
threatened  war  with  Russia,  on  the  subject  of  Oczakow,  down 
to  the  present  moment.  If  I  have  any  solid  knowledge  of  the 
interests  of  Great  Britain  in  relation  to  the  United  States  of 
America,  and  the  means  of  securing  a  paramount  influence  in 
those  States,  either  jointly  or  separately,  I  am  bound  to  con- 
fess that  I  am  indebted  for  that  knowledge  to  the  information 
and  instruction  I  have  received  from  Mr.  Williamson.  I  have 
long  had  confidential  communication  with  him ;  and,  in  the 
course  of  a  visit  he  paid  me  at  this  place,  during  my  residence 
here  last  winter,  I  had  occasion  to  discuss  this  topic  with  him  in 
every  point  of  view,  and  the  result  of  the  whole  is  a  perfect 
conviction  that  it  will  be  owing  to  our  own  mismanagement 
and  want  of  wisdom,  if  we  do  not  derive  substantial  aid  from 
North  America  for  the  emancipation  of  Spanish  America;  and, 
our  influence  over  Spanish  America  once  firmly  established,  it 
will  serve  as  an  instrument  in  our  hands  to  obtain,  consolidate, 
and  preserve,  a  paramount  authority  and  control  over  the 
councils  and  politics  of  North  America.  Indeed,  so  sanguine 
am  I  on  this  subject,  I  have  not  a  doubt  it  would  lead  to  Great 
Britain  obtaining  and  preserving  the  commercial  market  of  both 
Americas ;  and  it  would  be  the  interest  of  both  to  cling  to  the 
pre-eminence  of  the  British  flag,  as  the  only  effectual  guardian 
of  all  their  substantial  interests  ;  and,  that  being  established 
as  their  general  feeling  and  the  ruling  principle  of  their  system 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  447 

and  conduct,  Grreat  Britain  would  be  rendered  independent  of 
the  casualty  of  every  European  combination  against  her  ;  and 
the  whole  both  of  North  and  South  America,  in  place  of  being 
jealous  of,  or  cavilling  at,  the  maritime  power  and  interests  of 
Great  Britain,  would  feel  that  on  that  power  rested  all  their 
hopes  of  security  against  any  such  revolutionary  barbarity  as 
that  which  now  enthrals  the  whole  of  the  European  quarter  of 
the  globe. 