

11  m'*a  communique  bien  d''autres  choses,  relativement  k  la 
situation  actuelle  des  colonies  Espagnoles  dans  le  Nouveau 
Monde ;  mais  comme  c'est  un  sujet  sur  lequel  les  Ministres  de 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  453 

sa  Majeste  ne  veulent  pas  tourner  la  vue  dans  ce  moment-ci 
jusqu'a  ce  que  les  affaires  de  TEspagne  ne  soient  entierement 
terminees,  comnie  vous  m'avez  fait  Fhonneur  de  me  dire  Fautre 
jour,  je  m''en  defends  de  vous  en  parler  davantage — attendant 
avec  impatience  cette  remarquable  epoque. 

J'ai  ajoute  sur  la  copie  ci-jointe  la  liste  des  escadres  qui 
etoient  au  Ferrol,  quand  il  quitta  la  Corogne  le  17  du  mois 
passe,  en  compagnie  du  Due  de  Veraguas. 

Etant  toujours  avec  devouement  et  consideration,  votre  tr^s 

humble  et  obeissant  serviteur, 

Fran,  de  Miranda. 


Literal  Translation. 

Havana,  September  20,  1808. 
My  dear  Joe — for  a  long  time  have  I  experienced  with  re- 
gret the  want  of  news  from  you ;  but,  thank  God,  the  political 
events  in  Spain  have  opened  the  door  of  the  seas,  and  conse- 
quently to  me  that  of  communication  with  you. 

I  do  not  doubt,  my  dear  son,  that  you  have  embraced  the 
just  cause,  and  that  you  would  sacrifice  yourself  for  it,  without 
ever  forgetting  those  principles  of  which  you  have  so  often 
given  me  proofs :  and  I  repeat  to  you,  what  I  have  often  told 
you,  that  I  would  rather  lose  you  for  ever  than  have  the  re- 
gret to  learn  that  you  do  not  rank  among  the  honourable  men. 
I  have  said  enough  to  my  beloved  son. 

You  know  that  the  infamous  CFarrel  has  many  relations 
here,  and  is  greatly  allied  by  various  other  causes,  as  well  as 
Casa-Calvo  :  these  keep  and  foment  a  secret  party,  which  may 
be  very  prejudicial  to  us  ;  because  the  problem  of  the  French 
politicians  is  not  yet  resolved.  I  wish  you  would  minutely 
detail  to  me  what  has  passed,  and  give  me  your  opinion,  with 
reflection,  about  the  future,  that  I  may  with  reserve  do  all  that 
is  in  my  power  in  behalf  of  my  beloved  country. 

God  make  you  as  happy  as  is  the  wish  of  your  father, 

Lewis. 


454  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1809. 

Lord  Castlereagh  to  the  Rt.  Hon,  N.  Vansittart. 

Downing  Street,  August  2,  1809. 

My  Dear  Sir — As  you  are  much  better  acquainted  with 
Miranda  than  I  am,  I  venture  to  trouble  you  with  the  confi- 
dential perusal  of  the  enclosed  ;  and  perhaps  you  will  take  the 
trouble  to  ascertain  how  far  there  is  any  truth  in  the  represen- 
tation received  from  Admiral  Apodaca.  I  should  very  re- 
luctantly adopt  any  measure  of  unkindness  to  Miranda ;  but, 
connected  as  we  are  with  Spain,  the  honour  of  the  country  and 
of  the  Government  must  not  be  compromised  ;  and  I  think  you 
will  be  enabled  to  obtain  assurances  from  Miranda,  so  distinct 
with  respect  to  his  conduct,  as  to  justify  me  in  continuing  to 
him  the  protection  which  he  now  receives. 