

VOL.  VIL  G  Q 


450  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES  OF  [1808. 

America,  recommending  to  them,  above  all,  to  act  with  unani- 
mity^ wisdom,  &c. 

The  most  material  intelligence  which  my  information  con- 
veys is  that  the  French  detachment  of  troops  which  was  at 
Caraccas  had  returned  to  Guadeloupe,  and  that  there  is  at  pre- 
sent no  French  force  remaining  in  that  province.  2ndly,  that 
the  intercourse  between  the  same  province  and  the  island  of 
Trinidad,  since  the  late  calamity  happened  to  the  town  of  Port 
of  Spain  by  fire,  has  materially  increased,  and  a  friendly  com- 
munication been  so  far  established,  that  a  great  number  of  the 
Spanish  inhabitants,  sufferers  at  Trinidad,  had  been  received 
and  settled  on  the  opposite  part  of  the  Continent,  in  a  place 
called  Guiria,  with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the  present 
Governor  of  Cumana,  who  had  permitted  every  assistance  to 
be  given  to  the  Island,  and  received  Governor  Hislop's  confi- 
dential agents  in  a  most  friendly  manner.  Srdly,  that,  as  to 
the  dispositions  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  provinces,  on  hear- 
ing the  information  transmitted  by  me  from  this  country, 
they  were  excessively  willing  to  accede  to  it,  and  as  well  in- 
clined to  embrace  the  opportunity  for  emancipation  as  they 
ever  were. 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  at  the  moment  of  quitting  this  for 
Ireland,  (General  Stewart  present)  communicated  to  me  a 
message  from  your  lordship,  purporting  that  the  requests  in 
my  Memorandum  of  the  6th  of  June  were  agreed  to,  so  far  as 
it  related  to  the  re-establishment  of  my  pension,  and  providing 
for  my  Secretary,  Mr.  Molini ;  which  matter  was  to  be  referred 
to  Mr.  Vansittart*'s  statement ;  that  the  other  subjects  would 
be  decided  after  knowing  the  results  from  Spain  ;  and  that  the 
original  papers  that  I  had  transmitted  to  Government  would 
be  returned  to  me  through  General  Stewart,  with  whom  I  was 
to  continue  in  future  my  communications  to  Government,  as  I 
had  previously  done  with  Sir  Arthur. 

General  Stewart,  on  the  point  of  his  departure,  informed  me 
that  your  lordship  had  agreed  to  the  above  pension,  and  the 


1808.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  451 

support  of  my  Secretary  as  given  in  by  Mr.  Vansittart's  Me- 
morandum, and  that  I  was  to  apply  to  Mr.  Cooke  for  payment 
of  the  same,  on  which  account  I  beg  your  lordship  will  accept 
my  most  grateful  acknowledgments  and  thanks. 

Mr.  Vansittart  will  have  the  goodness  to  inform  you  of  the 
circumstance  of  two  officers,  Messrs.  Downie  and  K/Oorbach, 
who,  having,  with  the  approbation  of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley, 
been  induced  to  wait  for  some  time  in  this  town,  with  the  view 
of  being  usefully  employed  with  me,  may  be  entitled  to  receive 
some  assistance  or  support  from  Government,  if  your  lordship 
may  deem  it  proper. 