

I  certainly  do  not  attribute  this  disposition  to  be  quiet  to  any 
change  in  his  principles,  but  to  his  conviction  that  what  he 
wishes  must  take  place  speedily,  in  the  natural  course  of 
events ;  ^.^.,  either  that  Spain  will  be  overrun  by  the  French, 
(which  is  his  decided  opinion)  and  that,  in  that  event,  a  sepa- 


456  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES.  [1809. 

ration  of  the  Colonies  under  British  protection  will  take  place 
of  itself;  or  that,  if  Spain  should  be  able  to  maintain  the  con- 
test, she  will  be  obliged  to  adopt  a  more  liberal  policy  towards 
the  Colonies,  and  admit  them  to  a  full  participation  of  liberty 
and  civil  rights. 

Of  this  there  has  very  lately,  for  the  first  time,  been  some 
appearance,  though  Bonaparte  was  wise  enough  to  assume  the 
mask  of  it  at  first,  by  calling  the  pretended  deputies  of  Mexico, 
Peru,  &c.,  in  common  with  those  of  Spain,  to  the  assembly  at 
Bayonne.  But  what  has  particularly  pleased  Miranda  is,  that 
the  Marquess  del  Toro  and  some  other  persons,  whom  he  con- 
siders as  friends,  at  Caraccas,  and  who  had  been  arrested,  and 
were  even  said  to  have  been  executed  by  the  Jamaica  papers, 
have  been  set  at  liberty  by  the  new  Governor  of  Caraccas, 
Emparan. 

I  certainly  shall  not  fail  to  use  all  my  influence  (which  I 
believe  is  considerable)  with  him  to  confirm  this  disposition  to 
be  quiet,  and  I  think  I  can  answer  for  his  doing  nothing  with- 
out consulting  me.  If  you  wish  me  to  make  any  communica- 
tion to  him  as  from  your  lordship,  in  addition  to  my  own  ad- 
vice, I  shall  be  happy  to  do  it. 

I  remain,  my  dear  Lord,  very  sincerely  yours, 

N.  Vansittart. 


END  OF  VOL.  VIL 


F  Sbobcrl,  JuQ.,  B'upvit  Street,  Hityuiurkft. 


BINDING  SZC7.  NOV  9  ^  jgg? 


DA  Londonderry,  Robert  Stewart, 

522  2d  Marquess  of 

L3A3        Memoirs  and  correspondence 

I848  of  Viscount  Castlerea^ 

V.7 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


