

I  beg  you  will  excuse  the  liberty  I  have  taken  of  availing 
myself  of  your  good  ofiices  on  the  present  occasion,  and  that 
you  will  believe  me,  &c.,  Castlereagh. 


The  Rt,  Hon.  N.  Vamittart  to  Lord  Castlereagh. 

Great  Malvern,  August  7,  1809. 

My  dear  Lord — I  should  have  felt  considerable  uneasiness 
from  your  lordship's  letter  of  the  2nd  instant,  sensible  as  I 
am  of  the  delicate  situation  in  which  Government  is  placed,  if  I 
did  not  feel  confident  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  Apodaca  has 
been  misinformed ;  and  I  can  have  no  objection  to  state  dis- 
tinctly, for  your  lordship's  and  Mr.  Canning's  information 
only,  my  reasons  for  thinking  so. 

First,  I  am  satisfied  that  Miranda  has  heard  nothing  through 
Brazil,  since  he  received  the  letters  which  I  showed  to  you, 
and  to  which  he  did  not  return  any  answer :  but  I  think  he 
mentioned  something  to  me  of  a  duplicate  of  an  old  letter  of 
his,  which  he  supposed  to  have  been  intercepted,  and  of  which 
it  is  possible  Apodaca  may  have  heard. 

Secondly,  because  I  have  strong  reason  to  believe  that,  at 
present,  he  only  wishes  to  be  quiet  and  to  wait  for  events  ;  and 


1809.]  LORD  CASTLEREAGH.  455 

this  not  only  from  his  declaration,  but  from  his  conduct  on  a 
very  critical  occasion,  which  lately  happened,  and  which  I 
should  certainly  have  mentioned  to  your  lordship,  if  I  had 
not  found  you  wished,  as  far  as  possible,  to  keep  clear  of  all 
communications  on  the  subject. 

About  six  months  ago,  Miranda  received  a  communication 
from  Caraccas,  his  native  place,  pressing  him,  in  the  strongest 
manner,  to  go  there  immediately,  stating  that  those  who  op- 
posed him,  when  he  appeared  off  the  coast,  in  1 806,  were  now 
among  the  most  eager  for  his  return,  offering  him  any  money 
he  might  want,  and  even  mentioning  that  a  ship  was  ready  for 
his  accommodation.  He  consulted  me  immediately,  and  offered 
to  take  your  directions  as  to  the  answer  he  should  give,  but  I 
thought  it  best  (considering  what  you  had  said  to  me)  to  ad- 
vise him  to  decline  the  offer  entirely  with  civility,  without 
involving  you  in  any  way  in  the  business.  He  accordingly 
answered  that  he  did  not,  at  present,  think  it  advisable  to  go 
out,  and  referred  the  person  who  wrote  to  him  to  the  public 
accounts  and  to  his  correspondence  with  your  lordship,  of 
which  he  sent  a  copy,  for  the  state  of  affairs. 

I  think  this  transaction  very  material,  not  only  to  show  his 
present  disposition,  but  to  prove  how  essential  it  is,  even  to 
Spanish  interests,  that  he  should  remain,  as  at  present,  under 
the  protection  of  this  Government.  If  he  was  to  leave  this 
country,  where  could  he  go  with  personal  safety  but  to  the 
United  States  of  America  ?  And  if  he  had  received  such  a 
proposition  there,  I  cannot  doubt  he  would  have  accepted  it ; 
and  that  the  consequence  would  have  been  an  explosion,  which 
could  not  fail  of  being  very  mischievous,  whatever  the  event  of 
it  might  have  been. 