

## PENTLAND

ductive. Perceval himself, in distancing the government from Goldsmith's schemes, provided a useful pre ´cis: "He disavowed most heartily, and from the bottom of his soul, any doctrines which led to practices so unchristian-like and so foreign to a wise and manly policy." 23 hese sentiments provide one immediate context for the response to the assassination of Perceval. MPs could not but be reminded that public discussion of the propriety of assassination had been extensively canvassed over the previous year. It was certainly picked up in discussion outside of Parliament, as will be demonstrated below. Running beneath this prolonged concern with assassination-and in particular the Whig assault on the Anti-Gallican Monitor-was the suspicion that the private actions of ministers, in subsidizing and encouraging an ultra-loyalist press, were incompatible with their public protestations about the war. The debate in Parliament in the aftermath of Perceval's assassination served to foreground this other major recent source of political tension: the relationship between public and private life. Assassination, like scandal, forces us to question and discuss the division between the public and the private. 24 his was another issue with a venerable pedigree that had been taken up with a new urgency during the period immediately preceding Perceval's assassination. Two powerful discourses had lent the issue a prominent place within public discussion during the French wars: first, the evangelical critique of private moral corruption and, in particular, of those vices "formerly confined to the higher classes of society" percolating from the higher to the middle orders and poisoning the streams of public life; second, a reoriented reform critique, which had been rebuilt around a criticism of scandals-most notably the duke of York affair (1809)-to criticize the deleterious effects of private corruption on both public life and the conduct of the war against Napoleon. 25 n this latter critique, the relationship between public and private life had become the fulcrum of political debate in a way that had been foreshadowed by radicals such as Mary Wollstonecraft, who had identified private morality as the wellspring of public virtue. 26 Peter Spence has traced the emergence of this "romantic radicalism" and highlighted its centrality to political discourse in the first decade of the nineteenth century. As the war effort was beset by problems from 1807, including the moral issues raised by the bombardment of Copenhagen and the humiliation of the Convention of Cintra, a patriotic critique of private corruption and its public and military consequences became more and more plausible and more and more powerful. 27 It reached its apogee with the assault on the duke of York and his mistress, Mary Anne Clarke, in 1808-9. Perhaps the clearest exposition of this obsession with the public consequences of private corruption could be found in the pages of the Examiner, which remorselessly pressed this diagnosis during the duke of York affair, helped to establish its central premises, and circulated political aphorisms based on these ideas: "The union of public and private virtue is as necessary to the sound politics, as it is to the real glory, of a statesman." 28 s the Examiner was well aware, Spencer Perceval's reputation as both a prominent evangelical statesman-"the model of a Christian gentleman . . . Christianity personified" in the estimation of one contemporary-and a persuasive debater made him the natural choice to defend the duke in the Commons but presented him with some intellectual problems. 29 erceval's response, in a speech that stretched over two days, was to demand that the duke's detractors cease confounding the issues of public and private wrongdoing. His speech insisted that the House come to a decision on the charge of public corruption and, in effect, this entailed his establishing a boundary between public and private duties. The House might, as he did, reprobate "the moral guilt into which, in an evil hour, h.r.h. suffered himself to be plunged, by his infatuated attachment to this most profligate woman," but as a public man the duke should be judged only on his public conduct. The House must form an opinion, argued Perceval, as to how far the duke was guilty of "a departure from the duties of his public station," a desertion of the "importance of character" and "the importance of public opinion." 30 Such an apparently rigid distinction between public and private duties seemed to rub up against Perceval's evangelical convictions and the Examiner was not alone in responding with incredulity: "Mr Perceval, a man who has always professed to consider morality and patriotism inseparable, and who once brought in a bill to punish adultery as a crime, has separated the public and private character of high individuals, and has discovered that the profane and profligate debauchee is as fit a man as any in existence to guard the most dignified virtues of society, the virtues of a patriot soldier." 31 The parliamentary response to Perceval's assassination further exposed these tensions between different understandings of the relationship between public and private. The immediate response was that unanimity on both the unreserved condemnation of the assassin and the propriety of making provision to Perceval's family was essential. Francis Burdett, the leading parliamentary radical, was fairly typical in underlining the importance of a single and univocal public response: "There was no room for any feeling but one on such an occasion; and that feeling all must wish should be conveyed to the sovereign, unalloyed by any other. It was PENTLAND impossible that this feeling, on a subject which concerned the safety of every man in the nation, should not be carried with unanimity to the throne." 32 uch exhortations were necessary because, beyond the immediate condemnation of assassination, there was such rich potential for divergent opinions on how best to mark Perceval's murder. Indeed, consensus soon began to erode along political lines, when the initial shock of the event had subsided and ministers began to canvas more ambitious projects of indemnification and commemoration. For ministerial colleagues and supporters, these schemes presented fewer problems than for others: for them Perceval's private virtues were matched by his public ones. Castlereagh outlined these virtues and emphasized Perceval's high sense of public duty and his eschewal of all pensions and emoluments. 33 Such arguments, of course, tacitly accepted a relationship between Perceval's private and public virtues, but they did not need to delve any deeper than expressing an approbation of both. Ministers encouraged opposition members to support motions for a public monument and for more extensive compensation for Perceval's family on the basis that even party-political opponents could pay their respects to private and public character without implying a wholesale acceptance of Perceval's policies.