

The initial response among political elites in the Houses of Parliament is well captured in the Parliamentary Debates and contemporary eyewitness and newspaper accounts. The murder made its impact on a parliamentary scene that had been more than usually unsettled since the resignation of William Pitt in 1801 and more particularly since his death in 1806. Indeed, the formation of a ministry under Perceval in 1809, leaving out such "big beasts" as the feuding George Canning and Viscount Castlereagh (who later joined the ministry as foreign secretary), had been something of a compromise intended to address the ministerial instability of the first decade of the nineteenth century. Perceval's death was to pave the way for a more lasting ministry under Lord Liverpool. 15 here was little evidence of the powerful political clashes of the era in the united front presented by parliamentarians. The immediate reaction was simply a clamor to determine what had happened and, crucially, to ascertain whether Bellingham had acted alone or was part of some wider conspiracy. 16 Having satisfied themselves on this point by searching others for arms, both Houses moved very promptly on the following day to confirm that the murder had apparently been an "insulated act" unconnected with any wider conspiracy and to deliver a unanimous condemnation of the assassination. This was represented as a crime against both British and universal human values. In the Commons, Castlereagh became "so much affected" that he had to sit down, but not before he had condemned the assassination as a crime that might stain the character of the country and was "inconsistent with the first emotions of human nature." George Canning, a former (and future) foreign secretary, was the first of many to condemn assassination as fundamentally un-English, as "foreign to the character and abhorrent to the feelings of Englishmen." 17 A unanimous condemnation of Perceval's murder in particular and of assassination in general was easy to achieve. But it did not take long for this consensus to be challenged. On the following day, when debate took up the issue of addressing the prince regent to make an ample provision for Perceval's family, political and interpretative divisions began to appear in Parliament. They emerged in connection with two issues: the appropriate relationship between private virtues and public distinctions and the precise place of assassination within British political culture. Such divisions were apparent because both issues were live ones that had been the subjects of politically charged debates within recent memory.

As Stuart Semmel has demonstrated, the 1790s and the first decade of the nineteenth century provided numerous opportunities for Britons to discuss the ethics and nature of political assassination, to the extent that "assassination figured prominently in the public imagination of early nineteenth-century Britain." 18 Most notably, such discussions revolved around the actions of Napoleon-the kidnapping and summary execution of the duc D'Enghien was a crucial plank in the "black legend" that had developed since 1799-and, increasingly, on the availability or advisability of assassination as a means of defeating the Corsican tyrant. 19 he immediate context for Bellingham's actions, however, was a two-year period during which assassination had been extensively discussed. In May of 1810, the duke of Cumberland had been attacked in the early hours of the morning by his Italian valet, Joseph Sellis, who subsequently took his own life. There was considerable public interest in the coroner's inquest, which mixed suspicion of the verdict of suicide with criticism of the duke for employing foreigners. 20 ore significantly, from the spring of 1811, the renegade journalist Lewis Goldsmith, who had switched an initial allegiance to Bonaparte for a kind of ultraloyalist defense of legitimacy, was openly canvassing the establishment of secret societies devoted to the assassination of Napoleon and urging the wisdom of this policy on ministers. 21 Existing ministerial support for Goldsmith's Anti-Gallican Monitor-not least from Perceval himself-placed the government in an awkward position, which Whig opposition MPs sought to exploit. 22 As an oppositional language coalesced around a patriotic critique of the conduct of the war after 1809-in which corruption was highlighted as the root cause of military failures in Spain and the Netherlands-Earl Grey in the House of Lords and Samuel Whitbread in the Commons leapt on apparent ministerial complicity in assassination as a patriotic stick with which to belabor ministers. Both Whig questioners and uncomfortable ministerial respondents agreed on a range of denunciations of the crime: assassination was un-Christian, unmanly, un-British, and counterpro- 18 Semmel, Napoleon and the British, 126. 19