

These arguments were increasingly rejected by opposition members as the sums to be granted to Perceval's family and the honors proposed to his memory escalated. Especially vociferous were those parliamentary radicals who had faced the chancellor of the exchequer over the duke of York affair. In one sense they found themselves on the opposite side of the argument: they agreed to separate the private from the public man and pay testament to the first while reserving judgment on the second. In reality it was, for many, a very difficult division to maintain. Once parliamentary business moved beyond a modest recompense to Perceval's widow and family, Samuel Whitbread was most vociferous in the rejection of measures that must, he argued, imply endorsement of Perceval's public virtues. 34 nother political maverick on the opposition benches, Samuel Romilly, offered perhaps the clearest expression of this discomfort in his diary reflections on the fallen minister. Acknowledging his great respect for Perceval as a father and a private man, Romilly explained why he had shrunk from Perceval's invitations to friendship: "I could not endure the idea of living privately in intimacy with a man whose public conduct I in the highest degree disapproved, and whom, as a member, I was constantly opposing. I cannot indeed reconcile to my way of thinking, that distinction between private and public virtues which it is so much the fashion to adopt. . . . It is not suited to anyone who is really in earnest and sincere in his politics." 35 nitially, such strong statements were confined to men who operated on the fringes of the Whig establishment (Whitbread, indeed, was in the process of his final alienation from Whiggism) and whose proximity to and involvement in the radical critique of private corruption helped to shape their political convictions. That such a critique had wider purchase became abundantly clear when the debate 32 moved on from the issue of a modest provision for Perceval's family to that of a public commemorative monument to Perceval himself. 36 While the minority against the motion for a monument was small, the debate saw powerful speeches from the Grenvillite Charles Williams Wynn, who argued that "there was no instance on the Journals in which a monument had been voted to the public or private 'virtues' of any individual" and from the Whig Viscount Milton, who "could not, in his own mind, separate the vote of a public monument from the idea of public services." 37 Both men had been critics of the duke of York's conduct, and their attack on the idea that supposed private virtues could ever be a justification for public monuments was matched by similar criticisms in the radical press. 38 he reception of Perceval's death in Parliament thus underlined issues that had been mounting throughout Britain's experience of revolution and war. The increasing presence from the 1790s of assassination as a topic of public discussion and its recent endorsement as a political strategy by sections of the ultra-loyalist press provided a crucial context for Perceval's murder. More importantly, the increasing tension between public and private virtue that was being stoked by the language of the wartime state, its patriotic opponents, and an increasingly dominant religious discourse of evangelicalism provided a fulcrum for the debate on the assassination.