

Every serious well-disposed person is struck with horror; but I am sorry to say that numbers of a quite different description have been shewing marks of rejoicing, by firing Guns till near midnight, & the greater part of this Day! Boys in the streets are taught to exclaim-now the great Man in the Parliament House is dead, we shall have a big Loaf! My Ears are assail'd as I pass along the streets with declarations of distress, & almost threats; and I have too much reason to dread that it cannot be long before some serious Event must take place, as the lower classes seem quite ripe for it. 45 ese reports had an impact on parliamentary interpretations and, indeed, one of the contexts for Williams Wynn's objections to a monument was the evidence of rejoicing at the assassination in such an unlikely place as the Shropshire market town of Oswestry. 46 Such celebrations had begun almost immediately with the transfer of Bellingham from Parliament to Newgate: "When the prisoner was attempted to be put into the coach, a great bustle was set up, and an attempt to rescue him. In the most detestable spirit they huzzaed and cheered him, calling out 'Burdett for ever,' and execrating the soldiery as murderers, and hissed and hooted the carriages of the members and other gentlemen." 47 Abhorrence at the "savage joy manifested by the populace" was thus a common trope in elite responses to the assassination. 48 Romilly was not alone in tying the assassination and the "savage expressions of joy and exultation" in London to the increasingly violent nature of Luddite protest and positing a fundamental shift in the national character: "Sentiments so horrible as these, together with the recent assassinations and attempts at assassination which have taken place at Nottingham and in the North of England, are well calculated to excite the most lively alarms in the minds of all thinking men. The English character seems to have undergone some unaccountable and portentous change." 49 uch celebrations, as Canning feared, were met with a loyalist inability to interpret the assassination as an apolitical act. In the context of celebrations by "the mob" in Bolton, where the news had filled "all good Loyalists with grief," Ralph Fletcher, a prominent and virulently anti-radical magistrate, could report: "The Loyalists here cannot accede to what is stated in the Public Prints-viz that Bellingham had no political motive for committing the foul deed. We here, from the general language of the disaffected and from some secret Information, of a Revolution . . . expected to have taken place early in May, cannot refrain from entertaining an opinion that Bellingham's motives were revolutionary." 50 oyalist sermons, pamphlets, and newspapers that speculated on the assassination similarly lent political significance to the event and to the motivations of the assassin. Bellingham's action was taken as evidence of the deterioration in political culture effected by the American war and, in particular, by the political violence of Jacobins and Paineite principles. 51 Perhaps the most commonly referenced trope was the un-Englishness of assassination and the nature of the murder as a clear indicator of the foreign dangers to British political life. This formed a constant refrain in printed responses and was, for example, central to one specimen of the truly awful verse sent into loyal newspapers. Written by "An Englishwoman," these "Lines on a Late Disgraceful and Melancholy Degradation of the British Character" saw the assassination as an importation to Britain of Napoleonic crimes (the poet had in mind Napoleon's alleged poisoning of French troops in Jaffa) to Britain: out ‘Burdett for ever,’ and execrating the soldiery as murderers, and hissed and hooted the carriages of the members and other gentlemen.” 47 Abhorrence at the “savage joy manifested by the populace” was thus a common trope in elite re sponses to the assassination. 48 Romilly was not alone in tying the assassination and the “savage expressions of joy and exultation” in London to the increasingly violent nature of Luddite protest and positing a fundamental shift in the national character: “Sentiments so horrible as these, together with the recent assassinations and at tempts at assassination which have taken place at Nottingham and in the North of England, are well calculated to excite the most lively alarms in the minds of all thinking men. The English character seems to have undergone some unaccountable and portentous change.” 49 Such celebrations, as Canning feared, were met with a loyalist inability to in terpret the assassination as an apolitical act. In the context of celebrations by “the mob” in Bolton, where the news had filled “all good Loyalists with grief,” Ralph Fletcher, a prominent and virulently anti-radical magistrate, could report: “The Loyalists here cannot accede to what is stated in the Public Prints—viz that Bel lingham had no political motive for committing the foul deed. We here, from the general language of the disaffected and from some secret Information, of a Rev olution . . . expected to have taken place early in May, cannot refrain from en tertaining an opinion that Bellingham’s motives were revolutionary.” 50 Loyalist sermons, pamphlets, and newspapers that speculated on the assassination similarly lent political significance to the event and to the motivations of the assassin. Bellingham’s action was taken as evidence of the deterioration in political culture effected by the American war and, in particular, by the political violence of Jacobins and Paineite principles. 51 Perhaps the most commonly referenced trope was the un-Englishness of assassination and the nature of the murder as a clear indicator of the foreign dangers to British political life. This formed a constant refrain in printed responses and was, for example, central to one specimen of the truly awful verse sent into loyal newspapers. Written by “An Englishwoman,” these “Lines on a Late Disgraceful and Melancholy Degradation of the British Character” saw the assassination as an importation to Britain of Napoleonic crimes (the poet had in mind Napoleon’s alleged poisoning of French troops in Jaffa) to Britain: When British hearts—when British hands Can clasp the murd’rous knife; When Albion’s son assassin stands, To steal a Briton’s life! 52 47 Full and Authentic Report, 21. 48 W. Hughes to Lord Sidmouth, 30 January 1813, Devon Record Office (DRO): Addington Papers, 152M/C1813/OH40. 49 Romilly, Memoirs, 3:35–36. 50 Ralph Fletcher to Henry Hobhouse, 15 May 1812, TNA: Home Office Disturbances, HO 40/ 1, fols. 115–16. There were other complaints about the attempts of local loyalists and the loyalist press to connect Bellingham to Jacobin or Catholic politics in Liverpool Mercury, 15 and 22 May 1812. 51 See, e.g., Cursory Remarks Occasioned by the Horrible Assassination of the Right Hon. Spencer Perceval (London, 1812), 5–11. 52 “Lines on a Late Disgraceful and Melancholy Degradation of the British Character, in the rejoicings on the Assassination of the Late Most Worthy and Honourable Spencer Perceval” by “An English woman,” Morning Post, 19 May 1812.