

This article focuses not on Bellingham himself but on the reception of his act and the political meanings ascribed to it. It does not aim to pick over the year 1812 and arrive at some measure of its "revolutionary potential" or, conversely, to demonstrate the massive stability of British politics and society during the war. Instead, it seeks more modestly to show how the assassination of the king's principal minister-a traumatic and at least potentially transformative event-was used by various groups with political interests and featured in political discussion and rhetoric to illustrate a number of different issues: the nature of assassination and the relationship between private and public, the role of the commercial middle classes in the affairs of the nation, the cultures of Luddism and extraparliamentary PENTLAND radicalism, and the role of petitioning within British political life. While political elites were keen to ensure that the assassination was not seen as political and could not be politicized, their very attempts to achieve this undermined their efforts as Perceval's murder became politicized in a number of different ways. This article aims to explore these different responses. It does this by offering, first, a brief narrative of the affair of John Bellingham and the assassination of Spencer Perceval itself; second, an examination of the debate in Parliament and among political elites about the murder's significance and the appropriate public response; finally, an analysis of how the assassination was received, discussed, and used outside of Parliament, particularly among the commercial middle classes and those members of the working classes who were engaged in radical and reform politics.

There is no doubt that John Bellingham, a shipbroker from Liverpool, acted on the basis of private grievances. Born in St. Neots in 1770, Bellingham had experienced his fair share of commercial ups and downs before his fateful voyage to Archangel, where he arrived in the summer of 1804. He was prevented from either returning on or loading his goods onto the vessel he had chartered and was detained for a debt of 4,890 roubles, allegedly owed to a Mr. Conrad Dorbecker. Bellingham's lengthy imprisonment in Russia-from which he repeatedly refused liability for the debt and made frequent representations to Granville Leveson-Gower, then British ambassador in St. Petersburg-was to last until October of 1809. Bellingham remained consistent in his story throughout his life and always claimed to have been wrongfully imprisoned on the fraudulent oath of the bankrupt assignees of Dorbecker. This he linked to a wider accusation, that the real cause of his imprisonment was a conspiracy hatched by two wealthy Russian merchants, Solomon Van Brienen and Vassily Popoff. In 1803 these men had lost a ship, the Sojus, and Lloyd's of London had refused compensation on the basis of an anonymous letter claiming that the ship had been fraudulently sabotaged by its owners. Although Bellingham protested his innocence and encouraged the authorities in Russia to investigate these merchants, Popoff and Van Brienen were apparently convinced that he had sent the letter.