

To these alleged commercial injustices Bellingham added a strong conviction that he had been let down by the representatives of the British government in Russia. Early in his tour around different Russian penal establishments, while under the impression that his health was failing, Bellingham made a declaration to the minister of the English Church at St. Petersburg. This highlighted his strong sense of personal oppression, his conviction that he had been refused the protection that should attend British subjects, and his argument that Russian actions were an affront to British commerce: "I solemnly declare that I have been made the victim of oppression in this extraordinary and unprecedented manner . . . whereby justice and the laws have been trampled underfoot in the most pernicious manner to the great prejudice of His Most Imperial Majesty, as well as to the utter contempt and dishonor of Great Britain." 8 It was an overpowering concern to secure a public discussion of his wrongs and some redress for the injustice he had suffered that formed a constant refrain when Bellingham was released and arrived back in England in December 1809. To his sense of being a victim of commercial fraud and of the inability or unwillingness of the British government to protect its subjects abroad was added the conviction that the government at home also refused to discuss his case or consider his petitions. The substantial paper trail he left over the following years demonstrates that his attempts to have his wrongs redressed became nearly a full-time occupation for Bellingham. He petitioned and was rebuffed by Lord Wellesley at the Foreign Office, the Home Office, Spencer Perceval, the prince regent, the lords of the treasury, and the Privy Council. During this process, he consistently represented his grievances not only as a private matter but also as an "Affair of National Import" and deserving of public discussion. 9 Having failed to secure a public discussion of his cause in the press and with all official avenues apparently exhausted by the beginning of May 1812, Bellingham began to visit the gallery of the House of Commons. He also purchased a pair of steel pistols from a gunsmith and visited a London tailor to have a side pocket of very specific dimensions made to accommodate these weapons. 10 n the early evening of Monday 11 May, as he walked through the lobby of the House to attend a session of evidence on the Orders in Council, Spencer Perceval was shot through the heart by Bellingham, a moment captured by several sensationalist contemporary prints. 11 He was dead within a few minutes. Bellingham offered no resistance-"a mouse might have secured him with a bit of Thread," according to one eyewitness-and was easily apprehended. 12 He admitted the charge without compunction and was transferred to Newgate in the middle of a considerable crowd. His trial was speedily arranged. On that day, he wrote to his recent business partner, John Parton, explaining his action as a response to repeated denials of justice, in particular the refusal of every man's "birth right" of bringing his cause before Parliament. He made it clear, as he did at his trial, that assassination was his last desperate attempt to secure a public hearing of his cause: "I could stand it no longer and resolved to finish the affair by an appeal to a criminal court wether [sic] government can refuse justice or no." 13 Bellingham was tried at the Old Bailey on 15 May, with troops strategically positioned in case of attempted rescue. He ostentatiously refused any notion of pleading insanity and framed his actions-as he had throughout-as part of his dogged pursuit of justice. He explained his conduct as a reasoned response to the position in which he had found himself. He had even apparently interpreted one government rebuff as a sanction for assassination: "I had even a carte blanche from the British Government to right myself in any way I might be able to discover. I PENTLAND have done so." 14 He was convicted and sentenced to death, and the sentence was carried out on Monday 18 May. It had been one week since his murder of Perceval.