

The assassination was also used, however, to make more sophisticated arguments about the duties of the social and political "middle" that had been such a fertile cause of political debate since the 1790s. 53 The theme was taken up most trenchantly in a pamphlet containing Cursory Remarks on the assassination, which used Bellingham's social position to argue for the political importance of this middle class standing firmly with "the higher orders." The appeal was premised on identifying the self-interest of "the middling classes" with that of "the Throne itself," and readers were reminded that "the same principles which led one wretch to murder a Minister whom he considered as the cause of his ruin, will lead a discarded shopman to murder his former master." The tract was, however, far from a paean to the middle classes. It identified speculation and borrowing as one of the "principles that disorganize society," an explanation that provided a neat moral explanation for Perceval's murder: "The misery and guilt of Bellingham may all be traced up to the fatal error of trading without capital." 54 uch moral exhortations highlight the final way in which loyalists discussed Bellingham's actions: through the lens of religion. The discussion was complex. For the author of the Cursory Remarks, for example, the assassination and Bellingham's impenitence were an invitation to examine the political morality espoused by different sects with a view to restricting those "whose morality differs from the established law." 55 More representative were the lessons drawn by the prominent Anglican evangelical minister of St. John's in Bloomsbury (and future bishop of Calcutta) Daniel Wilson. His widely circulated Substance of a Conversation with John Bellingham was based on an interview held on the eve of Bellingham's execution. The pamphlet alluded to the political dangers of an accelerating infidelism, but it dwelt on what Bellingham as a case study of wretched humanity could reveal about the fundamental tenets of evangelical religion: the importance of early religious instruction, the hazards of "hasty and unmeasured schemes of aggrandisement," the necessity of constant vigilance against the temptations of the devil, and, above all, the need to reject "perfunctory and unmeaning generalities in religion" in favor of Wilberforce's "real and vital Christianity." 56 he ministerial insistence on the apolitical nature of the assassination was thus contested on its reception within public discussion, by loyalists as much as by radicals and reformers. Attempts to brand Bellingham as a Jacobin, or a Catholic, or an infidel, or a speculator, were part of a process through which loyalists derived their own meanings from the assassination of Perceval. That such responses were complex and multivocal provides further support for Mark Philp's influential approach to popular conservatism as a nuanced and evolving range of political positions rather than as the expression of a simple and instinctive conformity. 57 letters—Luddite and otherwise—after May 1812. A few examples will serve to illustrate the genre. An anonymous letter to the prince regent on 17 May urged “bread or blood” and told the Regent to adopt Burdett as his adviser: “If you do not you shall share the same fate that Pervical [sic] has done.” 62 Other targets included Granville Leveson-Gower, who had been the British ambassador in St. Petersburg during Bellingham’s detention. Bellingham had suggested at his trial that Leveson-Gower had been his preferred victim, and Leveson-Gower’s expla nation of his conduct in a public letter to Castlereagh meant that he continued to attract considerable public hostility: