

One factor that had been apparent in the parliamentary responses to the assassination was concern about the wider public reception of the event. In part, the purpose of swiftly demonstrating it to be the work of an individual actuated by private grievances was to inform and convince the wider public on this point. Indeed, Canning congratulated Castlereagh on his prompt statement, which he hoped had forestalled any attempt by radicals or by loyalists to use the event as the basis for action: "On the one hand it might have been held up as an example and encouragement of practices foreign to the character, and abhorrent to the feelings of Englishmen; while on the other, it might have been regarded as the symptom of a general and prevailing spirit of bloodshed and anarchy, forerunner of the evils which had desolated the rest of Europe." 39 Such attempts to depoliticize the assassination were echoed by the bookseller Joseph Butterworth's later efforts to secure a public statement from Bellingham to the effect that "he was engaged in no sort of confederacy, and that it was not from any kind of political motive whatever that he was induced to commit the horrid deed, but from a Full infat- 36 The monument itself and its uniqueness within the pantheon of British patriots that was constructed during the French Wars is discussed in Eveline G. Bouwers

## PENTLAND

uation of imaginary personal wrongs." 40 Butterworth succeeded in obtaining such a statement from Bellingham, which was assiduously and widely reported in accounts of his execution. 41 similar sensitivity to how both the assassination and the measures taken by Parliament in its aftermath might be received in the country ran through the subsequent debates. William Wilberforce reminded the House that in aiming for unanimity it should be remembered that "in the country his [Perceval's] political opinions had many strenuous opponents, who might think too large a sum wholly misapplied." 42 Opposition to the monument from Williams Wynn and Milton was partly premised on the idea that the meaning of any public monument would prove impossible to control and that it might become a "column of infamy" that would "commemorate the vices of the person by whom he was destroyed" rather than any supposed virtues of Perceval himself. 43 During a period when the didactic power of public monuments was being widely canvassed, such disquiet about the possible meanings of monuments was neither flippant nor irrelevant. 44 oncerns about public reception were shaped by the widespread reports of celebrations, which threatened to lend their own political meanings to Bellingham's actions. Reports of the impact of the assassination on the "public Mind" reached parliamentarians quickly and linked the murder to the prevailing distress, as did a correspondent from Wolverhampton: uation of imaginary personal wrongs.” 40 Butterworth succeeded in obtaining such a statement from Bellingham, which was assiduously and widely reported in ac counts of his execution. 41 A similar sensitivity to how both the assassination and the measures taken by Parliament in its aftermath might be received in the country ran through the subsequent debates. William Wilberforce reminded the House that in aiming for unanimity it should be remembered that “in the country his [Perceval’s] political opinions had many strenuous opponents, who might think too large a sum wholly misapplied.” 42 Opposition to the monument from Williams Wynn and Milton was partly premised on the idea that the meaning of any public monument would prove impossible to control and that it might become a “column of infamy” that would “commemorate the vices of the person by whom he was destroyed” rather than any supposed virtues of Perceval himself. 43 During a period when the didactic power of public monuments was being widely canvassed, such disquiet about the possible meanings of monuments was neither flippant nor irrelevant. 44 Concerns about public reception were shaped by the widespread reports of celebrations, which threatened to lend their own political meanings to Bellingham’s actions. Reports of the impact of the assassination on the “public Mind” reached parliamentarians quickly and linked the murder to the prevailing distress, as did a correspondent from Wolverhampton: