

The remainder of this article will trace the complex role that Bellingham's assassination of Perceval came to play within reformist and radical argument and action. If ministers could not avert loyalist politicization of the assassination, they could hardly have expected to be successful in containing radical interpretations. This was even more the case because Perceval's political conduct across his career made him liable to the hostility of a wide range of reform and radical groups and leaders. He had been involved in the prosecution of members of the London Corresponding Society in the 1790s, of Colonel Despard in 1803, and of William Cobbett in 1804; as prime minister, he strongly supported the imprisonment of Francis Burdett in the Tower of London; and alongside his consistent anti-radicalism, Perceval was associated with a range of other contentious positions, including a virulent anti-Catholicism. 58 adical interpretations of the assassination had been apparent in the incongruous cheers for Burdett as Bellingham was moved to Newgate, and numerous accounts attested to the spread of these celebrations and the political meaning they lent to the murder. William Cobbett, who watched Bellingham's execution from his own berth at Newgate, gave an account of the joy with which the news of Perceval's death was greeted: "It is very notorious, that the news of the death of Mr Perceval excited demonstrations of joy, the most unequivocal, amongst the people in several of the most populous parts of England; that at Nottingham the church bells were rung, at Leicester there was a supper and songs; at Sheffield there were sheep roasted whole; that, in short, the shouts in Palace-Yard were but a signal for popular rejoicing through the country." 59 f Cobbett's picture of a saturnalian reception of the news of Perceval's death was drawn rather too luridly, there was plentiful evidence (and criticism) of celebrations occurring in the provinces. 60 As Cobbett's commentary demonstrates, the radical press was quick off the mark in ascribing political meaning to the assassination. According to a hostile source, for example, the broadly Burdettite Statesman newspaper used its second edition on 11 May to peddle an idealized version of events: "Bellingham being seized and called upon to account for his motive in shooting Mr. Perceval, had said that 'HE HAD SAVED HIS COUNTRY AND WAS CONTENT': thereby intimating, that the act was praiseworthy, and a second Brutus had risen to snatch poor Old England from the claws of a tyrant." 61 racing the political meanings given to the assassination beyond these generalized reports of public rejoicing is more challenging. The most obvious relevant context was that of Luddism, something well recognized by contemporaries. The most frequent appearance of Bellingham's name and actions came in threatening PENTLAND letters-Luddite and otherwise-after May 1812. A few examples will serve to illustrate the genre. An anonymous letter to the prince regent on 17 May urged "bread or blood" and told the Regent to adopt Burdett as his adviser: "If you do not you shall share the same fate that Pervical [sic] has done." 62 Other targets included Granville Leveson-Gower, who had been the British ambassador in St. Petersburg during Bellingham's detention. Bellingham had suggested at his trial that Leveson-Gower had been his preferred victim, and Leveson-Gower's explanation of his conduct in a public letter to Castlereagh meant that he continued to attract considerable public hostility: emerged very quickly. In Wigan, an examination of a man involved in an open discussion in a public house about Perceval’s murder confirmed that the discussion had revolved around the oppressive nature of wartime taxes and that there had been general approval of Bellingham’s actions. One Mr. Atkinson “approved of the murder of Mr Percivall [sic] and said that a subscription for Bellingham’s wife and family would be a good thing.” 71 In areas of conspicuous Luddite activity, anxious correspondents noted that liberal newspapers, such as the Leicester Chron icle, advertised the subscription to Bellingham’s widow and attempted to tie this to a critique of assassination principles. 72 The issue of provision for Bellingham’s widow brought up similar tensions between private and public measures as had the assassination itself. John Drink water, the son of the recent mayor of Liverpool, corresponded with Canning over private donations made to Mrs. Bellingham from, among others, Lord Leveson Gower. Drinkwater was incensed when news of Leveson-Gower’s private £50 do nation made it into the Liverpool Mercury, a reformist newspaper. He argued that either Mrs. Bellingham herself or the assassin’s acquaintances—“like many others of Bellinghams [sic] companions, violent unruly Reformists”—were attempting to make political hay by appealing to the nation and publicizing Leveson-Gower’s gift to the detriment of the donor: “It is truly lamentable to see Party Spirit carried to so great an extent.” 73 In the aftermath of this private donation, Mary Bellingham herself felt compelled to make a public appeal through the London and Dublin newspapers, in the context of the subscriptions being raised for her (including an intended Dublin play, St. Patrick’s Night, to be published for her benefit): “I have never solicited any PUBLIC subscription, nor given my consent to any such that may have been PUBLICLY advertised.” Her claims to want to avoid an appeal to the public, however, ring hollow when compared to her letter of the following week that thanked Leveson-Gower for his donation and explained her conduct: “To a generous public, I am compelled to look for assistance.” 74 More explicit political connections had to be made when it was Bellingham’s actions themselves that were being discussed rather than provision for his family. Positive presentations, other than those that supported assassination as a political strategy in general, revolved around two themes: first, that Bellingham had acted the part of the patriot; second, that his actions demonstrated some of the fun damental problems within British politics. These interpretations highlight the more complex role that Bellingham’s actions played within political discussion, not least in having an impact on discussions of the nature of the British constitution and associated rights such as petitioning. In contrast to the representations of assassination as foreign to British political culture, some positive comment sought to rescue Bellingham’s patriotic creden tials. This was very apparent, for example, in a placard posted up in Hull: “Civil 71 Examination of Thomas Clare, 15 May 1812, TNA: George III Domestic Correspondence, HO 42/123, fol. 42. 72 Binfield, Writings of the Luddites, 139–42. 73 John Drinkwater to Viscount Canning, 28 May and 3 June 1812, TNA: PRO 30/29/6/11, fols. 1631–34; “Miscellaneous Extracts: No. XXXV,” Liverpool Mercury, 29 May 1812. 74 The following is a copy of a letter, addressed by Mrs Bellingham to the Editors of sundry London and Dublin Papers (printed), 6 June 1812, and Mary Bellingham to George Leveson-Gower, 10 June 1812, TNA: PRO 30/29/6/11, fols. 1637–38.