

An honest tradesman, of superior sense, Bless'd by experience, and by eloquence, His credit good, unsullied was his name, He paid with pleasure every honest claim. 76 e poem went on to examine "how an Englishman in Russia far'd," when his just claims were ignored by the "sycophant" and "courtier" Gower. The poem did not defend Bellingham's actions (he had shot the wrong man by the poet's account), but he stood at the center of a critique of how British commerce had suffered during wartime, with merchants imprisoned at will: Oh! John Bull, 'tis thee, From rogues-and taxes-losses never free; Devoted mortal, thy once lusty sides, Now thy bare ribs and sinews barely hides. 77 with the poem, most broadly positive interpretations of Bellingham's actions stopped short of public support for assassination. Instead, such accounts urged readers to consider the extraordinary provocations and oppressions that had driven Bellingham to seek his own justice. Bellingham found ready sympathy, for example, with other members of the middle classes, who were convinced that they had been swindled by a corrupt system but could achieve no redress for their losses. Augustus Cove, a Quaker whose business had occupied a wharf at Paddington before he was forcibly driven from it by the Grand Junction Company in favor of the carriers, Pickfords, took his claims to court. Like Bellingham, he spoke in his own cause and sought "redress before a jury of his countrymen." 78 In pamphlet expositions of his case, Cove drew explicit analogies between himself and Bellingham and drew more general lessons from Bellingham's experience: about the dangerous weaknesses in this relationship and as an illustration of what must inevitably happen when the people’s petitions were met with contempt or negligence: “For the removing of ERROR, information is necessary, and by its friendly communication, men may be pacified into Petitioners, who might oth erwise become Bellinghams; and Statesmen may be saved from Pistols, by a timely attention to Petitions.” 90 William Cobbett, in his response to the assassination and its aftermath from Newgate, took this analysis one step further. He too had evinced considerable interest in petitioning, and part of his lifelong concern with the teaching of English grammar and with redefining popular journalism was to empower both rural and urban workers to take part in a political world of print on their own terms. 91 Like Cartwright, he assigned Bellingham’s actions to the failure of a culture of peti tioning, the operation of which acted as a safety valve within a free constitution: “He seems to have explored ‘the Right of Petition’ to its utmost bounds! He, however, failed at last; he could not obtain Mr. Perceval’s permission to get a member to present his petition; and, not ten minutes before he expired, he de clared, that, ‘had my petition been brought into parliament, this catastrophe would not have happened.’” 92 For Cobbett—with his own incarceration for seditious libel clearly in mind—Bellingham’s actions were also explicable in terms of the failure of another boasted British liberty, the freedom of the press. Bellingham’s petition had been only one part of his attempt to secure a public discussion of his grievances. Had he had access to a free press through which to pursue this end, the tragic events may have been averted: “But, unfortunately, he had no channel through which to make known his case to the country.” 93 This was to be the most lasting manner in which Bellingham’s case was used within radical argument. His was an object lesson in how a corrupt and funda mentally flawed political system—representatives who did not represent, a forum for the redress of grievances that offered no redress, and a shackled press—by denuding the people of their constitutional rights drove them to the contemplation of desperate violence. It was a dynamic well described by the most prominent practitioner of popular constitutionalist protest, Henry Hunt. 94 In his Memoirs, Hunt, in common with Cobbett and Cartwright, distanced himself from any ideo logical defense of assassination, but he did use the case of Bellingham to explain the causes of political violence: “Bellingham had been grievously oppressed, he could not obtain justice from the Government; he could not even make his case known in any way except by means of a petition to Parliament. . . . At the end of eighteen months of hope and fear and agony, Mr. Bellingham found that the 90 John Cartwright, Letter, &c. (London, 1815), 5. 91 Olivia Smith, The Politics of Language, 1791–1819 (Oxford, 1984), 29–34; Ian Dyck, William Cobbett and Rural Popular Culture (Cambridge, 1992), chap. 4. 92 “To the Prince Regent . . . Letter I,” Cobbett’s Weekly Political Register, 30 May 1812, col. 678. 93 Ibid., col. 679. Cobbett made his contribution to this wider debate on the nature of constitutional rights clear in his second letter, by quoting Ponsonby’s speech about British freedoms above the leading article: “To the Prince Regent . . . Letter II,” Cobbett’s Weekly Political Register, 6 June 1812, cols. 705–6. 94 For whom, see John Belchem, “Orator” Hunt: Henry Hunt and English Working-Class Radicalism (Oxford, 1985).