

And whence the Wonder, that there should be found, In Town and Country-Bellinghams abound. 75 in fact, something of this critique in Bellingham's concluding remarks at his trial, during which he had argued in familiar language that in petitioning for redress "I demanded only my right, and not a favour; I demanded what is the birthright and privilege of every Englishman." 85 Such issues had been raised tangentially by MPs during the initial debates after the assassination. George Ponsonby, the Whig leader in the Commons, used the occasion to advert to petitioning as one of the hallmarks of British freedom and to contrast this with the political violence characteristic of despotic regimes: "One of the great blessings of a free government was that it allowed men to express their sentiments freely on all occasions, but if acts of revenge and assassination, like the present, were to prevail, the people would be in a condition no better than in those countries subject to the most rigid despotism." 86 For Ponsonby, Bellingham's actions clearly lay outside the parameters of British political culture. It was left to radicals to argue that Bellingham's experience in fact demonstrated that this "great blessing of a free government" was either defective or altogether broken.

Petitioning lay at the center of radical activities for the opening decades of the nineteenth century. It had, in fact, been a cause of debate as recently as March 1812, when Whitbread had questioned why petitions against the Orders in Council had failed to reach the prince regent. 87 Perhaps the chief theorist and defender of petitioning was the veteran radical John Cartwright. He innovated extensively with his campaign of printed petitions for parliamentary reform across 1812 and 1813. If this was in part a strategic effort to build a national movement, Cartwright also sought to ensure that the right of petitioning received extensive discussion in Parliament. 88 In his writings, Cartwright drew links between assassination and despotism similar to those made by Ponsonby and argued for the centrality of constitutionalism to radical aims in Britain: "The English People, who so well know their rights, must of necessity do their work in a different way from the people of Muscovy or Turkey. In those countries, when tyrants are become too brutal to be longer endured even by abject slaves, they are removed by volcanic insurrection, or by assassination." 89 Unlike Ponsonby, however, Cartwright did not characterize Bellingham's case as an aberration from the fundamentally sound contractual relationship between governors and governed but instead used it to issue a warning 85

## PENTLAND

about the dangerous weaknesses in this relationship and as an illustration of what must inevitably happen when the people's petitions were met with contempt or negligence: "For the removing of ERROR, information is necessary, and by its friendly communication, men may be pacified into Petitioners, who might otherwise become Bellinghams; and Statesmen may be saved from Pistols, by a timely attention to Petitions." 90 illiam Cobbett, in his response to the assassination and its aftermath from Newgate, took this analysis one step further. He too had evinced considerable interest in petitioning, and part of his lifelong concern with the teaching of English grammar and with redefining popular journalism was to empower both rural and urban workers to take part in a political world of print on their own terms. 91 Like Cartwright, he assigned Bellingham's actions to the failure of a culture of petitioning, the operation of which acted as a safety valve within a free constitution: "He seems to have explored 'the Right of Petition' to its utmost bounds! He, however, failed at last; he could not obtain Mr. Perceval's permission to get a member to present his petition; and, not ten minutes before he expired, he declared, that, 'had my petition been brought into parliament, this catastrophe would not have happened.'" 92 For Cobbett-with his own incarceration for seditious libel clearly in mind-Bellingham's actions were also explicable in terms of the failure of another boasted British liberty, the freedom of the press. Bellingham's petition had been only one part of his attempt to secure a public discussion of his grievances. Had he had access to a free press through which to pursue this end, the tragic events may have been averted: "But, unfortunately, he had no channel through which to make known his case to the country." 93 his was to be the most lasting manner in which Bellingham's case was used within radical argument. His was an object lesson in how a corrupt and fundamentally flawed political system-representatives who did not represent, a forum for the redress of grievances that offered no redress, and a shackled press-by denuding the people of their constitutional rights drove them to the contemplation of desperate violence. It was a dynamic well described by the most prominent practitioner of popular constitutionalist protest, Henry Hunt. 94 In his Memoirs, Hunt, in common with Cobbett and Cartwright, distanced himself from any ideological defense of assassination, but he did use the case of Bellingham to explain the causes of political violence: "Bellingham had been grievously oppressed, he could not obtain justice from the Government; he could not even make his case known in any way except by means of a petition to Parliament. . . . At the end of eighteen months of hope and fear and agony, Mr. Bellingham found that the 90 Hunt's memoirs, written from jail, were composed in the aftermath of an intense period of political agitation between 1816 and 1819, during which the exact boundaries of the constitutional rights of petitioning, meeting, speaking, and the press had been extensively canvassed. As has been demonstrated above, Bellingham's name, as a rallying call for popular vengeance, was mobilized in different contexts during this period of agitation. A print from January 1819 (see fig. 1 ), "John Bull in Clover/John Bull Done Over," neatly summed up some of the key ways in which Bellingham's legacy had been negotiated. 96 On the left, a portly John Bull, with full order books for the Russian and other markets, sits with his pipe and port praising the commercially sound nature of government policy. The sense of a departed golden age is communicated by the image of "Good Queen Bess" on the wall and the patriotic ballads beneath it. In contrast, the commercial John Bull of early 1819 sits in a decrepit room in shabby clothes. His order book is empty, his bills are oppressive, a list of bankrupts lies on the floor, and the tax collector knocks at the window. The patriot of 1819 is apparently faced with two options. On the table in front of him lies Toughts on Suicide [sic]. Behind him, on the wall, is a copy of Dennis Dighton's print representing Bellingham at the Old Bailey during his trial. Like Bellingham, John Bull has been driven to the precipice: in the complete absence of constitutional weapons his only options are violence against his own person or against the nation's governors. 97 part from its conventional contrast between a glorious age of plenty and a dire and oppressive present, the print is studiedly ambiguous in its meaning. Bellingham's inclusion is part of this ambivalence and reflects the way in which the political significance of his actions was debated and discussed in the immediate aftermath of the assassination and in the years that followed. Political elites had been very quick in their attempt to constrain opportunities for the event to become politicized. By a focus on the nature of the crime and a stress on the public presentation of Bellingham's motives as those of a man actuated by private grievances, theirs was an attempt to define and contain the political significance of the event. Even within Parliament itself, however, the debate over the nature of assassination and, more prominently, over the relationship between private and public virtue demonstrated how political meaning was derived from the assassination.