

If Bellingham could thus stand proxy for public anger and summary justice, there were more complex receptions of his actions that attempted to contest ministerial interpretations as well as to explain why Bellingham had been forced to act the way he did. One of the most obvious ways in which the government actions over Perceval's murder were contested was through public expressions of support for Bellingham's widow and family. A number of pamphlet and press contributions encouraged a public discussion of the Perceval murder and its aftermath: "The Cause of the Assassin and the Assassinated are both before the Public, and deeply is the public interest involved in their fate." 69 Such appeals invariably involved political arguments about Bellingham's actions and set up his widow and family as an alternative focus for compassion, their paterfamilias having been hounded to the point of madness by an insensitive government. One of these appeals took the opportunity to consider the nature of assassination by portraying Bellingham as a man driven by oppression to a desperate act and thus contrasting him with the kind of assassin advocated by newspaper editors, who had been "countenanced by the confidential servants of the crown": "Mr. Bellingham, therefore, is not of that description of assassins whom Mr. Goldsmith, and other ruffians of his stamp, would range under the drapery of England, to assassinate the man whom we can neither out-wit in the cabinet nor subdue on the field." 70 he idea of an appeal to the nation for a public subscription for Mrs. Bellingham and her family, in conscious imitation of the provision being made by the nation's representatives for Perceval's family, attracted considerable public attention and PENTLAND emerged very quickly. In Wigan, an examination of a man involved in an open discussion in a public house about Perceval's murder confirmed that the discussion had revolved around the oppressive nature of wartime taxes and that there had been general approval of Bellingham's actions. One Mr. Atkinson "approved of the murder of Mr Percivall [sic] and said that a subscription for Bellingham's wife and family would be a good thing." 71 In areas of conspicuous Luddite activity, anxious correspondents noted that liberal newspapers, such as the Leicester Chronicle, advertised the subscription to Bellingham's widow and attempted to tie this to a critique of assassination principles. 72 he issue of provision for Bellingham's widow brought up similar tensions between private and public measures as had the assassination itself. John Drinkwater, the son of the recent mayor of Liverpool, corresponded with Canning over private donations made to Mrs. Bellingham from, among others, Lord Leveson-Gower. Drinkwater was incensed when news of Leveson-Gower's private £50 donation made it into the Liverpool Mercury, a reformist newspaper. He argued that either Mrs. Bellingham herself or the assassin's acquaintances-"like many others of Bellinghams [sic] companions, violent unruly Reformists"-were attempting to make political hay by appealing to the nation and publicizing Leveson-Gower's gift to the detriment of the donor: "It is truly lamentable to see Party Spirit carried to so great an extent." 73 In the aftermath of this private donation, Mary Bellingham herself felt compelled to make a public appeal through the London and Dublin newspapers, in the context of the subscriptions being raised for her (including an intended Dublin play, St. Patrick's Night, to be published for her benefit): "I have never solicited any PUBLIC subscription, nor given my consent to any such that may have been PUBLICLY advertised." Her claims to want to avoid an appeal to the public, however, ring hollow when compared to her letter of the following week that thanked Leveson-Gower for his donation and explained her conduct: "To a generous public, I am compelled to look for assistance." 74 ore explicit political connections had to be made when it was Bellingham's actions themselves that were being discussed rather than provision for his family. Positive presentations, other than those that supported assassination as a political strategy in general, revolved around two themes: first, that Bellingham had acted the part of the patriot; second, that his actions demonstrated some of the fundamental problems within British politics. These interpretations highlight the more complex role that Bellingham's actions played within political discussion, not least in having an impact on discussions of the nature of the British constitution and associated rights such as petitioning.