

AW and the defence of Lord Wellesley, 1807-1808:

In the Commons, Paull’s accusations were taken up by a handful of radicals including Lord Folkestone, Lord Archibald Hamilton, and Thomas Creevey, but they had little support, for members were weary of the affair. Arthur Wellesley shared the feeling, telling Malcolm, ‘I hope that we shall be able to bring the House of Commons to a vote upon the Oude case, in the course of next week; not that I think that it signifies essentially whether we do or not, as time has had its usual effect upon the sense or the folly of the publick, and has convinced them that the man they have been in the habit of abusing was the best Governor for India. It is desirable, however, to come to a vote on this question, as several of Lord Wellesley’s India friends are anxious about it, as well as others who have more respect than I have for what passes in Parliament.’ (AW to Malcolm, 25 Feb 1808, Malcolm Papers, Uni of Southampton, Ms 308/124 printed in WD III p 12-13 with several names suppressed). This was unusually jaundiced, but the long drawn out battle in Parliament had been dispiriting and any shred of reason or principle in the original attack had long since been abandoned, so that Wellesley’s critics appeared motivated by nothing more than personal spite and partisan politics.

Support for Lord Wellesley’s defence and impression AW made on James Hall:

Arthur Wellesley played a leading part in securing his brother’s vindication, but he received help from many quarters. These ranged from his brothers William and Henry, to old India hands like Colonel Allan and Stephen Lushington, and political friends like Thomas Wallace and the Buckingham connection. To these was added a newly elected independent MP of advanced views, Sir James Hall, whose son recalled,

I remember his coming home one evening from the House, and expressing to me his great admiration of the way in which the whole these Eastern questions were treated.

 “I was much interested tonight,” he remarked, “with the resolute manner in which this topic was taken up by Sir Arthur Wellesley, brother to the late governor-general. He stood forward on the floor of the House, demanded investigation, and defied all the attacks against his relative with such an unusual degree of confidence, as went far to satisfy me that everything must be right in that quarter. Indeed,” he added, “I have seldom seen anything more vigorous or manly, in all respects, than Sir Arthur’s challenge, and I should feel it a sort of duty, were it on this ground alone, to go to the bottom of the affair whatever time or labour it may cost me. (Basil Hall Voyages and Travels p 176-77 – the story sounds almost too good to be true, but its substance is confirmed by Thorne History of Parliament vol 4 p 124).

Hall accordingly made an intensive study of all the relevant documents and made his maiden speech on 15 March 1808 in Lord Wellesley’s defence. His obvious independence and conviction made his support all the more valuable on this occasion – although they would also lead him to vote against the government (and Arthur Wellesley) on many later occasions, including the debate on the Convention of Cintra. (Thorne History of Parliament vol 4 p 124).