

 This does not mean that Richmond was a paragon of private virtue. His roving eye and indiscriminate hospitality caused the Duchess much distress and even some social humiliation while delighting the more malicious gossips of Dublin. Lady Bessborough, visiting Ireland in October 1808, reported that he was ardently courting Lady Edward Somerset – the wife of his ADC – and, over-ruling his wife’s remonstrances, insisted that she continue to dine with them every day. (Private Correspondence of Granville Leveson Gower vol 2 p 333). One anxious mother described him as ‘a great flirt’ and was delighted when her young daughter politely declined his invitation to dance at a ball. (Calvert Irish Beauty under the Regency p 171). And he was said to have encouraged the activities of two young Dublin belles who, lacking family connections or the formality of an invitation, nonetheless appeared at many social functions after he discovered them behind the counter of a shop. (Somerville & Ross An Incorruptible Irishman p 186).

Another witness describes the Duchess as ‘sawcy [sic] & ill tempered to a degree my pen cannot do justice to. She is jealous not only of his attentions to ladies, but of his being amused, & a walk, a ride, a dance is treasonable! ! ! he did all those things with the sweetest good temper & really seems a most delightful character to please in society, condescending & affable, with great dignity to all about him – and tho’ she was very civil, yet I confess her tantrums to him made me think her disagreeable.’ (Lady Charleville, on 18 October 1809 in The Marlay Letters p 129 quoted in Brett-James Wellington at War p 145n).

The Duchess (the eldest daughter of the 4th Duke of Gordon) has been described as ‘excessively proud, and disdainful of persons of inferior rank’, and has been accused of ruining her husband by her gambling (ODNB).

Richmond:

When Richmond visited Londonderry at the end of 1807, a report commented on his ‘extreme affability’, and he had a reputation for good cheer and hospitality that was notable even by Irish standards. (Sir G. F. Hill to AW, 3 Jan 1808, WP 1/187/12). In 1811 Lord Enniskillen told Sir Arthur Paget, ‘I must rejoin my Regt in Dublin on the 25th, of course shall have much hard drinking with the old Boy of Richmond, who has kept it up pretty warmly the entire summer.’ (Lord Enniskillen to Sir A. Paget, 9 Oct 1811, The Paget Brothers p 217). Richard Bourke who, as well as being a fine soldier, was an ardent Irish whig and therefore prejudiced against Richmond, commented:

 He is … famous for nothing but extreme drinking. As in the worst and last days of the Roman Empire the generals used to be chosen and preferred as they were supposed most capable of drinking with the Goths, so probably the Duke of R_____ has been sent over to drink with the Irish, and in this he has succeeded beyond all praise, as the merest Castle-Hack complain of the hardness of his head…. (Col R. Bourke to J. G. Le Marchant, 3 June 1808, Le Marchant Papers Mss 5a quoted in Ward Papers 300/8/2).