

For the next two months Wellesley’s plan lay on the shelf – if the expedition was not to begin its operations until December there was no need for the ministers to come to a decision until the summer at the earliest. Miranda, whose health was poor at this time, chafed at the delay, but Wellesley was probably content to let the matter rest. Robertson Life of Miranda vol 2 p 12-14; Castlereagh’s Memorandum of 10 April 1808 (Later Correspondence of George III vol 5 p 60-62) shows that the question was under active consideration by the cabinet in early April, before news of the events at Aranjuez reached London, but that no decision had been reached, and that some ministers were concerned that the army might not be strong enough to undertake this and other tasks at the same time). It was events in Spain, not lobbying in London which gave the American plan a new sense of urgency.

AW’s constitutional ideas:

Miranda had already outlined a constitution for his new country which provoked Wellesley’s scepticism being, ‘of a Republican form, and too regularly constructed ever to answer any practical good effect’. Wellesley instead favoured a regime ‘which suits the nature and prejudices of the people,’ namely, ‘a monarchy with such a representative body as will not be difficult to manage, at the same time that will give the people of the country such a share in the government as will afford them a reasonable security.’ He clearly had in mind a system not very different from that existing in Britain, although his upper chamber would be made up of nobles and landowners appointed by the King for life, rather than hereditary peers. And he concluded, ‘All the old institutions in the country ought in the first instance to be maintained, and to be changed and amended only as time and experience would point out what would suit both people and country better.’ This was as good an expression of Wellesley’s own pragmatic conservative political philosophy as one would wish to find, however incongruous the context. (AW Memorandum [on Spanish America], London, 8 Feb 1808, WSD vol 6 p 61-66).

British reaction to events at Aranjuez:

The British government had watched the growing French presence in Spain with disquiet and naturally – although wrongly – believed that Napoleon’s hand was at work in the coup at Aranjuez. Castlereagh had already brought his South American plans to cabinet, but the other ministers, and perhaps also the King, were doubtful if sufficient troops were available, and were reluctant to make the commitment. (This seems the implication of Castlereagh to the King, [10? April 1808] and enclosed Memorandum in Later Correspondence of George III vol 5 p 60-61. For other British reaction to the events at Aranjuez, see Harrowby to Countess Harrowby, 28 April 1808, Harrowby Papers, vol LVII f 251-2; Col J. W. Gordon to Sir J. Craig, ‘Private and Confidential’ 7 May 1808, BL Add Ms 49,512A f 16). News of Aranjuez swept these doubts aside. On 21 April the Duke of Portland wrote the the King arguing that as the French were now occupying most of Spain including Madrid and the Spanish King was in their power, there was an immediate and serious danger that they would also gain control of Spain’s colonial empire. If Britain did not act quickly it would be too late. Portland did not propose any particular scheme, wishing first to get royal approval for the principle of an expedition to establish the independence of the Spanish American colonies, and this was readily granted. Castlereagh was delighted: ‘If I had written his Majesty’s Answer, I could not have pen’d One more in the Spirit of my own feelings’; and he promised Portland that there would be no shortage of means for the expedition. (Portland to the King and reply, 21 & 22 April 1808 Later Correspondence of George III vol 5 p 67-69; Castlereagh to Portland, ‘Secret’, Stanmore [22 April 1808] Portland Papers, Uni of Nottingham, PwF 8583).