

British policy towards South America was given a new twist at the beginning of 1808 by the arrival in England of Francisco de Miranda, the great champion of independence. For the last fifteen years Miranda had lived in exile trying to persuade successive British, French and United States governments to adopt his cause. Pitt had been interested in his proposals, but the suitable moment to act had never arrived. More recently, Miranda had attempted to raise a rebellion in his native Venezuela (then still known as the Kingdom of Terra Firma) but lacked the resources to convince his compatriots that he was likely to succeed. Castlereagh embraced Miranda’s proposals with some eagerness, willingly abandoning any remaining thoughts of conquests in the Americas in exchange for the promise of local co-operation. He does not seem to have consulted Wellesley over the Montevideo plan – Wellesley was still in Ireland and the time – but he now brought Wellesley and Miranda together. This was natural: Wellesley was trusted by the ministers and he had already given detailed consideration to operations against the Spanish colonies. Wellesley and Miranda had a number of meetings in London in late January and early February as a result of which Wellesley revived and modified his earlier plans and presented them together with a covering memorandum and several supplementary papers on 8 February. Overall, Wellesley was confident that an attempt to ‘liberate’ Spain’s American colonies was likely to gain considerable local support and to succeed – although he warned that the army needed to be strong enough to be independent of any active co-operation from the locals – the less help was needed, the more likely it was to be offered. Nonetheless it seems clear that he had some reservations about the project, even arguing that its success would risk undermining Britain’s trade war – for friendly, independent, neutral South American countries would claim the right to unimpeded trade with Europe which could not be blocked as readily as when they were enemy colonies. (AW Memorandum [on Spanish America] WSD vol 6 p 61-66; Robertson Life of Miranda vol 2 p 9-12).

Wellesley’s main concerns were the practical problems of mounting the expedition, and he addressed them with his customary attention to detail. He was undecided whether it would be better to act first against Mexico or Terra Firma, balancing the advantage of having Miranda to rally support in Terra Firma against the risk that action there would lead to an immediate response by France or the United States in Mexico. (These fears had some foundation: see Rydjord Foreign Interest in the Independence of New Spain p 259-64; and on the wider question of Napoleon’s interest in and plans for Spain’s American colonies, W. S. Robertson France and Latin-American Independence p 16-17, 24-25, 40-57). Ideally he would have liked to begin in Buenos Ayres, but the too recent history of Popham’s and Whitelocke’s failures was an insurmountable objection. He rejected Miranda’s assertion that the rains in Venezuela were no bar to operations and strongly recommended that nothing be attempted until December. He made few significant changes to his 1806 proposals, although the idea of supplementing the army with troops from India was dropped, ostensibly because a large garrison would not be needed as independence, not conquest, was the objective, but also, presumably, because Grenville was no longer in office.