

AW and secret agents sent to Spain:

The rescue of Romana was the most successful, but not the only secret service that Wellesley encouraged, for his Irish office had introduced him to the world of agents and espionage. A fortnight after Robertson set sail, Wellesley proposed to Portland that the government employ an agent to gather intelligence, and perhaps even to stir up trouble, in France. He had already sent another man, one John Duggan, to Spain on a similar role. (AW to Portland, 19 June 1808, WSD vol 5 p 454-5; AW to John Beckett [under-secretary at the Home Office], ‘Secret’, 26 June 1808 WP 1/206 printed in WSD vol 5 p 462-3 with Beckett’s name suppressed. Sparrow Secret Service p 361-2 conflates these two operations, while adding some interesting details). Little or nothing seems to have come of either of these projects – there were formidable practical difficulties in sending information rapidly back to Britain even if the spies were honest and successful. The British government received most of its information of events in the Peninsula from more conventional sources, notably foreign newspapers and the reports of British admirals commanding squadrons off the Spanish and Portuguese coast. Lieutenant-General Sir Hew Dalrymple, commander of the British garrison at Gibraltar, was a particularly good source of news, for he was in correspondence with his Spanish counterpart, General Castaños. There were even a few British diplomats openly in Spain as agents for British prisoners of war, although their reports seem to have been delayed and disrupted, and at least one of them was imprisoned by the French. (For more on this see Muir Britain and the Defeat of Napoleon p 34-6).

Richmond wants AW to remain Chief Secretary:

On 4 June Arthur Wellesley wrote to Richmond warning him that ‘government have lately been talking to me about taking the command of the corps destined for Spain.’ Richmond replied with his blessing, while not concealing that he thought that Ireland was more important than the expedition. He hoped that Wellesley would not be gone long enough to make it necessary for him to resign, for there was no obvious alternative – a point reinforced by a quick run down of the possible contenders. It was natural for Richmond’s priority to be Ireland, and as the appointment of the chief secretary was made in London, he was wise to make his views well known in advance of the necessity. But the ministers in London were equally reluctant to remove Wellesley from a position where he had given general satisfaction, and on 14 June he was able to reassure Richmond that the Copenhagen precedent would be followed and that he would not be resigning. (AW to Richmond and reply, 4 and 8 June 1808, and AW to Richmond 14 June, WSD vol 5 p 443-444, 444-5, 453).

Canning’s dinner for the Asturian deputies and AW’s role

The evidence for this comes from Sheridan’s speech: ‘But as my right hon. friend has detached a very able general (Sir Arthur Wellesley) to represent him at his house, I feel less reluctant at thus intruding on his patience…’ (Parliamentary Debates vol 11 col 886-7).