

AW in Dublin:

On 27 June Wellesley’s sons were baptised at home. He worked hard to clear his desk of the arrears of Irish business that had accumulated while he was in London and to brief James Trail and the Duke of Richmond on any problems which were likely to arise in his absence. (Wilson Soldier’s Wife p 109-10). He greeted Rowland Hill, who was commanding the troops at Cork, with notable warmth, expressing his hope that ‘we shall have more to do’ than the last time they served together in the 1805-6 expedition to the Weser. He recognized that the number of transports was inadequate to the size of the force, and wrote immediately to Charles Stewart, Castlereagh’s under-secretary, who hastened to send a further 3,000 tons of shipping to Cork. And he gave sensible orders on ways to preserved the health and fitness of the troops already aboard, some of which Hill had already anticipated. No wonder Barrington thought he was happy. (AW to Maj-Gen Rowland Hill, 23 and 25 June 1808, WD III p 18-19, 19-20; AW to Brig-Gen C. Stewart, 25 June 1808, ibid p 21 and reply 29 June 1808 WP 1/205; Hill to AW 27 June 1808 WP 1/205; Barrington Personal Sketches p 172).

AW had good maps of the country around Lisbon

See the Narrative he presented to the Cintra Inquiry Proceedings p 28 (also in WD III p 142) where his desire to advance into this country is mentioned.

The Galician delegation resolves government’s uncertainty:

On 26 June Castlereagh was still hoping that ‘some more light may break in upon us’, before the cabinet settled on Wellesley’s destination and instructions; (Castlereagh to AW, ‘Private’, 26 June 1808, WP 1/205), and that same day his hopes were answered when two deputies arrived in London from Galicia. Their news was so good that even Canning hardly ventured to believe it: all of northern Spain was in arms against the French, and Galicia alone had put 50,000 men into the field, half of them regular troops of the Royal army which had large garrisons in the province. They reported that the 8,000 Spanish troops at Oporto had imprisoned the French commandant, and were marching to join the patriots, and that there had been widespread uprisings in Andalusia, Valencia and Catalonia, adding some circumstantial details which gave the story credibility and which later proved true. (Canning to the King, 26 June 1808, Later Correspondence of George III vol 5 p 90; Castlereagh to AW, 30 June 1808, WD III p 19n-20n).

AW’s instructions:

The news from Galicia more than enough to resolve the cabinet’s doubts, although Castlereagh was careful to give Wellesley very broad discretion in his instructions, in recognition of the lack of information in the government’s hands about Portugal, and the rapidity with which events in Spain were moving. At the broadest level Wellesley was ordered to assist ‘in counter-acting the designs of the enemy, and in affording to the Spanish and Portuguese nations every possible aid in throwing off the yoke of France.’ More specifically he was directed to precede the fleet to Coruña where he would gather the latest news and judge whether his force, together with Spencer’s, would be strong enough to attempt to defeat the French in Portugal. If he felt that reinforcements were needed, he was to obtain permission from the Galician junta to wait with the expedition in the fine harbour at Vigo, so that Junot would not be put on his guard, and because it was difficult for transports to move northward at that season – Castlereagh was anxious that the troops not go too far south while any uncertainty remained where they would act. A further force of 10,000 men was being prepared for overseas service, and Castlereagh hoped that they would be ready to embark in about three weeks. He also expected that Moore’s expedition would soon return from Sweden and be available to serve in Spain or Portugal – although this was not mentioned in Wellesley’s public instructions. Castlereagh had little to say about how and where the campaign was to be conducted, although he did mention a report that Junot had detached a substantial force towards Almeida as if to open communications with the French army in Spain. However he made clear the government’s conviction that the only basis on which the Spaniards could agree to suspend the struggle was the ‘entire and absolute’ evacuation of the Peninsula by all French troops. (Castlereagh to AW, 30 June 1808, WD III p 19n-20n).