

Within a few days Castlereagh had prepared a detailed plan for the cabinet based on Wellesley’s memoranda. The objective was to encourage and protect the Spanish American colonists in their attempts to secure independence and in particular to have an army of not less than 10,000 men ready to act in Mexico on 1 December. Castlereagh also considered that a small force based at Trinidad might be able to give valuable support to Miranda’s friends in Caraccas; and he indicated that the unnamed commander of the expedition should precede it to make arrangements on the spot. (Memorandum by Castlereagh, nd, [c24 April 1808] Portland Papers Uni of Nottingham PwF 8582). There is little doubt that Wellesley was destined to fill this role, although it would surely have necessitated the resignation of his Irish office – for he would be away months, not weeks – but no formal decision was taken. Indeed, despite the initial urgency of the reaction to Aranjuez a lull now followed, for there was no point sending any troops until the late summer, if their operations could not begin until December.

Wellesley continued to have talks with Miranda, and these, together with the fear that the French would use any delay to their advantage, led to a modification of his original plan. He now favoured an attack on Caraccas before that on Mexico, arguing that it would be best to start with an easy success, that Miranda and his contacts would convince the locals that the British had no eye to conquest and, crucially, that an operation against Caraccas could be mounted as early as the middle of October. To make this possible, the expedition should sail from Britain by 1 August. (Memorandum by AW, nd, WSD vol 6 p 74-77).

The evolution of British plans:

News of the Dos de Mayo and the abdication of the Spanish Royal family at Bayonne reached London towards the end of May (see The Times of 23 May 1808). Wellesley reacted strongly, urging that affairs had reached a crisis ‘in which a great effort might be made with advantage; and it is certain that any measures which can distress the French in Spain must oblige them to delay for a season the execution of their plans upon Turkey, or to withdraw their armies from the north.’ He recommended that all the available troops in Britain be sent to Gibraltar where they could combine with a small force (some 5,000 men) under Major-General Brent Spencer which had been hovering off the Spanish coast since the beginning of the year. The expedition should be equipped with large quantities of arms and ammunition and ordered to encourage and assist any Spanish uprising. If the insurrection failed, its leaders should be urged to take refuge in the American colonies, where their presence would greatly facilitate British operations – although the colonies might be sufficiently moved by events in Spain to declare their independence without the need for active British intervention. Wellesley also revived the idea of acting first in the River de la Plata where the climate was favourable, before proceeding to liberate Venezuela and Mexico – an over-ambitious programme which was rather out of character. (Memorandum by AW n.d. [late May, 1808] WSD vol 6 p 80-82).