

AW and Croker:

Wellesley also had dinner with Croker in these last few days in London, for Croker had agreed to manage the business of the Irish office in Wellesley’s absence. After the meal, Wellesley lapsed into a reverie until Croker asked what he was thinking of:

 He replied, “Why, to say the truth, I am thinking of the French that I am going to fight. I have not seen them since the campaign in Flanders, when they were capital soldiers, and a dozen years of victory under Buonaparte must have made them better still. They have besides, it seems, a new system of strategy, which has out-manoeuvred and overwhelmed all the armies of Europe. ‘Tis enough to make one thoughtful; but no matter; my die is cast, they may overwhelm me, but I don’t think they will outmanoeuvre me. First, because I am not afraid of them, as everybody else seems to be; and secondly, because if what I hear of their system of manoeuvres be true, I think it is a false one as against steady troops. I suspect all the continental armies were more than half beaten before the battle was begun. I, at least, will not be frightened beforehand. (Croker’s Memorandum, 14 June 1808 Croker Papers vol 1 p 12-13).

 It would probably be unwise to make too much of this, for it is not even certain that Croker’s Memorandum recording the conversation was made at the time. But it is quite plausible, and can be taken as a fair example of Wellesley’s remarkable self-confidence and belief in his troops, which were to prove vital ingredients in his success.

Although the words Croker attributes to AW show that this occasion was 1808 (not seen the French since Flanders etc), a letter from AW to Croker, 5 April 1809 (WSD vol 5 p 639) raises the possibility that the meeting actually occurred in 1809 or that Croker has conflated two separate meetings. AW discusses the Canal Company, the road taxes, and explains why it would not be possible for Croker to act for AW when he went. Add this to the fact that there is no evidence in Parliamentary Debates that Croker did fill AW’s shoes in 1808 – Parliament had almost risen, and in the few Irish debates which were held after AW’s departure Croker was not recorded as having spoken at all. The Times 15 June 1808 reported that ‘Mr Sturges Bourne is to be appointed Secretary of Ireland in the room for Sir A. Wellesley’. This was incorrect, but it doesn’t suggest that Croker was then known to be acting in Wellesley’s place.

So it seems rather unlikely that Croker played any special part in 1808, unlike in 1809. Whether this seriously undermines the credibility of Croker’s account of AW’s talk before he left is open to debate. Nothing AW says is inherently implausible, though the tone doesn’t ring quite true. There may not be sufficient grounds for dismissing the story, but it is at least worth raising a question mark over it.

Croker did play a role in 1809: see AW to Richmond, 6 April 1809 (WSD vol 5 p 641-2): ‘Croker, to whom I have given charge of the detail of my business in Parliament till a successor will be appointed…’ Thorne The History of Parliament vol 3 p 534 says Croker acted in AW’s absence in 1808, but this is probably no more than a repetition of what everyone assumed to be true.