

In a private letter accompanying these instructions Castlereagh explained, ‘I have thought it upon the whole better for the present to withhold any Instructions about S. America for obvious reasons, I shall keep however the arrangements as settled in view, and if our hopes should be blasted in Europe, which God forbid, I trust you will have the means of securing powerful support from Old Spain in that, the only remaining Effort for Spanish Independence.’ More optimistically, he looked to have a substantial British army ready to support the Spaniards, with the combination of Wellesley’s and Spencer’s forces, Moore’s corps from Sweden, and the 10,000 men being prepared in England. This last force, and presumably the army as a whole, was to be commanded by Lord Chatham, who, unlike Wellesley and Moore, had the seniority and royal favour needed for such a large command. (Castlereagh to AW, ‘Private’, 30 June 1808, WP 1/205).

Reading between the lines of these instructions one can see the government’s dilemma: the ministers were anxious to seize the opportunity presented by the Spanish revolt, but still had only a partial and complete picture of what was happening, especially in Portugal and southern Spain.

AW’s second-in-command:

It is said that AW’s second-in-command was originally Major-General Alexander Mackenzie, who had been a fellow student with him at Angers thirty years before (Royal Military Calendar vol 2 p 145-6; Gentleman’s Magazine vol 41 March 1854 p 314-15). But when the destination was changed from the Americas to Spain, and Spencer’s force was added, Mackenzie was removed from the expedition as he was senior to Spencer, whom the Horse Guards wished to keep as second-in-command.

Delays in the sailing of the expedition to Portugal:

The delay in the departure of AW’s expedition led to some criticism. As early as 30 June 1808 The Times wrote, ‘that exactly on this day fortnight, Sir Arthur Wellesley left England to take the command of an expedition, said to be bound to Gibraltar; and by letters from Ireland, we find that he had not quitted Dublin on Sunday last. We verily believe that Lord Chatham would ‘ere now have had British troops upon Spanish territories.’

This, (and probably other, similar, comments) led AW to assure Castlereagh on 10 July: ‘I see that people in England complain of the delay which has taken place in the sailing of the expedition; but, in fact, none has taken place; and even if all had been on board we could not have sailed before this day….[elaborates]’ (AW to Castlereagh, 10 July 1808, WD III p 28).
