

On the other hand, Croker’s memorandum recounting the conversation is dated, and does read plausibly as a contemporary record rather than a much later recollection (i.e. not too many intimations of future greatness).

Gleig’s comments are interesting, even if they embark on a quite separate subject of debate: ‘I have no doubt whatever that this reported conversation is substantially correct. I suspect, however, that Mr Croker’s memory was a little at fault in regard to details, for the phraseology is not the duke’s, and the inferences to which it leads would be unsound. The duke knew better than most men that the only difference then between French and English tactics was this, that whereas the French attacked in column, the English always attacked in line; and that the real resistance to an attack by troops waiting for their adversaries in line comes from the volume of fire with which the column is received. All armies, French as well as English, Russian, German, and Italian, defend a position in line, provided the assailants give them time to deploy. But the English alone have hitherto attacked in line, though I believe that the armies of other nations are beginning in this respect to follow their example. The flourish about receiving the French with the bayonet, and the steadiness required to do so, was not, I will venture to say, Sir Arthur Wellesley’s, but Mr Croker’s flourish.’ (Gleig Life of Wellington p 58-59). A great deal could be said about this, for the relative importance of firepower and infantry charging has been the subject of a prolonged historical debate, but it is sufficient here to note that the issue is not as simple as Gleig suggests, and that many contemporaries disagreed with the implications of what he says here.

Lady Wellesley in London:

In Soldier’s Wife (p 109) Joan Wilson states that Lady Wellesley made a flying visit to London in June 1808. The only evidence for this appears to be that Croker, in his account of his dinner with AW, mentions her as being present. This seems a flimsy foundation for assuming that Kitty came over from Ireland – no other source mentions it, and it seems inherently unlikely. It was not a simple journey, she had two babies in Dublin, and AW would hardly have encouraged it.

Date AW left London:

AW’s last letter from London was dated 14 June (AW to Richmond, WSD vol 5 p 453); the next is from Holyhead on 19 June (to Portland, ibid p 454-5). If he dined with the Spanish deputies at Canning’s house on the 15 th, he cannot have left until the 16th at the earliest. He may have been delayed at Holyhead by contrary winds. The Times 17 June states, ‘We understand that Sir Arthur Wellesley has left town for Cork.’ This may have been premature, but it is the only direct evidence we have, and there seems no reason to doubt that he did indeed leave London on 16 June.

Uncertainty caused by discouraging news from southern Spain:

When AW left London, the most recent reports from southern Spain were discouraging, with no sign of any inclination to rise against the French in Andalusia. The only consolation was that these reports were dated before news of the risings in Asturias and northern Spain had reached the south. Wellesley feared that if the Junta of Andalusia submitted to the French the ‘game’ would be over. Faced with this news the cabinet postponed making a decision on Wellesley’s instructions, ‘being unwilling that you should get too far to the southward, whilst the spirit of exertion appears to reside more to the northward.’ (Castlereagh to AW, 21 June 1808, WD III p 17n; AW to Hawkesbury, Holyhead, 19 June 1808, WSD vol 5 p 456-7).