

Castlereagh had similar ideas, although he hoped that the Spanish patriots might find a refuge in Cadiz as well as the Americas, and while he was willing to reinforce Spencer, he would not act quite as precipitately as Wellesley recommended. (Castlereagh to Dalrymple, 25 May 1808 and ‘Private’ of the same day, PRO WO 6/185 p 22-27, 27-32). The new policy was settled on 1 June when Castlereagh submitted it to the King for his approval. (Castlereagh to the King, 1 June 1808, Later Correspondence of George III vol 5 p 82). Wellesley summarized it in a memorandum:

 According to the plan of operations at present in contemplation, a corps, consisting of about 8,000 men, are to proceed from Cork to join General Spencer’s corps of about 5,000 off the coast of Spain; and in case affairs in that quarter should not hold out the prospect of a successful result, it is proposed either to send all the troops to the West Indies, with a view to operations to be carried on in the Spanish colonies in the Gulf of Mexico, or to divide the corps, and to send 8,000, reinforced by a regiment of cavalry, to the River de la Plata, and 5,000, reinforced by two regiments of cavalry, to the West Indies, who will there receive reinforcements which will enable them to carry on the proposed operations against Caraccas at the appointed season. (Memorandum by AW, 1 June 1808, WSD vol 6 p 68-70).

So while there were hopes of an extensive insurrection in Spain which would create opportunities for British intervention, the emphasis remained on subsequent operations in South America – reflecting an assumption that an uprising against the French was unlikely to prosper.

AW, James Robertson and the rescue of Romana’s corps:

Wellesley was also closely involved in a quite separate attempt to exploit French difficulties in Spain. Early in 1807 Napoleon had ‘borrowed’ 15,000 Spanish troops and placed them in garrison in northern Germany: they were useful as second line troops, and their removal lessened the danger of Spanish resistance to his intervention in the Peninsula. The British government had made several unsuccessful attempts to open communication with the commander of the corps, the Marquis de la Romana. Wellesley now proposed a fresh effort, employing Brother James Robertson, a Benedictine monk from an abbey near Ratisbon, and an old acquaintance of the Duke of Richmond, who had volunteered his services in any way compatible with his religious vows. Wellesley had met Robertson, and evidently been impressed, but only summoned him again on 31 May 1808. According to Robertson’s later account, ‘Sir Arthur broached the business with his usual affability, which immediately sets at ease those who have the honour of treating with him.’ The mission was explained and Robertson agreed without hesitation to carry a message to Romana. Wellesley subsequently met Robertson at the Foreign Office and escorted him in to meet Canning. ‘Being little accustomed to diplomatic or courtly forms, I, no doubt, made an uncouth appearance when ushered into the presence of the Minister. Sir Arthur could not refrain from smiling at my visible embarrassment, and Mr Canning, by his manner, seemed to think me ill-fitted for such a mission. I, however, showed the grounds of my hopes, and manifested so eager a desire to undertake the task, that it was finally entrusted to me.’ Robertson left London on 4 June and was taken to Heligoland, from whence a smuggler took him to Bremen. Here he found that Romana’s corps had been moved to Denmark. He followed them and with some difficulty gained an audience with Romana and persuaded him of his bona fides. Plans were made, and on 7 August the Royal Navy took most of Romana’s men on board its ships. They were brought back to Britain and from thence to Spain. Robertson survived his adventure and after the war returned to his monastery and devoted himself to the education of the deaf and dumb. (Robertson Narrative passim quotes on p 8-10; see also entry on him in the ODNB).