





Storm of 
H'oolal. 


Defeat of 
Dhoondiab. 


4 niSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Staff Officer, and Lieutenant Whitney McCally, 1st batta¬ 
lion 1st regiment. 

The head-quarters of the Army left the neighbourhood 
of Seringapatam on the 10th July, reached Chifctledroog 
on the 24th, and early in August advanced to Ilurryhur 
on the east bank of tho Toombuddra, a fort which had 
surrendered to Captain Willet of the 1st battalion 10th 
Bengal sepoys, on the 30th July. On the 14th August a 
detachment, 1 under Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, H.M/s 
74th regiment, was sent against the fort of Iloolal, 
about 20 miles direct north of Ilurryhur. The place was 
carried by storm on tho 16th, and most of the garrison 
were killed, either during the assault, or in their attempt 
to escape. Colonel Wallace and the detachment were 
tliarkcd in orders. 

Early on the morning of tho 17th August, Dhoondiah's 
collected force, amounting to 1,200 horse, and 300 infantry, 
posted under the walls of the fort at Shikarpoor in 
Nuggur, was attacked and defeated by Colonel Dalrymplo, 
aided by a part of Colonel Stevenson's detachment, Tho 
action was thus described by General Harris 

“The infantry and artillery of Dlioondiah were formed 
behind a small river, which, swelled hy tho rains, had become 
almost unlordahlo from tho depth and rapidity of its current. 
His horse, separated by this stream from tho infantry, formed, 
and steadily waited tho atti> k of tho regiments of Native 
cavalry which led Lieutenant-Colonel Palrymple’s detach¬ 
ment. These instantly charged, and in a short, but arduous 
conflict, drove the enemy into tho river, who loft 000 men and 
horses killed or drowned. Lieutenant-Colonel Dairy mplo’s 
infantry at the same time assaulted and took the fort by storm, 
assisted by part of Colonel Stevenson’s detachment, whoso 
mtirrh had boon retarded by the badness of the roads Tho 



1 Tw * flank companion, 11 .M. 73 rd and 7 Alh, and a battalion of Bengal 
Native Volunteers. 




histoey of toe madras army. 


5 



Killadars of the fort, when taken, were hanged on its walls CHAP 
in sight of the enemy’s troops, who fled in the utmost disorder, 
while the depth of the river prevented an immediate pursuit.” 

The effect of this blow was decisive. Colonel Stevenson, 
who had assumed command of the united detachments, 
pursued Dlioondinh as far as the frontier of the Mahratta 
country, in which he took refuge on tho 20th August. 

That vory night his camp was attacked by a chief named 
Doondah Punt Gokla, who dispersed his remaining fol¬ 
lowers and captured liis elephants, camels, bullocks, and 


gUU9. 

The province of Bednore was then occupied by our 
troops without further opposition. 

CAPITULATION OF GOOTY. 

A detachment of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force under 
Colonel Bowser obtained possession of Gurrumcondah, 
and other places which had fallen to the share of tho 
Nizam, without resistance, but the Killadar of the strong 
and extensive hill-fort at Gooty refused to givo it up, 
and did not capitulato until the Otli August when a prac¬ 
ticable breach had been made. Tho casualties 1 in the 
detachment during the investment were trifling. 