

composed of the 1st cavalry, the 2nd battalion 7th, the 

2nd battalion 11th, and a party of Bengal Artillery. This 

detachment obtained possession of the hill forts at Cbit- 

tledroog 2 on the 6th July without opposition. Colonel 

Dalrymple gave a minute description of the place in his 

report to the Adjutant-General, from which the followin'* 
, s 

is an extract :— 

“ Tho lower fort is very extensive, and contains within it 
several other smaller forts, and a great number of inhabitants. 
Some parts of the old Hindoo fortifications are still remaining 
in tho upper and lower forts, but by far the greatest part of 
the works are all done in the modern style of solid masonry, 
and built under the inspection of our unfortunate prisoners 
during their confinement at this place.” 

A few days after tho occupation of Chittledroog, 
Colonel Dalrymple was joined by tho 2nd cavalry, and 
both battalions of the 10th. regiment of Bengal sepoys. 
On tho 14th ho marched with tho two rogiinonts of 
cavalry nud 400 grenadior sepoys in pursuit of a body of 
Dlioondiall’s men who had been pluudering tho country. 
Ilo camo up with thorn on tho 10th, about 20 miles from 
Chittledroog, and having halted his infantry and guns, ho 
attacked with the cavalry, and destroyed nearly tho whole 
party, tho number of which was estimated at about 250 
boree, and *100 foot. 

This sarv <-o was accomplished after a march of 40 


Colonel 

Dalrpnple’g 

Detachment. 


Hnrpriaes 
aevoml 
\ artiefl of 
Dhoordiah’s 
follower#. 


Ai t»iit (JO niiko north-west of Sarinpupatuoi. 
About IDO luiKii north of Huringupntani. 



mtsr/ty 



miles iu 24 hours. The marauders having been guilty CHAP. XVI. 
of many atrocities, more especially after their capture of 
the small fort at Goondair, the Commander-in-Chief 
directed that the 40 prisoners taken by Colonel Dulrym- 
ple should be hanged at that place, with the exception of 
one man who was to bo set at liberty after lia\ ing wit¬ 
nessed the execution of his comrades. 

On the 17th Colonel Dalrymple agaia surprised a small 
body of horse and foot near the fort of Chengherry in 
Nuggur, and dispersed it with his cavalry, killing 40 men 
and taking 40 prisoners. He then attacked the fort and 
carried it by a “ coup dc main.” On the 20th ho captured 
about 0,000 head of cattle from Dhoondiah's brinjarries, 
together with a quantity of grain. Colonel Dalrymplo 
received the thanks of the Commander-in-Chief for tlieso 
services, and was authorised to grant the captured cattle 
and grain to his detachment. 

About tho end of July, Colonel James Stevenson Colonel 
rolievod Colonel Pater, and advanced towards tho fort of rc UcvA 
Shimooga in order to co-operate with Colonel Dalrymplo. p^^ 01 
By the 7th August both detachments had crossed to the 
western banks of the rivers upon which the forts of 
Shimooga and Honolly aro situated, and on tho morning Oapuuo 11 ' 
of tho 8 th these places were attacked aud t aken by storm, and Hoaclb. 
tho former by the detachment under Stevenson, tho lattor 
by that under Dalrymple. Genoral Harris, iu his report 
to the Commandor-in-Chief in India, remarked that a tho 
gallant behaviour of the native troops, who alone were 
employed, was highly honorable to thorn, and reflected 
croat credit on Colonels Stovonson and Dalrymple, and 
tho officers, who, under their orders, conducted tho 
attacks .” Colonel Stevenson was thanked in General 
Orders of tho 10th August, as were also Captain Mac- 
furlano, 1st battalion 8th regiment, Captain Strachan 