

SURRENDER OF JaMALABAD. 

The fort of Jamalabad in CanaTa was reduced by 
blockade, and surrendered to the Bombay troops on tho 
8th October. 


Killed. WoumltM. Total. 


'Artillery ••• . 

. 2 

0 

17 

8 

oo 

2 nd bat n. 2ud rogt. (30r b M.N.I.) • 

6 

18 

1st do. U h <lo. (21el M.N.I ) •• 

, 2 

10 

Total . 

. 10 

39 

49' 

Lieutenant-Colonel Bowser woujuM. 

Captain Roberta, 2ml fcattal.on SM, k.ltea. 







Ml HtSTQy 



CHAP. XVI. 


General 
Harris goes 
to Madras. 


Action at 
Bambrauce. 


6 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



General Harris, being required at the Presidency, loft 
the Army on the 24th August, having made over the 
command to Colonel Wellesley, and taken farewell of the 
troops remaining in the field in a very flattering order. 


Occupation op Soonda, 1799. 

Ike Peshwa having rejected the conditions attached to 
the offor of Soonda, 1 Harponolly, and certain talooks in 
Mysore, viz., that he should accept the mediation of the 
British Government on every question in disputo between 
him aud the Nizam, and that he should exclude the 
French from his dominions ; these districts were divided 
between the Company and the Nizam, and Lieutenant- 
Colonel, tho Honorable A. Sontlegcr, with the 4th 
cavalry, tho 1st battalion 1st regiment, and 4 guns, was 
sent early in September to take possession of Soonda. 
He met with no opposition until he arrived at the village 
of Sambranee near Hullihal, which was hold by 300 Mali- 
rattas sent from Dlmrwar by the Killadar of that place, 
to plunder the country, and to maintain the post against 
the British. The fort at Hullihal was held by 500 men 
with similar instructions. 

Colonel Sentleger made his attack on Sambranee on 
the 29th. Tho village was strongly barricaded, aud tho 
walls loop-holed, but it was carried after an action of 
about two hours. The loss of the dotachmout was trifling, 
but most of the garrison were killed. The fort at Hulli- 
hul was evacuated the next day, end no further opposition 
was offered. Colonel Sontleger was thanked in Division 
orders by Colonel Wellesley for having “ brought 
forward, with incredible expedition, his troops and guns 


• 'v°^ d A‘' “ ""'ll ,11,,rio< ' "'' :,vc ‘’- e w «l«rn OliauU, now inolodod 
tor! ' 1 ' ■'° n “ rU ' n *T°“ , ' l| y i» *ho w.Mtorn diolriol of tho coded I,rn- 



UJSTOEY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


7 


through jungles, over swamps, by the worst roads that I CHAP. XYI. 
have seen in India/’ Lieutenant Mason, 4th cavalry, and 
Lieutenant Macally, 1st battalion 1st regiment, wero 
specially mentioned on this occasion. 

Operations against the Southern Polygars, 1799. 

Although the disturbances in Madura and Tinnevolly 
had been put down by Colonel Maxwell's detachment in 
1792, the Polygars soon began to resume their turbulent 
and predatory habits. They withheld payment of their 
kists, and not only attacked each other, but made inroads 
into the district of Ramnad, and into the Company's 
territory, burning villages, and murdering the inhabi¬ 
tants. 