

The campaign against Tippoo had rendered it expedient Major 
to postpone operations against these offenders, but early Detachment, 
in August 1799, the Governor-General directed the form¬ 
ation of a detachment 1 * * * * 6 at Paiamcottah for that service, 
and appointed Major John Bannerman to the command. 

Ho was ordered to proceed in the first instance against 
Cataboma Naig, Polygar of Panjalameoorchy, a fort about 
26 miles north-east of Paiamcottah, and after haviug 
secured his person, he was then to dispossess tho inferior 
chiefs who had acted in concert with him, and finally to 
disarm the whole of the Southern Polygars, friendly or 
otherwise. He was invested with the power to execute 
such of the Polygars and their followers as might be 
found in open rebellion, and to sequester their lands. 


1 Detachment native cavalry. 

Doiacbmcnt Bongal artillery, with two 0 an 1 two 3»poundcn», under 
a Subaltern. 

U.M.’s 19th Foot, 100 t» 'u. 

1st battalion 3rd regiment-j 5 companies lot buttnlion 13th regi¬ 

ment. * 

6 companies 2nd battalion l«th rogim. nt ^3rd, 25th, fi D d 2Gtb 




miSTffy, 


HISTORY OF THR MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVI. 


Repulse at 
Panjalam- 
coorcby. 


<SL 


Major Bannerman wrote to Cataboma Naig from Pal- 
amcottali on the 1st September, directing his attendance 
on the M'th, to which a reply was sent dated the 2nd idem, 
to the effect that there was no lucky day at that time, but 
that as soon a3 there should be one, he would come. 

On receipt of this communication Major Bannerman 
marched for Panjalamcoorehy,and arrived on the morning 
of the 5th with the Native troops. The fort was sur- 
xounded by a detachment of the drd cavalry under 
Lieutenant Dallas supported by a party of infantry ; soon 
after which a considerable body of Polygars endeavoured 
to force tbeir way into the fort, but they were repulsed 
with loss. 

Cataboma Naig was then called upon to surrender at 
discretion, but he refused to leave the fort unless fur- 
nished with a written safe conduct. Major Bannerman 
bemg apprehensive that the Polygar might make his 
escape during the night, and not anticipating aT1 y diffi¬ 
culty m getting possession of the fort, determined to 
assault it at once. The storming party waa composed 
of six companies, viz., the Hank companies 1st battalion 
3rd regiment under Captain Bruce, and the flank com- 
panics of the 18th regiment under Captain O’Rmlly 
A few artillerymen, with a 6-pounder intended to blow 
open the southern gate, accompanied the party Tin 

supports consisted of the battalion companies 1st'batta 

110,1 3rd r °S ,mont ’ ,lnd companies 1st battalion 
13th regiment. The men advanced with seeming 
resolution, and the gate was blown opon by the artillery 
supported by the leading sections of infantry under Can- 
tam O Uoilly, who believed the place to be in his hands 
At Urn, U" .,„oni Lieutenant Douglas of the artillery was 
piked m the gateway, and the storming party, falling 

a ° ' COnimenct 'd a disorderly fire in return to that from 