


WHlST/fy 


HISTORY OR THE MADRAS ARMY, 9 

Captain. 0 Reilly, after Laving in vain endea¬ 
voured to induce the men to advance, was finally obliged 
to retire with the loss of 93 men, and 6 European 1 officers 
killed and wounded. The Native commissioned and 
non-commissioned officers having, with a few exceptions, 
behaved ill on this occasion, General Harris recom¬ 
mended their summary dismissal, and that the vacancies 
thus made should be filled up from the detachments 
under Colonels Stevenson and Dalrymple, which had 
recently distinguished themselves in Mysore. 

The companies of H.M.'s 19tli Foot arrived at Panjalam- 
coorchy on the evening of tlio 6tli, and during that night 
the fort was evacuated. Early on the 7th the vakeels of 
the Polygar waited on Major Bannerman with a request 
that their master might be permitted to proceed to the 
Presidency with his ordinary retinue, and accompanied 
by a British officer, but without being in any respect 
considered as under restraint. 

Major Bannerman having refused to listen to any¬ 
thing less than an unconditional surrender, the Polygar 
went off in a northerly direction with a number of 
followers. 

A day or two afterwards he was overtaken bv the 
Zemindar of Etiapooram, who dispersed his people and 
captured Soobrauiooma Fillay, his principal officer and 
advisor. Cataboma Naig effected Lum escape on horseback. 
Soobraraoonia Pillay was executed at Nitglopoor on the 
13th for acts of plunder and outrage committed in the 
territories of the Company, and of the Nawaub, and on 
the lame day Soondr&pandia 2\aig, brother of the Polygar 



the fort. 


1 Licubctflamt Douglas 13eug;0 artillery, Lieutenants D'Ormieux ami 
Collins 1st battalion 13tb, and Lieutenant Blako 2nd battalion 13th, 
killed ; OovnotMuut of the cavalry, and Liontenant McDowull, lnt bat¬ 
talion 13th, wounded. 


<SL 


CHAP, xvr. 


Evacuation 
of the fort. 


Flight of tho 
Polygar. 


Capture of 
hi3 principal 
adhoronta. 


VOL. 111. 








CHAP. XYI. 


Capture and 
execution of 
tho Polygar. 


Forfeiture of 
fivo Poliams. 


Demolition 
of forte. 


Measure 3 for 
settling tho 
country. 


10 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

of Naglepoor, was sent for execution to the village of 
Gopalpoorum in the Zomindary of Raranad, tho inhabi¬ 
tants of which had been murdered by a party under his 
immediate orders. 

Cataboma Naig was taken on tbe 23rd by the peons of 
the Tondiman, 1 and was executed at Kytar on the 16th 
October. His brother, and several other members of his 
family, were brought to Kytar at the same time, and sent-, 
shortly afterwards, to Palamcottah as prisoners. 

The lands of the five most refractory Polygars, viz., 
those of Panjalamcoorchy, Naglepoor, Kolampettah, Yali- 
rampanna, Cadulgoody, and Kylatoor, were forfeited to 
Government. The remaining Polygars tendered their 
submission, and consented to demolish their forts under 
the supervision of European officers, and to give up 
.their arms. 