

Tho destruction of the forts in the forfeited Poliams 
was effected by tho detachment of pioneers under 
Lieutenant Bagshaw. The completion 2 of these measures 
was reported to Government- on tho 21st October, and 
Major Banner man left camp for Madras tho next day, 
having made over charge to Major Turing. 

Shortly afterwards, steps were taken for revising tho 
assessment, and for relieving tho Polygars from the obli¬ 
gations of military service and police duties which wore 
attached to their tenures; flie Government charging 
themselves with the military protection of the country, 
and the administration of the police. 



1 UoproBontod by the Rnjah of Poodoocottab, whoso ancestors ren¬ 
dered material nervioo to the English during tho early warn in tho 
b' Uthorn Curnatio. This dignitary does not pay any tribute. 

* Forty-four for; h wore reported as having been destroyed. The arum 
r.rjni'HV'.od l nMr »c.‘i,r>ii of i.ioskots, n Mchlocks and pikej. About 1,800of 
t> <- two first, mid 3,8 f K) of tho last, worn given up. 

t ub: r qm .it event*- showed thul the Polygars had managed to retain 
r oouiidorsblo number. 




WNisr^ 


history of 'rnF. madras army. 


11 



Major Bannerman was thanked for his services by the 
Governor-General, as well as by the Government of 
Madras. 


Northern Circaes, 1799. 

A detachment 1 2 under Lieutenant-Colonel Fotheringham 
was employed during March and April against parties 
of marauders in Ganjam, but his progress having been 
slow, he was superseded by Colonel Urban Vigors, 
commanding the division, who soon brought matters to 
a satisfactory termination, and received the thanks of 
Government. 


Acquisition .of Tanjore, 1799. 

On the 25th October 1799 the Kingdom of Tanjore 
was made over to the East India Company on condition 
ol the annual payment to the Rajah of one lakh of pago¬ 
das, and oue-dfth of the net revenue of the province, 
after deducting the charges of collection. Tho fort of 
Tanjore was given up to the Rajah to be garrisoned at 
his pleasure. 

General Harris resigned command of the Army on the 
26th January 1600, and was succeeded by Major-General 
Brathvvaite of the Company’s service. 

Early in February tho three battalions o i Bengal Volun¬ 
teers under Lieutenant-Colonel Gardiner, set out on their 
return, but were detained in tho Northern Circars for 
some little time on account of disturbances in the Zemin- 
dary of Polaveram. Operations were brought to a suc¬ 
cessful termination in April, and tho services of Colonel 
Gardiner and hi-: brigade were acknowledged in hand¬ 
some terms by the Madras Government in a Gonernl 
Order dated 12 th May. 


1 lat battalion 10th, 3 companies ; 2ml buitaUon Stb, ? cor,panic. 

2 gimn. 


<SL 


CHAP XVI. 


General 

Harris 

resigns, 1800. 

The Bengol 
troops leuve 
Madam, 




v . xvr. 


history op the madras army. 

1 Le 10th regiment 1 Bengal native infantry , and the 
company of Bengal artillery, which had formed part of the 
Subsidiary Force at Hyderabad, marched for their own 
Presidency on the 27th February. Colonel Dalrymple 2 
issued a very complimentary order on their departure, a 
copy of which he forwarded to the Madras Government 
with a letter from which the following is an extract:— 
The accompanying extract from the order issued at 
parting with the Bengal troops is fully expressive of the 
estimation in which I hold them, and convoys tho general 
sentiments, I am convinced, of the Coast officers here, who 
have so long served with them on the most cordial terms.” 