

them, capturing tlieir remaining guns, baggage, and the enemy, 
cattle. Colonel Wellesley in his report stated that he 
attributed “ the opportunity which was given of destroy¬ 
ing the enemy's army to the movements of tho detach¬ 
ment under Colonel Stevenson ; in no part of tho army 
has thoro boon greater exertion or more fatigue, or ha ib 
been more cheerfully borne, and I conceive Colonel 
Stevenson, Lmuteuaut-Colonel Bowser, and the officers 
and troops under their orders, to be entitled to my appro¬ 
bation, and to the favorable report of their conduct which 
I now make to you.” 

Colonels Wellesley and Stevenson, as well ns the Thanks to 
<*ffi‘ 0 is and men, received tlio thanks of tho Mudra* troops. 

1 2nd cavalry. 1 19tli Dragons. 8 20th Dragoons. * 1st cavalry. 

5 2nd cavalry. 

* Tho 4lh cavalry aud tho detachment from Hydorabod. Tho 
information as to tho position of Dhoondiah ou tho night of the 9th 
September was given by a sepoy of Lieutenant-Colonel BowBcr'n rogi. 
moot, viz., the 2nd battalion 2nd. < ohmol Wellesley presented the man 

with a toward of 200 pay ■ !: ». and recommended him for promotion. 







CHAP. XVI. 



2*i HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Government and of the Governor-General; the latter 
desiring that it might be particularly expressed <{ to the 
officers and men of the detachment of cavalry employed 
in the action of the 10th September, the high sense 
entertained by the Governor-General in Council of the 
eminent courage and discipline manifested by them in 
the attack of the army of Dhoondiah Waugh, which 
terminated in the fall of that insurgent, and in the 
complete destruction or dispersion of his force.” 



Acquisition op the Ceded Districts, 1800. 

The territory on the south of the Toombuddra and 
Kistna, now known as the Ceded Districts, which had 
como into the possession of tho Nizam under the treaties 
of 1792 and 1799, was principally hold by Polygar chiefs, 
generally in a state of rebellion, and from whom both 
Hyder and lippoo had experienced great opposition. 
Matters became worse under the Nizam, so much so that 
he made over the country to the East India Company on 
the following terms, embodied in a treaty dated 12th 
October 1800, viz. :— 

jYr n*y v.-ith That two battalions of sepoys, and one regiment of 

tho Nizam, , . _ _ . ° 

1600. cavalry, with a due proportion of guns and artillery, 

should be added to the existing Subsidiary Force at 
Hyderabad, bringing tbo strength up to eight battalions 
of sepoys (or 8,000 firelocks) and two regiments of 
cavalry (or 1,000 horse), with the requisite complement 
of guns, 1 European artillerymen, lasears, and pioneers, 2 
fully equipped with warlike stores and ammunition. 

That for the regular payment of the whole, all tho 
territnri: s acquired by the Nizam uuder tho treaties above 

1 Tw'> 12, and oightoon S-p-unders, 140 artillerymen, eyelunivo 0 f 
commissioned and xioiwcomniiAgionod officers. 

‘ J Sr '! ’‘“t, 1 Jonia l&r, 3 Tlavildara, 3 Naiguos, 100 Privates, and 1 
1 uc .ally. Tlie compm-y wiw generally commanded by a Lieutenant 