

“The camp was strong, with its rear to the Malpurba, 
covered by the fort of Manowly on tho other side of it, and 
a deep nullah along its front and left. The 2nd regiment of 
cavalry, under these circumstances, was the only corps which 
got into it; but every person thore was eithor killed or driven 
into the river. All the baggage, two elephants, many camels, 
horson, bollocks, Ac. foil into our hands. Numbers 1 of people 

' In a letter to Major Munvo, dated 1st August, Colonel Wellesley 
gnTcth/ j. nun i- at about 3,000. A n-:ir ,i r r <f arms and accoutrements 
belongin', to the 25th Dragoon a mm! tho Scotch Brigudd, which had 
boon stolon at Vellore, were found m tho oamp. 




WHtST/fy. 



lllSTOHY Of TUE MADRAS ARMY* 


19 


were drowned or bliot in attempting to cross the river, and 
uinny prisoners, women and children, &o. were taken.” 


<SL 

CHAP. XVI. 


This exploit was performed after a march of 26 miles. 

On the 2nd August the detachment from Hyderabad, Colonel 
augmented by the 4th cavalry, was placed under the com- commS 
mand of Colonel Stevenson with instructions to follow ?£ der \ 

abaci Uetach- 

Dhoondiah up the river Malpurba; Colonel Wellesley ment. 
moving in the same direction, but at the distance of about 
15 miles from the river. A fow days later it was ascer¬ 
tained that Dlioondiah having crossed the Malpurba near 
its sources had again turned eastward, and reached a place 
named Cowdelgliee, about 24 miles east of the fort of Further 
Gokauk on the Gutpurba. In consecpience of this intelli- i a pursuit of 
gonce the following* disposition of the troops was ordered. ' ' booutlml1 ' 
Colonel Capper, with his brigado strengthened by the 
1st battalion Itli Bombay regiment recently arrived in 
camp, and a body of Mabrattas, was directed to move 
down the southern bank of the Mnlpurba towards Jellalml, 
while Colonel Wellesley was to march along the northern 
hank by Manolee. Colonel Stevenson was to move 
down tho river Gutpurba from Manoor by Cowdelgliee 
towards Bhagalcottah. The Mali rat tas were to- move 
between Cohmels Wellesley and Stevenson. 


On the22nd August Lieutenant-Colonel Capper arrived Coionoi 
at the fort of llooley, the garrison of which had carried n, ‘sachmrnt 
off the baggage of the Dragoons as it was pas ting on tho 
march to Soondootty on tho 1st. Colonel Capper attacked 
the place at once and carried it by escalade ; after which 
ho inarched to Syringhy, a fort about eight miles east of 
Hooley. The place was strong, tho scaling ladders too Capturo of 
short, and the resistance determined, but it was taken 
after a sharp struggle. Those affairs were brought to ' 

(he special notice of the Commander-m-Chief, by whom 
the following order was issued ou he occasion :_ 


MIMS;*,, 



CHAP. XVI. 


jJiicondJah 
(roacc.s iuto 
tiio Doab* 


20 HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

“ Head-quarters, Choultry Plain, 8 th September 1800. 

“ Major-General Bratliwaite has received from the Officer 
Commanding in Mysore a report of the very spirited conduct 
of a detachment from his force under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Capper, of the 2nd battalion 4th regiment, Madras native 
infantry, and composed of detachments from that corps, from 
the 2nd battalion 2nd, and 1st battalion of the 4th Bombay 
regiments under Captains Lock and Dickinson, and a detail of 
Coast and Bombay ai’tillery under Captain Sir John Sinclair. 
This force, on the morning of the 22nd August, attacked and 
carried by assault the forts of Hoc ley and Syringliy. 