

Tho cavalry having surrounded the fort so as to cut 
off retreat, Dhoondiah’s garrison, amounting to about 500 
men, wcro nearly all killed. 

The following order was issued to tho troops:— 

;; Ranee Bednore, Friday , 27 th June 1880. 

il Colonel Wellesley received much pleasure from observing 
the vivacity with which the attack of the fort of Ranee 



1 lot battalion 6th, and 2nd oatt&lion 9th regiment, 8 field piecoo, 

and 1,000 Nizam’s horse. 

3 3rd regiment native cavalry and six eompanioB of infantry, vi*.. 
iho flank companion 2nd bsi olion 2nd, 2ml battalion ah, and 2nd 
battalion 11th. 

•• About 14 miles uortharwit of Horryhur. 


<SL 

CHAP. XU. 


Detachmerus 
from Hydera¬ 
bad. 


Capture of 

Ranee 

Bednore. 








16 


HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XVI. Bcdnore was conducted this morning under the orders of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Monv penny. To this is to be attributed 
the immediate success of the attack without any loss on our 
side, although it appears that the fort contained a large 
garrison.” 


Defeat of 
Gokla by 
Dhoondiah. 


C'apturo of 
Koondgul. 


Dkocnda Punt Gokla, the Makratta leader, with 10,000 
horse, 5,000 foot and 8 guns, who was at this time in the 
vicinity of Kittoor for the purpose of co-operating with 
the British, was suddenly attacked by Dhoondiah 1 on the 
oOtb June, and defeated with the loss of his guns. He 
himself was killed. 

Colonel Wellesley crossed the Werdah near Deogherry 
on the 8th and 0th July, and after having constructed a 
redoubt upon the river, in which he left a small detach¬ 
ment, he marched to Savanoor on the 12th. Leaving his 
heavy baggage and stores in that place, ho proceeded 
against the fort of Koondgul, in which Dhoondiah had 
left a garrison of 600 men, and carried it by assault on 
the evening of the 14th with trifling loss. The following 
is an extract from his report to the Adjutant-General, 
dated 18th July :— 

“ Tho troops attacked Koondgul after a march of above 2*2 
miles, and that they had been under arms above 12 hours. 
The cavalry surrounded the place ; the gateway was attacked 
by tho 1st of the 12th, and an endeavour was made to blow it 
open, while tho grenadiers of the 73rd rogimont under Captain 
Todd, supported by those of the 1st of the 8th, escaladed tho 
curtain on the opposite side with a spirit which overcame 
every obstacle.” 


Relief of 
Sirhott v. 


On tho 16th Colonel Wellesley relieved tho fort at 
Sirliotty, which was besieged by one of Dhoondinh’s 


It " aid llu i. Dhoondiah dyr»d hij muutaohoa in the heurl’o blood 
o\ ok In > ii ful turnout, of a vow of revenge mado after hi« defeat by 
that chief m AugiiRt 1799. 9 




MINlSr^ 


history op the madras army. 



17 



adherents, and ho then returned to Savanoor for the CHAP. XYI. 
baggage and stores. 

Dhoondiah, who had tied from Koondgul on the Capture of 
J . Duaimul. 

approach of the detachment, being reported to bo in the 

forest in the neighbourhood of the fort of Dummul, 