

A detachment, * 1 under the command of Major Strachan, 
Gfch cavalry, attacked the place on the 14th December, 
but was repulsed with the loss of GO 2 men killed and 
wounded. 

A few days afterwards General Campbell arrived with 
ll.M.’s 73rd foot, and a second attack was made on the 
20th, but with a similar result, which was attributed to 
the want of artillery of sufficient calibre ; the light field- 
pieces, iu camp having been unequal to etfoct a practica¬ 
ble breach. The loss on this occasion w r as 173 officers 
and men killed and wounded. 

Breaching guns were afterwards brought up, and the 
fort was carried on the 30th December with the trifling 
1«>S3 of four men wounded, one horse killed, and two 
horses wounded. 

_ 

1 U.M.’s 25lh dragoons, 4th ami Gth regiments of cavalry. 

Detachment of ar(11 lory : 2nd l uttaliou ith, 1st battalion 12tb ; and 
2nd battalion 15(1. regiment: 

- Captain Maitland, 2nd battalion 1th, was killed on tlio 11th $ Gap. 
t.'in Cruuo, 1st battalion 12th, and Lieutenant D.utc, 4th cavalry, vvero 
wounded. 

tyuior Stracha- , 6ih cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Monypenny, Major 
'Pied- i.a Id, and Li. utcuuut. C l a ad IhouQptjou, 73rd,, were wounded 

' Li tho a’OlIi. 


CHAP.' XVI. 


Thanks to 
the troops. 


Kevolt of the 
Polygar of 
Ternakul. 


Ropulse? at 
Ternakul. 


Capture of 
Ternakul. 






23 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY, 


OHAF. XVI. 

AffaiM in 
Malabar, 
X7'J2-[)7* 


The *Pychy 
V v y h pocu to 
th a Wynaad, 
17U7. 


71© claims 
tliut district, 
179V. 


Operations against the Pychy Rajah, 1801. 

The -Government of Bombay, on acquiring the pro- * 
vine© of Malabar in 1792, reinstated most of the chiefs 
in their possessions, fixing, at the same time, a moderate 
assessment on their lands; but the revenues were not 
paid, and frejquent petty insurrections took place. The 
principal offender, generally known as the Pychy Rajah, 
was a junior member of the family of the Rajah of 
Cotiote near Tellichevry. During the early part of 1797 
he was at open warfaro with Government, but during 
the rainy season of that year ho agreed to resign his 
pretensions to authority in Cotioto, in consideration of 
an annual stipend of 8,000 rupees. 

Shortly afterwards he retired above tho ghauts into 
the Wynaad, which at that time was so difficult to 
.penetrate that Tippoo never attempted to occupy it, but 
contented himself with bending occasional detachments 
from his frontier posts a’ Kakeneottah and Edatora to 
destroy the crops, and to plunder the inhabitants. 

The Rajah, immediately on his arrival in the Wynaad, 
made friendly overtures to Tippoo, by whom they were 
favorably received, and who permitted him to remain in 
quiet possession of tho greater port of the district with¬ 
out paying tribute. Matters continued on this footing 
until tho conquest of Mysore, when tho Rajah preferred 
a claim to the sovereignty of the VVynuad on^tho ground 
that it had been granted to him by Tippoo. 

( blonel Close, and others, nominated to inquire, were 
of opinion that no r-.ueh grant had been made, nud that 
fht Rajah’s residence in tho Wynaad had been permitted 
in the hope that ho would make uso of his position th ro 
to neat' disturbances in Malabar, and thus embarrass 
the Brit i ah Go’-'crmnont. 