



bERVICE IN BulLUM, 1800. 

About the end of March a detachment 3 under Lieuten¬ 
ant-Colonel Tolfrey was sent against Kistnapah Naik, 
the Rajah of Bullum, who had taken possession of tho 
Bissly or Soobroomony ghaut leading from Mysore into 
Canara, and interrupted our communication with Manga¬ 
lore. Colonel Tolfrey arrived at Eygoor on the 30tli 
March, and finding it abandoned, he destroyed tho place 
and advanced to Arraknira, 4 where tho Rajah occupied a 

„ '?’* 1 1 0tba , nu l i0u aftorwarda h'-onmo tho 14th regiment, end tho 
/n.l batlBliou the Ibth regiment.. Neither of cl.oso is now in ox.atenoe 
, <het ' n gmshod and popular officor died ut Hyderabad 10ih 
llocembcr 1800, and was succeeded by Colonel Urban Vigors. Colonel 
Ualrymple rendered many imp, . taut services to the State, amongst which 
may be mentioned the storm, and capture of tho fortress of Kaichoor in 
1/Jo, and the expulsion of Dhoondiah from tho Mysore territory in 1799 

Z'Z: f f d t0 lra,J ^ s "*" k —P—sot M.N.T. employed 

ir ri rT??- 01 norai ^ Le*. 

If. 0 . 1 ? ? h ° Ucs ‘ ,k ' nt at Hyderabad, doted 17th December 1799 ._ 

I Join in thogenerol regret f - tho loss of Lioetenam-Colonel Dalrym- 

J : : 1 ;™;'-- - '•Pl-ohim; indeed, on X 

miXrtua' '' *‘ U “ '' “ 9 <UM “ h U looko ' J “P<>» by alt as a public 

l2 ' h > r< ffi "’ 0n ' 8 c0n, P*nio8 ; 2nd battalion 3rd reg,. 

Xrr::;:- 

L cu^l of Alunzc-nibaU, 





HISTORY OP THE MAEl (as ARMY. 


13 


strong stockaded position in thick forest. The barriers 
wore attacked on the 2nd April, but the detachment was 
repulsed with the loss of 47 men killed and wounded. 
About the end of the month, a reinforcement 1 arrived 
under the command of Colonel Montresor, H.M.'s 77th 
regiment, and the place was carried by storm on the 30ih 
after a stout resistance. 2 The following is an extract 
from Colonel Montresor's report: — 

“ I accordingly marchod to Munzcrabad on tho 29th, and 
on the following morning (this day) after leaving my equip, 
age and stores under the protection of the guns of that fort, 
and of the It.ijali of Mysore’s cavalry, I attacked and carried 
Arrakerry, dispersed the Polygar’s adherents, and burnt 
several of his villages and magazines of grain. I am much 
indebted to the troops under my command for the zeal arfd 
gallantry displayed throughout the day. 

“ Th ° colum “ of sttaok, consisting of the flank companies 
of H.M.’s 73rd and 77th regiments under Captain McPherson, 
three companies of the 2nd of the 3rd, and tho grenadiers of 
the 1st of the 12th, was led by Major Capper with a degree 
of spirit and gallantry which overcame a continued range of 
obstacles and resistance for near a mile and a half through 
u most intricate country.” 


1 Flunk companies H.M.’s 73rd and 77th, aud 4 
li<u, 1th regiment, under Major Capper. 


companies 2nd baita- 


: H.M.’a 73rd regiment 
H.M.’s 77th do. 

2nd bat)alion 3rd regiment N.F. 03th 

M.N.J ) . 

2nd battalion 4*!. regiment N-T. (ICth 

M.N.I.). 