








nrsTorr or tjie madras ar.mv. 


25 


• GO Vjt 



specified, should be made over to the Company for ever, 
with the following modification, viz., that with the' view 
of establishing a strong and well-defined boundary, the 
district of Adoni on the south of the Toombuddra, which 
belonged to the Nizam, should be given to the Company 
in lieu of certain districts north of that river, which had 
belonged to Mysore. 

Occupation of the Ceded Territory. 

Early in November the following measures, under 
tho direction of Colonel Wellesley, were taken for the 
occupation of the ceded territory. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Mack ay, with the 2nd battalion 6th regiment, entered 
lhtrponelly on the 9th, accompaniod by Major Thomas 
Mun o, who had been appointed to conduct the civil 
administration of the country. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Monypenny, with the 25th dragoons, tho 1st and 4th 
cavalry, the 73rd foot, the 2nd battalion 4th, and the 1st 
battalion 12th, crossed the Toombuddra near Anagoondy, 
and proceeded to take possession of Bellary, Adoni, and 
Gooty. Lieutenant-Colonel Cappago, commanding at 
Nundidroog, sent a detachment of the 2nd bAtalion 
18th to occupy tho fort at Gurrumcondah. 

On the 15th November Major-General Dugnkl Camp¬ 
bell was appointed to command in the Ceded Districts, 
oml war ordered to join immediately. 

The principal places were occupied without difficulty, 
but i.ho settlement introduced bj Major Munro was 
resisted by many of thevFaglmordnrs and Poly gar Chief j 
Serious disturbances ensued, und the troops were 
actively employed until September 1801, when General 
Campbell reported that tranquillity had been established 
throughout the provinces under his jfcutlmrity, and ho 
therefore recommended ’uu the l ,rco should be wit'. 


CHAP. XVI. 


General 
Campbell 
com i. and9. 

r>inrril)utioit 

1 ho troops 
1801 . 


19604 





CHAP. XVI. drawn from the field, and be distributed in the following 


manner, viz.;— 

Cantonment at Bellary . 

H.M/s 25th ‘dragoons, and the 4th regiment cavalry. 

Fort at Bellary. 

Detachment of artillery. # 

Six companies H.M/s 73rd, find 1st battalion 12th 
regiment. 

Fort at Gooty . 

Detachment of artillery. 

Four companies ILM.'s 73rd, and four companies 2nd 
battalion 4th regiment. 

Qanjecottali . 

Head-quarters and six companies 2nd battalion 1th 
regiment. 

Cantonment at Cnmlapoor. 

Sixth regiment cavalry. 

Fort at Rachouty . 

Head-quarters and five companies 2nd battalion 5th 
regiment. 

Fort at Qurnnneondah . 

Two companies 2nd battalion 5th regiment. 

Chit wail. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 5th regiment. 

Fort at Sidhout. 

One company 2nd battalion 5th regiment 
Climb um . 

Head quarters end six companies 2nd battalion I5(b 
regiment. 


I11ST0UY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Cotia Gotta. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 15tli regiment. 
Nos sum. 

Two companies 2nd battalion 15tli regiment. 


27 


These recommendations were approved of, and General 
Campbell and the froops received the thanks of Govern¬ 
ment in a General Order dated 7th October, but this had 
scarcely been published, when the Polygar of Ternakul. 
a fort about 17 miles east of Adoni, broke out into 
rebellion. 