

1 st battalion J2fh regiment .S'.I.- (23rd 
• . ... 

Piouoors ... ... ... Hl 

Total ... 

Mjrooie troop*, 19 killed 41 w^undoil. 


Killed. Wounded. Total. 


5 ... 5 

4 ... 4 

2 32 , u 

2 42 U 

3 ft 8 

2 4 6 

18 63 81 


<SL 


CHAP. XVI. 


Capturo of 
Arrakaira. 






miSTfty 



CHAP. XVI. 

Thanks to 
the troops. 


14 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



The tlianks of Government to Colonel Montresor and 
the detachment were published to the Army in an order 
dated 12th May. 


Final Operations against Dhoondiali, 1800. 

Dhoondiah, after his defeat by Gokla in August 1799, 
soon collected his scattered followers, and having been 
joined by nearly the whole of Tippoo's cavalry, and a 
number of disaffected men from the Hyderabad country 
and from Cuddapah, ho obtained possession of several 
places in the Southern Mahratta country, and threatened 
to enter Mysore. The Pesliwa sent a force consisting of 
5,000 horse and a large body of infantry to oppose his 
further progress in Savanoor, but this force was beaten, 
and a large number of horses captured. Such being the 
state of matters, orders were sent to Colonel Wellesley on 
the 2nd May 1800, directing him to assemble a held force 
as speedily as possible, and giving him authority to 
pursue Dhoondiah into the Mahratta territory or elso- 
. In conformity with this order a body 1 of troops 


Cavalry—* Colonel Stovcnson. 


1st brigade. J 1 J 9 , t , h d ™ ( ;nr,ue. 

' J eft and 4th native cavalry. 

2 nd do. f H ?5th dragoons. 

( 2nd nativo cavalry. 


Lirutcnant-Colonol Torin, 
1st cavalry. 

Colonel Pater, 2nd cav¬ 
alry. 


Fir at Brigade of Infantry. 

H.M.'n 73rd and 77th regiments Lieut.-Col. Monyponny, 

II.M.'s 73rd. 

Second Brigade of Infantry, 
lat battalion 1st regiment. 

1st do. 8th do. 
let do. 12tl» do. 


Liout.-Colonel Tolfrey. 
1st 12th. 


Third Bngade of Infantry. 

2nd battalion 4th regiment. > 

2u<\ do 2nd Bombay regiment, f ' Major Capper, 2ml *lth. 

The lut baMutioD 4th Bombay regiment, was ordered to join thin 
brigade, hut did not do bo until abont Uio middlo of August. 

I utnoliment Madras artillery under Captain, Sir John, Siurlnir. 
Detachment Madras pionoere under Captain Ucitland 6th regiment 






HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 15 

was assembled at Chittledroog during the early part of 
June, and by the 2orcx ot that month they had crossed 
the river Toombuddra at Hurryhur, and encamped in the 
Mabratta couutry. 

A detachment 1 of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force 
under Lieutenant-Colonel Maclean, 2nd battalion 9th 
regiment, was sent to co-operate in the Raichoor Doab, 
and this was reinforced soon afterwards by another 
detachment 2 from the same force, composed of a regi¬ 
ment of cavalry and 8 companies of infantry under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Bowser, who assumed command of 
the whole. 

Colonel Wellesley marched for Ranee 3 Bednore on the 
27th. His advanced guard having been fired at from 
the fort, it was immediately attacked by the picquets 
under Colonel Monypenny, consisting of 50 eurbpeans 
and 150 natives, supported by the 1st battalion 1st 
regiment, and carried by escalade without the loss of a 
man. 