


CHAP. XVI. 

Positions of 
the troops. 


Defeat and 
death of 
Dhoondiah. 


misr/fy 



CHAPJv-VI. Moodgul and Mooski, at the distance of between 12 and 20 
miles from the Kiatna, and the Mahratta and Mognl cavalry 
collected in one body between his corps and mine. 

“ I arrived atKanagherry on the 7th, and on tho 8th moved 
with the cavalry to Buswapoor, and on the 9th to this place. 
the infantry being on those days at Hutty and Chinuoor, about 
15 miles in my rear. On the 9th in the morning, Dhoondiuh 
moved from Mndgherry, a place about 25 miles from Raicboor, 
at which lie had been encamped for some days, towards the 
Kistna; but on his road Laving seen Colonel Stevenson’s 
camp, be returned and encamped about 9 miles in ray front, 
between me and Bnnnoo. It was clear that be did not know 
that I was so near him ; and I have reason to know that he 
believed that I waB at Chinnoor.* * 1 

“ 1 moved forward this evening, and met his army at a 
place called Conagul, about six miles from hence. He was on 
his march, and to tbe westward ; apparently with tbe design 
of passing between the Mahratta and Mogul cavalry and my 
detachment, which be supposed to bo at Chinnoor. Ho bad 
only a large body of cavalry, apparently 5,000, which I 
immediately attacked with the 19tli and 25th Dragoons, and 
1st and ‘2nd rogiments of cavalry.” 

“The enemy was Strongly post il, will, bin mr ftlu | )of , 
flank covered by the village and rock of Conagul, and stood for 
some time with apparent firmness; but such was the rapidity 
and determination of the charge made by those four regi¬ 
ments, which I was obliged to form in one line in order at all 
to equalize in length that of the enemy, that the whole gavo 
way, and were pursued by my cavalry for many mik.i. 
Many, among others Dhoondiah, were killed; and the whole 
body dispersed, and woro scattered in small parties over the 
face of the country.” 


' Tlilo illudoa to tho discovery of tho fact that the lion 

ZT7. " Dhoondiah with iutcliigonco of 

Wcllcaley a mo\ coiciui'. 


miiin of 
Colonol 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 23 

<£ Part of tlic enemy s baggago was still remaining in his camp CIIAr. XYI. 

nliont tlivpo miles from Conagul. I returned thither, and got - 

possession of elephants, camels, and everything he had ” 

“ The complete defeat and dispersion of tho enemy's force 
and above all, the death of Dhoondiah, put an end to thi 3 
warfare, and I cannot avoid taking this opportunity of 
expressing my sense of the conduct of the troops. Upon this 
last occasion their determined valour and discipline were con¬ 
spicuous, and their conduct, and that of their commanding 
officers, Colonel Pater, 1 Major Paterson, J Major Blaquiere, 3 
Captain Do vet on, 1 and Captain Price, 5 have deserved my most 
particular approbation. At the same time I must inform you, 
that all tho troops have undergone, with the greatest patience 
and perseverance, a series of fatiguing services.” 

Colonel Stevenson came up with tho retreating enemy Coionol 
tlio eume evening near Deodroog, and entirely dispersed ° a n 