

“The praise with which the Honorable Colonel Wellesley 
reports the conduct of the officers of the detachment in 
carrying a ladder to the walls, and of the troops in general 
in the course of these attacks is so favorable to their military 
character, that Major-General Bratliwaite deems it his duty to 
announce it to the Army at largo ; and to particularize th s 
meritorious exertions of Captain Sir John Sinclair with his 
detachment of artillery in dismounting and carrying a gun 
(which the outer entrance was too small to admit on its 
carriage) for the purpose of bursting the inner gate of tlx* fort 
of Syringhy. This service, successfully performed nndor a 
heavy tiro from the place, reflects the highest honor on that 
officer, and on the gallant detachment under his immediate 
orders.” 

From Syringhy Colonel Capper proceeded towards 
Boodihall, a short distance above the junction of the 
Malpurba with the Kistna, and he had got within 20 
miles of Dkoondinh when the Malpurba foil suddenly. 
Dhoondiah, taking advantage of this, crossed near Bo 'di- 
hall on the night of the 24th, and marched towards the 
Ttaiekoor Doab. His escape wa3 attributed to the miscon¬ 
duct ol the Mahratta troops with Colonel Capper who 
refused to proceed in advance and guard tho ford as had 
been directed by Colonel Wellesley. 



XIISTORY OF TITK MADRAS ARMY. 


21 


On the 5tli September Dhoondiah and his pursuers 
occupied the undermentioned positions. Dhoondiah was 
at Mooski, nearly in the centre of the Doab; Colonel 
Stevenson was at Hoonagoonda, close to the north¬ 
western frontier; Colonel Wellesley near Uunmunsagur 
at the south-western frontier; and the Mahratta and 
Nizam s horse in the centre; the intention being to 
drive Dhoondiah into the narrow fork between the Kistna 
and Toorabuddra, by which the Doab is bounded on the 
east. 

The next few days were passed in getting nearer to the 
fugitive, and on the 10th he was defeated and killed at 
Conahgul. The following is an extract from Colonel 
Wellesley’s account of his proceedings from the time of 
his entering the Nizam’s country up to the conclusion of 
tho action. 


u Camp at Yepulporvy , 10 th September 1800. 

“ After I had crossed the Malpurba at Jeliahal, I marched 
on the 3rd inti ait, and entered the Nizam's territories at 
Jlunmunsagur on the 5th. As Colotiel Stevenson was obliged 
to cross the Malpurba in boats, he was not able to advance 
from that river until tho 4th. It appeared to me probable 
that when Dhoondiah should be pressed by tho whole of our 
force on the northern side of tho Doab, ho would return into 
Savanoor by Kanagherry andCopaul, and would thus impede 
out* communication ; or, if favored by the Pataus of Kurnonl, 
and the Pollgars on the right bank of the Toombuddira, ho 
wouM pass that river and enter the territories of tho Rajali 
of Mysore. I therefore determined to bring my detach mo nib 
to tho southward, aud to prevent the execution of either of 
thee a designs, if he had them: aud afterwards push him to 
tho ■ astward, and to tak such advantage of his movements 
as 1 might be able; while Colonel Stevenson should move by 