

Colonel Wellesley moved in that direction from Savanoor 

on the 22nd, having been joined a day or two previously 

by a body of Mahratta horse recently under Gokla. Ho 

came before the fort on the morning of the 26th, and the 

garrison, consisting of about 1,000 men, having refused 

to surrender, the place was immediately attacked and 


carried by escalade. 

The following is an extract from Colonel Wellesley's 
report to the Adjutant-General :— 


“ Camp at Dummul , 26/7/ July 1800. 

“ The fort was surrounded by tho cavalry under Colonel 
Stevenson, and by tho Mahrattas under Goklah. 1 It was 
attacked in three places : at the gateway by Major Desse with 
the piequets, supported by two companios of the 2nd of the 
2nd; on one fa^e by Lieutonant-Colonol Capper with tho 
grenadiers and light infantry of the 73rd, and llio 2nd batta¬ 
lion 4th; and on the other face by Captain Macpherson with 
the grenadiers and light infantry of the 77111, and the 
remainder of the 2nd of the 2nd Bombay regiment. It was 
irnpe; mi hie to force the gateway, and the party on that attack 
entered the fort by escalade ; and the other two attacks like¬ 
wise succeeded nearly at the same time.” 

“ The Ibrfc is strong and well built, tho w ill about $0 feet 
high, with a dry ditch, in somo places of considerable depth. 
1 cannot say too much in favor of the troops, who, by this 
exploit, have added to tho reputation which they have 
already gained in this c ountry. 

Colonel Stevenson, Lieutenant-Colonel Capper, 2nd 


1 A leader who bn<l au m-odeil hid namesake. 


VOL. HI. 


3 


Nil HtSTfiy 



Dhoondmh 
refcreutb to 
tho nort h. 


Defeated at 
Mtmoleo. 


18 HISTORY OF rat MADRAS ARMY'. 

battalion 4tli, Major Desse, 1st battalion 8th, Captain 
Macpherson, H.M.'s 77th, Lieutenant Hooper, H.M/s 
/3rd, and Captain Heitland of the Pioneers were specially 
mentioned as having distinguished themselves. 

the fort at Gudduck was evacuated after the arrival of 
the accounts of the fall of Dummul, and was occupied by 
the British on the 27th. Dhoondiah, having thus lost all 
his torts in Savanoor and in the Dharwar country, moved 
northwards with the intention of crossing the river 
Malpurba at Manoloe, and encamped near Soondootty, 
about six miles south of thut place. Whilo there he 
heard of Colonel Wellcslc y’s approach, and broke up his 
army into three divisions. One division and the baggage 
marched towards Manoloe and encamped in front of it 
but without crossing tho river. In this hazardous posi¬ 
tion it was surprised on the afternoon of the 30th and 
destroyed. Tho following is an extract from Colonel 
Wellesley’s report: — 

“ 1 arrived hero with the cavalry at about 3 o’clock in tho 
afternoon and found the camp standing, and that wo had 
surpri sed the enemy. I instantly attacked his camp with 
tbc cavalry only. Lieutenant-Colon el Turin attacked their 
left with the 1st and 4th rcgimentB, and Colonel Stevenson 
and Colonel Pater their front and right with the 25th 
Dragoons and 2nd regiment of cavalry. 