

Tlle expected reinforcements having arrived, tho whole, 
k : ,iur. amounting to about 2,800 men, 1 assembled at Kytar on 
t-lio 27th, and marched for Panjalameoorchy on the 20th. 

Mu r n 4 !i, h cu n ° n th ° ,norilin K of the ^Oth, while on the march to Pashon- 
tlielly, a body of about 20,0 Polygar pikemen appeared 


1 Body Guard 
1st cavalry 
ll.M.’s 71th raiment 


60 men nnd 2 galloper guua. 

One troop. 

Two companies. 

Tho.wholo. 

Five companies. 

Thrte do. 

Thtoo do. 

Six do. 

OlWl 

d two 12 



1st do. 4th do. 

1st. do. 9lh do. 

Int do. lath do. 

l*t do. mil do. 

do. 16th do. 

po 







history of rnr. madi as army. 


41 




on the right flank. This was immediately charged' by the CHAP. XY1. 
cavalry undo* Lieutenant Grant of the Body Guard, and 
almost entirely destroyed. Our loss was numerically small 
viz., 4 men killed and 12 wounded, 3 horses killed and 18 
wounded ; but Lieutenant Grant was severely woundeef, 
and Shnik Ibrahim, the Subadar of the Body Guard, a 
very gallant soldier, was killed. The services of this 
valuable officer were recognised in a Genera) Order dated 
,15th April, and a pension equal to the pay of his rank, viz., 

30 pagodas per mensem, was grunted to his family. 

The detachment came before Panjalamcoorcliy on the Repulse at 
* morning^f the 31st Marcfi.* It was an irregular oblong coorciiy. U 
about 500 feet in length and 300 feet) broad, and had 
been considerably strengthened.sinco Major Macaulay's 
retreat, the walls and bastions having been raised to the 
height of about i2 and 15 fcot respectively. Tho whole 
was surrounded by a thick hedge of thorns. Major 
Macaulay having determined to attack the bastion at tho 
north-wester!} angle, the guns wero placed in position 
accordingly, and what appeared to bo a practicable breach 
having been made by about 3 pyx., tho storming party, 
composed of the two companies 71th, tho grenadiers of 
the several native battalions, and iftio battalion company 
1st Dftttalion 3rd regiment, advanced to the agsattlt, 
covered by tho flro^f the rest of the force which hml 
.been disposed on the, Hanks. The hedge was passed 
under a heavy fire, and tho men reached the tup of tho 
breach, but they woro unable to nmko any further 
progress, being either killed or disabled tin moment they 


showed thomseh c 




Major Macaulay, in his rep i t, expressed himself as Behaviour 
having boon well satisfied with the conduct of the troops. Ol lho lr0oJ,J, 
M Notwithstanding tho intropid ftrmnosB ol the u vaulting ’ 
party, the daring and desperate resistance of the enemy 

. voi HI. 





HISTORY of the MADRAd ARiTY. 


<SL 


Crmeo of the 
failure. 


CBAP: XVI. made it utterly impossible to enter the place, all those who 
attempted it being instantly piked or shot. 

“Perceiving at length the impossibility of ’succeeding, I 
•'as 1 educed to the painful necessity of ordering the troops to 
i»tiro. Our loss is very sevore. The whole behaved with' 
tne greatest animation and ardour.” 