



TAIAI/Sr^ 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


89 


Major Macaulay also took tho step of sending a party 
o£ GO men under a native officer to occupy the pagoda 
at Strcevygoondum, about 15 miles south-east of Palarn- 
cottali, which was accomplished on’tho night of the 25th 
February. 

Captain Hazard came before Cadulgoody on the 27th 
February, and found it surrounded by a dense hedge of 
thorns, and defended by at least 1,500 men. Finding 
himself not sufficiently strong to attack the place, he 
proceeded towards Nagulpoor, a fort distant only a few 
miles, which was held by a detachment of the Hamnad 
battalion. 

Captain Hazard was attacked on the march, and lost 
22 men killed and wounded, bat lie repulsod the enemy, 
whose loss was not ascertained. 

Tho party at Streevygoondum remained unmolested 
until about the 12th March, wliou tho pagoda was sur¬ 
rounded by large bodies of Polygars, and it was found 
necessary to send a strong detachment under Major Sliop- 
pard of tho 3rd to relievo and withdraw tho garrison. This 
was effected on tho 16th after some smart skirmishes. 

Theso proceedings ©licited the disapproval of Govern¬ 
ment, which was thus expressed in a letter to Major 
Macaulay:— 

44 His Lordship regrets that tho samo mot ives of prudence 
which induced you to relinquish tho intention of attacking 
tho rebels in Panjulamcoorchy wore not considered applicnb'o 
io your projected Attack on Cadulgoody, or any other offeusivo 
operation of the troopf under your command; for it tbo 
tviiolo disposal ’o force of tho provinco, collected under your 
own command, was insuLfieiVnl to make any impression on 
tho body of rebels at Panjalumcoorchy, it, was prcsumablo 
M» it a detachment from your force would be equally incapable 
•J attacking tho rebels with adjutage at any other poHt 

of imp ovtance to thorn- Tho system of detachments, id all 


<SL 

CHA’P. XVI. 


Failure 

Cuuuigoody. 


Withdrawn! 
oi' garrta'ni 
from Stroovy • 
gcondum. 


HoraarhB 
of Govern- 
mont. 



40 


niSTOKY or the madras army. 



CHAP. »W1. times exceptionable, the Governor in Council considers to he 


peculiarly hazardous in the face of an enemy so avowedly 
superior to your own force.’’ 

On tho 2nd March the fort at Tuticorin was taken by 
t!ie insurgents iu consequence of the misconduct of tho 
garrison, which consisted of a party of the 2nd battalion 
6th regiment under Lieutenant Ormsby. This officer, 
not having been longer than eight months in the country, 
•had no control over the men, who paid no attention to 
his orders, and gave up the fort without resistance, on 
being assured of their own personal safety. The Poly, 
gars behaved remarkably well on this occasion, as thoy 
put Lieutenant Ormsby on board a native craft with all 
his effects, and landed him at the adjacont port of 
Mannpur, from whence he made his way to ralamcottnh 
unmolested. 


Mr. Bagot, the Postmaster, who was taken at tho am 1 © 
time, was released a few days afterwards, without havihg 
been ilk treated in any way. 