

Major Colin Macaulay, commanding in the province 
of Tinnevolly, assembled oil tho available troops 2 at 
Kytar, about 19 milos north of Palamcottah, and 17 miles 
direct west from Punjalamcoorcliy, against wliich place ho 
marched on the 6th February. On the 8th he arrived at 
Kolonclloor, and whilo coming on his encamping ground, 
ho was attacked at soveral points by considerable bodies 
of V olygars. The sepoys behaved ste adily, and repulsed 
those assault#, killing 40 or 50 of the insurgents. ’ On tho 
9th the detachment encamped close to PanjaUimcoofthy, 
' hen Major Macaulay was astonished to find that the 


1 ’I he decree of rofitramt in which then" prUonoro wero V* 

- ;»i‘l t r *havo h.^t n cU»rrrmiir;d fix>in limo to time by tho i *v. mid if, 

cpjM ar.-», tlmi in ot>n*oquin, c m - tifbrrnk of tnali.p. \ «h>>rtly 
before tho t scape, t heir fatter* hod beun i cmoveil 

The Collect >r, on Inn part. laid tin reap* n •libjijfcy on the mi bill . , om- 

i,Muuling at UnlaTO' ottnh. Tho n wish \\\y t\ ^mrr n | m. .1. A wliich it 
vua ilironod that all State priumcre should, n futmv, ht: made over o 
the officer oominwuiinp ho din<n.fc, 

* 1 ht brutallon 3rd v< ginionl under Major Sheppard ; 1H0 men of tho 
Tjfm velljr Provincial battalion * Nan-abb’* invguiav horse 28 men • two 
0 »’.rd t wo 8 poiu)'.i"t8. 


# 


CHAP. XVI. 


Major 
Macnulay 
advAucoa to 
Punjalam- 
coorchy* 





38 


III:jTORY OF TIIF MADRAS ARMY* 



<SL 


Retreats to 
Pnlamoottali. 


CHAP. XVI. fort, which had been reported as having been completely 1 
destroyed by the pioneers in 1790, liad been rebuilt, 
and that the insurgents were in considerable force, both 
within and without the walls. In theso circumstances 
the Major determined to retreat to Palamcottah, and he 
inarched’ accordingly about 3 a.m. on the 10th. The 
insurgents followed and attacked the column, bu?having 
been repulsed with loss by Captain Vosey, who com¬ 
manded the rear guard, they desisted from any further 
attempt. 

Owing to the unsettled stato ol: affaivs in Malabar, in 
Diudigul, and in the Ceded Districts, some difficulty was 
experienced in organising a force for sorvice in Tiunevelly, 
but Government lost no time in despatching such troops 
as could be spared. 

On arriving at Palamcottah Major Macaulay informed 
Government of his intention to defer offensive operations . 
until the arrival of reinforcements, but on the 22nd 
February he directed Captain Hazard, then on the march 
from Madura with a detachment 1st battalion 9tli 
regiment, to attack the fort at Cadulgoody, which ho 
described as being without gates, and defended by 300 
cordon peons, only 100 of whom were armed. 


Reinforce¬ 

ments. 


Proccvodingn 
of Major 
Alacuulay. 


1 “ Tho walla wer© levelled with tlio ground j this wag not tlio on i© 
• with tho bastions, which were large ma-Fos of aolid and very firm tiny, 

faced with unbnrnt brick. Those were dug down considerably from tlm 
.centre till tho earth formed a gradual slope, leaving considerable 
mounds. By scarping tho earth from tho remainder of their exterior 
facco, and raising it round tho centres which remained from 7 to 10 
foot high, tho rebels, iu tho short space of six days from their oocapc, 
completed the baptions in a dcfenH * lo manner, and connected I ’ in 
with a wall of 5 or 0 fe. i high, in which *}tat© Major Macaulay imw 
tho for on tho Bib February. All the lala'rera of tIre surrounding 
country hud been omumonod and compelled to perform this work, which, 
before tho one! of that i r nth, placed tho fort of Ihmjuloraowm hy it> a 
better mat o than ii hi 1 l>cen b« Wire » n demolition.”— liion tenant. Colonel 
A; -. 4, to tho Command-., i-in-Chief, P&launr.ttab, '• h Ma^rch 18054, 