


U\HtST$y 


r* v ^ 

I 

HISTORY OP THR MADRAS ARMY. 29 

rernor-General, in a letter to the Government 
of Madras, dated 15th January 1800, thus expressed 
himself with reference to the Rajah's claim:— 

“ With respect to Wynaad, my decided opinion "is, that 
any consideration of the pretensions of the Pychy Rajah 
previously to our taking possession of the district under the 
treaty of Mysore, would be fatal to the authority of the 
Company. No compromise must therefore be admitted on 
this subject. The authority of the Company must he estab¬ 
lished in Wynaad as soon as possible, and if the Pychy Rajah 

• should presume to resist the measure, his contumacy must be 
punished with the most signal severity. 

Early in March Colonel Wellesley was invested with 
the general command in Malabar and Cunava in addition 
to that of Mysore, and ho was about to march into the 
Wynaad when it was found necessary to postpone opera¬ 
tions in consequence of the inability of the Bombay 
authorities to.sparo troops to take part in the service. 

On tho 9tli September an order was issued by the 
Governor-General to the effect that tho Bombay troops 
serving in Malabar and Canara, as well as those at Goa, 
should bo placed under the Government of Madras, and 
put on the same footing as the Madras troops in respect 
of pay and allowances. 

Shortly afterwards preparations were made for taking 
possession of the Wynaad by a force under Colonel 
Wellesley, aided by llio Bombay troops in Malabar under 
Colonel Sartorius ; but Colonel Wellesloy having been 
Ordered to Cuylon on special duty, tho command in 
Mysore, AJMabar, and Oanara devolved upon Colonel 
SteveI'Son, who entered the Wynaad iu January 1801. 

The Fychy Rajah's adherents were speedily dispersed, 
be himself became a fugitive, and before the commence* 

* mom, uf- the rains every post of any consequence in tho 
Wynaad was in ouf bnLuft The Rajah, however, eluded 




CHAP. XVI* 

Opinion of 
tho Governer- 
General,! '->00. 


Bombay 
troops in 
Malabar 
placed 
under the 
Government 
of Madrid. 


Colonel 
Stovon on 
MtCCCCds to 

llio command, 


Occupation 
of \VynjiHvl, 
1601 . 



WHlSTfty. 


HISTOEV OP T.UE MADRAS ABM?. 



CHAP. XVI. 


Tbp.nkn to 
the troops. 


Colonel 

Wellesley 

resumes 

coiianand. 


30 



all attempts to secure his person and escaped into the 
hill country of Travancore. 

.1 he troops were sent into cantonments on the approach 
ot clie rains in May, and on the 10th of that month, a. 
General Order was published, in which Colonel Stevenson, 
Colonel Sarlorius. the second in command, and the 
troops were thanked for their services. 

Colonel Wellesley, having landed at Cannauore on tlio 
28th April, Was reappointed to the Mysore Division 
immediately afterwards. Colonel Stevenson, as a reward 
for his serviScs, was at the same time nominated to the 
command of Malabar and Canara under the orders of the 
Officer commanding.in Mysore 

Operations against tuii Polyqars op- Dindigul, 1.801. 