


Tbanka to 
tho troopg. 


Fort St. George; 22nd May 1801. 

* • * * * 

Tho operations of Lieutenant-Colonel Innes’ detachment 
have been equally distinguished by the judicious arrangements • 
with which they were planned, and by the great energy and 
ability which signalised their execution, and the Governor 
in. Council has viewed with tho highest satisfaction, tho 
undaunted and porsovering ardour with which the difficulties 
opposed by the united force of tho rebels, the severity of a 
fatiguing service, and # of an unfavorable climate have been 
surmounted. Tho force of the rebels has been subdued their 
strongholds attacked and taken, and the civil government 
restored in the rebellious pollams, with a degreo of rapidity 
judgment,^ and success, which merits his Lordship’s warmest 


Expeditions against Trrnate, 1801, 

Early in 1801, at the instance of Mr. Farquhar, Resident 
at Amboyna, Colonel Burr, commanding tho troops in 
Lie Moluccas, organised an expedition against Tomato, 
ono of the spice islands belonging *o the Dutch! 
Although tho detachment 1 was small, yet it was considered 
sufficient, as Captain Astl6, the senior Naval officer on the 


Madras artillery 22 Europeans and 28 gim-lnsears. Captain Ross 

».—.f A.;,r 

'> rupoans. Lieutenant Haves, India. 

!Company , 30 Europe. na Capt .in Ganjp? ‘' 

licntnT ,on °' r ® : 20 mcn - Lienbnuuit Wiswott, 9tb M.N f. 

Fiiui 11 V K ,,lU, "° n ! m meu ' Lieutenant Gill. 

‘"f 1 "nnKMN.l.i I Uavfldar, 8 Sopor*. 

' UlUy * r ( ' ur,n: r>3 m,; ' ‘-aptuin Boles, 3rd M N.I. 

Kuiujicnn* 17 .S. Natives 170, total 019. 








misr/ff. 



station had promised his co-operation, and the force of OEA?. XVJ. 
the Dutch was supposed not to exceed 50 Europeans 
and 2,000 trained natives. » 

The detachment loft Amboyna on the 22nd January Determent 
under the escort of H.M.'s frigate “La Virginio” and the 
sloop “ Hobart,” accompanied by the Company's armed 
vessel.) (< Ternate ” and " Splinter” The fleet anchored 
off Ternato on the 10th February, and the Governor 
having refused to surrender, arrangements were made 
to attack Fort Orange the next day; but Captain Astle 
liuying insisted that a detached work should be taken 
before any attempt was made on tbe principal fort, Colo¬ 
nel Burr was obliged to give way. 

The boats containing tho troops left tbe ships about 11 
a.m. on tho U(h, and got to tho shore about 1 r.si., tho 
frigate and sloop keeping up a fire all tho time, but from 
such a distance that a groat part of tho shot fob jn to tho 
soa. The jungle at the landing-place was so dense that 
the dotactflnont was obliged to make a considerable detour, 
and after having been led by guides lor abo^t an horn* 

•along a path bo narrow that tho men wero obliged to 
march in single file, it came in sight of the fort standing * 

in ah open clearing. The troops, after a short halt, 
advanced to the assault, but were received with so heavy 
ft tiro of grape aud musketry, aided by that of two field- 
pieces which opened upon their right flank, that thoy 
were obliged to retreat with considerable 1 loss, Liouto* 
imuts Scott, aud Rawlings of tho Indian Navy stood in 
with tho “ Ternato ” and “ Splintd " and engaged tho 
8 ii-face of the fort in a very spirited manner, but their 