


i Tho return in not fart booming. Sox oral wounded mon wore loft, 
behind who wero well itouted by l, '0 Uuiol* . Whi . tho dcnob wont 
rvru.W iho bench the cmrf wn* so high thut tho two field-piocoe whirl* 
laid been landed wero spiked and abandoned. 


VOL. III. 




• <SL 

HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP. XVI.'guns, being only sis and four pounders, did not make 
any impression on the works. 

Colonel Burr addressed Captain Astld on tho 12th, 
urging him to co-operate in an effectual manner by 
anchoring within a proper distance of the fort, but as he 
declined to comply, tho expedition returned to Amboyna, 
where it arrived upon the 1 Oth. Colonel Burr ascribed 
the failure to the want of co-operation on the part of the 
Naval force, and in his report to the Madras Government, 
he mentioned that although Captain Astle h#d promised 
assistance in the shape of seamen and marines, he did 
not furnish any, and that not a single man belonging to 
tho fleet was wounded. 

Sccc.ml The “ Albion” transport, which had sailed from 

expo ltion. Amboyna for Madras with 150 sepoys, 1 was obliged to put 

back early in March owing to stress of weather. Colonel 
Burr and Mr. Farquhar, being anxious to reprieve tho 
failure, took advantage of this occurrence to make another 
attempt, and on tho 2nd April, a detachment of Europeans 
and nativjb, amounting to 329 lighting men, sailed for* 
Tornate under the escort of the Company's squadron, com¬ 
posed of the “Swift" commanded by Lieutenant Hayes, 
tho “Star,” tho “Splinter,” and the brig “ Resource.” 

Captain Astie declined to join tho expedition. Tho 
passage having been tedious, tho ships did not anchor until 
. the 23rd April. Tho troops wore landed, and operations 

wore commenced a few days afterwards. The strong 
redoubt of Koya-meira surrendered on the 8ih May, 
but being commanded by the hill of Talangaainy, the 
acquisition wan of little uso for the time. A few days 


> ui: in -jk n voliu.l cored in o body for ibo second liii.ui. It has 
• / .Bi-ertalnod whether thoy belonged to tho 2nd in'iun l H t 

rogimunt, or b) tho " Madras Volunteer UatiaUon,” o> to both. 






rtwisjfy. 



later, a party detached from camp near the captured 
redoubt constructed a battery from which fire was opened 
on Talangnamy on the 17th. The enemy immediately 
made ft vigorous sortie, which was repulsed, but they 
renewed, the attack on the 18th, and were *not driven 
back until after a sharp struggle, in which twelve of our 
men were killed, and many wounded. Our tiro was kept 
up until the 22nd, on tho night of which the enemy 
abandoned the hill, carrying off their guns. 

Lieutenant Hayes cannonaded Fort Orange on two 
occasions during the month without producing much 
effect, whereas he lost several-men killed and wounded, 
ond the <( Swift” was a*good deal damaged in her hull, 
as well a%in her masts and rigging. 

The progress made during the early part of Juno was 
very slow owing to the smallness of the force, the obsti¬ 
nate resistance of the oneiny, and tho number of detached 
works to be reduced before Fort Orange could be closely 
invented. This was at last effected, mid several small 
cmft and boats laden with provisions having boon inter¬ 
cepted by the squadron, the garrison became' distre^ody 
and u.n\\ illing to continue tlio Aefeuce. On the evening of 
tho 20th four Comihissioners, vested with full power?, 
came into ( amp to discuss the terms of capitulation. 
Those we.ro settled during the night, and ou tho morning 
of tho 2 Ibt, Fort Orange, with its dependencies, was 
giv< n up. The place was found to bo so strong that it 
could not have been taken by tho weak ioivo before it, 
had it not boon di tituto of provisions. 