

Captain Joseph Walker of the Madras Army, with a 
small garrison, was left in command of the island pernl- 
•njj instructions from the Readout at tho Moluccas, and 
Colonel Burr returned to Amboyna in Julv. 


♦ 




<SL 


chap. ::vi. 


Attacks by 
the squadron. 

a 


Surrender o£ 
the Fort and 
Island. 


The force 
1 urn o to 
Amboy ua. 





mtSTfiy 


* 



CHAP. XVI. 


Cuptaiu- 

GcnentJ, 

1801. 

G snoral 

stnart 

command*. 


' ,J> HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

On the 11th March 1801, the appointment of the 
Marquis of IVellesley to be Captain-General, and Com- 
inaiuler-in-Chief of all the Royal and Company's troops 
in India, was published at Madras. 

On the 28th July Lieutenant-General James Stuart, 1 
recently Commander-in-Chief at Bombay, assumed com¬ 
mand of the Madras Army. 

Acquisition of the Carnatic,# 1801. 

On the 31st of the same month, the following order, 
announcing the transfer of the . Carnatic to the East 
India, Company, was published to tho Army :_ 

Fort St. George, 31 st July 1801. 

"In conformity to a treaty 1 this .lay concluded between 
iho Right Honorable tho Governor in Council, and ITis High- 
11,0 Nawaub **eem ool Dowlah Bahader, Nabob of tho 
CaiUKc, by which the antire Civil and Military Government 
of He Carnatic has been transferred for over to tho hands of 
H- Honorable Company; orders have boon transmitted to the 
uvil officers appointed by tho Governor in Council to receive 
.•barge of tho provinces of tho Carnatic from tho offioers or 
(ho lato Government. His Lordship is thoreforo pleased to 
order and direct all Officers commanding Divisions, Stations, 
Garrisons, and Ports, to afford to tho Civil 0[beers of 
Government whatever military aid may bo necessary to n,,, 



1 Thia-fW carnet. Madras iu April 1782 with tho 78.1, (7-, n , v ,.j 
mem. and served in tin- Fro : lency for many years. Mo oomunmu, ,1 
lh«nxjv,iiti,,n lo Ceylon in 1705, and became Oommandor-in.Cl ,.l 
Hombttj In 170f. 

Tl;. Coni|du^ charged iUelf with tho maintonunco mml hm , .,f 
' H f*.rco . ,uirt'd for tho def.'noo of tho Cnrnntio, and with the prot.o- 
U^n r, f ,ighU, person, nud property of llio NaWauh. OikMIMi of tho 
r*^onvi(.« wore t- ho wt Riutio for hi* maintonunon, und to*U, ppJU i . 
‘ iuHtnlmoniii of 13,000 «.tur ( r.goilai, (ind noror h*» 

might tii tho .-nav of tho menucs. " 





HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


37 







t atablialimont of the authority of the Company throughout 
the provinces of the Carnatic.’* 

Insurrection in Tinnevelly and Madura, 1801-2 

The Polygar prisoners, confined in the fort at Palam- 
cottah lifter the suppression of tho disturbances in Tinne- 
volly by the force under Major Bannerman in 1799, made 
their escape 1 on the night of tho 2nd February 1801, and 
immediately repaired to the Walnaad hill near Panjalam- 
coorchy, where they were joined by nearly 4,000 armed 
men, who had been prepared for the attempt to escape, 
which, as subsequently ascertained, had been concerted 
for some time previously. 