

The Polygar chiefs in the hill tracts of Dindigul had 
withheld payment of their kists sinco 1798, and set tlm 
orders of the Collector at defiance. Government, however, 
were not in a position to coorco them until 1801, when 
Lieutenant-Colonel Innes, commanding at Dindigul, was 
directed to equip a small field force for that purpose. 
This wus immediately done, but the destination of tho 
detachment 1 was altered, and Colonel Innes was sent 
into Malabar to support Culoncl Stevensor^ then employed 
against the Pychy Rajah. Colonel lunea arri ved at! Arria- 
codo, about 25 miles from Calicut, on the 27th February, 
but Lis services not being required, he returned towards 
Dimlignl accompanied by a detachment of the 5th cavalry . 
ruder Major Leonard, lie arrived at Pylnoy about the 


Firm It oonipumoB 2»d b u. alien 13tli n ^irnont, MO. 
, DoUiohi' nt Malay onrptt, 100. 

»*i iu. lot Captain HngyhttW, lUO. 

DulucKmunt . r artiiloi v 





HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


31 


middle of March, and having received reinforcements/ chap. XVI. 
he commenced operations against Gopal Naigue,* Poly gar 
of *Veerapatchy, the principal of the refractory chiefs. 

Veorapatchy, 2 and. two adjacent strongholds belong- Captmv of 
ing to the same chief, were taken on the 21st without Veerapatchy. 
loss ; other places in the vicinity were occupied without 
opposition, and on the 27 th, most of the Poly gar’s 
baggage, horses and elephants wore taken at his resi¬ 
dence at Woodacaud. The Polygar himself having taken 
refuge with Yedul Naigue, the chief of Dhulleecottah, 
a fort about 40 miles west of Veerapatchy, and at which 
several of the minor insurgent chiefs had assembled, 

Colonel Innes sent a summons to Yodul Naigue desiriilg 
him to give up Gopal Naigue and all the othoV chiefs on 
pain of boing himself considered a rebel. An evasive 
reply having been returned, preparations were made to 
attack the place. 

Detachmonts were sent to occupy certain posts to the Capture of 
westward of Dhullce so as to cut off any attempted retreat ^ llll l L>0# 
towards Travoncore or Cochin, and a garrison having been 
loft at Veerapatchy, Colonel Innes advanced to Dhullce 
on the 12th April, and took tlio place on the 13th with 
tritiing loss, dispersing the Polygars and their adherents. 

Those who escaped fled to Jelliputty, where they made a 
hi.4 stand on the 22nd, after which no further opposition 
v to; attempted. The Polygar of Veerapatchy was taken 
on tho 4thMay, and on the loLli Colonel Innes reported to. 
Qcv^rnmont that tho authority of the Civil power *hud 
been comp tely re-established in tin province. Colonel 
Pines and the troops wore thanked by Government in 


» Dote eh men i H.M.’fl 12lh f . , uidor Major Eioton. 

Do. 2ud battalion Ihi raiment under Major Itmon. 
2 About 25 mihvi north *'' t 01 the tail of DuuUkuI. 






MIM ST/fy 



32 


HISTORY or THE MADRAS AHltT. 


<SL 


CH AP x T v I. an order dated 22nd May, from which the following is an 
extract:— 