


1 Light attack uudor Lioutem.ut-Colonpl Spry.—H.M.’a 19th 
thagoona, detachment. of artillery, defcaobmemB H.M.’a 77th, and 
raiment Do Mom. i, lat battalion let rngimt.'xit, l -‘ battulion 2nd 
i< . irnent, ami ft parly of pionok n*. 

Centro attack under Lieutenant-O t) l 0 n< I Cnppoge.—JDetoelm: ,-ci 1 6th 
cavuhy, artillory, n.M.’e 77th and regiment De Mearon, tho lut 
b iic linn 6th rrgiuiont, and a parly ol ploneera. 

Left at tuck under Major IfinglJgh.— Dctachmeuta H.M.’a 77th, and 
rupinioni Do Meuron, 2nd battalion 10th regiment, and u p ftV {y r 
Vi-.ui'urn. 













CHAP. XYT. 


Exertion of 
the Rajah. 


Arran ^ om out b 
for fkUling 
Liio country. 


^ t history OF THE MADRAS ARMY. • 

the officers and men employed on this service received the 
thanks of Government, conveyed in an order dated 16th 
March. 

A detachment was left at Arrakaira while Colonel 
TV ellesloy proceeded towards the Bissli Ghaut to destroy 
other strongholds which the Rajah was reported to possess 
in that direction, and also to open roads down the several 
passes leading into Canara. 

The Rajah was captured on the 9th February, and 
executed the next day, together with six of his followers, 
after which Colonel Wellesley broke up his detachment, 
and marched on his return to Seringapatam, having first 
made the following arrangements for the occupation of 
Bullura, and certain adjoining districts of the Mysore 
territory. 

five companies 1st battalion 5 th, three companies 2nd 
battalion 10th, two guns, and a detachment of pioneers 
wore left at Arrakaira, under Captain Macfarlane of the 
oth, for the purpose of making n road down tho, S’, mil 
Ghaut, constructing defensible posts at the Loads of (.he 
Si-jSul,’ Bissli, and bumpaji Ghauts, clearing tho jungle, 
and destroying tho stockades, and filling up the ditohos 
by which tho villages were surrounded. 

Major English, with soven companies 2nd battalion 
10th, anrMivo companies 1st battalion 5th, with two guns, 
and a party of pionocro, was to encamp at Belloor - in 
order to support the authority of the Mysore Rajah in 
that district, and in those of Oo8tara and Maharajdro vr. 

The inhabitants were to be disarmed, roads were t > bo 
n • do, and tho fortified vdlagol dismantled as in Bui: am. 



i lu’:': grants lead down into Canar?, tho Siso d or Ch illy l.. i 
■Kt. ’ir.rlhdrnmoftL 

O ybfura, Rolloor, mid Mfthurnjdroog bound Iiullum on tlio o»st. 








HISTORY OJF THE MADIJA3 ARMY. 


Insurrection in Wynaad, 1802. 


55 


On the 11 tli October 1802 the post at Panamurtha 1 
Cottali in Wynaad was surprised by a body of Nairs 
- about 400 in number, divided into three parties, one* of 
which seized the barrack in which the arms were kept, and 
another attacked the sepoys, while the third surrounded 
tko houses of the officers. 

The detachment consisted of about 70 men of the 1st 
battalion 4th Bombay regiment, with two European 
officers. Both of these, viz., Captain Dickinson and 
Lieutenant Maxwell, were killed. Twenty-four sepoys 
shared the same fate, and twenty-one were wounded* All 
the buildings were set on fire and destroyed. The head¬ 
quarters, and about? 1 3G0 men of this battalion were at 
1 ooliugall, about nine miles west of Panamurtha Cottali, 
but the Major in command neither moved from his post 
nor took any steps for the security of the district. This 
was not the only instance of such inactivity, for Colonel 
Wolk sloy, when writing on the 20th to the officer com¬ 
manding tlio Bombay troops in Malabar, animadverted 
upon tho general want of energy on the part of the 
officers, and went on is follows:— 