

* * * 

“ Constant Exposure to tho sun, and considerable fcitigne, 
1ms p duccd much sickness in tho detachment. A gn at 
proportion of the officers are at present unlit for duty.” 


1 Of 4 the.8<, two urc on Blips of paper about 3 inches long an I l iiu-h 
brand, supposed to hnvo boon convoyed in quills. 

■< 'vplaiu Macintosh, 77ib, and LicuL.nant B. Campbell, 7Ub, v,. ro 
wound hI on i big occuoion. A general roll ot casual t.ie» during i) , 
' l’uo fur--t -u. lonvurdi-u by Col aol .• v t Uu. j ,t 

tu bu found. • 







Colonol Agnow left Sorruvial on tlio 2nd September CHAP. XVI. 

for Ookoor, where lie arrived tlio safno day without - 

opposition, and established his head-quarters. The Agnow at 
detachment, under Colonol Innes was located at Sliola- Ookoor- 
poor am, about three miles south of Ookoor. 

Government having determined to reinstate one of tho Inauguration 
' Shovagunga family in possession of that zemindary, -they zemindi-r «I 
fixed upon Moottoo Vadaganadha Taver, and on the 12th Skevagunga. 
September ho was duly inaugurated by Colonel Agnow 
in camp at Sholapoorum. 

On the 18th the fort at Perah Mally was takon posses- Capture of 
ftion of by a small detachment 1 under Colonel Agnew, who Pcrah ^ ully * 
then returned to Ookoor, leaving a detaphmont of the 1st 
• battalion 7th in the fort. 

The fort at Comcry was invested by the rebels on the Investment 
21st July. They did all in their power to induce tho ofCoulory • 
sepoys to desert, and having enticed Lieutenant Greaves 
to the walls by a flag of truce, thoy fired at him, but 
. without doing any mischief, No assistance was received • 
trom Colonel Agncw, as the communications had been cut 
off, but on tho 13th August .the placo was relieved by iu*hcf of 
Lieutenant Millar, with a detachment of the Ramnad Come| y. 
local corps, who, although greatly outnumbered by tho 
rebel*, attacked them without hesitation, and Lieutenant 
Creaves sallying from tho fort at tho same time, tho 
enemy were defeated. Lieutenants Greaves and Millar' 
received the thanks of Government for their conduct. 

About tho ond of tlio mouth Colonol Agnow, having Cnptunjif 
received information which led him to believe lie might c,llh Vcoi ’- 
surprise the rebels at Oaliiicoil, maij^ tho following 
arrangements for a combined movement upon that place. 
Lieutenant-Colonel Spry with II.M/s 77th, and the 2nd 


A party of the* Ut c^-.dvy unrioi Major D .vetoo, nnd dofcachmeii 
battolion ArU, and l«t battalia 7tli N.I. 0L 


• lie 1 
VOL. 


1X1. 


7 






t 






a 





\ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


CHAP. XVI. battalion 6th regiment, amounting to about 1,000 men, 
Tvi u 50 pioneers, marched from Ookoor about 10 p.u. 
on the 30th September in order to reach Caliarcoil 
i\Y the road which had been cut through the forest 
u-om Serruvial, and afterwards by a path, the existence 
of which had been communicated by a Mahomedan 1 who 
had formerly been an officer in our cavalry. 

Colonel Agnew, with the centre party, set out before 
daylight on the 1st October by the main road leading to 
Caliarcoil through Moottoor. 