

ipoot. 






4 



m HSTQy 



Thanks to 
the troops. 


* 



history of the madras army. 

Fort St. George , 22nd February 1802. 

l , he whole coarse of operations connected with that sor- 
vico has been distinguished by a spirit of animated bravery, 
3tul persevering oxortion, which has merited the warmest 
approbation of the Governor in Council, and His Lordship in 
Council on bestowing upon the officers and troops the applause 
due to their conduct, reflects with the greatest satisfaction on 
the advantdge3 which have been derived to the public inter¬ 
ests by the suppression of a confederacy which tliroatened the 
most injurious consequences to the tranquillity of the British 
possessions.” 

Expedition to Egypt, 1801-2. 

• 

A detachment of the 2nd battalion artillery, and one 
of pioneers, accompanied tlio expedition to Egypt under 
Major-General Bail’d in 1801. 

The force arrivod at Rosetta on the 31st August, and' 
reachod General Hutchinson'S camp in time to witness 
the surrender of Alexandria on the 2nd September. It 
left Alexandria on the 7th May 1802 on its return to 
India, and in July of that year it was thanked by tho 
Governor-General .in Council, who, at tho same time, 
was pleased to order that medals should be conferred on 
all tho nativo troops which had been employed upon 
tho expedition. Tho Royal troops having been graut :d 
the. privilege of bearing tho "Sphinx” with tho word 
“Egypt” on their colors and appointments, the Com¬ 
pany's troops‘were subsequently allowed to participate 
in that honor. 



Treaty op Amieno, 1802. 

* Intelligence of tho Treaty of P^nco between Grout 
Bntuii) and E ranee, Spain, and the Batavian Republic, 
which was signed at Amiens on tho 27th March 1802, 




having been received at Madras, it was published to the CHAP. ZYI. 
Army on the 4th September. ’- 


Final Operations in Bullum, 1802. 

+ 

The Rajah of Bullum re-occupied his position at Arra- 
Jaira immediately after the departure of Colonel Aron- * 
tresor’s detachment in June 1800, and recommenced his 
predatory incursions. The operations against Dhoondiah, 
those in Alalabar and Wynaad, and in the Ceded Districts, 
prevented Government from taking any notice of his 
conduct until January 1802, when Colonel Wellesley 
* marched against him from Seringapatam. On arriving 
in the neighbourhood of Arrakaira he divided his own 
infantry into three parties for 4 the attack of tho stockaded 
posts in the forest, and placed that of the Mysore Rajah so 
Rs to cut off tho retreat of the enemy towards the ghauts. 

Ihe cavalry, uudor Lioutunant-Colonel Macalister, 
occupied all tho open ground. 

The Attack was made at 10 a.m. on the 16th by tho Capture bf 
three 1 divisions, viz., one nnder Lieutenant-Colonel A. *^ rraka ^ rtt * 
Cupp ago, 1st battalion 5tli regiment ; one under Major ’ 

English, 2nd battalion 10th regiment; and one under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Spry, H.Al/s 77th foot. Each 
party was successful, and all tho posts in the forest 
wore canned with trilling loss. Colonel Weilt^loy, and 