


The dominiops formerly constituting the Mahratta 
Empire had, for many years previous to this period, been 
divided into five separate independent states, which in 
1802, were governed by the undermentioned chiefs, 
viz. :— 

Bajeo Row, the Peshwah, who resided at Poonali, and ThoPcohv,,:.. 
ruled over the Southern Maliratta country, Sattarah, and 
the. Concan, in tho name of the Rajah of Sattarah, tho 
nominal sovereign of the Mahrattas, who lived at Sattarah 
under surveillance, if not in a state of actual imprison¬ 
ment. 

Ragojeo Bhonslali, Rajah of Berar, residing at Nag- Rajah of 
pore* in Gondwana. " Berar. 

Dowlut Row Scindiah, residing* at Oojein in Malwah, Scmdiali. 
und possessing Candeish and half of Malwah. 

Jeswnnt Row Ilolkar, residing at Indore, possessing Hollar, 
half of Malwah. This chief ruled ostensibly in behalf of 
his nephew Khan dab Row. 

The Guickwar ruling in Guzerat. Guickwnr. 

Scindiah, who was ambitious of becoming tho head of Defeat of tho 
tho Mahratta Empire, had, with a view towards that end,' 
succeeded in obtaining complete ascendancy over tho Golkar,’ * 
councils of tho Peshwah, and on tho 14th October 1801, ho 1802 ‘ 
advaucod his prospects by inflicting a severe defeat 
upon Holkr •, his principal rival, but having neglected to 
follow up this victory, Ilolkar reassembled an army, 
laid waste Candeish, and defeated the combined armies 
o( ,Scindiah and tho Peshwah uuder tho walls of Poonali 
on I ho 25th October 1802. The Poshwab fled into tho 
Com...n, and shortly afterwards embarked 4or Basscin 
where he landed on the fith December, and immediately 
ui 'do overture- to the Brilish. 




mtST/fy 



Treaty of 
B'jpdoin. 


• * 

HISTORY o? TIIE MADRAS ARMY.* 

ibe result was the treaty of Bassein concluded on the 
dlst December, tho principal stipulations of which were 
a3 follows, viz.:—That a permanent subsidiary force of 
not less than 6,000 regular native infantry, with the 
usual proportion of field pieces and European artillery¬ 
men, and a proper equipment of warlike stores and 
ammunition, should be stationed in His Highness* domi¬ 
nions ; and that for the regular payment of this force, 
territory, the annual revenue of which was estimated at 
26 lakhs of rupees, should be ceded to the Company in 
perpetuity. All the iorts in the coded territory were 
to be made over, together with their equipment of 
ordnance, stores, and provisions. It was subsequently 
agreed that a regiment of native cavalry should bo added 
to tho force, and paid for by a f urtlier cession of territory. 



Advance from Hurryhur, 18.03. 

In the meantime, an army, amounting to 19,798 regular 
troops, was being assembled at Hurryhur on the north¬ 
west frontier of Mysore, for tho protection of the Com¬ 
pany ^ territories, and the eventual # establi:jhment of 
tho subsidiary force at Poormh; but in conformity with 
instructions subsequently roceivod from tho Governor- 
General, the troops destined to advauco into the Mahrutta 
country wore limited to 10,617 1 met! under tho command of 