

Colonel Agnew halted at Tr’ppawanum, from whelicohe 
sent liis heavy guns to Madura, and then resnined his 
march. The rebels, takiug advantage of the many 
facilities for attack, with-little risk to themselves, which 
were afforded by the nature of the country on the lino 
of march, harassed the detachment a good deal, more 
especially near*Tripulchetty on the 7th, aud between 
Manamadura hnd Pntinoor on the 10th Juno. 

Our loss on the 7th, which amounted to 14 killed ? and 
31 wounded, was owing either to over-forwardness or 
nhsapproliension of orders on the part of Major Gray, who 
formed, his men in front of a bank, instead of behind it 
n Lad beef! directed. 

The lv)SB * on the 10th was caused by want of precau¬ 
tion on the part of the oflicor commanding the rear 
guard, who neglected to take up a proper pogitjon to 
ruver the passage of the river VT'.av. 

1 Qilc -m kilUd and wounUd, 70. J-au 1801 —1st bullion 3^1, 

I i *nt rmut t ' wort, woundod ; 2ml batlaliou 6th, Major Gray killed 
l. .uUmaDto Parmii.tor and Coin wounded. 

* K. t * * I 6. wow acted 70, niiiffeijig 3. 


CH AP. XVI, 


Relief of 
Comery. 


Colonol 
Agnew 
harassed 
on the inarch. 


Commit icj. 


TAWtSfy, 



4G 


HISTORY OK THE MAMAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Colonol 
Agnow 
returns to 
Mu dura. 


Detachment 

under 

Colonel « 
limes. 


Attacked at 

Mtmapa- 

»horry. 


Colonol 
• m iqh at 
N'uttum. 


•Joins Colonel 

Agt.A . . 


Colonel Agnew, on arriving at Ramnad about the 
middle of Juno, found tlio northern part of tlie district 
in levolt, and that he could not hope to bo supplied with 
provisions. In these circumstances he was compelled 
t) change his plan of operations, aud therefore marched 
to Madura, which he reached on the 4th July. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Xnnes, 1 commanding in Dindigul, 
having been directed to co-operate with the troops in 
Shevagupga, arrived. at Nuttum early in June, and on 
the 18tli ho surprised and cut up a party of the rebels 
at Singumpadaree, about three mil os south of t he fort at 
Perah Mally. He then encamped at Manapacherry, 
between Nuttum and Peruh Mally, for the purpose of 
covering the advance of certain reinforcements expected 
from Trichinopoly. On the 8th he was attacked by the 
rebels in force, who drove in his oiftposts, but they were 
soon repulsed, and having been charged by the detach- 
ment of tho 5th cavalry supported by the infantry, they 
dispersed, losing a number of men. The casualties in 
the cavalry 2 were sorious considering tho small number 
ongaged. 

Colonel Innes returned to Nuttum on tho 9th, and 
was joined at that place a few days afterwards by the 
flank companies of tho regiment DoHe^ron, the 2nd 
battalion 12th regiment native infantry, and a strong 
detachment of pioneers. 

Colonel Agnow marched from Madura on tho 22nd 
July, and reached Tricatoor on tho 24th without opposi¬ 
tion. Colonel Innos loft Nuttum on the 23rd, and I t or 
h" v ' U K roconuoitered the fort atPernh Mally, he proceeded 
to join Colonol Agnew. On the 25th ho Scamped at 
-- --- - - - ^ 