

I beg that yon will unje tbo officers to active measures. 
Let them put their troop? in camp forthwith, excepting tho 
number of men that may be absolutely necessary for tho 
do fence of tho small posts against surprise* If the rebels are 
really in force, let u junction be formed, and thou not a 
nmmont lost in clashing at them, whatever may bo their 
force.” 


At t'l! inn- there • e o 3M dr&s tl >bps either in 
Wynaad or Malabar, but the 1st battalion.8lii regiment, 
under Captain Burnell, with a party of pioneers, and 


1 la North Wynuad, about 7 milei south-east of M»uuntcx*dy> 



CHAP. XYI. . 


Surprise of 
Punamurtlia ** 
Cottah. 


Inactivity of 
the officer in 
command in J 
tho Wynaad* 


Mndma 
* roups enter 
Wynaad. 




4 






'HAP^XVI. -.00 Mysore horse, was ordered from Seringapatam 
nau cdiately the disaster became known. Captain 
Gurnell was directed to enter Wynaad from Kakencottah 
or the relief of Manantawaddy, and the general support- 
of the Bombay troops in the district. The battalion 
marched from Kakencottah on the 27th, and on reaching 
the frontier at Sungaloo on the Bawally nullah, it was 
opposed by a body of Nairs who had occupied an old 
stockade. Captain Gurnell passed the nullah on both 
flanks of the stockade under cover of the fire of a,third 
party, and carried it without loss j the Nairs suffered 
considerably. 


Tho 1«t 
bn t tali on 8th 
relieve* • 
Mniupta- 
wadtly. 


filcirmtfih nl 
^oii^uloo. 


The next day ho marched 17 miles to Manantawnddy, 
and reached that place with trifling* logs, although opposed 
nearly the whole way. On the 30th, five companies of 
the 3th returned to Sungaloo as an escort to the Mysore 
horse, which were sent back as being useless in so wet a 
country. A few days later. Captain Gurnell was ordered 
o construct a stockade for one company at Sungaloo, and 
two snmlar stockades between that place and Mnuanta- 
waddy. Tho main body of the battalion was to keep 
moving m tho neighbourhood of Sungaloo, and to attack 
the insurgents wherever they could bo found. These 
arrangements produced so m.wfi, effect* that Colonel 
Wellesley halted a detachment of H.M.’s 33rd and tho 
1st LatUilioa 14th NJ, „hbh wore moving to™,,,, „, 0 
Wyuafid as a further support. 

About the 12th November a smart skirmish took place 
between a dotachmont of the 8fch and the Nairs near 


.’bog 


wounded.'^ tU ° > - ,y00r0 C " V “ ,rjr W( ' rC kil,0d - nild 8ev outooa her 

frin'i ^(Kr^V 1 ” 08 Major Drummond h,. l.oon .clour 
tog sbnt op m h(» post at Ptflli 

-' ■i . ,i, er 180* li *" Bttt C ° Ion<)1 WoUoBl< ’>'* t,J M. 




HTSTOKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Sungaloo, thus described b y Colonel Wellesley in a chap. x\ 
report to the Coramaiider-iu-Chief :— ° - 

“ » Siuce 1 mote t0 y° u 011 tho ^th instant, a detachment of 
the 1st battalion 8tli regiment has hud a smart action with 
the Nairs in Wynaad, in which they sustained a considerable 
lops. They had marched to* Manautawaddy with a despatch 
to Lieutenant- Colon el Lawrence, and on their return were- 
attacked near a swamp at which the battalion had been hard 
pressed heretofore. The Nairs took advantage of a nullah 
which was impassable, across which they fired at them, and 
killed nine and wounded eighteen. The officer in command 
of the battalion, however, at Sungaloo, sent out three com¬ 
panies to the support of the other detachment, and the Naira 
were driven off with considerable loss. Many of those on this 
sido of the nullah were put to death in the road. By all 
accounts the troops behaved remarkably well on this occa- 
cion.” 