

Colonol Innes marched from Sholapoomm about the 
same time by Kcrranoor and Calangoody. . 

This operation was completely successful. The fort at 
Caliarcoil - was in Colonel Spry's possession by 8 a.m. on 
the 1st, and Colonol Agnew occupied Moottoor after a 
trifling resistance. The march of Colonel Innes was 
opposed at several barriers, but the rebels wore quickly 
driven from them, and the detachment reached Calan¬ 
goody without loss. At one barrier alone, and at an 
adjacent tank, the enemy loft 100 men killed. • 

'Hus was the death-blow to the insurrection, and the 
roboh dispersed in every direction immodialoly after¬ 
wards. One body under the Polygars of Pnnjahuucoorohy, 
catimat d at about 600 men, entered Dindigul and 
endeavoured to collect adherents in the hills near Y otll .... 

' patchy, but being prof od by a detachment under Colonol 
Innos, tlioy Separated, and the loaders wore captured 
soon afterwards by the peons of tho Collector. By the 


fnannrortiori 

<jUolR'i. 


■ M iliomO'' Klm.1* 1. Us won futon at Brntbwaito’s Uefo " in 1'sr 
i <l ufwrwartU aorvcl until the ..-low, or (ho wur In 

J J™ '• w * rdfld on tills oocuwon 1,/u n,„„l, „ 

oJ 20 paj oilna a monf h. 1 

.’^Twonty-oight guns a«il swivels, 14,000 cttrtri.igcn nnrl , r „ w 
, ■'•ros were found In Un-fort. A quantity I rmnr-v.h , „ ,, 
" ul " 1 'Mpeovcred i„ di% c . • iwrc of the fj,. ' 






HISTORY OF THIJ MADRAS ARMY 


51 



end of the month, the two Murdoos, their sous, and CHAP. XV I. ~ 
principal followers, as well as the Chiefs of Panjalam- 
‘ coorchy, had all been taken, and executed, with the 
exception of a few, who were deported to Prince of Wales 
Island: 

Early in November Colonel Agnow marched for PaJam- Breaking up 
cottak by Paujalameoorchy to make arrangements for of tho forC0, 
the destruction of the forts, and the disarming of tho 
population. H.M.’s 77th, the detachment H.M.’s 74th, 
and the 1st cavalry were sent to Triclii nopoly, and the 
rest of the force to the stations from whence they had 
come. The 2nd cavalry recently from Trichiuopoly, 
together with the 2nd battalion 6th, and tho 1st battalion 
3rd, were to remain in Tinncvolly under Major Sheppard, 
appointed to command iri that district. The 2nd batta¬ 
lion 12th, the detachment 1st of 7th, and tho five com¬ 
panies of tho Malay corps, were left in Shevagunga and 
llamnad under Major Lindsay of the 7th. 

The destruction of the forts was completed early in Destruction 
March 1802, and the officora commanding wore directed ^oo " 1 ,l " 1 ’ 

to cause the sitos to be visited at certain rogukir intervals 
by European ollieers. Tho general disarming 1 of the 
population was completed about the sanio time, and 
Colonel Agnew left Palamcottah*on the 7th March on bi3 
return to Madras. Tho following is an extract from the 
General Order issued by Government on the suppression 
of tho rebellion 


1 Vito Ll»t of Arm**, Appendix A This li«t, one item of which ia 
15,h7S piko»i wn«i signed ■ Uulnmcottah by ('clonal A ;ncw on iho 7th 
March 1S02. It m erroneously i ted by VVclwh that A .ncw left the 
h u October 1H0\, making ovor tho coun t .nd to Major Mq aulav\ 
j n v . mi&, tho CoArt ox Directors, tv. the instance of the 8ociWnry 
t l’ S \to for tho War Department, wrote to tho overnrnont of Mudrua 
jiOjCMX) Bulyga* pikes of the Ik-iji H**al r y 1 r iho uao of lli* 