


Intelligence having been received about this time of Madms 
the dofeat of tho armies of tho Pesliwah and of Scindiah, n* 

by that of Holkar at Poonah, it became necessary to frotn 
0330111 %, n strong force ou the Toombiuklra, in.con 
poquonco of which ordors wore issued for the withdrawal 
.•I ibo Madras troops in tho Wvnaad. 


Apvairs ir* Malabar, 1802-3. 

On the 30th October 1802, Colonel John Montrosor, 
H.M.’a 80th regiment, was appointed to tho command in 
Malabar and Cunara, which had been temporarily held 
by I dptatenant-Colonel Boles of the Bombay Army since 
the dupai ture of Colonel StevonsoD, win had boon nomi- 
naiod m February to tho command of rho Subsidiary Force 
tic Hyderabad in succession to Odom. I Urban Vigors. 

The disturbances in tho Wynaad spread into Malabar 
t rly in 1803, and as Colonel Moutrosor made a spcci u 
application for a Madras battalion, the 2nd of the 1 st w 

you rn. 0 



CHAP. xvr. 


Cause of the 
rebellion in 
Wyi&ad. 


« » 


nTSTORY or THH MADRAS ARMY. 

ordered into the Wynaad from Erode in February to 
supply the place of the 1st of the 8th, which had been 
selected 1 by Major-General 2 Wellesley for field service in 
the Mahratta country. 

General Wellesley, when writing to Colonel Montresor 
on the 27th December 1802, expressed the following 
opinion regarding the disturbances in the Wynaad :— 

“ I don’t believe that the disturbances in the Wynaad arc to 
be attributed to extortion on the part of tho revenue officers. 
They appear to have commenced by an accidental murder, 
and riot, after which tho party proceeded to surprise ilio 
post at Panamurta Cottah, and murder tho officers, and then 
finding that tho troops did nothing to defend themselves, or 
to revenge the murder of their comrades, Coongan Nair who 
was at the head of the insurrection, issued a proclamation 
calling upon tho inhabitants to meet him on a certain day at 
a pagoda not far from Manantawaddy, another of our posts 
They met there to tho number of 5,000, and have been in 
rebellion ever since. ,, 

# * * * * 

** tJp on tho whole T ain induced to believe that accident 
alone was the original cause of an insurrection which ban 

grown to be a rebellion from tho subsequent inactivity of tho 
troops.” 



1 ‘ It is nccoseary that I should appriee you that the lsb of ) o RfK 
ono of tho oorp. Which I have pitched open 

Bhljr sickly at presout, having bronght nearly 800 tick from the U'vn„„ i . 
mid I don't fc Hevo they v-K. leave lei8 than 200 sick aUWa^Uho 

: VC Ll “‘‘ r a I^- 1 ’" ,V0 ' refo ™» 1 ° take thin corps to tho field 
to cither of tho fi bers abovomenlionod, first, bocaufc I know it , a 
good corpc which has seen moth so, vice, and, secondly, liccou, , 

. tb. Mahraf, territory I.of e, • ',ich you may find m, »dv«n. 

, Mi, m-.Gonorul Woilcloy to the Commaudor-iu-f k,of dntad 
>■ ’ingapatain, 13lh January 1809. 

J47ih November jgQg, 






HISTORY OF 1UK MADRAS ARMY. 



M An katta Affairs, 1802-3. 


CHAP, xvi 