

A brigado of European and native cavalry at Arcot. 

One regimont«of European infantry, and a detachment 
of native infantry at Arnec. 

One battalion of native infantry at Sankerrydroog, 
furnishing detachments to Salem, Namcul, and Ah too r. 

One battalion of native infantry at Chandorglmrry, 
furnishing detachments to Rarapore, Ongole, and Nclloro. 

One battalion of native infantry, divided between 
Kistnaghervy and Ryacottali, • 

Threo companies native infantry at Am boor. 

One company of Europeans, and two companies of 
native invalids at Cuddulorc. 

One company of native infantry at Pondicherry. 

Five companies of artillery at the Mount. 

Invalids, recruits, and tinfe-expired men at Poona- 

inalloe. 

Northern Division. 


Six companies European infantry, on-' company 
avUll.M-y, and tv*o hnitnliona of uutivu infantry t,hy 

dihtrivl ol Masidipatatn. 


* 





Four companies European infantry, a detachment of CHAP. XVI. 

artillery, and a battalion of native infantry in the district - 

of Vizagapatam. Head-Quarters at Chicacole. 1 

One battalion native infantry, two-companies European 
invalids, and ono company native invalids in the district 
of Ganjain. Head-quarters at Aska. 

Mysore. • 

Two regiments of European infantry, three battalions Myaorc. 
of native infantry, and two companies of artillery at 
Seringapatam. 

One regiment European infantry, two battalions native 
infantry, one regiment native cavalry, and ono company 
of artillery at Ckittledroog. 

Two battalions of native infantry in Bednore and 
Soonda, one battalion native infantry at Nundidroog and 
Puughur. 

Ono regiment native cavalry at Bangalore. 

One regiment native cavalry at Serah. 

Southern Division . 

Ono regiment of European cavalry, and one of infantry, Somhorn 
ono battalion of native infantry, and one company of 1 l ' 1J,0I1 ‘ 
artillery at Triehinopoly. 

One battalion native infantry in the district of Tun- 
jore. 

Ono battalion native infantry at Madura. 

battalion native infantry at Palamoottah. 

One battalion native infantry, and a detachment of 
invalid artillery at Dindigul, furuiBhing detachments to 
Onroor and oilier poatn. 

One regiment of native cavalry, and one battalion of 
native infantry Coimbatore. 

1 Chtoncolti wcu> at that Umo incluU«)d in thn Strict of Vii^gnputium 

fj 






CHAP. XVI. 


Hyderabad. 


Foreign 

service. 


Cadet 

company, 

IbOu 




78 


history or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Hyderabad . 

*1 wo companies artillery, one regiment native 
and six battalions native infantry. 


cavalry, 


Foreign Service . 

One company artillery, and two battalions native infan¬ 
try in Ceylon. 

Ono company artillery, one regiment European infantry, 
and one battalion native infantry divided between Malacca, 
Amboynn, and Bauda. 

In July 1800 tbe following orders were issued for tho 
formation and discipline of a company of Cadets :_ 

“ G.O.O. , Fort St. George, 15 th July 1800. 

“Tho Right Honorable tho Governor in Council has boon 
pleased to resolve that for tho present the above-mentioned 1 
Cadets of Infantry shall bo formed into a company, placed 
under the command of Captain Charles Armstrong and* 
stationed at Chingleput, 1 whore tbe unoccupied barracks and* 
quarters will be allotted for their accommodation. 