

During January 1SOO, a draft of 200 selected men was Draft from 
sont to tho artillery from tho 2nd European regiment, ]^ ufanLrv ' 
which was then being reduced in conformity with tho ^ ’ 
new formation. 


On the JGth February two companies were added to Augmon- 
each battalion of artillery, and eight matrosses to each tation * 
company. A further draft of 300 men was sent from tho 
European regiment to meet this augmentation. 

The establishment of a company was fixod at— 


1 Cap lain. 

1 Captain-Lieutenant. 

2 Lieu ton ant a. 

1 Liei-Jetifint- Fire¬ 
worker. 


5 Serjeants. 
5 Corporals. 
10 Gunnora, 

2 Drummers. 
70 Matrosses. 


On tho 31st December it was ordered that'tho artillery j„oica«c 
should receive nn addition to then pay eijual tc that uf >’■ >'• 
which had been made to the European infantry under 
I ho provisions of the Royal Warrant of 1797. 

Xho company of native artillery, which had been ftoductl , 
raised at Madras shortly before the commencement if thonn,ivo 
ihe war of 1799, was reduced on the 17th March 1802 SST*' 








HISTORY or THE HABEAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVI. 

Augmonta- 
iion of tho 
European 
artillery. 


Reduction of 
gun loacni B. 

Inoificient 
r :ito (>f tho 
rorriiucnt, 
1803. 


72 



and on the same day an order was published directing 
that each battalion of artillery should consist of soven 
companies instead of five, and that tho establishment of 
eicli company should consist of— 


1 Captain. 

1 Captain-Lieutenant. 

2 Lieutenants. 

2 Lieutenant-Fire¬ 
workers. 


5 Sorjeauts. 

5 Corporals. 

10 Gunners. 

2 Drummers and Fifers. 
80 Matrosses. 


During April of tlfe same year tho number of gun 
las cars was reduced from 5G to 45 per company. 

On tho 21st March 1803, tho Commander-iu-Chiof 
found it necessary to address Government regarding the 
condition of the corps, which he did in the follow inn- 
words :— ® 


“ That vttluab!o cor P 8 . from a want of recruits, has become 
weak aud inefficient; and should the supply of recruits con- 
tinue to be so inadequate to its demands, tho army, in a very 
uhort period of time, will be destitute of artillery. I trust 
that your Lordship will represent this circumstance, and its 
consequences to tho Honorable tho Court of Directors. It 
^uust have hitherto escaped their notico ; for I cannot sup¬ 
pose that tho Honorablo Court would otherwise allow a corps, 
which has always done credit to their army, aud whoso 
services are ofloantial Wits success, to bo reduced to 
of its proper establishment.*’ 



miSTffy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


73 



European Infantry, 1790-1803. 


During September 1799, the office of Military Secre¬ 
tary to the Governor was created, and Captain Mark 
Wilks was appointed thereto. The salary was that- of an 
Aide-do-Camp, with an allowance of 40 pagodas per 
mensem for clerks. 

During the same month Lieutenant-Colonel Close was 
appointed Resident in Mysore, and was succeeded as 
Adjutant-General by Lieutenant-Colonel P. A. Agnew. 