


G2 


history of tite madras army. 


<SL 


position on tliat river between Poonah and Gardoon. On 
tiiL j.Sthj wliefi in camp near Baramatfcy, the General* 
xeceived intelligence that it was the intention of Ainrut 
Pow, the brother of tlolkar, who had been left in charge 
of Poonah since the battfc of the 25th October 1802, to 
set fire to the town soon as the British troops should 
arrive in the neighbourhood. In order to pi'event this, 
General Wellesley set out on the night of the 19tli with 
the cavalry, and the 2nd battalion 12th regiment N.I., 
aud reached Poonah at 2 p.h. on tho 20th, after a forced 
march of above 40 miles, in time to save it from the 
flames. Tho road down the little Bhore Ghaut was so hud 
that six hours were occupied in getting through, and 
several of the tumbrils attached to the cavalry had to bo left 
behind. Colonel.McLeod, with tho 2nd battalion 12tli 
regiment, was ordered to halt at Loohee near tho foot of 
the ghaut, and to rejoin the General the next day. The 

remainder of the force did not reach Poonah until tho 
22nd. 

On the 13th May’the Peshwah returned to his capital, 
escorted by the 78th foot, five companies of tlio 84th, and 
a battalion of Bombay sepoys, all under Colonel Murray 
of tho 84tli regiment. 

On tho 4th .Tune General Wellesley marched towards 
the Godavcryin order to watch the armies of Seindiah, and 
tho Rajah of Borar, which had been assembled near 
Boorhanpoor 1 with the supposed intention of invading 
tho territory of tho Nizam. Ho took with him the 78th 
foot in exchange for the 2nd battalion 3rd regiment which 
was left at Poonah. 

<)l! the 14th July it was ascertained that tho Uo 
confederate chiefs wore advancing towards the Adjuntnh 

T ‘J, hl of CnmleiMi, on p, - no nl)orn i,,., . , I ,i„, 

' 1 •" /U i. | from Adjuntnh on the ^i/.ruu’g northern 



. . vr mo MADRAS ATIMV. 


63 


GliaifT, iu consequence of which General W-n« i 
. . . nerai Wullosley wrote CIIAP. x\ 7 j. 

to the effect that unless the Rajah of Borar should 

immediately return to his capital at Nugpoor, and Scindiah 

recross the Nerbuddah, their want of compliance would bo 

treated as a declaration of war. Colonel Stevenson, then 

encamped near Aurangabad, was directed to be prepared 

to oppose Scindiah’s ascent into the Nizam’s country by 

tho Adjuntah Ghaut should ho attempt it. 

On the 18th the General received a despatch from Invested with 
Calcutta, dated 2Gth June, by which he was empowered plenary 
assume, and exercise, the general direction and control 
cf all the political and military affairs of the British 
Government in tho territories of the Nizam, of tho ' 
oshwah, and of the Mahratta states and chiefs. He 
was also invested with the power of negotiating and 
concluding treaties. 

In the meantime ho had advanced towards Ahmed- Encamp 
'inggur, and while encamped about six milos from the “u? - ' 
uly on the 3rd August, he received replies from tho ‘ 
umfedorato chiefs to tho effect that, provided the 
British troops near Aurangabad, those under the immo¬ 
late command of General Wellesley, and those in the 
Raichopr Doab, would all return to their respective' 