

Montgomery's Troop,” tho supernumerary troop of tho 
h°dy guard which had been raised during tho war, and of 
drafts from the old corps. 

The six regiments were then formed into two brigades, Brigades or 
the first to consist of the 1st, 3rd, and 5th regiments under cavu ^ >*• 
Colonol Dugald Campbell Commandant of Cavalry, and 
the sooond of tho 2nd, 4th, and Cth regiments undor 
Colonel James Stevenson. This arrangement, however, 
appears to have been merely nominal, for in the distribu- 
f iou of the army ordered in Novembor, tho undormon- 
tioiK’d stations wore assigned to tho cavalry, \ iis. : — 

Arcot ... 1 regiment. Chi tiled roog ... 1 rrgim ut. 

Bangalore... 1 do, Borah ... 1 do. 

Coimbatore. 1 do. Hyderabad . 1 do. 

Dining Novembrr a Surgeon, and an Assistant Snrgoon ii tP - i 

were posted to each regiment of cavalry, in ©'mformily 
with orders to that effect freui tho Court of Directors 


Diulnbuf j,v, 
of ttJguju ■ t i. 



mm sr Ry 



CHAP. XVI. 

Embassy 
to Persia. 


Brcsdiag 

stud, 

1795-1800. 


(foldings, 

1800-1648. 


Angn^nta- 

UOU, IS j\J. 


Pn v%if 
3ubf)0ul S. 


<§L 

HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 

About tbo ond of the year a detachment of volunteers 
from the bodyguard, consisting of 1 Subadar, 1 Jemadar, 

2 Havildars, 2 Naigues, and 20 troopers, proceeded 
to Persia as part of the escort of Captain Malcolm, 
appointed Ambassador to that Court. 

Lieutenant Evans of the infantry having urged tho 
advantages to be gained by the establishment of a breed* 
ing stud, ho was permitted to make an oxperimont on 
his own account in 1705, assistance being granted by 
Government in the ahapo of grazing land in the neigh¬ 
bourhood of Ganjam. This experiment having been 
favorably reported upon. Government took over tho stud 
in 1800, fixed tho number of maxes at 500, that of stallions 
at 25, and instructed the Revenue Board to purchase 
tho tract of land lying between Munsoorcottah and the 
Ganjam river for grazing purposes. The purchase of 
stallions was restricted to that of Arabs of the best blood 
and figure. 

About this time the question of mounting the cavalry 
on geldings was taken into consideration, and referred 
for the opinion of tho Military Board, and of oiticors 
commanding rogiini nts, but the general opinion having 
been against the change, the matter dropped, and does 
not appear to have been revived until 1848, when geldings 
were tried in the 4th regiment with such success that flie 
use of entire horses was discontinued shortly afterwords 
throughout the service. 

A seventh regiment of cavalry wa^. raised at Arcot in 
July 1800. Drafts to the extent of 88 office's, non- 
, .t, i i; ' 1 officers, and mem, with horses complete, 

wci o received from the existing regiments. 

During July an order 1 was published granting ud 
addition to the pay of aubadurs of cavalry, opacifying 

particulars v»a) 'jo fuimd iu tho nut)'.'© of rnvti*© infantry. 


misTfy 


ftlSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 69 

the pay and batta of recruit boys, and directing that 
in future no men belonging to the cavalry should be 
admitted into the invalid establishment. 