

In May.1802 it was resolved that the .detail of 120 
troopers serving in Bengal with the Governor GenornPy 
body guard, should bo borne on the strength of the Madras 
cavalry, which was carried into effect accordingly. 

Each regiment of cavalry was reduced at this time to 
800 private troopers, exclusive of tho 12 men detached 
to do duty at tho breeding stud. 

Tho following order of the Governor-General in Coun¬ 
cil on the return to Europe of Captain Montgomery was 
published at Fort St. George on tho 5th October:— 

“ The public service on this establishment has derived 
important advantages from, the exporionoe, skill, and abilities 
of Captain Montgomery in various branches of establishments 
connected with tho cavalry. The state of discipline and 
subordination which tho new body guard at Fort William 
li.H already attained, and tho alacrity and military spirit 
which havo Veen manifested on several occasions of foreign 
Si rvico by the nativo officers and troopers of that corps, aro 
to bo ascribed to tho abilities, rkill, aud activity of Captain 
Montgomery.” 

Captain Montgomery was succeeded in the command 
by Captain F. A. Daniolof tho 4th regiment, who appears 
to have retained it until 1805, when it devolved upon 
Captain Doveton of the 7th regiment, 

.During November the number of gnn Incurs allowed 
f* ^ tho galloper guns attache 1 to cavalry wiri reduced to 
1 hi :t tindul and 10 men for cm h Kuropeau regiment, 
and to 1 second lindal and 8 uiou for cueh uative regiment. 

Oil the 20th March 1803 a detail from the body guard, 
con listing of 1 Bubodar, 1 Jemadar, 2 lla vildars, and 
12 Naigues, was *ont to Bombay for tho purpose of being 
•joiployod a9 instructors during the formation of a body 






CJIAP. XVI. 


Details 
serving in 
Bengal, 
1802 . 


Reduction. 


Governor- 
Geueral’s 
body guard. 


Guu l*«cn. 


DoCaoLuiou t 
to Ikmibar. 
1803. 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<§L 


Detachment 
to Nagporo. 


-Vi. oj. iognlar cavalry proposed to bo raised in that Presi¬ 
dency. 

Another detail from the body guard, composed of 20 
mcn unc ^ er ft native officer, was detached in June as an 
escort to the Resident at Nagpore. 

_ 4 ... w During May and June regiments of cavalry were corn- 

full strength, plefced to their full complement of 70 privates per troop 
in consequence of the expected war with the Mahrattus. 


Regiments 
completed to 


71 



HISTORY 01'_TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 



Artillery, 1799-1803. 


chap, xv r. 


°n the 18th December 1799, a Native Adjutant was Gun lMoara , 
appointed to the companies of gun lascars attached to 1799 - 
each battalion of artillery, and four recruit boys were at 
the samo time allowed for each company of lascars, on 
the samo pay as that given in the native infantry. 

About the end of the year models of field and garrison Modola 
gun-carriages, and of tumbrils, were supplied to Bombay '«>PP>iod to 
on tho requisition of General Stuart, the Commander-in- 1< '’ mbay ' 
Chief at that Presidency. 