

No officer regularly accredited by the French Govern¬ 
ment arrived until the 15th June 1803, when the frigate 

La Belle Poule ” reached Pondicherry, having on board 
Citizen Lcger the Colonial Prefect, Monsieur Binot Chief 
of the Staff of the Expedition to the East Indian Islands, 
several other officers, and about 150 men. 

Lord Clive, in conformity with his instructions, declined 
to make over possession, but he permitted the officers 
and men to laud, and ordered arrangements to be made 
for fcheir-reception. 

On the 11th July, a French squadron, consisting of’ 
tho lane -of -battle Ship “ Marengo ” and several other 
vessels of war, conveying General Do Caen Captain- 
Ceneral and Governor of tho Islands of Mauritius and 
Bourbon, several staff officers, and a body of European 
troopB, arrived at Pondicherry, from whence a frigate 
immediately sent off to Madras with a lettor for tho 
Governor, demanding tho immediate restoration of tho 
French possessions. 

Lord Clive refused as before, but before his reply 
reached Pondicherry, the French squadron set sail and 
L'ft the place on tho night of the 12th, without having 

VOL. IJ7. 9 


CHAP. XVI. 


Arrival of 
a French 
detachment. 


Arrival of 
a French 
squadron. 


Precipitate 
departure of 
tho aquadrqn, 





ClIAP. XVI. 


War with 
Fi ftiicc. 


Surrondor of 
/•louHiour 
Binot nnd 
p;irty. 


HISTORY OF 1IIE MADRAS ARMY. 

landed any of the troops. This precipitate departure was 
opposed to lmvo been caused by the receipt of intelli¬ 
gence from France, brought by a corvette whicli arrived 
at Pondicherry about noon on that day. 

Monsieur Binot and his party remained until September, 
when news of the war with France, which had been 
declared in May, having reached Madras, the Officer com¬ 
manding TI.M/s 73rd foot, then on the march to Pondi¬ 
cherry, received orders to make prisoners of tho detach¬ 
ment. Monsieur Binot, however, had sufficient address 
io obtain terms “ infinitely 1 rnoro favorable than ho had 
any right to expect,” und, although tho capitulation was 
not approved of, it waB confirmed, and tho French, amount¬ 
ing to about 80 officers and 150 soldiers, were sent back 
to France in a cartel hired for that purpose by the British 
Government. 



1 Lieiitenant-Goncral Stuart, to General LaLo, 28tU October lb03. 





imsr$ y 



history or the madras w.uy. 


Cavalry, 1799-1803. 


07 


<SL 


CIJ.U. \\ i. 


Daring June and July 1790, a troop of cavalry for fcl le Governor- 
body guard of the Governor-General was formed by Gcucral ’* 
drafts of picked men from each of the four regiments of I70y/' u ’ 
Madras cavalry, and was sent to Bengal shortly after¬ 
wards undor the command of Lieutenant IT. C. Mont¬ 
gomery. The families of tho -men were permitted to 
accompany them. 

Two additional regiments of cavalry were raised in Sep- AuRmen- 
tember, one in consequence of tho increase of territory, tanon - 
the othor for tho purpose of serving with the Hyderabad 
subsidiary force. Tho 5th was formed at Triehinopoly 
and tho Oth at Arcot. The nucleus of both regiments, to 
the extent of about 100 men in oach, was composod of 