

“ Major-General Brathwaite will be ploa-od to fix upon an 
uniform for (ho company of Cadets; ho will also appoint such 
Non-Commb aioned Offieora to assist Captain Armstrong as 
he may doom necessary for this purposo; ho. will cause tho 
company to bo supplied with tho requisite arms and accoutre¬ 
ments, and furnish Captain Armstrong with such instructions 
for hi3 guidance as ho may judge necossary with resp^t to 
tho discipline of the company. 

“ As it is the intention of the Right Honorable the Govornor 
in Council to promote the Cadets on this establishment to 
1 11 vacant commissions in the corps for whioh they arc 


1 1 ' : '"ha oompi.ny wag removed to Tripuasoor in November ISO" 
tv CiuUlaloro about the middlo of 1806. 





respectively destined, when Captain Armstrong shall report CHAP 
them qualified to act as officers ; they are permitted to draw — 
the pay and allowances of Lieutenants from this date. 

“ Captain Armstrong is permitted to draw, so long as ho 
shall continuo to command tho company of Cadets, the pay 
and allowances of a Major of Iufantry, instead of those of his 
own rank.” 

# 

“ Head-Quarters , Choultry Plain, 24th July 1800. 

“ O.O. by Major-General Braihwaite. 

“ As directed by the Government orders of the 15th instant, 
tho Cadets of Infantry lately arrived are formed into a 
company to be denominated tho 1 Cadet Company,’ which is 
to be' mustered, paid, and returned as such, and to be 
commanded by Captain Armstrong of tho lt>th regiment 
native infantry. 

The Cadet Company is to be prepared as expedite usly as 
possible to march from the Presidency to Chingloput, and tho 
necessary indents arc to be mado upon the arsenal of Fort St. 

Goorgc. for such articles as cannot bo supplied at Cliingleput, 
i ds completing tho company with Europe accoutrements, 
arms, either muskets or fusils, and ammunition both balled 
ami blank, in the proportion allowed by tho regulations to a 
corps nf infantry for annual pmctico. 

u When reported ready to move, Captain Armstrong will 
bo instructed in regard toils camp-cquipngo ” 

“ The dress of the Cadet Company is established as fob Uniform 
Iowa:— 0 

u A scarlet jacket inn do to ill cl go and to button down tho 
front, with yellfcw cuffs nnd collar; three rows oi small 
white raetul buttons with twist, the colour of tho jacket,’ 
down the forepart: twiBt also to be substituted for shoulder 
straps; a round black hat with cockade and red feather; 
white linen waist-coats and pantaloons, and half.boots ; aide 
#nns—n bayonet/' 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


80 


CjJ AP. X VI. On tho 7tli July 1801, regulations on the subject of 
Droas r?£u- dress were issued by the Commander-in-Chief, prescribing 
l aUonE ’ iy01, the color and pattern of the clothing to be worn by each 
branch of the army. Standards, colors, and equipments, 
wore all minutely described. 

for^thc 1 Cadet ’August rules and regulations for tho 

Company. management of the company of gentlemen Cadets, of 
which the following is an abstract, were published to the 
army :— 