

"The Right Honorable the Governor in Council has been 
pi. ased to resolve that tho fifteen senior officers of each rank 
nliull bo successively posted to the fiftcou regiments 1 of 
infantry now on the establishment, that the next in senimity 
'•fiall be posted in a similar manner, eud that this operation 

Ih.r. t ii in on of E umpool) n i.-l fourteen of I II I i vo inftiutr.. 




H 


75 


[I1ST0RY 01' Tilt MADRAS ARMY. 


slinll ho repeated until all the corps may he complete with CliA.P v 
officers. * 1 ’ - 

The postings were made accordingly, but tho distribu¬ 
tion was cancelled almost immediately in consequence of* 
the contemplated addition to the establishment of three 
regiments of native infantry*, which took place in Decem¬ 
ber. The officers were then posted 1 on tho principle laid 
down in the order, and regimental rank in tho infantry 
commenced on the 1st January 1800. 

Certain other orders, of which the following ia an 
abstract, were received from the Court of Directors in 
November 1799, and published to the Army. 


The order of the Supreme Government, granting an 
addition of one rupee per diem to the pay of Captain- 
Lieutenants, was. confirmed. 

I lie order of the same Government, by which the batta 
of Captain was granted to Brevet-Captains, was cancelled, 
and an addition of one rupee per diem to their pay was 
auct ioned instead. 


Additional 
allov ancog 
to Capluin- 
L am tenant a 
and Brc\ f't 
C aptaiuB, 


Officers who had attained tho rank of Lieutenant- Retiring 

Colonel, Major, Captain, or Captain-Lieutenant, and 

w hose health rendered it impossible for them to servo “wMo to 

longer in India, were permitted to retire on half pay. India. ^ 

I he satno privilege, under similar circumstances, was 

granted to Lieutenants of 13 years* standing, and Ensigns 

of 9 years, including a furlough of 3 years. Lieutenants 

of shorter standing, if unable to serve in India, wero 

allowed to retire on tho half pay of Em ign. 

The sale of. commissions, the aecoptnnco, directly Solo of 

or indirectly, of any comin iisa& u. pia.u niiiry or other Cun '«q ‘ 'no 

' protutytaj. 

on retirement, was prohibited on pain of forfeiture of W 
pension. 

1 Although officers were i^rmnnoutlf \Atu\ before this tlnio 

I l»t \uu’ ueld'iui minorcd f . n* ono regiment to ftuoihor. 






CHAP. XVI. 


Passuge- 

money. 


Ilc-distri- 
bunion of 
the troops. 


Centro 
bi vision. 


Northm n 
I j >'- 11‘0r 


76 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Subalterns leaving India on sick certificate were 
allowed Its. 1,000 as passage-money, and Commanders of 
Indiamen were prohibited from charging more than that 
sum for tko passage of any Subaltern, Assistant Surgeon, 
or Cadet. 

During the same month the following re-distribution of 
the Army, which had become necessary in consequence 
of the accession of territory, was dirocted to be carried 

9 

out. 


Centre Division . 

A brigade of European and native troths’at each of 
the undermentioned stations, viz., Fort St. George, Walla- 
jahbad, and Veiloro. 