

■a ‘one at Hyderabad, Seringapatam, and Madras, they 
ocmditih and Rngojee Rhonslah, would retire towards 
iSoorhunpoor. * 

Upon this tho General determined to attack Ahmed- 
auggnr at once, and ho sent orders to The officer oom- 

' Carp. »/o beervatian at -at I). Campbell. 

IT.M.’t] 25th dragoons, 1st ami 2nd cm airy. 

2nd battalion artillery, one company. 

II.M.'h 38rd rogiment tivo companies, 80tb regimont 

companion. 6 8cv0lJ 

i ‘t battalion 12tli, and let ^attalion J7th regiment 
Pioncertt, • ae company. 




ims^ 



CHAP. XVI. man ding in Guzerat, desiring liim to commence operations 
against Baroach and other possessions jof Scindiah in 
that province. To Scindiah, and to the Rajah of Berar, 
he wrote as follows on the 6th August:— 

Declaration ** Yon will recollect that the British Government did not 

of war. . 

tijreaten to commence hostilities against you, hut you threat - 
• eucd to commence hostilities against the British Government? 
and its allies ; and when called upon to explain your inten¬ 
tions, you declared that it was doubtful whether there would 
bo peace or war ; and in conformity with your threats, and 
your declared doubts, you assembled a large army in a station 
contiguous to the Nizam’s frontier. On this ground T called 
upon you to withdraw’ that army to its usual stations if your 
subsequent pacific declarations were sincere ; but instead of 
complying with this reasonable requisition, yoa have proposed 
that I should withdraw tho troops which are intended to defend 
the territories of the allies against your designs, and that 
you and the Rajah of Berar should be suffered to romain 
with your troops assembled, in readiness to take advantago of 
their absence. . 

ibis proposition is unreasonable and inadmissible, and you 
must stand the consequences of tho measures which I find 
myself obliged to adopt in order to repel your aggressions. 
I offered you peace cn terms of equality, and honorable to 
all parties: you have chosen war, and are responsible for all 
consequences.’’ 

# 

Foreign Settlements, 1800-3. 

occiw.tif v , Shortly after intelligence of the coalition of the north, 
isoV. ,Jar ’ cm powers against Great Britain in December 1800 had 
reached India, tho fort and town of Tran quo bar, which 
l belonged to Denmark, were taken possession of, ami 
attach d to the southern division of the army. 

Alb'b'i hi <, * 

Vonflichi i ry, ,i00n a *for the ratification of tho Treaty of Amiens in 
Maj h 1802, troops were despatched to Pondicherry by 


65 



Napoleon with the view of endeavouring to restore the 
influence of France in Southern India, and the Royal 
Warrant from England, directing tho restoration of all the 
settlements taken from the French or Dutch, was received 
in due course, but the Governor-General, being apprehen¬ 
sive of the danger likely to ensue from the presence of the 
armament expected at Pondicherry, in addition to the large 
disciplined force under French officers in the service of 
Scindiah, directed the Governor of Madras to postpone 
the actual restitution of any portion of territory until 
express authority to that effect should be received by him 
from Bengal. 