

1. The company to bo formed into two sub-divisions, each 
to be commanded by a European Officer. 

2. The Ensigns, Serjeants, and Corporals required for tho 
company to bo selected from amongst the cadets. 

3. The company to attend drill or parade twice a day. 

4. General orders, and the orders of the Cadet Company 
to be read daily to each sub-division. 

5. The articles of war to be read to each cadet on his 
joining, and to the whole company at evening parade on the 
first Sunday in each month. • 

b. The instruction at drill will comprehend overy part of 
the rules and regulations for the formations, movemonts, and 
field exorciso established for His Majesty's forces ; and in 
addition thereto, tho form of mounting and relieving guards, 
pickets, sentinels, Ac., as also the modes of performing all 
other military duties of parade and otherwise." 
buty. $ “ A suitable proportion of the Cadet Company nhall 

always tfompose a part of the detail of the main guard at 
Gheagfepnt, and from retreat beating till 8 o’clock of tho 
following morning shall furnish a certain number of sentinels, 
viz., at tho Commanding Officer’s quarters, over tho arms, hr 
prisoners of iho guard, and at tho main gate of tho fort." 

8. “ The cadets shall rise at daybreak, breakfast at 7 or 8 
oVlc k according to the season, cimo at 2. sup at 8, and retire 
immediately after. All lighU shall bo pul. mi 
ur,H ^» lu ‘d the officer of the day shall bo held rc*poi nhlu r.,t 




• mtSTQy 


HI9T0BY OF TJIE MADRAS ARMY. 


31 



an exact and punctual observance of this order. No cadet, 
between i) o’clock at night, and daybreak of the following 
morning, shall go out of the foxt. 

9 n A Qoneral Mess shall be established for tho breakfast, 

dinner, and supper of the Cadet Company. The Captain of 

the company shall bo considered as the President of tho 
Mess, and a Commissioned Officer in turn as Vice-President. 
Every individual of tho company shall belong to tho Moss, 
and no ono shall be absent from it on any other account than 
sickness. Each person shall appear in the prescribed uniform 
on all occasions at the Moss. Tho utmost decorum in every 
respect shall be observed, and no meal shall bo of longer 
continuance than an hour, or an hour and a half. 


CHAP. XVI- 


Mess. 


10. “ ISTo spirituous liquor, wine, or l>eer, shall be admit- Liquor, 
ted into the fort or pettah of Chengloput without the express 
sanction of tho Commanding Officer, nor shall any issuo of 
either of theso articles ‘be allowed from tho Mess between 
meals, but under the permission oi tho Commanding Officer, 
and any native butler, or other person, convicted of selling 
spirituous liquors, wine, or beer, at Chengloput, or in its 
neighbourhood without the license of tho Commanding Officer, 

Bhail he punished in tho most exemplary manner, and turned 
out of the place.” 

11. “ Every cadet shall study the Hiudnstauoo languago, studios, 
and for that purpose, as well as of being instructed in the 
manner of making out returns, reports, &o., and of acquiring 
a knowledge of the rules and ivgulatiomB of the servi ce by 
copying the goneral orders in force ; tho port liberty of tho 
Cadet Company shall be stopped daily between the ha °f 
JO and 12; during which time i&o individual of the dompu^V] 