

“ Tho pay of first tindale of gun Iubuu-s, and at havil- 
du/H of pioneers shall each be three star pagodas p fcr 
month. 




imsTfy 



CHAP. XYI. 


NO Htopr»uges 
t»> he nuido 
»• * vlotbiug. 


*’ Ihe pay of second tindals of gun lascars and naigues 
of pioneers shall be two star pagodas and twenty-one fanams 
per month. 

“ Iho pay of gun lascars, of pioneers, and of Nativo 
doctors shall be two star pagodas and ten fanams per 
month. 

“ The batta of first and second tindals of gun lascars, 
and of liavildars and naigues of pioneers, shall be one fan am 
and forty 4 *ash per day. 

“ The batta of liavildars, naigues, and sepoys of infantry, 
of gun lascars, pioneers, and of Native doctors, shall be one 
fanam per day, or in lieu thereof one seer of rico in cases 
when rico may be issued from the public stores. 

“ Tho pay and batta of drummers, lifers, puckallies, and 
of bhestioa shall continue to be the same as arc at presoul 
fixed by the existing regulations. 

“ Tho rates of pay and batta above specified for all corps 
and rank8 Bhall bo clear and exclusive of all stoppages for 
clothing, which will continue to be provided for, as at present, 
by issues of cash from tho public treasury. 

4 ' The rates of pay above specified for all corps and ranks 
shall be the same in all months without reference to tlio 
number of days in each month.” 


Vn\ nnrl 
'•u' (iof 
tuvulidu. 


• Invalids. 

“ The pay and bat ta of invalid! of Native infantry, of gun 
lascars, and of pioneers, shall continue to bo tho Bamc as at 
prosont. 

“Snbadars of infantry, syrangs of gun lascars, and y ma- 
dars of pioneer:, who may havo attained the gradations of 
•ml; before specified, shall receive invalid pay or pensions 
according to tho scale of their actual pay at the timo of their 
being admitted on tho non-oflectivo list. 

No class of Nativo cavalry chad in futoro bo invalided, 
bnioftitors and men, of whutevor class or rank, shall, when 


# 




HISTORY OF Tiy: MADRAS ARMY. 


93* 



• 

judged unfit for the service by the proper committees, bo CHAP. XVL 
pensioned on half the not pay which they respectively enjoyed 
at the time of being transferred to the non-effective list. 

“The Governor in Council has been pleased further* to Pensions for 
resolve that the Native officers and men, of whatever corps or {faJba° B8 of 
ranks, who may lose a limb by wounds on actual service, shall 
bo pensioned on the full pay of their respective ranks. 

“ The Governor in Council is pleased to order and diroct Operation 
that the foregoing regulations for the payment of the Native of ordor * 
troops on this establishment shall commence from the 1st 
day of July 1800. 

u The Governor in Council takes this occasion to publish Revenue 
his Lordship’s intention of disbanding the x'evenue corps as cor l )3 ‘ 

'soon as circumstances may render that measure convenient. 

The pay and batta of those corps arc not to be affected by 
this order. ^ 

Such parts of all orders or regulations as may bo con- Orders 
trary to the tenor of this order arc to ceaao to have effect oancellod 
from tho let July 1800.” 