


Commissioned Officers . 

Pay of Native ‘‘The pay of all subadars of infantry who shall have 
ulRcerj. actually served ten years in that rank shall 1x5 twenty star 

pagodas per month. 

“ The pay of all subadars of infantry who shall have 
actually served six yoars in that rank shall bo fifteen star 
pagodas per month. 

“The pay'of all subadars of infantry who shall not 
actually have served six years iu that rank shall continue as 
at present to bo twelve star pagodas per month. * 

“ Subadars of cavalry who shall dually have served t ri 
years in that rank shall receivo an addition, to thoir present 
pay, of eight star pagodas per month. 

“Subadars of cavalry who Hliall have actually served six 
years in that, ranlf shall receive an addition of three star 
pagodas per month to their present pay. 

“The pay of subadars of cavalry who may not actnully 
have served six years in that rank shall continuo to bo, as at 
presont, twenty-six star pagodas per month. 

"The pay of syrangs of gun lascars, and jemadars of 
pioi- iug tbo eonwtend of companies) who 

actually have served ten yours in that rank shall bo twelve 
star pagodas por month. 

Tbo pay of syrangs of gun lasoars, and jemadars of 
pionoiM (having llio command nf companion) who filial! 








ft 


TAIMSr*,, 



HISTORY OT TITK MADRAS ARMY. 


01 



~5cf uAlly have served six years in that rank shall bo nyie star CHAP. XVI. 
pagodas per month. ' - - 

“The pay of syranga of gun lascars, and jemadars of 
pioneers (having the command of companies) who shall not 
actually have served six years in that rank shall continue as 
at present to ho seven star pagodas per month. 

“ The Commander of the Army in Chief will direct the 
Adjutant-General of the Army to famish the Native officer 
who may attain the gradations of rank above specified with 
certificates from his office, and to transmit duplicates of them 
to the Office of audit. 

° The pay of jemadars of infantry shall be seven star 
pagodas per month. * 

The Native adjutants of corps of cavalry as well as of’ Native 

infantry shall invariably be chosen from anionp* the iemadars ad 3 utanta to 
Jirnl o,.„1 ... „ *_ J •_ ' bo selected 


and Major-General Brathwaite will direct that if the appoint- from cho 
mont of Native adjutant should now be held in any regi- of 

Dn-jnfc or battalion by officers of the rank of subadar, it shall ’' 

bo immediately vacated, and filled up according to the teuor 


of this order. 


The batta of commissioned Nitivc officers, of whatever Pni'^of 
corps or rank, shall continno to be the same as is at present ’ 
fi^cd by tho existing regulations. office™. 


Non-Commissioned and Privates. 


"The pay of liavildara of infantry shall be three star 
pngodns per month. «,f non o >ir. 

I bo pay of naiguea oP infantry shall bo two star pagodas nffleem amt 
and twenty-one fanning per month. prfvateu. 

llio pay of sepoys and Native ■ doctors of infantry shall 
be two star pagodas per month. 

“ The-pay of sepoy boys of whatever corps shall bo one 
litar pagoda per month. 