

On the 20th August a new code of general rcgula- General 
ions and ordors, ,or tlio conduct of tho forces serving r^^tiou*. 

audor tho Presidency of Fort St, George, was published 
to tho Army. 

The following is an extract from that part of tho 
regulations which relates to orderlies 
“ 0rd f y mem—Para. lst - “The attachment of orderly BmpIoy * tet 

soldiers to officers being solely for the performance of duties ^ordorhc* 
purely military, the disgraceful practice of omploying Native 
Hifldiers in Carrying articles of table consumption ! in running 


1 OasuaUion wh«n ou snrrico in tho Extern 
in O.O., March n»*d Aujurunt 1802: 


letlandii, rvs imMiahect 


2ml battalion 1 nt roginiont ' 


... 233 

Volnntccr battalion 


03 

Gun Jafloaw . 


40 

Pionoora ... ... 

• 


• ... 22 



307 















HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 



<SL 


CHAP. XVT. 


kj the sides of palankins ! in supplying the place of domestics, 
and 4 horse-keepers behind carriages- and bandies ! and in 
following close at the heels of mounted horses, is to bo dis¬ 
continued, and no orderly soldier, except on urgent occasion, 
is to exceed the regulated military pace in tho execution 
of his duty.” 


Order 
modi Hed 
a-» respects 
roeruit boys, 
1806. 


Shortly after tho mutiny at Vellore in 1806, when the 
causes of that outbreak, and of the successful mainte¬ 
nance of the secrecy of the design, were under 
discussion, the expediency of tho order quoted above, as 
well as that of another of a similar character regarding 
rocruit boys, was called in question as tending to 
destroy the intimate association formerly existing ' 
between the sepoys and tlicir officers; it was also con¬ 
tended that the performance of the services specified in 
the orders was considered more as a privilege than as a 
degradation. 


This view appears to have been adopted by the then 
Commander-in-Chief, who, in an order dated 22nd Aug. 
1806, in which he colled che attention of all officers to the 
imperative necessity of becoming'thoroughly conversant 
with Hindostanee, went on to rescind tho order.-, by 
which the attachment of iho boys of the sepoy recruit 
establishment to thr European officers of corps as order¬ 
lies was prohibited, and concluded with these words :— 

“ His Excellency has been induced to adopt this decision 
from the conviction that the advantage gained by the 
restriction of the boys to duties purely military has not 
balanced the injury tin crvic. has sustained by tho lorn of 
the facility to tho acquirement of a common language aud 
knowledge of native coston , which their former attachment 
<o i ho junior officers jmxlueed.” 

Of tho 22nd September it wns tftsolved to raise a mow 
VuluntcK eorp to servo in the Moluccas for throe yours. 




V .hint • Li 
i n. 


marouY op the madras army. 97 

The strength was fixed at 500, non-commissioned officers, CHAP. XVI. 

rank and file, with tiio ordinary proportion of Native - 

commissioned officers, drummers, puckallios, &c. Tho 
European staff consisted of a Captain Commandant 
rm Adjutant, a Serjeant-Major, and a Quartermaster 
Serjeant. Tho Native staff, of a Jemadar Adjutant, a 
Drill Havildar, a Drill Naigue, a Drum-Major, and a Fife- 
Major. Captain Macpherson of the 14th regiment was 
appointed to command. 