

III. All disputes rclativo to property, all cases of civil 
injury, or matters relating to the general police of the coun¬ 
try, bolong exclusively to tho jurisdiction of tho civil magis¬ 
trate, and military officers shall not interfere thoroin. 

TV. Rice, butcher’s meat, and all articles of food for the use 
of tho troops, shall be exempt from duties or imposts of any 
description, oxcept such as may ho levied by the authority of 
the Collector of the district, on i.hc principle which regulates 
tho ordinary collection of the rovenue. 

V. The forcible seizure of sheep is expressly prohibited. 

Vi. Annnally, in the month of July, when a statement shall 
have been received of tho amount colloeted from ‘military 
bazars under the direction of tin Board of Revenue, a com 
tuition of officers will be appointed to report upon tho distri¬ 
bution of Lho funds in conformity with tho following rules :— 

Officers entitled to share shall be divided into threo 1 gbaren 0 f 


olnMuB, viz 


First Class—Officers commanding l)h boons. 
Rocond do. d»». District**. 


oflti'oi'B j n tJip 
prole h of 
bum in. 


Third do. do. Garrisons or Canton¬ 

ments 





This classification *** modified by mi Onlor dritud I6th October 1801 




I I 





84 


HISTORY OF THIS MADRAS ARMY. 



T. 


T-Iio portion allowed to officers of tlio first class shall bo 
double the amount allotted to officers of the second, and the 
portion of officers of the second shall be double the amount 
allotted to those of the third class. 


j.he distribution being approved by tho Governor in Coun¬ 
cil shall be published in General Orders to the army, and the 
payment provided for in the same manner as in a distribution 
of off-reckonings. 


85 


During August 1799 a representation regarding the 
conditiou of the Native troops serving at Amboyna and 
Banda was received by Government from Lieutenant- 
Colonel McNeile, commanding in the Eastern islands. 

Ho stated that the 17tli battalion had been four years 
on foroign service, and the volunteers from the 11th 
battalion nearly three years, although at the time of 
their embarkation the men did not expect to be absent 
for more than a year. He pointed out their sufferings 
from the climate, and from want of pay; arrears for 
13 months having been due at the date of his report, and 
he concludcMl by saying that bad health had “ prevailed 
to so distressing an excess as to have occasioned more 
instances of in amity and Ruicide than I have before 
known in the whole course of my service,” 

Major-General Brathwaite, then in command at Madras 
during the absenco of General Hands in tlie field, when 
forwarding Colonel McNeile’a letter to Government, 
proposed to raise two or more corps of 500 men each for 
the special purpose of foreign service. 

This proposal was not adopted, but the Supreme 
Government were requested to order the Bengal Marine 
battalion to relieve the Madras Native troops, as the acces¬ 
sion of territory from the conquest of Myi-oro rendered it 
impossible for the Madras Government to spare iron for 
that purpose. 