

•hull b permitted to go out of the tort.” 

12 “ Divine service shall be perfbrimd c-vory Sunday Divine 
f ronoon by tho Captain, or other person unde- hi.; nomination, Bl ' rvil ‘ 
ot which the company shall atu ml.” 

i:>. “ Except on occasions of taking some manly exercise, tt. i 
such as playing at cricket, fi »ou, o. other filin', no cadet shall 

VOl. Ut. , 11 

m 


t 



Leave. 


Puimhnienta. 


CJet.rral 
r. gu la lions. 


Military 

1802 . 


82 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


appear ont of hiB quarters, otherwise than dressed in the uni¬ 
form established for the Cadet Company in the General Order 
of the 24th A pril 1800 : the habit of lounging from quarter to 
quarter in a white waistcoat is expressly forbid.” 

14. “ No leave of absence from Cliengleput, even for a day, 
shall be granted to any individual belonging to the Cadet 
Company but by application to head-quarters.’’ 

15. “ Inattention to ordors, neglect of duty, and other 
irregularities will be punished by private, or public, reproof, 
extra drills, and duties in the first instance : by a privation 
of port liberty, and seclusion from society by temporary 
confinement, in the second, and by arrest or confinement in 
the last.” 

“ Upon tho receipt of this order at Chcngloput, it is to ho 
read at three successive evoniiig parades to the Cadet Com¬ 
pany.” 

On the 20th of the same month a new code of general 
regulations and orders, framed upon one recently issued 
for the guidance of the Royal troops, was published to tho 
army. Every officer serving in the Presidency was 
directed to furnish himself with a copy of those regula¬ 
tions which consisted of ten separate sections or chapters, 
viz.:— 


1. Rotation of duties. 

2. Field. 

3. Garrison. 
p 4. Sent lies. 

5. Mounting of guard b. 


G. Orderly men. 

7. Sick officers. 

K. Leave of abbcnco. 
9. Ordors. 

10 . Otumulti.es. 


On the 22nd September 1802 an order was issued for 
the regulation of military bazars with the view of pro* 
vf r ng tho abides and oppression which had ovistod 
under thu old i- v- tom. Tho following is an abstract uf 
the order 

i All otHoorrf nouimandi.ig forts, stations, or cantoumr uta 
un prohibit,ad, from and after the 1st January 1^03, from 





MlNtST# 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


83 



being engaged, directly or indirectly, in levying, receiving, CHAP. XVI. 
or boing concerned in any tax, impost, or receipt*from tlie 
bazar, or from any article of supply; or receiving, in any # 
manner whatever, any perquisite, or emolument of command 
not expressly authorised by Government. 
m II. Tho authority of officers commanding fort's or canton¬ 
ments, ‘over military bazars, or dealers of any description, 
ia hereby oxprossly limited to tho necessary means of preserv¬ 
ing peace and order, to the prohibition, within the limits of 
their command, of the sale of intoxicating drugs and liquors, 
to tho extent that tho health and discipline of tho troops, 
may, in their judgment require, and to tho punishment of 
crimes, strictly military, which may bo committed by fol¬ 
lowers of tho army. 