

Government about the same time issued tho following 
order as some compensation to the troops for their pro¬ 
longed detention on foreign service :— 

« Q.O.Q'j Fori St.. George, 5th A: . .o ^ r 1799. 

“ Until an opportunity shall occur, which tho Right Honor- 
nhl. tho Governor in Council now trusts will not be long 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Native Infantry, 1709-1803. 


( SL 


CHAP. XVI. 


Protracted 
detention 
on foreign 
service, 1799. 


Mea* tiros 
for relief. 


Family 

oortifieu • oe. 




80 



CHAP. XVT. 


Pensions. 


AuRinon- 

iutiou. 


15t.li rerci- 
rnftnt 

< McLeod's) 
a '.i« m.n.i. 

J tith regi- 
umnt 
(l Uviwvi’ii) 
M.N.X. 


^ fllh rryi 
\ *.nt 

( 1 i « rcil,i) 
81 i T.li.I. 


<SL 

history or Tnr madras army. 


proti acted, for relieving the Native troops now serving at 

a acca, Ambojna, and Banda; his Lordship in Council is 

pleased to order and direct, that no deduction shall bo made 
from the family certificates of those corps, on account of the 
casualties which may have happened since their embarkation 
on that service. 1 * 

“ being the further intention of tbe Governor in Council 
to manifest his sense of the zeal and gallantry of these troops, 
and to reward their attachment to the Honorable Company, 
by granting to the families of those who nmy have died in 
battle, or otherwise, a pen ion. equal to the regulated pension • 
of the different ranks ; tho Commander-in-Chief is requested 
to order lists to be prepared of the persons constituting the 
immediate families of the deceased, for the purpose of 
regulating the payment of the pensions.’ 1 

The troops on the Madras establishment having been 
found unequal to the duties entailed by the increase of 
territory on the conquest of Mysore, an order was issued 
on the 14th T)ocembor authorising an augmentation to 
the extent of threo regiments of Native infantry, to bo 
numbered the 15th, 16th and 17th. 

ilie 1st battalion 15th regiment was formed from tho 
ord extra battalion, and placed under the command of . 
Lieutenant-Colonel Georgo LJre. 

ih>.: 2nd batt .iion was formed from the Masulipatam 
battalion, supple man tod by drafts from tho Native corps 
at Ainboyna, tho 2nd of the 7th, iho 2nd of tho Oth, and 
tho 1st of the 12lL. Lfeutouant-Colonol Thomas Coko 
was appointed to-command. Colonel Robert Crokor 
became Colmiol of tho regiment. 

J1- 1st battalion 10th rogimont was raised at Trichi- 
nopoly on tho 1st January 1800, the nudeim, tn tho m 
extent of 360 men of all ranlfb, having boon furnished 
irom Iho Ut let, lat 2nd, 1st and 2nd 6tb, lot oth, Ufc 
7th, Ibi bth, and 1st LltLi. Lioutonant-Ooloncl Joimo- 


# • 




HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


87 


retfc, by whose name .tlio battalion is still known, was cnAP XY.I. 
appointed to command. 

The 2nd battalion was raised at Madura on the 1st 16 th rocri- 
January 1800, tho nucleus being furnished by drafts co m!n\i? 
the extent of 350 men from the 2nd 3rd, 1st and 2nd 
4th, 2nd 6th, 1st 7th, 1st 9th, and 2nd 13th. Lieutenant- 
Colonel Dvco was appointed to this battalion, and Colonel 
George Fotheringham to command the regiment. 