

“Tho sepoy in B« ngal, where rice is, at an average cmnpn- 
tfuiun, procurable at th«; rate of from 30 to 40 score for tho 
rupee, motives in addition to his pay a ooiiHtaufc allowance 
° r half hutta. His situation is infinitely superior to that of an 
ordinury laborer, and consequently an object of attainment. 








“ On the Coast, where rice is seldom cheaper in any station CHAP. XV 

than 18 seers per rupee, and where it is frequently served to - 

the troops from the public stores at 13 seers per rnpeo as a 
• ncccssai’y indulgence from Government, this allowance is 
unknown.” 

The Supreme Government eventually consented to * 
revise the scalo of pay and allowances to the Madras 
Native tro'ops, and on the 11th July 1800 the following 
General Order was issued on the subject:— 

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council reflecting 
on the scries of important servicos rendered by tho sepoys 
on the establishment of Fort St. George, has been impressed 
with a deep senso of the gallantry and fidelity so generally 
displayed by them. Ho has therefore been studious to 
avail himself of every opportunity to manifest his Lordship’s 
attention to their interests and comforts, and his Lordship 
reflects with pride and satisfaction on the frequent instances 
in which lie has beon enabled to reward the distinguished 
merit of individuals. 

“ Underlie impression of these sentiments, the Governor in 
Council has extended his enquiries with the assistance of 
Major-Geiloral Brathwaiff into the Actual situation of the 
Native soldiers, and has in consequence satisfied himselfTrom 
% tho reports of General Brathwaite, as well as from other 
sources of information, that the rate of pay at present allowed 
to tho Native infantry doos not bear a ju«t* proportion to the 
expense of maintaining themselves and their families, nor to 
the duties attached to the profession of arms. The Gover¬ 
nor in Council h is therofo .o represented tho result *.l\hiB 
Lordship's enquiries to the Most Noble tho Govornor-Goncral 
of Bengal. 

“ Tho .Most Noblo the Govcrnor-Gi nrral in Council having 
considered this representation, and being convinced from 
personal observation during his Lordship’s residence) at this 
Brostdoncy, of the necessity of extending tho bounty of the 
Company to the Native troops, tho Governor in Council baa 
vuj„ in. 12 




T mST/fy 





CHAP. XVI. 


90 


• iySTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



therefore sincere pleasure in announcing his Lordship’s 
resolution to bestow on them a more adequate portion of the 
advantages derived to the State from those successes to which 
their bravery and attachment have materially contributed. 

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council has accord- 
ingly been pleased A establish, under the authority of the 
Most Noble the Governor-General in Council of Bengal, the 
following increase of pay and advantages to the Native 
troops on iho establishment of Fort St. George according to 
the annexed tables of pay and batta :— 