

In the meantime the confederates, who had arrived in 
tho neighbourhood of Partoor with tho apparent inten¬ 
tion of marching upon Hyderabad, suddenly broke up 
their camp on tho night of the Gth September, and returned 
to tho Adjunta ghaut, whore they effected a junction * ill, 
their artillery and infantry. 

General W ellesloy, who had been watching their move¬ 
ments, was delayed on the Godavery until tin 18ilt 
September, when tho arrival ofa largo convoy, escorted i v 
tl/j 1st battalion 1th regiment under Major Hill, enabled 
him to p >p ire to bring the enemy to action. On the 19th 
hu detached tho 1st battalion 2 3rd, and tho 2nd battalion 


1 4(0 lnileB raah of Anrtingabnd, Lat. 10° 62' N. w 

Long tho h ad.quortore of the light Cel,l dh i on , Hyderabad 8u b,Hil¬ 
ary force. 

•* TM, wo. a very K oo,l battalion. It ba.l marchod from W-Horn ... 
the. Titptoe, o di.tnnae of about 1,000 mile, without a n „„. 

uml -van .ho urtooiul B' l.iur nativo corp* wifh flm forep. It t n . , , 
; Voo »* h ' b<50aueeof Warned complrdnta mud by <lw 
• ~r * tfardnig iho i oin in which bin men wore paid. 

OH|.j,lunwM.t.iry iloapatohw, Dukaof vs 0 lltegi«.n, Vol. IV pn K r I7y 



miST/fy 


history of the madras army. 105 

18tli for tho bettor protection of Poonah, and the next 
day he encamped at Gola Pangree on the river Doodna. 
On the 21st he made a short march to Julgaum near 
Budnapoor, where he reviewed Colonel Stevenson’s divi¬ 
sion, and concerted the plan of a combined attack on the 
enemy, to be made on the 24th. The two divisions 
separated on the 22nd, and moved towards Bokerdun, 
where the enemy was reported to be, Colonel Stevenson 
marching nearly due north by Hussainabad, and General 
Wellesley taking a more easterly route. 

Tho latter arrived at his ground near the village of 
Naulniah about 11 a.m. on the 23rd, and hearing that 
the enemy were within six miles of him, and preparing 
to move off, he determined to attack at once without 
waiting for Colonel Stevenson, so leaving his stores and 
baggage at Naulniah, protected by the 1st battalion 2nd 
regiment, and the rear guard, all under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Chalmers of the 2nd, he advanced with the rest 
of his division, consisting of four regiments of cavalry, 
six rogiments of infantry, and detachments of artillery 
and pioneers. 

About 1 o’clock in the afternoon the British troops 
came in sight of the armies 1 of Scindiali and the Rajah < f 
Berar, drawn up in order of battle between the rivers 
Kaitna and Juab, having the former parallel with their 
front at a short distance, and the latter nearly parallel 
with their rear. The General resolved to attack their 
left, and making a Hank march to tho right, he crossed 
the Kaitna at tho village of Peepulgaum, rather more 
than half a mile above it confluence with the Juah. 
The passage was not disputed, and the infantry was 

1 About 20,000 cavalry, IS battalion of dboiplined infantry, under 
European oflioors, c timated at about 12,000 men, and upwards of 100 