

It will be aeon on examining the items in the return, tied, both Euro- 
ana and natives are included in ihe general total# of killed and 
viz., 198 -f- 230 428, and 412 4- 696 = 1,138; but Wclttfc 

hn* counted i.) > European: tv r e, and the European oificers three time*, 
* 1/ , 198 k *28 y 412 -f 1,188, 4~ 23 -f 30 = 2,259. This, with thfc 18 
•uintnnp, givn. 2 . 277 . 





HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


109 


One hundred and two remarkably fine guns, of which CHAP. XVII. 
seventy-three were brass, a number of tumbrils, seven c , P turea 
stands of colors, and a quantity of ammunition, and or dnanoe. 
stores, fell into our hands. 

The General, both in liis official and private corre- Confiuofc of 
spondence, spoke most highly of the conduct of the troops. the troo P s - 
In his report to the Governor-General he said :— 

“ I cannot write in too strong terms of the conduct of the 
troops. They advanced in the best order, and with the 
greatest steadiness under a most destructive fire, against a 
body of infantry far superior in number, who appeared deter¬ 
mined to contend with them to the last, and who were driven 
from their guns only by the bayonet, and notwithstanding 
the numbers of the enemy’s cavalry, and the repeated demon¬ 
strations they made of an intention to charge, they were kept 
at a distance by our infantry.” 

In a letter to Major John Malcolm he gave the follow¬ 
ing opinion regarding the infantry of the confederates 
“ Their infantry is the best I have ever seen in India, 
excepting our own ; and they and their equipments far surpass 
Tippoo’s. I assure you that their fire was so heavy that I 
much doubted at one time whether I should be able to induce 
our troops to advance, and all agree that the battle was the 
fiercest that has over been seen in India. Our troops behaved 
admirably. Our sepoys astonished me.” 

Tho troops wore thanked by the Governor-General in Honorary 
Council in an order, dated 30th October, and honorary cU ° 1 
colors with an appropriate device 1 were ordered to bo 
prepared for presentation to each regiment engaged. 

Sir John Malcolm, when writing in later years L ‘ con- Anecdote of 
ceruiug tho management of sepoys, related the following r 

anecdote connected with tho battle at Assay© ; — 


1 Tho word “ Assayo ” with tho device of tho elephant, is bon.o on 
(lie colors nud appointments of th several regiments engaged. 





HJdTOKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Number of 
troops 
ciig4god at 
Asoaje. 




Among tlic? many instances of the effect which pritle in 
themsehes, and the notice of their superiors, inspire in this 
class of troops, wo may state the conduct of the 1st battalion 
8th regiment, which became at the commencement of his 
career in India a favorite corps of the Duke of Wellington. 
They were with him on every service, and the men of this 
corps used often to call themselves ‘ Wellesley ka Pultun,’ 
or Wellesley s battalion ; and their conduct on every occasion 
was calculated to support the proud title they had assumed. 
A staff officer, after the battle of Assaye, saw a number of 
the Mahomedaus of this battalion assembled apparently for a 
funeral. He asked whom they wero about to inter. They 
mentioned the names of five commissioned and non-commis¬ 
sioned officers of a very distinguished family in the corps 
‘ We arc going to put these brothers into one grave ’ said one 
of the party. The officer, who had been well acquainted 
wffh the individuals who had been slain, expressed his regret 
and was about to offer somo consolation to the survivors but 
he was stopped by one of the men. There is no occasion, ho 
said tor such feelings or expressions : these men (pointing to 
the dead bodies) were sepoys ; they have died in the perform¬ 
ance of their duty; the Government they served will protect 
their children, who will soon fill the ranks they lately oecu- 
pied.” 