

Tho right column, composed of the flank companion 
JFLM.'s 74th, and tho 1; t battalion 8rd rogiment, all under 
Captain Vosey of the lattor, was more fortunate, mi it 
escaladed at a re-ontering angle touching one of tho bas¬ 
tions. Tho \xubs raado an obstinate defunoo, bntui , 
i -harp struggle, during which 13 of the 74th, and 18 m 
the Mrd wore killed or wounded, the men nm.lo good 
tlmir footing, and getting down into tho pettah, they 
'•period tho gate to the third parly under leeutonunt- 
t • ionel Wallace, composed of the battalion companion of 





HISTOKT OF THb MADINAS A KM V. 


103 




the 7 1 tli, and the 1st battalion 8th regiment. The two CHAP.XVIi. 
columns uniting, the place was speedily cleared of its 
defenders. 




Our total loss 1 during tho storm amounted to 27 killed 
and 92 wounded. 


On tho morning of the 9th, a position within 400 yards 
of the fort, was seized by Colonel Wallace with five 
companies of the 74th, and the 2nd battalion 12th regi¬ 
ment. During the night a battery for four guns was 
constructed at this post, and opened at daylight with 
such effect that the Killadar surrendered, and gave up 
1 lie place on condition that the garrison should be allowed 
to depart with their private property. 


Ho marched out accordingly on the morning of the Surrender ol 
12th, with about 1,400 men, many of whom were Arabs. <liC ioit ’ 
Tho fort was found to contain a largo quantity of military 
stores. Tho gunpowder was of such good quality that 
the Oeueral made use of it to replace that which had been 
expended during the siege. 

The troops eugagod in this service received the thanks 
of tho Governor-General in Council conveyed in an order 
'Ittted at Fort William on the 8th September 1803. 

After having made arrangements for the settlement of C!moral 
the districts dependent upon Ahmodnuggur, and having 
placed a garrison 1 in tho fort. General Wollosloy marched 
♦ o the northward, and crossed tho Godavery ou tho 21st 
and 22nd August at Toka, where he was joined ou the 
2 r>fh by Major Dallas with the l b baltalion 10th regi¬ 
ment. 


1 Appendix B. 

* JTotAChmeut of artiltory. 

TI.M.’m Mih rogiui©" r . nmn \ 

2ud bttttnlion »Jrd roj^iiumt unitor C ptain Lucks. 




Welle. '•’> 
oroMc ’flu* 
(• <>-1 U «»ry. 



mtsr/fy 


HFoTOKY of the madras army. 






Cl.TAV.XVTJ. 


The conforl- 
‘ mLrt elude 
« nlom 1 
Btevezmon. 


< HJU IHV' of 

•I I’lim. 


Tin 

I Hi Nopftll.'! 

r. i in it Lo iho 
north 


r. I,r r.i1 
We II. iley 
ui'.l Colonel 
HU'M»u »ti 
u.i > i U 

i • i ly on 
Ili.'Li r'.un. 


During* those operations Colonel Stevenson b.\d moved 
to the northern frontier of the Nizam's dominions in 
order to watch the passes ; and on the 2Gth August lie 
encamped near the Dewul ghaut, in consequence of a 
demonstration made in that direction by Scindiali and 
the Rajah of Berar with part of their army, but tho main 
body of their cavalry had been sent to tho westward, and 
on the 24th it had entered the Nizam's country by the 
Adjunta ghaut. Colonel Stevenson followed, and on tho 
2 nd September lie attacked and carried by storm the small 
fort of Jaulna 1 at that time belonging to Scindiah. On 
the Gth, and again on t he 9th, he surprised and dispersed 
the camps of two parties of tho enemy's horse, after 
which he halted at Buduapoor near Jauina for some days. 