

k'uns. 



<SL 

CHAP. XVII. ~ 


Gene ml 
Wellesley 
leaves bis 
stores at 
Naulniah. 


Crosses the 
Kaitna. 


VOL. Ill, 


14 



U\NlSr/fy 


106 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 




CH AP. X \ II. formed across the fork between the two rivers in two 
lines, with the cavalry in the rear. The first line was 
composed of H.M.'s 78th on the left, the 1st of the 10th, 
and 1st of the 8th in the centre, and the pickets 1 on the 
right. The second line, which followed the first at the 
distance of about three hundred paces, consisted of the 1st 
of the 4th, and the 2nd of the 12th, with II.M.'s 74th on 
the right immediately in rear of the pickets. 

The enemy The enemy, in the meantime, had changed front, throw- 

ciiange front. . , . . _ . * 

mg their left on the Juali at the village of Assaye, and 

resting their right on the Kaitna, being sufficiently strong 
to occupy the whole space between the two rivers, which, 
at that place, was about a mile broad. Their line was 
defended by upwards of 100 guns, several of which wore 
disposed in front of the village of Assaye w hich was occu¬ 
pied by a strong body of infantry. 


Batti.e of Assaye. 

The British troops advanced with great steadiness 
under a remarkably heavy fire, but Colonel Orrock of the 
8 (h, who commanded the pickets, and who had'been 
directed to keep on 1 of the range of shot from Assayo, 
mistook his orders, diverged to tlio right, and led directly 2 

1 Tho pickets wero composed of details from each corps, and generally 
formed the advanced guard. Their strength on this occasion, probably 
amountod to about 100 rank and file. The detail of thn 2nd battalion 
horving with the pickets on tho 23rd September consisted of 1 subal¬ 
tern and CO sepoys, besides non-commissioned officers. This, with a 
t ’tnilar detail from each of tho other six regiments of infantry, and front 
the battalion of pioneers, would make 400 rank and file. 

2 Major-General Welle ley in a letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas 

Mtinn., r nr -1 1 Ht November 1803, expressed himself us fallows regard* 
nig Ljoatenant-Oolonel Orrock I do not wi.^h to cast any reflection 
up«»r <ho officer who led tho picquetn. I lament, tho consequences of 
1 iitfikf', but. 1 must nek now lodge thut it was not possible lor r> tuan 
1 - tm a r.,iy i n to a hotter firo than ho did the piequctu on that day 

against Atomy©.” 


mtSTfty 



upon that village followed by the 74tli regiment. The CHAP. XVII. " 

consequence was that not only did the pickets and the 

74th suffer severe * 1 Joss from the village, but they were 

charged by the enemy’s cavalry on their left flanks, 

through the break in the line which had been caused by 

the divergence of the pickets. Fortunately, and before 

irretrievable damage could be done, our cavalry came up 

from the rear, defeated the enemy’s horse, and pursued 

them to the left of their line. The 78th, with the native 

corps in the first line, supported by those in the second 

line, advancing at the same time, drove the enemy from 