

The new formation was completed in March, at which 
time the companies were distributed in the following' 
mariner, viz. :— 

1 st battalion.—The 6th company at Hyderabad ; tho 
remaining companies in camp. 

2 nd battalion.—The 1st company at Hydorabad; tho 
3rd company in tho Moluccas j tho remaining 6 com¬ 
panies in camp. 

On the 16th April orders were issued for tho form- 
ation of three battalions of Native infantry, to bo returned 
as (< Lxtra Battalions.” Bach was to consist of ton 
companies, and the establishment was fixed at ono 
Captain Commandant with a subaltern, and 900 privates, 
with tho ordinary proportion of Nativo officers, havil¬ 
dars, and naigues. 

Tho 1st Extra battalion was raised at Tricbinopoly, 
and placed undor the command of Captain Martin of 
the 5th regiment, with Lieutenant Trewman as adjutant. 

Tho 2nd Extra wa3 raised at Chicacole, and placed 
under tho command of Captain Crane of the 12th regi¬ 
ment, with Lioutonunt Shaw as adjutant. 

The 3rd Extra was raised at Neilore, and pJaccd under 
the command of Captain Whitlio of the 19th regiment, 
with Lieutenant Porter as adjutant. 






Kacli of til 000 battalions received drafts from the old CHAP. XV 1 . 

regiments to tho following extent, viz., 10 ietrudars as „ — 

r •» . CompoeiLiun. 

subadars, 10 haviltlars as jemadars, oO naigues as havil- 

dars, and 50 privates as naigues. 

# On the 22ml July orders wore issued directing that Ext™ 

all the additional privates which had been raised under JuJ^lboa.’ 
recent instructions by corps of Native infantry serving 
in the .Carnatic, in Mysore, and in tho Ceded Districts, 
should bo formed into four extra battalions of the snmo 
strength as those raised in April. 

The 4th Extra was raised at Elloro, and placed under 4th KxtrU 
Captain Macfarlane of the 5th regiment, with Lieutenant aYsb-iini 
Hughes as adjutant. M.N.l.) 

The 5th Extra was raised at Wallajalibad, and placed 6 th Extra fUL 
under Captain Shaw of tho 10th regiment, with Lieuto- 45 ^'l) 
♦unit Bird ns adjutant. 

The 6 th Extra was raised at Triehmopuly, and placed 6 th Extra 
under Captain Buchan of the 12 th regiment, with Lieuto* 22 nd 
najit P. Le Couteur as adjutant. M.N.l.) 

The 7th Extra was raised u,t Sankernacoil in the 7 th Extra 
District of Tinnevolly, and placed under Captain Farran o'/ni, cth 
of the 14th, with Lieutenant Kent as adjutant. ' **’**•!•) 

Those battalions wero brought on the permanent 2 ml hat 2f>»h 
Btrongth of the army in October 1804, as was also tho ( 40tb » M.N.l.) M 
Volunteer battalion on its return from tho Moluccas, when 
it bocaiue tho 2nd battalion 20th (40th M.N.L) 





102 



CUAP. XVII. 

Ahmt'd- 
iiUggiif, 1803. 


Atom (>t tho 


<SL 

HISTORY op TtlJ: MADRAS AKMY. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

FROM THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MAHRATTA WAR IN 
1803, TO THE TREATY WITH HOLKAR IN 1800. 


Major-General Wellesley arrived before Ahmednuggur 
on tlie 8th August 1803, and found the pettah occupied 
by a body of Arabs, supported by one of Scindiah’s 
regular battalions, and a number of horse encamped 
between the pettah and the fort. The Killadar having 
refused to surrender, the pettah was immediately attacked 
by escalade in three columns. The curtains were about 
eighteen feet in height, connected at every hundred yarda 
by towers or bastions hold by Arabs. The first column, 
composed of the pickets, and tho flank companies 
H.M.’s 78th regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Harness, 
planted the ladders on one of tho curtains, but as these 
had no ramparts, tho men on getting to tho top found 
nothing on which to stand, and wore consequently obliged 
to desist. The 78th alone hud 55 killed and woundod, of 
whom 4 wore oflicorg. 