




Tho following order sotting forth tho conditions of Condition* 
service was issued by the Commander-in-Chief on the of 80rvic0 
23rd September:— 

“ For the purpose of carrying into effect the resolution of 
the Right Honorable the Governor in Council as published 
in the Government General Order of the 22nd instant, the 
Commander-in-Chief is pleased to direct that such men of tho 
undermentioned corps as may make a voluntary offer to 
serve in the Madras Volunteer battalion during a period of 
throe years at tho Molucca Islands, shall be permitted to do 
:,o on the following terms, viz., jemadars to enter tho Madras 
\oIuntcer battalion ns subadars, havildars as jemadars, 
naigaes as havildars, and the requisite proportion of privates 
as uaigues, according to seniority. 

“ During the timo the Madras Volunteer battalion moy 
icumin embodied, tho promotion shall be confined to it; tho 
K five commissioned, non-commissioned, and rank and file, 
e ill tor the present bo struck off the strength of their respec¬ 
tive corps, but on their return to i he coast, bo re-admitted in 
tho sovoral ranks which they may have thon attained on the 
<»utablishmont of b icli roiq ■* m m y best .mil tho conveni¬ 
ence of tho public service, and they will be permitted to 
lucre family certificates ' 


“ Corps from which msn arc permitted to volunteer for tho 
Mi dms Volunteer battalion, viz. :— 


VOL. mi. 


Corps from 
whirli \ oJ'» n 
kotn'nf .* an 
allow/ -1 


13 


?V 


08 


HISTORY OF mi: MADRAS ARMY. 



C HAP XVI. 


Assistant 
Burgeon, and 
r.eruit boys. 

Battalion 

'mbarka. 

Rod act Iona, 
lbUi-2. 


Invnlidb, 

IH02. 


and butting. 


Detachment 1st battalion 4th regiment at Fort St. George. 

The 2nd battalion 14th regiment at Fort St. George. 

The 1st do. 17tli do. do. 

The 1st do. 18th do. do. 

The 1st and 2nd Madras battalions. 

On the 13th October an order was issued by which an 
Assistant Surgeon was posted to tlio battalion, and threu 
recruit boys allowed to each company. 

This battalion embarked at Madras oil the 10th Octo¬ 
ber 1801. 

The Muggletoor Revenue battalion having shown 
symptoms of insubordination in November, was broken 
up during the month. 

The Tinnevolly Provincial battalion, the Nair, Tier, 
and Mopla battalions in the province of Malabar, ;md 
the 1st and 2nd Madras battalions, were reduced early 
in 1802, the four fir3t on the 31st March, and the others 
on the 29th April. 

Two companies, viz., the 19th and 20th, woro added to 
the Native Invalid estrblishmcnt on tho 2nd April, and 
ordered to be stationed at Fort St. George. 

On the 22nd May an ordor, from which tho following 
is an extract, was published regarding camp equipage nud 
hut ing:— 

“ Hospitals, and buildings for tho reception of tho amirs 
stores, and gram of regiments of cavalry, and for tho arms 
and stores of battalions of infantry, will bo provided at lixed 
stations at tho expense of Government, but the ruon, v ' . ,» 
not encamped, must bo hutted without auy additional ;pon-o 
to the public, as it is to ho clearly understood that tb allow¬ 
ance for tho provision and carriage of camp equipage in (.. 
defray all oxponsos for cover to the Native troops lu Mm 
Hold, in cantonment, or in garrison, in peace or in war," 