

diviMi,,I « 13 101 ... I 21 I 10 *! 4 

Colour! Mtcvcnftou'h di- 

vi,ion 2 M 2 1 10 ftp! 1 

13 1 l "> 2 31 1 f> 10 




C | 3 1 0 

13 ,0,2 

f 11 


Oor particular« poo Appendix D. 





imSTfty 


111 ' 







HISTORY TUH MADRAS ARMY. 


HISTORY " 


standing on a lofty mountain in the range of hills between ClIAP. XVII. 
the sources of the Taptee and the Poorna. Both divisions 
encamped near Elliehpoor on the 5th December, and 
halted on iho 6th to establish a hospital for the wounded. 

On tho same day the 1st battalion 2nd regiment, under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, was sent to drive tho 
enemy from their position on,the south of the fort, while 
two companies of tho 94th, and tho 1st battalion Gth 
regiment, all under Captain Maitland of the latter, took 
possession of tho fortified village of Damergaum which 
commanded the road by which Colonel Stevenson was to 
advance in order to take up his position on the north of 
tho fort, that being the side it was proposed to attack. 

Colonel Stevenson crossed tho river Sapun near Jinkerra 
on the 7th, and reached his destination on tho 12th. havin'* 

J CO 

experienced the greatest difficulty in getting his guns 
and dorcs over the hills and ravines through which his 
route lay. General Wellesley took up his ground at 
Deogaum on the southern side. Practicable breaches in 
the outer fort having been effected by the night of tho 
1 1th, the following dispositions were made for the assault 
on tho noxt day. 

Tho storming parties, under Lieut.-Colonel William DiRp^H 
Kenny, 1st battalion 11th regiment, wore composed of— for th " 


One sorjoanfc and twelve volunteors 91th regiment in 
advance. 

First party.—One flank, and two battalion companies 
94th, and tho flank companies of the 2nd battalion 
7th, and of the 1st and 2nd baUaiioM J. Iih regi¬ 
ment under the immediate command Oolong! 

Kenny. 

* 

Second party.—One ilank, and two battalion 
companies 91th. and tho Hunk companies 1st 





120 


Ul.STOfcy UY THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


<SL 


battalion 6fch, 2nd battalion 9th, and 2nd battalion 
2nd, under Lieutenant-Colonel Lease of the last. 
Third party.—The remainder of the 94th under 
Major James Campbell. 


The 2nd brigade under Lieut.-Colonel Haliburton, 
viz., the battalion companies 2nd of the 7th, and those 
of the 1st and 2nd of the 11th followed in support. 

A detail of artillery accompanied each of the storming 
parties. 

The first brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Maclean 
formed the reserve. 

The troops were ordered to advance at 10 o’clock a.m. 
Attooks by Two demonstrations were made from General 
Wellesley's camp at the same hour with the object of 
drasving the attention of the garrison from the real attack 
on the north. One of these, composed of the 74th, tivo 
companies of tho 78th, and the 1st battalion 8tli regi¬ 
ment, was commanded by Colonel Wallace. The other, 
under Colonel Chalmers, was composed of five companies 
of tho 78th, and the 1st battalion 10th regiment. 
fjAMuraof The assault on the breach wu3 successful, and tho 
party under Colonel Chalmers happening to reach tho 
north-west gate while the enemy wore endeavouring to 
escape by it, he entered without difficulty. Shortly 
afterwards, Captain Campbell, with the light company 
94th, escaladed tho w all of the inner fort, and opouod tho 
gate for thereat of the stormers. 