

the 18th ho reconnoitred tho fort, attended by a squadron 

of cavalry, and tho pickets of native infantry, and on tho 

evening of tho same day ho attacked 1 and carried the 

pottah. During the 19th, batteries for seven guns were 

established in the pettah, and on the 20th, fire was 

opened on the lower fort. The extraordinary strength 

of the upper, or lull fort, and the great import unco 

attached to the possession of the plnco, induced Colonel 

Stevenson to offer liberal terms of capitulation, via., that 

the garrison should bo paid 20,000 rupee \ on account of 


' c unities during t! op. inli'ino at A#*soergl» » 
1st battalion 6th rogin cur, 2 k.llod, 1 wound, d. 
rionoorn, 1 killed. I wouudod. 



nnd 

A 36 eorghur. 


Movcmonts 

General 

Wellesley's 

division. 


rnustico 

with 

Beiudiah. 


116 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

arrears due to them, and that they should be allowed to 
march oat with their private property, and to go where 
they pleased. These terms were accepted, and the fort 
was given up on the 21st. The operations were con¬ 
sidered to have been very creditable to Colonel Stevenson 
whose division 1 appears to have been in a very efficient 
condition. 

On the 6th November, General Wellesley, when about 
35 miles south of Jaulna, detached 2 Lieutenant-Colonel 
Chalmers to take possession of the towns of Pokrio, 
Soorengaum, ancl Kamila, distant from 10 to 20 miles 
from cam}), and to make them over to Appah Dessayc, 
the commandant of the Peshwah's contingent, in behalf 
of his master. 

Tho General encamped near Tatreo on the 10th, and 
then proceeding northwards, ho crossed the Payen Gunga 
ae Wakud on the20th, and arrived at liajoora on the 23rd, 
where ho concluded an armistice with Scindiah for ten 
days, the principal condition of which was that Scindiah 
should take up a position about 50 miles to tho eastward 
of Ellichpoor. On the 25th tho General entered Berar, 
on tho 27th ho reached Akolah, 3 and on the 20tli ho 
joined Colonel Stevenson at Partcrly, for the purpose of 



1 “ I cannot emit to take U is opporturity to express to your E.wi I 
lency my sense of tho merits of C lonel Stevenson, ancl of the body (if 
troopo under his command. 

“ Upon every occ sion I have received from the Colonel the mo I. 
cordial, and zealous assistance, and tho troops under his oominand uiv 
iu tho highest slate of discipline and order, and fit for ony oorvico in 
which they can bo employed." 

Major-General Wcllosley to ihe Governor.General, 0th November 
1803 

Ini battalion 2nd rogimont, 60 pioneers, 100 Mysore horse, and a 
party of artillery. 

* A comndmbla oily in Borar, Lait. 22 *10 N. Long. < / * *' 





undertaking the siege of Gawilgliur 1 with their united CIIAP.XVH, 
divisions. 


Shortly after arriving at Parterly, bodies of the enemy’s Battle of 
cavalry approached, and commenced to skirmish with the Ar S aum * 
Mysore horse, in support of which the infantry pickets 
were sent out, and it was then discovered that the enemy 
were drawn up in force on the plains of Argaum 2 immedi¬ 
ately in front of the village of that name, distant about 
six miles from Parterly. 