

“ The exertion made by the troops is the greatest I ever 
witnessed. Every tiling was over by 12 o*clock on the 5th, 
anr h 1 think that, by that time, the infantry must have marchod 
<>0 miles from 6 in the morning on the 4th. 

“We halted from 12 in the day till 10 at night on the 4th, 
so that we marched GO miles with infantry in twenty hours.” 

In a letter of tho same date to Colonel Murray, ho 
observed :— 


CHAR xvur 


Exertions of 
tho detach¬ 
ment. 


41 1 think we now begin to beat tho Mabrattas in the celerity 
of onr movements. 7 ’ 

General Wellesley quitted tho army near Perinda on The (hmoi ui 
thu 23rd February, and proceeded to Bombay, leaving l y 
Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace in command. 

About the middle of April Lieutonant-Colouul Lang, ixi tt ch;.w! t 
commanding a brigade in Berar, composed of the 1 d and 111 
‘hid battalions 11 th regiment, with a proportion of 


1 Jt.M.'s llKh light dragoons i tho 4th, 6i! and 7l>. cavahy, and tho 
Mysoro aud Mahratta Lor.- - H.M 1 7: h reinmc? ' j f! • 1st bnttri- 

h"«i 8lh rogimont; lOOuion from ei: h of iho oth« mvt m* corps in camp, 

11 1st of Xud, 1st of 3rd, lm. * »* 4i b, 1 i or Kali, uid 2nd of l^tli ; 160 

\» i. «i- ; and u parly of lu-lilW'ty wit,' A g*ins. 



12C 


oISTORV 01-' THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


flio General 
g'jes to 
Calcutta. 


0:ilt*r on tho 

C/COU4UOU . 


<SL 


artillery and pioneers, which had been detached from the 
Hyderabad subsidiary force in January, for the purpose 
of establishing the authority of the Nizam in that province, 
surprised and defeated a body of freebooters under the 
command of Denojee Dosmookh, Nayaram Punt, and 
Ismael Khan. 

General Wellesley rejoined the army onthe22nd May, 
when ho recalled Lieutenant-Colonel Lang from Berar, 
and made arrangements to collect a force at Aurungabad 
with the view of attacking Holkar'a possessions in 
Candeish. Ho then resigned command of the subsidiary 
forces, and left Poonah on the 24th June for Calcutta in 
compliance with tho instructions of the Governor-General. 
The following is an extract from tho order of the day :_ 

“ Camp at Poonah , Sunday , 24 th Juno 1804 . 

“ Upon the occasion of quitting tho army in consequence o! 
the orders of the Governor-General, Major-Gene ml Wellesley 
once more returns his thanks to tho officers and troop 3 for 
their uniform good conduct since he has had tho honor of 
commanding them. In the apace of little more than a year, 
those in this quarter in particular, now composing tho sub¬ 
sidiary forces serving with the Peshwah, and the Soubalidar 
of tho Deccan, and those which are under orders to march 
to the southward, havo boon fried in every mode in which 
it is pohsiblo to try troops, and havo uniformly manifested 
that patience under fatigues, and seventy of climate, !mt 
activity and perseverance in Libor, and bravery and discip¬ 
line in action, which are the characteristic qualities of the 
beet soldiers; their success, and the honor which the 
troops have acquired arc proportionate to the good qualities 
which they have displayed: on which qualities Major-Goner a* 
WolIuBley bus always had the fullest reliance in < v «-vy 
1 nu 1 roucy 0 / flio aorvioo. Ho now recommend? to theta .in 
aeborence to tho principles which buvo brought them >vif I» 