

Their centre and left were composed of the troops of 
the Rajah of Berar consisting of artillery, cavalry, and 
infantry. A very heavy body of Sciudiali’s cavalry, with 
a number of Piudarries, composed the right wing. 

Although it was late in the day, an immediate attack was 
determined upon, and both divisions advanced in ono 
column in a direction almost parallel to the line of the 
enemy which was about 5 miles in length. On emerging 
from the rear of a village nearly opposite their contro, 
where it was intended to deploy, the enemy’s guns 
opened upon the native pickets, the 1st of the 10th, and 
the 2nd of the 12tli, 3 which led the column, and although 
the canuonado'Was from a distance, and not to bo com¬ 
pared with that at Assayo, these regiments broke, and 
retreated in confusion. Fortunately, the General, who 
was close by, was ablo to rally them himself, and to bring 
them back into action. 

Tn the monutimo Colonel Stevenson’s division had Advance of 
deployed and formed on the left, and about half past tho Ku6 * 

------* 

1 A strong fortress botwoeu tho sources of the Tapteo and Pooma, 
about 15 miles north wont from filliubpoor Lat. 22' N. Long. 

IT 81' E. 

- A village in Berar, 38 mile., wr*fc-south-wc a of K Mich poor. 

s This battalion waj badly off for Wuropoun officers. Licutonant- 
Cohnud McLeod, Major ‘MoCally, and -1 lieutc uuuts hud boon ivonndod at 
Awnnyu. Neither of the field officers were present at Argaum 




1 J 8 


tnSTOUT OF THU MADUAS AI;MY. 


<SL 


Defeat and 
p irnuit of the 


p. x \ I). four o clock, the whole army advanced in liue, and in 
perfect order. The 74th and 78th wore attacked by a 
large body of infantry, supposed to have been composed 
of Persians and Arabs, which suddenly made their 
appearance from behind a battery in front of the 74th. 
Nearly all of these men were killed, and several standards 
taken from them. 

Scindiali’s cavalry charged the 1 st battalion Oth 
regiment, which was ou the left of Colonel Stevenson’s 
division, but they were repulsed with loss. The enemy 
made no further attempt, and gave way immediateh 
afterwards, leaving 88 guns, and all their ammunition. 
The cavalry, under the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel 
Soutlegcr of the 6 tli regiment, pursued them for ho vend 
miles, killed groat numbers, and captured a quantity at 
baggage, together with many elephants and camels. The 
pursuit was continued for two days, and with great effect, 
by the irregular horse belonging to the Nizam, the 
Kajah of Mysore, and the Poshwah. 

Out - loss was inconsiderable, 1 viz., 15 Europeans killed. 
145 wounded, and 2 missing; 81 natives killed, 168 
wounded, and 5 missing; 19 horses killed, 9 woeudod, 
and 11 missing. 

Aft- 1 " the battle, the General lost no tiiuo in commenc¬ 
ing the siege of Gawilghur, a fortress of great strength. 


Crumultios. 


Mivc of 
f *’i riltfhur. 




I •uropooTirt. NativcH. 


Horsra. 


i K. W. M. 




K. | W. M. K. W M. , 

1 -L _1_I J 


Majwr-Ciuul. AVellonloyV, 