


lil /MtY OF TILE MAD I {Ac. AltM\. 


127 



<SL 


lionor 


Prize-money 
ami battu. 


Thanks of tlio 
House of 
CuininODs. 


through so many difficulties, as the certain pledge of CHAP.XYU. 
future success.” 

All ordnance and military stores taken during the 
campaign were reserved by Government, but Major- 
General Wellesley was authorised to distribute to the 
troops, in the usual proportions, the captured treasure 
and other property, valued at 11,52,196 Hyderabad 
rupees, and a donation equal to six months* full batta was 
granted to the European officers as compensation for the 
extraordinary expenses to which they had been subjected. 

On tho 10th November 1804, the Resolutions of the 
House of Commons, dated 3rd May, in which the officers 
and men were thanked for thoir sorvicos during tho war, 
were republished at Fort St. George, together with those 
of the Court of Directors, and tho General Court of 
Proprietors of tho East India Company to tho samo offeet. 

Tho Governor-General in Council directed that these 
Resolutions should bo road at tho several stations to tho 
troops under arms, and that they should bo particularly 
explained to the native ranks. 

Field Force in the Do ad, 1803. 

When Major-General Wellesley first advanced into the Army of 
Mahratta country, a strong force was assembled in the 
Raichoro Doab as a reserve under General Stuart, tho 
Cominander-in-Chief,but the retention of this having been 
considered unnecessary, he returned to Madras in August, 

Mid tho force was disposed nf in the following manner, 
viz., two battalions 1 of native infantry were sent to join 
General Wellesley—a division, composed of cavalry,, 
artillery, infantry, and pioneers, remained near Moodgul 
in the Doab under Major-General Dugald Campbell com¬ 
manding tho Ceded districts, and the remaining regi- 

1 lat battalion 4lh rogimenfc- Mnjur Hill. 

1st do. IOth do. — Major Halim. 


rcfloivo, 1803. 



128 


HISTORY OF TUE MADRAS ARMY. 



<SL 


CltAKXvii. ments were sent back into the territories of the Company. 

campb’n Early in December 1803 Major-General Campbell 
destroys a crossed the river Malpurba for the purpose of protecting 

b(Mer.fin tb’a ^' s country of Siddojee Rao Nimbulkur, Appall Dessaye, 
which had been invaded and plundered by the Polygar 
of Jelloor during the absence of the Dessaye, who, with 
his quota oi troops, had joined General Wellesley in tho 
field. General Campbell, having accomplished this object, 
received information, on the 27th December, of the 
irruption into the Doab, and advance towards the 
Company’s territories, of a body of Mahratta freebooters, 
consisting ot about 10,000 horse, and a number of 
irregular infantry, all under Mahomed Reg Khan, a leader 
who had assumed the title of Bhoondia. 

Leaving Colonel Urban Vigors, the second in command,- 
to follow by easy stages, General Campbell marched from 
Woodapoory on the 28th, with all his cavalry,' the flank 
companies of his infantry, and detachments of artillery 
and pioneers. The next morning lie recrossed the Mal¬ 
purba and reached Jallybal , 2 where he surprised a party of 
horse which had been detached to watch his movements. 