

The following account of tho troops of the Mahratta 
confederates is taken from a report made by Lieutenant- 
General Stuart- to the Right Honorablo Lord Hobart:—• 

“ Scindiali’s army consisted of a largo amouut of infantry 
regularly constituted, composed of natives from the north of 
Hindustan, the finest men in India, conducted by Europouu 
officers, and possessing all tho advantages of discipline, of 
lon«r experience in war, and of the confidence inspired by 
numerous successes. 

“His artillery had attained a degree of proficiency which 
was scarcely to be surpassed by the skill of European troops, 
and the founderies, which wore established in his dominions 
under the direction of Europoan officers, had supplied an 
extensive train of ordnance of excellent manufacture. 


1 Tlu.i officer died in April J801 from tlio offset of wounds recur oil ut 
lUu storm. 




HISTORY OF T1TE MADRAS ARMY, 


123 


“ His cavalry, although numerous, was inferior in quality 
to his infantry, and inferior indeed in activity, boldness, 
and skill, to the former cavalry of the Mahrattas. 

“ In all the actions which have been fought, his troops 
performed evolutions with a facility and order, which denoted 
a considerable progress in European tactics. 

“ The troops of the Rajah of Berar were constituted upon 
the same principles with those of Scindiali, but they possessed 
Je^JS experience, and were less respectable than the latter.” 

Shortly after the conclusion of the treaties, Major- 
General Wellesley returned to the southward, leaving the 
Hyderabad subsidiary force in Berar under Lieuteuant- 
Colonel Haliburfcon, who had succeeded to the command 
on the departure of Colonel Stovenson. 1 

The Nizam’s dominions were, at this time, infested by 
hordes of banditti, principally composed of men former¬ 
ly in his own service, who had been discharged under the 
mistaken idea that the peace of the country could be 
preserved by the subsidiary force, which, however, had 
never been equal to such a task, and when it was with- 


1 The following 18 an extract from an ordor published in camp, 30th 
Dvcombor 1803 :— 

“ Major-General Wellesley is much concerned that Col. Stovonsorf’s 
uruto of health should oblige him to quit the field. * * Major- 

General Wellesley har-», for some year s bad tlio assistance of Colonel 

8tevonsou in tho various services in which both have been employ* d by 
t!'o Government of Fort Si. George, and, in tho course of char time, ho 
Las derived tho greatest advantage fx*om his great experience, hi.* 
ndvkoand opinions, on all occa ions, ar well ns a renlmn ami uciivo 
discharge of all tho duties of an officer in his situation in tho field, 
particularly in this last crimp ilgn.” 

Tho Colonel ombarked for England in March ISO*, upon which 
occasion he received tho thauka <>f Government, for th long scries of 
important uud distinguished >:ervic ; w‘ irh h i nl i adored to the 
Ktfttu. 

Colonel Welsh in his ttcminisconocs, Vol. I, page 192, says that, 
1 oloncd IStr.-enson died a few days after the battle of Argaum—a 