

by ihoformoi ms sonior-officor. 

, vui.> nn 16 





Of ' MIA 


114 


UISlOEY or THE MADRAS ARM*. 



XVII. 


<SL 


Sciudiali had marched to the north for the purpose of* 
relieving Burhanpoor, then threatened by Colonel 
Stevenson, General Wellesley retraced his steps, and was 
joiner', near Adjunta on the 22nd October by the 1st 
battalion 3rd regiment which he had recalled from 
Ahmednuggur to replace his loss at Assaye. While at 
Adjunta he heard of the surrender of Burhanpoor; and 
also that the Rajah of Berar, separating from Scindiah, 
had gone towards tho south. This information led the 
General to march to Aurangabad, where ho arrived on 
the 29th, and, ascertaining that tho Rajah was in tho 
neighbourhood, ho endeavoured to surprise him, but 
without 8UCCC08, although ho compelled him to move his 
camp five times between tho 29tli and 31st. 

On the date last mentioned, the Rajah detached a body 
of 5,000 horse to intercept a convoy of 1,500 bullocks, 
carrying grain for the army, which was protected by an 
escort 1 under Captain Baynes. 

The convoy left the Godavcrv on tho morning of tho 
31st, and was attacked at the village of Umber 2 tho same 
afternoon, but tho assailants were repulsed with consider¬ 
able loss, particularly in horses, find tho convoy joined 
tho General on tho next day. 

Captain Baynes was thanked for tho able disposition 
ho had made of his small f-rree, and tho BtoadiuoBB of tho 
officers aud mon was favorably noticod in the same order. 

The Rajah, immediately after this failure, retreated 
hastily towards his own territories. 


1 2nd battalion 3rd regiment, 3 companion. 

2nd do. 10th do. 2 do. 

Hyderabad (mhetidlary 1‘oroo, 1 company (battalion uot known). 
Two 3-j‘Oumicnf- 
Mjfooio borao, 400. 

About 20 mile# north of the Ciodavery, and half way botwetn it 
* *d Juuluu. 



HI810RY 01' Till. MADRAS ARMY. 



115 


<SL 


About the same time as the action at Umber, an GHAP.XYUr 
attempt was made to take possession of the bridge of (jaliatY 
boats at Rackisbaum’on the G-odavery which was in ^ 0 )“' r ot 
charge of a party of the 1st battalion Gtli regiment under of the 6th 
Jemadar Shaik Modeen of that corps. This officer not rc 8 imcut * 
only repulsed tho enemy, but followed them up, and 
captured part of their equipments. This affair was 
mentioned in goneral orders of the 28th November, and 
Hie Jemadar was promoted. 

General Wellesley, in reporting tho circumstance to 
tho Commander dn-Chiof, observed: “ This man has 
bohaved remarkably well in other instances besides that 
slated in my letter to tho Adjutant-General. If the 
Soubah had had a dozen such men iu his service, the 
Rajah of Berar would have lost his baggage in his flight 
from me.” 


Tho large and opulent city of Burhanpoor surrendered Surrender v f 
1 , Burhauptwr 

1 o Colonel Stevenson on tho 15th October without resist- 

unco, and oil tho 17th ho marched against tho fortress 

of Asseergliur, about 12 miles north of Burhanpoor. On 