

of range mi haka to have boeu in.-dt by uu officer who was present at 

the siege of Gnwilghur. 


CHAP. XVII- 
and cavalry. 

Their skill In 
evolutions. 


Troops of the. 
ltajah of 
Borar. 


General 
Wellesley 
marches to 
the south. 


Banditti in 
the 'Nizam’s 
country. 





124 


HISTOCY ( V TUK 2IADKAS A/!21Y. 


<SL 


Lieutenant 

Wjght’g 

detachment. 


Defeat of 
k • > l''»otor8 at 
ALinkniair. 
IttOI. 


jVH. drawn for the purpose of acting against the Mnhrafcta 
confederates, the number of marauders increased, and 
they became so daring as to attack detachments of 
British troops. 

On the 11th December a company of the 1st battalion 
9th, under Lieutenant Wight of that regiment, which 
was escorting two lacks of treasure to Hyderabad for the 
use of General Wellesley's division, was attacked near 
the town of Paungul 1 by a body of about 1,200 moo, who, 
after an obstinate contest, were repulsed with the loss 
of their leader, and a number of his followers. 

Lieutenant Wight also sustained some loss both in 
killed and wounded, but ho made his way with the 
treasure to the village of Jamapooram, where ho main¬ 
tained himself until relieved by Major Bowness, 1st 
•battalion 17th regiment, then commanding a detachment 
near Paungul. Lieutenant Wight and the native officers 
and men received the thanks of the Commander-iu-Chief 
conveyed in general orders of the 22nd January 1801. 

General Wellesley arrrred at Jaulna on the 19th Janu- 
ary 1804, and while thero ho received a deputation from 
the town of Bhcer, 2 soliciting protection againsta numer¬ 
ous and formidable bond of freebooters, who, after having 
beaten a body of the Hi/t in's troops, and taken their guns, 
wore then plundering the country, and threatening Bheer. 
In compliance with this requisition, the General grossed 
the Godavery on the 21th, and on the 2nd February, while 
in camp at Ncemgaum, about 30 miio 9 south-east of 
Ahmednuggur, ho received information to tho effect th it 
the marauders wore in the neighbourhood of Perindn, 
upon which ho resolved to attempt to surprise them. Ho 


Hie southern dihtriofc cl tho li yd iTiifld country juyt north of ih,, 
Xw.inn. 

UlUi dominions, uhoat 70 rnuou iiwt of AUmcUmigRui:. 


MWtsr/fj, 





HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


125 


<SL 


^accordingly loft Neemgaum on the 3rd with all his 
cavalry, 1 and a select body of infantry, and arrived at 
Sailgaori*, about 18 miles north-west of Perinda, on the 4th. 
Tie resumed his march that night, and came up with the 
enemy about 9 a.m. on the 5tli, just as they had moved 
off from their encampment at Munkaisir. They were 
immediately followed and dispersed by the cavalry, who 
killed great numbers. All their guns, ammunition, and 
stores fell into our hands. Our iufantry arrived at 
Munkaisir with the cavalry, but from the nature of the 
action, they were unable to co-operate further than by 
taking possession of the enemy's camp. 

The General in a letter to Major Malcolm, dated on the 
'th, thus described the conduct of the dotaehmont: — 