

About tho end of November a respectable force 1 was Colonel 
assembled at Vellore under Lieutenant-Colonel Mony- 
penny, fl.M.'s 73rd regiment, who was invested with 
full powers. He reached Chittoor on the 13tli December 
aud immediately issued notifications to all the chiefs, 
calling upon them to surrender within seven days on 
pain of forfeiture. Theso notifications having been 
disregarded, except by the Polygars of Nargunty and 
Goodiput, martial law was proclaimed, and on the 23rd 
the detachment marched to Mograul, about sixteen 
miles north of Chittoor. The fort was evacuated on the 
approach of tho troops, and the Polygars retired to a 
st< op and rocky hill close by. On tho morning of the 
vl4tli the following dispositions were made for tho 


Artillery ... 

44 rank and tile. 

A troop of cavalry 

70. 


If.M.'e 73rd regiment 

120 

rank and ttlo. 

lot battalion ]at rtjpno’ul N ! 

500 

d«». 

2nd iln. 4th do. 

1,1 do 

do. 

l»t do. 16th do. 

0G2 

do. 

I'ioncorB 

313 

do. 



114 


HISTORY 01' THE .MADRAS • . 



P.XVII. 


Jlepulho at 

M ograul. 


<SL 


assault. The right attack under Lieutenant-Colonel 
I>arley was composed of the grenadiers of the 73rd and 
live companies 2nd battalion 4th regiment. The left 
attack under Major Grant was composed of the Light 
company 73rd and five companies 1st battalion 16th 
regiment. Colonel Monypenny romained near the fort 
with the rest of the detachment. The hill being very 
steep and rugged, tho ascent of the troops was slow, 
and when they came near tho summit they found them¬ 
selves in front of masses of perpendicular rock surrounded 
by dense jungle. This position had been converted into 
a kind of redoubt by connecting the rocks with high 
walls. The existence of such an obstacle not having boon 
suspected, I he men had not been provided with scaling 
ladders, and after soveral unsuccessful endeavours to 
gain an entrance, the attempt was given up. Our lo*e 1 
was small, probably owing to the circumstance that tho 
Polygars were badly supplied with firearms. Tho hill 
was deserted a few hours after the assault, aud no other 
stand was mado again t the troops, small parties of 
which, aided by a detachment 2nd battalion 19th regi¬ 


ment sent from tho Coded Districts by Lieufceuant- 
Colouel Thomas Munro, scoured the country in search 
of tho lebel knderH. Tho pursuit was so vigorous and 
unremitting that tho Poly gars of Mograul, Pulloor, 
Kulloor, Poolichcrln, Prmcal, and Toomba gav< thorn- 
•"PI'X ;• n selves up during January and February 1806, and by 
rid i, i j 05 . en( ^ the month last named the disturbances iu 

tho Pollanm had boon entirely suppressed. Tho only 
capital punishments inflicted were in the cases of tho 


lf..1 Vi 7dr*l Ki 1 lod : CajMM n f w !«, r (]-ilio thrivii) 1 Hr.’rjvuiu, 
l ,r vutoi'. Wotmdod : Lioutonnr.t Glonltolmo *nrl 1 private. 

Uud bnltnlion 4tb rcj.pmtnit—Killed 2 piirutea. 
i hi. do. JCtli do. —Woundod ; 3 dv. 


do. 







Chiefs of Yodergoond.il and Chergul captured by the CHAP. XVII. 