


Mysore horse. These men, having been tried and 
found guilty of having plundered certain villagg^m the 
taluk of Amhoor, were sentenced to bo hung, which 
sentence was carried out. 


Affairs in Travancore , 1804-5. 

A serious mutiny having broken out amongst the Tfco HesiderJ 
troops in the servicoof the Rajah of Travancore, attended Cochin, 
by general disturbances throughout that province, and 1804 * 
the life of the Resident, Major Colin Macaulay, having 
been supposed to be in danger, he quitted Alleppy 
on the night of the 1 Gth November 1804, and repaired 
to Cochin, then garrisoned by a company of the 2nd 
battalion 1st regiment. 

The Government of Madras, apprehensive that the Madras 
insurgents might enter the territories of the Company, at 

directed the Officer commanding tho southern division 1805 * 
to make, in communication with the Resident, such dis¬ 
positions of the troops at his disposal as might appear 
necessary to guard against any such attempt. 

The garrison at Cochin was immediately strengthened, 
and early in 1805, the 1st battalion 7th, and the 2nd 
battalion Gth arrived at Quilon, followed shortly after¬ 
wards by the 2nd battalion 13th, and a detachment of 
artillery, which demonstrations produced the desired 
effect. 

Affairs in Malabar } 1802-5. 


The provinces of Malabar and Canara were garrisoned Disturbance* 
by Bombay troops from tho period of thoir acquisition in 'wm at a 
1702, up to tho end of 1804, when most of tho Bombay l 8u2 *&* 
regiments were relieved by those of the Madras establish¬ 
ment. The province firat named was, for year#, the 
floenc of frequent insurrections. Tranquillity had been 
vox.. m. 19 






CHAP. XVII. 


Colonel 
Montros' r 
r. .hb for a 
* ^inrorce- 
iriiniv, 
1803. 


I nettle lent 
nth 'a r.f the 
Bern bay , 
i roopu in 
IA ulub^r, 

1802-C 


146 


<SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


temporarily restored in 1801 by the field force under 
Colonel Stevenson, but disturbances broke out again in 
the Wynaad in October 1802, and although a consider¬ 
able 1 force was maintained in Malabar during 1808-4, 
the rebellion was not put down. On the contrary it 
increased, and the European settlements on the coast 
having been threatened, it became necessary to use, for 
their protection, troops which might otherwise have been 
employed in Cotiote, and in the Wynaad, the principal 
seats of disaffection. 

In December ,1803, Colonel Montresor reported that 
the spirit of rebellion, and of obstinate opposition to tlm 
British Government, still prevailed in these parts of the 
province, and that his efforts to restore tranquillity had 
been unsuccessful in consequence of the small number 
of men at hie disposal who were available for service in 
the field, for which reasons he asked for a reinforcement 
to the extent of 5,000 men, with which requisition the 
Government of Madras were unable to comply as they 
had not a single battalion to spare. 

Out of 18 battalions 2 of native infantry at that time 
belonging to the Bombay establishment, from six to 
eight liad beon constantly employed in Malabar mid 