


ur'.f u’o . C ° loncl Ualiburton 1,aviu S die <i ^ July, was succeeded 

‘ re". 1S06. 111 ,ll ° command at Futtypoor by Colonel Wallace, who 

retained it until the early part of 1800, when tb ratifica¬ 
tion of a new treaty with Scindiah, and tho conclusion 
of peace with Ilolkar, led to tho breaking up of tho force 
shortly afterwards. The troops belonging to the Hyder¬ 
abad Subsidiary force roturnod to Hyderabad under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Lang, and Colonel Wallace marched 
to Poonah with the rest. 

r f 1 ^hiring tho continuance of tho forco near Futtypoor, 
(loiachmontL vero sonfc out from timo to time •• gainst the 





HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


139 


hands of marauders by which the country was infested. 
One of these detachments, composed of the 2nd cavalry, 
iho 2nd battalion 7th regiment, and a party of artillery, 
under Captain Hopeton Scott of the 7th, surprised a body 
of Mahratta plunderers near Mulkapoor on the 22nd 
December 1805. Their number was computed at 3,000 
horse, 4 guns, and a small party of infantry. They were 
completely defeated, losing their guns and baggage. 

The following is an extract of a letter from the Gover¬ 
nor-General in Council to the Madras Government on 
the conclusion of the war, which was published at Fort 
St. George on the 27tli May 180G :— 

“ On tho occasion of withdrawing tho armies of the esta¬ 
blishments of the several Presidencies from the duties of tho 
field, and placing them in cantonments in consequence of 
tho late honorable and advantageous peace with Joswunt Rao 
Holkar, we discharge a satisfactory obligation of our public 
duty in conveying to your Lordship in Council the expres¬ 
sion of the high sonso we entertain of the distinguished 
coi.duct of the officers and men of that portion of Hia 
Mujesty’b and the Honorable Company’s forces att, *hed 
iho Pre sidency of Fort St. George which has been employed 
on active service during the late contest. 

41 Under every trial of fatigue and difficulty incident to a 
protracted term o', military service in countries recently 
r, \'posed to the injuries of famine aud the ravages of war, 
tho officer;-! and troops of His Majesty's and tho Honorable 
Company's service employed under tho Presidency of Fort 
St. George have manifested an exemplary degree of fortitude, 
r -t ,iiy and military discipline; and in tho execution of the 
military operations which required their services, their con¬ 
duct lias been distinguished by every quality of per. \ erance, 
tMllantry, a nd skill, which can tend to elevate the reputation 
and establish the ascemlauoy of the British arms. 

,f We request that your Lorddiip in Council will lie 
pleased to direct tlio communication of these eutimeuts fca 


<SL 

CHAP- XVII. 


Thanks 
of tho 
Governor- 
General. 


' 

140 TIIhTuRY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

the officers and men of Hia Majesty’s and the Honorable 

Company’s forces of the Presidency of Fort St. Georgo 

engaged in the duties of the field during tho late contest 