

The captuTO of these forts having deprived Holkar of all 
his possessions to the south of the'mver Tap tee, Lieute- Buunou'u 
nant-Cblonel Wallace proceeded to Bunneim, a central 
position in Candeish, where he encamped pending further 
orders. 

.. .—i- 

1 Artillery—Lieutenant Purvis m l 2 men killed, 7 men v-nuudod. 

IT.M’i!. iHik regiment —1 ilrummtr, C rank nhd tik» wounded. 

2nd battalion 7'h regiment—Captain Drown and 5 nun killed. 

j) 0t do. —Lieutenant Pailby and lii men wounded, 

1«(. battalion-11th regiment—2 privates wounded. 

1 Wxsrs^r-l sOrjeuu* wnuudod. 

“The ca’ftuullies in the Poonah lorco aro not fbrt booming. Colonel 
lliilihurton reported them fewer time those of the Hyderabad 
ib'tuoUmont. * 







CHAP. XVII. 


Thanks to 
the troops. 


Colonel 
lluliburton 
conrtm.inds 
iu Candoi3h, 


Enters Berar, 


Encamps at 
Fultypoor. 


ITolU lmok to 
tlu. Clodavciy, 


L6q> HISTORY OF THE 2IADEAS ARMY, 

The services of Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, and of 
the troops, were duly acknowledged by the Governor- 
General, and the operations wore described by General 
Wellesley as having been of the greatest importance, and 
as having been performed with a degree of gallantry, 
celerity, and skill, seldom surpassed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Haliburton, having been promoted 
to the rank of Colonel about this time, assumed command 
of the whole force, shortly after which Lieutenant- 
Colonel Wallace was recalled to Poonah, but the brigades 
from that place under Lieutenant-Colonels Coleman and 
Hudleaton continued in the hold. 

Early in December, Mr. Jenkins, then acting Resident 
with Scindiah, suspecting that the Rajah of Berar medi¬ 
tated an incursion into the territories of the Nizam, 
calkd up the Madras troops from Candeisli. In compli¬ 
ance with this requisition, Colonel Haliburton arrived at 
Omraoty * on the loth January 1805, but the alarm 
proving to bo without foundation, ho withdrew nnHI 
encamped at Futtypoor closo to the frontier of West 
Berar, about 30 miles soutb-west of the town of Mulka- 
poor, where ho romained until February, when, in 
conformity with instructions from the Gov. nor- General, 
he foil back to tho northern bank of the Godavery 
near Propnlgaum. 

Attacks on thb Camp or thk Rbsipbnt with Scindiah 
1804-05. 

Wittul Punt, the Minister of Scindiah, having died in 
O' tobor 180 !, was succeeded by Sirjee Kao Ghatkny, an 
inveterate enemy of the British, who, in the hope of 

1 A largo town in Bt-rar, 34 mileij south cwvt of Kllii.-bpooi. 


UWSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


135 



compromising his master, induced a body of Pindaries to OHAP.XTU. 

attack the camp of Mr. Jenkins, the Acting Resident on - - 

the night of the 27th December 1804. The attack was December 
made in large numbers, and baggage valued about 1S04 - 
12,000 rupees was carried off, but most of the public 
property was saved by the exertions of the escort, who, 
at last, succeeded in beating off the marauders. In conse¬ 
quence of this affair, and of Seindiah's refusal to dismiss January 
the Minister, Mr. Jenkins quitted the camp on the 23rd 1:S0G ’ 
January 1805, and marched to a distance of 14 miles. 