









WtSTfiy 



cHaP. XVII. dore . 1 The pettah was taken tlie same evening without 
resistance, and early on the morning of the Oth, a column 
composed of two' companies of the 94th, 150 details 
serving with the pickets, and 800 of the 1 st battalion 
3 rd regiment, attacked and carried the lowor fort, and 
took possession of tho outworks between it and tlio 
upper fort. -This was accomplished without loss on our 
side, but a number of the enemy, principally Arabs, were 
killed. Tho garrison surrendered on the 12 th, and 
wore permitted to march out with their private property. 
Tho upper fort was found to be remarkably strong, and 
capable of making a good defence. 

Capture of When approaching Cliandore on the 8 th, the 2nd 

Leased gaum. battalion 7 ^ re giinont under Captain Brown, with o 
couple of 12 -pounders, was detached against tho fort of 
Lussulgaum, situated about 12 miles to tho south of 
Cbandore, regarding the strength of which we had no 
information. The gate of the pettah was blown open, and 
the men advanced without much opposition, but on 
getting through the pottah they found themselves in 
front of a high citadel, from which so heavy a lire was 
opened that tho European officers were either killed or 
disabled, and tho greater part of the ammunition having 
been expended, the battalion retired into the pettah, 
where it was joined during tho night by a reinforcement 
composed of a regiment of native cavalry, two companies 
of the 94 th, and five companies 1 st battalion lltli regi¬ 
ment, all under Major Simons of the latter. The assault 
was renewed early on tho morning of the 9th, and tho 
place was carried by tho storming party under Captain 
Lindsay of the 11th, after a desperate resistance made 
by the Arab garrison, all of whom, 80 in number, were 


1 About 60 uiiles .vo3t-noit'lwwoBt from Aur’n^abt.d, 





killed. Tho casualties 1 at botli attacks amounted to 9 CHAP. XVII. 
killed and 37 wounded. 

Tlic fort of Dlioorb, situated about IS miles west of Surrender of 
Chandore, having been included in tho capitulation of Dhoorb ‘ 
that place, it was taken possession of on tho 14th, by a 
detachment 1 st battalion 3rd regiment, under Captain 
Welsh. 

On the 21st the force arrived at Galna, a hill fort of Capture of 
great strength situated about 87 miles north-west of 
Aurangabad. Tho pettah was occupied on tho 22nd 
without opposition, except by the fire from the fort which 
did no execution owing to the good cover afforded by 
the buildings in the pettah. Two breaches were made 
during tho 25th, and the Killadar surrendered the next 
day on condition that ho and the garrison should be per¬ 
mitted to retire with tlieir private property. The ascents 
to the breaches wore extremely difficult, and, as the 
garrison consisted of 500 men, chiefly Arabs, all well 
armed, it was fortunate that the place had uot to be 
Htormed. Tho loss in tho Hyderabad J detachment Casualty®, 
amounted to 1 man killed and 9 men wounded. 