

with Jeswunt Rao Holkar.” 

Acquisition By tho successful issue of tlie war witli the Mahratta 
• of territory. 

confederates, the East India Company acquired a large 
accession of territory. Tho Upper Doab between the 
Ganges and Jumna, and the fort of Baroach with tho 
country dependent thereon, wero ceded by Scindiah. 
The province of Cuttack, including the fort and district 
of Balasore, was ceded by tho Rajah of Berar. 







Relief of the Madras Troops at Poonaii, 180 LG. 

When the Madras troops wore ordered into Malabar 
and Canava, it wa., determined that tho subsidiary force at 
Poonah should, for tho future, be furnished from Bombay, 
with tho exception of the rogiment of native cavalry, 
which was to be sent from Madras. 

Tho relief commenced about tho middlo of 1804, but 
in consequence of the threatening attitude of Scindiah 
and other circumstances, it was nob completed before 
March 1806, when tho remaining Madras battalions, viz., 
the let of the 2nd at Poonah, the 2nd of the 3rd at Ahmc. d- 
nuggur, and the 1st of the 8th in the neighbourhood <>i 
that place, wore withdrawn to thoir own Presidency. 

Military Operations within the Limits op the 
Madras Presidency, 1804-5. 

Outbreak in DhuUgvl, 1804. 

On tho 19tli Juno 1804, Mr. Parish, Collector and 
Magistrate of Madura, left Dindigul for Veorapatochy m 
consequonco of certain disturbances existing in that part 
of the district, but as tho-o wero not believed to bo 
noririu'’, his escort was limited to 40 sepoy and ah-ml. 
300 armed peons. 



iriS'loEY ‘>r TIT E MADRAS ARMY. 


141 


<SL 


Al*ter attacked 11 "ar 
Veera patchy. 


On tlie afternoon of tlie 20th, when within a march of CHAP. XVII. 
hit* destination, Mr. Parish was attacked by a body of The Collcci..r 
tlie insurgents, estimated at about 1,000 men. 
maintaining his ground for some time, during which he 
lost, several of his best peons, Mr. Parish retreated to a 
dismantled fort near tlio place where he had been 
attacked, and from thence ho made his way back to 
Dindigul, whero he arrived the next day. 

On receipt of this intelligence at Trichinopoly, five Captain 
companies 2nd battalion 13fch regiment (20th M.N.I.) ^pr^^c, 
wore immediately dispatched to Dindigul under Captain ^ ” l8urr,,tv 
Galbraith Hamilton. On the night of the 4th July a 
party of the rebels under Lotchmana Naigue, their 
principal leader, was surprised near Poottoornuttuin by 
Captain Hamilton with the flank companies of his detach¬ 
ment. Several of the rebels were killed, and the rest 
dispersed, leaving 80 pikes and several matchlocks cm 
the ground. 

Captain Hamilton again surprised Letclnnana Naigue 
about noon on the 7th while resting with his party in 
the bed of a river. A few wore killed, the rest fled, 
leaving 85 pikes, 17 matchlocks, 4 jinjals, and a number 
of swords. 

Lotchmana Naiguo was taken on tho 1 ltli by the Poly- 
gar of Myawaddy, and given up to Captain Chambers 
commanding a detachment 2nd battalion Gth regiment 
at Columbuin. 