

He was immediately followed by messengers entreat¬ 
ing him to return, and promising compliance with his 
demands. Mr. Jenkins accordingly returnod on the 
24th, but on the 25th, while in attendance on Scindiah 
accompanied by Lieutenant Josiah Stewart, 1 commanding 
the escort, his camp was surrounded by a large body of 
Scindiah ? s Pindarries, who succeeded in plundering it in 
apito of the gallant dofeuco made by the escort, composed 
of two companies 2nd battalion 11th regiment, and a 
party of the body guard. Lieutenant Green of the 11th, 
and Mr. Wise, tho Residency Surgeon, wore wounded, 
and several men of the detachment killed and wounded. 

Scindiali, who was believed to have beou innocent of 
any complicity with the perpetrators of this outrage, 
expressed great horror and regret, and promised full 
i eparation. 

Mr. Jenkins, in his report to tho Suproiue Government, CKk>j 
which was republished in General Orders at Madras on th^o'iVcT^ 
tho 21st May 1800, spoke most highty of tho conduct of 
Lieutenants Stewart and Green, and of that of the, native 
officers and men of the detachment;'in consideration of 
which he recommended (hat tho families of those who 




1 After vrwrds U 'dout at Uycicrulmd, L: 






OIlAP.XVII. 


General 
Wellesley’s 
farewell 
erdor, 1803. 


136 HrdTORY OF THE MADRAS AUMY. 

had fallen should be granted the same indulgences 4 as 
those enjoyed by the heirs of men killed during the 
Mahratta war. This recommendation was duly complied 
with, and those of the detachment who had been disabled 
by wounds were placed on the pension list. 

General Wellesley returned to Scringapatam on the 
30tli November 1804. 

On the 9th February 1805 he finally left that place for 
Madras on his way to England, and on the 9th March he 
issued his farewell order to the army. 



“ General Order by Major-Gcal, the lion. Sir A. Wellesley , K.B. 

“ Fort Saint George , 9 th March 1805. 

“ Major-General Sir Arthur Wellesley informs the troops 
under his command that he has received the permission of 
His Excellency the Governor-General to resign the political 
end military powers with which he had lately been intrusted 
in the Deccan, and the leave of His Excellency the Coin- 
mander-in-Chief to procoed to England. 

“ He cannot avoid expressing the regrot which lie t'ecle 
upon taking leave of officers and troops with whom ho hrw 
served ao long. 

“ In the course of tho period of time which has elapsed since 
Ma^r-General Wellesley was appointed to the command of a 
division of this army, various nervines have been performed 
by the troop:, and great difficulties have been surmount, d 
with a steadiness and perseverance which have seldom hemi 
surpassed. Upon every occasion, whether iu garrison or in 
the field, tho Major-Coneral has had reason to be satisfied 
with their conduct, and he once more returns them his 
thunks, and assures them that ho shall never forget then 


’ rho families of tho men of tho body fruard who v ere killed on i h u . 
oc’union iu question had ulroady been adinittod on the pen,ion c .Lulj. 
bailment. 