

Tho disturbances ceased after this capture, and tho 
troops returned into cantonments. 


Operation p in the Chittoor Poll am?, 1804-5. 

At the period of tho transfer of P Carnatic to tbo Ret, iii 0] , ,.r 
llritish Government in perpetual sovereignty, under tho ! r'l*} " 1 ,'’ ‘" 
operation of the treaty eoneludod with His Highness 


history of thd madras army. 



C.’oloiml 

Darluy'a 

brigade, 

1801. 


112 



Azeem-ocl-Dowlah on the 31st July 1801, the assessment 
o. the lands held by the Polygars of Chittoor was revised 
and fixed after a minute examination of the village 
accounts, which were submitted for the purpose. Tho 
assessment thus fixed was paid with punctuality at first, 
but tho Polygars soon relapsed into the contumacious 
and disorderly habits for which they had been notorious 
under the feeble administration of tho Nawaubs of the 
Carnatic, and, taking advantage of the disturbances of 
the period, they ceased to make any payments, and 
having assembled considerable bodies of armed peons, 
they began to plunder villages in the Company’s territory. 
The employment of the troops on service of moro urgont 
importance precluded the Government from taking stops 
to reduce the Polygars to submission until the end of 
June 1804, when tho Collector was directed to call upon 
thorn to discharge their arrears on pain of forfeiture. 

This requisition having been disregarded except by 
the Zemindar of Goodiput, a detachment 1 under Lieute- 
n.mt-Colonel Tlarlcy, 2nd battalion 4th regiment, marched 
into the district about the middle of July, and com¬ 
menced active operations shortly afterwards. No serious 
opposition was offered, except on two occasions, viz., 
at the Droog, or hill fort, of Pulloor, in the attack 
on which, on the 13th August, tho detachment had 4 
men killed and 16 wounded, aud again at tho attack of 
Snndoor Conduk on the 21th September by two com¬ 
panies of tho 1st battalion IGtb regiment under Captain 
Armstrong, when 5 men wore killed and 13 wounded. 






1 Artillery— 9 officers, 2S iJuropeana, 66 natives. 

Officers. Havildara. 
battalion 4th regiment. 16 60 

Ui lfifcl* do. 16 60 

Finnoom . . ,,, X 6 


Honk file. 
065 
913 
192 





HISTOKY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


143 



By tlie end of September the numerous hill-forts and OHAP.XVII. 

stockades having been destroyed, and the armed followers - 

of the Polygars having been dispersed. Government 
directed Colonel Darley to suspend hostilities ; and they Suspension of 
appointed a Commission of three experienced officers of 
the Civil Service to meet at Chittoor for the purpose of Appointment 
redressing any grievances of which the Polygars might Commui ' 
have just cause to complain, and also of revising the 
system of management in the Pollams. The troops were 
accordingly withdrawn, and the Polygar chiefs came into 
Chittoor on the requisition of the Commissioners, but 
they brought 5,000 armed men with them, and after a Renownl oi’ 
fruitless discussion which lasted some days, they suddenly thc rcvoU ‘ 
quitted Chittoor, and again broke out into insurrection. 