

The officers and men were thanked by the Governor- 
General in Council in an order dated at Fort ‘William on 
tho 22nd October 1803. 

During November 1804 it was found necessary to move 
against tho Rajah of Koordah in Juggernautli. His fort 
was taken after some resistance, and lie came in and 
surrendered soon afterwards. Early in 1805 a force was 
sent against tho Rajah of Knnkah in the north of the , 
district, and succeeded in obliging him to submit in 
March. With this event tho conquest of tho province 
may be said to have been completed. 


Operations in Candkish, 1804-05. 

During our operations against Scindiah, and the Rajah 
of Berar, Jeswuut Rao Holkar was engaged in predatory 
incursions in the province of Malwa, in the course of 
which he levied enormous sums of money, and captured 
booty of every description. With these means, lie was 
enabled to employ a number of soldiers discharged by 
Scindiali at the close of the war, and early in 1804 lie 
way of, the head of an army consisting of nearly 80,000 
in ‘ n. Intoxicated by success ho made tlio most extra- 
" K an t demands fox tho cession of territory, both in the 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 331 

ices, and in the Deccan, and, on these being 
refused by the Governor-General, he took up a threaten¬ 
ing position, and sent plundering parties into the country 
of the Rajah of Jeypoor, anally of the British Government. 
All attempts at an accommodation having failed, orders 
Were issued about the middle of April for the commence¬ 
ment of hostile operations against Holkar in Hindostan, 
and also in the Deccan. The force at, and near Agra 
under General Lake, destined for this service, was com¬ 
posed of Bengal troops, and that which was directed to 
advance into Malwa from Guzerat under Colonel Murray 
belonged to tho Presidency of Bombay. The reduction 
of Holkar's possessions in Candeish was entrusted to the 
Madras Army, and with this object part 1 of the Poouah 
subsidiary force, under Lieutenant-Colonel Wallace, 
marched on tho 22nd August, and formed a junction with 
a detachment 2 of the Hyderabad subsidiary force under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Haliburton near Aurungabad on the 
27th September. 



<SL 

CIIAP.XVII, 


Colonel Wallaco assumed con mand of tho whole, aiul capture of 
on the 8fch October ho came before the hill fort of Chan- Chandore * 






1 Detachment of artillery. 


6th and 7th cavalry GOO 

H.M.’n 74th regiment ... 200 
V. t battalion Jbd regiment. COO 

lat do. 8th do. ... 500. 

Two companies pioneers. 
a Detachment of Artillery. 


Lionfcenani-Colonel lludloi-ton 
commanding the brigade. 

Lieutenant-Colonol Coleman, 
ll.M.'s 84th commanding tho 
brigade. 


3rd and Oth cavalry about 700. 

II. M'a 04th regiment 

about .. ... 300 

1st battalion 11th regi¬ 
ment about .700 

2ud battalion 2nd regi- 
mont nhout ... 000 

2nd battalion 7th regi- i 

mont abi/ut ... buO ■ 


Lieutenant-Colonel Lang, 1st of 

11th. 


Lioutemmt -Colonel Dosse, 2nd 
of 2nd. 