

* * * 

.Computation 'Tara. 23. * * As the mode of calculating tho off- 

ol off-reckon- i * i , 3 

jitga, 1801. reckonings above noticed appears exceptionable, vve direct 

that in future the stoppages from the men actually clothed be 

considered as the fund applicable to distribution, and that 

the off-reckonings shall bo calculated upon the effective 

strength only of nil the corps. 

* * * # 

r U , 1 ' : b f0i; th0 ‘Tara. 84. In fact we aro convinced that the interests 
o funds. Lieutenant-Colonels aro amply provided for in tho 

prospects held out to them by the arrangement for distribut¬ 
ing the off-reckonings, which, after mature deliberation, wo 
have resolved on, and which is as follows :— 

*T. That the off-reckonings at all tho Presidencies, from 
tho regular corps of artillery, infantry, and cavalry, calculated 
08 above directed, bo drawn into a general fund. 

‘ 2. That a retirod list of General Ofticors, or Colonels, bo 
formed, who are to bo struck off tho strength of the Army, 
lu "' considered ftltog ’her out of the service ; tho number to 



HISTORY op the madras army. 


15 / 


bo twenty-one, viz., nine from Bengal, eight from Madras, 
and four from Bombay. The senior officers from all the corps' 
at each Presidency, according to the dates of their commis¬ 
sions, to form this list, unless it should bethought proper by 
our Governments to reserve any of this class of officers for 
staff appointments. 

“ 3. That each of the retired Generals or Colonels above 
mentioned, be .allowed the sum of £543-15-0 per annum from 
the off-reckoning fund in addition to the full or half pay they 
may be entitled to according to tho length of their actual 
service in India. 

“ 4. That the remainder of the off-reckoning fund be 
divided among the Colonels of the regiments of infantry, and 
cavalry, and of the battalions of artillery. 

“ 5. That tho officers last mentioned bo allowed to reside in 
Imrope with their shares of off-reckonings and their pay ; 
subject always to the Court’s orders for their return to their 
duty in India, and if they decline so to do, they arc to relin¬ 
quish their rdiare of off-rookonings, and retire from the service 
on their pay only. 

“ & That when ».u augmentation of tho armies in India takes 
phico, in increasing tho Goucral fund, tho shares to [he 
Colonels above mentioned in tho service arc to bo augmented 
accordingly; on tho other hand, iftlm armies be reduced so as 
to diminish tho General fund, their shares arc to bo reduced 
m proportion, it being our intention that whatever surplus 
remains after providing for the retired list in the manner 
stated in the 3rd article, it is to be divided amongst tho 
Colouels v ho continuo in tho service'. 

u 7. That if a reduction in the number of regiments takes 
place, tho Colonels ut the reduced regiments arc not there¬ 
after to participate in the off-reckoning*; rv.il h, waneioi 
occurring they are reinstated in the command of regiments. 

“ 3, That the General officers not on tho staff, or kept in 
India by tho orders of our respective Governments to succeed 
to tin? ^tnff (if such a measure should hu thought necessary), 
bo nPowed only their pay and *bare of tlie off reckoning j 