

(3) No officer or gentleman residing at an out-station 
to be manned without a license from the Governor 
of Fort St. George, such license to be obtained 
by application through the Town Major, 

(4) Funeral ceremonies to be performed either by 
Civilians or Military officers according to cir¬ 
cumstances. 

The order contains forms of certificates to be used 
when the duty should not bo performed by a Clergyman. 

On the same date officers commanding regiments of 
infantry, whether European or Native, were directed to 
instruct their men in tho duties of light troops as 
recently introduced in Europe. The instruction so 
imparted was not to be limited to the light companies, 
but every company was to be taught to manoeuvre in 
extended order. 

Ou tho 21st February 1806 the establishment of Divi- 
siomd staff was fixed at ono Assistant Qunrtrrma U< r 
General, one Assistant Adjutant-General, and one Aide- 
ih -Camp or one Bvigudo-Major according ns tho command 
of the division or district might be held by n Major- 
Uonoral or by an officer of inferior rank. Tho Hydera¬ 
bad Subsidiary force was excluded from tho operation 
of this order, and St aft officers of tin? grade of Deputy 

von nr. 21 


<SL 


CHAP. XVII. 


Light 
infantry 
oxen iso, 
1805. 


l)ivif iomil 
U-air 1800 . 



ursTORT or the :,udt:a 3 ARtiy. 



Companies 
ot invaJida. 


1 niform. 


New general 
regulations. 


Company. 

Ifindostaneo 
Irv truotor 


IVinsionu 

foi lora 
t f liraN. 


162 



Adjutant-General and Deputy Quartermaster-General 
were continued therewith as before. 

During the month of March the existing companies of 
European invalids were reduced, and the following 
arrangement substituted. Two garrison companies, to be 
officered from the non-effective establishment, each 
company to consist of 10 Serjeants, 10 Corporals, 10 
Gunners, 4 Drums and Fifes, and 100 Privates, were 
ordered to be formed from the invalids of artillery and 
infantry not holding situations on the staff. The 1st 
garrison company, under Lieutenant-Colonel Aiskill, 
was stationed at Vizagapatam, and the 2nd, under Major 
Jones, at Tanjore. 

The clothing was ordered to be blue, with scarlet 
facings. 

A new code of regulations for the several branches of 
the Army was published on the 11th March, and all 
previous regulations militating against the spirit of the 
new code were abrogated. 

On the 1st April tho Cadet company was ordered to 
inarch from Tripassoor to Cuddalore, there to be stationed. 

On the 0th May Lioutonant Charles Stewart, 21st 
regiment N.I., was appoint* d to instruct the cadets in 
Hindostaneo on a salary of 100 pagodas per mensem. 

The following order regarding pensions for wounds was 
published to the Army on Ihe same date :— 

“His Lordship in Cuun.il ha. been pleased to resolve that 
every European, or Native soldier, who may have lost a 
limb in tbp service by wounds received in actio shall bo 
pensioned on full pay; the certificates with which such 
soldiers kivo boon furnished will accordingly bo exchange* 1 
fur othorB entitling thorn to tho payment of their augmented 