

He at the same time announced his intention to maintain 
in the district, during the-rains, a force sufficiently strong 
to protect the well-affected portion of the population. 

After rebuilding the redoubt at the head of the Cotioor 
pass. Colonel Macleod marched to Panamurta Cottoh, 
where he stationed four companies to protect the pioneers 
ordered to rebuild the fort, and to construct cover for the 
troops during the rains. 

Detachments were sent into every part of the district 
in pursuit of tho rebels, and redoubts were constructed 
at VeTlaud in the north, and at Koiladdy and Kunyote in 
the south. During March, and April several captures 
were made, and a number of the inhabitants repaired to 
tho different camps and tendered their submission. 

By the end of April tranquillity was restored, and 
Colonel Macleod* returned to Cannanore about tho middle 
of May, leaving about 2,152 1 non-commissioned, rank 
and file in Wyuaad, who were distributed amongst eleven 
posts. Captain Watson, with 800 of the Malabar Police, 
corps, was also left-in tho district, and Lieutenant-Colonei 
Tunes,-2nd battalion 1st regiment, was appointed to 
-command tho whole. 

Active operations were recommenced at tlie end of the 
rains, and the disturbances in Wyuaad and Cotiote were 
at last terminated by the death of the Pycliy Itajah, who 

A Siud bacwilwn Ufc,1,000.—Panamurta CoUaIi, Koiladdy, Kanvcto. 
tottah. 

I t hatt' lion 18tb 81k—Vr-llnud, A,ttwoyb, Cuniiioh A rry, Dr, rRloor. 

1st bottalion 12th 80S.—Maiol- l<., Pallingal, Mauantoddy, La« r 7 . 

coUah. ** ' . •' 

Jluvildnr's post at San^aloo on the Mysore frontier, to bo relieved 
ovury third day from Manantoddy. 





was surprised and killed on tlie 30th November 1805 CHAP. XYli. 
by a party of the 1st battalion 4th regiment under Cap¬ 
tain Clapham, supported by 100 armed peons under the 
direction of Mr. Baber, the Sub-Collector, who had 
accompanied the detachment. 

Emin Nair, one of the principal rebels, was taken a 
few days after the death of the Rajah, and deported to 
Prince of Wales Island. 

Congan Nair, who burnt the cantonment at Panamurta- 
cottah in 1802, despairing of being able to evade capture, 
committed suicide about the end of the year. 

The troops suffered very much during this service Distress of 
from want of proper shelter, provisions, and medical aid. thc 
The 2nd battalion 1st regiment, which had been 
employed during tho rains without cover, had upwards 
of 200 men on tho sick list in May 1805. 


Succession of Governors and Commanders-xn-Chief, 

1803-6. 

Lord William Bentinck succeeded Lord Clive as Lord W. 
Governor of tho Presidency of Fort St. George on tho bcutmck * 
30th August 1803. 

Lieutenant-General Stuart resigned on tho 21st Octo- Lieutenant, 
bor 1804, and was succeeded, as a temporary measure, by gtSST* 
Major-General Dugald Campbell of tho MadraB Army. 

General Stuart issued an order on his departure, from 
which the following is an extract :— 

