

In consequence of these observations the following 
order was issued by the Governor in Council on tho 
15th May:— 

“The Governor in Council, fully impressed with the im¬ 
portant advantages to tho public service, and general disci¬ 
pline of the Army, which will result fr<?m the establishment 
of messes of officers in the several corps of the Army .as 
proposed in the 32nd paragraph of tho letter of the Honorable 
Court of Directors, desires that tho Commander-in-Chief will 
adopt such measures ns he may doom proper and necessary to 
obtain so desirable an object, to the extent which the nature 
of the service will admit, reporting bis proceedings 1 in this 
respect to the Right Honorable the Governor in Council.” 




1 j\Ie«bOB were introilw ed in Juno 1806. 




ITI3T0RY Or THC MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XVII. 


Complement 
of neces¬ 
saries. 


C impany of 
th». regiment 
of SViirtem- 
Wg. 


Marriage®, 

IrfiptiniOB, 

Mini funerals, 
1805. 


160 



On the 17tli June the undermentioned revised com¬ 
plement of necessaries was ordered to be adopted in the 
artillery and infantry. 

Shirts . 4 

White-sleeved waistcoats of 
Nankeen, with red and green 
wings to distinguish the flank 

companies . 3 

White pantaloonB ... ... 3 

White linen false collars ... 3 

Cloth half-gaiters (blackened) 

pairs. 2 

Black leather stock . 1 

Pipo-clay, whiting, black ball, ^ In such proportions as may bo 
grease and powder for the hair, rogulatodin the standing orders 

and powder bag and puff. j 0 f corps by their Colonels. 

The company of the regiment of Wurfcemberg, com¬ 
manded by Captain Gaupp, which had been admitted 
into the British Service in 1796, having become ineffi¬ 
cient in consequence of the great reduction in the number 
of men, it was ordered to be struck off the strength of 
the Indian Army from tue 1st September 1804. 

The officers and men were allowed to retire on full pay, 
in consideration of tho “ distinguished merit ” of the 
company, and such of tho latter as were able aud williag 
to serve, were admitted as privates into the East India 
Company's European infantry. 

On the 27th March 1805 an order was issued pro¬ 
scribing C( rtain rules for tho performance of marriages, 
baptisms, and funerals, and for the preparation of 
registers; of which order tho following is a precis :— 

(1) Registers of marriages, baptism., and funerals 
to bo kept by every Clergy man, Magistrate, or 
Military off! er who may perform them. Copies 
of tho entries to bo forwarded to the Senior 


biioea (pairs) ... ... ... 3 

Stock, clasp brass ... ... 1 

Hair leather .1 

Foraging cap ... ... ... 1 

Knapsack . ... 1 

Cumly watch coat .1 

Clothes brush ... ... ... 1 

Shoe brushes ... ... ... 2 

Combs ... 2 







Chaplain at the Presidency on the day of the 
performance of the ceremony. 

(2) In the absence of a Clergyman, marriages and 
baptisms were to be performed by the undermen¬ 
tioned functionaries in the following order, viz. : 
Magistrate, Collector, Commercial Resident. If 
no Civil Servant should be available, then by 
the senior Military officer on the spot. 