

1 Second-Lieutenant. 

1 Subadar. 

2 Jemadars. 

4 Havildars. 


4 Naigues. 

1 Trumpeter. 

1 Farrier. 

70 Privates. 

2 Recruit boys. 


1 Puckally. 

32 Horsekeepcrs, 84 Grass-cutters, and 83 horses. 

The undermentioned officers of artillery were posted to 
the troop :— 


Kative foot 
artillery or 
G« ! 'iithinze. 


• 1 2 nifurro 
•if 

art ill m y 
ami 1 4 


Captain-Lieutenant Noble, Commandant. 


Lieutenant G. W. Poignand. 
Do. E. M. G. Showers. 
Do. W. M. Burton. 

Do. Walter Shairpe. 


Lieutenant H. T. Rudyard. 
Do. R. Beauchamp 
Proctor. 

Mr. Abst. Surgeon D. Ainslie. 


Officers were to piovido their horses on the same 
principle and terms as officers of cavalry. 

On the 20th of the same month an order was issued 
directing that two companies of native foot artillery, of 
the undermentioned strength, should bo raised, one 
company to bo attached to each battalion ot European 
artillery :— 


1 Subadar. 

2 Jemadars 
6 Havildars, 
f> Naiguce. 


1 Drummer, 

1 Fifer. 

2 Bhjstics. 
80 Privates. 


A European officer was to be detailed by the com¬ 
mandant of artillery for the immediate charge of each 
company of Golandauze. 


The following order regarding the uniform of the Horso 
Artillery and Gulaudauzo was issued on the 8th May :—. 
41 The lo'.ting of I lor Be Artillery is to be blue, with b<:;rlet 





HISTORY OP THR MADRAS ARMY. 


155 


collar and cults; trimmingsyellow, and of the fashion of cloth¬ 
ing of cavalry regiments. 

•“ The clothing of Golandauze is to bo of the colours and 
fashion of clothing of artillery.” 

The undermentioned alteration in the designation of the 
Horse Artillery took place in January 1806 ;— 


0.0 . by the Commander-in-Chief, 6th January 1806. 

“ The Horse Artillery, which was established by General 
Orders of 4th April 1805, shall be denominated ‘ The Squa¬ 
dron of Horse Artillery/ aud shall bo mustered, paid, and 
returned as such from the 1st January 1806. 

u The European non-commissioned, rank and file, shall be 
denominated ‘The First Half Squadron.’ 

The Native commissioned, non-commissioned, rank and 
file shall be denominated ‘ The Second Half Squadron.’ 

“To the first half squadron shall be posted the Captain- 
Lieutenant, the second Lieutenant, the fourth Lieutonant, the 
sixth Lieutenant, and the Assistant Surgeon ; and to the 
second half squadron the senior Lieutonant, and the third 
and fifth Lieutenants.” 


CHAP. XVII. 


Golandauze. 


Squadron of 
Horse Artil¬ 
lery, 1800. 


Posting of 
officers. 


156 


nrsTo&y or the madras achy. 




European Infantry, 1803—1806. 

On the 15th May 1804, a despatch from tlio Court of 
Directors regarding the off-reckoning funds, and other 
matters, and from which the following are extracts, was 
published to the army. 

Computation. <l Para. 21. By the regulations established by Marquis 
hi 1788.° Cornwallis in 1788, for the annual computation of the off¬ 
reckonings, those of tho European artillery, and infantry aro 
calculated upon tho actual strength ; but in regard to the 
native corps, the established strength is taken, whether tho 
same be complete or not; hence if these corps bo deficient, 
the company aro charged with off-reckonings for a greater 
number than are clothed, and tho clothing being issued to tbo 
effectives only, the fund for distribution is thus increased.” 