

The 23rd had recently been raised in the district of 
i iunevclly, and contained in its ranks a number of tho 
followers of the Polygar chiefs whose possessions had 
been forfeited in 1801 for rebellion. Tho 69th were 
quartered in the fort. Most of the sepoys lived in the 
pettuh, but their arms were lodged in tho fort. 

Tho men for general duty on tho night of the 9tli July 
were taken from the 09th, and the 1st rogimont. 

The detail of tho 69th consisted of 3 serjeants, 4 corpo¬ 
rals, 2 drummers, and 44 privates, under Lieutenants 
Eley and Popkam. 

The men were divided between the main guard, tiiu 
general magazine, and the gate, but the number at each 
post has not been precisely ascertained. The main guard 
furnished fivo h entries, viz., one at the guard, and four at 
different points nt some little distance, from which it nmv 
be inferred that it consisted of about 20 rank and file, 
svirli one or two serjeants and a subaltern. 


1 ] -.ri.jr*i\2 Captains, 7 I louti Juints, 1 Assistant Surgoon, jj» s«m - 
*n1 . 18 CdrporalB, 5DrotmaerH, 330 Privates.—Return, 9t!i July lstHi. 
* Ir is *tfUed WiUon’s History of llritiah Tmliu, Vol. I, p it gn 1,13, 
1 1,1,1 1,10 ,1,fc rugimont had been ehicjbj raised in My* >r.. ant] thru runny 
I - t)i. and in on lmd florv.-d j n i ho nruiioe of lly.hr and T-t,,.,,,,. 

U'lu »u urary of this . . qu^tionn .In. '1 ho l.t battnlion v. r..rn.. .1 
]7bh from t..o indcpunl .t oompanien, forty yourn Inborn w had i.i, v 
cnjinoction ii h 'Myoi.rc. It dintim'd: hod it .oil in tho lirst ouiu , n ,, ,, 
1 •' hy«h '- 17S7-(»J. tt \v;t*i or •*ri\ do t roved at bnim ,, ! f».-i m 

1” m, ‘ r 1 Vsu, nml wiin » f- inn 1 at T„ni ,o in 17SI. It V \ ,| j fl 
1 to o 'n.pnign of nd g-bu during 'ho • nl . { ^ n 

j ! * * 11 ^ V(l • ‘ I «uu in the My >o < ounn until |.< 









The number of the 1st regiment on duty amounted to 
4 native ofllcoru, 0 havildara, and 251 run k und file, under 
Lieutenant O'Reilly, No return showing the particulars 
of tho distribution lias been found. 

1 serjeant, 2 corporals, and 12 privates of tlie 69th 
were on duty ot tlie barracks, and furnished three sentries, 
viz., one at the gate of the barrack yard, one immediately 
outside the barracks, and one over the regimental maga¬ 
zine close to the ramparts. 

Captain Miller of the 1st regiment was captain of the 
day. 

Nearly the whole of the 2nd battalion 23rd regiment 
appear to have received permission to sleep in the fort 
on the night in questiou in order to bo in readiness for 
»u early parade next morning. 

Nothing unusual attracted the attention of the officers 
on duty during the night; indeed it was afterwards 
Stated in evidence by a Hindoo sepoy who had been on the 
main guard, that tlie European officer did not go his 
rounds, but desired one of the native officers to tuke the 
duty, upon which Jemadar Shaik Cossim of the 1st, one 
of the principal conspirators, volunteered to do so, and 
(oft the guard ostensibly for that purpose. 