

About half past two o'clock on the morning of tho 10th, 
tlie native troops made an almost simultaneous attack on 
tho European guards, and on the barracks, also keeping 
up r» smart fire on the officers’ quarters in order to keep 
them from joining tlie men. 

Tho following account of the commencement of the 
attack is taken from n letter 1 to the Commander-in-Chief 

1 Ill reply to an order calling upon im lo lln nature of tlio 

precautions Wikon for tho protoction oi ih.< lsarroek*. Tbit, it nrrmttiob 
v»ufi required in consequence of ri> .»m to the • ir.*ct that tho barracks 
|,„ i llc ,j b, on nt lacked until mm* tina; fior tho men on tho main guirJ 
Uu •! V.'M t • l wered. 


CHAPTER 

XVIII. 

1st regiment. 


Parrack 
gnard. 


23rd 

regiment. 


Laxity c f 
discipline. 


Tho mutiny 
break* uui. 


VOL. III. 


23 



178 


HISTORY OF TJir: MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAPTER 
XVII r. 


Attnck on 
th© main 
guard. 


A ttncK on the 
barracks. 


<SL 


irom Major Coates of the 60th, who resided outside the 
fort. 

“With respect to the main gnard, one of the four Euro¬ 
peans who survived is Corporal Piercy, who received a sever© 
wound. He states that he was called to by the European 
sentry about half past two o’clock, saying that a shot or two 
was fired somowhere about the 69th barracks. He had scarce 
time to answer when the sepoy part of the guard rushed on 
the English and murdered the whole, himself and three more 
excepted. He conceives they thought him dead ; he sa}*s they 
were instantly joined by several more, who assisted in com¬ 
pleting the dreadful havoc, adding, that he perceived numerous 
bodies of sepoys attacking the barracks of the 69th regiment 
til that time.” 

* * * * 

“ Agreeably to your Excellency’s command, I relate to you 
as follows concerning the barracks occupied by the 69th 
regiment, 

“ Having the command of the detachment stationed at 
Vellore, I conceived it proper to mount a guard consisting of 
one serjeant, two corporals, and twelve privates, placing three 
sentinels from it on such parts of the barracks as I thought 
would most conduce to their order and regularity. The 
account I recoivod from Serjeant Cosgrave, who was serjeant 
of the barrack guard on the 10th of July, and was so severely 
wounded as to render him incapable of being of further 
service to His Majesty. He gives the following statement of 
the transaction- Hearing a trampling of feet, he called to 
the sentry at the guard houso door about half past two 
o’clock, expressing his astonishment that the patrol should 
pass that way. He had scarce spoke when a party of sepoys 
formed in front of the gate, and discharged a volley of mus¬ 
ketry on lho guard, and in the* uarrQcks, by which several of 
the 69th fell. On tho guards getting undor arms the pcj* >y«j 
qvHtod that Riation, when an instantaneous, and general 
aibwglr wuh made upon thu barracks. Ho uusuroM m**, as do 


HISTORY Of THK MADRAS ARMY. 


170 


4 ?v 

a number of respectable testimonies, that the barracks of the 
60th regiment was the first object of attack, the result of 
which has been so fatal to so many brave officers, and soldiers/* 