

! he six extra battalions above mentioned were reduced 
on the 30th June, and the native commissioned and 
non-commissioned officers, drummers, and rank and file 
were distributed amongst the regular regiments, large 
drafts being sent to those corps which had suffered mo^t 
during the war. For example, the 1st battalion 8th 
received 465 rank and file, and the 1st of the 3rd, the 
2nd of the 12th, and the 2nd of the 18th upwards i,f 300 
men each. 

On tho 14th November 1800 tbo following order, 
'■h. ii v. .3 destined to achievo an unenviable notoriety, 
vv,lH published to tho Army :— 


HIf)TORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


107 


‘‘Head-Quarters, Choultry Plain , 1 Uh November 1805. 

“ Lieutenant-General Sir J. F. Cradock lias established a 
turband for the native commissioned officers, non-commis¬ 
sioned officers, and rank and file, of regiments of native 
infantry, of companies of golandauze, and of gun lascars 
attached to battalions of artillery belonging to the Army on. 
the establishment of Fort St. George. 

“ The turband so established shall be considered to be the 
uniform of the above-mentioned corps, and shall be worn as 
such to the exclusion of every other that may heretofore have 
been authorised. 

41 Sealed patterns of the turband will be furnished to 
corps, and the Commander-iu-Chief forbids any deviation 
whatever from those patterns as established for Grenadiers, 
Light infantry, and battalion companies, either in their 
-e.nion or trimmings, or in their dimensions or weight.” 

I he Stoppages formerly made from the pay of the sepoys 
f'»r the purpose of supplying them with medical aid and 
country medicines were discontinued on the 1st January 
180t>, and the native dressers were ordered to bo received 
° u the strength of the corps to which they had been 
attached, and to be regularly paid by Government at the 
of ten pagodas each per mensem. One dresser was 
allowed to each regimont of native cavalry, and two to 
caeli battalion of native infantry. 

On tho 27tlx February orders were issued for the 
f <j illation of a corps ot dooly bearers, to bo employed 
iu tho carriage of doolies 1 for the conveyance of the sick 
and wounded, or as cauvedy coolies. 

Tho bearers wen formed into companies, each com¬ 
pany consisting of oik head maistry, three second 
tnaistrios, and ninety men. 

1 A lighi kind of pUankiu. tho 1 hi imr of . a »vn+ inrli >,j 0 f 
CnUrodioa nro haakotn, or boxen, carried on ho shoulder hv 
nici.nu of n liranhoo, to enoh end if which a rope netting 1*3 fixed For 
•Jo* roue pi ion of the busk ’t, or box, r.j 1.30 cmo may lx). 


CHAP. XVII. 

New 

turban ds. 


Native 

tlrcajerd, 

1806. 


OorpR 01 

dooly 

bearorn. 


E8inUii.li. 

mont. 




1C8 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XVII. 
Pay. 


Privileges. 


Commandant. 


Fnll batta 
granted to 
Ibo pioneers. 


AI low n nc 
ir men • . 


The pay was "fixed at four pagodas per mensem for 
the head raaistries, three pagodas for the second maistries, 
and one pagoda thirty-four fnnams for the men, besides 
batta at the rate of one fanam a day when marching, or 
in the field on service. 