


t rat f^rdor 
f'r tho trial 

«>» lh«- men 


170 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



aliaJl be clean shaved on the chin. It is directed also that 
urifo. mity shall, as far as it is practicable, be preserved in 
regard to the quantity and shape of the hair on tho upper lip.” 

During the months of April, May, and June 1806 
pattern turbands were sent to each regiment, and com¬ 
manding officers were directed to cause new turbands to 
be made up in conformity therewith, and to be issued to 
the men. 


The 2nd battalion 4th regiment/ then'at Vellore, was 
the first to show dissatisfaction. The men declared that 
the new turbands bore an offensive resemblance to the 
bat, or cap, worn by the East Indian drummers, and that 
they were objectionable with reference to caste, for which 
reasons they positively refused to wear them. 

Colonel Fancourt, commanding at Vellore, reported 
the matter, and the Commander-in-Chief, acting on tho 
advice oi his Staff, who informed him that there was no 
real objection to the turband, directed that the ring- 
leaders in the 4th should be confined and sent to Madras 
for trial. Lieutenant-Colonel Dnrley, commanding the 
battalion, remonstrated, and prevailed upon Colonel Fan- 
court to postpone the execution of tho order, pending 
u reference to head-quarters, but this reference had no 
effect. The correspondence is given below, having been 
afterwards quoted by the Governor, Lord William Ben- 
tinck, as having committed him to a certain line of action, 
which he might not otherwise have pursued. 

(l To Colonel Fancourt, 

ComrnaQding Vellore. 

“ Bir ~-Ihftve received your letter by express of yesterday's 
date, aud I have submitted it toth^ Co mm an d or-m-Chief. 


J hi 16th battalion, now the 15 1, regiment N.I. Tl.m nyimi 
T ,Mlinp,l * hea iu “***• campaigns, and has nlwavn borne a hi 
ini,irlt * r m ur '«y »P to thu present timo. 


Ub 




HISTOllY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


171 



“ While the Commander-in-Chief regrets the cause which 
requires such measures, he feels it to be his duty to check 
by the most decided resolution, the symptoms of insubordi¬ 
nation which you have reported in the 2nd battalion 4th 
regiment of native infantry. 

“ His Excellency has therefore ordered to Yellore a detach¬ 
ment of H.M.’s 19th dragoons, who will receive and escort 
to the Presidency for trial, before a General Court-martial 
now sitting, the 19 men confined by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Parley, against whom he will prefer charges, and prepare to 
support, the same by tho requisite evidence. 

u You will also direct the non-commissioned officers of the 
grenadier company (the two, who did not object in the first 
instance to deliver their turbands, excepted) to be reduced to 
the ranks; the Commander-in-Chief deeming a man who hesi¬ 
tates a moment to obey an order unfit to bear the character 
of a non-commissi ned officer. 

“ You will farther, through Lieutenant-Colonel Parley, 
direct the nativo commissioned officers of tho 2nd battalion 
4th regiment N.I .immediately to make up, and wear the turband 
of tli© prescribed pattorn. 