

The men were to be enlisted in the same manner as 
sopoys, and entitled to the same privileges as regarded 
prize-money, family certificates, and pensions. 

A European officer was appointed to command the 
corps. 

On the 11th March the following order was issued 
regarding the allowance of batta to the corps of 
pioneers:— 

“The Right Honorable the Governor in Council is pleased 
to direct that the corps of native pioneers attached to the 
Army under this Presidency, in consequence of the laborious 
duties which this corps is frequently called upon to execute, 
shall at all times be considered entitled, the European officers 
to the difference between their half ond fall batta, the non¬ 
commissioned European officers to their net dry batta 
according to the regulations, and the Nativo commissioned, 
non-commissioned, and privates to the full batta of their 
ranks respectively.” 

On the 30tli June an allowance of thirty-five pagodas 
per mensem when marching or in the hold, and of 
eighteen pagodas per mensem when in garrison or canton¬ 
ment, was grantod to each battalion of native infantry in 
which an. Officers* moss was maintained 




CH A PT 13R XVIII. 

MUTINY AT VELLORE, 180G. 


On the 14th November 1805, an order was issued by cn \ptyr 
the Commandcr-m-Ohief to the effect that a new paitern XVin. 
of turband had been determined upon for the native 
infantry and artillery. The introduction of stocks, leather iso™**’ 
cockades, and plumes, was directed about the same time. 

The new turband was ordered on the ground that Reasons fm 
those in wear were heavy and inconvenient, and also SSda.* 10 
because there was a want of uniformity in that article of 
dress as worn in different regiments. This last objection 
was not well founded, inasmuch as a pattern turband had 
been sanctioned by Government in March 1797, after the 
Military Board hud “ f liven > t every consideration which a 
subject oj that delicate and important nature required- 
consequently, any want of uniformity, which might bavo 
existed, ought to have been rectified by inspecting 
officers. 

Early in 1800 Major Pierce, Deputy Adjutant-General, Now 
prepared a volume of regulations for the army, which ,llio,1 *» 
f contained standing orders for the guidance of native 
infautry. These regulations were approved of by the 
Commandor-m-Chief, and submitted by him for the 
sanction of Government, but without calling attention to 
those paragraphs which prescribed alterations in dress, 
mid cognate matters. The lOtli paragraph of the ilth 
nation of these regulations ran as follows : — • 

M It is ordered by the Regulation that a mdivo soldier Canta mnrktjfl 
shall not mark his face i > denote his caste, nr wear earring# 'Uidonmn 
when drcoHedin 1ns uni IV »n.n ; uud it is further direetmi that :it 
all parades, and upon all duties, ©very soldier of the battalion 




TER 
XVIII. 


Pattern 

turbands 

issued. 


Refused by 
the 2nd of 
the 4tb. 


Action of the 
i’ommnndcr- 
-Chief. 