

On tho 29th June the Coinnmnder-in-Cliief sent Colonel 
Brunton’s letter to Government, together with one from 
himself, in which he mentioned that the new turband had 
boon introduced by the advice, and under the superin¬ 
tendence, of Colonel Agnew and Major Pierce; that a 
change having appeared necessary, he had thought that 
“ *° simple a matter ” could not bo confided to better 
1 lands or to officers of greater local experience ; but that 
he had at last come tv fh< conclusion that the object in us 
1° the turband were almost universal, and that it was 
wnmonly believed that ilv next attempt would be to force 
tl;,- sepoys to become OJtridians . He added that were the 
]u.'stion connected with British troops ho would not 
I eel any embarrassment, but, being ono of caste, he was 
desirous to have tho advice of his coadjutor:: in the 
Government. 

1 ho decision «-i Government was eommtinie fed in a 
letter dated 1th July, from which the following i« an 
extract:— 

If there had been reason • * suppose that 'ho into change 
oj dress was liable ». tho uhjoetn.n of militating against tlio 
• cligiou principles of the inhabitants of this country, no 
should have had no lit dniioo in inmudi itel) reoommemli 


CUArTTClC 

XVJIl. 

Colonel 
Brun ton’s 
■warning. ~ 


Tho 

Commander- 
in-Chief 
consults iho 
Governnuia. 




Dooiafon 

of tho 

Gu\ orumciil 








rtW($r^ 



Proposed 

order. 


Postponed nt 
tho instance 
of the 

Commander- 
ill.Chi< . 


lN‘U.-»nnn of 
the Oot em¬ 
inent for nor. 
' 

Uio order. 




lri HISTORY OP THJ2 MADRAS ARMY. 

to your Excellency the relinquishment of the intention to 
establish the propose 1 change, but as it appears from tie*, 
evidence taken in the late enquiry 1 at Vellore, that no objec¬ 
tion of this nature exists, we certainly deem it advisable, 
that the alternative of yielding to the “ clamor” arising from, 
an unfounded prejudice should, if possible, be avoided.” 

Notwithstanding the opinion thus expressed, Govern¬ 
ment sent to the Commander-in-Chief, by the same 
opportunity, the draft of a General Order intended to be 
published with the object of reassuring the sepoys, but 
the publication was postponed at the instance of His 
Excellency, who advised that course because lie believed 
that tho disinclination to wear tho turband was becom¬ 
ing more feeble, and he therefore thought it judicious 
to allow the matter to drop. 

After the mutiny, when the reference from Nundi- 
droog became the subject of discussion, Lord William 
Bentinck gave the following reasons for not having inter¬ 
fered iu a decided manner. He remarked, in the first 
plto'e, that the alteration in the turband had been ordered 
without any communication with Government, and that, 
when the 2nd of the 4th refused to wear it, tho ordc?r 
instantly issued by tho Commandor-in-Chief, iu which ho 
declared his resolution to put down all such manifesta¬ 
tion in the most, vigorous n inner, was of such a charac¬ 
ter that Government, cn becoming acquainted therewith, 
were of opinion that it would be impossible to r< code 