

“ Disobedience, or hesitation , on their part will he instantly 
followed by their dismission from the service in public orders on 
r report. Lieutenant-Colonel Kennedy has orders, should 
yon require it, to march the 19th dragoons to Vellore to assist 
in enforcing obedience. 

Il is the intention of the Commander-in-Chief imme¬ 
diately to r liovo the 2nd battalion 4th regiment, biH ^-ough 
ho thinks proper to remove them from Vellore, he will not 
admit hesitation even in their obedience to rho orders he has 
given. 

“ (Signed) P. A. AG NEW, 

“ Fort Saint George, Adjutant-iitmeral of the Army," 

“ 7th May 1800. 

“ 9 r.M ” 


CHArTKR 
XVI11. 



UUAI'TKH 
XVIII. 


-occmd 

melon; 







\ } .o uH, of 
thr i i lain, 



l,z UI8T0RY Or TIIE MADRAS AH.UY. 

44 To the Officer commanding Vellore. 

^ ,r > Tour letter of the 7th instant by express, covering 
one from Lieutenant-Colonel Darley,and stating your intention 
to suspend the execution of expected orders, has been received 
and submitted to the Commander-in-Chief. 

<c His Excellency secs no cause to relax from the orders ho 
has already given, which you will accordingly enforce. The 
places of the non-commissioned officers whoso reduction has 
boon ordered will be supplied from othor corps, as the Com- 
mander-in-Chief deems tho 2nd battalion of the 4th regiment 
of N.l. to be at present unworthy to participate in any 
promotion. From this prohibition, however, he excepts tho 
non-commissioned of the grenadiers who did not refuse to 
obey orders. They, if naigues, aro to bo promoted in the 
place of the havildars reduced. 

14 The 2nd battalion of the 23rd regiment N.l. has been 
directed from Wallajahbad to relieve the 2nd battalion of the 
4th in Vellore. 

44 (Signed) P. A. AGNEW, 

“Fort Saint Georoe, Adjutant-Gncral of the Army*" 

“ m May 18015.’* 

In conformity with these orders, 21 privates of tho it I , 
viz., 10 Mahomoduns and 11 Hindoos, wore tried at Fort 
St. George for contempt of authority and disobedience ei 
orders, in having refused to wear the new turband. Two, 
viz., one Mussulman and one Hindoo, wore sentenced t" 
receive900 lashes each, and to be discharged from tho 
service as 44 turbulent and unworthy subjects/* 

The remaining 19 men wore sentenced to receive 500 
lash os * m h, but they wore pardoned “ in consequence of 
'heir full ackuowlodgmdnt of error, deep contrition, and 
'dm, n promises of futuie good conduct.” Tho charges, 

; hto a m, and orders of tho Oomumndor-in-Chief thevoon. 





*wIiicli last were dated on the 29th June, were published 
to the army on the 2nd July. 

The Commander-in-Chief had gone on a tour of inspec¬ 
tion about tlie middle of May, and while at Nundidroog 
in the end of June he received a letter from Lieutenant- 
Colonel James Brunton, an able and experienced officer, 
then holding the appointment of Military A uditor General, 
hi this letter the Colonel stated that the introduction of 
the now turbaud had occasioned great discontent through¬ 
out: the army, and ho earnestly recommended that the 
order should bo cancelled. 