

Surgeon Jones of the 1st, and Assistant Surgeon Dean 
of the 23rd, who were actively engaged during the out¬ 
break, especially after all the other officers were either 
killed or disabled, made the following joint report for the 
information of the Commander-in-Chief. 

‘‘The following gentlemen, having been previously alarmed 
by a heavy fire of musketry, met accidentally at the house of 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing, 1st battalion 1st regiment, 
about half past 3 A.M., viz., Captain Maclachlan, Lieutenants 
Mitchell, Baby, and Jenour, and Serjeant Brady, H.M.’s 
60th regiment, Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing, Lieutenant 
Cutcliffo (desperately wounded), and Mr. Surgeon Jones, 1st 
regiment. 

u Mr. Assistant Surgeon Dean, 23rd regiment. 

41 Lieutenant and Adjutant Ewing having previously secured 
the arms and ammunition of one naigue and three sepoys (the 
guard over the battalion books at his house), every ono 
prepared for being attacked. In a quarter of au hour an 
attack was made by a strong party of sepoys on the front of 
the house. After a sharp fire on both sides thejr Retired, 
none of us having received any injury. 

“ On consideration,nt appeared advisable to retire to the 
house of Mr. Surgeon Jones (tho adjoining house) as being 
more capable of defence, the doors and different apertures of 
the house being better secured. This was immediately done. 

“ At the time of our quitting Lieutenant Ewing’s house, Ser¬ 
jeant Brady wos requested to go, and to endeavour to procure 
information of whrvt was going on, and < n his return an hour 
? iter, ho brought us the lament able account of the murder of 
every European on the difi\ rent guards, of ilio Mysore flag 
being hoisted, of the European officers, together with tho 
commandant of tho ga 1 itson, being killed. Many men in tho 
European barracks killed and wounded by two G-poundcm 


CHAPTER 

k xvm. 


Account gj 
by Surgeons 
Jones and 
Dcau. 


Eight officers 
and a sci joant 
meet at tho 
house of 
Lieutenant 
Ewing. 


They rotirn 
to that uf 
Surgeon 
Jones. 


Serjeant 
Brady'a 
report. 


180 


UISTQRY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



friou tenant 
Mitchell 

ffOOa to tho 

barracks. 


<SL 


^litl musketry keeping up a continued, fire on them, and the 
whole fort appeared to him to be in possession of the insur¬ 
gents. 

About ( a.m. Lieutenant Mitchell, H.M.’s G9tli regiment, 
f ft the party to endeavour to make his way to the barracks, 
or to the house of Captain Barrow, the senior officer of the 
regiment then in the fort. 


Tho othor 

ofllccru 

follow. 


r i ho officers 

and -m sully 

from tho 

baiTU' ku. 


“ Nothing had been heard since our retreat to this house, 
but confuted shoutings, and constant heavy firing of guns 
and musketry in different parts of the fort. In this state of 
anxious suspense did we remain until about 8 a.m., when a 
strong party attacked the rear of the house, and broke open 
tho door of the room in which we were posted to receive them. 
After having exchanged fire, judging any further opposition 
fruitless, wo retreated to the European barracks by the front 
of the house, the insurgents still kcoping up a fire on our rear 
during the retreat. 