


“ His Lordship in Council has accordingly been pleased to 
adopt, and to publish the following resolutions for general 
information:— 

“ First .—That the half pay of his rank shall he allowed to 
the nearest heir of every native officer and soldier 
of cavalry, infantry, pioneers, and gun la&ears 
who has died in battle, or in consequence of 
wounds received during the late war against the 
Mahratta confederates. 

u Second .—That in cases where the deceased officers and 
soldiers may have left sons, the provision shall be 
continued during the term of 12 years only. 

“ Third .—That in cases where the families of the deceased 
officers and soldiers may consist only of women 
and aged persons, the provision shall be continued 
during the life of the nearest heir of the family.” 

On the Oth October orders were isxuod for an augment¬ 
ation to the extent of four 1 additional regiments, and 
*ix extra battalions were ordered to be raised at the 


§L 

CHAP.XYTL 


Aupncnt* 
at ion. 


same time. 


The head-quarters of the 20th regiment were tixed at 2<hh rep. 
Tanjore. The 1st battalion was formed from the 1st 
**xira battalion, the second battalion was composed of the 
"Madras 2 Volunteer Battalion, ” supplemented by drafts 
from the “ Tanjore Provincial Battalion.” 

The 21st regiment was formed in the Northern Circars. >i*t n •: 
The 1st battalion was composed of the 2nd extra, uml wom 
stationed at Chicacole* The* 2nd battalion was composed M.K.l.) 
of the fourth extra, and was stationed at Mnsulipatr m. 


1 Tho 46th ami 45th wc.ro reduced * the 21th January 180*. tho 
41th, 48vd nt. 1 12a.fl on the 2UOi April aud tho lloL, 40th, and 
8 Uth i>n tho 30th Juno 1882. 

1 Rriuin* d from the Moluccas in e of the tre: y of Auiiong. 


HISTORY of THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CLTAP.XVII. 


22 ncl regi. 
Tuonfc (43rd 
arid 44th 

r.i.). 

23rd regi- 
men* (15th 
mid 46th 
M.N.I.). 


Officering of 
v.i - extra 
battalions. 


TK* ir 
wtnilona. 


OnidoM, 

1803. 


Tin DxtrtL 
hall u!io»h 
brek ‘in np, 




i or» 



The 1st battalion 22nd regiment was formed of the 
3rd extra, and was stationed at Vellore. The 2nd bat¬ 
talion was formed of tlio 6th extra, and was stationed at 
Tricliinopoly. 

The 1st battalion 23rd regiment was formed of the 
5th extra, and was stationed in Fort St. George. The 
2nd battalion was composed of the 7th extra, and was 
stationed at Sunkernacoil. 

The full complement of native commissioned and non¬ 
commissioned officers and naigues was furnished to the 
new extra battalions from the senior nineteen regiments, 
the men of each grade receiving a step in rank on their 
transfer. A largo proportion of this promotion was 
given to the regiments recently employed in the held, as 
a reward for their services. 

r l he 1st extra battalion was stationed at Seringapa- 
tam, the 2nd at Bangalore, the 3rd at Cuddapah, the 
4th at Erode, the 5th at Tanjore, and the 6th at Sunker¬ 
nacoil. 

* )n the 7tli June 1805 the establishment of the Corps 
of guides was fixed at 3 head guides, 14 second guide 4 
and 36 privates. 