



1 Poor* of enquiry al Volloro, hold 14th May, <'ompo*od of Licutanant- 
Colunol Me Kerraa $ud‘ battalion 2Urd, Lieutenant-Colonel Fori a n 1. 
battalion Jut, nod Liontcnant-Colomd Marriott 1st battalion 5th, in 
rl (/ tho Myaore I’rbioGH at Volt re. Th» proooodIngB aie not 
fm 1 'morning, bnt it appears from a zjiirmfc of tl; Cominandn ni-Cln f 
*hns nlthnnt.h uo it.jocliun to tho new turband was elicited from any 
1 ’ 1,1 native witimaaoR, yot tho oflkorj composing th Court e:pivvui 
ik |ii*fi:n m o for il <. old turband. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS aRMY. 


175 




without committing the discipline of the army. He went chapter 
on to say that Government, at the time the reference was 1IL 

made, were not in possession of positive information of 
the existence of general dissatisfaction, without which 
knowledge there would have been no sufficient reason 
for cancelling the order. So far as Colonel Brunton's 
warning was concerned, His Lordship remarked that 
the health of that officer had long been so bad, that 
his nerves were gone, and that he suffered from great 
despondency. 

The severe measures pursued in the case of the 2nd Seditious 
battalion 4th regiment appear to have rendered the 
opposition to the new turband more determined than ever. 

Frequent secret meetings were held in the lines of the 
native battalions at Vellore, at which the men bound 
themselves to resist all innovations, and finally formed 
the plan for the attack and destruction of the European 
officers and men. These meetings were attended by the 
majority of the native officers, and by several of the 
retainers of the sons of Tippoo then confined in the fort. 

On the night of the 17th June, the intentions of the Mustapha 
mutineers were divulged to Lieutenant-Colonel Forbes 
of the 1st, by Mustapha Beg, a private of the battalion. iao0ntiuei1 - 
The Colonel, instead of making cautious inquiries, scut 
for his native officers, who, on being questioned, affirmed 
their innocence of any <" il intention, professed their 
readiness to wear the turband, and persuaded Colonel 
Forbes to place tho sepoy in confinement as being insane. 

It also appears that a European woman named Burke Mra. limb 
would have givGn mu hn<l aim not boon prevented. 

41 The deponent * furl hoi* suite?. Hi.it, bIig v\. nt to Colonel Informs Linn. 
M : ice art to state what she- hud hoard, as well as to apply for 
her husband's prize-inonoy, but on his nuking her il she was 


‘ Evident*** before the rmumisiem at Vuliorc after the umi.nv 





Cat riaun 
‘ ' Vellore. 


* luurdp on 
tho. !Mi July. 

ll.M.'n GihJi. 







1 76 



or rill. MADKA i A l:.M y. 



«i married woman, and her replying slie was a widow, lie said 
ho took hi r to ho u bad woman, and bade her go away." 

Tlio garrison of Vellore at this time consisted of four 
companies 1 II.M.’s 69th regiment, six companies 1st 
battalion 1st, and the whole of the 2nd battalion 23rd 
regiment N.I. Tho 1st battalion was the oldest 2 in the 
service, and had always maintained a high reputation. 