

‘ On our entering the barracks they were found in tho 
greatest possible confusion, every man sheltering himself in 
the best way he was able, from tho shot which were frequently 
fired from the two guns placed to command the range* of tho 
cots. Many men lay killed and wounded. Hero we found 
Lieutenant Mitchell. 

“ Having a short time debuted on what was best to be done 
Captain Maclachlan, as senior officer, taking tho command, 
it was determined to enlly out from the windows opposite to 
the parcherry, 1 and to gain the ramparts adjoining. 

“It was found tho men* had been originally provided 
with only six rounds of ball cartridges. Many of these had 
been expended during tho morning. At the bottom of thu 
ramparts was a small magazine for tho European stores. All 


1 The ran^cn of hula oocupiod by the oamp-followerfl. 

ILe r»i.» -borot uon-com ml ten mod rail k nml fiJo in tho fort a mom (oil 
to 3 1 *, of whom 101 wore killed or wounded. ISlanyof thofic fell on t lm 
nunpurtB. Tho number < ( aouo who sallicri may therefore bo cation t- ,i 
about 2JO. 







tU bal1 cartridges hod been taken oat by the insurgents, and CHAP'j :S 
nothing left but a few blank ones, of which some were taken XVIII, 

“ Havin & climbed up the face of the ramparts under a heavy They^o 
fire of musketry, we took post on a bastion near at hand to P ossession 
collect the men. Wo then advanced to dislodge the instir- eLfcavalicl 
gents (in considerable force) from the north-east cavalier, 
which we accomplished, bnt with the loss of Captain Mac- 
lachlan’s further services (he having received a severe wound 
through the thigh) as also of several men. On our way to the 
attack of the cavalier w r c were joined by Captain Barrow, 

H.M.’s 69th regiment, who then took the command as senior 
officer. 

A party having been left at the cavalier, wc proceeded and the 
nloug the ramparts under a constant heavy fire of musketry to K atowa ^ 
take possession of the gateway, 1 which was effected. Wishing 
to ascertain whether the gafco was open we proceeded below 
and found it locked, and a 6-pounder placed opposite to it for 
lt * defence. fire from the palaco at this time was exces¬ 

sively heavy. Many men fell, and Lieutenant Mitchell was 
severely wounded by a musket shot in the arm. There boing 
no ammunition with tho 6-pounder, it was suffered to remain, 
aud the party stationed over the gateway was ordered to 
keep it from falling into the hands of tho insurgents. Tho 
men at this time had scarcely a ball cartridge remaining. 

To attack tho arsenal w as deemed impracticable, and the only 
remaining chance of gaining ammunition was by attempting 
to gain possession of the grand magazine. 

“ Tho main body of the detachment proceeded with Captain Capture of 
Barrow to carry tho bastion and cavalier at the south-east face tho ,Qlh * 
of tho fort, which lay on our way to the flagstaff and mag*- LmISod ami 

«e, then defended by a strong party of tho insurgent*. In oavaUor ' 
advancing to tho attack. Captain Burrow foil by o musket shot 
pa-.sing through his leg. There thon remained no officer 
e a pt Mr. Burgeon Jones, :.nd Mr. Ansiutant Surgeon Dqau, 