



£95 



m-'loltV Ml* TIIK MADRAS ARMY. 


reported and implicitly believed, both in the cantonment, 
and in the city, that the existoneo of a considerable 
treasure at the bottom of the well in the European barracks 
had been revealed by an oracle, which treasure, however, 
could not bo discovered until a certain number of human 
heads had been offered to the tutelar deity of the w T elI. 
The uumber of heads required was to be provided by the 
European troops, who were to be employed at night to 
waylay the natives ; and the discovery, about this time, 
of a headless corpse near the Residency, so completely 
confirmed the belief in the rumour, that few of the natives 
ventured out after dark. Other reports, of an equally 
monstrous character, obtained similar credence. 

On the night of the 12th a number of men assembled 
in rear of the cantonment, and the pickets w'ere ordered 
out for fear of a tumult, but their services wore not 
required. During the next few days the genera' dissat¬ 
isfaction was manifested in several ways. The sepoys 
declared it to bo impossible for them to comply with tho 
orders regarding dress, and at the same time to .adhere to 
the tenets of their religion. Tho men of tho 2nd batta¬ 
lion 15th regiment publicly announced their intention to 
refuse to wear the turband, and the other battalions wero 
believed to be of the saino mind. Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dovetou informed Colonel Montresor that the cavalry 
would not dr:iw a sword to put down any riot tint might 
be occasioned by an attempt to force ilio new lurbuud on 
the infantry. 

Colonel Montresor, after mature deliberation, nml having 
considered the small number 1 of European troops at 
his disposal, determined, in communication with Captain 


i il.M.’a 33r<l regiment, and a detachment m artillery. Tho 
i.ntiv. troops foiifliated of two reglmontn of cavalry, Bix Imli.dlona 
4 ,f , lir j v0 infantry, and knchuiontn of native nn iltci .v and phmetan. 


chaptui; 

XVIII. 


General 
disoontriiL 
in the force. 


C 'h.erl 
M out re <>i 
revokes the 
order* 
regarding 
droiJ. 









CHAPTER 

XVIII. 




Inefficiency 
of the nativo 
offioci a. 


196 FT 1 STORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Sydenham the Resident, to take the responsibility of 
revoking the offensive regulations, and this was done by an 
order published to the force on the 23rd July. Although 
immediate tranquillity followed this wise and timely 
concession, the importance of which can scarcely bo 
over-estimated, the Colonel does not appear to have been 
rewarded except by the approval of the Supreme and 
Madras Governments, subsequently endorsed by that of 
the Court of Directors. 

Nothing of moment took place at the other stations 
specified above beyond the dismissal of a few men at 
Nundidvoog, Bangalore, and Bollary, and the disarming 
of the 1st battalion 2ord regiment at Wallajahbad. Tho 
investigation which followed this last measure showed 
that the disaffection was limited to a few native officers, 
and men of indifferent character. Tho only other point 
worthy of remark is the circumstance that the nativo 
officers generally evinced extreme indifference in the 
discharge of their duty, and made no attempt to check 
inflammatory expression made use of by some of the ruon, 
more particularly at Wallajahbad. Nothing criminal, 
however, was established against any native officer, except 
in the easo of three subadars of tho 15th regiment at 
Hyderabad, who were transported to Penang for life, 
and of a jen Mar of the 1st battalion 22nd, who was 
■'Ontenced to be phot, which sentence was afterwards 
commuted to transportation for life. 