

tlio Commission, which was submitted to Government on 
the 9th August, together with the depositions taken 
during the enquiry ;— 

“ There are tw *° .principal causes which appear to us to 
have led to the mutiny. The late innovations in the dress 
and appearance of the sepoys, and the residence of the family 
of the late Tippoo Sultan at Vellore. We shall beg leave to 
submit our reasons on each of these heads, and first in regard 
to the dress. 

Ch.,nge 8 in “ The article of dross is, both with the Hindoos and Main,- 
medans, an indication of their caste, and a badge of their 
respective distinctions and piano in society ; and when it is 
recollected how obstinately the Indians of all descriptions 
adhere to their enjoins, and with what difficulty the natives 
v.orc brought to adopt many parts of their present military 
dress, it will not appear surprising that some of the late 
innovations in that respect were offensive to their feelings. 

“The sepoys appear to have felt that the wearing of the 
new tnrband wonld make them como to be considered as 
J uropoans, and would have removed them from tho society 
ai, d intercourse of their own cantos. 

Wo did not think it material to ascertain how far ovory 
u-Ue lo nf dress, which they have oomplaiuod of, was repug- 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


191 


nant to their tenets, or unreasonable in itself. Prejudices 
would cease to be so could they be regulated by reason. 

“ We shall not dwell particularly upon that part of the 
order which respected effacing from the forehead the marks 
of castes, as it has not been specified to us as a cause of 
grievance, though one of the battalions appears to havo 
previously carried it into execution. We may be allowed to 
suppose, however, that it was not without its effect upon the 
minds of individuals. In the same corps the turband was not 
complained of, yot we know that it led to the mutiny. 

These distinctions of castes add to the personal importance 
of the individual with society, and create a sense of honor, 
which operates more strongly than the fear of punishment in 
the prevention of crimes, 

“In this country the prejudices of the conquered have 
always triumphed over the arms of the conqueror, and have 
subsisted amidst all tho revolutions and shocks to which the 
empire has been subjected. Any innovation, therefore, in that 
respect must be calculated to call forth their feelings, and tho 
more trivial the object required to be sacrificed,, the stronger, 
in our opinion, would the reluctance be to make it. Nothing 
would appear to be more trivial to tho public interests than 
the length of the hair on tho upper lip of a sepoy, yet to the 
individual himself, the shape and fashion of the whisker is a 
badge of his casto, and an article of his religion, 

“ We shall now remark on the second cause, viz., the 
residenco of the families of tho late Tippoo Sultan at Vel¬ 
lore. 

“ Accommodations were here provided for them nearly 
resembling a pnloco in magnificence, and an establishment 
allowed them on a very extensive scale ol liberality. Their 
followers had emigrated u groat numbers t.» VolJoro, and 
husbands for tho Princesses were allowed to come from diffor- 
ent parts of the country. These persons naturally brought 
along with thorn their former attachments and prejudices, 
and tho interests of Soringapatam wore transplanted with its 
inhabitants to the Carnatic. Hpeaking the same language, 