

The order regarding caste marks and earrings was 
justified on the ground that, although they had not 
previously been prohibited by any formal order, it had 
never been (ho custom in any well regulated corps for 
the men to appear with them on parade. Letters from 
Geueral Dugald Campbell, Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, 
and Major Bruce were quoted in support of this assertion. 

It must be remembered that the reputation of the 
Military Department was at stake, and the report of the 
Comraandor-in-Chiei seems to have boon written with 
the view c.t showing that the new regulations lmd not 
been the can c of tlio mutiny, or, if they T :td, then that 
the responsibility rested with his advisors. Colonel Agiu n 
and Major Picroe, by whom lie had been assured i hat 
the p oposed changes were not open to any objection. 

As the. defence of the new turband rested chiofiy on 
the evidence! of the native officers and soldiers as given 
before the court of enquiry, it nay bo well to consider 


CHAPTER 

XVlil. 


Rrimtat ion of 
tho Military 


tho Milu ivy 
Depti: liuo'it 
ftt elitko. 


VaIuoIobm 
churn i. l n* of 
tho p^ 
in favor of 


wbut that evidence "as worth 
VOL. III. 


Bearing iu mind the uronoii. 


2d 






CHAPTER 

XVIII. 


f xcitoment 
uiouulati jm, 


A1 >>nn hi 
JI3 'lerabad. 


194 HISTORY OF Tlir MADRAS ARMY. 

exceedingly summary, arbitrary, and severe manner in 
which the 2nd of the 4th had been dealt with only six 
days before the assembly of the court, it ought not to 
have been matter of surprise to any one at all conversant, 
villi the disposition of the native soldiery, that the court 
should have failed to elicit any unfavorable opinion 
regarding the new turband. It was well known that the 
change had been recommended, either by the Adjutant- 
General or his Deputy,or both, officers, who,at that period, 
and for many years afterwards, were supreme in respect 
to all matters connected with native troops. With this 
knowledge, and with the punishment of the 4th before 
their eyes, was it to be expected that tho turband would 
be condemned by the native officers called upon for 
their opinions ? The extraordinary thing is, that opinions 
obtained under such circumstances should have been 
gravely put forward as good evidence in favor of tho 
change. The significant hint of the field officers of whom 
the court was composed docs not appear to have mot with 
any attention. 

The excitement created by the proposed alteration-, in 
dross extended to tho troops at Hyderabad, Bollary, 
Wallajithbad, Bangalore, Nundidroog, and Simkorry- 
lroog, but not to such a degree as to cause any anxiety 
•xcept at Hyderabad ; the subsidiary force at which ph i o 
was Uion commanded by Colonel T. G. Montresor, ILM.'h 
22nd dragoons. 

The first intimation of alarm was conveyed to Colonel 
Montresor, on tho evening of tho lltli July, by bouio 
officers of the 11th regimont who told him that 

Hie native troops suspected Government, of an intention 
I-, -make tlu»m rdiminHi uh <1 is; motions of cust» , ami to 
< overt them to Christianity by degrees. Thcexcii.- 
iTH'ht was intensified by certain absurd rumours invent* d 
end . ireulatod by ill deposed persons. It was generally 