

a result which may be attributed to the gallantry of the 
09th, for had the mutineers raised the drawbridge and 
closed the two outer gates, the fort could not have been 
recaptured by a coup de main . 

Five serjeants, 4 corporals, 1 drummer, and 90 privates 
of the 69th were killed during the outbreak, and 15 
privates subsequently died of their wounds. The num- 
bor of wounded, exclusive of these, amounted to 76. 

The undermentioned officers were killed, viz., Colonel 
Fancourt, H.M.’s 34th regiment, commanding tho garri¬ 
son, Lieutenant-Colonel McKerras, Captain Willison and 
Lieutenants Winchip and Jolly of the 23rd, Captain 
Miller, Lieutenants O’Reilly, Smart, and Tiehbourne of 
the 1st, and Lieutenants Floy and Popham of the 69th, 
Mr. Mann Deputy Commissary of Stores, Mr. Gill Con¬ 
ductor of Ordnance, and Mr. Smith tho Military Pay¬ 
master. 

Major Armstrong of the 16th N.I., who happened to 
be passing tho fort in his palankin, was first wounded 
by a Hindoo sepoy of the 1st and then killed by a Maho- 
modan follower of one of the Mysore Prince 

Captains Barrow and Maclaclilan and Lieutenant 
Mitchell of the 69th wore severely wounded, also Lieute¬ 
nant Cutclitfe of the 1st. 

Captain "Marriott Assistant* Paymaster of Stipends, was 
wounded slightly. 

The officers and men engaged in the suppression of 
the mutiny were thanked tor their services. Serjeant 
Brady of tho 69th was recommended fo> a commission, 
but lie was afterwards permitted, at his owe request, to 
exchange it for an appointment Conductor of Ordnance 
as being better suited to his circumstances. 

The detachment of native ciualry c\ nested of 107 of 
[hr 7th under Captain Dovoton, and of details from the 
other seven regiments, amounting to 305 men of all ranks 


CHAPTER 
XVIII. 


CasualtiesMt 
the garrison. 


Re want? to 
til. < llir. 1-8 
and men. 



XV1IJ. 


Puui hrnent 
of tho ring- 
loaders. 


188 history or tub m auras army. 

under Captain Mason of the 5th regiment. r l heSo men 
were rewarded by an addition to their ordinary pay on 
the following scale, viz. :— 

Subadar ... 

Jemadar ... 

Havildar... 

Naigue and Private 
This allowance was continued to the recipients on their 
being pensioned or discharged. 

It was resolved at the same time that medals, with a 
suitable inscription, should bo presented to the detach¬ 
ment, to be of gold for the native officers, and of silver 
for the other ranks, but this resolution was never carried 
into effect. 

Private Mustaplm Beg of the 1st regiment was pre¬ 
sented with a donation of 2,000 pagodas, and pensioned 
for life on the pay of a subadar of infantry. 

Tho principal leaders of tho mutiny were tried at 
Vellore, and disposed of in tho manner reported in the 
following letter from Colonel Harcourt to the Adjutant- 
General :— 

“ Vellore , 23rd September 1806. 

“ 8ir, 

“I request you will bo pleased i-j communicate to His 
Excellency tho Commaudcr-in-Cliicf, that 1 have this morn¬ 
ing carried into execution tho approved sontencca 1 of tho 