


CHAJPTFIi 

XVIII. 


Intrigues of 
tho Mysore 
prisonen*. 


?V . 


102 


FfTST' >l:V W 'I HE MAO JR AS ARMY. 


CILYTTEK 

XVIII. 


<»pi uion 
ot t tio 
('oil unit teo. 


I lie Govern¬ 
ments concur 
with t-he Com¬ 
mix lioncid. 


y’ho Oommnn 
Udr-in. Chief 
rliALOntB and 


j»»rii like* 
tin* no w 
i K •Intlnri . 


and following the same religion, connections were easily 
formed, and amongst men who were not much occupied 
with engagement • of trade or business, schemes of power and 
ambition would naturally occur to those who had been born 
to enjoy thorn. 

<l Under other circumstances the tnrband, &c., might have 
proved^ offensive to the sepoys, but when we look back t o 
sumo former insurrections amongst the troops, and remember 
(and it falls within the personal knowledge of some of us) 
the civility with which tho men distinguished their officers, 
and tho point of honor which they seemed to feel in doing so, 
we cannot hut think that the outrages on the late occasion 
are of foreigu growth and could only have been inspired by a 
barbarous enemy. 

“ On iho whole we draw from the evidenco now before us 
he following circumstances :— 

“ That the late innovations as to the dress and appearance 
of the sepoys was the leading cause of the mutiny, and the 
other was the residence of the family of the late Tippoo 
Sultan at Yell ere. ” 

The conclusion arrived at by the Commissioners was 
concurred in by t he Government of Madras, and by tho 
Supremo Government; tho only dissentient voice being 
that of Sir J. F. Crad ck, the Commandor-in-Chief, who, 
in a report to the Court of Directors dated 21 at Septem¬ 
ber 180<>, expressed the opinion that the alterations in 
dress had been nothing more than a pretext; 1 .he real 
object having been the restoration of the Mahomcdau 
power. He maintained that the new turband was free 
from objection of any kind, a , had been fully established 
by tho depositions of several Mohomedans arid Hindoos 
r, t tho highest, castes who wore examined before l he 


(hs would scorn to have ftr.->itcn hia loiter of tho£9Mi June, in 
ho informed Government that tlv objections to tb ui*lM%m) ? i. • 

uiiivuin il. 






history or rirc madras army. 


103 


<SL 



court of enquiry at Vellore in May. He was supported 
in this view by the Adjutant-General,and his Depjutv, who 
stated that turbands nearly resembling’ the new one in 
shape and material had long been worn by the 2nd batta¬ 
lion I8th ; that the men of the 2nd battalion 14th had 
shown a decided preference for the new turband ; and 
that no appearance of dissatisfaction had been manifested 
until it was unexpectedly shown by the 2nd battalion 4th 
regiment. It was further remarked that the old 12th 
battalion (12th M.N.I.) had, for many years, worn a 
bonnet almost exactly similar to those of the Highland 
regiments, and had continued to do so until the introduc- 
tion of the turband of 1797 ; and that when the 36th 
battalion (26th M.N.I.) was first raised, the men wore a 
bonnet of the -amo kind as the 12th, with the addition 
of a tuft and leather cockade. 