

About 7 o'clock the sepoys fired another volley, and then 
went upstairs, calling for tho Adjutant of tho 23rd. 

Colonel Marriott and his friends retreated from room to 
room, and then going down tho back steps, they returned 
into the lower part of the house, fortunately unobserved. 


1 Uv- adior Cooi was sIkm at Palnvarnm iu October 3S33 by a 

hftvildar of tho Kifle oompgny of the 6th wgimont, who had ini'onded, 

n« wr « RcnoraPy. beli«w«d, to kill tho Major of his corpu Ho had uo 
w i ic'ii’ t aguinHl Colonel Coombs. 




CHAPTER 
XV 111. 


Statement 
< f Captnin 
Marrett, 
l Zt raiment. 





•' Mir and 
Colon. 1 
Vor bt’h 
** i Uc 10 tl* 


HISTORY Or’ THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Tho sepoys went away shortly afterwards, and were heard 
to call out “ Come out, Nawab, come out, Nawab, there 
is no fear." This was supposed to be addressed to 
Futteh Ilyder, the eldest of the four Mysore Princes, who 
lived in the palace close to Colonel Marriott's quartors. 

About 8 o'clock the Colonel heard that the Europeans 
were coming out of the barracks, but he did not venture 
to leave his house until about lOi a.m., when tho gate 
was blown open, and the troops entered the fort. 

Lance-naigue Mahomed Yacoob of the 1st, who was on 
the in-tying picket, went to the house of Captain Marrotfc 
of the same battalion about 3 a.m., and warned him not 
to go near the barracks as the men of the 23rd wore 
firing upon them. Captain Marrett immediately went to 
the Amboor gate, whore he found a guard of his own 
regiment under arms. The naigue of this guard, Svod 
Ahmed, also advised him not to approach the barracks, 
upon which he returned to his quarters, where he wu.s 
joined by Lieutenant Bissett of the 69th. Presently they 
resolved to go to the Train guard, and on the way they 
passed another guard posted on tho Nawab's bastion 
near the north-west angle of the palace. Vencatram, 
tho naigno in command of this guard, t-old Captain 
Marrett not to venture near the parade, upon which tho 
two officers returned to the other side of the palace by 
the magriirine, and succeeded in gaining a houso behind 
the main guard. After waiting there a short time they 
got over the wall into the main guard, which had been 
deserted, and they concealed themselves there until the 
arrival of the cavalry. 

Liuutcnant Ewing of the isl having become separated 
from the other officers after leaving the house of Burgeon 
Jones, aa ambled several European straggleis, and 



HISTORY OV Til K MARK VS AllMY. 


1S5 



making 1 his way out of the fort, lie joined Colonel Forbes* 
These two officers, accompanied by a number of unarmed 
men belonging to the 1st battalion, then took possession 
of the principal hill fort, where they remained until after 
the dispersion of the mutineers. 

Major Coates, on hearing the beginning of the firing, 
endeavoured, together with some officers of the 23rd, to 
outer the fort, but being unable to effect this, he sent off: 
an officer to Arcot with a letter for Colonel Gillespie, 
who commanded the cavalry cantonment at that place, 
distant about 16 miles from Vellore. The letter having 
reached the Colonel about 6 o’clock a.m., he set out imme¬ 
diately, taking with him a squadron of the 10th dragoons 
under Captain Young, supported by a strong troop of the 
7th cavalry under Lieutoimnt Woodhouse, leaving orders 
h r Colonel Kennedy to follow with the rest of the cavalry, 
with the exception of a detachment left to protect the 
cantonment aud to keep up tho communication. 