

1 On tho eostom fueo of iho fort. A zigzag entrance, defended by 
four gates, and a drawbridge. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



OHAPTKR 

XVIII. 


The party 
reaches the 
magazine, but 
finds nothing. 


It returns to 
tbo cavalier 
and gateway. 


The Mysore 
bag pulled 

down. 


182 



to cany the plan in execution, who, leading on the party, 
carried the cavalier and bastion, but with the loss of several 
men. 

“ The insurgents chiefly fled into the body of the fort, but 
many posted themselves in the gateway of the granary. 
These were destroyed by a party sent down from the rampart 
for the purpose. 

u The party soon arrived at tho flagstaff, and were much 
annoyed by fire from tho pettah on the opposite side of tho 
ditch, and from the garden in the fort. A soldier, in attempt- 
ing to take down tho Mysore 1 flag, was shot from the pettah. 
A very heavy fire being kept up, and the men falling fast, no 
time was to be lost in proceeding to the magazine, which 
having boon burst open, t-o oar general disappointment, nothing 
but loose powder could be obtained. 

“Tho men at this time wished to proceed towards, and to 
attack, the sepoy barracks, which was instantly opposed. 
Our numbers being very much reduced, added to the disap¬ 
pointment of not getting ammunition, it became our principal 
object to return and keep possession of the gateway, and 
cavaliers, until tho arrival of a relief which we had hopes of 
soon seeing. 

On our return from the magazine the Mysore flag was 
taken down by two men who were requested to volunteer for 
the occasion, viz., Serjeant MacManus 2 and Private Philip 
Bottom, H.M. s 69th regiment, under a very heavy fire from 
the pettah 3 and fort. 

We returned to the cavalier and gateway, having left a 


1 This was said to bavo been handed out of the palaco by Mok.ool- 
deen, the third arm of Tipp o. It was an old flag-groon strips on a 
rod field, with a. sun in tho centre, and was supposed to have* bo» m 
bought at, one of tho sales of tho Soringapatam booty, a ooubidorahlo 
timo before iLo mutiny. 

! hope men wore thanked in General Ordciri for their gallantry, and 
received a donation of 50 and 20 pagodas respectively. 

3 Tho fiagstnfT on thocQnt.ro bastion of tho southern face win; within 
«Hu,y rango of tho pettah or native town. 





Ill,STORY OP THU MADRAS ARMY. 


183 


strong party at the cavalier and bastion on the south-east CHAPTER 
face for its defence. Soon after onr return a party of cavalry XVIiT ' 
was descried to approach towards the fort. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Marriott, the officer in charge of Statemem 
the Mysore Princes, who lived in the fort with Captain Marriott." 
Marriott, Assistant Paymaster of Stipends, was awoke by 
the firing, and immediately afterwards the naigue of his 
guard, who belonged to the 1st battalion, came upstairs 
and reported that the disturbance was caused by the men 
of the 23rd battalion, who were firing in every direction. 

The Colonel went down to his guard, where he found 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Coombs 1 of tho 23rd, who was 
very unpopular with his men, and had escaped from his 
quarters, where he had been fired at. Colonel Marriott 
desired him to go into the house, and he had just done 
so, when a number of tbe 23rd came up and ordered the 
guard to join them as it was a iC general business ” ; but 
they did not attempt to molest the Colonel, who returned 
into his house, whore he found Lieutenant Gunuing of the 
09th, who had come thoro afte^ an incfleetual attempt 
to reach the barracks. About daylight the house was 
surrounded by sepoys, who took possession of tho lower 
rooms, and fired a volley upstairs, by which Captain 
Marriott, the Assistant Paymaster, was wounded, after 
which thoy went and set fire to Lieutenant Coomb's house. 