


' let imd Hill cnvnliy, a detachment of artillery witli S gune, r - I f. 
hawltMtn. 33rd foul. 6 aoinpaniiu, Ut tutuiIii'U I'lili, .uni 

s,„| I,, 111 ,lion 21bt »»' mCintry, unil 100 ptonocra. Joim-J .-ou,, 
afti rivfuUii by Uio 2n l vn lr>, and 2nd battalion I.Otli niilivn lofaniij. 







HT6T0KY OF THE MADRAS ARM'S . 203 

quence o£ those depredations, troops wore ordered from 
Poonah and Jaulna, and on the 28th December the free¬ 
booters were surprised near the fort at Amulnair, 1 and 
dispersed by the Jaulna detachment under Lieutenanfc- 
Colonel Doveton, who displayed great energy and activity 
during this service. 

The following order was issued by the Governor- 
General on this occasion : — 

“ Fort William , 30th January 1809. 

“The Right Honorable the Governor-General in Council 
littH received tho satisfactory intelligence that a detach tin ut ‘ 
of tlio subsidiary force of Hyderabad, under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Doveton, consisting of a corps of horse 
artillery two regiments of native cavalry, and twelve eom- 
pani.of native infantry, employed in the province of Oaudeish 
y\\ i lie pursuit of the predatory force of the Chiefs Mohiput 
Ham Holkar, Wahid Ally Khan, and Daudin Khan, after a 
forced march of near 100 miles, having succeeded in surpris¬ 
ing the enemy at the fort of Ainnlnoir on tho morning of the 
28th ultimo, effected the completo dispersion of their troops, 
consisting of between four and fivo thousand men, cavalry, 
and infantry, captured tho whole of their gunr, baggage, and 
camp equipage, and near 1,000 horses. Tho lo on the part 
of the enemy in stated to have been very groat; on tho part 
of tho British detachment, between 20 and 30 men killed and 

minded. 

u Tho Governor-General in Council deems it proper, on 
this occasion, to expres- in the moat public manner the high 
Son80 which In entertains of tho zeal, judgment, and activity 
manifested by laouummUCuluncl Doveton in planning, and 


1 Alwat 22 niiloa nnlli-oo it "f Dhonlia in Camlt Fab. 

* Horao artillery one troop, 4th auU Sth roguncuts cavalry, iletuch- 
ii vntfl ,f tho lflt haitttljon lOfh (lOih M.N.I.), 1st battalion 12th (23rd 
W 2nd battalion l7<-h(lULh C.L.L) 






<SL 


CHAP. XIX. 


Oomplii en- 
tarv order, 
lbdu. 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAP. XIX. executing this arduous enterprise, and of the distinguished 
perseverance, exertion, and gallantry of the officers and troops 
under hri command in accomplishing a march of near 100 
miles in the space of 48 hours, and immediately attacking 
and defeating a superior force of the enemy, whose depreda¬ 
tions in the province of Candeish, and in the territories of 
the allies of the British Government, had so long disturbed 
the tranquillity of the Deccan, and hud rendered necessary a 
combined movement of divisions of the subsidiary forces of 
Poonah and Hyderabad under the general direction of Colonel 
Wallace, commanding the subsidiary force of Poonah.” 


* * * * 


