

Colonel McLeod immediately attacked, and compelled 
them to retreat in confusion with (he loss of nine guns. 

1 flth cuv.Uy Oiiuo tioops, ttunk uouapunit a GUih j C\ y luu tvgi nujiil , 
llank companit . lt-i ami 2iul battalions ttrd regiment ; flank ouinpunt"! 

13t)i ; « no company pinnnori undor bioutuiiant Pat error Minimi 
Krropnhn rngimont: detnohnumf royal artillery; galloper gtiun uf tho 
oava’rj 4iud u IjiigAtlii of Bi£-jx>UJuloro attached to t he 1st 13th 



The two villages were taken possession of without further CH AP. X IX. 
Opposition. Captain Lena of the Ceylon regiment, and 
Lieutenant Swayne 1st battalion 13th regiment, were 
wounded, and 4*0 rank and file killed and wounded. 

On the 19th the force advanced against the forts of Occupation of 
Oodagherry and Papanavoram, distant from Nagercoil an°(fpapanL 
about eight miles in a north-westerly direction, and found veram * 
them both abandoned. A. number 1 of guns and valuable 
arms wero taken, but the treasure had been removed. 

The following order was published on the 2Gth Feb¬ 
ruary :— 

“ The Governor in Council repeats to Lieutenant-Colonel Thanks to 
Sontloger, and to the officers and men under his orders, his t tr °°* a * 
wannest thanks for the activity, zeal, and bravery which have 
signalised their operations. 

“The Governor in Council has particular satisfaction in 
observing the further proof of military i-kill and gallantry 
afforded by that distiiignishod and valuable officer, Lieutenant- 
Colonel McLeod of ILM.’s tiOth regiment, in the action of 
Ootivnr and Nngorcoil, which has been followed by events of a 
highly important nature.” 

On the 21st February Colonel Senllcgcr took up a The force 
position half-way between Oodagherry and the town of ^ r Jvairnn,. 
Coluah.ee on the coast, which \yas taken possession of 
on tlm 23rd by a detachment for the purport of opening 
n communication by : ca with Colonel Chalmers atQuilon. 

This having been secured, Colonel Seutlegor inarched 
on tho 27th for Trovandruui, the capital of the Rajah, 
where he arrived on the night of tho 28th, and occupied 
h position commanding tho place 

When tho main body inarohod from Arambooly, u CnjUm* .,f 

detachment of the 2nd battalion Glh, under Captain jboaomi-.cm 

liuru. 

'1'ownsend, was- left thorn to protect tho eomimuncatriohs, 





CHAP. XIX. 


Action at 
Quilon. 


Dirtp itionB 
for attack. 








Lkfoat of 
the onomy. 


2M 


HISTORY OP TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


<si 


and also 10 take possession of the southern, or Cunniali 
Comary lines, which was accomplished without opposi¬ 
tion about the 21st February. 


Affairs at Quilon, 1809. 

H.M.'s 12th regiment, followed by the 2nd battalion 
18th regiment N.I., joined Colonel Chalmers early in 
January, and the next few days were spent in adding to 
the strength of the cantonment, then threatened by the 
enemy, who had assembled in the neighbourhood to the 
number of about 30,000 mon with eighteen guns. 

Early on tho morning 1 of the 15th January the enemy 
was observed approaching in force from several directions, 
and the troops were immediately got under arms. 