

1 Thin bar oc eatanry about n quarter milo broad and half a q,i | 0 
('< unuct' tIn <*r.' 'Mth n larg. hike or haekwai'T, v.luY.R extend. 


jiMHirly ptimUol to the cv«dt i\?r never: l mile;-). 





208 


HISTORY OF TllK MADRAS ARMY. 




CH AP. X IX. Immediately pushed on to oppose this movement, and 
failing in with several small parties of the enemy on the 
way, ho dispersed them and took a number of prisoners, 
from whom he learned that the troops at Ivicka consisted 
of about 4,000 Nairs, and a battalion of the Carnatic 
brigade from Alleppy. On arriving at the bar it was 
found that a considerable number of men lmd already 
crossed, and were drawn up to cover the landing of the 
remainder. Major Hamilton attacked them instantly, 
killed about 400, and drove the rest into the river, where 
a number were drowned. The guns were then opened 
upon the Carnatic battalion on the opposite side of the 
bar, and compelled it to retire, but in about two hours it 
returned with several guns, supposed to have been 12- 
pounders, and began to fire round and grape, which was 
replied to from our side. 

While this was going on, a number of boats, full of 

men, were seen crossing on each flank, observing which 

Colonel Chalmers directed Major Hamilton to fall back 

lest lie should be cut oft* from the cantonment. 

Colonel During the afternoon reports were received to the effect 

unwraps*near 1^,000 men were advancing from Paroor, in conse- 

tl |c canton- qnonce of which Colonel Chalmers moved the troop* into 

l -icnt. . . r 

the ruined fort at Quilon, as being a more defensible 

position, but early next morning, finding that nu imme¬ 
diate attack was to be apprehended, he left the fort, and 
encamped near the cantonment, which he entrenched to 
the best of his power. 


Defence of Cochin, 1800 . 

On the 10th of January an attack was made by several 
strong bodies of Ike onemy on the town of Cochin, 
defended by hi*. companies 1st battalion 17th native 
infantry, and 50 moil of II M.'s 12lh foot, all under the 



command of Major Hewitt of tlio former corps. Tho CHAP. XIX. 
defence was made with much skill and gallantry, and 
the assailants, after several determined attempts, were 
repulsed at every point, and compelled to retreat with 
the lo3s of about 300 men. 

The following is a copy of the report made to Colonel 
Macaulay :— 

“ I have the honor to inform yon that the detachment 
R.M.’s 12 th regiment, and the six companies 1 st battalion 
17f,b regiment under my command, were attacked by three 
columns of the enemy on three different points about 6 
o’clock this morning, and after a very severe engagement of 
three hours, we repulsed them on all sides with considerable 
slaughter, and captured their two gnus. 

“ By tho enclosed return you will obsorvo that our loss 1 
is not trifling. Since your departure wo are entirely cut off 
from all communication by sea, r.nd I am given to understand 
frtJ&U troops aro eomiug in from all sides. 