




HISTORY OF THE AT A LIUS ARMY. 


199 


liavo boon made indifferent modes, had given vou rcaron CHAPTER 
to suppose what the sepoys affirmed, that their conformity XVIIL 
would have determined persons of the same caste no longer 
to associate with them, the impositions, being of no real 
importance in themselves, might have been given up with¬ 
out discredit, and a new proof would have been afforded 
by Government of its tenderness to religious scruples.” 

The Court greatly regretted that when, on the 29th 
June, the Commander-in-Chief reported the existence of 
“ an almost universal objection ” to the new turband, Lord 
William Bentinck should have neglected to make full 
enquiry before permitting the change to bo carried out. 

As to the Commander-in-Chief, they observed that it 
was impossible to exonerate him from responsibility on 
the plea that he had acted under the advice of his Staff. 

The following reasons were given for the recall of the Reason* for 
Governor and the Commander-in-Chief:— tho recaIlof 

“ It acorns to us that tho Government, considered generally, 
did not exercise tho discernment and vigilance which all the 
circumstances of tho time required. 

“ Besides tho application of this observation to Sir J. CW.mandor- 
Cmrlock in particular, the injudicious regulations enforced in '^ ljloP 
under his authority, the remarkable degree in which he was 
unacquainted with tlio state of his own army just at theevo 
ol an insurrection, when he thought all was calm; and tho 
unpopularity which, it is too justly to be apprehended, the fatal 
issue of the wliolo would ontail upon him, rendered it, in our 
opinion, impossible, whatever regrot we felt on tho occasion, 
to continue him iu the comrn.«nd of the army. 

u With respect to L >rd William Bentinck. Of the upright¬ 
ness of his intentions, and his rcgvtrd for our service, wo 
have no doubt; and wo bav - hnd pleasuro in expre sing onr 
satisfac tion with different measureof his government ; but 
others which we felt oursolvos obliged, in tho Cv ir • of tho 
lost year to disapprove, impaired our confidence in him ; and 


and tlio 
Ouvprnor, 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY'. 



liemovnl of 
tho Adjutant- 
Geuoral and 
Deputy. 


Rewards. 


Annuities. 




(irutuity. 




I’uni.dnnent 
of tins 
luu l. incus 
l»it .u lions, 
1«07 


200 



after weighing all the considerations connected with the 
business of Vellore, we felt ourselves unable longer to con¬ 
tinue 1 that confidence to him which it is so necessary for a 
person holding his situation to possess.” 

Lieutenant-Colonel Agnew, 2 and Major Pierce were 
considered to have shown so little acquaintance with the 
disposition and prejudices of the native troops that they 
were removed from their respective appointments, and 
ordered to England. 

Colonel Gillespie was presented with 7,000 pagodas 
(lis. 24,500), and Serjeant Brady with 800 pagodas 
(Its. 2,800) in acknowledgment of their services. 

Mrs. Fancourt was granted an annuity of £100, so long 
ns she might continue a widow, and an allowance of £25 
per annum was given to each of her two children, to be 
continued until the age of 16 iu the case of tho boy, and 
to that of 21 in the case of the girl. 