



Pi v'i ‘din git 
of Major 
V* i*Mi itnd 

I • . 

C ol<*no) 
firuut. 


The agitation caused by tlicso events had begun to 
subside when it was revived by ttio precipitate action 
of Major Welsh commanding the 1st battalion 3rd regi¬ 
ment at Pahimcotiiih, ami of JY titoimnt Colonel Grant 
commanding tho subsidiary force in Travancore, who, 
n bout the middle of November, disarmed and confined 
a largo proportion of the Mahomeduu troops under their 
rc ] -ciive command’*. 


mtsT/ty 



l?TSl*OKY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


197 



These officers were tried by court-martial at Fort St. CHAPTER 
George in February 1807, for having taken such extreme II L 

steps without justifiable cause, adequate necessity, or 
sufficient investigation; such conduct being calculated 
to produce disunion, and distrust. 

Roth Colonel Grant, and Major Welsh were honorably Opinion of rhu 
acquitted, and the proceedings were approved and con- Cu " crumou '‘- 
firmed ; nevertheless Government, while giving these 
officers credit for their good intentions, aud zeal for the 
public service, condemned them for their precipitation, 
and want of judgment. 

The investigations in connection with the mutiny Final 
appear to have terminated with the proceedings of a V5s07. L sari011 * 
court of enquiry composed of Mr. A. Scott of the Civil 
Service, Lieutenant-Colonel (afterwards Sir John) Mal¬ 
colm, and Lieutenant-Colonel John Mu lire, who wore 
appointed to enquire and report their opinion regarding 
the existence of a general Mahomcdan conspiracy for 
the subversion of British rule in India, a view which had 
been pressed upon the attention of Government by 
Major Hazlewood of the 2nd battalion 24th regiment. 

These officers close 1 thoir proceedings on the 19th March 
1807, when they came to the conclusion that “ the infer¬ 
ences drawn by Ma jor Hazlewood were not supported on 
any sufficient grounds.” 

Government, on vlie 2nd April, expressed their entire 
concurrence in that conclusion. 


On Hie 15t h April 1807, the Court of Directors sent otu Bcinorni of 
an order directing the removal of Lord YVJimm B.ontinck, ^ n ‘ or - 



198 


CHAPTER 

XVIII. 


Remarks of 
f lie Court of 
Directors on 
the canp os of 
the mutiny, 
and on the 
conduct of 
the authori¬ 
ties, 


HISTORY 01 TIIE MADUA3 ARMY. 


They were of opiuion that the u immediate cause of the 
discontent among the sepoys was the introduction of 
certain innovations in their dress, which wore offensive, 
and, as they held, degrading to them ; and that the cap¬ 
tive sons of the late Tippoo Sultan, with their adherents 
and abettors, took occasion, from the dissatisfaction of 
the sepoys, to instigate them to insurrection and revolt, 
with the view of effecting their own liberation, and the 
restoration of the Mahomedan power.” 

They remarked upon the dangerof interfering, “ without 
y onie object of great and undeniable importance, with the 
sepoys in any manner which, however erroneously, they 
might consider as affecting their castes,” and they went 
on to say that to have proceeded with a measure which 
compromised tho authority of Government on the one 
hand, or risked the disobedience of the sepoys on tho 
other, seems to argue a want of that prudeuceand discern¬ 
ment so requisite in administering tho government of r. 
numerous and peculiar people.” They further observed 
hat (i when it was found that the sepoys discovered 
great reluctance to tlio adoption of these novelties, tho 
important question to be solved was, not whether the use 
of tho turband was indeed inconsistent with the purity of 
caste, or whether tlio prohibition of marks and whiskers 
was sanctioned by any former practice; neither was it 
enough that the M; horaodan priest and Hindoo brahmin, 
who wore consulted, both admitted that there was in (he 
turband, or in thoso other articles, nothing contrary to 
their castes; but the matter of enquiry should have boon, 
whether the sepoyn, ignorant and bigot tod as they might 
be, were really persuaded that the usages imposed upon 
tiiom did troii 'li opon heir castes, because, if they wore, 
n > compliance was to lie expect d from them, whatever 
momt be the sacrifice. And, if this enquiry, which might 