

Travancorc is divided from Tinnevelly by the range Arambooly 

of mountains running from the north to Cape Comorin Canuiixh 
. Comary hnea. 

■which are not practicable for tlio passage of an army 

except at a point some 14 miles distant from the Cape, 

where there is a break in the chain about throe miles in 

width. This break was defended by walls of masonry 
with bastions at intervals armed witli cannon, and the 
position could not be turned on either flank without much 
difficulty owing to the impenetrable nature of the country. 

This portion of (ho defences was known as the ,f Aram- 
booly ” lines, and the road from Palamcottah led nearly 
through the centre of the works The southern portion, 
called tho a Cunniah Comary ” lines, soparatod from those 
on tho north l>y a mountain, extended to tho Capo, was 
nearly ten miles in length, and similar in character to tho 
othor. 

The foreo from Tricliinopoly, which had been placed Capture 
under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable ° A nh( \ . 

0 '.ram uooly 

A., bentleger, Gth cavalry, eamo before the Arambooly bnea. 
lines on the Gth February. The Colonel, being without 
a battering train, determined to attempt a surprise, and 
on the night of the Oth, twelve 1 companies of infantry, and 
a party of pioneers with scaling laddors, all under Major 
Welsh of the 3rd regiment, moved towards tho redoubt 
on tho hill at tho southern extremity of the works. Tho 
country being very diflicult, owing to the thickness of the 
jungle, and the numerous ascents and descents, the troops 

1 Il.M.'a 69fch two coinpamod ami the pukota, (’aptuin Sima; lat 
battalion 3rd flank companion, 2nd battalion 3rd seven oompu lies, nil 
nmlor Captain bin.aa -ud battalion 3rd rogim-'ntj piuioora under 
Idontcnant Hcitrnpi of the 2nd battalion 17th N.I. Another company 
• f Uio fldili ami three oompanua let, bati a ion 13tli N.I., all undur 
Unptuiu ’Llodgxou of the *• ero nfiorwmdii :?unt ii support. 




^CFI A.P. xrx. did not reach tbe foot of the walls near the summit of the 
hill until after a march of six hours, when the ladders 
were planted, and the whole of the works, together with 
the arsenal, were in our possession by 8 o'clock on the 
morning of the 10th. Our loss was extremely small, viz., 
Captain Cunningham of the 69th and one sepoy killed, 
four Europeans, and seven natives wounded. 

Thanks to Major Welsh arid his detachment were thanked by 

fcho troops. , . J 

Colonel Sentlegor for “ their gallant exertions in accom¬ 
plishing an object which must ever be considered as enti¬ 
tled to a high place in military records," and ou the 16th 
February the Colonel's report was published in general 
orders, together with the names of the officora who hud 
been engaged in the escalade. Tho thanks of the Govoruoi 
in Council wore convoyed to Colonel Sentlegor, and tho 
officers and men in tho same order. 

Cnp ur. r,f Colonel Sentleger, having been joined on the 16th by a 
company of royal artillery from Coy Ion with six tliree- 
pounders, and a wing of the 3rd Coylon native regiment, 
marched about 3 o’clock \.m. ou the 17th for the contigu¬ 
ous villages of Nagercoil arid Cotaur, distant about eight 
miles south-west of Anunbooly, and where tho enemy 
had ruiHomblod in rouio xtrength. Tho advance, com- 
posed of n strong picked d< tachinenb, 1 led by Colonel 
McLeod ol tho 69th, crime upon tho enemy at daybreak 
in a Rtrong position, defended by cannon, and with a river 
in their front. 