Capture of Bnngush Khan having managed to re-collect several 
.Duudin Khan, hundreds of his scattered followers, retreated northwards, 
crossed the river Taptee near Ivoprcll, and took refuge 
in the adjoining hill country belonging to a Blieel chief¬ 
tain, by whom both lie and Daudin Khan wore given up 
to Colonel Wallace in January 1809. Mohiput Rao, who 
had separated from the others, effected his escape. 


Northern Circars, 1808-9. 

Disturbances took place near Vizianagram, and in the 
Hill Zemindary of Maringy during 1808. One of tbo 
chiefs, named Deo Pudmunabha llauze, was captured at 
Striugaram Cottah in August by a dotachment under 
Captain Powell, 1st battalion 21st, but others evaded 
pursuit, and towitrds the end of the year Government 
considering it necessary to direct that martial law should 
b*: proclaimed in certain parts of the district, issued 
special instructions for the composition of the Courtand 
laid down the principles upon which their sentences were 
to be guided. The disturbances appear to have been 
quolled tor the tirno during the early part of 1809. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


205 


Projected Expedition to the Persian Gulpii. 


CHAP. XIX. 


About the end of 1808, orders were issued by the 
Supreme Government for the assembly of an expeditionary 
force at Bombay for the purpose of taking possession of 
the island of Karrack in the Persian Gulpii. The quota 
furnished by the Madras Army amounted to 50 officers, 
and about 1,000 men, and was composed of horse and 
foot artillery, four troops 1 of cavalry, and a detachment 
of pioneers, all under the command of Brigadier General 
John Malcolm. 

The intention having been given up, the troops returned 
to Madras during May 1809, when they received the 
thanks of Government for the alacrity with which they 
had proceeded on foreign service. 

Honorary badges were conferred on the native officers 
and men. 


The other troops destined for this expedition wero 
H.M/s 05th regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Lionel 
Smith, and the Bengal Marine battalion under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Shuldham. 

The force was reviewed at Bombay on the 2 nd Febru¬ 
ary 1809, and highly complimented in general orders on 
its appearance and discipline. 

On the departure of Lieutenant-General Macdowall 
for England in January 1809, Major-General Gowdic, tho 
senior officer in the Company's service, was appointed i > 
command the army. 


War in Tkavanoore, 1S08-9. 

The subsidy payable by the Hajali of Tmvancorc Tnimnoofc 
having fallen cons idem bly into urrear, Lieutr nant-Colonel 130 ^° 
Macaulay, tho Resident, urged upon him, as a measure 


1 One fn w each of tho following 


regiment t, viz., 3rd, 5th, (5th anil 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 



206 


<SL 


of economy, the expediency of dismissing a body of 
regular infantry in his service known as the Carnatic 
Brigade,” but this proposal was not acceptable. The 
Resident believing that the Dewan, or prime minister, 
was the principal cause of the opposition, insisted upon 
his removal from office, which was agreed to, but during 
the interval required for the selection of a successor, the* 
minister employed himself in organizing an insurrection 
of the Nairs with the view of accomplishing the murder 
of the Resident, and he inducod the minister of the Rajah 
of Cochin to join in the plot. 