

“From what I could observe in tho field of action tho 
enemy’s force appeared about 3,000 excellent disciplined 
troops, but from what lean collect from report, they amounted 
lo much more. 

“On tho othor side of tho river, close to the mouth, they 
have erected a battery of two guns, which prevents vessels 
m coining in or going out, and which played ■ , th 

nnmo effect on our charging tho enemy on the south side. I 
trust you will immediately dispatch the armed cruiser to koop 
the month of the river open, and recover our craft.” 

(Signed) W. HEWITT, Major, 

Camp Cochin, Commontli j. 

VMK January 1809. 

I... - 

H M's I2th-»V private kill***!; IJouumnni Thompson, mid U rank 

,..l ftu, wimndoil 1st Iwn'ftlinn 17 h- 10 imviOr killed; rni»tutn 
Komi monally woundod ; A* fm iiml ttlo woundoU. 


210 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XIX. 


Thnnks of 
I iOTornniont. 


lt"inforco- 

uieuta. 


( SL 


A subsequent report, dated on the 21st, concludes with 
the following w r ords :— 

“ The small detachment H.M.’s 12th regiment behaved 
with great gallantry, and showed a noble example to the first 
battalion of the 17th regiment, who followed it entirely to my 
satisfaction.” 

Tho detachment received the thanks of Government, 
convoyed in a general order dated 4th February 1809 :— 

“ The Honorable the Governor in Council also takes this 
opportunity of expressing his warm approbation of the con¬ 
duct of a detachment of troops stationed at Cochin, 1 under 
tho command of Major Howitt, who with great skill and 
bravery repulsed a numerous and united force of the troops 
of Truvancoro aud Cooliin in an attack which they made ou 
the British detachment on the 12th ultimo. The Governor 
in Council has particular satisfaction in expressing to Major 
Hewitt, and to tho officers and troops under his command, his 
public thanks for tin ir highly deserving conduct.” 

Ou tho 3rd January a detachment of artillery, 300 
H.M.’s 80th foot, the 2nd battalion 12th, and tho 2nd 
of the 22nd arrived at Cannanoro from Soringnpatain to 
replace tho troops sent to Cochin and Quilon, and further 
reinforcements were put in motion from Mysore in tho 
direction of tho Western Coast A requisition for Euro¬ 
pean troops from Ceylon was made about tho same time. 

Operations in thp South op Travancore, 1809. 

About tho middle of January a force 2 was assembled 
in tho southern division with the object of operating in 

* On the lib S< t iSK) tho S8rd regiment M.N.I. was author- 

• cd to hour tho word 1 Oocb.in ” on the colors und appoint monttf in 
commemoration of this vortioo. 

htl> cavalry, ono company of : . tilery with f. or 0-ponnd.r" nr.d 
* vVt> howitzers, J1 M.’b 69th regiment, bi. battalion JJrr! live 

com, p,oI<h. 2mi butlr*lion 3rd, l«t battalion 13th, 2nd btiltalion 18ih 

’ 1 P*‘"v, 2nd but valiou IGt »i Livo coonvmiutf, 2nd battalion p. > i f 
too. 







HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


211 


Travancoro from the south, and thus creating a diversion CHAP. x:x. 
in favor of Colonel Chalmers. 