


Ttemforco- 

rnenta. 


Attempt, to 
murder tbo 
Tlcuidcat- 


“Kv.-nU at 


This design having become known at Madras, additional 
t roops were immediately ordered into Travancore. H.M.’s 
12 th foot sailed from Cannanoro for Quilon on the 2Gth 
December 1808, followed two days afterwards by the 2nd 
battalion 18th native infantiy, and on the 1st January 
by a detachment of artillery consisting of 45 Europeans, 
and 82 natives, with four 0-pounders, and two 5 V inch 
howitzers. The 1st battalion 17th native infantry em¬ 
barked at Tellicherry for Cochin on the 30th December. 

On the night of the 28th December, the house of the 
Resident, who was then at Cochin, was surrounded by u 
number of armed men, and he had barely time to concord 
himself when they broke into the Residency. Not 
finding him, they left the place, and the Colonel got on 
board one of the ships coming down the coast with troop. ’, 
which, most fortunately, happened to pass Cochin about 
daybreak on the 29th December. 

Lieutenant-Colonol Chalmers 1 was at this time in com¬ 
mand of tlio subsidiary force, the bead-quarters of whit h, 
consisting of the 1st battalion 2nd, 1st of 4th, and 2nd 
of 13th, were stationed at Quilon. 

■ lojt -Omi ;ul Bir John Chalmem, u.c.B. The officer, wl.o, 

wIujji n Lloutonunt, made the gnllanf defence of Coimbatoro in 17U1- 



HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY 




207 



The Colonel, having received information on the 29th 1 CHAP. 
December that a number of armed men, well supplied ~ 
with ammunition, had assembled at the house of the 
Do wan in the immediate neighbourhood, ordered the 
force to be on the alert, which had scarcely been done 
when he heard that a large body of Nairs was about to 
advance upon the cantonment from Paroor, a village on 
the coast about ton miles south of Quilon. Upon this 
he detached Captain Clapham, with five companies of the 
4th, and a gun, to occupy some heights near the Dewan's 
house, and to remain there during the night, with the 
object of preventing the force being placed between the 
fire of two parties. On approaching the heights, Captain 
Clapham found that a small hill On tho right of tho road 
was already held by the insurgents, whose numbers were 
increasing every moment, and he had scarcely time to 
load when he was attacked by a strong body in column. 
Reserving his fire, until it had como within a very short 
distance, ho delivered a volley, but it was not until after 
a good deal of firing that the enemy were finally compel¬ 
led to retreat. 

Nothing further took place until next morning, when 
Captain Clapham, having beet* joined by Major Galbraith 
Hamilton with two companies of the 13tli, the-Dewan's 
house Was attacked, and taken, together with six 1- 
potinders which had been mounted in front of it. 

1 his had just been effected when if- was reported ffial AtiAu 
the rVavauoore troops wore crossing the bar nf Ivicka,- ' 1 '* l - 
about five miles north of Quilon. Major Hamilton was 

’Rome accounts uny t ho 3<Uh ; that inthe«eH ix taken from tho 
rojiort rando by Oolouul ChalmrM H |., tho Uj- admit, dated ui (Quilon, 2ml 
January 1809. 