

A gratuity, equal to one month's pay, was sanctioned 
for each non-commissioned officer and private of the 19th 
dragoons who had been employed at Vellore. 

The punishment of tho mutinous battalions became 
the subject of much controversy, and was not finally 
settled until January 1807, when the 1st, and 23rd regi¬ 
ments wore struck off tho strength of the army from tho 
31st December 1800. 


1 In reply to n rr monstrance against this summary treatment, un<l 
nn application f«»r ich • : winch w;u vi»>- [uently profiled L v Lord 
William Dentine*Mho Court of Directors, on the 25th July 1809, whih. 

■ ■ • i • ir VI. O of hi ■ . \ ■. .-hi < • 

disc Ini tiling any intentiou of per*..mil dir respect, still adhered to their 
original view, and logi-ited tl*at “ fr . Uoroureund camion luid i.ct Ik vh 
' ^‘ i ikCiI ih examining’ Ivtu tlio real i imnnt » and .li j ■ ii ions «.f 
i 1m tf'.pny* Ik Tore mniMuroti of .-m verity were adopted to enforce l h<» 
order re upon flag c bo uao of iho new lurh&nd.” 

Tin-...- di •• i returned to duty, but »ro not icitorcd to their 
»PL did meiita on tho staff. 


201 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Their places were supplied by two regiments of two 
battalions each, numbered respectively the 24th 1 and 25th 
regiments. 

Mr. Petrie, Senior Member of Council and Provisional 
Governor, took liis seat as Governor on the 11th Sep- Qovomorand 
tember 1807, and Lieutenant-General Hay McDcwall in-Chief. 
assumed command of tho army on the 17th of the same 
month. 


CHAPTKU 

XVIII. 


Interim 


1 For the formation of these regiments, i'iae account of Native 
Infantry, 1S0G-9, Chapter XIX. The 24th and 25th regiments were 
restored to their original positions in the army in consideration of tho 
gallantry displayed by the 1st battalion 21th regiment at the battlo of 
•^eetabuldeo near Nagpore on the 26th and 27th November 1817. 







VUU Ul. 


26 





HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CliAT’ XIX. 


'.lolapufc 
Hum, tbOS. 


Action at 
A innhiuir. 




202 



CHAPTER XIX. 

prom THE TREATY WITH HOLKAR IN 1806, 

TO THE TERMINATION OF THE WAlt IN TRAVANCOKE, 1809. 


Sir George Hilaro Barlow, Bart., arrived from Cal¬ 
cutta in December 1807, and took his seat as Governor 
of Madras ou tho 24tli of that month. 

In February 1808, Incut. -Colonel Montresor marched 
from Hyderabad towards Sholapoor, in order to suppress 
.in insurrection caused by Mohiput Bam, an influential 
Jaghlrdar who had been recently dismissed from tho 
Court of the Nizam, at the instance of tho Resident, us 
being inimical to the interests of tho British Government. 
Mohiput Ram retreated on the approach of tho detach¬ 
ment., 1 and ultimately, but with difficulty, succeeded in 
making his escape into Candoish, whore ho took refuge 
with Holkar, but he had been so hard pressed, that he 
was obliged to abandon his guns and baggage. 

Colon -1 Montresor returned to Hyderabad in June. 

During this year, Mohiput Kao Ilolkar, Wahid Ally 
Khan BuDgush, and Daudin Khan, three dependents of 
Holkar, taking advantage of the confusion which followed 
the insanity of that Chief, established themselves in 
Candci h, from whence they mode incursions into the 
territories of tho Pe~hwa, and of tho hi i /.mil . In conso- 