

1 I'robjbilinjt cu.to-marlu uml luniugii wlioii iu iinifi/rm. 














rntSTfy 



<SL 

niSTottt ov rut :jadtias; army. 


<-NAt\ XIX. lion of the boys to duties * purely military ’ bas nol balanced 
the injury the service has sustained by the loss of that facility 
to the acquirement of a common language, and knowledge of 
native customs which tlieir former attachment to the junior 
officers produced.” 


Dvcflfl. 




r*r 5 Mtirks of 



On the 24th September, a further order, from which 
the following is an extract, was issued by Government on 
the subject of dress, and marks of caste. 

“The Right Honorable the Governor in Council deeming it 
of the utmost importance that the intentions of the Govern¬ 
ment with regard to the drc.ss and customs of the native 
troops should be exactly understood, and that all unauthorised 
ul t< ’ratio v in the established pattern dress should cense, is 
pleased to issue the following orders. 

“The order of Government under date the 15th March 
17‘d7, fixing a pattern turband, shall continue to be in forc< . 
leather co •kudos and plumes shall not bo worn. Stocks of 
every description shall be abolished. 

“ The jacket shall be worn as received from the contractor, 
without any additional ornament or distinction, and the li tli' 
mounting shall in no particular differ from the pattern lodged 
iu tbo office of the Military Board and already in use. 

il Tho fullest permission shall bo given to the native troop* 
to wear their murks of caste at all times, and ii any manner 
they think proper. The same full liberty shall be grunted 
with r l spoct to the hair on the upper lip, and the wearing of 
joys, and ornaments peculiar to different families, and caste*. 
The imposition of any restraint, either by order, or by ret] net-1, 
on tho inclination the .sepoys in these particulars, is pt>- : - 
: v ly fovhuhhm. T!,< Governor iu Council also requires 
that evey all bo shown to the 

in tbo observance oi his domestic customs.” 

Tho existing . rangemcMs of tho native* invalid o*trw 
id -hint nt wore revised iu November, with the v \v oi 
• Gliding tin mcii u> serve in their native tli trii tv, ;» ml 
.d o with the object of territorial recruiting. 










/ 


220 





HISTORY 01 THi: MADRAS AltM Y. 


The number of companies was ordered to be increased 
to forty-six from the 1st January 1807. Each company 
was to be considered as attached to an effective battalion, 
and was to be permanently stationed in the district where 
that battalion had been raised. 

The companies were to recruit for their respective 
battalions, and it was intended that when their connection 
had become fully established, the families of iho batta¬ 
lions on field service should reside under’the protection 
of tho invalid companies under the superintendence of 
a European officer whenever practicable. The pay of 
sepoy invalids was raised at this time to the same amount 
as that of effective men, to have effect from the 1st Decem¬ 
ber 180G. 