

In Juno 1807, it was announced that, in conformity 
with orders received from the Court of Directors, all sums 
collected on account of duties levied in military bazars 
would thenceforth be carried exclusively to the credit of 
Government. The final payment to be made to officers 
commanding districts, garrisons, cantonments, &c. to bo 
for the period between the 12th July 1806, and 11th July 
1807. 


t orngo cape. About the end of the year it was ordered that the pat¬ 
tern of forage cap worn by the officers of H.M/s 59ih 
regiment should be adopted by the European officers of 
the Company's infautry, including those attached to the 
native corps. 

?;!X T iS0Z. In March 1808 the establishment of a Military Fund 
for the benefit of the officers of each branch of the army 
was authorised by Government, subject to the approval 
of the Court of Directors. 

The following is an abstract of the main points of the 
original regulations •— 

1. It was optional with officers to join the fund. 

2. Monthly stoppages, at certain fixed rates, were to i>«. 
made by Paymasters from the pay and allowances of sub¬ 
scribers. 

3. A donation, equal to a month’s regimental pay, waft 

; ' , so tbit the whole amount should bo 

liquidated either in nix, twoltro, or eighteen mouths at ihe 
option of the Huhstiibcr. 





Native Infantry, 1806-9. 

The following orders were issued in July, August, and 
September 1800 in consequence of the mutiny at Vellore : 

« G.O. by Government.— Fort Saint Gooryo, 17th, July 1800. 

“ It having been represented to the Right Honorable the Dan cellini. 
Governor in Council that considerable misunderstanding has 
occurred among some of tho native corps of this establish- dress, 1JS0C. 
ment with respect to a late alteration in the dress of the 
nativo corps; and it being in all cases the desire of His 
Lordship i?i Council, and of the Co mmandcr-iu-Chief, to shew 
every just degree of attention to the usages of the native 
troops; it has been in consequence resolved that the orders 
which have been considered liable to the objection of affecting 
these usages shall be rescinded/’ 


“ 0.0 . by the Commai der-tn-Chi»f—.Choultry Plain , 

1 7th July 1806. 

“ The Commander-in-Chief is pleased to cancel the 10th 1 
paragraph of the 11th section of orders for Battalions of 
Native Infantry” under date the 13th March 1806.” 

On the 22nd August an order was published in which Native 
the Commander-in-Chiei called the attention of all officers u 
to tho necessity of making themselves acquainted with 
the native languages, and announced his determination 
not to recommoud any officer for appointment to the staff, 
unless duly qualified in that respect. 

The order of 1801, by which tho attachment of recruit hov» <l«i 
boys to European officers ns orderlies had been prohibited, 

\v is rescinded c»a this occasion for the following reason : 

“ 11 is Excellency has hi indue* d to adopt hb decision, 
from the conviction that tho advantage gained by tho reBtric- 