

“ Tho Honorablo tlio Court of Directors in their gone nil 
letter to the Governor-General in Council of the 12th July 
1805, have been pleased to confirm the general orders o 4 the 
Governor- Goneral in Council of 4th August 1803, declaring 
officers of Artillery and Engineers, when promoted to the 
rank of General Officers, to be eligible, 1 conformably to tiro 
existing regulations of the Honorablo the Court of Directors, 
to be employed on the general stafl.” 

These officers wore, by tbo samo order, declared in 
eligible for tho command of their respective corps. 

In February 1807 it was reported by the Commandant 
ot artillery that ton privates had recently shot or other¬ 
wise injured themselves, in order to obtain 1 heir disclui rge, 
and that ho attributed this conduct to the manner in whi-h 
men had been enlisted during tho last few years. Tho 
established period of service, up to the year 1800, had 
been five years, ot tho end of which men were entitled to 
bounty on ro-onlistmont; but the recruits recently reoc i \ d 
had boon enlisted for long terms, viz., some for ton years, 
nomefor ' f gonoral service/' without limitation of pe ' >d. 



Cancelled by the Court c Directors, February 1814. 




and others ns “ culprits 99 to serve for life, but unuccom- CHAP. xi::. 
pnnied by any specification of crime or record of sentence. 

Many of these men declared themselves ignorant of the 
conditions of their enlistment, and all were discontented 
at seeing the payment of bounty to their short-service 
comrades. 

Government, at the instance of the Commander-iu- 
Ohief, agreed to rocommend to the Court of Directors that 
these recruits should, at the expiration of five years, 
be entitled to tho same privileges as their comrades, and 
the Commander-in-Chief was requested to cause this 
resolution to be made known to the corps of artillery, 
aud to the European regiments. 

During August it having been brought to the notice of Tomb-etonea 
Government that a number of tomb-stones, which had J^tterioB. 
been taken from St Mary’s Church during the siege of 
Fort St. George in 1758, to bo used as platforms in tho 
batteries on tho northern face, had remained there ever 
rdneo, it was ordorod that they should be replaced. 

A new scale of pensions for Grohndauzo was introduced l’on»iona to 
during tho year, to have retrospective effect from tho 1st Gt)l uulau °* 
•January 1807 in arrears for Decembor 1806. Tho follow¬ 


ing were the rates fixed :— 

PAG. V. 0. * 

Subadar ... ... ... ... 8 0 0 

Jemadar ... ... ... ... 4 0 0 

Havildar ... ... ... 200 

Naiguo ... ... 1 21 0 

Sopoy . i 7 40 

Dru tumor or IP for ..200 


During 1808 the artillery received 113 men from tho Tmr ^r 
lleghnont de Meim i., which called forth the following 
re mark from the Court of Directors in their general letter UH ut * 1 
dated 0th April 1800 :— 




HISTORY OF TUK MADRAS AUMY. 



CHAP. XIX. 


Strength of 
the artillery, 
November 
1808. 


iTorro 

Artillery, 