

£lf Ihe Goverror in Council accordingly conveys to Lieute¬ 
nant-Colonel Chalmers, who commanded the British detach¬ 
ment at Quilon in this distinguished action, his public thanks, 
and Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers is requested to convey the 
thanks of the Governor in Council to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Picton H.M.’s 12th regiment, Major Muirhead, Major Hamil¬ 
ton, Captain Me wall, Captain Peppor, Captain Mackintosh, 
Lieutenant Lindsay, Lieutenant Arthur of the Engineers, 
and the oflicors of his stair Captain Cranston and Cup tail! 
Ahmnty, with the othOr officers and troops of the detachment 
who bravely signalised themselves on the occasion.” 

The cantonments were again attacked 1 on the 31 si 
January, with a similar result, and the Naira suffered *. 0 

severely that they began to desert in considerable nunir 
bers. 

No further attempt was made by the enemy after tin 
repulse of the 81st January, and Colonel Chalmers, 
having been joined on the 19th February by H.M ,’s 
19th regiment under Licutonant-Colonel the Honorable 
1 Stuart, felt him- ! sufficiently stroug to attach their 
position at Killmuooi, 1 which was protected by batteries 
Laving a deep nullah full of water in their front, and 
defended by about 5,000 men. 

The first brigade, oompo-od of II M’s 12th, the 2nd of 
L8th, and a wing of the 4th, all under Lieutonunt- 
Coloncl Pieton, was ordered to turn the left oft! o posi- 
' on, while tin; second brigade, eoiupo-, 1 of ll.M.’s Huh. 

' Thr ’ ri l ,ort i he pririioulorq of 11 > • alTaii l>;»« ma l. 

founrl 

I wo /tiiil n-hulf milca iulMfcid from < tinLnnnmu» b 








msTonv of tiu: madras army. 


217 


loci by Major Beaver, the 2nd of the 13th under Major CHAP. XJX. 
Hamilton, and three companies of the 2nd under Captain —T 

Pepper, all commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Stuart, 
attacked in front. Both attacks were completely success¬ 
ful, and the enemy took to flight, leaving their guns 
behind. The advance of the front attack having been 
covered by a well-directed fire of artillery until the head 
of the column had nearly reached the batteries, the casual¬ 
ties in this brigade were much less than they would other¬ 
wise have been. 


It does not appear that the other brigade sustained any 
loss. 

Tbo following are extracts from the report of Colonel 
Chalmers, dated 23rd February : — 

“The greatest credit is due to the troops for the steady 
inaunor they advanced against the batteries, through deep 
water and mud. and thorny bushes, under a heavy fire of 
musketry, round, and grapo. ILM.’s 19th regiment lost one 
killed and ten wounded, several very severely, and about the 
same number of natives. 

“ Captain Foote, H M.’s 1 Piedmontaiso * volunteered his 
services on shore, and landed a detachment of seamen. Half 
of them went with Lieut»-Colonel Picton under Lieutenant 
Turner, and the other half, under Captain Foote, accompanied 
bitntenant-Colonel Stuart. They wore employed in bringing 
up our artillery in the front of tbo enemy’s batteries. They 
did this with that alacrity and courage whioh they invariably 
display on all occasions of service. I regret one of them was 
severely wounded.” 