

On the 3rd Afaroh a geneml order was published, from OompHmcn* 
which the following is an extract:— bar - v ur ‘* r * 

“ The Honcvable the Governor in Council has great, p na uire 
m recording the high sense which ho entertains of the skill 
mid judgment evinced bv Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers in tin 

V OL. III. 28 





218 


HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 


CD Al\ XIX. arrangements made by him to secure the success of the attack 1 
upon the enemy’s position, and requests that Lieutenant- 
Colonel Chalmers will convey to Lieutenant-Colonel Picton, 
to the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel Stuart, and to the officers 
and men who served under them, the public thanks of the 
Honorable the Governor in Council for their meritorious 
exertions on this occasion.” 

The army Colonel Chalmers inarched from Quilon on the 26th 

Trovandrum. February, and encamped afew miles north of Trevandrum, 
a day or two after Colonel Sentlegcr had occupied n 
similar position on tho south. The Hajub submitted 
immediately after tbe concentration of tbe army round his 
capital, and on the 1st or 2nd March it was agreed that, 
in addition to all arrears of subsidy, ho should pay tho 
expenses of the war, uud that the Carnatic Brigade, ami 
the Nair battalions in his service should be dismissed. 
£u,--idoru tho The Dewan committed suicide, but his brother was 
!>'.i^ nti‘ rTof taken and hanged for his participation in the murder 
t;* brother. 0 f Assistant-Surgeon Georgo ITume of the Company’. 

service, and about thirty-three men of H.M/s 12th foot, 
which had been treacherously perpetrated at Alleppy on 
the 29th December 1808, the day after the commence¬ 
ment of the insurrection. Tho body of the Dewan was 
hung in irons and exposed upon a gibbet, a proceed¬ 
ing which called forth the vere animadversion of the 
Supremo Government. 

i julim. nt Tn the meantime, a strong detachment 2 under Lieute¬ 
nant-Colonel John Ouppago had entered tho territory of 
Cochin and encamped about t welve miles north of tho 
town, where it remained until affairs wore iinally settled. 

‘ From this »>rd"i it would ap| ar hafc tUo action took jjlaoo on th. 

» but Colons! ('hrtfnwrR mnkca it tho 22tid. 

J Dotfichiru nt artillery, rV hichments Q.M it 50th and 80th, flank 
tomf • i h i balu 1 i\ 5tb, 2nd battalion Ot ,2nd of I2tb, aud 2nd of 


HISTORY 01 ' THK MADJRAB ARilY. <419 

Lieutenant-Colonel John Monro, previously Quarter¬ 
master-General, was appointed Resident in October 1810. 
Soon afterwards, at the request of the Rajah, and with 
tlio assent of the British Government, he assumed the 
administration of the province, which he conducted with 
great success until 1814, when he made over the manage¬ 
ment to a Native, by which time the State had been 
relieved of pecuniary embarrassment. This arrangement, 
however, was condemned by the Court of Directors, who 
pronounced it to be entirely opposed to all the principles 
upon which their relations with triendly Native States had 
theretoforo been conducted. 