

of c'oiuumudii 
and staff 

appoint- 

merits, 

1806-7. 


Command nf 
tho troops in 
For* Faint 
George. 


PoY irrihtor- 

* hip of fclm 
rryd.'riib id 
H'>I»*tdUry 
f«»l C«'. 


2i0 




niSTOBY OF THE MADEA.3 ARMY. 



may perhaps perform similar services in oilier places, but in 
reference to the means of the governing power, and the view 
which it may take of the merits and services of the receiver.” 

Tho Rorond grievance specified above wns ronlly Sub¬ 
stantial, and although it had been animadverted upon 
by the Court of Directors on more than one occasion, 
no steps had been taken by tho Madras Govornmont to 
remove it. The undermentioned extracts from a letter 
of the Court, dated 12tli June 1807, will show that tho 
partiality complained of existed, at that time, to a very 
serious extent. 

After observing that the just pretensions of both ser¬ 
vices ought to be duly regardod, the Court proceeded 
to remark upon the objectionable manner in which th : 
patronage of Government and of the Compandor-in- 
Chief had, in several instances, been exorcised. 

With respect to the special appointment of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Monypenny, H.M/s 73rd, to tho command of 
the troops in Fort St. George, with a staff salary, they 
observed that, in conformity with the usual practice, tho 
command devolved upon tho senior officer at the Presi¬ 
dency, who was bound to perform the duties without any 
additional allowance, and for these reasons they directed 
the immediate discontinuance of tho appointment. 

Tho nomination of Lieutenant Hall, H.M/a 22nd 
dragoons, to bo Paymaster to the Subsidiary Force at 
Hyderabad, calle d forth the following c< n sure :— 

14 The Subsidiary Force at Hyderabad consists of about 
7,000 men, mostly nativo troops, and its annual expense 
amounts to several lacs of pagodas. The office of Paymaster 
to this corps must therefore bo considered as of equal impor¬ 
tance with that of any of the fixed stations of the army, and 
in this view it should have been filled by a Civil Sot 1 nut of tho 
higher mnks, in tho same raanuer taj the paymirttoiwbip «»f 
Mysore, Vellore, Trichinopoly uud Vizagapatain.” 


rtwgirjjj. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARM 241 

Tliuy went on to say that tho Governor, Lord Willia: 
Bontinck, in a minute dated 3rd March 1805, had recom- 
monded that paymasterships should be held by Captains 

n f not loss Hum ton years' service, notwitl /ihinding which 

ho had appointed a Subaltern of II.M.’b rervieu, who hud 
oidy been a few months in India, to be Paymaster of a 
large force, and they concluded by remarking that they 
had “ seldom met with an instance of so much inconsis¬ 
tency as is displayed in this appointment. We object to 
it, not only on this account, but also for the general 
reasons assigned above, and we direct that it be instantly 
annulled. No stronger proof cau be adduced of the 
impropriety of the preference to which we have alluded, 
than the present instance. The Subsidiary Force, being 
composed chietly of native troops, naturally pointed out 
t ho Company's officers, who had been accustomed to servo 
with such troops, as most proper to fill the staff offices 
annexed to the detachment." 