

the Commander-iii-Chief, who, at tho uumo time, informed 
tile Colonel that he regretted “that this subject has not 
been sooner decided upon, but being desirous of obtaining 
every opinion, and a recent one of some importance having 
only been forwarded to me a few days ago, it was impos¬ 
sible to avoid delay.” It never .became known what this 
opinion was, but it is not improbable that au occurrence 
which took place at Madras at this time may have had 
some influence on the decision of the Commander-in-Chief. 

Government having determined to employ Major 
Blacker, then Deputy Quartermaster-General, on special 
duty in Travancore, acquainted the Commander-m-Cbief 
with their intention on the 15th January. General Mac- 
do wall, in reply, requested that the subject might be 
reconsidered, because the selection of an officer from tho 
general staff ought to have been left to his judgment,, 
and ho therefore recommended Captain Macdowall for 
the situation a- being equal to Major Blacker in point 
of ability, while he was Superior to that officer in tho 
knowledge of the people and country of Travancoro. On 
the lbtli, Government wrote to the General declining to 
accept Ins nomination of Captain Mucdowall, and, on tho 
20th, Lieutenant-Colonel Monro was placed under arre't, 
by which measure the employment of his Deputy iu Tra- 
vancore was necessarily precluded. It is possible that tho 
propur/d employment of Major Blacker may have born 
unconnected with the arrest of Lieutenant-Colonel Mum-), 
but the circumstances have a suspicious appearance, espe¬ 
cially when it ia remembered that the charges had been 
shelved, i,ml tbui h at is factory reason was assigned 
their sudden revival. 


imSTQy 


247 



HISTORY OP TUP MADRAS ARMY. 





Colonel Muuro appealed to Government through the CHAP. XX. 
Military Department, on the ground that his report had colo^f* 
boeu prepared by order of the late Commander-in-Chief, 
aud was a confidential communication. General Mncdowall 

having refused to forward the appeal, the Colonel sent 
it. in direct. Government, after having consulted their 
legal advisers, 1 requested the Commander-in-Chief to re¬ 
lease Colonel Munro, and as he declined to do so without 
a, positive order, Government, on the 27t’u January, did, 
through their Chief Secretary, direct that Colonel Munro 
should be released from arrest forthwith, which order 
was obeyed .Accordingly. The General, who, a few days Gcnomi^ 
previously, had announced his intention to resign, and i e &vee 
who sailed from Madras to Negapatam on the 30th Janu- > " adr ‘‘ 3 ' - 
ary on his voyage to England, was so much annoyed at 
having been overruled by Government, that he left, for 
publication to the army, an order dated the 28tli idem, 
in which Colonel Munro was severely reprimanded for 
having appealed to the civil power, “ an act of disrespect 
for which ho would have been brought to trial had General 
Mucdowall remained in India.” 

Government, on becoming acquainted with this order, Hia 
directed that it should be expuuged from the public 
uncords; but not contented with this, they anticipated the 
expected receipt, from Negapatam, of the Commander-in- 
Chief s official resignation, and publicly dfemiBfed him, in 
the ground that the order of the 28th January contained 