

u Thus Bengal, the first great territorial possession of tho 
Company, had its establishments early settled with some 
analogy to its income, and that country, as being the scat of 
Government, tho centre of tho British interests in India, came 
to have a standard of public allowances which could not l»» 
exactly imitated at theotli i Presidencies under very different 
circnrastances.” 


Although IhomJdi Hof tho officers in noL yot hoforu u n »u 
unthont irfttod T u rn, wo ’hint*. it proper i > tnluj tho present oppoiiuni! 
1<> make onto observation y upon tho I . pice contained in it.” 

2 “2nd Mm jh 1809 Government i fumed tho Commands. ?, 

Chif.fji, it, mi officer who itcid signed tho Tuomoriul v. »i to I ■ • api )inu 
tfi the Staff until further ordure. 








history or the madras army, 



a persons nominated to Civil and Military employments CHAP. XX. 
liavo entered the services perfectly aware of these inequali¬ 
ties, and are therefore not entitled to expect that they should 
be afterwards removed.” 

u The Company have hence always resisted the idea of a 
general equalisation of allowances and emoluments of the 
different Presidencies as not founded on right 3 or reason, or 
tho nature of things. Supposing for a moment that such a 
principle could bo admitted and enforced, the consequence, 
in the present state of the finances of the Company, must bo to 
reduce the few remaining distinctions of the Bengal Presidency 
to a level with those of Madras, and Bombay, as it would be 
utterly impossible to provide for the expense of raising the 
emoluments of the inferior Presidencies to a level w T ith thoso 
of Bengal, extended, as this rise must be, to all the Civil as 
well as Military branches of the service, if once tho principle 
of equalisation were adopted.” 

“ In all tho Presidencies, however, tho scale of allowances 
has boon more than sufficient, for comfortable subsistence, and, 
in the case of all the privates and non-commissioncd officers 
of tho army, the rates have been at all times very generally 
the Fame at all tho Presidencies. The regimental allowances 
of both officers and men are very nearly tho same at all tho 
Presidencies, and, wherever mere comfortable subsistence is 
concerned, it has been tho object p£ the public regulations, at 
all times to approximate as nearly to an equality of allow¬ 
ances as tho local circumstances of each Presidency ’iavo 
admitted.” 

“ But staff, and other extra allowances rest upon a different 
foundation* They arc gratuitous advantages conferred on 
individuals at the pleasure and discretion of Government, and 
' arc calculated, not with regard to what othor men receive who 

1 Ah tho ego Hsnti .m of pay and allowances had boon recommended 
l,y Lord Cornwallis, and subeoqmmtly bolh by the Comninuder-in-C hi- f 
:«ml the Government of Mudrun, it is not surprising that tho continued 
codtttcmoeof the- disparity should have boon con Mured aa a grievance - 









TTnfnir 
th Attribution 