


• TAtNrs 


243 


HISTORY or nil: ilADRAS ARMY. 

feeling themselves taxed for the benefit of those who 
command them. It is further to be observed that in 
India the amount of Hie collections in military bazars lias 
al ways depended, principally, on the extension of spirit u¬ 
ous liquors to the troops.” 

Moreover, the abolition of this allowance was not con- 
liped to Madras, but was carried out in the other Presi¬ 
dencies also, and it affected the officers of the Royal army 
as well as those of the Company. 

The officers having pre-facod their memorial with coni- 
plnints of the length and severity of the service to be 
endured in a foreign land before becoming entitled to 
pension, and having spoken of their pay and allowances 
ns being scarcely adequate to their subsistence, the Court 
very justly observed that no one entered their service, 
but on their own application, and with full knowledge of 
their probable prospects; and they concluded their reply 
on that part of the subject with the following words :— 

44 They surely forget tliat the military allowances of the 
Company arc higher than t.hoso of any military service in the 
world, although the necessaries of life are comparatively cheap 
in India ; that they attain the highest raid: without punch an' 
or expense ; and that the provision for retiring officers : 

• in h ns no othor service has over afforded, and Ruch i\m the 
tin uncos of the Company are ever strained to support.” 

Lieutenant-General Stuart, w hen Comriiaudor-in -Chief, 
ill wised a plan for the provision ami conveyance of camp 
equipage, e nd regimental stores, with the object of avoid¬ 
ing the sorious lo^s which had been bu Uninod l y Clov¬ 
en i men t in con; 'queue > of the frequent capture < i -ublie 
cal tie and tent s during the wars with Hydur and 1'ippoo. 

This resulted in the issue of a regulation in i Sl)2, 
which, n consideration of a certain monthly sum to i»c 
di av 11 by officer:-, commanding regiment of cavalry, 
battalions of infantry, companit of artillery and tho 



CHAT. XX 


This nholit ion 
general. 


Unreasmmlilo 

complaints* 


Rfipl.v of 
tho Com, t. 


Establish¬ 
ment of t ho 
tout cualr/tot, 
1802. 


244 




HI3TORY 01’ THE MADRAS ARMY. 



corps of pioneers, made it obligatory upon them to provide 
and maintain, in constant readiness for the field, camp 
equipage and carriage for tlieir respective corps on a 
scale laid down in the regulation, besides carriage for 
regimental stores, and hutting accommodation for the 
men when not encamped. The allowance in question was 
to meet all expenses for cover to the native troops in the 
field, in cantonment, or in garrison, in peace or war. 

I his regulation came into operation shortly before 
the Mahratta War of 1803, and was found to answer 
remarkably well; but shortly after the peace in 1806, 
Government, in compliance wnth instructions from Eng¬ 
land, commenced to reduce the military expenditure, 
and Sir John Cradock, at that time Commander-in-Chief, 
called upon Major Munro, the Quartermaster-Gene ml, 
for information regarding the working of the tent con¬ 
tract. That officer accordingly submitted a report, in 
which,* for reasons assigned, the abolition of the contract 
was recommended, and the Commander-in-Chief, concur¬ 
ring, laid the report before Government in June 1807. 
f he recommendation, having been duly considered, was 
approved, and, having received the sanction of the 
Supreme Govern men t, the contract was ordered to bo 
abolished from May 1808. 