

fhe two battalions of pioneers were reduced at the 

•one time from S00 to 700 privates each. 


% 




HISTORY 0? THE MADRAS ARMY. 


235 


CHAPTER XX. 

MUTINY OF THE EUROPEAN OFFICERS, 1809. 

Vv r HEN Lord Cornwallis died at Ghazipoor in October 
1805, the Governmont devolved upon Sir George Hilaro 
Barlow as senior Member of Council in Bengal, and 
in February 1806 he was appointed Governor-General 
by the Court of Directors, which was agreed to by the 
Board of Control as a temporary measure. 

This appointment, however, was revoked a few days 
afterwards by the Ministry, who did not approve of the 
policy of Sir George Barlow in regard to certain Native 
States, and, after some discussion and correspondence, it 
was determined to send out Lord Minto, who arrived at 
Calcutta in July 1807. 

Sir George Barlow, who had been nominated Governor 
of Madras as some compensation for his supersession, 
reached that place in December, when that administration 
commenced which has been described as a “ season 1 of 
unprecedented private mi*er>i } and unexampled pub lit' peril 
and alarm. 99 

During tlio time Sir Georgo Barlow filled the office of 
Governor-General, he not only failed 2 to obtain tlio defer- 
ence and respect due to his station, but made himself 
obnoxious b^ his despotic condu ‘t in official matters, and 
his cold and repulsive manners in pi j vat v life. 

On arriving at Madras the Governor found the conduct 
of Mr. Sherson of the Civil Service under investigation. 

1 W'lson’e History of Jlriti h India. Vol. I, page 236. 

Mui-ihman's II in Lory of India, Yr i U, ]»ig c 230. 


CTIAP. XX. 

Sir G. H. 
Barlow, 

1806 . 


Becomes 
Governor 
of Madras, 
1S07. 


TIis unp »pu- 
Inritj' in 
Calcutta, 
1H06-7. 


Mr. 8ber«ot 
case. 






<SL 

nrSTOIiY OF THE MAD it AS ARMY. 

CH AP, x x. The accounts of that genfcleman had boon reported correct 
by the Civil Auditor, but as they happened not to agree 
with the native accounts in the office, Sir George Barlow 
assumed that Mr. Sherson had been guilty of peculation, 
suspended both him and the Civil Auditor from tho 
public service, and instituted a prosecution against the 
-former in the Supreme Court. Mr. Sherson was acquitted, 
and the Court of Directors being of opinion that ho had 
been improperly treated, they restored him to the service, 
and presented him with a donation of Rs. 70,000 as 
compensation. 

Reddy Itao’s A Special Commission was engaged at this time in 
enquiring into the claims of the creditors of tho lalo 
Nawaub of the Carnatic, and the Commissioners had 
employed, as their adviser, a native named Reddy ilu, 
who had been in the Account Department of the Nawaub. 
During the investigation, Reddy Rao produced, for exami¬ 
nation, a bond held by himself, the validity of which was 
impeached by another creditor named Avadanuin Paupiah, 
who supported tho accusation by witnesses. The bond, 
however, was pronounced by the Commissioners to bo 
genuine, and they resolved to prosecute the witnesses for 
perjury, but this intention was anticipated by the com¬ 
mitment of Reddy Ruo on a charge of forgery. At this 
stage of the proceedings Sir George Barlow interposed his 
authority. He summarily dismissed the Magistrate who 
had committed Reddy Rao, and ordered the Advocate- 
General to defend the latter at his trial. Two gentlemen, 
viz., Mr. Parry, a respectable merchant, and Mr. Roebuck, 
oho of the senior members of tho Civil Service, were also 
punished fur having opposed the Commissioners, the 
former by being deported to England, and tho latter by 
being removed to mi inferior situation in flic Northern 
Ci rears. where ho died soon afterwards. 