

The appointment of Inspector and Exercising Officer 
of cavalry, which had been recently created and con¬ 
ferred upon Lieutenant-Colonel Gillespie, H.M.’s 19th 
dragoons, with considerable emoluments attached thereto, 
\s :is ordered to be discontinued forthwith as unnecessary, 
and the Court observed that had such an office been really 
required, it ought to have boon given to one of tho 
Company's old and experienced officers of cavalry, in 
preference to one who had only been a short time in India; 
more e pcciully us four-fifths of that branch of I lie army 
Were natives. 

The Court then proceeded to remark tlm the com¬ 
mands at llydoruhad and Poormh, of Mysore a * i Mala¬ 
bar ; besides those of most of tho regular garripon:-;, such 
a , Vellore, A root, Poonuumllee, and »Seer t, wmv enjoyed 
hj officers of the H >y«l m my ; and (hey m uclmlod their 
despatch u fell- ws 

VOL, HI 31 



<5L 


CHAI*. XX. 


Appoint mom. 
of luBpiiCtor 
of cavalry. 


Diviiiimift) 

ami 

command*. 








212 


<SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


Having thus brought under your notice several instances 
m which we conceive that an unjust preference has been showu 
to the King’s officers at the expense of the Company’s, and 
particularly in situations where the superior local knowledge of 
the latter, and their acquaintance with the manners, customs, 
officers of the &nd prejudices of the natives, pointed them out as the fittest 
ISO? 1 . arm ' > to be employed ; we have only to repeat that while on the one 
hand we disclaim any intention of throwing any reflection on 
the character of the individuals so selected by you, and are 
ready to acknowledge to the fullest extent tbe meritorious 
services of His Majesty’s forces in India, we feel it our boun¬ 
der: duty, on the other hand, to guard the interests of our own 
officers. Their claims upon our countenance and protection 
are strong, and indisputable, their exertions have been great, 
and their services zealous and faithful. Oar interests must 
suffer materially from any want of harmony and cordiality 
between the two descriptions of officers, and wc know of no 


CHAP. XX. 

The Court 
of Directory 
condemn 
the uujust 
preference 

ahown to 


circuinstance more likely to produce that injurious effect than 
an undue preference of either. The exigencies of the public 
service may, unquestionably, jnstify occasional and temporary 
deviations from the principle we havo laid down, but wc aro 
so fully persuaded that a fair adherence to it is so easy, and 
tho path to ho followed so plain and obvious, that we desire 
it to be distinctly and explicitly understood that we shall 
consider a different line of conduct on the part of any of our 
Governments or Commamlers-in-Chief to ho so highly excep¬ 
tionable, as to do; t an , the strongest expression of our,cciisu.ro, 
and disapprobation.” 

^ The discontinuance of the allowances from tlio Bazar 

biinvum-'s fund was justified by the Court as being m strict con- 
f(,rmii y with the Articles of War, " which prohibit tho 
levy of duties by Military officers on any articloe of con¬ 
sumption, and is evidently founded on the most incon¬ 
trovertible principles of suimdpolh y. It is not polit i• to 
givo officers an interest iu the amount of imposts lovied 
on military markets, because it has an oviden t* ndoncy 
fo einkr the soldiers discontented wiih tlmir office!’'. \>y 