

This change was adverse to the interests of commanding 
officers, inasmuch a-, it was ma le during a tiino of peace, 
when the wear and tear of camp equipage being trifling, 
they expected to have had the opportunity of reimbursing 
themselves for the expenses incurred during the long and 
trying campaigns from 1803 until 1800, being debarred by 
the terms of their contract from soliciting any special 
compensation, although they did receive a gratuity of :• ix 
months’ batta iu common with all other officers of tho 
ai my in the field, to whom it had been grunted at ihc 









245 




recommendation o£ Major-General Wellesley at tlie close 
of tbo campaign of 1804. Nevertheless, the new order 
was quietly carried out without remonstrance beyond that 
contained in the memorial mentioned above, and in a 
separate memorial signed by a number of officers in com¬ 
mand of corps, which was forwarded by the Commander- 
in-Chief on the 28th January 1809, but returned to him 
by Government. 

In all probability the matter would then have been 
dropped had it not been that the Quartermaster-General's 
report, marked “private and confidential/’ and which had 
been given by Sir George Barlow to Colonel Capper, 
the Adjutant-General, came, in some unauthorised, 1 and 
unexplained manner, to be circulated to officers ■ommand- 
iug corps, who immediately took serious offence at one of 
the arguments used therein, viz., that the grant of the 
same allowances in peace and in war, placed the interests 
and duties of commanding officers at variance with each 
other. The result was that the following charge, signed by 
five commandants of cavalry, and twenty-three of infantry, 
was prof erred agaiust. Lieutenant-Colonel John Munro, 
Quartermaster-General of the Army, and Captain in tho 
Madras European Regiment 

(i For having * * * made use of fuLo and 

infamous insinuations, thereby tending to injure our charac¬ 
ters ns officers, and ofchervviso injurious to our reputations as 
gc lit lemon/’ 


CDAP. XX. 


Charge 
against the 
QuurtormaR- 
ter-General 


1 U in ditlicult to avoid the conclusion ihnt tho Qin rcorm st’r-CJcno- 
ral’* report vra circulated by oqn poreon or peieoAe in oilier, with the 
intention of tnnkin mischief 

It i i , untctl in Knot's Life of Sir John Malcolm, Vo). 1. p oie -ICO, that 
l ho mmi' unis pavii«raplm were circulated by Colonol Cajipor. No 
authority is given for thio p> - .ement, and nothing tending to corroborate 
it has be n fuuud in tho records. Si ha pn :<vliog on tho pro of 
Cudonol Cal>por w uild hove boon a Irgiumaii roro .n iV his Rnspomd 
and would certainly have huen mentioned by Sir <*«v>rgo liu'i ow litul !,<• 
know o of il 


HISTORY OF THi: MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XX. 

li is arreafc, 
1800. 






Hnepicious 
ivboyftuco of 
tRu chax-go. 





2 16 



Tliid charge, although dated on the 25th September 

1808, had been kept in abeyance until the 20th January 

1809, on which day Lieutenant-Colonel Munro was placed 
in arrest by order of Lioutenant-Genoral Hay Macdo wall, 