

\ ftww afterwards fluid that il.- officers who jnvI-mMl th" rhar.;n 
hud, in conBcqutmcc ofthocjj i’i m of the Ju«I;;o Ail-'U-m o-fa uoml, 
ted in tl*cu wpamte memorial forwardml by tho Command 
.n il.ft 2Pth January, that tho pror.coutit *wf Ooh-’ «d Mmn > 










Suspension 
of tho 
Adjutant- 
Go iHii-u l and 
lii J Deputy. 


Major Boles 
dooUiu . to 
apologise. 


App; ivul of 
tlio S u promo 
t»o'< nimeut. 


iriSTOEY OP THE MAD HAS ARMY. 

insinuations grossly derogatory to tlio character of tlic 
Government, and subversive of military discipline, and 
of tlie foundation of public authority.’’ 

Major Boles, Deputy Adjutant-General, who had signed 
the order in the absence of his principal, Lieut.-Colonel 
’Capper, who had accompanied General Macdowall on 
board ship, was suspended from the service for having 
knowingly acted in direct violation of his duty to the 
Government, by giving currency to an order of so offen¬ 
sive a character. Colonel Capper, 1 who, on his return, 
had immediately avowed himself to be responsible for 
the circulation of the order, was suspended on the 1st 
February. 

Major-General Gowdie of the Madras army, a respect¬ 
able, but by no means brilliant officer, who succeeded 
General Macdowall as the next senior, caused it to bo inti¬ 
mated to Major Boles that provided he would express :my 
adequate regret for his conduct, he should bo restored 
to the service, and reinstated in his office. Major Boles 
having declined to make any acknowledgment tending 
to show that he had been in the wrong, his refusal was 
made tho subject oi a fresh complaint against him, but 
he was afterwards publicly exonerated by the Court of 
Directors from all blame on that account. 

I Jm proceed mgs in the matter of the Commander-in- 
1 lnof. and his Staff were reported to the Supreme Govern 
merit on tho 8rd February, and the memorial of the 
officers to tho Court of Directors was forwarded “for the 
sent iinenta of His Lordship ” by the same opportunity. 

The Governor-General in Council, in their reply dated 
20Ui February, expressed their entire approbation of tlm 
whole of tho proceedings of tho Madras Government, mid 



1 Colont'l On)i|»r and (loin n»1 Mnc«lowent 
Alaic.1. 1HOU, wild it un i. It o vnyngo 10 Enylnml. 


Inilh lu»t d n ft in 







H1MT0KY OF 'lifE MADRAS AttMY. 


249 


condemned tin* * conduct of General Maedowall. They C1IAF. X? 
pronounced tlic memorial to be disrespectful in its tenor, 

•and they approved of tlie resolution not to forward it 
The Supremo Government went on to encourage Sir 
George Barlow to “ repress the spirit of insubordination 
which prevailed in some portions of the army of Fort St. 

George,” and assured him of their fullest support. 

A lthough the suspension of Major Boles was not specially 
mentioned in this letter, it must be presumed to have 
boon included in the general approval. 

Nevertheless, it appears that Lord Minto heard of the Lord Minto’* 
suspension of Colonel Capper and Major Boles “ with the U ' (lr > 