




HISTORY OR THE MAD I? A3 ARMY. 


287 


■Rodcly Iiao was found guilty before tlie Supreme Court, CHAP. XX. 
ard it was subsequently discovered that lie bad been 
concerned in the issue of other fabricated securities, and 
generally implicated in the frauds upon the Nawaub's 
treasury. 

The proceedings, in the matter of Mr. Sberson,as well 
as in that of the Carnatic bonds, were marked by want 
of judgment, undue severity, and injustice, and in the 
case of Reddy Rue, Sir George Barlow committed tho 
Government by “ throwing 1 11 the whole weight oj his autho¬ 
rity - into the same scale as an impostor and a cheat. 

Those occurrences did not tend to impress tho public 
with any respect for the justice or moderation of tho 
Governor. 

From tho beginning of 1807, if not from an earlier 
period, a spirit of discontent had existed among the 1807-s. 
officers of the Madras army, of which the uudermen- 
I i ruled appear to have been tho principal causes, viz., tho 
higher allowances granted to tho officers of the Bengal 
r rmy, and tho undue proportion of commands which had 
been recently bestowed upon tho officers of tho Royal 
army. This feeling was aggravated by the discontinu¬ 
ance, in July 1807, of certain allowances paid to officers 
c.mnuandiug districts, stations, and cantonments, out ot 
tho duties levied in military bazars ; and by tho ubolit ion 
of the tent contract in May 1808. 

the mutiny, 'which broke out in May 1809, **j“'«*i ’ 

ennnot iuirly be attributed to these grievances, but rather griovane.-, 
to the harsh and arbitrary measures of the Governor in uf 1 '< 


1 WiUon‘t, 'i .ory of Mulish India, Vol. 1, pa^ - 1 - 1 * 

- 1 was bn 1 i that tho Gtoteranont hod b lloddy 

:„o on lbs rq)i wutations of oorf.ln ofli. lulu who bud a J “<. '• interest 

1 1 . In.Mil, nml oUo in BcviTnl oil : claim. pr. fonx .1 by H. 'ldy Ha. 
Mm-li’s Jti'vn o' Boor imporin.a e.: -mV- in the • m.n.stnuioP 



HISTORY" OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Disparity of 
allowances. 





238 



Council, yet it may be well to describe the nature and 
extent of the former in order that t-lio reader may esti¬ 
mate their reality and importance, and judge what degree 
of influence they may be supposed to have exercised over 
the events of May. 

The disparity between the allowances of the Bengal 
officers, and those of Madras, had always existed, and 
was justified by the Court of Directors in their letter of 
the 15th September 1809, when commenting on the several 
grievances set forth in a general memorial 1 addressed to 
them, which had been submitted by the Coinmandor-iii- 
Chief to the Madras Government on the 23rd January 
with his favorable recommendation, but which they had 
censured 2 and refused to forward. The following are 
extracts from that part of the Court's letter treating o< 
the disparity in question :— 

“In the ditferent Presidencies of tho Company in India, 
distinctions, have from the beginning, snbsisted in respe ct to 
emoluments, and advantages (not only in the Military, but in 
every department); these distinctions have arisen from tbo 
comparative importance of the Presidencies themselves, and 
of the public business to be transacted under them.” 