







Tlie tent contract, wliicli had been introduced in 1802, 
was abolished in May 1808, and it was then determined 
that the establishment of camp equipage, lascars, and 
carriage for camp equipage, and regimental stores, should 
bo permanently maintained at the public expense. The 
Quartermaster- General was vested, under the orders and 
authority of tho Commander-in-Chief, with the general 
charge, direction, and control of all establishments con¬ 
nected with camp equipage; and a set of regulations for 
tho guidance of the department was published in general 
orders. 

Tho tents in use were made over to Government on tho 
terms specified in the following order, dated 3rd May :— 
“ The Honorablo the Governor in Council having resolved 
that the camp equipage maintained by Commanding Officers 
for tho uso of native corps shall be purchased by tho public 
on the expiration of the existing contract, at valuation ; to bo 
certified upon honor by those officers respectively, is pleased 
to order and direct that, the tents attached to native corps 
hhull ho delivered over on tho 31st instant to tho officers of 
custody of Government, and charged for in bills supported by 
declarations upon honor.” 

On tho abolition of the regulation above mentioned, 
allowances 1 for hutting wore granted to the several ranks 
of the native army, for whom, up to that time, accommo¬ 
dation had been provided by Commanding Officers. 

l'n August 1808, Captain Conway, then Deputy 
Adjutant-General at Hyderabad, recommended that tho 
knapsacks of tlio sepoys, when ou service, should bo 
carried at the public expense iu the sumo manner as 
those of tho European troops. Mo stated that during 
long and severe marches numbers of men 1 od to fall to 
tho rear, and that many of those rowarning in tho ranks 

' For ihn soalv of allowance* r!io a<\ »unt .»f Cavalry, LfiOU 9 




<SL 


chap. xix. 

Abolition 
oF the tool 
contract, 
1803. 


Jluttinr: 

money. 


Oarr.iff* of 

knapimek*. 





234 


history of the madras army. 




CHAP. XIX. 


Hoi 1 action, 
ISO 1 ). 


were jaded and fatigued by the weight they had to carry, 
which he estimated at 30 lbs. over and above that of arms 
and accoutrements. He remarked that “ the European 
soldier, who is relieved from this embarrassment, is 
seldom known to fall in the rear, even on the longest 
inarches or under the hottest sun.” This recommend¬ 
ation was supported by the Commander-in-Chief, but 
Government, although admitting the advantage of sucJi 
a measure, “ did not consider it expedient to issue any 
general order on the subject.” However, a few years 
later, on the occasion of the formation of battalious of 
“ Light Infantry,” and subsequently in the case of the 
“ Ritie Corps,” orders were given that the knapsacks of 
the men of these corps should be carried at the expense 
of Government. 

During June 1800 the establishment of privates on 
the strength of native battalions was reduced from 900 tu 
^0, but the troops serving with the Hyderabad subsi¬ 
diary force were kept up to the former number, 100 
being returned as supernumeraries. 