

Jt seems desirable that the eircumatr ace?, which caused 
the dissatisfaction of the Commander-in-Chief, and led to 


lii'i fulfil differences with Government, should he described 
in lliis jduoe, ns they worn not without influence on tho 
events which followed. 

Lumtonant-Gonoral Buy Mncdowall, who had been on Mu. 
staff of tho Madras Establishment since 1801, mice- nlcd 
hir Join. Crndook iu 'September 1807. IJp tot-hat tru % a 
Wuxi i" Council, with a handsome additional uUo'v«ince 
attached thereto, hud, almost always, Wen hold by the 






HISTORY OF THU MADRAS ARMY, 


251 


(jt , } anmmler-in-Chief; bat upon this occasion the Court of CHA* 3 . XX 
Directors thought tit to depart from the usual practice, 
and they nominated a civilian to till tho vacant office ; not 
from any personal objection to General Macdownll, but 
bocauao thoy had resolved that in future the Commander- 
in-Chiof should not be a member of Government, a 
resolution which they afterwards found it expedient to 
rosciud. Tho General naturally felt aggrieved by his un¬ 
expected exclusion from a situation of dignity and 
emolument, and this feeling seems to have led him to 
eympathizo with tho several complaints of the officers 
more fully than might otherwise have been the case. 

This sympathy, however, was not expressed in any 
objectionable form until about the end of 1808, when 
disturbances broke out in the province of Travancorc, and 
a plan of operations was determined upon by Govern¬ 
ment without consulting 1 tho Comuiander-iu-Chief, who 
became so much irritated in consequence, that ho appears 
to have placed little restraint upon his words or actions 
Iroiu that time, and he showed his resentment in a manner 
which uld scarcely tail to produce a bad effect upon 
tho discipline of the army. 

In i’. spcoch made to the Madras European Regiment on lu'tnmmn** 

V) occasion of inspecting it at .Masulipatam on the 24th j.' i i’ 
December 1808, hft observed that tho regiment had boon 1: - ir :il » 

. verlookod and negloctod by having boon stutionod in 
a remote part, of tho country where it had no opportunity 
of being exorcised w«’th other troops; not withstanding 

1 Otnuc-r* I Mardoyml) having compln noil of t his in a lo'C/ to Govt-rn- 
iM-nl ilatud 1U1 . 'inuarv 1600, a reply tru mado on i!.u 2 <t*d idon. in 
wtiic’li it f o ! tl. i tv® Oonimanilor-in-('"ii’f h d hoen o t o inid- 

oii I I * digtnnro . a i Prc^idcn > win . f lit dr n- i »f i ptun of 

iinpui; r» * oxnmaMHXl, hut thin IT in Kvxdlancy L»ol boou furnished v dh 
im , i, - full matori 1 papers < onncxdu.l iih f.r subjo fmmtinioro 
tlpim mul w ith h • lo'nt pum i'-a« dolay. No rejoinder * ihta «».tplauo 





252 


lTISTOr.Y 01 THE MADE AS ADM V. 



Ef i row ell 
Order, 
1800. 


Ord*T cenour- 
Dii, Colonel 
W uiro 


<SL 


winch disadvantage he had found it to bo in a high state 
of discipline. Ho then proceeded as follows :— 

C I know that this state of inactivity must be painful to the 
feelings of honorable gentlemen and officers, end painful to the 
feelings of brave soldiers—indeed I am at a loss to know the 
reason for this neglect.” 