

The next day he received tho following communica¬ 
tion :— 

“ Sir, Tho officers of tho Hyderabad forco having considered Ho is ordered 
your conduct yesterday in the oxccution of the orders of tj< J tlie 
Govornmeut as highly prejudicial to that confidence which 
subsists between the sepoys and their officers, and subversive 
of the discipline they are anxious to maintain ; they do declare 
that your presence in the vicinity of this cantonment after 
such conduct, must bo dispensed with, and they hereby direct 
you to leave the place in the course of this day, lest more 
unpleasant decisive measures should bo necessary/’ 

The fact was that tho Colonel's arguments had pro- RubmisAon of 
dneed a much stronger impression, both upon offioere and 1110 ollicer3 * 
men, than had been supposed, and they contributed 
materially towards the suddeu, and unexpected return to 
obedience which took place u few days later. On tho 





CHAP. XX. 


Address to 
Lord Minto. 


‘- 0U ni3T0Ry OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Stli August tlie Committee of Officers wrote to Colonel 
Montresor, and after having expressed their respect for 
liis character and conduct, they proceeded to say that the 
recent treatment by Government of the officers at the 
Mount 1 and elsewhere, rendered it necessary to adopt 
measures of precaution which might cause him uneasi¬ 
ness, and they therefore suggested to him the propriety 
of giving up the command of the Company's troops, 
which they, the Committee, proposed to withdraw from 
the cantonment, and to encamp in the neighbourhood. 
The Colonel, in reply, addressed himself to Major Neale 
as the senior officer, and one whose influence had fre¬ 
quently been exerted in the cause of order. 

He pointed out the fatal conseqences of the contem¬ 
plated movement, and earnestly warned him and his 
brother officers, of the disgrace and ruin by which any 
further perseverance in their present course, must inevi¬ 
tably be followed. This remonstrance, following the 
address of Colonel Close, and the recently acquired 
know j edge of the intention of the Governor-General to 
proceed to Madras, had the desired effect, and the officers 
tendered their submission three days later, in the follow¬ 
ing terms. 

“To the Right Honorable Lord Min to,” 

“ Governor-General.” 

41 U y Lord > We > the undersigned officers of the Honorable 
Company’s Army attached to the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, 
are fully impressed with a sense of the dangers that threaten 
the country, and not less actuated by thoso firm sentiments 


It _ was eaid that tho officers in camp at the Little Mount were 
offered tho tost at Colonel Hare’s house at the Madras end of tho 
Marmalong bridge, and that on their refusal, thoy were placed under a 
gu .rd, and gent off to the Coast without being allowed to revisit the 






WHlSTffy. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 2G1 

of loyalty and patriotism from wliieli we have never departed, 
beg leave to assure your Lordship that we chiefly attribute 
the want of success that attended Colonel Close’s mission, to 
the sudden and unexpected manner in which he presented the 
test that was proposed for our signatures. Relying, however, 
as we are now disposed to do, upon the justice, clemency, and 
wisdom of your Lordship, we do not hesitate in avowing our 
determination to abide by your Lordship’s decision ; and as a 
proof of the sincerity of our principles, have subscribed to the 
test which now accompanies this address, at the same time 
trusting to 3 'our Lordship’s generosity in granting a general 
amnesty to us, and all those who have engaged in the late 
unhappy events.” 