

The General's farewell order to the army dated 25th 
January 1800, was also objectionable as containing a 
passage tending to convoy f he idea that his exclusion from 
Council 1 had been the means of preventing him from 
efficiently advocating the interests of the officers. 

“ Had Lieutenant-General Macdowall succeeded to tho 
high and enviable office with all tin*, advantages enjoyed by 
his predecessors, he would, upon first assuming the command, 
have promulgated his sentiments on so flattering an event; 
but tho circumstances of his appointment were so humilia¬ 
ting and unpropitious that he declined addressing the army, 
in the anxious hope that the Court of Directors, might, on 
further deliberation, he induced to restoro him to his right j, 
and by altering the new and extraordinary form of Govern¬ 
ment, have enabled him to exercise tho functions of hi 3 station 
as the Representative of the Army, with honor to the service, 
and with credit to himself—no prospect of such an occurrence 
appearing at all probable; in justice to the army, and to bin 
character, he has deter lined to retire.” 

This was followed by the order of* the 28th January 
mentioned above, in which Colonel Munro was repri¬ 
manded for having appealed to tin Government against 
his arrest, and in which the Government wore censured 


by implication. 

k '‘Trent The summary punishment of Colonel C ipper and Major 
11 ' f ’ niy * Boles created great excitement and disgust thru ugh out 





1 IjohI Minto in adverting to a U tier of (General Mrudowali iluicd 
Ir-t Wn 1808, observed U.rtl it n'Uiifi: 'i! ‘'th 1 doltber ! «• iritm -u of 
t'i o (..< uorul to mu L v' tho a: i y an inutrunionfc of ooj» : iimn ami diiLurt. 
nuii-». M Lf.l r to the Secret Committor, Otb Fobruurj 1810. 




mtSTfiy 



HISTORY OF THK MADRAS ARMY. 


263 


<SL 


."ft*** 

the array. 


CEAF. XX. 


It was maintained that the illegality of the 
order of the 28th January was by no means evident, in 
which case alone, could these officers have been justified 
in refusing to issue it. It was also thought that they 
had the same claim to immunity as had been accorded 
to Colonel Munro, and they were consequently regarded 
as the victims of an unjust and vindictive resentment. 

Colonel Capper had loft India immediately after his sus¬ 
pension, but Major Boles received addresses from sever- Address to 
al quarters in which he was apprised of the intention of iJn ** or Bol ° 8, 
his brother officers to organise a fund for his support. 

Had they confined themselves to this intimation little 
exception could have been taken, but they denounced 
the punishment as “severe and unmerited/* and ended 
by saying that “such mutual support must be expected 
aud accepted by all, who, like yourself, have, or may, 
buffer through any such exceptionable measures on the 
part of the Civil Government of Fort St. George, as have 
rendered necessary the painful step wo have now taken. M 

Curly iu February a memorial was secretly prepared Proposed 
for transmission to the Supreme Government, of which Bengal!*' ° 
the following is an abstract. After complaining of the 
exclusion 1 of the Coramander-in-Chief from Council, the 
release of Colonel Munro, and the suspension of Colonel 