


Colonel Cloao 
appointed to 
command at 
llydcrubad. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

paper was signed by every officer in the force, 
except those on the staff. 

Towards the end of July, Government, with the view 
of ascertaining the exact state of feeling in the army, 
resolved that all the European officers iu the Company's 
service should be called upon to sign the following decla¬ 
ration :— 

“ We, the undersigned officers of the Honorable Company’s 
Seivice, do, in the most solemn manner, declare upon our 
word of honor as British Officers, that we will obey the orders, 
and support the authority of the Governor in Council of Fort 
St. George, agreeably to the tenor of the Commissions which 
we hold from that Government*” 

Such officers as might decline 1 to comply were to he 
removed from doing duty with the troops, and to proceed 
to any station on the sea coast, between Sadras, and 
Negnpatam that they might select, there to reside, and 
draw their ordinary allowances, until the state of affairs 
should admit of their being re-employod, 

A copy of this declaration was sent to Colonel Barry 
Close, Resident at Poonah, who had, on the 14th July, 
been appointed to command at Hyderabad, in the hope 
that his eminent talents, and great influence with tho 
army, might enable him to bring tho officers to a sense 
of their duty, and to restore order in tho force. 

The Colonel, on approaching Hyderabad, received a 
letter from tho officers desiring him to halt at the last 
stage as his services were not required. Notwithstand¬ 
ing this, he continued liis march, and arrived at the 
Residency on the 3rd August, when, after a consultation 
with Colonel Montresor, he determined, at all hazards, to 
attempt to place himself at tho head of tho troops. Ho 
en tered the cantonm ent accordingly, and was met by the 

1 Tim doctoral inn ««,. only signed by about 150 officer, out of 1,800* 







imsr$y 



two Senior Officers, Major Neale of the 1st cavalry,, and CHAP. XX. 
Major Deacon 1st battalion 16th regiment. 

Colonel Close used every argument to persuade these He addresses 
officers to return to their duty, and nrged them either to any 

sign the declaration, or to withdraw from the performance apparent 
of military duty, but, although deeply affected, they 
declined to accept eithor alternative. 1 he Colonel, upon 
this, declared that he felt himself at liberty to communi¬ 
cate directly with every native soldier in the cantonment, 
and he advanced with that intention towards tho troops 
which had turned out, and were forming on the general 
parade under their officers. He first addressed the 
cavalry, but -without effect, after which he rode up to 
tho 16th regiment and spoke to tho men, but with the 
same result. Finding his attempts unsuccessful, and the 
men having begun to load, Colonel Close left the parade, 
and going to the quarters of Colonel Montresor, ho relin¬ 
quished the command, as the object of his appointment 
had been defeated. 