

“ Hyderabad, 11th August 1809,” 

Tlio Jaulna brigades marched for Hyderabad on or 
about tlio 13th August, under Lieutenaut-ColonelDoveton, 
in compliance with a requisition from that place, and had 
reached Partoor, distant 30 miles from Jaulna, when they 
received intelligence of the submission at Hyderabad, 
upon which they immediately returned into cantonment, 
and the officers sigued the declaration a few days after¬ 
wards. 



Events in the Northern Division. 

The garrison of Masulipatam, at this time, consisted 
of the first division 1 Madras European Regiment,-the 1 st 
battalion 19th regiment under Major Storey, and a de¬ 
tachment of artillery. On the 7th May Lieutenant-Colo¬ 
nel Innes, who had been recently appointed to command 
the European Regiment, arrived at Masulipatam, aud lie 
dined at mess that evening, several strangers being 
present as guests. After dinner Lieutenant D. Forbes, 
seconded by Lieutenant and Quartermaster Maitland, 

l The regiment at this time consisted of two divisions uf six corn, 
panics each. 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 


Submission of 
the officers at 
Jaulna. 


Masulipatam* 




Ml NtSTfiy 



‘- u - HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

proposed the <e Friends of the Army ” as a toast. Tliis 
having been preceded by strictures on the recent orders 
of Government, and by remarks in commendation of the 
attitude of the officers at Hyderabad, Colonel Innes, who, 
before leaving Madras, had been warned that the officers 
were not favorably 1 disposed towards the Government, 
objected to the form of the toast, and requested that “ The 
Madras Army ” might be substituted. This amendment 
not having been agreed to, the Colonel left the room, 
immediately after which the toast first proposed was 
drank with three cheers. The next day Colonel Innes 
reported the occurrence demi-officially to Head Quarters 
particularly requesting that no public notice might be 
taken of the matter until such time as ho might find it 
necessary to bring it forward officially, failing the tender 
of any sufficient apology from the officers named above. 



Notwithstanding this request, an order, dated 17th 
May, was received at Masulipatam on the 22nd, directing 
the removal of Lieutenant Maitland from the Quarter- 
mastership, and detaching Lieutenant Forbes to the 
unhealthy outpost at Condapilly, distant 5i miles from 
Masulipatam, and at which there was not a single man of 
the European Regiment. Colonel Innes was at the same 
time directed to inform the officers that a repetition of 
the irregularity would involve “ the severest penalty to 
which such insubordinate proceedings wore liable.” 

Mutiny Of the The excitement caused by the publication of this order 
■was further increased by a requisition of an unusual 
. character. It so happened that an urgent application for 
European troops to serve as Marines had been made to 


' Tho dieciplino of tho regiment had boon relaxed emcc 180G, nud the 
officer# had rocomly boon irritated by the supjioBod intentional 
neglect of Go\ ernmont, which had been dwelt on by General Muedowall 
: ’ bio inspection in December. 