

rr he order having contained favorable notice of the < on 
Ouct of the lore, at Hyderabad/ tho officerB repudiated 
lie ec niplimeut, and issued an address to tlie army on the 
'J'-ib, in which iboy condemned tho action < 'Government, 
und announced their resolution to contribute toward: I lm 
support oi t bo Bur pended officers, ns well as to joi in 
any lc.pil men urc. calculated to remove tho cause of the 
< vis‘ ing discontent. This wo s , ellow-d by a letter to the 
Governor in Council, forwarded ou tho 23rd June mu! 
bearing the signature of f.,3 oflir ere, including tlmne of 
ilm brigades * at Junlna. In tins lot tor it wmh’ assert ml 


' PoloiKt T. (I. Jlo .trcor, H.M.-h L‘2 U <1 dragoon,. .„ 

1 * • ■• ‘" l •* l •> ••-■‘l- • trlilh y. I ; irolmonk 

-••'rnu-yj Jml But. r- linn Gtli, 2r.il hattalir-n 1 Oil I.i l;.uinlu,’i I|; t •, l 
WntlbMuii 21 il, mul ridiiitoTir i.mnocr: 

' Mc.Uoniiui-r:olon«l John Dovoiun, M <lrn« -uvnlrj. r, „ m „,| „ 

1 » '*«» «lh rnglim.uU , nV ftlr> ; Ut Utlaliou Um li, 1 *.t buUuUon I ,h 
*»»U } <x toll hi 1 1 



UtHlST/fy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


257 




that with the exception of a few individuals bolding CHAP. XX. 
confidential staff situations, or otherwise dependent upon 
the favor of Government, the whole body of officers con¬ 
sidered themselves pledged to support each other for the 
purpose of obtaining redress, and that unless the order 
of the 1st May were rescinded, they had strong reason to 
fear the most disastrous consequences. The letter con¬ 
cluded by promising that if the suspended officers w r ere 
restored, the army would patiently await the decision 
of the Court of Directors. 


About this time a Committee of Officers was formed Committee 
for the purpose of conducting correspondence, and con- ° f otiicora * 
certing ulterior measures, an example which was followed 
at most other stations. 


On the 17th July the 2nd battalion 10th regiment was Tho Commit- 
warned to prepare to march to Goa in conformity with tec r( :f ll f 3 t0 

, _ J permit the 

orders from Head Quarters, but ou the next day Colonel *0th rogi. 

Montresor received a letter from the Committee to the march** 
effect that although the officers of the force wero rc.'dy 
to obey him in all matters connected with ordinary duties, 
they could not permit the 2nd battalion 10th to leave 
Hyderabad. 

On tho 21st of tho same month the officers presented a Ultimatum to 
document, styled their “ ultimatum” to Colonel Montresor J? ln:,] bc!ord 

. ^ Oovcrumonf. 

in winch their demands were set forth in the following 
order :— 


1. The repeal of the order of the 1st May. 

2. The restoration of every officer who hud been suspended 
or removed. 

3. Tho trial of Lieutenant-Colonel Tones at Masulipatuni. 

4. The removal from office of every officer of the General 
Staff supposed to have influenced Government in thoir several 
rccont measures. 

5. A general amnesty. 


VOL in. 


33 


mtSTt!y 



Declaration 
or test. 