






WMST/fy. 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 263 

as Government by the Naval Commander-in- CHAP. XX. 

Chief, and as the employment of H.M. regiments in such a - 

manner had recently been forbidden except in cases of 
emergency, Government directed that three officers and 
one hundred men of the Madras European Regiment 
should be warned to be in readiness for embarkation on 
board H. M. Ships of war, for that duty. The officers, 
for several reasons, determined to disobey this order. By 
that time they had made common cause with the officers 
at Hyderabad, and were opposed to any measure by which 
the strength of the regiment would be diminished. More¬ 
over, the service was disagreeable in itself, and the legality 
of the order questionable. Advantage was therefore taken 
of certain expressions which had been used by Colonel 
Innes, and it was represented to the men that the pro¬ 
posed embarkation was the first step towards disbanding 
the regiment, a representation which appears to have 
obtained immediate credence, and to have been followed 
by the promise of support. On the arrival of the frigates, 
which took place on the 1st June, the officers waited upon 
Colonel Innes, and requested him to countermand the 
yrder for embarkation, pending a reference to Madras. 

This the Colonel refused to do, upon which the officers 
placed him in confinement under European sentries. 

The command of the garrison was then assumed by 
Major Storey, and that of the European Regimout by 
Captain Andrews. 

Government, on becoming acquainted with thoso t'olouol Mni- 
occummces, appointed Lieutenant-Colonel John Malcolm £du‘ 
to tho command of the European Regimout, and of the m <rad. 
garrison at. Masulipatam. 

ITo was also nominated President of a Committee to ho 
assembled at that place for the proposo of enquiry, and 
report. Tho other members were Lieutenant-Colonel 
Herkoley commanding tho 2nd battalion 4th rogiment at 







CHAP. XX. 


264 


history op the madras army. 


<SL 


Colonel Mal¬ 
colm advises 
Government 


Berhampore, and Major Evans Superintendent of the Stud 
at anjam, hut as both of these officers were prevented by 
illness from proceeding to Masulipatam the performance 
of the duty devolved upon Colonel Malcolm alone. He 
arrived on the 4 th July, and found everything in the hands 
of a committee composed of violent young men : the 
authority of Major Storey being little more than nominal. 
This committee was in correspondence with almost every 
station in the Presidency, and had received the strongest 
assurances of support from Hyderabad, towards which 
place, the garrison, together with the native battalions 
at Lllore and Saraulcottah were preparing to march. 
After a discussion which lasted for several hours, the 
officers consented to acknowledge Colonel Malcolm's 
authority, and to submit to an enquiry into their conduct. 

On the next day the Colonel reported that after having 
perused certain papers shown to him by the officers of 
ordcTof'tho 6 th ° S^vinon, he was satisfied that there was not a single 
corps in the Company’s army from Cape Comorin to 
Ganjam which was not pledged to rise against Govern¬ 
ment, and that no commanding officer had any real control 
over his regiment or battalion. 