


1 Tho phrase “ Representative of the Army,” used with reference to 
the Commander-in-Chief, waj, derided by tho Governor-General, n?ni 
by the Court of Directors ; and many paragraphs were written to prove 
il absurd m l inapplicable. I: was justly remarked that the tmbi.-ef. 
'van beyond the province of tho citicors, but- tho other crithdumH worn 
more sfu ioue than souud. for . . orts certain that manors connected 
Mith the wi 11 being and comfort of the aimy uro likely to ' e more fully 
an*. i?i». Uir\ ntly fl v iV r, ith when tho Command* r. in.Chief 
a wat in Counoil, than when that body in composed cxclm ivvly of 
Civilians. Moreover it is manifest from <h<* subsequent action of the 
tour’ that they were ‘otsoiblo of tho error which I d been comniittod 
win n i h-jy appointed u success ;r to Sir John C radock without nomi* 
uu i.g him to be a Member of tho Government 





Memorial 

abandoned. 


Kir Goorgo 
Harlow 
piopnroa to 
ptinlali all 
concerned 
in im pro¬ 
of, ru; ion of 
< 1; uiomorial 
lit: l address. 


*“ ,0 ‘ HfflTuRY OT' THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Capper and Major Boles, the memorialists observed that 
the general discontent produced by local and partial 
injuries had been falsely represented a3 public disaffec¬ 
tion, and they concluded by observing that they “ could 
not suppress the expression of their concern at the 
manner in which the exclusive rights of the army liavo 
recently been violated, and of tlieir sanguine hope and 
earnest entreaty that the Supreme Government may, in 
its wisdom, be induced to appease their just claims, and 
to anticipate the extreme crisis of their agitation by 
releasing them from a ruler, whose moasures, guided by 
the councils of their implacable enemies, are equally 
detrimental tu the interests of the State, as they aro 
repulsive to the feelings of a loyal and patriotic army." 
The circulation of this memorial was almost entirely con- 
lined to tho officers in Travancore, and in the Southern 
Division, and the intention of forwarding it was aban¬ 
doned about tho middle of March, when the general indig¬ 
nation had begun to subside. 

Shortly afterwards, a copy of this document was re¬ 
ceived by Sir George Barlow through a privato channel 
which ho decliucd to reveal, and although perfectly 
aware 1 that all idea of transmitting it to Bengal had boon 
given up, ho nevertheless prepared to punish all thuso 
concerned in signing and promoting the circulation of 
the p iper us soon as ho could discover thorn. About tho 


‘ “ A0 1 hnfl reaGon ‘o Micv* that Mm spirit of Man fat (on tint 
y fjsoiti d ill l.hu army, il did not appear thru ony danger wuu 
incuriud by waiting for fuller proof as to tho individuals who had brow 
non corned in winning and promoting the circulation of thin paper.* • • 
The information indeed, which I have lately received, afford Very 
' fri “JJ to hr>ACV '■ ihat tM$ intention i, almost, y not wholly ab<m<l pn«*< 
hut if r -on cortuin ilmt tho parties concerned in framing the paper 
mout polomn ition f ir , 