

duty would demand that wo ah on Id adopt each njcnsuren re^ardim p. 
an the nature of it obviously requires "— Minute, 1st M . , 180ff. 




255 






HISTORY 01' THi. MADRAS ARMY, 



same Hme ho became acquainted with the existence of the CIIAP. XX, 
addresses to Major Boles, regarding which no secrecy had 
been sought- tu bo observed. 

On the 1st May, after having maturely considered the Hiarccom- 
whole subject. Sir George Barlow laid a minute before moijdutloliL 
fche Council, in which he recommended that the under¬ 
mentioned officers should be punished for their several 
shares, active and passive, in these transactions, via. :— 

Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable A. Sentlegcr, Major 
John DeMorgan, Captain Josiah Marshall, and Captain 
dames Grant, to be suspended pending the decision of the 
Court of Directors. 


lliG dismissal of Lieutenant-Colonel G. Martin, who had 
gone to England, to be recommondcd to the Court. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Itobert Bell to be removed from 
die command of the artillery ponding the decision of tho 
Court. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Chalmers, commanding in Tra- 
vaucoro, Lieutenant-Colonel Cuppago Adjutant-General, 
and Captain Coombs Assistant Quartcrmaster-Qcnerul 
i T Mysore, to be removed from their respective appoint¬ 
ments and f o rejoin their corps 
Captain Smith -2nd battalion 14-th, .Major Keasbury 
2nd battalion 9th, Major Muirhead 2nd battalion LSth, 
and Major Hazlewood 1st battalion 21-tli regiment, to be 
superseded in their respective commands, for not. having 
exerted themselves to muintaiu proper df-cipline. Liou- 
tmmnt -(-olonol Burnley, commanding at Bangalore, to be 
rumen i d to tho cavalry at Arcot, his conduct hi \ lug 
been mi.- 1 1 isfnetory. 


'I’ll»>-10 recommondations woro agreed to in Council, 
•'»'! '■“» suspouMious and removal* were puliliahod in 
Ci, in ml Order dated 1st May. Several of tho olfic-r.j 
'•ann«d ■'.'»>/<) douied liavmyliad nny 'Amur to do w j(i, il;i , 

-d.ii xioua dorunouts, but all wore auimof.rily puniahed 


Olflcons 
puniahed 
wilhoi liin! 
or -»pport u» 
ii Uv of 
(I •hnu o. 













256 


HISTORY OP TUP MADRAS ARMY. 





'•n tin strength of private information^ not only without 
trial, but without having been allowed the opportunity 
oi: ofleriug any defence. Colonel Robert Bell of tho artil¬ 
lery, a most respectable officer, positively denied having 
had any thing to do with the paper the circulation of 
which he was said to have promoted, and this denial 
was supported by the statements of the whole of tho 
ofbeers at the Mount, twenty-nine in number. Tho 
deiiiah: of some officers wore not so satisfactory. 

No sooner had the order of the 1st May become public 
than the great majority of the officers placed themselves 
in opposition to Government, an attitude from which, n* 
several stations, viz., Hyderabad, Jaulna, Masulipatuin, 
Samulcottali, Ellore, Chicacole, Chittledroog, and Bering - 
apatam, they speedily passed into actual mutiny. 

Events at Hyderabad. 