

Subordination was restored in the garrison immedi¬ 
ately after the departure of the detachment, and tho 
whole of tho officer.* signed the declaration, an example 
which was followed by the rest of the officers in the 
Northern DiviVinn. 



' A jarrotifc umul.er of <| « men bail ctilisusl for unlimited ervioe, tun l 
wore ill t 'iitontod borauKc tl»ry bud not been .idotiltod ft* tho bom (it 
of ori Act, BqhfloqncntW parsed, which allt wed of limi'e I M»rvic».*, nml 
nod l 1 ho provision# of which n :iivy of their ycmngv r radon bad 
n^intcd. Another c. o ol conin' lint wan the long detention of tho 
r< t.iinr»f tv .nultp.u • n, i. Ir .m 1 sOO ujth th<< exception o: uu 
tuiin Mtl .luiing 1H0S whoq it • u i to Cut t«tck ..n n vvii c. 



CHAP. XX. 

Violent 
conduct <»r 
the men of 
the European 
Regiment. 




Order 

restored. 






FIISTORY OF THE MAhltAS ARMY. 



2G8 



Samulcottah. 

On tlie 12tli August, the 1st battalion lltli regiment 
stationed at Samulcottah, marched out of cantonment 
against the orders of Lieutenant-Colonel Simons the 
Commanding Officer. Captain James Patterson then took 
charge of the battalion, and detached two companies to 
Cocanada, distant about ten miles, with orders to take 
possession of the treasure at that place. The sum of 
Rs. .3,42,539 was seized accordingly, and conveyed to 
Samulcottah, from which the battalion marched the fol¬ 
lowing day for Masulipatam. It arrived at Rajahmundry 
on the 17th, when Captain Patterson took possession of 
the Post Office, and ordered that all the mails should bo 
delivered to him. 

The next day he crossed the God a very, having first 
called in the detachment of ilie battalion doing duty ut 
the station. On the arrival of the battalion at Covoor on 
the 20th, it was met by an express from Masulipatam 
with the intelligence of the submission of the officers at 
that place, in consequence of which Captain Patterson 
retraced his steps, and returned to Samulcottah, where 
ho arrived on the 25th, haviug previously restored tho 
treasure. Lieutenant-Colonel Simons resumed com nun !, 
and the officers signed the declaration. 

Ellore. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Fletcher, commanding the Ft 
battalion 24th regiment at Ell ore, being aware of the dis* 
Flection of his officers, had form< d a plan to place them 
under restraint iu the event of their refu-ing to sign the 
i esl, but this design having been divulged by the Native 
Adjutant, the Colonel was seized on the 5th August, and 
plwoil in confinement. However, he way allowed !o 
k :,vr ' the cantonment the same evening, and io gu to 


Madras. The command o£ the battalion was assumed CHAR XX. 
by Captain Sadler, who retained it until the submission of 
thu officers at Masulipatam, when he was superseded by 
Major Hazlewood of the same battalion. The officers 
signed the declaration on or about the 19th August. 

Chicacole. 

The liead-quarters of the 1st battalion 21st regiment. Mutiny at 
under Captain George Wahab, took possession of the trea- ChluUuI °* 
sure at Chicacole about the 15th August,, and marched for 
Masulipatam, being joined on route by a detachment of 
the same battalion under Captain Fair, who had seized the 
treasure at Vizagapatam to the amount of 11s. 5,50,000. 