

did coin i on, we should never have proceeded."—]nure<*pp d loti or 
from Lieutenant Baker. 

An officer of 11. M 25th approach- d tho column while it wan harassed 
by iho Mysore hoi . Th ■* icoount i of whn S dlowod ru- coiiuml h* 
lory Lieutenant C. A Walker uf the 8th deposed, supported by 
other of I ci.v '.bar h * ivlvonc d lowntd.' < i;- dim -ui linn, holding 
n whit fhg, but that bin' - , i n onnhl i\ u h him, the oflhn V artind, 
raHopo-ii.H and joined ! he *J • m- l K ,; • Others «Ay that the officer 

-x U* ill imI id 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 


Discreditable 
conduct of 
tho officers 
at Chittlo- 
droog and 
Soringap: - 
tam. 


Mijofiirln ,a 
of the 
•Resident’-! 
warning. 



UfSTi.IfY OF THE MAO If AS A EM Y. 



<SL 


Iji-0 natives, would have ventured to oppose such a force 
fts that under Colonel Gibbs. 


ilie fort. Guiing attack, the guns in the fort opened upon 

the camp, and a party under Colonel Munro of the loth 
sallied in that direction, but was driven back. The camp 
was again cannonaded at intervals during the night, and 
a few camp-followers and horses were killed and wounded, 
but no further damage was done. Another sally was made 
u]nn the Mysore troops on the 13th, in which Captain 
■Turner of the loth battalion was wounded, and several 
of his men killed. 


Burro nil or 
ol’ tl f fort. 


l)ifponnl 

Of fct'J 

f '»|mny’a 
olli .. ih 




The next few days were passed in negotiations, during 
which the intelligence of the submission of tho offices 
at Hyderabad having been received, the fort surrendered 
at discretion, and was taken possession of by Colonel 
Davis on the 23rd August, tho declaration having boon 
previously signed by tho officers of the garrison. 

Tho officers of the 5th cavalry, and 1st battalion 3rd 
regiment at Bangalore, having refused to sign the test, 

' 'icy had boon removed from tln ir respective corps hv 
Li. uteufint-Coloncl Dibits before his march upon Soringti- 
putam. 

1 he officers of the 2iid battalion 3rd regiment, which 
mul relieved the th at Bcdnoro, ulso refused to sign, and 
-Major Lucas made overcharge of tho lm.ttali.ui to tin; 
a nior native officer on the 9th August , pending the non..- 
tiatiou ol a European Commandant. 


Ci* (tfuiitU uu 
Oi.vciu- 
Mihllt 


A t fairs a* i nr 1 


KFIDIM'Y. 


I'.arly in Jut . in consequence of tho threatening .cpc.t 
ol ulTaiv :c Hyderabad and Mi, iilipatam. Govcnment 

I.ppli. -I to Ceylon, and to Bombay, tor roinforccim utn ,.f 
' utri.jn.un tnmps. They also took steps, by menus ..f 








HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 


277 


<SL 


correspondence, and agents, to disunite ' the native troops 
and their officers. 

About tbo sumo time they dneoW tie assembly ot » 
field force to bo encamped 0» tbo racecourse nearthe 
Mount, cod on tiro 20tb July tl.c declaration of hdelity, 
‘„i„ ,ly mentioned, rvas tendered to the Company . 
.Ulcers in the said camp, to those at the Mount, and also 
thee in garrison at Fort St. George. Tbo who e of 
Mtoso hi camp, with the exception of tlu-cc or four refused 
to sign, and were ordered off to the sea coast between 
Sadras aud lStogapatam. 