

The march was resumed at 10 o'clock the same night, 
and next morning, when about 10 miles from Seriuga- 
patam, tho rear guard, which had fallen behind, was 
suddenly attacked by tho Mysore horse, a few men 
wounded, and the baggage taken. The horse then made 
several charges which were repulsed, and tho battalions 
had arrived within about two miles from their destination, 
when they were simultaneously attacked and broken by 
H.M.’a 25th dragoons, and the Mysore horse. The 
sepoys were completely surprised, and made no attempt 
to defend themselves against tho Europeans, whom they 
believed to bo their friends. Captain McIntosh was 
v f unded, and taken prisoner*, and a number of tho men 
were killed, and wounded y but a very large proportion, 

ihi.f n count of rtio maroh « liken from un inforueptfd let-tor 
writ tun by L.uatonum llukcr of tbo 8th to hi.* brother. Mr. Coir, in u 
Jt-port dated 12lh August «ays, " a very considerable number of t ho 
. illadtr horr.r have bo.-n Icillr ), this body having flkirnn hod with tho 
doluchmont during the In 20 mile* before the notion took place.” 

' 1,0 uct,ai1 Cu ’ 1 ' i,! 1 ,u ulladar horse More 125 men, and 150 horhca, 
killed, and w*>uruiod. lor this information Tam indebted to Colon I 
K. C. KU:\VArt recently Lit eomrnai.J of the Mysnn Silladar Hunan 


8th rcgixnCnt. 15th x :/iu c nt. 
' Killed .. o y 

Wounded . . *h 

M ‘Ming .166 Ha 

2*'G 237 


1" Jdenant lic it 811. regiment lad of fatigue. 

Tlu- uhov. i.. ken fx«m n rot urn dated 15th Avgimi. 

- : ■ inj of those entered »j ** 
•uippo ed i * Ua In. i >i killed or wounded. 


i 





mtsrtfy 


HISTORY OF tllK MADRAS ARMY. 275 

viz., 20 European officers, 19 native officers, 10 Havil- 
ilars, and 785 rauk and file, made tlieir escape into the 
fort under cover of the guns. 

The conduct of the officers of the Chittledroog batta¬ 
lions, and that of those in Seringapataui seems to have 
been equally discreditable. 

The former induced thoir men to march by means of 
false representations, and the latter treacherously kept 
their advancing comrades in ignorance of the arrival of 
the troops from Bangalore. 

Indeed, had it not been for the receipt of a pressing 
requisition from the fort, it may be assumed, as nearly 
certain, that the lamentable conflict would never have 
taken place. It appears from a report to Government 
from the Resident, dated lltli August, that a few hours 
before the action, Captain McIntosh received a letter 
from the garrison, in which ho was urged to push on. In 
lonscquoucc of this ho made ft forced march which was 
the cause of his missing a despatch 1 from the Resident 
mentioning the arrival of tho force under Colonel Gibbs, 
and the determination of Colonel Davis to prevent tho 
entrance ef the battalions into Seringapatam. It cannot 
bo supposed that Cap to hi McIntosh, at the head of about 



1 It is greatly ' o bo lamp a ted that wo did not receive tho letters 
from Mr. C<»I*•, a d Colonel Daria, which I understand they sent, 
impiORting ns not t proceed. Even had an officer cornu to us from 
cither of tho King's corps, i 