

Amongst these were Lieutenant-Colonel Floyei am 
officers 3rd cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Runiley ami 
7 officers 7th cavalry, Major Bruce and 14 officers 1st 
battalion 20th, aud Major Gurnell aud 5 officers ‘-ud 
battalion 25th regiment. 

All the officers of artillery at the Mount, viz., 1 Licuten- 
uut-Colonol, 0 Captains and 15 Lieutenants, having 
refused to sign, Major Sir John Sinclair, Bart., f» Bent 
from Madras to command one battalion, and Captain 
Creighton, Jl.M.’s 59th regiment, to command the other. 

The vacancies in the native corps were filled, so tar 
as the means would admit, by officers of the Royal army, 
and such available Company’/} officers as had signed the 

The declaration was signed by all the officers of the 
General Stall at tho Presidency, but only by n anuu 

t <0 _* A 1. . ( Mil tfICf th item 


chap. J.X. 


Tender of th.* 
declurutioto. 


Reault in 
camp. 


At tho 
Mouut. 


At Made 


vnuicttii “ . • 

number of the regimental officers in the ’ rf, viz., those 


1 Thia mcn-nro In. l.een denounced n* dungeo.i.n mol Imi-lm. 
Tli. . IlnwiiiK extract irom on intercepted In ri ' ’ ’ "" ’ ‘ ‘ ' 

“ 

" . ' Tl •< ««+ lorn; before nil wl.tto fat !•••'««• 1 '■** 

" ’ (iovvrn Itf O il M o t nnto, «b»i tin y ’ lhau ulm. mu 


u •! I 


)„ V ( „o V uy m-v«r miml in wbui tit- 









imsTfy 


history op tiik madras army. 



cjiap. xx. 


Field force 
for the 
Ceded 
! »>' trictH. 


Tn hiiiopoly. 


278 



b longing to the 1st of the 6th, 2nd of the 8th, and 2nd 
of the 20th. 

About tho end of July a detachment of Royal artillery, 
J00 H.M.’s 60th, and 200 H.M.’s 89th were sent from 
Ceylon, and the 1st battalion H.M.’s obth from Bombay, 
llie Government, on being informed of the approaching 
reinforcements, determined to send a strong force into 
the Ceded Districts, to move, either upon Hyderabad, or 
Masulipatam according to circumstances. This force was 
placed under the temporary command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Conran of the Royals, and inarched from Madras 
about the middle of August. 

VELLORE. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Ross Lang having been unable to 
prevail upon any officer of the 2nd battalion lltli regi¬ 
ment, then stationed at Vellore, to sign the declaration, 
they wore all ordered off to the sea coast. 

Proceedings in the Southern Division. 

Thr declaration was tendered to the officers at Trichino- 
P 0, y on 30th July by Colonel Wilkinson, H.M.’s 30th 
regiment, commanding the Southern Division, and win 
signed by 20 officers, viz., 1 of cavalry, 1 of artillery, 2 
oi‘ engineers, 3 of tho 2nd battalion 13th, 12 of tho 2nd 
bat talioii 3 tfch,and 1 Staff officer. The remaining officers 
of iho 24th who were stationed at Tan j ore signed a few 
days afterwards. Sixteen officers at Tridbinopoly having 
not only refused to subscribe tho declaration, but having 
declined to u give their word of honor that they would 
not interfere, or have a* / further intercourse” with their 
nK.*ii, Colonel A\ ilkinson placed them in confinement, 
and 8ont them towards Negapatam under a guard of 2t'0 
rmm iLM.sd' iu, with instructions to liborato thorn .t 
1 ijon> provided t 1 m would engage to proceed cpiietly f .. 