

On the 31st Colonel Davis sent the declaration of 
fidelity to the fort with instructions to Colonel Bell 
desiring that it might be tendered to the officers for 
signature, and that in event of refusal he should use his 
endeavours to prevail upon them to abstain from the 
further exercise of their military functions. 

The envelope and letter were returned along with the 
note given below, tho copy of the declaration having 
been abstracted, and retained. 


11 Seringa pat a m , 316/ July 1809.” 

“ My dear Colonel. You must bo perfectly aware of tho 
state of the garrison which I reported to you long since, and 
it is at the peril of my freedom, to open any public communi¬ 
cations.’’ 

(Signed) J. BELL. 


On the 2nd August the sum of Rupees 1,40,000 on tho 
way from the Ceded Districts, was seized by a party sent 
from the fort for that purpose. 

On tho 3rd August the detachment of K.M/s 80th regi¬ 
ment was sent out of the fort with instructions to march 
t' Bangalore. It was duly provided with camp equipage, 
and sick carriage, and the garrison went through the 
form of presenting arms as it left. These companies 
proceeded along the Bangalore road for some marches, 
and then changing their route they joined Colonel Davis 
id My sere on tho 7th August. 

Tho declaration was signed, b ( Bell on the 

3rd August, upon which he was invited by Cob uel 
Davis, and the Resident, to abandon the mutineers and 
come to them at Mv or but ho declined, ami announced 


chap. xx. 


•Seizure ot 
treasure. 

The declara¬ 
tion sent to 
the Fort for 
signature. 


Further 
seizure of 
treasure. 


Tho detach¬ 
ment. )1. M.'h 
SO tb sent out* 
of the Fort. 


Colonel Hell 
signs tho 





Tho other 

officers 

rufu.io. 


It- iiiHiii of f ho 
b /»ff Officers. 


r.'.icorl of fiic 
JUiHmt. 


I iivr» : l mort 
< f the fmt. 


“' * 1! 1 TOUV OF Til K MAble AS A \l M V. 

intention to remain in the fort as long as he could bo 
llf an y service. With the exception of Colonel Bell, the 
whole of the officers refused to sigu the declaration for 
the reasons given in the following resolution which was 
subscribed to by the officers of artillery, and those of the 
native battalions. 

“ The moment the grievances of the army are redressed, we, 
the undersigned officers, will, with the greatest satisfaction, 
sign the proffered declaration of Government under date the 
^(ith July 1809, but as the intention (at present) of’ that 
obligation is evidently to bind us down to abed the bluod of 
our own brother soldiers, we must decline affixing our names 
thereto.” 



The staff officers, viz., Captain Do ljavilland of the 
engineers, Captain Cadcll, Town Major, and three others, 
recorded their dissent in the following terms :_ 

“ We never cun pledge ourselves to obey the orders of .Sir 
George Barlow and his advisers, which so clearly tend to the 
total destruction of the British Empire in India. In this 
declaration we are actuated alone by principles of regard 
for the public safety, and the welfare of the State.’ 1 