

Captain Wahab had arrived within two marches of Saniul- 
eottali on the 21th when he was met by a messenger from 
Masulipatam, upon which he returned to his station. 

The treasure was restored. 

Be an am pore. 

Lieutenant-Colonel AV. Borkely, commanding the 2nd Hattklion m 
battalion 1th regiment at Berhampore, on hearing of the 11,14,311,011 

march of the battalion from Chicacole, sent a detachment 
f*»r the protection of that place. The officers of the 2nd 
of the 4th do not appear to have been implicated, in the 
mutiny. 

Tho pardon granted by General Bator to tBe garrison < ^ i u. 
of Masulipatam, and subsequently to the officers at Mllore, ',.’,^ 1 ’,,!' 
Sunmleotlnb, and Chieaoolo, was not recognised by Gov- <IW 

c , Qciitnul 

ominont, who • nt orderr directing tho march of thu JPutor. 
undermentioned corps to Madras, viz., the European 
liOgimcnt, tho 1st battalion 19th, and iliu 1st battalion 
2lfh regiment, all 0 1 which niovonieiits commenced Oailv 
et September. 



CHAP. XX. 

State of the 
garrison. 


C«»lonol Dnvi -i 
lUliPpsoa tho 
oi T '*« i'.ta 
without 
H&uct. 


- /U HISTORY OF THE MAP RAF ARMY. 

Affairs at Seeing apatam. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Davis, H.M/s 22nd dragoons, 
Commanding the Mysore Division, the Head-quarters of 
which were at Bangalore, happened to be at Mysore un 
the 24th July when he received a letter from Lieutenant- 
Colonel John Bell of the artillery then in command at 
Seringapatam, requesting that certain recent orders for 
the march of a company of artillery, and the second 
battalion 19th regiment, might be countermanded on 
account of the severity of the duty which their removal 
would throw upon the remaining company of artillery, 
and the 2nd battalion loth regiment, which corps, to¬ 
gether with two companies H.M.bs 80th foot, composed the 
garrison. This request was accompanied by letters from 
the officers expressing their alarm in consequence of the 
prevalence of a report to the effect that it was in con¬ 
templation to separate the native corps, and to seize tho 
European officers. It was well known, however, that the 
officers of the garrison were in communication with tho-o 
at Hyderabad and at Masulipatam, and pledged to 
support them, hence their principal objection to reduce 
the strength. 

Colonel Davis, being without the means of enforcing 
compliance with his orders, consented to their postpone¬ 
ment pending a reference to Head-quarters, and on the 
29th he entered the fort with tho view of usim' his 

o 

personal influence with the officers. On the morning of 
the 80th he called them together, and after having 
addressed them without effect, 1m was told that ho must 
not only remain in the fort, but that ho must not quit 
his lion -c. 



However, they changed their minds during the day, and 
allowed him to return to Mysore the same evern «»■. 


history of thk madras army. 



271 


The public treasure was seized, under the immediate 
direction of Captain Cadell tlie Town Major, on the same 
day. 