




HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


279 


their destination. Of the officers thus removed, 7belonged CHAP. XX. 
to the Gth regiment of cavalry, 1 to the artillery, and 8 
to the 2nd battalion 13th regiment. 

About the 12th of August Colonel Wilkinson, at the Dindiprui. 
head of a strong 1 detachment, left Trichinopoly by order 
of Government for the purpose of enforcing obedience 
throughout the division. He arrived at Diudigul on the 
17th, but none of the officers of the 2nd battalion 16tli 
regiment would sign the declaration with the exception 
of Major McDonell, the Commandant. The rest, eleven 
in number, were sent off to the coast. 

The officers of the 2nd battalion Gth regiment, then at Palamcouah. 
Paid moot tali, had been extremely violent in their language 
for some time, and on two occasions they had gone tho 
length of seizing and opening tho mails, from which they 
abstracted despatches destined for the officers command¬ 
ing in Truvancore, aud in Malabar. Colonel Wilkinson 
readied tho station on the 30th August, and found the 
Officers prepared to submit, with tho exception of four, 
who wore cousecpicntly removed from the battalion and 
sent to Ouddalore. Captain Townsend and two others, 
who wore charged with having seized tho mails, were sent- 
to Madras for trial under a guard of tho Gth cavalry. 


PliOCKEDlNOS IN TraVANCORK, MALABAR \ND OaNAR \, 
AND AT Goa. 

On tho 9th July orders wore issued for the march of 
three battalions <»t‘ native' infantry from Travincore, but 
tho officer* refused to obey, on the ground that i’ was 
the intention of Government to separate the native corps, 

* o as to place thorn under the control el lI.MVe regiment 

nml tho e,v c ement Was so groat at Quilon that picquets 

I (•(!, iv^imont Oftv.Ury; tinnk or»*npnuii 1 R» H.MXnWUh, 

• , l uuh,2ml lmitulion 2 Ith, &n«i 1 • »injmiiy of urtilki). 





insU'n oi* in r: madiia* akmv. 

- .'^0 men each, nruler European officers, were regularly 
detailed from each native battalion to guard against 
surprise. Lieutenant-Colon el the Honorable 1\ Stuart, 
H.M.’ : 10th regiment, then commanding in Travam - .o, 
nnf bring sufficiently strong to coerce the native troops, 
remained passive. 

The declaration was tendered to the officers of (he 1-t, 
battalion 2nd, 1st battalion 4th, ami 2nd battalion 0th 
regiments at Quilon about tho 16th August, but they all 
refu ed to sign with the exception of four, unurngs* 
whom were the Commandants of tin 4th and 9th. \ f« ,v 
day - hi' *r, v : z., on tho 22nd August, tho officer, of the 
4Ut wore prevailed upon to submit. 

Tho officers or the 1st battalion 17th regiment at 
Cochin, imd those ol the 2nd battaliou 14th, and 2nd leu 
tnlmn 18th rogimonts stationed at Alleppy, all signed tho 
decla ration. 

Major G-albmith Hamilton commanding tho 1st but ; 
lion 18th regiment, then iu the fort at Oodaghnrry, md 
nl! hia officers, refused to sign. 

Tho garrison at CVnnanoro was composed, in addition 
to European troop :, of tho 2nd battaliou J2th, mid 2nd 
battalion 22nd regiments The officers of tho 22nd, v>ltli 