

I he European officers of the detachment doing duty 
at Mysore ns the liesident’s escort, and who belong it to 
'he ind ot the 15th, resiguod their military functions 
rather than sign the test, but tho native officers and men 
remained steady. 

Governinont, on the oth August, sent orders for tho 
investment of the fort, and on tho 10th, a detachment 
Jr-m Bangalo v , consisting of two squadrons H.M.’m L’.M h 
dragoons, three companies II.M.’s 50th regiment, ,1,. 
5th regiment cavalry, and the 1st battalion 3rd regiment 
with a party of artillery, all under Lieutenant Colonel 
Jibhij U.M. n o »th, arrived, am] encamped about t-lirco 
mil- from the fort. 




1 V. 

history or Tin: mat-ws army. 27‘3 

About this time. Colonel Bell, when called upon to 
surrender, wrote several letters of an extraordinary 
character to Colonel Davis, and to Government. He 
complained of neglect, of his not having beon made 
acquainted with the real objects which the Government- 
had in view, aucl feigned to believe that an attack on 
the fort was contemplated by the troops of the Mysore 
Itajah, for which roason he declared that he could not 
give it up without the special order of the Governor 
General. 

All hough tho fort was amply supplied with artillery, 
and military stores of all kinds, the garrison was scarcely 
equal to the defence of so extensive a place, and the 
officers were therefore anxious to obtain an addition to 
their -itrength. With this object they placed themselves 
in communication with the 1st battalion loth regiment 
rtationed at Chittledroog about 150 miles north of Sering- 
uputam, and also with the 1st battalion 8th regiment 
then on the march from Nuggur Boduore to YValhyjalibad, 
nml they succeeded in persuading lie officers of these 
corps to join thorn The 1st of the 8th left their 
Fauijlic: at Chittlcdroog having boon informed by their 
officers that their .services were emergently required to 
nssi t in the defence of Serii)gapatam against the troops 
of the Rajah of Mysore who were about to attack tlm 
fort. 

The 1st of the loth were misled in a similar man nor. 
Tho two battalions ' left Chittlodroog accordingly on fho 
5ih Aug'ml, and ou the morning of the 10'h, while 



1 1 it of Sill iucln I'npiam II Molnttuh, 8 <• m] ni" 
m C liittli- iltong.) 

lit ni I 'it ii under Caplttin l' K. A * »U i » I 7 , am; n.> t'J iMjinj , )M >n 
Uiiu'.r.lru i n I’ 

voi.. in. 35 


<§L 


CHAP. XX. 

Extraordi¬ 
nary ooud^ot 
of Colonel 
Bell." 


Tho 1 Rt of 
the 8th, ami 
1st of the 
loth marqj) 
to Suringupn- 
tam 




HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAI\ XX. 


Attacked by 

the My Bore 

ho run, and 

European 

troops. 






approaching Nagamungalum, 1 distant about 20 miles from 
beringapatam, they fell in with a body of 3,000 silladur 
horse, which, together with about 1 ,500 armed peons, had 
been sent by the Honorable Arthur Cole then officiating us 
Resident, with instructions to retard the progress of tho 
detachment, and to prevent it from entering Seringupa- 
tmn. No collision took place that day, and the battalions 
encamped at Nagamungalum. 