

I Sin!. ..I 

v *i in 


ih'iu'l iiu.P; aUutt th 

(U |K‘V I I i'O' ’ll I 
i \> 1 "W icrimeiit -~ 


il 




But vefn ; n 
from cl-ioijj no. 





[» i/.’ \ «: 





Ifc rums to 
"Mrulva. 


Tils conduct 

*!• “approved 
of. 


m*ral 

Vntr-r offers 
n p irdon to 
thu men. 


•Sahudfi, ton 
or Hi.- 
or n tJl 


“ U niSTOlCY or THE MAD IMS' AIJMY. 

Oil tl?e 1/th July ho wrote to Madras for permission 
ro k turn to that place for the purpose of conferring 1 per¬ 
sonally with Sir George Barlow. He left Masulipatam 
accordingly a few days afterwards and arrived at Madras 
on the 26th July. 

The course he had pursued was not approved by Gov¬ 
ernment, who, in their report- to the Court of Directors, 
dated 6th September, remarked that “to this apparently 
unreasonable forbearance, 1 and attention to the feelings 
of officers who had, by their acts of violence and aggres¬ 
sion, forfeited all claims to such consideration, may, 
v.v conceive, be ascribed, Lieutenant-Colonel Malcolm’s 
failure in the establishment of any efficient control over 
the gail*i&on. ,, 

A copy of the declaration of the 26th July was received 
in due course by Major-General Pater commanding the 
Northern Division, who laid arrived at Masulipatam 
shortly after the departure of Colonel Malcolm, but who 
did not deem it expedient to produce it for signature until 
the 9th August, when ho orderod a general parade of the 
troops, at which lie offered a pardon to the garrison, tli . 
European officers excepted, on condition that they would 
return to thew duty to the State; but the offer was 
rejected because of the exclusion of the officers. 

On the t-ith of the same month intelligence of tlm 
submission at Hyderabad reached Masulipatam, and on 
(he next day the officers consented to sign the declur- 
ation. This sudden change alarmed the men of the 
Enropoan Regiment, who immediately began t- 
their officers of a design to abandon them to punishnmut, 



’ 1 TI ‘“ ry policy of Colonel Malcolm was d.-fomlod W Mm ,.|f 

ot 1 " 1 ' * >arr Y Clc .t*, < !tu !> most nldo unci v ju U ,. IH>( l( 

■' - " • ’ * n oppr»uU« «>; Snion, imd i«i fu\ r ,4 

L "" n 0 , n. "I'iuiou wbf' hsQcm- jn tilied Uy U10 event. 




HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY. 207 

and under tbe influence of that feeling they turned out, 
and threatened to shoot any officer who should sign the 
test. 

The General, not knowing to wliat extremities the men 
might not proceed, was induced to promise, in the name 
of Government, a general pardon both to officers and 
men, which pacified the latter for the moment, but they 
continued to suspect the existence of some treachery, and 
a violent disagreement ensued, a number of the men in¬ 
sisting upon marching to Madras with their officers, there 
to state their grievances. 1 At last Lieutenant Scott, 
one of the General Staff, took it upon himself, with the 
view of allaying the tumult, to order the whole regiment 
to march, and it quitted the fort accordingly about 
I p.m. on the 17tli It was intended that the native batta¬ 
lion should follow', but the Europeans, finding, after having 
gone some little distance, that they and their officers were 
unprovided with the necessary requisite for a march, 
returned to the fort the next day with tho exception of 
i serjeants and lbO rank and hie, who, with 5 officers 
chosen by themselves, proceeded towards Madras, accom¬ 
panied bv 12 artillerymen, and a Jemadar's party of the 
1st battalion 19th regiment. 