

the rank 


of Lieutenant-Colonel doing duty with 

the troops in 


' ' -I- J — v w 

and two at Suringapatam Of these. Colonel Innes alono 
was an avowed supporter of Government. Colonel Munro 
was active in the mutiny. Colonel Bell pleaded that ho 
had not been a free agent, and Colonel Doveton defended 
the abandonment of his post at Jaulna on the ground 
that he accompanied the troops solely for the purpose of 
preventing excesses. 

Lord Minto's arrival and proceedings. 

Lord \Tinto, the Governor-General, had intended to 
go to Madras in July, but ho unfortunately postponed 
his dc par tare on being assured by the Madras Govern¬ 
ment that the agitation was rapidly subsiding, an ass nr 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


283 


ance which showed how little that Government under¬ 
stood tbe nature of the indignation, which had been 
created by their hasty and indiscriminate proceedings. 
It was not until the 5th August, when, alarmed by the 
events at Masulipatam, his Lordship sailed from Calcutta, 

but having been delayed by bad weather, ho did not 
arrive at Madras until the 11th September. 

Lord Minto had supported the Madras Government 
throughout from the first, and in an elaborate despatch of 
95 paragraphs, dated 27fch May, he discussed, and entirely 
condemned the memorial 1 which had excited the wrath 
of Sir George Barlow who had sent him a copy thereof 
on the 1st April. Nevertheless, there was a general 
feeling of confidence, throughout the army, in the justice 
and moderation of His Lordship, which was justified by 
the result, and it seems probable that had ho arrived at 
an earlier period, the disastrous affair at Seringapatam 
would not have taken place, and the impolitic measure of 
separating tbe European officers from tbeir men would 
not have been attempted. 

On tho 25th September a general order was published, 
in which tho Governor-General, after having dwelt upon 
the criminal, and desperate character of the contest in 
which the officers had been engaged, granted a general 
amnesty to all concerned, with the exception of tho 
undermentioned, viz. :— 


Garrison of Seringapatam. 
Lieutenant-Colonel John Bell, Commandant. 

Captains DeHavilland Engineers, and Cadell 2nd bat¬ 
talion 12th regiment. Staff Officers. 


1 It would set-in to have been tho policy of both UovernmontB, to 
disregard, if not to ignore, the fact that tho 1 1 .mmni-.sioii of the memo¬ 
rial had been given up by tho authors u.; far back aa the mouth of 


CHAP. XX. 


Confidence 
felt iu the 
justice of 
Lord Minto. 


Amnesty. 


Exceptions 
to tho am¬ 
nesty. 





CHAP. XX. 


O filccr r at 
Hyderabad. 


Thi :' i8pnnd- 
rd offloern re. 
turn to fluty. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

Lieutenant-Colonel JR. Muuro, and Major D. C. Kenny, 
commanding the native battalions in the garrison. 

Captains McIntosh, and Aiskill who commanded the 
battalions from Ckittledroog. 

Captain Turner 2nd battalion 15tii regiment who had 
taken a prominent part in the proceedings, and in a sally 
from the fort. 