

'L i• i^ letter did not reach Madras until after ho publ - 
cation of the order of tbo 1st May, in which Colonel 
flcnth'gor u’ul others had been suspended, but the inslnut 
it hoi been received, the permission vliicli had L oa 
grunted Colonel Scntlogdr to visit Trichiiiopoly for the 
purpnn. of arranging his v*ri vato affairs before proceed¬ 
ing to Madras via- revoked, aud Colouol Wilkinson was 
u dered to send an officer to meet him on bis way from 
Trnvaneorc to desire him to march to Poouamalleo by 
Ibr ‘.ea cn: k 1, in d to await Hind orders a( iLnt rtntion, 
which lit that mo . was tho depOt lor foreign pri iuv* 
Failing nu u^nrnnoo on (bo part of Colon . 1 Sentb get 
th i? !i*% wou 1 obey these nrd«n, ho wn to bo ml to 
ihxiliuinalleu under a guard. The Colonel ar.Med il 
ih aim i dh in due cour r having gi on tho promise 
1, and << n ftorwniah lm wan alliK « 1 to go to 


CHAV XX. 










WQUU 0 


HISTORY OF THR MADRAS ARM V. 




CilAF. >,X. Madras, where he filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court 
preliminary to an action in the King's Bench, which he 
proposed to bring against Sir George Barlow for unjust 
suspension, and slanderous and malicious libel. In this 
affidavit, which was sworn to about the middle of June, 
tbo Colonel denied having circulated, or promoted the 
circulation, of any memorial to the Governor-Goncral, 
or that he had employed his influenco for the purpose of 
subverting the authority of Government. On the 18th 
of Juno lie applied for permission to remain at Madras 
in order that he might be present at the next session of 
the Court, but this was refused, and he embarked for 
England a few days afterwards. During October two 
witnesses, viz., Lieutenant-Colonel Veney Madras army, 
and Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod H.M.'s 69th regimoi.it, 
wore brought forward to rebut the statements of Colonel 
Sentleger, and after having given their evidence before 
„ the Judges, they were cross-examined by the ColoncLs 
counsel. 

Colonel Vescy deposed that the inomorial had been 
sent to biin at Paluincottah some time during March by 
Colonel Sentleger, and that ho had immediately written 
to him to tho effect, that he had destroyed it am bring 
an improper document, of which action the Colonel had 
afterwards approved, became the intention to forward 
the memorial in tliat shape had been abandoned. 

Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod stated that the momm -l 
had been brought to him in TVavaricore by tho Colonel, 
who requested him to sign it, und also to procure tho 
bi gnat urea of his officers thereto; both of whi«h he 
refund to do, and also told the Colonel that if he did 
n<»t Hutvood in turning out Sir Goorgo Barlow, lie, the 
Colonel, ought to bo turned out luinself. Thin t« «ti 
niony was uol shaken iu crosK-oxaminiitioii. It may lm 




presumed that the removal of Sir George Barlow, and CHAP. XX. 
the subversion of Government were not considered as 
synonymous terms by Colonel Sentleger. 

Officers at Triciiinopoly. 

