

Encouraged by these prepnrations, the Nagpore ti\ «p» 
attacked Ameer Khan,and drove him into Bhopal; but the 
advance of Colonel Close being ^iill consicU r< 1 n • c m v 





HISTORY Otf'lHC MADRAS ARMY. 


297 


lie Inarched 1 from Jaulna about the middle of November 
by Ain raw u tty, Ashty, and Bliilsa, and on the 10th Febru¬ 
ary 1810, he arrived at Seronge, 2 the capital of Ameer 
Khan, after a long and difficult march. 

The place had been evacuated on the 9th by the last 
party of Ameer KhaiTs troops, he himself having previ¬ 
ously takon refugo at Indore. On the lltli, Colonel 
Close placed himself in communication with Lieutenant- 
Colonel Martindale commanding a detachment of Bengal 
troops, which had been ordered to co-operate from 
Bundleound, and which was then encamped about 45 
miles from Seronge. 

All apprehensions of a further invasion of Berar being 
over for the time, Colonel Close was soon recalled. He 
reached tho Nerbudda on the 8th March, and from thence 


CHAP. XXI. 


Occupation 
of Seronge, 


1810. 


Breaking up 
of tho arfciy. 


1 Tho army was brigaded aa follows in December 1809:— 

Cavalry division, Lioutcnant-Colonol Hare, H.M. 22nd Dragoons. 


Is*, brigade, Major Neale, 

1st cavalry. 

H.M. 22nd Light Dragoons, 
let .’togiment Cavalry. 

7th do. do. 


2nd brigade, Major Lewis, 
2nd cavalry. 

2nd Itogiment Cavalry. 
4th do. do. 

8th do. do. 


Right, brigade, Major Bruce, 
20ili native infantry 
1st. battalion lGth N.I. 
2nd do. 17th do. 


Centre brigade, Lieutenant Colonel 
Irton, 12th native infantry. 

1st battalion 10th N.I. 

H.M. 31th Reirimetit. 

1st battalion 12th N.I. 


Infantry division, Liontenant-Colonel Conran, Royals. 


T oft brigade, Lieutenant-Colonol Troitcr, 20th native infantry. 
1st battalion 9t.h native infantry. 

1st do. 20th do. 

2nd do. 7th do. 


Major Cross.lill to command tbo artillery. 

Captain Bowes (litb N.I ) to command the pioneers. 

Duropouns 1,507, natives 7,600. 

Nizam's troop: 2,078, Mysore llorso 1,300, Balabut Khan’s coutiugout 

2,2U0. 

* In iho province T Malwa, Lat. 21-5 N. Long. 77-41 JE., about 450 
mile;, from JauLna in o D' rth-easterly direction. 




VOL. III. 


38 






Ml HtST/ty. 



Recognition 
of Colonel 
Closo’s, 
services. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

proceeded to Amrawutty, where the army was broken 
up on the 24th April, A detachment under Lieutenaut- 
Colonol Hewitt of tho 17th was sont to Hyderabad. A 
brigade under Lioutenant-Colonol Conran marched to 
Jaulna, which had recently been fixed upon as the Head 
Quarters of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, and the 
remainder of the army, under Colonel Close, followed to 
the same station, from whence the regiments, under orders 
for cantonments in the south, proceeded to their several 
destinations. 

Colonel Close returned to England in September, upon 
which occasion the following order was issued by Govern¬ 
ment :— 



“ Fort St, George, 6th Septemrer 1810. 

“ Col op el Close is permitted to proceed to Europe on 
furlough. The important services rendered by Colonel Close, 
in the high and confidential situations which he has held 
under the Government of this Presidency, have so frequently 
received the testimony 1 of public approbation that it would 