Acquitted by 
the Court. 


miSTffy 



Suspended by 
the Governor- 
General. 


Colonel 

Doveton’a 

defence. 


Dissolution 
of tho Court. 


ABsembly of 
& nc.v Court. 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

I he Commander-in-Chief disapproved of the finding, 
and recommended that Colonel Doveton should bo sus¬ 
pended until further orders, but that he should continue 
to draw his pay and allowances. 

This recommendation was approved of, and acted upon 
by tho Governor-General in Council on the 21st March 
1810. 

Colonel Doveton had rested his defence partly on the 
plea that he accompanied the troops with the object of 
preventing them from the commission of excesses, and 
partly on the strength of a private and confidential letter 
from the Resident at Hyderabad in which that line of 
conduct had been recommended. Neither of these pleas 
were considered admissible either by the Commander-in- 
Cliief, or the Governor-General, who pronounced it- to 
have been the duty of Colonel Doveton to leave the 
mutinous officers so soon as he found himself unable to 
control them. 

Tho Court Martial of which Major-General Warde was 
President was dissolved on tho 4th April 1810, and an 
order was published at the same time in which, while the 
Governor-Genoral admitted the ff upright aud honorable 
motives of the respectable officers who composed tho 
Court,” he took exception to their judgments as having 
been erroneous in some points. 

It is conceivable tliat this Court may have been con¬ 
sidered not sufficiently plastic, and too favorably disposed 
towards the accused officers. 

Neither of these objections could bo urged against the 
members of the fresh Court Martial which was ordered 
to assemble at Wallajahbad for the trial of the remain- 
iug officers. The President of this Court was Colonel 

Vilkinson H.M. 80th Regiment, a firm and uneompro- 



mtSTfty 



iaieing 1 adherent of Sir George Barlow; and two-thirds of 
the members belonged to H.M. Service. The Court was 
consequently believed to have been packed, and the 
accused officers having preferred the alternative of dis¬ 
missal to that of trial, they were dismissed accordingly 
on the 5th April 1810. The name of one officer, viz., 
Captain McLeod 8th regiment cavalry, having been 
inserted iu the order by mistake, his dismissal was can¬ 
celled on the 28th April. 

Case op Colonel the Honorable A. Sentleger. 

During, and after, these troubles, many complaints 
were made of the harsh and degrading treatment to 
which a number of officers had been subjected after the 
suspension of Colonel Capper, and Major Boles; but it 
will be sufficient to mention two instances, one of which 
is a striking example of insubordinate and intemperate 
behaviour on one sido, and undignified retaliation on the 
other. 


1 This officer in a letter to tho Military Secretary, dated 18th July 
1809, reported that ho had no reason to beliove that any officer under his 
command meditated any hostile measure against Government, but ho 
added that, in event of “ any wretches po far forgetting themselves 
as to bo taken in arms agaiust Government, it would be desirable to 
know if the punishment dui to rebols might not bo indicted on them 
ini mediately.” 