

Ou tho 21st of tho same month, ho offered to make prisoners of tho 
European officers of the native corps at Trichinopoly, and to appoiut 
King’s officers thereto—Letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Barclay, 21st July 
1809. 

Shortly after the arrival of tho Governor-General, charges were pre- 
ferred against Colonol Wilkinson for unnecessary severity in carrying 
out the orders of Government with respect to tho declaration, but his 
acts were held to be covered by the general amuo * y. Li these circum¬ 
stances, although Colonel Wilkinson had probably ucted honestly 
according to his convictions, he could not be considered an unbiassed, 
and vra3 therefore not a fit and proper porann to bavo been selected ao 
t hr President of the Court MartiaL 


<SL 


CHAP. XX. 

The officers 
decline to bo 
tried by it. 




288 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 



Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable A. Sentleger of the 
6th cavalry was an officer who had served with distinc¬ 
tion under Coote, Cornwallis., and Wellesley, and had 
recently received the thanks of Government for distin¬ 
guished service in Travancore. Nevertheless, his con¬ 
duct on some occasions had called forth the displeasure of 
Government, who, in a despatch to the Court of Direc¬ 
tors, written in October 1807, before the arrival of Sir 
George Barlow, reported that “ a very dangerous spirit 
of cabal has shewn itself among several officers of your 
army. This feeling has been greatly inflamed by the 
impunity with which the Honorable Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sentleger has hitherto been enabled to brave and insult 
the authority of this Government. Every means of the 
most public nature have been taken at some of the princi¬ 
pal military stations to hold up Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sentleger as the champion of the rights of the Com¬ 
pany's army, and as one whose example calls for general 
imitation. ” 

On the 7th April 1800, the Government, having re¬ 
ceived information that Colonel Sentleger had been con¬ 
cerned in the preparation of the memorial to the Governor- 
General, sent a letter to the Resident at Travancore, 
desiring that the Colonel should bo relieved from the 
command at Oodagherry, and desired to return to liis 
regiment at Tri chi no poly. 

It so happened that in this letter, which was not re¬ 
ceived until the 25th April, the title of “ Honorable M had 
been omitted, upon which Colonel Sentleger addressed 
the Chief Secretary in the following terms : — 

41 That the letter, I have herewith the honor to enoloso, 
was intended by the Honorable the Governor in Council to 
hurt, iny feelings, I am fully satisfied ; that he has succeeded, 
I am unable to dony; but although it maybe in tho power of 
tbo Honorable tho Governor in Council to wound iri3 T feelings, 


mtsrffy 



msiuKY Oi 1’Htt RADIUS AKSiY. 


289 


r* pun 
VOL. 


<SL 


luui degrade lilt: from command, I am ignorant, of any power 
or uuthority ’ estcd in him tu annul that- title to which my 
birth lias elevated me.” 

‘ As removal from command is generally conceived a 
punishment for an offence committed, I am relieved from 
i lueh anxiety ns to tin cause of my removal, by having 
received officially the cop; of a letter addressed by the present 
Commancjtir-in-Chief to the Officor commanding in Travan- 
f*oro respecting the expression of the general sense of the 
army on the unfortunate situation of Major Boles, a paper 
to which I affixed my name as being purely expressive of 
my hvntixtti'nts on the subject to which it iclatos; and 
further, 1 have no hesitation to declare that, had I been 
appointed to bit as member of a general Court-martial to 
investigate the conduct of Major Boles, as having refused to 
«ign and publish the orders of his immediate Commander- 
in-Chief on a subject ;o purely military, I should have 
n warded cashiering as a punishment only adequate lu such 
Jisol>odionce. M 