





uifroKY o* 'nit Madras -imv 


2L» 5 


in which, several officers of rank were removed from CMJ 
their commands, would never have been framed. 

In reading the correspondence of the time it is impos¬ 
sible not to be struck by the exaggerated and violent 
language in which the officers described their grievances 
and fears. The former, with the exception of the unfair 
preference shown to the officers of the Royal army in 
respect to commands, and appointments on the staff, 
were more imaginary than real, and not sufficient to 
a. count for any violent agitation, far less for the mutiny, 
the principal cause of which must be sought for in the 
severity of the local Government; for although the feeling 
of alarm and insecurity, which pervaded all ranks subse¬ 
quently to the suspensions and removals ordered on the 
1st -lay, seems at first sight to have been out of all pro¬ 
port urn to the importance of the circumstances so far as 
they affected the general body of officers, yet it must be 
remembered that in those days of slow communication 
with England, suspension meant being reduced to a bare 
i ubsbmneo for an indefinite period, certainly for a year 
at least, and that the Madras Government had shown 
thouiselvof disposed to make an unsparing use cf that 
n< vere, and thoretofore exceptional method of punishment, 
without trial, and without disclosing the evidence upon 
which they acted. No man felt safe, and no relief could 
bo exported 1 torn the Supreme Government, w hich had 
committed itrolf to an unqualified approval of the pro¬ 
ceedings of Sir George Barlow. Nothing can justify the 
misguided and guilty conduct of the officers, but (ho 
arbitrary closing of the door of appeal in India, and the 
nuforfcunuto procrastination of Lord Minto i) delaying 
to proceed to Madras, must bo held as important factors 
in their continued insubordination, and the culmination 
thereof in ini'iny 







CHAP. XXI. 

Amcf*r Khan 
Aoifcua 

J’ALulpoor, 



Preparations 
i*l i I *' Britinh 
< ovommont. 


A»1. aaco t>» 
EnrODgrj 


<SL 

290 HISTORY OF rur MADRAS ARMY. 


CHAPTER XXL 

FROM TEE TERMINATION OF THE WAR IN TRAVANUORE 
IN 1809, TO THE COMPLETION OF THE CONQUEST 
OF JAVA, 13L2. 


Occupation of Seronob, 1810 . 

A soldier of fortune named Ameer Klmn, wlio had 
attained some distinction in the service of different 
princes in Contra! India, at last attached himself to 
Jcswnnfc Rao Holkar, and ultimately became independent. 
In January 1809, taking advantage of the insanity ol 
Holkar, he entered the territories of the Rujah of Nagpore 
at the head of a largo force estimated at 10,000 homo 
and 24,000 Pindarics, and took possession of the city of 
Jubbulpoor, and tlio surrounding country. 

The interests of the British Government being supposed 
to ho injuriously affected by this movement, an army waA 
assembled at, and in the neighbourhood of, Jaulna 
during November, and placed under tho command of 
Colonel Barry Close, who was invested by the Governor- 
General with the entire control of all the British troops 
serving in the territories of the Nizam, the Pcishwa, and 
the Rajah of Bcrar. 