The other instance was the treatment of the officers at 
Triciiinopoly by Colonel Wilkinson, who was said to have 
marched them to the barracks surrounded by a detach¬ 
ment of H.M.’s 30th regiment, with loaded muskets, 
and fixed bayonets, and with orders to shoot thorn all 
in case of a rescue being attempted. 

There is reason to believe that this complaint was 
true, but there must have beeu considerable difficulty in 
knowing how to deal with a set of officers 1 who would 
neither sign the declaration of fidelity, nor promise to 
abstain from communicating with the men of the regi¬ 
ments from which they had been removed. Officers, in 
making such complaints, forgot the manuer in which 
th» y had themselves behaved in ar resting and confining 
thcr lawful commandants. 

Debates at the India House. 1810-12. 

The measures of Government were attacked at the 
India House by Sir Francis Faring, Sir Hugh Inglis, 

Messrs : Baimerman, Hudleston, and others, and defended 
1 y the majority, led by Messrs : Grant and Astell, the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman. Lc ng and angry de¬ 
lates followed. It was maintained by one party that the 
mutiny had been entirely caused by tlio inveterate spirit 
of insubordination wlm h prevailed among the officers 
whereas it was contended on the other sido th t all the 

1 Many i * mom bcloiii r t , <l to tbo cnvairy, tho oITIcojh <»f which had 
h*. n much irr’»tn+"l t v flm .mapeimi.m of (Yh.ml £ 1 i.tsr ami tho 

..vul <>. Ouhaul Itua.lcy from hi a .• nuunml. 




Mr. Banner- 
xnan'n 

tinctures ou 
tlio conduct 
of Govern¬ 
ment. 





L ill STORY or THi; MADRAS ARMY. 

evils which were to he lamented in the disgraceful, and 
guilty state of the army of Fort St- George, were, in o 
great degree, to be ascribed to the acts of Government. 

The following is a summary of some of the principal 
objections taken by Mr. Bannerman in his dissent, dated 
23rd April 1810 :— 

The rejection of the memorial 1 of officers commnnding 
corps forwarded by the Commander-in-Chief on the 28th 
January 1809, on the ground that it was objectionable and 
improper; by which rejection the door of appeal was shut, 
and authority interposed, to stop, not only the regular course 
of justice, but the ultimate appeal against oppression. 

“ The suspension of Colonel Capper and Major Boles for 
the strict performance of their military duty; an act unsound 
in its principle, and rash and unnecessary in its npplicatl >n, 
and which may be considered the chief ground of discontent 
in the army, and by the subsequent measures growing out of 
this fatal error, to have been one of the leading causes of the 
lato unfortunate rebellion. 

“Tbo promulgation of the Goneral Order of the 1st May 
1809, which suspended and degraded, without trial , officers 
whose characters, in the order, were publicly stigmatised ou 
private examination and private information , withholding from 
the accv.. ed the detail of tho accusation , the name of the accuser, 
or any of those circumstances which justice exacts for the pur¬ 
pose of enabling the accused to repel imputed guilt.'* 