

Garrison of Masulipatam and NeigiibouFwIng Posts. 

Major J. Storey 1st battalion 19th, Captain Andrews 
European Regiment, Captain J. Sadler 1st of 24th, 
Captain J. Patterson 1st of 11th, and Captain G. Wahab 
1st of 21st. 

Field Force at Jaulna. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Joan Poveton Commanding. 

Captains J. L. Lushington, and A. McLeod of tho 
cavalry. 

( aptains-Lieutenant Hopkinson, and Poignand of the 
artillery. 

Major Mathew Stewart, and Captains G. M. Gibson, 
and T. Pollock of the infantry. 

The three Commandants, viz., Lieutenant-Colonels 
Bell and Dovoton, and Major Storey, were ordered to be 
tried by Court Martial. The remaining otlicers were 
allowed the option of standing their trial, or of being dis¬ 
missed from tho service. 

Although the officers at Hyderabad had been tho 
leaders of the mutiny, they escaped punishment in consid¬ 
eration of the importance attached by Lord Miuto to 
their submission at a critical period. 

On the 30th September an order was issued by which 
all officers who had been removed from their military 
function:, were permit ted to rejoin their respective corps 
on signing the declaration, a proffer which was universally 
accepted. 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


285 



Trials of the Officers. 


On the 1st November, a General Court Martial, of which 
Major-General Warde, H.M. Service, was President, and 
which was composed of an equal number of officers of each 
service, assembled at Bangalore for the trial of Lieuten¬ 
ant-Colonel Bell and others. 


<SL 

CHAP. XX. 


Colonel Bell was found guilty on the 9th December Colonel Bell. 
1809, and sentenced to be cashiered. The Proceedings 
were returned for revision, but the Court adhered to their 
original sentence. The Commander-in-Chief, when con¬ 
firming it, remarked that the punishment awarded to the 
prisoner bore no proportion to the atrocity of the crime. 

Major Storey was sentenced to be cashiered. This Major Storey, 
sentence was also returned for revision, but the Court 
having declined to make any alteration, it was confirmed 
by the Commander-in-Chief without remark. 


Lieutenant-Colonel Munro was sentenced to be 
cashiered, which sentence was duly confirmed. 

Major Kenny was also sentenced to bo cashiered, and 
the seutence was confirmed. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Doveton was charged with having 
marched from Jaulna without authority, and with mutin¬ 
ous designs, with having endeavoured to oxcito tho troops 
under his command to mutiny against the Government, 
and with having affixed his name to a mutinous and sedit¬ 
ious paper. 

The Court wore of opinion that Colonel Doveton was 
not guilty of any of tho charges, and therefore acquitted 
him in tho “ most full and honorable manner.” 

The proceedings having been returned for revision, tho 
Court sent them back on the Lith February 1810, with a 
remark to tho effect tlmt they saw no reason to alt< r their 
former opinion. 


Colonel 

Munro. 


Major Kenny. 


Colonel 

Doveton. 


