

I he contest at the India House continued for about 
three year.*, when the attacking party having acquired 
tho majority, orders were sent out in December 181.2. 
nominating Lieutenant-General the Honorable John 
Abercrornby to be Governor of Fort St. George, and 
annulling the provisional appointment of Sir George 


1 IJ. t"fir of biioi’tors im i»r t 99 r»f their general U*t t« r Kind lGth 
1 ' 1 - omW 1HU9, oxprvavH their «l.*i»i>|>rovui of the rUmml U 
thin muiM i iuI 







M MtSTQy 




HISTORY OF 1 II K.MADRAS Al.'.V.Y. 2'J3 

Barlow to succeed to the office of Governor-General. 
These orders having been received at Madras in May 
1S13, Sir George Barlow vacated office on the 21st of 
that month. 

Pardon op the Officers, 1811-16. 

With the exception of Lieutenant-Colonel John Bell, 
and the Commandants of the battalions which had 
marched from Chittledroog, every surviving officer who 
had either been suspended, dismissed, or cashiered, was 
ultimately restored to the service. This was an act of 
grace in the cases of most, but the few who had been 
unjustly treated had reason to complain of the continu¬ 
ance of their suspension by the majority of the Court, 
who were desirous to avoid any thing having the appear¬ 
ance* of reflecting upon any of the actions of the Madras 
Government. On this plea, Major Boles, and Captain 
Marshall wore not relieved from suspension until October 
1811, although a large body of officers, who had been 
engaged in actual mutiny, had been exempted by tho 
amnesty from any punishment whatever. 

Lieutenant-Colonels Doveton, and Robort Bell were 
restore 1 to their respective commands in January 1813. 
With respect to the former, the Court observed that 
although they doubted whether his acquittal had been 
justified by the evidence, the} would not deprive him of 
tho benefit thereof. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Munro, Major 0 Kenny and Stewart, 
and Captains Sadler and Poigmud were not restored until 
April and Juno IS 14, and Major Storey not until two 
years later. All the others wer restored during 181:2 
and 1813. 

Tho bad feeling, and dissension engendered by these 
lamentable events dicin' i •$ubeidefor notin v years. Several 
i\»uit h. martial wire held upon officers during 1801)-10 



<SL 


CHAP. XX. 

Sir G. H. 
Bnrlow 
va;*ate3 
eftiue, 1613. 


BnU 

in ha anwT 


HISTORY 01 THK MADRAS ARMY. 



291 



for insulting others who had aided with tho Govern¬ 
ment^ and in 1812, an officer was suspended for having 
ieiused to dine with Colonel Conran Commanding tho 
Hyderabad Subsidiary Force, or to make any apology 
foi his refusal. Fvcn so late as 1835, an officer of rank, 
then holding an important staff appointment at tlio 
1 i esidency, was still in bad odour with his surviving 
contemporaries for alleged treachery towards the officers 
of his own regiment. 


Although the motives which led the Commander-in- 
Chief to take action against Colonel Munro may havo 
been questionable, yet it must be admitted that his pro¬ 
ceedings were regular, and consistent both with military 
law, and tho usages of the service; whorona those of 
Government, besides being severe and arbitrary in the 
extreme, were, in some instances, positively unjust. It 
is now conceded that Major Boles ought not to hnvo 
suffered for his obedience to the Commander-m-Chiof, 
mure especially ns he only signed the order in conse¬ 
quence of the temporary absence of his superior, who, on 
his return, assumed the responsibility ; but this avowal, 
instead of having the effect of leading to the restoration 
of Major Boles, only involved Colonel Capper in the sumo 
predicament. Again, supposing an example to have been 
necessary, the removal of those two officers from their 
important situations on the staff would have been suffi¬ 
cient to murk the displeasure of Government with .at tin-, 
infliction of the additional cruel pmbMimmt of suspen- 
• ion. 'I his puTiidiment, folk wed immediately after wards 
by tho refusal fcu permit Major B 1< to 
in tlm Gmhington,” was ono proximate cause of ih" 
mutiny, for, hud not that ofika been detained in India, 
m. subscript a in ffir lus maintenance would have U,-,i 
required, and tho addresses to him, fur being emu era, d 