

1 Extract of a letter to tho Governor-General from Gcner:il Harris, 
Soringapatam, 13th May 1799. 

In every point of view, I must call your Lordship’s particular 
attention to the Adjutant-Goneral of tho army. Hia general chaiactor 
a« an ofheer hi too well established by a long and distinguished course of 
tho most meritorious service to require my testimony. * « * Tho 

ability, zeal, and energy displayed by him in superintending tho various 
operations of an arduous siege, whero he was ever present, stimulating 
tho exertions of others, or assisting their judgment ;md labor with hiu 
own, claim from me to be stated to your Lordship in the meat forcible 
terms. It in my earnest wish that my sentimontB on this subject may 
bo publicly recorded, and it is my firm opinion that, if the nuccoss of 
this army has been of importance to the British interests, that surer 38 
is to be attributed, in a very considerable degree, to Lieutouant-Colonel 
Cloao.” 

Extract from General Orders by tho Governor-Gen era I, Fori St George, 
24th May 1799. 

Ilio conduct of tho Adju ant-General, Lionicuant-Colonel Closo, 
has amply justified the implicit confidence reposed by tho Governor- 
tenoral in Council in his extensive knowledge, approved c:cporionco, 
■upurirr t&leute, ardent valor, and indcfatigablo activity.'" 





mist# 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 200 

be superfluous to recapitulate them. The Governor in 
Council, however, cannot allow that officer to depart without 
again expressing the hig(\ sonso which this Government must 
ever entertain of services so eminent and distinguished, 
which have contributed ao essentially to the prosperity of 
the British interests in the Deccan,* and which so justly entitle 
him to the strongest expressions of gratitude and esteem.” 

Colonel Close became a Major-General in July 1810. 
He was created a Baronet soon afterwards, and died in 
England in 1813, aged 56. 

The Court of Directors sent out a handsome monument 
to his memory “ in testimony of their gratitude for his 
ardent zeal, and entire devotion to their service, equally 
manifested in the application of high military attainments, 
and of profound political knowledge .” This monument 
is now in St. Mary’s Church, Fort St. George. 

Expeditions against the French Islands, 1809-10. 

Occupation of Rodrigues, 1809. 

Between 1792, and 1809, the trade of the East India 
Company suffered severely from the attacks of .French 
men-of-war, and of privateers sent from the Mauritius 
and Bourbon, but the British Government was long 
averse to undertake any. expedition against these islands 
on account of tho expense which it would iuvolve. At 
last our losses became so serious that it was determined 
to establish a blockade, and in furtherance of this object 
it was resolved tj take possession of tho small island of 
Rodrigues 1 as a depot for stores and provisions, and as 
a station for tho squadron. This island, almost uninhab¬ 
ited, was occupied accordingly by a detachment from 
Bombay consisting of about 200 of H.M.’s 56th foot, and 