

A noticeable feature of this expedition was the prompt! - Volunteering 
tude with which the native troops volunteered for the serv i CQ> 
service the moment they heard it was in contemplation. 

The undermentioned corps are specified in the report 
which was made by the Coramander-in-Chief to Govern¬ 
ment on the occasion, viz., the 3rd and 6th cavalry, the 
1st battalion 5th, 1st of 6th, 2nd of 3rd, 2nd of 12th, 2nd 
of 21st, and the 2nd battalion of pioneers. The 2nd of 
the 20th, and 2nd of 25th volunteered at the same time 
to form a battalion which it was proposed to raise for 
duty at the settlement of Bencoolen 2 in Sumatra. The 
Governor-General, who was then at Madras, thanked tbo 
troops in an order dated 6th April 1810 for the “zeal, 
fidelity, and military spirit by which their conduct has 
been distinguished on this important occasion.” 




Expeditions against the Moluccas, 1809-10. 
Capture of Amboy na, 1810. 

In October 1809, the frigate u Dover ” of 88 guns, the 
rf Cornwallis ” of 44 guns, and the sloop u Satnaraug ” of 
18 guns, sailed for iho Dutch settlements in tho Eastern 
Islands, having on board a detachment of Madras artil- 


1 6th and 24t.h regimen la and tho 41 Sappovd and Miners *' 

i\ n-osentiug tho “ pionorra.” Tho word 44 Bourhnn ” had been granted 
to IT.M.'-i 69th, and SBth some years earlier. No honorary distinction 
was conferred for tho capture of St. PnuTs, which, considering rho 
small furuo at the disposal - >. Colon d Konting, was tho moat dtirhin^ 
affair daring the expedition. 

' Exchange with the Dutch in 1821 for th m posscB-ions in Malacca 

40 


VOL. 111. 




ciiap. xxi. 




lery under Captain Court, and one of the Madras Euro- 
pean regiment under Captain Phillips. Captain Tucker 
of the “ Dover” was in command of the whole. 

The expedition arrived at Amboyna on the 13th or 
14lh February 1810, and anchored at some little distance 
from the land in order to reconnoitre the defences, the 
principal of which was Fort Victoria with a battery on 
each flank. There were also two batteries on the heights 
above the town, with an interval of about 1,500 yards 
between them, one named Wanitoo, and the other Battoo- 
Gantong. About 215 pieces of ordnance were mounted 
in the fort and lower works, and 21 in the hill batteries. 
The garrison consisted of 130 Europeans, 220 officers 
and seamen, and 1,000 natives. 

The boats left the ships with the troops about Ia.m. 
on the 15th, but they missed the landing-place in tho 
dark, and a discharge of rockets from the fort indicating 
that the enemy were prepared, the attempt at a surprise 
was given up, and tho boats returned to the squadron. 

About 2 p.m. on the 16th, after a farther reconnais¬ 
sance had beon made, the troops 1 landed under cover of 
the fire of the ships. One party, composed of 30 artillery¬ 
men, 85 seamen and marines from the “ Dover,” and a 
company of the European regiment, all under Captain 
Phillips, advanced against the battery at Wanitoo, which 
was soon carried, and three of the guns turned against 
Battoo-Gimtong under the direction of Liontenant Duncan 
Stewart, 2 who, although wounded, continued his exer¬ 
tions. Captain Phillips, leaving a small party in Woni- 
too, proceeded to attack Battoo- Gan tong, but finding * 