


! About. 300 miles c «t of tiro Mauritius ox Isle of France -hat. 
Vr -U' S., Long. 03' DO h. 



<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


Ho returns to 
England. 



miSTffy 



300 HISTORY OY THB MADRAS ARMY. 

an equal number of men from tbe 2nd battalion 2nd regi¬ 
ment Bombay native infantry, attainder tbe command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel H. S. Keating of the 56th. 

During August, and the early part of September 1800, 
ordnance, stores, and provisions were landed, roads 
were made leading to the interior of the island, and the 
troops wero exei'cised preparatory to an attempt to sur¬ 
prise tho town of St. Paul's situated on the west coast 
of Bourbon. 



Capture of St. Pauls. 

On tho 16th September, a detachment, consisting of 
368 officers and men, embarked on board H.M.'s ships 
“Nereido” and “ Otter” and tho East India Company's 
cruiser “Wasp.” On the morning of tho 19th, they 
fell in with H.M.'s ships “Raisonable” and “Sirius” 
off the Mauritius, and on tho Bamo day the troops and 
seamen destined for the attack, consisting of 604, wero 
put on board tho “ Nereid e,” and tho squadron sailed 
for Bourbon that evening. 

About 5 o’clock on the morning of the 21st, the troops 
landed a short distance to the south of Point de Galotte 
on the north-western coast of the island, about seven 
miles north of the town of St. Paul’s. Colonel Koating 
moved rapidly forward, and by 7 a.m, ho was in posses¬ 
sion of the first and second batteries. 

The enemy made a stand behind a stone wall near tho 
third battery, but they were soon forced from that posi¬ 
tion. The remaining batteries were then taken, and the 
guns turned upon the shipping in the harbour, the whole 
of which surrendered shortly afterwards to the British 
squadron which stood in at this time. 

By half past 8 o’clock, the town, batteries, magazines, 
and public stores were in oar possession. The French 
frigate u La Caroline,” of 46 guns, was taken, and sov ral 


mtSTfty 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


301 


merchantmen belonging to the East. India Company, were 
recaptured, also the brig Grappler ” of 18 guns. 

After this brilliant exploit, Colonel Keating returned to 
Rodrigues, whore he arrived on the 25th October, and 
immediately began to build store-houses, barracks, and 
houses for the officers. 


Expedition to Bourbon , 1810. 

On bearing of the success which had attended the 
efforts of so small a detachment, the Supreme Govern¬ 
ment resolved to attempt the complete reduction of the 
French islands, and they sent instructions to Madras, 
in conformity with which, a force, 1 consisting of 1,650 
Europeans, and 1,000 Natives, embarked at that place for 
Rodrigues on the 8th May 1810, under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Hasting' Fraser, H.M.'s 86th regi¬ 
ment. 

The troops arrived on the 20th June, and Colonel 
Keating having assumed command, tbo expedition sailed 
on the 3rd July for St. Denis, the capital of Bourbon, 
and approached the place of debarkation on the 6th 
idem. 