

The first brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel Fraser^ 
composod of H.M.’s 86th, the 1st battalion 6th Madras 
native infantry (6th M.N.I.), with a party of artillery 


Madras artillery ... ... ... ... ... 100 

Flank companies, H.M.’s 12th and 33rd. . *100 

U.M.’a 69th rogiment ... ... ... 730 

„ 86th do. ... ... ... 420 

1,650 

lf t. ’ . + ralion 6th Madras native infantry . . S50 

2nd do. 12th do. ... 850 

Detachment 2nd battilion pionoora ... . 200 


<SL 


CHAP. XXX. 


Arrives off 
St. Denis. 


Orders to tbo 
troops. 


Total rank and filo ... 3,550 




Difficulty in 
landing. 


Success of the 
Urst brigade. 


302 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

and pioneers, was ordered to land at Grand Chaloupe, 
about six miles west of St. Denis, which is situated on the 
northern coast of the island. 

The remaining three brigades, under the general com¬ 
mand of Colonel Keating, were ordered to land near the 
“ Riviere de Pluies/' about three miles east of the town, 
viz.:— 

The second brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Drum¬ 
mond, H.M.'s 86th, composed of a party of Royal marines, 
and the 2nd battalion 12th regiment Madras native infan¬ 
try (24th M.N.I.). 

The third brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod, 
H.M.'s 69th, composed of H.M.'s 69th, and a detachment 
of Bombay native infantry. 

The fourth brigade under Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell, 
H.M.’s 33rd, composed of the flank companies H.M.'s 
12tli and 33rd regiments, a detachment H.M.'s 56th, and 
a party of pioneers. 

The disembarkation began at 2 p.m. on the 7lh, aud 
about 300 men of the third and fourth brigades under 
Colonel McLeod, together with a few seamen under 
Captain Willoughby, had landed, when the surf became 
so heavy that nothing more could be done. Upon this 
Colonel McLeod moved a short distance to the eastward 
as far as St. Marie, where he took possession of a battery 
and remained during the night. 

The first brigade succeeded in landing at Grand 
Chaloupe without loss, and Colonel Fraser, pushing on 
towards the town, occupied the western heights above it 
with the view of preventing the eutrance of any succour* 
from St. Paul's. Early on the morning of the 8th, the 
Colonol, leaving the 6th battalion, to protect his rear, 
descended the hill towards the town with the Europeans, 
and attacked the enemy, who were drawn up in two 



Nil MSr#y, 



‘ e <W 
• ,-_ ^ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


303 


columns on the plain with two field-pieces, and supported CHAP. XXL 
on the flank by a redoubt. They were quickly driven 
back by the bayonet, broken, and pursued so closely that 
they retreated into the town, leaving the redoubt in our 
possession. The guns were then turned upon the place, 
and the rest of the troops coming up about 4 o’clock in 
the afternoon, the commandant surrendered, and a capit- Surw* of 
illation was signed by which the whole island, together 
with all public property, was ceded to the British. The 
troops became prisoners of war. Our loss was incon¬ 
siderable, viz., 18 killed 1 and 70 wounded, exclusive of 5 
seamen. 