

Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell was detached to St. 

Paul’s with his brigade on the 10th, and took possession 
of that place, where 1,500 men laid down their arms. 

145 pieces of ordnance of various calibres, 195,000 lbs. Captured 

r ordnance, 

of gunpowder, and a quantity of small arms, and military 

stores fell into our hands. 

Captain Moodio of the 6th regiment. Captain Lambert Thanks to 
1 . A in/-« j. officers of tho 

2nd batt alion 13th regiment, acting Aidc-dc-Lamp to brigade 

Colonel Fraser, Lieutenant Davies Engineers, Lieutenant 

Abdy artillery, and Lieutenant Soouler of the pioneers 

(1st battalion 22nd regiment) received the thanks of 

the brigadier. 

The services of the several brigadiers, and of tho and staff, 
officers on the staff, were duly acknowledged by Colonel 


brigade. 


/■ H.M.’s 86th ...11 
j 6th M.N.I. ... 1 
C Pioneers ... 1 


Killed. 


Wounded, 
r H.M.’s 86th . 58 
1 st brigade. ^ 6th m.N.I.... 7 


2nd 

3rd 

4th 



H.M.’s 69th ... 2 
J Flank corps ... 1 | 

I H.M.’s 56fch ..1 









imtSTffy 



Thanks of the 

Governor- 

General. 


301 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 


<SL 


Keating* in liis report to the Governor-General, dated 
21st July, which was conveyed to Calcutta by Lieutenant- 
Colonel Campbell H.M.'s 33rd regiment. 

On the % 24th August an order was issued by the 
Governor-General in Council in which the officers and 
men engaged in the expedition were thanked for the 
zeal, courage, and perseverance, by which a conquest of 
so much importance to the national interests had been 
achieved. 


Capture of the Isle de la Passe. 

On the night of the 13th August the “ Isle de la Passe/' 
situated at the mouth of the harbour at the south-eastern 
extremity of the Mauritius, known as the “ Grand Port/' 
was attacked by a small 1 party of marines and seamen 
in the boats of the " Sirius" and “ Iphigenia" and carried. 
Lieutenant Norman of the " Sirius ” and 6 men were 
killed, and 18 men wounded. A garrison of 130 men was 
placed in the island, and Lieutenant Davies of the 
Engineers was entrusted with the duty of improving the 
defences. 

Attacks on the Captain Willoughby of the “ Nereide ” having been 

pOBtS Of tllQ 11*1 ® 

enemy. placed in charge of the island, made preparations for 
attacking some of the enomy’s posts on the mainland, and 
leaving Captain Todd H.M.’s 33rd, in command, ho 
embarked a small detachment 2 in the boats of the 
“ Nereide ” and “ Staunch ” at 1 a.m. on the 17th, and 
assaulted and carried the fort at “ Point de Diablo,” which 

1 Seventy-one in all.—James’ Naval History* Vol. V, p. 146. 

3 170 officers and mon, viz., Liontcuant Aldwinklo Madras artillery, 
and 12 mon; Lieutenant Morlett H.M’g 83rd, aud Lieutenant Ncodhall 
H.M’b GUtb, with GO men ; Lieutenants Pye and C-or Loyal murines, with 
GO men ; and Lieutenants Deacon and Wiees R.N., with 60 men. 

Lie id count Davies Mtdrus Engineer*, accompanied tho party nud 

WU 0 nightly wounded -^Jamra’ Naval Ulglurjr, V«*! V, nod Mu-iioa 
Army List for 1810. 