

The English squadron being reduced to Comm, dore 
Rowley ’s ship “ Boadicca” of 38 guns, the sleep “Otter ” 
of 10 guns, and the gun-brig “Staunch,” the French 
turned the tables, blockaded the island of Bourbon, ami 
captured some transports carrying troops and prove ions 
for the projected expedition against the Mauritius. 

Hus blockade was maintained until tho 12th Scpb mix 
on whrnh day the “Africame^ frigate of 38 gunB,.Caplxm 
t oi’bi It, arrived *fT St. Denis, when 1 he Cnimnodore v 1 ii 
the 44 Boadicea,” “Otter,” and “Staunch” put out fium 
St. PauL’a to meet it, having received intuinuit - >n oi ir h 
rn val from Colonel Keating. Tim blockading nl,ip., nl 
this t utu were the “ Astr6o” of 44 guns, the “Ipnigmiiu * 
(captured ul “ Lie do la Passe;,” and tlic brig “ Emu*, 
l I’enant,” \vi . li iqq .muil)y in conHequcm-i ' ■ ’ -ual 

from thr others, mndv ail t<» t m* m ri li-ri i • u i m 


liiHTORV or nil-: mai:i:as aum\. 




aj)pc iranoc* of the “Africaine,” and was quickly out of CHAP. 
sight. The Commodore then endeavoured to bring the 
frigates to action, but the ‘^Boadieea” was a bad sailer, 
and at 2 a.m. on the 13th, when the “Africaine ” had got 
close to the “Astree,” the “Boadioea” was still four or 
five miles to leeward, and the ** Otter ” and “ Staunch 3> 
out of sight. 

Captain Corbett, knowing that the frigates wore within Cujmuo 
a few hours run of Port Louis in the Mauritius, and ^Afl'icuiuo ” 
e xpecting that the “ Boadicca” would como up, deter¬ 
mined to engage notwithstanding tho disparity of force, 
but In. was overmatched, and the “ Africaine 33 struck 
her colors about 4-45 a.m. with tho loss of 49 killed, and 
114 wounded. Captain Corbett was mortally wounded at 
tho commencement of ihe action. 

Out of a detachment of 25 men and one officer 
HOth which had been taken on board at St. Denis, 5 were 
killed and 18 wounded, including the officer. Captain 
Robert Elliot 5th Bombay native infantry, who bad 
volunteered at St. Denis, was killed. 

About 7 A.M. tho “ Roadicea ” was joined by her two Her 
consorts, and the wind having freshened, the Commodore rcru, * li ‘° 
boro up for tho frigates, which Were making slow progress 
owing to tho crippled state of the prize, which had been 
much damaged both in her masts and hull. They deserted 
her about 3-30 r.M., and the “ Boadicea 33 "coming up 
about 5 o’clock, towed her back to St. Paulks, where slio 
nniv d on tho 15th. 

On the morning of the 18th throe ships having appeared r.qm,,.,, - r 
»'i tho utlin _ tho Commodore made sail after I hem. 1 u f ' 

t !r 1 i'i '< Vi! ii iii. 




i lie eorvcl to “ Viet or,” the liltk r hav i .. in r w tin Briii h 
frig.o ‘ u Ccvlon ’ 1 of 52 guns, winch tho\ bad euptmvd 


1 An • <!ii. i? in .f U/2 ■ hi-, 'v I urli I vl I- • Imhi lit tin- lii-jf, |, 
< min- jit m l M‘ Ci hi * f , :ii l i i i. ii 







HISTORY or TUP. MADRAS ARMY. 



ciiAi*. y.yi. 


< i*iioral Aber¬ 
crombie*. 


A uclumity 
»tnmiaul:, 

1810. 





<>n tbf preceding day. The “ Victor ” cast oft the prize 
about. 3 r.M. and stood off to the eastward. The “Boadi- 
cea” came up w r itb the “Venus” about 5 r.M. and com¬ 
pelled her to strike her colors in about ten minutes. She 
had lost her mizen mast and topmasts in the action with 
the “ Ceylon/’ and consequently made a poor defence. 