

One company H.M.’s 11th and 89th, and a detachment 
ol Bombay native infantry under Captain Tt duoh. 

Tho troops in Fort Malartic near the head of tho bay 
bud quitted the pi ice on tho uppeuvuutv of the licet, and 

jHhodtoiVrt Bonis. 



' H U*. XXI. 


.Advance of 

t\o army. 


AfT.iim fvt 
' 1*.» rlvf. a 
*1 oHifuaw, 
tu» l Hocl.' 




’ A J TTISIORY OF THE MADRAS AUMV. 

Tlie fifth brigade was left to secure tho landing-place, 
\viil. orders to follow next day with tlie ammunition and 
stores. 

Tlio remainder of the force moved on at once along 
the coast for about five miles, after which it bivouacccl 
for the night. 

During this march the reserve brigade, which was in 
advance, was fired upon when emerging from a wood 
into the plain, but the enemy retired without making any 
stand. 

Colonel Keating, and Lieutenant Ashe of the 12th were 
wounded, and two men hilled at this place. 

The march was resumed on the morning of the dOth, 
but the heat was so great that the force war obliged to 
halt and encamp at Moulin a Poudre," about six mdes 
from Port Louis. 

During the afternoon a reconnoitring party under 
General Decaen attached our pickets and compelled them 
to retire, but being reinforced they rallied and dmv< 
back the enemy with some loss. 

Before day-light on the 1st December Colonel Mel cod 
was detached with his brigade to take possession of i ho 
batteries at the bays of Tortue, and Tombeau, about a 
couple of miles to the right of tho lino of march, which 
service war successfully performed. 

About r. o'clock tho main body moved on towards 
Port Louis for about two miles, when it touud tho 
} ruroge of tho river Tombeau disputed by about :',0n < i 
Mm enemy with two field-pieces. They were booh driven 
lack, and tho troops crossed the bridge, but it would 
not admit of tho passage of t ne guns, having been part i dly 
destroyed. This caused mmo delay as tho guns had I<i bn 
MOn1 to a lower- down. Major O'Keefe JLM A J 
wu- lcdled in this uCair, 




Tlie troops were again opposed about two miles further 
on at the river Seche, where Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell, 
commanding the European flank battalion, was killed. 
Tho enemy were driven back with the loss of about 100 
men, and pursued to the river Lataniers near the out¬ 
works of tho town. The troops were then withdrawn 
beyond the range of tho batteries, and encamped for the 
night. 

A Hag of truce was sent to the camp by the enemy the 
next morning, and terms of capitulation having been 
agreed upon, they were ratified on the 3rd December, 
win i the whole island was surrendered, together with a 
largo quantity of military and naval stores and ammuni¬ 
tion. 209 pieces of heavy ordnance were found upon tho 
voiks. 

The frigates “ Bellone,” “ Minerve,” “Manchq,” 
“ Ah tree ” and (lato British) “ Iphigeuia,” tho corvettes 
f< Victor” and “ Entreprenant,” with a new vessel of the 
same class, woro taken in tho harbour, besides twenty- 
four merchant ships, some of which were of large burden. 