





history or tiil maijRa.i my. 



3 u r> 


<SL 


A 10I 
Uarhouj ol 

“ Ol'llUo 

Port.” 


fmnndcd tho nortli-cantor n entrance into the t<r Grand c’IIA l\ XXI 
p,, r t Having spiked the guns, do .troyed the carriages, 
and blown up the magazine, Captain Willoughby advanced 
to the town of “ Grand Port/' distant about twelve miles, w 
after having dispersed a party of the enemy by which he 
was opposed on tho march. lie returned to his ship the 
sarins evening. 

The next day he landed again with the same force, 
and destroyed the signal-house at the port ot “ Grand 
Riviere/' about live miles north of “ Point do Diablo/' 
to which place ho then returned, and after having 
destroyed the works, lie went back to the " Isle do la 
Passo." 

Disasters of the Squadron. 

Those successes were quickly followed by a series of 
disasters to the squadron. On the 22nd August the 36-gun 
friga is “ Sirius/' and “ Nereide" made an attempt to 
attack the French vessels in the "Grand Port/' but the 
“ Sirius ” having grounded near tho entrance, nothing 
wn effected. The “ Iphigenia," and “ Magiciomio/' 
also of 36 guns ends having arrived the next day, tlio 
attempt was renewed by the four ships, but the “ Sirius " 
and Mugiciouno " both took tho ground, and the 
other two vessels w *ro unequal to contend again at Die 
combined fire of the enemy's ships and batteries. The 
‘ Nereide,” which had grounded after standing into the 
harbour, was obliged to strik« her Hag about 10 c m , 
iii tcr ho iiighod 230 seamen, marines, and soldiers killed 
nnd wjumlcd put of a total of 2SI Amongst the killed 
Wore Lieutenant Morlett Il.M.'s 33rd, and Lieutenant 
i\ Aid winkle hi battaliou Madras artillery. Lieutenant 
Neeilliall of t ho dPth was wounded. 

f | M . ) i-viciem ■>" wuh nl nnd- red, and et on fire »< 

/ i- i lIu- 2 1th, and bh*w up t LI e On the 2->tli 

if, Inin i uia M 'ideas »mvd to gel lliO ” mills - II, 

:o 


IjOSi -a’ On. 
whip.*. 


HJS'IiMY OF THK MADKAs Al'MV. 



CHAV XXI. 

— 





Mil' “ lull! tfl<* 

I IV " TO 





'll., Irouch 
WxoUilc 
IU uil.ou 


I «U.l* 






•Mi 



^ >ut finding this impracticable, she rook the crew on 
board. The “ Sirius ” was set ou fire, and blew up 
about 11 a. if. 

riie “ Ipliigenia ” then began to warp herself out, but 
the wind against hev was so strong that she did not 
get back to the “ Isle de la Passe ” until the night of the 
“(ith, when she anchored about three-quarters of a mile 
from the island. 

On the 27th the French were reinforced by four ships 
of war from Port Louis, and on the same day Captain 
Lambert of the “ Ipliigenia” was called upon by CajHain- 
Gcneral Decaen to surrender the officers and crews of the 
squadron within one hour, together with liis ship, ;nnl 
the batteries, arms, ammunition and troops upon the 
island. 

Me was also summoned by Commodore Ilamelin of thu 
40-gun frigate “Venus,” who commanded the French 


squadron, and after some correspondence the surrender 
took place at 10 a.m. on the 29th. 