

Tho Kngli-h Indiamen “Charlton,” “ ^eylou,” and 
u Buih'd Kingdom” were recaptured, and about 2,000 
English amen and soldiors, who had been taken pri- 
Moitors, were rescued from confinement. 

The French troops and seamon. wore not made prisoners 
of war, but wore sent to France with their arms nnd 
c* iIiU’m, and nil their personal effects, nt. the expense <>F tho 
British Uovornmant, far more favorable Conditions t inn 
the enemy hud any right to expect, considering the great 
disparity o' force* 

O '* loss was only 28 killud, 9 1 wounded, and 47> mis 
ing, 107 in all Maj<* Taynton of the Madras artillery, 
la, i,n mini Kcnpp k H M.’s 12th, and Lioutenaut Join-s 


<3L 


chap. xx.. 


Sarreader of 
tho island. 


Captured 

Hhipa. 


British 

recaptured. 


Knemy’fl 

troopi. ^iif- 

to Piumw. 





CHAT. XXL 


Fom» of the 
cnomy. 


ThnnkHto 
'to treops. 


1hnnU* to 
H< Mticlms 

11 i 1 . • o 

i loop*, 1812 . 


M tlrvln. 


UT8T0RY OF Tin: MADRAS AUMY. 

li.M/s 84th, were wounded, besides the two officers pre¬ 
viously named. 

The French regular troops did not exceed 1,300, of 
whom about 500 were Irish, chiefly recruits taken out of 
captured Iridiamen. 

The native militia were computed at about 10,000 men, 
but they did not render any assistance to rhe French, 
having been deterred, it was believed, by proclamations 
distributed by Captain Willoughby in August at tbe time 
of his incursion from the “ Isle de la Passe.” 

Th ' services of Major-General Warde, of the offiec'r.s 
commanding brigades, of Major Taynton senior officer of 
artillery, of Major Caldwell Madras Engineers, and -I 
the officers and men generally, wore duly acknowledged 
by General Abercrombie in his report to the Governor- 
Gcru ral, and ou the 9th February 1811 the force wan 
thanked by the Governor-General in Council. 

The Madras troops returned early in 1812, when the 
following order was issued at Fort St . George, dated 1 hh 
February 1812 :— 

“ The whole of the native troops employed on thelafo tr pe- 
dition against the Islands of Bourbon, and Mauritius having 
returned to Fort St. Gcm-ge, the Honorable the Governor in 
C ouncil performs a satisfactory part of his duty in requosliiiy 
that His Excellency the COmmandor-in-Chiof will bo pi-as .1 
i convey to the several native corps and detachments which 

rvod at tho conquest of those islands, the public th:ud> nt 
tho Government for tho alacrity with which they omlmrlc d 
(>• Ui:.t service, for the gallantry which they displayed wl -u 
oppt.-.od to tho enemy, ad for tlieir uniform good conduct, 
on all ooeajii.jis during tho period of their absence from tb%j 
ooaAt," 

't**!** ro granted f,'. vtly »ift,r.rw;ird.i i.. (,ho ,iti\ „ 
trf.( |,s, ( ;i.n lawars included, but it wiih not uui.il bit. 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 313 

hi 1838 that they 1 were permitted to carry the word CHAP. XXI 
“ Bourbon” on their colors and appointments. 

The island of Bourbon was restored to the French after Disposal of 
the peace in 1815. The Mauritius still remains in our thSl3lauds * 
possession. 