


1 Artillery 4u, Madron European regiment. 130, Beamon and marine* 
2*25, total lOt). 

let but to li<>n 2otii i/iuiftm U.N.l . doin^; duty with the artillery. 



MINIS/*,, 



the approach barred by an impracticable ravine, he was CHAP. XXI. 


obliged to desist. 

In the meantime the other party, led by Captain Court, 
composed of 15 artillerymen, 140 seamen and marines 
from the " Cornwallis ” and “ Samarang,” and a company 
of the European regiment under Captain Forbes, turned 
the position at Battoo-Gantong, and having gained a 
height which commanded it, the enemy retired about 
sunset and left it in our possession. 

During the advance of the troops against the batteries 
on the heights, a heavy fire was kept up by tbo fleet on 
the furt and shore * * batteries, and during the night the 
party in possession of Battoo-Gantong was reinforced by 
40 men under Captain Spencer of the “ Samarang.” 

Early on the 17th fire was opened from the heights 
on the fort and town, and the commandant, having been 
called upon to surrender, forwarded articles of capitula¬ 
tion, 1 and the place was given up the next day. 

The capitulation included the whole island, and the Capitulation, 
dependencies of Saparoifa, Ilila, Haroeko, Laricque, 

Bouro, and Muni pa. 

Five armed ships, and six merchant-men, fell into our Prize, 
hands, and the value of the public property captured was 
estimated at 2 £&00,000. 


The Dutch and Javanese troops were sent to Java, and 
the Amboynese, 5 * who were well disposed towards us, were 
taken into our service. 

Our loss was extremely small, viz., 1 seaman, 1 marine. 




1 General Daond* (9, Governor and Commandor-iu-Chief of thr Dutch 
settlements, n 1 • »pt* .1 very severe i icaaures again.it tho principal ofticorri 
Concern capitulation. Colom l Fite, the Commandant, wng 

executed, and tho Civil Governor diuinisHcd and dh'tji .*< d 
J Appendix F. 

* Appcmii* (.♦• 





WMSTfiy 



CliAP. XXI. 
Casualties. 

Mauado. 


Tbankato 
the troopa. 


<SL 

,J l6 niSTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

and 2 privates of the European regiment killed; 1 Lieuten¬ 
ant and 1 corporal of artillery, 4 seamen, 1 marine, and 
4 privates of the European regiment wounded. 

The Dutch settlement at Manado, on the north-eastern 
coast of the island of Celebes, was taken possession of by 
Captain Tucker about the end of May, in order to pre¬ 
vent the supply of provisions from thence to the islands 
of Banda-Neira and Ternate, which it was intended to 
attack on the arrival of reinforcements expected from 
India. 

Lieutenant Nelson of the European regiment, with a 
few of his own men, and a party of Amboynese, was left 
in charge of the post. 

The conduct of the troops received the special commend¬ 
ation of the Governor-General, who caused the report of 
Captain Court to be published at Fort St. George on the 
Gtli May 1810. 

Capture of« Banda-Neira i 1810. 

On the 6th May 1810 two companies of the Madras 
European regimeut under Captain Nixon, with Lieuten¬ 
ant:’ Brown andDacre, sailed from Madras for Amboy mi 
in the frigates “ Caroline” aud “ Piedraontaise ” of 36 and 
38 guns respectively, and the 18 gun brig “ Bamicouta.” 
Captain Cole of the “Caroline,” who commanded the 
squadron, having received permission from Admiral 
Drury to attempt the reduction of the Banda group of 
Spice Islands, touched at Penang, where he took in some 
military stores and a number of scaling ladders. The 
41 Barrncouta ” was detached to Malacca, where sho 
embarked 20 men of the Madras artillery and a couple of 
field-pieces under tlio command of Lieutenant Yen tea. 
These preparations ba\ mg been completed, the squadron 