

Lieutenant Yeates 2 doing duty with the artillery, and 
Ensign Allen 3 who hnd volunteered from Penang, also 
received the thanks of the Governor-General, conveyed 
in a separate letter to Captain Cole, dated 23rd Novem¬ 
ber 1810. 



Capture of Ternate, 1810. 

On the 21st August 1810 a detachment under the com¬ 
mand of Captain David Forbes of the Madras European 
Regiment, with Lieutenants Charles Forbes, and Curshatn 
of the same corps, embarked on board H.M/s ship 


1 Cr.-al Han-’n, Coouong Api, Rost ufgen* Palo Ay, Pu! v Iihiui, 

• . n<l battalion lgtb M N.l. 

* Simi battalion Slat M.NJ. 






HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


310 


<SL 


at- Amboyna on the requisition of Captain CHAP. XXL 
Tucker, for an attempt upon the island of Ternate, the 
last remaining possession of any consequence in the 
Molucca seas still in the hands of the Dutch. The town 
was defended by Fort Orange, and the detached works of 
Kayo-Meira, and Kota-Barro. 

The garrison was composed of 500 disciplined infantry, 

203 European inhabitants and seamen, and 500 native 
soldiers. 

The island was sighted on the 25th, and the troops 1 left 
the ship on the night of the 27th, but the landing was not 
effected until 7 a.m. on the 28th, when Captain Forbes 
marched inland with the object of gaining a hill which 
was supposed to command Kayo-Meira. i he hill was 
reached about noon, but nothing could be seen from it 
owing to the thickness of the forest. After resting his 
men, Captain Forbes proceeded in the direction of the 
fort for a short distance, when, finding the road rendered 
impassable by large trees which had been cut down and 
thrown across it, he turned to .the right and made his 
way, with much difficulty, along the course ot u stream, 
to the beach, which he reached about 10 p.m., aud ho then 
found himself within about 800 yards ot the fort. 

Ho immediately advanced, but had not gone abovo 
fifty yards, when he was discovered by an outlying picket, 
which opened fire. Captain Forbes, however, pressing 
forward, crossed the ditch, and the fort was speedily esca- 
laded and taken with trifling 2 loss owing to the darkness 
of the night, and the rapidity of the advance. One officer, 
and sixty-eight men were taken prisoners. A number 
mado their escape. 


1 Enropenn infantry, and artillery 74, marines 36, seamen 3 Amboy- 
nt»u 32 i total 174. 

Ki?bd 3, woundod 14 




mtSTfiy 



CHAP. XXL 


Ordnance. 


Color a. 


Tlmnk* to 
tlm trvMip i 


JtohM>ruMon 
" f 'l" ulilmln 
IH10. 



<SL 

0 history ok the madras army. 

The wind and current were so strong against Captain 
Tucker that he did not succeed in laying the “ Dover ” 
opposite the battery at Kota-Barro (between Kayo-Meira 
and Fort Orange) until about 2 p.ra. on the 29th, when 
he quickly silenced it, and passed on towards another 
shore battery, in doing which he became exposed to Fort 
Change; and the gunners in Kota-Barro reopening fire, 
Captain Tucker was obliged to return, and had nearly 
regained his former position when Kota-Barro was 
attacked in rear and taken by Lieutenant Curshain, who 
had been sent from Kayo-Meira by Captain Forbes for 
that purpose. The guns of tho battery were then turned 
upon tho town, and tho cc Dover ” coining to close action 
with tort Orange, the place surrendered about 5 p.m. 