





proceeded on tlie voyage, and after having taken in water CHAP. XXI. 
and provisions at the Sulu Islands it arrived off Great 
Banda on the 8th August. 

Banda-Neira, the principal island, separated from Great 
Banda by a narrow strait, was selected for attack. About 
two miles long, and three-quarters of a mile broad, it was 
defended by two strong forts, Belgica and Nassau, and 
by several detached batteries. The number of guns in 
the several works amounted to 138, of which 52 heavy 
pieces of cannon were in Fort Btdgiea. 

Captain Cole having determined to attempt a surprise, 
a party of 200 men, composed of seamen, marines, artil¬ 
lerymen, and infantry, left the ships at midnight. The 
boats assembled under the bluff point of Great Banda 
about 2 a.m. on the 9tli, and then pushed oft’ towards 
Banda-Neira, where the men landed in a heavy squall an 
hour and a half before day-light. 

A battery close to the beach was instantly attacked, and 
carried by a party of seamen armed with pikes, under the 
command of Captain Kenah, and Lieutenant Carew of 
the “ Barracouta.” The sentry was killed, and an officer 
and several men taken prisoners without creating any 
alarm in the other works. 

Leaving a small guard in the battery, the detachment 
advanced against Fort Belgica with the ladders aud 
seamen in front, and, although the enemy were on the 
alert, the assault was made with such speed and resolu¬ 
tion that the place was escaladed and taken by 5-80 a.m. 
without the loss of a man. The colonel commandant, 
and 10 of the garrison were killed, 4 officers and 40 
artillerymen were taken prisoners ; the rest made their 
escape. Shortly after day-light, the mcn-of-war stood into 
tho harbour, aud as Fort Belgica commanded the town 
as well as the othor works, the enemy, finding them- 
fiolvea between two fires, surrendered the settlumcnt 



CHAP. XXI. 


Thanks to 
tliO troops. 





'H8 HISTORY OF TIIE MADRAS ARMY. 

unconditionally, togethei* with tie several islands 1 depen¬ 
dent thereon. The garrison consisted of 700 regular 
troops and 800 militia. 

This brilliant and successful, although extremely haz¬ 
ardous enterprise, was duly appreciated by the Governor- 
General, who, in an order dated at Fort William on the 
16th February 1811, thus expressed himself :— 

“ His Lordship in Council considers the rapid conquest 
of a place so strongly fortified by nature and by art as the 
island of Banda, in the face of a superior force, without the 
loss of a man, as forming a singular event in the annals of 
British enterprise, and the Governor-General in Council has 
great pleasure in recording a public testimony of the appro¬ 
bation and applause with which he contemplates the distin¬ 
guished zeal and gallantry of the Commanding Officer of the 
troops, Captain Nixon, and the courage, discipline, and firm 
ness of the general body of the officers and troops under his 
direction, in carrying into effect, with such signal and rapid 
success, the plan of operations for the reduction of that settle¬ 
ment, concerted by Captain Cole of His Majesty’s Ship 
1 Caroline.* ” 