

General Jansens fled to the eastward, and wa 9 followed 
to Cheribon 1 by pnrt of tho fleet with a Bengal Volunteer 
battalion under Colonel Wood. The place was surren¬ 
dered, but the General having escaped to Samarang/ lie 
was followed early in September by General Aiuhmuty. 


’On tho northern coaut of tho island, about 198 miles uast-somh- 
casfc from Batavia. 

2 On tho northern coast of the inland, Lut. 0* 56* 8., Lon^. llo L. 





mtST/ty. 



TT1ST0RY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


327 


<SL 


CHAP. XXI. 


The troops landed on tlie 12th, and on the 16th they 

came in sight of the enemy in a strong position at Jatu, - 

six miles from Samarang. They were about 8,000 
strong, principally natives, with 20 guns. The detach¬ 
ment under General Auchmuty, composed of a few 
companies of the 14th and 80th foot, one company of 
Bengal volunteers, and a party of artillery and pioneers, 
did not exceed 1,200 men. 

This small body advanced without hesitation, but the 
enemy made no stand, and retreated upon the fort at 
Onarang, about four miles further on. Being pursued 
at once, they dispersed. 

General Jansens, finding further resistance hopeless, Surrender of 
proposed a capitulation, and on the 17th September a the 18land * 
treaty was signed, by which the island and dependencies 
were surrendered to Great Britain. 

Colonel P. A. Agnew, Adjutant-General to the expedi- Gonernl 
tion, was sent to England with the despatches early in retunS'tJf 
October, and the Commander-in-Chief, having made Intlia - 
arrangements for the transport to India of part of the 
cavalry and artillery, H.M.’s 69th, and tho head-quarters 
and a wing of the 89th, made over the command of the 
remaining troops to Colonel Gillespie, and emb rked for 
Madras. 

Ou the 14th January 1812, a letter from the Governor- 
Ceneral in Council, dated 26th December 1811, was 
published to the army, in which His Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief was thanked for his eminent 
ter vices during the expedition. Those of the officers 
and men were also duly acknowledged in the same 
letter. 

On the 28rcl May, a general order was issued by tho TVmce 
Oom'rander-in-Cbief, in which he communicated to the ' 

troops the approbation of HisKoyal Highness tho Prince 
Regept for the distinguished gallantry, and spirit dis¬ 
played during the several operations in Juva, more parties 


TtnnlcR of 
t ho < !i verncr- 
General and 


, 1812 . 




328 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



ularly at the assault and capture of the entrenchments. 
Medals 1 * were granted to all the native troops, and to such 
of the superior European officers, as had distinguished 
themselves. 

Lord Minto, the Governor-General, w ? as raised to an 
earldom. 

Expedition to Palembang, 1812. 

The Sultan of Palembang" in Sumatra having destroyed 
the Dutch factory at that place, and murdered the people 
belonging to it during September 1811, a detachment 3 
under Colonel Gillespie proceeded against him in March 
1812. The Colonel arrived off the Palembang river by 
the middle of April, and the troops went up it in boats 
towards the town, distant about sixty miles. On the 
morning of the 25th, when close to the place, intelligence 
was received of the flight of the Sultan, upon which 
Colonel Gillespie, pnshingon with a few officers and men, 
landed about 8 o'clock at night, when he found the town 
in a state of tumult, the troops of the Sultan being engaged 
in firing the houses, and plundering the inhabitants. 
Passing quickly through the excited crowds, he reached 
the palace unmolested, and was joined, boon after mid¬ 
night, by a party of the 89th under Major Trench. The 
next day an investigation was commenced, which result: d 
in the confirmation of the accusations against the SuHan, 
upon which he was formally deposed, and the sovereignty 
conferred upon his brother. Colonel Gillespie returned 
to Java about the end of May, having taken possession 
of the island oj Banca on his way, and placed therein a 