

lishment. but doing duty in Bengal, died on thio fceivico. 




mtSTffy 



Madras liorse artillery, died on the 2Sth of wounds CHAP. XXI. 


received in this action. This corps was highly praised 
by Colonel Gillespie in his despatch of the Ilth : “1 
cannot say too much of Captain Noble, and the officers 
and men under his command, who so gallantly fought the 
two guns that drew a most terrible fire from the enemy ; 
indeed the zeal and ability displayed by Captain Noble 
throughout this service demand my particular commend¬ 
ation.” 

The force of the enemy was estimated at about 17,000 Entrench- 
men, European and native, of whom 13,000 were in the Cornell! 
lines at Cornells under the Governor, General Jansens. 

The position was extremely formidable, being an en- 
trenchcd camp between the unfordable river Jacatra, and 
the Slokan canal, defended by redoubts and batteries 
containing about 280 guns and mortars mounted on the 
works. 

The army broke ground before Cornelia on the 14th, 
and the batteries were completed on the 21st. Early on 
the morning of the 22nd the enemy made a sortie but 
were repulsed. 

The preparations for the assault w r ere completed on 
the 2Gth, by which time our casualties amounted to 
about 200 officers and men killed and wounded, amongst 
whom were Captain-Lieutenant Shepherd of the Madras 
European Regiment, serving with the 1st battalion 
pioneers, killed during the sortie of the 22nd, and Ensign 
Norman McLeod, 1st battalion 6th regiment N.I., also 
doing duty with the pioneers, who was morally wounded 
at the same time. 

The troops marched soon after midnight, and the AitsmiHand 
assault begun at daybreak on the 27tli. The principal Cornel Z. * 
attack was made by the column under Colonel Gillespie, 
supported by a brigade under Colonel Gibbs. This 


326 


history or the madras army. 



CHAP. XXI. 


Casualties. 


Captured 
ordnance 
o ud stores. 


Pursuit of 
(loueral 
J ansone. 


<sl 


column was headed by a company of the 14th Foot under 
Lieutenant Coglan, followed closely by a detachment of 
Madras pioneers under Captain Smithwaite (1st battalion 
10th M.N.I), commanding 2nd battalion pioneers. Tlio 
second attack was under Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod 
of the 69th, the third under Lieutenant-Colonel Wood, 
Bengal Volunteers, and the fourth under Major Yule of 
the 20th B.N.I. 

After a sev T ere struggle the enemy gave way, were 
forced from all their entrenchments, put to total rout, 
and pursued for about ten miles by the cavalry, under 
Major Travers of the 22nd dragoons, and by the 
Madras horse artillery mider Captain Noble. 

Great numbers were killed, and 6,000 taken prisoners, 
amongst whom was a regiment of Voltigeurs recently 
arrived from France. Our loss amounted to about 643, 
killed, wounded, and missing. Fifteen officers were 
killed or died of their wounds, thirteen of whom 
belonged to the Royal, and two to the Bengal army. 

Besides the 280 pieces of ordnance mounted on the 
works, 150 wore found in the entrenched camp. The 
whole number captured at Cornell's, and at the citadel of 
Batavia, amounted to 2Ul* brass, aud 504 iron guns and 
mortars, and a very large quantity of ammunition and 
stores fell into our hands. 