

Isiuety mounted, and twenty-nine dismounted gnus, 
ami mortars were found in the several works. 

i The colors of the Fort Kayo-Meira, and those of tho 
European regiment in garrison at Fort Orange were seht 
to Amboyna for transmission to India. Captain Forbes 
remained in command at Ternate. 

The Governor-General thanked the detachmont in tho 
sumo general order which was published regarding tho 
capture of Bauda. 

The Governor-General in Council considers the expression 
of his high commendation to be equally duo to the gallantry 
and exertions of Captain D. Forbes, and of tho officers and 
“ on uudm ’ hlH oommand, so conspicuously displayed in tho 
attack of the fortified places on the island of Tomato, under 
the general superintendence, a ail authority of Captain Tucker 
cL IJ.M 'a ship “ Dover,” the success of which was followed 
by to. surrender of that important possession to tho British 
arms.’' 

Aniboyna an( ^ t ' )l! oilier islands reuininnd in our pom ck- 

u.n until 181(5, when tboy wore restored to tho Dutch n , 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


321 


conformity with the terms of the Convention of August 

1814. 

During the interval between their capture and restora¬ 
tion, the detachment of the European regiment was em¬ 
ployed on several occasions against pirates in the island 
of Celebes and elsewhere, and some of the officers were 
employed in political situations of importance. Captain 
D. Forbes was appointed Deputy Governor of Banda, and 
while holding that office, he quelled, 1 with a party of his 
regiment, at the requisition of Mr. Martin, the Governor 
of Amboyna, an insurrection in the island of Poran, which 
the Bengal troops had failed to suppress. Lieutenant 
C. Forbes, Assistant to the Resident at Palembang in 
Sumatra, was permitted, at the special request of the 
Resident, to retain his appointment after the return of his 
regimont to India. Captain Richard Phillips, Resident, 
and Commandant at Macassar under the Government of 
Batavia, received the acknowledgements of the Supreme 
Government for his valuable services, and on the receipt, 
at Batavia, of the intelligence of his death at Macassar 
on the 3rd December 1814, a general order was published 
by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, expressing their 
sense of his great merits, and of tho loss sustained by tho 
public service owing to his premature decease. 

Several officers, 2 and a number of the men of the regi¬ 
ment died in the islands owing to tho unhealthiness of 
tho climate. 


Northern Circars, 1810-12. 

During 1810 detachments of the 1st battalion 11th, 
1st of the lGth, and 2nd of the 21st regiments were 


1 Services oP the First. Mndi.ifi European Regiment, page -108. 

- Ijieutcunnt DavonaDt died at Banda 1811, Captain Phillips at Macu*i- 
nar, 1814. Ideutenaufc Dacre at Banda Neira 1811, Oaptuiu i orbofi ut 
Banda 1815. Lieuienan Carbonv at Tomato 1815, and AbBifituut 
Burgeon Milne ut Banda 1811 

VOL. III. 41 


CHAP. XXI. 


European 