

On the 22nd July 1813 the following order by Colonel 
Gillespie was published at Fort St. George by the 
Commander-in-Chief. 

“ Head Quarters, ]Vcltc Vrccden , 2 7th May 1813. 

“ On tho return of the Madras horso artillery to their 
Presidency, the Commander of the forces cannot bettor evince 
the high opinion he entertains of their merit, than by a 
short review of the active services in which they have been 
engaged under liis personal command. Placed in the advanco 
of the army, Major-General Gillespie had early an oppor¬ 
tunity of discerning the character of the corps, nnd their 
conduct on every occasion confirmed his first impression of 
the value of their services. In the successive achievements 
of tho 10th, and the memorable 26tli of August 1811, their 
exertions, directed by that experienced officer Captain Noble, 
eminently contributed to the glory acquired to the British 
arms; and the brigade employed under Captain Rudyard at 
Pale di bang, and Djojokarta were conspicuous for tho gallant 
conduct which so honorably marked their first career. 

“ The Commander of the forces also offers his thanks to 
Captain Rudyard and tho officers, for tho discipline and 
highly creditable appearance the corps lias uniformly main¬ 
tained ; and will perform a pleasing duty in communicating 
tbe .o his sentiments to the Commandor-in-Chicf, and to tho 
authorities under whom they will eventually bo placed- 







HISTORY OF THE MATHIAS ARMY. 


33). 


<SL 


C( The Commander of the forces regrets that the medal 
which it was his intention personally to present to John 
O’Brien in commemoration of his gallant conduct near 
Djojokarta lia 3 not yet been received from Bengal; it will, 
however, be forwarded to Madras through the regular 
channel.” 

The detachment H.M/s 22nd dragoons, when about to 
return to India in June 1813, were thanked for their 
services by the Major-General, more especially for “ that 
gallant and decisive charge, which, by overthrowing the 
retreating columns, occasioned the final dispersion of the 
army at Cornells, and secured an earlier termination to 
the campaign.” 

The same order concluded with the following para¬ 
graph :— 

“ The Commander of the forces has equal pleasure in 
recording liis sense of the conduct of the detachment of the 
Madras pioneers commanded by Lieutenant Stuart, 1 who have 
been uniformly distinguished by a zeal and steudiness, and 
patient enduring under trying circumstances, which have 
rendered thoir services eminently useful, and themselves 
deserving of particular regard and consideration. ’ 

On the departure of Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie of 
the Engineers for India, an order, from which the follow¬ 
ing are extracts, was issued by tho Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council at Batavia, and republished at Fort St. George 
on the 10th September 1813 :— 

“ Tho Honorable tho Lieutenant-Governor in Council 
avails himself of the opportunity afforded by the approaching 
departure of Lieutenant-Colouel Colin Mackenzie, Chief 
Engineer on the expedition to Java, to render to that distin¬ 
guished officer his peculiar acknowledgments, and to testify 