

1 On the 20th December 1820 the corpB of Madras Engineers, the 
florae Brigade of artillery, and the 2nd Battalion Piomvrs . j>. r- 

Tnirtod to boar the word " JAVA ” on the ir appointmenta in comr.t mo* 
ration of their services in the redaction of that inland. 

"A Malay principality at tbo southern one! of SurarIra, opposite lit© 
island of Bauca, from which it is separated by a strait. 

3 Dotaohmontn Madras horse and Bengal foot artillery, C'Jtb and 
6Bfh, and Bengul Volunteers. 









miSTfiy 



detachment under the command of Captain Mears, 1 17th 
M.N.I., who had raised a native battalion in Java. 


Further Operations in Java, 1812. 

The Sultan of Mataram, one of the southern districts of 
the island, having called upon other native chiefs to assist 
him in expelling the British, a force 2 was sent against 
him under Colonel Gillespie, which came before the 
capital at Djojo-carta 8 on the 17th June 1812. 

The principal fort, called the Kraton or palace, was an 
oblong quadrangular, enclosed by a good rampart with 
a bastion at each angle, the whole surrounded by a 
broad wet ditch. It was garrisoned by about 15,000 4 
men, and defended by nearly 100 guns. 

The place was attacked and carried on the 20th, with 
the loss of 99 killed and wounded, after a contest of 
three hours. Great numbers of the enemy were killed. 
Captain Rudyard, and Lieutenant Black of the Madras 
horse artillery were amongst those thanked for conspic¬ 
uous gallantry. 

During the advance of the second detachment of the 
force into Mataram, Lieuteuant-Coloncl McLeod, who 
was in command, found it necessary to communicate 
with Captain Byers of the Royal artillery, who was a 
day's march behind. This service, which was extremely 
hazardous, owing to the numerous scattered parlies of 
the enemy, was performed by gunner Johu O'Brien, 
Madras horse artillery, who was thanked in treneral 
orders and rewarded with a gold modal. 

* Thir; officer wn.i killed on the 15th September 1812 in the attack ou 
n stockade hold by the cx-Sultan of Valembang, 

2 Detachments H.M ’a 22nd dragoon8, Royal, Bengal, and Mndun 
m ullery, Mtb, 59M and 78th foot nod Bangui volunteer^. 

*> AIro called Yodhya-carta and Yughya cartu 

« Some writers say 17,000; Sir T. Stamford Raffia says from 10,000 
lo 15,000. 

vol. in. 42 


<SL 


CHAP. XXT. 


Storm of the 
Kruton. 


Recognition 
of services. 




umsT/} y 



C1IAP. XXI. 

Compliment- 
ary orders, 
18X2-13. 

H.M.'s 86th. 


Horeo 

artillery. 


330 HISTORY OP HIE MADRAS ARMY. 

Hostilities ce&sed with, this capture. 

The following orders were afterwards issued regarding 
the services of certain corps and individuals during the 
expedition, and our subsequent occupation of the island. 

In a general order published at Fort St. George on 
the 10th October 1812, the detachment of H.M.’s 89th 
under Major Trench, which had recently returned to 
Madras, was thanked for the exemplary zeal, gallantry, 
and subordination which it had displayed since being 
separated from regimental head-quarters. 