


CHAP. XXI. 


H.M.’b 22nd 
dragoons. 


Pionoers. 


Colonel 
Markon xio. 
Chief 
Engineer, 


> Lieutenant G. M. Steuart l.t battalion 24th N I., doing duty with 
iht? 2nd battalion pioneers. 




miSTffy. 



CHAP. XXL his unreserved approbation of the zeal, ability, and unwearied 
application which he has displayed on this island. 

<k Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie has, since the conquest of 
Java, been employed, under the sanction and authority of 
the Right Honorable the Governor-General, in collecting and 
arranging the topographical and military reports and 
surveys of the former government, in investigating the 
history and antiquities of the island, and in ascertaining' 
the state of the landed tenure, and the general condition of 
the inhabitants.” 


* # # # 

“ Under his superintendence, a general statistical table of 
the population and produce of the island has been compiled 
on principles which ensure its near approach to accuracy, 
and the answers which have been given to the queries, histor¬ 
ical, literary, and economical, circulated through the island 
at his suggestion, afford information of considerable interest 
and importance.” 

* * * # 

“Java must ever be considered as a great agricultural 
country, and ns the granary of tho Eastern Islands. To 
remoye every restriction on the agriculture and commerce 
of the country is alike conducive to the happiness of the 
people and to tho interests of Government; and the informa¬ 
tion and opinions furnished by Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie 
will enable the Government, in ameliorating and improving 
the general condition of the colony, to‘establish a more 
enlightened and advantageous system of internal adminis¬ 
tration.” 

* * # * 


Java restored A convention was entered into by Lord Castlereagh 
Dut ° h ' August 1814, restoring to the Dutch all their 

former possessions in the Eastern Islands, but Java was 
not actually made over until tbe 19th August 1816, when 
# the flag of the Netherlands was hoisted at Batavia. 


miSTffy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


333 



Cavalry, 1810-11. 

On the 21st April 1810 orders were issued for the 
formation of a Veterinary Establishment at the Presi¬ 
dency under the immediate direction of the Commander- 
in-Chief, for the purpose “ of educating and instructing 
in the veterinary art, a number of boys not exceeding 
48, who will ultimately be posted to regiments of cavalry 
with the rank and pay of European Farriers.” 

“The boys to be educated at the Madras Veterinary 
Establishment are to be enlisted for the Service of the 
cavalry.” 

The establishment was to be recruited from the “ Mili¬ 
tary Male Asylum and the Charity School, as far as those 
institutions can supply the number of boys required, or 
from such sources as he may deem most advisable in the 
event of those institutions not furnishing the required 
number of boys.” 

A Veterinary Surgeon was placed in charge of the 
establishment. 

During October of the same year tho manner of wear¬ 
ing the swords, which, up to that time, had been carried 
in a shoulder belt, was altered. “ The swords of all ranks 
in the horse artillery and cavalry are to be carried in a 
waist belt of the breadth of 2* inches, and the cartouch 
boxes over tho left shoulder in a belt 3 inches in breadth.” 