

The appointments of Assistant Adjutant, and Assistant 
Quartermaster-General of Divisions were abolished, and 
officers of the grade of Brigade Major, and Brigade 
Quartermaster were nominated to perform the duties. 

The situations of Brigade Major in the Centre, and in 
the Southern Divisions were abolished. 

The appointments of all Deputies Judge Advocate, 
with the exception of that at Hyderabad, were abolished. 

The proceedings at courts-martial were to be conducted 
by officers specially selected for that purpose when re¬ 
quired. 

Field Officers were not to bo considered eligible in 
future for the situation of Barrack master, except at the 
Presidency, and at Bangalore. 

The appointments of Town Major at Seringapatam, 
and of Fort Adjutant at Bangalore, and at Caunanoro, 
were to be discontinued from the 1st December. 

The situations of Superintendent of Bazars in Travan- 
core, at Goa, and at Secunderabad, were to cease from 
the same date. Arrangements for the performance of 
the duties of these officers were left to be made by the 
officer at the head of Commissariat. 

Orders regarding tho tenure of certain appointments 
on the General Staff were published on tho 9th October. 

No officer to be eligible for the appointment of Adju¬ 
tant-General, or of Quartermaster-General, unless holding 
the rank of Major in his regiment, or in tho army by 
Brevet. 

No officer to be appointed Deputy Adjutant-General, 
or Deputy Quartermaster-General, under the rank of a 
Captain of two years* standing. 

No officer to be appointed Assistant Adjutant-General, 




HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


341 


or" Assistant Quartermaster-General, under tlie rank of a 
Captain. 

No officer to liold any Staff appointment, except tliat 
of Aide-de-Camp, until after a service of four years in 



India. 

No Subaltern to be Aide-de-Camp until after a service 
of one year with his regiment. 

During October the Commander-in-Chief issued an Dress of tho 
order prescribing certain alterations in the dress of the ^ 
army. With the exception of the following, none of these 
seem to require any particular notice. 

“ 2nd. Clubs and Queues are abolished in all ranks, and tho 
hair is, in future, to he cut close to the neck—no powder to 
be worn on duty.” 

“ 5th. All Field Officers, whether by Brevet or otherwise, 
are to wear two epaulettes.” 

“ Captains of flank companies, who have the Brevet rank 
of Field Officor, are to wear wings in addition to their 
epaulettes.” 

“ Captains and Subaltern officers are to wear one epaulette 
on the right shoulder, excepting those belonging to flank 
Companies. Captains and Subaltern officers of flank com¬ 
panies are to wear a wing on each shoulder, with a grenade, 
or bugle horn on the strap, according as they belong to tho 
grenadiers or light infantry. 

“ Surgeons and Assistant Surgeons are not to wear either 
epaulottos or wings. They are to substituto a waist belt 
instead of tho shoulder belt at present worn, and are not to 
wear a sash. 