

“ 9th. In lieu of pantaloons and half boots; widq trousers 
with gaiters, or gaiter pantaloons, are permitted to be worn 
in the Engineers, artillery, infantry, and pioneers, but all 
Field Officers in full dress will still wear full boots and chain 
spurs. Regimental mounted Stuff Officora full boots and 
plain spurs.” 


TAiNisr^ 



r5,L HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

u 12tli. The non-commissioned officers and privates of Euro¬ 
pean artillery and infantry are to wear white trousers and 
white gaiters.’* 

u 13th, The very unmilitary practice of officers appearing 
out of quarters without their swords and uniform is strictly 
forbidden.” 



Military 

Fund. 


Royal 

Commission a 
grant* d to 
Company’s 
ofiucory, 1811. 


Medals for 
Boringa. 
pa lam. 


In the month of November a letter was received from 
the Court of Directors in which they approved of the 
establishment of a Military Fund, and authorised tho 
Government to pay on that account an annual subscrip¬ 
tion of 5,000 pagodas. 

On the 9tli June 1810 His Majesty was pleased to issue 
a warrant, by which rank in the Royal Army in India 
was granted to officers in the Company's service. The 
commissions to bear the same date a 3 those held by 
officere from the Company. 

The Commander-in-Chief in India, for the time being, 
was vested with the power to issue these commissions. 

The warrant in question was published to the army of 
Fort St. George on the 30th March 1811. 

The following extracts from a letter from the Court of 
Directors, regarding the medals granted for the capture 
of Seringapatam, were published to the army on the 6th 
July 1808 


I£ Some time ago we caused a medal to be executed by one 
of the most eminent artists in this country, in commemoration 
of the brilliant success of the British arms in Mysore in 1799, 
for distribution amongst tho officers and soldiers (European 
and Native) employed on that glorious occasion. On one sido 
of it is represented the storming the breach of Seringapatam 
from an actual drawing on tho spot, with the meridian sun 
denoting the time ot the storm, with the following inscription 
in Persian underneath : The Fort of Seringapatam, tho Gift 
of God, tho 4th May 1799. On the reverse side is tho British 
Lion subduing the 1 iger, the emblem of the 1'ito Tippoo Sul- 


Ml HtSTffy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


343 


Government, witli tlie period when it was effected, and 
the following words in Arabic on the banner : ‘ Assad-oollah-ul 
Ghalib,’ 1 signifying the Lion of God is the Conqueror, or tho 
Conquering Lion of God. 

" Of those medals, gold ones have been struck for His 
Majosty, the Right Honorable Lord Melville, the Governors in 
India at the time, Marquis Cornwallis, the Nizam and his two 
Ministers, the Peshwa and his Minister, the Nabobs of 
Arcot and Oudo, and the Rajahs of Tanjore, Travancore, 
Mysore, Coorg, and Berar, Dowlut Row Scindiah, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, General Officers on tho Staff omployed on 
tho service, and the Oriental Museum. 