

The Quartermaster-General was authorized to receive 
from the Surveyor-General, on application, any maps and 
papers that might be required from time to time, such 
maps and papers to be returned at the earliest practi¬ 
cable period. 

Officers commanding troops in the field were, on 
application to Government, to be supplied with maps by 
the Surveyor-General. 

Progress Reports of surveys were to be submitted to 
Government quarterly, and returns of maps, plans, and 
instruments were to be made half-yearly. 

The appointment of Inspector of Revenue Surveys was 
discontinued, and the records and establishment of that 
office were made ovor to the Surveyor-General. 

A certain number of young officers attached to tho 
Military Institution, not exceeding twenty, to be selected 
by the Commander-in-Chief, were ordered to be placed 
under the immediate direction of tho Quartermaster- 
General for tho survey of routes, passes, fortresses, and 
the military objects of such provinces as might have 
been the least explored. 

The maps and reports of these officers, and of those 
charged with the survey of the marches of detachments, 
wore to he sent to the Quartermaster-General, by whom 
they were to be transmitted to the Survey Office after 
such parts of them as might seem to bo required had been 
copied. 











HISTORY OF THE MADE AS ARMY. 


339 



European Infantry, 1S10-11. 


CHAP. XXi. 


The formation of a Commissariat Department, tlie Commissariat 
functions of which w r ero to come into operation on tlie igjfo. 

1st Decomher 1810, was ordered by Government in 
October. The Commissary-General was charged with 
the entire control and management of the several depart¬ 
ments theretofore conducted by Garrison Storekeepers, 
and also with that of certain details formerly managed by 
the Quartermaster-General. 

On the 1st December all previous orders and regulations Regulations, 
relating to the branches of the service placed under the 
Commissariat were annulled, and a new Code was pub¬ 
lished to the army, consisting of the undermentioned 
sections, viz. :— 

Section I. Grain and Provision Department. 

,, II. Victualling European Troops on the march 
from station to station, or iu the field 
„ III. Supply of Military Stores. 

„ IV. Supplies for Cavalry. 

„ V. Barrack Department* 

,, VI. Supply of Remount Horses. 

„ VII. Regulations for the Dooley Corps and Bearers.. 


„ VIII. 

Do- 

Public Cattle. 

» IX. 

Do. 

Hired Cattle. 

„ X. 

Do. 

Military Bazars. 

„ XI. 

Do. 

The Grain Department iu the 



field. 

XII. 

Do. 

Provision do. do. 

Captain W, 

Morisou of 

the artillery was appointed Officers. 


Commie -ary-General, with the official rank of Major 
and a seal at the Military Board. Seven officers were 
appointed Assistants and four officers Sub-Assistanta 
Co minima ry - General. 


MIMS;*,, 



Reductions in 
thr General 
Staff. 


Tonarc of 
cert:«u ap- 
pointmentB. 


340 HISTORY OF THE 31 ARRAS AR3.1Y. 

The undermentioned reductions in the General Staff 
were ordered to have effect from the 1st November, vi^.:— 