

“ Silver gilt for the Members of Council at the three Presi¬ 
dencies, the Residents of Hyderabad and Poonah, the Field 
Officers, and the General Staff on tho service. 

“ Silver for the Captains and Subalterns on the service. 

“ Copper bronze for tbo Non-Commissioned, and puro 
gravin tin for the Privates.” 


Tho medals were not received at Madras until January 
1311, when ordors were issued for their distribution to 
survivors, whether effective or otherwise, and also to tho 
heirs of decoased persons who had been entitled. 

On the 5th April 1811 the undermentioned dot-ail from 
tho Madras European Regiment was warned to serve as 
pioneers with the expedition about to sail for Java, viz., 
1 subaltern, 3 serjeauts, 3 corporals, and 30 privates. 

During the same month it was ordered that the three 
companies of European invalids should be embodied as 
tho nucleus of a Veteran battalion, to be denominated tbo 
ts Carnatic European Veteran Battalion/ 5 to be paid and 
mustered as such from the 1st May. 

The battalion was to be divided into five companies, the 
strength of which was to be determined by circumstances. 


<§L 

CHAP. XXI. 


Distributed, 

1811 . 


Derail for 

foreifirn 

service. 


Veteran 

battalion* 


Establish¬ 

ment. 


1 Literally fr Lion of God, tbo Couquorur. 1 




miSTfiy 



Officers. 

Clothing. 

Stations, 

I no reuse to 
pensions. 


Boon to 
invalids. 


344 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



but-the number of non-commissioned, corporals, &c., was 
fixed at 5 serjeants, 5 corporals, 1 drummer, and 1 fifer. 
50 men, viz., 10 for each company, were to be selected 
from the invalids of artillery, and armed and clothed as 
gunners. 

The staff and artificers attached to the battalion were : 


1 Adjutant. 

1 Surgeon. 

1 Surgeon-Major. 

1 Quartermaster-Serjeant. 
1 Drum Major. 

1 Fife Major. 

5 Puckallies. 


2 Armourers. 

1 Carpenter. 

1 Smith. 

1 Hammerman. 
1 Bellows Boy. 
1 Chiekledar. 

1 Chucklcr. 


4 Lieutenant-Colonels, 4 Majors, 12 Captains, 12 
Lieutenants, and 1 Ensign, all of the invalid establish¬ 
ment, were posted to the battalion, and Lieutenant- 
Colonel F. Aiskill was appointed to command. 

The clothing was ordered to be rod, with grey facings 
and silver lace. 

The head-quarters were fixed at Masulipatam; two 
companies, each of 50 men, being detached, one to Vizaga- 
patam and the other to Ganjarn. 

In May of the same year the pensions of European 
non-commissioned, rank and file, were increased to the 
following rates from the 1st of the next ensuing mouth, 
viz. :— 


Pngs. Fnn. Cash. 

Toasorjeant . 4 11 33 

Rank and tile. 3 26 40 

It was resolved at the same time that on the transfer 
of any European or native soldier to the non-effective 
establishment, he should be allowed his effective pay and 
batta until he joined the corps or station to which ho Lad 
been appointed. 



miST/fy 



On the 10th September His Majesty’s regulations CHAP. XXI 
regardiug gratuities for the loss of limbs in action, and Gratuities for 
those granted to the widows or children of officers killed, }^ b 1 ° 8 i 3 n of 
or who might have died of their wounds within six action, &c. 
months, were extended to the officers of the Company s 
service. The following are the particulars : 