


Hifl Royal Highness the Duke of Vork, then Corn- 
mander-in-Chief, when transmitting copies of these 
resolutions to the Court of Directors, concluded his letter 
with the following sentence :— 

il It is with peculiar satisfaction that I avail myself of the 
opportunity to express, through the channel of the Court of 
Directors, the high scuso I entertain of tho universal good 
conduct displayed by the Company’s European and Native 
troops during the course of tho arduous services upon which 
tlioy have been employed.” 


Return of the Troops from the Moluccas, 1816. 

The following order was published to the army on the 
return of tho Madras troops from tho Moluccas in Novem¬ 
ber 1816 

(?.0. C.C., 30lh November 1816. 

“ The Commauder-in-Chief has great satisfaction in publish¬ 
ing to the army the following extract of a letter from tho 
Resident of Fort Victoria addressed to tho Government, of 
Fort St . George. 

“ Such testimonials of .he zealous aud valuable services of 
the officers of this establishment, and of the orderly nod good 


<§L 

CHAP. XXII. 


Letter from 
tho I)uko of 
York. 


mtsTfy 



CHAP. XXII. 


Services of 
the Madras 
troops in the 
Moluccas 
HiibBocmenfc 
to their 
capture, 
1811 - 16 . 


-iff “ W*? <SL 

HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

conduct of their detachments, reflect the highest honor on 
themselves, and are creditable to their respective corps.” 


tl Extract of a letter to the Government of Fort St. George 

from the Resident at Fort Victoria, Amboyna, dated 19th 

August 1816. 

u I have the honor to acquaint you that under the expect¬ 
ation of the speedy restoration of these islands to the Dutch, 

1 have judged it proper to take immediate measures for send¬ 
ing to Fort St. George as large a proportion of the troops 
belonging to that establishment which are now employed at 
the Moluccas, as can be conveniently removed. 

“ On the occasion of the final departure, for the Presidency 
to which they belong, of the officers and troops proceeding on 
the “ Laurel,” I consider it to be a duty incumbent on me to 
communicate to the Government of Fort St. George the 
sentiments of cordial esteem, and approbation which the 
invariable tenor of their conduct, and their eminent profes¬ 
sional services, and merits, have indelibly impressed on my 
mind. In the exigencies of, every public crisis, and on every 
occasion of difficulty and danger which lias occurred during 
my administration at the Moluccas, they have always been 
distinguished by their eminent alacrity,zeal, and promptitude; 
and by their uniform skill, activity and courage they have 
confirmed those claims to public approbation and gratitude, 
which they had previously established by their services in the 
capture of the island.” 

Lieutenant Kyd of the European regiment,and Lieuten¬ 
ant Nelson of the artillery, wore specially thanked for 
their sendees while in civil employ under the Resident 
for the period of five years; and the skilful execution 
of topographical military charts, and plans of the fortifi¬ 
cations at Banda, and Amboyna by Lieutenant Gale of 
the European regiment, was also duly acknowledged. 