



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Goomsoor, 

1815 . 


Gross 

misconduct 
of Oolonol 
Fletcher. 


KLiuu’dy, 

1818 - 17 . 


TAINfSr^ 



CH AP. X XII. of Padmanabha Deo, a landholder on the borders of the 
zomindary, who was discontented at his removal from the 
office of manager. He was apprehended by order of the 
Magistrate, and tried before the civil court, but escaped 
punishment for want of sufficient evidence. Doorgarauze, 
his less guilty instrument, was captured and oxecuted in 
April 1817. The troops were then withdrawn with the 
exception of detachments at Kimedy and Bageereddy- 
pooram, a large village on the Palcondah river°about 16 
miles south-west of Kimedy. 


Government 
interfare 
in the 
succession, 

1813. 


Kurnool, 1813-16. 


When the Nizam transferred Bellary and Cuddapah 
to the East India Company in 1800, the suzerainty of the 
principality of Kurnool/ which had been tributary to the 
Nizam, became vested in the Company. 

In October 1813 the Collector of Bellary was sent to 
Kurnool to enquire into the state of the intellect of 
Munawur Khan, the eldest son of the then Nawaub Alif 
Khan, to remonstrate against the unjust preference of 
the Nawaub’s sixth son Gholam Rasool, and to signify 
the wishes of the British Government with respect to the 
succession, viz., that it should devolve upon the eldest 
legitimate son. This mission having failed, a force, 2 of 
snch stren gth as to preclude any attempt at resistance. 


° n th ; ri0rt , h '' y th0 riverB Toomhuddra and Kistn;,, and on 
the east, vest,. nd sooth by the Coded Districts. The revenue at t! o 
end of loot century was estimated at 20 lakhs of rupee#, hat owin - to 

hnTfTTT tb 0 . C 0 i ,Wti0 “ equally diminished, and by 1S13 'tVey 
had fallen to about half that amount, 3 3 

First cavalry, R.M.’a 66th foot, l*tbattalion 2nd Inf ^ , 

2nd buttnlion 18tb, 2nd battalion 17th, Mmol of n l 

1 • ant-Colonel Alai-,in of the 

„„l 1 T'' f' 0l0 “ el Bar ‘' lny HM ■* 8«th. «•-• whole 

1 , 11 Taylor, eommeudi.ig iu tho Ceded Diotrictr 








miSTffy 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY, 
was sent from Bellary in December with tho 


-3(3 i 


view of 


releasing Munawur Klian from the confinement to which 
he was subjected, and of causing his formal recognition 
as heir. These objects having been satisfactorily accom¬ 
plished, the troops returned to cantonments. 

Alif Khan died about the end of September 1815, upon 
which Munawur Khan was immediately set aside by his 
next brother Mozuffer Klian, who took possession of the 
town and district. 


Government, on receiving intelligence of this occur¬ 
rence, directed the assembly of a field force 1 at Gooty, and 
on the 14th October they appointed Colonel Marriott to 
the.command, associating with him Mr. Chaplin of the 
civil service for the purpose of installing Munawur Khan 
in his rights and dignities. 

Tho troops marched in November, and on arriving at 
Kurnool, Mozuffer Khau was called upon to submit, but, 
being confident in the strength of tho fort, which was 
defended by a numerous garrison, he held out, and 
obliged us to lay regular sioge to the place. 