

Fire wa r opened from the batteries on the 14th De¬ 
cember, and Mozuffer Khan surrendered the next day. 
Munawar Khan was then duly installed, and agreed to 
permit tho British troops to occupy his fori until matters 
should have settled down. 


Colonel Marriott and the troops were thanked in gene¬ 
ral orders of the 1st January 1810, and on the 29th June 


1 Squadron HUtf.’a 22nd dragoon#, 4th regiment cavalry, H.M.’g 84th 
foot. M i Iras Eu < |>oun Ueghnont, one company Madras Kith corps, 1st 
battalion 3rd. 2nd battalion. 6Ul, lai battalion 12th, ono and a half 
company of artillery, three romp;.: dog lit tmttrtimn pioneers 

The Assistant Adjnti nt-fSouonil. mid V- istunt Quortenua; u r-Gonornl 
of the unity ( Join Ui f01*00. 

VOL. HI. 40 


<SL 


CHAP.^XII. 


Mozuffer 
Khan usurps 
tho Musnud, 
1815. 


Government 

again 

interfere. 


Surrender 
of Kurnool. 


Field foroo 
broken up, 
1816. 









MIMS?*,, 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 



CHAP. XXII. 


362 



the force was broken up, and the Colonel returned to his 
own command at Bangalore. 


Garrison 

•withdrawn, 

1817 . 


An ordinary garrison, composed of the European regi¬ 
ment, the 2nd of the 9th, the 2nd of the 14th, and 
detachments of artillery and pioneers, was placed in 
Kurnool, as a temporary measure, under the command of 
Lieutonant-Colonel Thompson of the European regiment. 
This Government command was abolished on the 7th 
April 1817, and the troops were then withdrawn. 


Peace with France. 

Intelligence of the conclusion of the Treaty of Paris 
on the 30th May 1811 having been received at Madras in 
January 1815, it was ordered that royal salutes, with 
three volleys of musketry, should bo fired at all the prin¬ 
cipal stations of the army in honor of the event, and 
that batta should be issued to the European and N ative 
troops, as on other occasions of extraordinary rejoicing. 


Thanks to the Troops. 

On the 7th February of the Rime year the following 
extract from a despatch from the Court of Directors, 
dated 3rd August 1814, was published to the army : — 

“ His Royal Highness the Commander-iu-Chief having 
transmitted to us the following Resolutions of the Honorable 
House of Commons, we feel great satisfaction in transcribing 
them for your information, and wo desiro that the same may 
be communicated in the most public manner to tho whole of 
the troops serving in your Presidency.” 


44 Mcrcurie, 6th Die Julie 1814. 

“ Resolved —Ncthijic contradicente : 

“ That the thanks of this House be given to the officers of 
the Army (including the troops employed in the service of 



HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 363 

tisfc India Company) for the meritorious and eminent 
services which they have rendered to their king and county 
during the course of the war. 


u Resolved —Neminc coiitrctdicoitc: 

« That this House doth highly approve and acknowledge 
the services of the non-commissioned officers and men em¬ 
ployed in the Army during the course of tlie war, and that 
the same be communicated to them by the commanders of 
the several corps, who are respectively desired to thank 
those under their conimatid for their exemplary and gallant 
behaviour.’ * 