

1 Afterwurdu Resident At Hyderabad. 



Ml HlSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 355 

Colonel Webber’s detachment was attacked when CHAP 
ascending the Cotiaddy Pass. Captain Hunter, Lieutenant — 
Inverarity, and 17 or 18 men of the 2nd battalion 3rd were 
wounded, the two former severely; but the rebels were 
dispersed, and the post at Manantoddy, which was held 
by two companies 2nd battalion 3rd under Captain Tagg, 
was relieved on the 9th April. The detachment under 
Major Welsh arrived next day ; parties were then sent 
out in several directions, and by the end of the month 
the principal rebels had been taken, and the disturbances 
suppressed. 

The detachment at Sultan’s battery, under a native 
officer, had expended most of its ammunition, and was in 
danger when relieved by Major Welsh on the 18th; but 
we suffered nothing except from the climate, a great 
number of officers and men having been prostrated by 
fever. 

Tho European companies marched for cantonment on tho 
23rd April, and the native troops followed early in May, 
after a chain of posts had been established at Panamurta- 
cottah, Porakaudy, Paukurn, Moodramoly and Sultan's 
battery, garrisoned by detachments of the 2nd of the 3rd 
and 1st of the 13th, each under the command of a Euro¬ 
pean officer, with the exception of the last, which was 
held by a nativo officer with 30 men. 

Mutiny at Quilon, 1812. 

On the night of the 24th May 1812, the existence of a 
conspiracy at Quilon, having for its object tho destruc¬ 
tion of the European officers and men of the subsidiary 
force in Travancore, was brought to the knowlcdgb of 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Cox 2nd battalion 14th regi 
ment, by Jemadar Iyaloo of the same battalion, to whom 
it had been revealed by a private of his company 




CHAP. XXII. 

Subsidiary 

force. 


Apprehen¬ 
sion of the 
conspirators. 




Execution 
of the ring¬ 
leaders. 



Result ot 
of Iter trials, 

1813. 


3o6 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

The subsidiary force, at this time under the command 
of Colonel Hamilton Hall, was composed of a company of 
European artillery, the 2nd battalion 9th, 2nd of the 11th, 
2nd of the 14th, and 2nd of the 18th regiments of native 
infantry. 

On the morning of the 25tli, Colonel Hall, and tho 
officers in command of battalions, mot at the Residency, 
and it was there arranged that a general parade of the 
troops should be ordered for that afternoon, and that the 
principal conspirators should then be seized ; wbilo tho 
Resident, Lieutenant-Colonel John Munro, took stops 
for the apprehension of such inhabitants of the town and 
vicinity, as were believed to bo implicated. 

These measures were successfully carried out. Jemadar 
Shaik Hoossain of tho 14th, together with 2 liavildars 
and 22 men of that battalion, were called out of tho 
ranks, and placed in confinement, the troops behaving 
with perfect steadiness. 

Womnuah Tumby ex-Dewan of Travaucore, an indi¬ 
vidual claiming to be the nephew and representative of 
the late Pychy Rajah, and several religious mendicants, 
were seized at the same time by the Resident's people as 
being the chief instigators. 