




CHAP.^XII. 


“3. The Governor-General in Council has, in the course of 
his correspondence with the Resident concerning the affairs of 
the Southern Jaghircdars, had frequent occasion to mark his 
approbation of the zeal, judgment, and ability of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Dowse in the exercise of his command, and His 
Excellency in Council has great satisfaction in conveying this 
sentiment, as well as his approbation of the conduct of the 
detachment generally, to the Government of the Presidency 
to which it belongs.” 

“ Fort William, 

“ 20th May 1814.” 


The efficiency of the Commissariat Department, which Enquiry 
had been organised in 1810, was first put to the test into tho 
with Colonel Dowsed field force, and was very favorably ^eVommia- 
reported upon by that officer; but complaints having Z^To^t 
been made by Major Sir Charles Burdett, H.M.'s 56th 
regiment, who attributed the sickness of his men to tho 
bad quality of the meat issued to them during the service, 
a Court of Inquiry, composed of Lieu tenant-General Pater 
of the cavalry, Lieutenant-Colonel Evorard H.M.'s 34th, 

Major Fraser Royal Scots, Major Munro Madras riflo 
corps, and Captain Rudy&rd horse artillery, was assem¬ 
bled iu November 1814 to investigate the subject and 
report thereon. Tho Court wore of opinion that the sick¬ 
ness and mortality in the 56th had not been owing to the 
bad quality of the animal food served out to thorn, but— 

VoL, 111 . 45 


umsr/iy 



CHAP. XXII. 


Intelligence 

Department. 


Insurrection 
in the 
Wvnaad, 
181 *. 


<SL 

354 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

To the immoderate use of spirits, and exposure to vicis¬ 
situde of climate ; 

To the large proportion of recruits recently joined ; 

To the men failing to report themselves when taken ill; 

To the very wet weather at the commencement of the 
service, and the loss of baggage and bedding in con¬ 
sequence of the failure of a private bullock contractor. 
The Commander-in-Chief and the Government con¬ 
curred in this opinion, and Captain Josiah Stewart, 1 11th 
native infantry, the senior Commissariat officer with the 
force, was thanked in general orders for the ability and 
attention with which he had conducted the duties of his 
department in the field. 

It appears from the correspondence of Colonel Dowse 
that several men of the 2nd battalion 2nd regiment were 
employed by him in the Intelligence Department during 
the continuance of the service, that they acquitted them¬ 
selves to his satisfaction, and were handsomely rewarded. 

Wynaad, 1812. 

A rebellion having broken out in the Wynaad in March 
1812, troops entered the country early in April from 
Canuanoro, and Seringapatam, for the relief of our de¬ 
tachments at Manantoddy and Sultan’s battery, which 
were threatened by the insurgents. 

The troops from Cannanore under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Webber 2nd battalion 3rd, consisted of a company of 
il.M.’s 30th regiment, the 2nd battalion 3rd, and a detach- 
meat 1st battalion 5th native infantry. Those from 
Seringapatam under Major Welsh 1st battalion 3rd, con¬ 
sisted of the light company H.M.’s 80th regiment, two 
companies 1st of the 3rd, and two companies 1st of the 
13th, formed into a light battalion. 