

“ Their wealth, their booty, and their families, were dis¬ 
persed over a wide region, in which they found protection 
amid the mountains, and in tho fastuosses belonging to them¬ 
selves, and to thoeo with whom they wero either openly or 
secretly connected ; but nowhore did they present any point 
of attack ; and the defeat of a party, the destruction of one of 
their cantonments, or tho tomporary occupation of some of 
their fastnesses, prodneed no effect beyond the ruin of an 
individual freebooter, whose place was instantly supplied by 
another, generally of more desperate fortune, and theroforo 
more eager for enterprise.” 

The Pindaries do not appear to have made any inroad 
into tho territory of the Company until 1812, when they 
entered the district of Mirzapore, and carried off their 
plunder through Rewah, in consequence of which a treaty 
was entered into with the Rajah of that province, who 
undertook to guard tlie passes, and to allow our troops 
to occupy such posts in his country as might bo suitable 
for the purposes of observation and defence. 

About tho 10th March 1816, a numerous body crossed 
tho Kistna, and entered the district of Guntour, which 
they plundered for seven successive days, after which they 


mtST/fy 



passed into Cuddapah, and making a detour, recrossed the CHAP. XXII. 
river on tlie 21st, just as a party of British troops came 
in sight. The detachment in the town of Guntoor was 
quite inadequate for its protection, consisting only of a 
few invalid sepoys, and peons, employed to guard the 
treasury and the jail. 

A Board of Commissioners appointed to inquire into Estimated 
the nature and extent of the losses and injuries sustained, losse3 ‘ 
reported that 269 houses had been burnt, 6,203 houses 
plundered, 183 persons killed, 505 wounded, 3,603 sub- 
jected to torture; and property to the value of £250,000 
carried off or destroyed. 

In December 1816 another body of Pindaries, esti- They plunder 
mated at about 5,000 men, entered Purlakimedy through * n ^ au i arD * 
the zemindary of Jeypoor, burnt the town, and destroyed 
a number of villages in the neighbourhood. The town 
of Ganjam was plundered about the same time, and the 
taluks of Itchapoor, Munsoorcottah, and others in that 
part of the district were laid waste. 

The celerity of the movements of the marauders, and 
the quickness with which they broke up into small 
parties, saved them from sustaining any considerable loss 
from the detachments of native infantry stationed at 
Kimedy, and at Berliampore, but the officers at those 
places acquitted themselves as well as the means at tlicir 
disposal would admit, and they received the thanks of 
Government for their exertions. 

The following is an account of the attack upon Kimedy Defeated at 
as reported by Major Oliver 1st battalion 6th regiment, 
v T, ho commanded the detachments 1 at that place, and in 
the neighbourhood :— 

1 Throe companies of tlie 6th at Kimedy, and one at an outpost under 
Lieutenant Jackson ; one company 2nd battalion 2nd under Lieutenant 
M. Ttvoedie. » 