

Private Hoossain Khan, who had given information to 
Captain Ives of the same battalion on the 24th May, but 
in rather an incoherent manner, was pensioned on the 
pay of a Havildar. 

Womanah Tumby, and the Pychy Rajah were tried by 
the Court of the Travancore Government. The former 
was sentenced to death, but this sentence was commuted 
to banishment, and he was removed to Nellore. The 
Pychy Rajah was banished to Ckinglepnt, but he was 
released from confinement in 1815. 

General Abereromby relieved Sir George Barlow as 
Governor on the 21st May 1813, and continued to hold 
the office of Commandor-in-Chief in addition, until the 
3rd December of the same year, when Lieutenant- 
General Sir Thomas Hislop Bart., arrived from England, 
and assumed command of the array. 

The Right Honorable Hugh Elliott arrived at Madras 
in June 1811, and assumed charge of the Government 
on the lOtii of that month. 



Northern Circars, 1813-17. 

Kimwly, Towards the end of 1813 disturbances were com¬ 

menced in Kimcdy at the instigation of the widow of the 
Zemindar Gujputty Deo; and the civil authorities being 
unable to quell them, five companies of the 1st battalion 
10th from Yizianagrum under Captain Eraser, and three 
companies 2nd battulion 21st from Borhainpore under 


HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 359 

Major Waliab, entered tlie Zemindary about the middle 
of March 1814. 

The 1st battalion 3rd regiment, and a detachment of 
pioneers wore sent up from Madras about the end of 
April, and Lieutenant-Colonel Fletcher was appointed to 
command, but tranquillity having been restored before 
the arrival of these reinforcements, the 3rd battalion was 
kept for a time at Teckely as a corps of observation, and 
Colonel Fletcher remained on the coast. 

The Zemindar of Goomsoor having been guilty of sever¬ 
al acts of cruelty and oppression about this period, and 
having resisted the authority of Government when called 
to account, Colonel Fletcher marched against him from 
Berhampore in April 1815, and took possession of the 
fort at Kolada on the 20th May without opposition. 

The Zemindar having fled towards the hills, ho was 
followed by Colonel Fletcher, and surprised near Gullery 
on the 27th, but he made his escape. Ultimately he gave 
himself up on the 24th June, and tho troops returned to 
cantonment. 

It was afterwards discovered that Colonel Fletcher had 
received 7,000 rupees from the Zemindar for the purpose 
of securing his good offices with the authorities, and of 
delaying the advance of the detachment. It was also 
ascertained that treasure, jewels, and other property to a 
very considerable amount had been taken at Gullery, 
20,000 rupees of which the Colonel retained for himself, 
and divided the remainder amongst, the detachment, 
making no report whatever of the transaction. Ho was 
tried for these acts of misconduct in November 1816, 
and sentenced to be cashiered, which sentence was con¬ 
firmed in July 1817. 

Troops were again sent into Kiniedy in October 1816, 
in consequence of disturbances created at the instigation 