



imSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


365 



‘ G % 



PlNDARIES, 1812-17. 


CHAP. XXII. 


The Pindarics, 1 originally obscure freebooters, grad¬ 
ually became auxiliaries to the several Maliratta powers 
to whom they attached themselves, and by whom they 
were granted unlimited license to plunder, besides being 
occasionally rewarded by grants of land. J heir head¬ 
quarters were in the province of Malwa, where they lived 
under the protection of Scindia, and of Holkar. Their 
numbers, periodically increased by success, and dimin¬ 
ished by misfortune, were continually fluctuating, but 
were generally estimated at about 25,000 horse, of whom 
some 6,000 were good, 4,000 fair, and the rest indifferent. 

The leaders appear to have been generally, if not 
always, Mahomedans, but the men were of every caste 
and religion, and natives of every province in Central 
India, the Deccan, and the Southern Maliratta country, 
united only by their common love of plunder, and a law¬ 
less life. The following extract from Sir John Malcolm's 
report on the province of Malwa describes their com¬ 
position and method of warfare : — 

When they set out on an expedition they placed them- Method of 
solves under the guidance of one or more chosen leaders, wartaro * 
called Lubbireaha, 3 who were selected on account of their 
knowledge of the country they meant to plunder ; they were 
neither encumbered by tents nor baggage; each horseman ear 
lied a few cakes of bread for his own subsistence, and some 
feeds of gram for his horse. The party, svhich usually con¬ 
sisted of two or three thousand good horse, with a proportion 
of nioanted followers, advanced (as secretly as they <?on Id, 
ond without plundering) at the rapid rato of forty or fifty 
miles a day, neither turning to the right nor loft till they 

1 Supposed to bo derived from I'iuria, an intoxicating drink to which 
they wero addirted.-MaWlm It.‘port on M.»lwa. v ' -80. 

a Selected for tlioir iul -iligenco and activity j tlicir iirving ont with 
Uio standard w the signal Cor murch. 







366 


history of the MADRAS army. 


<SL 


They enter 
Mirzapore, 
1812. 


They plunder 
Uuntoor and 
Cud<la[»uh, 
1810. 


XII. arrived at the country meant'to be attacked. They then 
divided, and made a sweep of all the cattle and property they 
could find ; committing at the same time the most horrid atroc¬ 
ities and destroying what they could not carry away. They 
trusted to the secrecy and suddenness of tho irruption for 
avoiding the troops who guarded the frontiers of the countries 
they invaded, and before a force could be brought against them, 
they were on their return. Their chief strength lay in their 
being intangible. If pursued they made marches of extra¬ 
ordinary length (sometimes upwards of sixty miles) by roads 
almost impracticable for regular troops. If overtaken, they 
dispersed and reassembled at an appointed rendezvous ; if 
followed to the country from which they issued, they scat¬ 
tered into small parties. 