

Jemadar Shaik IIoos3ain, and Private Salabut Khan of 
the 14th were tried in a summary manner by a board of 
officers, of which Major Fraser 2nd battalion 9th, was 
President. Both were convicted, and sentenced to be 
blown from a gnu, which sentence was carried into exe¬ 
cution on the ovening of the 28th May at a general 
parade of the whole forco. 

Two haviidavs, one naiguo, and twenty-six privates of 
the 14th, of whom 19 were Mahomedans, and 10 Hindoos, 
were tried by ordinary court-martial, and sentencod to 
death. Of these, two privates were pardoned, the rent 



MWisr^ 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY, 


357 


<SL 


wore either shot or hanged, the sentences being carried 
into execution at Quilon, Cannanore, Seringapatam, Tri- 
chinopoly, Yollore, and St. Thomas' Mount respectively. 

Six native officers, and one havildar of the 18th, two 
native officers of the 9th, and ono native officer of the 
14th, were also tried and sentenced to death, but- it was 
subsequently discovered that they had been falsely 
accused, and they were consequently pardoned and 
released, full belief in their innocence being expressed by 
the Commander-in-Chief in general orders. 

Nothing transpired to prove that the conspiracy ex¬ 
tended beyond the 2nd of the 14th. The 2nd of the 11th 
(22nd M.N.I.) was specially reported as having “ mani¬ 
fested distinguished attachment and discipline ” through¬ 
out. 

Hie result of the enquiries made by the Resident, 
which occupied some time, led him to the conclusion that 
Womanah Tumby, th e pseudo Pychy Rajah, and Jemadar 
Shaik Hoossain of the 14th, had been tho originators of 
the conspiracy. 

The design was to confer the sovereignty of Travancoro 
upon the Pychy Rajah. The Jemadar was promised the 
office of Pewan, but this, in all probabiliiy, was, really 
intended for Womanah Tumby. The pay of all sepoys 
as might join in the plot was to be raised to Rs. 10 per 
mensem. 


CHAP. XXII. 


Pardon of 

native 

officers. 


Good conduct • 
of 2nd batta¬ 
lion 11th. 


Originators 
of tho 
conspiracy 
and their 
object. 


The chief body of conspirators consisted of discharged 
sepoys, fakcers, and disaffected natives of the province. 

The European officers were to have been attacked while 
at dinner, and the barracks sot on fire at the same tone 
in order to distract attention, after which tho public 
treasury was to have been given up to plunder. 

On the 16th February 1813 Jemadar Iyaloo of the Rewards 
1 ttb was promoted to be Subadar, and presented with 






Niwisr/fj, 



OHAP. XXII. 


Baninhment 
ot Wouianuh 
Tmnby. 


Governors 
and Com¬ 
ma nderii-in- 
Chiof, 
1813 - 14 . 


358 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

a palankeen, and an allowance for bearers. He also 
received a gold medal, and a donation of 1,000 rupees. 
On liis decease, bis nearest heir was to be allowed a 
pension of 35 rupees per mensem. 

Vencatram, the sepoy who had informed the Jemadar 
of the plot, was pensioned on the pay of a Jemadar, and 
received a donation of 500 rupees. 