

In compliance with this order troops 2 were aasem- 


1 These lands were hereditary in a lew instances, but, as a rule, they 
wore only granted for tho lifetime of tho holder, and were reaumable 
at his death. However, they wore generally renewed in favor of tho 
Loirs. 

* H.M.'b 25th light dragoons, one squadron, and the gun troop ; 3rd 
regiment cavalry j H.M.’b 5t>th regiment) 1 it battalion 12th, 1st battalion 
13th, 1st battalion 22nd, and 1st battalion 24th N.i.; detachments of 
artillery and pioneers. The 2nd battalion 2nd N T joined tho forco 
in June 1813, and the 1st of the 12th - hen marched to Bangalore. A 
detachment of the Royal Scots, under Lieutenant-Colonel UcKeUur, 
\ in October of the -uma year 







Compliment¬ 
ary order, 
1814 . 


352 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

bled in the Ceded Districts about the end of August 
1812, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse, 
which crossed the river Toombuddra at Humpsagur, and 
arrivod at Gudduk in the Mahratta country on the 28th 
September. 

The force was actively employed until early in 1814, 
when it was withdrawn, the objects for which it had been 
called out having been successfully accomplished. 

Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse died at Goa on the 27th Juno 
1814, shortly after which the following general order 
was published to the army 

“ Q.O.G ., Fort St. George , 8 th July 1814. 

‘ The Honorable the Governor in Council had directed 
that the sentiments of approbation expressed by the Supreme 
Government in the following letter from the Secretary at Fort 
William should be communicated to Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse 
on bis recent return from field service, but the lamented 
death of that highly deserving officer having occurred before 
the communication could be made, the Governor in Council 
is desirous of manifesting his respect for the memory of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse by publishing them to tho army in 
general orders.” 

<c Sir,—The Resident at Poonah having reported to the 
Governor-General in Council that the services of the detach¬ 
ment under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse is no 
longer required in the Mahratta country, and that he had 
requested that officer to direct the troops to return to the 
stations al lotto ito them by the Government of Fort St. George, 
1 am directed to take this opportunity of convoying to you, fur 
the information of His Excellency tho Governor in Council of 
Fort St. George, ,he sentiments of the Governor-General in 
Council relative to the conduct of Lieutenant-Colonel Dowse, 
and tho officers aud troops under his command, daring the 
poriad of their employment in that quarter. 



mtSTfty 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 353 

Governor-General in Council has great satisfaction 
in transmitting to the Governor in Council of Fort St. Georgo 
the enclosed copy of a letter addressed to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dowse by the Resident at Poonah, and in adding the expres¬ 
sion of his own sense of their exemplary conduct, founded 
on the uniformly favorable report which has been made by 
the Resident under whoso immediate observation they were 
employed. 