

The inhabitants rose upon tlio plunderers during their 
retreat and captured a number, all of whom were exe¬ 
cuted by order of the Nizam’s Government. 



WHtST/fy, 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 375 


Cavalry, 1812—1816. 

In March 1812 the standard for the horses of native 
cavalry was raised to 14 hands 2 inches, but with per¬ 
mission to take horses one inch lower, provided they 
were of good blood, compact, strong, and active. As 
regards age it was laid down that no horse should be 
bought under 3^ years' old in time of peace, or under 4 
years in time of war, or above the age of 6, except when 
the exigencies of tho service might require it. This 
order continued in force until June 1816, when the 
standard was again reduced to 14 hands. 

On the 26th January 1813, tho native officers and men 
of the body guard, and of the 1st regiment of cavalry, 
who had returned to Madras after having been attached 
to tho Embassy in Persia, were thanked in general orders 
for their meritorious conduct while on that service. A 
gratuity equal to three months'pay andbatta was granted 
to each man of the two detachments, and a similar gra¬ 
tuity was paid to the families of men who had died during 
their absence from the Madras Presidency. Several of 
the native officers and mon received additional rewards, 
borne in the shape of promotion, others in that of 
enhanced pensions. 

Gold medals of the order of tho (i Lion and Sun ” 
having been subsequently conferred on Jemadars Syed 
Hoossain, aud Hoossainee Beg, by Abbas Mirza tho 
Prince Royal, the Court of Directors, as a special mark 
of favor, permitted these officers to wear ihora. 

During the early part of 1813, it was ordered that, 
fr,>m the 1st January 1 81 1, tho cavalry, which since 1 7‘d 1< 
had worn scarlet jackets witli white lacings, should bo 



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Height anil 
ago of horses, 
1512 . 


Rewards for 
service in 
Persia, 

1813 . 


Module* 


Uniform, 

1818 . 





CHAP. XXII. clot-lied in dark blue with silver lace, and tlie undermen¬ 
tioned facings were assigned to tlie several regiments 


1st regiment Pale yellow. 
2nd „ Orange. 

3rd „ Buff. 

4th „ Deep yellow. 


5th regiment Pale yellow. 
Gth „ Orange. 

7tli „ Buff. 

8th „ Deep yellow. 


Changed to Tho Court of Directors objected to the change on 
grey, 1818. accoU nt of the high price of blue cloth, owing to which 
the amount of the off-reckoning fund had been seriously 
diminished, for which reason it was ordered that grey 
cloth should be worn by the cavalry. This order was 
carried out in 1818, since which time there has not been 
any alteration in the color of the uniform. 


Veterinary During November 1813, the “ Madras Veterinary 
iuent^i8l3 Establishment ” was transf erred from the Presidency town 

to Arcot. The number of boys to be educated as farriers 
was increased to fifty-eight, with the view of supply¬ 
ing the horse artillery, and body guard, as well as tho 
cavalry. Each boy was to receive four pagodas per 
mensem, from which sum his messing, and necessaries 
were to bo provided. 