

which must have been applied by Colonel Boll, Captain CHAWXXII. 
Noble, and the oilier officers acting* under him. 

“ The observation of Lord Moira was, not very long ago, 
rpQciiieally called to all those details which constitute the 
fitness of a corps of artillery for service ; and ho is happy to 
say that the troops which he saw yesterday, hear an honorable 
comparison with the excellent pattern lie was, at the former 
period, accustomed to contemplate.” 

About the end of October the use of the gorget, as Abolition of 
part of the appointments of an officer of artillery, was Sorget 
ordered to bo discontinued. 




On the 7th December the Commissary of Stores, in Comm.uid of 
charge of the arsenal at Fort St. George, was relieved 
from the duty of superintending and inspecting the lUu:M 

ordnance on the works; the charge of the guns on the 
fortifications and in the batteries of the Fort and Black 
Town, and of the expense magazines belonging to them, 
together with the command of the detachment of artil¬ 
lery doing duty in Fort St. George, was ordered to bo 
vested in an officer of experience, to bo specially selected 
for that purpose from the corps of artillery, and whose 
authority was to bo entirely independent of the C< utnis- 
Hury of Stores. 


The horse and foot artillery Stationed at the Mount Tnsj,. i.,n 
v.uim inspected iv A reviewed by tlio Corainander-in-Ohief 1 ' 1 " 

* m.mdcMn 

iu July 1*1 J, and Major-General Bell, the Commandant, chief, ' 
w tlmnkod in general orders lor the high state of disci¬ 
pline and efficiency iu which tlio corps had been found. 

The Court of Directors, in their letter to Beugal of the rw , 

Ibtli February 1S1J, which was published at Madras on or * 

th liHtli Got t Lor, can veiled the ordor of 180b regarding h>».i . »u ,» 
tb>. employment of Clone!a 1 Officers of artillery and 
Oiigincoi'i on the Staff, and also that which prohibited 
I’'.in from exercising the comm and of their rcnpcoiivu 
i j, uflei' promo! ion 


• to l»o 
Upl“V«'U n,l 
tJ.o f lair. 








ill-.TORY or rrir. madras army. 



omp.xxTi. 


380 



“ Para. 333. We therefore direct that no General Officer of 
engineers or artillery he hereafter put upon the General Staff 
of tho army ; but that you select from among tho General 
Officers of engineers and artillery, and tho officers actually at 
the head of those corps at the time, whether General Officer** 
or not, such officers as ycu may think most fit to conduct iho 
duties of those corps respectively.” 


Command of In March 1815 the Commander-in-Chief, when in camp 
vrVci* iu g 11 with tho “ Army of Reserve/’ directed it to be considered 
uutory, 18 5. as a rn ] c 0 f the service, that whenever cavalry guns wore 
brigaded, or brought together to act in battery, the com¬ 
mand of them should be given to an officer of the corps of 
horse artillery, if any part of that corps should happen to 
bo serving with the army or detachment. 
l‘ay ’ - On the 17th April 181G the pay and allowances of 