




Ml HlSTfiy 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


373 



over by the regiment from 1 in tbe morning to 6 at night on CHAP. XXII. 
the 26th at 70 miles- 

“ Though I have only one casualty to report to you, yet I Beatli^of 
feel it a most painful duty, for in Captain Darke the service D ^ k ““ 
has lost a gallant and most excellent officer, and the regiment 
has been deprived of a brother officer, highly respected and 
esteemed. He fell, shortly after I ordered the pursuit to 
commence, by a thrust from a spear which proved almost 
instantly fatal. 

“ 1 enclose a return of tbe killed, wounded, and missing 
horses, which is very inconsiderable.” 

This affair having been communicated to the Madras Com^liment- 
G-ovcrnment by the Resident at Poonak, a general order ig* l7 ° 
was published at Fort St. George on the 27th January 
1817, in which Major Lushington was thanked for the 
judgment, activity, and professional ability which he had 
displayed ; and the officers, native officers, and men of the 
regiment were also thanked for their exemplary conduct. 

Early in November 1810 a body of Pindarics, computed The Pindarics 
at about 2,500 men, under the command of ono of tlicit ^ a Jj 1orc an j 
principal leaders named Buksoo, left Nimav. ar 1 in Malwa, 
crossed the Nerbudda, and advanced in a south-easterly 
diroction by Seoneo and Ramteak, leaving Nagpore on 
the right, and Chanda on the loft. It then passed 
Yedalabad, andBeder, and penetrated as far as the-Kistna, 
plundering as it went. On reaching the Kistna it turned 
up along the left bank for some distance, and then struck 
north towards the district of Nuldroog, which it entered 
early in January 1817. 

At this time Maior Robert McDowall 2nd battalion 

J _ T . , ,. by Major 

21th regiment, was moving about in the Nizams uis- McDowall. 

* Ou tlie Goc.ln.vory opposite to ScinditPs fort at Hiutlla. It wnn one 
of tlio bead-quarter camps of the Pindarics. The account oi the 
movements of Buksoo’s party is taken fiom a letter from the Resident 
at Hyderabad to the Madras Government. I9th January 181, 




chap.xxil 


374 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

tncts of Beder, Nandair, and Nnldroog, witli a small field 
force consisting of part of his own battalion, some com¬ 
panies of tlie 2nd battalion 15th regiment under Captain 
Williams, and a body of Mysore Silladar horse under 
Annajee Row. On the 14th January, when marching 
towards the town of Omergh in Nuldroog, he received 
information to the effect that the Pindarics were in the 
neighbourhood of the village of Moorli, distant about 8 
miles towards the south-west. Leaving his camp at 
Omergh under the protection of 80 men, the Major marched 
about 9 p.m. with 325 rank and file, and 1,000 Silladar 
horse, and about 3 a.m. on the 15th ho surprised tlio 
Pindaries in their encampment, and dispersed them with 
considerable loss. 

They continued their flight until evening, when they 
made a short halt, after which they resumed their retreat, 
taking the most direct line for the Oodavery. Their loss 
was estimated at about 500 men, killed, wounded, and 
taken prisoners ; 800 horses, of which half were very good , 
were captured, and about 200 were killed and wounded. 
Two of the chiefs, named Cawder, and Moomdee, besides 
several other leaders, were wounded, but they were 
earned off by their men by being tied on their horses. 
All their booty was loft behind, oxcopt what they had 
about their persons, and a large quantity of arms, princi¬ 
pally swords and spears, were abandoned. 