




mtSTfiy. 


\ 

368 HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP.XXII. “I have the honor to acquaint you, for the information of 
the officer commanding the division, that about 5 o’clock 
yesterday evening we were surprised by the Mahratta horse 
entering this town. Having only Lieutenant Tulloh with me, 
I sent him to take post at the other end of it, and from both 
our divisions parties were sent out to the different streets 
to endeavour to keep them out of the town. Wo had a con¬ 
tinued skirmishing for about two hours, and some men and 
horses were killed in the streets. 

“ A little after 6, Lieutenant Tweedie, who had retreated 
upon my detachment, arrived, having marched all night 
and that day, having been surrounded by them from 11 
o’clock in the morning. I found it impossible to save the 
town as they galloped through, and set fire t-o it in several 
places. At 11 o’clock p.m. Lieutenant Jackson, who had been 
stationed with his company about. 10 miles off, arrived, when 
considering myself strong enough to gi\e them an alert, I 
left Lieutenant Twcedio with two companies in a strong posi¬ 
tion, and having procured two peons from Mr. Spotliswoodo, 1 
who promised to show me the road to their camp about a 
mile off, I put myself under their guidance, and am happy to 
say we succeeded beyond my expectation. We were actually 
in the middle of their camp before they discovered us, and 
we gave them two volleys from the companies within ten 
yards, which did great execution, and caused such confusion 
among them that they fled in every direction. 

t: We traversed their camp, and killed, I should imagine, 
from twenty to thirty of them. They left the p&rt 

of their baggage on the ground, and this morning there were 
about a hundred horso running looso about the town, and we 
have killed and taken about seventy horse. Lieutenant 
Tweedie, when he heard the firing, detached Lieutenant 
Tulloh with a company to take post on the bank of a lank 
for which they appeared to be making. This win- such an 




1 Tbo Collector of the district 




miSTffy 



HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 


369 


unexpected measure that a party of them galloped up closo to 
Lieutenant Tulloh without discovering him, when he gave 
them a volley and killed some men and horses. They have 
been drawn up in front of ns this morning. I should suppose 
there aro about 5,000 of them, and they are now moviug off 
in the direction of Jcmboor and Sericottah. 1 I shall march 
this evening for Chicacolo as I conceive it probable they will 
move in that direction. We havo taken a standard and a 
trumpet.” 


“ KlMBDY, 

“ 20 th December 181G.” 


The Right Honorable the Governor in Council, when 
publishing this letter in general orders, requested the 
Commander-in-Chief to <c signify to Major Oliver, and to 
the officers and troops who served under his command, 
the high approbation of the Government for the exem¬ 
plary discipline and gallantry which they displayed in 
their attempt to defend the town of Kimody, and in their 
subsequent attack on the camp of the Pindaries.” Tho 
officers and men of tho detachment were thanked accord¬ 
ingly by tho Commander-in-Chief in an order dated at 
Fort St. George on tho 17th January 1817. 