

The troops in the north of tho district of Gaujam, con¬ 
sisting of tho head-quarter wing of the 2nd battalion 
2nd regiment at Bcrhampore, and of tho other wing at 
Aska, wore quite inadequate to protect <he country against 
a numerous body of predatory horse, but Lieutenant- 
Colonel Steele, who was in command at Berhampore, 
made the best dispositions in his power to prevent the 
Pindaries from entering the province of Cuttack, in which 
object ho was successful. 


1 Direct south oi Pttrlakimedv, a ml on the wav to tho town 
ooli». 


•>f Chic a • 

17 


<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 


Thanks totho 
dotachmont, 

1817 . 


Detn hmonts 
from Berliam- 
porc. 


VOL. III. 



Lieutenant 
Borthwick 
defcatu the 

Titularies. 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 

The first notice of the irruption was given by the 
burning of Itchapoor, a thriving town about 18 miles 
south of Berhampore, which took place about the 20th 
December, upon which Colonel Steele sent olf an express, 
desiring Major Monin to march from Aska to Ganjam, 
after having detached a party into the zomindary of 
Calicote 1 to close the road into Cuttack from that direc¬ 
tion. Lieutenant Byrn, with 50 men, was sent from 
Berhampore on the 25th to hold the narrow strip of land 
between the southern extremity of tho Chilka Lake, and 
the sea at Priaghee, while Lieutenant Borthwick, with 
another detachment, marched towards Hautghur with 
instructions to act according to his discretion. 

Lieutenant Borthwick left Berhamporo early on tho 
27th, and having received information while on the march 
that a body of about 1,000 horse were iu the neighbour¬ 
hood of Hautghur, he surprised them near tho village of 
Bagwanny 2 about 11 o'clock the same night when in camp, 
killed 20 men, and captured 50 horses, together with a 
number of spears, swords, and shields, and all their 
heavy baggage. 

Ho followed them up into Goorasoor the next day, and 
about 4 a.m. on the 20th he again surprised them when 
encamped in tho open paddy-fields near tho village o» 
Now gaum, 3 killed the leader and u number of his men, 
and took .19 horses, tho weakness of his party h iving 
prevented him from securing more. A considoniblo 
quantity of plunder wus taken by tho villagers. After 
this defeat the Pindarics retreated north in great haste, 
and loft tho district by Bodingy and Chokapad. 



1 On the went* rn shorn* of tho Chilka Lake. 

4 Between Aeku and Hautghur, or Autugudda. Probably the jduoo 
market " Boiniony " in t ho nmp. 

3 About four utiles boulli of Koluiu, and do&c to Kuuuollcoudu. 







HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 371 

Major Monin having missed the express from Berhain- 
jpore, did not reach Gan.jam until about noon on the 23rd, 
a few hours after it had been plundered, but he was in 
time to secure the passes iu Calicote. He then marched 
into Gooiusoor to support Lieutenant Borthwick, but the 
Pindarics had fled before his arrival. 

The exertions of Lieutenant Borthwick and his detach¬ 
ment wore handsomely acknowledged by the Governor 
in Council in the following general order, dated 27th 
January 1817 :— 