

“ The Right Honorable the Governor in Council having 
received the satisfactory intelligence of the complete expul¬ 
sion of the numorous body of predatory horse which lately 
penetrated the Company’s territory in the Ganjam District, 
deems it proper to express iu the most public manner his 
high sense, as well of tho zoal, judgment, and enterprise 
1 1 is played by Lieutenant Alexander Bortliwiek of the 2nd 
battalion 2nd regiment of native infantry throughout tho 
operations which have led to this decisive and important 
result; as of the exemplary perseverance, exertion, and 
gallantry of the native officers and men of the detachment 
under his command, whoso conduct equally in their unwearied 
pursuit of tho enemy, and in every attack on their camp, 
reflocts tho highest credit on tho discipline and efficiency ot 
tho corps to which they bolong, and has entitled them to his 
unqualified approbat ion. ’ ’ 

Two other successful attacks upon tho Pindarics wore 
made about tlio same time,ono by Major Lushington, 1 with 
tho 4th light cavalry, in the territories of tho Peislnva, 
the other by Major Robert McDowall commanding a 
brigade in the Hyderabad country. 

On tho night of tho 25ih December Major Lu-diiugton, 
then at Pcppulwarrie, having received information that 

' Afterword* General Sir Jaino Law Luebing'ton, <i.e.n 



<SL 


CHAP. XXII. 

Major Monin’a 
movements. 


Thanhs of 
Government. 


Other affair* 
with tho 
Pindarics, 
1810 - 17 . 


Their defeat 
by Major 
Lunhtugnm.. 


miSTfty 


372 HISTORY OP THE MADRAS ARMY. 

CHAP. XXII. the Pindaries had appeared at the village of Sogaum, 
distant about. 22 miles, marched for that place at 1 a.in. 
on the 26th. Before he had gone above a few miles both 
of his galloper guns broke down, and ho was obliged to 
leave them. On arriving at Sogaum about 7 a,ra., he 
found that the Pindaries, about 2,500 strong, had gone 
off tho day before in an easterly direction. Leaving the 
recruits, baggage, and followers at Sogaum under the 
protection of the gun troop and rear guard, he continued 
the pursuit as far as Kami 20 miles further on, at which 
place he arrived about noon, having with him 350 rank 
and filo. He there halted for nearly an hour to water 
the horses and refresh the men, after which he went on 
to Peepry, distant 7 miles, where he was told that tho 
whole body of Pindaries, after having plundered a number 
of villages, had halted at Gowak about 3 miles from 
Peopry, and were engaged in preparing their food. Major 
Lusliington then pushed on at a brisk pace, and came 
upon the plunderers without having been discovered. 
Tho rost of tho account shall be given iu his own words. 

Defeat of tho “The surprise was complete, the success proportionate, 
and though the Pindaries were not two minutes before they 
were on their horses, flying in various directions, yot ilio 
ground was so favorable to pursuit, and it was kept up by 
tho pursuing divisions for 10 miles with such ardor, that I 
cannot estimate their loss, from the sovoral reports I have 
received, at less than 700 or 800 killed and wounded, together 
with a great number rendorod incapable of pursuing their 
plundering excursion by tho los3 of thoir horse 3 . Balliah, 
tho person who was at the bead of the party, escaped with 
about 200 of the best mounted, and went off iu a southerly 
direction. I am of opinion that ho will scarcely bo able to 
reassemble, at tho utmost, moro than 400 or 500 of his late 
party, and which I learn was estimated at 3,000. Including 
f-ho pursuit and return to Cowah, I estimate tbe dietanco gone 