

On the 23rd June Lieutenant-General the Honorable 
John A bore ro in bjTj then Governor and Commandoi-in- 
Ciiiof, issued an order directing that a general puratb 
and public guard mounting should :ako place on the inland 
at. Madras every Sunday 1 morning at 6 o'clock, and that 
it should be attended in full drosR by every officer of tin. 
General Stuff at- the Presidency, and also by all other 
officers ihere, unless prevented by sickness or specially 
permitted to be absent. 

/Ml tho troops at tho Presidency woro reviewed on the 
iffih September by General, the Earl of Moira, iP r - 
vvvds Man pi is of Hastings, then on his way to (. nit uttn 
io take Jiia treat as Governor-General. Jli lAcdlciuy 

1 T' «<i : -i coatlmiMi.: . foroo until tho 22] .d N mb. . 1 -u |., 

1L w:«* can. ■« llod by U « Cummuml r in OR i. 







II'STORT OF TIIE MADI1AM AlCH7. 


383 



paid a high compliment to the appearance of the troops, CHAP. XXII. 
more especially to that of H.M.’s 89th toot, then forming 
part of the garrison of Fort St. George. 

No particular rule having been laid down n9 to the Pay and 

c . ftllowanoca 

amount claimable by officers during men* connnement o£<jfficora 
as prisoners of war, the following order of the Court of 
.Directors on that subject was published to the army on 
the 6th October 

“ When an officer shall be detained by the enemy as a 
prisoner of war in India, he shall, dnring his residence on 
shore in India, receive the pay and half batta of the rank he 
may hold at the time of his capture, or may obtain by promo- . 

tion during his captivity, but on all other occasions during 
liis captivity, whether on boardship in India, or ashore or on 
boardship in Europe, he shall receive the pay of his rank 
only.” 


On the 29th October an order, of which the following 
is a precis, was issued with regard to appointments oi. 
the staff— 

1. No officer to be eligible to hold any appointment 
conferring the official rank of Lieutenant-Colonel until 
after nine years* service. 

2. No officer to be eligible to hold any appointment 
conferring the rank of Major, or any subordinate app int- 
meat on the general staff of the army, until after seven 
years* service. 

3. No officer to hold any general or personal staff 
app« intiuenl, that of aide-de-camp excepted, until after 
too years’ service, three of which must have I on passed 
in regimen ltd duty. 

1. No officer to bold a i gimeiital stal v appointment 
until l.o ban performed three years’ regimental duty. 

, No officer to bo au aide-de-camp until be } •> •, ljomi 
p: -.c ut 'a ith hi* regiment for one year. 

The dress roguhoioiw of October 1810 woro modified 


Appointments 
on the **tall. 





Dm*. mi i. 







QHA^xxil. by an order of July 1814, from which the following are 
extracts:— 


W elliugton pantaloons and half boots aro to bo worn by 
aH officers of engineers, artillery, infantry and pioneers, 

Illack kid-skin 1 caps, of the same muster in every respect 
as in use with the Madras European Regiment, urc to bo 
worn by all officers of engineers, infantry, and pioneers, 