

He was to bo furnished annually, at the expense of 
Government, with one uniform jacket and one watering 
cap. A barrack was provided for the accommodation of 
the lads, with the same allowance of furniture ae that for 
European soldiers. 

Allowances On the 17th April 1816, the pay and allowances of 
1816. JU lUtb ’ Adjutants of native cavalry wore fixed at Rs. 147 per 
mensem, viz., staff pay Rs. 62, allowance for a clerk Rs. 
40, for stationery and candles Rs. 15, and Rs. 30 for u 
horse. 


Itacrmriiig 

dtpdt. 


A recruiting depot h r the general service of the 
alry wa, formed at Arcot in May under the command of 




t':i plain Outlaw 3rd cavalry. lilach rrgimont wan directed ( ua»\a>:ii 
to furnish a detail consisting of 2 subadurs, 2 jemadars, ^ /u;j* 

8 havildars, 8 naignos, and 1G privates, to do dutj at 
tlio depot. The staff was to consist of 1 riding-master 
and native adjutant, J drill liavildar, 2 pay hnvilcbmi, 

1 drill meg ip, 2 rough-riders tirst cla*s, 2 rough-riders 
ioco: d class, 1 staff serjeant, 2 trumpeters, uud the 
ordiin »/ proportion of artificers, 

200 recruits, 200 horses, 200 sots of horse appoint- 
uoul« 




<SL 

873 HISTORY or THE MADRAS ARMY 

Artillery, 1812— 181G. 

Tho detail of native liorso artillery which returned 
from Persia in September 1812 having been strongly 
recommended to the favorable consideration of Govern¬ 
ment by successive British Ministers in Persia, and by 
the Qommander-in-Ohief, a pension of 110 pagodas per 
mensem was granted to Subadar Sliaik Moideen Bahador, 
and it was resolved at the same time that a peusiou uf 
50 pagodas per mensem should, on his decease, be paid t»> 
bis nearest heir for the maintenance of the family. The 
subadar was also presented with a horso and a palattkin, 
and a grant of 16 cawnies of laud was made to him. 

The non-commissioned officers and privates fit for 
farther service were promoted to the ranks of jemadar, 
and havildar of cavalry respectively, ami such of tho 
privates a3 were unfit for duty were pensioned on the 
pay of naigues of cavalry. 

Subadar Shaik Moideen having subsequently been 
presented with a gold medal of the order of the “ Li il 
and Bun” by Abbas Mirza, tho Prince Royal, ho was 
permitted by the Court of Directors, as a special ■ ..irk 
of favor, to wear that decoration. 

General, the Karl of Moira, afterwards Marquis of 
Hastings, havP landed at Madras in September 18 b; 
on his way to Bengal as Governor-General, tool il* 
opportunity to review tho artillery at tho Mount, aft< i 
which he issued the following order:— 

1 72a«r' 7 Quarter*, Ob llrj Pini , IS th ^ptmnhn lhi:i 

‘ Tho Earl <if Moira desires to twprcjn how highly he wu* 
gnitiiiod by his inspection oi the Hnnorr.olo Compiiny’i 
c of artillery nt. tho Mou. I yc.tordey. Thp condition 
i tin* onrp.-*, the sii idinof.s of the 'a on, and tho pm: i<»n uf 
• ' luuiiuouvrc. p/.'o doci ivoly in pruittc *.l tlio ttoiu a. 


MiAiisr^ 


HISTORY OF THE MADRAS ARMY. 37P 