

1813, from which the following is an extract, that the 

budges were not issued until the month of May iu that 

year. 

“ It was oar intention to have published a general order on 
the occasion of distributing these badges, but as honorary 
4 ‘‘dors had alrcndy been presented to the corps engaged in 
f hat battio by the late Commandor-in-Chief, and as the Euro¬ 
pean officers had been permitted to wear badges of distinction 
under tho same authority, wo deemed it sufficient to request 
the present Cominiiuder-in-Chief to give the necessary direc¬ 
tions for the distribution/’ 


On tho llth March 1814, tho “Volunteer Battalion ” Mmlm* 

W.is formed iu to n rifle corps of the undermentioned Con"/ 181 


strength, viz. :— 

1 Field Officer. 

K Captains 
U* Subaltern . 

I Adjutant. 

I Qunrtcrumsti'r. 

I Surgeon, 
a Sulj&durs. 

' *hnittdius. 

1 Native Adjutant. 

I Horji nil M» jn, 


1 Quartet master Serjcnul 
1 Ilavildaifi. 

1 JBqglor Major 
Id Buglers. 

48 Naigucs. 

-0 Privates. 

40 Recruit Boys 
30 Feusion Boys. 

H PuckaHr . 

2 Native Dressers 




TJlWfST^ 


HISTORY \JV rUK MADRAS ' CMY. 




' hat. xxii. The ordinary establishment of artificers was allowed, 
also i Drill Haviidar, 1 Drill Naigue, 8 Pay Havildars, 
and 1 Vakeel. 


the commissioned officers, European and Native, were 
to continue to be borne on tlio strength of fclieir respec¬ 
tive battalions. 

The corps was to consist of eight companies, and as 
it was to be a select body of men, all non-commissioned 
officers, rank and file, not considered equal to the duties 
of light infantry, were drafted into the line. The batta¬ 
lion wa-i allowed the same privilege with regard to the 
carriage oi knapsacks as had been granted to the regi¬ 
ments of light infantry. 

In January 1815 it wu , ordered that the “ Rifle Covps” 
should be entitled to take the " right 3i of all other regi¬ 
ments ol Native infantry, and that it should be exempted 
from fatigue, and other ordinary general duties in canton¬ 
ment in the same manner as fho light infantry batta¬ 
lions. 

a i 1 1 r h ° f ^ 10 battalion 3rd regiment was inspected and 

. revie wed by the Comraander-in-Chhf at Wallajnbad in 

March 1814, for the first time since it had been rnado a 
light infantry corps, and it was found to have at tained 
bo high a degree of efficiency that tlio officers were com¬ 
plimented in general orders. 

On the 20*11 April 1811 the establishment of ubntta- 
lion of Native infantry was reduced from 73d to 750 
pn vates. 

: v 11,0 The'* Rifle Corps” was inspected at Poonamaflcc m 

b ' i ) < . 1 1 | ^.4 _ 

Jul> by the Commander m-CWt. His Excellency c.\- 
pr- his satisfaction in general orders with the soldicr- 
liko appearance «.f the men, the p . r. r t at ate of tlu-ir 

• 1, l' , 'p»" I||,| i nud i li it, ulinr- i liiivl pr<M-i*i«m of Uk 
ai field cxoi 'i 






• WtST^ 


HISTORY OF Tin: MADRAS ARMY. 807 

On the 22nd July regulations wore published regarding OHAP ::xn. 
the issue of family certificates, and the manner in which Ffln 
payments were to bo made. The department was, at the payment;', 
same time, placed under the management and control 
of an offioer dosignatod the i( Superintendent of Family 
Payments.” Subsidiary rules for the guidance of the 
department were issued iu February 1815. 