

That in point of facL they could only be considered as 
pensioners drawing the full pay of oifiwtivc snldiern, 
be lidos burdening the State with the co.'t v>f i heir arn s, 

. •‘•outn nionis and clothing. 

On these grounds the Lieutenant-General proposed to 
fOrm tie* oompnnie • into battalions and this being agreed 
to, it .as resolved, on the loth October, that from the 
I *31 -Im unary 18M the whole of the Native n velid onlh 
* .tablihhn.cat fc’ioiild bo form* d ini< font veteran l.iUu- 
lioitrj, t;» V)(< dmu minuted 

VO! til. vMt • ■ 





301 


CHAP. XXII. 


CfMonmud- 

ftnts. 


Adjutant. 


KHtnbiish- 

mcnt 


Pay nnd 

Mien- 


Uniform. 


OlU. , r * i 


l. o 


<SL 


HISTORY or Tin: MADRAS army. 


The 1st oi* “Madras Native Veteran Battalion.” 

The 2ml or “ Arnce Native Veteran Battalion.” 

The 3rd or “ Caujarn Native Veteran Battalion.’’ 

The 4th or “ Dindigul Native Veteran Battalion.’ 

Each battalion waj to be commanded bv a European 
commissioned officer of the invalid establishment, to be 
selected and appointed by the Commander-in-Chief. 

An Adjutant, to be selected from the list of Conductors, 
or of deserving Serjeants, was allowed to each battalion. 

Each battalion was to consist of ten companies of such 
strength as might be found necessary from time to time, 
and the following tixed establishment was allowed :— 


1 Serjeant Major. 

1 Quartermaster Serjeant. 
1 Native Adjutant. 

1 Havildar Major. 

1 Vakeel. 

1 Drum Major. 


1 Fife Major. 
Sepoy Recruits. 

40 Pension Boys. 

10 Puokallioa. 

2 Native Dressers. 
2 Toties. 


Tho same proportion of artificers a, allowed to a batta¬ 
lion of ofi’ectivo Native infantry. 

It was ruled at the same time that, all officers transfer¬ 
red to the Veteran establishment, from whatever branch 
of the service, should draw tho pay and allowances ..I 
officers of infantry. 

Leu uniform oi tho Native \ etenvn baUalkm was 
m ierod to he tho same as that of tho " Carnatic European 
Ytternu Battalion,’ viz., red, with grey facings and 
silver laco. 

On the 30th November the number of IDnropoan com¬ 
mit loued officers to be attached to a batt alion of pioneers, 
w:o (ix.o'1 at two Captains, six Subalterns, undone .Wist- 
ant Siu'goon. 

Ahh 'Ugh the Govorum -Ocneral in Council had, 
tlm 30th October dimled that honorary 






imSTffy 



RTS TO l.‘Y OT T H K MADRAS ARMY. 



with an appropriate device, should be presented to every CHAP.XXjj. 

regiment or battalion engaged at the battle of A ssn ye, 

no slops were taken to carry out the order at Madras 

until October 1811, when the Comniauder-in-Chief moved 

the Government to adopt the device of the “Elephant/” 

as borne by His Majesty's regiments which had been 

present on that occasion. Government approved of the 

recommendation, and ordered the preparation of the 

requisite number of badges, silver for the Native officers, 

and copper for the other ranks. It appears, however, from 

a letter to the Court of Directors dated <‘31 st December 