exclusively with the military.2 They argue instead that military logistics are often

based on the ability of a nation, including its manufacturing base and infrastructure, to

support its armed forces. There is thus a close relationship between the state and

military logistics, as demonstrated by the relationship between the British army and

the state during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.

         The implications of the close relationship between state and army in the period

 could be significant. The force was contained by the state, which imposed political

and economic boundaries on the army that restricted its influence and size. This was

 achieved through the intermeshing of the military structure with that of civilian

 government, the army being unable to act without the support of the latter. This

 intermeshing occurred not only at the higher levels, with half of the army controlled

by a civilian (the Master of the Ordnance), but also in the field, where commissaries

working alongside the army were employed by the Treasury. The consequences of the

intermeshing of military and civil were to have an impact at a variety of levels, the

extent of which has yet to be fully considered by historians.

         The relationship between the state and army had considerable implications for

both defence policy and the nature of the military power that stemmed from it. Jeremy

Black states that the keystones of British military power in the period were four

fundamental capabilities: suppression of revolt, a small but effective army, naval

dominance and an ability to wage transoceanic warfare.3 This study, however, takes

the view that British military power was instead based on three pillars: the navy,

subsidy of foreign allies and the army. That this policy existed has often been used by

historians as evidence of Britain's industrial strength. This study demonstrates that this



2 D. Schechter and G. Sander, Delivering the Goods: The Art ofManaging Your Supply Chain (New
Jersey, John Wiley & Sons, 2002), p.21.
3 J. Black, The British Sea Borne Empire, (London, YUP, 2004), p. 170.
