 and in many cases, particularly welfare, the army lagged behind the Royal Navy.8 Yet

this does not detract from the fact that many of the policies adopted by or in regard to

 the army would not be implemented outside of the British military for several

 decades, by which time many would become important social issues.

         The factor that made the army distinct from the navy was its relationship to the

 state as it was often the third pillar of national defence, after the Royal Navy and

 subsidy of foreign allies. Because of this for much of the period the army would

 remain under funded and thus under resourced. How the army contended with this

 situation, which for the most part originated in the system of safeguards intended to

 limit the power of the army in the seventeenth century, is also reflected in a study of

the organisations tasked with maintaining the force.

         The organizations tasked with maintaining the British army in the period are

 frequently been overlooked by historians, who are often critical of the systems used to

maintain the army. Yet these organizations faced many difficulties that hindered their

activities. Some difficulties were the result of problems created by the practices of

these organizations, some were attributable to the limits of contemporary knowledge,

while factors as diverse as sleepy muleteers or heavy snowfalls could also have a

significant impact. One of the most fundamental difficulties, however, was the

relationship between the state and army in the period, and-it is the nature and origins

of this relationship that is the focus of the chapter 1.




8 The personnel of the Royal Navy enjoyed benefits such as more efficient medical provision, a
subsidised postal service and a system of pension some years ahead of that in the army. C. Emsley,
British Society and the French Wars 1793 -1815 (London, Macmillan, 1979), p.55; M. Duffy, 'The
Foundations of British Naval Power', in M. Duffy (ed), The Military Revolution and State, 1500 to
1800 (Exeter University, 1980), pp.49-84.
