it but not how it was regulated. The situation regarding accommodation is particularly

interesting as historians have tended to focus on the political significance of barracks,

rather than their importance for soldiers. As chapter 3 will demonstrate, there is much

to be learned by examining these organizations in a wider context. In particular it will

challenge common perceptions of Britain's industrial strength through illustrating

fundamental shortcomings in production.

        Traditionally, studies concerned with the maintenance of the army have

focused on the consequences of production, that is to say physical items such as guns.

The view taken in this study, however, is that not everything required by an army can

be carried on a wagon. To be maintained an armed force requires a diverse range of

services. Thus chapter 5 is concerned with the second group of organizations,

specifically the Medical and Chaplain General's Departments, as well as various

policies adopted by the army. The final group of organizations to be considered are

those that were tasked with county governance and defence. This group forms the

basis of chapter 6, a chapter that demonstrates the involvement of civilian bodies in

the maintenance of the army. This is arguably the most important chapter in the entire

work. Through utilising rarely used sources chapter 6 highlights the willingness of the

state to drastically alter its relationship with the army to aid national defence.

        The objective of the above chapters is not to provide a complete overview of

how the army was maintained in the period, but rather to examine key features in the

context of the relationship between state and army and the consequences of this. One

aspect that could warrant consideration in a study of this nature is soldiers' pay. While

an important consideration, however, it is apparent that it was something that soldiers

could and, importantly, did do with out for many months and this study instead
