                                                Introduction



         The maintenance of armed forces is an under researched subject. This can

create a significant gap in our understanding of history as it is a subject concerned

with a variety of issues, not merely the effectiveness of armed forces. The existence of

a gap in our knowledge is demonstrated by the maintenance of the British army at the

end of the eighteenth century. It is incorrect to believe that the subject of how the

army was maintained in the period is concerned solely with wagon counting. It was

entwined with economics, politics, stability and military power, and remains an under

considered area. This has arisen due to a polarisation in the canon of literature relating

to Britain's military in the period. Historians including Clive Emsley, Jeremy Black

and Lawrence Stone have written extensively on how the British state sought to

support the army. Other historians, including Paddy Griffiths, lan Fletcher and Philip

Haythornthwaite, have described the army in the field. The gap in our knowledge of

the period exists because there is little consideration of how the resources provided by

the state were translated into a form that could be utilised by the army in the field. It is

through this process that an army is maintained, and it is also through this process that

the consequences of the relationship between an army and state become apparent.

         In his influential study of the subject, Martin van Creveld has described

military logistics as being 'the practical art of moving armies and keeping them

supplied'. 1 He notes that this was a key element of strategy that relates not only to

requirements such as food but also organisation, administration and transportation. An

important refinement of this argument has been made by Damon Schechter and

Gordon Sander, who highlight that military logistics has since the Age of

Enlightenment ceased to be 'just a uniformed matter', that is to say one concerned

1 M. van Creveld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton (CUP, 2004), p.l.
