considered will be Commissariat (chapter 2). This department is one of the few

involved in maintaining the army that receives any attention of note from historians,

who are often critical of the organization. The Commissariat had various roles,

including storekeeper, supplying food and book keeping. It was a civil-military hybrid

and a study of this organization is effectively a study of the relationship between army

and state in the field, while its bureaucratic practices ensure it is also a case study of

military administration hi the period. As this study will demonstrate it was neither the

complete failure that it is often portrayed, nor wholly responsible for many of the

failings in the logistics system. The only other organization to be allocated its own

chapter is Royal Wagon Train (chapter 4). Thisorganization is almost entirely ignored

by historians but warrants a much a higher profile than it is commonly given. Through

an extensive consideration of the Royal Wagon Train's structure and evolution, this

study demonstrates how the army was able to display some structural autonomy and

had an ability to adapt to new challenges, despite the constraints placed on it by the

state.

         Organizations that fulfilled less important roles are grouped on a thematic

basis. The first group to be considered form the basis of chapter 3, and are

organizations tasked with procurement for the army. This group includes the Barrack

Master General and Quarter Master General, the role of which was providing

accommodation; the Clothing Board, that co-ordinated uniform provision; and the

Ordnance Board, that supplied munitions. The attitude of historians towards these

organizations and the items that they supplied has often been apathetic. Furthermore,

when these issues have been considered it has tended to be from a limited perspective.

Often little consideration has been given to how these items were supplied. Much has

be written, for example, about the appearance of uniform and regulations concerning
