           Since the publication of Sinews of Power, historians such as Lawrence Stone

 have discussed and expanded Brewer's arguments and theories. 12 In both Sinews and

 subsequent works historians have tended to shy away from defining the boundaries of

 the fiscal-military state and the implications such boundaries may have had. Brewer

 touched on the subject in his consideration of British sensibilities regarding enforced

 service in the military, but the boundaries still remain an under-considered area. 13 A

 concept central to Brewer's model of the fiscal-military state is that the nation

 underwent significant political, economic and social modifications to accommodate

 the needs of its armed forces. Taken to a logical conclusion this dictates that the

 armed forces would be able to expand perpetually to meet operational requirements

 but this was not to occur. During the eighteenth century the demands of Britain's

 growing military power had been met through the expansion of central government's

 ability to raise finances (and the willingness of British subjects to fund this through

 paying their taxes). By the end of the century it was apparent that this expansion could

 not continue indefinitely and the ability of the state to raise revenue was stretched to

the limit by the Napoloenic Wars. This arose because there are limits to the

 concessions a state is able or willing to make to meet the needs of its armed forces.

Once these limits are reached, the needs of the armed forces can no longer shape the

state. In such a situation the armed forces are contained by the boundaries imposed by

the state. Thus the military is tailored to the needs of the state, not the state modified

to meet the needs of the military. 14

          Historians generally agree that the power of the state was confined within

certain boundaries but have failed to address a fundamental issue: the state could have

ridden roughshod over the sensibilities of British citizens. Asking why the state did
12 See L. Stone (ed), An Imperial State At War: Britain From 1689 - 1815 (London, Routledge, 1994).
13 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 63.
14 This was the situation in a civilian state. In a military state, such as Prussia, the state was more likely
to adapt to meet the needs of the military. Corvisier, Armies and Societies, p.61.
