their peace time deployments).'9 It is apparent, therefore, that for civilians contact with

 soldiers could be disruptive, unpleasant and dangerous. Appreciating that citizens

 were sometimes opposed to the army at a local level, whether it was due to disruption

 to markets, drunken brawls or its role as a police force, but not opposed to the army as

 an institution per se is vital for understanding the relationship of the army with the

 state and the continued existence of the dual relationship with crown and parliament.

 The attitude of the population in general is perhaps best described as 'not in my back

 yard': the army was necessary but citizens preferred it not to disrupt their lives. 60 The

 fear essentially was of disruption (be it social, political or economic), not of the force

 being used as an instrument of tyranny. Even when fears of mutiny and revolution

were at their height following the French Revolution and Irish Rebellion of 1798 fears

related not to the army itself but the actions of individual soldiers. By the time of the

unrest in the post-war period the army was seen as reliable and called on by the

government to suppress disorder in the capital. 61 Thus, in regard to the situation at the

time of the outbreak of the Revolutionary Wars, it is an oversimplification to state that

the dual relationship the army had with crown and parliament existed as a means to

control the force. Such a concept no doubt provided comfort to liberty minded liberals

but more importantly the dual relationship had shaped and become embedded in the

British state. It was the dual relationship that provided the driving force for the

administrative and financial reforms of the eighteenth century, creating the need for

parliament to expand and even create its own financial apparatus so that it, rather than

the monarch, could support the armed forces. 62 Safeguards that restricted and


5" Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.51.
60 Hoppit, A Land ofLiberty?, p. 157.
61 Mr. Wood, Mayor of London, to Major Elington of the Tower Garrison, Mansion House, December
 1816 (undated), PRO WO 94/15, Tower of London Constables Office: Letters and Orders 1816-3 L f.4;
M.I. Thomis and P. Holt, Threats ofRevolution in Britain 1789 - 1848 (Archon Books, 1977), pp.39-
75.
62 Carter, 'The Revolution and the Constitution', p.48.


                                               20
