warships of a similar size outgunned British frigates.48

          The impact of the policy favouring the navy over the army was not entirely

 detrimental to the force. Sea power was utilised to significant effect to maintain the

 army, being used to move supplies and protect lines of communication. Traditionally

 historians considering the latter, such as Christopher Hall and Piers Mackesy, have

 focused on sea borne lines of communication but the importance of sea power to the

 protection of those on land should not be overlooked. Piers Mackesy notes that

 Britain's naval power enabled her to harass the enemy's coasts but this argument

 should be extended to include the fact that Britain's own coastal flanks were secure,

 preventing similar raids on British supply lines.49 Disadvantages of the policy placing

 the navy first not only included inevitable budget deficiencies for the land based force

 but also influenced its deployment. The Royal Navy could only project its power with

 secure bases and in consequence large garrisons were deployed for the defence of

locations that included Sicily, Minorca, Greece and Alexandria. 30

          Whatever its impact on the army, the policy favouring the Royal Navy

continued, allowing it to continue to defend the home nation, expand the Empire and

safeguard commerce. This preference for the navy existed not just in government but

also society in general, despite the fact that the navy could be as disruptive as the

army. The presence of large dockyards and fleets, for example, inflated food prices in

the locality and in 1795 this led to riots in certain regions/ 1 The unfavourable attitude

of the population exasperated soldiers such as Ensign John Aitchinson, serving in the

3ld Regiment of Guards, who complained that until late in the Napoleonic Wars, when

success in the Peninsular War finally elevated the prestige of the army, 'the navy had

been the darling of the people, the likes of Nelson and Hood having looked down on
4S P. J. Haythornthwaite, Napoleon 's Military Machine (Staplehurst, Spellmont, 1988), pp.186-187.
49 P. Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean, 1803 to 1810 (London, Longmans, 1957). p.7.
50 Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean, 1803 to 1810, p. 16.
51 Black, Sea Borne Empire, p. 162.


                                                 17
