 began shortly after the party left Ireland, when fights broke out between Irish Roman

 Catholics and Protestants in the group. Harris noted how the recruits, drawn mainly

 from rural backgrounds, were too overawed by the cities of Bristol (the port at which

 they disembarked) and Bath to cause more trouble. This situation continued until the

 group reached Salisbury Plain, at which point a sectarian fight broke out and violence

 continued when the group reached the town of Andover. At this point the local

 Volunteers were called out to restore order with loaded muskets and calm was

 restored/6

         A more serious outbreak of disorder occurred amongst troops billeted in Cork

 during September 1795. Troops of the 105th and 113 th Regiments of Foot, en route to

the West Indies, mutinied, marching through the city with bayonets fixed and

releasing prisoners from the jail.^7 Needless to say the scenes caused considerable

 concern amongst the inhabitants of the city, although control was restored relatively

bloodlessly following the imposition of a curfew and arrival of troops from the 7th

Dragoon Guards. 58 In this case the disorder had gone beyond drunken or rowdy troops

and was a mutiny but, while one of the more extreme examples of what could happen

in a garrison town or city, it was a realistic threat and ample reason for civilians to

oppose the presence of soldiers in a locality, even if they were not opposed to the

army as an institution of the state.

         Mutinies and drunken brawls were not the only reasons for hostility between

citizens and soldiers. Indeed, while instances such as those noted above could

potentially create conflict between soldiers and civilians, it was often the use of the

army to restore control that caused hostility (a role that determined the locations of
56 E. Hathaway (ed), A Dorset Rifleman: Tfie Recollections ofBenjamin Harris (Swanage,
Shinglepicker, 1995), pp.20-21.
57 Deployment to the West Indies also initiated a mutiny amongst sailors in 1801. Black, Sea Borne
Empire, p. 161.
58 John Travers to Lord Lismore, Cork, 4* September 1795, NAM 6807/370/44; Notices Announcing a
Curfew in Cork, 4th September 1795, NAM 6807/370/43.


                                               19
