         To state that there was a fear of a powerful army in Britain is an

 oversimplification of an important issue that went deeper than questions relating to

the armed forces alone. Certainly the dictatorship of Cromwell's generals in the 1650s

 had created a fear and distrust of the army, a fear so deep rooted that it shocked many

 soldiers into eventually supporting the restoration of the Stuart dynasty in 1660. 23 The

hatred of soldiers and the army in which they served was, however, only part of the

equation, just as military rule was only a part of the widespread and longer-lasting

upheaval in seventeenth-century Britain. Significantly, it was not the existence of a

powerful standing army that had triggered the events that led to the eventual collapse

of the Commonwealth, but rather the role of the army in politics. Thus, in 1660 efforts

were made to depoliticise the army and in 1661 a new type of standing army was

created, described by John Childs as being 'a non-political body, concerned solely

with the execution of the civil authority's wishes regarding national defence and

preservation of internal law and order'.24 This enabled the army to undo some of the

damage done to its reputation by its actions in the aftermath of the civil war but its

standing was further damaged by events in the reigns of Charles n and James JJ,

events that created a fear of the army being used as a tool, rather than an instigator, of

tyranny. Such fears had appeared to gain most credibility in the reign of James JJ,

when the perceived threat was not only of an army used as an instrument of power but

also as a Catholic and even foreign one (troops being introduced from Ireland was a

persistent fear of James' opponents). 25

         To counter the threat posed by the army, two policies were adopted that were

to become keystones of British military policy during the eighteenth century. The first

was the maintenance of only a small standing army, which during the reign of Charles

23 R. Hainsworth, The Swordsmen in Power (Stroui Sutton, 1997), pp.250-269.
24 J. Childs, The Army of Charles II (London, Routledge, 1976), p.l.
-5 P. Seward, The Restoration, 1660-1688 (London, Macmillan, 1991), pp. 127-130.


                                               12
