 differing preferences expressed in Cabinet concerning who should lead the British

 army dispatched to Portugal in 1808 caused the confused situation that resulted in the

 Convention of Cintra and subsequent recall of the officers concerned (Sir Arthur

 Wellesley, Sir Hew Darlymple and Sir Harry Burrard). 7' Of particular importance to

 the army were the following government departments and their heads: the Foreign

 Office, the policies of which could dictate where and when the army was deployed;

 the Home Office, which had jurisdiction over militia, fencible and volunteer forces;

 and the Treasury. The latter was possibly one of the largest and most important

 government departments and, amongst other roles, was responsible for the

 Commissariat. 72 This organisation was effectively part of the army and the principal

 organisation tasked with supplying the force.

          Two Cabinet posts had more direct control of the army. These were the Master

 General of the Ordnance and the Secretary of State for War and the Colonies. The

 former was head of the Ordnance Board, which had responsibility for the engineers

 and artillery, but had only an advisory role in Cabinet. Conversely, the Secretary of

 State for War and the Colonies was a government post and had more influence over

policy. This post was a development of the Council of War, formed in 1620, and the

office the Secretary of War, which had emerged in the reign of Charles II. John

Brewer describes this latter post as being only a minor one and suggests that its

holders were generally unimportant government officials who only rarely sat in

Cabinet and thus had little impact on policy. 73 While such a view is to an extent true,

it is excessively dismissive of a post that was to evolve into an important government

department. The office of the Secretary of War rose to prominence largely due to the

efforts and ability of the first holder of the post in the reign of Charles, Sir William
71 C. J. Esdaile, The Peninsular War, (London, Alien Lane, 2002), p.95.
72 Innes, 'The Domestic Face of the Fiscal-Military State', p. 103. For a consideration of the
Commissariat, see chapter 2.
73 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 44.


                                                   24
