 department with responsibility for the entire army, and of the three departments, Horse

 Guards was unique in having a military man in charge, known as the Commander-in-

 Chief. 80 The control exercised by the Home Office over auxiliary forces was only

 nominal with the result that the British army was effectively divided into two

 departments. A similar situation existed in the French army but differed in that the

 separation was based on function rather than type of arm. 81

          Although only having direct control over the cavalry and infantry, the

 Commander-in-Chief was the senior military figure in the British army. Furthermore,

 the importance of the arms under Horse Guards enabled the Commander-in-Chief to

 exercise a degree of operational control over the army as whole. The Ordnance Board

 may have collated the returns of its own forces and maintained them, but it was with

 the forces under Horse Guards that they marched and relied on for their protection. It

would be incorrect to view the importance of the infantry and cavalry arms as

 enabling the Commander-in-Chief to circumvent the national command structure and

the checks in place to curb the power of the army, although they did permit him more

influence than was allowed on paper. Despite this the Commander-in-Chief remained

powerless without the co-operation of certain civilian-led departments.

         The office of Commander-in-Chief for much of the Revolutionary and

Napoleonic Wars was held by Frederick, Duke of York, George Ill's second son. York

temporarily left office in 1809 due to his affair with Mary Clarke and, although

cleared by Parliament of any wrongdoing, he resigned as a matter of honour. York

returned in 1811 and it has been argued that during his brief time out of office he was

still effectively in control, as interim Commander-in-Chief General David Dundas


"° S. J. Park and G. F. Nafziger, Ttie British Military: Its System and Organisation 1803 - 1815
(Cambridge (Canada), Rafei, 1983), pp.5 -11.
*' In the French army the combat arms were under the chief of staff while the general staff tended to
fulfil logistical duties. J.F.C. Fuller, The Conduct of War 1789-1961 (London, Methuen, 1961), p.53.


                                                27
