 controlled the army were in some respects redundant by the end of the eighteenth

 century but were nevertheless an integral part of the state, one example being the

 policy that placed the Royal Navy before the army. Effectively the dual relationship

 continued to exist not for its original purpose - that of controlling the army - but

 because it enabled Britain to sustain its economic growth and social stability. A key

 factor in the relative stability enjoyed by Britain compared to other nations in the

 period of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars was that this suited both the

 government and large sections of the population alike.

          Although the reasons for the dual relationship had changed from that initially

 envisaged (as a means of controlling the army and preventing it from becoming

 involved in politics), its impact on the army remained and should not be

 underestimated as it characterised the organisation of the force into the nineteenth

 century. Because of the dual relationship, civilian authorities governed Britain's

 armed forces to an unprecedented degree when compared to the situation elsewhere in

 Europe, particularly in Prussia, Russia and Austria. 63 This created an increasingly

 significant role for government, with the result that the army was administered

through what can be considered a combination of old and new departments. The old

departments predated the reign of William in and in the eighteenth century existed in

forms quite different to those originally envisaged, in terms of both role and structure.

Some, such as the Ordnance Board, had evolved over centuries while others, such as

the War Office, had began to emerge in the 1640s.64 Conversely, the new departments

were created during or after the reign of William HI, and included the Home Office.

Another group of departments of note were those that predated the reign of William

in but lost significance in relation to the army, an example being the Privy Council,
63 Corvisier, Armies and Societies, pp.76, 116-122.
64 For the various stages in the evolution of the Ordnance Board from its creation in the fifteenth
century to its decline in the nineteenth, see F. Duncan, History of the Royal Artillery (2 vols, London,
John Murray, 1879), passim.


                                                   21
