continued his policies. 82 That York held the post of Commander-in-Chief almost

continually from 1796 to 1827 would suggest a stagnant and conservative

administration, in an era that would begin to require a gradually more educated rank

and file, along with increasingly complex equipment. Fortunately for the army York,

while a poor field general, was unafraid of innovation and was a first class

administrator. Reforms implemented during his time in office included regimental

schools, a staff college, published rules and regulations for non-commissioned officers

and a subsidised mail service." Such reforms helped drag the army from its nadir of

the previous decade, thereby directly improving morale. This was noted by fighting

soldiers and in 1805 Captain Thomas Browne of the 23'd Foot wrote of 'a rejuvenated

British army, whose spirit had been rejuvenated by internal reform and

improvements'. M

         Under the Commander-in-Chief was a secretary, who enabled him to

communicate with other departments. Initially this was a civilian post but from 1811

became a military appointment, a demonstration of increasing professionalism within

the military hierarchy. 10 Besides this secretary, infantry and cavalry, Horse Guards

contained two departments. These were the Quartermaster General, who was

responsible for troop movements, information gathering and the supply of camping

equipment, and the Adjutant-General, who was responsible for drill and discipline.

         The combat arms not under Horse Guards - the artillery and engineers - were

the responsibility of the Ordnance Board. The two organisations had developed along

markedly different lines, this being apparent by the fact that while the Horse Guards


s2 Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, p.6.
*3 Such a mail service already existed for the sailors of the Royal Navy. J. Bartlett, The Development of
the British Army During the Wars with France 1793 -1815 (unpublished Ph.D thesis, University of
Durham, 1997), p. 184; Partridge and Oliver Army Handbook p.7.
u R. N. Buckley (ed), The Napoleonic War Journal of Captain Thomas Henry Browne 1807 -1816
(London, Army Records Society, 1987), p.xi.
85 Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, p.7.

                                                  28
