 Corps of Engineers, which employed only one clerk in the garrison. Marginally larger

 was the stores organization of the Royal Artillery, which employed a clerk and two

 keepers of stores, and the Quartermaster General's Department, which employed a

 deputy quartermaster, and assistant quartermaster and one servant. The Commissariat

 overshadowed these organizations, the department employing a deputy commissary

 general, an assistant commissary, fourteen storekeepers and clerks, nine labourers and

 seven servants, almost five times the size of the other organizations in Alexandria

 combined." Of note is the fact that the personnel of the Commissariat were not only

 employed on administrative tasks, demonstrating that the size of the organization was

 not merely the result of the need to meet the demands of increasing bureaucracy,

 unlike the situation regarding certain governmental departments. 100 The high

 proportion of storekeepers and clerks indicates that bureaucracy was a feature in the

 growth of the organization in the period but, to use a physiological analogy, labourers

 represented muscle rather than the mere fat that administrators represented. The

 Commissariat was not just an administrative body, but also one capable of performing

 functions such as moving and storing supplies.

         In Alexandria the organization that most closely replicated the function and

role of the Commissariat was the Quartermaster General. The primary role of the

latter organization was the distribution of items designated camping equipment,

which, in addition to items such as tents, included corn sacks for the cavalry,

associated forage, entrenching tools for the infantry and slack lime to dispose of

animal carcasses. 101 It is apparent that in Alexandria the ability of the Quartermaster


99 PRO WO 164/525, Royal Hospital Chelsea Prize Records, Alexandria Garrison 1807.
100 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 102.
101 General Order No. 188, by Order of the Commander of the Forces; 'Rules and Regulations Under
Which the Foraging of the Horses of the Cavalry in Ireland is to be Conducted', PRO WO 63/91, Entry
Book of Letters Received at Commissariat Headquarters, Dublin, 1810 - 1812, p.49; Extracts from
General Orders, Quinta, 16th June 1811, Porta Legre, 28* July 1811, NAM 6807/221, Books of
Commissary General N. Jackson, c!814, pp. 16 and 22.


                                               33
