Commissariat was a global organization. Our perception of the Revolutionary and

Napoleonic Wars is often Eurocentric, shaped by the writings of historians such as

John Keegan, David Chandler and Charles Esdaile, all of whom emphasise conflict in

the European theatre. Thus, there is a tendency to overlook the extent of Britain's

imperial commitments in the period. Even when these are considered they usually

 involve the expeditions sent against French colonies or rebellious Indian princes. For

the Commissariat, the reality was quite different to this Eurocentric perception and the

organization found itself attempting to supply garrisons dispersed across the empire

and beyond, which often included remote and militarily quiet regions of Africa or

Asia, proving Daniel Baugh's assertion that despite their economic advantages

colonies could be a strategic burden. 155 Supplying the more isolated outposts could be

amongst the most difficult tasks faced by the Commissariat and the situation was such

that Charles Greenwood estimated it could take as long as two years for items arriving

in a colony to reach the most distant outposts. The isolation of certain garrisons also

hampered communications, which disrupted the normal pattern of Commissariat

activities and therefore disrupted the delivery and monitoring of stores. Greenwood

wrote of regiments in foreign stations that they 'may be, and frequently, are so divided

and dispersed as to make it extremely difficult to ascertain the quantity of clothing

delivered [or required]'. 156

         The numbers of items to be supplied posed further problems for the

Commissariat, the scale of the task being demonstrated by the request of the Duke of

Wellington in 1811 for the delivery of 150,000 pairs of shoes to the River Tagus by



155 Baugh, 'The Maritime State', p. 186. Historians including Jeremy Black have argued the converse:
that colonial expansion contributed to success in warfare. Such views, however, are often based solely
on the economic contribution of colonies, with little reference to their strategic consequences. Black,
Sea Borne Empire, p. 170.
156 C. Greenwood to Lieutenant-Colonel Torrens, Craig's Court, 30* March 1811, PRO WO 377/2,
Various Papers, 1809 upon the System of Clothing and Off Reckonings for the Army.


                                                  50
