The system utilised to support the Commissariat was cumbersome but it was in some

respects efficient and in particular it appears that its administrative apparatus would

have been able to cope with a significantly expanded organization without itself

expanding. Returns and finances were handled efficiently and there were few signs of

strain in an administrative system co-ordinating a globally deployed organization,

evidence that Commissariat administration could have shouldered an additional

burden with the resources that already existed.

        There was no typical structure of a Commissariat station and there was much

variation due to individual circumstances and the nature of certain postings. Personnel

were employed to fulfil a wide range of tasks depending on local requirements, while

it is apparent that there was also some variation in which the role of personnel was

recorded. In Bermuda and Malta, for example, boatmen were employed, the

Commissariat in New South Wales was unusual in having a bookbinder on its

strength, Nova Scotia was the only station to record the specific roles of its issuers

(either fuel or food) and in 1816 Mauritius was the sole location in which a store

serjeant (sic.) was present. 187 Figure 7 is based on a single and relatively small

Commissariat station (in this case Calais) in February 1816. Of note is its very

conventional structure, with only storekeepers and clerks employed, and neither

labourers nor specialists, such as coopers and boatmen.


                                           Deputy Commissary

                                      Deputy Assistant Commissary

                     ADMINISTRATION                              STORES
                     2 Clerks                                    2 Storekeepers


                 Figure 7: Personnel of the Commissariat serving in Calais, February 1816.


187 PRO WO 61/25.
188 Commissary General J. Drummond to Quarter Master General Murray, Paris, 1 st February 1816,
PRO WO 28/14, Letters from Quarter Master General's Department, 1816 January to June.


                                                60
