         little wheat there is in the country cannot be ground at this season of the year
         as the mills are generally turned by water and there is now no water in the mill
         ponds. 167



Wellesley's comments not only highlight the difficulties of procuring sufficient

supplies but also the difficulties that could be encountered when processing them (in

this case, milling). Added to these problems was the difficulty of transporting the

required items, whether in raw (such as harvested crops) or refined (such as flour)

forms. The Commissariat was hampered hi this activity by the inefficient tasking and

utilisation of the wheeled conveyances operated by the army. Not only were these

vehicles split between various organizations, including the Royal Wagon Train and

Commissariat, there were also pools of vehicles held by individual regiments. 168 As a

result the only means through which a deficiency of transport could be rectified was

by utilising assets otherwise allotted to other duties, thus Commissariat carts that

could have been moving supplies were frequently used to move wounded personnel

between hospitals (the situation could of course be reversed, with serious

consequences for the medical services). 169 Significantly, even if these duties were

conducted on return journeys, that is to say after carts had delivered supplies and were

empty en route to the depot, their journey was still slowed.
        Even if available, many of the carts operated by the Commissariat were often

unsuited to the task, and a report on wagons was sceptical about their use over the

rough terrain encountered in Spain and Portugal, a region noted for its poor roads. In

Spain there existed Royal Roads, constructed using the latest building techniques and

30 to 60 feet wide but these were few in number, linked only major cities and were

badly maintained. The most common types of roads were known as caminos and

167 Wellesley to Burrard, Aeyria, 1 I th August 1808, PRO WO 1/228, p. 191.
168 See below pp.133-134.
169 Thomar, 8* March 1811, Extracts from General Orders, NAM 6807/221, p.8.


                                              53
