That it was not standard practice for commissaries to inspect roads automatically in

such circumstances is somewhat surprising when it is considered that the organization

relied on the movement of wagons by road to undertake its duties. In part this could be

explained by the structure of the British army, specifically that the movement of

troops was the responsibility of the Quartermaster General, although this applied

mainly at a strategic level and responsibility inevitably devolved to local officers. 174

Even if local roads were found to be open, however, there was then the problem of

snow in other areas forcing significant detours. The drivers of one group of wagons

were instructed that 'the weather and state of the roads must govern the departure of

the detachment; and it will march through Limerick (the crossroads at Cashel being

reported impassable) and Birr, where fresh horses will be supplied'. 175

         The snowfalls experienced in the United Kingdom that winter were unusually

        heavy, but, while accompanying a wagon train to Almeida during the winter of

         1812, Conductor of Stores W. Morris recorded in his diary the difficulties that

         could be encountered when moving convoys even in relatively good weather:

         Wednesday 18 November 1812
         We were very unfortunate this day with our mules falling down particularly in
         passing over the water... some of them fell with our boxes but nothing of very
         serious consequence... the road [to Almeida] was wholly lined with sick and
         convalescing troops - marching for different villages in the neighbourhood of
         Almeida.

         Friday 20 November 1812
         We could scarcely make any way in consequence of the road being crowded
         with bullock cars conveying the sick and wounded baggage.


Added to Morris' problems was that on Sunday 22 November the column did not

move at all because it was still awaiting orders concerning the route that it was to



174 Park and Nafziger, The British Military, p6; see also Macleod to Crew, Woolwich, 17* June 1807,
PRO WO 55/1314..
175 Brackets in original. N. Malasses to Robert Colvill [sic], Commissary General's Office, 4* February
1811, PRO WO 63/45.

                                                 55
