take. 176 This is significant as it demonstrates that the routes of supply columns were

not planned in advance. As highlighted by Morris, however, this could prove

detrimental and delay the delivery of supplies. In contrast the French army operated

with sometimes-strict traffic regulations, with certain bridges open to only specific

traffic, such as troops, wounded or supplies. 177

        Another factor that hindered the activities of the Commissariat was the

allocation of its personnel, which could at times appear to be chaotic. This was

particularly apparent in 1808 when elements of the army were deployed for action in

Spain, Portugal and Gibraltar. Lieutenant-General Sir David Baird, for example, was

instructed to lead to the Peninsula a sizeable contingent of reinforcements that

consisted of seven infantry battalions and two companies of artillery. The force was to

travel from Cork to Falmouth but was delayed for three weeks by the late arrival of

transport vessels. Eventually arriving in Falmouth and already several weeks late,

Baird discovered that several key personnel were not awaiting his arrival. This was

reported to the War Office, the general informing Castlereagh that 'I think it necessary

to appraise your Lordship also that I have not as yet heard of any paymaster or

commissary being appointed to this army'. 178 Thus, even after a three-week delay, the

commissary (and paymaster) had not arrived. Two days later there was some

confusion when an officer from the Commissariat reported to the general, who

promptly informed the War Office that he would take matters into his own hands if

the situation was not resolved soon:
        I beg leave to state that an assistant Commissary of accounts, I. Dickson Esq. -
        has just reported to me his arrival from Portsmouth, but does not appear to
        know whether he should consider himself part of the army, as he has received
        no instructions upon the subject. I understand some under Commissaries are


176 NAM 7508/24, Notebook of W. Morris, Conductor of Stores, 1812.
177 Creveld, Supplying War, p.53.
178 Lieutenant-General Baird, to Castlereagh, Falmouth, I st October 1808, PRO WO 1/236, War
Department in Letters: Sir John Moore and General Baird, September 1808 to January 1809, p.337.


                                             56
