         The Commissariat's reliance on foreign personnel in certain stations was

reflected in the garrison of Sicily in 1813, the returns for which note that the personnel

employed by the organisation consisted of eight Italians, five Sicilians, four English

(with no reference to Scots, Irish or Welsh) and one Swiss. 192 The differing

nationalities present were concentrated in certain occupations and, significantly,

Englishmen did not hold all of the senior positions. This says much about the structure

 of the Commissariat overseas, as British personnel would be expected to dominate by

rank, if not numerically. This was the case in the Sicilian garrison itself, which was

 supported by British troops and advisors. Those listed as English were concentrated in

the bakery, occupying three of the four positions there: they were the master baker

John Henderson and the two head bakers Robert Witlaw [sic] and Thomas

Richardson, while the overseer of bakery was a Swiss named Fran9ois Solincy. The

remaining Englishman, John Mitchel, was the senior Commissariat administrator in

Sicily and held the post of clerk. Mitchel's office also consisted of five under clerks,

all of whom were listed as Italians: Dominico Agedo, Parlo Averia, Antonio Grosso,

Fransico Scullina, Giuseppe Bruno. Of the remaining posts, Italians also occupied

those of storekeeper and under storekeeper, these being held by Pasquale de Gaelano

and Puolo Chilleme respectively, while the Sicilian Andrea Caravello oversaw the

officers' mess. All three posts were positions of responsibility and required

trustworthy individuals as they involved the handling of money and management of

stores. Finally the labourers and craftsmen were all Sicilian. These were the coopers

Alberto Castelli and Antonio Caiopardo, along with Gioachine Crisalli and Antonio

Pioro, both of whom were labourers. It is apparent that other than Andrea Caravello hi

the officers' mess, Sicilians held few positions of trust.


192 Monthly returns of those employed in the Commissariat Department under the control of Assistant
Commissary General Grellier at Milazzo, 25th October 1813 to 24th November 1813, NAM 7902/36.


                                               62
