 During 1816 the senior Commissariat officer in France (with 150 personnel), Portugal

 (with 79) and Canada (with 137) was a Commissary General. Although larger than the

 department in Portugal, that in the Windward and Leeward Islands, along with the

 Mediterranean, were split between several locations and in consequence three

Assistant Commissaries General in each region shared command, hi Honduras the

 senior Commissariat officer was only a temporary clerk, the affairs of the department

 being overseen by a committee that was collectively granted the rank of Deputy

Assistant Commissary General, demonstrating that the Commissariat was on occasion

 able to modify its practices to accommodate certain local situations. 189

          As the Napoleonic Wars progressed the Commissariat frequently found itself

hamstrung by global deployments and the need to expand despite already having

insufficient manpower. As a result the organization employed a large number of

foreigners, particularly locals in Italy, Spain and Portugal. The contribution of foreign

personnel to the British armed forces as mercenaries has long been recognised, E.A.

Wrigley citing them as a tangible way in which the financial strength of a state could

be applied to its army. 190 By the time of the Napoleonic Wars the use of true

mercenaries in the British army had declined and foreign troops tended to be either

exiles from occupied countries, prisoners of war, or motivated by ideology or

patriotism rather than financial gain, examples being the forces of the Duke of

Brunswick and the King's German Legion. 191 More significant to the British army in

this period were the foreigners employed in organizations to support the army, of

which the Commissariat was perhaps the largest employer.




189 PRO WO 61/25.
190 Wrigley, 'Society and the economy in the eighteenth century', p.73. The Royal Navy also used a
considerabie number of foreigners and it is estimated that in 1812, 9% of trained seamen serving in the
royal Navy were not of British origin. Duffy, 'British Naval Power', p.9.
191 Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, pp.86-88.


                                                  61
