Despite occupying an approximately similar geographical position in the same time

frame, it is apparent that the level of supply to the three divisions was somewhat

inconsistent: the 3 rd division possessed only two days of full supply and the 4th one,

while the 7th did not have sufficient quantities of each commodity for a single day. The

situation for the 3 rd is improved significantly (to five days) by discarding alcohol. The

importance of this commodity should not, however, be discounted, due to its influence

on morale and discipline.
         Perhaps the most notable feature of the data in figure 9 is the disparity between

reserves of meat when compared to those of bread and biscuit. This situation was

primarily due to the differences in how meat, bread and biscuit were supplied. Meat

marched on the hoof with the army, was available regardless of season and could be

slaughtered as required on the spot. Conversely bread and biscuits required some

effort to produce and their manufacture was a relatively long process. To begin with,

baking required wheat, which was not always available and also required

processing.224 Another difficulty was procuring or manufacturing sufficient yeast for

the baking process, great efforts being made by army bakers throughout the period to

increase both the quality and cost effectiveness of this important ingredient.225 Finally,

even if these difficulties could be overcome the baking of bread was time

consuming.226 This affected strategy and planning at the highest levels and was

apparent in the orders issued to Lieutenant General Sir John Moore concerning his

expedition to northern Spain in 1808: 'a large proportion of biscuit has been sent in

the victuallers [sic] that you may be relieved from the inconvenience of baking when

the troops are in motion'.227
        More easily stored and preserved, biscuit was generally seen as an emergency
224 p.54.
225 PRO WO 30/141, pp.30-32.
226 Wellesley to Burrard, Aeyria, 11 th August 1808, PRO WO 1/228.
227 To Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, Downing Street, 26* September 1808, PRO WO 1/236.


                                              71
