flour.231 The stocks held in Lisbon no doubt enabled markets to recover rapidly, but it

remains apparent that the existence of such extensive stocks did not always benefit the

army in the field. This gives rise to a situation in which there is a considerable

disparity between anecdotal evidence and official records regarding the supply of food

to troops in the field.

         Whatever the type, the food supplied by the Commissariat was sometimes of

questionable quality and its nutritional value was clearly in some doubt, indicating a

preference for quantity rather than quality. In his melancholy 'Subaltern's Elergy'

Ensign Meade described his pitiful rations thus: 'see in camp kettles all we have to

dine, yielding soup meagre to frighten swine', and there was also a tinge of envy and

longing for the comforts of Britain when he wrote of 'ye fat rich citizens of London...

snug over claret... Blest be the land of rich turtle soup - glamorous venison

haunches'.232 The poor quality of rations was not merely a complaint of troops in the

field. Judge Advocate Larpent, based at army headquarters, complained that ration

beef 'cooked up like Indian rubber', while a letter written concerning the

Commissariat depot in Longford described a sample of biscuits containing 'dust and

dirt and bad bits'233 .

         The poor diet of the army was a source of some concern for several soldiers,

although it is apparent that the food available to soldiers may have been of a superior

quality and more plentiful than that available to civilians. A study based on scientific

data such as the average calories consumed by civilians and soldiers would be of

interest, although the lack of suitable information concerning their respective diets

precludes an accurate comparison from being made. Despite the scarcity of data,

general conclusions can be drawn concerning the diet of soldiers compared to that of

231 Hall, Wellington's Navy, p. 115.
232 NAM 7505/10, J. R. Meade, 'The Subaltern's Elegy' (Spain, 1 st July 1813).
233 P. Singer to Mr. Heathy, Commissary General's Office, 25th March 1806; G. Larpent (ed), The
Private Journal ofF S Larpent, Vol. 1, p.36.


                                                73
