necessary to acquire supplies. This was achieved through the employment of

occasionally brutal tactics that could literally be those of an occupying army: to

counter local attempts to conceal stores underground, for example, commissaries

resorted to the French practice of pouring water on the ground to locate areas of

recently disturbed soil (where it drained away quicker).266 Some of the other methods

used by commissaries were little more than terrorism and in 1813 a commissary was

found guilty of burning down a Spanish house.267 It is also interesting to note that

commissaries co-operated with guerrillas, Lieutenant John Ford recording in his diary

that 'the inhabitants of Amaraz were very much alarmed by the arrival of a

commissary and a company of guerrillas... to search the houses for provisions'.268
          The plundering of supplies in this way was dramatically at odds with a concept

that was crucial in defining the relationship between the British army and state,

specifically that the army should cause as little disruption to civilians as possible.269

Although primarily a domestic policy, it would be incorrect to view the tactics utilised

by the Commissariat overseas as evidence that the concept of limiting disruption to

civilians was applied only in the home nation or its colonies. The British government

was anxious not only to avoid upsetting its allies but also the population of France,

therefore an extension of a policy that inflicted minimum disruption to civilians was

thus required on the continent270. Ultimately, however, operational requirements

would on occasion take precedence over political expediency and the practices

normally utilised to placate civilians were ignored.271 Thus the Commissariat

continued to utilise all means at its disposal when the situation warranted.

266 Buckley (ed), The Napoleonic War Journal of Captain Thomas Henry Browne, p. 181.
267 L C Gurwood (ed), General Orders of the Duke of Wellington in the Campaigns of1809-14
(London, Clowes and Son, 1837), p. 14.
268 NAM 6807/7l,p.53.
269 Brewer, The Sinews of Power, p.49.
270 Esdaile, The Peninsular War, passim.
271 It is likely that such a situation would have existed in Britain also had the French invaded. See
chapter 6.

                                                    81
