         The ruthlessness of commissaries in the field was to have implications for the

organization. In a country already devastated and left, in the words of Henry Booth,

'wretched in the extreme from the French occupation', it was inevitable that the

inhabitants of towns and villages would react with hostility to the arrival of a

commissary intent on plundering what remained of local stocks.272 On occasion this

led to violence and in 1810 Spanish civilians set upon two members of a foraging

party, one receiving seven gunshot wounds and the other being shot through the

lung.273 This was a consequence of a policy that sought to provide supplies through

legalised plunder; an unbalanced policy that, instead of maximising the potential of a

region to sustain a force, could provide only a short-term solution to the problem of

maintaining the army.
         The plundering of supplies was a crucial element of the reflexive doctrine in

the field, although this doctrine was also to have an influence on other aspects of the

Commissariat, including its bureaucracy and administration. General J.F.C. Fuller

cites planning as a key element of warfare in the period, noting that Napoleon himself

said that 'nothing is gained in war except by calculation' and that 'it is only when

plans are deeply thought out that one succeeds in war'. 274 Yet planning was noticeably

absent in the Commissariat. The many volumes of paperwork tended to be concerned

primarily with returns relating to the situation at the time of writing, rather than what

was required in a week, a month or a year (data collection, rather than estimation and

projection appears to have been the objective of such bureaucracy). Information of

this nature was vital if shortages caused by the mismanagement of local resources

were to be rectified through imports, yet it was rarely collated. There is little evidence

that the Commissariat sought to understand what was required by a body of men such

272 Henry Booth to wife, nr Vittoria, 20* June 1813, NAM 6702/33/102, Booth Letters.
273 W. Tomkinson, The Diary of a Cavalry Officer 1809 -1815 (Staplehurst, Spellmont, 1999), p.35.
274 Fuller, The Conduct of War, p.47.


                                                82
