                                                     Chapter 3

                                      Procurement for the British Army



          Procurement for the British army in the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars

 relates in particular to one aspect of the relationship between the army and the state,

 this being the extent to which the force benefited from Britain's growing economic

 and industrial power. By the time of the Revolutionary Wars Britain's armed forces

 were to become not only a means to promote the nation's diplomatic ambitions but

 also economic, colonial, industrial and even technological growth. Initially a reason

 for the financial revolution, the armed forces had rapidly become a means to sustain it

 through their role in the economy, providing employment, possessing considerable

 purchasing power and safeguarding the Empire. 280 Such was the importance of the

 armed forces that an increasingly broad section of society shared a common interest in

their development and maintenance.

          In coastal areas in particular the state had become the largest purchaser of

food, clothing and metal ware, while also providing the biggest source of employment

in the construction industry due to the building of dockyards and barracks. 2" 1 Members

of the public took an increasing interest in military affairs. During the eighteenth

century it was to become ever more fashionable to read about the exploits of Britain's

soldiers and sailors, while during the Nine Years War days of public thanks were

introduced to celebrate important victories, a practice that persisted into the

Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. 21*2 When these factors are added to Britain's

expanding industrial and economic potential it would appear that the scene was set for

the army to be supported to an unprecedented level. 283
2SO Brewer, The Sinews of Power, pp.27, 59.
281 Dufiy, 'British Naval Power'. pp. 51 -60
-*- Harris, Praising the Middling Sort', p.5; Hoppit, A Land ofLiberty'?, p. 130.
2W Wrigley, 'Society and the Economy', p. 72.


                                                   85
