 Such arrangements were only temporary (effectively only while there was excess

 forage available) and by June 1810 the situation was such that personnel were

 informed 'it is not expedient just now to part with the hay and straw in any depot. 293

 While the clause had operated, however, Mr. Webb the forage merchant had

 effectively been allowed to use the forage store as an extension of his own at no extra

 cost. Furthermore the arrangement had benefited the army, the Commissary being

 informed that it was 'an object of advantage'. The reasons for this were not explained

 in the letter, although difficulties were frequently experienced regarding the storage of

 excess fodder. 294

         Contracts were monitored and would be lost if the contractor was found to be

 in breach of the terms. Particularly large contracts came under the scrutiny of

Parliament itself, and in 1809 a contractor named John Trotter was called to give

evidence to a parliamentary enquiry. Mr. Trotter had a contract to supply camping

equipment to the army and was the nephew of the individual (also called John Trotter)

awarded the same contract in 1775. While the inquiry lasted several days, and the

minutes are therefore too long to reproduce in their entirety, it is of value to consider

some of the questions and responses as they reflect how such a contract operated. Of

particular interest were the following extracts:

        Question 13: In what manner have you made your charges on the current
                     articles?
        Answer:      The charge to government is made on the same principles in
                     both; the cost of the materials is brought to the money price, as
                     I have before stated, to which we add the price of labour, and
                     these two form the net ready money cost on which all other
                     percentages are calculated.

        Question 14: What expenses and outgoings are covered by the ten percent
                     charge?

-9? Malisses to G. Bimiy. Commissary General's Office, 9* June 1810, PRO WO 63/45.
-'* See above p.78.


                                              90
