          Answer:           It is intended to be a clear profit for the services we perform,
                            which are not confined to the provision of the articles simply,
                            but include excessive labour and anxiety in the subsequent
                            management.

 It is apparent that there was some confusion concerning the charges made by the

 contractor. After total costs including labour and raw materials were calculated an

 additional ten percent was added and the commissioners clearly believed this was

 intended to cover additional costs. Conversely Mr. Trotter, despite a somewhat vague

 answer to the second question, primarily viewed it as profit. The second issue raised

 in the above extract is that of how contracts could encourage inefficiency. In this case,

 for example, the contractor's profits effectively increased with costs: whether or not

 the ten percent was wholly profit, the percentage was of more value when costs were

 higher. Thus, a contractor seeking to increase profits could potentially benefit from

 inefficiency and would have made false reporting of costs particularly lucrative, such

 practices being relatively common in the period.295 The enquiry convened and on the

following day questioned Mr. Trotter about who authorised him to deliver items:

         Question 19: On what requisitions or authority do you issue the supplies of the
                      articles?
         Answer:      The camp necessities are issued by authority of the
                      Quartermaster General, and hospital stores by that of the
                      Surgeon General; occasionally they are issued by order of the
                      Commander-in-Chief [or] the Secretary at War.

It is apparent that orders for the items produced by Mr. Trotter could come from no

fewer than four separate departments, one of which was the civilian War Office.

Utilising a single manufacturer maximised the potential economic benefits of such a

contract and ensured that the equipment used by the various organisations was

compatible. Both advantages, however, would have been greatly enhanced had a

central store of camping equipment existed in the British army. This would have

allowed a rationalisation of the stores held by each department, improving efficiency,

-^ Brewer, •Commercialisation and Polities', p. 197.


                                                 91
