civil disorder it appears that cavalry armed merely with sabres would be sufficient, as

demonstrated bloodily at Peterloo. An insurrection or landing would, however, have

been a different matter and the experiences of the army in suppressing the Irish

rebellion demonstrates that enthusiastic rebels could, in the right circumstances, inflict

a reverse on an ill-prepared force of regulars, as could a small force of regular troops

landed to either support such a rebellion or act independently. 318 Despite the relative

security of Britain, therefore, it is apparent that a deficiency of munitions could have

had potentially serious consequences for units deployed on home defence duties.

Added to this should also be the fact that insufficiently armed units could not be sent

to fight on the continent and thus had only limited utility until deficiencies could be

rectified. Depriving units on home defence was thus a way of maximising the

potential of the field army but was nonetheless a dangerous gambit.

         Shortages of weapons could be serious enough, but the effective strength of

units may have been even lower when other factors are considered. In particular it is

important to appreciate the ergonomic aspects of infantry weapons, as equipment of

this nature required items such as rifle straps, pistol holsters and sword scabbards to

be properly utilised. That the army acknowledged the significance of such items was

demonstrated by their inclusion in the section of inspection returns concerned not with

aesthetics (such as uniform) but armaments. This was illustrated by a return of the

weapons present in the 4th battalion, Royal Artillery in Canada, during May 1808, the

following items being listed: muskets, bayonets, rammers, musket slings and

ammunition pouches. Besides indicating the items required to utilise a musket fully,

the return is of further note because it was made as part of the 'demand of arms and

accoutrements for four companies of the 4th Battalion, Royal Artillery in Canada, in


318 T. Pakenham, The Year ofLiberty: The History of the Great Irish Rebellion ofl 798 (Hodder &
Stoughton, 1992), pp.95-105.


                                                99
