         When considering both contemporary and modern attitudes towards the

uniform of the British army in the period, it is apparent that ambiguity existed. This

ambivalence, however, existed not only in attitudes but also the administration of

uniform. There existed over 100 volumes relating to the regulation and administration

of uniform, while being improperly dressed on parade was a court-martial offence, yet

on campaign certain officers appeared to be particularly lax. 349 Of the Duke of

Wellington, an individual known for conservatism, Lieutenant Grattan noted that:

         [he] was a most indulgent commander... provided we brought our men into the
         field, well appointed, and with sixty rounds of good ammunition each, he
         never looked to see whether their trousers were black, blue or grey; and as
         ourselves, we might be rigged out in all the colours of the rainbow if we
         fancied it. 350



The provision of uniform was unusual, as, unlike many other items required by the

army, it was overseen not by a single department but various sub-organisations. This

was unusual because the trend in the period was for increasing regulation, and in

many respects the regulation and provision of uniform had changed little since the late

seventeenth century despite the administrative revolution. Although the reasons for

this are unclear, and may possibly be found in the structure and interdepartmental

power struggles of the eighteenth century, a logical answer is simply that uniform had

changed relatively little in the era other than to conform to fashion and thus its

administration remained relatively unaltered. The bodies responsible for regulating the

provision of uniform, including the style and material to be used, were the Clothing

Board, commissions of military enquiry and various 'Boards of General Officers'. The

latter were created to consider specific matters, such as proposals to modify items of

uniform or appropriate regulations. These boards were primarily drawn from a single
w Draft Wan-ant 1816, PRO WO43/296, Amalgamation of Boards of General Officers with
Inspectorate of Clothing to form the Consolidated Board; PRO WO 90/1, General Courts Martial
Abroad, 1796 -1825.
350 Grattan, Adventures with the ConnaughtRangers, p.50.


                                               108
