 This was a total of 108 books and these volumes say much about the administration of

 the provision of clothing: books relating to regulations in 1751 and 1768 were

 superfluous considering that more up to date books existed from 1798, while the

 reference to invalid clothing serves as a useful reminder that uniform was not only

 issued to fighting soldiers.

          The ten pattern books reflect the scale of the task facing the Consolidated

 Board and its predecessors; while the existence of books concerned with particulars as

 specific as looping demonstrates the level of detail involved in the regulation of

 uniform. 3- 4 The image is of a highly regulated and bureaucratic system, both of which

 were characteristics of administration in the period. Yet the extent of the bureaucracy

 surrounding uniform should not be entirely attributed to contemporary administrative

 practices. Of note is the fact that, through relying not on a major department but minor

 organisations, the system of uniform provision was not typical of military

 administration. There is also the issue of military uniform itself, which has

traditionally been a complex subject requiring its own administration. In the French

army of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, for example, uniform was dictated

by convention, particularly following the reforms of the Marquis de Louyois. 355

         It would be incorrect to infer that uniform provision operated entirely outside

of normal administrative practices. Rather it functioned within the system to a lesser

degree than was the case regarding munitions and similar items, due to the way in

which responsibility was shared amongst various boards. In December 1816 this

situation changed when the Consolidated Board of General Officers came into being.

It consisted of eighteen Generals, twenty Lieutenant Generals and seventeen Major

Generals, the senior officer being the Earl of Harcourt, while R. Barry was appointed
334 R. Bany, Secretary Consolidated Board of General Officers, to Secretary at War, Office of Military
Board. 23"' January 1817, PRO WO43/296.
355 C. S. Grant, From Pike to Shot, 1685-1720: Armies and Battles of Western Europe (Devizes.
Wargames Research Group, 1986), p. 59.


                                                 110
