 been given too much attention by historians. The most famous example of this is

 Charles Oman's theory on the role of British firepower in countering French infantry

 tactics. This theory is now discredited due to the work of historians such as Brent

 Nosworthy, who have sought to consider how various factors, including firepower and

 discipline, combined to cause events on the battlefield. 337 While the significance of

 munitions has been overemphasised, the converse is true regarding uniform in debates

 concerning the army in the period. It is often overlooked, for example, that soldiers in

 many allied armies were clothed as well as armed by British manufacturers. 33*

         When considering uniform it is necessary to appreciate that, while the canon of

 literature concerned with the subject is of both considerable quantity and quality, it

 has traditionally been confined within relatively restricted boundaries. In particular

 studies related to uniform have tended to focus on uniform as defined in the

 regulations laid down by Horse Guards, with little consideration of the actual state of

 uniform. While common sense compelled historians to consider that dress was not

 always immaculate and often patched or torn, the image portrayed by them (and

 artists) was still at times far removed from that of reality. Recently there has been a

trend towards a more realistic appraisal of uniform, a trend apparent in the

illustrations accompanying Mark Adkin's work regarding the Battle of Waterloo,

illustrations that show how soldiers would probably have appeared on campaign, not

how regulations instructed them to dress. 339 There remains, however, a gulf between

how the uniform worn in the field is portrayed by historians and by contemporaries.




337
  7 B. Nosworthy, 'Charles Oman on Line versus Column', in P Griffiths (ed), A History of the
Peninsular War VolLX: Modern Studies of the War in Spain and Portugal 1808 -1814 (London.
Greenhill Books, 1999), pp.231-264.
338 Hall, Wellington 'sNavy, P-137.
339
    Adkin, Tlie Waterloo Companion, plates 1 - 16.


                                               105
