this was only achieved at the expense of the British army. In 1810, for example, a

consignment consisting of 20,000 stands of arms (a stand consisting of a musket and

associated equipment such as ammunition pouches) was despatched to Portugal.

 16,000 of these, and other 'corresponding equipment', were subsequently sent to

Cadiz for allocation to Spanish forces, with only 4,000 held in reserve for British, or

other allied forces, at the Tagus. 334 This is significant because within months the Duke

of Wellington would be requesting the transfer of munitions from Portuguese stores,

demonstrating that items supplied to allied armies were also required by British

forces. 335 It appears that the shortages rectified by the transfer of Portuguese stores in

August 1810 may in part have been caused by their allocation to Portugal to begin

with.

         The supply of arms to allied nations was evidence of the army's role as one of

three elements of British defence policy, along with the Royal Navy and support of

coalition partners. It is apparent that in some cases, due to the supply of munitions to

foreign powers, the army was third place in this relationship, although that the army

was not adequately supplied may also indicate the limitations of British manufacturing

output. There is a tendency to focus on the achievements and capabilities of British

manufacturing, although the fact that the army was not adequately supplied may

indicate an inability on the part of British industry to produce sufficient munitions for

both the army and foreign powers. The question is not merely one of manufacturing

capacity and relates to the fact that industry operates in sectors and that deficiencies in

one sector may not always be rectified up by reallocating capacity from another. 336

         While a consideration of munitions is fundamental to any study concerning the

effectiveness and capability of an armed force, it is a subject that, on occasion, has

3J4 Wellington to Liverpool, Cartaxo, 12th January 1811. PRO WO 1/248.
335 Wellington to Liverpool, Alvera, 221"1 August 18KIPRO WO 1/245.
336 P. Kenned)', The Rise and Fall of the Great Pavers (London, Fontanna, 1988), passim.


                                                 104
