unit is commendable, and it must be noted that the only factor hindering the

implementation of the scheme was bureaucratic regulation. A unit of the British army

could not obtain equipment from stores, but through the auction of surplus equipment

such items were available to civilians in Ireland, a country in which armed

insurrection was perceived as a near constant threat.

         There existed other conventions and rules governing uniform to hinder its

effective supply. Although items were referred to with catchall terms, such as tunics,

those required by various units or personnel were not always the same and there were

variations in style and colour stipulated in regulations. 381 A company's designation as

line, light or grenadier dictated the arrangement of its lace and shoulder decoration.

Tunic colours were broadly divided into red for the infantry, blue or red for cavalry

and blue for the supporting arms, although there were variations (most famously the

green of the Rifle Brigade) and the facing colour of regiments also varied (basically

this was the colouring of the cuffs and collar). Furthermore, details concerning colours

could be confused and in the 4th Dragoons, for example, the commanding officer was

unsure whether the holsters should have been black or bearskin. 3*2

         Uniforms were expensive, a parliamentary report of 1807 revealing that of 319

articles waiting to be settled, approximately one-third (98) related to uniform or

similar items including horse furniture. 3"3 An average price for uniforms being £1 17s

lOd for a private soldier's, £3 12s lOd for a drummer's and £5 Is 3d for a sergeant's. 3"4

Interestingly David Dundas (the Commander-in-Chief in 1809) believed that there

was little variation in these costs when uniforms were purchased overseas, noting that


m See for example E. Littlehales to Commissary General, Dublin Castle, 1 st March 1811, PRO WO
63/91.
™- Major General Cartwright's confidential report on the actual state of the 4Ul Queen's Own Dragoons.
7th May 1808, PRO WO 27/92/1.
3a Statement of the Number of Unsettled Accounts in The Miscellaneous Department, in Eighth Report
ofMilitary Enquiry.
M*A Treatise on Military Finance (Whitehall, Egerton, 1796), pp. 113-5.


                                                 118
