 secretary.3-6 This new board was to work in close co-operation with the Inspectors of

Army Clothing while it could, in addition, call upon other organisations, as made clear

in its instructions:

          His Royal Highness thinks it highly necessary that the committee shall, in
          addition be allowed at their discretion the occasional assistance of two quarter
          masters, or other persons experienced in the nature and quality of army
          clothing, to inspect and examine materials in the presence, and under the
          personal direction of the committee... the two quarter masters or other
          persons... should receive an allowance of 5s for every day their attendance is
          required [and officers] the staff pay of their respective ranks. 357



 The recommendation that the board call upon the services of experts was significant,

being tacit acknowledgement that a group of such high-ranking officers may not

themselves have possessed sufficient knowledge to conduct their duties. The pride of

these officers was preserved by instructions that the experts could only 'examine

materials in the presence, and under the personal direction of the committee'. Despite

this clause, the introduction of experts was evidence that the provision of clothing was

adopting more characteristics of administration in the period, in this case the use of

professionals or specialists. 358

         Despite the efforts of the various boards and commissions that existed to set

the standards of army uniform, it is apparent that the dress of soldiers in the field was

frequently far removed from that laid down in regulations. As Piers Mackesy writes,

regulations were only relevant if they were enforced, and it is apparent that those

relating to uniform were frequently not.3;>y Lieutenant Ford, for example, wrote that in

the 79th the coats of its officers were 'black or blue of various forms', not the


356 'Warrantfor consolidating into one establishment from 25* December 1816 inclusive, the Clothing
Board and all other boards of General Officers usually held in London'; Heylehurst to Secretary of
State for War, Horse Guards, 2nd October 1816, PRO WO43/296.
357 Illegible to Secretary of State for War, Horse Guards, 21 st June 1816, PRO WO43/296.
358 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.67; Childs, TlieArmy of Charles II, p.81; Mingey, The Eighteenth
Century Land Steward', p.8.
3Sy P. Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt, p.30.


                                                  Ill
