designed for long marches, had other requirements. Thus in 1812 the Duke of

Northumberland felt compelled to complain about the standard of boots supplied to

the cavalry. In particular he highlighted that:

         Jack boots properly made are the most advantageous to troopers under service,
         they not only save the man's legs and knees from that most severe pressure,
         occasioned by such horses in a charge, which I have known attended by
         various injurious consequences but in case of the horse falling upon his side,
         they are certain to save the trooper's leg being broken.367



Considering the potential implications of poor quality uniform, it is surprising that

when defective or poor quality items were returned to the depot they were not

destroyed but merely re-issued, often without modification. In 1807, for example, a

consignment of greatcoats intended to be issued to the Royal Artillery in Malta were

returned as defective, but were then re-issued to new recruits in Britain. This situation

was seen as unsatisfactory by Brigadier-General Macleod, and his subsequent

communication with the Board of Ordnance on the subject demonstrated that the

defects were not minor: 'I am sorry to add, that it would have been better if they had

been destroyed at Malta, as they are so bad, that battalions will not be able to profit by

any of them'. 368 Issuing clothing already acknowledged to be defective was further

evidence that the state lacked the ability to supply the army adequately. This was

despite the fact that the British armed forces were, in 1807, below strength and that

the challenges of the Peninsular War had yet to be faced.

        Even if the clothing available was of sufficient quality there were other factors.

Some deficiencies could be attributed to the actions of soldiers themselves, who

discarded clothing to make their packs lighter or during sieges threw shakos into the



367 Duke of Northumberland to Lieutenant Colonel Hill, Alnwick Castle 4th February 1812. NAM
6309/138.
36* Macleod to Crew, Woolwich, 5th March 1807, PRO WO 55/1314.


                                               114
