regulation red, while top hats became popular with officers serving in Egypt due to the

greater protection they offered against the sun. 360 That such dress was the norm, and

not merely a practice in the field or on informal occasions, was demonstrated in Major

General Cartwright's report on the uniform of the 4th Queen's Own Dragoons. He

concluded that the standard of uniform in the regiment was good even though many of

the pairs of breeches worn were not regulation issue and were purchased from several

sources. 361 This last point is significant as the state was clearly unable to provide the

items of clothing that officers required, which led to individuals purchasing their own

items. Besides being more colourful than often thought (and allowed in Kings

Regulations) uniform may in some cases have been torn, patched or even ragged.

Lieutenant Meade, complaining as usual, wrote of his uniform: 'see the crimson coat

beseamed with stitches. The torn degenerate regimental breeches'; Captain

Tomkinson described the cavalry helmets issued to his unit as 'completely worn out,

and so warped... that the men could scarcely wear them'; and Private Wheeler wrote

of his unit: 'it was difficult to tell to what regiment we belonged, for each man's coat

was like Joseph's "a coat of many colours'".362

         The sometimes-shocking state of soldiers' clothing could be attributed to a

variety of factors. Uniforms were subjected to constant attrition caused by weathering

and other wear and tear on campaign. Both Wheeler and Tomkinson attributed their

complaints to this but the situation was worsened by the provision of poor quality

items. Particular difficulties were encountered in regard to equipment and clothing

made from leather. From 1807, for example, the spur leathers of artillery drivers were

to be replaced annually, rather than every two years, due to 'many [spurs] being lost
360 NAM 6807/71, p. 133; P. Mackesy, British Victory/ in Egypt, 1801, p.29.
361 Major General Caitwright's confidential report on the actual state of the 4th Queen's Own Dragoons,
7th May 1808, PRO WO 27/92/1, Office of Commander in Chief and War Office: Adjutant General and
Army Council Inspections, 1808.
362 NAM 7505/10; TomMnsoa The Diary of a Cavalry Officer, p.34; Liddell - Hart (ed), The Letters of
Private Wlieder, p. 74.


                                                 112
