 items taken with them. This was demonstrated by the orders issued concerning the

  embarkation of several militia units in August 1811:

          the commander of the forces for the time being having been pleased to direct
          that the several regiments of Irish militia under orders for embarkation should
          take with them their canteens and haversacks, I have the honour to inform you
          that the necessary directions have been given to officers commanding the
          several corps to retain these articles in their possession, delivering in the
          remaining articles of field equipment into store as at first intended. 374



 The practice of militia units taking some items of equipment and uniform with them

 was to prove a double-edged sword. It was often the case that the militia concerned

 were not merely redeploying but joining a different regiment. This meant the parent

 formation would need to be brought back to strength, requiring the replacement of

 items taken by those personnel deploying overseas (in the case of the units in the

 above example this meant canteens and haversacks). The extent of losses is illustrated

 by those incurred during 1805, 2,927 watch coats being lost from a total of twenty-

 five Irish militia regiments due to deployments overseas. Of these units six (Carlow,

 Kings County, Louth, Tipperary, Tyrone and Westmeath) each lost more than 150

 such coats. 375

         Inconsistencies in what units took with them when deploying overseas could

not always be put right from stores at the destination and in consequence newly

arrived units often lacked even basic equipment. For example, in November 1808

Brigadier Taylor complained that the 2nd battalion of the 72nd Foot arrived in South

Africa fresh from the Isle of Wight depot 'with a short compliment of necessities'. 376

While the arrival of a unit in such a state in a distant colony may be excused due to


374Assistant Quarter Master General to Lieutenant Colonel John French, Quarter Master General's
Office. ^August 1811. PRO WO 63/91.
rs E.B, Littlehales to Commissary General Hanfield, Dublin Castle, 13 th September, 1805, PRO WO
63/88.
376 Letter from Brigadier General J. Taylor to Adjutant General Horse Guards, Isle of wight Aim)
Depot, 8th November 1808, NAM 6112/78, p.76.


                                                116
