 due to the spur leather perishing'. 363 More significant were the doubts expressed

 concerning the durability of footwear. Of that issued to cavalry it was noted the

 contractor 'instead of jacking them by boiling them and beating them in the proper

 methods, barely stiffens them by means of some gummy substance'. iM Similarly

 Captain Jennings noted of infantry boots issued to his unit that 'the shoes finished by

the contractors were so bad that in twenty four hours they were useless, the soles were

 very little thicker than the uppers and had paper between the soles to make them

 stronger. Most of the men carried their shoes in their hands' 365 . It is interesting to note

 that both of the above criticisms extended not from flaws inherent in the design of the

 specified items, but the fact that contractors sought to limit costs. This is evidence of

competition for contracts, with consequences for troops in the field and, by

implication, the effectiveness of the army itself. Through encouraging such practices

the system was contributing to the army's problems rather than resolving them: when

supplying the army in this way the imperative was economics as much as

effectiveness.

         Supplies of good quality footwear were important both aesthetically and for

speed during marches, although these were not the only issues. The Duke of

Wellington, for example, believed that 'as the soldiers pay for the shoes they receive,

it is but fair towards them that they should be of the best quality for their purpose and

should fit them' (this is also further evidence of the inability of the state to supply

soldiers as their footwear was only subsidised, not purchased for them). 366 Good

quality boots were required both to improve the effectiveness of troops and for safety.

This was particularly true of the cavalry arm, which, while not requiring boots

363 Macleod to Crew, Woolwich, 19th July 1807, PRO WO 55/1314.
364 Duke of Northumberland to Lieutenant Colonel Hill, Alnwick Castle 4th February 1812. NAM
6309/138, Various Letters from the Duke of Northumberland.
365 NAM 8301/102, no page number or other reference and the passage is included on a separate,
undated, sheet.
366 Wellington to Liverpool, 31 st March, 1811, PRO WO 1/248.


                                                113
