that could potentially occur when the army was required to co-operate with the local

authorities.

        The concept of minimal inconvenience further restricted the mobility of the

army by limiting the manpower and vehicles that were available for general transport

duties. Until 1795 the army had little integral transport capability of note and instead

relied on civilian contractors. This practice had came to the fore in Europe during the

Thirty Years War and has been defined as effectively marking the start of modern

logistics.422 Yet it was a system with drawbacks and such contractors were not always

reliable. This was illustrated by the case of James Maton, who was called before

Wiltshire magistrates in November 1808 'for not attending with a wagon and five

horses in the market place [of] Sarum to receive the arms, clothes and accoutrements

of the 5th Dragoon Guards and then convey the same to Stockbridge', despite being

contracted to do so.423 Another feature of the employment of civilian drivers, and one

not typical of British politics in the period, was a lack of regulation from central

government regarding their employment.424 Instead these contracts were administered

at county level, and local magistrates were allowed to determine payments to be made

based on mileage and transport supplied, hi October 1803, for example, it was agreed

that contractors in Wiltshire would receive 1 s per mile for wagons, with an additional

3d if towed by four horses or six oxen, while payments for carts were to be 9d per

mile, with an additional 2d for four horses or oxen.425 It is apparent, therefore, that due

to their role as guides, allowing entry to convoys and establishing rates for

contractors, magistrates fulfilled a vital role in military transport within Britain.

         Considering the inefficiency of a transport system utilising only civilian

drivers, the reluctance of the state to allow the army control of civilian property and a
422 Schechter and Sander, Delivering the Goods, p.35.
423 Minutes of meeting held at Fisherton Anger, 8 November 1808, WSRO B18/100/7.
424 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 102.
425 Salisbury Journal, 31 October 1803, p.l.


                                                 130
