enjoyed even this basic protection from the elements: until 1810 only half to three

quarters of infantry serving in the Peninsula had been issued with these special

blankets, and of those received many were lost or, as in the case of Private Wheeler's,

illegally sold or traded by soldiers for food, alcohol or clothing. 411 In addition, the

erection of the makeshift shelter was noted as being unpopular by Quarter Master

Surtees because it provided little protection during cold nights. 412 A more substantial

solution than the blanket shelter was the round tent, which was initially developed for

use in Flanders but officially issued to all British forces from 18U.4U In practice many

units received them much later than this or not at all, and Judge Advocate Larpent

noted that there were sufficient tents available only if absentees, servants and sentries

were discounted. 414

         The procurement of tents, like other items, for the British army reflects an

important factor in the relationship between the force and the state - the extent to

which the state was willing to allocate resources to sustain the force. When

considering the procurement activities of the army it is clear that Britain's economic

and industrial capability was not fully exploited. This was because the machinery of

the British state was created not to pander to the needs of the army but to contain its

power. There is no evidence that there was a concerted policy to keep the army in

check through deliberately failing to meet its needs. Rather it was a question of

priority. The first hurdle confronting the army was the attitude of both the state and

society towards the military and war, conflict being seen as disruptive to the economy.

The proportion of output allocated to fighting the Napoleonic Wars, however,

demonstrates a willingness on the part of the state to meet the challenge of war. The

difficulty facing the army was thus not one of resources committed to the war in
411 Liddell - Hail (ed), Tlie Letters ofPrivate Wheeler, p.70.
4U W. Surtees. Twenty Five Years in the Rifle Brigade (London, GreenhilL 1996), p. 189.
413 Bartlett, The Development of the British Army, p. 136.
414 Laipent (ed), We Private Journal ofFSLarpent, Vol. 2, p.63.


                                                   126
