 host.390 The rank and file rarely had the luxury of being billeted with a family,

 although Private Thomas Howell of the 71 sl Regiment of Foot experienced this during

 the winter of 1812-13. This was a learning experience for both parties and

 demonstrated the ignorance each had of the other's culture - Howell was surprised to

 find Spanish children so well treated and the local priest amazed to discover the

 'heretical' English knew the Lord's Prayer.391 Despite the example of Howell, for

 most of the rank and file local accommodation tended to be a crowded barn or peasant

 dwelling. This could be an unpleasant experience for owner and occupier alike, as

 demonstrated by the fact that Commissary Schauman deliberately billeted troops in

 the properties of locals he disliked. 392

          The billeting of troops in local properties was not unique to overseas

 deployments, and during the early stages of the Revolutionary Wars it had been

 common practice in Britain to billet troops at local inns and even in local homes. This

latter practice went against a concept central to British policy in the period: that the

existence of the army should cause minimum inconvenience to civilians. 393 The

billeting of troops in homes continued as a result of a loophole in seventeenth century

legislation that had allowed the practice to continue in certain parts of Edinburgh.

Furthermore the owners were only eligible for compensation if the property was

located in certain suburbs of the city, going against another concept that characterised

the relationship between he army and society: that the army had to pay its way and not

requisition items. 394 This did not stop officers from renting rooms but merely

prevented them from being forced on homeowners, although even the leasing of

rooms could be unpopular. This was particularly so in 1809, when large numbers of


3VO Buckley (ed), Tlw Napoleonic War Journal of Captain Tliomas Henry Browne, p. 181.
391 Hibbert (ed),A Soldier of the 71st, pp. 80-2.
39- Schauman, On the Road with Wellington, p. 76. See also Hibbert (ed), A Soldier of the, p.57.
m Brewer, Hie Sinews ofPower, p.49.
3M Anon, A Treatise on Military Finance, p.66; Brewer, Tlie Sinews ofPower, p.36.


                                                  121
