In effect, there was only sufficient barracks space for the artillery while large numbers

of its personnel were deployed abroad. The experience of the Royal Artillery at

Woolwich suggests, therefore, that the success of the barrack-building programme in

terms of accommodating troops may not have been due to an impressive rate of

construction so much as extensive commitments on the continent and in the colonies.

         Barracks were to play an increasingly important role in accommodating the

army. It was apparent, however, that the needs of the force could not be met through

the utilisation of barracks and civilian properties alone; in particular the army needed

to expand its capability to house troops in the field. The solution was to make greater

use of camping equipment. As demonstrated by the contract awarded to the uncle of

John Trotter in 1775, the concept itself was not new, although its use to accommodate

troops grew during the course of the Napoleonic Wars. The provision of camping

equipment was theoretically the responsibility of the Quarter Master General's

department, although as noted in the previous chapter some of its tasks were in

practice conducted by the Commissariat.

         Initially the provision of camping equipment was such that, according to

Lieutenant Grattan, the only cover for many troops was 'the canopy of heaven'. 40S

Sleeping in the open in this way could be particularly ruinous to health and Private

Howell wrote of awaking one morning that 'we were up, an hour before day, and

wrung out our blankets, emptied our shoes of the water, each man trembling like the

leaf of a tree'. 409 The first (and on occasion only) line of defence for a soldier against

the elements was his blanket. This could be used either conventionally or as part of a

crude shelter, supported by muskets. The latter role was facilitated by the introduction

of a reinforced ring in the corner of army blankets.410 Not all soldiers, however,
tm Grattan, Adventures with the Connaught Rangers, p.292.
40" Hibbert (ed),^ Soldier of the 71st, pp.7922.
410 L. C. Gurwood (ed), General Orders of the Duke of Wellington in the Campaigns of 1809-14
(London, Clowes and Son, 1837), p.35.


                                               125
