         The Depot Troops first formed as cadres in December 1803 and, while starting

 as under strength formations, they were soon to expand. This ability to expand (and

 contract) was a notable feature of the Royal Wagon Train and demonstrated that it

 could benefit from and utilise additional resources more rapidly than other

 organizations. Clearly there is a question of scale as it was easier to raise the

 manpower required for a troop for train consisting of approximately 60 personnel

 rather than a 100 strong infantry company, yet taking into account the equipment and

 animals required this was still a considerable achievement and one that gave the

 formation flexibility.

         While the organization was relatively flexible, it is necessary to appreciate that

any significant expansion of the Royal Wagon Train (one that involved the creation of

new troops) would take time and could not necessarily occur as an immediate

response to a crisis. The processes involved in the forming of new troops were

demonstrated by the raising of the Depot Troops in 1803. In December of that year

there existed four such troops, all of which were assigned a skeleton staff, as shown in

figure 16:
          1 s' Depot Troop         Captain Turner, one Quarter Master, one sergeant and three
                                   corporals.

          2nd Depot Troop          Captain Green, one Quarter Master and two corporals.

          3rd Depot Troop          Captain Ewing, one Quarter Master and two corporals.

          4th Depot Troop          Captain Ravenscroft, one Quarter Master and two corporals

                 Figure 16: The Depot Troops of the Royal Wagon Train, December 1803.46 '




hi the months of January to March 1804 the process of enlarging the troops began but

they remained well below operational strength (as shown in figure 17). Even the full

complement of trumpeters (one per troop) was not attained until March.

461 Royal Wagon Train monthly pay list, December 1803, PRO WO 12/1523.


                                              143
