 the support offered through local poor rates, which was not always monetary.

 Authorities could be creative in how subsidies were paid, sometimes paying in kind

 through services such as clothing or laundry rather than with cash. 555

          Although the economic arguments against men enlisting were not as strong as

 they may first appear, there were other factors that could prevent men with families

 from enlisting. One difficulty was the family remaining together during the soldier's

 various redeployments and at the outbreak of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars

 the army made little provision for them to travel with soldiers. Regulations concerning

 this referred only to wives, it being assumed any children would also accompany

 them. It was relatively easy for wives to follow husbands serving in Britain and,

 despite the fact that married quarters and similar provision for wives did not exist

 until the mid-nineteenth century, families could remain together or at least in

 proximity due to the practice of billeting troops at inns (a practice that became less

 common as more barracks were constructed).556 When travelling overseas the army

 allowed a restricted number of wives (and their children) to follow each regiment. In

 such circumstances the army allowed for only six wives to travel with each infantry

company or cavalry troop, while in the Royal Artillery the allocation was a more

generous eight and ten for foot and horse batteries respectively."7 Rations were

established as being half that of a man's for women and one third for children. 55"

         Only the wives of privates and non-commissioned officers were permitted to

travel with the regiments to foreign postings at the expense of the army, while

 555 Christie. Stress and Stability, p. 106.
 556 M. Trustram. Women of the Regiment: Marriage and the Victorian Army (Cambridge, CUP, 1984),
passim. Colonel N. T. St John Williams, Tommy Atkins' Children: The Story of the Education of
Army's Children (London, HMSO, 1971), p.6.
557 H. Ton-ens to Duke of Wellington, Horse Guards, 5th November 1811, NAM 6807/221, p.40;
Brigadier-General Macleod to R.H. Crew, Woolwich, 10th July 1809, PRO WO 55/1314. For the
expedition to Egjpt the permitted number of wives allowed to follow the force was reduced to three per
company, a policy that adversely affected morale. P. Mackesy, British Victory in Egypi, 1801 (London,
Routledge, 1995), p. 15.
ss* Ton-ens Wellington, Horse Guards, 5th November 1811, NAM 6807/221, p.41.


                                                 180
