                                             Chapter 5

                              The provision of sundry necessities



         The military revolution had created the need for a state to pay, train and equip

its soldiers. In consequence military personnel represented an investment and, as

noted by Colin Jones, one that had to be protected and nurtured, with states taking a

growing interest in their welfare/41* Issues pertaining to welfare in the army can be

divided into two categories: those related to specific departments and those that were

more general issues, managed by either several departments or by government

legislation. This chapter examines both, the former through the medical and

chaplain's departments and the latter through a consideration of the army's policies to

encourage men with families to enlist. In all three areas the army was to demonstrate

both innovation and conservatism, with policies that had varying degrees of success.

The common denominator, however, remained a concern for soldiers' welfare and

while not logistics in a conventional sense this could be as vital to maintaining the

army as guns or food.

         One of the most innovative policies adopted by the army in the period was its

encouragement of men with families to enlist. Through legislating for families the

army was to increase its responsibilities, adding extra persons whose welfare the force

had to consider. Despite such drawbacks, this policy was considered important not

only to increase manpower but also because men with families were perceived to be

of a higher standard and more reliable, the Duke of Wellington stating in a letter to

Lieutenant-Colonel Torrens in 1811 that the army's failure to cater for their needs

encouraged 'the worst description of men to enter the service'. M9 Such a view was

S4S Jones, "The Military Revolution and the Professionalism of the French Army under the Ancien
Regime', p.41.
54V Gurwood (ed), Despatches and General Orders, p.348.


                                                 178
