By November 1816 there was clearly a concentration of capability as well as

manpower in France. This was reflected in the number of active troops deployed, with

four in France and only one in Britain. The solitary troop in Britain was, however,

massively over strength compared to its predecessors earlier in the war. In terms of

personnel this one troop, 166 strong, was approximately equivalent to the three active

troops that accounted for the main element of the Royal Wagon Train in the summer

of 1799, each of which had an average strength of approximately 60 privates.

Furthermore, the number of artificers - eleven - was actually more than the total

number employed by all of the troops in that same period. Thus, the operational

capability of Royal Wagon Train in Britain was at least as good as, if not marginally

better, than it had been at the turn of the century. That only one troop existed did not

unduly influence its flexibility either. Although still based at Croydon Barracks, the

Royal Wagon Train continued to maintain detachments at Hythe, Sandhurst and on

the Isle of Wight.

        The men of the Royal Wagon Train stationed in Britain in 1817 were

administered differently to their comrades on the continent. Even the way in which

Waterloo veterans were noted in returns was different, this practice being introduced

in September 1817. In both cases the veterans were noted in muster rolls by a Union

Flag symbol (specifically the cross of St. George and St. Patrick in red) next to their

names. 546 hi Britain this was recorded in the column indicating length of service,

whereas hi France it was placed directly next to the individual's name. The most

noticeable difference in the organization and structure of the two forces was the

respective complements of their specialist sergeants. In Britain the train had on its

strength a school master sergeant, an armourer sergeant, a saddler sergeant and a

trumpet major sergeant, but no sergeant majors. In contrast the force in France

 1 Royal Wagon Train monthly pay list, September 1816, PRO WO 12/1530.


                                             173
