wives and children of its soldiers the army would adopt policies that were in some

respects ahead of those in civilian society, as evident in regard to education. The

availability of education, for soldiers and their children alike, was one of the more

tangible advantageous offered by a career in the army, the education of soldiers'

children being an offshoot of programmes intended to educate the rank and file. The

subject of educating soldiers was a source of some debate; one contemporary arguing

that service in the army alone was sufficient, due to 'the beneficial influence of

moderate instruction and impressing the mind with a due sense of moral and religious

duty'/72 Such a view, however, was not common and formal education in the British

army had a history stretching as far back as 1675, when the first army school was

created in the Tangiers garrison. The growth in the number of such establishments

was not rapid but the barrack-building program enabled permanent schools to be

established in most regiments by 1809. The purpose of these schools was to educate

soldiers but it was common for their children to be taught in them when the regiment

was away. 573 Initially the provision of such education was at the whim of regimental

colonels although a standard structure was soon adopted and General Wetherall noted

that the school of the 80th Regiment in particular paid great attention to the children of

the regiment. 574

         The Duke of York was a keen advocate of education in the army, for both

soldiers and their children alike, and he considered that the cost of schools to be

'trifling compared to the benefits [of] attending such an establishment'. 575 It is no

coincidence that during York's tenure as commander-in-chief several notable

advances in the field of army education were to occur. One of the most significant


5T- MacDonald, Instructions for the Conduct ofInfantry, p.cl.
573 Williams, Tommy Atkins'Children, pp3-9.
514 NAM 6112/78, p!55.
575 Duke of York to Viscount Palmerston, Horse Guards, 26th August 1811, Williams, Tommy Atkins'
Children, Appendix B.


                                                  183
