almost the sole responsibility of certain departments, particularly in regard to the

provision of medical care and religious services. Military medicine in the early

nineteenth century was possibly most famous for its shortcomings. It is both an under-

considered and under-appreciated aspect of army life in the period, while its

availability was a tangible advantage enjoyed by soldiers over civilians. While

facilities were often rudimentary and unsanitary they were regulated, and, in theory at

least, staffed by trained personnel with access to up-to-date advances in medicine. At

this juncture it is necessary to stress that military and battlefield medicine can be

distinct and separate subjects. Battlefield medicine is concerned almost exclusively

with wounds and other injuries sustained on the battlefield, in effect the occupational

hazards of a career as a soldier, such as gunshot wounds. Conversely military

medicine is much broader subject that encompasses not only battlefield medicine but

also the provision of more general medical treatment, for those ailments and injuries

that could be suffered by soldiers had they been civilians, such as fevers and broken

legs caused by falls. Thus it is military medicine that forms the basis in this chapter as

it covers the full range of activities conducted by the army's medical personnel.

         The organisation with overall responsibility for the provision of medical

services in the army was the medical board. This body consisted of the Surgeon

General, Physician General, Inspector-General of Hospitals and a number of advisors,

persons who were specialists in their fields but who only temporarily sat on the board.

In 1816, for example, Surgeon James Fellows and Dr. Pym were consulted over the

outbreak of fever amongst British troops in Spain. 591* In his general overview of the

army in the period, P.J. Haythornthwaite is critical of the board. In particular he states

that the individuals who sat on the board possessed their own private practices in


5'" Army Medical Board to Secretary at War, 28th March 1816, PRO PC 1/4087, Privy Council
Miscellaneous Unbound Papers. March 1816.


                                               189
