laundry.'*0 This use of apprenticeships was not unique to the army and was similar to

the system utilised in industrial schools, in which the child's labour contributed to

running costs. 3" 1 This should not detract from the fact, however, that the apprentice

system was further evidence of a shift in army policy that improved the situation of

soldiers' families. The majority of teaching was to have been conducted by senior

pupils, this being a characteristic of the monitorial systems adopted in the eighteenth
century. 582

         The education offered at institutions such as Chelsea, Dover and the

regimental schools was in some respects innovative. Education available to civilians

was dominated by Sunday schools of various denominations. These establishments

had became increasingly secular during the 1790s with the result that by 1818 two

thirds of children attending school in England did so at Sunday School. 5*3

Secularisation in civilian education was such that it even interfered with learning,

through        preventing   co-operation      with      similar   establishments     of different

denominations or even by the fact that certain activities, such as writing, were not

allowed on Sundays. 5"4 Army schools differed as they were less concerned with

religious matters and instead focused upon skills considered likely to be of use in

adult life. 585 In this respect the army occupied a middle ground in its education

practices, ahead of such practices in the less progressive schools but lagging

somewhat behind the ideas of educationalists inspired by the works of Rousseau,

ideas that would remain on the fringes of education until the mid-nineteenth


wo Williams, Tommy Atkins' Children, p. 12.
581 W.A.C. Stewart, Progressives and Radicals in English Education, 1750 to 1970 (London,
MacMillan, 1972), p.92.
™- Stewart, Progressives and Radicals, p.27.
5*3 Horn, Education m Rural England, pp.30-32..
554 A.P. Wadsworth, The First Manchester Sunday Schools', in M.W. Flinn and T.C. Smout (eds).
Essavs in Social History (Oxford, Clarendon, 1974), pp. 110-114; Horn, Education in Rural England,
p.3L
555 Williams, Tommy Atkins' Children, p.13.


                                                  185
