se but rather the utilisation of those allocated to transport items such as regimental

account books. As a result general orders were issued restricting the practice but this

did little to improve the process of casualty removal from the battlefield. 639

        It is necessary to note that it was not practical for a division to possess a

number of wagons sufficient to remove all its casualties at the same time, not least

because casualty rates could vary from battle to battle. At Talavera, for example,

Aitchinson's division suffered over 1,800 wounded, six times the number sustained at

Salamanca in the following year.640 As a result it was inevitable that a number of

movements would be required to clear casualties but this was hindered by other

shortcomings. Of major importance was the absence of an effective triage system at

any point in the process of casualty removal or treatment, with casualties being

removed from the field as encountered and not according to the seriousness of their

injuries.

         A factor that aggravated the difficulties caused by insufficient transport was

lack of discipline. Looting would invariably follow victory, while in the aftermath of a

defeat the wounded would be left to fend for themselves as the army left the field.

Himself wounded during the Battle of Salamanca, the anonymous author of Life in the

38th Foot wrote that 'I was so weak that I could not get in [the sick wagon] of myself

so I was left laying on the ground and was taken prisoner'.641 Those taken prisoner

were perhaps fortunate as they were spared the fate of many other injured comrades,

who, due to the lack of attention paid to the wounded in the aftermath of a battle, fell

victim to looters, succumbed to their injuries or died of exposure as they lay on the

battlefield. Immediately after a battle swarms of looters would descend, primarily

locals but also soldiers and their wives. Captain Browne noted soldiers' wives were

6M Gurwood (ed), General Orders, p.49.
640 Smith. Napoleomc Wars Data Book, p.327.
641 NAM 7912/21, Anon, Life in the 38th Foot, p.52.


                                                201
