         Whenever any of the inferior persons of the Commissariat department may
         require admission into any field or general hospitals application for that
         purpose must be made by the Commissariat officer under whom such inferior
         person or persons may be serving, to the senior medical officer of the hospital.
         And the Commissariat officer will send the sick person to the hospital with a
         ticket, specifying his name, trade and place of birth. 630



 Of note is that admission of 'inferior persons' to hospital, unlike cases involving

 military personnel, required authorisation from both the commanding officer and the

 senior medical officer, not just a sick certificate. The order also addresses the

 difficulty of identifying the large number of persons employed by the Commissariat,

 as the commanding officer was to provide proof of identity. This would have been of

 additional importance overseas, given that the personnel may have been locals unable

to speak English. 631

         The trial of Surgeon Inglis demonstrated that the army would not tolerate

incompetent surgeons. In addition to doubts about their abilities, however, surgeons

were also vulnerable to accusations of fraud and embezzlement due to their

responsibility for medical stores including medicine but also items such as food for

patients. Such charges were not always correct and in 1815, for example, Surgeon

Barker, then serving with the 11 th Regiment of foot at Gibraltar, was cleared of

charges relating to embezzlement and failure to carry out his duty, although it was the

opinion of the court that he had made some 'dubious decisions'. 632

        As a group surgeons were open to criticism but it is important to highlight in

their defence that their effectiveness could be influenced by other factors. The daily

running of hospitals effectively rested not with themselves but the sergeants allocated

to each ward. Possessing at best a rudimentary knowledge of medicine, these

individuals were expected to fulfil a variety of diverse duties within hospitals on a
630 Standing Orders, Order No. 52, NAM 6807/221, p. 11.
631 See above p.63.
632 PRO WO 17/113, Proceedings Against Surgeon Barker, 1815.


                                              198
