troops in the field and it relied instead upon the personnel of other departments for

this task. The day-to-day running of medical services in the army was the

responsibility of the Medical Departments, one existing for each of the army's two

branches (Horse Guards and the Ordnance). At the head of the Horse Guards Medical

Department was a director-general and two principal inspectors, both of who were

qualified doctors, and all three men had joint responsible for employing personnel.

The number of other personnel employed by the department was subject to some

variation, and the following figures are based on those of 1812. The Inspectors of

Hospitals and their deputies oversaw hospitals, a total of eight and twenty-three of

these personnel respectively being on strength.

         The Medical Department exhibited many of the traits of such organisations in

the period, such as a bureaucratic administration, but differed from similar bodies as

its structure, while conforming to conventional military practices of hierarchy, was not

a pyramid. 608 In 1812 the total number of staff employed in army hospitals were, in

order of seniority, as follows: twenty-four physicians, one hundred and eighteen

surgeons, ten assistant surgeons, five purveyors, twenty-five deputy purveyors and

fifteen apothecaries. A total of thirteen personnel (an inspector, a deputy inspector, a

deputy purveyor and ten surgeons) were noted as being foreign, although anecdotal

evidence suggests that the number of foreigners employed to have been much

greater.609 The discrepancy between sources such as surgeons' memoirs and returns

concerning the number of foreign personnel employed in hospitals may be explained

by the close co-operation that occurred between the medical services of the British

army and those of other allied forces; certainly by the end of the peninsular war the

forces of Britain, Spain and Portugal were co-operating so closely in military

m NAM 6807/441, Appointment of John Webb as hospital mate. 24th December 1811.
609 Army List, 1812 (London, War Office, 1812), p. See P. Hayward (ed). Surgeon Henry's Trifles:
Events of a Military Life (London, Chatto & Windus, 1970).


                                                192
