 establishment in a hastily acquired local building such as a farmhouse. Here, despite

 the best efforts of surgeons, large numbers of casualties would result in a backlog that

 could take days to clear. In 1811 Dent was given the task of caring for wounded

 French prisoners of war, during which time he witnessed the consequences of a

 medical system without triage, and a situation where certain individuals were

 inevitably given a low priority:

         We found these unfortunate creatures in a most wretched condition; I think
         without exception the ugliest wounds I ever saw, numbers of them having
         fractured limbs from grape shot, and not being dressed for three days after the
         action (on account of our own wounded being so numerous) they really had a
         frightful appearance, and to crown all, they were laying on the floor, it being
         impossible to procure hospital bedsteads in sufficient numbers. 647



 One positive consequence of the lack of triage was that there was little respect of rank

 regarding the treatment of the wounded in hospital. In such situations Surgeon Henry

 claimed to have worked on the principle of'first come, first served; without respect of

 persons [or their rank]'.64*1

         Facilities with resources stretched beyond capacity, poor medical practice and

a limited understanding of human physiology were not the only factors that restricted

the effectiveness of surgeons in the British army. The failure of the army to supply

hospitals adequately with basic medicines and equipment hampered surgeons. The

Duke of Wellington complained to Lord Castlereagh that even a relatively small

battle, such as Talavera, would deplete hospital stores.649 Perhaps the most significant

difficulty facing surgeons, however, was that one of the most common lethal wounds,

and therefore the most frequently treated, were those inflicted by musket balls. This

was unfortunate as musket balls were capable of inflicting horrific and potentially life-

647 Dent to his Mother, Gibraltar, 21st August 1811, NAM 7008/11/2.
S4S Hayward (ed), Surgeon Henry's Trifles, p82.
649 Wellington to Castlereagh, Talavera, 21 st August 1809, PRO WO 1/228, War Department in Letters
and Papers, 1808-1820.


                                               203
