appear unremarkable, although the intensity of the fighting prior to the Peninsular War

 should not be underestimated. The significance of Jenning's case is that it

demonstrates a soldier's health could suffer despite avoiding the trauma of injury on

the battlefield.

         Due to a combination of factors such as the limitations of nineteenth-century

science, poor living conditions encountered by soldiers on campaign and the

 seriousness of wounds inflicted on the battlefield, death was a feature of military

medicine during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. Many soldiers doubted they

would survive time in hospital and in such situations turned to religion for comfort.

Clergy, however, were often notable by their absence and Private Wheeler complained

that there was 'no minister of religion to cheer the dying sinner' while in hospital. 677

This was despite the fact that the army had a commitment to provide clergy, and

associated facilities, to enable religious observance amongst its troops, including those

in hospital.

         The organisation responsible for providing soldiers with access to religion was

the Chaplain General's Department, whose personnel operated at divisional level. 571*

Chaplains were exclusively Anglican in this period, and it was not until much later in

the nineteenth century that those from other faiths were introduced.679 This was a

direct result of the relationship between the army and state in the period, and the role

of religion in the latter. Church and state in Britain were closely linked, the monarch

being both head of state and head of the Church of England. Ideologically the

maintenance of Protestantism was perceived as vital to concepts of cultural identity,

parliamentary democracy and the British way of life. 680 Non-Anglicans were viewed

677 Liddell - Hart, Tlie Letters ofPrivate Wieeler, p. 153.
67S Adjutant General Harry Calvert to Duke of Wellington, Horse Guards, 8th November 1811, NAM
6807/221, pp.3 9-40.
679 G. Hanies-Jenkins, The Army in Victorian Society (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977).
passim; J. Keegan, The Face ofBattle (London, Johnathan Cape, 1973), p. 137.
6m Co\ley, Britons, p.382.


                                                211
