 complaint demonstrates that, in addition to wounds sustained during battle, patients

 were admitted to hospital with other complaints and conditions (in this case described

 as 'agues'). It is important to appreciate that military hospitals were not only filled

 with the wounded as soldiers could find themselves requiring medical attention for a

 variety of reasons. In such instances admittance to hospital was achieved through

 presentation for a sick certificate, applications for which were made through the office

 of the Adjutant-General or, in the case of Commissariat personnel, the Commissary

 General.673 These applications were assessed by medical boards, which met at selected

 hospitals on the fifth, twelfth and twentieth days of each month.674

         Admittance to hospital for treatment of various ailments was an advantage

 enjoyed by soldiers over civilians because, despite their failings, military

 establishments were relatively well regulated and, while not free, incurred only a

 minor cost. Despite these advantages, however, disease and rigours of service took a

 toll on many soldiers. On 31 st May 1808 Captain Jennings' of the 28th Regiment made

 his decision to retire from the army, stating that:

         at this time my health having suffered considerably and finding myself no
         longer fit to encounter the hardship of actual service I resolve to retire... after
         eighteen years service chiefly foreign in which period I completed several hard
         campaigns without ever having experienced any wounds or other corporal
         injury, the usual consequence of field service.675



During service he had suffered from an occasional liver complaint, in addition to

'violent and alarming' bleeding from his head towards the end of his career.676 It is

interesting to note that Jennings, despite the failing health that he attributed to military

service, regarded himself as fortunate not to have sustained any wounds. Considering

that Jennings avoided the fiercest fighting of the Napoleonic Wars this may at first
673 Standing Orders, Order No. 51, NAM 6807/221, p. 11.
674 Cartaxo, 5th December 1810, NAM 6807/221, pp.3-4.
675 NAM 8301/102, Memoirs of Captain Peter Jennings. pp.133-4.
676 Ibid, p. 134.


                                               210
