threatening injuries. Of such injuries Chevalier wrote that:

          a wound of this description must... produce more or less contusion and
          laceration of the wounded parts; will often be accompanied with haemorrhage;
          the fracture of a bone; and, in many instances, with the lodgement of
          extraneous substances. 630



 Frequently the velocity of gunshots was sufficient to allow a musket ball to strip

 muscle from bone after entering the body, further adding to the trauma caused by the
 injury.651

         Despite the severe damage inflicted by gunshots even serious wounds could be

 survived. In 1813, for example, Lieutenant Bingham noted how a soldier of his

regiment survived being shot through both his nose and the roof of his mouth. 652 This

is remarkable considering that, prior to Chevalier's treatise, the accepted medical

practice in regard to gunshot wounds was, quite literally, hit and miss. In his treatise

Chevalier urged surgeons to open wounds prior to operating. This was because such

practice was perceived to be:

         generally safer and better, and often gives much less pain, than poking into a
         narrow and inadequate aperture, or making a random plunge, which may
         include parts that had better be avoided, and perhaps even miss the vessel it
         was intended to secure.6'3



While primitive by twenty-first-century standards, the advice contained within

Chevalier's work was a step forwards. Thus, the Royal Colleges of Surgeons adopted

Chevalier's treatise in 1806 but until this information was disseminated to surgeons

the wounded continued to suffer the 'random plunge' of medical instruments.

         After leaving the field hospital the casualty, depending on the seriousness or

nature of the injuries sustained, could return straight to his unit, begin a period of
650 T. Chevalier,^ Treatise on Gunshot Wounds (London, Bagster, 1806), p.2.
651 Chevalier, A Treatise on Gunshot Wounds, p. 97.
652 Bingham to his mother, nr Echelar, 3"1 April 1813, NAM 6807/163, p.59.
653 Chevalier. .4 Treatise on Gunshot Wounds, p.75.


                                                204
