 For soldiers of other faiths the Anglican religious services provided by the army

 would have had little relevance and, as a result, they either failed to attend or utilised

 local religious facilities such as convents. 707 Such practices, however, could make

 non-Anglican soldiers a visible minority and subject to the prejudices of their

 colleagues, the word Methodist being used as derogatory term to describe a reserved

 individual. 708 Interestingly non-Anglicans were not the only soldiers of overt religious

 faith to be victimised by comrades: the Anglican Lieutenant George Hennell, for

 example, complained that his comrades were profane and mocked the bible, evidence

 of a general decline in deference towards religion in the period. 709

         It is apparent that there were a considerable number of reasons why soldiers

would be reluctant or, for that matter, unable, to attend a religious service. Yet,

despite a relatively low demand for their services, there were an inadequate number of

chaplains available to meet this demand. Again this parallels developments in British

society: a lack of clergy being the factor highlighted by John Foster as the reason for

declining religious observance in British cities during the period. 710 Lieutenant

Bingham in particular was critical of the lack of chaplains and complained that the

small number available was barely sufficient to do more than 'remind us that we are

Protestants'; he also noted that he believed only by allocating chaplains to brigades

rather than divisions could this shortfall in religious provision be avoided. 711

Bingham's belief concerning the allocation of chaplains cut to the heart of the

problems concerning the provision and attendance of religious services in the army.

There is evidence that otherwise regular churchgoers, such as Judge Advocate

Larpent, Captain Browne and Private John Green, were unable to attend religious


707 Green, Tlie Vicissitudes of a Soldier's Life, p.21.
7(w Hibbert (ed),A Soldier of the 71st), p.xiii.
"0* Glover (&d),A Gentleman Volunteer, p.201.
~'° Foster. Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution, p.29.
711 Bingham to his mother, Galispendo 6th March 1813, NAM 6807/163, p. 12.


                                                218
