 outside of his own parish. Even chaplains in regular formations, however, failed to

 make close bonds with troops in regular formations. This included even the overtly

 religious memoirists Quartermaster Surtees who evidently underwent a profound and

 painful religious conversion during his time in the army with little input from military

 clergy.694 Above all the army's policy towards chaplains in the auxiliary forces

 demonstrated that there was relatively little concern about the religious practices of

 British soldiers, and in consequence only a limited effort was made to force the

 Anglican faith upon them.

          The Duke of Wellington wrote that he believed 'the meeting of soldiers in

 their cantonments to sing psalms, or hear a sermon read... is, in the abstract, perfectly

 innocent\69:> This was typical of the army's policy, which sought not to instil

Anglicanism into its troops but facilitate its practice. In consequence, chaplains on

 active service were expected to conduct church services twice per week and divine

service each Sunday. For such services chaplains were instructed that 'more men shall

not be assembled for that purpose [a church service] at a time, than the voice can

reach, a precaution very necessary to ensure the attention of the soldier... [to allow

this] the chaplain shall perform the service successively to the different corps of his

division'. 69& The preferred location for such services was the open air as the army did

little to provide buildings. This may be significant for understanding the attitude of

soldiers towards religion while in the army because the decline of religious

observance in urban areas during the period has been linked with lack of religious

facilities. 697

         There is evidence that, due to a variety of factors, services occurred

6"4 See NAM 7912/21. Anoa Life in the 38th Foot; Surtees. Twenty Five Years in the Rifle Brigade.
pp. 300-314.
695 Gurwood (ed), Despatches and General Orders, p.429.
6y6 Adjutant General Harry Calvert to Duke of Wellington, Horse Guards, 8th November 1811. NAM
6807/22, pp.39-40.
697 Harvey, Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century, p.71.


                                                215
