 were predominantly Catholic. 691 Protestantism was a principle that the state was

 willing to sacrifice in the face of military necessity, whether it was overriding the

 rights of an individual to worship on a Sunday or accepting Catholics and Dissenters

 into its ranks if not the hierarchy. The latter in particular was to be significant, leading

 to reforms that had implications for society in general. 692

          Despite high-minded principles such as defending the Church of England, the

 actual policy towards religion in the army can be best described as lethargic. This was

 apparent at the most basic level, specifically the allocation of chaplains. While

 divisional chaplains were, in theory at least, present in regular formations, there was

 no such provision in the auxiliary formations. This was caused by the structure of

 militia, volunteer and fencible units, formations that were often administered outside

 of a divisional structure and thus unable to benefit from the existence of associated

 personnel. In consequence chaplains were assigned to certain auxiliary formations, but

were rarely on the active strength of such units. This was demonstrated by the case of

Reverend Samuel Wells, who was appointed as chaplain to the Coleridge Volunteer

Artillery in 1804. Despite the formation conducting drills and meeting on a regular

basis, he was instructed not take up the full responsibilities of his post and 'not to take

rank in the army except during the time of the said corps being called out into actual
service'. 693

         By failing to integrate chaplains fully into the structure of auxiliary formations,

the effectiveness of such individuals could have been undermined by lack of

familiarity with those under their care. In part this could have been avoided due to the

nature of auxiliary units, which tended to be drawn from a single locality, but it is

possible that such a chaplain would have known few individuals originating from
SV1 See above p.62.
Gn Cookson. The British Armed Nation, p. 156.
693 NAM 6807/405, Commission from Lord Lieutenant of Devon appointing Samuel Wells Chaplain to
the Coleridge Corps of Royal Volunteer Artillery, 24th October 1804.


                                              214
