significantly less frequently than was recommended. Private Wheeler, for example,

noted that 'in winter quarters [chaplains] once on a Sunday (weather permitting),

perform divine service, but when the campaign opens, it is seldom, or ever, an

opportunity offers'. 698 Thus weather and the practicalities of military life could prevent

religious observance. Many battles - including Waterloo - were fought on Sundays,

limiting the time available for religious observance. 699 In consequence Sundays were

frequently perceived by soldiers on campaign to be like any other day. This was a

significant departure from attitudes in civilian life as both pressure from ecclesiastical

authorities and state regulations restricted the activities that could occur. Non-

religious meetings, for example, could not be held on Sundays following the Sunday

Observance Act (1781) and Seditious Meeting Act (1795). 70° Soldiers on campaign

were effectively exempt from such regulations and their relaxed attitude towards

Sunday may be evidence of the general decline in religious practice across Britain

during the period, as noted by Anthony Harvey. 701

         The lack of respect shown by many soldiers towards Sundays shocked recruits

from staunchly religious backgrounds. Private Thomas Howell of the 71 st Regiment of

Foot was such a soldier, although he soon adopted the practices of his colleagues, and

admitted that he did not attend a church service while serving in Spain. 702 It may be

that this is further evidence of a general decline in religious adherence amongst

soldiers, reflecting trends in society itself. Through being removed from restrictive

Sunday regulations and social pressures to conform to religious codes of conduct, it is

possible that Howell was able to display his true feeling about religious observance

while on campaign. There were, however, a variety of reasons why formerly devout


698 Brackets in original. Liddell - Hart (ed), 77ie Letters ofPrivate Wheeler, p. 153.
6W Keegan, Tlie Face ofBattle, p. 138.
700 Foster, Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution, p.32.
"01 See Harvey, Britain in the Early Nineteenth Century, passim.
702 Hibbeit,^ Soldier ofthe 71", pp.16-17.


                                                    216
