services as frequently as they desired, and this inability could be attributed to

deficiencies in the number of chaplains available. 712

        The limited allocation of chaplains to divisions could significantly restrict the

practice and observance of religion in the army (and it is important to note that there is

little evidence the army failed to recruit the number of clergy it believed to be required

- in this case the culprit was certainly policy, not manpower shortages). No doubt

apathy towards such activities had to be overcome but it was also the role of chaplains

to encourage faith as well as service the needs of those who possessed it, measures to

combat the spread of Methodism being a case in point. As result of this role, which

was almost missionary in nature, the small numbers of chaplains available were

overstretched, a fact demonstrated by the orders of 1811 which instructed them to

deliver the Sunday sermon multiple times due to the size of their congregations. 713

When units were deployed in Christian countries this pressure on chaplains was in

part relieved through the utilisation of local facilities by the troops, just as Catholic

soldiers in Spain had used churches of their own religion. On occasion soldiers even

proved willing to use other denominations' places of worship, the Protestant Private

Green, for example, stating that he attended both 'churches and dissenting chapels'

while in Ireland. 714 This, however, was not the situation in distant colonial garrisons,

which often lacked access to local religious facilities of any Christian denomination.

        While Bingham may have been justified to complain of a shortage of chaplains

in the European theatre, such individuals were almost non-existent in the army

overseas. The absence of chaplains in units deployed overseas can be attributed to a

variety of factors. As previously stated, the army had a somewhat ambivalent attitude


712 Laipent (ed), We Private Journal ofFSLarpent, vol II,, pp.150-51; Buckley (ed), The Napoleonic
War Journal of Captain 'Thomas Henry Brawne, p.257; Green, Vicissitudes, p. 185.
713 Adjutant General Harry Calvert to Duke of Wellington, Horse Guards, 8th November 1811. NAM
6807/221, pp.39-40.
7" Green, Vicissitudes, p.218.


                                                219
