 individuals, such as Howell, would be reluctant to attend the religious services

 provided by the army.

          It is possible that the nature and content of religious services offered by the

 army may have served to deter some soldiers. A sermon preached to the Queen's

 Regiment of Volunteers in 1804, with its references to the destruction of Jerusalem,

 demonstrated that an element of 'fire and brimstone' existed in the discourse of army

 chaplains. 703 That preaching of this nature could be unsuitable was demonstrated in

 advice issued by the Adjutant-General, who recommended that services should 'close

 with a short practical sermon, suited to the habits and understanding of soldiers'. 704

 These instructions are of note not only because of the advice they contained, but also

that they were one of the few instances in which the army as an institution acted to

 increase its troop's attendance at religious services. This occurred at a time when there

was growing concern at the spread of Methodism in the army. Thus, John Keegan

argues, attempts to increase the attendance of religious services directed by army

chaplains was an attempt to combat the spread of Methodism. 70;> Such a theory

explains the sudden interest displayed by the army in the content of sermons during

the later phases of the Napoleonic Wars, the preceding years having been

characterised by the army's relative indifference to the religious practices of its troops.

         Fears relating to the spread of Methodism demonstrated that there existed in

the army a significant number of troops who were not of the Anglican faith, although

the precise numbers concerned cannot be determined as the religion of troops was not

included on returns until 1861 (further evidence that there was little concern about the

religious composition of the army and, perhaps, a lack of administrative efficiency). 706

"w NAM 7404/58, A Sermon Preached At The Presentation Of Colours To The Queens Royal Regiment
of Volunteers in 1804. pp. 1-2.
104 Adjutant General" Harry Calvert to Duke of Wellington, Horse Guards, 8th November 1811, NAM
6807/22 l,p.40.
705 Keegan, Tlie Face ofBattle, p. 137.
706 Cookson. The British Armed Nation, p. 177.


                                                 217
