                                                   Chapter 6

                            English county governance and the British army



         Maintaining the British army was very much an affair of central government,

executed through governmental and military departments such as the Ordnance Board,

the Commissariat and Royal Wagon Train. There remained, however, a small but

significant role for the organisations and individuals more often associated with the

governance of counties. Parish councils, churchwardens, justices of the peace and

Lords Lieutenant would undertake a variety of important tasks directly related to

maintaining the army. Prior to 1802 these tasks primarily consisted of supervising the

movement of troops and ensuring adequate numbers of recruits were raised in the

county. The threat of French invasion would increase the importance of these tasks

and create new responsibilities for the organisations that governed the counties. From

 1802 the role of these bodies would change from one of merely supporting the

standing army to raising and maintaining new auxiliary forces in the form of the

Volunteers.

         Due to the efforts of the Royal Navy the invasion was not to occur but the

contingency plans designed to counter a French landing reveal much about British

military thinking in the period, and the difficulties that could be encountered when

raising and maintaining armed forces. 72" More significant is that the invasion

preparations demonstrate the criteria under which the state would be willing to

remove the checks and balances imposed to restrict the army and safeguard civil

liberties, issues that lay at the heart of the army's relationship with the state and thus

the level of support it enjoyed. The army would have been raised to the status of a

7-s Some of this research has been previously published. C. Chilcott, "English counties and defensive
planning. 1803 to 1805', inBulletin of the Military Historical Society, vol. 54, no.215, February 2004.
pp. 149-154.

                                                  229
