 militia ballot."2 This task involved many elements of a county's administrative

 structure, the overseers of the poor in individual parishes who paid the expenses of

 those selected by the ballot, the Lord Lieutenant who co-ordinated the county militia

 and magistrates who enforced the quotas. The involvement of county institutions in

 the ballot militia ballot was effectively a blurring between the role of the centre and

 periphery in defence policy, the periphery ultimately possessing not only the power to

 raise troops but also a role in their employment. 733 Joanna Innes describes this blurring

 as evidence of a close relationship between the centre and periphery in Britain, but

this could also be described as resulting from an anachronism. 734 During the

eighteenth century the militia had been viewed as a force for local defence so its

administration at county level was logical. 73" By the end of the eighteenth century,

however, the militia had become an instrument of national defence, with regiments

operating outside the boundaries of the home county and, importantly, as a source of

recruits for the regular army. 736 In these circumstances, the wisdom of administering

the militia at county level was questionable. Clearly, the relationship between the

periphery and centre in British politics had evolved at a slower pace than military

developments.

         Despite the fact that the elevation of the militia to a national defence force

rendered the role of the county in its administration an anachronism, other evidence

exists supporting Innes' description of the close relationship between the centre and

periphery. Perhaps the most significant evidence can be found in the intended role of

the bodies associated with county government in the event of a French invasion.


1}- To see how the ballot operated at a count) level, see PRO PC 1/13/160. Militia Returns for
Lincolnshire and PRO PC l/13/155,EastRiding of Yorkshire. See also Hall, British Strategy, p.2.
733 See below p.252.
~34 Innes, "The Domestic Face of the Fiscal-Military State', p. 118.
735 Brewer, Tlie Sinews ofPower, p.33.
736 Fletcher, Wellington's Regiments, pp. 15-16; P. Karsten, Irish soldiers in the British Army. 1792
1922: Suborned or Subordinated?', in Journal of Social History, (Autumn 1983), p.35..


                                                  231
