additional advantage that many already lay on a road and canal network.

        Parishes were instructed to appoint 'several and discreet trusty persons' for the

task of remaining behind in the village after its evacuation, until the enemy

approached or they were surrounded (how this latter situation was to be escaped was

not made clear). Their role was to safeguard the remaining goods and 'facilitate the

means of supplying our army with what must otherwise be destroyed'. 773 It is likely,

but not explicit in the orders, that a number of millers and bakers may also have

remained in the villages. Such individuals would have co-operated closely with the

Commissariat, which would have both purchased the goods they produced and

arranged the delivery of necessary supplies (such as flour for bakers if none was

available locally). 774 Furthermore commissaries may have been required to advise

civilians about how best to bake their bread, giving an insight into how this activity

was conducted in the military. Many civilian bakers believed that ovens could only be

used to produce four batches of bread per day, although in the military six was

standard practice. It was anticipated that yeast would be in particularly short supply

and bakers were advised to produce either unleavened bread, or manufacture their

own yeast. The latter was to be achieved through using a recipe written for the Dunbar

garrison in 1796, rather than experimentation, as it was the belief of the authorities

that 'it is highly necessary to caution everyman concerned in supplying an army,

against placing any confidence in schemes not perfectly and satisfactorily tried

himself. 775 The optimum loaf size was to be between three to four and a half pounds,

with a thick crust, as such bread stayed fresher longer. Guidance was also to be given

how best to stack bread on wagons (preferably when cold) and the duration of any

storage prior to its consumption. 776 This advice is notable not merely because it
773 PROWO30/14l r p.5.
774 PRO WO 30/14l.pp.22-3.
775 PRO WO 30/141, p.30.
776 PRO WO 30/141, pp.24-30.


                                          241
