 whole population of a county would be mobilised to defeat any invader.

           The preparations for invasion required careful planning, a process that began

 in 1803 when questionnaires were distributed to each county under the Defence of the

 Realm Act. 741 The bureaucratic practices of the period - including pre-printed forms

 and tabulated data - were used with considerable effect in an attempt to determine the

 manpower resources available in each county. 742 These, and other preparations,

 utilised the structure of county government. Parishes would report to subdivisions, in

 turn these would report back to the Deputy Lords Lieutenant, with the Lord Lieutenant

 having ultimate responsibility for a county's invasion preparations. The utilisation of

 existing bodies allowed the Lords Lieutenant to use their authority to full effect, while

 also allowing a rapid implementation of the required preparations: this was a vital

 factor given that a French landing could have occurred within months or even weeks

 if conditions were favourable. Thus, the Lord Lieutenant of Hampshire was able to

 impose a tight schedule for the initial phase of preparations. On 24th June 1803 he had

 received his instructions; these were discussed at a public meeting on 8th July at

Winchester, meetings were held within each Parish nine days later (17th July), and the

subdivisions met on 25th July, with the required returns from parishes also completed

by this date. 743 The dates selected for each meeting were not arbitrary and the selection

of the 17th is of note as it was a Sunday. This day was selected deliberately to allow

the parish meetings to be held immediately after morning or evening services, it being

believed that scheduling meetings after Sunday service would ensure good

attendance. 744
          The bodies responsible for governing a county did not continue unhindered by


741 Colley, Britons, pp.306-307.
 42 Brewer, Tlie Sinews ofPower, pp.222-225.
743 This system was effectively a military one imposed on civilians and is similar to that utilised by
organisations such as the Commissariat, p.49.
744 Salisbury Journal, 11th July 1803, p. 3.


                                                   233
