 from stables. 7" 2

          The movement of large numbers of civilians and livestock would have placed

 a heavy burden on the transport infrastructure. When moving large bodies of civilians

 the Lords Lieutenant were instructed that:

         proper march routes should be fixed upon for driving them away to certain
         places of security in the interior of the country, taking care to chuse [sic] bye
         roads for that purpose; that the Great Turn Pike Roads may remain entirely
         free for the marching of troops... and where it may be unavoidable to pass one
         or more of the great roads, it should be done in such a manner, that they may
         only be crossed and occupied during the shortest time possible. 783



 It was further recommended that, to avoid congestion, the movement of civilians be

 approved by the general commanding that district. The large herds of sheep present on

 the South Downs were a particular source of concern in Wiltshire because, due to

 their proximity to the English Channel, it was likely they would be removed soon after

 an invasion. It was stated that 'the greater part of this county is highly favourable for

the removal, not only of inhabitants, but of large flocks of sheep requiring space; they

must therefore take their route over the downs'. 71*4

         The evacuation of herds would have caused considerable disruption not only

to the transport infrastructure but also to the regional economy. If the French had

driven inland then such herds would have been lost in any case but given that the

envisaged scenario was of an invading army being confined to the coast such

disruption would have been unnecessary. John Brewer states that the principal object

of any invader would probably have been to cause financial panic rather than capture

territory. 785 Thus the policy of evacuating herds as soon as invasion occurred would in

fact have aided the enemy. It is necessary to note that while Brewer believed an


~*2 Schechter and Sander. Delivering the Goods, p. 45.
"w PRO WO 30/141. p.4.
7S4 General Meeting of the Lieutenancy, Sarum, 19th November 1803, WSRO 1719/30.
785 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 191.


                                              243
