would have been expected to travel cross-country as much as possible. Such vehicles

had only limited cross-country mobility and, while wagons earmarked for military

service were instructed to be equipped with at least one tool such as a shovel in case

of becoming stuck, movement would have been slow. 7ss>

         It is likely that bureaucracy and regulations may have further slowed the

movement of the civilian wagons impressed into military service. The rights of the

individuals manning the wagons was made clear to them when opting for this duty,

and it is apparent that in the anti-invasion scheme the rights of the individual were to

be eroded less than those of private ownership. Each vehicle was to be given a

certificate identifying the owner, driver, number of horses and, most significantly the

date at which it was to be discharged from duty, along with the number of days spent

marching. Drivers were to be paid for each day of service, according to rates set by

magistrates and lieutenants in each county. Every wagon was also to have a conductor

of stores, responsible for ensuring that receipts were received for all goods transferred

and rations received. 790 The system was bureaucratic and had the potential to be a

recipe for disaster if enacted, with drivers unwilling to move without the appropriate

paperwork or because their period of service had expired. The Royal Wagon Train had

been formed to avoid such situations and the utilisation of civilian transport for

general military service would have thus been a step backwards for the army. 791
         Living off requisitioned cattle and its advance probably slowed by columns of

refugees and evacuees, the British army would have sought to drive back the invader.

The regular army would have been supported in this task not only by the militia but

also by other formations created to resist invasion. 792 A scheme to raise a corps of

7S" WSRO 1719/30. schedule 6.
™ PRO WO 30/141, pp. 16-17.
7>n See chapter 4.
:w For a consideration of how they were raised see C. Chilcott, "English counties and defensive
planning, 1803 to 1805\ mBulletin of the Military Historical Society, vol. 54, no.2157 February 2004.
pp. 149-154.

                                                 245
