mounted scouts and guides from local populations was never implemented but new

Volunteer units were to be raised. 793 Besides infantry and cavalry formations, the

Volunteers included pioneer corps that were to be raised from each parish. Their role

was described in 'Proposals for Rendering the Body of the People Instrumental in the

General Defence' as follows:

        The duty of the pioneers will generally consist in repairing and opening such
        roads, bridges and communications as may facilitate the movement of our own
        army, and in breaking up and obstructing such as it may be necessary to render
        impassable to the enemy. 794



The inclusion of a corps of pioneers in the invasion preparations is notable for several

reasons. Not least is the fact that it demonstrates an understanding and appreciation of

the need for supporting arms in an army. In addition the pioneers represented a natural

progression of the doctrine adopted in British defence plans, one that sought to both

deprive the enemy and support British forces (in this case through opening and closing

lines of communication as required).

        The pioneers were to have operated in companies of twenty-five to fifty men,

commanded by a lieutenant or captain respectively (schedule 5). In the event that the

minimum number of twenty-five could not be attained companies from different

parishes would have been combined, this was a contrast to policy in the regular army,

in which even seriously under strength formations were rarely amalgamated. 79'

Equipment would have varied between units as personnel were required to provide

their own and the following was a recommended list of items for a unit of twenty-five

men: six each of pickaxes, spades and shovels, three billhooks and four felling axes. 790

In addition it was also noted that 'a proportion of wheelbarrows will also be very


7"3 PRO WO 30/141, p.6.
794 pRO wo 30/141, p.6.
793 Orders. General Meeting of the Lieutenancy, Sanim, 19th November 1803, WSRO 1719/30.
7% PRO WO 30/141, p.6.


                                              246
