serviceable'. 797 The fact that the pioneers had to provide their own tools was evidence

that the state lacked the means to meet adequately the needs of defending forces itself,

and raises doubts about their effectiveness if such tools could not be supplied.

         An insight into the volunteer units formed to counter a French invasion can be

gained by the fact that the ability of each parish to supply personnel for military

purposes (as summarised in schedule 4) was initially based on the number of

individuals able to arm themselves. It was anticipated that each parish would be able

to supply contingents of both horse and foot, while the armaments each was to

provide reveals much about the force and its potential effectiveness on the battlefield.

Cavalry were requested to supply a pistol or a sword (preferable both), while those on

foot would provide either a 'firelock' (musket) or pitchfork798 . The reason for this was

laid out in a letter from the Lord Lieutenant to the parish of Box in August 1803:
         There will be difficulty in issuing arms from his majesty's stores for the
         extensive training and exercise required in this period, without material injury
         to the other essential branches of the military, I am directed to resort to the
         zeal and public spirit of the inhabitants of this county for procuring a return of
         arms in their possession, in order that, with their consent, they may for a time
         be applied to the service of this country. 799



In short, there were insufficient armaments to go around and the use of civilian

weapons alleviated the need to supply firearms to volunteer formations. 800 Of note is

that the Lord Lieutenant stated that a ratio of one musket between four men was

initially sufficient, to allow for adequate training and drill/01 There was thus a very

real possibility that volunteer units resisting a French invader in 1803 could expect to

engage the French with a ratio of one musket to three close combat weapons (one
""PRO WO 30/14Lp.6n.
""* WSRO 1719/30, schedule 4.
"w To the Minister. Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Principal Inhabitants of Box in the
County of Wilts, from the Lord Lieutenant, Wilton House, 2"d August 1803, WSRO 1719/30.
m This is further evidence that the supply of munitions to coalition partners occurred at the expense of
British forces, p. 105.
m To the Minister, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Principal Inhabitants of Box in the
County of Wilts, from the Lord Lieutenant, Wilton House, 2nd August 1803, WSRO 1719/30.


                                                  247
