 invasion with such objectives would have been best aimed at southeastern England, an

 invasion at any point in southern England would most likely have caused severe

 economic disruption due to the anti-invasion measures. This supports Linda Colley's

 claim that Wiltshire was a county likely to be threatened by an invasion, even though

 it was landlocked. 71*6 Wiltshire might have been affected by a French invasion

 primarily because of its wider repercussions, not actual military action or an advance

 inland.

           Clearly sheep and civilians on foot could make the journey cross-country but

this would have been more difficult for the wheeled conveyances that would have

been used to move the infirm, food, personal possessions and those unwilling to walk.

The village of Box had promised to supply three carts for conveying supplies to

defending forces, each with four animals (a total of twelve). Schedule 2, however,

reveals that the village contained no fewer than ninety-two draft horses, leaving a total

of eighty animals available to pull the carts and wagons of the population. It is likely

that, despite orders to the contrary, many of the population would have taken to the

roads, particularly in a village such as Box that sat astride the London to Bristol road

(the modern day A4). 7*7
           The wagons allocated for the transport of supplies were to be ready to move at

twenty fours notice. It was expected that they would travel twenty-five to thirty miles

per day, depending on load but such a figure may have been excessively optimistic. 78"

These vehicles occupied an ambiguous position within the command structure and it

is unclear whether they were to be given the same rights on the roads as the military.

This was crucial because if the vehicles were to be regarded as military, civilians were

expected to give way, but if this was not the case wagons, and the supplies on them,


m Colley, Britons, p.308.
7S? WSRO 1719/30. schedule 2.
7>* PRO WO 30/141, p. 16.


                                            244
