and frequently overlooked, is that increased regulation created standards for soldiers'

welfare even after their period of service. Regular inspections ensured that barracks,

schools and hospitals met the required criteria. Considering the conditions in the latter

this is contentious but nevertheless regulations existed that defined standards in

hospitals, and these regulations were enforced on occasion. Regulations created

additional costs and administration for the army but it is apparent that in this period

there was a trend towards increasing investment in soldiers' welfare, a situation seen

to benefit the army. This was most apparent in regard to the treatment of soldiers'

families.

         The state provided the resources and impetus for many of the factors that gave

the British army its strength but this strength was fragile. The army lacked strategic

depth, a policy that suited a state conscious to avoid disruption and control

expenditure but one that was also a dangerous gambit. Potentially the army could have

been a one shot weapon, defeat in one campaign spelling the end of the force, such a

fate effectively befalling Napoleon's Grande Armee in Russia, a debacle from which

it never recovered. 829 There was a genuine fear amongst contemporaries that such a

fate would befall the British army if committed on the continent, and it has been

estimated that the loss of one brigade may have been sufficient to cause the collapse

of the Peninsular army. 100 If such an event had occurred it may well have resulted in

the loss of the Royal Wagon Train's most effective elements and many Commissariat

personnel, besides the loss of equipment and frontline troops.

         Considering the above scenario, how realistic was the possibility of a

significant British military defeat? Given the nature of this study, such a question

could be turned to that of how effectively was the army maintained. Yet, as stated by

*-9 Mackesy. British Victory m Egypt, p.4.
*30 Wilson. An Enquiry into the state of the Forces of the British Empire, p.51; Weller, Wellington in
the Peninsula, p.372.


                                                  258
