 against the French threat. 83" Yet, to understand the army the two spheres cannot be

 separated as one could influence the other and, as noted by Jeremy Black, conflict was

 closely linked to concepts of Empire in the period.*40 As demonstrated in this work

 garrisons in all theatres competed with each other (and allied armies) for the

 sometimes scarce resources that they needed, including uniforms, munitions and

 manpower (as demonstrated in the global distribution of chaplains in particular). The

 global deployment of the army was also one of the most subtle but significant

 consequences of its relationship with the state, creating a situation that not only

 hindered the army but also influenced its composition. 1*41 Thus, in the context of a

 force deployed around the world, the failures of the army beyond Europe cannot be

 ignored. M2

          If it is accepted that the British army was not an overwhelming success, and a

 major defeat was possible, it must be asked how far the state was willing to alter its

 relationship with the army in order to aid the recovery of the force? The state

 demonstrated that certain principles would be sacrificed to aid national defence, such

 as the right of practising Anglicans to worship when they wished if in the auxiliary

forces. More far reaching concessions may have been made in the event of a French

invasion, a situation that had the potential to trigger the implementation of military

control over large parts of southern Britain, not to mention massive economic and

social disruption.



 *39 See Haythomthwaite, Tlie Napoleonic Source Book. Hie Colonial Wars Source Book (London.
 Anns and Armour, 1997).
s40 Black. Sea Borne Empire, pp. 113-114.
841 In particular colonial commitments influenced the creation of light infantry tactics and formations in
the army. A. Harman, 'They decide not, nor are they chiefly relied upon in battle1 : British Rifles and
Light Infantry in the Peninsular War', in P Griffiths (ed), A History of the Peninsular War Vol IX:
Modern Studies of the War in Spain and Portugal, 1808 -1814 (London, Greenhill Books, 1999).
pp.265-298.
s42 Imperialism could and did continue separately from military affairs. Examples include the Mungo
Park's expeditions in West Africa (1795-97, 1805-06) and Flinder's circumnavigation of Tasmania
(1802-03), the latter in particular beign concerned with trade. Black, Sea Borne Empire, pp. 165-166.


                                                   261
