focuses on more necessary items.5 Other important aspects that could have warranted

consideration include cartography and intelligence gathering. The two issues could be

closely linked but data concerning them tends to be either scarce or fragmentary.

Another issue absent from this work is how foreign armies were maintained. This is

because frequently the system utilised by Britain was by far the most comprehensive,

the organizations utilised by other nations being smaller, not so well organised,

crippled by corruption or even non-existent. There is also the question of doctrine:

that of living off the land as used by the French compared to that of supplying items

from markets at home and abroad as used by the British. The distinction between

these two doctrines, however, was not always clear. In 1805, for example, French

forces marching through neutral Hesse-Kassel were expected to exist on rations rather

than plunder.6 There is also the difficulty of comparing the military capability of states

due to their diverse circumstances and practices.7

         Although using the departmentalisation of the force as a structure, the study is

not solely concerned with how individual departments operated. Instead it

demonstrates that while the army is traditionally seen as a conservative institution, it

could be innovative and flexible. Although confined within certain boundaries by its

relationship with the state the army had some autonomy and utilised this to good

effect. The force not only modified its structure and practices to better suit its

requirements but also implemented policies concerned with aspects such as welfare

and regulations to limit corruption. The army was not unique in addressing such issues

6 For a consideration of the difficulties of supplying the monetary requirements of the Peninsular army,
see C.D. Hall, Wellington's Navy: Sea Power and the Peninsular War 1807 to 1814 (London,
Chatham, 2004), pp. 129-136. Andre Corvisier stated that following the military revolution armies
without pay had a tendency to mutiny but the British army demonstrated this was not always the case.
A. Corvisier (trans. A. T. Siddall), Armies and Societies in Europe 1494 -1789 (London, Indiana
University Press, 1979), p.61.
6 Creveld, Supplying War, p.45.
7 For a consideration of systems utilised by other armies see Corvisier, Armies and Societies; J. R.
Elting, Swords Around the Throne: Napoleon's Grande Armee (London, Phoenix Grant, 1998);
Creveld, Supplying War.
