strength was fragile, and that the three tier policy was only practical because the army

was given a low priority.

         The lower priority given to the army did not prevent the state from at times

ruthlessly utilising the force to pursue its own aims, a fact particularly apparent in

regard to Empire. The global deployment of the army arose as a direct consequence of

 it being a tool of an Imperial power and it was expected to police the Empire, a

 keystone of the British state in the period, despite itself occupying the third tier of

 British defence policy. Thus the state frequently expected a return in excess of its

 sometimes-miserly investment in the army, and the disparity between resources and

expected function was to continually hinder the army.

         The relationship between army and state not only influenced the force's

deployment and resources available but also had a significant impact on its structure.

 Through the intermeshing of civil and military, and the dominance of the former, the

army adopted many of the characteristics of civilian administration in the period,

including bureaucratic practices and departmentalisation, along with the benefits and

drawbacks of each. The organizations tasked with maintaining the army exhibited

such traits to a high degree and they were heavily departmentalised, various bodies

having specific roles, albeit on occasion overlapping jurisdictions. The advantage of

the departmentalisation for the historian is that the administrative structures provide a

framework around which a study of how the army was maintained can be structured.

This study differs from many works relating to the maintenance of the army as it does

not focus on a single department but instead focuses on several.4

         In some cases the organizations upon which this study is based were large and

their role significant, so they are considered in their own chapters. The first to be


4See for example J. Sutton (ed.), Wait for the Wagon (Barnsley, Leo Cooper, 1998); Lieutenant Colonel
J. H. Plumridge, Hospital Ships and Ambulance Trains (London, Seeley, 1975).
