                                                  Chapter 1

                                The relationship between state and army



         It is generally accepted that the changes that occurred in British politics and

society due to the political turmoil of the seventeenth century brought with them many

advantages for the nation's armed forces. It is a commonly held view that the

administrative and financial revolutions enabled the state to channel to its military the

resources provided by Britain's industrialisation. This chapter challenges this

 somewhat cosy picture by demonstrating how the state inhibited the army as much as

it facilitated the army's success and expansion. Andre Corvisier wrote that the military

revolution created obstacles for states to overcome. 9 A study of eighteenth-century

Britain demonstrates how a state contended with these obstacles. This was to be

achieved through the maintenance of the army becoming driven by political and

economic concerns rather than military ones.

         John Brewer has described the relationship between the British state and its

army in the period as the fiscal-military state. 10 This somewhat over-simplifies the

situation through accommodating diverse strands within one neat theory. In particular

it downplays the importance of the military revolution as a distinct event, even though

this revolution was in some ways a pre-requisite for the creation of the fiscal-military

state." While the concept of'the fiscal-military state' maybe flawed, it is apparent that

a fiscal-military state existed. That is to say a state in which fiscal policy and the

military were closely linked, with implications for aspects such as defence and

taxation policies. In any case, the fiscal-military state is a useful term to describe the

British state at the end of the eighteenth century.

9 Corvisier, Armies and Societies, p.61.
10 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, passim.
11 M. Duffy, The Military Revolution and State', in Duffy(ed), The Military Revolution and State, p.l.
