not do so is important as the answer addresses important issues that are central to

understanding Britain in the period. The first issue was that the state could only

operate through a consensus across the various socio-economic and political groups

and could ill afford to upset the proverbial apple cart. The system of tax collection, for

example, would have been redundant if citizens had refused to pay their taxes en

masse. l5 The second reason for the inability (or failure, depending on perspective) of

the British state to ignore the concerns of its citizenry in favour of the armed forces

was that those in power often shared similar concerns to those same citizens, thereby

lacking the will or, for that matter, any interest in disturbing the status quo. The

acquisition of wealth was a common goal across most sections of British society, from

the landed gentry to the newly emerging industrialists and the growing ranks of the

'middling sort', and growing militarism would threaten this activity. 16 As Julian

Hoppit states, the economic consequences of larger armies - higher taxes, diversion of

resources, disruption to markets and reductions in available labour - were far-ranging

and, most importantly, had already been experienced in Britain to varying degrees

during the early eighteenth century. 17

         The existence of a large army would have struck at the key element of British

economic growth, specifically the existence of a large pool of labour that was readily

available to be transferred between economic sectors and industries (an oft-quoted

example being from agriculture to weaving). 18 The relatively high productivity levels

of the British workforce, particularly in agriculture, worsened the problem because

each individual removed from industry or agriculture resulted in a greater drop in
15While there is no reason to believe such a move was mooted, it was feasible. The rise of the anti-corn
law movement could be seen as evidence of a national protest movement.
16 B. Harris, 'Praising the Middling Sort: Social Identity in Eighteenth Century British Newspapers', in
A. Kidd andD. Nicols (eds.), The Making of the British Middle Classes (Stroud, Sutton, 1998), p6; F.
M. L. Thompson, English Landed Society in the Nineteenth Century (London, Routledge and Kegan,
1963), p.7.
17 1 Hoppit, A Land ofLiberty? England 1689 -1782 (Oxford, Clarendon, 2000), pp. 128-9.
18 N.F.R. Crafts, British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution (Oxford, Clarendon. 1985),
pp. 115-116.


                                                  10
