 Conversely, through safeguarding mercantile interests, the Royal Navy was seen to

 contribute directly to British economic growth, while the exploits of explorers such as

 Cook had further focused public attention on the importance of maritime affairs. 38

 Although such reasoning does not give due credit the part played by the army in the

 growth and maintenance of the Empire in this and the preceding period, it is fair to say

 that the importance of the army to British ambitions was considerably less than in the

 late nineteenth century. Crucially, the protection of India was not the responsibility of

 the British army but rather the army of the Honourable East India Company, and

 remained so until the mutiny of 1857. 39

           Besides economic and colonial concerns (the two could become inseparable

 during this period) there were sound strategic reasons for successive governments to

 support the navy over the army. As an island nation it made more sense for Britain to

maintain a strong fleet to prevent an invasion, rather than a strong army to repulse

one, and there was what Jeremy Black describes as a belief in Britain's 'maritime

destiny'. 40 In this regard the policy of the government was a success, and through an

unequal allocation of resources the navy was able to take a lead over its rivals in the

fields of armament and hull design, while through installations such as rope works

and government dockyards the navy had considerably more control over production of

its own material than did the army (including facilities overseas such as the rope

works in Malta).41 Even when the latter maintained its own facilities, such as the

Woolwich arsenal, a certain proportion of output would be allocated to the navy.42 The

infrastructure allocated to support the navy was far greater than that allocated to the
 38 D. A. Baugh, The Maritime State and Atlantic Commerce', in Stone (ed), An Imperial State At War,
pp. 185-223; Black, Sea Borne Empire, p. 127.
39 Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, pp.88-90. The company's army was of further
importance to Britain's militarj power as, through acting in conjvmction with other British forces, it was
able to seize and garrison enemy colonies in the Indian Ocean region (notably Java and Madagascar)
and supplied troops for the Egyptian campaign during the wars with France.
40 Black, Sea Borne Empire, p. 125.
41 Black, Sea Borne Empire, p. 161.
42 Baugh, The Maritime State and Atlantic Commerce', p. 186.

                                                   15
