 Britain's wartime finance until the end of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. 33

 These policies were to have two main impacts. The first was that the system of

 procurement utilised by the army was also to become based on credit. 34 The second

 consequence was more indirect but arose as a result of the growing number of

 government departments such as the excise, departments created to raise or allocate

 taxation.35 The creation of such departments had implications for administrative

 practices throughout the state, eventually influencing the way in which the army itself

 was administered.

          Although the dual-relationship continued to exist by the end of the eighteenth

 century its role had changed. Fears concerning militarism persisted, it being a subject

 frequently addressed by the cartoonists, caricaturists and pamphleteers. 36 Militarism

 was seen to threaten the relationship between the centre and periphery in British

 politics, opening the way for the former to attain more power at the expense of

 individuals. Because of this, fear of militarism was also linked to the notion of liberty

 that existed in Britain, which was based on the preservation of parliamentary

 democracy and rights of subjects. 3? It is apparent, however, that fear of militarism was

not the only factor that sustained the dual-relationship: the tendency to applaud the

success and capability of the fleet was, after all, militarism.

         By the late eighteenth century the real fear of military expansion was as much

economic as political; a large army would have tied down resources seen by many to

be better spent on industrial expansion at home and imperial expansion overseas.
33 E.L. Ellis, 'William m and the Politicians', in Holmes (ed), Britain After the Glorious Revolution,
p. 126.
34 See below p.40
35 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, pp.67, 102-112.
36 R. J. White, Waterloo to Peterloo (London, Mercury Books, 1963), pp. 7-8. See also J. Brewer, The
English Satirical Print, 1600-1832: The Common People and Politics, 1750-1790s (Cambridge,
Chadwyck, 1986).
37 S. Caunce, 'Not Sprang from Princes: Middling Society in Eighteenth Century West Yorkshire', in
Kidd andNicolls (eds.), The Making of the British Middle Classes, pp.26-29. True liberty was seen to
be as dangerous as militarism. E. Royle, Revolutionary Britannia: Reflections on the Tlveat of
Revolution in Britain, 1789 to 1848 (Manchester, Manchester University Press, 2000), p. 14.


                                                  14
