 production. Wrigley estimates, for example, that British agricultural labourers

 produced enough food for three families (including their own), compared to those in

 France who produced sufficient to support only one and a half families. 19

          Historians have overlooked the irony of a situation whereby Britain's military

 expansion in the eighteenth century was financed by and utilised institutions that were

 originally envisaged as means to limit the armed forces in general, and the army in

 particular. To appreciate this argument it is necessary to consider when a fiscal-

military state began to emerge in Britain. One of the main weaknesses of Brewer's

 hypothesis on the existence of the fiscal-military state is that its origin is not clearly

defined. Brewer's argument is that the fiscal-military state was created in the

aftermath of the Glorious Revolution, as the relationship between monarch,

parliament and the nation was redefined following decades of political turmoil. 20 It is

clear, however, that the processes involved commenced much earlier than this.

Lawrence Stone cites the mid-seventeenth century (approximately 1640 to 1660) as

the starting point. 21 During this era Britain experienced several traumatic events,

including the civil wars, the rise and fall of a republic, dictatorship, restoration of the

monarchy and foreign invasion in the form of William ffl's accession to the throne in

 1689. 22 These events had a significant impact on the psyche of many Britons that

persisted into the nineteenth century, creating an aversion to military power in the

country that no amount of administrative reform could counter. This was to have

significant implications for the army in the eighteenth century and helped define the

boundaries within which its growth was contained.




Is> E. A. Wrigley, 'Society and the economy in the eighteenth century', in L. Stone (ed), An Imperial
State At War: Britain From 1689 - 1815 (London, Routledge, 1994), pp. 76-77.
-° Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.xiii.
21 L. Stone, 'Introduction', in Stone (ed), An Imperial State At War,, p.46.
22While William Ill's arrival was generally welcomed as a liberation, it was effectively an invasion.


                                                  11
