the army'/2 There are a variety of reasons why Britons continued to have an aversion

to the army. As suggested above fear of overt militarism was not necessarily a factor

as it existed in regard to the navy and, furthermore, was eventually fully embraced

during the Peninsular War as the nation celebrated victories such as Salamanca and

Vittoria with peals of church bells, special edition newspapers and other revelry.53

Neither were economic arguments concerning the value of the fleet as opposed to the

army necessarily significant, this being a concern primarily of the wealthy or those

educated enough to read about the markets and other financial affairs in newspapers,

an activity that was increasingly popular amongst the middling sort in the provinces

but less so among poorly educated labourers.54

         The factor that united many elements of society against the army was the

disruption it could cause at a local level, directly affecting the lives of individuals.

Fights between soldiers, which were often fuelled by alcohol, were a feature of life in

garrison towns, and particular those that contained depots at which new recruits would

arrive. This was the situation facing Private William Wheeler of the 51 st Regiment of

Foot when he arrived at Maidstone in April 1809, when he described scenes of

'drunkenness and riot' amongst the newly arrived troops in the town/5 Such disorder

could be dangerous to inhabitants and on occasion required the deployment of other

military forces to restore order. The memoirist Benjamin Harris recorded such an

incident, which occurred while he was travelling from Ireland to depots in

southeastern England and accompanied by fellow recruits to the 95th Rifles. Trouble

53 W. F. K. Thompson (ed), An Ensign in the Peninsular War: The Letters ofJohn Aitchinson (London,
Michael Joseph, 1981), p.230.
53 Hugh Marendes to Privy Council, Edinburgh, 25th July 1813, PRO PC 1/4011, Privy Council
Miscellaneous Unbound Papers, July 1813; Salisbury Journal, 24th August 1812, p.4.
54 Harris, 'Praising the Middling Sort', p5; J. Brewer, 'Commercialisation and Polities', in
N.McKendrick, J Brewer and J.H. Plumb (eds.), The Birth of a Consumer Society: The
Commercialisation ofEighteenth Century England (London, Europa, 1982), p.216.
55 B. H. Liddell - Hart (ed), The Letters ofPrivate Wheeler 1809 - J828 (London, Michael Joseph,
1951), pp.17-18. Such disorder could involve sailors but they tended to spend more time isolated from
the population aboard ship.

                                                 18
