 maintenance of the army. It was rarely fully effective in fulfilling even this limited

 task, however, and could be so ineffective that Richard Partridge and Michael Oliver

 describe its creation as being little more than a 'political fudge' by Pitt the Younger to

 strengthen his control over government. 77

          Despite the powers over the army granted to it by the Act of Settlement,

 parliament, through the Cabinet and then the Secretary of War, could do little more

 than order the army into a theatre of war and issue guidance, such as on the need to

 avoid casualties or to aid an allied nation. On occasion politicians did intervene more

 directly, as in the case of the Walcheren fiasco, but in such circumstances the army

 rarely met with success. It is important to note, however, that the support and

 guidance of politicians was not without value to the army. One of the few occasions

 when the army did act largely on its own initiative was the expedition to Buenos Aires

 in 1806, which proved a complete military disaster and resulted in the surrender of the

force involved. 78 This event was also to have political repercussions as it gave the

 Spanish colonists a new self belief and increased their determination to achieve

independence from Spanish colonial rule, an event British foreign policy makers

sought to avoid or delay for as long as possible.

         Below the Secretary of State for War and the Colonies the national command

structure of the army became more complex, leading Andre Corvisier to state that one

characteristic of the system was confusion, although this is perhaps excessively harsh

about administrative practices that could prove effective. 79 The combat elements of

the army were divided between those of Horse Guards (regular infantry and cavalry),

the Ordnance Board (regular artillery and engineers) and the Home Office (militia,

yeomanry, fencibles and volunteers). It is apparent that there was no single military

77 Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, p.8.
78 Black, Sea Borne Empire, p. 163.
7sl Corvisier, Armies and Societies, p.76.


                                                  26
