 result of these changes was that by the time of the outbreak of the Revolutionary

 Wars, the army was, in practice, a tool of parliament or, more specifically, whatever

 government was in power as it was this body that decided where and when the army

 would deploy. Thus, in some respects, the army was subordinated to the civilian

 administration, which had the Prime Minister at its head. 68 The power of this office

 over the army was limited due to the nature of British politics. In particular, the Prime

 Minister did not necessarily lead the largest political group in parliament, or even

 draw members of the government from his party. As a consequence the role of the

 Prime Minister more often became one of performing a political balancing act rather

than direct involvement in every aspect of policy. Of the Prime Ministers in the early

nineteenth century, only Pitt and Grenville became seriously involved in the affairs of

the army. Pitt was one of the instigators of the army's involvement in operations

 against enemy colonies and reformed the national command structure through creating

the post of Secretary for War and the Colonies, while Grenville's Foxite Ministry of

Talents fell following attempts to reform the army. 69

          The principal means through which a Prime Minister was able to influence the

actions and structure of the army was through the appointment of his Cabinet, a body

that had risen to prominence during the reign of William HI to meet the need for

wartime planning. 70 Although attempts were made to run the affairs of government

through consensus the personality of those individuals appointed to lead ministries

and departments could be significant. It has been suggested, for example, that

Raised at Privy Council.
68 For a consideration of the relevant departments and how they operated in regard to the armed forces,
see Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, pp.5-9; Haythomthwaite, Tlie Napoleonic-
Source Book, pp. 195-6.
69 Emsley British Society, pp!28-9. For a consideration of how the varjing domestic political situation
could have an impact on a military campaign and the army, see R. Muir, "Britain and the Peninsular
War', in P. Griffiths (ed), A History of the Peninsular War Vol IX: Modern Studies of the War in Spain
and Portugal 1808 -1814 (London, Greenhill Books, 1999), pp.335-372.
70 Carter, 'The Revolution and the Constitution', p.50; Innes, "The Domestic Face of the Fiscal-Military
State', p.103.


                                                  23
