                                                  Chapter 2

                            The Commissariat and associated organizations



         Of the organizations associated with the maintenance of the British army in the

period of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, the Commissariat was the most

 significant. It was an organization that has attained a degree of notoriety for its

 failings, being described by Mark Adkin in his analysis of the 1815 Waterloo

 campaign as 'a much maligned body'.97 As this chapter will demonstrate, however, it

was also an organization that achieved a rarely credited degree of success through the

adoption of new policies. This success was notable as it was achieved despite the

constraints placed upon the organization by the practices of the period and policies of

British governments, such as an at times labyrinthine bureaucracy, the need to manage

finance carefully and the need to operate throughout the Empire. Through the latter

the Commissariat would also demonstrate that many of the advantages supposedly

provided by the fiscal-military state were only effective within certain geographical

boundaries.

         The Commissariat exemplified many aspects of administration and

government that had developed in the eighteenth century, although the whole logistics

network of the British army (and navy) demonstrated one characteristic in particular, a

multitude of departments and organizations with overlapping jurisdictions, many of

which were created in the turmoil and administrative reforms of the later Stuarts.98

None of these departments matched the Commissariat in terms of either size or

capability. For example, logistics in the Alexandria garrison in 1807 were the

responsibility of four organizations. The smallest to maintain stores was the Royal
97M. Adkin, The Waterloo Companion (London, Aurum, 2001), p.325.
98 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.67; Childs, The Army of'Charles //, pp.96-105. Fora consideration
of the similar system that operated in the navy see Duffy, 'The Foundations of British Naval Power',
pp.49_84; Black, Sea Borne Empire, pp. 171 -208.


                                                32
