          Generally, whether forces were administered from Horse Guards or by the

 Board of Ordnance was of little consequence for logistical operations, and while slight

 variation in procedures existed the organizations concerned tended to work along

 similar lines. That the officers of the artillery and engineers were recruited from the

 Royal Military College at Woolwich, for example, made little difference; neither did

 the alternative system of bounty payments in the artillery nor the fact that rules

 governing women accompanying the regiments were more relaxed. 1 " Gunners and

 artillery drivers required munitions, food and uniform just as infantry and cavalrymen

 did. Even if uniform was of a different colour, or ammunition larger, such items were

 generally    purchased     from     similar    sources,    requiring    similar   standards     of

 transportation, storage and distribution.

         The role of the Commissariat can best be described as logistics in its broadest

 sense. Frequently the term logistics is used purely in relation to the movement of

 supplies, although in the case of the Commissariat this included the procurement,

 storage and distribution of such items. The numerous aspects of the Commissariat's

task become apparent through a study of Commissariat accounts from the period.

Figure 1 illustrates the diverse roles of the Commissariat through the thirty-three

different accounting categories, along with their relevant codes, to be found in the

Commissariat ledgers used in the Peninsular War. Figure 1 demonstrates that

ultimately every individual employed by the army, from the common soldiers to chief

surgeons, would in some way rely on the Commissariat, while there was even special

provision in its administrative practices for temporary organizations such as recruiting

parties."2

111 Macleod et al to Mulgrave, Woolwich, 2nd January 1811, PRO WO55/1369, Adjutant General's
Confidential Letters, Out letters, September 1810 to February 1816; Macleod to R.H. Crew, Woolwich,
17* June 1807, Macleod to Crew, Woolwich, 25th July 1807, PRO WO 55/1314.
112 Wellesley-Pole to Commissary General Handfield, Dublin Castle, 2nd October 1810, PRO WO
63/91, p.159.


                                               36
