 the movement of troops. 89 The first holder of the office was Brigadier General

 Macleod, who remained in the post throughout the Revolutionary and Napoleonic

 Wars. As stated by John Brewer, the systems of patronage utilised to fill positions

 such as the Deputy Adjutant General's department did not necessarily result in poor

 administrators and Macleod is proof of this. 90 On several occasions Macleod

 demonstrated that he possessed a good understanding of the difficulties experienced

 by the artillery in the field, and not only gathered data on these difficulties but also

 proposed effective solutions.91

          An important factor that contributed to the persistent inefficiency within the

 departments under the Board of Ordnance was the nature and structure of the board

 itself. Many of the departments responsible for the administration of the army had

 been created during the seventeenth century. In contrast the Ordnance Board had

 existed in various forms for several centuries and despite reforms was a product of a

 previous period, a situation that had implications for its structure and efficiency.

Although the role of the Ordnance had changed over the centuries it continued to have

 at its head the Master General of the Ordnance, a post perceived as being one of the

 most important and prestigious in the United Kingdom. Its responsibilities included

supplying the Royal Navy and army with munitions, although it was the latter that

virtually monopolised the board's time, and, unlike the post of Commander-in-Chief,

the post of Master General also entitled its holder to a seat in the Cabinet. 92 The

individuals who held the office during the period of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic

Wars were the Duke of Richmond (1784 to 1795), Marquis Cornwallis (1795 to


89 Park and Nafziger, The British Military, p.5.
* Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, pp. 75-81.
" For his efforts relating to straw yards see Brigadier General Macleod to R.H. Crew, Woolwich, 3 rd
April 1807, PRO WO 55/1314, Letters to Board of Ordnance from Adjutant General, February 1807 to
July 1809.
92 Duncan, History of the Royal Artillery, Volume 2, p!4; Park and Nafziger, The British Military, pp.7-
8.


                                                  30
