had at its head a soldier and, until 1811, a civilian secretary, the situation in the

 Ordnance was reversed. The head of the Ordnance was a civilian with a seat in the

 Cabinet but below him was an army officer, known as the Deputy Adjutant General.

 The Deputy Adjutant General's department was created to rectify a peculiarity of the

Royal Artillery, specifically that despite being granted the title of 'regiment' it lacked

many of the administrative organs associated with such a formation. Prior to the

 creation of the department it had been the responsibility of the individual company

 and battalion officers deployed around the globe to transmit inspection returns to the

Ordnance Board and make requests concerning supplies. It is possible to draw

parallels between the creation of the Deputy Adjutant General's department and the

administrative revolution in general, particularly in the field of data collection and

compilation of statistics, activities that saw the growth of government departments to

achieve this.*6 How far the formation of the Deputy Adjutant General's department

was linked to this trend is, however, questionable. Far more influential was the poor

performance of the army in North America, which triggered several reforms of the

army in its aftermath.

         When the Deputy Adjutant General's department was formed in 1783 the post

carried the rank of Brigadier General, although in 1795 this was elevated to the status

of a staff appointment. 87 The department was to fulfil many of the administrative roles

of the Commissariat but in relation to the artillery and engineers. 88 Significantly,

despite its name, the Deputy Adjutant General's department was a quite separate

entity from the Adjutant General's department under the Commander-in-Chief at

Horse Guards, the role of that organisation being primarily to ensure discipline and


86 Brewer, We Sinews ofPower, p.222-225.
" Deputy Adjutant General, 8to April 1795, PRO WO 55/3045, Board of Ordnance Orders and
Regulations foot Artillery Order Book c!790 to c!846, p.73.
"* See Chapter 3.

                                              29
