General to distribute such items was limited and to a large degree depended upon the

infrastructure of the Commissariat. Thus the definition of many items as being the

responsibility of the Quartermaster General rather than the Commissariat was

administrative and had little bearing on practice, in effect, the Quartermaster General

was required to ensure an adequate supply of certain items, while the Commissariat

would distribute them. Such anomalies in regard to corn sacks and forage would

persist until 1810, when the Commissariat was finally made responsible for their

provision. 102

         Another organization that duplicated some of the Commissariat's duties was

the office of the Store Master General, which was created in 1808. Primarily based in

Britain, and not present in Alexandria, its tasks included making accounts of all goods

held in depots and the packing of military stores (prior to 1808 this had been carried

out by civilians). The organization maintained a small number of personnel and in

1808 its entire staff consisted of fewer than forty personnel, including ten porters,

nineteen clerks, an accountant, a storekeeper and his deputy. The Store Master

General's department did not have a role in the field but due to its specialist function

the significance of the department was greater than its size alone would suggest. 103

The Store Master General's department reflected a trend towards greater

professionalism that was occurring in both the armed forces and administration,

because specialist organizations were created to meet specific needs. Despite the

existence of such departments the Commissariat remained the premier organization

involved in the maintenance of the army. It was a cog in the logistical machine

without which the others could not rum, not least because other departments were to

rely on the Commissariat, whether as a store keeper, distributor or administrator.


102 General Order No. 188, PRO WO 63/91, p.49.
103 Eighth Report ofMilitary Enquiry (London, Office of the Secretary at War, 1809), pp. 161-2.


                                                 34
