 extraordinary supply (that required in wartime), a situation that had enabled an army

to be maintained while having its activities curtailed. 126 During the eighteenth century,

the Committee for Public Accounts ensured that expenditure remained under scrutiny,

while detailed investigations were conducted for Reports of Military Enquiry.'27 Such

scrutiny encouraged efficiency but potentially made finance, rather than capability, a

priority.

          While at a depot the primary role of Commissariat personnel was ensuring the

distribution of supplies, monitoring stock levels and keeping accounts. To assist this

task a number of special aids, including branding irons and stamps, were employed by

storekeepers to identify Commissariat property. Various weights and measures were

also utilised. A typical Commissariat store, for example, contained scales and weights

for candles ranging from ten ounces to eight pounds and coal measures in quarter, half

and whole bushels. 128 hi addition to keeping records and monitoring stores

commissaries were also authorised to sell certain items. Generally these items were

damaged and judged too costly to repair but in some cases were simply no longer

required. The nature of these sales, and the commissaries' role in them, is

demonstrated in the clear instructions given to Commissary Healy of Cork concerning

the selling of camping equipment in December 1805:
         The list of camping equipment in the Cork store now being recorded you will
         please to advertise and sell by public auction the entire of that under the head
         unserviceable be particularly careful that nothing is disposed of but what truly
         comes under that description and that nothing is preserved under the head of
         serviceable adverting to repair the doing of which may almost amount to the
         original value of the article. Your particular attention will be required during
         the sale to this point - the unserviceable camp equipage in those stores are at
         present selling and to much advantage which I trust will be the case at Cork
         and that every publicity will be given which may tend to ensure it. 1129


126 Carter, 'The Revolution and the Constitution', p.47.
127 Eighth Report ofMilitary Enquiry, passim; Hoppit, A Land ofLiberty?, p. 147.
128 Letter from Barrak [sic] Master General to Barrak Masters (Barracks Office, 1797), appendix.
129 Punctuation as in original. P. Singer to Mr Healy, Commissary General's Office, 30* December
1805, PRO WO 63/40, Letters to Commissariat Officers 1803 - 1807.


                                                  42
