In 1806 it was the possibility of relocating the four Dublin depots into a single,

specially constructed building was considered. This was to cost £6,713 for five storeys

but it was discovered that if reduced to four storeys the cost would amount to only

£5,609. Besides saving £831 paid for rent each year, the single depot would require

only one assistant storekeeper rather than the four then employed. This represented a

total saving (in rent and wages) of £1037 17s per annum. The scheme proved

successful and the policy of amalgamating depots was implemented across Ireland. By

1811, of the sixteen towns and cities in which Commissariat depots were located, only

one, Enniskillen, was listed as having two. 125

         The amalgamation of the depots in Ireland demonstrated that financial

administration in the Commissariat during the period was not concerned solely with

allocating revenue, and that an element of economy was involved. This reflected a

boundary imposed by the state, a boundary created by the need to monitor

expenditure. It was economics that restricted the number of depots available and

although the amalgamations ultimately proved beneficial by increasing efficiency, the

situation may have been different if the fear of large-scale unrest in Ireland had been

proved true. In such a scenario single depots may have been unable to cope with

demands for various supplies, while the loss of a single amalgamated depot would

have caused greater disruption than if the stores it contained had been split between

several sites.

         Much of the pressure for economies in the Commissariat was due to

parliamentary scrutiny. The cost of supplying the army (as opposed to paying soldiers'

wages) had traditionally been a contentious issue for parliament and it was not until

1691 that parliament was willing to provide a single annual budget for supply. Prior to

this a distinction had been made between ordinary (peace time) supply and

125 Elliot to Handfield, Dublin Castle, 27* July 1806, PRO WO 63/88.


                                                41
