         The existence of fraud in the Commissariat can be attributed to a variety of

 factors. Administration in the period is generally perceived to have been corrupt and

 the Commissariat frequently sought to recruit personnel from occupations that were

 particularly associated with the practice, including professionals such as lawyers and

 estate agents. 139 Despite these factors it is incorrect to dismiss corruption in the

 Commissariat as being solely a symptom of administration in the period, as such

 organizations have traditionally attracted corruption throughout the world. In 1835,

 for example, the logistical organization of the Mexican army in Texas was rendered

 ineffective by corruption, despite the fact that Mexico exhibited few characteristics

that we would associate with Britain at the end of eighteenth century. 140

         Pressure to limit fraud within the Commissariat appears to have originated

internally as much as from pressure from parliament, and it was clearly in the

organization's interests to optimise its financial resources by reducing fraud. The

Commissariat's method of achieving this, through introducing new procedures, was in

some respects typical of a trend towards increased regulation in the period. Regulation

was not, however, the traditional approach to combating corruption. In the Excise, for

example, corruption in the 1780s had been controlled through the introduction of new

personnel to supervise tax collectors, thereby adding a new tier of administration

rather than extra regulation. 141 Thus, the Commissariat was utilising its own approach

to resolving problems and not necessarily following trends in administrative practice.

Indeed, the Commissariat was prevented from introducing a new tier of administration

due to restrictions on manpower, either though none being available or unwillingness

on the part of the state to fund it.


139 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, pp.72-73, 211; G.E. Mingey, 'The Eighteenth Century Land Steward',
in B.C. Jones and G.E. Mingay (eds.), Land, Labour and Population in the Industrial Revolution
(London, Edward Arnold, 1987), p.8.
140 A.A. Nofi, The Alamo and the Texas War ofIndependence (New York, Da Capo, 1994), p. 195.
141 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, pp. 102-110.


                                               45
