parent formation rather than the Commissariat made mistakes. Horses were identified

 by name, distinguishing marks and a code (consisting of a letter and number) but in

 July 1806, for example, two horses transferred from the Dragoon Guards were

wrongly reported as being E31 and F77 by the regiment. The numbers should have

 actually been G31 and G77, and for a time it appeared that the correct horses were not

present. 164 This was only a minor administrative error as the correct number of

animals was received, although this was not always the case. In April 1810, for

example, fifteen horses were supposed to be transferred from the 2nd German Heavy

Dragoons, but thirty-six were delivered. 165
         Despite a growing dependency on, not to mention an apparent obsession with,

data collection and related paperwork in the administrative organizations during the

period, bureaucracy alone could not guarantee the availability of supplies.

Improvements in administrative efficiency, measures to reduce fraud in the

Commissariat and even the economic strength of the British state were futile if the

required goods could not be procured. Frequently the efforts of the Commissariat were

hindered, if not thwarted, by the simple fact that the supplies it required did not exist.

During the Peninsular War providing grain proved to be particularly problematic due

to the scarcity of that commodity in the theatre. Due to the Continental System this

could only be rectified by importing great quantities directly from the United States,

Canada and Brazil. 166

         Of the difficulties encountered regarding the supply of grain to the Peninsular

army Arthur Wellesley noted that:

         in the present season of the year [summer] you cannot depend upon the
         country for bread. Portugal never fed itself during more than seven months out
         of twelve, the common consumption of the country is Indian corn; and the
164 Return of the Horses of 7th Dragoon Guard to be Transferred to the Commissariat in Half Yearly
Inspection in July 1806, Major General Affleck, 1 st August 1806, PRO WO 63/88.
165 Adjutant General's Office to Commissary General, Dublin, 9"1 April 1810, PRO WO 63/91, p.63.
166 Hall, Wellington's Navy, p.6; Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean , p. 10.


                                                52
