that governed expenditure on forage for cavalry units in Ireland. 145 Such bureaucracy

was not without difficulties and at times it appears completing paperwork threatened

to surpass logistics as the primary aim of the organization. This was demonstrated in

1811 when Commissary Hagan faced disciplinary action for incorrectly listing shirts

after shoes in a list of expenses, the reprimand being more severe than that received

by a fellow commissary known to have 'misplaced' militia stores (including

ordnance) but who was not guilty of filling out forms incorrectly. 146 The most

significant consequence of increasing bureaucracy was its impact on the structure of

the Commissariat itself. The organization was effectively split into two branches,

designated stores and accounts, with the latter becoming so large that it accounted for

half of Commissariat personnel employed in garrisons such as that of Gibraltar in

December 1816. 14? Thus the organization had evolved administratively, an evolution

that went hand-in-hand with increased professionalism created by the need for skilled

accountants and administrators.

        There was a trend in the period towards the gathering of precise information,

whether it was statistical, tabular or mathematical. 148 This was apparent in

Commissariat practices and perhaps the most important elements in its bureaucracy

were the ledgers and account books. The information contained within them

ultimately formed the basis of returns utilised by the Commissariat to maintain the

army, by generals to formulate strategy, by government to formulate policy and by

parliamentary and Privy Council enquiries to draw conclusions on the efficiency of

the armed forces. Commissariat accountants were issued four ledgers and instructed to



145 'Rules and Regulations Under Which the Foraging of the Horses of the Cavalry in Ireland is to be
Conducted', PRO WO 63/91.
146 Commissary General to Mr Hagan, Cork, 17th April 1811, PRO WO 63/46, letters to Commissariat
Officers 1811-1812.
147 See below p.58.
148 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.222.


                                                47
