 fraud nor error but outright incompetence. Personnel found guilty of this could be

 dismissed, although a written warning or reprimand was more common and was

 frequently sufficient to resolve the situation. A typical example of a warning was that

 issued to Commissary O. Timms in March 1806. The following extract reflects the

way in which such matters were approached, the practices that could cause

 disciplinary action and what constituted 'incompetence':

         complaints having been made by Mr Heathy, which also he has been under the
         necessity of repeating of the extreme inconvenience to which he is constantly
         subjected by the irregular transmissal [sic] and altogether inadmissible form in
         which your vouchers are made up, I beg in the first instance to put you on your
         guard against a repetition of errors which they can (thus persisted in) be
         accounted for on the ground of incompetence for the situation of a public
         accountant... must end if the matter is brought before the Commissary General
         as it quickly must - in the summary measure of removing you from your
         present station. 153



Of particular note in the above extract is the structure of the disciplinary process: a

complaint was made by a fellow commissary, which was handled by the office of the

Commissary General and then only passed to the Commissary General himself if the

situation remained unresolved. Furthermore, the complaint only arose after Timms

persistently failed to complete and return paperwork satisfactorily, indicating that the

Commissariat tolerated a degree of incompetence amongst its personnel. Finally, it

must be noted that the warning worked as Timms evidently continued in his post. Just

as advances in administration enabled efficient administrators to rise to prominence,

so too did they allow less competent individuals to remain in post. 154
        As noted previously, not all cases of inefficiency could be attributed to the

incompetence described above. Genuine mistakes were made, which was inevitable

when the sheer scale of the task facing the organization is considered: the

153 Punctuation as in original. W. Webb to O. Timms, Commissary General's Office, 25* March 1806,
PRO WO 63/40.
154 Brewer, The Sinews of Power, p.77.


                                               49
