        The example of the Sicilian garrison demonstrates that personnel from various

nations occupied the ranks of the Commissariat and overseas it could be a

cosmopolitan organization. If the financial power of the state did provide the British

army an advantage by giving it a capability to employ foreigners it was these

personnel, rather than mercenaries, that proved most crucial to the war effort. The role

of foreign personnel in the Commissariat is highlighted by the fact that, due to the

publication of his memoirs, the German A.L.F. Schauman is arguably the most

famous commissary of the period. 193 As a serving officer, however, Schauman was not

a typical example of the majority of foreigners employed by the Commissariat. More

common were the local civilians employed under contract to support the army

overseas, the most significant group of such persons being the Spanish and Portuguese

muleteers who transported supplies in the Peninsula.

        Initially, little thought was given to the utilisation of drivers indigenous to the

nation in which the army was operating, despite the fact that such a policy had proved

successful for Napoleon during his campaign of 1805. 194 It was believed that the

vehicles and personnel of the Royal Wagon Train, in conjunction with the logistical

organizations of allied armies, would be sufficient to meet the logistical needs of the

army. 195 This was reflected in the orders issued when the army first arrived in the

Peninsula, where the only mention of the region's indigenous transport capability is in

relation to the purchase of mules, horses and oxen. 196 John Brewer writes that a major

advantage provided by the fiscal-military state was one of the most advanced transport

infrastructures of the era. 197 This infrastructure, however, terminated at Britain's

borders and was of little relevance to the army operating overseas. The initial

193 See A. L. F. Schauman, On the Road with Wellington (London, William Heinemann, 1924).
194 Schechter and Sander, Delivering the Goods, p.38.
195 See chapter 4.
196 To Lieutenant-General Sir John Moore, Downing Street, 26* September 1808, PRO WO 1/236, p.9.
197 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 183.


                                              63
