          also here in similar circumstances -1 intend taking the whole with me, unless I
          should receive any particular instructions respecting them. 1179



 The force left Falmouth on 9 October, over a month late, but with its full complement

 of Commissariat personnel. That the force embarked late was bad enough, but that a

 general had been forced to consider acting on his own accord to ensure a commissary

 sailed with him says much about the system through which commissaries were

 assigned to individual forces. The concern expressed by Baird at the absence of a

 commissary is also significant, as it reflects the importance attached to the

 Commissariat, although much more may perhaps be inferred by the placing of the

missing paymaster before the commissary in his letter of 1 st October. More significant

is how the episode highlights that, despite improvements in administration, the system

 struggled to co-ordinate the various departments and organizations that had been

created, even for a small force such as that commanded by Baird. 180

         Despite its obvious importance to the operational capability of the army, the

Commissariat took second place to the manpower requirements of the front line

formations. This was inevitable when it is considered that a fully manned

Commissariat would have been of no value to an under-strength army (although that

neither the army nor the Commissariat were ever at full strength is evidence of the

state's inability to sustain the army). Some manpower could be made available

through centralising depots but, while the centralisation of depots in a city such as

Dublin was feasible, the policy could not be implemented across an organization

operating in war zones or far-flung colonial outposts. 181 This was one of the features

of the Commissariat that set it apart from other supporting organizations, as its
179 Lieutenant-General Baird, to Castlereagh, Falmouth, 3 rd October September 1808, PRO WO 1/236,
p.340.
180 Baird's force would face further delays due to lack of shipping and chaotic Spanish organisation
before disembarking in Galicia. Hall, Wellington's Navy, p.66.
181 See W. Elliot to Handfield, Dublin Castle, 27* July 1806, PRO WO 63/88.


                                                 57
