wagons in 1811 highlighted the advantages of using muleteers, although it also

 stressed the differences between the army's official practices and the opinions of an

 individual experienced in their successful employment. The report stated that a

 significant advantage of employing local drivers, besides releasing military personnel

 for other duties, was that 'by this means you place the beasts... under the charge of

people of the country, who are more capable of doing it well'.210 It was advised that

 the ideal ratio of muleteers to mules should be one to four, rather than the standard

practice in the army of one to three. This suggests the report's anonymous author had

 greater faith in the abilities of muleteers than did his superiors. 211 His most surprising

recommendation, however, was the following as it was concerned with the ownership

of the mules:

         it is most strongly to be recommended however that these mules be the
         property of the muleteer, and not of the government for from the circumstance
         of it being proposed to place them entirely under the charge of the muleteer
         himself, not allowing the farriers to interfere with them at all, they are most
         likely to be well treated, and kept in readiness to march if the private property
         of the individual.212




This would have been a considerable departure from previous policy, in which the

mule occupied an ambiguous position, being the property of the army but only for the

duration of the muleteer's employment. 213

         An important element in the relationship between the British army and state

was the legislation that prevented the army from requisitioning civilian property.

Issues relating to the relationship between the British army and civilians tend to be

seen in the context of England, but this policy was to have implications not only



210 PRO WO 37/10/26, paragraph 14.    ,
211 Standing Orders, Order No. 37, NAM 6807/221, p.S
212 PRO WO 37/10/26, paragraph 17.
213 Standing Orders, Order No. 36, NAM 6807/22, p.7.


                                               67
