the system would have removed almost all the expenses associated with the operation

 of mules. The Commissariat was the first organization to adopt a similar system for its

 muleteers and it soon discovered that muleteers were indeed more effective when

 employed in this way.218

         An organization with diverse personnel, with diverse roles fulfilled with

mixed success is perhaps a suitable description of the Commissariat. Its scope, in

terms of both brief and geographical area of operations, was indeed large but it has

 come to be most associated with one item in particular: food. When hungry, soldiers

had little doubt upon whom to heap the blame. Private James Gunn of the Black

Watch Regiment noted that 'I never complained but when the Commissariat was at

 fault (and that was not seldom)', while a Rifleman of the 95th Rifles declared to his

 colleagues 'damme, boys, if the commissary don't show his front we must find a

potato field or have a killing a day', this being a reference to the practice of looting

dead French soldiers for food.219 Criticisms concerning the role of the Commissariat in

the supply of food were justified, as the organization was involved in the procurement

and supply of this commodity to such an extent that it was almost solely responsible

for its provision. This was unlike the situation regarding other items, such as uniform,

which were frequently the responsibility of other departments and the role of the

Commissariat in their provision tended to be one of distribution or storage rather than

procurement.

         Although food may simply be seen as the bread, meat and biscuit supplied to

the troops, there is a broader definition, one that includes drinking water, alcohol and

the fodder for the numerous animals utilised by the army. It is also important that the

significance of regular supplies of food should not be underestimated. If the
218 PRO WO 37/10/26, paragraph 17.
219 Brackets in original. R. H. Roy (ed), 'The Memoirs of Private James Gunn', in JSAHR, Vol 49
(1971), p. 119; A. Brett-James (ed), Edward Costello: The Peninsular and Waterloo Campaigns
(London, Longmans, 1967), pp.122.


                                                69
