ration that could take the place of bread when required, but such characteristics also

made it preferable for an army wishing to remain on the march, hence its inclusion in

the same category as bread in returns. Despite the advantages of biscuit, however,

bread was more easily digestible and thus popular with the troops, especially if

consumed fresh. Regular stops to bake bread would have hindered an army on the

march but there was no such difficulty when encamped. In consequence, units on

occasion produced bread independently of the Commissariat. Following the Battle of

Talavera, when supplies became short due to the large number of troops present in the

region, Lieutenant Bingham of the 53rd Regiment of Foot wrote that 'we were living at

Talavera from hand to mouth, that is we were obliged to thrash the corn ourselves,

grind the flour and make the bread'.228 The duty was clearly unpopular with the

lieutenant and he was relieved to write in a letter home the following month that 'we

are, however, plentifully supplied, having an excellent market'.229 On other occasions

the bread ration was issued as grain to speed up the supply process.230
         Bingham's account of bread production after Talavera reveals two important

issues. Firstly it says something about the composition of his unit, which contained

personnel able to harvest wheat, mill it and then bake bread. The personnel need not

have been professional farmers, millers or bakers before enlisting but it is likely they

had some experience in such backgrounds. More important than the composition of

Bingham's unit, however, is the fact that the situation after Talavera demonstrates the

relationship between strategic and local supply. In 1809 stores of flour in Lisbon were

so full that vessels allocated to transport the commodity were reassigned to other

tasks, yet soldiers in the field, such as Bingham, had to find their own sources of



228 Bingham to mother, Delatosa, 10* August 1809, Vol. 1, NAM 6807/163, p.62.
229 Bingham to mother, Badajoz 13* September 1809, Vol. 1, NAM 6807/163, p.68.
230 G. Larpent (ed), The Private Journal ofF S Larpent: Judge Advocate General of British Forces in
the Peninsula, vol 3 (London, Richard Bentley, 1853), p.6.


                                                72
