 Commissariat were beyond its control, and a study of the organization's efforts to

 supply food highlights what was possibly its greatest weakness regarding operations

 in the field: specifically a reflexive doctrine that aimed to react to situations rather

 than prepare for them.

          Creveld states that the first requisite of any logistics system is an exact

 definition of requirements.263 This was clearly lacking in the Commissariat's doctrine

 and from the very start of a campaign the resulting limitations were apparent. As

 noted above, the first personnel from the organization to arrive in a region were

 purchasing agents. The task of these individuals was not one of ascertaining the ability

 of a province to sustain a force in the long term but rather to purchase the supplies

 required by army when it arrived. This was to be achieved regardless of long-term

 consequences for the local economy and, by implication, future procurement

 activities. This was demonstrated in August 1808, when commissaries in the force

 under the command of Arthur Wellesley procured so many mules that subsequent

 forces were compelled to purchase other draught animals.264 Further evidence is

provided by the disastrous effect of procurement activities on local markets and

commodity prices. Captain Bragge of the 3rd Dragoons noted of the vicinity of Belem

in 1811 that 'the English have ruined this market as they do all others, and at this

moment everything from a hen's egg to a mule is dearer than in England', while Judge

Advocate Larpent complained in May 1813 that 'we cannot buy anything to eat except

honey, sugar, bacon, bread and cheese'.265
         The depletion of markets alone was not sufficient to end the activities of the

Commissariat in a region and its personnel were expected to utilise any means


263 Creveld, Supplying War, p. 18.
264 Wellesley to Bmrard, Aeyria, 11 th August 1808, PRO WO 1/228, p. 191.
265 S. A. C. Cassels (ed), Peninsula Portrait 1811 -1814: The Letters of Captain William Bragge 3rd
(Kings Own) Dragoons (London, OUP, 1963), p. 13; G. Larpent (ed), The Private Journal of FS
Larpent,Vol I,p.l95.


                                                 80
