 only a fa?ade of fair competition, a characteristic of contracts in general during the

 period. 2" Consider, for example, the tender put out by the Barracks Department in

 1802 for the supply of coal to certain barracks. Adverts were placed in the relevant

 local press and on 5th April 1802 it was announced that the contract would run for

twelve months, from 25th June that year. Proposals for the contract were to be

 delivered in sealed envelopes to the Barrack Master General on or before 12th April

 (seven days after the announcement). The terms of the contract were not advertised at

this time but were available from either local barrack masters or the barrack office

itself. An insight into early-nineteenth century British bureaucracy is provided by the

fact that the latter was open for such enquiries only between 12pm and 3pm each day,

except for Sundays. Proposals were required to specify the pits from which the coal

was to originate, to be supported by 'adequate security' and to include the names of

two referees willing to confirm these details. Clearly the requirement for securities

gave some protection to the army but the time period of seven days was too short for

many potential contractors to respond, particularly considering that little would

happen on the Sunday and that the terms of the contract first needed to be acquired. 300

In short, only a supplier aware of the contract in advance would have been able to

meet the terms of the tender, and this could only have been achieved through inside

knowledge.

         The utilisation of contractors by the army was to be both beneficial and

detrimental. The state benefited as contracts, if properly managed were economical

and prevented the need for the army to acquire its own manufacturing capability, a

situation that would have undermined the state as it would have enabled the army to

obtain a greater degree of autonomy. John Bartlett states that the greatest advantage,


2^ Brewer. -Commercialisation and Polities', p. 199.
300 Salisbury Journal. 5th April 1802, p.3.


                                                 93
