while folly exploiting the compatibility of equipment derived from a single source.

The next question concerned the delivery of items:

         Question 20: Are you responsible for the safe delivery of the articles at the
                      places in Great Britain to which they are ordered?
         Answer:      Certainly not. At the same time permit me to add, that I know
                      not of any instance of loss by miscarriage, one alone excepted.

At the point of leaving the source of production, therefore, the items concerned ceased

to be the responsibility of that particular contractor, a different contract being awarded

for their transportation. Evidently Mr. Trotter satisfied the enquiry as he continued to

supply camping equipment to the army following his interview. 296

         Contracts were of benefit to the military for a variety of reasons. Not least was

the fact that they could fix prices for a length of time that could not be guaranteed in a

wartime economy. Furthermore, the already limited manpower of organisations such

as the Royal Wagon Train and Commissariat muleteers was not employed in

transporting large quantities of goods from their source but more usefully in supplying

the troops. The contractors themselves, however, also benefited and this went beyond

merely earning a steady income and reliable payments. Dealing with the military

allowed them to operate under special rules, exempt from certain regulations. In 1805,

for example, it was ruled that the Russian, Danish and Swedish vessels chartered by

Turnball, Forbes & Co. to deliver wine to the garrison in Gibraltar could not be seized

by the Royal Navy, which was the common practice regarding vessels of this type.-97

Similarly exports of arms to Africa were exempt from certain customs inspections to

avoid 'an unnecessary delay in carrying on this trade'. 298

         Despite contracts to supply the army being put out to tender, the system had


2"6 Eighth Report ofMilitary Enquiry, pp.22 7-8.
-*1 Draft of Instructions to the High Court of Admiralty Respecting Vessels Belonging to Russia,
Denmark or Sweden, 2ml February, 1805, PRO PC 1/3643, Privy Council Miscellaneous Unbound
Papers, February 1805.
-m Privy Council to (Illegible), 17th August 1813, PRO PC 1/4013, Privy Council Miscellaneous
Unbound Papers, August 1813.

                                                 92
