 however, was that contracts isolated the army, and consequently its troops from the

 price rises and fluctuations of the wartime economy. 301 Such a statement overlooks

 more fundamental benefits of contracts, specifically that they prevented the need for

 the army to maintain its own extensive production facilities and therefore freed

 manpower for military duties. This itself brought disadvantages, especially that of the

 army being dependent on outside agencies.

         By their nature contracts were inflexible and it was one thing to maintain a

 garrison in this way as it represented a military presence that would remain in a single

 location for a long period, even though its constituent military units may have

changed, but it was quite a different matter for specific formations as they could

potentially be redeployed within a short period of time. An unexpected movement

could take place before supplies were delivered, and while a unit may have taken

several days to reach a port of embarkation, the logistical system and communications

also moved at a slow speed. Such a situation, involving several companies of artillery

from the King's German Legion, arose in 1807. Initially concern was expressed that

the contractor had failed to supply the units in question with feathers, but a subsequent

investigation by Brigadier General Macleod revealed that the contract had had another

eight weeks to run when the units had embarked and the contractor had intended

fulfilling the contract in this final period. Of note is the fact that Macleod warned that

several other companies would leave Britain without this item, indicating that no

attempt would be made to rectify the situation and that any deficiencies would only be

remedied at their eventual destination. 302

        It is important to note that the army's controlling of production may not have

resolved the problems caused by relying on civilian producers. Evidence of this may


301 Bartlett The Development of the British Army, p. 136.
302 Macleod to Crew, Woolwich, 1* May 1807, PRO WO 55/1314.


                                              94
