 The above data has certain characteristics that warrant consideration before discussing

 its implications for the regiments concerned. Of particular note is the fact that, unlike

 returns of available stores of food submitted by the Commissariat, inspection reports

 made by the department of the Adjutant-General highlight deficiencies as well as what

 was available. 307 This allowed the army to estimate what items were required to bring

 units to strength, a crucial element that was lacking in Commissariat record

 keeping.301* Secondly, it is apparent that deficiencies are based on the actual strength of

the units concerned, not their authorised or paper strength. John Brewer states that the

 collection of such comprehensive data was characteristic of administration in the

period, especially in the tabular form utilised in inspection returns. 309 Such practices,

however, were not typical in the army because departments such as the Commissariat

could be less meticulous in their collation of data. Pressures caused by operational

requirements and the breakdown of peacetime practices in wartime overrode, or at

least eroded, advances in administrative practice.

          That the data was based on actual strength rather than paper strength is

demonstrated by the disparity between the requirements of the 4th Dragoons and 20th

Light Dragoons, the theoretical strengths of the two units being the same

(approximately 900 to 1,000 men). Thus, a considerable number of personnel (over

one quarter of the 20th Dragoons) did not possess a firearm or, in the case of the

cavalry who carried a mixture of swords, carbines and pistols, a full complement of

such items. This is clear evidence that the army was unable to supply its troops with

the small arms they required, whether through its own output or contractors, and that

this applied to even under strength regiments That the regiments concerned were


307 The original listed the number of items that the regiments were deficient, while the percentages were
calculated for comparative purposes in this study.
m See above p. 80.
30" Brewer, Tlw Sinews ofPower, pp.222-225.


                                                  96
