manufacturing capability. It is incorrect to dismiss the role of Britain's growing

economic strength in aiding the procurement activities of the army, however, and it

will become apparent during this chapter that the army was able to exploit certain

advantages but not to utilize them to their full potential.

       Almost all of the numerous organisations and departments in the army would

be involved at various stages of procurement, whether it was through actually

purchasing goods or issuing a specification for requirements. In addition to the

Commissariat, four departments in particular stand out and form the focus of this

chapter, as they were concerned with specialised items. These were the Quarter

Master General (one concern of which was the supply of camping equipment), the

Barrack Master General (who oversaw barracks), the Clothing board (which set the

standards for uniform and oversaw its supply) and Ordnance Board (munitions

production). A fifth department with specialist requirements was that concerned with

medical provision but this is considered in the subsequent chapter. Of the

aforementioned organisations, only the Ordnance Board possessed its own production

facilities, and in most cases procurement was conducted through civilian contractors.

        The utilisation of contractors intermeshed military organisations with private

companies, making the army an important element in the British economy, while

contracts also enabled the army to exist without the need maintain its own extensive

production facilities. The terms of individual contracts could vary, but generally

contractors would produce goods, which were then transported to army depots by

either themselves or a different contractor. Distribution to the troops would then be

conducted through the appropriate army organisation. Local laws could have an

impact on how contracts could work, and this was particularly so in Portugal where a

royal warrant was required to sell soap, tobacco and snuff. So as not to contravene




                                            87
