         be paid for the purchase of forage, you will be pleased, when you give the draft
         to the contractor, to furnish to the Barrack Master / who is responsible for the
         due transmission thereof / a General Return and Certificate of the quantities of
         each species of forage that have been issued in conformity to the before
         mentioned article of the King's regulations: to which necessary forms are
         annexed. And you are also, in compliance with the said article, to give the
         Barrack Master every Monday morning, the customary return of the horses
         belonging to the officers, Quarter Masters, and soldiers, which have been
         foraged the preceding seven days, specifying the names of the said officers and
         quartermasters. 290



 The letter reveals several key points about the operation of such contracts. They were

 of twelve months' duration (in this case September to August inclusive), responsibility

for administering the contract locally rested not with personnel from the Commissariat

 or Barrack Master General's office but the commanding officer, requests for supply-

were made through the Barrack Master's Department, a degree of estimation was

required on the part of the officer - requests having to be made fourteen days in

advance of forage being required, bills were to be paid within ten days, and anti-fraud

measures (including receipts, returns of horses on the unit's strength and payment of

excess bills by Barrack Master's department) were in place.

         There was some flexibility in contracts, which could work to the advantage of

either the contractor or the army. Those supplying forage, as in the above example,

were sometimes able to negotiate clauses that allowed them to buy back, borrow or

otherwise acquire excess fodder from the army. 291 The terms of such an agreement,

operating in 1806, were explained as follows:

         it has been considered an object of advantage to permit the forage contractors
         to have the use of a part of it [excess forage] under the personal responsibility
         of the Assistant Commissary of the District, you will therefore please on the
         requisition of Mr. Joseph Webb forage contractor... to cause such a proportion
         to be issued to him as may he may want under stipulation of his returning it
         into store when called on for that purpose. 292
290 Punctuation as in original. NAM 7211/58/1, Barrack Office to Officer Commanding in Barracks at
Norwich, 20th September 1797.
-" This situation was particularly common at harvest time. p. 80.
2W Singer to Heathy, Commissary General's office, 25th March 1806, PRO WO 63/45.


                                                89
