 Interestingly there is some evidence that, regarding uniform, twentieth century popular

 culture may have overtaken historians in terms of accuracy. 340

          Historians may have struggled to address fully issues relating to uniform, as

 military dress is rarely seen outside its role as a means of battlefield identity. Besides

 preventing a full understanding of the significance of uniform to soldiers and the

 army, this can also limit attempts to understand its provision and issues surrounding

 this. In consequence a certain degree of complacency has risen regarding uniform,

 leading to a tendency to accept the regulations laid down by Horse Guards at face

value and assume that this was how soldiers appeared on campaign. 341 Only by fully

appreciating the importance of an item such as uniform, however, can there be a

consideration of the wider issues that surround it.

         Central to a broader perception of uniform is its relationship to British society

and perceptions of the army in the period. Military uniform came to symbolise many

things; masculinity in portraits, military glory in art and national pride in

propaganda. 342 Dress and appearance very much represented the public face of the

army and its condition was seen as a measure of how tough fighting had been during a

specific campaign. This was apparent in a newspaper article that recorded the return

of troops from the Mediterranean to Southampton during February 1802. It reported

that 'different detachments of the 10th and 22nd Light Dragoons have... lately landed

""Although largely derided by Charles Esdaile in his survey of Peninsular War literature, the television
 series Sharpe is to be commended for promoting the image of vagabond soldiers. The main protagonist
 has a French pack and sword, his sergeant carries a non-regulation firearm and his other troops wear a
 mixture of headgear. While precise details may indeed be of dubious accuracy it is an image concurrent
with that given by memoirists such as Private Wheeler and Lieutenant Grattan. C. Esdaile, 'The
Peninsular War: aReview of Recent Literature', in The Historian, No. 6, (Winter 1999), p.9; B. H.
Liddell - Hail (ed), Tlw Letters ofPrivate Wheeler 1809 -1828 (London, Michael Joseph, 1951), p.74;
W. Grattan, Adventures with the ConnaughtRangers, 1809 - 1814 (London, Greenhill, 1989), p. 135.
The issue of captured equipment is well highlighted in the episode entitled Sharpe's Gold, Carlton
DVD, 2002.
341 See for example Park and Nafziger, Tlie British Military, passim: R. M. Bames, A History of the
Regiments and Uniforms of the British Army (London. Seeley Service & Co), passim: P. J.
Haythornthwaite, Uniforms of Waterloo (London, Anns and Armour. 1974), passim.
342 L. Colley, Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707-1837 (London, Vintage, 1996), p. 303; J. Brewer, The
Sinews ofPower, (Cambridge, C.U.P., 1989), p.58.


                                                  106
