actions of 1812 the army was compelled to rely on ordnance temporarily transferred

from the fleet, and captured Russian pieces, to provide guns of the necessary calibre to

pound enemy fortifications. 329 Piers Mackesy states that often this arose not due to a

shortage of army guns (a contentious point) but due to a preference for the greater

mobility of naval guns. This, however, further highlights the technological lead

enjoyed by the navy.330 More significant than the navy in drawing munitions away

from the army (not least because the former had its own production facilities such as

those at Carron) was the policy of supporting allied nations. This was a policy that

both exploited and maximised Britain's economic potential. The former was achieved

through supplies of cash and material to allied nations, while the latter was facilitated

by Britain maintaining a small army and letting its proxies do the fighting. 331

         The extent of Britain's military contribution to the successive coalitions

created to counter French power during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars is

open to some doubt and it was perhaps Austria that deserved the title of Napoleon's

most resolute enemy. There can be little question, however, regarding the important

role played by Britain as both financier and arsenal for the major European nations. 33'

In the first three years of the Peninsular War, British vessels alone delivered 200,000

muskets and 155 artillery pieces to Spanish and Portuguese forces, and initially

individual ships captains in the Royal Navy were given free reign as to who they

supplied muskets too, often several hundred at a time, in an attempt to raise bands of

guerrillas. 333 Historians such as Christopher Hall see this in the context of Britain's

contribution to the Allied war effort and evidence of Britain's industrial strength, yet

'^ Partridge and Oliver, The British Army and Her Allies, p.49; C. W. C. Oman, A History of the
Peninsular War, (Oxford, Clarendon, 1930), V, pp.257-61.
330 P. Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt, 1801 (London, Routledge, 1995), p.27.
331 And the supply of munitions to allied forces was not always cost effective. By 1808 many of Sicily's
fortresses remained unarmed and the army was ill equipped. P. Mackesy, Tfie War in the
Mediterranean, p. 108.
332 See R. Muir, Britain and the Defeat of Napoleon (Yale, YUP, 1996).
"3 Hall, Wellington 'sNavy, p. 13 7.


                                                  103
