 any straw, palliasses or things of that nature to lie on' for several days. 387 To construct

 such shelters units were compelled to utilise whatever building materials were at

 hand, with the result that frequently whole villages could be stripped to provide

 building materials for makeshift shelters and, more commonly, fuel. The practice was

 to become so widespread that in 1811 general orders were issued in an attempt to limit

 such activity:

         The commander of the forces requests the general officer commanding
         divisions will place safeguards in the villages in the neighbourhood of
         encampments to prevent the soldiers from carrying off furniture, poles of the
         vines, and other property of the inhabitants. 381*



 Away from the frontline, when troops tended to be less mobile, the allocation of

 shelter and associated items, such as fuel, could be better controlled. Indeed, troops

were less likely to be given a crude shelter and instead find themselves billeted in the

home of a local civilian (a policy that was in theory the responsibility of the Quarter

Master General but practicalities in the field dictated that it was executed by the

Commissariat).

         In Spain and Portugal the practice was popular amongst many locals as those

most commonly accommodated in this way were officers, the presence of whom were

believed to deter looting. The validity of such a belief was seemingly demonstrated

during the storming of Badajoz. Lieutenant Grattan was invited to dine in a house at

this time and he wrote, 'all outside was noise and pillage [but] affairs within went on

agreeably enough'. iw Despite protection from looting, however, the arrival of an

officer was not always "welcome and they could prove to be less than gracious guests.

Captain Browne, for example, instructed his servant to steal clothing from his Spanish


387 Cassels (ed), Tlie Letters of Captain William Bragge, p. 75.
3*s Poimbera, 18th March 1811, Extracts of General Orders, NAM 6807/221, pp.8-9.
m Grattan, Adventures with the ConnaughtRangers, p!61.


                                               120
