 also created extra regulation but this bureaucracy generally benefited soldiers by going

 some way to ensure their barrack accommodation was of a reasonable standard.

 Barracks were the responsibility of the Barrack Department, which in 1812 consisted

 of three inspectors general; twelve assistant inspectors general and one hundred and

 fifty barrack masters (approximately one for each barrack, although some postings had

 two). Other personnel employed included varying numbers of artificers (for example

 six in 1806, none in 1812)402 . Barrack masters oversaw individual barracks and their

 role was to ensure the blocks were properly equipped, maintained and run in

 accordance with a bureaucratic system of regular returns, including monthly, four-

 monthly and six-monthly reports. 403

         In barracks the rooms of officers were equipped almost solely as a place to

 sleep, containing few items other than those for bedding, washing and heating, a desk

and a chair (with a variety of 'luxury' options, including rosewood inlays). Even these

basics were not always available, however, as Judge Advocate Larpent complained

that he lacked even a stool. 404 Captains were allocated individual rooms, while two

subalterns or staff officers shared a single room. An inventory of the differing items in

the rooms of officers and the other ranks, compiled from a list of requirements written

in 1797, is shown in figure 12. It can be seen that one of the primary differences

between the rooms of officers and other ranks was the provision of cooking

implements, including a wide variety of pots and pans. Conspicuous by its absence

from the list of officers' furniture is bedding, although other sources indicate its

presence. The rooms of the other ranks were clearly intended for use by far greater

numbers of men, and the rooms also contained lower-quality bedding materials -

primarily straw and sacking.

4(i- Army List, 1806 to 1812 (London, War Office, 1806), passim.
403 See Letter from Barrak [sic] Master General to Barrak Masters (Barraks Office. 1797).
404 Larpent (ed). The Private Journal ofFSLarpent, Vol. I (London, Richard Bentley. 1853). p.66.


                                                 123
