case transportation) - represented a new way of maintaining the army and ultimately

waging war.

         The employment of specialists also reflected the trend towards professionalism

that was occurring in both the army and society. While that of society increasingly

relied on education through the use of examinations, however, the army was adopting

both an academic approach and one emphasising practical skills.446 The latter is

important as it demonstrates that the army was starting to appreciate the importance of

experience, a crucial step towards undermining the worst aspects of the purchase

system. This is apparent when it is considered that in the period increasing numbers of

officers were indeed promoted based on this principle, rather than through purchase,

patronage or other privileges.447

         Despite the fact that the concept of the Royal Wagon Train was progressive,

its structure reveals origins rooted in contemporary military thinking. At the heart of

train's organization lay the troops, which approximately equated to companies or

squadrons in the regiments of the combat arms, and reflected the fact that the

organization shared many of its administrative practices with the cavalry. The number

and composition of these troops were not constant, as shown in figure 13. The number

of troops on the strength of the train fluctuated due to a variety of factors. These

include the absorption of the Irish Wagon Train following the Act of Union (reflected

by the increase from three troops in September 1799 to eight by 1801); the reductions

in defence expenditure caused by the Peace of Amiens; the restructuring of the troops

in 1804; the invasion scare of 1805 which promoted an increase in Britain's military

readiness; the peak of the organization's efficiency in 1813-14; and the dispersal of

446 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p. 88.
447 P. J. Haythomthwaite, 'The British Army, Wellington and Moore: Some Aspects of Service in the
Peninsular War' in P. Griffiths (ed) A History ofthe Peninsular War Vol. IX: Modern Studies of the
War in Spain and Portugal 1808 -1814 (London, Greenhill Books, 1999) pp.90-100. For a wider
consideration of purchase and its demise see also A. Bruce, The Purchase System in the British Army
1660 -1871 (London, RHS, 1980), passim.


                                                136
