growing tendency towards professionalism and specialisation in society in general, it

is surprising that no dedicated corps dedicated to transport in the army existed until

1795. Known as the Corps of Royal Waggoners, this formation soon proved

inadequate and was disbanded.426 Subsequently, in 1799 the Royal Wagon Train was

formed from a cadre of cavalry personnel to meet the transport requirements of the

British army in the Netherlands.427 Like its predecessor, the Royal Wagon Train would

prove incapable of carrying out its task and the Commissariat would be forced to rely

upon civilian drivers to maintain the majority of the supply network. Despite its

shortcomings, however, the train provided a professional core around which the

transport network could operate, reflecting the increasing professionalism of the army

in general during the period.

         The employment of military drivers rather than civilians gave the Royal

Wagon Train flexibility, as it was not hindered through operational constraints

imposed by contracts. Military drivers could be called on to deliver supplies under

fire, for example, and were thus more effectively utilised if assigned to such tasks,

rather than transporting manure from barracks, a role, amongst others, for which

civilian contractors continued to be employed.428 The employment of military

personnel as drivers also enabled the army to resolve difficulties more rapidly as its

personnel could be subject to action far sooner than civilians could through the courts.

Besides being able to use military discipline officers on occasion resorted to their own

initiative to get convoys moving, as was the case when Major Dickson found six of

his drivers drunk. He noted that 'previous to moving from Torquemada I ducked [in a

water barrel] drivers Henderson, Mitchell, Ash, Farmer, O'Neal... and driver Doran

426 Even prior to its employment in Flanders senior British officers had expressed doubts about its
effectiveness. P. Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt, p. 10.
427 The designation of this organization from 1799 to 1802 was the Royal Wagon Corps, but for clarity
the later designation of Royal Wagon Train is adhered to in this work.
428 Singer to Boyes, Commissary General's office, 24 March 1806, PRO WO 63/45.


                                                 131
