to reveal the relationship between the state and army but also to demonstrate a product

of this system. In addition a study of the Royal Wagon Train will bring together issues

previously raised in this study, particularly in regard to the reflexive or pragmatic

policies that characterised the methods used to maintain the army.

        The Royal Wagon Train performed a crucial role for the army but is one of the

least studied units of the British army. The train is frequently overlooked in works by

informed contemporaries such as Lieutenant Colonel Wilson, J. MacDonald and the

anonymous writer of A Treatise on Military Finance, all of whom paid scant attention

to the organization and its role in logistics. 433 The train was a relatively anonymous

organization in the Napoleonic British army, a situation that has often worked to its

advantage as criticism is deflected to the much more prominent Commissariat. This

was apparent in Arthur Wellesley's letter of 16 August 1808, in which he informed

Castlereagh that 'I have found the British Commissariat to be so ill composed as to be

incapable of distributing even to the British troops the ample supplies which have

been procured for them'.434 Wellesley made no mention of the pathetically small, and

totally inadequate detachment of the train then operating in the theatre.435 This was

despite the fact that Wellesley was well aware of the limitations of the Royal Wagon

Train, believing that no effective wagon train had existed in the British army until the

absorption of the Irish Wagon Train.436

         The operation of wagons in the army was not exclusive to the Royal Wagon

Train and regiments held a limited number. These were utilised for duties including

the distributing supplies from regimental depots, carrying wounded and administrative

tasks. Commissaries accompanying units used a wagon for the carriage of ledgers,

433 See L. T. Wilson, An Enquiry into the state of the Forces of the British Empire (London, 1804); J.
MacDonald, Instructions for the Conduct ofInfantry in Actual Service (London, 1807); Anon, A
Treatise on Military Finance.
434 Arthur Wellesley to Castlereagh, 16 August 1808, PRO WO 1/228.
435 Monthly return of the Royal Wagon Train, August 1808, PRO WO 17/54/1, Wagon Train 1805 - 12.
436 Arthur Wellesley to Castlereagh, 8 August 1808, PRO WO 1/228.


                                                 133
