                                         Chapter 4

                             Transport in the British Army415



         Transport is a central but often overlooked part of logistics.416 One might

assume that the British army was almost certain to possess a sound transport

infrastructure due to the support of the state yet as in the case of manufacturing this

support was neither total nor adequate. By the time of the Napoleonic Wars Britain lay

between the end of the canal building boom and on the brink of railway mania,

possessing national canal and road networks that were unrivalled. The significance of

such advances for the army, however, was far less than that for industry and, as noted

in the previous chapter, the resulting industrial and economic benefits of canals and

roads could not be fully exploited by the army. The simple fact was that while

operating in its home country the British army had internal lines of communication

unlike any other force in Europe but, while this may have been a factor if an invasion

had occurred, in the event had little significant impact in the main theatres of war.

Roads and turnpikes may have enhanced the mobility of British forces travelling to

and from ports of embarkation but this then depended on shipping schedules to be of

value.

         For the army, shipping was to be the most reliable aspect of Britain's transport

infrastructure. Between 1808 and 1814 404 convoys sailed from Britain to the Iberian

Peninsular, a total of 13,427 voyages in a system that proved secure from any

action.417 British naval supremacy was such that its merchant ships no longer had to be

designed with defensive armament in mind, allowing increases in cargo capacity and



415 Some of this research has been published. C. Chilcott, 'The Royal Wagon Train (notes and
documents)', in JSAHR, volume 82, number 330, Summer 2004, pp. 175-177.
416 Creveld, Supplying War, p.l.
417 Hall, Wellington's Navy, p. 113.


                                            128
