was so completely inebriated that he was left behind'.429 Inevitably there were

difficulties involved in employing civilian or military drivers, but it is the

consequences for the individuals involved that underline the value of the latter.

Dickson was able to resort to instant (not to mention dramatic) measures to resolve his

difficulties, while in the case of civilians such as James Maton (above) there were few

sanctions beyond any penalty clauses, revoking the contract and a fine (in this case

40s) imposed by a civilian court days or weeks after the event.430 A footnote to

Dickson's actions, and one that puts the issues into perspective, is that if he had

ducked contractors he would have effectively been guilty of assault as British soldiers

were bound by civil law even when carrying out their duty.431

        Besides illustrating the benefits offered by the employment of military

personnel, the Royal Wagon Train is important to a study concerned with the

maintenance of the British army for a variety of reasons. One of the most fundamental

is that it was an organization that played a significant role in logistics but a detailed

study of the train also reveals much about the relationship between state and the army.

The Royal Wagon Train perhaps reflects this relationship more than any other

formation because it was a product of the contemporary state. The train had no real

roots in an earlier period, unlike the Commissariat, which had slowly evolved, with

each new development or practice, be it administrative, social, military or

technological, being added to and eventually absorbed by the organization (as was to

occur in many institutions in the period).432 Conversely the Royal Wagon Train was

created at the end of the eighteenth century, when many of these developments had

occurred or were underway and were incorporated into the organization from its

conception. Thus the Royal Wagon Train warrants a detailed consideration, not only
429 Leslie, The Dickson Manuscripts, Vol. 4, p.712.
430 Minutes of meeting held at Fisherton Anger, 8 November 1808, WSRO B18/100/7.
431 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.48.
432 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.69.


                                              132
