support of the state? While the number of personnel involved was considerable,

approximately 300, the long-term significance of the absorption of the Irish Wagon

 Train may be overestimated. Not least is the fact that by 1803 the personnel of the

Royal Wagon Train had been drastically cut back and in effect a new force, based on a

 cadre of former personnel, was raised to support the army in the Peninsular War. The

importance attached to the Irish train has no doubt arose in part from the timing of its

absorption - between the failure of the Royal Wagon Train in Flanders and its success

 (or rather improved performance) in the Peninsular War. Based on this it would

appear that the Irish train had indeed been a catalyst for the success of the train in the

Peninsula but other factors should also be considered. In particular the Royal Wagon

Train had been in its infancy in 1799 and had gone to war below strength and in the

process of forming. It will also become apparent that by 1808 the lessons of the first

campaign had been learned and that the organisation, structure and composition of the

train were significantly modified in the based on this. Crucially the organization

would also receive more resources, a factor that can be attributed solely to the

economic strength of the British state.

         On 1 July 1802 the Wagon Train was organised as follows: commanding

officer Colonel Digby Hamilton, the 1 st Troop under Major William Langley, the 2nd

Troop under Captain A. Robuy, the 3rd Troop under Captain Charles Tudor, the 4th

Troop under Captain William Horton, the 5th Troop under Captain Thomas Shields,

and the 6th Troop, which had no permanent commander assigned. The typical strength

of the troops numbered 1 through to 5 was as follows: one captain (a major in the 1 st

troop), one lieutenant, one comet, one quartermaster, three sergeants, three corporals,

one trumpeter, one wheelwright, one collar maker, one blacksmith, two farriers and

forty-nine privates.457

457 Monthly return of the Royal Wagon Train, July 1802, PRO WO 17/53/2.


                                               141
