 been present in a troop although this was an exception rather than the rule. The

 artificers included a mixture of wheelwrights, farriers, blacksmiths and collar-
 makers.450

          This was the organization of the Royal Wagon Train that went to war in the

 Netherlands. The logistical services were singled out for harsh criticism after this war

 but the performance of the army in general was unsatisfactory, it being in this

 campaign that Wellington famously learned 'what one ought not to do' in war.451

 Following the campaign in Flanders the train avoided the fate of its predecessor and

 instead of disbanding was restructured. By June 1800 the headquarters formation,

renamed the Commandant's Troop, was brought up to the strength of a troop, a

process that had began the previous December with the addition of four non-

commissioned officers. The following personnel were employed in the troop at this

time: Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, Adjutant Walford, Surgeon Oxley, Assistant

Surgeon Geddes, Veterinary Surgeon Burke, Paymaster Pettigrew, four sergeants,

three corporals, two artificers and forty-five privates.452 The Commandant's troop

would remain active until April 1804, when it was again removed from the list of

troops. The troop was reduced to a command formation and consisted of the following

officers: Colonel Hamilton, Lieutenant Colonel Langley, Adjutant Purvis, Surgeon

Oxley, Veterinary Surgeon Baker and Paymaster Pettigrew. Of note is that the

regiment was still commanded by Digby Hamilton but he had now been promoted to a

full colonel, while a new officer, Lieutenant Colonel Langley, had arrived to fill the

vacancy created by Hamilton's promotion. The newly awarded colonelcy, therefore,

was not merely a sop to the vanity of the Royal Wagon Train's commanding officer,

but a reflection of the train's increasing status and importance to the army.453 The
450 Ibid.
451 C. Hibbert, Wellington: A Personnel History (London, Harper Collins, 1997), p. 14.
452 PRO WO 12/1522.
453 Royal wagon train monthly pay list, April 1804, PRO WO 12/1524.


                                                 139
