in Britain. If necessary the Depot Troops could have formed a core around which

additional troops could be raised in an emergency, but not without weakening the

units deployed at home. This is significant because it must be borne in mind that the

Royal Wagon Train based in Britain, while maintaining a similar number of troops,

was actually weaker than during the peace of Amiens when it had been drastically

reduced (a strength of approximately 200 in 1810 compared to 250 in 1802).

        There were several differences between the Royal Wagon Train as it deployed

to Spain in 1809 and the Netherlands in 1799. By the time of the Peninsular War

command and control in the train had improved dramatically and reflected trends

elsewhere in the army due to the addition of an extra sergeant, sergeant major and

lieutenant to each troop, while trumpeters were also more common.479 The

introduction of such personnel related not only to discipline, however, but also

reflected changes intended to improve the attractiveness of the army as a career

through increasing opportunity for promotion.480 More significant for improving the

operational capability of the Royal Wagon Train than the introduction of additional

personnel was a slight increase in the number of wagons available in each troop

(rising from 27 to 30). Besides a marginal increase in strength the Royal Wagon Train

also benefited from improvements to transport technology in the period. This was an

indirect consequence of the agricultural and industrial revolutions and arose due to

improvements in agricultural practices.481 The three types of wagon employed by the

train during the Napoleonic Wars were designated as bread, sprung and forage wagons

respectively. The regulation number of wagons per troop in April 1805 is shown in

figure 18. Of note is the smaller number of wagons employed by the Depot Troops.

479 The addition of non-commissioned and lower ranked commissioned officers being an important
reform of the British army operationally. Muir, Tactics and the Experience of Battle, p.55.
480 Bartlett, The Development of the British Army, p. 137; Haythomthwaite, 'The British Army,
Wellington and Moore', p.91.
481 John, 'Farming in Wartime, 1793 to 1815', p.35; Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.183.


                                                149
