bearing on the actual situation, and it was not until March 1810 that the Royal Wagon

 Train deployed a significant amount of manpower to the theatre: of the organization's

 nine troops, five were deployed to the Iberian Peninsula. The manpower of the force

 in that theatre consisted of the following: one colonel, one major, three captains, seven

 lieutenants, four cornets, one paymaster, one adjutant, one assistant surgeon, two

 quartermasters, six sergeant majors, twenty sergeants, four trumpeters and 293 rank

 and file. The presence of only four troop commanders (one major and three captains)

indicates that one troop of reduced personnel operated in the Peninsula. Of the troops,

four were based at Leira and one at Rio Mayor, while a small detachment was

deployed to Belem. The number of officers was subject to some fluctuation and both

 Colonel Hamilton and Major Tudor, among others, were in the theatre for varying

periods of time.

         In September 1810 the 'Detachment of the Royal Wagon Train in Spain and

Portugal', as the force became known, reached the peak at which it was to remain

until 1814. Its principal officers were Lieutenant Colonel W. Langley, Quartermaster

C. Carter, Quartermaster W. Newman, Adjutant J. Backer, Assistant Surgeon T. Noye,

Paymaster J. Harrison, Major T. Aird, Captain F. Bloeme, Captain B. Jaimy, Captain

G. Lenon, Captain S. Watson and Captain J. Whittle. Of note is the presence of the

two quartermasters with the organization in the Peninsula, as typically only one such

officer had been on the strength of the Royal Wagon Train in Britain. The presence of

two with the organization in the Peninsula is perhaps indicative of that detachment's

greater mobility and dispersal across the theatre.474 Additionally, this force provided

the core of the 'Detachment Royal Wagon Train in France' that served in that country

during 1814, where it was then commanded by Major Aird.475 That the strength of the
474 Royal Wagon Train monthly pay list, Leira, March 1810, PRO WO 12/1527, Royal Wagon Train
 1810- 11.
475 Royal Wagon Train monthly pay list, France, April 1814, PRO WO 12/1529, Royal Wagon Train
1814-15.


                                              147
