dictated that it was continually active, and bad weather that forced fighting regiments

to return to cantonments or remain in barracks was not allowed to hinder its activities.

This was particularly apparent during the Peninsular War, a campaign in which the

army pursued a strategy of fighting decisive battles and then withdrawing for long

periods, a tactic exemplified by the retreat of the army to the lines of Torres Vedras in

1810.529 Captain Grenville-Eliot of the Royal Artillery believed such periods were

'very much to the satisfaction of every individual in the army' as they allowed the

army to recuperate.530 This, however, could only be achieved if during such periods

the activities of organizations such as the Royal Wagon Train continued; supplies

were required not only to maintain forces but also to refit them following the previous

campaign and prepare them for the next. The situation was worsened by the fact that

the organization was required to transport not only essentials, such as food, fuel,

clothing or munitions, but other items as well. In February 1811, for example, when

Ireland was experiencing some of the worst snow in years, a troop of the Royal

Wagon Train was still despatched to brave both blocked roads and the elements to

move the belongings of Major General Beck to his new billet.531 The result of such

duties was that the personnel of the Royal Wagon Train were to become amongst the

most mobile in the British army.

         While on campaign the Royal Wagon Train followed the movements of the

army, but even in Britain the troops of the train were redeployed to meet the

requirements of the army on both a local and national basis. The latter is illustrated in

figure 19.




529 W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula, Vol 3, (London, John Murray, 1890), pp.39-
47.
530 Grenville Eliot to wife, Truxillo, 19* August 1809, NAM 5903/127/6.
531 J. Malasses to J. Jones, Commissary General's Office, 4th February 1811, PRO WO 63/45.


                                                 164
