(Queen's Own) Dragoons were too big for cavalry duties (being more suited to pulling

wagons), while in April 1809 Arthur Wellesley had written to Castelreagh expressing

concern that even the regiments of guards had on their strength horses that were

unsuitable for combat duty. 503

        It is apparent that the Royal Wagon Train on occasion received the cast-offs of

the cavalry. This says something about the pecking order in the British military

establishment and, importantly, reveals that many of the animals it employed were not

carthorses, but breeds more suited to cavalry use had it not been for their condition.

Surprisingly this could be an advantage because while carthorses were ideally suited

to the task of pulling wagons and carts, they were more costly both to purchase and

maintain, while they also took up more room on naval transport vessels.504 Often there

was barely sufficient transportation for the cavalry horses, let alone the animals

required by the Royal Wagon Train, further evidence that the advances in British

transportation capacity that occurred during the period were of little significance to the

army on campaign.505 The difficulties encountered when moving horses to war zones

was demonstrated by the instructions given to General Sir John Moore upon his

arrival in Spain during 1808:

         the cavalry you will... direct to move by land and if the horses for the artillery
         can take the same route so as to admit the whole of the horse transports being
         returned to England, it will tend much to accelerate the arrival of the cavalry
         from home. 506


The orders make no mention of the animals of the train, indicating that they were

either not present or too few in numbers to affect the planning of the operation. It is


503 Major General Cartwright's confidential report on the actual state of the 4* Queen's Own Dragoons,
7 May 1808, PRO WO 27/92/1; Wellesley to Castlereagh, Lisbon, 29 April 1809, PRO WO 1/238.
504 John, 'Fanning in Wartime' p.28; Weller, Wellington in the Peninsula, p.29.
505 Brewer, The Sinews of Power, p. 183. Advances in transport technology directly improved the
effectiveness of the Royal Wagon Train but due to the small size of the organization and other factors
the army gained only minor benefits from these advances.
506 To Moore, Downing Street, 26 September 1808, PRO WO 1/236.


                                                 157
