however, had a strength that allowed it in part to circumvent its small size, specifically

an ability to evolve or adapt to a situation. In particular the train was able to

restructure itself, contracting and expanding in response to peace and war time

situations, creating new elements within its structure (the Depot Troops), splitting

itself between different theatres and incorporating changes adopted by other elements

of the army (such as new administrative practices). It is apparent that the Royal

Wagon Train was the most flexible of the organizations tasked with maintaining the

British army.

         Although there were a variety of possible reasons for the flexibility of the train

compared to other organisations, one of the most important is that it was a new

organization and thus did not require extensive reform to remove outdated practices or

to incorporate new ones. This was in contrast to the Commissariat, which was a

lumbering behemoth compared to the leaner and more efficient Royal Wagon Train

and was forced to expend its energies trying to improve practices rather than adapt to

new situations. 547 The Royal Wagon Train also had other advantages over the

Commissariat and in particular it was one of the few organisations not to deploy assets

outside of the European theatre in the period. Yet this factor should not be

overestimated because there is little evidence to suggest that the Commissariat would

have been significantly more efficient if its activities had been concentrated in Europe.

The organisation would have been leaner but there is no reason to believe its systems

would have been less cumbersome as a result.

         Comparisons between the Royal Wagon Train and Commissariat are not

always appropriate. The task of the latter was broad, while the focused on one aspect

of logistics, transportation. When considering the Commissariat solely in regard to

this, however, another advantage of the Royal Wagon Train over other organizations

547 See above pp.80 to 84.


                                            175
