becomes apparent. The Royal Wagon Train was able to benefit from the British state

in an unusual way as it was able to utilise technology that was, in effect, transferred

directly from the state and was a consequence of the agricultural and industrial

revolutions. The period saw subtle but significant improvements to the technology of

wheeled transport, including suspension and axle designs, and in many respects

Britain led Europe in such fields. Using this technology made the wagons used by the

train superior not only to those of continental armies but also superior to those hired

by other British military organizations on the continent, particularly those utilised by

muleteers, and upon which the Commissariat relied. The Royal Wagon Train was not

unique in utilising the superior technology available in Britain during the period but

that advances were made in its specialist field enabled it to benefit to a significant

degree.

          The state offered the train other advantages, the capability to expand in

response to a situation being of note only when backed by the resources of the state.

Yet the fact remains that, like other organisations, the train was constrained by the

boundaries imposed by financial considerations and the resources that the state was

willing to allocate. Thus, in many respects, the train reflected the best and worst

aspects of the army's relationship with the state. The strength of the system was that

resources (be it money, materiel or technology) could be made available quickly but

these resources were limited due to the reluctance of the state to support the army to

the extent that the force wished. Although important, it was not only lack of resources

that limited the ability of Royal Wagon Train to maintain the army. Some

commodities that the force required were less tangible than bread or guns and could

not be carried on the back of a wagon. It is these commodities that are the focus of the

following chapter.




                                          176
