deployed over a dozen of these latter individuals, indicating the emphasis placed on

command and control over other aspects of army life. If there was no sergeant

schoolmaster in France, then there was no regimental school, arguably one of the most

significant additions to army barracks in the period.

        The existence of the Royal Wagon Train into the post war period was an

achievement for the organization and one that is often overlooked. Its survival was

significant because the train had been created during the war, in response to a wartime

situation, its continued existence in to peacetime evidence that it had became to be

considered an essential element of the British army. The majority of transport duties

for the army continued to be conducted by civilians but these duties tended to be the

mundane, such as delivering produce from suppliers. It was in a war zone that the

Royal Wagon Train came to the fore; delivering supplies at key moments in the heat

of battle or ensuring troops at the very front line of an advance were maintained. The

Royal Wagon train could easily have been disbanded in 1815, its forte being the

support of large scale military operations, yet by maintaining the train the army

demonstrated a reluctance to return to the rather ad hoc policy towards military

logistics that had existed prior to the Revolutionary Wars. The army would eventually

return to such a policy in 1833 following the disbandment of the Royal Wagon Train

but this would be short lived.

       The continued existence of the Royal Wagon Train reflected that an evolution

had occurred in the army regarding logistics. Thus, the creation of the train could be

considered progressive but it was restricted by the traditional shortcoming of all

elements of the British military - lack of resources. There can be little doubt that a

larger train would have achieved more even if it continued to focus on its main role,

that of operating when civilians may have been less effective. The organization,




                                          174
