 century.     This approach - the adopting of current but not necessarily established

 ideas - was to characterise army education and was reflected in the adoption of the

 Bell monitorial system prior to its use nation-wide. 5"

          It is apparent that through policies such as those intended to support soldiers'

 families and, as discussed in previous chapters, soldiers themselves, the army was to

 become increasingly involved in welfare. The extent of and motivation for these

 policies is open to some interpretation but it is evident that the army was one of the

 few careers that fed, clothed, sheltered and even educated its employees. With the

 exception of the Royal Navy, other employers provided less comprehensive support,

 factory owners, for example, providing schools, and some farmers housing and

 feeding their labourers out of season/81* Another important area of welfare was the

 provision of pensions.

         Initially perceived as a means to prevent disgruntled former soldiers becoming

involved in unrest, pensions had, by the time of the Napoleonic Wars, become linked

to the appeal of the army as a career and also related to the welfare of soldiers and

their families. 5"9 The army lagged behind the Royal Navy in the field of pensions and

in 1806 William Windham, then Secretary of State for War and Colonies, proposed

significant reforms of the system utilised by the army. If fully implemented, these

reforms would have dramatically improved the status of the regular army as a possible

career but they became entangled with politics and ultimately proved too ambitious." 90

Windham recognised that for a career in the army to become viable, there was a need

to improve pay and, most importantly, increase pensions. Following Windham's

reforms every soldier was to receive a pension and in an effort to make some postings

M Stewart, Progressives and Radicals, pp.21-22.
5157 Stewart, Progressives and Radicals, pp.92-96; Williams, Tommy Atkins' Children, pp.24-26.
sw J. Foster, Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution: Early Industrial Capitalism in Tliree
English Towns (London, Widenfield & Nicolson, 1974), p.215; Christie. Stress and Stability, p.209.
589 Jones. 'The Military Revolution', p.41; Corvisier, Annies and Societies, pp.83-83.
590 Emsley British Society, pp. 128-9.


                                                 186
