 progressive as the question of soldiers' families was a concept that led to the creation

 of married quarters in the mid-nineteenth century and has become something of an

 emotive subject and political issue in the twenty-first century due to media coverage

 concerned with the families of serving soldiers.550 The problem of soldiers' families is

 thus still a subject with which the state struggles to contend.

          A potentially important reason for men with families not to enlist was

 economics. In civilian life women could make a substantial contribution to a family's

 income, earning an average of 6s per week in an industrial city such as Birmingham

 during the 1790s, which was almost equivalent to a soldier's pay of Is per day. 551 In

 the Midlands during 1795 it was established that a family consisting of a husband,

 wife and two children should receive 15s per week, any shortfall in wages being

rectified through poor relief."2 Thus, for a man with a family to enlist there was a

 potential loss of income that could not be avoided if the husband was to serve in the

army. The economic issues related to the recruitment of men with families, however,

not only concerned incomes. While labourers and their families could earn more than

soldiers their expenses could also be considerable. The terms 'labourer' and 'poor'

have been described as being synonymous in this period and labouring families,

particularly in rural areas, were not so well off as their incomes alone may suggest.^

It has been estimated, for example, that early in the nineteenth century a labouring

married couple could spend £20 per year on food, £3 on rent and £8 on clothing.""4 By

enlisting at least these costs would be subsidised by the army, who would clothe, feed

and provide accommodation for the soldier. Another consideration was the nature of


5SO See for. example, the media coverage concerning the 2004 Invasion of Iraq.
551 1. R. Christie. Stress and Stability in Late Eighteenth Century Britain (Oxford Clarendon, 1984),
p.84.
552 M. Blaug, "The Myth of the Old Poor Law and the Making of the New', in M. W. Flinn and T.C.
Smout (eds), Essays in Social History (Oxford, Clarendon, 1974), p. 131.
553 R. J. White, Life in Regency England (London, Batsford, 1963), p.22.
534 E.W. Bovill, English Country Life 1780 - 2830 (London, OUP, 1962), p. 18.


                                                   179
