 civilian life and thus devoted little time to their military duties. 599 While there can be

 little doubt that the board frequently failed to address issues with the required vigour,

 the potential benefits of its structure should not be underestimated. In one respect a

 part-time board of this nature went against the trend of increasing professionalism in

 the army during this period, but it was also concurrent with the trend as it utilised

 skilled specialists to meet the needs of the army. By allowing the members of the

 board to continue in their more profitable civilian careers the army gained the benefit

 of their expertise without the expense of paying their full wages. In consequence even

 advisors to the board were frequently individuals of some standing and held in high

 regard. Viscount Palmerston, the future Prime Minister, described Dr Pym as being

 'an excellent man, [about which] I have heard a great deal in his favour'.600 Due to the

 advice of individuals such as Pym, medical provision for soldiers was more advanced

than that available to many civilians.

          The very existence of the Medical Board was itself evidence of the superior

medical provision available to soldiers compared to civilians. A similar organisation

for the civilian population was not proposed by the Royal College of Physicians until

 1805 and, despite consisting of five rather than three permanent members, it was to

have fewer responsibilities than its military counterpart, its primary role being to

safeguard Britain from outbreaks of diseases such as the plague."01                The advice of its

own Medical Board led to the army adopting some of the most up to date medical

practices available in the early nineteenth century. 602 In particular the army was at the

forefront of inoculation and while soldiers were not necessarily inoculated as a matter

sw Haythornthwaite, The Napoleonic Source Book, p.209.
600 Palmerston to Mr. Wharton, 26th July 1813, PRO PC 1/4011, Privy Council Miscellaneous Unbound
Papers, July 1813.
601 Royal College of Physicians to Privy Council, 5th February 1805; Instructions to the Board of Health.
13th February 1805, PRO PC 1/3643, Privy Council Miscellaneous Unbound Papers, February 1805.
602 With the exception of the treatment of battlefield wounds, the army was almost always several years
behind the practices of the Royal Navy. M. Duffy, 'The Foundations of British Naval Power', inM.
Duff)- (ed), The Military Revolution and State, 1500 to 1800 (Exeter University, 1980), pp.74-75.


                                                   190
