 brought into line with those of the regulars (militia surgeons had to serve for fifteen

 years before gaining the same rights as their counterparts in the regulars). Most

 significantly the petition highlighted the fact that a majority of these surgeons already

 had successful careers in civilian life, to which they would return if their situation did

 not improve. 622 Yet, despite possessing qualifications and demonstrating growing

 professionalism, there remained a number of surgeons who were of questionable

 competence.

         Surgeon Henry was highly critical of his superior, a German surgeon, and

 noted that he was 'much fonder of schnapps than of surgery; and from keeping late

hours, not particularly punctual in his morning visits at the hospital; in fact,

 sometimes staying away altogether three or four days'. 623 Interestingly, similar

comments were made in regard to another surgeon in 1825, who was subsequently

court-martialled. While falling just outside of the period covered by this work, the

case of Surgeon Inglis is of significance as it reveals what the army expected of

competent surgeons and their responsibilities. Inglis faced three charges in relation to

his conduct at the army hospital on Corfu and it is interesting to note that while

ostensibly a surgeon of the Ordnance Medical Department, the surgeon operated

alongside those of Horse Guards. 624 The first charge was of:

        Great irregularity in his attendance on Sergeant Reavil of the Royal Artillery
        while in hospital having proscribed for him irregularly, and not having paid
        that attention to his case which it appears to have demanded... [and also]
        conduct tending to aggravate the complaint."25

Surgeons were expected to attend their patients at least twice a day 'to keep regular



622 NAM 6801/43, Letter from Irish Militia Surgeons to the Duke of York Expressing Concerns about
Pay, c!804.
623 Hayward (ed), Surgeon Henry's Trifles, p.29.
624 PRO WO 71/114, General Courts Martial of Assistant Surgeon Charles Inglis.
625 Charges Preferred Against Assistant Surgeon Charles Inglis of the Ordnance Medical Department
Office of Ordnance, Corfu 10th November 1825, PRO WO 71/114, General Courts Martial of Assistant
Surgeon Charles Inglis.


                                               196
