 books of diseases, medicines, diet tables and hospital funds'. 626 Inglis' failure to keep

 adequate records of either the treatment or progress of his patients was raised in the

 second charge:

         Negligence as a medical officer in not having regularly recorded or detailed
         the symptoms of Sergeant ReaviPs case, nor the cases of other patients in his
         diary journal or register. 627



 The third charge was basically an addition to the first and would no doubt have

 seemed familiar to Surgeon Henry, specifically 'general irregularity in hours of

 visiting his patients in hospital, and for general inattention to those entitled to his

 attendance out of hospital'. 628

         The charges demonstrate that surgeons were expected to attend their patients

 regularly and keep records. This is hardly surprising, although the second part of the

 third charge, relating to patients outside of hospital, is revealing. During the hearing it

was to emerge that Inglis failed to attend at the quarters of a sick officer, and it was

the opinion of the court that it was the duty of an army surgeon to make house calls of

this nature. Indeed, this was perceived as being of equal importance to his work in

hospital. Another important issue raised in the case was the failure of Inglis to treat a

civilian employed as the servant of an officer. Again the court ruled against the

surgeon, indicating that servants and non-military personnel were regarded as part of

the military establishment in regard to eligibility for medical treatment, even though

they may not have been eligible to draw rations or clothing from the army. 62S

        Non-military personnel were referred to in regulations as 'inferior persons' and

the procedures for the treatment of such persons employed by the Commissariat were

outlined in the following order:
626 NAM 6807/370/29, Orders For Regimental Hospitals, 1804.
627 PRO WO 71/114, Charges Preferred Against Assistant Surgeon Charles Inglis.
628 PRO WO 71/114.
62y Office of Ordnance, Corfu, 8th November 1825, PRO WO 71/114.


                                                197
