 daily basis. These included ensuring rooms were ventilated and cleaned, that 'no man

 able to sit up is to lie upon his bed during the day', taking responsibility for patients'

 possessions, washing patients, and administering medicine. 633 Thus the success of

 treatments prescribed or administered by surgeons depended to a degree upon the

 abilities of the non-commissioned officers who ran each ward. If, for example, a

 surgeon correctly prescribed a medicine, this could only be effective if the sergeant

 ensured that it was administered.

         Besides specialist knowledge to be effective the sergeants appointed to run

 wards also required integrity but this was a trait not always apparent in either

 themselves or their staff. Theft from patients was common, and of his time spent in

 hospital at Wlachern Private Thomas Howell of the 71 st Regiment of Foot noted that:

         All the time I was in hospital, my soul was oppressed by the distress of my
         fellow-sufferers, and shocked at the conduct of the hospital men. Often I have
         seen them fighting over the expiring bodies of the patients, their eyes not yet
         closed in death, for articles of apparel that two had seized at once; cursing and
         oaths mingling with the dying groans and prayers of the poor sufferers.634



Besides the limitations of those responsible for the daily running of hospitals, another

factor that could hinder surgeons was that the system could be stretched beyond

capacity by a large number of casualties sustained during a single military operation, a

problem not only in war zones but also Britain itself. This was demonstrated during

the Walcheren operation, which saw wounded conveyed directly from the war zone to

hospitals in southern and eastern Britain, and the opening phases of the peninsular

war, when the required infrastructure to handle large numbers of casualties was not in

place locally.    In such circumstances there was often an insufficient number of

surgeons available, as the hospitals were prepared to cope with the sick and,


633 NAM 6807/370/29, Orders For Regimental Hospitals, 1804.
634 Hibbert (ed),.4 Soldier of the. 71st, p.45.


                                               199
