 likely destination would have been either a permanent hospital or hospital ship, either

 of which could have been in the same region as their posting or Britain.

         Twenty-six hospital ships were active during the course of the Napoleonic and

 Revolutionary Wars, although the highest number active in a single year was nine in

 1799. The navy had used hospital ships since Tudor times but the army had made little

 use of them and initially viewed such vessels as being little more than transports for

 the sick and wounded, although from 1808 limited use was made of them as floating

 hospitals (such as HMS Charon). Prior to this soldiers had been treated aboard similar

 vessels in colonies, such as HMS Seraphis in Jamaica, where shore-based medical

 facilities were limited. Some craft were designated as stationary hospital ships and

 permanently moored at a single location. Such vessels were not always well placed

 and one was moored a league off the coast of Cornwall, where it was noted that for at

 least one week per year poor weather made it 'almost impossible for a boat to have

 any intercourse [with the shore]'. 660 Hospital ships were often no more than regular

naval or merchant vessels, converted through the addition of extra bedding, and often

retained a secondary role as store ships (such has HMS Magnificent). They were

described as being cramped, dirty and airless. 601

         Those soldiers sent to a regimental hospital were in theory better off than their

comrades afloat. Regimental hospitals were governed by numerous regulations

concerning ventilation, hygiene and diet but these were frequently circumvented or

just ignored due to circumstance, lethargy or conftision. Much emphasis, for example,

was placed on cleanliness but instructions regarding this could be vague. Consider the

following order, which relates to the cleaning of wards: 'occasionally, in fine weather,

the rugs and blankets [are] to be hung out and well aired, and the bedsteads and
660 Secretary of Customs, Extract on the Report on the Collector and Comptroller of the Customs at
Sciliy Relative to the Stationary Hospital Ships', 2nd February 1805. PRO PC 1/3643.
661 PRO ADM 102/1, Hospital Ship Musters; Lieutenant Colonel J. H. Plumridge, Hospital Ships and
Ambulance Trains (London, Seeley, 1975), pp. 16-26.


                                                206
