 canvas to be washed with soap and water, and the plastered walls to be frequently

 whitewashed' 662 . Although the requirement for regular cleaning is note worthy there

 was little real guidance in regard to the frequency of this activity. Is occasionally

 weekly, monthly, six monthly or bi-annually? And what of'frequently whitewashed'?

 Clearly there was a need for the frequencies to be stipulated, although even when this

 occurred it raised further questions: windows, for example, were to be opened daily

 but there is no indication whether this order was rescinded in winter. Often the

 regulations, even if the hospital staff wished to adhere to them, were simply

 impractical or even impossible. It is apparent that the orders were written with ideal

 conditions (such as those encountered in Britain) in mind. It was stated, for example,

 that each man was to be allocated a bed, the linen of which was to be changed

fortnightly, and 5 feet of space. In practice hospital overcrowding, particularly

following a large battle or in regions prone to high rates of sickness prevented such

luxuries. At times the only available bedding was straw on the floor and space,

especially in the wards of the West Indies, could be as little as 22 inches. 663

            There can be little doubt that conditions in military hospitals could be

unpleasant and even hazardous to health, with death rates ranging from one in sixty-

seven in Britain to one in twenty-four in the Caribbean. 664 For patients this state of

affairs was readily, and depressingly, apparent: Private Wheeler of the 51 st Regiment

of Foot spent five weeks in hospital with a fever and noted that during this time, in a

bed adjacent to his own, five men died and another left in 'a hopeless state', while the

anonymous writer of Life in the 38th was convinced he would not survive a prolonged

stay in hospital665 .

662 NAM 6807/370/29, Orders For Regimental Hospitals, 1804.
663 Statistical Report on the Sickness Mortality and Invaliding Among the Troops of the West Indies
(London. HMSO, 1838), p.4.
664 Ibid.
665 Liddell - Hart (ed), The Letters of Private Wheeler, p. 153; NAM 7912/21, Anon Life in the 38th
Foot, p. 24.


                                                207
