with suspicion or hostility and Catholicism in particular was perceived as being

 particularly dangerous, with the fear of 'Popery' sometimes reaching hysteria. This

manifested itself during the general election of 1807, described by Clive Emsley as

being one of the most sectarian in British history, and saw Lord Grenville's

 government defeated by the Duke of Portland running on an anti-Popery ticket.6"

Another faith singled out as the target of suspicion was Methodism, a faith seen as

 subversive as it was non-hierarchical. 6"2 The prejudices inherent in the state were

transferred directly to the army through regulations that limited the employment of

non-Anglicans, imposing a glass ceiling on their advancement by restricting them to

the rank of Captain or lower. 683

          Regulations limiting the advancement of non-Anglicans were based on the fear

of subversion and rebellion, yet it is important to note that even the Anglican faith

could at times be disruptive and not conducive to good military order. An example of

a potentially serious conflict between the religious beliefs of an individual and

military duty arose in 1808, when Private Philip Arthurs of the militia was

 'imprisoned in the gaol of St. Helens for refusing to attend the regimental drills and

military reviews on Sundays, from scruples of conscience and praying belief 6M

Arthurs was not a Dissenter but an Anglican, evidence that even adherents of the state

religion could come into conflict with military authorities. Arthurs appealed against

his imprisonment, stating that he would be willing to attend on a weekday. The

military authorities stated that allowing the militia to choose their own day of drill

would undermine discipline, although the appeal was dismissed by the Privy Council




681 Emsley, British Society, p. 129.
682 Royle, Revolutionary Britannia, p. 14.
683 Cookson, ne British Armed Nation, p. 156.
684 PRO PC 1/3 866, Petition Brought by Philip Arthurs, Private of the South West Regiment of the
Jersey militia, 11 th April 1809.


                                                 212
