          The experience of a period spent in hospital would have been worsened for

 many soldiers by the strict regulations governing them. It is interesting to note that

 these regulations were to be posted in each hospital on a large notice and read out to

 new patients, in a manner similar to modern day health and safety regulations. A

 hospital uniform consisting of white long coat, flannel waist coat, shirt, trousers and

 cap was to be worn at all times and entry to hospitals was strictly controlled so visits

 from colleagues were rare. To ensure these rules were adhered to sentinels were

 appointed:

         to prevent all persons from entering the hospital, the staff, or officers in
         uniform, patients and servants of the hospital excepted; to be particularly
         careful in preventing liquor, or anything improper from being carried into the
         hospital. No patients to be allowed to go out without a ticket of leave from the
         surgeon. 666


Ward sergeants were responsible for imposing further restrictions and were instructed

 to 'prevent patients from spitting on the floor, irregularities, gaming [and] swearing',

 as well as preventing the defacing of hospital property. Although perhaps not common

 activities while in the ranks on the parade ground, these would have been common

amongst soldiers at rest or even on the march, in regimental hospitals, however,

soldiers were continually under the watchful gaze of the sergeants, who were to report

any disobedience (although there is little evidence that sergeants did so). In addition to

these restrictions normal military conventions, such as morning roll call, continued to

be applied. Then, adding to the misery of a soldier wounded in service of his country,

was the fact that he was also deducted nine pence per day for the duration of his stay

in hospital! 667

        After several weeks or months in hospital patients would be either sent back to

their units or allowed a period of convalescing. Some, such as Lieutenant Anderson of

666 Standing Orders, Order No. 52, NAM 6807/221, p. 11.
667 Standing Orders, Order No. 52, NAM 6807/221, p. 11.


                                                208
