Of particular note is that besides serving an increased number of garrisons, in most

years the number of chaplains actually exceeded the number of garrisons. This

demonstrated chaplains were available to serve the more dispersed detachments.

        While figure 31 clearly demonstrates that there was an increase in the

availability of chaplains in overseas garrisons, it is important to note its limitations.

First there is the question of garrisons and their definition. In this work overseas

garrisons have generally been defined in accordance with the terminology used by the

army to administer its forces deployed overseas. These could be somewhat arbitrary

and of unequal size, Hanover, for example, counted as a single location, as did France,

while Britain was divided into North (Scotland), South (including Wales and the

Channel Islands) and Ireland. 720 In the case of the deployment of chaplains to overseas

garrisons, however, a different system was adopted. In the general army system, for

example, modern day Canada was divided into Canada and New Foundland, while

returns for chaplains added New Brunswick. It is this latter system that is used in

figure 31, rather than that used elsewhere in the work, because, as discussed below,

the information has implications for understanding how chaplains operated outside of

Europe. This, however, makes it difficult to compare properly the deployment of

chaplains to troop concentration. Both of the systems described above relied on

vaguely defined areas of land, those relating to chaplains merely having the distinction

of being slightly less general, and, as the more detailed data relating to garrisons in

this area is incomplete, any comparisons must to a degree rely on estimation.

       Another limitation of figure 31 is that it masks a significant imbalance in the

way in which chaplains were allocated to serve overseas. Specifically, between the

years 1816 to 1817 the number of chaplains serving overseas doubled from six to



-° PRO WO 17/2814, Monthly Returns of the Army at Home and Abroad.


                                            222
