 opportunity for Anglicans to worship is evidence of a more relaxed attitude, with

 Protestantism a feature rather than a principle.

          The motivation for medical services were more clear-cut than those of religion

 in the army, the overriding concern being the maintenance of an effective fighting

force. The limiting and defining factors of medicine were scientific but in this field

the state could have been more active. The military revolution had triggered a degree

of state involvement in medicine and Prussia took a lead in this field as early as 1713,

when the Berlin Anatomical Theatre was established by the state to train surgeons,

 and in 1723 when a College of Medicine and Surgery was set-up. Regulations were

 also passed requiring all surgeons to graduate from the institution and serve one year

 as regimental surgeons. 727 In some respects British practices, including inoculation,

were as advanced, but still lagged behind Prussia in relation to fundamental issues

such as amputation.

         Despite such shortcomings it is necessary to note that the medical service

provided by the army was one of the most comprehensive of its kind in the period and

was unrivalled by that offered to many civilians in Britain. The army demonstrated a

willingness to adopt new developments such as inoculation, utilising an integrated

system of hospitals that were located progressively further from the frontline, and

introducing regulations to encourage good practice such as cleanliness. These

regulations were often inadequate but through them the army demonstrated that it

possessed some understanding of what was required from a modern medical system.

         The motivation for reforms relating to women following the army and pension

provision were as clear cut as those for the medical services, being concerned with

enlistment. Pensions in particular increased the appeal of the army as a career, as did


127 M. Duffy. "The Military Revolution and State', in M. Duffy (ed), Ttie Military Revolution and State,
1500 to 1800 (Exeter University, 1980), p.5.


                                                  227
