 to towards religion and it must be noted that, while many overseas garrisons possessed

 a sound supporting infrastructure of stores, hospitals and regimental schools, the same

 could not be said of the provision of chaplains. 715 This may, however, have been a

 consequence not of a deliberate policy (if chaplains were needed anywhere, it would

 be in garrisons isolated from Christianity in darkest Africa) but rather the practice of

 allotting chaplains to divisions. The majority of divisions existed in Europe so to

 ensure these formations were at strength, chaplains were also concentrated in this

 theatre. Conversely, units deployed on colonial duties tended to be deployed as

 regiments or even smaller formations and thus did not benefit from divisional level

 organisations as the provision of chaplains to garrisons at any level would have been

 contrary to established practice.

         There is a more fundamental issue when considering the army's failure to

 allocate chaplains to colonial garrisons, which in part relates to the role of such

 individuals. Chaplains were a special case amongst the personnel who helped

 maintain the British army, as they required direct and, on occasion, one-to-one contact

with the troops. Surgeons could claim such a role but chaplains were unique as to

function with maximum efficiency their contact had to occur on certain days of the

week (primarily Sunday) and at certain times of the year (such as Easter and

Christmas). Achieving this proved a difficult enough task in the European theatre,

where troops were heavily concentrated, and would surely have been almost

impossible to achieve amongst the isolated outposts that controlled some of the more

inhospitable parts of the British Empire. That concerns about the inability of chaplains

to function adequately in dispersed garrisons persisted was demonstrated by their post

war distribution. This saw chaplains primarily deployed not to the vast regions of

Africa or Asia, which possessed scattered garrisons, but relatively self-contained areas

715 NAM 6112/78, pp. 13-17, 115-18, 149-57.


                                              220
