 the threat of invasion. Two to three magistrates oversaw each of the subdivisions

 within a county, and such men often held commissions in the auxiliary forces. To

 limit the impact of such persons being called to active service, Lord Hawkesbury

 advised the Lords Lieutenant 'it is essential that the magistrates who are thus

 employed should if possible be persons not holding commissions as volunteer

 officers, nor liable on any other account to be called away from the county'. 745 The

 number of individuals who had roles in both the auxiliary forces and county

government was considerable. In Wiltshire the commander of the militia, Colonel

Henry Herbert, Earl of Caernarvon (sic), was also a Deputy Lieutenant, an office that

entailed separate duties in the event of invasion. The following officers also held

considerable property or responsibilities outside of Wiltshire and may have fulfilled

roles in these counties: Lieutenant Colonel George Montagu, Captain Awdry Ambrose

and Captain Robert Maundrell 746 . This says much about the nature of such forces, it

being interesting to note that the situation in rural Wiltshire was similar to urban

Oldham, where prominent local men also provided the officers of auxiliary units. 747

For the invasion preparations, however, the significance of prominent local figures

serving in the auxiliary forces was that the allocation of magistrates to oversee

subdivisions in the event of invasion itself required special planning, in addition to the

multitude of tasks already facing counties as they prepared to resist an invasion.

         The preparations undertaken by each county were to be based on a series of

reports from each parish, the most important of which were designated schedules one

through to nine. The information recorded in these reports reveals much about the

parishes concerned and, most importantly, the invasion preparations themselves. In


745 Circular from Lord Hawksbury, Whitehall, 20ljl August 1804, PRO WO 55/1548/17, Regulations for
each county, in case of Invasion.
746 WSRO A1/75 2/19, Return of the Qualifications of Deputy Lieutenants and Commissioned Officers
[of Wiltshire Militia], 29* January 1796.
747 Foster, Class Struggle and the Industrial Revolution, p. 13.


                                               234
