 The purpose of listing the infirm in schedule 1 was to ensure means to remove them

 had been arranged prior to invasion and an overseer was also appointed for this task.

 Livestock, wagons, money and account books were all to be moved with the

 population, while bakers and millers were instructed how best to render their

 equipment unusable by an invader (by breaking crowns of ovens and upper mill stones

 respectively). 7^ Such destruction demonstrated that the policy of evacuation was

 designed to prevent resources from falling into enemy hands as much as it was a

 means of civil defence. Although a common practice in response to any invasion great

 importance was attached to denying the French invader resources because it was

 envisaged that the enemy would be forced to exist solely on supplies drawn from the

 immediate vicinity. 757

         If the invader was to be so easily contained, why was a landlocked county such

as Wiltshire included in the plan? Certainly plans had to be made for a worst-case

scenario, i.e. an enemy breaking out of the beachhead. Wiltshire itself, however, had

historically been considered vulnerable to invasion despite having no coastline. 7iS

Wiltshire's borders were only 30 miles from major ports such as Bristol and

Southampton. This demonstrates that administrative areas such as county boundaries

were not always compatible with military realities. Yet these boundaries were to be

the basis of the anti-invasion plan.

         By its nature the plan had to prepare for a number of contingencies, a French

advance inland being one of them. This, however, was not the sole reason for the

continued evacuation of communities in the event of invasion. Besides denying the


756 General Meeting of the Lieutenancy, Sarum, 19th November 1803, WSRO 1719/30. Wiltshire
Lieutenancy7 Papers Dealing with the Parish [of Box's] Preparation to Raise a Volunteer Force to Meet
the Anticipated French Invasion; PRO WO 30/141, p.5n.
~57 PRO WO 30/141, p.3.
758 Colley, Britons, p.308.

                                                 237
