While this never occurred, the plans drawn up by the government to counter a full-

scale invasion warrant some consideration. This is because the preparations not only

relate to the role of county government, which was to be significant, but also reflect

many of the themes considered elsewhere in this work, by revealing how the resisting

forces were to be maintained and in some cases raised, while also shedding light on

some less well-known operational procedures in the regular army. The need to educate

civilian bakers in military procedures quickly, for example, resulted in discussions

concerning how the army produced its own bread, the best recipes for yeast and the

preferred size of loaf. 737 Above all the plans demonstrate the principles that the state

was prepared to sacrifice in order to aid national defence. 73"
         During the invasion scares that haunted Britain during the first decade of the

Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars period, plans were drawn up regarding the

capability of each county to help maintain a defending army. A document entitled

'Proposals for Rendering the Body of the People Instrumental in the General Defence'

formed the blueprint for these plans, which were disseminated to the counties via the

Lords Lieutenant. 739 Much emphasis was to be placed on the protection of property

during invasion and an announcement by the Lord Lieutenant of Hampshire stated the

plans were intended to guarantee 'the particular protection and security of persons and

property of the inhabitants of this country... and the indemnifying persons who may

suffer in their property by such measures for that purpose'. 740 Despite such noble

sentiments, however, the protection of property (which was arguably the cornerstone

of the British political system) was only a minor concern. At the heart of the scheme

lay logistics, for both the defending and invading armies, and it was envisaged that the


737 PRO WO 30/141, pp.22-30.
73S Just as the state had shown willing to disregard the rights and beliefs of Anglicans serving in the
Jersey militia, p.23 3.
73" PRO WO 30/141, passim.
740 Salisbury Journal 11th July 1803, p. 3.


                                                    232
