force that was central to policies for national survival, rather than the third placed

pillar (behind the fleet and continental allies) of Britain's approach to strategy. Indeed,

if the army had been called on to repel an invader, these other elements of British

policy would have already failed. The invasion preparations were the most radical

aspect of defence policy in the period, and it will become apparent that if the plans

had been implemented they had the potential to alter many of the issues discussed in

preceding chapters, not least being the relationship between the army and state.

         Traditionally the principal link between county government and the army had

been the Lord Lieutenant, whose role had been to raise and maintain the county militia

battalions. While carrying out this task the Lords Lieutenant fulfilled many of the

functions that in regular regiments were the responsibility of military departments,

including annual inspections and returns that were similar to those conducted by the

Adjutant General. 729 These annual inspections were frequently conducted when the

militia battalions mustered for their fourteen days of annual training, occasions that

were accompanied by some excitement in the neighbourhood and announced in the

local press. 730 The outbreak of war in 1793 increased the importance of the Lords

Lieutenant role in regard to the militia but his role remained confined to the mustering

of auxiliary forces.

        The county officials that most frequently came into contact with elements of

the regular army were local magistrates, whose task included the supervision of troop

movements through their areas. 731 This practice was one of the few through which the

institutions of county governance became involved in the operational affairs of the

army, although they were also to have a significant role in the administration of the


72y See PRO WO 27/92, Office of Commander in Chief and War Office: Adjutant General and Ann)
Council Inspections, 1808; WSRO A1/545, Navy Acts, 1794 to 1795: Books and Papers; WSRO.
A1/550, Army and Navy Acts, 1796 to 97: Books and Papers.
~30 New'recruits mustered for twenty-one days. Salisbury Journal, 17th August 1812, p.4.
731 See above p. 133


                                             230
