 invader resources, the scheme was also intended to maximise those available to

 defending forces. This aim is demonstrated in orders issued by the Lord Lieutenant of

 Wiltshire regarding livestock.

          If the enemy should advance into the county... His Majesty has given express
          orders... that all horses or draft cattle, that are in evident danger of falling into
          the hands of the enemy, should be shot or hamstrung, provided they are not
          wanted for the service of th_e_army... and axle trees or wheels of all carriages
          in the same predicament, should be smashed or broken as much as possible. ;759


 It is apparent that the policy was not merely a genteel version of scorched earth

 (achieved through depriving the enemy of resources by a policy that emphasised

 removal rather than destruction) because, throughout the movement of these

 communities, the overriding concern was to ensure that as much as possible was

preserved for the defending forces, who would get first pick of items scheduled to be

destroyed. 760 Fully implemented, the invasion preparations were to have enabled the

army to utilise the resources not only of the counties targeted by invasion but also

those adjacent or further from the enemy lodgement. For the duration of the invasion

at least the army would be given free rein to requisition the resources it required to

drive the French back into the sea. This would have undermined a notion central to the

relationship between the British state and its population in the period, namely the

sanctity of private property. 761 As for the resources not required by the army, some

would have been removed but the rest sacrificed for national defence.
         The rights of private ownership were seemingly protected in orders issued to

county lieutenants, which stated that 'the first principle is an indemnification from the

communities at large... for the value of all stock which may be removed in


7W Underlining added. Orders, General Meeting of the Lieutenancy, Sarum, 19th November 1803.
WSRO 1719/30.
760 A similar scheme was proposed for the defence of Prussia in 1813, but in that case it was the
intention that the population would disperse to wage a guerrilla war on the occupying army. Fuller, The
Conduct of War, p. 58.
761 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.49.


                                                 238
