hundred and fifty years previously, during the civil war, the ideal ratio of shot to pike

had been approximately two to one).

        Interestingly there appears to have been no attempt to emulate the tactics of

Irish rebels in producing large numbers of pikes. Easily produced by village

blacksmiths, these had proved to be effective weapons against cavalry in close terrain

during the rebellion of 1798."02 This would have been of great value to the volunteer

units given the questionable utility of their own cavalry, an arm that requires extensive

training for both its personnel and animals."03 Furthermore, volunteer cavalry lacked

carbines, which were weapons not generally available to private citizens, but of some

value on the battlefield."04 This would have put them at a major disadvantage against

other cavalry even if problems associated with insufficient training and drill could

have been overcome. Giving the proven value of the pike in the hands of trained or

willing civilians, as in 1798, the failure to adopt the weapons for the volunteers

appears inexplicable. Conservative military thinking no doubt influenced the decision

but the most likely explanation is that, fearful of unrest, the government was reluctant

to promote the manufacture of such a weapon in the English provinces. This was

understandable given that even a relatively quiet county in the period, such as

Wiltshire, showed signs of growing unrest during 1802, the year in which the anti-

invasion plans were introduced. *°- That August, for example, a Samuel Baker was

convicted:

        on a violent suspicion of having unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously
        assembled, and having feloniously by firing of arms, and using other offensive
        Weapons, attempted to destroy the dwelling-house [sic.] and mills, belonging
        to John Jones, Esq., of Staverton.*06


*°- See T. Pakenham, Tlie Year ofLiberty: We History of the. Gnat Irish Rebellion of 1798 (Hodder &
Stoughton, 1992), p.77; A. T. Q. Stewait. The Summer Soldiers: Tlie 1798 Rebellion in Antrim and
Down (Belfast, Blackstaff Press, 1995), passim.
m MacDonald- Instructions for the Conduct ofInfantry, pp.lx-lxi.
m Haythomthwaite, Tlie Napoleonic Source Book, p. 80.
s05 Charlesworth (ed), Rural Protest, passim.

                                                248
