 that did not exist. There was simply too little slack in the system to rectify any

 deficiencies. Manufacturers were already cutting corners to meet contracts, and even

 prior to the Peninsula War deficiencies of items such as clothing were being rectified

 through using equipment acknowledged to be substandard.*24

           It would be incorrect to view the army as completely starved of resources by

 the state. Surprisingly the one organization that was clear evidence of the beneficial

 consequences of the relationship between army and state is the one most often

 overlooked by historians - the Royal Wagon Train. The organization was a bright spot

 in the system used to maintain the army. The concepts underpinning it were modern,

 perhaps even progressive, and its creation was evidence that the influence of the state

 over the army was not entirely detrimental. The organization was relatively efficient

 and flexible, utilising technology created as a result of the industrial and agricultural

 revolutions, and benefited directly through the growth, (both political and

 geographical) of the British state due to the absorption of the Irish Wagon Train. The

 Royal Wagon Train represented a new doctrine as it was relatively self-contained and

 provided a transport capability maintained through its own artificers. This allowed the

Royal Wagon Train to exhibit a degree of structural fluidity, the organization being

able to restructure itself in response to the strategic situation. This manifested itself

not only in an ability to create or demobilise troops but also develop new operational

practices, leading to the creation of the depot troops.*25

          The flexibility of the Royal Wagon Train made the organization ideally suited

to the pragmatic policies adopted towards logistics as it was created to meet the needs

of the army at the time. The Royal Wagon Train represented a modern approach to

warfare; by comparison the quasi-military Commissariat was an evolutionary dead-


s24 See above p. 114.
"5 See above p. 142.


                                           256
