powder, why did it not authorise the widespread manufacture of pikes? Linda Colley

describes the decision as a calculated risk on the government's part. sl° It was also a

limited risk, however, as those receiving the lead and powder already possessed

firearms so the potential threat already existed, unlike a horde of rebels armed with

pikes recently produced by a local blacksmith. In addition, allowing part-time soldiers

to maintain possession of their firearms even when not on duty was not a new concept

but an existing policy. This was demonstrated by the following appeal, placed in the

Salisbury Journal by the commanding officer of the Dorset Yeomanry: 'All persons

that formerly belonged to my regiment... and do not intend to renew their services in

that corps, are requested to give in their arms and accoutrements to their respective

captains'." 11 Those weapons that were not returned may well have found their way into

the ranks of the volunteers.

        Many contemporaries believed the forces raised in the counties would have

been an effective force due to their structure, organisation and the fact that they drew

their manpower from a single locality. Lieutenant Colonel Wilson wrote of land-

holding officers that 'a feudal attachment [of his tenants] would, in a great degree,

supersede the necessity for any martial control'; while the Lord Lieutenant of

Wiltshire stated in August 1808 that 'it can scarcely require a moment's consideration

to determine how preferable it must be for the volunteers to be formed into distinct

corps, officered by gentlemen of respectability in their own neighbourhoods'." 12 Such

ideas may appear to be a desperate attempt to justify the concept of the Volunteers:

given their diverse armament and initially poor training it is difficult to imagine the

volunteers achieving little more than being hacked down by French cavalry,


*10 Colley. Britons, p.328.
*'' Salisbury Journal 11 * July 1803, p. 1.                                              .
812 Wilson An Enquiry into the state of the Forces of the British Empire, p!2; To the Minister,
Churchwardens. Overseers of the Poor, and Principal Inhabitants of Box in the Count) of Wilts, from
the Lord Lieutenant Wilton House, 2ml August 1803, WSRO 1719/30.


                                                250
