bodies would have been suppressing disorder in the army's rear areas, the regulations

stating that they were 'to receive and execute the orders of the magistrates, in

preventing and quelling disturbances, in taking up and conveying offenders to prison,

in supplying escorts for all military purposes... and furnishing a guard for the county

gaol... if wanted'. 1* 1' It was anticipated that the 'military purposes' described above

may have included the maintenance of supply lines:

         If, contrary to expectation any impediment should occur in the regular supply
         of the different markets every assistance is to be afforded to the persons who
         are accustomed, or who offer to supply them; and escorts to be granted in
         cases where it may be necessary for the secure passage and conveyance of
         cattle and provisions. 816



Such duties could have only been fulfilled if the volunteers were present in the county.

It is, however, questionable if such formations would have turned out at all, many

militiamen in Ireland opting to remain with their families when called upon to act

against Irish rebels in 1798.* 17

         If deprived of a military force to deploy at the request of the army, the role of

the magistrates would have been confined to determining the rates of pay for wagon

drivers employed in support of the military, and the price at which items such as flour

and bread were to be sold to commissaries.""* How long this situation existed would

have been decided by the efforts of the British armed forces, aided in no small part by

the invasion preparations implemented by the magistrates, Lords Lieutenant and

parish officials of counties across Britain. In the meantime the army, providing the

regulations had been fully enacted, would have been able to break many of the bonds

815 Regulations for the preservation of good order, to be adopted in case of invasion, in each count) in
Great Britain, 12th August 1804, PRO WO 55/1548/17, Regulations for each county, in case of
Invasion.
816 Regulations for the preservation of good order, to be adopted in case of invasion, in each count) in
Great Britain, 12th August 1804, PRO WO 55/1548/17.
817 B. Cleary, 'The Battle of Oulait Hill: Context and Strategy', in D. Keogh and N. Furlong (eds), The
Mighty Wave: the 1798 Rebellion in Wexford (Dublin, Four Courts Press, 1996), p82.
818 PRO WO 30/141, pp.17, 22.


                                                  252
