 Only four days earlier, a Thomas Hilliker and 'divers other persons not yet taken' had

 been convicted of destroying a mill, while three Trowbridge cloth workers had been

 found guilty of attempting to form an illegal combination (trade union). 807 For further

 proof that insurrection remained a concern of the government, the historian needs to

 look no further than the role of the volunteers in the event of invasion, which was to

 include suppression of disorder in rear areas. 501*

         Significant difficulties would have been encountered in supplying the

volunteer units due to the variety of firearms that would have been found in their

 ranks. As individuals were encouraged to supply their own firearms it is likely that

everything from duelling pistols to fowling pieces, in a variety of calibres, would have

been employed. The authorities were well aware of the potential difficulties that such

diversity could cause and special provision was to be made for these firearms:

         It is earnestly recommended to all who voluntarily offer to appear with arms,
         to provide a bullet mould for the calibre of their gun or pistol, a small bag for
         bullets, and a powder horn, lest the bore of their arms, being smaller than those
         of the army, should prevent their using the ammunition made up for the King's
         Troops, in which case a delivery of lead and powder will be made to them. 809



The request for accoutrements such as powder horns and the like, while unusual, was

not unreasonable giving that those possessing firearms would already own some or all

such items. Most surprising is the offer to deliver lead and powder to individuals for

the manufacture of their own munitions. Such a decision was not taken lightly in a

period of revolutions and demonstrates the seriousness of the French invasion threat.

        A valid question is that if the government was willing to supply shot and

806 Devizes Session, 10th January 1802, WSRO Al/125/46W , Calendar of Prisoners in the Count) Gaol
at Fisherton Anger and Devizes and Marlborough Bridewells, 1803, p.6.
807 Devizes Session, 10th January 1802, WSRO A1/125/46W, pp.6-8.
m To the Minister, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Principal Inhabitants of Box in the
Count) of Wilts, from the Lord Lieutenant, Wilton House, 2nd August 1803, WSRO 1719/30.
809 WSRO 1719/30, schedule 4.


                                               249
