presuming they stood to fight or even turned out at all. Despite this the Irish rebels of

1798 proved what could be achieved and it is possible that the volunteers, fully

integrated with the regulars, may have achieved some success on the battlefield. At

worst they could have relieved frontline troops of tasks such as convoy or prisoner

escort in the rear areas, or provided a means through which potentially serious

disorder could be contained."13

         It is appropriate to conclude this chapter with a brief consideration of county

governance in the aftermath on invasion. Even though the volunteers were mobilised,

livestock on the move and villages serving as depots, the magistrates of the county

bench and lieutenants were to have continued to play a role in maintaining the

defending forces. Due to the movement of the population away from their homes,

continuing the militia ballot would not have been possible, although justices could

have continued to supervise the passage of troops. In August 1804 regulations were

published concerning 'the preservation of good order, to be adopted in case of

invasion, in each county in Great Britain'. If these regulations had been implemented

it is apparent that the civil power, while officially supported by the military, would

have effectively become subordinated to its requirements. Such a course would have

been anathema to many libertarians in Britain, and surely would have been used as

vindication for the views of those who had long warned of the dangers posed by the

ever-growing power of the state. 814 It was a situation that may have been inevitable for

national survival but one that could have lasted indefinitely as legislation existed for

enacting the regulations but not repealing them.

         The regulations required that the magistrates sit daily, along with an officer of

the volunteers and chief superintendent of constables. The primary task of these
m Regulations for the preservation of good order, to be adopted in case of invasion, in each count) in
Great Britain, 12* August 1804, PRO WO 55/1548/17, Regulations for each county, in case of
Invasion.
814 Brewer, The Sinews ofPower, p.63.


                                                  251
