         The consequences of the manpower shortage were apparent in regard to the

Chaplain General's Department. This was far too small for its task and unable to

influence the religious affairs of soldiers significantly. 820 The Royal Wagon Train also

had to contend with a shortage of manpower and could have achieved considerably

more had it been enlarged. 821 This could have been of significant benefit for the

Commissariat, which was often compelled to rely upon local transport overseas. The

employment of Spanish and Portuguese muleteers was not a major problem for the

army but could nevertheless hinder efficiency."22 Economics was a decisive factor in

determining the quantity of manpower available but was not the only one. Much has

been written about Britain's economic strength and its beneficial consequences, but

this strength could only be maintained through depriving the military of vital

resources, the most important of which was manpower. 823 Almost as important as

manpower was materiel, as this too cost money and was required to sustain Britain's

economic growth. The commercialisation of industry dictated that production was

geared towards profit rather than meeting the needs of the armed forces. The two

could be compatible but this was not always the case.

         Finance permeated every aspect of logistics. To prevent the abuse of liberty the

army was required to pay for the supplies it required, a system that relied on cash or

credit, the availability to the army of both being controlled by the state. Required to

pay its way with barely sufficient means the army frequently found itself living a hand

to mouth existence and unable to construct a significant logistical reserve. Historians

have frequently written about the small size of the army and its inability to survive

defeat but manpower could have been raised through conscription if the need arose.

What is overlooked is that it was a capability to arm and maintain these new forces
^ See above p.220.
821 See above p. 175.
*" See above p.65.
8-3 See above pp.88-89.


                                           255
