 end for the army. The Commissariat is often criticised for its failings yet historians

 have shied away from addressing this, its most fundamental difficulty.

          Creveld writes that nineteenth century warfare began, and eighteenth century

 warfare ended with Napoleon's campaign of 1805, when movement replaced sieges as

 the central component of strategy."26 By establishing the Royal Wagon Train in the

 1790s, therefore, the British army was already, if inadvertently, preparing for this new

 form of warfare. Neither the Royal Wagon Train nor Commissariat would survive the

 nineteenth century, their roles ultimately being amalgamated in the Royal Army

 Service Corp.*27 As a purely military force, employing its own specialist personnel, it

was, however, the Royal Wagon Train that most closely paralleled the R.A.S.C. and

later organizations. Intriguingly, the relationship between the British state and its

 military in the twenty first century is again becoming heavily influenced by economic

concerns, rather than military effectiveness, and civilian contractors have once more

become an integral part of the army's supporting services.

          The Royal Wagon Train demonstrated that despite drawbacks the relationship

between army and state was not necessarily detrimental for the former. It is the case

that factors that caused difficulties could also bring benefits. For example, financial

considerations frequently ensured economy rather than military effectiveness was a

priority but also improved efficiency. 82" Administrative practice in the army was

significantly influenced by the state and there is a tendency to equate bureaucracy with

inefficiency. As the army of the period demonstrated, however, this was not always

the case as regulations limited corruption in the logistics system. More importantly,
*26 Creveld, Supplying War, p.40.
 827 Indeed, this was the fate of almost the entire system utilised to maintain the force in the period, the
multitude of departments with often over lapping jurisdictions slowly being amalgamated into larger,
more efficient organizations. The most significant of these advances was the absorption of the
Ordnance Department by the War" Office in 1855. This united the aims of the army into one command,
although it is necessary to note that this did not necessarily improve efficiency and improve co-
operation between the arms. As late as the 1960s there were power snuggles within the army
concerning the responsibilities and roles of the Royal Artillery.
82S See above p.41.


                                                   257
