         It must be assumed that if the invasion had occurred the scheme would have

been implemented. Not only had the necessary (and detailed) regulations been

introduced but the army had already demonstrated that in a war zone peacetime

regulations governing it could be eroded. At the most basic level administrative

practices introduced due to the relationship with the state were circumvented by

military necessities, while more significant were the ruthless activities of

Commissariat personnel and purchasing agents in the hunt for the items they required.

There is no reason to believe the activities of Commissaries on the front line in

England would have been any different to those in Spain and Portugal, particularly in

an area already devastated by French occupation. 843 Whether this would have left the

relationship between state and army in tatters is less certain, this being dependent on

how long the situation lasted and the extent to which the old rules were broken. What

is apparent was the willingness of the state to consider sacrificing central principles in

aid of national defence, thereby redefining the relationship between army and state.

         The repercussions of any change in the relationship between the state and

army in response to an invasion might have been significant. The maintenance of an

armed force is as much a political or economic issue as it is a military one. As a

consideration of how the army was maintained in the period demonstrates, a state can

both facilitate and hinder the growth and maintenance of an armed force. After

determining how an armed force is to be used, one of the most important tasks facing

policy makers is how it should be maintained. This will define the relationship

between an army and state, as well as the effectiveness of the force. In turn this will

determine the military options available to a state and the ability of an armed force to

protect the state itself.

*43 Throughout the period of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars there was little difference between
the practices of occupying and friendly armies when gathering supplies. Corvisiex, Armies and
Societies, pp.66-67.


                                                 262
