Schechter and Sander, the effective maintenance of a force is not itself a sound

indicator of that force's success. Successful maintenance may make a force more

effective but is not a guarantee of victory. 831 The example they cite is that of

McClellan's Peninsula Campaign of 18627 in which poorly supplied Confederate

forces consistently beat better maintained Union formations, but examples relevant to

this study could include Spanish victories during Napoleon's initial invasion of Spain

and the success of Irish Rebels in 1798.

         When considering the possible fallibility of British arms in the period, a

common stumbling block is the perception of the Napoleonic Wars as a British

victory. This ranges from the outrageously jingoistic and populist version of events

portrayed in the work of Richard Holmes, who describes the British army as

possessing 'a certain something that flickers out across two centuries like an electric

current', to the Anglo-centric works of historians such as lan Fletcher, who describes

the Peninsula War as 'Britain's greatest military contribution to the downfall of

Napoleon Bonaparte'. s32 The former statement in particular represents a throw back to

the views of the early to mid twentieth century, held by historians such as Charles

Oman and Jac Weller.

         Piers Mackesy writes that prior to 1800 the British army had known little but

failure, examples including defeat in North America, a fiasco in the Low Countries

and the devastation of garrisons in the West Indies by disease."33 Following 1800 the

force was to emerge victorious but not unbeaten, with famous victories such as

Salamanca and Vittoria sitting alongside fiascos and disasters such as Buenos Aires


"31 Schechter and Sander, Delivering the Goods, p.22.
"3- R Holmes. Red Coat: We British Soldier in the Age of the Horse and Musket (London, Harper
Collins, 2001), pxvi; I. Fletcher (ed), Voices from the Peninsula: Eye Witness Accounts by Soldiers of
Wellington 'sArmy, 1808-14 (London, Greenhill, 2001), p.5. As a contrast to the work of Fletcher see
Esdaile. The Peninsular War, passim.
833 Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt,, p.3. Added to this could well be the army's performance in the
Irish Rebellion of 1798.

                                                 259
