 and Walcheren. As noted by Peter Hofschorer even the most famous victory of all,

 Waterloo, would have been a disaster had it not been for the intervention of the

 Prussians. In fact the often forgotten campaign that followed the battle was militarily

 an overwhelming Prussian victory, with only British political influence in Paris

 keeping Blucher in check, depriving Prussia of well deserved glory in the process. 834

 Perhaps Holmes' most pertinent point about the British army is that it was capable of

 victory and not immune to defeat."35

          The concept of the British army as a success can to a great extent be attributed

 to a Euro-centric perception of the Napoleonic Wars. It was within the borders of

 Europe that many decisive battles were fought, while some of the greatest fiascos

 were to occur elsewhere, including the disastrous expedition to Argentina, defeat at

 New Orleans and the devastation of garrisons in the West Indies by disease (although

 the success of British arms in Europe were not universal - the Corunna campaign

 being a case in point). As David Chandler stated, no battle or indeed campaign should

 be seen in isolation but rather as the sum of many parts, so the Napoleonic Wars

 should be no exception. 836 Despite being a struggle between European powers the

 conflict was fought across the globe, to a lesser extent than that of the Seven Years

War maybe, but it was still a global war.*37

         Another important factor is that the British army was to participate in conflicts

that were not always part of the Napoleonic Wars or had only a tenuous link to that

conflict, against colonial enemies in Africa, Asia, the Americas and the United States

of America. 838 Philip Haythornthwaite effectively divides the British army into two

during this period, that part of the force engaged in colonial actions and that arrayed
834 P. Hofschroer, 1815: The Waterloo Campaign The German Victory, Volume I (London, Greenhill,
 1999), pp. 116-129, 271.
** Holmes, Red Coat, p.xvi.
536 D. Chandler, Waterloo: Tlie Hundred Days (London, Osprey, 1980), p. 11.
M7 See Black, Britain as a Military Power, pp. 115-154. 241-266.
83S Haythornthwaite, Napoleon's Military Machine, p. 78; P. Mackesy, British Victory in Egypt, p. 5.


                                                 260
