

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS. »
1, Well-Specified Antecedents and Consequents

ur first recommendation might strike readers as a tad obvious. Like actual
experiments, thought experiments should manipulate one cause at a time,
thereby isolating pathways of influence. Although excellent advice in princi
ple, implementing it is often deeply problematic. There is no way to hold
“all other things equal” when we perform thought experiments on social
systems that are densely interconnected (cf. Jervis 1993; Commentary 4,
Jervis). To invoke the terminology of experimental design, we cannot ma-
nipulate the “independent” variable in interconnected systems without creat-
ing ripple effects that alter the values taken on by other potential causes in
the historical matrix, thereby creating “confounding” variables that render
interpretation of the original thought experiment problematic.

At this juncture, radical wholists take the systems-theory argument even
further and insist that if we want to advance coherent and defensible coun-
terfactuals, we will have to reconstruct an entirely new hypothetical world
for each new counterfactual proposition—a new world that specifies all
other things that would also have to change in order to accommodate the
hypothesized antecedent (otherwise the counterfactual is underspecified)..
This position strikes us as too extreme. Causal interconnectedness is a mat-
ter of degree. In the words of one systems theorist: “Everything is connected
but some things are more connected than others. The world is a large matrix
of interactions in which most of the entries are very close to zero” (Pattee
1973, 23). The analytical challenge then becomes estimating interconnected-
ness and designing our counterfactual thought experiments with due consid-
eration for the complexities created by interconnectedness. Sometimes we
will discover that the wholists are right: the causal antecedent that we men-
tally manipulated is so deeply embedded in a recursive network of causation
that simply positing that “if cause x took on a different value, then y" is
deeply uninformative. Consider two examples:

(J) Cederman (Chapter 11) criticizes the structural-realist claim advanced
by Mearsheimer (1990, 14) that “ceteris paribus, war is more likely in a
multipolar system than a bipolar one.” In Cederman’s view, other things
probably cannot be held equal in the post-World War II case, and Mear-
sheimer glosses over the problem by failing to articulate what else would
hhave had to be different in counterfactual post-World War I systems in
which multipolarity prevailed. As soon as we try to specify the alternatives
to a bipolar world more precisely, we begin to appreciate the need for do-
mestic-political boundary conditions on the polarity counterfactual. For in-
stance, the identity of the third power—be it Great Britain, France, ot
China—might matter. Given the special historical relationship between Lon-

