

(5) Cederman (Chapter 11) draws on cartel theory to support his critique
of neorealism and his claim that if defense-dominance had prevailed
throughout history, there would have been less stability,

(6) Herrmann and Fischerkeller (Chapter 6) invoke Huth and Russett’s
theory of extended deterrence (a theory indigenous to political science, not
aan import) to argue that even if Truman had not threatened Stalin, the So-
viets still would have withdrawn from Iran.

(7) Perhaps the most systematic use of theory to assess counterfactuals
‘occurs in the chapters by Bueno de Mesquita and Weingast. These authors
argue (among other things) that possible worlds become plausible only inso-
far as they are logically consistent with the equilibrium conditions of the
game that captures the strategic interdependence obtaining between actual
historical actors. For example, it does not make much sense to posit a hypo-
thetical world in which both players cooperated in a single-round game if
one or both of the players could have been much better off by defecting
whenever the other player cooperated. Using this game-theoretic screening
rule, itis possible to eliminate vast numbers of counterfactuals.

This overview is, however, disturbing. It suggests that each school of
thought can foster its own favorite set of supporting counterfactuals (Chapter
12, Weber). Moreover, these schools of thought will sometimes prescribe
contradictory rules for assessing counterfactuals. Where does this leave us?
Consistency with well-established theory is a reasonable standard for gaug-
ing the plausibility of counterfactuals but we should expect disagreement
about what counts as well-established theory in world politics. To prevent
‘competing schools of thought from simply inventing counterfactuals of con-
venience, we need reality constraints. Counterfactuals must not only fit
existing historical and statistical data (the emphasis in our third and fifth
standards), they must stimulate testable predictions that hold up reasonably
well against new data (the emphasis in our sixth standard, projectability).

5. Consistency with Well-Established Statistical Generalizations

In many contexts, we rely not on theoretical laws but on statistical general-
izations to fill in “what would have happened if this rather than that event had

