Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       the monarchy.
             On leaving Madrid, I expected to complete the study in a couple of years, but Topsy's fate intervened, or perhaps it was Parkinson's
       law, and the project took on ever-wider and deeper dimensions, as the length of this volume and date of its publication attest. Another
       grant from the Social Science Research Council and a half year's sabbatical from the University of California allowed me to spend the year
       1963–64 in Spain. There I pushed the date of the study back half a century to include the information on the provinces of Salamanca
       and Jaén from the immense register of Castilian property and incomes created in the mid-eighteenth century by the Marqués de la
       Ensenada, which is housed in the Archivo Histórico Nacional, the archive of Simancas, and the historical archives of the two provinces.
       During this year I also traveled through all the corners of these provinces to observe their geography and to search for parish records.
             A senior fellowship from the National Endowment for the Humanities took me back to Spain in 1968–69 with the intention of
       winding up the project. Fortune decreed otherwise, however, for in my first hour in Madrid, a large suitcase containing many of my notes
       from the previous visit was one of two stolen from my car, and most of the year was spent in the task of reassembling my materials from
       the archives (fortunately the records of López Fando were safely on computer). Every disaster has its silver lining, and in going through
       the records for the second time I discovered much relevant information, the significance of which had escaped me before. But the
       frustrating loss of time did mean that the project was to continue for more years and that I would need more financial help.
             This help came from many sources. Through the years, the Institute of Social Science, the Institute of International Studies, and
       the Committee on Research of the Berkeley Campus of the University of California have given me continued support for research
       assistance, computer programming, and the like. In addition I received further sabbatical leave from the university in 1971 and 1979–80,
       supplemented by grants from the Council for the Humanities of the Berkeley Campus. An invitation



                                                                                          ― xxvii ―
       from the Sixième Section of the École Pratique des Hautes Études in Paris allowed me to work there in the spring of 1973, while the
       directorship of the Madrid center of the Education Abroad Program of the University of California from 1975 to 1977 gave me the
       opportunity to pursue my writing, with the archives accessible to solve immediate questions. And finally, this preface is being written at
       the beginning of another year abroad made possible by the Guggenheim Foundation, whose mark of confidence thus punctuates the alpha
       and omega of the undertaking.
             In a quarter of a century, one accumulates a welter of debts to individuals as well as institutions, embodied in a web of recollections
       of the years of work and pleasure in which these friends played central roles. Since most of their help came in the 1960s, when I was
       gathering and organizing the material for this study, some persons who were central to the discovery and recording of the sources are no
       longer around to read this expression of my thanks, while others, then graduate students, have become senior scholars or turned to
       different pursuits than those of the academic world. The experience must be for them but an exotic memory; for me, however, the debt
       remains vivid and worthy of record.
             Two painstaking tasks were essential to the preparation of the data for analysis: punching into IBM cards the records of the deeds
       of deposit and the catastro of la Ensenada for the provinces of Jaén and Salamanca, the basis for much of Part 3 of this book; and
       totaling the sales province by province for the entire monarchy from the microfilmed indexes of the notary's volumes (the subject of
       Chapter 5). As research assistants, Neal Galpern, Erna Olafson, and David Fogarty carried out the first task; Betsey Scheiner, Edward
       Segal, and John W. Levenson the second. (Visitors to my office have for years been struck by the large map of Spain, covered with
       colored pins, the careful creation of Betsey Scheiner—the pins representing not secret agents but the location of prosaic properties
       disentailed in 1800. Now, as editor of the manuscript, she has contributed substantially to the appearance and accuracy of this book.)
             A third task involving dedication and patience was the tabulation of the property and income of each household recorded in the
       catastros of the towns studied in Part 2. Lawrence Carlson and David Fogarty carried this out. Other jobs involved the analysis of census
       and price data and miscellaneous information provided by the catastro; all the above assistants participated in such work, and others
       have contributed through the years: Ian Dengler, Roberta Pollack Seid, Linda Abramson


                                                                                          ― xxviii ―
       Heilman, Joaquín Arango, Ralph Duncan, Elizabeth Green, Jacqueline Urla, Alan Sherman, and Lisa Cody. Where their help has been
       exceptional, footnotes to the text make mention of it.
             Equally critical to the success of the research was the cooperation of the persons in Spain responsible for the documents I have
       used. Their enthusiasm, patience, and generosity with their knowledge have always made research trips a delightful experience. In
       Madrid, without question, the most important person has been don Antonio Matilla Tascón, then director of the Biblioteca del Ministerio de
       Hacienda, which housed the provincial summaries of the catastro of la Ensenada and all the legislative and administrative records dealing
       with the royal finances (for which he had prepared invaluable catalogues with summaries). His associate, don José Montenegro González,
       and doña María del Carmén Toledo of the library also gave me help. At the Archivo Histórico Nacional, don José Antonio Martínez Bara,
       director of the Sección de Consejos, doña Pilar Loscertales of the Sección de Clero, and doña María Teresa de la Peña of the Sección de
       Hacienda (after the archives of the Ministerio de Hacienda were moved there) gave me personal advice and allowed me to use the
       unpublished card catalogues in their offices. Don Alberto García-Gill and doña Carmen Crespo Nogueira of the archive administration were
       also especially helpful. In the Archivo Histórico de Protocolos of Madrid, don Francisco Lupiani, don Miguel Bordonau, the next director of
       the archive, doña María Teresa Baratech, and don José Luis de la Peña of the staff of the archive contributed their support. In fact,
       everyone in the archives in Madrid, Simancas, and Paris whom I consulted or who had charge of the records collaborated fully with me,
       and I thank them collectively when not individually.
             It required more ingenuity and direct personal knowledge to find the necessary materials in Jaén and Salamanca, for the provincial
       historical archives were still being organized in the 1960s. The directors of the provincial archives have always been exemplary
       collaborators in my search for documentation: in Ávila, doña Carmén Pedrosa; in Salamanca, doña Petra Calzada; and in Jaén, don
       Melchor Lamana Navascues and, after his retirement, don Miguel Martínez Masegosa and don Juan José Fuentes Romero. Don Melchor
       Lamana, archivist of the recently established provincial historical archive of Jaén, located in an ancient building with a fountain in the
       small patio, was then leafing through the sixteenth-century volumes to catalogue their contents, despite a painful allergy to their dust,
       which regularly gave him asthma and fits of coughing. He did not long survive his retirement, but the ar-


                                                                                          ― xxix ―
       chive, now in a handsome new Casa de la Cultura, is in many respects his creation.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
