Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                            ―5 ―
       The third part looks at the provinces in which the seven towns were located, Salamanca in the northwest of the Castilian meseta and Jaén
       in Andalusia. By enlarging the field of vision, we can identify other features of the rural world. A comparison of geographic regions within
       each province gives an idea of the extent to which economic development depended on topography, communications, and royal or
       seigneurial jurisdiction. An analysis of the people who bought property in the disentail and the kinds of land they preferred tells much
       about provincial society and the changes taking place in it. We shall form an image of the provincial elites, those men and women who
       provided the hinge between the rural people who drew their sustenance directly from the soil and the outside world of royal government
       and national markets, what their objectives were and how their pursuit of them influenced the general development.
              When the picture is complete, it will embrace the motives and actions of government and individuals at the national, regional, and
       local levels—a broad but concrete study of state, economy, and society that observes the complex ways in which royal policies were
       decided and carried out and how their effects were felt throughout the rural world as well as the role of impersonal forces like
       demographic growth and the market for agricultural products. A final chapter will attempt to interpret the findings and set them against
       contemporary developments abroad and the later stages of desamortización in Spain. Thus a study of court and country in the
       enlightened reign of Carlos III and the troubled one of his son should enlarge our understanding of what was involved in the passage
       from the old regime to contemporary times in Spain, and not only in Spain.


                                                                                            ―7 ―




       Chapter I—
       Agrarian Conditions and Agrarian Reform in Eighteenth-Century Spain
       Until recently agriculture has been Spain's main domestic economic activity, and agrarian policy has always been an issue of major
       concern to its governments. Nevertheless, they did not take up the idea of a planned redistribution of land until the second half of the
       eighteenth century, when changing conditions forced the royal advisers to envisage the relationship between the countryside and the
       country as a whole in a new way.
             During the seventeenth and much of the eighteenth century, their main domestic concern was to increase the king's revenue. Their
       attention focused on the unequal weight of taxation borne by the different regions and social classes. At the beginning of the seventeenth
       century, the people of Castile contributed far more heavily to the revenue of the monarchy than those of Aragon or Portugal. The Conde-
       Duque de Olivares under Felipe IV and Josef Patiño under Felipe V sought to equalize taxes and military service among the various realms
       that formed peninsular Spain. Olivares's attempts led to a revolt of Catalonia and the secession of Portugal from the Spanish crown, but
       Felipe V succeeded after the War of the Spanish Succession in imposing direct taxes on the realms of the crown of Aragon in place of the
       niggardly subsidies formerly voted by their cortes. The new taxes, called equivalente in Valencia, catastro in Catalonia, and real
       contribución in Aragon, represented a fixed percentage of the income from land and occupations.


                                                                                            ―8 ―
       Land belonging to nobles as well as commoners and land acquired in the future by the church was subject to the new impositions.[1]
             The new taxes on the eastern kingdoms embodied the principle that everyone should contribute equitably to the needs of the state.
       For half a century after the reforms in Aragon, the search for a further redistribution of levies held the attention of royal policy makers.
       Felipe V and Fernando VI struggled with the church to establish their right to tax ecclesiastical properties, finally obtaining papal
       recognition of it in the Concordat of 1753.[2] The kingdom of Castile posed a different kind of problem. Here the major royal taxes, the
       rentas provinciales, weighed heavily on the poor, and their complexity meant that the expenses of collection absorbed an inordinate part
       of the proceeds. [3] The new system in the eastern realms proved so successful, especially in Catalonia, that Felipe V's advisers
       recommended that Castile's system be replaced by a similar one based on a single tax. The única contribución would be divided between a
       "real" sector that taxed income from property and a "personal" sector that taxed income from labor, professions, and commerce. The real
       property tax would be proportional to the income from land and buildings and be paid equally by nobles and commoners. As in Catalonia,
       a prior survey, or catastro, of property and personal income would be needed. [4] The aim was to establish a less regressive tax structure
       as well as a more efficient one.
             In 1746 Fernando VI, on the urging of his secretary of hacienda (finance), the Marqués de la Ensenada, ordered an experimental
       survey in the province of Guadalajara, using the Catalan catastro as a model. It showed that a 7- or 8-percent tax on income from land
       of commoners and nobles and on commoners' personal income would produce the same amount as current taxes at less cost to the
       state. If the real property of the church were included, the tax could be reduced to 5 percent.[5]
             In 1749 Ensenada obtained a royal order to extend the catastral survey to the other twenty-one provinces of Castile. To carry it out,
       the king established the office of provincial intendant. Intendants had been created in 1718 on the model of the French officials of this
       name, but they had soon been discontinued. The order of 1749 was the origin of a

       [1] Matilla, Única contribución, 29–41; Kamen, War of Succession, 335–37, 359–60.

       [2] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 13.

       [3] Ibid., 97, 110. Ozanam, "Notas," 52, says the cost of collecting all royal revenues in Spain was 11.2 percent of the gross income in
       1751–60. The rate for the rentas provinciales must have been much higher. They represented 32.8 percent of net income.

       [4] Matilla, Única contribución, 43–51.

       [5] Ibid., 53–55.


                                                                                            ―9 ―
       new, permanent set of royal servants who were to become the key figures in the provincial administration of the kingdom.[6] The



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
