Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             In this phase, two people stand out as pillars of support. In Salamanca, don Antonio Moreno Moreno of the Delegación de Hacienda,
       a devoted student of the past of his province, gave me unstinting advice and information. He was a patron of the Provincial Historical
       Archive, which was in the care of his wife. Together, they had organized the archive in the beautiful but ill-lit Renaissance building of the
       Escuelas Menores, and his knowledge of the collection and of legal terminology was vital to my progress. It is my sorrow that he is not
       alive to read my thanks, which I extend also to doña Petra.
             In Jaén, the person who became my local cicerone and adviser is don Juan José Barragán Pérez, now of the Archivo Hístorico
       Provincial, but in the 1960s of the Delegación de Hacienda, which still housed the catastro de la Ensenada of the province. Learning of my
       project, he uncovered for me volumes that were housed in a dark cellar. I worked there as many hours as the building was open, while
       Gypsies loitered and joked outside the window. Assistance in the use of these volumes was given by don Manuel Escribano Jiménez,
       director of the archive of the Delegación de Hacienda. (I cannot overlook the Civil Guard, don Lucas Joyanes González, who was required
       to sit with me while I worked. During our breaks he gave me information on farming practices in the province—he owned some small
       olive groves in a sierra town.) Ever since 1964, when I carried out the first research, don Juan José Barragán has responded whenever I
       have appealed to him in person or by mail to provide me with more information and xerox copies. Through him too, I met don Rafael
       Ortega Sagrista of the Delegación de Hacienda, amateur historian of Jaén and collector of works on olive culture, on which he is an
       expert. Because of him, the cultivation of the olive lost for me some of its mystery.
             Once out of the organized historical archives, my search for documentation was much less successful, although it led to parish
       churches in many corners of the provinces and introduced me to many people out of the ordinary circles of a historian. Through don
       Angel Cabo Alonso, professor of geography of the University of Salamanca, I learned of the tithe records of La Mata, and the venerable
       priest of this small community, don Gerónimo Pablos, allowed me to copy them. Although don Gerónimo could not understand the interest
       that this account of payments made by eighteenth-century farmers held for me, the reader will appreciate its importance for Chapter 7.
       In my search through the south-


                                                                                          ― xxx ―
       ern sierras of the old-regime province of Salamanca, I had the good fortune to knock on the door of the elderly priest of Gallegos de
       Solmirón, don Antonio Hernández Sánchez, who knew the surrounding communities well and located for me the various parish records
       used in Chapter 10. The most important was the tithe record of El Mirón, and the alcalde and schoolmaster of the town, don Juan Victor
       García Gómez, and his wife offered me their parlor to work in. My debt to these people is more fully expressed in notes to the individual
       chapters. With them I should include don Onesimo Avezuela de la Fuente of the Registro de Propiedad of Piedrahita, who uncovered for
       me in his office the records of the Contaduría de Hipotecas of the partido of El Mirón for the period of Carlos IV, and the young and
       enthusiastic resident of Piedrahita don José Luis García, who acted as my guide in the district and introduced me to local dignitaries of
       church and state. Only a few of the many priests, alcaldes, and others whom I called on could furnish me with the records I needed, but
       all those who searched patiently through their shelves equally deserve appreciation. So do the keepers of the hotels, village inns, and
       private houses who furnished me what comfort they had and provided local fare and drink not described in published guidebooks.
             Over the years I have of course discussed my work with colleagues, and I have surely received ideas from them that I now think
       were my own. Several stand out for their continual interest and help. In Spain, these are don Gonzalo Anes and don Antonio Domínguez
       Ortiz; in the United States, Helen Nader, Jan de Vries, and David Ringrose. Finally, in the dark winter weeks of 1969, when it became
       apparent that neither the police nor the thieves' market nor offers of reward in the newspapers would produce my stolen notes, Valerie,
       my colleague and wife, revived my spirits and shared in copying out old and new information in the archives. Her competence in statistics
       and demography has been a constant resource and her patience with this project unbounded.
            To these individuals and institutions and all others who have given me help, some of whose names appear in the notes, I extend
       my profound thanks. May this book justify their contributions.


                                                                                            ―1 ―




       PART I—
       THE MONARCHY
       On a mid-December morning in 1800, don Martín Sánchez Tomé, a notary of his majesty in the city of Salamanca, rode north out the
       Zamora gate, bearing a written order issued by don Manuel Ortiz Pinedo, alcalde mayor of the city. With him was a constable (alguacil
       ordinario ), to provide him aid if needed. The road toward Zamora took them over a slight rise, from which they could observe a gently
       rolling countryside dotted with small villages but otherwise virtually unobstructed as far as the eye could see. The plain of La Armuña was
       one of the richest grain regions of the Castilian meseta, and in spring half the land would be tilled and the wheat would grow up lush and
       green. But now in the wintery light the scene was not encouraging to the two men, for all the fields were lying fallow and the rich, red
       earth was showing through its covering of stubble and weeds. Oxen, mules, donkeys, and sheep pastured here and there, kept from
       wandering by their herdsmen.
             After the pair had traveled some two leagues along the road, they turned off toward one of the smaller villages. It sat atop a low
       rise, a covey of mean houses huddled under the protective presence of their firm granite church. La Mata de Armuña, despite its small
       size, was a lugar, with its own officials; two of them, the "petty mayor" (alcalde pedáneo ) and the keeper of the records (fiel de fechos ),
       were expecting the visitors. With them was one of the leading figures of the community, a forceful man along in years named Francisco
       González.
             Once the order of the alcalde mayor had been presented and read, the men set off into the fields, followed by a group of curious
       villagers of all


                                                                                            ―2 ―
       ages, eager to witness a scene that had been enacted several times since the previous summer but that still broke their monotony with
       the mystique of royal agents from the provincial capital. The group stopped beside one of the hundreds of small plots into which the open
       fields around the village were divided. The notary read from the order a description of the plot, two acres (huebras ) more or less,



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
