Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [25] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 138–39, Map 4.

       [26] See Ringrose, "Perspectives," 63–65; Hamilton, War and Prices, 182–83.

       [27] García-Lombardero, "Aportación," 58, Cuadro 4.


                                                                                           ― 14 ―
       while the meseta and, to a lesser extent, Andalusia preserved an older, more isolated, and locally oriented economy, which received
       effective outside stimuli only toward the end of the eighteenth century. [28] Not that central Spain lacked internal trade or consisted only
       of subsistence economies. The presence of cities, especially Madrid, with their needs for foodstuffs and fuel from their hinterlands, the
       dedication of some rural areas to products intended for distant consumers—olive oil, wines, wool—and the manufacture of certain—
       Castilian specialties—woolens, linens, knives, and others—meant that goods moved around and agricultural products reached urban
       markets, sent there directly by peasants or by people who received the rent, tithes, and other payments of peasants. These were,
       however, economic patterns that came down from the past and owed little to contemporary outside developments, although demographic
       growth in the interior did stimulate their expansion.
             While the entire peninsula did not participate in the Atlantic economic expansion, it shared in the general western population growth.
       Spain was blessed with rulers who counted their subjects on a national scale earlier than those of most other European countries did. In
       1712 Felipe V ordered a count of all households, which was made everywhere but the Basque provinces, and formal censuses of all
       individuals were taken in 1768–69, 1786–87, and 1797. A careful analysis of these documents reveals that on average over most of the
       century, the population of Spain was increasing at the rate of 0.46 percent per year. This is very close to the best estimate of the rate of
       growth for England (0.44 percent), slightly above that attributed to Italy (0.38 percent), and well above the accepted figure for France
       (0.27 percent).[29]
            A comparison of the population figures for the different regions of the peninsula reveals that the periphery of the north and east
       was growing at a somewhat faster rate than the center.[30] This is the situation that one would expect if one believes that economic
       prosperity is a cause for demographic expansion. The detailed study of Catalonia made by Pierre Vilar supports this explanation, for its
       coastal areas, open to commerce with the Atlantic world, were growing much more rapidly than most parts of the interior. Part of the
       reason was a difference in birth rates, but migration also played a major role in the population shifts.[31] Valencia also grew rapidly in
       the century, at a rate that can only be explained

       [28] These are the conclusions of Ringrose, "Perspectives."

       [29] See Appendix A for details on eighteenth-century censuses and population.

       [30] See Appendix A.

       [31] Vilar, Catalogne 2 : 42–94 and 3 : Map 56.


                                                                                           ― 15 ―
       by massive immigration. Galicia probably had the fastest demographic expansion of the peninsula, but at the same time, as the region of
       densest population, it sent forth a large number of emigrants, especially single men, to the rest of Spain and America.[32] The proximity
       of the sea, both for the export of local products and for the import of food, is a critical factor in explaining the greater rate of growth of
       the coastal over the interior population.
             Nevertheless, the interior was also growing, some regions faster than others. In the crises of the seventeenth century, the Castilian
       meseta had experienced an absolute population decline, and its growth in the eighteenth century could represent a recovery toward some
       kind of Malthusian limit (as indeed the growth of Catalonia did at first), according to the familiar demographic pattern described above.
       One can well suppose that this is what occurred during the first half of the century, but the evidence suggests that by 1750 the meseta
       was again approaching this limit, for food prices were becoming unstable.
             After the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, central Spain produced enough grain to feed itself except for years of bad
       harvests. This is the conclusion to be drawn from the figures collected painstakingly by Earl Hamilton, which show that the level of
       agricultural prices was relatively low at this time. About 1734 Spanish prices, like those in France and England, began a long-term rise
       that was to continue until the Restoration in 1814, slow at first but accelerating in the fourth quarter of the century. Agricultural products
       led other goods, with wheat going up the fastest.[33] Within these long-term trends, brief oscillations appeared as responses to the
       quality of the harvests. Poor harvests in 1721 and the late 1730s pushed up agricultural prices temporarily, oscillating, as one would
       expect, more sharply in the meseta and Andalusia than in Valencia and Catalonia.[34] These data indicate furthermore that after
       midcentury central Spain experienced a growing shortage of foodstuffs. A crop failure made prices soar in 1750, and a further bad harvest
       in 1753 pushed them even higher. By 1754 the agricultural price level in New Castile, according to Hamilton, was 68 percent above that
       of 1746; the rise in the level for nonagricultural goods was only 24 percent.[35] Although harvests improved in the next years, the crown
       had to

       [32] Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 35–42, largely based on the unpublished work of Francisco Bustelo.

       [33] Hamilton, War and Prices, 173, Chart 5. See also Anes, Crisis, 220.

       [34] Hamilton, War and Prices, 143, 148–49, 184, Chart 7; for Catalonia, Vilar, Catalogne 2 : 338–40, 3 : Atlas et graphiques, no. 69.

       [35] These are the ratios that result from Hamilton, War and Prices, 172–73, Table 2.



                                                                                           ― 16 ―
       send grain to Andalusia in 1757–58 to meet a shortage there. [36] The royal ministers were beginning to find the threat of famine a
       matter of concern. The evolving relation between food production and population growth in the interior must be considered a major factor
       in understanding the history of Spain at this time.
              The demographic expansion of Spain does not suffice to explain the increasing sensitivity of the agricultural price level. The Polish




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
