Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       bordered on the east by the road from Salamanca to the village of Narros, on the north and west by lands of the hospital of Salamanca,
       and on the south by a field of the village church. The plot in question was now to change hands, and the order instructed the notary to
       deliver it to its new owners. The tenants, the document stated, would have to vacate it in three days or, if allowed to remain, must pay
       their rent to the new owners from the date of transfer.
             The order was the result of an event that had taken place in Salamanca on the previous Sunday. At eleven o'clock that morning in
       the hall of the royal jail of Salamanca, "the usual place for such acts," the alcalde mayor don Manuel Ortiz had met with the notary don
       Martín Sánchez Tomé and an alguacil to complete the auction of seven plots of arable land in the towns of La Mata and Narros belonging
       to a confraternity in Salamanca, pursuant to recent royal orders to sell the properties of such religious foundations to the highest bidder
       and deposit the resulting capital in the Royal Amortization Fund. Don Manuel ordered the public crier, who acted as auctioneer, to
       announce the last written offer for the plots and open the final bidding. The crier did as told, in a voice that rang through the hall, saying,
       "The bid has been raised to eleven thousand eight hundred eight reales. Match this last bid! . . . I perceive the closing, soon! . . . Soon!"
       He waited a few minutes, then intoned his cry again, and once more. No one in the audience responded to his encouragement. One final
       time the alcalde mayor ordered the crier to announce the auction, to no avail. After a suitable delay, he instructed the crier to award the
       sale to the authors of the previous bid, wishing them "Good fortune!" (

       Buen provecho! ), the accustomed formula for the occasion. The successful bidders were Francisco and Marcos González of La Mata, and
       the seven plots included the one that the crowd now stood beside in the cold, open air.

             Sánchez Tomé took Francisco González by the hand, "in his name and that of his partner Marcos González," and led him into the
       plot. Francisco walked around its boundaries, kicked a few clods, ordered everyone out of it, "and took several other actions as evidence
       of the ownership that he assumed . . . quietly and peacefully without opposi-


                                                                                            ―3 ―
       tion from anyone." The traditional Castilian rite for the transfer of real property had now been performed. The notary said that it applied
       "in voice and name" to the other six plots included in the sale; even had the purchasers wished, the midwinter light would not have
       lasted for a visit to all of them. Before leaving, Sánchez Tomé recorded the names of various witnesses, including the keeper of the
       village records, a local linen weaver, "and many other persons who attended this ceremony."[1]
             This scene is representative of thousands of others enacted throughout Spain in the last decade of the old regime. The government
       of Carlos IV, crushed by the expenses of war and fearful of a catastrophic bankruptcy, in 1798 ordered the sale of the property held in
       entail by charitable institutions and other religious endowments in order to appropriate the proceeds for its own needs. It thereby
       introduced one of the most significant developments in modern Spanish history, the abolition of entail and the forced sale at auction of
       church properties and many public properties as well. In 1800 most Spanish real estate could not be freely transferred on the market; a
       hundred years later the opposite was the case. In the intervening century, thousands upon thousands of buildings and hundreds of
       thousands of fields changed hands. The process, known in Spanish as desamortización, affected the way in which Spanish cities developed
       and the structure of rural society evolved. It involved the basic relationships between church and state and became central to the
       conflicts between Spanish liberals and conservatives in the nineteenth century, and it has been blamed for many of the country's
       contemporary social and economic ills.
             The first of the great waves of disentail swept over Spain between 1798 and 1808. This was the ominous final decade of the old
       regime, which led up to the Napoleonic invasion, and the introduction of desamortización belongs to the agony of the absolute monarchy.
       Its authors, however, were responding not only to the tensions that emanated from the French Revolution but to the optimistic
       enlightened rationalism of the reign of Carlos III in which they had been reared. They believed that freeing rural property would improve
       agriculture and reform society.
             In this book, the disentail will appear as the culminating act of the absolute monarchy, not the introduction of an age to come. This
       is a study of royal domestic policy and rural society in the second half of the eighteenth century, how they evolved and how they
       interacted. The bu-

       [1] AHPS, Sección Notarial, legajo 3844, ff. 40v–44v.


                                                                                            ―4 ―
       reaucracy of enlightened Spain, inspired by a dedication to improvement, left to posterity impressive sets of records that make it possible
       to look in depth at the rural world at the end of the old regime. They include the first full population censuses of Spain, the famous
       survey of real property and economic activities in Castile at midcentury known as the catastro (cadaster) of the Marqués de la Ensenada,
       and memoirs on conditions in the countryside and proposals for agrarian reform authored or inspired by Carlos III's ministers.
              The first part of the study looks at the country as a whole, focusing on the impact of demographic expansion and the response of
       the royal government. Spurred on by urban riots in 1766, the king's counselors sought ways to provide more food for the cities. The
       information they had and their own reason told them that the solution was to multiply the small farmers and restrict the power and
       privileges of the large landowners. Even during the wars of the French Revolution, the royal government strove to fulfill this program.
       Disentail was the most dramatic measure, seeking now fiscal salvation as well as rural reform. We shall look at how it was carried out
       and how much property changed ownership throughout the country. We shall see, too, how all the royal efforts were no match for the
       forces of nature and war that beset the state. When Napoleon's armies occupied Spain in 1808, neither horses nor men could have put
       the absolute monarchy together again.
             The second part of the book turns to the rural scene and looks in detail at the structure of seven towns in the mid-eighteenth
       century and their evolution up to the Napoleonic invasion. (La Mata will be one of them.) We shall observe who owned the land, who
       worked it and how the town income was distributed locally and to the outside world, who lived well and who scraped by and how many
       there were of each kind. Rural population was growing, and the towns had to cope with the threat of declining per capita income. In one
       way or another all seven were responding to the rising demand for agricultural products quite independently of any royal planning.
       Pressures for change were wearing away the prevailing structures, and Carlos IV's orders to sell ecclesiastical property opened the gates
       to accelerated change. The results would be molded by local conditions and forces in ways that the planners did not fully anticipate.
       Francisco González, who took over ownership of the plot in La Mata, was new to farming. The disentail permitted him to use his savings
       gained elsewhere, as a muleteer perhaps, to become one of the leading farmers in the village.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
