Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       intendants began the survey in 1750, setting about obtaining a full list of the properties and sources of personal income in all the cities,
       towns, and villages of Castile. By 1756 they had completed all twenty-two provinces. [7] The result is commonly known as the catastro of
       the Marqués de la Ensenada.
             The returns revealed how unfair the existing tax system was. The income from the property of the church represented 19 percent of
       the total income from real property in Castile, but the subsidio it paid annually to the crown was equal to only 3.6 percent of the rentas
       provinciales collected from the rest of the population. [8] According to the information collected, an equitable single tax of 4 percent on
       income from all sources would produce as much as all existing taxes. Such a reform would obviously benefit the poor, while the religious
       orders, secular clergy enjoying benefices, and wealthy nobles would lose some of their privileged status.
             Although Fernando VI approved the single tax in 1757, it never went into effect. Ensenada had been dismissed in 1754, and
       Fernando became despondent and nearly insane after the death of his queen in 1758, succumbing himself a year later. His successor,
       Carlos III, and the new minister of hacienda, the Marqués de Esquilache, took up the matter, but they lost time by ordering the towns to
       review their original surveys and bring them up to date. Now fully aware of the significance of their returns, the petty municipal
       oligarchies dragged their feet, raising malicious questions and delaying their responses. [9] The reassessment took four years, and when it
       was done, the towns had discovered that their incomes were far lower than those stated in the original surveys. Two years later riots in
       Madrid and many other places drove Esquilache from power and marked a major turning point in plans for reform. Pedro Rodríguez de
       Campomanes, a fiscal, or advisory attorney, of the Council of Castile, became the most influential adviser in economic matters, and he
       had serious doubts about the practicality of the única contribución in regions whose agricultural economy was not mone-

       [6] Ibid., 63, 87–88; Desdevises, L'Espagne 2 : 134–37.

       [7] Matilla, Única contribución, 92.

       [8] For value of ecclesiastical property and all property in Castile according to the catastro, see Table 5.5. The figures for the
       ecclesiastical subsidio and the rentas provinciales are in Matilla, Única contribución, 93.

       [9] Otazu, Reforma fiscal, 145–76. Otazu provides the full story of the única contribución in Extremadura.



                                                                                           ― 10 ―
       tized. [10] Still, a royal junta continued to discuss the single tax for another decade. In 1770 Carlos III ordered it put into effect as soon
       as provincial quotas could be assigned. Six years later this had still not been done, and the matter was dropped. [11]
             All the work was not in vain, however. The idea of replacing the rentas provinciales by a single tax on income remained to inspire
       later ministers[12] and became the basis for a sweeping revision in 1845.[13] Meanwhile, the thousands of volumes of the catastro of
       Ensenada containing detailed information on the ownership of property throughout Castile were stored in the offices of the intendants,
       ready at a moment's notice to reveal the entailed estates of the church and the nobility. They are today one of the most remarkable
       sources anywhere of information on the society and economy of a preindustrial state.


       2

       In the 1760s a new worry drew attention away from the need for tax reform: the apparent disparity between the increasing food
       requirements of the country and the harvests from its soil. In recent decades historical scholarship has devoted much attention to the
       relation between the supply of food and population levels in early modern European countries. As a general rule, the prices of basic
       foodstuffs like wheat or other grains were far more elastic than those of nonagricultural goods. Europe as a whole in the early modern
       period followed a short fallow system, the two- or three-field rotation of grains, pulses, and fallow familiar to historians. Ester Boserup
       has shown that this system of cultivation is particularly susceptible to bad harvests. [14] The resulting impact of famines on real incomes
       directly affected demographic trends. In the extreme situation a bad harvest would cause the price of bread to rise precipitously, and
       many people would be unable to buy the food they needed to survive.
            Two common demographic responses to declining per capita food supplies can be related to Malthus's identification of "preventive"
       and "positive" checks to the growth of population. In the "preventive" case, a rise in food prices resulting in lower real incomes
       discourages mar-

       [10] Llombart, "A propósito."

       [11] Matilla, Única contribución, 96–100, 107, 123–24.

       [12] See Cabarrús, Cartas, 349.

       [13] See Estapé, Reforma tributaria.

       [14] Boserup, Conditions, 48–49.


                                                                                           ― 11 ―
       riage and thus induces a decline in fertility. Although the resulting demographic response is sluggish, it nevertheless preserves a relatively
       high standard of living for a preindustrial society. A "positive" check, on the other hand, exists among populations that live close to the
       margin of subsistence, whose lower classes suffer a constant condition of malnutrition. Here a disastrous grain harvest or, worse, a series
       of bad harvests will cause the weakest members of the society to die off, victims of starvation or diseases that attack the debilitated
       society. In their impressive history of English population, E. A. Wrigley and Roger Schofield have labeled these two demographic
       responses respectively a "low-pressure system" and a "high-pressure system." As per capita food supplies decline in a high-pressure
       system, increased mortality lowers the level of population, while in a low-pressure system reduced fertility keeps the population from
       straining the subsistence resources except in unusual circumstances. [15]
             According to these two authors, England enjoyed a low-pressure system from the early seventeenth century to the industrial
       revolution, with the consequence that it was socially and economically better prepared than continental Europe to take advantage of
       technological innovations. From the evidence that has been produced by historical demographers who have looked at France, Wrigley and
       Schofield conclude that during most of the old regime this country approached a high-pressure system. Present information indicates that



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
