Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       France suffered severe crises of mortality in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, usually associated with poor harvests,
       although a recurrence of the plague and the ravages of war also played important parts in these catastrophes. [16] We still do not know if
       the severity of these crises reflected a society that was less prudent than England's in making decisions to marry, or if the famines were
       extraordinary events that resulted from a monoculture of wheat, more susceptible to meteorological vagaries than the English mix of
       winter and spring grains, or from a poorer communications network that caused French regions with harvest failures to suffer with little
       outside help. [17] Recent work has brought into question whether France or any other early modern European society let its population

       [15] Wrigley and Schofield, Population History, chaps. 10, 11.

       [16] See Le Roy Ladurie, "Motionless History," 129–31.

       [17] See Weir, "Life Under Pressure." Weir rejects the view that France had a higher "pressure system" than England. Andrew B. Appleby,
       "Grain Prices," argues that after the seventeenth century England suffered less severe famines than France because it did not follow the
       monoculture of wheat to the same extent, harvesting major quantities of other grains that were hurt less sharply by the same climatic
       acts of God.


                                                                                           ― 12 ―
       rise to levels that would entail near starvation when crops were normal. [18] Nevertheless, France was more liable than England to suffer
       from bad harvests, and this may be our best definition of the difference between a high- and a low-pressure demographic system.
       Historical demography is in a period of rapid advance, and future research should clarify our understanding of the situation in early
       modern countries.
             Less historical work has been done on the demography of Spain than on that of England or France, but the knowledge we have at
       present indicates that in the seventeenth century the interior of Spain, like France, labored under a high-pressure system. It suffered
       three major crises of mortality in 1630–32, 1647–52, and 1684, all three following immediately upon famines. The "little ice age" of the
       seventeenth century, known to have affected agriculture adversely in northern Europe, appears also to have reached Spain, accentuating
       the irregularity of harvests. [19] Outbreaks of the plague affected the Mediterranean coast, but no evidence has been uncovered that it
       ever became virulent in the interior, where the major killer has been identified as typhus. In central Castile high grain prices and
       increased mortality went hand in hand, although the population decline experienced by various regions of the interior may also have been
       the result of a flight of people from a countryside overburdened by royal taxes.[20] During the War of the Spanish Succession, a series of
       bad harvests between 1704 and 1709 led to famine prices for grain, which reached their apex in 1710. Death rates were also high during
       these years, especially near the Portuguese frontier where the demands of rival armies intensified the suffering of the countryside. [21] It
       is worth noting that the four major Spanish demographic crises of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries were experienced in
       France as well, evidence that we are observing a condition that was common to western continental Europe.
             With the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, the close association between harvests and mortality disappeared in Spain, as it
       did in France. No serious famines occurred between 1711 and midcentury, and local mortality crises appear to have been caused by
       influenza or typhus, not associated with food supplies.[22] No simple explanation has been found for this change, but it is one feature of a
       general European eco-

       [18] Jones, European Miracle, 14–16.

       [19] Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 404–5.

       [20] Pérez Moreda, Crisis de mortalidad, 294–326.

       [21] Ibid., 329–34, 360–62.

       [22] Ibid., 334–36, 362–63.


                                                                                           ― 13 ―
       nomic growth that began about the turn of the eighteenth century. In France more effective royal authority put an end to much of the
       civil turmoil that marked the seventeenth century. Production of grain for export increased in England, Prussia, and other regions, and
       European cities that could be fed by sea trade grew in size. Inland regions were more susceptible to shortages, but central and local
       governments improved roads and built canals and thereby facilitated the shipment of food into areas whose normal supplies had failed.
       Even a high-pressure demographic system like the French became insulated from the worst effects of crop failures. Agricultural
       catastrophes recurred in the eighteenth century without the earlier, devastating mortality. Poor harvests in 1788 and 1789 were
       instrumental in inducing popular violence in the early French Revolution, but they did not produce excessive deaths. [23]
              Spain was a somewhat different case. The periphery of the peninsula—the provinces of the northern coast, Catalonia, and Valencia—
       followed the developments of the European maritime community. The economies of these regions began to recover from the national
       crisis of the seventeenth century around 1680, and after 1700 they experienced a fairly steady growth. [24] The periphery imported grain
       by sea from France, Sicily, North Africa, and other sources of supply. Animals for slaughter crossed the Pyrenees to Catalonia and the
       Basque provinces, while north European maritime nations provided salt cod. [25] The prices of wheat and other basic foodstuffs followed
       the same curve in these areas as in the rest of maritime Europe, convincing evidence of their integration into the Atlantic economic
       world. [26]
             Because of the rugged geography of Spain, communications remained difficult and expensive in the central meseta and Andalusia,
       and these regions did not experience a comparable increase in traffic or a similar economic takeoff until the second half of the eighteenth
       century, and then only in some areas. After 1750 grain prices in Old Castile rose more rapidly than those in Galicia and Catalonia,
       evidence of the isolation of the meseta from the Atlantic economy.[27] The failure of central Spain to share in the general western
       economic growth meant that the country now belonged to two different economic worlds. The northern and eastern periphery formed part
       of the Atlantic maritime community,

       [23] Meuvret, "Demographic Crises."

       [24] Ringrose, "Perspectives."




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
