Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       teamsters' guild, the continued enjoyment at fixed rents of the pastures grazed on by their animals. The public properties went back
       farthest in time. During the early reconquest of Castile and León from the ninth to the eleventh centuries, when the Christians were
       moving into the northern meseta, they

       [43] On the rise in price of land: Anes, Crisis, 274–91; Defourneaux, Olavide, 131; on the stagnation in price of agricultural labor, Anes,
       "Informe, " 100.

       [44] Vilar, Catalogne 2 : 219–21, 242–91, 321–31; Giralt, "Técnicas."

       [45] Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 189–90.

       [46] See also Mem. ajust. (1784), §249, 173.

       [47] Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 171–77. See Huetz de Lemps, Vignobles 1 : 306, 309, and 318, on the extension of vineyards in Salamanca
       province.

       [48] See also Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 167–69 on Aragon, 191–95 on the northern coast.


                                                                                           ― 19 ―
       took over many territories that were empty of people or thinly occupied. The written sources that have been preserved permit only a
       shaky reconstruction of the process of settlement, but it would appear that as a general rule, all the land was assumed to belong to the
       crown or, by tacit or express cession of the crown, to the military leaders who recaptured it or in common to the settlers who came in
       and established new villages and towns. Private property developed through occupation and cultivation by the settlers, a process known in
       Castile as presura and escalio, which resembled squatting on the American frontier. As the Reconquista advanced beyond the central
       sierras after the eleventh century, the Christians captured regions already well populated, where most residents remained under the new
       rulers. Here too there was much vacant land, and it too belonged now to the crown, unless a king granted it to another person or body.
             Lands that were not established as private property or ceded expressly to a town or an individual and remained as wastes and
       common pastures were known as tierras baldías or simply baldíos. They included the mountains, barren wastes, woods, and rough hills of
       scrub growth, to which the term monte applied, all of them uncultivated and many of them of no use. Those parts of the baldíos on
       which local livestock grazed or which provided firewood—known in Spanish as tierras de aprovechamiento común (lands of common use)—
       were vital to the economy of the peasant villages. By early modern times it would appear that all the surface of the peninsula, except
       possibly some remote mountain wildernesses, had been allocated to one town or another or to several towns jointly. [49] It was a moot
       point, however, whether the unused land within the limits of a town, the baldíos, belonged to the crown or the municipality. In practice it
       made little difference, because the kings protected the use in common of these lands, but it did mean that once the Mesta had acquired
       their use as pasture, it could henceforth insist on the right to their use. [50]
             During the population expansion of the sixteenth century, new squatters settled in the baldíos, and Felipe II, in need of money, sold
       private title to these lands to the squatters or to their towns. The king also sold off other baldíos that were still unbroken. Sales of
       baldíos became one

       [49] Such was the case of the Montes Universales of eastern Aragon, common property of twenty-three villages (Domínguez Ortiz,
       Sociedad y estado, 245).

       [50] This discussion is based primarily on Nieto, Bienes comunales, 54–65, 101–132. Vassberg, "Sale," 631–34, also has a valuable
       discussion of the nature and legal position of the baldíos.


                                                                                           ― 20 ―
       of his largest sources of royal income. Faced with strong protests of the towns and cities of Castile that the loss of these pastures was
       harmful to their agriculture, in 1586 the king ordered a halt to sales of baldíos that were being used by local farmers and demanded in
       return the approval of a new tax known as the millones .[51] A century and a half later, in 1737, when the demand for land was again
       rising, Felipe V, in need of funds to construct the royal palace of Madrid, reopened the sale of baldíos, only to face the strong protest of
       city and town governments. Fernando VI in 1747 halted the sale of lands that were being used by local residents and the restoration of
       those that had been sold, but he maintained the right to sell baldíos that were not being used. The legislation of Felipe II and Fernando
       VI implies that the king had the ultimate title to the baldíos, while recognizing the claim of the towns to lands of aprovechamiento
       común. [52] Nevertheless, the catastro of the Marqués de la Ensenada attributed the title of land not held by specific owners to the
       municipal councils, so that the question of ownership of the baldíos remained open.[53]
             Except in the north and on the Mediterranean coast, most settlements were closely nucleated. Cultivated lands and improved
       pastures and meadows surrounded the village or town, and the baldíos lay beyond this ring. In central and northern Castile, where most
       towns were small and close together, baldíos might hardly exist, but in Andalusia, La Mancha, and Extremadura, where settlements were
       larger and frequently far apart, the wastelands were very extensive. Spurred on by the profit in land, private individuals, noble lords
       (señores ), and religious orders were surreptitiously taking over large tracts of the baldíos for plowing or private pasture, while city
       councils appropriated them to rent for municipal income, allowing the tenants to cultivate them. [54] What to do about the baldíos was a
       question that would concern royal advisers for the rest of the century, for in them they saw an immense resource and, whoever had
       rightful title, they believed the king had full authority to dispose of them.
             Not all public lands belonged to the crown. The municipalities had open pastures and monte, lands of common usage that had been
       specifi-

       [51] Nieto, Bienes comunales, 161–62; Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 91.

       [52] Nieto, Bienes comunales, 135–68, esp. 164–67; Rodríguez Silva, "Venta de baldíos."

       [53] None of the lists of property of the catastros of the seven towns studied in Part 2 show any royal property. Monte and pastures are
       assigned to the municipal council, even the vast stretches of the Sierra Morena belonging to Baños, much of which was later used to
       found the colonies of Sierra Morena.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
