Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       historian Witold Kula has argued that in a mixed subsistence and market economy based on peasant farming, the amount of the grain
       harvest that reaches the market fluctuates more sharply than the total harvest. Peasants try to keep a constant amount of grain for
       themselves before selling any, while landowners (which in Spain included religious institutions) take care of their needs before disposing
       of their surplus.[37] This would explain sharp price fluctuations, which primarily affected urban dwellers because the peasantry as a whole
       relied only marginally on the market for their food.
             The long-term imbalance came about because of rural and urban demographic expansion that caused suffering to both sectors. As
       the number of peasants grew, so did their propensity to consume the food they produced, but they were not in a position to withdraw
       much grain or other staples from the market. Landowners, seigneurial lords, the church, and the king drew payments from the farmers
       for rent, feudal dues, tithes, and taxes, and peasants made most of these payments in kind. Such obligations remained in force,
       whatever the size and number of peasant families. The grain and other products collected in this way provided most of the foodstuffs that
       reached the urban markets. [38] Peasants sold their surplus in the market, and they could reduce this amount as their needs rose, but
       they could not suppress the trade entirely. They had to obtain some cash to pay rents due in coin and to buy the limited outside
       products that they needed. Part 2 of this study will uncover some of the ways in which peasants of Castile and Andalusia struggled to
       maintain their real income. Their plight had little effect, however, on the long-term trend of prices.
             Urban dwellers would also suffer if they had to rely on domestic food supplies. Most of the large cities in Spain, as elsewhere, were
       near the sea and could be fed from abroad: Barcelona, Valencia, Málaga, and Cádiz. In the heart of the meseta, however, lay Madrid, the
       largest city

       [36] Ibid., 157.

       [37] Kula, Economic Theory, 66–67.

       [38] See Anes, Crisis, 338–39.


                                                                                           ― 17 ―
       in the country. No other European metropolis of its size was like it, for it relied exclusively on land transport for its supplies. Since its
       establishment as the capital of Spain in the sixteenth century, its demands had strained the transportation capacity of the meseta, forced
       provincial capitals to compete with it for supplies, and caused the royal government continual concern. Between 1685 and 1800, it
       expanded from about 125,000 to nearly 200,000 people, a rate of approximately 0.41 percent per year, faster than the rest of central
       Spain, evidence that it was the recipient of considerable inmigration. After midcentury the city imported annually more than half a million
       fanegas of grain and legumes, half a million arrobas of wine, one hundred thousand arrobas of olive oil, three hundred thousand of meat,
       fifteen thousand hogs, and proportional quantities of fuel and other rural products. In the 1780s an average of seven hundred carts and
       five thousand pack animals arrived every day in good weather with cargoes to supply the city.[39] The market for farm products in Castile
       meant primarily the demand of Madrid, which dominated the entire region and provided incentives to expand commercial agriculture. By
       comparison, Valladolid, with 20,000 people, and Salamanca, with 16,000, were small provincial centers, but they too drew on the
       agricultural market. Zaragoza, whose population rose from some 30,000 in midcentury to 45,000 in 1800, dominated the region of
       Aragon much as Madrid did that of Castile. [40] Andalusia was more highly urbanized. The largest cities, Seville and Granada, had
       populations of 85,000 and 50,000, although Seville could also receive supplies by sea up the Gaudalquivir River. The relative prosperity of
       the region attracted immigrants from northern Spain, strengthening its urban centers.[41] Except for Madrid, the cities of Castile and
       Andalusia may not have been growing at a faster rate than the country as a whole, but any growth resulted in increased demand, to
       which agricultural price curves responded.[42]

       [39] Ringrose, Transportation, 39–40 for products except wheat. For wheat, Ringrose, Madrid and the Spanish Economy, 110, 350
       (Madrid needed about 1,500 fanegas of wheat per day in 1767, or 550,000 per year). The fanega was 55.2 liters, the arroba, 11.5 kg.
       The relationship between the Madrid market for foodstuffs and the countryside is discussed, ibid., 174–90. On the population, ibid., 26–
       29, and Ringrose, "Perspectives," 75–79.

       [40] Valladolid, Zaragoza: Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 187, 243–44; Salamanca: Real Academia de la Historia, Censo de España
       (1787), legajo 9-30-3, 6259.

       [41] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 87; Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 225–33.

       [42] Ringrose deals with both the urban market for agricultural products, especially Madrid, and the rural incentives to withdraw
       production from the market in Madrid and the Spanish Economy, 174–90.


                                                                                           ― 18 ―

       3

       With an increasing rural population and a growing demand for food, the value of land could be expected to rise vis-à-vis labor, the other
       major factor of agricultural production. There is in fact evidence that rents were going up while wages remained stagnant.[43] These
       circumstances produced a strong incentive to change land uses from extensive to more profitable intensive types of agriculture, and land
       was becoming an attractive investment opportunity. In a region like Catalonia, which had water available and could sell on the
       international market, capital was put into new irrigation works and market-oriented plantings like nut trees, olive groves, and
       vineyards.[44] Similarly, Andalusia, able to import grain by sea as far as Seville and to ship out more specialized produce, exploited the
       comparative advantage of its climate and soil to extend olive groves and vineyards, in some places at the expense of land sown in
       wheat. [45] Part 2 of this book will observe this development in detail in the towns of Jaén province. Farther in the interior, the obvious
       response was to bring pastures and wastelands under the plow, and this study will show that such a response was indeed occurring. [46]
       Parts of the meseta had long produced wine and some olive oil for local consumption, and some of this production also expanded,
       especially in the second half of the century. [47] Throughout the peninsula, economic incentives were bringing about changes in the uses
       of the land. [48]
             There were, however, obstacles to the transfer of land to more profitable uses, particularly in Castile. The most important were legal
       restrictions on the exchange of ownership or use of land. They applied to church and public properties and to lay estates that had been
       established as entails, while the crown had guaranteed the Mesta, the guild of sheep owners, and the Real Cabaña de Carreteros, the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
