Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       punished ringleaders with imprisonment or death and rescinded all concessions made to the rioters. The freedom of the grain trade
       remained in effect. They did not want Spaniards to think that a recourse to violence could change royal policy. [93]
             The Motín (riot) de Esquilache, as the event became known, caused a profound impression on the king and his counselors. Although
       bread riots were relatively common in France and England—in the same year an exceptional number occurred in England because the
       grain harvest in that country too had been disastrous [94] —they were little known in Spain. Royal authority had not been so threatened in
       Castile since the revolt of the Comuneros in 1520. Publicly the king's counselors blamed the rising on provocation by aristocrats and
       clergymen, and they justified the expulsion of the Jesuits from all Spanish dominions in 1767 in part by accusing them of complicity in the
       motín. But the royal counselors were well aware that high food prices had been instrumental in causing the discontent. For the next years
       the problem of increasing the food supply became the overriding concern of the government, pushing into the background the long-
       standing search for a less regressive and fairer tax structure.
             Since the days when royal agents were compiling the catastro, local officials in various quarters had directed petitions to the Council
       of Castile asking it to correct abuses that they said hurt farming. They complained especially of the excessive privileges of the Mesta and
       the rising

       [92] Vilar, "Motín," 233–44; Laura Rodríguez, "Spanish Riots," 132–33. Rodríguez has mapped sixty-nine riots, forty-three in central
       Spain and twenty-three around the periphery, eleven of the latter in the Basque provinces.

       [93] Vilar "Motín," 233–44; Laura Rodríguez, "Spanish Riots," 139–43.

       [94] Thomas, "Feedings England," 333–34; Tilly, "Proletarianization," 23–24; Cornelius P. Forster, Uncontrolled Chancellor, 101–2.


                                                                                           ― 36 ―
       rent for land. [95] While the rioting was still in progress, the secretary of hacienda (finance) ordered the intendants of Old Castile and
       León to give their views on the best means to improve farming, stock raising, and industry.[96] As complaints from southern Spain
       continued to pour in, at the behest of Campomanes the survey was extended to Andalusia, La Mancha, and Extremadura. It asked for
       opinions on the advisability of restricting the subleasing of farm lands, placing a ceiling on agricultural rents, limiting the extent of land a
       single individual could exploit, and establishing villages on the cortijos.[97] The whole survey had as its objective the formulation of a
       legal code for agriculture or, in the words of the inquiry, an "agrarian law."
              The crown also took a more direct step to improve conditions. Suspecting the complicity of local elites in the riots, Campomanes
       spurred on the Council of Castile to establish "representatives of the people" whose purpose would be "to stop the wrongdoing of
       municipal officials, who usually hold hereditary offices."[98] On 5 May 1766, a bare month after the riots, the king created two new
       officials to represent the public interest in the municipal councils. In all towns of two thousand or more vecinos, the taxpayers would elect
       by two-stage voting four "deputies of the commons" (diputados del común ) to sit with the permanent city councilors (regidores ).
       Smaller towns would elect two such deputies. In addition, towns large enough to have a procurador síndico, who was in theory a
       spokesman for the public interest but had in practice in most places become an hereditary officer allied with the ruling group, would add
       another new official, a procurador síndico personero del público, similarly elected, to be a kind of public tribune. Relatives of regidores
       were declared ineligible for the new positions. These elected officials were to take charge of feeding the cities, and they were to enforce
       the freedom of the grain trade. [99]
            Another, more delicate task fell into the lap of the diputados del común. The Council of Castile had directed some towns of
       Extremadura to distribute common lands as farms to their vecinos, beginning

       [95] Mem. ajust. (1784), §15–29, 143–47 (Zamora); §35–55, 148–56 (Salamanca); §133–56, 157–64 (Soria); Anes, " Informe ," 103;
       Defourneaux, Olavide, 133 (Extremadura).

       [96] Mem. ajust. (1784), §1, 139; Anes, "Informe, " 104.

       [97] Mem. ajust. (1784), §635–36, 211; §658, 219; §694, §716, 234; Anes, "Informe, " 105; Defourneaux, Olavide, 144 (on
       Campomanes's role).

       [98] Quoted in Laura Rodríguez, "Spanish Riots," 142. She cites attempts of oligarchies of southern cities to foil inquiries into the causes
       of the riots, 140–41.

       [99] Nov. rec., VII, xviii, 1, 2; Defourneaux, Olavide, 94–95.


                                                                                           ― 37 ―
       with the day laborers (jornaleros ) and marginal farmers (senareros ). In the month of the motín, the local intendant informed the
       council that its orders were being subverted, for the "vecinos poderosos," working through the town councils, were allocating the best
       part of the commons to themselves and their friends. At his suggestion, the provisions of the reform were extended to all Extremadura to
       obtain better enforcement.[100] Both municipal lands normally rented (propios) and common pastures suitable for cultivation were to be
       divided into lots and distributed among the vecinos for a reasonable rent, to be held as long as they were properly cultivated and the rent
       paid, and not to be subleased. Jornaleros and senareros would have priority, and after them farmers with one yoke of draft animals, then
       those with two, and so on. In 1767 the king extended the provision to La Mancha and Andalusia, and in 1768 to the rest of the kingdom.
       He assigned the distribution of the lands to the Juntas de Propios y Arbitrios, municipal finance committees made up of the regidores and
       new diputados del común. [101]
             Again the council received complaints, this time from Andalusia, that the municipalities were not carrying out the order, or that
       where they were, the choice lots were going to the poderosos, with little or none left for the poor. [102] The council struggled to find a
       way to enforce the royal will against the local oligarchs. In 1770 the government decided to modify its approach by giving priority not to
       jornaleros but to farmers who possessed draft animals and tools but no land. The municipal electors chosen to select the diputados del
       común were to name arbiters and assessors (repartidores y tasadores ) to oversee the process. [103]
             A study of the documents that have survived indicates that the Council of Castile was frustrated in its good intentions. Most
       municipal governments chose to ignore the orders, and those that responded twisted the instructions to give the vacant lands to the
       poderosos and their clients, ignoring the just claims of the lower classes. An occasional town did distribute plots to small farmers and day
       laborers, but few beneficiaries succeeded against the odds posed by lack of capital and the denial of a moratorium on rent while they got



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
