Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             Beyond the various forms of legal ownership, a different kind of institution prevented the free employment of the land. This was the
       Mesta, the guild of owners of migrant sheep, which dated from the thirteenth century. Because of the climate and geography of the
       country, the flocks of merino sheep, noted for the fineness of their wool, spent the summer in pastures in the central and northern
       sierras and were driven south before the snowfall to distant fields in Valencia, Murcia, Extremadura, La Mancha, and Andalusia, to return
       north in the following spring before the summer heat burned up the southern grasslands. In their semi-

       [58] Cardenas, Ensayo.

       [59] Nieto, Bienes comunales, 140–41.

       [60] Olavide, in Mem. ajust. (1784), §921, 281.

       [61] See Appendix B.


                                                                                           ― 24 ―
       annual migrations, tens of thousands of sheep followed long-established walks, or cañadas.
             For centuries merino wool had been one of Spain's leading exports. The crown, eager to encourage a trade that brought it much
       revenue, had granted the Mesta extensive privileges and its own courts to ensure their observance. Among these privileges, the right of
       posesión ensured the members of the Mesta the continued use of any pastures they had ever occupied without an increase in rent.
       Extensive baldíos in Extremadura, La Mancha, and Andalusia as well as communal lands and baldíos in the northern and central sierras
       and private pastures were used by the Mesta, while pastures near the cañadas were also subject to the periodic invasion of the flocks.
       The right of posesión was a disguised form of entail, which restricted the land to its present use. By midcentury, farmers had begun to
       invade and plow up pastures reserved to the transhumant sheep, leading to lengthy lawsuits brought by the Mesta to preserve its
       rights. [62] Before towns could break new ground in the baldíos used by the migrant sheep or owners of rented pastures could recover
       them for their own use, they had to overcome the opposition of the Mesta. As the century progressed, the royal government received
       many complaints and petitions over this issue.[63]


       4

       Spanish agriculture followed myriad practices in the eighteenth century, only a few of which have been studied. No generalized pattern
       can reflect them all faithfully, yet some broad strokes are needed for orientation before proceeding with the account of individual and
       official responses to the new demand for foodstuffs after midcentury. One may turn first to the division between center and periphery
       that marked economic and demographic developments. [64] Although proximity to the sea seemed to offer all the coastal areas the
       possibility of participating in the maritime economy, the agriculture of only certain districts was able to take advantage of it. The
       Mediterranean lands of Catalonia and Valen-

       [62] Mem. ajust. (1784), §249, 173.

       [63] The Mesta in the eighteenth century and the royal efforts to reform it are the subject of Mickun, La Mesta. The older work Klein,
       Mesta, is still valuable.

       [64] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, chap. 4, gives an extensive description of the landowning patterns of this period, and I shall
       not repeat it here. To bring the picture up to date, there is the authoritative survey of Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 163–95, and the relevant
       sections of the marvelous survey of the economy and administration of the different regions of Spain in Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y
       estado. Also relevant, although concerned with a later period, is Malefakis, Agrarian Reform, chap. 2.


                                                                                           ― 25 ―
       cia flourished under the impact of domestic population growth and foreign trade. [65] Catalan farmers were especially prosperous. Few
       owned the land outright, but the tenants enjoyed long-term leases, censos emfiteúticos, which ran indefinitely or, in the case of
       vineyards, for the life of the vines. They guaranteed the lessee the use of the land, the dominio útil, leaving to the owner only the
       dominio directo. As a rule, farms were consolidated single-family holdings called masías, and Catalan customary law provided that the
       farm be inherited as a unit so that subdivision did not occur. This typical property was thus bound by a form of entail, but it did not
       produce pernicious economic effects because there was no restriction on the use of the land. Pierre Vilar has shown how Catalan
       agriculture progressed under these conditions. Landowners and tenants cooperated to extend irrigation and introduce new crops that
       could be sold on the international market, such as wine, nuts, and dried fruits. The profit from these products provided the capital for
       agricultural improvement and foreign exchange to pay for imported grain and meat. Indirectly, the savings accumulated from farming
       contributed to the remarkable expansion of Catalan trade and manufacture in the second half of the century.
             Along the coast south of Catalonia, the terrain was divided between rough, arid uplands, about which we know little other than the
       fact that much was devoted to the pasturage of sheep, and the coastal plains, which included rich irrigated valleys known as huertas or
       vegas. These latter enjoyed a great expansion of agriculture and an accompanying growth of population. In Valencia the cultivation of rice
       spread rapidly in newly developed fields along the coast, providing food for a growing population, while plantations of mulberry trees
       supported the worms that spun the raw material for Valencia's fast-growing silk industry. Local lords received heavy seigneurial dues, up
       to a quarter or a third of the harvest of certain crops, but the fact that farmers were guaranteed the dominio útil encouraged them to
       break new ground and invest capital in their exploitations. Here too agriculture provided the basis for a flourishing economy. The huerta
       of Alicante and the southern coast of Granada enjoyed similar prosperity. Products included dried fruits, nuts, and select wines, such as
       that of Málaga, much in demand in foreign and domestic markets. [66] The agricultural products of the Mediter-

       [65] Vilar, Catalogne, vol. 2, part 2, provides a brilliant study of the evolution of Catalan agriculture in the eighteenth century.

       [66] On Valencia, see Anes, Antiguo Régimen, 167–69; for Alicante and Granada, Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 102.


                                                                                           ― 26 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
