Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       harvesting. One of the striking features of this region was the large number of day laborers. It ran from 54 to 76 percent of the men
       engaged in agriculture in New Castile but was 80 percent or more in the Guadalquivir valley. The laborers, jornaleros or braceros, lived in
       the large towns with their families, in a state of poverty that with luck was alleviated by the help of religious charities. The extensive
       baldíos, which theoretically should have provided a resource for the landless jornaleros, were in fact of little use to them. Without tools,
       animals, or capital, they could not have exploited more than a small plot, even if they had been given a chance. Every indication is that
       the men who controlled the town councils made no effort to give them a chance or even resisted such an eventuality, preferring to
       appropriate the municipal properties for their own use or that of other influential persons, and of course the baldíos were distant from the
       town nucleus and much of them was occupied by the sheep of the Mesta during the growing season.[77]
              If social divisions were greater, absentee ownership was apparently less prevalent here than in the region of small farms. To judge
       from the examples studied in Part 2, the larger towns of the south tended to maintain local ownership because strong ecclesiastical
       institutions and funds existed within the towns and most of the important lay owners

       [75] For the size of a fanega, see Appendix N.

       [76] Mem. ajust. (1784), §659–62, 219–21; §663, 221–22; §678, 227–28.

       [77] Anes, Crisis, 180, citing Campomanes (1771); Defourneaux, Olavide, 137–38; Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 109–10.
       Rodríguez Silva, "Venta de baldíos," tells of a tierra baldía in Andújar (Jaén) on the banks of the Guadalquivir where the poor of the town
       planted melons and other crops until in the mid-eighteenth century the nearby landowners took over these fields for their own use and
       drove out the poor.


                                                                                           ― 31 ―
       were members of the local elite. The major exception to this generalization were towns under the jurisdiction (señorío ) of a noble in
       which an absentee señor had acquired extensive properties. We shall see one such case in the town of Navas in the province of Jaén. [78]
              The cortijos, olive groves, and vineyards of Andalusia specialized in production for sale. Part of the market was located in nearby
       cities, part in Madrid, the American colonies, and northern Europe. The owners and tenants of these properties, exploiting labor that the
       population expansion was making relatively cheap, were in a good position to take advantage of changing market conditions. They faced
       the obstacles described above to borrowing money to finance improvements, but the improvements they were likely to undertake
       required little capital. They might involve replanting grain fields with olive groves or vineyards or breaking new land for this purpose.
       Olive trees and vines required a number of years before they produced fruit—around ten for olives and four for vines as a minimum—but
       with a sufficiently large estate the owner could make the transition in gradual stages.
             The agricultural pattern of the south and west created a highly stratified society. The large towns and cities of Andalusia and La
       Mancha, dominated by aristocratic residences and teeming with landless workers and their families, approached an ideal type of early
       modern hierarchical society. In the north and east of the interior, the region of small exploitations, village society was more egalitarian.
       The difference was only relative, however. A landowning class also existed here, whose holdings consisted of numerous small fields, and it
       was less visible because it resided away from the villages in the district and provincial capitals. A word frequently on the tongue of
       contemporaries revealed the oligarchic nature of rural society throughout the interior of Spain: poderosos, the powerful ones. In Andalusia
       the poderosos were the men whose control of the land permitted them to exploit the braceros, appropriate the common lands for their
       own use, and tyrannize their districts. They included the señores and other major landowners, but the term was applied with even
       greater opprobrium to the large tenant labradores.[79] Poderosos also existed in the region of small farms. In Soria the name applied to
       large owners living in the provincial capital who

       [78] See the study of Andalusia in Artola, Contreras, and Bernal, Latifundio. An excellent study of the agriculture of the province of
       Seville in the nineteenth century is Bernal and Drain, Campagnes sevillanes.

       [79] For the use of the term poderoso in Andalusia, Mem. ajust. (1784), §294, 185; §332, 195; §661–62, 220–21; §667, 223.


                                                                                           ― 32 ―
       rented fields to the peasants or offered loans to peasants with land and foreclosed when harvests were bad.[80] In Salamanca it was
       used to describe the large sheep owners who controlled the Mesta and through it obtained the best pastures for their immense herds. [81]
       One would certainly include in their number the wealthy churches and religious orders and the clergymen who enjoyed opulent benefices.
       The meaning of poderosos varied according to the local economy, but all parts of the interior had oligarchs that the term fitted. Their
       interest lay in marketing agricultural products, and it was largely through them that the impact of rising demand would be transmitted to
       the men who worked the soil.
             The rising population and the increasing value of land provided the conditions for a clash of interests between the crown and the
       poderosos. Economic self-interest would encourage the powerful owners to circumvent any restrictions that hindered them from exploiting
       the rising agricultural prices and the increasing supply of labor. They could be expected to seek to control as much land as possible,
       whether their own or the public's, and use it as they wanted, renting it at high rates or producing directly for the market with hired
       hands. The crown, for its part, wanted to ensure a supply of food for the cities at reasonable prices while keeping imports at a minimum.
       Both the crown and poderosos sought to increase production, but beyond this common aim, their objectives were bound to conflict.


       5

       The first response of the crown to the growing threat of grain shortages was to expand an institution long familiar in Spain. Beginning in
       the Middle Ages, Spanish authorities had established public granaries (pósitos ) as a defense against bad harvests. Some pósitos were
       creations of the crown, others were founded privately as acts of charity. According to an eighteenth-century writer, every farmer within
       the district of a pósito was required to deposit with it each year a portion of his harvest; he received back his deposit or its value in
       money after the following harvest, when he brought in his next quota.[82] Besides keeping on hand a supply of grain to feed the people
       in time of scarcity, the pósitos lent

       [80] Ibid., §133, 157–58.

       [81] Ibid., §248, 172–73. Mickun discusses the use of the term "poderoso" and the activities of some poderosos, La Mesta, 82–98, 288–



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
