Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [54] Rodríguez Silva, "Venta de baldíos," 8–12.



                                                                                           ― 21 ―
       cally deeded to them, and they also had fields, meadows, and buildings that they rented to their residents or even to outsiders. These
       properties were known as the bienes de propios or simply as the propios, and their rent was one of the main sources for municipal
       budgets.
             Properties that belonged to churches and cathedrals, religious orders, charitable institutions, and ecclesiastical funds were said to
       belong to manos muertas, mortmain in English, and were also normally barred from sale. They included the places of worship and
       monastic houses, the rural and urban properties that churches and religious orders had at some time purchased, and the properties that
       pious individuals, out of generosity or seeking to offset their sins in the eyes of the Lord, had bequeathed to ecclesiastical institutions and
       foundations to provide income for their activities. The building and maintenance funds of churches (fábricas ); the emoluments
       (capellanías ) of certain priests; the funds for the upkeep of chapels and shrines and the performance of services at them, for the recital
       of masses in memory of deceased persons (memorias ), and for charitable activities such as providing dowries for orphaned girls; the
       income of confraternities and the funds to run hospitals, orphanages, old-age asylums, and like institutions; as well as much of the
       regular income of parish churches, cathedrals, and religious orders came largely from property owned in mortmain. Because the purpose
       of these properties was to provide income, they tended to be of above-average quality and could easily become the object of desire of
       individuals looking for ways to profit from the rising demand for agricultural products. They will play a central role in this story.
             The third kind of entail applied to the estates of individual families. By legally enforceable acts, the owners of these estates at some
       time in the past had established them as inalienable and indivisible units that were passed on from generation to generation by
       primogeniture. They were known as vínculos legos or, more commonly, mayorazgos.[ 55] Not only real estate but all forms of property
       could be included, such as royal bonds or juros, the ownership of local public offices, seigneurial jurisdictions, and other privileges. The
       usual justification for the mayorazgo was that it protected the nobility as a class necessary to the monarchy by preserving its patrimony
       from being squandered by prodigal heirs, although the law of 1505 that governed the creation of mayorazgos did not restrict them to
       members of the nobility. [56] Some mayorazgos

       [55] Clavero, Mayorazgo.

       [56] In the Leyes de Toro (1505), Nov. rec., X, xvii, 2.


                                                                                           ― 22 ―
       were vast estates belonging to titled aristocrats, but others were modest holdings of provincial hidalgos and commoners.
            As direct lines died out or as mayorazgos went to female heirs for want of males, two or more mayorazgos could become the
       property of the same family. Although they legally remained distinct entities, in effect they became a single entailed estate, for they
       would normally follow the same line of inheritance. This was one way in which an estate could assemble widely scattered properties, as
       many great artistocratic holdings did.
             Vinculación operated in various ways to check the economic forces that pushed for changes in agriculture. Most obviously it
       prevented the sale of land by inefficient, bankrupt owners to persons with capital who could farm it better. There was no reason why the
       legally prescribed heir should be the best administrator among the siblings, but even if he was, he could run into difficulty in seeking to
       make improvements. He could not assume a mortgage for this purpose, because at his death all liens would be nullified so that his heir
       would receive an unencumbered estate. With royal authorization the rule on borrowing could be relaxed, and in the sixteenth and
       seventeenth centuries a number of aristocrats had received permission to borrow against their mayorazgos, but the purpose had seldom
       been agricultural improvement. Paying off debts incurred in the service of the king or the maintenance of conspicuous consumption were
       more common purposes.[57] Legally an owner could mortgage or sell parts of his estate that were not entailed or use other unrestricted
       funds to improve a mayorazgo, but the interests of his family would discourage him from doing so. Improvements in the mayorazgo
       would be transferred with it, and his other heirs would lose part of their anticipated inheritance. Finally, by prohibiting long-term leases,
       vinculación also discouraged enterprising tenants from improving the properties.
             Despite all of these forms of entail, much property, both in land and buildings, was owned outright by laymen and could be freely
       exchanged. It is tempting to contrast favorably these properties with those that were inalienable, but in practice the difference was only
       relative. The laws of inheritance provided strict limitations on the disposition of estates. Most was destined to the direct heirs (the portion
       known as la legítima de los descendientes ), with each entitled to a specified minimum share; and no more than a fifth could be given
       outside the family to, for ex-

       [57] Jago, "Influence of Debt."


                                                                                           ― 23 ―
       ample, a religious fund. Because of these rules, an estate was seen more as a family holding than as the individual property of the
       current owner, and there was reluctance to sell any part of it. Thus law and custom worked to keep off the market even land that was
       legally free to be exchanged. [58]
             Except for an estimate of the extent of ecclesiastical property, based on the catastro of the Marqués de la Ensenada, it is impossible
       to state what proportion of Spanish soil fell into each of these different types of ownership. There seems no question that the Baldíos
       were very extensive, possibly covering more territory than all the other lands together. An eighteenth-century writer estimated that of
       136 million fanegas (a measure roughly equal to an acre) in Spain, 89 million were Baldíos, [59] while Olavide, intendant of Seville under
       Carlos III, asserted that two-thirds of Andalusia was uncultivated and deserted.[60] Although hardly exact, these estimates are a good
       expression of the magnitude of the wastelands. Of the remaining land in Castile, which includes all entailed and free private holdings,
       ecclesiastical estates, and municipal property, both of aprovechamiento común and propios, the catastro indicates that about 15 percent
       of the land belonged to the church if the area is taken as the basis and 20 percent if the annual return is the basis. The provincial
       summaries of the catastro listed ecclesiastical property under a separate heading, making possible this calculation, but the different types
       of secular property were recorded only in the individual town surveys and the enormous task of assembling this information for the entire
       kingdom probably never will be undertaken. Although statements have been made about the extent of mayorazgos, no reliable figure can
       be advanced.[61]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
