Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                   Map 1.1.
                                                              Old Regime Spain, Provinces of Salamanca and Jaén
             ted each farmer to harvest crops during all the years of the local rotation and to share in the other agricultural activities of the
       village. The farmers had the use of the common pastures and the fields in fallow for the support of their animals, and certain individuals
       could rent grain fields and meadows owned by the village councils, the propios described earlier. A number of districts in the northern
       part of this region were noted for their highly developed patterns of periodic redistribution among the vecinos of the communal pastures
       and grain fields. [72] Nevertheless, the migrant sheep of the Mesta spent the summer in many uplands of this region, and the right of the
       Mesta to preserve its pastures could pose an obstacle to their exploitation by the villagers.
            The number of landowning farmers should not, however, be confused with the distribution of the ownership of the land. To judge
       from the reports of royal intendants and the results of Part 2 of the present study, few peasants owned enough land to satisfy their
       needs. In most cases those classified as landowners must have possessed one or a few

       [72] See Costa, Colectivismo, part 2.


                                                                                           ― 29 ―
       small parcels and had to rent the rest of their exploitation on short-term leases, three to nine years being their common duration. Those
       who farmed for their own account were known as labradores, but their characteristic feature was to own a plow team, not an
       exploitation. In most areas the bulk of the land belonged to the village councils or the local parish church and religious funds, a situation
       that favored the vecinos, or to nobles and other laymen and religious institutions and foundations residing or located elsewhere, such as
       the provincial capital or district seat (cabeza de partido ), in which case the vecinos were at a disadvantage. We shall see in Part 2 that
       the share belonging to these various categories of owners varied widely, depending in part on the nature of the local terrain and the
       distance from active urban centers. As noted earlier, the major share of the products of this region to reach the market left the villages
       in the form of rents, tithes, and similar obligations. Where land was owned locally, markets were usually distant; and elsewhere the
       conditions of farming were largely determined by short leases, which called for payment in specified quantities of certain crops. Here the
       peasant was not in a good position to respond to market forces; yet when his interest and that of the absentee owner coincided, there
       could be an effective response, as we shall see.[73]
              South and west of the Salamanca-Albacete line, the average size of towns and agricultural exploitations was considerably larger.
       Towns here too were nucleated, surrounded by intensively cultivated land known as the ruedo and beyond it the more open, cultivated
       region called the campiña. The land would be divided into plots, some for grain, many for olives or vines, and there would also be
       irrigated huertas for vegetables or fruit trees, broken up into small, individual exploitations. Some of these units were owned by local
       small farmers, but many formed part of larger estates, including those of religious bodies. The percentage of men engaged in agriculture
       who were listed as landowners in 1797 was between 13 and 20 in the provinces of Toledo, La Mancha, and Extremadura, but 5 or less in
       the Guadalquivir valley: Jaén, Córdoba, Seville. Granada was 16 percent.[74]
            The valley of the Guadalquivir was the archetypical region of large farms and towns. Although most of its farming was undoubtedly
       done on parcels in the ruedo and campiña, its characteristic exploitation was

       [73] Many of the features of the region of small farms can be observed in the fine study of García Sanz, Desarrollo y crisis. The present
       province of Ávila, which includes part of the eighteenth-century province of Salamanca, is analyzed by Gil Crespo, "Estructura agraria."

       [74] See Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, Map 1.


                                                                                           ― 30 ―
       not the collection of parcels but the cortijo, a large, compact property devoted primarily to raising wheat. Cortijos tended to be distant
       from the town centers, in the campiña or beyond it, perhaps carved out of the baldíos. According to contemporary accounts, cortijos ran
       from a few hundred to two or three thousand fanegas.[75] Besides a house for the administrator or tenant, cortijos had buildings for the
       livestock, granaries, offices, and perhaps a bakery. They could be farmed by the owner or, as was frequent, leased to a tenant who had
       the necessary capital, draft animals, and implements. In Andalusia these large tenant farmers were called labradores, and their working
       capital might include a hundred or more yokes of oxen with their plows and other equipment, enough to take on more than one
       cortijo.[76]
              Cortijos depended on a plentiful supply of cheap labor to be called on during certain brief periods of the year for planting and



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
