Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       ranean coast, along with the fine sherry shipped out of Cádiz, went to the American colonies and penetrated the markets of the
       advancing countries of northern Europe.
             The northern Atlantic coastal fringe from Galicia in the west to the Basque provinces by the Pyrenees told a different story.
       Mountainous terrain and difficult communications combined with the unrestricted subdivision of properties to discourage the development
       of commercial agriculture. Here the most notable development was the introduction of maize in place of grains from Galicia to the Basque
       provinces. A study of Guipúzcoa at the eastern end of the coast indicates that the switch began there in the seventeenth century and was
       accompanied by marling the soil with lime, which permitted the elimination of most fallow. In addition, much pasture and wasteland was
       broken to provide harvests for an expanding human and animal population. [67] Basque law maintained the farms as single, hereditary
       units called caseríos, exploited individually to the benefit of the farmer, but local custom did not prevent them from being subdivided
       among tenants. A recent study of Vizcaya indicates that during the course of the century as the population grew, the number of tenant
       farmers rose sharply, while that of farmer owners declined slightly. By 1800 there were almost twice as many tenant farmers as owners in
       the region studied. [68]
             In the western half of the northern fringe, the unitary family farm gave way to nucleated towns and exploitations that grouped a
       number of parcels. With demographic expansion, this pattern encouraged the multiplication of tiny units. Western Asturias and Galicia
       became plagued by the problem of minifundia, small uneconomical exploitations worked by poor tenants. In Galicia most of the land
       belonged to religious institutions. At some time in the past, the owners had accepted permanent leases called foros with rents that by the
       eighteenth century represented a very low return on the value of the land. The tenant holders of the foros took advantage of the
       situation to sublease their lands in smaller units to men who actually worked the soil, while they, now middlemen called señores
       medianeros, came to enjoy the status and leisure of hidalgos. Because the foros usually stipulated what crops were to

       [67] Fernández Albaladejo, Crisis, 85–91, 181–228; Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 132–33, 151, 163–64.

       [68] The unpublished thesis of Emiliano Fernández de Pinedo, "Crecimiento de Vascongadas," reports that in eighty-four sample towns of
       Vizcaya there were 829 owners and only 526 tenants about 1700, but 791 owners and 1387 tenants in 1800 (cited in García-Lombardero,
       Agricultura y estancamiento, 151). See also Fernández de Pinedo, "Entrada de la tierra," 100–101.


                                                                                           ― 27 ―
       be raised, they hindered agricultural changes in response to market demands. [69]
             Except for concern about the plague of Galician minifundia, developments in the periphery gave the royal policymakers little cause
       to worry. On the contrary, they found in the family farms, long-term leases, and emphyteusis of these regions models to be
       recommended elsewhere. The problem lay in the interior. The predominant pattern of landholding divided the central Castilian meseta into
       two distinct parts, one with small farms and villages, the other dominated by large properties and large towns. The obvious division of
       the meseta into Old and New Castile by the rugged central mountain range offers the temptation to draw the border between these two
       parts along this range, but this would be a mistake. Rather, the frontier is an irregular line running from northwest to southeast,
       approximately from Salamanca to Albacete, passing west of Madrid (Map 1.1). Western Salamanca province lies in the territory of large
       farms, while the hilly region of New Castile known as the Alcarria, comprising the provinces of Guadalajara and Cuenca as well as Madrid
       province, is characterized by small towns and properties. One could extend the small-farm region north and east of Castile to include
       southern Navarre and Aragon, although less than half of Aragon was cultivated. The rest, dry and of poor soil, was given over to
       sheep. [70]
             While it is dangerous to generalize on the basis of current knowledge, it does appear that the region of small villages and small
       farms was dedicated to arable and livestock, the balance between the two and the nature of the harvests or livestock depending largely
       on the terrain and climate. Many residents (vecinos ) of the villages and towns owned some property. According to the census of 1797,
       the percentage of men engaged in agriculture who were landowners in this region went from a low of 11 percent in Ávila and 13 percent
       in Valladolid and Guadalajara to 46 percent in Navarre and 48 percent in Aragon. Except in Palencia, less than half the men engaged in
       agriculture were hired laborers, a strong sign that most of the exploitations were small, family-run affairs. [71] The distribution of
       individual exploitations into parcels of arable scattered within the limits of a village and sometimes beyond it permit-

       [69] García-Lombardero, Agricultura y estancamiento, 90–110, esp. 94–95.

       [70] Compare Map 3 of Malefakis, Agrarian Reform, 31, "Area held by large (over 250 hectare) owners." Although the data for it are of
       the twentieth century, the general pattern would apply also to the eighteenth century. On Aragon, see Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y
       estado, 240–45.

       [71] See Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 92–94, Map 1 and accompanying table.


                                                                                           ― 28 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
