Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       consultivo que pende en él, . . . sobre los daños y decadencia que padece la agricultura, sus motivos, y medios para su restablecimiento
       y fomento.[6] It contained the complaints of local officials against existing practices, the reports of in-

       [3] Anes, "Informe, " 111–14.

       [4] Domergue, "Real Sociedad," 25.

       [5] A brief biography of Jovellanos is contained in Polt, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, chap. 1.

       [6] See Bibliography for the original edition and 1967 republication, and for my form of citation.


                                                                                           ― 49 ―
       tendants, and the opinions of royal servants and councils. Its most impressive section was the lengthy report, actually an essay, by
       Olavide in his position as intendant of Seville. [7] To read the volume is to get a sense of the tensions in the countryside among the
       different groups that drew their income from the land, for the aim of most of the documents was to urge change, not to defend the
       status quo. It did not circulate in large numbers, but it helped to arouse interest in an "agrarian law" among policymakers and other
       educated persons who could influence wider sectors of public opinion.
              Although the junta now had its main source of information readily available, it did not begin deliberations in earnest until 1787. After
       the first discussion led to a unanimous agreement that Spanish agriculture was decadent, the members decided to prepare individual
       written opinions on the causes of this decadence. Gathered together to listen to several responses, they heard Jovellanos deliver a
       brilliant discourse. His ideas represented an evolution in his own mind that reflected changes occurring in the thought of his listeners. He
       had once joined Campomanes and Olavide in admiring earlier Spanish proponents of reform, the arbitristas of the seventeenth century,
       and the eighteenth-century European mercantilists and Physiocrats. About 1784 he had read Adam Smith and was thrilled by his power of
       reasoning and analysis. He had lost his faith in earlier writers, Spanish and foreign, and become an enthusiastic advocate of economic
       liberalism.[8] This was the ideology that he now propounded to the junta, as he argued that all the causes for Spanish decadence could
       be traced back to the effects of bad laws. Convinced by his presentation, the members charged him with the task of drafting their
       report.[9]
             Whatever ideas Jovellanos may have expressed to the junta, he was not ready to present a text at this stage. For several years his
       duties as a royal servant gave him little leisure for the monumental task involved. An indirect consequence of the French Revolution was
       to provide him with the time he needed. The Conde de Floridablanca, whom Carlos IV kept on as first secretary, frightened by the events
       north of the Pyrenees, in 1790 acted to separate the most prominent reformers from sensitive positions. Campomanes was dropped as
       governor of the Council of Castile, and Jovellanos received the charge to investigate the coal mines of Asturias, a task that exiled him to
       his native province. [10]

       [7] This section has been republished separately: Olavide, "Informe."

       [8] Polt, "Jovellanos," 8–9.

       [9] Anes, "Informe, " 109–21; Robert Vergnes, "Dirigisme," 323–25.

       [10] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 261.


                                                                                           ― 50 ―
       In his home in Gijón, Jovellanos was free to take up the materials on agrarian reform. He corresponded with the itinerant cleric and art
       critic Antonio Ponz, author of a series of volumes that in part described the landscape and towns of Spain. He reread Adam Smith. Much
       of his spare time for three years went into preparing his recommendations for the improvement of agriculture.[11] Finally in 1794 he sent
       the completed text to the Economic Society. The members of the Junta on the Agrarian Law met in a number of sessions to hear it read
       —it is a lengthy document—and they listened "electrified," as one member related. The society then adopted it as its official report to the
       Council of Castile. Floridablanca had fallen in 1792, and the leading figure in the government was the young royal favorite Manuel Godoy,
       recently made Duque de la Alcudia, who was more friendly to reform than the aged statesman. With his support the society published the
       report as the Informe de la Sociedad Economica . . . en el expediente de ley agraria.[12]
             The Informe de ley agraria was to have a profound effect on Spanish policy. Some readers believed that it threatened the religious
       and social structure of Spain and attempted, without success, to have the Inquisition ban it. [13] Instead it became widely known and was
       reprinted a number of times in the next half century. Written in a facile yet elegant style, clear in its argument, graphic in its illustrations,
       and biting in its conclusions, the Informe is the culmination of Spain's intellectual flowering in the second half of the eighteenth century
       and ranks among the great works of the Enlightenment in any language. It is the product of deep immersion in Spanish history and law
       and in contemporary European thought and also of Jovellanos's sensitive observations during his wide travels in the service of his king.


       2

       A century after the Informe appeared, Joaquín Costa, outspoken critic of the political and social structure of the Spain of his day and one
       of the fathers of the Generation of 1898, published a book entitled Colectivismo agrario en España. It described at length the practices of
       communal farming found in many towns of Spain, such as the sharing of pastures, the sowing and harvesting of crops collectively, and
       the peri-

       [11] Polt, "Jovellanos," 9; Anes, "Informe, " 122–24.

       [12] Jovellanos, Informe.

       [13] Helman, "Some Consequences," 256–57; Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 379–80.


                                                                                           ― 51 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
