Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       [51] Jovellanos, Informe, 81.

       [52] Memorial ajustado (1771), cited in Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 211–12.

       [53] Mem. ajust. (1784), §782–83, 248–49.

       [54] Jovellanos, Informe, 95.

       [55] Mem. ajust. (1784), §817, 260.


                                                                                           ― 58 ―
       to earn his wage with little effort." [56] This was true not only in the south. The intendant of Burgos expressed pity for the farmers of his
       province "because they do not have lands of their own and are tenants and miserable slaves of the churches and mayorazgos."[57]
              Entail was even harmful to the owners. The sixteenth-century law on mayorazgos permitted the establishment of small entailed
       estates, adequate to support an hidalgo at a modest level. One could conceive the result to be a class of small gentry that would be a
       pillar of the monarchy. Not so, according to the royal agents. "The small vínculos, of which there are an infinite number in Andalusia, with
       from two hundred to five hundred ducats of annual income, are prejudicial to the state, because these mayorazgos are the ruin of the
       head of a family and even his entire household. From the time he has the use of his reason he knows that he is the owner of an entailed
       property, he receives a bad education, he applies himself to no career, and in time he turns into one of the worst citizens of the republic,
       with no more estate than his vanity. Every day such men are seen begging for charity with their patents of nobility in their pockets," the
       dean of the Audiencia of Seville complained. [58]
              He was obviously exaggerating. As we shall see when we look at the economies of individual towns, an income of two hundred
       ducats, although modest, permitted a comfortable life. The real objection to small entails was that they tied up the land just as much as
       the big ones, and these writers were convinced that a man who could not lose his land would not care for it. Olavide put the matter
       neatly: "The name of the owner is a matter of indifference to the state, but it is very harmful that properties remain always in one
       family. What is needed is that many people sell their possessions and many buy them. The reason is as simple as it is obvious. Everyone
       who buys improves. Everyone who sells his land does not have the means to work it or does not want to."[59] Campomanes added
       criticism of ecclesiastical manos muertas: "It is a timeless maxim that population is greater and more permanent where real property
       circulates with more ease among the secular subjects, without being withdrawn from them, because it is the indispensable basis for their
       general prosperity."[60] Jovellanos foretold the consequences in his usual pithy phrases: "[The laws of entail] chain landed property in the
       perpetual possession of certain institutions and families,

       [56] El censor, 365.

       [57] Mem. ajust. (1784), §166, 165.

       [58] Ibid., §1026, 299.

       [59] Ibid., §812, 259.

       [60] Rodríguez de Campomanes, Regalía, Prólogo, ii–iii.


                                                                                           ― 59 ―
       deny forever all other individuals the right of aspiring to it, and combine the unlimited right to add to one's property with the absolute
       prohibition of disposing of it. They make possible endless accumulation and open up a terrifying abyss that can with time swallow up the
       entire landed wealth of the state." [61]

       3

       Thus in many ways entail and the Mesta worked inexorably to eliminate the virtuous farmer. There was virtual unanimity among the
       reformers, both those of the 1760s and Jovellanos, about the causes of Spain's ills and about the ideal society. Although they spoke of
       Spain, they had in mind Castile and Andalusia, not the periphery of the north and east. Disagreement arose, however, when they
       proposed solutions. It is the differences in their practical recommendations that provide the basis for the interpretations of Costa and
       later critics. Here again, however, the conflict between Campomanes, Olavide, and their colleagues on the one hand and Jovellanos on
       the other is more subtle that Costa would have us believe. Jovellanos's Informe de ley agraria was, in fact, the logical outcome of the
       discussions of Carlos III's servants.
             Three lines of thought emerged in response to the royal inquiries of the 1760s. One frankly called for state regulation based on
       replacing existing restrictive laws with others equally restrictive that would respond to the new situation. This line represented the
       persistence of an older mentality. A second urged freedom from restrictive laws but nevertheless conceived of state intervention to ensure
       that freedom would produce the desired effect. This was the position of the leaders of the reform movement. In part they were influenced
       by the French Physiocrats, especially by Mirabeau's L'ami des hommes. Finally a third approach was a fully fledged advocacy of economic
       freedom. Although not widely held, it was found in Spain before Adam Smith published The Wealth of Nations. Even though Smith made
       the classical doctrine of economic freedom popular, he did not invent it; in fact the doctrine already had wide support in England in the
       seventeenth century, and one should not be surprised at finding it voiced in Spain a century later. [62]
            To see how these lines of thought differed, one can look at the opinions on what to do about cortijos, those large properties devoted
       primarily to raising grain that characterized the Andalusian scene. Two

       [61] Jovellanos, Informe, 98.

       [62] See Joyce Appleby, Economic Thought, 255.


                                                                                           ― 60 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
