Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       questions in the inquest ordered by the Council of Castile in 1768 were directed at learning what bad effects, if any, the cortijos had and
       how they could be remedied. One asked if a formula could be found for rents paid in kind that would be fair to both the owner and the
       tenant. The other asked whether a limit should be placed on the extent of land farmed by a single individual or on the number of teams
       of oxen that he could employ. It raised the issue of whether cortijos should be broken up into smaller exploitations.[63]
             The interest of the council in these issues had been inspired by a petition from the city council of Seville asking it to find ways to
       reduce the price of grain.[64] The petition blamed the situation on a recent rise in the rent of land and proposed that the king impose a
       new set of regulations. "To reduce the high price of grain the rent for farms should be rolled back to the level of 1750. . . . No farmer
       should be allowed to farm more than one thousand fanegas of land, including fallow and pasture, so that in this way all may benefit and
       more land may be put under the plow, . . . because this [abuse] is the origin of the high price of land and indirectly of grain and
       meat. . . . Tenants of cortijos of over one thousand fanegas should be required to release the excess so that the owners may dispose of it
       as they wish, at the same price as the rest, and the part released is not to be of the best or worst quality, but average." [65] The officials
       of the city of Jerez also denounced the exorbitant rise in rents. According to their reasoning, the rent for land could be expected to rise,
       but only in proportion to the increase in the amount of money in circulation and the corresponding rise in the price of agricultural
       products. But rents had gone up faster, and the farmer, to avoid ruin, had to raise the price of grain an excessive amount. The high
       price of food then increased the cost of labor, with the result that industry also suffered. "And thus it is indispensable that the
       government take measures to subject rents to just limits."[66] The two city councils thus voiced explicitly the first line of thought, a
       traditional demand for active state regulation of the economy to solve a problem of subsistence.
             In their responses most administrators of southern Spain tended to agree with the city officials. They believed that the lack of
       regulation was leading to a dangerous situation where the rich and powerful, the poderosos, were taking over all the land. "The poor man
       is deprived of

       [63] Mem. ajust. (1784), §716–31, 234–38; §658–93, 219–33.

       [64] Ibid., §4, 139–40.

       [65] Ibid., §279–92, 183–84.

       [66] Ibid., §767, 243–44.


                                                                                           ― 61 ―
       his natural patrimony, and farming is restricted to the poderosos and men of money," the intendant of Córdoba said, and that of
       Granada, "In small towns one can easily see the harm done when most or all the best lands are taken up by the poderosos." [67] The
       síndico personero of Seville painted a graphic picture of the evil as he saw it:


            The excessive wealth of individuals is opposed to the happiness of the state for the reason that, as the poderosos amass for themselves the sustenance of their fellow
            townsmen, they turn the latter into day laborers and reduce them to begging and other extremities. These then do not marry, and the state suffers as a result. A town
            that falls under the grip of a rich religious community or one of these caciques is in a few short years reduced to the greatest distress. His power is greater than that
            of all the other townsmen and today he buys up their lands, tomorrow their vineyards, another day their houses, and finally all their properties, until he reduces once
            useful and industrious subjects to the miserable condition of beggars.



              The síndico personero went on to describe how the economic power of the strong man bent the local council, notaries, and judges
       to his will, so that he could exploit all the municipal lands and pastures and even invade private properties without anyone daring to stop
       him. [68] The intendant of Ciudad Real described a similar process at work in La Mancha, with the refinement that here large farmers
       stored up grain for sale in bad years, when they were able to buy up cheaply the lands of their less affluent neighbors. They thereby
       "gather in one hand land that is sufficient to support many families, so that to produce one large holding forty to fifty townsmen are
       impoverished and reduced to misery. No town exists that does not reveal such cases."[69] The result was the opposite of the small-
       farmer ideal. But they saw it as a problem with a different cause from what the reformers pointed to, not ancient legislation and outdated
       privileges but current economic forces. It posed a challenge to their conceptual powers.
             Their answer, like that of the city councils, was to ask for government regulation. They agreed that a limit should be established to
       the amount of land that a single man could farm, [70] and they recommended that cortijos be broken up and settled with independent
       farmers. The intendant of Córdoba urged that owners be required to rent lots of six to eight fanegas to any poor man who promised to
       build a house on the

       [67] Ibid., §661, 220; §667, 223–24.

       [68] Ibid., §332, 195.

       [69] Ibid., §665, 223.

       [70] Córdoba's intendant said 300 fanegas, Jaén's, 1,000 (ibid., §662, §663, 221–22).



                                                                                           ― 62 ―
       lot; the intendant of Jaén would require the owners to put up houses at their expense.[71] In sum, these royal agents believed that the
       solution to the problem of the cortijos was to legislate in opposition to economic forces, for doing nothing meant that the mass of the
       population and the state would continue to suffer.
             These officials showed a limited perception of the working of the economy, as can be seen in their responses to the council's
       question whether the subleasing of farm land (subarriendo ) should be prohibited.[72] It referred to a practice followed widely in New
       Castile and Andalusia whereby an individual rented the lands of a large owner and sublet them in small lots to many farmers. The
       intendants opposed the practice wholeheartedly because it permitted the powerful to exploit the poor mercilessly, and they called for its
       legal prohibition. [73] Their responses showed no sense of the economic utility of middlemen or the existence of transaction costs. "It
       seems to this intendant [Córdoba] that the subleasing should be universally prohibited because the sublease is normally for a higher price
       than the original lease. One cannot conceive by what right the lessee can profit from something that is not his and which he only has the
       right to use." [74] The intendant of Jaén pointed out a disguised form of subleasing that he asked also be prohibited. This was the case of



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
