Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             These sales involved the transfer of property from ecclesiastical mortmain to free hands—only laymen were allowed to buy—but
       they were not conceived as an attack on entail as such. A major Jesuit cortijo in the province of Córdoba was turned into one of the
       towns of the new colonies of Andalusia.[124] Another indication of official intentions involved the fate of extensive pastures of the military
       Order of Calatrava in the valley of Alcudia (La Mancha), which the king had put up for sale in 1766. Troubled by second thoughts on the
       wisdom of this decision, in 1770 Campomanes and Moñino used the first returns of the sales of Jesuit properties to buy up for the crown
       those pastures that had not yet been alienated (and thus placed in royal hands the estate that would provide the title and wealth of the
       favorite of the next king). [125] Other proceeds of the sale of Jesuit holdings went to the support of hospitals, the city of Madrid, and
       various aristocratic houses in the form of loans at low rates of interest. None of these uses of the fortune that had befallen the king from
       the departure of the Jesuits reveal an ideological commitment to the superiority of free property over entail.
              The sale of Jesuit properties appeared almost as a side effect of the

       [122] RC, 14 Aug. 1768, quoted in Yun Casalilla, "Venta de los bienes," n. 17.

       [123] Ibid., 20–22. According to Yun Casalilla's Appendix 1, Jesuit properties worth 112.9 million reales were sold by 1808. Since less
       than 100,000 of this total came in the last three years, little could have remained. Of the total, properties worth 55.9 million were sold in
       the first three years, 30.5 million in 1770 alone.

       [124] San Sebastián de los Ballesteros, see Vázquez Lesmes, Ilustración y proceso colonizador, 64–70.

       [125] Corchado Soriano, "Desamortización."


                                                                                           ― 46 ―
       decision to expel the order. It was not presented as setting a precedent, although some individuals might have had their own thoughts on
       such a matter. Nevertheless, it foreshadowed the decision of Carlos IV in 1798 to begin a general disentail of properties under
       ecclesiastical control. Before ecclesiastical disentail could become a consciously announced policy, two developments occurred. One was in
       the realm of ideas, the other in the realm of royal finances. On the whole they ran their course independently of each other, and they
       can be observed separately.


                                                                                           ― 47 ―




       Chapter II—
       The Philosophy of Agrarian Reform
       In 1777, at Campomanes's instigation, the Council of Castile sent the files it had collected on agricultural conditions in Spain to the Royal
       Economic Society of Madrid, with a request to study them and propose a plan for agrarian reform.[1] Campomanes had been the person
       most responsible for the founding of the Economic Society two years previously, a semiofficial body of leading citizens dedicated to the
       improvement of the national economy, and he was now its director. [2] He had been inspired by the example of the successful Royal
       Basque Society of Friends of the Country (Amigos del País), established in 1765, and the Economic Society of Madrid in turn became a
       model for over fifty societies founded in other Spanish cities in the next decade. Campomanes's initiative in referring the question of
       agrarian reform to it appears to have been aimed at gaining support from a prestigious and progressive group of Spaniards in the dark
       years after the fall of Aranda and the arrest of Olavide.
             The council had to wait almost twenty years to receive the study it requested. In August 1777 the Economic Society instructed its
       Agricultural Section to review the materials and render a report. Despite many meetings over the next six years, the section did not
       produce a recommendation, and in 1783 the society established a smaller Junta Particular de Ley Agraria, an ad hoc committee of twelve
       members, to take

       [1] Anes, "Informe, " 109.

       [2] Defourneaux, Olavide, 165 n. 1 and 169.



                                                                                           ― 48 ―
       over the task. [3] Its most prominent member was Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos, who had recently become known as one of the king's
       most promising servants. The following year Campomanes resigned as director of the society in order to devote himself fully to his new
       position as acting governor of the Council of Castile, and Jovellanos was elected to succeed him. [4] Campomanes and Olavide had been
       the driving force behind the agrarian program in the 1760s and 1770s. Now Jovellanos, twenty-five years their junior, was to assume that
       role.
             Like Campomanes, Jovellanos was a native of Asturias. After studying for the priesthood at the Universities of Ávila and Alcalá de
       Henares, he changed his career and entered public service as a magistrate in Seville in 1768. He frequented the salon (tertulia ) of
       Olavide at the height of the reform period and gained a reputation as a gifted young poet and playwright. In this company he read French
       and English works on political philosophy and economy. He was transferred to Madrid in 1778, where he became a protégé of
       Campomanes and a well-known figure in official circles. Thirty-four years old at his arrival in Madrid, he was still single, a condition he
       never abandoned. He already revealed the serious, generous, incorruptible character that was to mark him the rest of his life, very
       different from the garrulous self-assertion of Campomanes or the erratic enthusiasm of Olavide. As he grew older, he gave up writing
       poetry and became dedicated to two causes, the return of the Spanish church to the simple practices of the early fathers and the welfare
       of his countrymen. In these causes he was a priest in secular garb and would eventually become their martyr. [5]
             Although Jovellanos was president of the Economic Society for only one year, he remained a member of its Junta on the Agrarian
       Law and from this vantage point gradually assumed responsibility for the report to the Council of Castile. The junta promptly discovered
       that it could not deal effectively with the mass of manuscript documents provided by the council, and it requested the council to publish
       the full record. This appeared in 1784 in a large folio volume with the title Memorial ajustado hecho de órden del Consejo, del expediente



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
