Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       an agent who took over the administration of a property for a fixed sum and then leased out the lands for as much as he could get.
       "These leases are in effect subleases. . . . He seeks to satiate his ambition . . . by raising the rents to the highest possible price." [75] In
       the minds of these men, the cause of economic problems was at bottom unbounded human greed, and the solution was government
       intervention to frustrate it. This was exactly the attitude of the city councillors of Seville and Jerez, who believed that the avarice of
       landowners lay behind the rise of rents and indirectly of foodstuffs.
             It was in opposition to this spirit that the advisers of Carlos III introduced the freedom of grain trade. They took the advanced
       position that freedom would provide incentives to increase production and thus reduce prices in the long run. Olavide was a supporter of
       the new policy. One of his first official tasks was to defend it before the hostile city council of Madrid. Against the argument of the
       councillors that grain merchants were avaricious exploiters of the public need, Olavide justi-

       [71] Ibid., §737–38 (Córdoba), §747–48 (Jaén), §750 (Granada), 239–43.

       [72] Ibid., §636, 211.

       [73] See intendant of Ciudad Real, ibid., §643, 213.

       [74] Ibid., §638, 211.

       [75] Ibid., §640–41, 212.



                                                                                           ― 63 ―
       fied their economic usefulness. When freed from price restrictions, their activities would help the growth of agriculture, he maintained. In
       plentiful years they would cushion prices against collapse by putting aside stocks to sell in years of poor harvests. [76] As intendant of
       Seville, he applied the same reasoning to the question of fixing rents. The cities call for rent control, he said, as they call for fixing the
       price of grain. But a legal limit on rents "opens the door to fraud" and would only favor the poderosos, who have the power to corrupt
       inspectors and judges. The poor farmer would be the victim. [77] Olavide sensed that the forces of the market determined the price of
       land. "Rentable lands are few, compared with the population, and the number of renters is large." This scarcity permitted the owners to
       raise the rents to an exorbitant level and also gave an advantage to the large tenants who rented entire cortijos and sublet the worst
       parts at excessive prices. [78] But land was not really scarce; it was made so by the privileges of the Mesta and the accumulation of it in
       entails. The solution was to increase its availability.[79]
             For Olavide the answer was the same as in the matter of the grain trade: harmful restrictions must be removed. Specifically, one
       must eliminate controls on rents and grant freedom for farmers to enclose their properties against sheep and other animals. He quoted El
       amigo de los hombres at length in favor of the right to enclosure: enclosed fields are notoriously better tended than open ones because
       this protection doubles the love of the owner for his property. [80]
             Olavide could not, however, follow the doctrine of economic freedom to its logical conclusion. He wanted the cortijos to be rented
       perpetually in small lots at reasonable prices. To achieve this end he recommended that the government give the owners a limited
       number of alternatives formulated in such a way that their self-interest would lead them to select the one most beneficial to the common
       good. He believed that the way to assure a just share of the product to both owner and tenant was to require that all rents be paid in
       kind as a fixed proportion of the harvest.[81] He calculated from available information that the owner's just share was about one-ninth of
       the gross harvest. Given this fact, the government should establish three forms of lease and require all owners to choose one. If land
       were leased for less than one hundred

       [76] Defourneaux, Olavide, 96–102.

       [77] Mem. ajust. (1784), §768–69, 244.

       [78] Ibid., §796–98, 255.

       [79] Ibid., §774, 245–46.

       [80] Ibid., §777; §791–95, 246–47, 252–54.

       [81] Ibid., §800, 256.


                                                                                           ― 64 ―
       years, the owner's share would be one-tenth of the crops. On land leased for over one hundred years, it would be one-ninth. But on land
       subdivided and leased in lots of less than one hundred fanegas for over one hundred years with the requirement that the tenant build a
       house and live on the land, the owner's share would be one-eighth of the harvest. "These laws alone, gentle as they are, for they do
       violence to no one, will produce the desired effect, whether the property be in vínculos or manos muertas, or free of entail."[82]
             Thus Olavide's concept of economic freedom. And not his alone. The síndico personero of Seville (a position created, one recalls, to
       see that the freedom of the grain trade was enforced) attacked strongly the city's call for rent control on farm land. He explained that
       the working of the market forces, that is, the level of demand and the amount of money in circulation, determine the price. The solution
       he proposed was not to roll rents back to the level of an earlier date, as the city wanted, but, like Olavide, for the crown to establish a
       fair share of the harvest for the owner. He further urged a legal limit to the amount of land farmed by a single individual. [83]
       Campomanes also stated: "An agrarian law should place a limit on the number of fanegas of land that can be rented to each farmer,
       because in this way farming will be divided among a larger number of households"; and he favored calculating rents as a proportion of
       the harvest.[84] The line of thought represented by these men arose from a certain awareness of the working of economic forces and
       involved a conditional acceptance of economic freedom. Deep inside them, however, they did not really trust the effects of the market and
       wanted government intervention to assure that freedom produced the right results. They could not yet shake off the belief that it was the
       responsibility of public officials from the king on down to protect society from the working of human depravity.
             In contrast, the third line of thought put its faith fully in economic freedom. It was voiced in the opinion submitted to the crown by
       Francisco Bruna, dean of the Audiencia of Seville. The Council of Castile asked him to review and comment on the original petitions from
       Seville and Jerez and the responses of the intendants of southern Spain to the questionnaire of the council.[85] Bruna revealed a keen
       sense of the role of the market. The price of wheat determines the state of agriculture, he



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
