Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             We lack studies of the results of these decrees, but they were a departure in the policies of Carlos III's government. Instead of
       attempting to reform by edict, Campomanes had adopted the smoother path of eliminating outmoded controls over the use of the land.
       This policy meant that economic forces were allowed to determine the outcome; it stood to benefit the large owners of southern Spain as
       much as the villages of

       [117] Ibid., 238 n. 5.

       [118] RC, 28 Apr. 1793, AHN, Hac., libro 8101, no. 4913.

       [119] Documents in the case between the cities of Extremadura and the Mesta were published in Memorial ajustado (1771).

       [120] Klein, Mesta, 345–46; cédula del Consejo, 15 June 1788, Nov. rec., VII, xxiv, 19.


                                                                                           ― 43 ―
       Castile and León that recovered rights over their common lands. In 1791, during the height of the reaction inspired by the French
       Revolution, Carlos IV dismissed Campomanes from the governorship of the Council of Castile. In the following years the owners of
       migrant sheep recovered major features of the right of posesión. Nevertheless, the wheel of history could not be turned back. The Cortes
       of Cádiz legislated against the Mesta, and after a long agony, it was finally abolished in 1836.[121]
             On a different level, the attack on the Mesta was consistent with the agrarian policy of Carlos III. After the revolts of 1766, the
       royal counselors were concerned with feeding the growing population of Madrid and other Castilian cities. Although the reforms of the
       countryside were worded to apply to all Spain, they were conceived to improve conditions in the center and south, the breadbasket of
       these cities. This was the area where the poderosos were most influential, and royal interference led to battle lines being drawn between
       opposing camps. The reforms dealt with three types of holding: the pastures of the Mesta, the common lands of the municipalities, and
       baldíos currently not exploited. Except for the decision to repopulate despoblados of Salamanca province that were in private hands, the
       crown did not interfere with private or church properties. Yet it had unequal success in the three main areas of its activity because the
       reforms affected the local elites in different ways.
              In two areas the crown was relatively successful: in colonizing the wastes of Sierra Morena and Andalusia and in restricting the
       privileges of the Mesta. The former did not conflict with the interests of local landowners, for virtually all the land employed was outside
       their field of operation and the settlers came from other parts of Spain and Europe, causing few ripples in local society. In the case of the
       Mesta, the large owners of the south and southwest stood to gain from authorization to plow up private and common pastures.
             The third area of reform, however, the attempt to turn municipal common lands into small farms, brought the king into direct
       conflict with the poderosos of the region of large towns and large properties. Through the municipal councils they controlled these lands,
       and rising agricultural prices meant that they had here a potential source of personal gain. They had no interest in cooperating with the
       king to create a class of small farmers that would both deprive them of control of the municipal lands and threaten their cheap supply of
       labor.
              The history of Carlos III's rural reforms reveals the Achilles' heel of

       [121] Klein, Mesta, 347–48.


                                                                                           ― 44 ―
       Spanish enlightened despotism, the lack of effective linkage between the royal government in Madrid and its subjects throughout the
       country. By appointing enlightened reformers to the critical spots in the highest advisory body of the kingdom, the Council of Castile—
       Aranda as its president and Campomanes and Moñino as its fiscales—the king could legislate a comprehensive reform program, but he
       lacked an effective local administration to carry it out. The creation of intendants at midcentury was a first step in providing the missing
       linkage, and the rapid completion under their direction of the vast task of drawing up the catastro of the Marqués de la Ensenada shows
       that there were plenty of competent hands available in the provinces to serve the royal administration. But when it came to introducing
       new policies, the king had few means to force compliance on municipal governments. For all the centuries of expanding royal authority,
       Spain remained in many ways a federation of self-governing municipalities, at least in those areas where the municipalities were large
       towns. Self-governing in a relative sense only, of course, for those who governed were the oligarchs, the poderosos, not the vecinos as a
       whole. Their resistance was central to the failure to introduce the single tax of the Marqués de la Ensenada, as it was to the failure to
       distribute baldíos to peasants. The royal counselors sought to overcome the lack of effective linkage by placing elected defenders of the
       public interest in the municipal councils, who, they took for granted, would see the wisdom of the reforms and defend them. The creation
       of the diputados del común and the procuradores síndicos personeros del público was conceived with the region of large towns in mind—
       the decree divided places into those with more or less than two thousand vecinos—that is, southwest of the Salamanca-Albacete line. As a
       measure to wrest control from local elites, it was a failure, and with it went any hope of legislating against their pleasure.
             Besides these three areas of reform, the aftermath of the revolts of 1766 involved Campomanes and Moñino in a different
       undertaking with implications more pregnant for the future than they could have imagined. The expulsion of the Jesuits raised the issue
       of what to do with their properties, which included not only the buildings occupied by their schools, hospitals, and other activities—these
       went to bodies that would continue their functions—but numerous urban and rural properties that had produced income for the order. The
       two fiscales did not hesitate to argue that these estates reverted to "the Nation," from whose members they had originally come, and
       specifically to the king, as "Head,



                                                                                           ― 45 ―
       Administrator, and Sovereign of the Society." [122] The king approved the recommendation in August 1768 and a subsequent one in March
       1769 that put up for sale at auction properties in a state of deterioration or neglect or whose condition was harmful to society. Again it
       became apparent that when a royal order met with the support of the influential public, it could be carried out expeditiously. Even more
       than the legislation on the Mesta, the disentail of ecclesiastical properties brought the king into direct cooperation with the landowning
       classes, who stood to gain through the purchase of the lands. Half the Jesuit estates that were judged fit for sale—and this seems to
       have meant everything not used in their religious, charitable, and educational activities—were disposed of before the end of 1771. To
       judge from the example of the province of Valladolid, which has been studied, rural properties were most in demand, being gobbled up by
       persons of local social and economic prominence. [123]



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
