Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       thousand fanegas of grains and legumes per year, almost enough to feed Madrid.          Every colonist had cattle, and Olavide struggled to
       introduce artificial meadows and sainfoin for fodder. He also encouraged the planting of crops that could be the basis for local industries:
       flax, hemp, and silk. In 1775 the colonies had one hundred looms for wool in private homes and a linen factory with ninety-one looms.
       The Sierra Morena project now had nine towns and thirteen thousand people. Spanish and foreign travelers did not tire of extolling their
       beauty, cleanliness, and prosperity. The Englishman Henry Swinburne summed up their reaction: "I never saw a scene more pleasing to
       the eye, or more satisfactory to the mind of every person that feels himself interested in the welfare of his fellow creatures."[112]
             Olavide never bestowed on the colonies near Córdoba the same devotion as on those of Sierra Morena. Yet in a different way they
       too embodied the ideals of the reformers, for they incorporated the concept of the best kind of settlement for a region dominated by
       cortijos. The population was not gathered in towns—there were only four of these—but scattered in homesteads located on individual
       farms. Clusters of live oaks were left standing in the fields of grain, giving the region a natural beauty and sense of prosperity out of
       tune with the rest of Andalusia, as Swinburne remarked.[113]
            Despite its inauspicious start, the great experiment succeeded, and it made the name of Olavide known throughout Europe.
       Although the local industries founded by Olavide did not survive the Napoleonic war, the towns of Sierra Morena and Córdoba remain
       today, with their regular streets and modest churches, a tribute to Carlos III and his servants. The scattered farms of the colonies of
       Andalusia lasted until

       [110] Rodríguez de Campomanes, Industria popular.

       [111] Defourneaux, Olavide, 222, 233. See n. 39 above.

       [112] Swinburne, Travels 2 : 105; on the colonies, Defourneaux, Olavide, 190–239.

       [113] Ibid., 235 and n. 4. Vázquez Lesmes, Ilustración y proceso colonizador, studies the colonies of Andalusia, with special attention to
       San Sebastián de los Ballesteros, the only one whose archives have been preserved.


                                                                                           ― 41 ―
       recently, but the small, egalitarian exploitations of Sierra Morena disappeared after the restrictions on their sale or accumulation were
       abolished in 1835, and gradually olives and cattle replaced wheat as the major products. [114]

       7

       The rural revolution from above lasted seven years. In 1773 Olavide left La Carolina for Seville, and more significantly, Carlos III named
       Aranda ambassador to Versailles, removing him from authority over the Spanish government. According to contemporaries, Campomanes
       contributed to his dismissal; how is not clear. [115] Campomanes, the self-made son of a modest Asturian hidalgo, compulsive, self-
       confident, increasingly domineering, and Aranda, a grande, vain in his social superiority, convinced of his leadership in Spain's
       Enlightenment, jealous perhaps of the other's intellectual superiority, were not made to work well together. Loyalty to the king and
       common hatred of the Jesuits had united them, but Aranda's brief removal of Campomanes from the colonial project produced lasting
       bitterness.
             The departure of Aranda provided the occasion for a counterattack by those who resented the reforms. Landowners were only one
       group; more active were conservative clergymen who chafed at recent reforms in the universities, the religious orders, and the Inquisition
       and feared further changes. Their triumph came when the Inquisition arrested Olavide in 1776, charging him with unorthodox statements
       and correspondence with known heretics like Voltaire and Rousseau. He was convicted in 1778, deprived of his property, and sentenced
       to eight years' confinement. Although he escaped to France two years later, his fate was a warning to all who wanted to move rapidly
       against existing institutions.[116]
             Campomanes remained alone to continue the struggle for agrarian reform. Fortunately for his efforts, in 1776 Carlos III appointed
       as first secretary of state Campomanes's partner in reform and colleague as fiscal of the Council of Castile, Joseph Moñino, recently
       named Conde de Floridablanca. In 1780 the king rewarded Campomanes with the title of Conde de Campomanes and in 1783 made him
       interim governor of the Council of Castile. Carlos IV raised him to permanent governor in

       [114] Defourneaux, Olavide, 492–95.

       [115] See ibid., 310–11.

       [116] For the full story, ibid., 309–95.


                                                                                           ― 42 ―
       1789. Although he lacked the title of president of Castile that Aranda had enjoyed, he now occupied the latter's onetime position. Under
       Floridablanca and Campomanes, the government moved at a more moderate pace, but its direction remained unchanged.
              The idea of settling Spain's open stretches persisted. Various señores and landowners of Andalusia had proposed to Olavide the
       colonization of their lands, but after his arrest nothing was done.[117] In 1769 the royal governor (corregidor ) of Salamanca
       recommended the settlement of its depopulated places (despoblados ), which he said could become prosperous villages if properly
       colonized. These were private or ecclesiastical estates, and peopling them entailed different issues from the colonizing of unclaimed
       baldíos. Later on, in Chapter 19, we shall observe the modest but positive results of this proposal. The idea of establishing small farmers
       on the vacant pastures of Extremadura did not perish either. In 1783 Carlos III created a committee of members of the Council of Castile
       to review the situation. Ten years later Carlos IV, following its advice, revived the plan of 1770 and ordered the baldíos of Extremadura
       distributed to vecinos, this time with the size of the farms to be proportional to the number of yokes of oxen owned by the settler. [118] I
       have seen no evidence that this edict was any more successful than earlier ones.
              The attack on the poderosos wavered, but the last decade of Carlos III saw a victory for reform over the Mesta. The Council of
       Castile had received many complaints about it, especially from the cities of Extremadura. [119] In 1779 the king named Campomanes its
       president, and the latter used his position to enforce his views. He ordered the judges of the Mesta to favor local interests over the sheep
       owners. In 1786 he obtained the abolition of the privilege of posesión, the right to the permanent enjoyment of their pastures. Two years
       later landowners were authorized to enclose their properties and plant them as they wished.[120]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
