Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             If there seemed a contradiction between the ideal society of farmers and his proposal that men with money could buy public
       properties four or even forty times as big as those given to the owner of two yokes of oxen, Olavide was prepared to justify it by
       borrowing from the doctrine popularized by Montesquieu that monarchies rest not on egalitarian societies but on ones with legal ranks.
       "The inequality of fortunes is necessary and proper in monarchic states," he explained. But there must be a gradual scale, and Spain
       needed to create intermediary ranks between "today's owners and those whom we are going to make with fifty-fanega lots." [92]
              His mind swam with the giddy image of his new society:


            How many useful small owners can be produced by this means? I dare to predict that soon the population will grow so much that a man will call himself lucky to
            acquire a lot in the baldíos. Today these are despised as useless, but they will flourish with an infusion of manure and sweat. And this is not all. These lands are worth
            a vast treasure. Those that are sold will produce liquid cash, those that are leased, an annual sum so immense that it will provide a monstrous income. . . .


            What shall we do with these immense funds? What? Why the general good of Spain, the improvement of agriculture itself. . . . Let them be applied to building roads,
            to irrigating the land that can be irrigated, to making rivers navigable, to digging the canals that are feasible, to establishing acade-



       [90] Ibid., §931–37, 283–85.

       [91] Ibid., §940–41; §1009–10, 285, 295.

       [92] Ibid., §932, 283.


                                                                                           ― 68 ―


            mies of practical agriculture and endowing them suitably, to carrying out experiments that will introduce in each province the new and profitable methods that the
            agricultural nations have discovered. And if some money remains, after these immense tasks, let it be used for the relief and succor of those in want. . . .


            Where will the money be found for such vast and important expenditures? In the baldíos. Providence has set them aside for these magnificent endeavors, for the
            resurrection of Spain, for our century, in which a wise government will use them with insight and fairness. This fund suffices for everything. [93]



             In other words, people the barren wastes of Spain with homesteaders by a wave of the royal scepter, and their industry will produce
       the wherewithal to modernize the nation. Never did Spain's enlightened reformers voice their dream more graphically and eloquently. This
       was the dream that Joaquín Costa later described as a "collective system . . . of agrarian socialism of inestimable value." Costa's
       emotional commitment to the "agrarian collectivism" that he saw under attack in his own day must explain his strange enthusiasm for
       Olavide, Campomanes, and Aranda and his condemnation of Jovellanos. For the reformers of the 1760s were as individualistic as
       Jovellanos was to be. Their ideal was the small property owner, able to enclose his lands against the herds of his neighbors and the
       Mesta, living with his family in his house on the homestead. More individualistic a picture one can hardly imagine. In practice they even
       hesitated to invade the rights of large landlords. Olavide urged the king to sell off lands under his authority or to lease them
       permanently, but in the case of private properties, he and Campomanes were prepared only to regulate the terms of the leases in the
       public interest. Costa's perception of these reformers as collectivists was inspired not by their view of the ideal society but by the fact
       that they fell back on government regulation to achieve their ends.
             They were not even in agreement on this point, however. Those who truly favored government regulation adhered to the first line of
       thought described above and called for legal limits on rents and the size of exploitations. Campomanes and Olavide were advanced
       mercantilists who believed that free enterprise, properly regulated, would create a more productive economy than strict controls. Theirs
       was a position with which one can sympathize today, but logically it had less to recommend it than either the fully interventionist doctrine
       of the city councils and intendants or the laissez-faire argument of Francisco Bruna.

       [93] Ibid., §943–44; §954; §960, 285–89.


                                                                                           ― 69 ―
       From this review of the Memorial ajustado, one must conclude that it offered no clear answer to the problem of how to establish an
       "agrarian law," but a motley of conflicting philosophies. When the Council of Castile gave the Economic Society of Madrid the task of
       drawing up such a law, it gave them the challenge of formulating a single rational and acceptable policy.

       4

       It was a remarkable accomplishment that the society met the challenge, although it took eighteen years. The final result was Jovellanos's
       convincing defense of economic freedom as the answer to the agrarian law. His posthumous reward, since Costa, has been to carry the
       blame for turning Spanish planning away from its proper course by popularizing laissez-faire doctrines in Spain. The records of the
       Economic Society show, however, that his work cannot claim this honor. Jovellanos was but the most brilliant of his colleagues in the
       society, who as a group were already becoming converts to economic liberalism in the 1780s.[94]
             In the late 1770s the society, headed by Campomanes, accepted the views of the reformers of the 1760s. A case in point is the
       award it made in its essay contest on the question "What are the best means to encourage agriculture?" First prize went to José Cicilia
       Coello, former síndico personero of Ecija, a town near Seville. He had evidently seen Olavide's memoir to the Council of Castile, for many
       passages drew directly from it. In selecting it, the Economic Society both honored Olavide, who was hidden away in the prison of the
       Inquisition, and indicated its approval of the recent reforms. [95]
             By the 1780s interested Spaniards were becoming familiar with contemporary European economic thought. They read not only
       Mirabeau but other French, Italian, and English writers who favored economic freedom. Some Spaniards began to call for absolute
       economic liberty and "the sacred right of property." [96] These men saw in political economy the new science of man, which could find
       solutions to society's ills. "The science of the citizen and the patriot," Jovellanos called it. [97] A few read Adam Smith, probably in French
       translation, and appreciated his




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
