Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       ber of individual owners." Such were the laws of entail. Religious endowments were but "the deathbed consolations of the wealthy" and
       served only to corrupt the clergy, while the mayorazgo deprived virtuous second sons of their just reward and cheapened nobility by
       making it commonplace. The privileges of the Mesta, which were not to be confused with the requirements of transhumance, were equally
       "monstrous." "A barbarous custom, born in barbarous times and worthy only of them, has introduced the barbarous and shameful
       prohibition to enclose lands." [107]
             The evils were the same as before, what was new was the spirit in which Jovellanos attacked them. He applied a far keener
       appreciation of the working of the marketplace than his predecessors. Campomanes and Olavide had championed freedom of trade in
       grain, because they believed that the open market would induce farmers to increase production, but when they turned from the
       commodity market in grain to the factor market in land, they found the cause of existing evils in human depravity, and they looked to
       the wisdom of legislators to guide economic growth. Jovellanos had full confidence in economic freedom in both markets. He did not claim
       that men were all good; on the contrary, he found them acting selfishly and harmfully, as when the clergy sought to increase their
       holdings or when men of wealth created mayorazgos or sheep owners monopolized pastures. The evils arose from the lack of insight of
       past governments, which catered to these men's avarice by granting it legal sanction. In the process they prevented the free play of the
       avarice of other men, by denying the majority access to private ownership.
             He scathingly referred to the reports in the Memorial ajustado as "so many aberrations of reason and zeal."[108] "They pretend that
       the rise in price of land is caused by the greed of the owners, but is it not also caused by the greed of the tenants?" No price can be
       unjust that is the result of a free agreement between the parties. "It is natural, where rural population is excessive and there are more
       renters than rentable lands, that the owner lay down the law to the tenant, as it is that he must accept it where there is an excess of
       rentable land and few farmers for many fields." Rents have gone up in southern Spain, where they are paid in money, but not in the
       north, where they are paid in kind. "What better evidence that the cause is in the rise in the price of foodstuffs or in an increase of
       population or both?" No rule for fair rent can apply to all Spain. To attempt to enforce one would require "constant vigilance,

       [107] Ibid., 83, 100, 103–5, 86.

       [108] Ibid., 79.



                                                                                           ― 73 ―
       many agents, long and complicated investigations and accounts. . . . It is therefore proper to allow the parties freedom in the choice of
       rents. Only thus can the interest of owners and tenants be reconciled."[109]
             When Jovellanos argued that geography determined the size of exploitations, he had in mind only those worked by their owners or
       tenants. He condemned the latifundia of Andalusia that were tilled by jornaleros because they were never tilled well. [110] How to get rid
       of them? Free them from entail, and the laws of the market would soon reduce them to the most efficient size. The right to acquire
       property would produce holdings of unequal size, but large properties would not be tied to specific families. "The natural vicissitudes of
       fortune will make them pass rapidly from one owner to another." [111]
             He kept hammering home that the backwardness of the Spanish countryside was principally the effect of bad and ancient laws. Like
       Olavide, he believed the baldíos represented a waste of natural resources. He said that they appeared under the Visigoths as a response
       to the depopulation of those troubled times. [112] They survived the Reconquista because the insecurity of those centuries gave an
       advantage to mobile wealth in livestock. But when the last Muslims were subdued, the baldíos should have been put under the plow. They
       were not, because "public policy, finding the legislation on grazing disastrously entrenched, continued to lavish favors on livestock until
       the baldíos became its exclusive property." Thus, under the pretense of furthering the common good, the land that could provide the
       well-being of many families fell under the control of the rich.[113]
              In this and other ways, past history, strong interests, and misguided governments had brought Spain to its present pass. Human
       intelligence could open the way to progress, once it was freed from "barbarous" customs born in "barbarous" times. (The adjective used
       by classical authors to indicate the absence of reason was Jovellanos's favorite term of abuse. Adam Smith had applied the very same
       word to the practice of entailing vast estates.)[114] Indeed the "enlightened legislation" of Carlos III had already raised Spanish farming
       to the most flourishing state it had ever known, Jovellanos insisted.[115]

       [109] Ibid., 94.

       [110] Ibid., 89.

       [111] Ibid., 98.

       [112] Nieto, Bienes comunales, 139, takes pains to reject this "traditional" view of the origin of the baldíos, which he believes was first
       advanced in Jovellanos's Informe.

       [113] Jovellanos, Informe, 83–84.

       [114] Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations 1 : 385 (III.ii.7).

       [115] Jovellanos, Informe, 81.



                                                                                           ― 74 ―
       His reasoning led him to dismiss as relatively unimportant how the state put wasteland into private hands. An equal distribution, as called
       for by Olavide, would favor the common people; sales would put land in the hands of the rich. But if land could henceforth be bought and
       sold—a condition Olavide precluded—how it was now disposed of was immaterial. "The self-interest of the new owners in the long run will
       determine the size of the exploitation and fix on the crops that are most suitable to their resources and abilities and to the conditions of
       the soil and climate. If the laws but leave the owners alone, do not be concerned that the owners may follow the less profitable
       course."[116]
             His solution then was this: regardless of how it was done, turn public property into private property and allow full freedom in its sale
       and rental. Sell the baldíos, sell the municipal lands (propios), sell the national forests, or at least lease them permanently. The grazing
       interests claimed a threat to the meat supply if public pastures were not protected. No worry. If the price of meat were to rise, stockmen
       would find pastures for their herds, "in grassy meadows where the climate permits and in prairies where it does not."[117] The crown had




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
