Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       long regulated the use of forests (montes), fearful of a shortage of wood. "Allow the owners free and absolute exploitation of their timber
       and the nation will acquire many fine forests. The natural effect of this freedom will be to awaken the interest of the owners and inspire
       their devotion and activity, which regulations have dulled." [118]
              Similarly, free the land in entail, and it will begin to circulate and its price will drop. High costs had driven capital out of agriculture
       into livestock, industry, or other more gainful fields, [119] while owners had become neglectful absentees and tenants penniless rustics.
       Look at Andalusia, for two centuries the center of commerce with America. "Can it show a single rural enterprise that gives evidence of
       the transfer of wealth into agriculture? Has it seen a single clearing or an irrigation canal, a drainage ditch, a machine, an improvement,
       any sign at all of efforts to apply its resources to the improvement of cultivation? Such works are carried out only where properties
       circulate, where they provide profit, where they pass continuously from poor and idle hands to rich and enterprising ones." [120]
       Jovellanos had the innate sense of a development economist, anxious to attract capital where it would be invested most

       [116] Ibid., 84.

       [117] Ibid., 86.

       [118] Ibid., 91.

       [119] Ibid., 99.

       [120] Ibid., 100–101.


                                                                                            ― 75 ―
       gainfully. He saw that the way to do so was to free the factors of production from legal restrictions on their transfer and employment. He
       was further convinced that, far from hurting the little man, this freedom would so increase the total output that everyone would benefit,
       except those whom the laws now protected from the consequences of their own inefficiency.
              Finally, beyond geographic difficulties and irrational laws, Jovellanos saw a third set of obstacles, which he called moral and today
       one might call cultural. Spain's prejudices blinded its leaders to its real needs. Statesmen had for centuries held to the belief that
       industry and commerce should be defended and encouraged, while agriculture could be sacrificed. Yet, said Jovellanos, showing again how
       much he was a man of his age, agriculture is the fountain of a nation's wealth, the source of population growth, "the mother of innocence
       and honest labor and, as Columella said, the ally and kin of wisdom." [121] Spain's schools and universities "produce a surplus of priests,
       friars, doctors, lawyers, notaries, and sacristans, while we lack muleteers, sailors, artisans, and husbandmen [labradores]." Farmers need
       primary education and landowners training in agronorny.[122]
            Like Olavide, Jovellanos dreamed of a new Spain, with waving fields of grain, traveled highways, and busy ports. Beyond the
       prosperity of his countrymen, however, he also wanted their happiness. He denounced the practice in small towns of mimicking the
       severe policing found in cities.


            Not an alcalde exists who does not establish a curfew, does not ban singing and charivaris [cencerradas ], does not patrol and spy, and, besides pursuing those who
            rob and swear, is not constantly after those who merely sing and play. The poor lad who has sweated all week and comes home exhausted on Saturday night to
            change his shirt, cannot join his friends to shout freely and sing a ballad. . . . The forces of law and order confront him in his festivals and dances, in his gatherings
            and feasts. No matter where he goes he sighs in vain for that honest liberty that is the soul of innocent pleasure. What other cause can there be for the despondency,
            the slovenliness, the fierce and unsociable character that mark the rustics of some of our provinces? [123]



             Within the mature statesman and enlightened reformer, busy writing his prescriptions in his paternal home in Gijón, burned still the
       poetic passion of his youth. His agrarian law would fill the countryside not only with roads, canals, and fruited plains but with joyful
       families.


       [121] Ibid., 120.

       [122] Ibid., 124–25, quotation on 124.

       [123] Ibid., 134.


                                                                                            ― 76 ―


            Who does not see the tenants coming to settle in the fields, drawn by their own interest? Who does not see the small owners following behind them, inspired to till
            and improve their lands? And who does not see that when the fields are peopled and plowed and made beautiful, then the great and rich will arrive too, at least in
            those seasons when nature calls aloud to them, offering its many attractions and its many consolations? [124]



       5

       The argument of Jovellanos's Informe de ley agraria was as clear and simple as it was moving. Free the economy, and the agrarian
       reform would take care of itself! The Memorial ajustado had provided only confusion and lack of direction, out of which Jovellanos had
       selected the one message that foreshadowed the evolution of European economic thought. This was the memoir of Francisco Bruna, dean
       of the Audiencia of Seville. But whereas Bruna could prescribe economic freedom because he accepted large estates, Jovellanos urged it
       because he believed it would produce a society of virtuous farmers everywhere that Spain's geography would permit. He held to the same
       enlightened ideal as the reformers of the 1760s, and his faith in it helped sell his argument to his contemporaries.
            The reason for his success has been frequently attributed to his conscious defense of the interests of the rising new class of the
       bourgeoisie.[125] Freedom to invest capital in land, freedom to create large exploitations where these were most productive, and freedom
       to contract between owner and tenant are seen as so many measures to assure the bourgeois takeover of the face of Spain. If Jovellanos
       did not directly attack the noble mayorazgos, this interpretation holds, he was bowing to his awareness of how far the Economic Society
       was prepared to go. Not the literary or philosophical qualities of the Ley agraria but its usefulness to a social class explains its success.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
