Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             The course of Spanish ideas on agrarian reform traced here provides a different explanation. That something needed to be done
       about agricultural production became evident when rising population began to press against the available sources of food, especially in the
       interior, a development that was common to most of western Europe in the eighteenth century. Responsible Spaniards struggled to find
       solutions. Those they came up with owed much to their preconceived views of the ideal

       [124] Ibid.

       [125] This is the burden of Vergnes, "Dirigisme."


                                                                                           ― 77 ―
       society, most notably their concept of the virtues, both economic and moral, of the independent farmer. They could not agree on how to
       achieve this ideal because they were thinking in a period of transition between the mercantilist doctrines that relied on public intervention
       to correct social evils—doctrines that reflected the Christian view of human nature—and the emerging faith in freedom to follow individual
       self-interest.
            In an age when people sought clearly logical solutions to human problems, economic freedom made more sense than a modified
       program of state intervention. On reading Adam Smith, Jovellanos noted approvingly in his diary, "How admirable when he
       analyzes!" [126] The example of Francisco Bruna shows that reason and logic were directing other men independently to the same
       conclusions as Smith.
             The rise of new ideas in the Enlightenment has no measurable relationship to the rise of a new class. In France the call for limits on
       the role of the state was largely an act of the nobility; indeed Montesquieu, who spoke consciously for this class, was one of the most
       famous champions of the doctrine. In Spain the men who debated the issue were first and foremost royal servants, devoted to the cause
       of the monarchy and the commonwealth. Many of them, like Jovellanos, were hidalgos by origin. He did not speak for a new class any
       more than his predecessors did. Political writers are, of course, influenced by the world in which they live and respond to the problems
       presented by it, but beyond this obvious fact, for the purposes of analyzing history, ideas can be ascribed as much an existence and
       evolution of their own as the other major forces that we perceive to affect human evolution.
             Like his predecessors, Jovellanos denounced civil and ecclesiastical entail, but like Olavide he recommended the outright alienation
       only of public lands and those under royal authority. Both men urged the sale of the baldíos and the use of the income for public works.
       Four years after Jovellanos finished his report, Carlos IV began to put his ideas into practice. He began, however, not with the baldíos but
       with the properties of religious foundations. He sold them at auction and he used the income not for public works but to shore up the
       royal credit. His act responded not only to the rise of economic liberalism traced here but to the effect of foreign wars and revolution.


       [126] Jovellanos, Diarios, 304–5 (1 June 1796).


                                                                                           ― 78 ―




       Chapter III—
       The Decision to Disentail
       Within a few months of the death of Carlos III in 1788, a tempest arose in France whose blasts would convulse the reign of his successor.
       In 1793 the government of the new French Republic declared war on Spain, and except for two brief respites, Spain would be at war for
       the next two decades. One of the grave decisions that hostilities forced on Carlos IV was to raise money by the sale of religious
       properties.
             Wars have always placed a strain on the credit of European states, but throughout most of the eighteenth century Spain faced the
       strain with remarkable success. In part it benefited from dropping its commitments to defend an empire in central Europe after the War
       of the Spanish Succession, and in part from the growing economy of its empire in America. After 1770 its domestic economy was also
       growing rapidly, expanding the tax base of the crown, one of whose major sources of revenue was duties on exported and imported
       goods. [1]
             The Spanish treasury suffered from the cost of Spain's participation in the War of American Independence on the side of France and
       the new American nation. Because of the effectiveness of the British navy, trade between Spain and its American colonies declined,
       entailing a sharp loss

       [1] Stein and Stein question the growth of the Spanish economy in this period in "Concepts and Realities." They rely on reports of royal
       ministers. What their sources show is that the ministers were not aware of where growth was taking place. Evidence of growth beyond
       that offered in Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, can be found in Canga Argüelles, Diccionario de hacienda, s.v. "Libre comercio."


                                                                                           ― 79 ―
       of royal revenues that domestic sources could not make up. To meet the deficit, the government of Carlos III created a form of paper
       money known as vales reales. They were interest-bearing bonds that were declared to be legal tender for private and public debts. The
       first issue in 1780 was for 16,500 vales, each of 600 pesos face value, equivalent to approximately 9,000 reales de vellón, the standard
       unit of currency in late eighteenth-century Spain, for a total issue of about 149 million reales. Each vale earned interest of 1 real per day
       for the first 361 days each year, almost exactly 4 percent per year. The government paid the interest only once a year, but when the
       vales were used as currency, it was easy to calculate the total value including interest to date. Legal penalties were prescribed for refusal
       to honor them, but since the unit value was large, they did not serve for retail purchases, salaries, or similar payments.[2]
             During the war the government made two more issues of vales, for a total of approximately 303 million reales. To put these sums in
       perspective, one may consider that the annual royal income from ordinary taxes in Spain and America in the five years 1784–88, years of
       peace, was around 500 million reales.[3] For these issues, the unit value was 300 pesos each, to make their circulation easier. The effect
       of creating so much paper money was to depreciate its value vis-à-vis hard currency. At the end of the war the vales circulated at a loss



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
