Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       [82] Ibid., §861–76, 268–71, quotation in §876.

       [83] Ibid., §303; §307; §318–19; §330; §332, 186–96.

       [84] Rodríguez de Campomanes, "Discurso preliminar," xxviii–xxix. The author is identified in Sempere y Guarinos, Ensayo 5 : 188.

       [85] Mem. ajust. (1784), §11–12, 142.


                                                                                           ― 65 ―
       said. When wheat was worth twelve to fifteen reales a fanega (as it was at the time of the catastro), rents were low, cortijos were
       empty, and the farmers sold off their equipment at the fairs. Others kept their oxen only to be able to till the olive orchards. But recently
       conditions had changed. "Agriculture is so prosperous that land is lacking and there is an excess of farmers [labradores]. One needs no
       more proof of this truth than to hear the high rents of cortijos. Some have gone up by half and others even more." Bruna called it an
       error to blame this rise on the large tenants, for the same men were around when rents were low. He credited the improvement partly on
       the recently introduced freedom of grain trade and partly on a depression in colonial trade. "Everyone has come to realize that the true
       gold of the earth is the grain in the fields. So we see the greatest merchants of Seville engaged in this trade. The only business they
       think about is farming and producing olive oil." All classes benefited, he said, as one could see in any town in Andalusia. "One finds whole
       streets of new houses where there used to be hovels of straw. Even the unhappy braceros have shared the new wealth, for their wages
       have gone up more than a third, and they see their children clothed who used to pester them naked in the fields." Bruna was convinced
       that economic freedom inspired men to take advantage of their possibilities. Few Andalusians had the drive to save, he admitted—"what
       the majority earn in a week, they spend on the day of rest"—but those few who did "begin with a small plot [as peujaleros ], with good
       luck they set up a farm with a house on it [become rancheros ], and soon achieve the position of large farmers [buenos labradores ]." If
       a man were denied the prospect of enlarging his farm, he would work only enough to fill his daily needs. [86]
            Opposing the recommendations of the intendants, Bruna favored allowing economic forces to determine the size of exploitations. To
       break up cortijos and limit the amount one person could till was to court disaster, in his view. Cortijos were the result of the geography
       of Andalusia, marked by large towns distant from each other. Unlike the peasants of the small villages of the meseta, farmers could not
       go out daily with oxen to till these distant fields, and only occasionally were workers needed in large numbers. Not enough men owned
       yokes of oxen to make it practical to divide cortijos into small farms, nor could one imagine that large farmers would turn over their oxen
       and seed to landless laborers. "No one will abandon the administration of his farm and

       [86] Ibid., §677–84, 227–30, quotations from §681, §682, §677.


                                                                                           ― 66 ―
       his resources to unfortunate and unreliable men so that they may waste them. If he were forced to do so, with one blow the sinews of
       the main form of agriculture of these provinces would be destroyed." Large owners were best for Andalusia; they produced the best grain,
       raised the best horses, and could store up harvests for bad years, which were frequent. [87]
             Bruna was equally adamant in opposing rent control. "Nothing is more important to all business, whose leading branch is agriculture,
       than the freedom to make contracts." To prohibit money rents and specify the share of the harvest that owners were to receive, as
       Olavide urged, would not be appropriate to all cortijos. Some required more input of labor by the tenant than others because of the
       nature of the land, some had pastures that could be paid for only in money, and some contracts called for the tenant to clear new land.
       "Even the tenants would object to such a regulation, because they do not want others informed of the extent of their wealth or checking
       on their harvests. Everyone wants to be free to strike a bargain and get the benefit he can from his industry and diligence." If owners
       and tenants were allowed to reach their own terms, they would cooperate to extend the amount of land farmed, and rents would
       eventually go down on their own. [88]
             The dean had read Mirabeau, and he reflected the physiocratic doctrine that agriculture should be freed from legal controls and that
       large properties were the most progressive. Yet his conclusions were based firmly on a close observation of conditions in Andalusia.
       Olavide, who also referred to Mirabeau, could not bring himself to let individuals make their own decisions, because he sensed, although
       less clearly than Bruna, that the result would be the preservation of the cortijos. The myth of the good farmer had him in its spell. The
       dean, like the Physiocrats, did not hold the myth, and he let freedom lead to its logical conclusion.
             The difference between their mentalities is brought out by a revolutionary proposal of Olavide's. He recommended that the king
       settle small owners on the lands that he had authority over. These included municipal lands, those of charitable foundations, of the
       military orders, and of the Jesuits.[89] Most especially, however, he had in mind the baldíos, the public wastelands. Sell them off, he
       advised, or lease them. Let every man with two pairs of oxen who does not own twenty fanegas get a lot of fifty fanegas in return for
       one-eighth of the harvest and the obligation to erect a house and farm buildings. Let every man with money

       [87] Ibid., quotation from §683.

       [88] Ibid., §725–28, 236–37, quotations from §725, §727.

       [89] Ibid., §810, 258.


                                                                                           ― 67 ―
       buy outright a lot of fifty to two hundred fanegas to farm himself or have someone farm for him. He pointed out that there was much
       loose capital in Andalusia, some of it in the hands of foreign merchants, who would repatriate it if not offered an investment in Spain. Tap
       this capital, he urged, and at the same time turn laborers into useful farmers by letting men of wealth buy sections of baldíos of up to
       two thousand fanegas each, provided they lease it to poor braceros in fifty-fanega lots with a house and a yoke of oxen. [90] By such a
       variety of measures he saw the baldíos transformed into small fertile farms. To keep them such he proposed laws as strict as the ones of
       entail that he condemned. No one was to be allowed to subdivide his fifty-fanega lot or accumulate more than one or sell it for profit or
       mortgage it or transfer it to manos muertas.[91] Although he did not say so, what he was proposing was an amalgamation of the
       instructions of the Council of Castile to Extremadura to divide common lands among their peasants and the regulations for the colonies of
       Sierra Morena, whose founding he was supervising.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
