Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       doubtless tormented by the perils of bankruptcy, approved Soler's proposal almost at once.
            On 19 September 1798 Carlos signed four decrees that incorporated the recommendation of his secretary of hacienda. The most
       important read in part as follows:

       [58] Godoy, Memorias 1 : 179–80, which quotes part of RC, 21 Feb. 1798.

       [59] Infante Miguel-Motta, "Desamortización."

       [60] See above, Chapter 1, section 7.


                                                                                           ― 94 ―


            In order to continue procuring the welfare of my beloved subjects by all possible means amid the present urgent needs of the crown, I have believed it necessary to
            dispose of a massive fund that can serve two objectives. One is to substitute for the vales reales another debt with lower interest and fewer problems. The other is to
            give relief to industry and commerce by extinguishing the vales reales through more effective measures than those already adopted. Since my sovereign authority to
            make use of public establishments for these and other ends of the state is undisputed, I have resolved after mature consideration to alienate all the real property
            belonging to hospitals, hospices, houses of charity, homes for the aged, foundling homes, confraternities, memorias, obras pías, and lay patronatos. The product of
            these sales will be deposited in my Royal Amortization Fund at 3-percent interest per annum, as will the capital of any censos [obligations] owed to these
            establishments and foundations that are redeemed.[61]



              The decree furthermore "invited" the archbishops, bishops, and other prelates to alienate "properties belonging to capellanías
       colativas [benefices whose holders were appointed by prelates of the church] or other ecclesiastical foundations, depositing the product in
       the Amortization Fund at 3-percent annual interest." The logic of the decree is evident. It interpreted the possessions of charitable
       institutions and other obras pías and endowments for religious services to be public property, under the sovereign authority of the crown,
       and so too benefices whose holders were nominated by laymen (patronatos de legos). The king could dispose of such properties at will.
       Endowments for benefices under the full control of ecclesiastical prelates escaped the king's authority, but he could appeal to the prelates
       to help meet the national crisis.
             Two other decrees ordered the sale of two other types of real property and the use of the product to redeem the vales. One were
       the possessions of the Company of Jesus that had not yet been sold. [62] The other affected the properties of the Colegios Mayores, six
       residential colleges located at the Universities of Salamanca, Valladolid, and Alcalá de Henares. Carlos III had tried to reform them to
       eliminate the influence of the partisans of the Jesuits, but instead they had fallen into decline. The king now ordered their income from
       rents and tithes paid into the Amortization Fund and their properties sold, except those used for educational purposes, which went to the
       universities. [63] The income from specific Jesuit properties had been assigned to certain obras pías; the decrees left in the air who, if
       anyone, was to receive the 3-percent interest

       [61] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, AHN, CCR, no. 1221.

       [62] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, ibid., no. 1217.

       [63] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, ibid., no. 1222.


                                                                                           ― 95 ―
       payable on the capital realized by the sales of the remaining properties of these two sets of institutions.
             The fourth decree was distinct in nature. It gave permission to owners of mayorazgos and vínculos and other titles "that are
       inherited according to the rules observed in the mayorazgos of Spain" to sell their real properties at public auction provided they
       deposited the net proceeds in the Amortization Fund, "not withstanding whatever clauses [in their acts of foundation] may prohibit [their]
       alienation." [64] The king explained ingenuously that the purpose of the decree was to allow holders of entailed estates to contribute to
       the patriotic loan without interest that he had opened the previous May, but he guaranteed 3-percent interest to future owners of the
       mayorazgo, so that the heirs of the contributor should not be defrauded. The entailed estates would still exist, but in the form of royal
       obligations. Indeed, the king offered to pay the present owner the interest at once if his needs prevented him from subscribing to the
       patriotic loan. Royal permission to sell entailed family estates was nothing new, but before it had usually been given to individuals in
       financial need. [65] The decree extended the authorization to all owners of entailed estates, thereby establishing a pregnant precedent that
       national urgencies could override private articles of vinculación.


       3

       The four royal decrees of 19 September 1798 initiated the long process of desamortización in nineteenth-century Spain. A number of
       developments contributed to the final decision. Most obvious was the urgency of the fiscal crisis. The decrees promised a sure way to
       shore up the faltering credit of the monarchy and solve the current fiscal dilemma. The owners of vales reales could use them at full face
       value to buy properties put up for sale, and the crown would be able to retire the vales from circulation as it received them in payment
       for properties. Henceforth the creditors of the crown would be the privileged, unproductive sectors whose properties were sold, the
       religious foundations and the individual clergymen who profited from them, and the landed owners of vinculos, to the extent that they
       chose to collaborate, rather than the merchants and other members of the productive classes who had been saddled with the burden of
       the vales that circulated at ever-declining market value.

       [64] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, ibid., no. 1216.

       [65] Jago, "Influence of Debt."


                                                                                           ― 96 ―
       Although the measures avoided new taxes on all levels of society, they fitted in with the policy of tapping the resources of the idle rich
       rather than the industrious poor to pay the expenses of the state. The royal debt would remain, but consolidated at an interest of 3



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
