Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       percent rather than the 4 percent paid on vales or the 5-percent interest on the recent loans. At one blow the annual cost of servicing
       the debt would be reduced by at least a quarter. At the same time, the income of the crown would increase because the properties of the
       obras pías would lose their tax-exempt status as they came into the hands of laymen. Their harvests would be subject to alcabalas and
       similar imposts. Such was Soler's plan. It had one weakness: its success depended on the crown's not putting back into circulation the
       vales received—that is, on the product of the sales actually going to the Amortization Fund. This in turn depended on balancing the
       budget, an achievement hardly possible as long as the war with Britain continued. For the moment, however, the properties allocated for
       sale seemed so vast that even the expenses of the war were not a cause for worry.
             Even though the decision to disentail was directed primarily at finding fiscal resources that would solve the current crisis, it was also
       inspired by the long consideration of the need for agrarian reform. The demands of war had, however, produced a major change in the
       plans of the agrarian reformers. The king would not, as they had urged, distribute the baldíos to impoverished farmers and laborers at
       modest cost in a kind of Old World Homestead Act or sell them to men of wealth to raise money for an economic infrastructure. The
       urgent need for liquid funds meant that the king must put properties up for sale at a good price, and this meant offering buyers not
       barren wastes but lands and buildings that would provide an immediate income. Those belonging to or controlled by the church fitted the
       need. For centuries ecclesiastical institutions had been buying up valuable estates or receiving them from the faithful as endowments for
       their many activities. For centuries, too, the crown had turned to the wealth of the church in its time of need. In the thirteenth century,
       Fernando III had obtained two-ninths of the tithes of Castile to support his war of reconquest,[66] a tribute the kings still collected, now
       from all Spain. Fernando and Isabel had obtained the sale of indulgences, known as the bula de la cruzada, to support the conquest of
       Granada, a practice also still being followed. Felipe II had established the excusado, the right to the tithes of the most productive

       [66] Nov. Rec., I, vii, n. 1.


                                                                                           ― 97 ―
       household in each parish, to support his war against the Turks.[67] In Part 2 of this study, we shall run into it still in operation at the end
       of the eighteenth century. Carlos IV was following an old-regime tradition when he selected the estates of obras pías to help him now.
       But to take over property rather than income was new, a product of changed circumstances and philosophies.
             The beginning of desamortización reflected the evolution of eighteenth-century society. The expanding population inside and outside
       Spain increased the demand for food in the markets and transformed the relations among the factors of production. Labor became
       cheaper and land dearer. Those who controlled or used land were encouraged to apply more capital and labor to its exploitation. It was
       no accident that the king's counselors selected land as the resource that would attract available private capital and strengthen the royal
       credit. The reformers, from those of the 1760s through Jovellanos, had remarked on the high price of land—"scandalous," Jovellanos
       called it—and the exorbitant rents that owners were asking. Land was a factor of production in high demand. The fiscal exigencies of the
       war simply decided the crown to free some of it from artificial restrictions on its transfer. In this way desamortización was a belated
       response to the demographic revolution of the century, as the reforms of Carlos III had been an earlier one.
             The invitations extended by the king to church prelates and owners of mayorazgos to sell estates under their control and place the
       proceeds in the Amortization Fund at 3 percent were thus more than desperate and artless appeals to their patriotism. Quite conceivably,
       their properties could command a high enough price on the market for the interest on the capital received to produce more income than
       the properties did. This was especially so if the properties were inefficiently tilled or managed by corrupt administrators, as the reformers
       kept repeating.
             The king ordered the sale of properties of obras pías and similar ecclesiastical foundations, but he left the decision on the alienation
       of properties of capellanías up to the bishops and of mayorazgos up to their owners. One might conclude that the king was merely
       recognizing the difference between public property, which was under his authority, and private property, which was protected from
       expropriation. That something else was involved, however, is suggested by the king's response to Soler's recommendation to include the
       estates of the encomiendas of the military orders among those to be forcibly sold. The

       [67] Ibid., II, xii, n. 1. See Appendix G.


                                                                                           ― 98 ―
       military orders of Santiago, Calatrava, and Alcantara had been founded in the Middle Ages as brotherhoods of knights who took religious
       vows and fought against the Muslims. Since 1523 the king of Spain was their hereditary grand master, and their properties, which were
       extensive in Extremadura and Andalusia, could be considered part of the royal domain. Nevertheless the income from their encomiendas,
       or fiefs, went to their caballeros (knights), who since the end of the reconquest were honorary appointees, most of them titled aristocrats
       or wealthy hidalgos. Despite Soler's urging, the royal decrees did not provide for the sale of these properties. Although one suspects that
       at a practical level the royal counselors did not believe it advisable to stir up this influential group, the decision fits a more general
       pattern. The king could order the sale of the estates of obras pías because, as his decree said, "my sovereign authority to make use of
       public establishments . . . is undisputed." The throne might tremble beneath him but the king did not hesitate to proclaim an unabashed
       assertion of his absolute authority. Yet royal absolutism had its limits, and the rights of the church and the nobility presented one such
       limit. Desamortización as conceived by Carlos IV and his advisers had as its objective to shore up the monarchy, and for this purpose the
       privileges of the legal orders (estamentos ) were an integral part of the monarchy. The French revolutionary government confiscated all
       the estates of the church and those of émigré nobles. No such act emanated from the king of Spain, however dire the situation, for he
       was holding the dike against revolution, social and political.
             Desamortización offered a way to cut the Gordian knot of reform, creating new landowners without destroying the economic basis of
       a society divided into legal orders. By transforming the capital of mayorazgos and manos muertas from real property to royal obligations
       that were expected to produce their owners a greater net income, the king would actually benefit the aristocracy and clergy. Thus in the
       decree on the sale of mayorazgo properties, the king congratulated himself for achieving simultaneously "the two important objectives of
       preserving intact the entailed estates, and with them the splendor of the families to which they belong, and of restoring the lands to the
       husbandry of active and industrious owners, with transcendental influence on the progress of the wealth and happiness of the nation."[68]
             Agrarian reform was still definitely part of the agenda. To assure that active owners acquire the land, the decrees specified that the
       sales should

       [68] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, AHN, CCR, no. 1216.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
