Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       months later the royal agents received a circular charging them "to activate and promote the alienation of the properties of obras pías.
       The serious public emergency demands these sales and can no longer brook procrastination, delays, or pretexts that obstruct them." [18]
             The most significant instruction came in 1803. The Memorial ajustado published in 1784 had recorded complaints from various parts
       of the monarchy that rents for land were being raised to the detriment of the tenants and the public. In November 1785 Carlos III,
       concerned lest landowners attempt to pass on to their tenants a recent tax on income from their properties, had frozen rents for land
       unless the local justicias and intendants approved the increase. He also prohibited owners from evicting tenants in order to cultivate land
       themselves unless the owners were resident farmers in the towns where the lands were located.[19] As with so many of Carlos III's
       praiseworthy orders, not all poderosos chose to obey; [20] nevertheless it remained on the books, and in 1794 Carlos IV reaffirmed it. [21]
       In September 1803, however, the king decided to exempt from its application the lands being disentailed:


            Having learned from experience that these regulations, which were intended to prevent owners from evading, by indirect means, moderation and just measure in the
            use of their fortunes . . . , hinder the alienation of properties belonging to pious foundations, because they discourage many [potential] buyers, who judge that they
            will not be able to employ the properties as they wish or that they will have to undergo costly lawsuits with the tenants, . . . I have ordered that the buyers of
            properties of the pious foundations be perfectly free to do with them as they see fit, whether by cultivating the properties and lands that they have bought or by
            concluding new and more advantageous leases, so long as they execute evictions with sufficient time for the former tenants to find other leases or make other suitable
            arrangements.[22]



             With this cédula royal policy turned its back on the reforms of Carlos III that were aimed at protecting the small farmers and
       laborers from the poderosos. Henceforth tenants would see their farms pass from an owner who was subject, in theory at least, to rent
       control to another who was free to squeeze as much as he could out of his new properties.

       [17] Adición, 27 Dec. 1799, AHN, Hac., libro 8052, no. 5992 art. 18.

       [18] Circular, 26 Mar. 1800, ibid., libro 6012.

       [19] RC, 6 Dec. 1785 AHN, CCR, no. 740. On his measure, see Jovellanos, Informe, 94.

       [20] Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad y estado, 422–23.

       [21] RC, 8 Sept. 1794, AHN, CCR, no. 1086, capítulo 2.

       [22] RC, 15 Sept. 1803, AHN, Hac., libro 8055 no. 6476.


                                                                                          ― 105 ―
       The financial plight of the crown was shattering the dream of a land of independent small farmers. Even Jovellanos's prophecy that
       disentail would work toward a redistribution of land in small units was belied by the tone of this order. Its effect would be to place the
       burden of guaranteeing the vales reales on the small tenant farmer, who was threatened with a rent increase, along with the former
       ecclesiastical owner, who was forced to accept royal obligations in place of real property.
             Besides affecting the properties of religious foundations, the decrees of September 1798 gave permission to owners of mayorazgos
       and lay vínculos to sell their estates and deposit the proceeds in the Amortization Fund. Inducing lay owners to part with their holdings
       was a different kettle of fish from executing the forced sale of church properties, and the royal counselors groped for means to this end.
       The original decree indicated that the properties were to be assessed and auctioned in the same manner as the church properties. In
       January 1799 the king published another cédula aimed at encouraging owners of mayorazgos to sell their real estate. Noting that some
       individuals had offered to dispose of their entails and deposit the capital received in the Amortization Fund but were unable to do so
       because of their debts, [23] the king allowed them to keep an eighth of the proceeds from their sales "as a reward." Although the fund
       would receive only seven-eighths of the total sale price, it would recognize the entire amount as a debt of the crown to the mayorazgo
       and would pay 3-percent interest on it. [24] By this measure, the owners were allowed to spend part of their inheritance as they wished,
       not just to pay off debts, and still keep the full amount in royal obligations. The net effect for the moment was to increase the interest
       on the money received by the Amortization Fund from 3 to 3.4 percent. According to the memoirs of Godoy, who was out of favor at this
       time, "this concession was considered on all sides an unbecoming measure, as much to the government that proposed it as to those
       persons who were moved by it to sell their properties."[25]
             Less unbecoming was the next measure, which revealed a perception of the issues of economic development. In February 1803,
       acting on the advice of the Council of Castile, the king gave permission to the owners of entailed estates to sell properties of their entails
       that were located far from their homes and use the proceeds to buy others of obras pías.

       [23] Godoy, Memorias 1 : 271, confirms that some mayorazgo owners had made such offers.

       [24] RC, 11 Jan. 1799, AHN, CCR, no. 1238.

       [25] Godoy, Memorias 1 : 273.


                                                                                          ― 106 ―
       Thereby the owners could consolidate their estates, reduce the cost of administration, and dedicate themselves to improving their
       properties, to "the progress and general development of agriculture." For sales of this kind, the king withdrew the "reward" of one-eighth
       of the sale price. [26]
             Another cédula of 1805 exuded further economic philosophy. It enabled owners of mayorazgos and vínculos to free portions of their
       estates from entail. They would "buy" the properties from the mayorazgo at a price established by an independent assessor by depositing
       the price in cash in the royal fund, to be credited to the mayorazgo. Because the one-eighth "reward" was maintained, owners could free
       properties from entail for seven-eighths of the assessed value. The mayorazgo would possess royal obligations paying 3 percent instead
       of the real property, which the owner would now be free to bequeath to the heirs he chose instead of the liquid capital used for its
       purchase.[27]
             The text of the decree suggests that the initiative came from Soler, whom, it said, the king had charged to advise the Council of
       Castile on the merits of the proposal. It thus represents official thought on private property. Land, the cédula said, was preferable to




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
