Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       liquid capital as a family holding not because it produced a higher return but because it was safer. Dishonest guardians could not
       squander a ward's inheritance or husbands dissipate their wives' dowries if these consisted of real property. What father who lacks sons
       would want his entailed lands to go to a distant and perhaps unknown relative while being forced to leave his daughters only cash? Why
       should he improve his lands if his widow and daughters could not benefit from his efforts?


            This measure can even be of fundamental importance in improving private and public customs. Firstborn sons, who today have nothing to fear from the owners of the
            mayorazgos that they will receive, and secondborn sons, who expect nothing from them, will now vie for the affection of their father by their deference and good
            behavior. Now the father who has accumulated savings will have the power to settle on his more virtuous children the very estates whose value they have all come to
            appreciate because they have had their fruits before their eyes since childhood. [28]



            The decree contains a curious mixture of the new faith in competition and the virtues of the nuclear family with a traditional
       acceptance of the superiority of land over other forms of capital. Gone is the older belief in the need for the monarchy to guarantee a
       noble class by entail-

       [26] RC, 3 Feb. 1803, AHN, Hac., libro 8055, no. 6375.

       [27] RC, 10 June 1805, AHN, CCR, no. 1624 (also AHN, Hac., libro 8057 no. 6677).

       [28] Ibid.


                                                                                          ― 107 ―
       ing its estates. The decree would preserve landholdings in the immediate family while freeing them from entail. Except for the stimulus to
       a father to increase his savings, all these advantages could have been achieved more directly by abolishing the mayorazgo outright. The
       king and his advisers were not ready, however, to attack private entail. Fifteen years later, after the turmoil of the Napoleonic invasion,
       the revolutionary leaders of 1820 did abolish the mayorazgo. Rescinded in the restoration of 1823, the abolition was reenacted
       permanently in 1836. By then the owners of entailed properties had had time to discover the advantages to them of disentailing their
       own estates, a lesson that Carlos IV first taught them.
              In other ways the royal ministers struggled to turn adversity to profit. Censos, or permanent liens on real property, had plagued the
       owners of estates, both entailed and free, since the sixteenth century, but the terms of many of them, those called censos perpetuos,
       made their redemption virtually impossible. Most commonly, censos were established on the estate of a debtor in favor of the estate of
       the creditor in return for a monetary loan, but also frequent was the establishment of a censo perpetuo on a specific property in favor of
       a religious foundation or obra pía as a permanent endowment for a specific purpose without any loan being involved. The persons who
       founded such a censo did not deprive his heirs of part of the family estate, but he did alienate a portion of the income from it
       permanently in favor of a religious fund. The decree of 1798 ordering the sale of properties of obras pías permitted persons whose
       properties were encumbered by censos in favor of these institutions to redeem them by depositing their capital value in the Amortization
       Fund in the name of the institution. [29] A year later, when the market value of the vales was falling rapidly and disentail was barely
       getting under way, the king authorized every person who was subject to perpetual or redeemable censos in favor of anyone or any
       institution to pay them off with vales. Perpetual leases or quitrents (cánones emfiteúticos ) could also be redeemed with vales. The vales
       would be marked out of circulation and be kept by the former owner of the censo or canon, who would receive the 4-percent interest
       they bore, more, the cédula pointed out, than the 3 percent the law allowed on censos. Redemption payments of censos belonging to
       obras pías would, as before, be deposited with the Amortization Fund and bear 3-percent interest. The act was a boon to debtors, for
       they could pay off their obligations with depreci-

       [29] RC, 19 Sept. 1798, AHN, CCR, no. 1221.


                                                                                          ― 108 ―
       ated vales, while creditors, who had lost the power to foreclose on the real property of their debtors, in the future had to rely on the
       crown for interest on their capital. [30]
             In April 1801 the king extended his authorization to redeem fixed charges with vales to include all forms of permanent payments to
       ecclesiastical institutions for festivals, masses, dowries, and the like and such payments to the crown as the ones made annually by
       property owners in Madrid for street cleaning and street lighting. Even more significant, owners of mayorazgos were allowed to sell part
       of their entails in order to pay off liens on the remainder. Where the principal was not specified in the original contracts, the cédula
       assigned to it an amount 33 1/3 times the annual payment due if it was a redeemable censo and 66 2/3 times if it was a permanent
       obligation. That is, the obligations were capitalized at 3.0 and 1.5 percent, respectively. This time the king decided that capital of censos
       perpetuos would be deposited with the royal fund at 3 percent, while owners of redeemable censos could do what they wanted with the
       vales they received in payment for them. [31]
             Specifically under attack was the concept of permanent unredeemable obligations. A cédula of 1804 clarified that recent legislation
       did not preclude the establishment of new censos, provided they were redeemable and were not to be owed to ecclesiastical funds whose
       properties were being disentailed. The cédula recognized that borrowing played a legitimate role in the expansion of industry and
       agriculture. It maintained, however, the legal limit on interest of censos at 3 percent.[32]
             The royal counselors were using the crisis of the monarchy to end all permanent, quasi-feudal obligations. The consequences could
       be profound. No doubt the prospect was threatening, especially to landowners long separated from the direct use of their lands by
       emphyteutic contract, of whom there were many in Catalonia. They could now lose any rights to the land and be henceforth at the mercy
       of the state for their income. There was evidently strong resistance to the measure. In a cédula of 1805, the king spelled out again the
       rules for redemption. The detail was greater, but the tenor was the same as in 1801. The new cédula described legal procedures for
       forcing a reluctant owner to accept repayment of the obligations due him. However, the king excluded specifically from redemption the
       foros of Galicia and Asturias and annual payments in kind of part of the harvests, such as many lay and ec-

       [30] RC, 10 Nov. 1799, AHN, Hac., libro 8052, no. 5975.

       [31] RC, 17 Apr. 1801, AHN, Hac., libro 8053 no. 6168.

       [32] RC, 15 Sept. 1804, AHN, Hac., libro 8056, no. 6598.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
