Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       field in this condition in the countryside, one naturally remarks that it must belong to a capellanía."[51] Jovellanos was even more severe.
       Medieval monarchs, he said, quite properly granted lands and other sources of income to the clergy to reward them for their services in
       war. Later, however, unrestricted gifts inspired by the piety of the faithful turned this practice into an abuse. "How many capellanías,
       patronatos, aniversarios, memorias, and obras pías have been established since the laws of Toro [of 1505] . . . allowed the makers of
       wills to give property to the church as a sacrifice of atonement!" The result, he complained, was a large number of clergymen with no
       useful function and great harm to agriculture. The church should be endowed with royal bonds and similar holdings rather than land. [52]
       His reasoning seemed to rest on the difference between land, a limited good, and credit, of which there could be no finite amount.
              Both Jovellanos and Olavide looked rather to the baldíos to solve the agrarian problem. Just as the Ley agraria was published,
       however, the troubles of the royal exchequer became acute, inclining the royal advisers to rethink the needs of the nation. In 1794 they
       received a memoria (the author is not identified) that echoed the ideas of the reformers—Spain is by nature a rich country made poor by
       its institutions, which prevent the multiplication of small farms—but stressed the possibilities inherent in a sale of religious properties. The
       estates of capellanías, hermandades, and obras pías, it said, must be worth 200 million pesos, and those of the churches and religious
       orders another 300. If this enormous sum were to be deposited in the royal treasury at 3-percent interest, "with the proper solemnities of
       papal bulls and the rest that is called for," the government would be able to attack Spain's enemies with such vigor that they would be
       "confounded and filled with terror by the mere

       [50] Mem. ajust. (1784), §810, 258. See also §831, 263.

       [51] Ibid., §1025, 299.

       [52] Jovellanos, Informe, 102.


                                                                                           ― 92 ―
       news of such a measure." [53] The crown would gain funds, the nation farmers, the church a steady income, and the poor clergymen an
       honest salary. "The obras pías, freed from the corruption of their administrators, will produce more income and it will be spent for the
       holy ends intended by their founders."[54]
             Set aside in 1794, this proposal received new attention after the outbreak of the war with Britain. The Dirección de Fomento General
       (Office of Development) brought the idea to the attention of Godoy in September 1797. "There are," it said, "according to the census of
       1787, 773 hospitals, 88 hospices, 26 houses for retirement, 51 foundling homes, a total of 938 establishments. . . . The obras pías are
       much more numerous, and all together account for an extraordinary mass of properties withdrawn from circulation, whose administration
       and cultivation are generally in the worst neglect . . . producing only 1- or 2-percent income for their owners." [55] Their sale by the
       crown in return for a fixed interest on the capital would benefit their owners, provide the crown with "great assistance . . . in the present
       circumstances," and, if the measure were extended to other similar properties, "the national debt would be extinguished in a brief
       time."[56] Juan Sempere y Guarinos, a former member of the Junta on the Agrarian Law of the Economic Society of Madrid, sent Godoy a
       similar memoir two months later. In May 1798 Saavedra, the secretary of hacienda, now fully convinced of the urgency of the matter,
       wrote the king a report on the critical financial situation that said, "What is most important is to decide once and for all on the sale of the
       properties of hospitals, brotherhoods, benefices, and obras pías." The extraordinary ministerial junta of May 1798 reviewed the proposals
       and gave them its blessing. [57]
             In February 1798, after Saavedra became secretary of hacienda and before Godoy's resignation, the king decreed a measure that
       offered the junta a precedent. Using the arguments of a generation of reformers in favor of the disentail of municipal properties, the king,
       on the advice of his ministers, ordered the sale at auction of buildings belonging to municipal propios that were rented out as private
       residences. The resulting

       [53] Memoria in Sempere y Guarinos, Historia de los vínculos, 417–25 (quotation on 421).

       [54] Ibid., 423.

       [55] The text of the project in ibid., 425–30 (quotation on 426–27).

       [56] Ibid., 430.

       [57] Ibid., 431–32; Canga Argüelles, Diccionario de hacienda, s.v. "Memoria de D. Francisco Saavedra al Señor D. Carlos IV, 4 de mayo
       de 1798." On this subject see also Merino, "Hacienda."


                                                                                           ― 93 ―
       capital was to be deposited with the royal tobacco administration, which would pay the municipal governments 3 percent on their
       deposits. The explanation offered for the measure was that private owners would take better care of the houses, the towns would receive
       a surer form of income, and the nation would gain from the free circulation of property, arguments drawn straight out of Jovellanos and
       his predecessors.
             The act seems almost a trial balloon for ecclesiastical desamortización, and Godoy presents it in his memoirs as the first step in this
       direction, for which he takes credit.[58] We now have a study of the effects of this decree in the city of Salamanca. While local officials
       began within a month of the order to prepare for its execution, the first sales were not completed until November 1799. By 1804 eighty-
       two separate sales had disposed of 90 percent of the houses belonging to the city.[59] In advising the king to sell off religious properties
       in August 1798, however, Soler could have been encouraged by the reception given to this order, but he could not yet know how it would
       work out. A more positive precedent was the rapid disposal of Jesuit properties after 1769.[60]
             One can appreciate the dilemma faced by the king and his counselors. On the one hand, the accursed French revolutionaries had
       confiscated the properties of the church to pay off their national debt. On the other, the Spanish crown faced a bankruptcy like the one
       that forced Louis XVI to call the Estates General and thus begin the process that ended with the fall of the monarchy and his own
       execution. Soler's warning that "the stability and very existence of the government" were in danger voiced the crown's fear of fiscal
       insolvency inspired by the Gallic experience. But could Spain not avoid the catastrophe by adopting the French policy as a preventive
       measure? It would save the crown while doing no harm to the church, because the king would acknowledge the full value of its
       confiscated properties. How could the measure be criticized if the institutions affected were guaranteed a larger income than they now
       received in rents? Such was Soler's word to the king at the end of August. Carlos IV, sadly missing the moral support of Godoy and



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
