Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       only 693,750 for the patriotic loan, but more must have come in later.

       [41] Col. CG, Soler (1799), f. 14. The exact figure is 35,781,530. For the excusado, see Appendix G.

       [42] Matilla, Catálogo 1 : 533, Orden general no. 5750.

       [43] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 421.

       [44] Col. CG, Soler (1798), f. 204.


                                                                                           ― 89 ―
       dressed them up in attractive colors. He had discussed his proposal fully with Saavedra, he said. "The best statesmen have much desired
       it and public opinion has accepted it." It was "to sell the real property of brotherhoods, charitable foundations, hospitals, and ecclesiastical
       benefices (patronatos y capellanías ), and also the estates belonging to the encomiendas of the military orders, and deposit the product
       in the Amortization Fund at 3-percent interest, to be used to extinguish the vales reales and royal bonds."
              The idea of a direct attack on the wealth of the church was nothing new, he added.


            I have read a memoir written in August 1794 and another in October 1796 when the present war was declared, which show with perfect clarity not only the great
            public benefits that would accrue to the state, as anyone can perceive, from the sale and subsequent circulation of those properties and the increase they would bring
            to the income of the crown, but also the private gains that those foundations would obtain by receiving punctually the interest on their capital. . . . The bad
            administration of those properties is so notorious that no one fails to lament the harm that their neglect and decay cause the public. Their yields, which could be a
            great source of national wealth, are reduced, and the pious intentions of the founders are betrayed. For these reasons alone, therefore, the transfer of these properties
            into active and taxpaying hands would be seen as very important and much applauded. [45]



              Soler knew well how to sweeten the pill!
             He was correct in saying that statesmen had long discussed the problem of the extensive properties that belonged to ecclesiastical
       manos muertas, but on the whole they had muted any suggestions for their alienation. As we have seen, they fixed their eyes rather on
       the baldíos. Yet they never forgot that the manos muertas were a major form of entailed property and stood in the way of economic
       freedom. Campomanes first became famous as author of the Tratado de la regalía de amortización, which appeared in 1765. It was
       intended as a defense of a proposal under review by the Council of Castile that would require royal approval before a religious institution
       could acquire further property. Campomanes argued, as others had before him, that since canon law prevented the clergy from selling
       properties of religious bodies, eventually all property would belong to the church unless a restraint

       [45] Ibid., ff. 205–6. The memoir of 1794 that Soler refers to is found in part in Sempere y Guarinos, Historia de los vínculos, 417–25. I
       do not know the one of 1796, but it may be the memoir of Juan Sempere y Guarinos given to Godoy in Nov. 1797, ibid., 431–32.


                                                                                           ― 90 ―
       were placed on its acquisition. He went on to say, "If already at the beginning of the last century it was believed advisable (conveniente
       ), as we have seen, to dismember the superfluous property that the church already then had in excess, . . . how much more true this is
       today, given the unchecked expansion of acquisitions in the century and a half that has elapsed since then." [46]
             The Council of Castile failed to recommend the law, convinced by opposing arguments that the manos muertas were not yet so vast
       as to pose a serious threat. [47] The reformers turned their attention elsewhere, as the need for food became the most urgent item on
       their agenda. When they looked again at land belonging to the church, it was with the idea of settling farmers on it. Then they discovered
       that there were two types of religious properties, those that belonged to recognized ecclesiastical entities like parish churches, cathedral
       chapters, and religious orders, and those that could be considered part of the public domain. The latter were properties that had been
       donated as endowments to pay for the performance of religious services and processions in memory of defunct donors (aniversarios and
       memorias ), to maintain shrines and altars devoted to the worship of saints, to contribute toward the activities of religious confraternities,
       and to support charitable establishments such as orphanages, asylums, and hospitals. [48] These endowments were all known familiarly as
       obras pías. Another type of fund, more ambiguous in its nature, were the patronatos and capellanías, funds to provide income for
       members of the clergy. Many were sinecures, in the proper sense of the term, posts without souls to care for, and can be loosely
       translated as benefices. Nomination to patronatos de legos were made by laymen, presumably descendants of the founder, and thus were
       a kind of family property; nomination to capellanías came from ecclesiastical authorities such as bishops. [49]
             As a rule the properties of all these foundations and funds belonged to manos muertas. The catastro of the Marqués de la Ensenada
       listed them under "ecclesiastical property," and they were administered by the secular or regular clergy or by organizations like
       confraternities that were tied to the churches. Royal officials nevertheless distinguished be-

       [46] Chap. 20, quoted in Justo Fernández, "'Regalía,'" 74.

       [47] Ibid., 78–79.

       [48] For examples of such bequests in sixteenth-century Seville, see Pike, Aristocrats, 117.

       [49] Patronatos de legos were also known as capellanías laicales (see circular, 3 Mar. 1807, AHN, Hac., libro 8058, no. 6871). I am
       indebted to M. Christian Hermann for helping to clarify this point.


                                                                                           ― 91 ―
       tween their properties and those belonging outright to churches and religious orders, as is evident in the recommendation of Olavide that
       "the government make many small owners with the lands that it has in its possession, such as those belonging to the towns [los propios
       y arbitrios], those of the military orders, those that belonged to the Company [of Jesus] and those belonging to capellanías and obras
       pías."[50]
             The reformers were very critical of the state of the lands belonging to obras pías and capellanías. Francisco Bruna observed, "There
       is nothing more common in Andalusia than the untilled scrubby lands and unkept vineyards of abandoned capellanías. When one sees a



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
