Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       the measure to Carlos IV in August 1798.


       [72] Ibid., 369–70.

       [73] Ibid., 401. 253,028, 894 reales.

       [74] ANP, AF 1608 , 2 : 11. 300,001,129 reales.

       [75] Godoy, Memorias 1 : 369.


                                                                                          ― 119 ―




       Chapter V—
       The Extent of Disentail
       It is relatively easy to follow the legislation on disentail in these years. The decrees, cédulas, and circulars can be found in various
       collections in the Archivo Histórico Nacional in Madrid. It proved much more difficult to study the sales themselves and the other
       transactions that resulted from the legislation. I was unable to locate the records of the Amortization Fund and Consolidation Fund (Caja
       de Amortización and Caja de Consolidación).[1] At the local level, the provincial historical archives are assembling the past records of the
       notaries. The volumes from these years contain copies of the original notarized deeds of sale of the disentailed properties. Here one can
       find samples of the sales, like the one described in the first pages of this book, but it is impossible to study the process throughout the
       monarchy, because many volumes of notarial records have been lost. Even if they had not been, the task would be forbidding. The deeds
       of sale are bound along with the other notarized documents of the time and can be located only by a search through the entire notarial
       collections for these years. Each deed of sale is lengthy, at times having as many as fifty folios. Anyone who has worked with notarial
       archives is aware of how long it takes to review them for one province, let alone fifty. Another possible source is the records of the
       former

       [1] Some of the records of the Caja de Consolidación are in the archive of the Dirección General del Tesoro, Deuda Pública y Clases
       Pasivas, in Alcalá de Henares (see Cuartas Rivero, "Documentos"). When I checked with this archive in the 1960s, its catalogue did not
       yet list these records (except for a volume of 1824), and I have not used them.


                                                                                          ― 120 ―
       contadurías de hipotecas (property record offices), which are also being collected in the provincial historical archives. Carlos III founded
       these offices in 1768 in the cabezas de partido to record liens and exchanges of property. [2] The instructions on desamortización of
       January 1799 ordered the contadurías de hipotecas to record the sales. [3] It is easier to follow the transactions here than in the notarial
       documents, because the offices recorded the essential details in brief, and they contain very few other entries in these years. They are, in
       fact, one of the basic sources for the study of disentail in individual towns in Part 2 of this book. Nevertheless, in the provincial historical
       archives of Jaén and Salamanca, which I used, a number of registers of the contadurías de hipotecas are missing, and one suspects that
       the same is the case in other provinces.
             Fortunately, I located a source that is relatively complete for the entire monarchy. From the outset the Amortization Fund and later
       the Consolidation Fund issued notarized acknowledgments or deeds of deposit (escrituras de imposición ) that recognized the royal debt
       to the former owners of the properties or redeemed censos (the obras pías and other ecclesiastical institutions and the entailed family
       estates). These deeds of deposit tell us the amount of the royal debt resulting from each transaction as well as other pertinent
       information and calculate how much the fund would pay the former owner annually in interest. According to the accepted practice, the
       notary kept a copy of each deed. At first, the deeds of deposit were delivered by provincial notaries, but the funds rapidly centralized the
       activity in Madrid, using the notary Juan Manuel López Fando and after 1807 Feliciano del Corral. Their records (protocolos ) are now in
       the Archivo Histórico de Protocolos of Madrid, a total of 147 bound volumes and 17 unbound bundles with 78,428 deeds of deposit dated
       from 1798 to 1808.[4]
             The number of deeds is enough in itself to suggest that Soler's appeal to the avarice of the king's subjects was indeed successful.
       The deeds consist of printed forms of three pages, recognizing the royal debt to the former owner, with blanks in which to record by
       hand the details of each deposit. With time, in order to reduce the paper work, the notary's office adopted the practice of including in one
       deed the proceeds of the sales of various properties when they had belonged to the same institution or estate. Thus there were more
       sales made than the number of deeds.

       [2] Pragmática sanción, 21 Jan. 1768, AHN Hac., libro 8025, no. 2167.

       [3] RC, 29 Jan. 1799, AHN, CCR, no. 1240, art. 26.

       [4] See Appendix F.


                                                                                          ― 121 ―


         Table 5.1. Deposits in Amortization and Consolidation Funds Recorded by
                                Madrid Notaries, 1798–1807



                                                           Thousands of Reales de
                                                                  Vellón




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
