Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       subject to the daily demands of the monarchy. To emphasize the importance of the measure it was published as a pragmatic sanction,
       equal in force to a law approved by the Cortes. The public crier of Madrid proclaimed it before the royal palace and at the Gate of Alcalá
       to the sound of trumpets and drums. [55] Indeed the measure was to have lasting effect, for the commission, soon

       [53] Ibid.

       [54] A later cédula spelled out the new charges for gracias al sacar: RC, 19 May 1801, AHN, Hac., libro 8053 no. 6184. It also ordered an
       increase of one-fifth in the bula de la cruzada, a donation collected each year from all communicants. A subsequent instruction ordered
       this increase to take effect in 1802 (Circular, 16 Sept. 1801, ibid., no. 6232).

       [55] Pragmática sanción, 30 Aug. 1800, AHN, CCR, no. 1322; also in AHN, Hac., libro 8052, no. 6072.



                                                                                          ― 114 ―
       known as the Caja de Consolidación (Consolidation Fund), became a separate state treasury with its own income and capital and played a
       major role in the remainder of Carlos IV's reign.[56] Among its tasks was to administer the desamortización of ecclesiastical and
       mayorazgo properties and collect the resulting capital.
             Despite the public solemnities, the discount on the vales did not budge. In desperation the king once again victimized the church.
       On 3 October 1800 Pius VII granted Carlos IV one-ninth of all the tithes collected in Spain, over and above the tercias reales (two-ninths
       of the tithes) that the king had received since the thirteenth century. In return Carlos IV graciously agreed to give up the 7-million-real
       annual subsidy that he had collected from the church since 1794.[57] And still the royal maw pursued the clergy. On 10 February 1801
       the pope signed another breve approving more impositions on the church of Spain to apply to the redemption of the vales. Giving his
       approval, in effect, to measures already outlined in the pragmatic sanction of 1800, the pope ceded to the king the first year's income
       from all benefices, except those that involved the cure of souls, and from episcopal pensions. In return, the king gave up income from
       vacant benefices that Pius VI had authorized for the amortization of vales in 1795.[ 58] The arrangement, which ended the temptation to
       keep benefices vacant, may have been a fair quid pro quo, but the pope also gave the king for ten years the excess income from tithes
       not payable to parish priests and churches or needed to support the other clergy at a decent level, although the breve did not specify
       how this amount was to be determined. Finally, the breve also applied to the first year's income from encomiendas of the military orders,
       whose beneficiaries were not the clergy but the nobility. [59]


       4

       The fiscal history of these years shows that Soler's campaign to disentail ecclesiastical and family properties was only part of a broadly
       conceived program to save the royal credit. Threatened with bankruptcy, the gov-

       [56] Because the Consolidation Fund collected its own revenues, the records of the royal treasury given in Barbier and Klein,
       "Revolutionary Wars," and in Cuenca Esteban, "Ingresos del estado," do not tell the full story after 1800.

       [57] Papal breve, 3 Oct. 1800, published in RC, 26 Jan. 1801, AHN, Hac., libro 8052 no. 6094.

       [58] See above, Chapter 3, section 1.

       [59] Papal breve, 10 Feb. 1801, published in RC, 24 Apr. 1801, AHN, Hac., libro 8053 no. 6140.


                                                                                          ― 115 ―
       ernment gave the appearance of grabbing at straws. Yet even in the midst of the worst crisis in a century, it sought to maintain the spirit
       of tax reform followed since the days of the Marqués de la Ensenada, placing the new burdens not on the poor, who bore the brunt of
       the rentas provinciales, but on the wealthy and the clergy. The instructions on how to impose the forced subsidy of 300 million reales for
       1800 ordered the towns to avoid burdening the poor; the levy on carriages and servants introduced the concept of a tax rising
       progressively with the wealth of the subject. Similarly, the instructions to disentail obras pías spared until further notice the properties
       belonging to hospitals, asylums, and other institutions dedicated to the care of the poor. No doubt, the motives were practical as well as
       altruistic, for the rich had more wealth to tap, but the aim of a more just society was as present in the tax measures as in the decrees
       on disentail. And the better society that the royal advisers conceived needed an end to restrictions on the free use of the means of
       production—land and capital—with rewards for the enterprising person, whether he was a farmer with savings or a second son who was
       kind to his parents. Permanent debts, including emphyteutic quitrents, would vanish, along with selected permanent entails, but fixed-
       term borrowing for economic development would not be affected.
             Many of the clergy resented being the prime targets of the king's decrees. Although the king maintained that the endowments of
       obras pías and other ecclesiastical foundations covered by the disentail were public property and thus subject to his sovereign authority,
       the common opinion of both clergy and laity, revealed for example in the catastro of mid-century, held that they belonged to the church.
       For all the king's confident assertion, the royal act flew in the face of clerical privilege, and many clerics responded with stubborn
       resistance. The royal cédulas and instructions referred frequently to inexcusable delays of ecclesiastical administrators. [60] In October
       1800 a cédula repeated to the ecclesiastical authorities that they were obligated to report all properties subject to sale and gave them a
       limit of thirty days, after which the royal judges were to intercede. The cédula reminded the ecclesiastics that exact information on the
       properties was available in the massive surveys carried out for the tax reforms in the realms of Aragon early in the century and for the
       catastro of the Marqués de la Ensenada in Castile. [61] It warned

       [60] For example, Circulares, Apr. 1799 and 13 Apr. 1802, ibid., libro 6012.

       [61] RC, 21 Oct. 1800, AHN, CCR, no. 1334. The catastro of La Ensenada is referred to as the "papeles de la Única Contribución." I have
       seen no records of sales of crown property.


                                                                                          ― 116 ―
       against "confabulations" between owners or administrators of pious foundations and the justicias of the pueblos to delay the sales. To



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
