Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       can serve to establish a rough concept of the provincial structures of agrarian property, for it gives the value of the different agricultural
       products in each province.
             From Appendix E we learn that in most provinces one can estimate that the mean face value of a deed of deposit was
       approximately thirty times the cadastral value of the same piece of property (a ratio of 30 : 1). In provinces where the proportion of
       improved land was high, the ratio would have been higher than 30 : 1 because we found that buyers in the disentail offered a higher
       markup over the cadastral value for improved land than for arable. These provinces, according to the Censo de frutos, were Córdoba,
       Galicia, Granada, Murcia, and Seville. The proper ratio appears to be 36 : 1 for Granada and 34 : 1 for the other four. Madrid also needs
       a special ratio because a large amount of urban property was sold here, at a high markup. A ratio of 43 : 1 is applied. We can now divide
       the total amount of the deeds of deposit for ecclesiastical disentail in each province (Table 5.3, Column B) by 30 (or the larger number
       for the six provinces noted) to obtain the approximate cadastral value of the property disentailed (Table 5.4, Column B). With this
       information, we can calculate a preliminary estimate of the percentage disentailed in each province (Table 5.4, Column C).
              Except for Madrid, the percentages in Column C vary between 5 and 28. The figure 50 percent for Madrid is not correct. If the
       buyer of a property did not live in the province where it was located, he could opt to make his payment to the commissioner in his
       province. The records show that many residents of Madrid adopted this option, buying properties of considerable value in other provinces
       and having the sales recorded in Madrid. As a result the Madrid total represents more than the amount sold in its province. Let us
       suppose that 25 percent of the ecclesiastical properties of Madrid were sold, a credible figure since there were many sales. We must
       distribute the remainder of the amount deposited in Madrid among the other provinces. [16] The distribution can be made proportional to
       the amount sold in each province, but the three bordering provinces, Guadalajara, Toledo, and Segovia, deserve more. I

       [14] Censo de frutos y manufacturas.

       [15] Fontana Lázaro, " 'Censo de frutos y manufacturas.' "

       [16] We must use the ratio 30 : 1, not 43 : 1 of Madrid. The provinces of Castile represent 79 percent of all the sales outside Madrid; we
       must distribute only this much of the remainder among them.



                                                                                          ― 130 ―




                                                                                    Map 5.1.
                                                     Castile, Proportion of Ecclesiastical Property Disentailed, 1798–1808
             have assigned them a proportion double that of the other provinces. The result is that one must increase the amount of sales in
       provinces outside Madrid by 8.06 percent and in Guadalajara, Toledo, and Segovia by 16.12 percent. Raising Table 5.4, Column B, by
       these percentages, one obtains the results in Column D. The corrected percentages of ecclesiastical property disentailed are in Column E.
       They run from 6 to 30 percent.[17]
            The significance of this table can be better understood by looking at the results in Map 5.1. It becomes clear that the disentail had
       more effect in the south than elsewhere. There is an impressive block of provinces from Seville to Murcia where 19 percent or more of
       the properties owned or controlled by the church were sold, and in Jaén the propor-




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
