Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                     Map 5.2.
                                                            Castile, Proportion of All Property Disentailed, 1798–1808

       5

       Thanks to the catastro it is also possible to calculate the approximate proportion of all the properties in Castile that changed owners in
       these years as a result of desamortización. The procedure is identical: obtain the total value of the property in each province according to
       the catastro and compare it with the total of the deeds of deposits (in this case using both ecclesiastical and family entails). To make the
       comparison, we use the same ratios of deeds of deposit to cadastral value as in Table 5.4. The results are given in Table 5.5 and Map
       5.2.
             The proportion of all real property that was disentailed in Castile then is estimated to be 3 percent. The highest percentage of land
       that changed hands was in Andalusia, Salamanca, and Madrid, 4 percent or more. In second rank were Zamora and the belt from Burgos
       to Extremadura, including this time Toledo, where 3 percent was sold. In other


                                                                                          ― 136 ―
       regions, the northwest of Old Castile and León and the south and east of New Castile, with Soria and Murcia, the figure was below 3
       percent.[28] But in Salamanca it reached 7 percent, and in Seville, 6 percent. In the first, approximately one property out of every
       fourteen—in the towns and the countryside—changed hands, and in the second one out of seventeen, and in the rest of Andalusia one
       out of twenty or twenty-five. Since these are only provincial averages, there were towns and cities where the transfer was greater, as
       appears to have been the case in Madrid.
            Andalusia and most of the province of Salamanca lay southwest of the Salamanca-Albacete line. The disentail of Carlos IV hit
       hardest in the region of large properties, the areas that the counselors of Carlos III had singled out as in most need of agricultural reform
       and that have been marked by great estates to the present day. In due course we shall have to consider whether the desamortización
       served to improve conditions, as its proponents hoped, or exacerbated an already bad situation, as the critics of desamortización hold.


       [28] Although according to our calculations Murcia had the highest proportion of ecclesiastical disentail, the proportion of all property
       disentailed was low because the province had relatively little ecclesiastical property, according to the catastro. One may question the
       accuracy of the catastro for Murcia, but there is no easy way to check it.


                                                                                          ― 137 ―




       Chapter VI—


http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
