Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [17] There have been some recent studies of the desamortización of Carlos IV, but they do not provide provincial totals that can be
       checked against Tables 5.3 and 5.4: Campoy, Política fiscal; Marcos Martín, "Desamortización"; and Pardo Tomás, "Desamortización."


                                                                                          ― 131 ―
       tion was 16 percent. Other areas of high sales were Salamanca (20 percent) and Madrid (25 percent, although the figure for Madrid is
       arbitrary, as we saw). At the other extreme are two blocks of provinces where 10 percent or less was sold: the northwest sector of the
       kingdoms of León and Old Castile, including Galicia, and all New Castile except Madrid and Extremadura, together with Soria, which
       borders on this block to the north. Between these two blocks runs a belt of provinces from Burgos to Extremadura, including Segovia and
       Ávila, where between 14 and 17 percent was sold. Because of the number of unknowns in our calculations, one cannot expect the
       percentages to be exact, but the pattern revealed by the map is hardly likely to be the result of a coincidence of errors.
             Probably the most important factor in accounting for the pattern is the proportion of ecclesiastical property that belonged to obras
       pías, memorias, and other foundations subject to the decree of 1798. It was very likely greater in the areas of higher disentail, but there
       is no easy way to check this assumption. Human factors also played a part, for much depended on the dedication and efficiency of the
       royal commissioners in charge of the operation. On the other hand, factors such as regional types of agriculture or local weather did not
       have much effect. An analysis of the total value of sales in each province in each year produces no regional patterns, as one would
       expect if the kind or size of harvests had played a role. A large proportion of sales in one province might occur in a year during which
       there was little activity in neighboring provinces. (There was, however, a decline in sales in most provinces in 1803, 1804, and 1805,
       years of bad harvests and rural crisis.)[18]
             The dedication of the local commissioners was critical, as the royal advisers were aware. Repeatedly in the early years, the king
       issued circulars to the intendants urging them to put pressure on their subordinates and local justicias to hasten the sales. [19] The
       archives of the ministry of hacienda include a copy of an order dated November 1799 from the intendant of Seville to the justicias of the
       province to push the disentail, threatening, if they did not, to send a royal agent at their expense to act for them. [20] In 1804, when
       sales were notably slow, the king through the president of the Consolidation Fund once more pressed the intendants to use all their
       energies to hasten the affair. Again the intendant of Seville passed the word on to the justicias of his province, with the warn-

       [18] For the annual sales for all Spain, see Appendix F.

       [19] Circulares, 18 Nov. 1799, 26 Mar. 1800, 7 May 1800, AHN, Hac., libro 6012.

       [20] Circular, 15 Nov. 1799, ibid.


                                                                                          ― 132 ―
       ing, "If as a result of your inactive disposition I do not see all the good effects that ought to be forthcoming, I shall take against you the
       most serious measure that corresponds to your indolence in a matter so stringently urged by higher authority."[21] Seville was one of the
       regions where a high percentage of ecclesiastical property was sold, but it is impossible to tell from the evidence here if the intendant's
       threats overcame the perennial problem of administrative linkage with local officials whose loyalties lay elsewhere or if the province had a
       greater than average number of eager potential buyers with disposable capital.
            A judge of the Cancillería of Granada, who bitterly opposed the disentail, later described in scathing terms the attempts of the
       government to force its officials to carry out its instructions. All to little avail, the judge recalled: "But despite such efforts the truth
       triumphed, de jure and de facto, and in accord with it they [the agents of the crown and the prelates of the church] remained remiss in
       the consummation of the sales, presenting a tacit resistance in this prudent way, in default of open resistance, which they could not and
       should not oppose to an irresistible force." [22]
             As the judge pointed out, the attitude of the church authorities was also a factor. Capellanías and charitable foundations whose
       properties had been donated by religious institutions could not be sold without their permission.[23] It is easy to imagine that few
       prelates accepted with alacrity the royal invitation of 1798 to proceed with disentail. One who did was the Jansenist bishop of Salamanca,
       Antonio Tavira y Almanzán, a friend of Jovellanos,[24] who favored the undertaking. Many properties of capellanías were sold in
       Salamanca, but few in Jaén. [25] Besides Madrid, Salamanca was the only province outside Andalusia that had more than 19 percent of its
       church properties sold, Jaén the only province in Andalusia below that figure. The attitude of servants of church and state may explain
       these peculiarities in provincial responses; nevertheless, the overall pattern observed in Map 5.1 must reflect major regional differences in
       the nature of ecclesiastical property, that is, conditions produced by previous history.
            According to these calculations, 15 percent of all ecclesiastical property in Castile was disentailed. It is true that this proportion is
       based on

       [21] Circular, 5 Nov. 1804, and letter of intendant, 14 Nov. 1804, ibid.

       [22] Reguera Valdelomar, Peticiones, 125.

       [23] Circular, 18 Nov. 1799, AHN, Hac., libro 6012.

       [24] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 415–16; Saugnieux, Prélat éclairé, 269–70.

       [25] As determined by the study of the towns in Part 2.


                                                                                          ― 133 ―
       the only total figure available for ecclesiastical property derived from the catastro made under Fernando VI, but the holdings of the
       church would not have increased much by the reign of Carlos IV. This was no longer a time of large grants for religious ends, and the
       government frowned on any increase in manos muertas. In making these calculations I have been careful not to overestimate the
       proportion sold, leaning rather in the other direction. Fortunately, there is independent confirmation of its extent. Among the questions
       that Napoleon posed the Spanish bureaucrats in 1808 were the following: "What is the amount of capital that is the product of the sales
       of the properties of charitable foundations [obras pías]? Of the clergy? What is the estimate of how much remains to be sold of the
       properties of charitable foundations and of the clergy, in comparison with the quantity of both kinds of property whose sale has already
       been ordered?" The Spanish officials did not give an exact answer to the first question because no one had kept a separate tally of



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
