Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       [7] The data on the Armuña region refer to one of the geographic zones into which I divided the province for analysis (see Appendix Q).
       The data come from an analysis of the provincial returns of the catastro, AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, libros 7476, 7477, 7478, in
       each volume under letra D, "Producto de cada medida de tierra en reales de vellón."


                                                                                            ― 171 ―


                        Table 7.2. Estimated Grain Harvest, La Mata, 1753



                                           Fanegas of grain b per
                                            Year per Fanega of
                                                   Land              Gross Annual Harvest



        Class of Land     Total Area a      Wheat         Rye         Wheat         Rye



             First           245.1             4           —           980           —



           Second            523.6             3           —          1,571          —



            Third            212.8             2           —           426           —



           Fourth             35.3             —            3           —           106



            Total           1,016.8                                   2,977         106



           SOURCE . Preliminary summaries in La Mata, maest. segl. and maest. ecles.



          a In fanegas. The fanega of land in La Mata was .447 hectare (see Table N.5).



          b The basic volumetric measure of grain was the fanega, the same name as the
        basic measure of land. The standard volumetric fanega was 55.20 liters (according
        to RD, 21 Nov. 1804, AHN, Hac., libro 8056, no. 6625: 1 hectoliter = 1 fanega, 9
         celemines, 2 cuartillos, 1.9 ochavillos; 12 celemines = 1 fanega; 4 cuartillos = 1
                                 celemín; 2 ochavillos = 1 cuartillo).


       tion in the fertile grain regions of Castile, which could produce wheat regularly, was to establish large fields within each término,
       alternating between a year of grain and another of fallow, half the fields in one cycle and half in the other. After the summer wheat
       harvest, the fields would lie untilled through the winter, and the animals would pasture on the stubble (rastrojo ) and weeds. Fallow
       plowing followed in the spring, to renew the soil and retard evaporation, until time for the autumn sowing of the next wheat crop.
       Henceforth all farmers of a village had to follow the same pattern, called familiarly año y vez, but each farmer needed to have plots
       scattered through all the hojas in order to equalize his harvest.[8]
             The information in the catastro provides an easy estimate of the annual harvest of La Mata, since it includes the number of fanegas
       there were of each quality of land and the size of crop each quality produced annually per fanega. The latter figure was obtained by
       halving the expected harvest because each plot was sown only every other year (Table 7.2). These figures can hardly be expected to be
       exact. The makers of the catastro did not survey the plots but had to accept the best estimate of their size, and it was a matter of
       judgment into what class of land they

       [8] García Fernández, "Champs ouverts," 705–9.


                                                                                            ― 172 ―
       assigned each plot, since there was a continuum in the quality of the soil from the poorest to the best.
            A more reliable measure of the harvests is provided by the tithes (diezmos ) reported in the catastro for the five-year period ending
       in 1752. In describing the different plots, the catastro defined them as being planted in either wheat or rye, but in fact the tithe returns
       show that the farmers also planted other crops, barley, oats, algarrobas (carob beans), and garbanzos (chick-peas). The farmers paid
       one-tenth of their harvest of all these crops as tithes. [9]
             The tithes fell into three categories. The larger part were lumped together for distribution to those institutions that were entitled to a
       share of the town tithe fund, the cilla . These were known as the divisible tithes, or partible . The property of certain religious institutions
       was exempt from tithes, and the owners required the tenants who farmed these lands to pay them a substitute for the tithes. These
       payments were called the diezmos privativos, or more commonly the horros, from the expression horro de diezmos, exempt from tithes.
       Rather than a stated proportion of the harvest, the horros were a fixed payment, such as some proportion of the rent, and were usually
       less than a full tithe. [10] The property of the benefice of the parish church (emolument of the priest), of the fabric (building and
       maintenance fund) of the church, and of a monastery and two convents in Salamanca enjoyed this privilege. [11] Finally, by a special
       concession, the cathedral of Salamanca received for its fabric the tithes of the fourth largest tithe payer of each parish in this region, the
       cuarto dezmero .[12] The horros were paid into the tithe fund, which then distributed them to the owners of the land; the tithes of the
       cuarto dezmero, however, never entered the tithe fund but went directly to the cathedral. [13]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
