Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       nated as the scheming tyrant, and Carlos IV, contemned as his ineffectual dupe.
             Perhaps more permanent in its effects was the blow desamortización dealt to the right of the entail of property, the traditional
       defense of the privileged orders on which the monarchy rested, the nobility and the clergy. Of course, in his decrees the king never
       questioned the right of entail, just as he sought to recognize the proper legal rights of the privileged orders; he proposed only to change
       the nature of the entailed property from real estate to interest-bearing royal obligations. But, as a violent critic of the desamortización
       wrote after the accession of Fernando VII, "the least cautious man would not place the capital of a thousand reales in them [royal notes]
       with the confident hope of recovering it, or even of collecting the interest for the first year." [86] Religious and charitable institutions
       suffered the most from the failure of the crown to live up to its obligations, but so did the owners of family estates who sold their
       entailed properties. The precedent of the liquidation of the real property of manos muertas and mayorazgos now existed to guide future
       Spanish legislators, who were to be faced continuously with an unmanageable national debt.
             Yet the idea of disentail anteceded the fiscal crisis imposed by the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. The reformers of Carlos III
       had conceived it as a way to regenerate the Spanish countryside, to create a flourishing class of farmers and strengthen the national
       economy. The sale of church properties to the highest bidder was a far cry from Olavide's call for the free distribution of vacant lands to
       indigent peasants and laborers, but its authors also counted on it to improve the common welfare. They were guided by the new political
       economy that, in the elegant language of Jovellanos, argued that free property would sooner or later end up in the form and hands that
       would produce the most, that is, they thought, in the hands of independent small farmers.
             Despite the demands of war, reform remained an objective of the advisers of Carlos IV almost to the end. The measures adopted to
       raise money and to guarantee new loans and issues of vales reales regularly involved levies on the privileged orders. An obvious reason,
       of course, was that here was where the money was, and expediency alone can explain the resort to increased duties on imports and
       exports. But the royal ministers were guided by more than mere expediency. Not until 1805, after two years of disastrous harvests and
       famine, with America

       [86] Reguera Valdelomar, Peticiones, 23.



                                                                                          ― 157 ―
       once again cut off by British fleets and Napoleon importuning their treasure, did they abandon the policy of moving from regressive to
       progressive taxes with the imposts on wine and untithed harvests. Disentail was not a tax, yet it offered a way to tap the savings of all
       classes without hurting their income. At the same time, as its advocates regularly pointed out, alienation of ecclesiastical property would
       put it in the hands of taxpayers and thus immediately increase royal revenues. The disentail of Carlos IV must be understood not only as
       a wartime measure but as part of a broad plan for economic reform.
             Whatever the ideology of the royal counselors, it was utopian to think that the national calamities would not affect peasants as well
       as lords. In 1803 the king permitted buyers of disentailed land to raise the rent or evict the tenants, contrary to existing laws.[87] The
       measure came right out of Jovellanos, who denounced rent control as an "aberration of reason and zeal," but peasants did not read
       Jovellanos, and coming on top of the first disastrous harvest, the measure could deal many of them a cruel blow.
              Other blows were more direct. Ever since the Middle Ages, the crown and the church had worked out a system to exploit the
       harvests for their own support. Unlike many of the royal taxes, which had long ago been compounded (encabezado) with the municipal
       governments at fixed rates that no longer reflected the current inflated price level, the tithes, first fruits, and similar charges on the
       agricultural producers were effectively geared to take immediate advantage of any change in output or prices. In this they partook of a
       major characteristic of tariffs on external trade, which made new duties such a tempting expedient to relieve fiscal needs, but an increase
       in tithes posed no threat to economic activity as higher duties might well do. The tercias reales and excusado had long provided the king
       with his share of the tithes, the machinery for collection was maintained well oiled, and his subjects were indoctrinated with the belief
       that the Lord above had ordained these levies.
              But the system had its loopholes, and the exigencies of the treasury inspired the royal advisers to plug them. In 1796 the collection
       of tithes was instituted on harvests previously exempt because grown on lands belonging to privileged religious bodies, and the decree
       gave the king his customary two-ninths of the proceeds. [88] The owners, presumably, would

       [87] RC, 15 Sept. 1803, AHN, Hac., libro 8055, no. 6476. See above, Chapter 4, section 2.

       [88] RC, 8 June 1796, AHN, Hac., libro 8048, no. 5313. See above, Chapter 3, section 1.


                                                                                          ― 158 ―
       be the ones to suffer, since they had been taking advantage of the exemption in the level of the rent they collected, but peasants too
       would inevitably be hurt. The tax of 1805 on untithed harvests struck at another loophole, this time as an undisguised levy on the
       producers, for no new tithe was involved. The clergy could use both innovations to rouse the resentment of the peasants against Madrid,
       and Godoy obviously thought that many did.
             The unsuccessful reforms of Louis XVI in the 1780s, Alexis de Tocqueville pointed out long ago, showed the common people of
       France how much the privileges of the nobility were costing them and undermined the stability of the regime, preparing the way for the
       French holocaust. [89] Reform in Spain at the end of the old regime had much the same effect. How revolutionary Carlos IV's counselors
       were can be appreciated by comparing their achievements with the failure of Louis XVI to persuade the privileged orders of France to
       relieve the desperate straits of his treasury. The untoward sequel to the righteous obstinacy of the French aristocrats was not lost on the
       king, lords, and prelates south of the border. The affected sectors grumbled at Carlos IV's impositions and dragged their feet, but they
       did not resist openly. They did, however, unburden their anger in a campaign to discredit the Prince of the Peace with Spaniards of all
       ranks. Disaffection had become so universal that the privileged classes, "lords of consciences and opinion," as Godoy termed them, had
       the common people in their hands. The result was the rising at Aranjuez and the unbounded celebration that swept Spain at the news of
       the fall of Godoy and advent of Fernando VII, only to turn to unrestrained anger when Napoleon hoodwinked the innocent young king and
       foisted his own brother on Spain. Desamortización thus played a key role in the fall of the absolute monarchy.
             Perhaps, however, as its authors expected, desamortización prepared a better future for the people. To begin to assess whether this
       was in fact the case, we must turn from the thoughts and acts of counselors and kings to the lives of the ordinary men who worked the
       land in the towns and villages or exploited it by the sweat of others, from Olavide and Jovellanos, Soler and Carlos IV, to the labrador
       Francisco González and the rentero Francisco García Serrano, the capellán don Alonso Molina de la Zerda and the three distinguished
       spinsters doña Margarita, doña Inés, and doña María Josefa Montilla y Zevallos.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
