Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



       [89] Tocqueville, Old Regime, 180–203 (book 3, chaps. 5–7).


                                                                                          ― 159 ―




       PART II—
       SEVEN TOWNS
       The first part of this book has studied the course of royal policy toward agriculture in the second half of the eighteenth century. It
       observed the failure of Carlos III's attempts to increase the number of small farmers and the modifications in the philosophy of
       agricultural reform and the demands of the royal fisc that culminated in the disentail of ecclesiastical properties under Carlos IV. The
       second part aims to be a parallel study of the evolution of rural society and agriculture at the local level. Its subject is seven communities
       in the provinces of Salamanca and Jaén, two provinces in distinct parts of Castile that experienced high levels of disentail. In each
       community it will analyze the farming patterns, the social structure, the level of income of the communities as a whole and of the
       occupational sectors within them, the economic relations with the outside world and their effect on local conditions, and the power
       structures. When possible, it will indicate the direction of evolution, especially of the population, the agricultural patterns, and income. For
       each community it will then observe the process of desamortización and relate it to prior conditions and current developments. This part
       thus proposes to describe, in these individual cases, the local reality that royal policy sought to improve and the effect on the local reality
       of the execution of the royal decrees. One may then form some judgment of the accuracy of the perceptions of the king's counselors and
       of the wisdom of their policies. The developments in seven towns can also suggest conclusions on the wider evolution of Spanish
       agriculture and rural society at the end of the old regime. These conclusions can be put to more general


                                                                                          ― 160 ―
       tests in Part 3, which deals with the provinces of Salamanca and Jaén as a whole.
             Within these provinces, I selected for detailed study rural communities in which the Madrid records show that there were numerous
       sales and for which the provincial archives have full or nearly full records. The two major sources at this level are the catastro, or survey
       of individual and institutional property and personal income, executed in the provinces of Castile in the 1750s under the direction of the
       Marqués de la Ensenada and the archives of the contadurías de hipotecas founded by Carlos III in 1768.
             Undertaken to make possible the substitution of a single tax on income to replace the complex tax structure of Castile inherited
       from the Middle Ages and the Habsburg era, the catastro is one of the most extensive sources in existence for social history in the early
       modern period. Its basic feature is a series of town-by-town surveys conducted under the guidance of royal agents. Where preserved
       these town surveys are bound in volumes, with several volumes for each place unless it was tiny. [1] The first part, known as the
       respuestas generales or autos generales, consists of answers to forty questions covering the geographic limits of the town; the number
       and kinds of buildings; the crops raised and their average price; the different qualities of land in the town and their average yield; the
       income from livestock, forests, and other natural resources; the amount of tithes, seigneurial dues, royal taxes, and other impositions on
       the town; and the number of people engaged in each kind of occupation, with their daily wage or annual income. This part is followed by
       the libro personal de legos and the libro personal de eclesiásticos. These are lists of all the individuals in each household, the first of
       laymen and the second of households headed by an ecclesiastic. They provide the name and occupation of the heads of household (male
       or female) and a list of all others in the household with their relationship to the head of household. Frequently all personal names are
       given and the ages of all males. Much miscellaneous information is also preserved in these volumes, but it varies from town to town.
       They are invaluable sources for studying family size and structure and its relation to social class and occupation. The third main part of
       each town's catastro, the most extensive, is formed by the libro maestro seglar and the libro maestro eclesiástico. These give household-
       by-household and institu-

       [1] See Matilla, Única contribución, 77 n. 64, for a list of those provinces where the volumes are in existence. It records Jaén as missing,
       but this is incorrect; most of the volumes are available.


                                                                                          ― 161 ―
       tion-by-institution surveys of all the property, real and animal, in the town. They give the name and occupation of the owner, followed by
       his livestock (pigs, sheep, goats, and larger animals, not dogs, chickens, and small animals), his houses, and his fields. Individual income
       from official positions, professions, and commerce is also listed, but not from daily wages and sale of the products of handicrafts (the
       latter information appears in the respuestas generales). Real properties are identified by their location within the town limits (property
       that the vecinos owned in other towns would be listed in their catastros) with the names of owners of adjoining properties, number of
       rooms and size of buildings, extent and quality of fields, number of trees in orchards, and so forth. Municipal and ecclesiastical properties
       are surveyed in equal detail (the latter in separate volumes), and the volumes can be hundreds of folios long.
              The planners of the catastro took pains to keep the records of lay property (including municipal property) separate from those of
       ecclesiastical property. The latter records served the crown well when Carlos IV began the disentail of the endowments of obras pías.
       They are also useful to the historian, for they make possible the identification of the properties sold and their place in the economy of the
       town. Furthermore, they can be presumed to be fairly accurate, because the volumes were read aloud at town meetings that often lasted
       more than a full day and were then certified as correct by the leading vecinos. It would have been difficult for any privileged person to
       falsify his record unless he had the town completely under his thumb. In only a few cases have I found properties sold that do not appear
       in the catastro.
             The other main source at the provincial level is the records of the contadurías de hipotecas. By a pragmatic sanction of 1768, Carlos
       III ordered each cabeza de partido to establish an oficio de hipotecas under the charge of the notary of the municipal council. It was to
       keep a record of transfers of real property and liens on property. These offices later became known as contadurías de hipotecas. In the
       nineteenth century their name changed to registros de propiedad, as they are known today. From my experience, as late as 1969 the
       registry of sales or transfers of property with these offices was voluntary, and the archives indicate that the contadurías were not very
       active until the beginning of disentail, when they were ordered to record the sales. Most of their records from 1799 to 1808 concern the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
