Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       disentail. The registros de propiedad took over their records, and recently care of them has been assigned to the provincial historical
       archives.
              Not all their records have been preserved in either Jaén or Salamanca


                                                                                          ― 162 ―
       province, but those that do exist give vital information for the study of the process of disentail under Carlos IV at the local level. They
       furnish synopses of the notaries' records of sales, providing the name and domicile of the former owner and the buyer and a description
       of the property that usually makes possible its identification in the catastro. Information that is vague or incomplete in the Madrid records
       is here specific. Furthermore, the records are kept by town; thus they make relatively rapid a process that would be almost interminable
       if one had to search for the original deeds of sale of a certain town in the records of all the notaries who might have executed them,
       even if none of them had been lost. Unfortunately, some buyers were lax about registering their titles, so that there is no assurance that
       the contadurías provide a complete record of sales of any one town. Sales turn up in the Madrid archive that they do not list;
       nevertheless, without them it would be very difficult to recreate the process of disentail at the town level.
             Finally, when they are available, one of the most valuable sources for information on local economic activity is the parish tithe rolls.
       In the second half of the eighteenth century, the prelates of Salamanca began to require the parish tithe collectors (cilleros ) to keep
       accounts of the payments made by each farmer, instead of noting only the total of the various crops collected in the parish each year, as
       had been the prevailing practice. This reform lets us see not only how many people were farming in a town but how much each one
       harvested. We can draw an economic pyramid of the farmers and locate in it those persons who bought property in the disentail.
       Unfortunately few parish tithe rolls (tazmías ) seem to have been preserved, and those that have been are hard to locate since they are
       uncatalogued in the shelves of the village churches or the homes of the incumbent priests. Two were already known in Salamanca
       province, those of La Mata and Villaverde, both close to the capital, and an extensive search on my part through the south of the
       province unearthed a third, in El Mirón (today in Ávila province). I chose these three towns to study because of the completeness of the
       information on them. I selected a fourth, the rural estate of Pedrollén, as an example of a different kind of region and community.
             In Jaén province, as probably in most of Andalusia, where parishes were large, the ecclesiastical authorities farmed out the
       collection of tithes to private individuals. These tithe farmers (administradores ) contracted to pay fixed amounts of money or crops to
       the religious institutions entitled to receive the tithes and collected the payments due from the farmers, keeping as their profit the
       difference between what they col-



                                                                                          ― 163 ―
       lected and what they paid. In bad years their profit could turn to loss, and they had to demonstrate in bidding for the contract that they
       had the financial resources to be able to absorb losses. What accounts may have been kept of payments by individual farmers were in
       the hands of the administradores and have most likely been lost or destroyed. I found no trace of any and therefore I selected three
       towns in different parts of the province for which we have catastro and contaduría records, where a considerable amount of land was
       disentailed and which were not too large to be manageable. They are Baños, Lopera, and Navas de San Esteban del Puerto.
             These seven rural communities run the gamut from a large estate through small villages to a town of nearly two thousand people.
       For simplicity I refer to them all as towns, begging the indulgence of sticklers for definitional accuracy. Let us turn first to the towns of
       Salamanca, which are smaller than those of Jaén and for which I have fuller information.


                                                                                          ― 165 ―




       Chapter VII—
       La Mata
       The city of Salamanca is built on a group of low hills on the northern bank of the Rio Tormes some distance upstream from its confluence
       with the Rio Duero. The Duero is the major river of the northern meseta, and the Tormes is its main tributary from the south, bringing
       waters from the northern slope of the massive Sierra de Gredos. An impressive Roman bridge of twenty-six stone arches crosses the
       Tormes at Salamanca, a witness both to the volume of the river at its height and the secular importance of the city as the center of a
       rich agricultural region.
             The urban skyline stands out above the valley, marked by the two cathedrals, the new one of the sixteenth century with the older
       Romanesque one tucked in its shadow, and the numerous convents and parish churches, so many that Salamanca has been known
       familiarly as Little Rome. Lying lower and less visible are the buildings of the university and associated colleges, mainly of the
       Renaissance. Under Felipe V, a more worldly age, the heart of the city was torn out to create the Plaza Mayor, a large open square
       surrounded by a four-storied building with arcades and shops on the street level and apartments above. The city hall dominates its
       northern side. The Plaza Mayor is a beautiful example of early modern city planning and a reflection of the wealth pouring into the
       metropolis in the eighteenth century, for it rivals the older Plaza Mayor of Madrid in size and surpasses it in elegance.
           Behind the eighteenth-century limits of the city is a rise; over the top of it stretches to the north a broad, gently rolling plain
       marked by the beds of a few streams and an occasional low hill. The plain of La Ar-


                                                                                          ― 166 ―
       muña is one of the richest grain regions in dry Spain, characterized by thick, red soil that can be plowed deeply and holds its moisture
       when regions of thinner cover have dried up. In the eighteenth century many nucleated villages dotted the plain, as they still do today.
       They lie only three or four kilometers from each other, so that the view from any of the low rises includes a number of distinct
       settlements, each surrounded by wheat fields, green and lush in the spring, brown and dry after the summer harvest. Communication by
       cart was easy from town to town and into the city.[1]
              Near the center of the plain, at an altitude of 818 meters, lies the village of La Mata, about twelve kilometers due north of




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
