Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       secretary of the Council of State for the last six months of 1807 are still not liquidated. To pay the bills of the office, he has had to
       borrow from the doorman, although the latter has "only a pittance of a salary"! [80]
            The financial plight of the crown reflected all the myriad disasters of the reign of Carlos IV: the wars with France and Britain, the
       earth-

       [76] ANP, AF IV, 1608 , 2 : 41, f. 19v.

       [77] Ibid., pièce 9, f. 2r.

       [78] In the decree on desamortización in America, 28 Nov. 1804, AHN, Hac., libro 6012.

       [79] ANP, AF IV, 1603 , 2 : 119.

       [80] Letter in AHN, Estado, legajo 882.


                                                                                          ― 154 ―
       quakes, epidemics, and famines. These dire events had worked steadily to awaken the political awareness of Spaniards. Many aristocrats
       had been upset by the favors and titles bestowed on the royal protégé, Manuel Godoy, who since 1795 was known grandiloquently as the
       Prince of the Peace. They had encouraged rumors that Godoy owed his place to an adulterous relationship with the queen, María Luisa.
       As years went by, more and more people were prepared to blame Godoy for the disasters of the country and to believe that he was
       plotting with the queen to place himself on the throne with her at his side. Carlos IV was in poor health, demoralized by the constant
       blows to his monarchy, and people feared that Godoy and María Luisa would connive to set aside Fernando, heir to the throne, after his
       father's death. Godoy, to his misfortune, encouraged resentment by his displays of wealth and grants of favors to his friends and
       relatives. The public, powerless to understand why the Spanish state was beset by continual and frightening torments, came to see in him
       not just a vain and avaricious man but almost a hellish monster, prime cause of their miseries. [81]
            The disentail had angered many clerics, and they had worked on the religious feelings of their flocks. Godoy offered them a
       convincing villain to blame for it. Not the disasters of the state but his insatiable greed explained the desire to despoil the church. [82]
       Godoy attributed his own unpopularity largely to the machinations of the mass of clerics, who proclaimed that Fernando, upon his
       accession, would put an immediate end to the sale of ecclesiastical properties. "What could be my fate, when I had against me, with very
       few exceptions, the majority, the vast numbers of priests and monks, in so many ways lords of consciences and of opinion, so powerful
       among the common people, where so many lived happily on their meager crumbs."[83]
            The arrival of French troops in the winter of 1807–8 further increased tensions and suspicion. Officially they came as friends to help
       defend Spain in its war against Britain and to support a Spanish army drawn up to attack Portugal. The French and Spanish forces
       invaded Portugal, whose rulers hastily fled to Brazil, ending the war. During the winter the forces of France and Spain occupied that
       country without op-

       [81] The full story of the myth of the diabolical Godoy is told in Herr, "Good, Evil, and Spain's Rising."

       [82] Reguera Valdelomar, Peticiones, 80. Written to seek restoration of the properties to their former owners, this work specifically states
       that the disentail was not used for the urgent needs of the crown but to sustain "the unbridled whims of one [of Spain's 'two tyrants,'
       that is, the queen] and the insatiable greed of the other [Godoy]."

       [83] Godoy, Memorias 2 : 234.


                                                                                          ― 155 ―
       position, yet French armies inexplicably continued to cross the Pyrenees and took possession of various cities in northern Spain. When
       French units advanced on Madrid in March, Godoy, increasingly suspicious of Napoleon's real objectives, urged King Carlos to withdraw to
       a safe distance in Andalusia. The king ordered the Spanish garrison out of Madrid to his residence in Aranjuez, where the court was
       wintering as usual. Many people of Madrid suspected a trap and feared for the safety of Fernando. Some followed the garrison out of the
       city, and in the early hours of 18 March 1808 a crowd demonstrated outside the royal palace of Aranjuez and attacked the nearby
       residence of Godoy. After more than a day, it discovered the hapless Prince of the Peace hiding in his garret, beat him brutally, and put
       him under arrest. Terrified and demoralized, Carlos IV abdicated in favor of Fernando, who alone had the charisma to disband the mobs
       and restore royal authority.[84]
             The tumultuous accession of Fernando VII and the threatened descent of Spain into anarchy inspired Napoleon to substitute his
       brother Joseph on its throne. He feared the complete fiscal collapse of an ally that, he firmly believed, had vast wealth that its
       incompetent rulers lacked the ability to tap.[85] It was no whim that led him at this moment to demand the detailed reports on the
       Spanish finances that are now housed in the National Archives in Paris and have made possible our reconstruction of the fiscal picture of
       the reign of Carlos IV. Napoleon's aggression began five years of violent conflict, known to Spaniards as the War of Independence.
       Accompanied by the meeting of the Cortes at Cádiz in 1810, which restructured Spain into a parliamentary monarchy with a written
       constitution, the war marked the end of the old regime in Spain.
             The sale of church properties was, next to the conflicts with Great Britain, the most momentous development of the reign of Carlos
       IV. It was both a symptom and a cause of the decay of the absolute monarchy. The royal counselors conceived it as a way to save the
       credit of the crown. This it could not do, for in the era of Napoleon's wars Spain's rulers had to grasp desperately at every available
       resource to try to preserve its status as a great power, and with it the empire and the well-being of its people. The capital raised from
       church properties flowed down the maelstrom. Disentail maintained Spain's freedom of action for a while, but it served also to discredit
       Spain's rulers, both Godoy, abomi-

       [84] The fullest account of these events is in Martí Gilabert, Motín.

       [85] Napoleon's irrational belief in Spain's wealth is one of the main points of Fugier, Napoléon et l'Espagne.


                                                                                          ― 156 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
