Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                          Beneficiado (priest)                         1             2.0



                          Total male vecinos                           49           99.9



                      Female heads of household



                                Widows



                          Viudas labradoras                            2



             Pobres de solemnidad (registered indigents)               3



                                Others                                 5



                             Total widows                              10



          SOURCE . AHPS, Catastro, La Mata, personal de legos, and ibid., Resp. gen. QQ
                                          32–36, 38.


       while the other eight widows had no specified means of support (Table 7.1 and Figure 7.1).
            The término, or area of the town, was small; only half a league from east to west and three-eighths from north to south was what
       the vecinos reported to the makers of the catastro.[3] From the top of the knoll they could see similar towns in all directions. To the east
       La Mata bordered

       [3] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 3. A legua was traditionally the distance covered in an hour's walk, about five kilometers.


                                                                                           ― 168 ―




                                                                                    Figure 7.1.
                                                                        La Mata, Employment Structure, 1753
            on Carbajosa de Armuña and to the west on Castellanos de Villiguera. Slightly further to the south was Monterrubio, at the foot of
       the small reddish hill that gave it its name, and to the northeast the twin towns of Palencia de Negrilla and Negrilla de Palencia, hardly a
       stone's throw apart. In addition, La Mata bordered on three despoblados or alquerías (the terms meaning literally "depopulated place" and
       "grange" were used almost interchangeably and indicated that a caretaker, a herder, and a few others might live there, but probably not
       the owner): Narros de Valdunciel on the northwest and Aldealama and Mozodiel del Camino on the south.[4] These occupied poorer land,
       some of it good only for grazing. So flat is the terrain, despite its gentle roll, that, even today, on clear days the vecinos of La Mata see
       La Peña de Francia, a sharp mountain on the southern border of the province, seventy-five kilometers away (see Map 7.1).
            The catastro, dated 1753, and the register of tithe payments at the end of the century permit the reconstruction of the economic
       and social

       [4] Ibid. Q 2.


                                                                                           ― 169 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
