Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                       Map 7.1.
                                                                                La Mata and Its Environs
            structure of this small rural community. [5] It is convenient to determine first insofar as possible the income of the different
       households and the total income of the village. With this economic profile before us, we can then observe how this society was evolving in
       the second half of the eighteenth century and what impact the disentail of Carlos IV had on the course of its development.
            The makers of the catastro recorded the area of La Mata outside the town nucleus as 1,073 fanegas (480 hectares). [6] This is about
       18 fanegas

       [5] For the tithe records, see Archivo Parroquial, La Mata. I was able to copy this record thanks to the hospitality of the late parish
       priest, don Jerónimo Pablos, who made me welcome in his house for some ten afternoons in 1964 and 1969. This venerable gentleman
       also told me much about the town itself and the Armuña district. The pleasure of such interchanges is one of the unsung perquisites of
       the historian's craft.

       [6] This is the total given at the beginning of maest. segl. La Mata, resp. gen. Q 10, says 1,100 fanegas but is less accurate. The local
       fanega was 400 estadales of 16 square varas each, or .447 hectares 1.13 acres) (ibid. Q 9). See Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 113.


                                                                                          ― 170 ―
       for each of its vecinos, far below the Armuña regional average of 48 fanegas per vecino.[7] The fertility of La Mata's land, however,
       compensated partially for what it lacked in extent. The catastro's estimate of the productivity of the land in La Mata averages out at an
       annual return of forty reales per fanega. This is well above the regional average of twenty-seven; only five towns in La Armuña had more
       valuable land, and La Armuña was the richest district in the province. The value of La Mata's soil lay in its ability to produce first-class
       wheat, trigo candeal. Ninety-one percent of the término was wheat land (sembradura de secano que produce trigo ), 3 percent was
       devoted to rye (centeno ), and the rest was meadow (prados de secano para pasto ). None of the land in the town was barren or waste.
       Furthermore, both wheat and rye fields were sown every other year, whereas in most parts of arid Spain the land could produce a crop
       only once every three years or less often. The meadows were mowed for hay every year. Few towns in arid Spain could match the
       fertility of La Mata's soil.
             The término was divided into many plots, very irregular in shape, scattered higgledy-piggledy across the rolling fields. The biggest
       plots were one of nine fanegas (four hectares) belonging to the town council and one of eight fanegas of the parish church. Altogether
       the catastro listed 551 arable plots and 33 meadows, which means that the average size of the first was under two fanegas and of the
       second hardly one. The larger holdings did not consist of larger plots but only of a greater number of them. As was common practice
       under such a system, the término was divided into several large fields (hojas ), and all the plots in each field were sown and harvested in
       the same year. In the late spring, the landscape of La Mata and its region would alternate between large patches of rippling green and
       others of fallow red and brown earth.
              The scene had not always been so neat. Records preserved from earlier times suggest that prior to the population expansion of the
       late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when much of the region was still waste and available for pasture, farmers planted and harvested
       their individual plots as they wished. As more of the land of a community was put under the plow, an arrangement had to be made to
       feed the livestock: draft animals and sheep, both essential to the local economy. The solu-



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
