Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                          ― 185 ―
       viudas labradoras, and seven of the latter (Table 7.1). The difference between a labrador and a jornalero was not whether he owned land
       or not, for only six labradores owned land and one jornalero did, but whether or not he owned a team of animals for plowing. All but one
       of the labradores owned one or more yokes of oxen (the other owned a pair of horses), while jornaleros had none. Since the word
       labrador comes from the verb labrar, to plow, possession of a yoke of draft animals was evidently the requirement for belonging to this
       category. The jornaleros probably worked on the land for a daily wage, as their name implies. In addition, some vecinos who were not
       labradores raised crops as a marginal source of income. These were called senareros, and the catastro says there were thirteen of them,
       including, presumably, the jornaleros and guardas. [28]
             Of all these people only one could be considered an independent landowner. This was the richest layman in town, Juan Rincón, who
       had ten oxen and twenty-two other large animals, five arable plots, one meadow, and five houses. He owned half the land belonging to
       the lay vecinos. [29] He also had the largest household in the village: a wife, a twenty-year-old son, two daughters, and five children not
       his own called enternados, three boys and two girls, whether children of relatives or charity cases we have no way of knowing. Seven
       other vecinos and two children owned land, but each had only one or two arable plots or a small meadow. Except for Juan Rincón, all
       labradores had to rely on lands they rented to provide their livelihood, and even Rincón's fields produced too small a harvest for his
       family. Like the other labradores, he got most of his crops from rented plots.
            The catastro does not say who rented the fields of La Mata, so that one cannot calculate directly the harvest of each farmer. One
       can approach the problem indirectly, however, from two sets of data, the number of draft animals each farmer had and the individual
       payments recorded in the tithe records of the end of the century.
            According to the catastro, the eleven labradores and two viudas labradoras owned forty-eight oxen and two horses. At the other
       extreme from Rincón, with his ten oxen, were three labradores and one labradora with two oxen each and the labrador with two horses.
       Contempo-

       [28] Ibid. Q 35. The register of tithes calls the tithers labradores and senareros, or sometimes all jointly cosecheros (harvesters).
       According to ibid. Q 15, twenty-eight persons raised sufficient crops to pay first fruits.

       [29] La Mata, maest. segl., ff. 63–70.


                                                                                          ― 186 ―
       raries calculated that a yoke of oxen could plow 22.5 fanegas per season.[30] Since La Mata sowed its fields every other year, the
       twenty-four yokes of oxen were theoretically sufficient for 1,080 fanegas, a figure very close to the 1,017 fanegas of arable land reported
       in the catastro. One can thus hypothesize that the individual harvests of the labradores were roughly proportional to the number of oxen
       they owned. It is possible that they rented teams to each other or to the senareros in return for goods or services, and this would alter
       our results some, but the general pattern of land tilled was probably closely related to the number of yokes owned. If one assumes that
       two horses were equivalent to one and a half oxen, and that the senareros each averaged the share of one-half ox, the total net harvest
       (2,422 EFW, Table 7.8) can be divided into fifty-seven shares, each representing the output of one ox (about 42.5 EFW per ox). These
       shares can then be distributed among the farmers as shown in Table 7.9.
             Labradores with more than one yoke of oxen had to have help to use all their teams regularly. Juan Rincón needed four men
       besides himself, and the others with more than two oxen needed another eight men (assuming the labradores with five and three oxen
       combined their odd oxen into one yoke and shared it). Only four, including Rincón, had sons in the household fifteen years of age or
       over. The two widow labradoras had sons above fifteen who could do their farming. The eight remaining hands would have been those of
       the seven jornaleros and a resident servant (criado ). The wages of these hired hands would have to come out of the net harvests of the
       labradores. The catastro credits the jornaleros with income of two and a half reales per day for 120 days, [31] 17 EFW. If the wages of
       eight men are prorated among the labradores with more than one yoke according to the number of their oxen, their net income from
       farming is shown in the last column of Table 7.9.
             These results can be checked by using the tithe register of the end of the century. After 1791 it lists each tither by name and states
       how much he paid of each crop. It thus permits one to determine with considerable accuracy the relative size of the individual harvests at
       that time. One should use reports of two consecutive years, when all the fields would have been harvested once, averaging over the two
       years the percent of

       [30] The "Capítulos que deben observarse en la repoblación de Salamanca," 15 Mar. 1791, Nov. rec. VII, xxii, 9, says 22 1/2 fanegas "is
       what a yoke of oxen can plow [in one year]." Cabo Alonso says that in the nineteenth century a yoke of oxen was needed for each 40
       fanegas for a two-year cycle in neighboring Monterrubio ("La Armuña," 382).

       [31] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 35.


                                                                                          ― 187 ―


            Table 7.9. Individual Harvests Estimated from the Draft Animals, La Mata, 1753



                                                                                   Approximate
                                           Share of       Net         Cost of        Individual
                                             Total     Individual      Hired       Income from
             Rank of        Number of       Harvest     Harvesta      Labor b         Farming
             Farmers          Oxen         (percent)     (EFW)        (EFW)            (EFW)



           Labradores



         1 (Juan Rincón)       10.0          17.5          425           45            380




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
