Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                     Figure 7.2.
                                                                          La Mata, Ownership of Land, 1753
              small amount belonged to similar church institutions in neighboring villages. Among vecinos, town council, and ecclesiastical funds,
       about 29 percent of the land by value (it was 31 percent by area) was owned locally, but two-thirds of this belonged to religious
       institutions.
             The situation of the buildings in the town was strikingly different. Of the sixty-two houses, lay vecinos owned fifty-three, the priest,
       the town


                                                                                          ― 179 ―
       council, and the parish church one each. There were thirteen barns (pajares); lay vecinos owned ten and the priest one. Of the nine
       corrals, vecinos owned seven and the town council one. Based on value, altogether 91 percent of the buildings was owned locally, but
       because the total value of the buildings was only 7 percent of that of the land, the property in local hands still represented less than one-
       third of the total value of all property.
             By far the largest part of the land belonging to nonresidents was in the hands of persons and institutions located in Salamanca city,
       and again the church held the lion's share. Ecclesiastical funds of Salamanca owned 52 percent of the agricultural land in the town. This
       was divided among the benefices (beneficios ) of two parish priests and four other benefices (capellanías ) attached to parish churches,
       the fabric of another church, five secondary schools (colegios ) of religious orders, six convents (male and female), two hospitals, and five
       endowments (memorias ), three in the cathedral and two in convents. An additional 11 percent belonged to individuals, lay and clerical,
       living in the city. Two percent belonged to individuals located elsewhere, including the Vizconde de Villagonzalo of Valencia. A capellanía
       of Madrid owned 5 percent of La Mata's land, and a convent in another town in Salamanca province owned 1 percent.
             In sum, nonresidents owned 71 percent of the land. Or looking at the situation through the eyes of the statesmen who planned the
       catastro, religious institutions, both local and outside, owned 78 percent of the land. These were the hard economic facts facing the
       peasants who plowed and reaped the fields.
             How the nonresident owners exploited their land is shown by account books of monasteries and convents in Salamanca that were
       confiscated when the state dissolved the religious orders in 1837.[16] These provide examples of the agreements between the
       ecclesiastical owners of land and those who did the actual farming. I have not seen rental agreements of lay owners, but their practices
       must have been similar if not identical. Contracts were usually signed formally before a notary for six- or nine-year periods, "de tres en
       tres," meaning that they could be renegotiated at the end of each three-year period. The tenant (rentero ) had to have a third party sign
       as guarantor of his payments, the fiador, usually another farmer in the town. The tenant agreed to deliver to the owner's granary in
       Salamanca (or elsewhere) a specified number of fan-

       [16] I have used the following account books: AHN, Clero, libros 10653, 10668, 10854, 10869, 10880, 10888.


                                                                                          ― 180 ―
       egas of first-class wheat (trigo candeal) on 15 August of each year, to care for the land, to maintain the drainage ditches, and not to
       sublet. Sometimes other payments were stipulated in addition to wheat: rye, barley, garbanzos, straw, firewood, and, for Christmas,
       chickens. [17] Monetary rents were collected for pastures and houses but not normally for arable land. The tenant was also to pay the




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
