Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       century.
              Grain or bread, while the largest item in the individual budget, would be only part. Other items of food that the vecinos of La Mata
       produced—pulses and meat—have been counted in calculating their net income. Part of their harvests went to feed their livestock. In
       addition, however self-sufficient the village was, the peasants needed wine, oil, salt, wood for fuel, probably some additional preserved
       meat and maybe salt fish, items of clothing, occasionally tools and building supplies; some farmers needed to pay for the transport of
       their harvest to market or to their landlord's granary. There also had to be what the social anthropologists call a family ceremonial fund,
       savings to pay the expenses of the formalities and celebrations that marked rites of passage as well as the regular expenditures for
       religious ceremonies and festivals. One can estimate that the grain consumption for food represented about half the needs of a family.
       For a normal subsistence, then, a rural community required roughly the equivalent in income of 12 fanegas of wheat per person per year.
       Although only an estimate, the figure of 12 EFW can serve as a standard measure of adequate individual income, a benchmark against
       which to compare the conditions in our towns as we proceed. Individual families could, however, do with less, perhaps little

       [42] Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos," 81–82. Cabo speaks of 800 kg. per year as the consumption of a family of four members.

       [43] Le Flem, "Cuentas de la Mesta," 64. The exact amount is 1 fanega and 1 cuartillo (1/48 fanega) per person per month.

       [44] Le Roy Ladurie, Paysans de Languedoc, 98: 5.6 hectoliters per capita for a travailleur de force.


                                                                                          ― 193 ―
       more than half as much, if they went without sufficient bread, meat, clothing, fuel, and the amenities of life. And if the proportion of
       infants to adults in a family was high, its per capita need was also less.
             From the lists of families in the catastro, one can know the average size of households in La Mata. Of labradores' households where
       both parents were alive, this was 5.1, of jornaleros', 3.6. The labradores not only had more children (2.6 per family compared to 1.6) but
       Juan Rincón's five enternados added to their average. At 12 EFW per capita, household needs averaged about 60 EFW for labradores and
       43 EFW for jornaleros. The two viudas labradoras had an average household size of 4 and needed 48 EFW each. According to Table 7.11
       the top thirteen farmers whose net annual income ranged down to 75 EFW had more than enough for their family needs. These would
       have been all eleven labradores and the two viudas labradoras. The five labradores whose net income was 190 EFW or more were
       prosperous, able to hire help, live at ease, and save as well—buying bedclothes, copper and brass cooking utensils, embroidered woolen
       garments, and amassing coins and jewelry. The large filigreed gold and silver buttons and necklaces of the Salamanca charro are famous
       and in a pinch would be readily exchanged for money by a cambiador at a rural fair. [45] The next four labradores, with net incomes of
       105 to 140 EFW, if not wealthy, were comfortably off, and the remaining four, at 75 to 85 EFW, easily had enough for their needs. The
       remaining fifteen farmers were in the 20 to 30 EFW range, not enough by itself for the average family; they either were engaged in other
       activities as well—as senareros whose main activity was not agriculture or as jornaleros who also had wages—or were incomplete
       families. If the jornaleros did earn the 17 EFW with which the catastro credits them, they had enough for their households, between 3
       and 4 in size., to live adequately. On the whole Ceres was kind, even generous, to the vecinos of La Mata who tilled the fields.


       5

       Many vecinos were not farmers, however. The district of La Armuña was one of the few in Castile that had a sizable number of muleteers,
       or arrieros, and La Mata, with twenty-three, had the highest proportion of arrieros among its vecinos of any town in La Armuña. Some
       specialized

       [45] On the rural custom of putting savings into gold and silver jewelry and exchanging it for cash at rural fairs, see Fernández de
       Pinedo, "Actitudes del campesino," 377–78.


                                                                                          ― 194 ―
       in the transport of local grain to nearby markets, Salamanca, Zamora, and other provincial centers,[46] while others traveled regularly on
       a northern route to Vitoria and Bilbao, taking wheat and bringing salt and salt cod on the return journey.[47] Among them they owned 18
       mules and 152 donkeys, most of which they used in their trade. [48] The makers of the catastro estimated that each arriero worked two
       hundred days per year and earned 1 real per day with each donkey and 2 with each mule.[49] At this rate their total gross annual
       income would have been 37,600 reales, but the figure arrived at by the makers of the catastro was 33,200 reales (2,370 EFW), after
       allowing for animals declared not in service. [50]
             Against this income, the arrieros had to charge the expenses of feeding their animals and replacing those that died. They probably
       occupied the pastures available to the vecinos not being used by the farmers. This represented a cost of 31 EFW. Since the animals were
       on the road over half the year, they also had to pay for pastures where they went. [51] These may have cost them another 75 EFW. In
       addition, they had to supply fodder, which they would buy since they had few crops of their own. They may have consumed a quarter of
       the fodder grown locally and bought an equal amount on their journeys. Barley and algarrobas were the local crops for feeding livestock;
       a quarter of the local production was 121 EFW (Table 7.4), so that the arrieros spent about 240 EFW for fodder. The total cost of feeding
       their animals was then some 345 EFW.
            Owning three-quarters of the donkeys in the town, the arrieros raised those they needed to replace the ones that died, but they
       would have to buy a couple of mules a year from the farmers for about 550 reales.[52] Their net gain on breeding donkeys was about
       twelve animals (because they used their animals for traffic, they would not have bred as many young as was possible), or 240 reales.[53]
       Some arrieros, the catastro tells us, also traded in mules, and together they had about 800 reales a year income from this activity. Their
       net balance from raising and dealing in livestock was about 500 reales, or about 35 EFW.

       [46] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 32.

       [47] Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 126–27. For salt, see Klein, Mesta, 23.

       [48] La Mata, maest. segl., shows this many owned by arrieros. La Mata, resp. gen. Q 32, says 136 donkeys and 8 mules used for
       transport.

       [49] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 32.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
