Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                   Figure 7.3.
                                                                    La Mata, Socioeconomic Pyramid, 1753
                                                      Note: This is a bar graph based on Table 7.13, with an indication
                                                           of dispersion. It is not a set of frequency distributions.
            destitute, although no income can be assigned them. To complete the economic picture of the town and judge its overall well-being,
       one may look at it as a single unit rather than as a collection of discrete households and consider it in relation to the outside world.


       6

       The income of the town as a separate economic unit came from its agricultural production and the value added to goods and services it
       sold


                                                                                          ― 200 ―
       outside. The net harvest after deduction for seed was 3,606 EFW, the gross income from livestock 353 EFW (Table 7.8). The arrieros
       brought in most of the income from outside. While they transported some of the local harvests and brought in goods, most of their
       services were rendered to others. It seems reasonable to attribute 75 percent of their gross income from haulage (2,370 EFW) to outside
       sources: 1,780 EFW. If three-quarters of their income from trading mules also came from outside, this was another 43 EFW. It is possible
       that the linen weaver and the shoemaker sold some goods outside the town, but their incomes were so small that they hardly added to
       the total.
            Against these incomes one must charge the payments made outside the town. These included rent on the fields owned by
       nonresidents, on pastures in adjoining despoblados, and on pastures used by the arrieros while on the road, as well as the cost of the
       fodder they bought while traveling, all of which have already been calculated. It was likely that vecinos of La Mata and its church owned
       as much land in neighboring towns as vecinos and churches of those villages owned in La Mata, so that rent received from nearby farmers
       would offset the rent paid for land in neighboring towns (about 23 EFW). This amount can be subtracted from the rent paid outsiders
       (575 EFW; Table 7.8), while none of the rent paid to local churches will be charged against the town.
             A good proportion of the payments to the church also left the town. Two-ninths of the partible tithes of Castile had been granted to
       the king by the pope in the thirteenth century. Known as the tercias reales, the grant was extended to all Spain and made permanent in
       1487.[66] In La Mata and other places around Salamanca, these now went to the University of Salamanca by royal cession (87 EFW,
       Table 7.3). In addition another third of the partible tithes (131 EFW) belonged to the prestamo, a form of ecclesiastical perpetual right,
       whose current holder was a member of the faculty (maestre de escuela ) of the university.[67] These beneficiaries had to pay their share
       of the cost of collection and storage of the tithes, and this expense remained in the town economy. The holder of the prestamo was also
       entitled to one-third of the first fruits (9 EFW), while, as described earlier, various institutions received horros in lieu of tithes on the
       crops of their fields, the tithes of the cuarto dezmero went directly to the cathedral, and the Voto de Santiago to the archbishop of
       Santiago de Compostela through his local agent. After the local benefice took its third of the partible tithes, the local fabric received the
       remain-

       [66] Desdevises, L'Espagne 2 : 369.

       [67] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 15.


                                                                                          ― 201 ―
       ing ninth. [68] Besides the tithes of the villagers of La Mata, its church also received those of the neighboring despoblado of Narros, which
       was an anexo of the parish. These totaled 97 EFW [69] and had the same destination as the partible of La Mata: five-ninths left the town.
       A good part of the ninth paid the fabric as well as the rent of the fields belonging to the parish church (exclusive of those of the
       benefice) must have been spent outside the community for supplies for the church and religious services, perhaps 25 percent (28 EFW).



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
