Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       needed in the fields or on the road.
             In the middle of the eighteenth century, La Mata was a prosperous town of some sixty families. All thirteen labradores, all but one
       of the twenty-four arrieros, and the priest, altogether two-thirds of the households, had incomes that allowed them to live with ease. Of
       these at least

       [73] For the data of the 1786 census of La Mata, see Appendix N, Table N.6.

       [74] See Scott and Tilly, "Women's Work," for an analysis of this widespread practice in the nineteenth century.


                                                                                          ― 206 ―
       nine labradores, eight arrieros, and the priest earned twice or more what their families needed for an adequate standard of living. The
       tavernkeeper and surgeon-bloodletter turned a fair penny, and only the large size of their households kept their per capita income from
       being among the higher levels. Most of the other families, headed by artisans, jornaleros, herders, and widows, no doubt supplemented
       their direct income by tilling a small plot as a senarero or doing odd jobs for others or for the church or the town council. The town
       profited from a dual economy based on agriculture and muleteering. The income of the arrieros represented about 6.5 EFW per capita.
       Had these men been engaged in agriculture, even if in so doing they had increased the harvests through more intensive cultivation, the
       per capita income would have declined to close to the adequate mean. Their activity made possible the flourishing economy of the town
       in the face of the small extent of land per vecino.
             This little community would have warmed the hearts of the Madrid reformers. It is true that its vecinos did not live on separate,
       enclosed homesteads or own their own land as the reformers propounded, but they had fairly stable, assured leases, which allowed them
       to make a comfortable living and produce a healthy excess for the market. They could keep six fanegas of wheat for each person in the
       community and all the other grains and pulses from the harvest and still leave two thousand fanegas of wheat to export, as rent, as
       tithes, or for their own account. Fewer than four hundred such communities, one hundred thousand people in all, could supply all the
       wheat Madrid needed. Campomanes recommended that rural communities introduce domestic manufactures that would use local raw
       materials and give remunerative occupations to the women and children. [75] Although we do not know what the women and children did
       in their homes, La Mata had no active artisan sector, but the arrieros did provide a mixed economy and were responsible for the
       substantial margin of well-being of the community as a whole. If all arid Spain had been like La Mata, agricultural reform would never
       have become the dominant domestic issue of the last decades of its old regime.
             For their well-being, the people of La Mata paid with the timeless labor of rural folk. The labradores, their jornaleros, and their sons
       hitched their oxen to their plows and worked their tiny scattered plots in the cold winds of the winter and early spring; later they bowed
       under the parching July sun to harvest the ripe wheat with their sickles and

       [75] Rodríguez de Campomanes, Industria popular.


                                                                                          ― 207 ―
       rode their heavy threshing boards behind their oxen round and round the town threshing floor, the eras, to separate the grain from the
       chaff—a task in which wives and children could join—loaded their carts or animals in August with the wheat they owed their landlords in
       Salamanca and in the fall cared for their newborn lambs and slaughtered their pigs. The arrieros heaved the bags of grain on their mules
       and donkeys after the harvest, heading for the main regional markets or setting out on the long journey north to Burgos and Bilbao,
       walking beside their beasts in all kinds of weather, unloading in the evening and loading again in the morning the goods that provided
       their livelihood. They returned in time for Christmas but set out again as soon as the roads were passable, getting home once more for
       the June fairs. Following the local custom, the arrieros of La Mata traveled together for security and company. They helped each other
       and needed few additional hands, and their sons stayed to work for other vecinos until they were ready to set up in their fathers' trade.
       Then they would join the group to learn the routes and the best pastures and watering holes.[76] Meanwhile the wives kept the hearths
       alive, prepared the thick bread soup of breakfast and supper, washed and mended the clothes, and in the fall made the farinato sausages
       of pork and crumbs.[77] The daughters of the poorer families spent their adolescence serving in the city, and the widowed grandmothers
       took care of the children too young to work.
             Religious holidays solemnized the revolution of the seasons that marked the life of La Mata. The town council's budget provided 110
       reales for a preacher in Lent, possibly a friar from Salamanca, and another 60 reales for the parish curate to say extraordinary masses
       on other occasions. [78] The parish had four confraternities that supported special services out of the income provided by the lands they
       owned. They were dedicated to Corpus Christi (ten weeks after Easter), Saint Michael (29 September), Our Lady of the Rosary (7
       October), and All Souls (2 November).[79] These were all occasions for pageantry, but they could not compare with the town fair of 26
       June, the feast of San Pelayo, patron of the parish.[80] Then the grain fields were almost ripe, and

       [76] On the lives of the arrieros, Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 127–29. The author's source is evidently the community memory, for he is a
       native of La Mata.

       [77] On the soup and farinato sausages, Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos," 81–82.

       [78] La Mata, resp. gen. Q 25.

       [79] Cofradías del Santísimo, de San Miguel, de Nuestra Señora del Rosario, and de Animas, La Mata, maest. ecles., ff. 64–77.

       [80] The parish was named San Pelayo Magno, according to the census return of 1786.


                                                                                          ― 208 ―
       the farmers knew if the harvest would be plentiful. The muleteers had returned from their spring trip with wares to hawk—iron tools and
       copper and brass pots and pans from Basque forges, perhaps woolens from northern Europe. Vecinos of nearby towns brought livestock
       to trade. Solemn mass and the inevitable procession sanctified the occasion, a symbiosis of religion, business, and festivity.[81] Different
       but equally central to the year's course was the day in August when the vecinos who harvested grain paid their tithes "to God our Lord,"
       as the catastro says, and the earthly vicars who received them for Him provided refreshments for the parishioners. [82] To judge from the
       tithe rolls of the end of the century, the farmers followed an accepted custom in delivering their holy dues. The larger tithers held back,



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
