Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       meadow in 1801, and three plots in 1802, yet he was not farming in 1799–1800. We saw him take possession of his first fields, which he
       obtained by outbidding local and Salamanca residents. In 1801 he was twentieth on the tithe roll; in 1802, after three years of buying
       land, he was fifth.[119] He disappeared from the tithe list after 1803. Did he replace the former first tither (casa excusada) or fourth
       tither (cuarto dezmero), neither of whose tithes are recorded in the rolls, or did he die? I believe the latter. The name Ana Hernández
       appeared for the first time in 1804 near the top of the list. She may have been the former first or fourth tither, but more likely she was
       González's widow. In 1805–6 she was sixth, in 1807–8 third. This appears to have been a household that rose from nothing to obtain the
       third largest harvest in town. One can guess that González was a wealthy arriero who was inspired by the sales to engage in agriculture.
             His case illustrates the importance of the arrieros to the well-being of La Mata. The town defended itself successfully against outside
       buyers because of its dual economy. The leading labradores had the savings that they and their forebears had set aside for half a century
       or more. But the agricultural sector did not account for all the town's gains. The muleteers also were amassing capital, and some put it
       into land when they had the opportunity.
            Their judgment was sound, for on the whole those who bought land rose economically. We can follow the development in the
       second part of Table 7.25. Francisco González is only the most obvious case. Vicente Alonso had the sixth largest harvests in 1799–1800;
       he was just below the first tither in 1807–8. Antonio Alonso López was tenth at the beginning, fifth at the end; Marcos González rose from
       twenty-fourth to seventh. Not all were so successful; Pedro González fell from second to sixth; Ignacio Alonso from fifth to eighth. But
       compare the fate of Agustín de Dios, who was number three in 1799–1800. Since 1787 he and Juan López had rented jointly the lands of
       the Discalced Franciscan Nuns.[120] Agustín did not buy lands; in 1807–8 he had fallen to number eleven. Bernardo Prior, who was
       number six in 1799–1800, bought no lands and dropped to number 19 in 1807–8.
              It would be wrong to conclude that the increase in a buyer's harvests came just from the lands he bought. In most cases the buyers
       tilled more fields than those they acquired, as one can tell by comparing their har-

       [119] The rank 12 assigned him in Table 7.24 for these years is a result of averaging the two years.

       [120] AHN, Clero, libro 10854, f. 24.


                                                                                          ― 235 ―
       vests with the areas they purchased. The account book of the monastery Nuestra Señora del Jesús shows that one of them, Pedro
       González, second among the buyers, and another man rented its fields in La Mata from 1789 to 1808. González's half share of the crop
       would have been about 60 fanegas of wheat per year. [121] The plots he bought would have produced only about 46. After 1800 his total
       harvest averaged over 250. Francisco González, who had never farmed before, bought 30 fanegas of land, which would have produced
       about 105 fanegas of wheat per year. [122] In 1802 he paid tithes on 262 fanegas of wheat, plus other crops. The plots he bought
       accounted for less than half of his harvest. The next three buyers who were labradores could produce only between one sixth and one-
       quarter of their harvests on the lands they purchased.
              One can conceive of an explanation for the changing relative size of the vecinos' harvests that has little to do with the disentail. A.
       V. Chayanov, in his classic studies of the economy of rural Russia before the Revolution, described how the peasant exploitation expanded
       and contracted as the family proceeded through its life cycle. For a newly married couple the farm was limited to what the peasant could
       till himself, but as his sons reached an age where they could work, he extended his farm by renting new fields. The exploitation would
       increase in size until all children reached adulthood, then decrease as the sons left to form their own families.[123] One should consider
       whether the rise and decline in the harvests of the individual vecinos of La Mata responded to some similar life cycle.
             Such an explanation has a certain appealing simplicity, but the knowledge we have developed leads one to reject it as the primary
       cause. First of all, the monastic account books of the eighteenth century cited at the beginning of this chapter [124] show very little
       change in renters. Leases were inherited by widows and children, and only tenants who fell seriously in arrears appeared in danger of
       losing their leases. The free market in rented farms that Chayanov observed in Russia was not present in La Mata. Besides, an increase
       in the harvests of an individual regularly followed his purchase of disentailed land. In other words, purchases of land were being made
       when the life-cycle model predicts that sons had not yet reached working age. Yet this is precisely when the peasant, a

       [121] The weighted average crop of wheat land according to description in the catastro was 3.0 fanegas of wheat per year per fanega of
       land (Table 7.2). This must be raised 17 percent to 3.5, because harvests were greater than the catastro predicted.

       [122] AHN, Clero, libro 10668, f. 100.

       [123] Chayanov, "Nature of Peasant Economy."

       [124] Above, n. 16.



                                                                                          ― 236 ―
       struggling young father of hungry children, would be least likely to have savings. According to the life-cycle model one would expect
       purchases to occur when the family work force was largest and the per capita income therefore greatest, or shortly afterwards. Purchases
       would be followed by a decline in harvests as adult children left. The relationship between purchases and harvests observed in La Mata
       thus flies in the face of the life-cycle explanation.
             By 1808 all the first nine tithers except the casa excusada and the cuarto dezmero were labradores who had bought land, and
       perhaps one could identify these as buyers too if one had their names. Furthermore, the share of those at the top was greater than
       before the disentail. In 1799–1800 the largest tither on the rolls (number two after the casa excusada) paid 7.0 percent of the tithes
       collected; in 1807–8 the person in this position paid 9.2 percent. The top seven tithers listed in 1799–1800 had 42 percent of the total;
       in 1807–8, when all of them were people who had bought land, their share was 48 percent. This fact adds further support to the belief
       that the purchase of properties was a direct cause for an increase in harvests, even one that was greater than the additional return
       provided by the lands bought.
             Disentail benefited ambitious men in more ways than offering land to buy. Every time a vecino purchased a plot to farm himself, he
       took it out of the supply available to rent and forcibly depressed the remainder of the local farmers. Furthermore, the royal legislation
       permitted outside buyers to change the conditions of tenure or to rent to new tenants. Although leases had been traditionally renewed
       rather automatically, new absentee owners would be looking for the best lessee, and a successful farmer would be their first choice.
       Buying land gave a farmer a reputation that helped him acquire leases held by other vecinos. One cannot explain the meteoric rise of




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
