Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       Francisco González in any other way, or the more modest gains of others who also rose in rank. Whereas disentail could only mitigate the
       decline in per capita income of the farming sector caused by demographic growth, it permitted the more enterprising men to rise within
       the economic hierarchy of the town. Population growth in the second half of the eighteenth century had reduced the disparities in
       farmers' income. Disentail reversed this trend and produced a somewhat more stratified society.


       11

       The war against Napoleon put an end to this period of disentail and struck the town harshly. French armies engaged in Portugal passed


                                                                                          ― 237 ―
       through the province of Salamanca and lived off it, and the campaign of 1812 brought heavy fighting to the region. In November 1812
       French troops sacked La Mata. [125] Between 1810 and 1813, the tithe records show harvests scarcely half the size of ordinary years, and
       monasteries settled for much less rent than their leases called for.
             Peace brought back normal conditions and harvests recovered. For the rest of the century the history of La Mata revolved around
       the forces we have observed. The number of men engaged in transportation increased until midcentury. In 1850 there were fifty-one
       muleteers and five carters (carromateros ), and ten years later sixty-two muleteers and thirty-eight carters. Thereafter, the appearance
       of the railroad led to a steady decline of haulage as an economic resource; in 1900 only two arrieros were left in La Mata. Meanwhile the
       vecinos benefited from the successive waves of disentail. By the turn of the twentieth century, they owned 71 percent of the land in the
       town, and the renting of fields from nonresidents had almost disappeared as a practice, as outside owners sold off their plots in search of
       investments with more growth potential. Harvests per hectare rose slowly, but not enough to offset the disappearance of transportation as
       a source of income. In 1863 the number of vecinos reached 165, its highest point ever.
            After 1900 the discovery of a simple chemical process to keep lentils from spoiling before reaching market brought a revolution in
       crops, and the introduction of artificial fertilizers reduced the need for fallow.[126] Thereafter, the end of haulage and the new farming
       technology gave the town a very different economy from the one studied here. The half century between the catastro of la Ensenada and
       the end of desamortización of Carlos IV thus appears as the early stage of a cycle that lasted through the nineteenth century, during
       which this rural community remained dependent on early modern technology in both agriculture and transportation. Disentail operated as
       one factor in economic change, along with population pressure and evolution in the means of transportation.


       [125] Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 387 n. 122.

       [126] Ibid., 374–411.


                                                                                          ― 238 ―




       Chapter VIII—
       Villaverde
       Twelve kilometers due east of La Mata, about eighteen kilometers northeast of Salamanca, is the lugar of Villaverde. It lies just off the
       main highway from Salamanca to Valladolid, at 831 meters altitude, near the source of the small Rio Guareña. Here the land is flatter
       than at La Mata, and the town nucleus can be seen from all directions, dominated by its square church tower rising like the prow of a
       ship at its western end.
             Although not large, the town had features in the eighteenth century that gave it a modest urban flavor. At its center was an
       irregular unpaved plaza, on which faced a public building that served both as council house and prison. The town council also owned a
       tavern, a blacksmith shop, and a butcher shop, which it rented to the vecinos who operated them. In addition, 116 houses faced on the
       streets that led off in various directions from the plaza. Of these 2 were in ruin and 10 others were empty—the town had had more
       inhabitants in the sixteenth century. Three granaries (paneras), one belonging to the town council and two to the receiver of the tithes,
       eleven barns (pajares), four corrals (two of them belonging to the town council), and some baking ovens completed its structures.[1]
            Villaverde is on the eastern edge of the rich Armuña district, where the land gets poorer. In the eighteenth century it was
       surrounded by two despoblados and two alquerías. Only to the west did it border on a popu-

       [1] AHPS, Catastro, Villaverde, libro 2813, resp. gen. QQ 22, 23, 24, 29, and information in maest. segl., and maest. ecles. The total
       number of houses comes from the libros maestros, more accurate than the respuestas generales.



                                                                                          ― 239 ―
       lated town, Pedrosillo el Ralo, slightly larger than Villaverde.[2] Yet Villaverde itself was in a fertile spot; the catastro returns indicate that
       on the average its soil produced thirty-eight reales per fanega per year, close to La Mata's forty and well above the regional average of
       twenty-seven. The total area was 1,650 fanegas, or huebras as they were called locally[3] (740 hectares), and there were 97 lay vecinos
       and 1 ecclesiastic, for a total population of 357. [4] Both in area and in population Villaverde was half again as large as La Mata.
            Its employment structure was also more complex, as Table 8.1 and Figure 8.1 show. The proportion of men engaged in agriculture
       was higher, and next after them came the craftsmen, whereas in La Mata there were only two craftsmen. The muleteers of Villaverde, on
       the other hand, were only a ninth of the vecinos.
             The farmers of Villaverde devoted themselves primarily to the raising of wheat, as could be expected in the Armuña district.
       According to the catastro, the town had 1,354 plots devoted to wheat, 88 meadows, and 13 enclosed plots (cortinas ) for growing fodder
       (herren ).[5] Despite this description, however, wheat was not the only crop sown in the open fields; the tithe records show that there
       was a sizable harvest of algarrobas, used for fodder, and lesser ones of barley, rye, and garbanzos.
              A first approximation of the annual harvest comes from the recorded area and quality of the arable plots, and the average yield and



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
