Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                Map 8.1.
                                                                      Villaverde and Its Environs
                                              NOTE : In the nineteenth century despoblados were incorporated in adjoining
                                                towns. La Cañada and La Cañadilla went to Villaverde. I am indebted to
                                                 Angel Cabo Alonso of the University of Salamanca for identification of
                                                          the eighteenth-century roads that served Villaverde.
             different. Is this pure coincidence, or is it possible that the accepted rates were established some time in the past to produce similar
       rents but had since been altered by economic forces to the benefit of the farmers of La Mata and the disadvantage of those of Villaverde?
       Let us keep in mind the possibility of such a development.
            At 31 percent of the predicted harvest, the rent paid by the vecinos for the grain fields of the town church and endowments it
       controlled would be 113 EFW, and for fields belonging to nearby churches, 48 EFW.
             An important share of the town land belonged to vecinos of nearby towns, more in fact than to vecinos of Villaverde itself (Table
       8.6). As Map 8.1 shows, most of the nearby owners lived in the larger town of Pedrosillo el Ralo, four kilometers to the west. The
       question arises whether Villaverde was exploited by nearby vecinos or there was a pattern in this area of ownership across town
       boundaries. Without a full study of the catastros of towns within walking distance, no firm answer


                                                                                          ― 250 ―
       is possible, but a review of the catastros of the three nearest towns reveals that in them the vecinos of Villaverde owned less than half
       the property that their vecinos owned in Villaverde.[18] I shall therefore estimate that Villaverde's vecinos owned about half as much
       outside its término as nearby vecinos did in it.
             In assigning the income from these lands, one must know who farmed them as well as who owned them. Even though vecinos of
       Villaverde owned less land outside the town than nearby vecinos did in it, the tithe records indicate that they harvested about four times
       as much outside as others did in their town (Table 8.5). Obviously even locally owned fields were not always farmed by their owners, and
       the vecinos of Villaverde had to pay rent to nearby owners as well as to more distant landlords. The lands of nearby vecinos would
       produce an estimated harvest of 396 EFW, with a potential rent of 123 EFW, at 31 percent of the harvest. From the tithes we know that
       nearby vecinos harvested about 140 EFW in Villaverde (twenty times the tithes they paid to the parish of Villaverde, Table 8.5), which is
       35 percent of the total crop in the fields belonging to them. Villaverde vecinos must have farmed the rest, paying some 80 EFW in rent.
            If vecinos of Villaverde owned half as much land outside the town as nearby vecinos in their término, the harvests on these lands
       would have been about 198 EFW. But the tithe records indicate that Villaverde vecinos actually brought in 556 EFW from outside (twenty
       times what they paid the parish of Villaverde on outside harvests, Table 8.5). They therefore rented lands outside the término that
       produced 358 EFW. At the ratio for seed and rent found in Villaverde, their net harvest from outside, after deduction for seed, would be
       450 EFW and the rent for these lands would be 111 EFW.
            From the tithe records, we have also estimated that the farmers of Villaverde harvested 630 EFW in the despoblados of La Cañada
       and La Cañadilla. Their net crop after seed would have been about 510 EFW, and their rent, 195. One must remember that on all
       harvests grown outside the término, half the tithes remained in the town where they were grown.
              Besides the tithes, the farmers paid also the first fruits and Voto de

       [18] Vecinos of Pedrosillo el Ralo owned land in Villaverde evaluated at 2,098 reales per year; those of Villaverde owned land in Pedrosillo
       el Ralo evaluated at 607 reales. The corresponding figures for Gomecello are 71 and 40, for Pajares 50 and 356. Totals: outsiders held




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
