Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                   Total                                                   100.5



                                    SOURCE . Villaverde, maest. segl., individual entries.



                             NOTE. Figures are for each farmer at ranks specified in first column.



                                                  a Owned one draft horse.



                       b One labrador owned no draft animals. He is assigned the share of one-half ox.



             c As in La Mata, senareros are assigned the share of one-half ox. Comparison with the tithe register
                                                indicates that this is too high.


       that one yoke of oxen could plow 22.5 fanegas per year, forty yokes sufficed for 1,800 fanegas of land in a two-year cycle. Villaverde's
       catastro recorded 1,650 fanegas of arable, but the oxen were also used outside the town.
             One can also check the table by the tithes of the fourth tither. These indicate a gross harvest of 252 EFW, which means a net
       income from harvest of 105 EFW (see Table 8.10). This is below the 130 EFW predicted in Table 8.12 and, if correct, would mean larger
       harvests for the first three tithers than predicted in the table. We recall that the tithes of the fourth tither of La Mata were also less than
       predicted (Appendix I). Perhaps fourth tithers fudged on their tithes because the cathedral of Salamanca, to which these tithes went,
       could not keep a strict control throughout the many towns of the partido or perhaps, as suggested, the "fourth tither" had fallen from
       fourth place but had not been replaced. In any case, his tithes do not seem adequate evidence to discredit Table 8.12.
               In addition, most of the income from raising livestock went to the labradores, who owned the largest number of each kind of animal
       ex-


                                                                                             ― 257 ―
       cept donkeys; and fifteen of the labradores also dealt in livestock as tratantes. Table 8.12 indicates the estimated income from these
       activities for the individual labradores.
            Out of their gross income, the wealthier labradores had to pay the cost of hired labor. Thirteen labradores had more than one yoke
       of oxen, ranging from one and a half to three. There were ten jornaleros in the town, to each of whom the catastro assigned wages of
       two reales per day for 180 days per year, or 26 EFW. [28] One can divide the total wages of the ten jornaleros among the top labradores
       according to the number of extra yokes of oxen they owned. The approximate results are given in Table 8.12, together with the net
       income of the labradores from all sources after deducting the cost of labor, and the net income of the senareros from agriculture.
              The range of the net income of the labradores is great. The casa excusada, with 315 EFW per year, received ten times the amount
       of the most modest labradores. How well-off they were depended on the size of their households. The fifteen labradores who were also
       tratantes had larger households than the others; they averaged 5.2 people as opposed to 3.4. Ten of the fifteen labradores-tratantes had
       a male servant in the household eighteen years or more of age, and four of them had servant girls. The other labradores had only two
       male servants and one female servant among them. Neither group had many children, and the two largest households had only 7
       members including servants. If, as established earlier, an adequate household income consisted of 12 EFW per person, the average
       requirements of the labradores-tratantes was 62 EFW and of the others 41. All the labradores-tratantes had more than required, and the
       first six, with net incomes of 165 EFW or more, could be considered wealthy. At the other extreme, however, at least five of the bottom
       six families, who had incomes estimated at 31 EFW and 3 or more members (one family consisted of a childless couple), were below the
       line of comfort.
            A comparison with the income of the labradores of La Mata is revealing (see Table 7.11). All these had an income of at least 75
       EFW, whereas 40 percent of those of Villaverde were below this level. At the other extreme, 40 percent of the labradores of La Mata can
       be considered wealthy (over 100 EFW annual surplus above the 12 EFW per person require-

       [28] Villaverde, resp. gen. Q 34. The catastro of La Mata says its jornaleros worked 120 days a year. The disparity is too great to be
       credible, but I follow the information of the catastro. The effect on family income is not great (Table 8.18).


                                                                                             ― 258 ―
       ment), but only 20 percent of the labradores of Villaverde. While the wealthiest labradores in Villaverde were as well-off as their
       counterparts in La Mata, as a group the labradores of Villaverde did not have the economic strength of those in the nearby town. The
       most obvious reasons for the difference that have come to light are that the land in Villaverde was less fertile and the proportion of the
       harvest taken as rent was higher. Although there may have been errors in drawing up the catastros of the two towns, it is hardly likely
       that all the differences are merely the fault of bad data. In both cases, the rate of rent is based on actual contracts. One can assert with
       confidence that the labradores of Villaverde were poorer than those of La Mata.
             The other people in agriculture skirted the threshold of poverty. These were mostly older villagers, some possibly retired from more
       active occupations, with smaller families and fewer needs. The shepherd was seventy and had a daughter and a sixteen-year-old son. The
       four guardas de campo averaged forty-seven years of age, the ten jornaleros forty-two. The youngest were three jornaleros of thirty-two.
       Most of the jornaleros probably leased a few plots and were senareros as well and had incomes of 6 to 11 EFW from this activity plus
       their animals (Table 8.12). Almost all these people had families of three; even so, as Table 8.14 shows, they barely eked out an
       adequate income, and the elderly widowed shepherd did not.


       3

       La Mata owed much of its well-being to its flourishing sector of muleteers (arrieros). In Villaverde the sector devoted to haulage was
       much less important. Nine vecinos were arrieros, and so were two adult sons of widows. The individual income of these men depended on



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
