Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                  Figure 8.3.
                                                                  Villaverde, Socioeconomic Pyramid, 1752
                                                     NOTE : This is a bar graph based on Table 8.18, with an indication
                                                          of dispersion. It is not a set of frequency distributions.


                                                                                          ― 267 ―
       various sectors and individuals, an estimate of the condition of the economy as a whole. The sources of income have been seen, but of
       the payments made to the outside world only the rents have been established. Most of the others were religious in nature, and of these
       the most substantial came out of the tithes (Table 8.3). Two-ninths of the partible tithes, the tercias reales, went to the University of
       Salamanca. Three-ninths went to the owner of the prestamo of the town, the Colegio de San Gregorio of Valladolid, but the colegio was
       required to give one-twentieth of this payment to the cathedral of Salamanca. These two shares of the partible were 104 and 156 EFW.
       (Of the remaining four-ninths, three went to the parish benefice and one to the fabric.) The tithes of the fourth tither (cuarto dezmero)
       went to the cathedral of Salamanca, and the outside owners of lands free from tithes took the horros on the lands. The minor tithes
       (diezmos menudos ) on animals and wool were divided in the same way as the partible; of a total of 8 EFW, 4 left the town. The first
       fruits, 66 EFW, were all taken away, two-thirds to the holder of the "beneficio simple servidero," the second priest of the parish, who had
       chosen not to reside in the town, and one-third to the aforementioned Colegio de San Gregorio. The Voto de Santiago, 23 EFW, went to
       the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela. [37] Finally, as in the case of La Mata, one can estimate that about one-quarter of the income of
       the parish church was spent outside the town. Taking into account its share of the tithes, the horros, and the rent on the plots that
       belonged to the church and the endowments attached to it, the amount leaving would be 26 EFW.
             The final deductions are obligations that the town council met for the vecinos as a whole. It paid a hospital in Salamanca 2.5
       fanegas of wheat and 1 fanega of garbanzos (5 EFW), presumably for the right to send its sick to the hospital, and 206 reales (15 EFW)
       variously to a preacher for Lent, the insane asylum of Valladolid, and the bula de la cruzada. The administrators (sexmeros) of the
       partido of Salamanca received 380 reales (27 EFW). [38] (La Mata must also have paid them its dues, but its catastro overlooks the item.)
       The town council also paid royal taxes, established as an annual fixed sum through encabezamiento (Table 8.19). These taxes were
       almost nine times as high as those reported by La Mata, which in fact did not mention alcabalas y cientos (a sales tax originating in the
       Middle Ages). As with its high rents, Villaverde appears to have been burdened with charges that dated from an earlier, more prosperous
       time.

       [37] All from Villaverde, resp. gen. Q 16 and maest. ecles., ff. 314–23.

       [38] Villaverde, resp. gen. Q 23.


                                                                                          ― 268 ―


                                Table 8.19. Royal Taxes, Villaverde, 1752.



                                                                                reales de vellón




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
