Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                Total                                 18                   100.0



                             SOURCE. Pedrollén, maest. segl. and maest. ecles.



                                           a Residence not given.



                   b An ecclesiastical benefice to which the king nominated the holder.




                                                                                        Figure 9.1.
                                                                           Pedrollén, Ownership of Shares, 1752


                                                                                              ― 298 ―
       estate themselves but rented it to a single individual (colono ), who became responsible for its administration. The catastro has no
       information on how the contract between them was made, whether the tenant negotiated with them individually or, what was more likely,
       the four employed a common agent to deal with him.
             The makers of the catastro were required to specify the rent and income of tenants on ecclesiastical lands. We have seen before
       how their replies make possible an estimate of the total rent paid by the vecinos of a locality. I have assumed that secular landowners
       charged the same rent as ecclesiastical; in the case of Pedrollén this is certain since it was all leased under one contract. The makers of
       the catastro calculated that the tenant paid one-sixth of the grain harvests as rent, and they assigned the entire income from the
       meadows and monte to the owners (meadows and monte were never attributed a large annual product; in Pedrollén it ran from 2 to 6
       reales per fanega). According to the extent and quality of land and the expected harvest from it, the total rent comes to about 41.5
       fanegas of wheat, 11.0 fanegas of rye, and 2,700 reales per year. At prevailing local prices, these payments convert to 242 EFW. [8] As
       will be explained soon, the catastro may have overestimated the productivity of Pedrollén's arable by about a third, and if so, the rent is
       also overestimated by 17 EFW. In the absence of the lease, we can posit that the tenant paid 225 EFW, although one must be suspicious
       of the figure because it rests so heavily on the amount paid for pasturage, calculated on a very rough measure.
             The farmer who could undertake such a contract was a man of considerable substance. His name was Francisco García Serrano, a
       widower forty-eight years old, whose only family living with him was a son of nineteen. Besides the furnishings of his house, his farm
       utensils, tools, carts, and other equipment, he owned an extensive assortment of livestock (Table 9.3). From its listing one can see that in
       addition to his crops, García Serrano produced for the market wool, cheese, cattle, lambs, pigs, goats, chickens, and turkeys. In fact he
       had so many animals that Pedrollén could not support all of them, and all except the oxen pastured elsewhere part of the year, "where
       there is best accommodation" ("donde mas comodidad halla").[9]
             His was a diversified establishment, geared to extract all possible profit from the estate, and it required a number of hands to run.
       Living

       [8] Pedrollén, resp. gen. Q 14: fanega of wheat, 15 reales; fanega of rye, 9 reales.

       [9] Pedrollén, maest. segl., f. 2v.


                                                                                              ― 299 ―


                                        Table 9.3. Livestock of Pedrollén's Tenant, 1752



                    Animal                      Number                        Animal                    Number



                    Cattle                                                    Goats




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
