Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                       Map 9.1.—
                                                                               Pedrollén and Its Environs
             At the time of the catastro, Pedrollén was within the Cuarto de Peña de Rey of the partido of Salamanca. The catastro describes it
       as one-fourth league from east to west and three-fourths from north to south.[1] An alquería, it lacked a government of its own and
       came under the jurisdiction of the alcalde of San Pedro de Rozados, seven kilometers to the northeast. [2] It was what was known as a
       término redondo or coto redondo, that is to say, the entire unit was a single property, although in this case various individuals owned
       shares in it and divided the income from it. [3] Bordering on it were the despoblado of Sanchillame, the alquerías Arguijo and Garriel, and
       the lugar Llen (Map 9.1). In 1786 Pedrollén, Arguijo, Garriel, and Llen had only six households among

       [1] AHPS, Catastro, Pedrollén, resp. gen. Q 3. The entire catastro of Pedrollén is in one volume.

       [2] Pedrollén, maest. segl., f. 2r.

       [3] Pedrollén, resp. gen. Q 3. According to David Vassberg, Land and Society, 169–70, the terms coto redondo and término redondo were
       applied in the sixteenth century to areas for which the crown had sold enclosure permits that prohibited open grazing by animals of other
       owners. This is probably the origin of the terms.



                                                                                          ― 295 ―
       them, forty people. Sanchillame, a despoblado, did not have a separate census return; one guesses another family lived there.
            The region had not always been so thinly populated. In 1534 Llen (then called Layn) had twenty-three vecinos, over eighty people.
       At that date Pedrollén and Carrascal del Asno were counted together and had sixteen vecinos, about sixty-five people; in 1786 they had
       populations of ten and seventeen respectively. The decline appears to have been continual since the sixteenth century. The census of
       1712, which was usually underenumerated, shows seventeen vecinos for Pedrollén, Arguijo, Garriel, and Llen; at the time of the catastro
       there were twelve; in 1786, I estimate nine and a half (the half a widow) (Table 9.1).
             The catastro records the area of Pedrollén as 1,009 fanegas, but how this compared with La Mata's 1,073 fanegas is hard to say,
       because Pedrollén followed an old practice of defining a fanega of land as the area sown with a fanega of grain (with the result that a
       fanega of good soil was smaller than a fanega of poor soil). [4] There was little further resemblance between the two places. In Pedrollén
       only 220 fanegas (22 percent) was used as arable, and this was divided in three fields, or hojas, each of which was sown only once in
       three years. One hundred forty-five fanegas was classed as pasture (prados de secano), and the rest, 64 percent, was uncultivated
       monte alto covered with encinas, used for the harvest of acorns and for wood to make charcoal. The average annual product of a fanega
       of land was five reales; in La Mata it was forty. [5] Four houses marked its center, along with two granaries (paneras), two haylofts
       (pajares), and three smaller buildings used for a forge and shelter for the animals. [6]
             The income, or aprovechamiento, from Pedrollén was legally divided into eighteen shares (partes ), which belonged to two
       artistocrats and two religious foundations (Table 9.2 and Figure 9.1). The catastro does not say when or how this unusual division took
       place, but it went back a long time, for we know from another source that don Andrés Villalón and his wife doña María Villafaña
       established a patronato in the church of San Julián of Salamanca in 1501, endowing it with nine of the eighteen shares in Pedrollén.[7]
       The four current owners did not manage the

       [4] See Pedrollén, maest. ecles., at end. On this widespread European practice, see Mendras, Vanishing Peasant, 62. Measures of land




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
