Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [66] The casa excusada and cuarto dezmero are identified in the tithe roll of 1804; they were Manuel Escudero and Antonio García.
       Neither was a buyer.


                                                                                          ― 291 ―
       manca for large blocks of properties scattered across a number of towns, but they let escape lands in their own town that were easily
       within their reach: eleven plots and four meadows bought in 1800 by a resident of Salamanca for only 9,285 reales, two small plots of
       first quality land that went to another buyer in Salamanca in 1801 for 800 reales, and the only properties of the General Hospital in
       Villaverde, seven plots, bought by a vecino of Salamanca in 1806 for only 8,150 reales.[67]
             Since the middle of the century, the vecinos had improved their economy substantially. When disentail began, their estimated per
       capita income of 17.5 EFW was not far below that of La Mata, 20 EFW. Yet they did not take advantage of the royal decree as the
       vecinos of La Mata did. A number of reasons have come to light for their differing responses. Villaverde had only recently recovered from
       what appears to have been a long, drawn-out depressed economy. According to the data, at midcentury it had a lower yield-seed ratio,
       higher rents, and heavier royal taxes than La Mata; a large sector of its population engaged in declining crafts; and its arrieros followed
       less remunerative routes. Its physical aspect as well, with abandoned houses and an elegant old church, indicates a more prosperous past
       when artisans were thriving, more productive land justified higher rents, and the crown compounded its taxes at a corresponding level.
       Times had gotten worse, but the burdens of rents and taxes were fixed by tradition. La Mata had a more modest past, witness its taxes
       and its church, not completed until 1791. Since before the catastro it had experienced a heady growth, which led to its seizure of the
       opportunity of disentail.
             The story of the two towns since the catastro was almost reversed, with Villaverde improving its economy and La Mata struggling to
       stay where it was, and this may be the major factor in the difference in their responses. With rapid population growth induced by the
       town's prosperity, La Mata's farmers had declined relative to the population of the town as a whole. For a while in the 1780s the
       despoblado of Narros offered them a way to keep their marginal productivity from falling, but when it became a separate town in 1789,
       they lost this resource. The town was still prosperous; the families had savings accumulated over recent generations; and the labradores
       with large harvests had immediate means to pay for purchases, as did the arrieros, whose position had not declined. Disentail offered
       them a possible way out of their straits, and one that looked especially attractive at a time of high grain prices. The pressure of
       circumstances encouraged them to unite against the

       [67] AHPS, Contaduría, libro 851, f. 181v; libro 852, f. 123r; libro 856, f. 152r–v.


                                                                                          ― 292 ―
       world represented by their landlords in Salamanca, as they did in buying the lands of the General Hospital.
             It would be hard to argue that the labradores of Villaverde were less enterprising than those of La Mata, for the remarkable
       expansion of their harvests, in part at the expense of neighboring towns, shows that as a group they had plenty of drive. Rather, one can
       say that for Villaverde the disentail came at a less opportune moment. Prosperity had come more recently, and the cause of it, the
       expansion of farming into the two despoblados anexos of the town, was still working. Families probably had fewer savings, and labradores
       could see less advantage in buying land when they could rent virgin soil relatively cheaply next door. In economic terms, the opportunity
       costs of investing in disentailed land were higher for the farmers of Villaverde, and so they let slip out of their grasp some easy
       acquisitions.


                                                                                          ― 293 ―




       Chapter IX—
       Pedrollén
       If instead of going north from the city of Salamanca the Cuarto de Armuña, one goes south and southwest toward the mountains that
       separate the province from Extremadura, one crosses a very different countryside. The rise out of the valley of the Rio Tormes is more
       gentle, and, going southwest, one passes through a region in which the land rolls in long waves, with outcroppings of shale like whitecaps
       on the waves. The rich, deep earth of Armuña rapidly gives way to brownish gray soil, often too thin to plow. Today grass pastures
       studded with live oaks (dehesas is the term for such lands) alternate with regions of grain fields. Towns are few and small, and
       cultivation is carried on in large estates, many of them devoted to raising cattle, for which the acorns of the live oaks (encinas ) are one
       of the main sources of food. This is the Charro district of Salamanca, as famous in its own way as La Armuña is in its.
              Almost thirty kilometers southwest of Salamanca, in a saddle between two hills of encinas, is Las Veguillas, the only sizable town for
       about ten kilometers in any direction. Just before one reaches it, one passes a well-cared-for estate called Pedrollén. It occupies a broad
       hollow, 940 meters above sea level, surrounded by a rise of low hills. The hollow has carefully tilled grain fields, flat enough to serve as
       an airfield in the Spanish Civil War. Some of the hillsides are farmed; the rest are dehesas supporting. handsome black cattle. At the
       center, by the road, is a cluster of houses surrounded by trees and flowers, the living quarters and farm buildings of this prosperous
       finca.


                                                                                          ― 294 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
