Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                    Map 10.1.
                                                                    The Partido of El Mirón and Nearby Towns
                                                                NOTE : Since the eighteenth century El Mirón has
                                                             incorporated Aldeaelabad, and Santa Maria del Berrocal
                                                                has incorporated Navahermosa and Valdemolinos.
             nomic region, one must also take into account Gallegos de So el Mirón (Gallegos under El Mirón, today Gallegos de Solmirón). By
       road it is the closest town to El Mirón, lying below it a few kilometers to the northwest and visible from the castillo. In the eighteenth
       century it was a villa eximida, which meant that it lay outside the jurisdiction of any partido, and in 1786 it had 682 inhabitants, more
       than twice the population of El Mirón.
              El Mirón was the most isolated of all the places in the partido. Two



                                                                                          ― 312 ―
       roads lead north from Piedrahita to Salamanca. One runs west of the rock of El Mirón, through Santa María del Berrocal, Valdemolinos,
       and Gallegos de Solmirón, and its traffic helps explain the greater size of the first and last of these. The other runs east of El Mirón,
       crossing the rocky outcropping at El Collado. El Mirón itself can be reached only by spurs off these roads and requires a person coming
       from Piedrahita to make a wide circle around its rock. It owed its prominence to its selection, centuries earlier, to be the legal head of
       this tiny partido, very likely because of its castle and strong defensive position.[4]
             The available evidence indicates that since the sixteenth century El Mirón, despite its administrative primacy, had been losing out
       economically to Santa María del Berrocal, beneath it in the valley. The census of 1534 shows a total of 131 vecinos for El Mirón and its
       two anexos and 63 vecinos for Santa María. [5] But by 1752 El Mirón and its anexos had declined to 106 vecinos, while Santa María had
       risen to 90. In the next thirty-five years El Mirón's relative decline continued, both with respect to Santa María and to the partido as a
       whole. In 1752 it had 32 percent of the vecinos in the partido; in 1786 it had 26 percent of the total population. Conversely Santa María
       rose from 39 percent of the vecinos in 1752 to 44 percent of the total population in 1786 (Table 10.1). Although the census figures are
       not fully reliable, the trend is so clear that it can hardly be the effect of census errors.
             The structure of the partido fostered a struggle between El Mirón and Santa María del Berrocal. El Mirón, high on its rocky hill with
       its harsh plateau and numerous flocks, clung to its privileged position as cabeza de partido. Santa María, blessed by land in the valley and
       a highway, found its strength in farming and transit. One can almost imagine the forces pitted against each other as a microcosm of the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
