Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       probably had no such economic potential. He could only watch his landlords change and hope that the new one would be no more
       exacting than the old. A quarter of a century later, in 1826, the population of Pedrollén was twelve, with three vecinos (Table 9.1). There
       were only two more people than in 1786, and their future was no brighter than it had been then. Disentail did not reverse the
       demographic decline that began in the sixteenth century or improve the condition of the men and women who worked the land and
       tended the livestock.


       [22] See above, Chapter 5, section 3.


                                                                                          ― 309 ―




       Chapter X—
       El Mirón
       Today the southern border of the province of Salamanca is formed by the Sierra de Candelario and the Sierra de Gata, which are western
       extremities of the mountain range that cuts across central Spain and separates Old Castile and León from New Castile and Extremadura.
       In the eighteenth century the southern part of the province extended farther east than it does today to include two valleys lying in the
       shadow of the more imposing Sierra de Gredos, which boasts the highest mountains in central Spain. One of these runs along the
       northern flank of the range and contains the headwaters of the Rio Tormes, flowing here from east to west before turning north at Barco
       de Ávila eventually to pass the city of Salamanca and join the Rio Duero at the Portuguese frontier. The other is the broader and gentler
       valley of the Rio Corneja, separated from the valley of the Tormes by the low Sierra de Villafranca. In the nineteenth-century
       reorganization of provinces both of these valleys were transferred to the province of Ávila.
             The dominant town of the valley of the Corneja is Piedrahita. The cabeza of the partido that contains most of the fertile valley, it
       has long been a center of some prominence. In the early sixteenth century it gained notoriety as the home of a mystic nun of the suspect
       sect of Alumbrados, the Beata de Piedrahita. [1] In the eighteenth century the Duques de Alba, who were señores of both these valleys
       together with much of the rest of the southeast of the province, built an austere granite

       [1] Bataillon, Erasme et l'Espagne, 73–74.


                                                                                          ― 310 ―
       palace just above the town. Local tradition, hardly reliable, holds that Goya painted the Maja Désnuda in one of its rooms.
             Piedrahita lies at the foot of the Sierra de Villafranca, and from its vantage point one can see the valley of the Corneja stretching
       out to the north, almost circular and surrounded by hills in all directions. Straight across the valley, about twelve kilometers away, a
       rocky outcropping juts up sharply from the valley floor. At its western end is an impressive rounded peak of barren rock. Still today it is
       surmounted by the ruins of an ancient fortification known simply as the castillo. Just behind and beneath the castillo lies a town known as
       El Mirón, "the lookout," whose name testifies to its strategic value. The site is so distinctive that legends surround it—one is that an old
       escape tunnel runs all the way from the garden of the palace of the Albas in Piedrahita under the valley to come out at the castillo. In
       the Civil War, fires were lit beside this fortification to guide Nationalist airplanes returning to Salamanca from bombing Madrid.
              The town of El Mirón is built against the northern shoulder of this rock, out of sight of the Corneja valley. Its fields fall away
       gradually to the northwest, north, and northeast, on a harsh plateau. In the eighteenth century, El Mirón was legally a villa and cabeza
       de partido. Five towns (lugares) were under its jurisdiction; together they constituted the smallest partido of the province. (Piedrahita had
       twenty-three towns under it.) [2] The mountainous southern part of the province was characterized by larger towns than the plains around
       Salamanca, but four of the towns of the partido of El Mirón were small by any standard. Valdemolinos, Navahermosa, El Collado, and
       Villar de Corneja had populations of 46, 71, 116, and 124 respectively in 1786. Three of them bordered on El Mirón and were closely tied
       to it: Valdemolinos, in a rocky valley to the west, El Collado on a pass in the hills to the east, and Navahermosa on the edge of the
       broad valley beneath the rock (Map 10.1). El Collado and Navahermosa were anexos of El Mirón and paid tithes to its parish.[3] Villar de
       Corneja lies off to the southwest, outside the immediate orbit of El Mirón. The fifth lugar, however, was a different case. Santa Maria del
       Berrocal, located on the northern edge of the valley, below the rocky hill of El Mirón, had a population of 517, two-thirds again as large
       as El Mirón's 311, making it the demographic center of gravity of the partido. Finally, in constructing a picture of this eco-

       [2] España dividida en provincias ," 453–54.

       [3] See AHPA, Catastro, El Mirón, libro 548 f. 14.


                                                                                          ― 311 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
