Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                   SOURCE. El Mirón, personal de legos and personal de eclesiásticos.



                                    a Assumed to work in agriculture.



             b Two labradores (counted above but not here) were also called linen weavers.



          c El Mirón, resp. gen. Q 32, reports the existence of an escribano (notary), an office
                                              "now vacant."



                                     d Called also labrador y herrero.




                                                                                           ― 315 ―




                                                                                     Figure 10.1.
                                                                         El Mirón, Employment Structure, 1752
            butcher shop (carnicería ), a granary (alfondiga, that is, the town pósito),[7] and an early sixteenth-century church with a square
       stone tower and late medieval arches over the altar but only a wooden roof over the nave. Even in the eighteenth-century El Mirón had a
       very modest appearance, much more like an ordinary lugar than a villa and cabeza de partido.
            The catastro records sixty-seven lay families and two priests, each with his household. Table 10.2 and Figure 10.1 give the
       occupational distribution. Although El Mirón had nine artisans, all associated with the making and tailoring of cloth, it was more
       completely an agricultural community than either La Mata or Villaverde. Farming and pasturage occupied almost three-quarters of the
       male heads of household.
            Its land was its major source of income, stretching out on the rolling plateau beyond the rocky ridge on which the town is located.
       The catastro indicates that it had an area of 2,841 fanegas outside the town nucleus. [8] One cannot, however, compare this figure with
       the 1,073 fanegas of La Mata or 1,650 fanegas of Villaverde, because the fanega of El Mirón, or fanegada as they preferred to call it, was
       not a fixed area. In

       [7] El Mirón, resp. gen. Q 23.

       [8] Total of tables at the beginning of the El Mirón, maest. segl. and maest. ecles.


                                                                                           ― 316 ―
       the custom of this region, as in Pedrollén, a fanega or fanegada was the area of arable that took a fanega of seed, a fanegada of good
       land being smaller than one of poor land. The informants did not say how much these might measure in area. The fanegada of woodland
       (monte) was defined as an area that contained fifty live oak trees (pies de encina ), again not a fixed measurement. A unit of pasture
       was called a peonada and described simply as equivalent to a fanegada.[9] Despite these uncertainties, it becomes clear that the término
       of El Mirón was far greater than that of either La Mata or Villaverde.
             On the other hand, the information provided by the makers of the catastro reveals a mediocre soil. Almost a third, 931 fanegadas,
       was pasture and wooded hills of live oak, to which no value could be assigned "because of its bad quality and location and also because
       the oaks are usually eaten by worms so that in most years they do not bear acorns, and when they do the crop is so small that it does
       not provide enough fodder for the few animals of the vecinos, nor do they provide more wood than is needed for their houses and farm
       implements."[10] The vecinos did not intend to hide their hardships from the king. Of the remaining 1,910 fanegadas, only 18 percent
       was good enough to plant wheat. Sixty percent produced rye. The plowed land consisted of small plots distributed through three great
       fields (hojas), each sown only once every three years. A small number of fields enclosed by stone walls (cortinas), totaling 4 percent,
       produced rye for green forage (herren) every year; the rest was meadows from which hay was cut: 12 percent produced hay every year,
       7 percent only once every three years. The average annual income from a fanegada of productive land in El Mirón averages out to be
       twelve reales, far below La Mata's forty reales or Villaverde's thirty-six reales per fanega.
             Following the method with which we are now familiar, from the stated amount of each quality of land and the predicted harvest on
       it, one can obtain a predicted total annual harvest of 457 fanegas of wheat and 1,180 fanegas of rye, at fifteen reales per fanega of



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
