Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                SOURCES.



                                    a AHN, Hac., libro 7476, letra H.



                                            b See Appendix K.



       animals. In El Mirón also animal husbandry was of major importance, and uncertainty about income from this source weakens the
       assessment of town income.
             Appendix K describes the method I have settled on to estimate income from animals. There is the additional difficulty that here, as
       in the harvests, the vecinos understated their wealth. The authorities who compiled the provincial summary appear to have uncovered
       their deceit, for the provincial summary attributes El Mirón more animals than the town catastro. Table 10.7 uses the numbers in the
       summary to calculate the town income from livestock, 1,771 EFW.
             It is proper to note that the information provided by the reported tithes (in the working sheet, not the reduced figures in the
       respuestas generales), does not indicate such large reproduction for sheep and goats, as Appendix K, Table K.2 establishes. It says the
       parishioners paid ninety-nine lambs and nine kids per year, at the rate of one for every ten born. Since the farmers of El Mirón owned
       about one-half of the sheep and four-fifths of the goats in the parish, this would mean they had about five hundred lambs and eighty
       kids born per year; whereas


                                                                                          ― 328 ―
       the ratios adopted in Appendix K result in about fifteen hundred lambs and five hundred kids per year. If the reported tithes were an
       honest reflection of the animal births, the birth rate was far lower than the estimate in Appendix K and the resulting income lower than in
       Table 10.7. The estimated income, of course, includes the production of wool and cheese, and the tithes report on this, too. For the entire
       parish they were 711 pounds of wool and 55 pounds of goat cheese. With wool valued at 1.0 real per pound and cheese at 0.6 real per
       pound, the share of El Mirón represented a gross production from these two sources of about 3,800 reales, or 255 EFW. The number of
       births indicated by the tithes multiplied by the stated value of lambs and kids (5 reales each) results in an income of about 210 EFW, for
       a total income of 465 EFW from these two breeds, barely 40 percent of the estimate in Table 10.7. This result seems unreasonably low,
       but the contrast between it and my figure means that one cannot dispel the uncertainty about the income from animals. The queston
       must remain open.
             Most if not all the pastures must have been within the town limits, but the owners of livestock had to pay rent on meadows and
       cortinas belonging to the parish and outsiders. If the rent were the annual income attributed by the catastro to these properties, the
       vecinos paid for them 108 and 131 EFW respectively.
            One can now tabulate the income from agriculture of the farmers. Table 10.8 provides two figures for net income from agriculture,
       which represent the maximum and minimum estimates from harvests and animals. The larger estimate, 2,710 EFW, is almost 50 percent
       greater than the minimum figure, 1,836 EFW, yet the two estimates do provide limits within which we can proceed.
            Because so much income came from livestock (44 percent of the minimum estimate; 55 percent of the maximum estimate), the
       methods used previously to determine the distribution of this income among the labradores and others engaged in farming are of limited
       value. Nevertheless the available information must be milked for all that it can produce. The catastro states that twenty-seven "labradores
       and senareros" had large enough harvests to pay first fruits, one less than the number of men identified as labradores in the list of
       vecinos. [18] (Here a farmer had to pay first fruits if he harvested ten fanegas of any single grain; in La Armuña the amount was six
       fanegas.) In the three years 1799–1801,

       [18] El Mirón, resp. gen. Q 16.


                                                                                          ― 329 ―
       covered by the tithe register, an average of forty-four farmers harvested enough to pay first fruits. (Three years are needed because of
       the local three-year rotation.) Table 10.9 shows the distribution of the gross and net harvests among them, and it projects this
       distribution onto the twenty-seven harvesters in 1752.
            The striking feature of the table is the low income of the labradores. At the end of the century, the first tither had a net income
       from harvests that I estimate at only 100 EFW. [19] Only five farmers out of forty-four who paid first fruits had net incomes from harvests
       over 50 EFW. At midcentury, the harvests had been as large and the number of labradores smaller, yet my maximum estimate of the net
       income from harvest of the most wealthy labrador is only 150 EFW, and only six out of the twenty-seven who paid first fruits received
       more than 60 EFW. This is a far cry from La Mata, whose thirteen labradores had net income from harvests ranging from 75 to 300 EFW
       (see Table 7.11), or Villaverde, where seventeen out of twenty-eight labradores had net incomes from harvest of 60 to 260 EFW (see
       Table 8.12). In fact, farming was done on a different scale in El Mirón than in the Armuña district, carried on with yokes of cows instead
       of oxen. The twenty-eight vecinos of El Mirón who called themselves labradores in 1752 had only eight oxen among them, and only two
       had pairs. The others teamed their oxen with cows or had only cows. Five had only one cow and had to borrow to form a yoke.[20]
             At first sight the explanation appears simple. Since about half of the income from agriculture came from livestock, one need only
       double the net return from harvests to determine the total income of the farmers, which would then be comparable to that of the other
       towns. The catastro and tithe register reveal, however, that the situation was far less simple than this. All the labradores had some pigs
       and cows and many had horses and donkeys, but less than half also owned flocks of sheep. The labradores owned virtually all the cows
       in the town, half the sows, two-thirds of the mares, and 60 percent of the female donkeys. (Only one owned any goats.) We can thus
       attribute to them these proportions

       [19] As before, I assume a first tither with harvests projected above the largest tither recorded in the register. There is no explicit
       statement in the register that El Mirón followed the practice of separating the tithes of the casa excusada from the partible tithes after
       1760, but all Spain was covered by the papal grant. If there were no such unrecorded tither, the harvests at the end of the century
       would be considerably smaller than those at midcentury.

       [20] El Mirón, maest. segl.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
