Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                    Figure 11.1.
                                                                         Baños, Employment Structure, 1752
              kings up to Felipe V, about one-third of the town limits, a block of marginal land stretching across it from west to east south of the
       mountain pastures and running down the eastern edge was set aside to be distributed to the vecinos individually to till free of charge.
       They received only the use of the land (dominio útil) and lost it if they did not cultivate it within certain stated intervals. After deducting a
       fifth of the término privativo that was barren and another fifth good only for pasture, about 30,000 fanegas remained that could be
       planted about once every twenty years, fertilized by the ashes left from cutting down and burning off the undergrowth (monte bajo ) that
       had grown up in the intervening period. This form of primitive slash-and-burn agriculture was known as roza de cama.[8] Only a small
       part of the término privativo was planted regularly, however. The catastro indicates that in the current year individuals had sown about
       160 fanegas of it. [9] If this was representative, over a twenty-

       [8] Baños, resp. gen. QQ 10, 12. "Roza" is a general Andalusian term for land that is burned off and sown (see Bernal and Drain,
       Campagnes sevillanes, 65). In the eighteenth century baldíos in Extremadura were being turned into rozas, "which can be exploited, some
       every eight years, others every ten, twelve, or twenty years" (quoted in Rodríguez Silva, "Venta de baldíos").

       [9] Baños, maest. segl., totals. Resp. gen. Q 10 says about 80 fanegas were planted, but this, stated by the town officials as a global
       figure, seems less reliable than the sum of the reports of the individual vecinos.


                                                                                          ― 375 ―
       year cycle barely one-tenth of all the land available would have been planted. Yet roza de cama was reputed to produce a harvest of 8
       fanegas of wheat for each fanega of area, higher than any other land in the town. The término privativo also contained 2,000 fanegas of
       better quality soil, which could be planted once every five years with wheat, barley, or rye after burning the small growth of underbrush,
       in a rotation known as roza de barbecho. About a fifth of this section of it was cultivated in the current year, indicating that most of it
       was in use. Finally, 957 fanegas of the término privativo were good enough to have encouraged those who exploited them to build
       cortijos in their lands, permanent buildings to shelter animals and seasonal workers. For example, one cortijo of 120 fanegas, which
       belonged to a priest of Baños, consisted of two sheds to protect workers, donkeys, and cattle "at the time of planting and harvesting," a
       hay rick, two corrals, and a paved threshing floor. [10] Despite the terms of the royal grant, there were fourteen "cortijos de sierra" in the
       término privativo, so well established in the hands of the current holders that the catastro treated them as private property. Here
       harvests ranged from two crops of wheat every three years to one crop of rye every four years.
              The catastro indicates that only about 3,000 fanegas of the término privativo were planted at all regularly. Together with the 4,244
       fanegas that were cultivated under private ownership, about 7,250 fanegas produced crops. This is 4.6 percent of the entire término, but
       still seven times the area of La Mata. Since the population was slightly more than seven times that of La Mata, the cultivated land per
       head was about even. As will become apparent, however, the similarity did not extend to the per capita income. La Mata at midcentury
       was a flourishing, little-stratified community despite the outside ownership of most of its land. Baños, Andalusian to the core, had a vastly
       different economic and social structure.
             The private property was located relatively close to the town nucleus, mostly in lo llano. Twelve hundred fifty fanegas of private
       property were planted in grains. The best quality fields were in the ruedo, 266 fanegas of cultivated land lying in the immediate vicinity of
       the town nucleus. First-class ruedo land was sown in a three-year cycle, 1 fanega of land producing six fanegas of wheat, eight of barley,
       and six of habas (broad beans) in successive years. Second-class land gave only two crops in three years: five fanegas of wheat and
       seven of barley; while third-class

       [10] Baños, maest. ecles., ff. 24–30.


                                                                                          ― 376 ―
       land could be sown only once every three years with wheat, giving a harvest of six fanegas. Beyond the ruedo, in the campiñuela, 987
       fanegas in extent, private lands varied greatly in quality, from the best that produced three harvests in three years—five fanegas of
       wheat and two harvests of six fanegas of barley—to fourth-class land that yielded only two crops in eight years, six fanegas of barley and
       five of rye. Over half the ruedo was first class, but only one-fortieth of the campiñuela. The extent of property tells little about its worth,
       since "quality" as defined by the catastro was crucial.
              Of the private land 2,760 fanegas, or 65 percent, was planted in olives, about 119,000 trees, which produced the most valuable
       harvest in the town. The catastro does not state how the olive groves were located spatially with reference to the arable. Close by the
       nucleus, in the ruedo, were a number of orchards and huertas. They were irrigated by streams or norias (wells with waterwheels worked
       by donkeys or mules).[11] Their figs, pears, cherries, chestnuts, pomegranates, peaches, lemons, oranges, mulberries, and as many other
       fruits again, and their vegetables—turnips, cabbages, eggplants, tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, garlic, onions, and lettuce are listed—
       were of high value, but the extent of their cultivation was limited. Verdes de cebada and verdes de centeno (barley and rye planted
       yearly and harvested green for fodder) were also grown in small parts of the ruedo.
             The use of the land in Baños conformed closely to the pattern conceived in the early nineteenth century by the German geographer
       Johann Heinrich von Thünen. Based on the experience of his own estate near the Baltic Sea, he demonstrated that if a nucleated
       settlement or farmstead was surrounded by land of even quality, its use would be distributed in a series of concentric rings around the
       nucleus. Economic efficiency would dictate that the crops requiring the greatest amount of labor, fertilizer, and other inputs, including
       transport, would be located closest to the nucleus. The total expense in inputs compared with its price in the market would determine
       how far from the center each crop or form of exploitation would be. Thus intensive cultivation like horticulture would be closest to the
       nucleus, intensive arable rotation would be farther out, followed by arable of less frequent rotation, with grazing and ranching at the
       greatest distance. Of course, in a real situation the quality of the land, physical impediments to cultivation and communication, the
       availability of roads, and other local features would modify

       [11] Baños, resp. gen. Q 4.


                                                                                          ― 377 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
