Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                                                                                          ― 367 ―




       Chapter XI—
       Baños
       The rugged surface of the Iberian Peninsula affords only two easy routes between Andalusia and Castile. One, in the west, runs north
       from Seville to Mérida in Extremadura. It was the route preferred by the Romans, who from Mérida continued it over the central sierras to
       Salamanca and León. After the Visigoths made Toledo the capital of Iberia, this route lost its primacy in favor of one to the east. Leaving
       Seville, it follows the valley of the Guadalquivir to the town of Bailén in the province of Jaén and then turns north to pass through the
       Sierra Morena where it is relatively easily crossed into La Mancha, and thence it has an almost flat course to Toledo and Madrid. Between
       these two roads, the low, broad, labyrinthine ranges of the Sierra Morena separate Castile from Andalusia.
              Today the main railroad and highway from Madrid to Andalusia follow the eastern route and traverse the sierra through the pass of
       Despeñaperros, a spectacular, narrow, rocky gorge beneath overhanging peaks, on which, its name suggests, even dogs lose their
       footing. Great human effort was needed to make it passable for anything but pack animals. This effort was undertaken in 1779 at the
       initiative of the Conde de Floridablanca, who engaged a French engineer to blast a road beneath the precipices, to the awe of
       contemporary travelers. Before then the main road crossed higher but easier terrain by way of El Viso del Marqués, the last town in La
       Mancha, which lies five kilometers to the west of the present road.
              Since the Middle Ages this line of communication has been of great


                                                                                          ― 368 ―
       commercial and military value, used by travelers, merchants, and armies descending from Toledo and Madrid to Seville, Cádiz, and
       beyond to America, or heading north toward the capital. After passing south through the Sierra Morena the old and new roads join at Las
       Navas de Tolosa, scene of the critical Christian victory of 1212, which opened Andalusia to reconquest. Six centuries later, in 1808,
       Napoleon's troops under General Dupont, marching to subdue southern Spain, succumbed to a superior Spanish army near Bailén. To
       make this highway safe from bandits and to bring a desolate region into cultivation, Carlos III founded the colonies of Sierra Morena, one
       of his most successful undertakings, which provided fame and ultimate tragedy to their director, Pablo de Olavide, as we observed in
       Chapter 1.[1]
             At the time of the catastro these colonies were not yet there, and the road between Las Navas de Tolosa and Bailén ran most of the
       way through the término of Baños. The first two inns south of the pass of Despeñaperros were located here, the large Venta de Miranda
       that travelers stopped at just beyond the pass, and the smaller venta at Guadarromán, halfway down the slopes. From there, the road
       skirts a little to the east of Baños itself, for its nucleus, like many in Andalusia, is located on the top of a hill, easily accessible from only
       one side.
             The nucleus is built on a low spur of the Sierra Morena. At the southern tip of the spur, about 425 meters above sea level, rises a
       castle of Muslim origin, reputed to date from the tenth century. With its thick walls and high square keep, this imposing bastion guarded
       the Andalusian valley from marauders of the north. The low, white houses of the town cluster on the crest of the hill behind it, like chicks
       snuggled to their mother. Close beside the castle is the main square, a small affair dominated on its opposite side by a Renaissance
       church with an octagonal bell tower crowned by a curious tapered dome, like the pointed end of an egg. Farther along the crest, the
       hermita, or sanctuary, of El Cristo de los Llanos stands at a distance from the eighteenth-century town.
             From the top of the castle keep, a lookout can dominate the region in all directions. To the west, the promontory it sits on falls
       rapidly off toward the rugged valley of the Rio Rumblar, and beyond are barren, steep hills, good only for meager grazing. To the north
       rises the rolling, wooded Sierra Morena, and in the opposite direction, between two hills, a sharp valley leads off to the southwest and
       the Guadalquivir.

       [1] For the roads see the map of Jaén in Biblioteca Nacional, Tomás López, "Atlas particular," tomo 1; Bourgoing, Travels in Spain 1 :
       374–76; Laborde, View of Spain 2 : 4–7. On the colonies, above Chapter 1, section 6.


                                                                                          ― 369 ―
       Only to the east does the view suggest the wealth that supports Baños, for eighty meters below the castle and town, a broad, flat valley
       known as lo llano stretches four kilometers to the east and twelve kilometers north and south between the town and the Madrid highway.
       Beyond the road the land to the east rolls gently, and the mining city of Linares is visible from the castle, fifteen kilometers away. The
       plain is of deep red earth, typical of the Sierra Morena, and today it is covered with a patchwork of grain fields and olive groves.
            Although lo llano formed the heart of Baños's agriculture, it was but a fraction of the término, which stretched six and four-fifths
       leagues north and south according to contemporaries and six and one-quarter east and west. Translated into thirty-eight and thirty-five
       kilometers respectively, these estimates were slightly high, but not far off (Map 11.1). The northern limit was the province of La Mancha,
       twenty-eight kilometers from the town nucleus. Most of this territory was in the Sierra Morena and barren or used only for pasture and
       occasional crops.[2]
              In Andalusia in the eighteenth century, as today, towns were bigger than in Old Castile in population as well as in extent. In 1752,
       according to the catastro, the villa of Baños had 306 houses, plus 14 others uninhabitable or in ruins. The town hall (casa de
       ayuntamiento ) faced on the square and housed the jail and town granary (pósito). The town also owned on the square a public butcher
       shop and a slaughterhouse.[3] The populace provided enough business to support two taverns, one of which sold olive oil, vinegar, and
       spirits (aguardiente ), three grocery stores (especerías ), nine bakers, and two dealers in soap. [4] At a distance from the nucleus and
       nearby plain but within the término, fourteen cortijos or rural estates housed a few permanent residents.
             The books of households list 1,779 people in Baños in 1752 (Table 11.1). The numbers suggest a marked underreporting of females,
       especially single women. (The books show 407 sons of all ages living with their parents and only 341 daughters.) Some young women
       may have gone away to work (but where?); still, one can safely add 50 women to the population without exaggerating its true size. This
       gives a total of about 1,830. Baños had 437 lay vecinos: 281 married men, 39 widowers, 85 widows, and 32 single men; 12 clergymen
       were heads of household, and three clergymen lived alone.
              The occupations of the vecinos reveal a more complicated social



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
