Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                 Table 10.24. Mean Annual Income from Land, Partido of El Mirón, 1752



                                                                                    Reales per
                                                                                     Measure



                                    Upland towns



                               Gallegos de So el Mirón                                   9



                                       El Mirón                                         11



                                     Valdemolinos                                       12



                                      El Collado                                        13



                                     Valley towns



                                    Navahermosa                                         15



                                   Villar de Corneja                                    19



                               Santa María del Berrocal                                 20



         SOURCE. AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, estados seglar, eclesiástico, and eclesiástico
                                        patrimonial, Letra D.


       valley (by a vecino of El Collado in Navahermosa). [52] Vecinos of valley towns bought lands in other valley towns, but they also bought
       lands in upland towns. Perhaps residents of the upland towns made purchases in other valley towns that I have not studied, but it is
       highly improbable that any such purchases would have negated the pattern observed here.
             In the eighteenth century the changing demand for agricultural products and the growth of rural population gave comparative
       economic advantage to towns with good farmland. Rough as they are, the figures in the catastro for the value of agricultural land show
       this. The mean annual product of a measure of land (a fanega or its local equivalent) in upland towns was lower than in valley towns
       (Table 10.24). The towns of the region that were engaged primarily in farming had the economic strength to profit from the disentail at
       the expense of those dedicated to pasturage.
            To judge from the tithe register of El Mirón, the disentail confirmed and solidified a development already taking place. During the
       three-year cycle 1799–1801, fifty farmers from seven outside towns paid tithes to the parish for harvests within its limits (not including
       farmers of Navahermosa and El Collado, which were part of the parish). Sixteen of them

       [52] A vecino of El Collado (upland) participated in the purchase of a large block of lands in Navahermosa (valley) belonging to a fund in
       Piedrahita, the rest of the lands going to a purchaser in Piedrahita. The records do not indicate how the shares were divided. Table 10.22
       and Figure 10.5 are based on a hypothetical equal division, but the vecino of El Collado may well have got less than half.


                                                                                             ― 366 ―
       had harvests in more than one year of the cycle. Their payments indicated a total average annual harvest of some 330 EFW. At the time
       of the catastro individuals living in nearby towns did not own nearly enough land to produce such harvests (Table 10.6). Unless vecinos of
       El Mirón had sold much land to outsiders in the intervening fifty years—hardly likely—outsiders were renting plots within the town,
       probably from church funds. Was this a recent development? I have no information, but I suggest that it was a practice that had been
       growing as El Mirón got relatively poorer. The sales continued the outside takeover. The partido of El Mirón is the clearest case we have
       seen of disentail accelerating a regional redistribution of economic resources that had already been going on despite restrictions on the
       free exchange of property.
             After the desamortización of Carlos IV, the decline of El Mirón continued. By 1826 its population was down to 270 from 311 in 1786,
       and it had less than 18 percent of the population of the partido, compared to 26 percent in 1786 (Table 10.1). Santa María increased
       from 517 in 1786 to 780 in 1826 and now had nearly 52 percent of the people in the partido (against 44 percent in 1786). Administrative
       reorganization added to El Mirón's woes. By 1826 its two anexos, Navahermosa and El Collado, had parishes of their own. [53] In 1833 its
       towns were incorporated in the partido of Piedrahita and El Mirón ceased to be a cabeza de partido. Santa María, with its rich fields and
       major road, on the other hand, had its municipal boundaries extended to include Navahermosa and, by the twentieth century,
       Valdemolinos as well. If, as was suggested earlier, one can see here in microcosm the national conflict between the harsh Castilian
       meseta and the lower, more commercial periphery, an oversimplified comparison but one of some validity, the history of this small
       partido suggests that after the eighteenth century only the persistence of government institutions and patterns of authority inherited from
       earlier times made possible the continued dominance of upland Spain over lowland Spain.


       [53] Miñano, Diccionario geográfico 3 : 147, 6 : 223.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
