Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                             Figure 10.6.
                                                 Partido of El Mirón, Purchases of Disentailed Properties, 1800–1805
                                       NOTE : Areas are proportional to the amount of the sales in the town (see Table 10.23).



                                                                                          ― 364 ―
       percent of the property sold. [51] The town economy was a net loser. (Of the properties that were sold, they got slightly more than half
       those that belonged to their church, but less than half those of outside parish funds.) Vecinos of all nearby towns except Valdemolinos, a
       tiny place of forty-six people in 1786, shared in the purchases of its lands.
            By comparison, in Gallegos de Solmirón 67 percent of the property sold belonged to local church funds, but the vecinos bought 84
       percent of the property: all the properties of their church and half the rest. They also bought some property in El Mirón, coming out well
       ahead on the disentail.
             The picture in Santa María del Berrocal, the expanding town in the valley, was more complex. Its economy lost out in the sales in El
       Mirón, its church owning 36 percent of the property sold in El Mirón and its vecinos buying only 26 percent, and also in Gallegos, where
       its church was the only outside owner to have properties sold, half of them, as was said, going to vecinos of Gallegos. To judge from the
       pattern of sales in the five towns, religious funds in Santa María had gained considerable hold over the economies of nearby towns before
       the disentail began. Since these funds had been formed by bequests from the faithful, in the past either its vecinos had bought outside
       lands that they then donated to their own religious funds, or landowners in nearby towns had preferred to invest in their celestial future
       by giving to the parish of this prospering town rather than to their own. Probably the former was the case, but either way, Santa María
       had been economically expansive. Only 4 percent of the lands sold within its limits belonged to an outside fund, located in Piedrahita, the
       largest town in the region.
             Well placed before the sales, the economy of Santa María lost some through the disentail within the region studied. Properties that
       its church owned in other towns were sold for 97,644 reales, its vecinos bought lands in these towns that went for 73,433 reales. I do not
       know about sales in other valley towns, including Piedrahita. In Santa María itself there was a slight loss of about 8,000 reales, most of
       the outside purchases being made from Piedrahita. By comparison, even though outsiders bought much property in El Mirón, its vecinos
       bought absolutely nothing in the five towns nearby.
            Figure 10.6 shows graphically the meaning of these exchanges. Vecinos of upland towns, except El Mirón and Valdemolinos, made
       purchases in other upland towns, but they made only one purchase in the

       [51] All percentages are based on sales prices.


                                                                                          ― 365 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
