Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


             These shares also applied to five contracts covering individual fields (hazas ), but most fields were rented under two other standard
       contracts. In nine cases, the rule was one-quarter of all crops to the owner, in other words the contract that was considered standard in
       Baños and in the province as a whole according to the intendant. Even more common for hazas, however—thirteen contracts—was a fixed
       annual rent ("renta fixa anual") payable almost always in wheat (once only in coin), the kind of arrangement we have become familiar
       with in Salamanca. What was the basis for the difference? Evidently much depended on the quality of the land. The five fields whose rent
       was a share greater than one-fourth of the harvest were small plots of high quality. The rental payments recorded on these indicate
       harvests every other year of almost ten fanegas of wheat per fanega of land. The highest harvest we have observed previously was in La
       Mata, eight fanegas of wheat per fanega of first-class land every other year. [24] The rate of one-fourth of all crops was used for fields of
       poor quality and large size, where other cereals besides wheat had to be planted and the yields were comparatively low. Finally, the fixed
       rate, payable in wheat, which was most common, applied to

       [23] "El monte por aprecio."

       [24] The fanega of land was almost identical in the two places (Table N.5).


                                                                                            ― 385 ―
       the fields of middling size and quality, which regularly produced wheat out of which the rent could be paid.
             Not only the quality of the land was involved in the choice of terms, however; the tenants of the hazas leased for a share of the
       crops tended to stay on longer than those who paid fixed rents. In the period covered by the account book (which varies from two years
       to twenty, depending on the property), the names of the sharecropping tenants can be followed in twelve cases. In six, the same man
       was tenant throughout, in four the tenant changed once and in two, twice. In the last cases, the second tenants (the only ones whose
       length of occupancy is known) farmed the plots five and six years. But of nine cases of lots with fixed rent, never was the same man
       tenant throughout; in one instance the tenant changed three times (in four years), and in another four times (in eleven years). These
       tenants must have been looked on as unreliable or impoverished, men who could not be depended on to keep an exploitation going and
       had to be held to specific terms. It comes as something of a surprise to discover that sharecropping was considered a preferable
       arrangement to leasing for a fixed rent, but this conclusion is supported by the terms afforded to lessees of cortijos, who also leased for a
       share of the harvests and stayed on a long time, men who approached the big "labrador" of whom Carlos III's reformers complained. Of
       six cortijos, in two the same man was tenant throughout the period covered by the book (nine and twelve years); in two the tenant
       changed once (the first tenant of one had occupied it for at least nine years); and in two a relative of the tenant took up the lease—a
       son-in-law and the widow's next husband.
             The convent evidently divided its tenants in two classes, those who were steady, loyal, and able to finance their exploitations and
       those who could not be counted on. To the former it offered more desirable properties with arrangements to share the harvest, and they
       stayed on and even passed their leases to their heirs. From the latter it demanded a fixed rent and dismissed them promptly if they
       failed to pay. The former would be reliable labradores, the latter jornaleros and pegujaleros (small farmers). In Córdoba, where the
       cathedral chapter collected two-ninths of the harvest on its cortijos in bad years (with a fixed specified payment in oth er years), it sent
       to each cortijo in the bad years two trusty men (fieles) with instructions that they should not both sleep at the same time.[25] Perhaps
       the convent of Alcalá la Real adopted similar precau-

       [25] Ponsot, "Rendement des céréales,"476–77.


                                                                                            ― 386 ―
       tions to ensure that the tenants paid them their full due, but they had already made a selection before entrusting a farmer with a cortijo.
       No doubt the convent preferred to state a specific fraction of the harvest as a guarantee of obtaining all it could and the tenant to protect
       himself against poor yields. In Salamanca province the owners wrote contracts for fixed payments with tenants who stayed on for years
       and whose heirs inherited the leases, the kind of person who sharecropped in Jaén; clear evidence here that one cannot project the
       practices of one region of Spain to others.
            One does not know on what basis the nuns calculated their fixed rents, but most sharecropping contracts called for either 25 or
       28.6 percent of the harvest. Whatever the actual arrangements were in Baños, it seems safe to proceed on the assumption that the
       owner who leased his lands got one-fourth of the harvest, as the catastro says, even if the actual payments varied somewhat from this
       norm.
             Nevertheless, his net benefit appears to have varied according to the different crops. This is the conclusion that can be drawn from
       the different proportions of each kind of land that the ecclesiastical institutions of Baños chose to lease or to cultivate themselves. Lands
       not leased would have been farmed with hired labor and either administered directly if they belonged to local institutions or by a paid
       administrator if the institution was located elsewhere. Table 11.9 shows that religious institutions were much more likely to lease their
       grain fields and huertas than their olive groves and vineyards. One may assume that the institutions preferred the method of exploitation
       that they had found economically


                                               Table 11.9. Leasing Practices, Baños, 1752
                                                      (percent leased to tenants)



                                           Arable         Olive Groves         Vineyards           Huertas         Pasture



          Ecclesiatical institutions
                    Local                    50                0.0                0.0                100              c



                  Outside                    82a               34.0b                c                     c          0



          Outside secular owners
                (estimate) d                 80               33.3               33.3                100             0




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
