Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                              SOURCE. Baños, maest. segl and maest. ecles. Percent based on annual income.



                                        a Value leased, 255 reales per year; exploited directly, 60.



                                              b Value leased, 1,579; exploited directly, 3,114.



                                                               c None owned.



                               d No information in catastro, projected from outside ecclesiatical institutions.




                                                                                               ― 387 ―
       most advantageous, other things being equal. If this is so, owners of olive groves and vineyards could usually make more than the
       lessor's standard 25 percent if they were in a position to oversee the exploitation directly. Conversely, 25 percent in rent was a bigger
       share than the owner of a huerta could get by using hired labor.
             Much more land was owned by outside laymen than by outside churches, and, for lack of other information, one can project onto
       them the practices of the outside churches. In this way Table 11.9 estimates the amount of their property leased and exploited directly
       by outside lay owners. The catastro does, however, identify the administrators used by outside owners, both secular and ecclesiastical.
       That an administrator was used does not necessarily mean that the land was exploited directly, for in several instances both an
       administrator and a tenant were named for ecclesiastical properties.[26] Indeed, according to the report of the intendant of Jaén in the
       Memorial ajustado, so-called administrators were often lessees who rented large estates only to sublet them in small parcels to the actual
       farmers. [27] Most of the administrators of the outside owners did not live in Baños (Table 11.10), a fact that indicates that these
       administrators did not oversee direct exploitation but acted as intermediaries between owner and tenant. Outside owners administered
       four-fifths of their olive groves from outside, either themselves or through a nonresident administrator. This means that they administered
       from outside not only the third of their olive groves that I assume they leased to local tenants but also most of the rest that they
       exploited themselves. With arable land, the prevailing practice differed. Nonresident owners preferred to lease them than to exploit them
       directly and used local administrators more often than for olive groves (but still only one-third of the time, see Table 11.10.)
             By now it has become clear that the economic relations involved in the agriculture of Baños were considerably more complex than
       those of the towns of Salamanca studied previously. In the latter the outside owners regularly rented their properties directly to vecinos,
       unless the owners happened to be farmers living in neighboring towns, in which case they probably farmed the lands themselves. Variable
       costs of administration did not enter into their calculations, nor did cultivation with wage labor. In the few cases where vecinos needed
       additional hands, they kept male servants in their households or hired their neighbors

       [26] Baños, maest. ecles., local institutions nos. 21, 26, outside institutions nos. 38, 45, 47.

       [27] Mem. ajust. (1784), §641, 212.


                                                                                               ― 388 ―


                                 Table 11.10. How Outside Owners Administered Their Properties, Baños, 1752
                                                           (percent of total value)



                                                 Arable          Olive Groves          Vineyards            Houses    Oil Mills



            No administrator named                 27                  45                 100                 53        23



           Nonresident administrator               42                  36                  0                      8     47



           Baños vecino administrator              31                  19                  0                  38        30



                      Total                       100                 100                 100                 99        100



                                                 SOURCE. Baños, maest. segl. and maest. ecles.


       part-time, and the cost of hired labor can be calculated for individual cases. But Baños represents a very different situation, for all these
       costs were involved in a large scale. In order to calculate the income of the town as a whole and the different sectors within it, one must
       establish, even if only roughly, the share of the harvest that accrued to the different expenses that entered into the production of the
       crops. The practices of the ecclesiastical and nonresident secular owners and the proportion of the harvest taken by tithes and seed
       provide the needed information.
             Table 11.11 is the result. On the basis of information already developed, it assigns percentages of the harvest to the different
       participants whose share has not yet been specified, notably labor, tenant, and administrator. At first sight these shares may seem
       arbitrary; but in fact they are determined within fairly narrow limits by the shares that are already fixed: the tithes, the proportion of the
       grain harvest needed for seed, and the standard 25 percent of the lessor. Within each type of harvest, the shares specified for the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
