Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       society, although their benefices were ample to support an individual without income of his own. The smallest provided 16 EFW; it was
       held by a man independently wealthy. The benefices could have been used to enable sons of modest families to become priests, but the
       elite of Baños had managed to fill them with their own kind and kin, using the church to harden social distinctions. Even if a man of
       modest means had broken through the barrier erected by the elite, he would have run into trouble. Before he could take over his bene-

       [46] María Blanco y Crespo, Letters from Spain, 82, Letter 3.

       [47] See Herr, "Comentario," 276.


                                                                                          ― 410 ―
       fice, he might have to guarantee his administration of its properties with a lien on estates of his own. [48]
             The town square, lying in the shadow of the old Moorish castle, made the power of the elite apparent to the world. Facing the castle
       was the parish church, and along one side the house of the town council, both safely in its control. Opposite these edifices were the
       houses of three of the wealthiest of the town notables, two priests and the widow doña Francisca, representing the three dominant
       families. The square could not accommodate the residences of all members of the elite, nor could such people all afford to vie with the
       Molina de la Zerda, the Charidad Villalobos, and the Galindo y Soriano families. But even the modest hidalgos and priests were members
       of the notability, set off by the distinction of the don, above the commoners of the community.
             The pecheros, the commoners, fell into six strata beneath them. The highest stratum was one of almost thirty households, devoted
       to occupations whose members averaged over 100 EFW income. They were the storekeepers, the innkeepers, the labradores, the leading
       public officials, and the most highly rewarded artisans: the farriers and the bakers. The innkeeper of the Venta de Miranda had a net
       income of 740, placing him third in the town, although his business, way off in the sierra, would not have permitted him to parade
       frequently in the main square. In this level belonged the three men with official positions who were not of the notability: the inspector of
       butchershops (fiel de carnicerías ), who was also the schoolmaster; the inspector of oil measures and the tax on outside tradesmen (fiel
       medidor de aceite y alcavala del viento ); and the second alcalde ordinario. In this level without question the most prestigious, although
       not the most wealthy, were the five labradores. They belonged to only three families; for two were named Muñoz Galindo and two
       Barrionuebo. A third Muñoz Galindo, the widower Pedro, was the second alcalde ordinario, chosen no doubt as a representative of this
       select group of commoners. (The catastro even calls him don when listing him with the other public officials.)[49]
              The matronymic surname of this family suggests relationship with the powerful Galindos. They were unique; none of the others of
       this level shared a surname with the hidalgos and other notables (except for the frequent one Ruiz). Intermarriage between hidalgos and
       pecheros, even wealthy ones, was virtually unknown. One begins to see why there

       [48] AHPJ, Contaduría, libro 4426 (7 July 1801), ff. 6v–7r. The curate of the parish of Baños obtains a capellanía upon promising to care
       for its properties and providing an "hipoteca" on ruedo land worth 15,000 reales.

       [49] Baños, resp. gen., intro. f. 1v. He appears without "don" in the libro personal de legos and the maest. segl.



                                                                                          ― 411 ―
       were six wealthy spinsters of hidalgo status. Yet even if the commoners were kept at a distance by their social betters, many of them
       could rival the notability in income. They had the means, like the ruling sector, to amass a peculium for a favorable opportunity.
              Below the top commoners came two strata whose incomes were moderate but adequate. The first included most of the master
       artisans, the muleteers, the servants of the parish church (sacristan, organist, and subchanter), all with mean incomes between 50 and
       100 EFW. Here too I place those men who for one reason or another could not work but did not need to because of their private incomes,
       no doubt a condition that gave them a certain prestige among the commoners. Members of this stratum could live comfortably, but
       except for a couple of muleteers, they could not match the wealthy commoners and notables. The position of the master artisans was
       considerably better, both in absolute terms and relative to their fellow vecinos, than that of the artisans of the towns of Salamanca.
       Pierre Vilar has shown that the catastro reveals this contrast to be general between northern and southern Spain. In the north artisans
       worked alone; in the south they were heads of small shops, and Vilar found that the income of the latter was higher as a result. In the
       south the artisans, as a general rule, were better off than the agricultural classes (except the landowning elite); in the north the opposite
       was true. [50] Baños supports this generalization. Although farriers, carpenters, and a wineskin maker worked alone, the shoemakers,
       tailor, saddlemaker, blacksmiths, and masons each had one or more journeymen helpers (oficiales).[51] Theirs were establishments open
       to the public, perhaps with shops on the street, different from the cottage work found in our Salamanca towns. Just as the whole social
       structure was more complex in Baños, so was that of its crafts.
            The second of these two strata, third of the commoners, was headed by the farmers who could not qualify as true labradores,
       known familiarly as peujareros, or pegujaleros in correct spelling, and the garden farmers, the hortelanos. Here too were the animal
       herders (who had their own flocks to supplement their wages), the miller (did he get unlisted gratuities from his clients?), the barbers,
       and the lesser artisans, such as the pitchfork maker and soapmakers. Their incomes were marginal, between 30 and 60 EFW, but most
       managed to live adequately by restricting the size of their families. Here too I place the twenty-five single women of common status.
       Although their incomes were low (mean 21), they had few dependents and as a group enjoyed adequate

       [50] Vilar, "Structures de la société espagnole," 425–47.

       [51] Baños, resp. gen. Q 33, personal de legos.


                                                                                          ― 412 ―
       income for their needs. If a spinster maintained her own household, it was because she had the wherewithal to do so, and almost half of
       them even had the service of a maid.
             We come now to the levels of people who failed to earn enough to support their families adequately, and the lowest of whom lived
       in poverty. Altogether they were 301 households, three-fifths of those in Baños. The largest stratum, 183 families, was made up of
       jornaleros who had some animals or property (perhaps just the house they lived in), and the families headed by widows with property. If
       the latter included males old enough to earn the wages of a jornalero, they could be well-off: as a group (and there were 25 of them),
       their per capita income approached the 12 EFW threshold. For the other widows with property and the jornaleros with property, the per



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
