Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                                                                                          ― 405 ―
       to every vecino. Strangely, only one-tenth of the area available for slash-and-burn (roza de cama) was cultivated, yet only fifty-three of
       the jornaleros, one-quarter of the total, tilled even modest plots here, and of these all but four owned some land or animals. Of eighty-
       three labradores with no property, only these four made use of the término privativo. By comparison, eleven of the fifteen labradores and
       labradores pegujaleros exploited it, and three of the six labradores titled don had large tracts in it. Were the poorest jornaleros
       systematically discouraged from taking their share? Could they not afford the seed or necessary tools and use of animals?
              The answer to both questions might be yes, and still another reason be more important. The jornaleros might find work outside the
       town limits. Migrant labor is a well-known phenomenon in twentieth-century Andalusia, and it has existed for centuries. Several towns in
       Jaén province enacted rules in the sixteenth century to control the temporary exodus of their harvest workers.[42] By chance, evidence
       for it in our period appears in the catastro of the small town of Tobaruela, a bare fifteen kilometers southeast of Baños. To the question
       "How many jornaleros are there in the town, and how much is their daily wage?" the reply was "There are no jornaleros, and those who
       come from outside to work for short periods are usually paid three reales daily." [43] In addition, indirect evidence of the use of migrant
       labor will appear in Lopera, the next town to be observed. Both Tobaruela and Lopera were near the Guadalquivir River. Baños, a sierra
       town, could well have been one of their suppliers. For the jornaleros of Baños, walking to places a few hours, or at most a day, away
       could be more attractive than struggling with virgin soil in the hills and the possible displeasure of their betters, the dispensers of local
       employment.
             How much did they make this way? At this stage of our information, we do not know the pool of migrant laborers or the extent of
       the demand. But jornaleros could not labor in two places at once, so that the question is partly how much earlier the various agricultural
       tasks, especially the harvest, were performed in the valley than in the sierra. If the seasons overlapped by half, the workers might have
       gotten another thirty days' labor, and this can be used as an approximation. If each brought home 80 percent of his earnings, this would
       mean about 5 EFW more per year, giving each a total of about 20 EFW. This, rather than 14

       [42] Vassberg, Land and Society, 195.

       [43] Tobaruela, resp. gen. Q 35, in AGS, Dirección General de Rentas, Única Contribución, libro 327, f. 1.



                                                                                          ― 406 ―




                                                                                  Figure 11.3.
                                                                    Baños, Socioeconomic Pyramid, 1752
                                                NOTE : In Baños and Lopera the complexity of the structure calls for more
                                               levels than elsewhere. Note that the top level was substantial and had very
                                                 wide economic limits. This is a bar graph based on Table 11.20, with an
                                                     indication of dispersion. It is not a set of frequency distributions.
             EFW, will be considered the individual income from agricultural labor, whether migrant or not. The outside income of the migrants,
       of course, is an addition to the total town income not previously noted and should be included in Table 11.17. Two hundred thirty-seven
       jornaleros and working dependents (Table 11.18) would bring in another 1,200 EFW and raise the per capita town income to between 11
       and 12 EFW.
             For the rest of the households, the calculations are more complex than for the smaller towns of Salamanca, but the results can be
       tabulated in a similar socioeconomic pyramid, although with more occupations and levels (Table 11.20 and Figure 11.3). The groups are
       arranged according to income and, secondarily, ascribed criteria like the appellations don and doña and callings that would attribute
       respect like labrador and municipal officials. The result is a pyramid of seven strata, ranging from hidalgos, priests, and professionals




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
