Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                              Tithes and other payments leaving the town



                                           Ecclesiastical levies                                        –1,474



                                       Royal taxes (Table 11.16)                                        –1,626



                                           Interest on censos                                            –271



                                      Total payments leaving town                                       –3,371



            Church purchases and payments outside the town (25% of local church income)                  –250



                                            Net town income                                            +19,020



                   Additional income from migrant labor performed outside the town                      +1,200



                                           Total town income                                            20,220



                      SOURCE. Baños, catastro, and calculations described in text.




                                                                                          ― 398 ―
       of the different qualities of land recorded in the catastro, especially in the case of olive oil. The catastro indicates 40 percent more olive
       oil than the tithes, a difference of 4,300 EFW, and also 700 EFW more in grain. These additions would give a town income of close to
       24,000 EFW, enough for each inhabitant to have 13.1 EFW. But this is an outside figure, and the truth probably lies closer to the original
       estimate. A town of this size probably could cheat on the tithe collectors (who were not clergymen but tithe farmers), but it is hardly
       likely that close to a third of the olive oil could escape their noses. If one-tenth of the oil and grains were hidden, the total would be
       20,700 EFW, and the per capita income 11.3. Let us accept momentarily a figure between 10.4 and 11.3, under the 12 EFW threshold of
       well-being, but leave the question open for reconsideration. This figure is below that of La Mata and Villaverde on the plains of La
       Armuña but above the level of the sierra town of El Mirón.

       4

       How this income was spread among the vecinos determined the economic position of the different sectors. Unfortunately we lack the tithe
       payments of individual heads of household, which were the basis for much of our knowledge of the social structure of the towns of
       Salamanca. Since the collection of tithes was farmed out to private individuals, it is unlikely that the religious authorities ever received a
       report on each vecino's payments or that they have been preserved elsewhere. One must proceed solely on the information furnished by
       the catastro. Except for the few properties that the religious institutions rented, it tells us nothing about who actually farmed the land,
       only who owned it. But we can assume that local owners who used hired labor nevertheless administered their own properties, and from
       the social structure one can guess with fair assurance who actually labored in the fields and who paid others to do so. All we lack is the
       names of the lessees of properties of nonresident laymen, and in the total picture this information is not of major significance.
             Table 11.11 on the division of the harvests and the information in the catastro on other activities make possible an approximation of
       the total income of the various heads of household. For each owner of land, buildings, and animals, one must decide whether he worked
       his land and tended his flocks himself or used hired labor (either mozos who lived in his house or jornaleros). Those whom I assume to
       use hired


                                                                                          ― 399 ―
       labor and receive the corresponding share of the harvest (Method B) are labradores titled don, clergymen, boys under tutelage, widows
       titled doña, and other ferrale heads of household except widows with one or more sons over eighteen living at home. All others are
       considered to work their properties themselves or with the mozos listed in their households.
            Since local administrators are identified, their income is calculated according to the proper category (Method C, D, E, G, or H). We
       do not know which lands of outside owners under the care of any specific administra tor were farmed directly and which were leased, but
       we have estimated how much of each kind of land owned by outsiders was leased and can thus calculate the total amount of
       administrative costs and prorate it among the individuals according to the income from the lands they oversaw.[39] Neither do we know
       the names of the individual lessees of properties of outtsiders, but their total share, 232 EFW, is divided among the larger labradores, as
       the most likely group among whom to find the lessees.
              The income of agricultural laborers must also be determined. The provincial summary of the catastro attributes to Baños 126
       labradores and their sons and hired hands ("labradores inclusos hijos y mozos") and 336 jornaleros. [40] This is a total of 462 adult males
       employed in agriculture, but it is not clear how the drafters of the catastro assigned specific individuals to each group or got these totals,
       for the household lists of the town do not obviously produce these figures. [41] Table 11.18 indicates one possible reconciliation of the two
       sources. To arrive even near the total number of males working in agriculture recorded in the provincial summary, all sons of
       shopkeepers, muleteers, and artisans (except two sons of farriers said to work with their fathers) have to be considered to earn their
       livelihood in the fields or as herders.
            To all men engaged in agriculture, the catastro assigns indiscriminately an income from their labor of three reales per day. It does
       not say how many days per year they worked, nor does any catastro from a town in Jaén province give this information. In La Mata, the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
