Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       entitled to the don or doña, at the top, to propertyless widows and indigents at the bottom.
              The stratified social structure of the town jumps at one from the table


                                                                                          ― 407 ―
       and figure. Forty families formed the top level. Above all the others was the widow doña Francisca Luisa de Molina de la Zerda y Soriano,
       who lived in her house facing on the town square with her three maidservants and the twenty-five men servants she employed to till her
       extensive fields, olive groves, and huertas (most of them tied up in six vínculos that had fallen to her lot), tend her fourteen hundred
       goats and one thousand sheep, and run her cortijo and oil mill. Her net income was some 1,800 EFW, six times that of the wealthiest
       labrador we found in Salamanca. Next to her came the hidalgo labrador don Francisco Manuel Zambrana y Rivera, with 950 EFW, and the
       prior of the parish church, the licenciado don Francisco Charidad Villalobos, with 940 EFW, 400 from his ecclesiastical emoluments and
       the rest from his private estate. Two priests with net gross incomes of 60 EFW and two dons (hidalgos I would guess), whose only
       recorded receipts were 9 and 28 EFW, made up the bottom of these forty households.
              They fell into two distinct groups, those that belonged to the landowning class and those that owed their position to their
       professional or clerical status. All were called don or doña. Although this attribute is no guarantee that they were hidalgos,[44] it is more
       than likely that the landowners had their patents of nobility. If they did not, they might as well have; no one was likely to pry into the
       question. The landowners included seven men, two widows, and a single woman; each possessed lands producing over 100 EFW for their
       owners. Four of the men were regidores perpetuos (surely hidalgos), the others were an "official" of the town council, the town recorder
       (fiel ejecutor ), and the alguacil mayor of the Inquisition. These positions paid no money, but they formed the major portion of the
       municipal government or represented the disciplinary role of the church. With them can be grouped four members of the clergy who
       owned private lands worth 100 EFW or more: the prior, two other priests, and a man in minor orders, while the other in minor orders had
       land worth 60 EFW. Their family names show that many of these individuals belonged to small dynasties. Don Francisco Charidad
       Villalobos was the prior; don Diego Charidad Villalobos was a regidor. Molina de la Zerda was the family name not only of the wealthy
       widow but of the alguacil of the Inquisition, of one of the clerics in minor orders, and of the two single women called doña. Don Josef
       Galindo y Soriano was fiel ejecutor and don Francisco Galindo y Soriano the other cleric in minor orders (he also had a house on the town
       square).

       [44] See the discussion of this subject in Chapter 15, section 4.



                                                                                          ― 408 ―
       These three families formed the aristocracy of the town. Close beneath them were three others. The del Marmols were less wealthy but
       very much part of the upper crust. Don Francisco del Marmol Navarro (with an income over 100 EFW) was a regidor and an alcalde
       ordinario as well, while don Pedro Andrés del Marmol was a priest. The bachelor don Juan Benito del Marmol Galindo (recorded income
       only 41 EFW) was the fifth regidor and related through his mother to the Galindo family. The Navarro clan belonged here too; besides
       being related to the del Marmols through marriage, they had a priest, a widow, and a nonresident owner, native of Baños, now living in
       Baeza, episcopal see of this region.[45] The third family was the Zambrana. Doña Leonor de Bargas y Zambrana, with 400 EFW rolling in
       annually, was the richest single doña; don Francisco Manuel Zambrana y Rivera was a labrador, second in the town in income, town
       official, and administrator of the properties of doña Cathalina Thomasa de Zambrana, who lived nearby in Linares. Don Francisco de
       Zambrana, another of the family, was temporarily classed among the nonresidents; he was in prison in Granada, for reasons not
       elucidated. Only three persons among the wealthy hidalgos and clergymen had family names not shared with others: Pérez de Bargas
       and Pérez Carrasco were regidores (and perhaps related, as the first was probably to doña Leonor de Bargas), and an Espinosa was an
       independently wealthy priest.
             Forming a second level were the less wealthy clergy and those professionals honored with the attribute don. The latter included the
       notary, the surgeon, the doctor, the apothecaries, and the administrator of the royal tobacco monopoly. Perhaps the don was in some
       cases evidence of hidalguía, but most likely it was an attribute accorded their profession, as it was for members of the clergy. Among
       them, only the notary owned land, and his returned a mere 32 EFW per year, but their professional incomes ranged from 80 to 315 EFW.
       The less wealthy clerics owned more private property than these men; all but one had land in Baños producing for him over 20 EFW.
       Among these men one found another distinguished local family, the de Lechuga, which included the notary don Thomás and the curate
       don Antonio Joséph. Don Thomás, in addition to 30 ducats' income from his notarial office (330 reales, 24 EFW), received 100 ducats
       from the cabildo and 150 ducats from the crown for handling the alcabalas and millones taxes. His total income was 316 EFW. The
       priests' benefice was worth 76 EFW, and he had property that

       [45] Baños, maest. segl., no. 367.


                                                                                          ― 409 ―
       produced 66 more for him. The de Lechuga family might well be hidalgo, part of the local oligarchy. Indeed, the notary's matronymic
       surname was Galindo, indicating ties with one of the wealthiest landed clans.
             To them who have shall be given. The persons chosen by nonresident owners to administer their properties in Baños were mostly of
       this top level. Priests, already stewards of the ecclesiastical properties in the town as well as their own, were preferred. Nine of them
       received 270 EFW in fees from outsiders (according to the rates calculated in Table 11.11). Of the remaining 84 EFW paid for
       administration, 48 went to two hidalgo labradores. One can expect that among these people were to be found most of the lessees of land
       of absentee owners, whose identity the catastro does not provide. To their income one should then add one attributed to lessees. No
       doubt some of them also had properties beyond the town limits, but unless these lands surpassed those owned by nearby vecinos in
       Baños, they supplemented only marginally the income of this level.
             This top level, despite the wide range and different sources of their individual incomes, formed a unified group that dominated the
       town economically, politically, and through the church, culturally. The priests clearly belonged to this elite, both by economic status and
       by family ties. Priesthood in Baños was not a calling for sons of modest families. José María Blanco, a contemporary native of Seville, who
       later as a priest became notorious by fleeing to England during the Napoleonic conquest of Spain and abandoning his Catholic faith,
       complained that Spaniards who entered the clergy were divided by social class. The poor usually entered the regular orders, while the
       sons of the gentry became secular clergymen.[46] His observation could not be generalized to include northern Spain, where many priests
       were of very humble origins, [47] but Baños demonstrates its cogency for Andalusia. None of its priests came from the lower sectors of




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
