Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [92] Ibid. (1802), ff. 28v, 31r.

       [93] Ibid. (1807), ff. 3v, 4r.


                                                                                          ― 429 ―
       for agricultural goods, but the market was not new. Jaén province produced large amounts of olive oil in the sixteenth century. [94]
       Indeed Andalusia had exported olive oil since classical times. In this sense the economy of Baños was capitalistic and had long been so. It
       was not now the scene of an incipient bourgeois revolution. Neither was it a feudal society. The villa of Baños was under royal
       jurisdiction, and no vecino or buyer was a señor entitled to seigneurial rights or income.
             When desamortización came along, the stratified society of Baños gave advantages to its traditional elite of hidalgos, priests, and
       other notables. Their purchases increased the agricultural basis of their strength. For the present this group also preserved the
       endowments of their ecclesiastical benefices from the attack being levied against the real property of the church. At the same time,
       desamortización permitted the ambitious to better their positions within their social strata, whether they were a royal councillor, local
       priests and scions of leading houses, or labradores and bakers. They advanced, and the less aggressive and less fortunate declined
       relatively. The economy of the town lost a little of its autonomy, for outsiders increased their landholdings in the town. Since much of the
       land was free to buy and sell, these changes were going on in any case. More clearly than in the towns of Salamanca, disentail served to
       hasten existing economic developments. The only ones to whom the situation gave no option were the 65 percent who lived by their labor
       alone. And ecclesiastical institutions, which were still adding property in the second half of the eighteenth century, had entered a decline
       that was to accelerate as the new century progressed.


       [94] Information on Jaén given me by the late archivist of the Archivo Histórico Provincial of Jaén, don Melchor Llamana Navascues,
       based on his cataloguing of the notarial records of the province.


                                                                                          ― 430 ―




       Chapter XII—
       Lopera
       Once past Baños and Bailén, the Andalusian highway descends to the Guadalquivir at the large town of Andújar. Crossing the river, the
       road rises again over low rolling hills and soon enters the province of Córdoba. The last town in Jaén through whose territory it passes is
       Lopera. The nucleus lies off to the south, out of sight of the road, surrounded on all sides by low rolling hills. Its position in the center of
       a valley makes it almost unique in the province, but its low position is only relative, for at 275 meters it is 60 meters above Andújar.
       Still, it is the lowest town of our seven. South and southeast of Lopera runs a ridge of gentle hills, the highest elevations in the region.
       Sitting astride this ridge is the larger town of Porcuna, from whose church one can look down at Lopera and its saucerlike término.
       Important pre-Roman remains have recently been unearthed near Porcuna; we are talking about a region of advanced settlement already
       centuries before Christ.
             Following the reconquest of Andalusia, the king of Castile placed the villa of Lopera and the surrounding towns of western Jaén
       province under the jurisdiction of the military Order of Calatrava. They were towns of señorío, but in the eighteenth century the señor
       was the king, who since 1523 had been ex officio grand master of the Spanish military orders. [1]
             Although Lopera did not dominate a hilltop, it had not been defenseless. A medieval castle still stands with the walls enclosing it,
       next to the

       [1] AHPJ, Catastro, Lopera, libro 7822, resp. gen. Q 2.


                                                                                          ― 431 ―
       town square. In the mid-eighteenth century the castle formed part of the Encomienda de Cañaveral held by the Conde de Dietristan. [2]
       Close by on the town square is a church whose style betokens the turn of the sixteenth century: a flamboyant Gothic facade with
       plateresque decorations, surmounted by a Renaissance tower with a sharp point striped in dark and white tiles. Across the square a single
       building held, at the time of the catastro, the ayuntamiento (town hall), jail, and pósito (public granary). The town council also owned
       and rented out a butcher shop. Streets ran off irregularly from the square, lined with low, two-story houses set directly on them, over
       some of whose doorways one can still see the escutcheons of the noble vecinos. With their heavy paneled doors, iron grills on the
       windows, and whitewashed walls, the domiciles told the visitor at once that he was in Andalusia. The town had in 1751, the date of the
       catastro, 298 inhabited houses, including 11 belonging to the clergy and 7 others in ruins or otherwise uninhabitable. This was not far off
       the 306 habitable houses of Baños. Unlike any other town we have observed, Lopera also boasted a convent of monks, of the charitable
       Order of San Juan de Dios.[3]
             The houses held a population smaller than that of Baños. The libro personal de eclesiásticos is lost, so that we lack a count of the
       households of the clergy. The number of clergymen is given in the respuestas generales, however, and one can estimate how many
       people lived with them. The libro personal de legos lists 307 vecinos and a total of 1,181 individuals. The balance between the sexes is
       close enough to suggest that the count is fairly accurate. In addition there were 7 priests, 9 clergymen in minor orders, and 31 inmates
       of the convent, including 14 more priests and 4 monks (Table 12.1). In Baños the average household size of the secular clergy was 5.5,
       but the priests were much richer than those of Lopera. Only 6 of the clergy in Lopera had personal property that produced between 50
       and 200 EFW. The priests of Baños whose income was in this range averaged 3.3 people per household (including themselves). If one
       assigns an additional 2.3 to each of these households and 1.8 to those clerical households with less income, one gets 32 additional
       people, most of them undoubtedly female. This gives a total population of 1,260, or 70 percent of that of Baños. People in Lopera were
       more amply housed, only 1.08 households per habitable house by com-

       [2] Lopera, maest. ecles., no. 1. The writing is not clear, this is the closest I can make out, but I cannot find the name in official lists of
       titles.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
