Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       capita income averaged around 9 EFW, which is what we found among the poorer families in the sierra town of El Mirón. Finally, I place
       here a few men who served the public in semi-official ways. The three "ministros ordinarios" were presumably servants of the city council;
       the hermitaños took care of the chapels outside the town limits. Even attributing to them the income of a day laborer, their income was
       inadequate; but it is not hard to imagine, given their function and the society in which they lived, that gratuities frequently greased their
       palms. They would not have been at the bottom of the pile.
             Those that were at the bottom were propertyless widows and jornaleros. The day laborers and the widows with working sons had
       income we can detect (we saw that the average able-bodied male earned some 20 EFW per year, including his labor outside the town
       limits). Their families were small, but probably larger than the catastro and Table 11.20 say, because one recalls that the libro personal
       de legos appears to omit some fifty females, most of whom would have been in households in the bottom strata. These families could
       have obtained hardly half the 12 EFW per capita that I have judged adequate. And even this still left almost 5 percent of the households
       with no recorded income at all, the widows without adult sons, the old, the halt. Odd jobs and charity must have maintained them, but
       here were the miserable creatures that impressed the contemporaries who visited Andalusia. These lower levels were almost a quarter of
       the families in the town. And here too I place the three families of Gypsies, living by their labor and their wits but ostracized by those
       who were economically their peers.[52]

       [52] See Sánchez Ortega, Gitanos españoles, and Sanchez Ortega, Documentación selecta.


                                                                                          ― 413 ―
       The picture that emerges is of an economy and society strikingly different from the towns of Salamanca. The peasants of La Mata,
       Villaverde, and El Mirón lived together in nucleated villages with less social ranking than economic differentiation. The priests stood out, as
       did the notary of El Mirón, but the class of large landowners who controlled the arable fields of La Armuña and the cotos redondos like
       Pedrollén—the beneficed priests of the cathedral and parishes of Salamanca, the city officials, and the titled nobles who lived as far away
       as Madrid—although of the same ilk as the priests, hidalgos, and other notables of Baños, lived far away and were invisible. The peasants
       of La Armuña were exploited from outside; they did not face an omnipresent class of poderosos to inculcate them with a sense of
       ignorance, poverty, and inferiority. In a sierra town like El Mirón, most of the outside owners were nearby labradores like themselves. Of
       course, no one who lived in Spain then or is familiar with its history would find anything new in this contrast between north and south,
       but generalizations gain from direct illustration.
              Baños was the image of the social order of the old regime, based on caste and the exploitation of human labor in traditional ways.
       Its elite belonged to the familiar privileged orders, hidalguía and priesthood, united by family ties and closed against intermarriage with
       the pecheros. Members of the elite dominated the land, the church, and the local government. Not all may have been legal hidalgos, but
       all shared the traditional distinction of that order, the title don. Notables is a suitable term for them. More or less on a par with them
       economically but separated by a social chasm were the most select commoners, mainly labradores and merchants, middle classes if one
       wishes but of a very traditional kind, no different from those present two or three hundred years before. Far below were the day laborers
       and widows living in poverty. In between was the middle range of pecheros, most artisans, the muleteers, the small farmers and market
       gardeners. Basically this was an agrarian economy, with those who controlled the land at the top, those who labored on it at the bottom,
       and in between the secondary and tertiary sectors.


       5

       In 1767 Carlos III created the colonies of Sierra Morena along the Madrid-Andalusia highway.[53] In so doing he took a large section of
       the ter-

       [53] See above, Chapter 1, section 6.


                                                                                          ― 414 ―




                                                                                 Figure 11.4.
                                                                      Baños, Population Structure, 1786
                                                          NOTE : Since there is no limit to the top age group, a span
                                                              of seventeen years is used for convenience only.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
