Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                  Figure 12.3.
                                                                     Lopera, Socioeconomic Pyramid, 1751
                                                 NOTE : In Baños and Lopera the complexity of the structure calls for more
                                                levels than elsewhere. Note that the top level was substantial and had very
                                                 wide economic limits. In Lopera the social elite was bimodal economically;
                                              Level 6 is part of it and is just above the bottom. This is a bar graph based on
                                           Table 12.14, with an indication of dispersion. It is not a set of frequency distributions.
             total from land, animals, and a craft, business, or profession, and these results provide the socioeconomic pyramid for Lopera (Table
       12.14 and Figure 12.3). The figures for the landed sector are on the low side, because these people would have owned some properties
       in adjoining towns, and I have not attempted to estimate this income.[23] The table is surprisingly similar to that of Baños (see Table
       11.20). As there, a division into seven levels appears appropriate, and the income range in each level is roughly the same, indicating a
       similar social structure and economic condition. Yet there are peculiarities that distinguish the two towns and show that no one place
       should be considered typically Andalusian.


       [23] Nearby vecinos and clergymen owned about a quarter as much land in Lopera as local vecinos and clergymen did. If vecino
       landowners of Lopera responded with a similar amount of property in neighboring towns, their rent from this land might add 10 to 15
       percent to their net income, but Lopera was smaller than surrounding towns and its término was probably more exploited by vecinos of
       neighboring towns than vice versa.


                                                                                          ― 456 ―

       5

       The most striking differences are in the top category (Level 7), occupied by noble and clerical households. No household in Lopera had
       the wealth of the three richest people in Baños, a widow, an hidalgo landowner, and the parish prior. The top level had a lesser range of
       income, and that of the clergy was comparatively low. The highest stratum consisted of ten men labeled caballeros hijosdalgo and six
       single women evidently belonging to hidalgo families. On a per capita basis the latter were the most wealthy; their mean 235 EFW per
       household provided them with the wherewithal to maintain an ostentatious position and still amass an ever-growing fortune. For the men,
       the title of caballero hijodalgo was a mark of exclusive status, hidalguía, but it did not imply membership in the military order. The only
       person said to wear the habit of Calatrava was the prior; whatever perquisites he might draw out of his parishioners, his only recorded
       income came from his office and was under 100 EFW, a far cry from the wealthy priests of Baños. The others in the community called
       don—the doctor, the administrator of the royal tobacco monopoly, a labrador, and one whose occupation is not stated—were economically
       and socially lower but still part of the town notability. With them one can place clergymen with personal property, although some of their
       incomes were very modest. One commoner also belongs in this level, Francisco Díaz Serrano, the notary of the town council. His income
       places him very high, but he was not called don, although this appellation has been applied to the other notaries (escribanos) we have
       encountered. His income and activity make him a notable, and he may have belonged to a leading family. Díaz and Serrano were names
       of caballeros hijosdalgo, and a Díaz Serrano was a cleric in minor orders.
             As can be expected, the notables belonged to family groups, but no families were as prominent as the best in Baños. The wealthiest
       member of the elite, don Ignacio Montilla, with 840 EFW income, could not compare with the widow Molina de la Zerda y Soriano of
       Baños. Although he had a household of fifteen, including five minor sons, three daughters, three maids, and a manservant who worked in
       the fields, he did not head a powerful family. No other hidalgo and no priest shared his surname, and he held no official position. The




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
