Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       small amount of land in ecclesiastical hands. Single ladies called doña with pittances to their name and all the widows called doña are the
       second group in this level. The clergy must have benefited from fees for masses and other services and from the administration of
       properties, activities that cannot be traced in the catastro. The women could hardly have flourished, however, since they had no servants
       and some not even a relative to live with them. They could cling to the status of their wealthier relations and scorn the commoners who
       had more than they did, but even if genteel, theirs was a hard-pressed life of counting cuartos and ochavos, whose need offered
       commoners the possibility of entry into the privileged ranks through marriage.
            Below the privileged elite, in the top level of the commoners—those with household incomes over 100 EFW—the most prosperous
       group was the twenty-one muleteers. We recall that muleteering gave La Mata its remarkable well-being. Here too transportation was an
       organized undertaking, and its practitioners prospered. The catastro credits them


                                                                                          ― 460 ―
       with a mean income from their calling of 84 EFW. This figure could be suspect, based on a round sum of two hundred reales per pack
       animal (and it probably ignores the amount spent outside the town for feed), but their prosperity is evident, for their activities spilled
       over into the local economy. Several farmed land that they owned or rented, raising their income by another 50 percent. Entrepreneurial
       spirit guided them, not a desire to switch activities, for those who had the largest pack trains also did the most farming. At their head
       Benito Merino, with seven animals (93 EFW), had 79 EFW from land. Two arrieros joined muleteering with baking and made almost 100
       EFW from each. Their choice was hardly a coincidence, for bakers were the other group that belonged in the top level of commoners, as
       they did in Baños. The bakers too were entrepreneurs; three of the five panaderos rented olive groves and grain fields although they
       owned no land of their own.
            At this level let us also place the public officials—regidores of the common estate, tax collector, grain steward of the military order,
       and schoolmaster. Their household income did not reach 100 EFW, but they had small households (the regidores were bachelors) so their
       per capita income was substantial. In any case, their official positions would add to their status and place them with the top commoners.
             The storekeepers, master craftsmen, and labradores, who attained the top income of commoners in Baños, here fall into the middle
       range (Levels 4A, 4C, 4D). Indeed the labradores of Lopera were modest farmers, whose known income, even when credited with a share
       of the return on lands leased from outside owners, gave their families less than 12 EFW per person per year. Nevertheless, their social
       status was greater than their income would warrant. As we saw, they shared family names and probably family ties with the hidalgos.
             Below the middle range but above poverty, as in Baños, come the widows with working sons at home, who could support them.
       Here too are the lesser public and church servants, and the jornaleros with property of their own. Out of the 135 jornaleros, 85 are in
       this group, a larger percentage than in Baños. Sixty-three owned their house, 15 owned or rented some land, 21 had donkeys, and 11
       had pigs, goats, or other animals. The household incomes of these jornaleros place them in this level, but their family per capita income
       was below 12 EFW because their families were numerous.
           Finally one reaches the poor, the propertyless day laborers, the single women, the widows without the help of able-bodied sons, the
       mendicants, and the blind. Almost all the women who headed households


                                                                                          ― 461 ―
       owned the house they lived in, but only four at this level had any animals. They worked, of course, as did their minor children, and the
       widows must have received charity, as did the blind and mendicants, so that more came into their homes than the catastro reveals. But
       most of the members of the families in these levels (2 and 1) surely dressed in rags and gave reality to the contemporary picture of
       Andalusian poverty. In this level were 30 percent of the households, 6 percent more than in Baños, proof that the greater per capita
       income of the town did not mean a better distribution of wealth. The structure of the elite might differ, and the relative economic position
       of the upper occupations of the commoners, but for the majority of the vecinos and vecinas it made little difference whether they lived in
       Baños or Lopera, except that the jornaleros of Baños left their town periodically to seek work.

       7

       The only information I have on the evolution of Lopera in the eighteenth century comes from the available censuses. These   are of
       varying reliability, but they all concur in showing that the population grew steadily after the end of the War of the Spanish Succession.
       Furthermore, the rate of growth was increasing (Table 12.15). In 1786 the reported population was 1,407, [27] by 1826 it was 2,016.
             The list of occupations in the 1786 census does not shed light on the evolution of the economy. It shows a small but reasonable
       growth in the number of labradores, artisans, and male servants. [28] A figure of 83 jornaleros where there had been 135 in 1751 is
       clearly a miscount: the total number listed for all occupations is 95 less than the male population over twenty-four. On the other hand,
       only 10 hidalgos are reported (there had been 12 "caballeros hijosdalgo" in the catastro), 4 priests (there had been 7), and 1 cleric in
       minor orders (there had been 9). If accurate, the figures show that notables and clergy were declining in numbers, especially the latter.
       The falling off of clerical vocations, so marked in Spain after 1800, may already have begun, spurred on here by the insignificance of the
       capellanías combined with economic well-being. Another suggestive item is that the Inquisition no longer had an agent in Lopera in 1786.
              The officials of Lopera did not respond rapidly to the royal orders of

       [27] For the 1786 census of Lopera, see Appendix N, Table N.6.

       [28] Labradores, 15; artesanos, 18; criados, 49.


                                                                                          ― 462 ―


                                           Table 12.15. Population of Lopera, 1715–1826



                                     Percent Increase                                  Percent Increase



                                                                                                               Pop./




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
