Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       Rio de Montizón, a tributary of the Guadalén, itself a tributary of the Guadalimar, which flows into the Guadalquivir east of Bailén (how
       persistently the Arab word for "river" lived on in the Iberian countryside!). The valley lies between the Sierra Morena to the north and a
       ridge to the south that separates the Montizón from the Guadalimar. This ridge, though low, is impressive enough that the town at the
       northern end of the best road through it is called San Esteban (or Santisteban) del Puerto (Saint Stephen of the Pass) and is watched
       over by an impressive ancient castle. The other towns controlling the valley, Las Navas to the west of Santisteban and Castellar to the
       east, also lie on passes through the ridge, with the broad valley at their feet.
            The valley is of rich, red soil, still today devoted mainly to grain, although there are a few olive groves and live oaks. The ridge on
       which the towns sit is also of red earth, sandstone in origin, as is the Sierra Morena north of the valley, quite distinct in this respect from
       the yel-



                                                                                          ― 476 ―
       lowish white sedimented marl of the Guadalquivir, once under sea level. The Montizón valley is geologically part of the Sierra Morena.[1]
             In the eighteenth century these three towns had a common término, Las Navas and Castellar being aldeas (villages) of Santisteban.
       Together they formed the señorío of the Duque de Santisteban del Puerto. [2] We shall look at the smallest of the three, Las Navas,
       located above the western limit of the valley, where the hills close in on the Montizón, prior to its confluence with the Guadalén. Its
       término has little flat land, but it stretches south over the ridge and down to the Rio Guadalimar, which divides it from the término of
       Ubeda, the largest city in the region. Mostly upland monte, it did not offer a very promising site for an agricultural economy. Of the
       23,400 fanegas listed in the catastro (11,200 hectares), [3] 14,000 were called useless, another 4,000 were dehesas, and only 3,130
       plowed land. One recalls that Baños, whose término was nearly seven times the size of Navas's, also was largely monte, the Sierra
       Morena above the town, but Baños had its llano, with a clearly defined ruedo and campiñuela. Living on the margin of the fertile valley of
       the Montizón, under the jurisdiction of Santisteban del Puerto, the vecinos of Las Navas were as if expelled from the garden of paradise,
       condemned to look over the wall at those within. One is reminded of El Mirón on its hill above the valley of the Corneja, but El Mirón was
       the cabeza of its partido.
             The town itself is located in a saddle at the top of the ridge (at 653 meters), where it can dominate the lands on either side. At its
       center are two small squares. The parish church watches over the Plaza del Molino. Nearby the smaller Plaza del Pozo was in those days
       the site of the ayuntamiento, which housed also the town prison.[4] Facing on this square were the butcher shop, the barber shop, and
       the houses of two "labradores peujaleros," as they were called here (a pegujalero is a small independent farmer), one of them an alcalde
       ordinario, the other an alcalde de la hermandad (police officer). Most other vecinos lived in 166 habitable houses that lined the town's
       twelve streets. (Thirteen other houses were in ruins or uninhabitable, a higher proportion than in Baños or Lopera.) On the edge of the
       town and slightly above it, the ruins of a small castle bore witness to the strategic value of the location. Outside the nucleus there were
       nineteen cortijos and casas de campo

       [1] Information provided by don Juan Manuel Medina Ruano of the Servicio de Extensión Agraria, Arjona, May 1969.

       [2] AHPJ, Catastro, Navas, resp. gen. QQ 2, 3.

       [3] See Appendix N, Table N.4, for the equivalents of the different local fanegas.

       [4] Navas, resp. gen. Q 23.


                                                                                          ― 477 ―


                                            Table 13.1. Population of Las Navas, 1752



                                                         Single



                                   Under       18 and        Probably   Probably 18
                                    18          over         under 18    and over       Married      Widowed       Total



                Males



               Laymen               194          133               0          0           157           26         510



              Clergymen                 0            4             0          0               0           0           4



            (Total males)          (194)        (137)             (0)       (0)          (157)         (26)        (514)



               Females              102            66             43        52a           157           54         474



                 Total                                                                                             988



                               SOURCE. Las Navas, personal de legos and personal de eclesiásticos.



                                    a Includes three whose approximate age cannot be known.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
