Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       most important family was the Laras. At its head was don Pedro Josef de Lara, eighty-one years old, a widower, the holder of the royal
       jurisdiction in the town. Don Francisco de Lara, probably his son, the poorest of the hidalgos,


                                                                                          ― 457 ―
       was also a widower, with two minor sons and two daughters, the future hope of the family. Don Juan de Lara was a priest, but his
       personal property and benefice gave him only 31 EFW per year.
             The Lara family had three heads of household. None of the elite families had more, and among them a surprising number were
       spinsters ("de estado honesto"), six of whom were wealthy enough to belong in the highest level. Doña Balthasara Jil had an income of
       615 EFW and a household that included a maid, five male servants for field work, and six shepherds. Her sister (or close relative), doña
       María Josefa Jil supported a nephew, a maid, and two male servants on her 354 EFW. Doña Josefa de Andújar belonged with them.
       Besides olive groves and grain fields, she owned three notarial offices (escribanías ) in the town, two of the council and one of royal taxes
       (millones), all of which gave her 205 EFW. The notary Matheo Díaz performed the official duties for her. Theirs were imposing houses, but
       no direct heirs would come out of them. The nephew of doña María Josefa Jil would probably inherit her wealth and that of her sister (if
       indeed she was her sister), but we do not know if he was a Jil. In the mid-eighteenth century a sense of family honor condemned the
       daughters of hidalgo families in Lopera to a solitary existence, as it did in Baños, and as it would in the house of Bernarda Alba two
       centuries later. In the process some lineages died out.
             As in Baños, the elite families controlled the political structure of the town, although their authority was more veiled. The crown had
       preserved a voice for the representatives of the commoners in the municipal government, the Consejo de Capitulares. At its head was the
       aged don Pedro Josef de Lara, alcalde by virtue of his office as royal justice. [24] The council had five offices of regidor, two hereditary
       ("perpetuos") and three elected. One of the former belonged to a caballero of the Order of Calatrava who lived elsewhere and was
       represented by don Fernando Gutiérrez de Arce, hidalgo and military officer (teniente alférez mayor ), vecino of Lopera. Another belonged
       to a minor girl, and her proxy was another hidalgo in Lopera, who was himself alguacil mayor for the Inquisition of Córdoba and the
       owner of a regidor's office in Torredonjimeno, a town twice the size of Lopera forty kilometers away.[25] The noble estate of Lopera
       elected one of their number to be a regidor, and the commoners ("estado general") elected two of theirs. One of the

       [24] The catastro does not give him the title "alcalde," but at the end of the century the person exercising royal jurisdiction was called
       alcalde (see AHPJ, Contaduría, libro 4465 [14 Nov. 1800], f. 373r; and AHPJ, Protocolos, libro 3980 [20 Feb. 1802], f. 19r–20r).

       [25] Lopera, maest. segl., vecino no. 288.


                                                                                          ― 458 ―
       latter was the procurador síndico (public attorney) and the other the padre de menores (guardian of public wards). The formal income of
       the regidores came from market fees and amounted to only 16 EFW each per year.[26] The commoner regidores were modest men; one
       of them had hardly any personal property and must have worked in the fields. Although modest, they appear to have had family ties with
       the elite. One was a Chiquero and the other a Bueno on his mother's side. A well to-do cleric in minor orders was named Bueno Chiquero,
       and two single doñas were Chiqueros, although too poor to be placed in the elite level. It is hard to avoid the suspicion that the devotion
       of these regidores to the public interest was tempered by other considerations.
             Perhaps because it belonged to a military order, Lopera had a less exclusive society than Baños. As an example, the witnesses
       asked to swear to the exactness of the catastro came from all social levels. Among them, the royal judge, eighty-one-year-old don Pedro
       Josef de Lara, whose hand trembled as he signed, three regidores, the prior, and two other priests belonged to the elite. (The wealthy
       don Ignacio Montilla is conspicuously absent.) All the rest were commoners: the two regidores, the notary, the police officer (alcalde
       ordinario de la Santa Hermandad ), who owned no property, a labrador, a baker, a muleteer, a carpenter, and two jornaleros. Not social
       status but age gave them distinction. Except for the aged judge and the noble regidor, who was twenty-six, the others were between
       forty-five and sixty-three.
             Other evidence of some social flexibility appears at the lower level of the elite, where the distinction between the dons and the
       commoners becomes slightly blurred. We have seen the connections of the notary and the commoner regidores with noble families. The
       Morales family provides another case. Three labradores had Morales as one of their surnames. So did a cleric in minor orders and a widow
       called doña. One of these labradores, Pedro Morales de Aguilera, may have been related to two hidalgos named Aguilera. The sense of
       honor did not prevent family ties from developing across social estates at the boundary where they met economically.
             One must visualize the elite of Lopera differently from that of Baños. Rather than a collection of families of which a few were
       dominant (and richer than the richest in Lopera), the leaders of Lopera seem a corporate body of people who distinguished themselves by
       the label caballero hijodalgo. Perhaps this phrase appeared only in official documents, but

       [26] Lopera, resp. gen. Q 28.


                                                                                          ― 459 ―
       it was reserved for certain people and gave expression to their superior status. The wealthiest women, whose position did not allow them
       to marry beneath their station, belonged with them. This corporate body dominated the economy by extensive holdings in land, and the
       greater wealth of Lopera redounded to the benefit of its members—ten of the eleven caballeros hijosdalgo and three of the six single
       women in this group had incomes over 100 EFW; only seven of a larger group of landowning notables in Baños reached this level. They
       controlled the municipal administration, formally by their official positions and informally by patronage. Family ties and the ownership of
       office connected them with their counterparts in other towns of the region, a relationship critical to their position, for a large proportion of
       the town's land was in the hands of outsiders.

       6

       In the pyramid just below the privileged elite I have placed two groups on the basis of their claims to social status, for their wealth or
       income would locate them in the lower levels. One of these is clergymen with only their benefice to live on. The rule of José María Blanco
       that one needed personal wealth to become a priest did not apply here, for over half the clerics in town had no property of their own. In
       Baños the smallest capellanía was worth 16 EFW; in Lopera seventeen of thirty capellanias produced less than this, a corollary to the




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
