Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       cases may well have involved errors in calculation by the maker of the catastro.



                                                                                          ― 487 ―
       balance out properties assumed to be owned in nearby towns by vecinos of Navas.)
             Tables 13.4 and 13.5 reveal a form of dual economy in the town. Olive groves, whose product was destined for an outside market,
       belonged almost exclusively to the aristocrats in Madrid. Grain fields and huertas, most of whose harvest was consumed in the
       community, were in the care of vecinos. Vecinos and the local church owned two-thirds of them, and vecinos tilled most of the rest
       through leases. Cortijos also produced grain, but these belonged to outsiders. Of eleven held by laymen, only one belonged to a vecino,
       the notary (escribano, one of the two laymen in town favored with the title don ), and another, tiny, to a nearby vecina. How many of
       those owned by outsiders were farmed directly rather than leased cannot be determined with assurance. Two vecinos received salary in
       kind from the Duque de Santisteban as managers (caseros ) of two of his cortijos, and another as manager of a cortijo of the Conde-
       Duque de Benavente. The registrar (notario público ) was also a casero of Benavente. These four cortijos were clearly exploited directly,
       with local stewards. The notario also administered the three cortijos of the hidalgo of Arjona, but for these he received only 1.2 percent
       of the harvest in cash, indicating that he was only the agent for leasing them to other vecinos who exploited them for their own
       account. [11] This leaves only two cortijos belonging to laymen whose disposition is unknown. One cortijo belonging to the parish church
       was leased, but we do not know how many ecclesiastical cortijos were farmed directly.[12] As a reasonable approximation, I assume that
       half of the value of cortijos owned by outsiders was leased to vecinos (Table 13.5).
             My estimate of the division of harvests among the different costs of production follows the method used in the last two chapters
       (Table 13.6). Using these percentages, Table 13.7 calculates the income to outside owners from their properties in Navas. Table 13.8
       gives an estimate of the income of their administrators who do not reside in Navas. Since the catastro provides no information on this
       topic, I assume the same pattern as found in Baños. The result may be too favorable to Navas, that is, I may have allocated too much
       property of outsiders to local agents, because Navas lacked a class of wealthy landowners and beneficed clergy such as those in Baños
       who administered properties for outsiders.

       [11] Navas, maest. segl., nos. 211 and 267, property of don Juan Lucas Talero: harvest, 11,286 reales; administrator's fee, 135 reales.
       The other information also comes from this volume.

       [12] In 1800 the collegial church of Ubeda sold a cortijo of almost 300 fanegas. Most likely it already owned the cortijo in 1752 and was
       administering it itself.


                                                                                          ― 488 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
