Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       around a patio

       [9] Navas, maest. segl., ff. 206–14 (Santisteban); ff. 215–25 (Benavente).


                                                                                               ― 485 ―
       where the olives were piled after being harvested. Three naves housed four millstones, eight "beams" or presses (vigas ), four cauldrons,
       twenty-four large earthenware amphoras (tinajones ) for distilling and separating the oil that drained from the presses, and a storage
       room (bodega ) with ninety-nine containers (vasos ). Adjoining was an office, a shed for horses, and a hayloft (pajar). The whole complex
       measured forty-three by thirteen meters. The casa de campo and another smaller permanent house were nearby, and nine tiny dwellings
       linked to the former, where "the families [of the workers] live during the olive harvest."
             One can visualize the activity in his olive groves during the winter harvest season. The jornaleros of Navas, with their women and
       older children, would walk in the morning to the duke's estate, half a league away, where they would shake down the trees with long
       sticks and gather up the olives off blankets spread on the ground. They would then load the fruit on donkeys to take to the patio of the
       mill. From there specialized workmen would place the olives on the millstones to be lightly crushed by a conical stone rolled around on
       top of them (being careful not to spoil the flavor by breaking the pits). The workers then loaded the mash in the presses, first placing a
       round esparto mat on the floor in the middle of the press, then a layer of mash, another esparto mat, another layer of mash, and so on
       until a pile sufficiently high had been achieved for the pressing to be effective. The beams were then lowered on top of the pile to
       squeeze out the oil. The liquid would run into the first large tinajón, where gravity separated oil from water, and then, as the oil was
       decanted from one tinajón to the next—a process requiring days—the purer oil would rise to the top and be drawn off to sell at a higher
       price than the rest. At day's end, most jornaleros would return to the town, but some, including those who worked in the mill, would bed
       themselves down in the nine small houses. The harvest would go on for days, and the mill would operate for some time more, until all
       the olives piled in the patio had been ground and pressed and their oil distilled.
             The duke's four cortijos were more extensive than his olive groves, 1,257 fanegas, but only 24 percent of them were cultivated, the
       rest being monte bajo. Benavente had 940 fanegas of olive groves and 3,300 more in two cortijos, but only 8 percent of the latter were
       cultivated and 15 percent more were recently planted with live oak (chaparro ), presumably to be used for pasture. These two aristocrats
       were after olive oil, not grain, as were the majority of outside owners in all three of our Andalusian towns.


                                                                                               ― 486 ―


                                   Table 13.5. Leasing Practices, Las Navas, 1752
                                                      (percent)



                                   Arable Fields     Cortijos     Olive Groves      Orchards         Huertas



             Ecclesiastical
              institutions



                 Local                  52              a               0               0               67



                Outside                 87              a               0               0              100



        Outside secular owners
              (estimate)                85              50              0               0              100



           SOURCES. The amount leased is the total of thirty-seven leases described at the end of Las
           Navas, maest. segl. The total amount of ecclesiastical property is the difference between the
        secular property and the town total, stated in maest. segl. The amount owned by local and outside
          institutions is not known but is estimated in Table 13.4. The percent assumed to be leased by
        outside secular owners is based on that of outside ecclesiastical institutions, except for cortijos, for
                                            which there are no examples.



                                                    a None owned.



            The leases described in the catastro indicate that the practice here was to rent land for one-fifth of the harvest.[10] In the other
       two towns of Jaén province, the owners received a quarter of the harvest. In Navas, the practice appears to have compensated the
       tenant for the poverty of the land.
             Because the volume describing ecclesiastical properties is lost, one can achieve only an approximation of the proportions of each
       kind of land that church officials chose to rent and to farm themselves (Table 13.5). Outside secular owners are assumed to follow the
       same preferences as outside religious institutions. Besides the two aristocrats, twelve outsiders owned land in the termino. One had
       extensive holdings, an hidalgo of Arjona, seventy-five kilometers away, near Lopera, who owned three cortijos (16 percent of the arable
       in the town). The others owned arable and a few huertas, for the only outsiders to have olive groves besides the aristocrats were three
       nearby vecinos, who I assume cultivated their properties themselves and are not included in this table. (As in other towns, I count their
       properties as locally owned to

       [10] The makers of the catastro were required to state the local rate for rents in Navas, maest. ecles., but this is lost. Details on thirty-
       seven leases of ecclesiastical property held by twenty-six vecinos are given at the end of the maest. segl. In twenty-eight cases the
       tenant is assigned between 79 percent and 81 percent of the harvest. Six cases ranged from 58 to 69 percent, one was 76 percent, and
       two were over 81 percent. There is no pattern in the kind of land that was reported to rent for more or less than 80 percent, and these



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
