Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       sandalmaker, and the carpenter each administered a fund). Whatever their income, these priests could not match the display of the prior.
            The leaders of the community were not these few individuals but the labradores peujaleros, the thirty-six male heads of household
       and the seven widows. They were a relatively large group, 16 percent of all households. Although their highest incomes surpassed all but
       those of


                                                                                          ― 500 ―
       the notary and the prior, their average income and their style of life consign them to a second level. Of all the groups we have observed
       in the various towns, they were the closest to the concept of the villano honrado of the seventeenth century or the Anglo-Saxon yeoman
       farmer. Unlike the wealthy labradores of La Mata, who leased their fields, they had lands of their own, 42 percent of the arable not in
       cortijos, 8 percent of the olive groves, and about 10 percent of the other kinds of property, plus a large number of cattle. Many of their
       households were self-contained units. Together they had eleven sons and twenty-one adult male servants. The labor of these labradores
       and their sons and mozos in many cases was enough to till their holdings, so that they did not have to resort to hired hands. They
       rented most of the grain fields that were leased by ecclesiastical institutions and without doubt most of the fields of outside lay owners.
       Francisca Alonso de Gámez, a widow labradora peujalera, rented the one cortijo whose lease we have a record of, belonging to a local
       obra pía. Others probably leased the other available cortijos.
             A spirit of enterprise imbued the labradores peujaleros. Recently a fever for olive groves had gripped the town; more and more land
       was being taken from the monte or out of grain production to plant trees with the intention of selling olive oil on the national market.
       The expected returns made this investment attractive, although it meant that the land would produce no income for ten to fifteen years.
       One can surmise that throughout the province of Jaén the transfer of lands from arable and pasture to olive groves was in progress, and
       it continued for another two centuries, turning it into one of the major centers of olive oil production in the world. The catastro of Navas
       provides specific evidence of the extent of this development, since it lists as a separate item the olive groves recently planted and still not
       producing, reporting their acreage but attributing them no income. Besides 1,722 fanegas of mature trees and 136 of dead trees, the
       town had 331 fanegas of new groves, a recent addition of 18 percent. The labradores peujaleros were much more aggressive than this. To
       60 fanegas of mature groves belonging to them, they were adding 33 and had 9 more uncultivated, ready for planting, a total addition of
       70 percent. They conceived their exploitations as commercial ventures and were responding to the incentives of the market. (By
       comparison, the two dukes, long aware of the commercial possibilities of olives, were adding another 14 percent to their groves, less in
       proportion than the labradores but much more in area, 205 fanegas.)


                                                                                          ― 501 ―
       A look at several labradores gives meaning to this description. Juan de Siles was thirty-four years old, married with a son and daughter,
       and owned a comfortable but not luxurious house on the main street, the Calle Real. His wife took care of the house since there was no
       maid (no labrador had a maid), but three adult menservants lived with them and worked on his fields. His property included five grain
       fields totaling thirty fanegas, and two olive groves. One of these had about 150 mature trees, half the other was newly planted and the
       rest still vacant. He was extending his olive production. These properties brought him net (before labor) some 56 EFW. In addition he had
       numerous livestock: eight cows and twelve young, three goats with four young, and two horses, all of which provided him with perhaps
       another 15 EFW. Also living in Siles's home was a twenty-year-old jornalero named Antonio Pérez (physically or mentally disabled,
       perhaps), whose guardian Siles was, administering his property. This brought in 20 EFW, and Siles may have kept half for his efforts.
       Siles did not rent any ecclesiastical lands, but he must have rented secular lands, since with three male servants and Pérez, he could
       have tilled twice as much land as he owned and administered. After rent, wages, and keep of his servants, his net annual income was in
       the range of 105 EFW, not the highest of his group but near the top.[25]
             Although Cristóbal de Mercado lived in a bigger house on the same street, his establishment was less imposing, with only two grain
       fields and a small olive grove of his own (they hardly brought in 6 EFW). From a local obra pía he rented a large field that produced for
       him another 13 EFW, and he probably rented secular lands as well, for he had an adult son living at home (but no farm hands). His other
       wealth was a flock of twenty sheep and, at the moment, thirty lambs, and he owned his own yoke of mules. Forty years old, with a wife,
       two minor children, and a total income of perhaps 45 EFW, he was one of the more modest labradores peujaleros.[26]
             What was special about these two men was that they were the two regidores of the town. The town council consisted of two other
       men as well, the alcaldes ordinarios. These were also labradores peujaleros, Pedro Calvo, aged fifty, living with his wife on a net income
       of some 52 EFW, including 7 as alcalde; and Balthasar Rodríguez, forty-eight, with wife, three young sons, an adult manservant, fields,
       olive groves, huerta,

       [25] Navas, libro personal de legos; maest. segl., vecino no. 23.

       [26] Navas, maest. segl., vecino no. 11.


                                                                                          ― 502 ―
       and more rentals from the church than anyone else. He was the wealthiest labrador of all, 155 EFW income. On his death he would
       endow a capellanía in his name with an olive grove and huerta to support the local clergy. [27] The other town officials were two guardians
       of the peace, the alcaldes de la hermandad, one a labrador peujalero and the other a jornalero (aged twenty-nine and twenty-five). [28]
       Except for the last person, the town government was firmly in the hands of the labradores peujaleros, most of them young and vigorous.
       Their authority was limited by the imposing figure of the notary; by the public attorney, the síndico procurador general of Santisteban del
       Puerto, whose responsibility included the affairs of Navas; and finally by the power of the duke their señor, who appointed them, choosing
       in each case from two names presented by the town council.[29] But the labradores peujaleros formed the backbone of the local economy
       and society and ran its government. It was their ancestors who had led the town in buying out the duke's interest in the tithes and
       alcabalas.
             The local elite here was not the pinnacle of society but the more numerous second level of farmers, men who worked with their
       hands and whose wives kept their houses, cared for their children, fed them and their hired hands, with occasional paid help, no doubt,
       from the daughters of the jornaleros, and took over the agricultural exploitation if an untimely death should carry off their men. Unlike
       the notabilities of Lopera and Baños, they were not an exclusive group nor a collection of ruling families. The forty-three labradores and
       viudas labradoras had thirty different surnames. Only nine of these were repeated among them, but all but six belonged also to vecinos
       with other occupations. Cristóbal de Mercado, the regidor, was undoubtedly related to Juan Ruiz de Mercado, his more wealthy next-door




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
