Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       neighbor, another labrador, but also to Juan de Mercado el menor, a jornalero. Antonio Megino, aged sixty, a labrador with three sons at
       home, lived next to Diego Megino, aged twenty-nine, a jornalero with two sons and already a widower, surely Antonio's son or nephew. A
       few proto-dynasties appear, notably the Torres family. Its households included three labradores, an unmarried doncella, and a widow,
       both women with lands of their own. They resembled an hidalgo family, but there were also two propertyless Torres widows, one with an
       adult son who was a jornalero. Distant

       [27] The lands of the "capellanía colativa fundada por Balthasar Rodríguez" were disentailed in 1808 (AHPJ, Contaduría, libro 4412 [26
       May 1808], ff. 283v–284r).

       [28] Navas, libro personal de legos, vecinos 103, 197, 196, 215; Navas, resp. gen. Q 32.

       [29] Navas, resp. gen. Q 28.


                                                                                          ― 503 ―
       relatives or a coincidence of names? In any case the wealthy Torreses were almost unique.
              Had the olive groves and cortijos of the two dukes been in the hands of a local hidalgo class, this class would have run the town, as
       it did in Lopera and Baños. But the dukes were in Madrid, and vecinos, including two labradores peujaleros, ran their estates for them.
       The prior and the notary could not by themselves form an elite, and so leadership of the community fell to their social inferiors. One
       comprehends why the notary wanted to be recorded in the catastro as a labrador peujalero although his income, education, and style of
       life placed him in a different world. The strength of his patronage could not match the social leadership of the labradores.
            The rest of the social structure conforms more closely to that of the other two places. The innkeepers, the holder of the tobacco
       monopoly, and the notario rank just beneath the top level along with the labradores. The owners of livestock earned a little less. They
       concentrated their attention on their flocks of goats, which ran from 30 to 264. This activity did not provide the prestige of farming, for
       they had neither public office nor family relations with the labradores.
             Public officials fall, as expected, in the middle level, but bakers and artisans, who are in this level also, are further down the
       pyramid than in the other two towns. The difference, which is probably real and not the effect of the makers of the catastro, can be
       explained by the absence of a substantial upper sector. Crafts flourished on the clientage of the conspicuously wealthy, and the
       labradores peujaleros were not of this kind. The same must have been the case of the four bakers.
            They did not feel inferior, however. The olive fever had bitten them, as it had the labradores. To their 2.5 fanegas of olive groves,
       the owners of livestock and the market gardeners were adding 4.5 more; to 13 fanegas, the butchers, bakers, and storekeepers were
       adding 5; the notario, who owned only 6 fanegas of land, had 3 in new trees; while three craftsmen (the shoemaker, the blacksmith, and
       a sandalmaker), with 1.5 fanegas of mature trees among them, had 10 fanegas more growing, leaving them only 5.5 in grain! These men
       found olives, with their better market and lower proportional cost of labor, a capital gain worth waiting for.
             When we descend to the jornaleros, family size and per capita incomes do not differ greatly from the previous towns. The slightly
       lower earnings attributed to them in EFW represent almost the same in reales, because of the higher price of wheat here. Were they
       better or worse off? Since the households of the labradores provided most of their own labor


                                                                                          ― 504 ―
       and the dukes' olive groves gave no steady employment, were they not more squeezed? The majority here, as in Lopera and Baños, had
       some property, a field or two, a donkey, some goats or a pig, even a cow. Four had small olive groves and three others had seedlings
       sprouting. But odd jobs were scarcer than elsewhere. There was less money floating around the top that could filter down to their family
       members. They probably ate less than the jornaleros of Baños and Lopera, and we know they were crowded into fewer houses.
             Were they better off psychologically? The answer depends on the social integration of the community, and specifically on the
       relations between the labradores and their inferiors. Were the labradores "villanos honrados," yeoman farmers, or were they incipient
       kulaks, "rural bourgeois"? Their olive planting showed them to be enterprising, and they preferred not to rely on day laborers. Does this
       mean that they were standoffish, a ruling class?
               The catastro of Navas provides a side of town life that we have observed nowhere else. It says who lives on each street. If one
       maps them out, one obtains an interesting pattern (Figure 13.4). Town life had two foci, the Plaza del Pozo and the Calle Real, a block to
       the west. Of the thirty-six labradores and widow labradoras who lived in the town itself, all but nine had their house on one of these foci
       or within a block of the plaza. The notary lived on the Calle Real, the doctor and tobacco dealer on the nearby Plaza del Molino, on which
       the parish church faced, the notario on the street between the two plazas. (We do not know where the priests lived.) This was the area
       of the storekeepers and the inn. There were a few artisans here too, but they were more widely scattered. Plenty of jornaleros and others
       in the bottom levels lived on these streets, mixed in with the better-off vecinos, but when one moved farther away from the foci, the
       streets were lined almost entirely with the houses of the poor. It is as if the town nucleus had its own von Thünen's rings: the elite, the
       storekeepers, and labradores at the center, mixed with households of all social levels, a second ring that lacked the top levels but had
       still its artisans, market gardeners, and livestock owners, and an outer ring almost exclusively poor, except for an occasional labrador.
            The congregation of the better off in the center of the town, typical of early modern urban geography, meant that the vecinos would
       be aware of economic differentiation, but it did not mean rigid social stratification, at least not of the kind of Lopera and Baños. Nor
       should one exaggerate the spatial differentiation, for no place was more than three streets away from one of the town foci. It was a small
       community, and everybody rubbed elbows with everybody else frequently. The labrado-


                                                                                          ― 505 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
