Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                                                                         e Ministro ordinario, sacristan, hermitaño.



                                                        f Storekeepers, bakers, butchers and butcher's helper, barber bloodletters.



                                           g Not including the tile maker, whose income is not given (family size six, including two adult sons).




                                                                                           ― 498 ―




                                                                                   Figure 13.3.
                                                                   Las Navas, Socioeconomic Pyramid, 1752
                                                          NOTE : This is a bar graph based on Table 13.11, with an
                                                      indication of dispersion. It is not a set of frequency distributions.
             extensive family: wife, four sons (one over eighteen), two daughters, a maid, and two male servants (one over eighteen). Besides
       being escribano, he is also listed as a labrador peujalero. In his case peujalero is hardly appropriate, for he had more land than anyone
       else in the town. The only vínculo belonged to him and included the only cortijo owned


                                                                                           ― 499 ―
       by a vecino. His other lands were arable and a sizable olive grove with the only oil mill of a vecino. His total income was over 280 EFW.
       Since he had only one adult manservant, he was a big employer of jornaleros, one of the few local people that had the wherewithal, both
       economic and political, to attract a network of clients.
             The town doctor, don Joseph Antonio Tortosa, belongs with these two because of his income and his appellation, but he was not of
       their stature. Twenty-three and still a bachelor, he had living with him only a maid, and he had no property in town. Perhaps he was a
       newcomer. But his utilidad as doctor was judged to be 2,260 reales per year (126 EFW), the highest professional income in the
       community. His position had great potential, and it is a pity one cannot observe his household and position twenty or thirty years later.
            These three men, although impressive in the community, could not compare in wealth and way of life with the leading figures of
       Lopera and Baños, whose incomes were over 500 or even 1,000 EFW. They also lacked other essential characteristics of the elites of
       Lopera and Baños. They were not heads of powerful families, nor did they form a corporate oligarchy united by marriage ties. The family
       names of the notary, Salcedo and Navarrete, and of the doctor, Tortosa, belonged to no one else in the community. Although several
       members of the lower groups were Martínezes, like the prior, the name is common and may not connote any blood relationship. Even
       among themselves, these three leading men do not appear to have been related.
             Like the prior, the other three priests also had maids and belonged socially to the top group. Economically it is hard to place them,
       however, because the relevant book has been lost. The parish curate (cura ) received some of the first fruits (perhaps 18 EFW), but the
       only local capellanía of which record remains, because it leased some lands, brought in only 3 EFW in known income. Even if all the
       unidentified local church properties belonged to capellanías, the most they would have brought in to these three priests was about 130
       EFW altogether. They also had income from saying masses and administering some church funds (but not all, since the notario, a



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
