Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       ing difference is that large exploitations were more typical of the southwest. The large properties of the north were not single
       exploitations but many small parcels. In La Armuña there were also large exploitations at midcentury—despoblados and alquerías—but
       these had extensive pastures, and they were giving way to smaller grain fields. By comparison, the cortijos and olive groves of Jaén were
       not under attack, nor was the coto redondo that formed Pedrollén.
              As a general rule, town size also differed. The mean population of the three towns north of the line was 310, of those in Jaén about
       1,360, and the términos of the latter were far larger. Social structure also was more complex in the towns of Jaén, with distinct elites
       and an abundance of nearly propertyless day laborers (except that the elite of Navas was emasculated), and more egalitarian in the
       communities of the north. Even though the towns are not a random sample, they reflect a clear contrast between the two halves of dry
       Spain. Pedrollén is a deviant case; south of the line by the nature of its exploitation, it had only 29 inhabitants in 1752 and no social
       elite. One might argue that it was not a town at all but a farmstead; yet it had its own catastro and census return. The royal
       administration considered it a separate unit even though it had no recognized government of its own. These observations suggest a
       refinement in our concept of the two regions of dry Spain: the size of the largest active exploitations (not pastures) appears to be the
       most critical difference, with the stratification of society in second place.
             The eighteenth-century reformers who prepared the ideological way for the disentail of Carlos IV did not like large exploitations.
       They judged them inefficient and socially harmful—as a rule they did not conceive of economies of scale—because large exploitations
       stood in the way of the desired regime of independent small farmers. They explained their existence not by the nature of the soil or the
       use to which they were put but by the laws governing property relations, and specifically by legal entail. The practices they found
       objectionable—the leasing of entire cortijos to powerful labradores, subleasing at extortionary rents, leaving baldíos unexploited while
       jornaleros starved—they traced back to the working of laws that kept land off the market and prevented its acquisition by productive
       small farmers. The more traditionally minded critics would not attack entail directly but recommended that the crown step in to force
       owners to let their holdings out in small allotments on long-term leases. The more venturesome reformers, with Jovellanos at their head,
       believed that the abolition of entail and the introduction of freedom to buy and sell land would take care of the evils on


                                                                                          ― 519 ―
       its own, without need for further state action. But entail was the main scourge—civil mayorazgos, ecclesiastical manos muertas, and the
       baldíos of the crown—and by the 1780s a free economy was widely held to be the cure.
             Because large exploitations were the clearest symptom of the evil, the reformers directed their attention southwest of the
       Salamanca-Albacete line, and especially to western Andalusia and Extremadura. Our seven towns, close on either side of the line, offer no
       archetypes of the reformers' nightmare, yet examples of most of the evils they saw are present—the cortijos, the jornaleros, the baldíos
       —in the towns of Jaén. Contemporaries spoke of the poderosos, the powerful ones, and we can now embody the concept with real
       people, the prior of Baños, the aged royal justice of Lopera, the two dukes in Madrid who exploited the olive groves and cortijos of
       Navas, the marquis and count who owned 40-percent interest in Pedrollén, the Bernardine sisters of Salamanca with twenty-nine grain
       plots in La Mata and most of the neighboring despoblado of Narros. In one form or another, they seem omnipresent, except in the
       mountain community of El Mirón, where the weight of the señora, the Duquesa de Alba, was light.
            The independent, self-made poderoso such as the large tenant farmer described by Carlos III's intendants, who leased a thousand
       fanegas or more and had a hundred teams of oxen, has not turned up, although one who complained of them was the intendant of Jaén.
       Our closest figure is the tenant of Pedrollén, Francisco García Serrano, with his sixteen hundred animals, eleven male servants, and two
       shepherds, but his income resembled that of a prosperous labrador of La Armuña, he lived and ate with his farm hands, and he faced the
       power of the absentee owners.
             Lessees are the most dimly perceived figures in the landscape because of the nature of my sources, and I have documented no
       case of extortionate subleasing at all. Perhaps it did not take the form of written contracts, but it is hard to see how the subdivision of
       properties by the lessees in order to sublease to small tenants would fit into the patterns of landholding observed in these towns, for
       most exploitations were clearly defined and not easily divided. The intendant of Jaén complained to the crown that administrators were
       frequently disguised lessees who sublet at handsome profits. The nonresident administrators who handled the properties in Baños
       belonging to outside owners (see Table 11.10) may have been of this type, but the tables calculating the share of the harvest accruing to
       the different inputs indicate that they worked within defined


                                                                                          ― 520 ―
       limits of appropriation of the income from the land. They could force the owner to give them a larger part of his share, but they were
       limited in how much they could extort from sublessees and labor.
             Entail was the great concern of the reformers, and of this there have been many examples. Most of the income of the poderosos
       came from lands that were legally bound to families or to religious institutions. Yet there was a surprising amount of buying and selling of
       real property going on everywhere except in the villages around the city of Salamanca, where the church held imposing shares of the
       total property. We have even seen religious institutions selling land; their entail was not absolute.[1] Leases, not ownership, mattered to
       the vecinos, and these, although fairly stable, did move around. The villagers of La Armuña who bought disentailed properties, for
       example, were able to augment their harvests by acquiring new leases as well as lands of their own.


       2

       In the minds of the reformers, the nature of property rights and legal restrictions on the use of the land were the independent variables
       in the equation. Changing the laws—for some by making them stricter, for others by abolishing them—could produce the proper rural
       economy. The reformers were also aware of two other forces at work, the residence of the owner and the influence of the market.
       Nonresident owners, secular or ecclesiastical, were bad because they neglected their land, but the cause again was entail. The market,
       too, they believed could stimulate production and wealth—hence the abolition of restrictions on the grain trade in 1756 and 1765.
       Jovellanos argued strongly for free trade in commodities of the land.
             This study of seven towns provides other ways of analyzing the interaction between ownership, residence, and market that sheds a
       different light on the working of the agricultural economy of the old regime. Every community was to a greater or lesser extent engaged
       in an outside market economy. Whether the wheat of the arable plots of La Armuña and the cortijos of Jaén or the animal products of
       Pedrollén, El Mirón, and Baños or the olive oil of Navas, Baños, and Lopera, some product was leaving the community for a regional or
       national market, reaching a Spanish city or even, in the case of oil, an American colony. Most of the marketed commodities passed



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
