Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       correct, since peasants had to exchange part of their products in order to obtain other necessities, tools, cooking utensils, and clothing
       and foods not produced locally. If the analysis presented in these chapters is correct, the households with per capita incomes from
       agriculture above 12 EFW, and certainly those with per capita incomes above 20 EFW, would have had produce to sell outside the town
       for their own account. If the total income produced by their own properties reached a certain level—100 EFW net is a likely figure, or 200
       EFW without question—they were no longer economically part of the peasant community but formed a separate ruling elite assimilated to
       the outside landowners, behaving like them and applying pressure on the agricultural producing classes, the peasant community. Their
       high incomes raised the per capita income of the towns without making the jornaleros any better off, at least insofar as the catastro
       permits one to detect.
             The powerholders, both local and outside, wanted their income in hard currency or in marketable kind. Rents were collected in
       money and in grain, not in perishable goods, except such token payments as chickens at Christmas and wood for monastic fireplaces. The
       tenants, to pay the rents and obtain the leases, had no alternative but to plant the crops the landlords called for. In Jaén, where the
       owners had a choice between leasing and direct exploitation—especially where exploitations were large enough to be efficiently
       administered by a third party—they sought to put their properties into easily marketable harvests that they could produce with hired
       labor. Such harvests minimized labor costs and thus the share remaining to the peasant community. Olive groves offered the best
       combination, but large-scale grain farming—the cortijo—was also satisfactory.


       3

       If the peasant community were to achieve a surplus that remained in its hands, this surplus had to be in marketable form to be of use.
       The large

       [5] It is no innovation to say that peasants were subject to both Malthusian and Ricardian pressures, although I do not believe it has
       been explained in the terms used here. In "Reply to Professor Brenner," Le Roy Ladurie says, "The neo-Malthusian and neo-Ricardian
       model [was] outlined by [H. J.] Habbakuk in 1958 and since put forward by [M. M.] Postan and myself," but the works he cites of these
       authors, while recognizing the dual pressure of demography and rent, do not refer to Ricardo's theory.


                                                                                          ― 526 ―
       wheat harvests of the labradores of La Mata at mid-century were of this nature. In La Mata, however, the Malthusian and Ricardian traps
       soon began to threaten this surplus. The great dilemma of the peasant community was to find a way into the market that could expand
       without limit, or at least whose limit was enough higher than present production for it to offer temporarily the possibility of unchecked
       growth. The various communities we have observed were all searching for this bonanza.
             Agriculture offered restricted possibilities to most communities. With current technology, food output was almost as limited a good
       as land itself. The farmers of the towns in La Armuña varied their plantings in the second half of the century, but the tithe records show
       that the net EFW harvest increased little, unless the relative prices of the crops varied much more than the evidence suggests (see
       Tables 7.19 and 8.24). The tithe register of La Mata shows that the marginal output of additional labor in the fields was virtually zero.
       Their failure was not due to ignorance. Experiments in royal fields in the fertile valley of Aranjuez in the 1770s indicated that the kind of
       cultivation recommended by agronomists in England and France would not raise output significantly in the vastly different Spanish
       countryside. The dry climate in Spain does not permit as rapid a reconstitution of the soil after a harvest as occurs in northwest
       Europe. [6]
             Production might be increased more successfully by breaking new ground. La Mata and Villaverde bordered on untilled alquerías and
       despoblados, and after 1750 their labradores began to farm them. Some of La Mata's vecinos moved to Narros, personally escaping the
       dual trap for at least a generation or more, but those left behind remained ensnared. Villaverde's farmers obtained leases to plant fields in
       the despoblados of La Cañada and La Cañadilla, successfully raising the town's per capita income because its population remained stable.
       A different and more promising venture was the olive fever of Navas, which inspired even small owners to plant their grain fields with
       seedlings. The market for olive oil seemed to have no limit.
              When the royal government took much of Baños's término to found

       [6] García Sanz, "Agronomía y experiencias." On the slow reconstitution of the soil because of summer drought and the high rate of
       evaporation, see also García Fernández, "Champs ouverts," 699–700. The author believes that a more intensive three-field system was
       possible in Old Castile but not adopted because it would produce less wheat.


                                                                                          ― 527 ―
       the colonies of Sierra Morena, it was seeking to establish production for the market where previously there was none and give the profits
       to the peasants, by eliminating all powerholders except itself. Elsewhere peasants had to find the solution by themselves. Our towns
       show that farmers needed information on the evolution of the outside market—in Madrid, in Bilbao, in Mexico—and those who had access
       to this information were the large owners and other beneficiaries of the rural economy who were already into the market. The labradores
       peujaleros of Navas copied their señor, who lived in Madrid; the labradores of La Mata knew from their arrieros where their landlords were
       selling their wheat. When Jovellanos argued that small farmers would get more out of the land, he did not envisage their need for
       information to be able to hook onto one of the growing sectors of the economy.
             Most agricultural solutions held out little promise for them. Peasants owned little land, so that the Ricardian trap was ever
       threatening. The rural community needed a nonagricultural way to expand its income. Crafts were a familiar and traditional alternative,
       but the demand was problematic. Every town had a few craftsmen, part of whose customers lived elsewhere: linen and woolen weavers,
       shoemakers, sandalmakers, blacksmiths; but the second half of the eighteenth century was not kind to them. Transportation and
       communications were improving, bringing in goods from more industrial regions rather than broadening the market of local craftsmen.
       Villaverde, whose shoemakers, carders, and weavers were disappearing without replacement, exemplified the tragedy of rural industry. If
       the landowners lived in the town, as they did in the larger nuclei of the south, they practiced conspicuous consumption and furnished a
       limited but secure clientele. The landowning elites of Baños and Lopera were a major factor in providing the local bakers and master
       craftsmen with household incomes of 50 to 100 EFW. The artisans lived well, but their market was strictly limited and offered no solution
       to hungry jornaleros.
            One may well ask why the putting-out system did not move into these towns, providing their artisans the needed relationship with
       the national economy. They appeared to offer ideal settings for cottage industry. The skills were there, and the craftsmen lacked full



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
