Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       through the hands of people who did not

       [1] In La Mata and Navas (see Chapter 7, section 2, and Chapter 13, section 6).


                                                                                          ― 521 ―
       till the soil, precisely the poderosos seen above. Although some labradores of Salamanca and Jaén sold the products of their own fields,
       most of their commodities that reached the market left the community as rent, tithes and other religious exactions, seigneurial dues, and
       royal imposts (see the tables providing the estimated annual income of the towns). Tithes and rent also went to the parish church and
       local landlords, and from them to the market. The majority of these payments was still made in kind, but in some cases they were
       monetized: rents for pastures, tithes on vegetables and most animals, and royal taxes. To cover these, the vecinos had to exchange
       some of their produce for money.
             By tradition most of these payments were fixed. Tithes and other ecclesiastical exactions—first fruits, Voto de Santiago—represented
       precise fractions of the harvest, and their collection was carefully watched to ensure that the farmer paid his full due, even when the
       event was clothed in ceremonial trappings such as we found in La Mata. Rents were also customary: the makers of the catastro could ask
       every town what share the church got of the harvest on the lands it rented and receive explicit answers. One can understand why the
       royal intendants believed that varying the fixed rate for rent was an effective means of agricultural reform. Sometimes the local rate was
       a percentage of the harvest—20 to 25 percent in the towns of Jaén—sometimes so much per fanega of land, as in La Armuña. According
       to my calculations, the proportion of the harvest levied for rent varied from 20 to 31 percent: [2]


                                    La Mata                                                    23


                                   Villaverde                                                  31


                                   Pedrollén                                                   30


                                    El Mirón                                                   20


                                     Baños                                                     25


                                     Lopera                                                    25


                                     Navas                                                     20

            Seigneurial dues (where applicable) and royal taxes were also specified amounts, the latter in most places having been compounded
       (encabezado ) for a permanent fixed payment at some time in the past.

       [2] Total rent over gross harvest from arable plus income from livestock in Pedrollén. Other towns, mean rent on arable over gross
       harvest. Goubert, "French Peasantry," 67, finds the rent in the French region of the Beauvaisis to be between one-sixth and one-third of
       the harvest.



                                                                                          ― 522 ―
       Custom and law had therefore worked to stabilize the payments made by the producers, those people whom we loosely call peasants,
       protecting them in the same way that the control of food prices in the cities protected the modest urban classes. An increase in
       production, whether from a successful innovation in rotations or a new use of the land, should have increased the net income of the
       peasant community. Where its payments were fixed, all increase should go to it; where its payments were a specified fraction, its share
       should increase absolutely. A widely held model of early modern rural economies holds, however, that when a surplus appeared above the
       basic necessities of the peasant communities, meaning not only their nourishment but the expenses of depreciation and replacement of
       animals and tools and the cost of socially mandatory ceremonial activities, this surplus would sooner or later be absorbed by demographic
       growth or by greater exactions of the nonproducers. The peasants' per capita share would return to the level of the basic necessities.
             How the demographic response affected the monarchy as a whole in the eighteenth century has been discussed in Chapter 1. It can
       also be observed at the level of small communities. According to the model, which in essence goes back to Thomas Malthus, an increase
       in output should stimulate a growth in population, either by increasing the margin of the birth rate over the death rate or by attracting
       immigration, until a new Malthusian limit is reached. Population would thus rise and stagnate or fall in waves for each town, as it did for
       entire regions or countries. The comparative histories of La Mata and Villaverde, nearby towns in La Armuña, suggest that such a model
       applies here. La Mata, with a higher per capita income in the middle of the eighteenth century, based in part on lower rents and royal
       taxes, grew rapidly in the next fifty years, both through earlier marriages and through immigration, while Villaverde had a stationary
       population. Comparing per capita income of the seven towns in 1751–53 with their population change in the next three and a half
       decades supports the belief that the two variables were related (Table 14.1). (Baños cannot be considered because its census for 1786 is
       not reliable. Pedrollén is obviously a deviant case; it was an estate rather than a town, much of its estimated income at midcentury came
       from leases to adjoining despoblados, and its population, being small and not permanent, was liable to wild swings.)
             Another accepted view of peasant societies is that the demands of the individuals and institutions with power over them, whether
       for rent or




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
