Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                          ― 523 ―


                             Table 14.1. Per Capita Income and Demographic Change, Seven Towns



                                                       Per Capita Income                    Percent Change in Total
                                                                                              Population Between
                                                                                              1751–53 and 1786
                                           Maximum (EFW )           Minimum (EFW )



                Pedrollén                       22.9                        —                        –65.5



                 La Mata                        19.4                       18.0                      +37.0



                 Lopera                         15.6                       13.9                     + 17.2



                Villaverde                      13.8                        —                         –3.1



                  Baños                         12.0                       10.4                        ?



                El Mirón                        9.3                        6.3                        –0.3



                  Navas                         7.3                        7.0                        –8.3



                    SOURCE. Per capita income and populations calculated in the text of chapters 7–13.


       taxes, would increase to absorb any surpluses that appeared.[3] In the Spanish case the "powerholders" would be the king, the clergy,
       and the landowners who did not till their properties themselves. In other words, customary or legal limitations on payments might
       restrain the demands of landlords, church, and crown, but in the long run these bodies would get around such rigidities and skim off any
       increase in agricultural output not needed to maintain the peasant community at subsistence level. Peasants thus faced a second obstacle,
       which one may call the Ricardian trap. The early nineteenth-century economist David Ricardo argued, one may recall, that as new land is
       pressed into service, the marginal output of land decreases, creating a difference between the product of the new, marginal land and the
       better land previously under cultivation. Because of competition among those who do the actual tilling, the difference between the product
       of old land and the marginal product, which Ricardo called the rent, would soon be drained off by the owners as rental payments or in
       other ways, so long as the economy is free. One may apply the same reasoning, whether new land is put under the plow or new crops
       are sown on old land. Despite the improvements they may introduce, competition for leases among the farmers will leave them only what
       they need to survive.

       [3] See, for example, Wolf, Peasants, 12–17.


                                                                                          ― 524 ―
       Contemporary observers reported that landlords were raising rents faster than existing norms called for. Rent control was one of the
       demands of the officials of Andalusia in the 1760s, and the protests by large tenants of Salamanca province subjected to exorbitant
       exactions by their landlords were one of the sparks that set off the investigation of the conditions of Spanish agriculture under Carlos III.
       The sources for this study provide little information on rents except at the time of the catastro, but scattered evidence supports the
       contention that landowners were raising the terms of their leases to take advantage of increasing outputs. Villaverde appears to have
       been suffering from high rents and high taxes established in a period of greater prosperity, which persisted and weighed excessively on
       the current economy of the community. The Bernardine sisters of Nuestra Señora del Jesús of Salamanca increased the rent steadily on
       the alquería of Narros as the neighboring vecinos of La Mata and Carbajosa exploited it more fully. In response to the better harvests in
       La Mata in the 1770s, the same nuns and the Franciscan sisters of Salamanca got more fanegas of wheat for their grain plots. In Navas
       the owners, both local and outside, restrained by custom from raising rents, were replacing arable with olive groves because the latter
       permitted them to switch from leasing to direct exploitation and thus to export a larger share of the product. In one way or another
       owners sought to maximize their shares, getting around the customary limits on rents in order to obtain for themselves the increase in
       output. In response to such developments, in 1785 a royal decree froze rents on land and prohibited the eviction of tenants without
       official permission. [4] One may well question how successful the measure was.
             The evidence developed in this study indicates that peasant communities were caught in a scissors. As soon as any surplus
       appeared, on the one hand population growth multiplied the mouths to feed. On the other, their landlords sought ways to appropriate the
       surplus, and the presence of more households meant that the competition for leases played into their hands. Unless a peasant owned
       enough land to provide for his family's needs—and virtually none of the men who worked in the fields in our seven towns did, whether
       labradores or jornaleros, except in the sierra community of El Mirón—they were pressed by their landlords, and all were potential victims
       of their fertility. The rural economy was subject not only to demographic waves but to waves of rental exac-

       [4] See above, Chapter 4, section 2.


                                                                                          ― 525 ―
       tion. If the two peaked simultaneously, they could create a crisis leading to population decline and emigration.[5]
              One way to visualize the surplus, the Ricardian "rent," is to see it as the produce that reached the market. This is not entirely



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
