Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       employment. Many other vecinos and vecinas had time on their hands, especially in a community such as El Mirón, dedicated largely to
       animal husbandry, and the towns of Jaén, with extensive olive and grain cultures, that had peak labor demands only twice a year. In the
       seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, many rural regions of Europe witnessed the development of


                                                                                          ― 528 ―
       proto-industry to supplement their incomes. [7] It has been argued that cottage industry needed "aloofness from urbanism" to be free to
       develop. [8] El Mirón certainly fits these requirements, yet cottage industry did not appear, although domestic spinning and weaving of
       wool continued on a modest scale.
             If marginal agricultural areas, such as the mountain valleys of northern Switzerland studied by Rudolf Braun or the plains of Picardy
       described by Franklin Mendels, produced a flourishing proto-industry,[9] why not those of Spain? The answer is not in the nature of the
       peasantry but would appear to be in the absence of merchants to organize the activity. Putting out depended on the presence of
       mercantile centers with a manufacturing tradition and the necessary linkages to raw materials and markets. [10] It existed in the silk
       industry of Valencia and the iron industry of the Basque provinces, both regions tied into the international economy.[11] Cloth
       manufacture was carried on widely throughout Castile by weavers living in villages like Villaverde and El Mirón, but historians have found
       very few examples of Castilian weavers and spinners tied directly to urban entrepreneurs. The Toledo region is one, and the uplands of
       Cameros between Old Castile and Aragon another. [12] The infrastructure was missing in Castile and upper Andalusia for this solution to
       the peasants' dilemma, a reflection of their continuing isolation from the Atlantic commercial world. In any case, because proto-industry
       was based on relatively static technologies and because the merchants were in a position to drain off the profits, it would have offered
       the rural communities little possibility of independent growth.
             Transportation, on the other hand, provided the needed activity. As the economy of Spain developed, and especially as cities grew,
       the foreseeable future offered an almost limitless demand for haulage. David

       [7] Joan Thirsk, "Industries in the Countryside"; Mendels, "Proto-Industrialization: The First Phase." Current thinking on the subject is
       summarized in Mendels, "Proto-Industrialization: Theory and Reality."

       [8] Dodgshon, "Spatial Perspective," 15.

       [9] Braun, "The Impact of Cottage Industry;" Mendels, "Proto-Industrialization: The First Phase"; Franklin F. Mendels, "Agriculture and
       Peasant Industry." Mendels sees this peasant industry coming out of demographic and rental pressures. On the relationship between
       proto-industry and the structure of agriculture, see also Jones, "Agricultural Origins of Industry."

       [10] Gullickson, "Agriculture and Cottage Industry," shows that in the Norman countryside around Rouen cottage industry flourished in
       the eighteenth century in a prosperous grain region, thereby challenging the theory that it could appear only in poor rural areas. The
       motivating factor was the organizing activity of the cloth merchants of Rouen. See Mendels, "Proto-Industrialization: Theory and Reality,"
       79.

       [11] Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 134–36.

       [12] González Enciso, "Protoindustrialización en España."


                                                                                          ― 529 ―
       Ringrose has shown that the expansion of Madrid in the eighteenth century spurred on the transport sector. Agricultural specialization
       called for additional transportation to carry the new goods to market. The olive oil fever of the towns of Jaén is not the only example at
       this time; vineyards were being extended at the expense of arable in western Andalusia, causing not only the export of wine from the
       region but the importation of grain by pack animals from Extremadura and central Andalusia.[13] The needs of carters for passable roads
       and adequate pastures placed a ceiling on the amount that could be carried by wagon, [14] but the muleteers of La Mata, Villaverde, and
       Lopera faced no such severe restrictions, because they could vary their routes to find pastures. The number of muleteers of La Mata
       increased steadily from 1750 to 1860, when the railroad began to replace them. The twenty-one muleteers of Lopera at the time of the
       catastro, despite prolonged absences from the community, were one of the most active groups in the local economy, engaged in farming
       and baking. The catastro shows 48 percent of La Mata's vecinos dedicated to transportation, 11 percent of Villaverde's, and 9 percent of
       Lopera's (see Tables 7.1, 8.1, and 12.2). They produced respectively 34, 11, and 6 percent of the net town incomes (see Tables 7.14,
       8.20, and 12.12), and these were the towns with the highest per capita incomes (Table 14.1).
             These examples indicate that studies of early modern rural economies have not given due attention to professional transportation as
       a way to escape the Malthusian and Ricardian traps. Chapters 17 and 18, which look at Jaén and Salamanca provinces as a whole, will
       provide further evidence of the economic stimulus of muleteering. It was an essential feature of the market economy, growing as the
       economy grew, and was free from the exactions of landlords and powerholders, who could not drain off its profits, except indirectly and
       to a limited extent by charges for pasturage. In the long run, of course, the railroads and internal combustion vehicles would eliminate
       the arrieros, just as improved technology would kill off cottage industry, but until such time, long-distance haulage remained a major
       resource for rural communities.


       4

       In order to classify the social as well as the economic structure of the seven towns, one may introduce as another variable the residence
       of the

       [13] Ponsot, "Andalusie occidentale," 106–7.

       [14] Ringrose, Transportation, 92.


                                                                                          ― 530 ―
       major landowners. One can fit them into two definite groups: the absentees (aristocrats and religious foundations) and the local residents
       (both members of leading families and peasant landowners). Used jointly with the nature of the economy, this distinction produces four



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
