Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       groups among the towns.
            First are those whose agriculture was close to subsistence and was therefore little involved in the market. Its major landowners
       were vecinos (what nonresident would want property in towns that produced so little to sell?). El Mirón fits the definition. Its per capita
       income was low, but it had a basically egalitarian society, in which only the priests stood out from the community.
             A second category includes the towns with low outside ownership but whose economies were distinctly market oriented. In this case
       the major landlords lived in the town and stood out as a separate elite, socially divorced from the community, living on rents and
       harvests produced by others, much of which they sold outside the town in order to maintain their way of life. This definition applies to
       Baños and Lopera, with their ruling class of notables based on the sale of olive oil and wheat. It is true that half the land in Lopera
       belonged to outsiders, but its hidalgos were integrated by marriage and public office into a regional elite and drew strength from this
       relationship, with property outside Lopera as well as in it. Such towns had great social differentiation, accentuated by the clear line
       between notables and commoners, which denied marriage to many upper-class women. These communities epitomized the society of
       legal orders and ascribed status of the old regime.
             The other two categories were towns whose major owners, through whose hands the produce passed to market, resided elsewhere.
       In the first case, vecinos were unable to develop autonomous commercial outlets; hence they were potential or actual victims of the
       Ricardian squeeze and very likely poor. Villaverde was the best example of such a town. Seventy percent of its land was in outside hands,
       and its rents and taxes were heavy. Its artisans were in decline and its muleteers engaged in less remunerative routes than La Mata's
       (they went to Madrid and lacked return freight, whereas La Mata's, traveling to the north coast, carried loads both ways). Its economy
       was growing temporarily in the second half of the century through the expansion of farming into the neighboring despoblados, but its
       farmers owned none of the land they were breaking and were potential victims of a rental squeeze. Villaverde could be falling into a
       depressed third category. It was, however, socially egalitarian, for the exploiting elite lived elsewhere, out of sight.


                                                                                          ― 531 ―
       Finally, in other towns the majority of the land belonged to nonresidents, but the community was mounting a local response that gave it
       independent entry to the national economy. La Mata was the obvious case. It was caught in the Ricardian trap but surviving on the
       expansion of its muleteering. Though divided between labradores and arrieros, with the richer labradores conscious of their place, its
       society was at the egalitarian end of the spectrum (except, of course, for the priest).
             Two of our places are hard to classify. Pedrollén was not properly a town. It had an economy of arable farming and animal
       husbandry geared to commercial production, but almost half the net return was paid in rent, either directly in kind or indirectly as
       currency, after its sale. Francisco García had considerable capital in tools and chattel, with which he exploited not only this coto redondo
       but surrounding despoblados as well, giving him a net income of some 300 EFW, a good five-sixths of which must have been exported for
       sale for his own account. Economically he was far above his farm hands, and he may have been an arrogant master to them, but they
       slept in his house and ate at his table, and they would have called him tu. Navas is the other doubtful case. It was also subject to
       outside powerholders who owned its cortijos and olive groves, primarily the two dukes resident in Madrid, one of them its señor. Its
       labradores peujaleros and artisans who owned land had discovered the value of olive oil, and this gave them their own marketable
       surplus. At the current stage of their rhythms, these two places seem best attributed to the prosperous fourth category, along with La
       Mata.
            Three of the four categories had relatively egalitarian social structures. The only category that did not was the one whose
       landowners lived in town: Lopera and Baños. Socially absenteeism was not an evil, for it muted social tensions. Economically absenteeism
       was not an unmixed evil either, for communities like La Mata, whose common people had found an entry into the market economy, had
       absentee landlords who left them alone, so far as these activities were concerned.
             The cases of Villaverde and Navas remind us that rural conditions were not permanent even in the old regime. The demographic and
       rental pressures came in waves, but the phases of different places and different levels of the economy were not synchronized. At the
       national level, the population in the periphery began to expand and the economy to participate in a broad Western prosperity about the
       turn of the eighteenth century, while central Spain maintained a more isolated economy until late in the century. Demographic growth in
       Castile and Andalusia also



                                                                                          ― 532 ―
       began during the century, but Navarre, Aragon, and Extremadura lagged behind.[15] Superimposed on this national pattern, local
       economies alternated in different rhythms. Pedrollén and Villaverde, in the economic orbit of the city of Salamanca, suffered
       proportionately heavy rents in the middle of the eighteenth century, and their population stagnated or declined, while their neighbor La
       Mata had lower rents and experienced rapid population growth (Table 14.1).
             The welfare of a community depended on the current phase of its demographic and rent rhythms, on their conjoncture, as the
       French call it, within the limits set by the rhythm of the economy at the broader national or regional level. The position of a community
       could change within a generation. Unless it broke out of the Malthusian and Ricardian traps by discovering some sustained entry into a
       larger economy that was currently in a growth phase, it could advance only so far before demographic expansion or rental increase or
       both brought it to a halt or even forced it into a decline.


       5

       The decision of the king to disentail church properties added a new element to the equation. Our seven towns provide specific examples
       of its effects. We must keep in mind, however, that they are located in provinces where there was more than average transfer of
       property under the desamortización of Carlos IV, and within these provinces the seven towns were relatively active. On the other hand,
       they are not the most active towns in either province, and the difference between the effects of their disentail and that of most other
       places should be more one of degree than of kind.
             The reformers saw in the freeing of property a solution to the evils of the countryside, believing that the peasantry would be more
       productive, more prosperous, and happier if it owned the land it worked. They were aware of the Ricardian trap and wanted the
       producers to be guaranteed a proper share of their produce. They tended to overlook the Malthusian trap, however, because they were
       populationists. They believed that if the land were properly distributed, there was plenty to support many more people than then lived in
       Spain. In some abstract sense they may have been right. The colonies of Sierra Morena, carved out of the barren hills of Baños, proved
       that there was fertile land not in use. But for com-



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
