Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




            Redeemed censos                                                         4.4           1,617




              Total percent                                                        99.9




           Total amount (000s                                                                    36,364
                   rs.)




                                           SOURCE. AHPM, deeds of deposit.



        NOTE. For types of property, see Table 15.1. Olive groves are too few to include. Pastures are a
          new type. The percentages of arable that are "unspecified" properties are (Levels 1–4) 29.8
                percent, 31.8 percent, 45.0 percent, 37.7 percent; total amount 14,060,000 rs.




                                                                                          ― 549 ―
       intensive properties and in the towns we looked at large private owners preferred to lease them to others.
             At first sight, the pattern of property acquired by the different levels of buyers in Salamanca province appears unlike that of Jaén
       (Table 15.2). Whereas in Jaén there was a clear trend for the smaller buyers to acquire proportionately more arable, Salamanca shows no
       such trend although there is an indication that larger buyers directed their purchases toward arable more than the smaller ones. The
       difference, however, is more apparent than real. Large buyers in Jaén interested in the grain market bought cortijos, classed as "rural
       estates." In Salamanca, as we saw in the two towns of La Armuña, large buyers acquired the collections of numerous small grain plots
       that the ecclesiastical institutions had built up and whose purchase the peasants could not afford. Unimproved arable was the
       predominant type of property in Salamanca, accounting for 59 percent of all the money spent; even though arable was also highest in
       Jaén, it represented only 32 percent. The difference between the provinces lay in the willingness of large buyers in Salamanca to acquire
       arable to lease to peasants, as the church had done. In Jaén much commercial production was conducted with administrators and hired
       labor, in Salamanca with tenant farmers. Rural estates in Salamanca meant primarily alquerías and despoblados, which produced both
       grain and livestock. As in Jaén and for the same reason, the trend in purchasing rural estates was strongly toward the top buyers.
             In Salamanca the sales included a number of pastures. The table shows that they were of two kinds, large pastures that could carry
       extensive herds and appealed to the wealthy, and smaller ones primarily for household animals. Commercially oriented pastures went to
       the top level, but below Level 4, the trend was toward the smallest buyers, who were prepared to pay extravagant prices, as was the
       case in El Mirón.
             In other respects, the two provinces were similar. More obviously than in Jaén, large buyers shied away from labor-intensive
       properties, especially the improved or irrigated plots, most of them walled cortinas so typical of this part of Spain. They also spent a
       smaller share of their money to redeem censos, and they avoided urban properties (even though the inclusion of Salamanca city in the
       provincial analysis means that substantial urban properties, out of reach of small buyers, figure in the table). Curiously, in both provinces,
       the level that showed the greatest propensity for buying urban properties was the second, not the bottom, so that this preference was
       not a straight linear function of wealth.
              One is led to conclude that wealthy buyers had a different mentality


                                                                                          ― 550 ―
       than more modest ones, more open to the possibilities of the market. Before accepting this conclusion, however, there is an alternative
       explanation that should be considered. Perhaps the difference was simply one of opportunity. In the most obvious case, wealthy buyers
       spent more of their money on rural estates than small buyers. The fact is that most rural estates went for high prices because of their
       size, and the simple act of buying one automatically placed the buyer into one of our top levels because its cost was greater than the
       total amount spent by a single buyer in the lower levels.
             There is one way to test whether opportunity or a different economic outlook was the primary motivating factor in the different
       choices of the various levels. If one tabulates only those individual purchases made by all buyers that cost less than the "breaking point"
       between Levels 1 and 2, that is, those purchases that a person in the lowest level could have made, one can observe whether the
       preferences observed for all purchases are repeated here (Table 15.3). The test is not conclusive because the upper levels spent only a
       small percentage of their money on purchases in this price range, and the trends turn out to be fewer and weaker than when all
       purchases are considered. Nevertheless, those that do appear run in the direction one would expect if the big buyers had different goals
       than the small buyers. In Jaén the big buyers put a greater share of their money into olive groves than the small ones, and in Salamanca
       the small buyers preferred vineyards and orchards, in all three cases trends that were found when all purchases were tabulated. It would
       appear that there was indeed a difference in mentality among the levels, large buyers as a whole showing more interest in properties that
       were directed to the market and could be profitably cultivated with hired labor, whether they were making large or small purchases.


       3

       Wealth not only gave access to properties oriented toward the market but reduced the ratio of price to expected return, making
       expensive properties attractive in more ways than one. The royal decrees organizing the disentail, one recalls, offered the buyers a choice
       of ways in which to pay for their purchases, the basic choice being between payment in hard currency or in vales reales. From the
       beginning, preference was given to bids in hard currency (metálico or efectivo), and within a year bids for less than the assessed value
       (the minimum bid was two-thirds of it) could be made only in hard currency. Moreover, the smallest



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
