Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                          ― 544 ―
       sumed that they belonged to the same individual; if in distant towns, I did not. On the whole, the likely error is of treating the purchases
       of one individual as if they were made by two or more, rather than vice versa.
             I concluded that 2,552 individuals made purchases in Jaén (1.8 purchases per buyer) and 2,148 individuals in Salamanca (1.5
       purchases per buyer). These include 67 "unnamed" individuals in Jaén and 233 in Salamanca, my solution for dealing with deeds which
       read "so-and-so and two others," "so-and-so and his companions," and "various persons." In the case of unspecified plurals, I assumed
       three buyers. In all cases of more than one buyer, I divided the amount spent equally among them, for lack of information on each
       buyer's share. One must remember that the identity of the buyers and the amount they spent individually were of marginal interest in the
       deeds, which were contracts between the king and former owners. The information essential to this study was frequently omitted or
       entered hastily, for the copyists of the Madrid notaries produced fifty deeds per working day on the average, and in years of intense
       activity many times more.
            In order to proceed, I ranked the buyers in each province in ascending order according to the amount they spent. This procedure
       produced Lorenz curves, with the cumulative percent of buyers plotted against the cumulative percent of the amount they spent. By their
       nature, the curves rise slowly at first and sharply at the end. I then divided the purchasers ranked on the curves into four levels as
       shown in Figure 15.1. In both provinces the small buyers in Level 1 are more numerous than the large buyers in Level 4, although the
       amount spent by the latter totaled ten times that of the former, a clear indication of the disparity among the buyers.


       2

       Once one has accomplished this step, it becomes possible to compare the characteristics of the different levels of buyers and the patterns
       they followed in making their purchases. Three features prove revealing: the type of property the buyers acquired, the terms of payment,
       and the legal estate of the buyers. The months, years, and seasons in which the buyers made their payments were also compared, but
       with no meaningful results. The decisive factor in determining when a buyer could make a purchase was the date that the royal
       commissioner put the property up for sale. The data indicate that this decision was not related in


                                                                                          ― 545 ―




                                                                              Figure 15.1.
                                                              Allocation of Buyers to Four Different Levels
                                                            NOTE: Buyers are ranked in ascending order of
                                                            the amount of each individual's total purchases:
                                               Level 1 —buyers of the bottom 5 percent of total purchases (0–5.0 percent)
                                              Level 2—buyers of the next 15 percent of total purchases (5.1–20.0 percent)
                                             Level 3—buyers of the next 30 percent of total purchases (20.1–50.0 percent)
                                              Level 4—buyers of the top 50 percent of total purchases (50.1–100 percent)
              any regular pattern to the level of buyer to which the property would appeal.
             Table 15.1 shows how each level of buyers of Jaén province divided the amount it spent among the different types of property and
       the redemption of censos. By showing the share of their money that each level of buyers devoted to each type of property, this table
       reveals their preferences, with arrows to identify the trends. The lower was the level of buyers, the more their money went into arable,
       vineyards, orchards, and redemption of censos, and there was a strong but not complete trend in this direction for urban properties (Level
       2 devoted a larger share than Level 1 to this type). On the other hand, the higher the level of buyers, the more they spent on olive
       groves and rural estates.


                                                                                           ― 546 ―


                                    Table 15.1. Property and Buyers, Jaén Province



                                                  Level of Buyers




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
