Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       [15] See Appendix A.


                                                                                          ― 533 ―
       munities in well-populated regions, property redistribution would not balance demographic pressure. Disentail in La Mata showed that
       even a very favorable redistribution could not compensate for the large number of people entering agriculture. Its muleteers offered a
       better promise for the future than its new small owners.
              The reformers also wanted more foodstuffs to enter the market so as to feed the cities. Disentail was for them not only a way to
       increase the welfare of the peasants but to expand the economy. Here, however, there was a failing in their logic, for the produce that
       was assured to the national market was that taken by the large landowners, the church, the crown, and those who farmed their revenues
       for them. Local vecinos had to allocate their net product after seed, tithes, rent, and taxes between their own uses and what they sold. It
       was likely that some of the additional share accruing to them from newly purchased properties would be consumed at home, and so at
       first the marketable surplus would decline. We shall see later when we look at the despoblados of Salamanca that turning land over to
       peasants would in fact reduce rather than increase the share they exported. When the reformers argued that independent small farmers
       would both live better and feed the cities better, they were engaged more in wishful thinking than rational analysis.
               When it came, desamortización was carried out by auctions, in order to solve the royal fiscal crisis. Jovellanos's reasoning
       established that free ownership of property would eventually place land in the productive hands of small farmers, but even he would have
       recognized that auctions gave an immediate advantage to the wealthy. As an added guarantee of acquisition by small farmers, the royal
       decrees called for large exploitations to be subdivided. Subdivision proved impossible at short notice, however, except for properties that
       consisted of a number of independent plots, and even these were usually sold in large batches, so that the size of exploitations changed
       little. The experience of the different towns indicates that disentail through auction usually accelerated economic processes already under
       way or reinforced existing patterns. It seldom produced radical changes.
             The biggest buyers were attracted by properties oriented to commercial production, which they could tap either through rents, like
       the collections of arable plots of La Armuña, the coto redondo of Pedrollén, or the cortijos of Jaén, or by direct exploitation with cheap
       labor, like the olive groves that in Jaén were most desired of all. One could have predicted closely their pattern of purchases from the
       leasing practices of the


                                                                                          ― 534 ―
       outside owners in the middle of the century. These patterns appear to have applied equally to the purchases of local elites and outsiders;
       the economic interests of landlords was much the same whether they lived in the town or not.
              Among church properties there were many small parcels dedicated to relatively labor-intensive cultivation, which provided little to
       sell. These were more suitable for cultivation by peasant households, whose labor input could be increased with little additional
       expenditure, being more of the category of a fixed overhead cost than a variable labor cost, as the Russian economist A. V. Chayanov has
       shown. [16] Such were the cortinas enclosed by stone walls in the north, and the irrigated huertas, tiny orchards, and small fields in the
       ruedos of Jaén. For big buyers they offered much bother and little profit, and the peasants got them, often after bidding against each
       other. Disentail through auction did not change the nature of the dual economy—subsistence and market. The market economy was
       primarily the realm of the powerholders, the subsistence economy of the peasants; when peasants bought grain fields, as they did in La
       Armuña, they most likely reduced the share of the harvest entering the market.
             That the larger buyers sought commercial properties does not mean that they were bourgeois capitalists, as this term is commonly
       understood. Table 14.2 lists the occupation and residence of the largest buyer in each town. None was a vecino, and five resided at a
       distance. Only one was a merchant, don Francisco Alonso y Moral, grain dealer of Salamanca. One was the widow of a regidor of
       Salamanca city, and one a member of a royal council. Army officers had a prominent place, a caballero of the order of Carlos III resident
       in Madrid and a lieutenant colonel resident in Córdoba. Their example reveals that the army was already a powerful force in Spanish
       society under the old regime. Thus in three cases the economic basis for the purchase was evidently service to the crown, in the fourth
       to a royal city. (Some of the capital may have come from elsewhere, of course, such as an inheritance; one cannot tell from the sources
       for this study.) If these towns were typical, the power of the crown and the cities to redistribute wealth through taxation provided much
       more of the capital invested in disentail than commerce did. This money did not come out of value added, out of productive labor, except
       insofar as the government and armed forces offer a necessary ser-

       [16] Chayanov, "Theory of Non-Capitalist Systems," and Chayanov, "Nature of Peasant Economy."


                                                                                          ― 535 ―


                      Table 14.2. Occupation and Residence of Largest Buyers, Seven Towns



                      Town                              Occupation                        Residence



               Salamanca Province



                     La Mata                   Army officer, caballero of the              Madrid
                                                   Order of Carlos III



                    Villaverde                        Grain merchant                   Salamanca city



                    Pedrollén                 Widow of regidor of Salamanca            Salamanca city
                                                           city




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
