Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       towns had broken the Ricardian trap, and this cushioned them, at least temporarily, against the Malthusian trap. The economic and
       demographic phase was right for them. The benefit of disentail to peasant communities depended on their having discovered a way of
       their own into the market.
             Villaverde seems a deviant case, for its vecinos too had been expanding their harvests, yet they acquired only a small share. Part of
       the reason was the failure of the commissioners of the Consolidation Fund to break up large properties as instructed. The vecinos bought
       most of the lands of their parish church, but those belonging to outside foundations were put on sale in large blocks located in a number
       of towns, which were beyond their means. Furthermore, because their energies were engaged in a rapid expansion of farming in two
       neighboring despoblados,


                                                                                          ― 537 ―
       they had correspondingly less incentive to reduce their rent at home by buying land.
             The history of the seven towns shows that demographic pressure and rental pressure tended to equalize peasant communities,
       pushing everyone down toward the limit of subsistence, except for the local elites, who were alien to the peasant societies. Freeing a
       major factor of production through disentail had the opposite effect on the societies. It improved the lot of the higher socioeconomic
       levels, and within those the levels of the most venturesome individuals. By putting property in the hands of enterprising men and women,
       disentail fostered economic growth.
             Socially, however, by increasing the holdings of some of the more affluent vecinos, desamortización tended to weaken community
       ties. Moreover, the royal order of 1803 removing the rent freeze on disentailed properties hurt the legal and customary defenses of the
       peasant producer. The historian can perhaps perceive these developments better than contemporaries did, although the labradores of La
       Mata who did not buy land and then discovered that their landlords preferred to switch their leases to the persons who did, must have
       resented their neighbors' success. Later critics would denounce desamortización and the reformers who conceived it, in large measure
       because of its effects on rural social structure, overlooking the economic growth it inspired at the national level and frequently at the
       community level as well. Like the reformers, they believed that disentail could produce an effect autonomously, whereas the examples
       studied here show that its effect on a given community was molded by existing conditions.
             This chapter has tried to develop a coherent model of the forces at work in rural Castile and the directions in which they could lead
       rural communities both before and during the disentail. It finds that peasant communities were subject to the dual pressure of
       demographic growth and the exactions of large owners, the church, and the crown. The challenge facing them was to find a way to get
       into the market economy that would provide an escape from the dual trap of Malthus and Ricardo. Cottage industry, the solution turned
       to by many agricultural regions of Europe at this time, was not available to them because the merchants that could direct it were not
       present in Castile. Breaking new ground and planting olive trees offered temporary solutions; providing longdistance transportation was
       more promising. When disentail came, the extent to which the individual rural communities took advantage of it


                                                                                          ― 538 ―
       showed how well they had responded to the challenge and thus inadvertently prepared themselves to meet the conditions of economic
       freedom. Seven scattered towns of secondary importance are, however, a small sample on which to base a general interpretation. Part 3,
       by observing two entire provinces, will provide added insight into the forces at work in rural Castile. [17]

       [17] Additional statistics of the seven towns are provided in Appendix N.


                                                                                          ― 539 ―




       PART III—
       TWO PROVINCES
       Up to here at both the national and the local level, the account of royal policy and agrarian change has been essentially episodic: of
       evolving theories of agrarian reform, of the struggles of ministers to solve social ills and fiscal crises, and of the evolution of different
       towns. The last chapter drew some general lessons from the histories of seven towns, but their validity is limited by the very uniqueness
       of these towns.
            In an attempt to establish some historical regularities at a more macro level, the last part of this study deals with two provinces:
       Salamanca and Jaén. Rather than be fully descriptive, it looks at the structure and development of the rural society and economy in the
       form of variables that can be quantified and compared. Thus we may attempt to establish correlations between structures existing at the
       time of the catastro, the evolution of the next half century, and the changes that disentail produced.
             The choice of these provinces results from the structure of the administration of the desamortización at the local level. Permanent
       commissioners of the Amortization and Consolidation Funds were established in every provincial capital and in the major cabezas de
       partido, while a number of lesser cabezas de partido had commissioners temporarily located in them. At least 137 localities appear as
       seats of commissioners at one time or another. For ease of collecting data, it made sense to choose the sales handled by certain
       commissioners, because they can be easily identified in the Madrid notarial archives. After some trial and error, I selected the
       documentation of two permanent commissioners, those in


                                                                                          ― 540 ―
       the cities of Salamanca and Jaén. The commissioner at Jaén had charge of the entire province, but in Salamanca province the extensive
       partido of Ciudad Rodrigo in the southwest was administered by a commissioner in that city, and I did not record his sales. My study of
       Salamanca province therefore lacks this territory.
            They proved fortunate choices. The provinces are located in different regions of central Spain, providing examples of both sides of
       the Salamanca-Albacete line, and each province has considerable variety of landscape and social structure, facilitating comparative
       analysis. Both provinces were also areas that preoccupied the royal reformers, and they had a high percentage of church property sold.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
