Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                          ― 541 ―




       Chapter XV—
       The Social and Economic Spectrum of Jaén and Salamanca
       The province of Salamanca is the southernmost of the kingdom of León. It is located south of the Rio Duero, which drains the northern
       meseta of Castile, a frontier region that was captured from the Muslims and settled during the eleventh and twelfth centuries in the
       second major push of the Reconquest. To the west it borders on Portugal and to the south is separated from Extremadura by the central
       mountain range. To the north and east it has no clear boundary, for the flat, rich grain-bearing tableland of the northern meseta extends
       south into Salamanca and forms the core of the province.
             The capital city, Salamanca, sits on high ground above the Rio Tormes, and the tableland stretches out in all directions around it.
       Under the old regime most of this plain belonged to the partido of Salamanca, the portion of the province directly under the jurisdiction
       of the provincial capital and thus of the crown. To the southeast, the plains bordering on Ávila province formed the partido of Alba de.
       Tormes, which belonged to the señorío of the Duque de Alba; and to the west, beyond the partido of Salamanca, was that of Ledesma,
       most of which was part of the señorío of the Duque de Alburquerque.
             Farther to the southwest, the plain spreads on into the partido of Ciudad Rodrigo, second only to that of Salamanca in extent. It
       accounts for most of the frontier of the province with Portugal and Extremadura. As explained before, because the royal commissioner for
       the disentail of Carlos IV located in Salamanca city did not deal with the partido of Ciudad Rodrigo, it is not included in this study.


                                                                                          ― 542 ―
       The sierras in the south of the province contained in the eighteenth century a number of partidos, all under seigneurial jurisdiction. These
       included those of Miranda del Castañar, Montemayor, and Béjar, lying in the valleys of the sierras of Peña de Francia and Béjar, most of
       which are still part of the province of Salamanca. The province also embraced the partidos of Barco de Ávila, Piedrahita, and El Mirón, in
       the valleys to the north of the massive Sierra de Gredos, which were transferred in the nineteenth century to the province of Ávila. When
       we observed the town of El Mirón, we formed a sense of what these sierra regions were like.
            Leaving Salamanca and crossing the central sierras and the meseta of New Castile one reaches the kingdom (reyno ) of Jaén, as it
       was still known in the eighteenth century. It forms the northeastern corner of Andalusia. The Guadalquivir River, whose basin forms the
       heart of Andalusia, rises in the imposing Sierra de Cazorla, which separates Jaén from the kingdom of Murcia to the east. To the north,
       the Sierra Morena lies between Jaén and La Mancha, while to the south a series of sharp ranges divide it from the kingdom of Granada.
       Only to the west does Jaén lack a clear geographic frontier; the province of Córdoba occupies the next portion of the Guadalquivir valley.
       The eighteenth-century kingdom was somewhat smaller than the present province, for the partido of Orcera now belonging to it was
       added from La Mancha and Murcia in the nineteenth century.
             When we looked at the town of Baños, we saw that the main route from Castile entered Andalusia through Jaén after crossing the
       Sierra Morena by the passes of El Viso or Despeñaperros. Jaén was the first Muslim kingdom conquered by the Christians after the
       decisive victory of Las Navas de Tolosa—northernmost town of the kingdom—in 1212. The twin cities of Baeza and Úbeda fell rapidly, and
       then the Christian forces gathered their strength for a generation before pushing on to Jaén, Córdoba, and Seville in the middle of the
       century. Granada, to the south, held out until after 1480.
             For two and a half centuries the southern mountain ranges of Jaén province were the frontier between the Christians and the
       Muslims, as they had been earlier between rival Muslim kingdoms. Today the fortresses that dominate the towns of Jaén and the
       numerous towers scattered along these mountains bear witness to this history. Even the names of many towns recall the military past:
       Alcalá la Real, La Guardia, Torre del Campo, Torreperogil (Torre Pedro Gil), Torredonjimeno, and the simple Torres. Other names are
       evidence of later resettlement: Villa-


                                                                                          ― 543 ―
       nueva del Arzobispo, Villanueva de la Reina, Mancha Real, La Carolina (in the eighteenth century), and more recently Puente del Obispo.
             In order to grasp the structure of rural society and economy of these two provinces and how it was evolving at the end of the old
       regime, one may start by observing how individuals behaved in the disentail. The data come from the deeds of deposit (escrituras de
       imposición) recorded in Madrid by the two notaries Juan Manuel López Fando and Feliciano del Corral. We met these documents in
       Chapter 5, where they formed the basis for calculating the extent of disentail throughout the monarchy. They are copies of the
       acknowledgments that the crown gave to the former owners of disentailed properties and redeemed censos specifying the amount of
       royal indebtedness to the former owner and the annual interest payment due on it. Between 1 January 1800 and 30 January 1801, deeds
       of deposit were also issued by provincial notaries. My best estimate is that the deeds of the two Madrid notaries cover about 75 percent
       of the sales outside Madrid province. A search through the historical archives of the provinces of Jaén and Salamanca unearthed only a
       few examples of deeds of deposit registered at the provincial level. Since they are not complete, I judged that their inclusion would
       distort more than strengthen the results, and I have based the study of the provinces and their zones on the Madrid records alone.
             The deeds of deposit are printed on standard forms of three pages, which quote in extenso the royal decrees and specify the nature
       of the royal obligation. They provide blank spaces in which the notaries recorded the location of the commissioner, the name and location
       of the former owner, the date of payment for the purchase, the name(s) of the buyer(s) or the redeemer(s) of censos, the amount paid
       and the form in which paid (hard currency, vales reales, etc.), the number of installments for payment, and usually the type and location
       of the property. Each document contains up to fourteen items of usable data. I found and recorded 4,642 deeds for Jaén province and
       3,314 for Salamanca.
             The first step in preparing the data for analysis was to group together all the purchases made by each individual. One here faced
       the problem familiar to demographic historians who have reconstituted families: the name of an individual often appears with more than
       one spelling. Spanish orthography had not yet been standardized, and notaries sometimes recorded one and sometimes two surnames
       (apellidos). There are also many common Christian names and surnames in Spanish, so that identical names do not necessarily refer to
       the same person. I used my best judgment. If similar names appeared in the same town, I usually as-



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
