Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       the province. They are called poor basin zones. South and east of this region are four zones whose towns have their lands in the valley
       of the Guadalquivir and their town nuclei against the foothills of the southern and eastern ranges. Identified here as south basin zones,
       they are Martos (JF), Jaén (JG), Mancha Real (JH), and Cazorla (JI). The Sierra Morena zone, JJ (Baños), is in the foothills of this range
       and is made up of the town we studied and a similar one called Vilches. Two rolling ridges or hog's backs (lomas ) rising between rivers
       in the northeastern part of the province are the location of four zones, the two to the west rich loma zones: Baeza (JK) and Ubeda (JL);
       and the other two poor loma zones: Santisteban (JN), which includes the town of Las Navas of Part 2, and Villanueva (JM). Finally five
       zones are located south of the basin of the Guadalquivir. Three of them are sierra zones, Bédmar (JO), Pegalajar (JP), and Cambil (JQ);
       and two lie in broad valleys in the south, isolated from the rest of the province, Alcalá la Real (JR) and Huelma (JS), the southern valley
       zones. Appendix P provides a detailed description of the geography, population structure, and political status of these zones.


                                                                                          ― 565 ―




                                                                                       Map 16.1.
                                                                                 Zones of Jaén Province

       2

       Few readers will have been surprised to learn from the previous chapter that two types of economy existed in the provinces—market and
       local—and that they can be associated with different social groups, although the prominent role of nobles and clergy in commercial
       agriculture may seem paradoxical at first. If we turn to the data for the individual zones within the provinces, we can refine this simple
       observation, for the zones show that the different factors associated with the two types of economy come together in a variety of ways to
       produce distinct



                                                                                          ― 566 ―
       subpatterns, which in turn help us to understand the economic forces at work in rural Spain at the end of the old regime.
             When added to the deeds of deposit, the midcentury catastro and various censuses provide a diachronic perspective. The detailed
       information of the catastro on individual property holding in each town, which made possible the studies in Part 2, is unmanageable at
       the provincial level, at least for this study. The royal bureaucracy in the eighteenth century, however, extracted much of the information
       from the reports and their results have fortunately been preserved in most cases. The Archivo General de Simancas has a precise listing
       of the property of the largest owner in each town, the hacendado mayor, including his, her, or its (if it was an institution) name and



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
