Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                  Vales reales




             Salamanca Province



                   Hard currency
                 below assessment




                  Vales reales




                                  SOURCE. AHPM, deeds of deposit.



                         NOTE. Other terms do not show marked trends.


       quently, and they paid for their purchases more often in depreciated vales. Smaller buyers competed more actively against each other
       and got less favorable terms as a result. This is the case even when one considers only those purchases below the "Level 1–2 breaking
       point," although the larger buyers had to use hard currency more often for these small purchases than for their others (Table 15.6).
             The difference between upper and lower levels is more marked in Salamanca than Jáen. In Salamanca the bigger and smaller
       buyers seem almost to have lived in distinct economic worlds. Level 4 buyers made four-fifths of their purchases for vales, Level 1 only
       one-fifth (Table 15.5). Conversely, Level 1 paid hard currency proportionately more than four times what Level 4 did. Big buyers here
       were into an economy based on paper money, received, most likely, for commodities sold on the national market or furnished to the
       crown for its armed forces. Smaller buyers lived in a world of cash on the line. They could not bid for the large properties, but the rules
       of the game meant that they could keep each other from using vales to buy church lands. They fought each other at the auctions, not
       their economic superiors.
              In Jaén the trends were the same, but the differences were less marked.


                                                                                          ― 555 ―
       Vales reales dominated the economy here less, only 45 percent of payments were made in this medium, compared to 70 percent in
       Salamanca (Table 15.4). The biggest buyers used vales six times more than the smallest, but the small buyers used hard currency
       proportionately only one and a half times as much as the large buyers.
             When one considers entire provinces, as here, the range of economic means of the buyers in Salamanca appears much greater than
       that in Jaén. We saw earlier, however, that the distinction in types of property acquired by the different levels was more marked in Jaén.
       Putting both sets of evidence together, one can conclude that in both provinces there were two types of economy present, one involved in
       production for a nonlocal market (olives and wheat being most important harvests) and the other of a variety of products—fruits,
       vegetables, lesser grains, flax in Salamanca, grapes in Jaén, as well as wheat—for local consumption (self-sufficiency would be a
       misleading term). The market economy dealt primarily in vales reales, the local economy in hard currency. Production for the former
       minimized the input of labor, intensive farming was directed to the latter. In actual practice, almost every locality and most individuals
       participated in both economies, but each was located at a different point on a continuum that ran from the limiting case of all production
       for the nonlocal market to the other extreme of all for local consumption. At this time, no individual would have reached the first limit,
       but many small farmers (although probably not many buyers) may have been at the second limit, except that their payments for rent
       and tithes would enter the larger market. Disentail reinforced this spectrum.
             The information on terms of payment permits one to distinguish also between purchases paid for at once and those paid for over
       several years. Time payments were not very advantageous; they had to be made in three installments: at the time of purchase and on
       the next two anniversaries, with interest on the last two. As a result this method was little used: 1.5 percent of the total payments in
       Jaén, 0.4 percent in Salamanca. Jaén shows a slight trend for smaller buyers to use this arrangement more,[2] Salamanca no trend. If
       conceived to help the less affluent to compete for the properties, the measure had a negligible effect. Again one perceives that so far as
       the local rural world was concerned, Spain's was still primarily a cash economy.


       [2] Level 1: 2.5 percent; 2: 1.8 percent; 3: 1.6 percent; 4: 1.3 percent.


                                                                                          ― 556 ―

       4

       Finally, the data in the deeds of deposit enable one to establish a limited social profile of the people involved in the two economic worlds.
       First they tell us the appellation of the buyers. Some were called don or doña, but the majority not. Since these were notarized
       documents, it is more than likely that the use of the title depended on a legal privilege or, if not a specific document, on a well-
       recognized public reputation. Of the persons who made more than one purchase, a few appear at times with the don and at others
       without it, but they are a minority. The consistency of usage for each individual is remarkable, especially when one recalls that these were
       résumés of the original documents and that the name of the buyer was of marginal interest.[3] To call oneself don was not a matter of
       caprice but a recognition of a legal or at least semiofficial status. Among those who regularly appear with the title don are priests, who
       can be identified by the abbreviation pbro. (presbítero ) after their name. I have kept them as a separate category.
             Table 15.7 indicates the proportion of dons and doñas and priests among the different levels of buyers in the two provinces. There
       are virtually no titled aristocrats (condes, duques, and marqueses) among the buyers (most aristocrats probably hid behind the name of
       an agent), but those that appear are grouped with the dons. (The previous tables have been based on the amount spent by the buyers;



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
