Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       labor on their lands; and accumulated depreciated vales reales, which they could use to buy those disentailed properties that could
       expand their commercial output. Though functionally and socially different, the two economies were not physically separate. Most
       individuals connected with agriculture engaged in both, to a greater or lesser extent. In the towns of Jaén those who concentrated on the
       market lived cheek by jowl with the others; in Salamanca, the commercially oriented were more likely absentees residing in the provincial
       capital or the cabezas de partido. Such is the general picture that emerges from the provincewide analysis of the deeds of deposit. To
       refine it, we can turn to the variations among the geographic zones within the provinces.



                                                                                          ― 562 ―




       Chapter XVI—
       Jaén Province:
       The Determinants of Growth
       In order to proceed, I have divided the two provinces into a number of zones that I have sought to make geographically and economically
       homogeneous. They have been drawn on the basis of maps and studies of the physical landscape and geology and extensive personal
       travels throughout the two provinces by automobile. The purpose is to establish units with different social and agrarian patterns that can
       be used for a comparative analysis of their evolution.
             The division of the province of Jaén into zones is not obvious. Except in the mountains, the region has a low rainfall, weather
       stations reporting a mean annual precipitation ranging from 487 millimeters at Cazalilla near the Guadalquivir River to 601 millimeters at
       Jaén. Conversely, evaporation is high everywhere. There is not much difference in annual mean temperature either, ranging from 16° to
       18° centigrade. Climate, in other words, is relatively similar throughout the study region, with a cool, moist winter and spring, and a hot,
       dry summer. [1]
             In the eighteenth century and still today, agriculture predominated over grazing, even in the mountain valleys; and agriculture was,
       and is, marked everywhere by a division between wheat fields and olive groves. The marls that predominate are excellent for olives but
       less favorable to

       [1] Information on the geography and climate of Jaén province comes from Higueras Arnal, Alto Guadalquivir, and Lázaro, Elias, and
       Nieves, Regímenes de humedades. In addition, I was given invaluable help by don José María Ontañon and doña María del Carmen Cid of
       the Centro de Estudio Hidrográfico, Madrid, whom I consulted at length and who traced maps of the soils of Jaén for me.


                                                                                          ― 563 ―
       the cultivation of wheat, and over the centuries olives have been gradually replacing wheat. Today there are districts where the rolling
       hillsides of red or brown earth are dotted as far as one can see with silvery green olive trees set out in precise geometric patterns,
       columns of plumed soldiers marching up hill and down. In few places of the world has reason tamed nature so successfully. Yet, lest we
       forget that this is Andalusia, the two or three trunks that make each tree, taunting imposed discipline, become circling dancers with arms
       flung back in their own flamenco ritual. But go on a few kilometers and the unbroken rows of trees give way to rectangles of alternating
       olive grove and grain fields, the latter verdant and waving in the spring, sprinkled with brilliant flowers, then brown and parched after the
       June harvest.
             There are few level plains, for the basin of the Guadalquivir undulates in waves of different lengths, heights, and directions. On
       reaching the southern ranges, the land rises sharply, and a short way up the olive trees give way before thin soil or barren limestone
       rock, the stark mountains wrapped in flowing green polka-dotted skirts, Gypsy maidens decked out for a perpetual fiesta of the local
       Virgin. The richness of Jaén's rolling basin, with its broken pattern of olive groves, wheat fields, and stark white towns, the towering
       ranges on the south and east, the wild, wooded Sierra Morena on the north, make the province a constantly varied vision of beauty.
            As is common in southern Spain, the inhabitants of Jaén are gathered into large settlements. In the census of 1786, Jaén had
       seventy-four cities and towns, with an average population of 2,380. Both for military defense and to escape the heat of summer and the
       danger of epidemics, most towns of Jaén stand white and nucleated at high points in their territories. Baños is a good example. In the
       Guadalquivir basin many sit on hilltops, and at the southern and eastern edges of the basin they are located up the base of the
       mountains, with their fields stretching out beneath them and the barren slopes above serving as protection from attack. The capital city,
       Jaén, at the foot of the Sierra de Jabalcuz, is a perfect example, dominated by the Castillo de Santa Catalina, which commands the two
       approaches from Granada, the older western road that circles the higher ranges and the newer road south through the sierra. On the
       northern limits of the province, the ranges are lower and several towns nestle in saddles where roads pass through the hills, as does
       Navas.
             Close by the towns, where water flows either from streams or wells, lie the irrigated huertas with their vegetable plots and fruit
       trees. In the



                                                                                          ― 564 ―
       eighteenth century, and still today, the closest land to the nucleus was called the ruedo, the most intensively cultivated zone that is not
       irrigated. Beyond is the campiña of the town, not to be confused with the term campiña applied generally to the basin of the Guadalquivir
       as opposed to the sierra. In the empty spaces between the towns of the basin there were, and are, scattered residences and farm
       buildings of the large estates, the cortijos that roused the ire of Carlos III's reformers and of those of the Second Republic and the casas
       de campo in the major olive groves. In the case of Baños, we saw that this land use reflects the pattern known as von Thünen's rings,
       with the intensity of cultivation depending not only on quality of soil and availability of water but on the distance from the town nuclei.
             I divided the province into nineteen zones (Map 16.1). Five are located fully in the valley of the Guadalquivir, in the western part of
       the province. Three have rich soil, centering on the cities of Andújar (Zone JA); Arjona (JB), which includes the town of Lopera, studied in
       Part 2; and Linares (JE). In the ensuing analysis, they are referred to as rich basin zones. The two other zones in this region are further
       south, in a rolling plain where salt deposits have reduced the fertility of the soil. Santiago de Calatrava zone (JC), made up of three
       distinct blocks because of the way the municipal boundaries run, is near the Córdoba frontier, while Mengíbar zone (JD) is in the center of



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
