Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

               Other b                                                                 0.6              13




            Total percent                                                             100.0




               Total N                                                                                 2,147




                                           SOURCE. AHPM, deeds of deposit.



                         a Includes "unnamed" buyers: Jaén, 67; Salamanca, 233 (see text).



         b In Jaén, twenty-six religious institutions, five civil institutions; in Salamanca, thirteen religious
                                                      institutions.


       there must have been many buyers called don who were not included as nobles in the census. Who were they?
            It is very likely that the census takers underreported the number of hidalgos. The preface to the census of 1787 says that pressure
       was applied to eliminate from the number of hidalgos the persons who were not entitled to the privilege, and the number in the census
       of 1797 is


                                                                                               ― 558 ―
       even less. This last gives 14 percent fewer hidalgos for the province of Jaén than the census of 1768 does for the bishopric of Jaén, and
       for the province of Salamanca 12 percent fewer than the bishoprics of Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo in 1768. Since three partidos of the
       province—Barco de Ávila, Piedrahita, and El Mirón—were in the bishopric of Ávila, the decline in Salamanca between 1768 and 1797 was
       even greater. [5] It is probable that the censuses of 1787 and 1797 counted fewer hidalgos than the persons who were reputed to be
       hidalgos and that if these persons bought disentailed properties, they had themselves listed as don in the deeds.
             This could account in part for the number of buyers called don, but more can be explained by other categories of men addressed as
       don because of their vocation, whether or not they were hidalgos. Such were the priests, as already noted. The deeds reveal that high
       servants of the crown, officers of the armed forces, and notaries appear as don (they could, of course, also be hidalgos, as were
       Campomanes and Jovellanos). In the various town catastros, men with official and semiofficial positions enjoyed the title: doctors,
       surgeons, apothecaries, and administrators of the tobacco monopoly. The census of 1797 lists 404 notaries, doctors, surgeons, and
       apothecaries in Jaén (against some 785 nobles) and some 450 in our portion of Salamanca (against 441 nobles). Nevertheless, the royal
       government strove to limit the use of the appellation. A decree of 1775 allowed notaries (escribanos) the right to sign with the title don
       only if they were hidalgos.[6] Our evidence suggests that the practice was more liberal than the letter of the law, but the consistency in
       the use of the appellation don in the deeds of deposit indicates that it was applied only to persons with a recognized right to it.
             We can conclude that the buyers who disported the don or doña had a proper claim to the title. They formed an elite of "notables,"
       of which the true hidalgos were the most important (and probably the most numerous) part, the top stratum of the society of the old
       regime, not counting the exiguous high aristocracy. Table 15.7 shows that these notables dominated the top level of buyers in both
       provinces, the people who could spend fortunes for church properties.
             This conclusion ill fits the stock hidalgo of literature and history, the threadbare and deluded Quijote. The Cervantine image was
       alive and

       [5] The census of 1768 appears at the beginning of the published Censo . . . de 1787 .

       [6] Decreto del Consejo (14 Sept. 1775), Nov. rec., VII, xv, n. 11. A RC of 19 May 1801 established, among other imposts to support the
       Consolidation Fund, a fee of 550 reales "for the authorization for notaries [escribanos] who are in possession of nobility to sign
       themselves don" (ibid., n. 12, and in more detail in AHN, Hac., libro 8053, ff. 195–200).


                                                                                               ― 559 ―
       well in the mentality of the eighteenth-century reformers, recognizable in the scornful portrait of the rural noble painted by José Cadalso:
       "He takes the air majestically in the sad square of his impoverished village, wrapped in his poor cape, admiring the coat of arms above
       the door of his half-ruined house, giving thanks to God for having created him don Fulano de Tal." [7] A picture that twentieth-century
       historians have not abandoned,[8] but our provincewide analysis of the disentail brings its accuracy into question. It is not the first such
       piece of evidence; the reconstruction of the society of Lopera and Baños in Part 2 already revealed the economic and political power of
       the local hidalguía. We shall return to the issue when we look at the big buyers in Chapter 19.
             Priests followed the same trend as the dons, toward the higher levels of buyers. Not all priests can be identified, because the
       qualification pbro. was not always added in the deeds, [9] so that the trend toward the larger buyers may be exaggerated, but it is not
       spurious. Part 2 has shown that in the towns of Salamanca the income of the priests was among the highest in the parishes, that in those
       of Jaén the priests belonged to the best families. In Chapter 19 we shall see another, higher clerical world represented among the buyers,
       that of cathedral canons, capellanes, and university professors. Their means permitted a significant number of them to make purchases
       that placed them among the upper levels of buyers.
             One can also identify the gender of the buyers from the deeds, in this case relying on their first names and the title doña (Table
       15.8). If one considers all women as a group, one finds no trend in the proportion of buyers who were women from level to level in either
       province, but when the women are divided between those who were called doña and the others, the same trends become apparent as
       among the men, doñas being more common in the top levels and commoners at the bottom. That is, family and social level, not gender,
       determined the economic behavior of women. (Because some of the "unnamed" buyers in Table 15.7 would have been women, the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
