Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                   Map 16.4.
                                                                Jaén Province, Income from Muleteering, ca. 1750
              B1 , and only one of eleven in Type C. The difference in proportions is significant at the 1-percent level.
             Of course, active muleteering could be independent of the nature of local agricultural production, as is shown by zone JQ, the
       deviant case labeled Type B2 . It had the largest arriero income per vecino of all the zones. It lay on the new road from Madrid to
       Granada through the sharp valleys south of Jaén city, and all its arriero income came from the two towns nearest the border with
       Granada, Campillo de Arenas and Noalejo. Relatively small mountain towns, they specialized in transport independently of their
       agricultural activity. Zone JD was a similar


                                                                                          ― 580 ―
       case, second in income per vecino from arrieros only to JQ. All of its arrieros were located in one town, Mengíbar, site of the main ford
       across the Guadalquivir River on the way south to Jaén and Granada. A small town, it was nevertheless the largest of five in this poor
       valley zone and prospered from its location. Surrounded by zones actively into the market (Type A1 ), it stood in a natural spot to develop
       muleteering.[12] Elsewhere the variation in the amount of muleteering income among the three types of zones lends support to the
       proposition that the types do in fact represent different orientations toward commercial agriculture. Although positive proof is lacking, all
       the information adduced leads to the conclusion that the three types of zones differed in the market orientation of their agriculture but
       not significantly in other forms of economic activity except muleteering, which can be seen as a forward linkage of commercial agriculture.

       4

       Having determined the extent of the involvement in the market of the agriculture of the different zones, we may proceed by observing
       how this factor is related to their social structure. To begin with, I shall use the information provided by the sales during the disentail.
       One statistic is especially revealing: the proportion of the buyers who were notables (as defined in Chapter 15). Table 16.8 gives these
       figures for Levels 1 and 4 and all buyers, broken down by type of zone. Among the three types of zones, there is a significant difference
       in the proportion of buyers who were notables. Zones with all levels of buyers into the market (Type A1 ) had the highest proportion (46
       percent), zones not into the market (Type C) the lowest proportion (30 percent), while those where only the top levels of buyers were
       into the market were in between (35 percent). This trend appears also among Level 1 (small) buyers, but not to a statistically significant




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
