Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


            JN               3.6                19



                                              SOURCE. See Table 16.1.


              Map 16.3 shows that these types reflect geographic affinities. Except for the two unclassified poor zones, JC and JD, marked by
       infertile soil, small towns, and few purchases, most of the central and west of the Guadalquivir valley consists of Type A zones (all levels
       into market). Type B zones (top levels into market) form a ring around this block on the east and south, while Type C (no levels into
       market) are peripheral in the northeast and southwest. Only one Type A zone is not contiguous to the others, JR (Alcalá la Real), made
       up by the three rich valleys in the southwest. Type A2 zones (all levels into the market, small purchases) lie next to each other on the
       eastern edge of the A zones, and the B2 zone (top levels into the market, small purchases) is nearby, in the long valleys above Jaén city.
             Because of the way in which being into the market is determined, with the bottom levels depending on the purchases of olive
       groves and the top levels on either olive groves or rural estates, one would expect Map 16.3 to reflect closely Map 16.2, which shows the
       zones of heavy purchases of olive groves and rural estates. There is a similarity but by no means an identity. All the zones that had a
       large proportion of their


                                                                                          ― 575 ―




                                                                                       Map 16.3.
                                                                             Jaén Province, Types of Zones
             sales in olive groves do, in fact, fall into Type A (except Zone JC, not classified for lack of sufficient sales), but so do four other
       zones that were not strong in olives. In three of these, the small buyers sought the available olive groves within their means, while the
       upper levels went for rural estates. In the fourth, JO (a Type A2 zone), Level 1 got into the market by buying vineyards as well as olive
       groves. Three of the six zones strong in rural estates thus fall into Type A, leaving only three others for Type B, along with two others
       not strong in rural estates. Those zones that had a large share of their sales in either rural estates or olive groves belong to one of the
       types that were into the market—and quite properly so—but by concentrating their purchases on the available rural estates (JP) or olive
       groves (JQ), the upper level of buyers placed two other zones among those where the upper levels were into the market.
            One may question whether the division of the zones into these three types in reality represents different orientations toward the
       wider mar-


                                                                                          ― 576 ―
       ket. It could, for instance, be simply a reflection of the size of their towns, with Type A zones containing the largest towns and Type C
       the smallest. (One recalls that we have found a rough correlation between the mean size of the towns and the mean amount spent by
       the purchasers.) If one treats these three types of zones as random samples drawn from an imaginary larger population of zones with
       similar characteristics and applies a test of significance to the differences in the size of their towns in 1786, one finds no significant
       relation between town size and the three types. The mean town size has the expected trend, but the difference in town size varies so



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
