Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       6

       If we return now to the categorization of the zones into three types of orientation toward the outside market at the end of the century,
       we find a clear and suggestive relationship between these categories and the evidence of increase in olive cultivation (Table 16.11). Type
       A1 zones, where all levels of buyers were into the market, show little expansion (only one zone of seven). These are the zones of
       relatively large, established hidalgo elites. At the other extreme, all three Type C zones, not into the market, also show no evidence of
       significant expansion of olive production. Expansion occurred in Type B1 zones (three of four), those with only the top levels of buyers
       into the market and thus with a narrower elite than A1 zones. Four other zones also gave evidence of expansion. Three were the deviant
       cases of types A and B, those that were into the market but with average purchases much lower than the majority of the zones of their
       types, and the fourth was zone JC, not included in any type because of its few sales. The B2 zone was acting like B1 zones, expanding its
       olives. The difference that calls for explanation is between A1 and A2 zones, since the former were not expanding their production. Table
       16.8 shows that the A2 zones (the two contiguous zones east of the zone of Jaén city, JH, Mancha Real and JO, Bedmar) had a similar
       percentage of their buyers who were noble as the A1 zones. There was also much income from arrieros in this region, concentrated in JH
       zone (see Table 16.7 and Map 16.4), another characteristic of A1 zones. Although similar in these respects to A1 zones, the A2 zones had
       not seen their wave of expansion recede by 1750 and were still in full growth. Perhaps their distance from the major arteries of traffic
       explains their late blooming and the modest fortunes of their elites. If so, they provide another example of the influence of
       communications on economic growth.
            The main conclusion to draw from Table 16.11, however, is that the zones where the top buyers were devoting the largest
       proportions of their capital to acquiring cortijos were those where the expansion of


                                                                                                  ― 591 ―


                                   Table 16.11. Expansion of Olive Cultivation, Jaén Province



                                                                      No. of Zones with           Percent with Expansion of
              Type of Zone                 No. of Zones            Expansion of Production                Production



                   A1                             7                           1 (JR)                         14



                   B1                             4                        3 (JL, JP, JS)                    75



                    C                             3                              0                           0



                   A2                             2                         2 (JH, JO)                      100



                   B2                             1                           1 (JQ)                        100



              Not classified                      2                           1 (JC)                         50



                                                      SOURCE. Table 16.10.


       olive production was most pronounced. (Compare Table 16.4, Types A2 and B1 .) Commercial agriculture was old here, but it had been
       directed to grain production, hence the cortijos; now the rural entrepreneurs were discovering the advantages of olives, for they were
       nowhere near the limit of efficient use of labor in the olive groves.
             An apparently extraneous factor may clarify the forces at work, the jurisdiction over the towns. Spanish municipalities could be
       under any of four types of jurisdiction: (1) directly under the crown (royal or realengo ); (2) under lay señores, that is held by a
       hereditary grant to a noble family (señorío lego ); (3) under ecclesiastical señores, such as episcopal sees and monasteries (señorío
       eclesíastico ); and (4) under the military orders founded in the Middle Ages (señorío de orden militar ). The last were effectively under
       the crown since the king of Castile became the permanent grand master of the orders in 1523. Table 16.12 shows the percentage of each
       type of zone under each jurisdiction. It is based on the population rather than the number of towns, so as to avoid giving undue weight
       to small places, of which many were under señorío lego. Towns in A1 zones, which experienced the wave of growth in olive production
       prior to 1750, were overwhelmingly under royal jurisdiction (89 percent of the population), either in royal municipalities or in the territory
       of the Order of Calatrava. In Type C zones, not into the market and not expanding, only 46 percent of the population lived under royal
       jurisdiction. Except for Type B2 (zone JQ), those zones experiencing the current wave of expansion (Types A2 , B1 ) were closer to Type C
       than to Type A1 , zones, with respect to the jurisdiction under which they lived.



                                                                                                  ― 592 ―


                                                                 Table 16.12. Jurisdictions in Each Type of Zone, Jaén Province



                               Royal (Realengo)           Military Order                 Total Royal          Señorío Lego        Señorío Eclesiástico




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
