Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       comparing the two ratios. Greater growth than 50 percent in Column D provides a strong presumption of expansion of olive groves in the
       second half of the century. Zones JR, JL, JP, JS, JH, JO, JQ, and JC show such expansion.
            Map 16.5 makes the result visual. Assured growth occurred primarily in the south of the province: the three southern sierra and the
       two southern valley zones. Two other zones were contiguous to older olive regions, JC in the west and JL on the Loma de Ubeda, next to
       Baeza zone. The other zone to show growth, JH (Mancha Real), was the only Guadalquivir basin zone with an established olive production
       at mid-




                                                                                  Map 16.5.
                                                            Jaén Province, Concentration of Olive Groves, ca. 1750,
                                                                  and Expansion of Olive Groves, 1750–1800


                                                                                          ― 587 ―
       century that definitely revealed expansion. The traditional olive areas in the north and west, Andújar, Arjona, Linares, Baños, and Baeza,
       either did not expand olive groves or expanded so little as not to show up in this analysis. (Zone JN, also an olive zone in 1751–53,
       showed an apparent decline in olives and in the sales appeared as a region not into the market. It was a marginal zone as far as
       commercial agriculture was concerned. Las Navas was located here.) On the other hand, five of the eight zones of confirmed growth had
       few olive trees in 1750.
              This apparent paradox may be partially the effect of the statistical procedure: it is easier to achieve a high proportional increase
       when starting from a low base. The range of the estimates in Column D is so wide, however, as to indicate that the difference in rate of
       growth was real. For all the shakiness of the table, it suggests that the expansion of olive production in Jaén province took place in
       waves. A first wave, antedating 1750 and not observed in this study, had affected the rich basin zones JA (Andújar), JB (Arjona), JE
       (Linares) as well as the two loma zones JK (Baeza) and JN (Santisteban) and the Sierra Morena zone JJ (Baños). In the half century of
       this study growth here either slowed or came to a halt. Other zones that had turned toward olives before 1750 continued to expand, JH,
       JO, and JP. JH (Mancha Real) was in the basin south of the river, JO (Bedmar) and JP (Pegalajar) in the sierras nearby. Finally, a new
       wave of expansion after 1750 hit many of the zones not previously affected, leaving only two in the east and a belt of three in the center
       still strongly committed to grain as the cash crop in 1800. These last, oddly, include Martos (JF) and Cazorla (JI), today among the areas
       in the province most intensively dedicated to olive cultivation. Apparently their specialization did not begin until after the fall of the old
       regime.
             That most zones strongly devoted to olive cultivation in 1750 give little evidence of growth in production over the next half century
       presents a puzzle. During this period the price of olive oil rose somewhat faster than that of wheat. According to the price tables
       published by Earl Hamilton for New Castile, if the mean of annual prices for the decade 1751–60 is assigned the index number 100,
       during the decade 1791—1800 the mean price of wheat was 196, of olive oil 230.[14] At the end of the century olive oil had a wider
       market than wheat. It was being exported from Spain to northern Europe, whereas the market for wheat was limited to central Spain,
       since the periphery imported grain from

       [14] Hamilton, War and Prices, Appendix 1.


                                                                                          ― 588 ―
       abroad.[15] Why should landowners already engaged in producing olive oil not continue to push into an expanding market? The answer



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
