Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                    Map 16.6.
                                                             Jaén Province, Jurisdictions and Residences of Señores
             one. Through the Order of Calatrava he also held the west. Although strategic considerations entered into the alienation of
       jurisdiction, conscious economic planning does not seem to have been involved. The economic evolution of the towns under lay señorío
       thus appears to have been more an effect than a cause of the type of jurisdiction.
              Señores received tribute from their towns, but the case of Navas, one of the first given out, unless widely atypical, indicates that
       this tribute was not heavy. One has to look for indirect rather than direct effects of seigneurial domination to account for the relative
       backwardness of their towns. Evidence for such effects is not hard to find. One feature is the residence of the señores. Of twenty-five
       towns in all zones under señorío


                                                                                          ― 595 ―
       lego, seventeen had señores who resided in Madrid at the end of the eighteenth century and three others lived elsewhere outside the
       province (Córdoba, Granada). [20] Only three resided in the province, but none of them in the town of which he was señor. (The residence
       of the señores of two towns is unknown.) Lay señores were thus by the middle of the eighteenth century overwhelmingly absentees (if
       they had ever been residents), most of them living in Madrid. The lord of the towns of ecclesiastical señorío was the archbishop of Toledo,
       also nonresident.
             Benign neglect by an absentee señor or señora might not have been prejudicial, were it not for the fact that in most cases he was
       also the owner of extensive properties in the towns under his jurisdiction, indeed he was frequently the largest property holder
       (hacendado mayor). This was so in seventeen of the twenty-five towns of señorío lego, in fifteen of the twenty towns whose lay señor
       lived outside the province (Map 16.6). [21] In two other towns under señorío lego the largest property owner, who was not the señor, also
       lived outside the province. The hacendado mayor was much more likely to be an absentee in towns under señorío lego than under other
       forms of jurisdiction (Table 16.13). Eighty-two percent of the population under royal jurisdiction lived in towns where the largest property
       owner was either a vecino or the municipal council, and an additional 13 percent where he lived somewhere else in the province. For the
       population under lay señorío the situation was almost the reverse: only 18 percent lived in towns where a vecino was the hacendado
       mayor; 72 percent were in towns where he lived outside the province (for 57 percent, in Madrid). Towns of the military Order of Calatrava
       had a pattern close to that of realengo towns, except that more hacendados mayores lived elsewhere in the province (in Baeza, Jaén,
       Martos, and Huelma) than in the town itself. The six towns in the eastern part of the province under the archbishop of Toledo were very



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
