Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       may be economically rational if one considers that the expansion of olive groves could entail taking over arable land. The use of labor for
       the cultivation of olives and grain is complementary. The harvests are about six months apart, with olives in winter and grains in the
       summer, and the plowing of olive groves and the pruning and care of the trees can be done during the slack seasons for grain growing
       (Figure 16.1). So long as the local labor did the cultivation of olives, the opportunity costs of expanding olive production were low.
       Although the chapters on Baños and Lopera show that migratory labor was used for grain harvests and thus presumably was available for
       olive harvests as well, the marginal cost of migratory labor would be higher. The differential rise in the price of olive oil was not great
       enough to encourage unbalancing the established economy by turning grain fields to olive groves. Pastures and wastes would be
       sacrificed, but most of these were public lands and could be turned to private use only by corrupt means. Expansion into pastures and
       wastes was probably going on, but if a balance of wheat and olives was being maintained, it would not show up in Table 16.10. In other
       words, under prevailing circumstances, there was a limit to the proportion of land that could be economically devoted to olives, and the
       older olive regions of the Guadalquivir basin appear to have approached this limit by 1750. Only a sharp drop in the price of wheat vis-à-
       vis olive oil, such as occurred at the end of the nineteenth century when American wheat invaded the world market and the international
       demand for olive oil rose sharply, would create conditions that would encourage the expansion of olive groves beyond this limit. [16]
             If this were the full explanation, the proportion of land devoted to olive production would have stopped in all zones at about the
       same level. This was not the case, however. In the zones that showed no clear growth between 1750 and 1800 (JA, JB, JE, JJ, JK), the
       ratio of the value of olive harvest to arable harvest ranged from 34 to 225 percent in the 1750s. The ratio was highest in Andújar (JA), a
       zone that in many ways was unique. The mean amount spent here by buyers was twice as high

       [15] According to Laborde, View of Spain 2 : 75, 132–33, Cádiz and Málaga exported olive oil to northern Europe (along with wines and
       dried fruits). Townsend, Journey Through Spain 3 : 30, corroborates the export of oil from Málaga. Laborde says Andalusia also shipped
       some oil (together with much wheat) to other parts of Spain (2 : 131). For wheat imports to Spain: Anes, "Agricultura española," 258.

       [16] For the expansion in demand of olive oil after 1880, especially in South America, see Vicens Vives, Historia 5 : 238–39.


                                                                                          ― 589 ―




                                                                                 Figure 16.1.
                                                        Seasonal Demand for Labor in Grain Fields and Olive Groves
                                                   SOURCE . Martínez Alier, La estabilidad del latifundismo. Appendix 1,
                                                   no. 3, pp. 350–51 (based on Consejo Económico Sindical de Córdoba,
                                                "Bases para un plan de desarrollo económico de la provincia," June 1962).
                                                  NOTE : The greatest demand for labor comes in February and March. In
                                                  February the end of the olive harvest overlaps with fertilizing the arable
                                               (a task perhaps not performed in the eighteenth century). In March, pruning
                                                and cultivating the olive trees overlaps with weeding the grain fields. Much
                                                 of the harvesting of olives and weeding of grain fields is done by women.
             as in any other zone (Table 16.1), and the total land disentailed that was olive groves and cortijos was higher than in any other
       zone (76 percent, Table 16.3). One can see some reasons for its peculiarities. Within it lay the wide alluvial basin of the Guadalquivir
       River, the most fertile soil in the province. The English traveler Joseph Townsend commented on its location "in a rich and highly
       cultivated plain," and the Frenchman Alexandre de Laborde noted that "the land about is very fertile and produces a great deal of corn,
       oil, wine, honey, fruit and game."[17] Equally important, no doubt, was its location on the highway from Ma-

       [17] Townsend, Journey Through Spain 2 : 296–97; Laborde, View of Spain 2 : 111.


                                                                                          ― 590 ―
       drid to Seville and Cádiz. The continual traffic on this road, making it easy to import grain and migrant labor, combined with its fertility,
       could encourage its landowners to develop olive production beyond the level of the balance with arable that would be favored elsewhere.
       Evidence for the importance of the Andalusian highway is also provided by Baños (JJ) zone. Also on the highway, it was the other zone
       that had stabilized at a high ratio of olives to arable (107 percent).




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
