Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       reveal the least stratification among


                                                                                           ― 583 ―
       the buyers. The percentage of nobles is higher and more evenly distributed among the levels. Zones in which only the top levels of
       buyers were into the market lie in between.
             If one recalls from Part 2 the contrast between Baños and Lopera on one hand (both located in zones where all levels of buyers
       were into the market, JJ and JB), and Navas on the other (zone JN, no levels into the market), one can posit a conclusion. The first two
       had a wealthy resident elite headed by a number of hidalgo families. Their elite formed a distinct layer at the top of the social pyramid (8
       percent of the vecinos in Baños, 10 percent in Lopera, see Tables 11.20 and 12.14), which ran their towns and extracted wealth from the
       land without getting their hands dirty. But in Navas there was only one landowning don out of 214 male vecinos, the notary. The
       information provided by the present chapter indicates that this contrast can be generalized to the entire province. One can conclude that
       there were two distinct typologies of social structure in Jaén province. Towns in zones actively engaged in commercial agriculture
       attracted more wealth and developed a strong resident economic, social, and political elite of which hidalgos formed a major part.
       Nonnobles were a vast majority of the vecinos, but among the buyers they were a bare majority (a minority in two zones), and even at
       the lowest level of buyers they were not an overwhelming majority. The conclusion of the last chapter is reinforced: the presence of
       commercial agriculture and a strong resident hidalgo class went hand in hand.
             At the other extreme, areas involved primarily in a local economy did not produce or attract a resident elite of this nature. A few
       hidalgos were present and formed the apex of the social pyramid. When they bought disentailed lands, they sought the best properties,
       having the most money to spend, and dominated the top level of buyers, where they might be joined by outsiders. But they left to local
       commoners the largest amount of land put on sale. Although there was greater disparity in the composition of the buyers, this reflected a
       smaller and weaker, not a stronger, local elite.
            Type B zones, where the top levels of buyers were into the market, are a halfway stage between the two extremes. Disentailed
       property here was split more evenly between what was commercially oriented and what was produced for local consumption. The elite of
       notables, smaller than in Type A zones, stressed the purchase of market-oriented properties, leaving the less expensive properties to the
       noncommercialized, nonnotable sector of the towns.


                                                                                           ― 584 ―

       5

       This analysis of the relationship between the different types of agricultural activity and social structure offers a static picture of the rural
       world of Jaén at the end of the old regime. Our next task will be to make the picture move, to demonstrate evolution during the half
       century under study and discover the forces at work. The data will not always permit the sequence to be fully in focus, but the picture
       will be instructive, nonetheless.
             One may start by determining in which zones the market economy was expanding. For this purpose, one would like to compare the
       proportion of land devoted to harvests for the market at the time of the catastro with that shown by the sales, but the data available do
       not permit so precise a comparison. The catastro of each town states the area devoted to each type of cultivation and the value of the
       annual harvest,[13] while the records of the sales give the price but not always the size of the ecclesiastical properties that were sold.
       The extent of land devoted to the various harvests at the time of the sales is unknown, but from the available data one can compare the
       value of land devoted to cereals and olive groves at the time of the catastro with that shown by the sales. If the ratio of olive groves to
       arable shows an increase between the two dates, one can assume increasing production of olive oil for the market. There is unfortunately
       no way of determining an absolute increase in grain production for the market, but because the demand for olive oil was outdistancing
       that for grain, as will be explained below, greater participation in the market was likely to show up as an increasing ratio of olive groves
       to arable.
             Even here there are difficulties. One saw in Chapter 5 that the ratio of catastro value to sales price varied widely among the
       properties devoted to different cultivations. One must adjust for the different markup of the two types of property when comparing
       figures from the two sources. Table 16.10 shows the results.
             My comparison of the figures (Column D of Table 16.10, which measures the change in olive tree cultivation vis-à-vis arable in each
       zone) is based on three assumptions, all of them open to some error: (1) that the sales represent a true cross section of the cultivated
       land in each zone between 1799 and 1807; (2) that the ratio of the markup of olive groves

       [13] This information is in the introduction to the survey of property owed by laymen in each town, the libro maestro seglar. Where
       maest. segl. is lost, I used the earlier estimate in AGS, resp. gen. QQ 10, 12, 13, 14 (see n. 2 above).



                                                                                           ― 585 ―


                    Table 16.10. Ratio of Olive Groves to Arable, Jaén Zones, 1751–1753 and 1799–1808



                                                    A                  B                    C
                                            Catastro Value of   Disentail Total       Correction of      D Estimated
                                               Harvests a        Sales Price b        Column A for         Percent
                                            (olives/arable ×    (olives/ arable    Different Mark-up c     Changed
             Type              Zone               100)              × 100)             (A × 43/24)          (B/C)



              A1                JA               225.2              526.8                403.1               +31



                                JB                34.2               86.0                 61.2               +41




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
