Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       Salamanca Province:
       Hardening the Patterns
       The patterns discovered in Jaén most likely existed elsewhere in the Guadalquivir valley, but they were not representative of Castile as a
       whole. This truth is proclaimed when one turns to Salamanca province, for almost none of the characteristics of Jaén are found here. Most
       of the people who lived in the countryside of the portion of the province covered by this study inhabited small towns and villages that
       were set relatively close together and enjoyed more egalitarian societies than the large agrarian towns of Jaén.
             Geographically and socioeconomically there is much greater contrast among the regions of Salamanca than of Jaén. The portion of
       the Old Castilian plain that surrounds the city of Salamanca is another world from the hill towns and upland valleys of the southern
       sierras. The sharp contrasts facilitate comparison, with the result that I have divided the province into only nine zones, while Jaén has
       seventeen (Map 17.1).
             Four zones make up the plain. Its communities are larger and more prosperous to the north and east, where the earth is rich and
       deep, than to the south and west, a land of thin, sandy soil, better suited to pastures than to fields of grain. In our time, interspersed
       among the villages like La Mata and Villaverde were many despoblados like Narros and Pedrollén. Armuña zone (SA) north of Salamanca
       city and Alba de Tormes zone (SB) in the northeastern corner of the province can be classed as rich plains zones. The other two zones,
       south and west of the city, will be identified as poor plains zones. Charro zone (SC), which includes Pedrollén, lies on either side of the
       road to Ciudad Rodrigo and Por-


                                                                                          ― 607 ―




                                                                                      Map 17.1.
                                                                             Zones of Salamanca Province
              tugal, and Ledesma zone (SD) to the north of it borders on the province of Zamora.
             There are three sierra zones. On the east (and now in Ávila province) is Piedrahita zone (SI), occupying the valleys north of the
       Sierra de Gredos. El Mirón is on its northern edge. Just west of it, Béjar zone (SH) is dominated by the sierra of that name and lies
       astride the main pass between Old Castile and Extremadura. The large town of Béjar was already an important woolen center in the
       eighteenth century. Finally the zone of Miranda (SG) lies beneath the Sierra de la Peña de Francia. The towns through here are large by
       comparison with those of the plain. Steep, narrow, cobbled streets lined with two- and three-story granite houses, many still boasting
       coats of arms from past ages, provide human features that combine with the majesty of the sierras to make this one of the most
       picturesque corners of Spain.
            The two remaining divisions do not fit either of these types. Aldeadávila zone (SE) is the northwestern corner of the province,
       bordering on


                                                                                          ― 608 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
