Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                   SOURCE. Real Academia de la Historia, individual town returns of the census of 1787.



                        a This includes all towns of señorío lego with population of more than 1,000.




                                                                                          ― 599 ―
       gos was between one-fifth and one-third for other jurisdictions. Small towns as a rule had a smaller proportion of hidalgos than big ones,
       but the difference between towns under lay señorío and others cannot be accounted for only by their smaller size.[23] When all towns
       under lay señorío with populations over one thousand are compared with royal towns in the same population range, the former still have
       a strikingly smaller proportion of nobles, as the table shows. In the six towns under the archbishop of Toledo in the eastern part of the
       province, hidalgos were as dense as in towns under the crown. The incompatibility between señorío and hidalgo residents applied only to
       señores who were laymen.
             One of the characteristics of Type A1 zones was a prosperous hidalgo elite, as shown by the census of 1786 and the characteristics
       of the purchasers (Tables 16.8 and 16.9). We see now that even though royal towns had such an elite, those under lay señorío did not,
       or did to a much lesser extent. For reasons that may have been largely social, hidalgos preferred to live in towns where they were
       directly under the king rather than under another noble. [24] In royal towns they had the government effectively in their hands and the
       church as well, to judge from Baños and Lopera. Their relative absence surely was related to the undeveloped state of the economies of
       towns of señorío lego.
            Although lay señorío appears to have been a major factor contributing to economic backwardness in Jaén province, ecclesiastical
       señorío was not, according to the evidence developed here. Only one of the six towns under the archbishop of Toledo had an absentee
       hacendado mayor, they did not have a high concentration of land ownership (the proportion owned by hacendados mayores was even
       lower than in royal towns), and three had a large contingent of hidalgos. In all these characteristics they resembled royal towns. Yet they
       were all located in zones that showed no commercial expansion in our period.[25] The only appar-

       [23] The increasing proportion of hidalgos as town size grows is as follows (total hidalgos over total males 25 and over, census of 1786):
       towns with populations 30–499, 3.2 hidalgos per 1,000 adult males (N = 13 towns); 500–1,499, 10.6 (N = 22); 1,500–2,999, 9.8 (N =
       17); 3,000–14,999, 16.8 (N = 16); over 15,000, 48.4 (N = 1, Jaén city). The concentration of hidalgos in the larger cities of Jaén (and
       the rest of Andalusia) was already the case at the end of the sixteenth century (Molinié-Bertrand, "'Hidalgos,'" 80).

       [24] Domínguez Ortiz, Sociedad española, 326, remarks that under the Habsburg rulers, "when a town fell under señorío, the more
       illustrious families expatriated themselves so as not to be subject to someone they considered of equal or lesser rank than they."
       Vassberg, Land and Society, 98–99, also reports a strong preference in the sixteenth century for royal jurisdiction over señorío.

       [25] They were two of the three towns in Zone JI, the only Type B zone not to give evidence of commercial expansion, all three of the
       towns in Zone JM, and one of four in Zone JN (both Type C).


                                                                                          ― 600 ―
       ent reason for the backwardness of these regions was their geographic isolation in the northeast and east of the province, away from any
       major transportation artery. The 1787 map of Tomás López shows no direct road from either Cazorla or Villanueva del Arzobispo west to
       Jaén, Ubeda, or the main Andalusian highway, or east to Murcia. The only connection was a local north-south road. Even today it takes a
       considerable detour from any regularly traveled route to reach these towns.

       7

       One might anticipate a relationship between the different types of zones and their demographic structure. Certain connections have
       already appeared involving the size of towns. Town size was related to jurisdiction and to the proportion of hidalgos in the population, but
       it was not significantly related to the type of zone. Population changes between the four main census dates, 1712, 1751–53, 1786, and
       1826, would give an indication of the different demographic development of the various zones, provided of course that the data are
       sufficiently reliable. Unfortunately, we have plenty of evidence that the data are not very good. The towns were big, census takers hardly
       went from door to door, and they had to accept the information available from the municipal officials and the clergy. The information in
       the catastro is probably the best, but this gives only the vecino count. The 1712 census of vecinos is everywhere notoriously low, for the
       respondents feared that it would be used to impose taxes or military conscription. Rather than attempt to establish real growth rates, I
       have compared the figures in the consecutive censuses, looking for different patterns of growth among the types of zones and hoping
       that errors in reporting would balance out (Table 16.16). While the different types of zones show markedly different growth rates, the
       variation among the zones within each type is so great that these differences are not statistically significant. One does find a meaningful
       pattern, however, for the middle time period, from the catastro to the census of 1786, if one takes not the types of zones but the
       individual zones. Comparing the population change of those zones that showed an expansion of olive cultivation against those that did
       not, one finds a more rapid population growth among the former, statistically significant at the 1-percent level. [26]

       [26] Since the vecinos reported by the catastro do not include the clergy, I subtracted the number of clergy in 1786 from the total
       population before comparing it with the vecino count of 1751–53. Zones JC and JD omitted.


                                                                                          ― 601 ―


                                Table 16.16. Population Statistics, Jaén Province, 1712–1826



                                           Growth Rates                                             1786




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
