Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                          ― 603 ―
       characteristics. Many had a prosperous sector of muleteers, and their largest landowners, the hacendados mayores, were more likely to
       be local residents than in other regions. They were also more likely to be under royal jurisdiction. Towns under lay seigneurial jurisdiction,
       in contrast, on the whole lacked both a strong hidalgo elite and advanced commercial agriculture at the beginning of our period.
             A wave of expansion of olive cultivation swept over portions of the province in the second half of the century—the only stage of
       economic growth that this study can identify and describe. In these regions a demographic spurt responded to the improving economic
       conditions. The regions of the north and west that had already achieved a balance of arable and olive groves did not experience this
       wave, but the region east and south of the city of Jaén, although already actively involved in the cultivation of olives in 1750, did expand
       this crop. In addition most of the zones that had specialized in grain production for the market in 1750—the regions of cortijos and few
       olive groves—participated in this wave. Together they formed a semicircle around the east and south of the older olive area. These were
       less wealthy zones, with a weaker hidalgo elite and extensive lay señorío. The general expansion of economic activity in Spain in the
       second half of the century drew these sectors into olive production, overcoming their less propitious social structure and relative
       geographic isolation.
             By 1800 only three zones in the east and northeast—Cazorla (JI), Villanueva del Arzobispo (JM), and Santisteban (JN)—and Martos
       zone (JF) in the west lacked evidence of active commercial production. (All regions, of course, shipped some products out for sale, the
       question is one of degree.) The first three contained the six towns of ecclesiastical señorío, but this does not appear to be the cause of
       their backwardness, which our information can assign only to their geographic isolation. Martos, in contrast, was on the old road to
       Granada and belonged to the Order of Calatrava. The explanation for its failure to take off before 1800 would appear to be its soil. A
       saline marl, it is not conducive to good arable, with the result that the zone had not developed the export of grain. Although its soil is
       ideal for olives—as one can see today from its virtually seamless blanket of silver-green trees—it had only a weak hidalgo elite in the
       eighteenth century (Table 16.9) and little commercial orientation. Its case indicates that entry into commercial agriculture in the old
       regime came first via the sale of grain and not directly with olives. Oil production required a significant capital investment: ten to fifteen
       years' wait after planting for the production of the first harvests,



                                                                                          ― 604 ―
       and the building of olive mills. The commercial growth of grain could provide the needed savings. A later wave of olive expansion would
       turn Martos into one of the richest olive zones in Spain, as it would Cazorla in the east, but not until after the old regime.
             Wide commercialization of agriculture thus begins in most parts of Jaén well before the end of the old regime. Four factors
       interacted to determine the rhythm of the different regions: the quality of the land, the accessibility of major highways, the nature of
       jurisdiction, and the presence of a prosperous, largely hidalgo elite, which ideally included the hacendado mayor. Originally, the
       development of this elite depended greatly on the other three factors, most notably the type of jurisdiction.
             The example of Jaén province indicates that lay señorío—feudalism, if one wishes—retarded the transformation of agriculture into
       commercial production by removing the largest owners from the towns and discouraging the presence of hidalgos and no doubt by other
       subtler means not detected through our data. The economic takeoff of the late eighteenth century, however, affected towns of señorío
       lego as well as others, moving them into olive oil, where they were not inhibited by factors such as poor soil or poor communications.
             Although señorío was an obstacle, hidalguía was not. Hidalgo families formed the core of the sector that developed the local
       agricultural potential. Hidalgos too might be considered feudal, especially because a good part of their property was tied up in vínculos
       and mayorazgos, but they were far from being anticapitalist as a group. The reformers of Carlos III's reign, one recalls, roundly
       condemned entail as harmful to the economy and hidalgos as an idle, parasitic class. Jovellanos claimed that no one in Andalusia was
       investing in the improvement of agriculture because entail made owners neglectful absentees. Cortijos too they found evil; they wanted
       these estates divided into prosperous homesteads. In their eyes, the laws of property in Andalusia had created a class of poderosos who
       were taking over whole towns and impoverishing the laboring poor.
            The present study indicates that the reformers misread the situation. Vinculos in some instances were surely neglected, as were
       other types of property, but as a group the notables were interested in agricultural development. Cortijos offered them the wherewithal to
       pursue further commercialization through olive groves. They included many poderosos, for we have seen them in control of municipal
       governments and they exploited the large and powerless class of jornaleros. But what eco-


                                                                                          ― 605 ―
       nomic initiative existed was largely in their hands. More like members of the English gentry than the royal reformers appreciated, very
       different from the popular perception of the lazy impoverished hidalgo stereotyped by the authors of the Golden Age and accepted
       uncritically by later historians, they seized a good possibility when it arose.
             Such a possibility came with the desamortización of Carlos IV. These hidalgos and other notables associated with them were eager
       to break entail—the entail of the church—if they could get more land for themselves, and this meant members of the hidalgo families
       who had entered the clergy as well as the heads of families. Notables were of course not the only buyers, but they dominated the top
       levels and were proportionately much more numerous among all buyers than in the population as a whole. Disentail strengthened their
       class and pushed it toward greater commercial orientation.
             Everywhere commoners also bought lands, in most zones in larger numbers than the notables. Properties that were not market
       oriented were more likely to go to them, and those that needed intensive labor input. Commoners with available capital also bought
       commercial properties, especially olive groves, and thus established a common interest with the notables. This was especially the case in
       those zones of grain culture, where the hidalgo elite was exiguous. Desamortización did not mean the displacement of an older landed
       class by a new class of capitalists but rather the invigoration of the older class by adding new recruits and by giving its more driving
       individuals a chance to excel. In the process, it accelerated the commercialization of agriculture.


                                                                                          ― 606 ―




       Chapter XVII—


http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
