Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




             big buyers were notables than small buyers (Table 17.8). Furthermore a greater proportion of buyers was notable in Type A1 and B1
       zones than in the others, that is, zones where the top levels or all levels of buyers were into the market and spent a large amount per
       capita. A2 and B2 zones, where the amounts spent were small, had considerably fewer buyers called don or doña, similar in this respect
       to Type C zones, which were not into the market.
            The census of 1786 supports this association. The zones where all levels of buyers were into the market (Types A1 and A2 ) had
       more hidalgos per thousand adult males than other zones (Table 17.9), with one apparent exception: SA (Armuña) had slightly fewer
       than SG (Miranda). The reason is easy to perceive. Salamanca city was the cabeza de partido for SA, as it was for zones SC and part of
       SB. The hidalgos associated with partido administration or who lived off the income of its lands were to be found in the city. In the sierra
       zones, including SG, the hidalgos lived in the zones; and they did also in SD (Ledesma), the zone with the highest proportion of hidalgos.
       The town and village structure was much


                                                                                          ― 623 ―




              different from that of Jaén, but the association of hidalgos with commercial agriculture appeared here too.
             Yet there was a difference even in this respect. The hidalgos of Jaén lived by and large in the towns where they owned and
       exploited their properties, forming the dominant portion of the local political and economic elites. In Salamanca province, with its myriad
       small towns and hamlets, this was not the case. Hidalgos clustered in the larger places: the mean population of towns with hidalgos was
       between 1.6 and 4.2 times as great as the mean population of all towns in the zones. Even if




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
