Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       be expected that the sales would strengthen existing patterns of control of the land—except, of course, that ecclesiastical owners would
       lose out. The Salamanca data allow one to test this hypothesis in two different ways.
              The first involves the concentration of landowning. If the sales re-

       [21] See Appendix R.

       [22] An earlier version of the following analysis appeared as Herr, "Vente des propriétés de mainmorte."


                                                                                          ― 630 ―
       inforced existing patterns, the acquisition of land should be concentrated among the buyers in proportion to the concentration already
       existing. The most obvious test of this proposition would be a comparison of two sets of Gini concentration coefficients (drawn from
       Lorenz curves) for each of the zones, one for landowning as shown by the catastro and one for the purchases. Neither is available,
       however, the first because of the prohibitive time that would be needed in the archives, the second because the Gini coefficients of the
       zones vary substantially according to the way the researcher decides to divide purchases made by more than one buyer among the
       different buyers (information on how they were in fact divided not being given in the Madrid records). [23]
             Using the kinds of data with which we are familiar, however, one can develop surrogate indexes of concentration that permit a
       satisfactory test of the proposition. For the index of concentration of ownership at the time of the catastro, I used the product of two
       statistics. One was the percent of the total property in the zone that was owned at midcentury by the hacendados mayores (the largest
       property owner in each town). The catastro records in Simancas give the income of the hacendados mayores, and the provincial
       summaries of the catastro in Madrid provide data for obtaining the total income from land in each zone. [24]
             Although this statistic alone is a simple index of concentration, I decided to multiply it by a second statistic: the ratio between the
       mean income of the properties of the hacendados mayores and the mean income of all properties. The reason for this step is that the
       size of not only the largest properties but the others as well determines the extent of concentration. There is more concentration (as
       measured by a Lorenz curve) where there are one or a few large properties in the midst of many small ones than where all properties are
       relatively large. The mean income of the properties of the hacendados mayores could be obtained directly, but that of other properties
       could only be approximated. For this purpose, the income of the properties of the hacendados mayores was subtracted from the total
       income in the zone, and the remainder was divided among the estimated number of other properties in the zone. [25]
              The index of prior concentration is the product of these two statis-

       [23] See Appendix S.

       [24] The provincial summary in Madrid: AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, estados seglar, eclesiástico patrimonial, and eclesiástico, under
       "letra D" of each volume, gives the number of measures of land in each town belonging to each type of owner, broken down according to
       the annual income from each measure of land. The calculations are extensive, but made easier with a computer.

       [25] See Appendix S.


                                                                                          ― 631 ―




            tics. It can be looked on as the area of a rectangle. The vertical side is the percentage of property in the zone owned by the
       hacendados mayores, and the base is the ratio of the mean income of the properties of the hacendados mayores to the mean income of
       the other properties (Table 17.12).
              The index of the effect of sales on concentration of landholding is a similar rectangle derived from the sales records. The base of the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
