Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       agriculture, but it is less clear that they were oriented toward an outside market. In Miranda del Castañar zone (SG), only 29 percent of
       Level 1 purchases were arable, while 23 percent were orchards. All of these were chestnut groves, a regional specialty,[7] but most
       chestnuts were probably consumed locally, since grain was scarce. Level 1 buyers did make 13 percent of their purchases in vineyards
       and 8 percent in olive groves, no doubt with an outside market in mind, but as a group these buyers cannot be classified as commercially
       oriented.
              Much the same can be said of the smallest buyers in Piedrahita zone (SI). Although half their purchases were arable fields, 22
       percent were pastures. At midcentury this zone had the largest number of sheep and cattle per vecino in agriculture of all the zones in
       the province. Our study of El Mirón showed that pastures were the most sought-after purchase in the region, but they were much more
       likely to be used for cattle than for sheep, which could graze on the hills and stubble. Some cows and steers were produced for the
       market, but again, the smallest buyers in this zone did not belong structurally to commercial agriculture.
            These inferences exhaust the information presented by the type of property purchased by different levels. The examples of La Mata
       and Villaverde in Armuña indicate that the nucleated towns of the rich plains zones (but not their despoblados) had a virtual grain
       monoculture, a conclusion reinforced by the high percentage of arable land in the disentail in these zones (Table 17.3). [8] Here every
       farmer, and thus every level of buyers, had to be involved to a greater or lesser extent in the sale of grain.
             One is left with a sense that the picture is incomplete and selective. Reviewing the conclusions developed in Chapter 15, one
       discovers another approach. A much greater proportion of the purchases were paid

       [6] Level 2, 79 percent; Level 3, 72 percent.

       [7] Larruga, Memorias 35 : 21.

       [8] On the grain monoculture of this region, see García Fernández, "Champs ouverts," esp. 695–701.


                                                                                          ― 615 ―
       for in paper currency—vales reales—in Salamanca than in Jaén (70 percent compared to 45). Large buyers everywhere used vales reales
       more than small buyers and were more oriented toward the national market. Furthermore, a separate analysis of Salamanca province
       shows that properties oriented toward commercial agriculture were paid for in vales much more than those for home production. This at
       least is the logical conclusion from a comparison of the sales of rural estates and improved or irrigated fields. Eighty-six percent of the
       payments for rural estates—most of which would be oriented toward market production—were made in vales reales. The latter account for
       only 35 percent of payments for improved or irrigated fields—labor-intensive huertas, enclosed fields for herren (fodder harvested green),
       flax fields, and the like, not all directed to domestic consumption, of course, but of all the categories the one most fully of this kind.
             Basically the argument being developed is that, although arable formed the largest proportion of the sales in most zones, and one
       cannot distinguish between arable bought for commercial purposes and arable bought for subsistence agriculture from the deeds'
       descriptions of the properties, one can predict reasonably well the orientation of the purchases by the currency used in payment. Table
       17.6 provides this information for Level 1 and Level 4 buyers. In all the plains zones and both hilly zones Level 4 buyers paid for more
       than 70 percent of their pur-


              Table 17.6. Percentage of Payments Made in Vales Reales, Salamanca Zones



                      Zone                      Level 1            Level 4             Total



                Rich Plains Zones



                       SA                         21                 84                 68



                       SB                         18                 71                 67



               Poor Plains Zones



                       SC                         11                 86                 70



                       SD                         49                 91                 84



                   Hilly Zones



                       SE                         26                 87                 77



                       SF                          0                 85                 67



                  Sierra Zones



                       SG                          0                 53                 34



                       SH                          2                 51                 41




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
