Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       only zones with a majority of the population

       [13] For the whole province the figure was 66.3 percent (Mateos, Salamanca, 39).

       [14] Partidos of Alba, Barco de Ávila, El Mirón, Piedrahita, and Salvatierra, all under the Duque de Alba; Béjar under the Duque de Béjar;
       Ledesma under the Duque de Alburquerque; Miranda under the Conde de Miranda; and Montemayor under the Marqués de Castro Monte.

       [15] The situation is spelled out in detail in España dividida en provincias. On the grant of exempt status in the sixteenth century, see
       Vassberg, Land and Society, 165–69.


                                                                                          ― 626 ―
       under royal jurisdiction were those lying mainly in the partido of Salamanca: SA and SC.
            The striking difference between señorío in Jaén and Salamanca was that the former was accompanied in two-thirds of the towns by
       the ownership of the largest properties in the town. This was not the case in Salamanca; of 419 places with separate catastro returns
       that were under señorío lego, the señor held the greatest share of real property in only 29 places (7 percent).[16] All señores hacendados
       mayores were absentee owners; most of them resided in Madrid.[17]
             The three largest señoríos in the province reveal the nature of señorío here. The señores had the rights of jurisdiction, with the
       corresponding income from fines and appointments to municipal offices, and the crown at some time in the past had given them the
       alcabalas, or sales tax, and the tercias reales, the royal two-ninths of the tithes. These sources could produce considerable income, but
       they were called alienated rights (derechos enajenados ) because the loss was to the crown, not the subjects, since the latter would have
       had to make the payments in any case.[18] In fact the crown got very little from these territories, as we saw in the case of El Mirón.
             The Duquesa de Alba, who lived in Madrid, was señora of five partidos covering the eastern sector of the province, all zone SI and
       most of SB and SF, 129 places of the catastro. In only 12 was she the largest owner of real property, including five cotos redondos, in
       which she was virtually the sole owner. In 11 other places she was hacendada mayor by virtue of the payments she received, and the
       catastro record of hacendados mayores permits us to appreciate how much of the local economy was absorbed by these payments. In 8
       towns it ranged from 7 to 22 percent of the annual income from the land; in 3 cabezas de partido from 29 to 46 percent. These figures
       are misleading, however, because agriculture provided only part of the income of the towns. Cabezas de partido had many craftsmen and
       paid more alcabalas as a consequence, while towns in the sierra drew much income from livestock, yet neither of these types of income
       can be readily calculated from the catastro. The share of the gross town product going to the Duquesa de Alba was therefore less than
       these percentages, perhaps between 5 and 15 percent.

       [16] In sixty-three places the señor was also the hacendado mayor, but in many of these his "hacienda" or property consisted not of land
       but of the complex feudal dues, taxes, and tithes paid to him. For a discussion of the wide variety of taxes, dues, and rights accruing to
       señores in Salamanca province, see Mateos, Salamanca, 39–53.

       [17] Eight señores, hacendados mayores in fifty-eight towns, lived in Madrid.

       [18] AHN, Hac., Salamanca, libro 7479.


                                                                                          ― 627 ―
       The economic impact of the señorío of the Duque de Béjar was about the same. Lord of the partido of Béjar (the major portion of zone
       SH), he was hacendado mayor in 25 of the 32 towns of the partido, but in 20 of them because of his seigneurial rights. His income
       ranged from 3 to 76 percent of the income from agriculture in the town. These figures are even less indicative of the duke's true share,
       because income from livestock and from cloth making was high here. In 3 towns where the duke's income was over 60 percent of the
       harvests, it came mostly on alcabalas levied on local manufactures. [19]
             The position of the Duque de Alburquerque was very different. Señor of the partido of Ledesma in the northwest (most of zone SD
       and part of SE), he had jurisdiction over 186 places but was hacendado mayor only in Ledesma, cabeza de partido, because of payments
       received as señor. Since Ledesma was a town of craftsmen, the weight of his señorío was comparable here to that of Alba and Béjar in
       their partido capitals. Outside Ledesma his presence was nowhere as onerous as that of the hacendados mayores.
             Since seigneurial jurisdiction in Salamanca seldom entailed extensive ownership of real property and it absorbed most of the income
       that would have gone to the crown otherwise, it could have had little adverse economic effect. It may even have been helpful. Lay
       señorío in Jaén discouraged the presence of hidalgos. Not so in Salamanca, to judge from Table 17.11. Hidalgos were concentrated in the
       provincial capital and the cabezas de partido, but outside these places, regions of seigneurial jurisdiction had almost twice as many
       hidalgos proportionately as regions under the crown. Towns under lay señores were more than twice as likely to have a noble in their
       midst as royal towns. Since the presence of hidalgos is a good indication of commercialized agriculture, señorío in Salamanca does not
       appear to have discouraged it. Among the Type A1 zones, those most commercialized, Zone SD had the highest proportion of nobles and
       of noble buyers; it also was the zone with the greatest percentage of purchases made with vales reales, our best evidence of market-
       oriented farming (Tables 17.6, 17.8, and 17.9). It was dominated by the señorío of Alburquerque.
             Why were the effects of lay señorío so different in the two provinces? One might expect that, being an older region of Christian
       Spain, Salamanca received an earlier form of señorío, less burdensome to its subjects. The major jurisdictions, however—Valdecorneja
       (the partidos of

       [19] Baños, Béjar, Candelario.



                                                                                          ― 628 ―


                          Table 17.11. Hidalgos and Jurisdictions, Salamanca Province, 1786



                                                 Proportion of Hidalgos




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
