Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                       SI                          0                 53                 43



                                   SOURCE . AHPM, deeds of deposit.




                                                                                          ― 616 ―




                                                                                      Map 17.2.
                                                                          Salamanca Province, Types of Zones
            chases with vales. This includes the four zones where Level 4 buyers put a quarter or more of their money into rural estates. In the
       three sierra zones Level 4 buyers paid for about half their purchases in vales, and were probably much less market oriented than their
       counterparts elsewhere. While Level 1 buyers used vales much less, those of SA, SB (rich plains), SD (poor plains), and SE (hilly) paid for
       18 percent or more of their purchases in vales and were probably involved in the market to a significant extent.
            On the basis of this analysis, which is less conclusive than one might wish, one can now assign the Salamanca zones to the
       categories developed for Jaén (see Table 17.1 and Map 17.2).
              Type A. All levels of buyers involved in the outside market
              A1 . Large purchases
              Rich plains zones: SA (Armuña), SB (Alba de Tormes)


                                                                                          ― 617 ―
       Poor plains zone: SD (Ledesma)
              Hilly zone: SE (Aldeadávila)
              A2 . Small purchases
              Sierra zone: SH (Béjar)
              Type B. Top levels of buyers involved in the outside market
              B1 . Large purchases
              Poor plains zone: SC (Charro)
              B2 . Small purchases
              Hilly zone: SF (Salvatierra)
              Type C. No levels of buyers involved in the outside market
              Sierra zones: SG (Miranda), SI (Piedrahita)



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
