Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



       2

       With no more than four zones in any one type, statistical correlations become almost impossible to establish, yet one can seek apparent
       relationships between the types and the social and economic characteristics of the zones. Certain obvious features show no correlation.
       This is true of mean town size (Table 17.2). Type A1 zones span the whole range from the next to the lowest (Ledesma) to the next to
       the highest (Aldeadávila). Industrial activity is also not related to the extent into the agricultural market (Table 17.7). There is less cloth
       making (fewer carders and weavers) in the commercially oriented Types A1 , B1 , and B2 zones than in Types A2 and C.
             The table is drawn up so that geographic comparisons can also be observed, and it shows that the pattern of crafts can be explained
       much better by geographic affinities than by the extent of commercial agriculture. Cloth making was concentrated in the sierra zones,
       with SH (Béjar) far ahead of any other, obviously because the city of Béjar was a major woolen center of Castile. This region, one recalls,
       grew much flax, while SI (Piedrahita) had more sheep per peasant family than any other zone. Much of the wool and linen was woven
       locally, a task performed by professional carders and weavers, such as those we met in El Mirón.[9]
              Table 17.7 shows that the total proportion of craftsmen in the popu-

       [9] Zones SD, SE, and SF also grew flax, and this may explain their slightly larger proportion of clothmakers. All zones did some
       weaving, but the catastro summary does not distinguish between woolen and linen weavers.


                                                                                          ― 618 ―




             lation reflects closely the number of carders and weavers. SD (Ledesma) is a deviant case, however; with few involved in cloth
       making it still has one of the highest proportions of craftsmen. This deviance is misleading, for it reflects a problem inherent in the study
       of the zones of Salamanca. The plains zones were dominated by three cities: Salamanca (population 16,438 in 1786), Ledesma (1,844),
       and Alba de Tormes (2,293). Salamanca city lies at the junction of three zones, and I excluded it from them. Alba de Tormes is in zone
       SB and Ledesma in SD. All these cities had a concentration of crafts serving their residents and the richer members of their hinterlands.
       If Ledesma is excluded from zone SD, the proportion of craftsmen becomes similar to that of the other plains zones. Alba de Tormes had
       less impact.
            In sum, craftsmen tended to concentrate in the cities, but only Béjar had a specialized industry. Elsewhere, the sierra zones had
       more crafts-



                                                                                          ― 619 ―


                                                         Table 17.7.



                                                    Part B, Specific Areas



                                                       Carders &
                                      All Craftsa       Weavers          Tailors      Shoemakers
                                                                                                        Muleteers
                                                                                                       Income per
                                                       (number of craftsmen per                          Vacino b
                                                           1,000 vecinos)                                (reales)




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
