Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                                                                                          ― 624 ―
       one considers only towns that reported at least ten vecinos in the catastro, no zone had hidalgos in more than 40 percent of the towns.
       The zones identified as having all levels of buyers into the market (Types A1 and A2 ) had their hidalgos more widely scattered, that is,
       present in a larger percentage of their towns, than other zones. Nevertheless, one cannot escape the fact that most towns in all parts of
       the province, especially the smaller places, had no resident hidalgos. If nobles had a morethan-proportionate role in commercial
       agriculture and in making purchases during disentail, it had to be as absentees.
             In Jaén we found that the presence of hidalgo residents was negatively correlated with lay señorío. In Salamanca lay señorío
       differed in important ways from that in Jaén, and its impact on the economy is far




                                                                                          ― 625 ―




                                                                                  Map 17.4.
                                                                  Salamanca Province, Seigneurial Jurisdictions
                                                                  NOTE : Based on Mateos, Salamanca, Map 9.
             less obvious. Much more of the province was under this type of jurisdiction, as one can observe from Table 17.10 and Map 17.4.
       Three-quarters of the population in the study area lived under lay señorío (two-thirds if one includes Salamanca city, which was
       royal). [13] The only administrative division primarily under royal jurisdiction was the large partido of Salamanca city, while nine smaller
       partidos were entirely under lay seigneurial control.[14] The situation was not so clear cut as this, however, because throughout the
       province there were "exempt towns" (villas eximidas), outside the jurisdiction of the partido within which they lay geographically. [15] The



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
