Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


              Salamanca city               458            73              84              102              108



         SB w/o Alba de Tormes             62             15              12               10                 22



             Alba de Tormes                177            77              55               33                 3



             SD w/o Ledesma                71             14              27               3                  0



                 Ledesma                   377           166              36               78                 15



              SH w/o Béjar                 116            87              10               6                  88



                   Béjar                   534           444              18               30                 5



               SOURCE. AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, estado seglar, letra G (crafts), letra H (arrieros).



        a In addition to clothmaking, tailors, and shoemakers: blacksmiths, other metal workers, leather workers,
                        makers of domestic and agricultural implements, etc. (not building trades).



                   b Total income of arrieros in the zone divided by the number of vecinos in the zone.



        c Number of towns declaring arriero income divided by the number of towns in the zone with at least ten
        vecinos according to the catastro. Only one town with under ten vecinos had any arriero income (in Zone
                                                          SG).


       men than the plains zones, in part no doubt because the town size was larger in the sierras. But in part one can also observe that the
       proportion of craftsmen was negatively correlated to the commercialization of agriculture. We can recall that the craftsmen in La Mata and
       Villaverde, both in the rich plain of Armuña, were hard pressed and declining, faced by the competition of outside products brought in
       along the lines of communication that served to export their harvests. Artisans in the larger and more isolated sierra towns fared better,
       and their zones had more craftsmen than the plains, with the hilly zones in between. One may conclude that the concentration of crafts
       responded to two factors: positively to the production of local wool and flax and negatively to the commercialization of agriculture.
            Because the greater concentration of cloth making in the sierra zones does appear in a region of noncommercial agriculture, it
       exhibits one of


                                                                                          ― 620 ―
       the characteristic features of the putting-out system. [10] The appearance is misleading, however. Domestic weaving does not give
       evidence of being a new development in the sierras in the eighteenth century or of being organized as proto-industry. Nor did it offer an
       opportunity for economic growth. Béjar continues until now to be a center for woolen manufacture, but in the transition to modern
       factories, it destroyed the artisan production of the towns around it. [11] The case of the sierras thus does not invalidate my earlier
       conclusion that the lack of the necessary commercial infrastructure precluded the emergence of a proto-industry in central Spain similar
       to that in northwest Europe or the Spanish periphery. One cannot extrapolate directly from Salamanca to all Castile, of course, but
       historians who have been looking at early modern Spanish industry tend to support this conclusion.[12]
             In Jaén muleteering was associated with market-oriented agriculture. Table 17.7 reveals no similar association in Salamanca. It is
       true that the two zones with the most transport activity, Armuña (SA) and Béjar (SH) have all levels of buyers involved in market-
       oriented agriculture (Types A1 and A2 ), but the concentration of arrieros in other Type A zones was among the lowest in the province.
       Again, geographic location, not commercialized agriculture, was the dominant factor. It worked in two ways. First, the sierra zones
       engaged in muleteering as they did in crafts, as compensation for poor agricultural potential. Second, towns that sent out arrieros were
       located on or near the main north-south highway from Andalusia and Extremadura through Béjar and Salamanca to León, Burgos, and
       the north (Map 17.3). It passed through Zones SH (Béjar), SF (Salvatierra), and SA (Armuña). A number of towns with arrieros were
       clustered in the vicinity of Salamanca. The city drew heavily on the food production of the surrounding plain, but our study of La Mata
       and Villaverde showed that their muleteering activity did not depend on transporting grain to the city, done rather by the farmers
       themselves. Muleteers served the city in other ways, in long-range operations to the north coast, Extremadura, and Madrid, that is, along
       the old Roman road. Although the arrieros in the region may have got their start from furnishing Salamanca city, their clientele was now
       located throughout the northern half of Castile.

       [10] See Jones, "Agricultural Origins of Industry."

       [11] González Enciso, "Protoindustrialización en España," 35. His Cuadro 5 gives the number of looms in four towns of the region, based
       on Larruga, Memorias. The catastro, however, shows weavers in all but four of the thirty-two towns of the partido, 525 altogether,
       although it does not specify what material they worked (AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, estado seglar).

       [12] González Enciso, "La protoindustrialización en España."


                                                                                          ― 621 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
