Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       third statistic (Column C) is drawn from information on ecclesiastical ownership, since much land belonged to religious institutions and
       foundations located outside the small places.


                                                                                          ― 636 ―




                                                                                          ― 637 ―
       It represents an attempt to calculate the percentage of land in the hands of outside ecclesiastical owners. To obtain it, the share of land
       owned in each zone by ecclesiastical institutions is multiplied by the share of all the land in the zone that was located in towns where the
       hacendado mayor was an ecclesiastical institution. The final index is a simple mean of these three statistics. One should stress that the
       index does not represent an estimate of the proportion of land owned by outsiders; its purpose is to permit a comparison among the
       zones.
             The index of sales made to outside buyers also had to be derived indirectly, for the Madrid notaries' deeds of deposit did not usually
       state the residence of the buyers, although where it was given I noted it. A search of local notarial records unearthed the residence of
       many of the largest buyers. In addition, unlocated persons who bought property in more than one town were considered residents of the
       town where they made the most purchases and nonresidents elsewhere. Those persons with names preceded by don not identified as
       priests, who bought in towns where the census of 1786 showed no hidalgos, were also considered nonresidents. (Not all laymen called
       don were hidalgos, but hidalgos were probably the most numerous group among them.) [28] The purchases thus identified as made by
       outsiders were totaled and divided by the total amount spent in the zone. The result, in Table 17.16, shows that the share of the sales in
       each zone that appears to have gone to outsiders ranges from 9 to 82 percent.
             When the index of prior absentee ownership is compared to that of nonresident buyers, the two give a surprisingly high coefficient
       of correlation, r = .97. Figure 17.2 illustrates the close relationship between the two, r 2 = .94, implying that the amount of land that was
       bought by outsiders was 94 percent determined by the amount owned by outsiders before the sales. [29]
             Where the land was in nonresident hands (much of it ecclesiastical), potential outside buyers would know about the possibilities, the
       channels of information were good. They could take over existing leases and tenants from the present ecclesiastical owner; the
       transactions costs of the purchase were low. Furthermore, where local farmers owned little, they also were likely to have little capital. As
       in La Mata and Villaverde, they might bid for small collections of arable plots but not for holdings

       [28] See above, Chapter 15, section 4.

       [29] The correlation coefficient in this case does not depend heavily on one outlying point.


                                                                                          ― 638 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
