Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                          ― 640 ―
       terized by greater use of vales reales, extensive cultivation, larger participation of hidalgos, and, we can now add in the case of
       Salamanca province, greater absenteeism. Regions of local agriculture relied more on hard currency, had more intensive farming and less
       land in the hands of outsiders, and were more socially egalitarian.
             Chapter 15 concluded that all areas had some of both kinds of agriculture, indeed that most individuals were involved in both kinds.
       The more wealthy the individual, the greater his participation in the market was likely to be. What we find in Salamanca is that the
       distinction is not only social but regional, much more so than in Jaén. The plains around Salamanca City, including the partidos of
       Ledesma and Alba de Tormes, were strongly marked by commercial agriculture. The sierra zones were much less defined by external
       contacts. This was true even of Béjar zone (SH), which, because of its livestock and flax, was oriented toward the wider market. Its
       buyers had comparatively little money and were local people, like those of the sierra zones on either side. In the plain, the poor zones
       had more outside buyers and less active bidding at all levels than the rich zones. The latter had a more prosperous peasantry that offered
       an impediment to complete domination from without, peasants who were themselves participants in the greater economy.
             The close relationship between prior outside ownership and the extent of purchases by nonresidents, together with the high
       correlation between prior concentration of ownership and concentration in buying, offers convincing evidence in support of the proposition
       that in an area where the economy was basically rural, sales of entailed land at auction, as provided by the desamortización of Carlos IV,
       perpetuated and accentuated existing patterns of landholding; they did not create new ones.
             The two provinces do not offer evidence on how the result might differ in an area that was industrializing or whose economy was
       changing in other ways, but one can predict that the correlation between prior conditions and the redistribution of land would be weaker.
       Buyers with capital from sources other than agriculture could be expected to accentuate concentration and absentee ownership. The
       regions around Salamanca city offer some support for this view. The three zones surrounding it were SA, SB, and SC. Figure 17.1 shows
       that zones SB and SC are above the regression line, indicating that the effect of the sales was greater than the regression predicted. The
       deviance is especially notable in SB. If the correlation is recalculated without these three zones, the coefficient of correlation, r, rises from
       .89 to .95 (significant at the 1-percent level). Figure 17.1 shows the new regression line. Salamanca



                                                                                          ― 641 ―
       city had no modern industry, and most of its income came ultimately from the plains around it. The university, the cathedral, and its
       many parishes and religious orders owned land and received tithes from farmers in this region. The city's merchants dealt in grain. Its
       craftsmen furnished their products to clerics, señores, hacendados mayores, and merchants who resided in the city and to the vecinos of
       the surrounding towns, drawing indirectly on the agriculture of the region. But Salamanca was also the capital of the province, receiving
       some of royal revenues that came from beyond the partido, and its artisans no doubt sold their wares throughout the province, the silver
       jewelry of the charro costume, for instance. Local grain was shipped to Madrid and the north, and the city's merchants received a share
       of the profits. The university drew students from throughout Castile. [30] Its leading citizens thus had available more capital than that
       produced by local agriculture, and this can explain the greater concentration of purchasing than that predicted by a regression line based
       on the structure of prior landholding. Its example offers support for the proposition that nonagricultural sources of income could hasten
       the concentration of landowning in a period of desamortización, provided, of course, that the recipients of such income chose to invest it
       in agriculture, and especially in commercially oriented farming.
             Disentail encouraged the commercialization of agriculture by offering lands to men and women interested in a profitable investment,
       whatever the source of their capital. In this respect it carried out the wishes of Jovellanos and the royal reformers. Nevertheless, its
       impact in a country like Spain, where agriculture was by far the major occupation, was determined primarily by existing conditions, which
       it served to accentuate rather than mitigate. And this, of course, is not what Jovellanos had predicted, at least in the long run.


       [30] See Kagan, Students and Society, 202–210, Map 5.4, and Appendix A, Table 4. The latest date for the geographic origin of students
       given for the University of Salamanca is 1690, but the pattern would be similar in 1800.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
