Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       rectangle also represents a comparison of large to small properties, in this case the ratio of the mean amount spent by the buyers in
       Level 4 (the largest buyers) to that of the buyers in Level 1 (the smallest buyers). Rather than use the simple ratios, which run from 23 :
       1 to 210 : 1, I sub-


                                                                                          ― 632 ―
       stituted their logarithms. The reason is that the range is very high, the largest reading being over nine times the smallest. The other
       statistic in this index, to be described next, has a range of only 2.6. Multiplying them together would give an excessive weight to the
       first. The logarithm reduces the range to 1.7, less than that of the other statistic but not so dissimilar.
             The vertical side of the rectangle is the percentage of buyers in Level 4 who bought more than one property. At first sight this figure
       may not seem directly comparable to the percentage of land owned by hacendados mayores used for the earlier index. It was chosen
       because this index was intended as a measure of change due to the sales, not of the already existing concentration of the lands being
       sold. Properties being farmed as single units were not ordinarily divided before their sale. Therefore the lowest concentration effect (the
       greatest increase in the number of landowners through the sales) would result if each property went to a different buyer. The percentage
       of buyers who bought more than one property is thus a measure of how much concentration was effected above this minimum. It is
       proper to use only Level 4 buyers in each zone because, smallest in number (they ranged from 3 to 12 percent of all buyers), they had
       the greatest effect on the pattern of landholding: by definition they accounted for 50 percent of the purchases. The index and its
       components are given in Table 17.13. (One should stress that even though this index measures the extent to which the sales created
       new large holdings in the hands of laymen, it is not a measure of the absolute change in concentration. Some religious endowments
       consisted of various properties that were sold off separately, thus tending to decrease the existing concentration of ownership. The
       absolute change was the difference between these two contrary effects, which I have not attempted to calculate.)
             When the two indexes or sets of rectangles, one of the prior concentration of landowning and the other of the effect of sales on
       concentration, are compared, they give a high coefficient of correlation, r = .89. Statistically this means that the correlation could have
       occurred by chance less than once in a hundred cases (it is significant at the 1-percent level). Although the indexes are the products of
       circuitous calculations, they offer strong support for the validity of the proposition.
             Figure 17.1 graphs the result, the regression line of the effect of the sales on the prior concentration. The resulting pattern supports
       both the division of the zones into types of participation in the market and into geographic regions. Type A1 zones (SA, SB, SD, SE) fall
       in the middle of


                                                                                          ― 633 ―




            the pattern, with Type B1 (SC) far out on its own and Type C (SG, SI) together at the other extreme. Zones in the different
       geographic regions are even more closely associated, poor plains zones (SC, SD) with high concentration, sierra zones (SG, SH, SI) with
       low concentration, and zones in the other two geographic regions are also proximate to each other. [26]

       [26] The statistical strength of the correlation depends greatly on the outlier SC. Without it, the correlation coefficient drops to 0.59, and
       consequently the correlation line swings clockwise. The pattern loses its statistical strength, being valid only at between the 10-percent
       and 20-percent level. What weakens the correlation is the deviance of Zone SB, which shows a much higher effect of concentration from
       the sales than the regression would predict.


                                                                                          ― 634 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
