Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [5] García Zarza, Despoblados, 36–51, 65–82.

       [6] Vilar, Catalogne 1 : 464–66; Vicens Vives, Manual, 163–64; Cabrillana, "Villages désertés en Espagne," 493–95, 504.

       [7] Letter referred to in Pedro IV of Aragon to Alfonso XI of Castile, 30 Mar. 1350, in López de Meneses, Documentos acerca de la peste,
       377–78.

       [8] García Fernández, "Champs ouverts," 707–8.

       [9] AHN, Hac., libro 7476, letra D: Partido of Salamanca, 78; of Alba, 11; of Ledesma, 24. García Zarza, Despoblados, 149–51, lists
       these.

       [10] Instituto geografico y estadístico, Nomenclátor . . . de 1900 2 : 356, defines an alquería in Salamanca as "a rural house inhabited by
       the owners or tenants of surrounding fields used for the cultivation of cereals."


                                                                                          ― 645 ―
       Why this concentration of deserted villages in Salamanca? The activities of noble estate builders and the destruction of war and taxes
       were not peculiar to this region. One must look for a scenario that fits the local situation. From the ninth to the eleventh century, the
       region was a no-man's-land between the Christian monarch of León and the Muslim states south of the central sierras and was virtually
       without permanent residents. After the reconquest of Toledo in 1085, the future province of Salamanca came permanently under Leonese
       rule. Salamanca city was fortified and given a cathedral, and the smaller places, Alba de Tormes and Ledesma, also became strongholds.
       Rural settlement was done in small nuclei, villages and hamlets of only a few families. Some settlers came as organized groups originating
       in a town in the north, others had been collected under the leadership of some enterprising individual of higher social status. Frequently
       the name of the new village reflected the origin of the settlers or the person who founded it. Such toponymic evidence indicates that the
       new inhabitants came from all over: Galicia, León, the Basque lands, and Navarre to the north as well as a large number of Mozarabes
       (Christians who had been living in Muslim territories) and Moriscos (converted Muslims) from the south.[11]
             Settlement tended to follow the old Roman road from León to Salamanca and south through Béjar to Mérida, spreading out to the
       east and west from it. The rich Armuña plain north of Salamanca city was repopulated before the mid-twelfth century; by 1200 its towns
       were substantial nuclei. The poorer zone south of the city filled up a generation or two later, and the southern sierras between about
       1190 and 1230. One can picture these early hamlets as a half-dozen or so houses and a few sheds around a small unpretentious church.
       The nearby arable had been distributed in fields to the settlers in a reparto, while the common pastures and woodland lay beyond. It is
       possible that some places were private estates with only a few permanent hands, protoalquerías, especially those in the poor plains
       bearing the name of the founder. Many villages were required to make payments to the cathe-

       [11] Four places named Naharros (Narros), a Naharillos, and two Naharra reflect the immigration from Navarre, while three Gallegos, two
       Galleguillos, and a Nava Gallega, that from Galicia (six of these thirteen places were despoblados or alquerías in 1789). There was also a
       Córdoba, a Cordobilla, and a Mozárvez (Mozárabes), a Morisco, and a Castellanos de Morisco. Founders' names appear in Aldehuela de los
       Guzmanes, Gutierro Velasco, Martín Pérez, Andrés Bueno, Gimén Gómez, Velasco Muñoz, and so forth (all of these being despoblados in
       the eighteenth century). See Julio González, "Repoblación de la 'Extremadura,'" 241–45, and Julio González, "Reconquista y repoblación,"
       176–81. These are the sources for this and the next paragraph.


                                                                                          ― 646 ―
       dral of Salamanca, but jurisdiction lay with the council of one of the fortified centers, Salamanca, Alba de Tormes, or Ledesma; the basis
       was already established for the later partidos. Except for a few places under ecclesiastical jurisdiction, señorío did not come until later;
       the cities and villages were royal.
             When hardship came in the form of plague and civil strife in the fourteenth century and later, those settlements located where the
       natural conditions were least favorable, notably in the thin topsoils south and west of Salamanca city, suffered most. The villagers still
       alive in the smallest villages, places with less than ten families, some as few as two, chose to go to bigger towns or were forced to do so
       by local magnates who desired unobstructed use of the fields. But the places did not disappear from official records. The owners chose to
       preserve their names and identity so that they would not be taken over by neighboring towns as common wastes and pasture. [12] These
       places had never flourished under farming, and the rise of migratory and sedentary sheep raising after the fourteenth century made them
       profitable as pastures, turning them into permanent despoblados.
             Angel Cabo Alonso, the leading historical geographer of the province, emphasizes the importance of geographic conditions in
       explaining the appearance of despoblados. They were found, he says, in the plains where the underlying rock formation lay closest to the
       surface of the sedimentary deposits, leaving little soil cover for crops. He theorizes that after the reconquest the larger settlements were
       along the rivers and streams, while the future despoblados were smaller hamlets that appeared in the hilly interfluvial spaces and never
       became populous villages. [13] One needs a case-by-case study to test this hypothesis. It undoubtedly applies to many places, but not all,
       because there are authenticated accounts of forcible removal of villagers in the fifteenth century, [14] while the first census available, from
       1534, still shows numerous vecinos in many places that would be despoblados in the eighteenth century. [15] What seems indisputable is
       the importance of the physical characteristics of the plains, first in attracting early settlers into numerous small hamlets and then in
       proving unsuited to the permanent arable culture needed to support so many nuclei. The settlers had set up life in the

       [12] See García Zarza, Despoblados, 28–29.

       [13] Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos," 65–66. Anes, Crisis, 181–86, also questions the belief that all despoblados had once been
       populated centers.

       [14] García Zarza, Despoblados, 36–48.

       [15] Tomás González, Censo . . . siglo XVI, Appendix 5.


                                                                                          ― 647 ―
       way familiar to them, only to discover too late that the physical reality would not accept it here. Theirs was not the last such experience,



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
