Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                                                                                          ― 642 ―




       Chapter XVIII—
       Salamanca Province:
       The Despoblados and Alquerías
       Because eighteenth-century reformers believed that the Spanish countryside suffered from a lack of population, they found the cause of
       the agricultural backwardness of the province of Salamanca in its large number of despoblados, a verdict that recent historians have
       echoed. [1] Several despoblados have played a role in our story. Royal plans to repopulate them led to the migration of settlers from La
       Mata to the despoblado of Narros de Valdunciel. The vecinos of Villaverde did not move their residence, but they broke grazing land in the
       neighboring despoblados of La Cañada and La Cañadilla, increasing their harvests in this way. Sixty percent of Pedrollén was sold in the
       disentail, but it had been and remained a single exploitation, rented by one tenant, so far as one can tell from the census returns.[2]
             Despoblados resembled the cortijos of Andalusia, another abomination of the reformers, but they differed in essential ways.
       Pedrollén, although a single exploitation, had several owners and the shares could be sold separately. Many despoblados, legally single
       properties called cotos redondos or términos redondos, were owned in shares by various people, but I have found no such case of a
       cortijo. The latter were carved out of vacant municipal land and may have had their origin before the Reconquista. The despoblados were
       the result of a historical process since the

       [1] See García Zarza, Despoblados, 88 and passim; and Domínguez Ortiz, "Ruina de la aldea," 110. Domínguez Ortiz does not consider
       specifically the case of Salamanca.

       [2] Although Pedrollén was called an alquería in the official index (nomenclátor ) of 1789, it was listed as a despoblado in 1769 (García
       Zarza, Despoblados, 146).


                                                                                          ― 643 ―
       Reconquista that removed the inhabitants from an established village, or so at least the name implied. The Christian resettlement of
       Salamanca took place after the middle of the eleventh century, apparently in the form of many small villages and hamlets placed in close
       proximity. A despoblado arose when the population of a village was reduced to one or two families or disappeared altogether, but even
       when all fixed population vanished, the name and administrative unit persisted. Cortijos were not separate political or census units.
             Why despoblados had declined is not clear. The times of greatest loss of population would appear to be the hundred years following
       the Black Death and the seventeenth century, periods of plague and demographic crisis throughout western Europe. Two authors who
       have studied similar deserted villages in France argue, however, that plagues alone cannot account for the complete disappearance of
       villages. The destruction and military levies of wartime played their part in driving away the inhabitants. Permanent depopulation did not
       result, however, unless other causes prevented resettlement once the hardships had passed. One might be adverse physical conditions,
       another the desire of a landowner to build up his estate. The smaller the hamlet, the more likely it was to disappear, but it was rare for a
       place to be abandoned completely. Some farmstead, some group of people remained to keep alive its name. [3]
             The story in Salamanca is similar, suggesting that the causes were not unique to this region or to Castile. Antonio Domínguez Ortiz
       believes that small settlements disappeared in the centuries after the reconquest because the insecurity of the open countryside drove the
       peasants to seek safer and more healthy locations. After 1250 there was a great demand for settlers in Andalusia, and many may have
       been attracted by this opportunity. [4] Eugenio García Zarza, who has studied the despoblados of Salamanca most closely, points to the
       action of noble lords, desirous of creating large estates as a basis for political power during the struggles of aristocratic bands in the
       fifteenth century. They forcibly moved peasants to larger towns, a procedure renewed in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries,
       when the crown was again weak. Seventeenth-century wars with Portugal, destructive and demanding in money,

       [3] Pesez and Le Roy Ladurie, "Deserted Villages," 95. A fuller version of this study appears as Pesez and Le Roy Ladurie, "Le cas
       français." This volume includes Cabrillana, "Villages désertés en Espagne," 461–512, which attempts to identify the despoblados in much
       of Spain but does not cover the territory of the crown of Castile north of the central sierras. Anes, Crisis, 181 n. 29, questions its figures.

       [4] Domínguez Ortiz, "Ruina de la aldea," 106–7. On migration to the south, see MacKay, Spain in the Middle Ages, 70–72.


                                                                                          ― 644 ―
       and the increasing tax burdens, which hit the remaining peasants ever more heavily as the others fled or died, completed the desertion of
       the villages. [5] Curiously, these historians make no mention of the Black Death as a contributing cause to the depopulation, although
       students of medieval France and England have stressed its central role in the redistribution of population. Plagues of the fourteenth and
       fifteenth centuries are known to have laid waste Catalonia, Aragon, and Navarre.[6] In 1350 the Black Death had spread so widely in
       Castile that Alfonso XI wrote to Pedro IV of Aragon, expressing his concern about the loss of population and the number of his subjects
       going to Rome to obtain a papal indulgence. [7] The following year, the Cortes of Castile heard complaints that the great mortality had
       raised the price of agricultural labor to such heights that owners were being forced to abandon cultivation. [8] The plague may well have
       been the event that triggered the early desertion of the smaller places in Salamanca.
             What is unique about Salamanca is the large number of despoblados that appeared, far above anything found in France or the rest
       of Spain. The catastro identified 113 in the study area, while the nomenclátor of 1789 raised the number to 197, plus another 93 in the
       partido of Ciudad Rodrigo.[9] Most lay in the poor plains southwest and west of Salamanca city, that is, on the large property side of the
       Salamanca-Albacete line, but a number were also in the rich plains north and east of the city. Almost indistinguishable from the
       despoblados were places called alquerías, large properties tended by one or several families. Although this name, derived from the Arabic
       word for a small settlement, does not imply that they were ever larger, the available censuses show that many had had more people in
       the past. [10] The catastro does not identify alquerías as such, but the nomenclátor names 151 of them in the study area, located in the
       same regions as the despoblados, and 30 more in the partido of Ciudad Rodrigo.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
