Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                   Figure 17.1.
                                                                Salamanca Province, Regression of Concentration
                                                               Effect of Sales on Concentration of Prior Ownership

       4

       The nature of the data makes possible another test of the proposition that the sales at auction strengthened existing patterns of
       landholding, by comparing the amount of absentee ownership in each zone before the sales with the amount of property bought by
       nonresidents. We know already that absentee ownership was a strong characteristic of the province. [27] In the studies of individual towns
       we observed that around Salamanca city the large blocks of property were in the hands of outsiders and that nonresidents were the
       biggest buyers, a fact confirmed above for the province as a whole, since we saw that notables were the major buyers and they were
       largely absentees. Most hacendados mayores at

       [27] Absentee ownership is defined as ownership of the property in a place by persons or institutions domiciled outside the place;
       nonresident buyers similarly are those domiciled outside the place where the property is located.


                                                                                          ― 635 ―




            midcentury were also outsiders (Table 17.14). Some relationship between prior absentee ownership and absentee buying is
       apparent; the data permit us to test statistically the strength of the correlation.
             To obtain an index of prior outside ownership (Table 17.15), I used three figures. The first (Column A) was the proportion of the
       land in each zone owned by absentee hacendados mayores. It is an accurate statistic of how large a share was owned by certain
       absentees, namely those who were the largest owner in the town. To get an approximation of absentees among other landowners, I used
       the ratio of the total value of the land in towns with absentee hacendado mayores to the total value of all the land in the zone (Column
       B), on the assumption that towns with absentee hacendados mayores would also have a larger share of smaller absentee owners. The



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
