Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                                                                                          ― 663 ―




                                                             NOTE : Since there is no limot to the top age group, a
                                                             span of seventeen years is used for convenience only.
              native villages by the charms of social intercourse, but the economics of the situation suggest another explanation.
            The mean productivity of labor was far higher in the despoblados than in the villages. The estimate used above for production on
       the despoblados and alquerías was an average return to labor of 300 EFW per man in the rich plains and 200 EFW in the poor plains. The
       overall


                                                                                          ― 664 ―
       gross return from land per vecino engaged in agriculture in the rich zones was 110 EFW and in the poor zones 60 EFW (including
       residents of populated and depopulated places). The difference is impressive. One might object that the estimate for return per farmer in
       the depopulated places is excessive (although, if it is, they needed even more outside labor than deduced above). An easy calculation will
       respond to this objection. One can compare the mean return per measure of land and the mean income per vecino engaged in agriculture
       in the nine zones of the province (Table 18.7). The results reveal a striking fact. The mean return of a measure of productive land is
       related to the geographic characteristics of the zones, as one might expect. The rich plains zones had land of high return per measure,
       the poor plains zones a low return. The sierra zones were also high, in part because of the high value of crops like flax, and the hilly
       zones were intermediate. But the income per vecino engaged in agriculture does not correlate with the productivity of the land. The five
       zones with a large number of despoblados and alque-


                             Table 18.7. Mean Return from Land, Salamanca Zones, 1752–1753



                                   Mean Return per Measure     Mean Return per Vecino
                                           of Land                  in Agriculturea
                                                                                             Percent of Places that
                                                                                             Were Despoblados or
                  Zone                               (reales per year)                            Alquerías b



               Rich Plains



                   SA                         27                         1,413                        54



                   SB                         21                         1,602                        43




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
