Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       an outcome to which they were also inclined by their smaller extent and poor soil.
            The places that lost their population after 1712 were mostly of a different kind. Of the forty-nine places in the four zones in this
       category,

       [17] See García Zarza, Despoblados, 65–82.

       [18] See Anes, "'Depresión' agraria."

       [19] Anes, Crisis, 117. See ibid., 88–126, on the seventeenth-century depression.

       [20] Guy Fourquin, "Villas et hameaux du nord-ouest de la région parisienne en 1332," Paris et l'Ile de France 9 (1957–58): 141ff., cited
       in Pesez and Le Roy Ladurie, "Deserted Villages," 74–75.


                                                                                          ― 651 ―
       only five had more than 4 vecinos in 1712, none more than 7.5 (widows heading households counted as half vecinos). By the time of the
       catastro, twenty-eight reported no vecinos at all. Most of these appear never to have been even hamlets—only ten show up in 1534, all
       with 7 vecinos or less—just estates whose owners decided to reduce the number of people living on them in the eighteenth century or
       whose inhabitants chose to move to nearby villages and walk to their work. These are places that fitted the definition of alquerías, yet
       they were called despoblados.
             Historians have repeatedly blamed the señores for the despoblados, echoing the accusations of eighteenth-century reformers.[21]
       Their lords are accused of driving off the peasants to extend their señorío. The case of Arauzo, already mentioned above, became
       notorious for its continual decline since the sixteenth century. Its location on the road to Madrid from Salamanca and its great size, 2,350
       hectares, largest despoblado of all, made it conspicuous. The alcalde of the adjoining town in 1768 reported that its señores, the
       Marqueses de Almarza, resident in Salamanca city, "kept buying the houses, lands, and chattel of the vecinos and inhabitants, until they
       became the largest owner. Afterwards they realized that they had more to gain by letting it become deserted and turning it into a coto
       redondo. And for its exploitation they did not want to rent small pieces to the vecinos, who ended by leaving, and thus little by little the
       houses and buildings fell into ruin as the farmers left."[22] It is tempting to see the success of the Marqueses de Almarza as a function of
       their señorío and to attribute the actions of other nobles as well to its evils. In the last chapter we saw, however, that señorío in
       Salamanca had little adverse effect on the rural economy because it was seldom associated with extensive ownership of the land.
       Similarly, the facts indicate that the despoblados cannot be blamed on it, for in few places were the large owners also the señor. Most of
       the despoblados and alquerías were either in royal territory (almost all zone SC was royal and it had the most despoblados) or in the
       señoríos of the Duques de Alba and Alburquerque. Out of thirty-four despoblados and five alquerías in her señoríos, the Duquesa de Alba
       was hacendado mayor in only four despoblados and two alquerías, the Duque de Alburquerque in none of those under his jurisdiction,
       forty-three despoblados and ten alquerías.

       [21] García Zarza, Despoblados, 61–65; Domínguez Ortiz, "Ruina de la aldea," 115–16. Domínguez Ortiz, Régimen señorial, 25, quotes
       the eighteenth-century reformer Martínez de Irujo complaining of the actions of the señores.

       [22] Response to the royal survey by the alcalde of Ventosa (1768), quoted in García Zarza, Despoblados, 31 and 67.


                                                                                          ― 652 ―
       The Marquesa de Almarza was also hacendada mayor in Arauzo, and this role is the proper clue to her behavior. From the point of view
       of the owner, the ideal despoblado or alquería was obviously a coto or término redondo, a single property. Although there is no official
       list of términos redondos, the catastro supplies information on ownership that permits one to identify many of them. [23] In zone SA 33
       percent of the despoblados and alquerías can be identified in this way as términos redondos; in zone SB, 34 percent; SC, 59 percent; SD,
       58 percent; SF, 58 percent; with a total of 49 percent for the five zones. The records of the disentail of Carlos IV, however, indicate that
       these were not all. Both noble and ecclesiastical owners had developed términos redondos, but nobles had been much more active since
       the sixteenth century, and among the nobles, titled aristocrats had been most successful.[24]
             There was no reason, of course, that large owners should acquire all the available property only in despoblados and alquerías. Forty-
       two towns in these five zones not classified officially in this manner also had but one owner; thirty-nine of them in the poor plains
       zones. [25] One might suspect that these were also tiny villages that the bureaucracy had not yet got around to labeling despoblados or
       alquerías, but in fact only five had fewer than forty people, and nineteen had over one hundred. The population of two was greater than
       five hundred, Matilla and San Muñoz, both in Charro zone (SC). [26] In both the only landowner was also the señora, the Duquesa de
       Uceda, who resided in Madrid. She was lord and owner of all the land in two other towns as well, in the same zone, Vecinos and
       Olmedilla. Altogether in these four places she owned 2,650 hectares of arable and 3,700 hectares of pasture, which she must have rented
       out to the inhabitants, since she had no animals of her own. In these four towns lived 246 families, their houses being their only real
       property. Cases like this gave a bad reputation to señorío, but they were the exception, not the rule. Titled aristocrats were sole owners
       of eighteen other towns, hidalgos of seven, and ecclesiastical institutions of twelve, but only in two belonging to aristocrats was the
       owner also

       [23] To identify términos redondos, I took all places where the area of the property attributed to the hacendado mayor was 99 percent or
       more of the recorded area of the place. If the despoblado was owned in shares, as many were, this process would not detect it. (Area of
       hacendado mayor from AGS, Dirección General de Rentas, Única Contribución, libro 536; total area from AHN, Hac., libros 7746–48.)

       [24] Seventy-five percent of the términos redondos that had become depopulated since the sixteenth century belonged to nobles, that is,
       hidalgos and títulos.

       [25] SA, 2; SB, 1; SC, 23; SD, 16; SF, 0.

       [26] Matilla, 106 vecinos in 1751, 588 population in 1786; San Muñoz, 105 and 568.


                                                                                          ― 653 ―
       señor.[27] It was and is a popular misconception that señorío had any significant economic impact in Salamanca province. To be the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
