Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                          ― 657 ―




                                                                                          ― 658 ―
       what was going on in the despoblados. The first step is to estimate whether the residents listed in the small places were numerous
       enough to produce the return reported from these places.
             According to my calculations, Pedrollén produced a gross income from agriculture and livestock of some 800 EFW (see Table 9.8),
       although some of this income was the result of pasturing animals outside its limits. The provincial summary of the catastro, however,
       reported its land to produce 5,685 reales, that is 380 EFW, about half what I calculated. Most of the disparity is the result of the low
       income that the catastro assigned to pastures. In La Mata and Villaverde, towns of the rich Armuña district, my calculations of gross
       income from the land are also higher than the return reported in the provincial catastro summary (1.5 and 1.2 times as great), although
       the difference is less than for Pedrollén, partly because there was less animal husbandry.
            The wealthiest labrador in La Mata (the casa excusada) had a gross income of some 600 EFW, but at the above rate, he would have
       farmed land evaluated in the catastro at 400 EFW. He used five yokes of oxen, thus needing four additional hands (including any grown
       sons), at least during plowing. In Villaverde, where per capita income was lower, the richest labrador had a gross income of 400 EFW,
       and the reported return on his share of the land would be 333 EFW. These figures give us an idea of how much land, in terms of its
       reported harvest, a fully employed farmer could handle.
             Since the alquerías and despoblados had more pasture than the towns of La Armuña and pastures were undervalued in the catastro,
       the gross return on the amount of land that one vecino could work would be less than that produced by the wealthiest labradores in
       Villaverde and La Mata. Land reported to return about 300 EFW (4,200 reales) would be the maximum for one man in the rich plains
       zones; in the poor plains zones, with more pastures, the limit would be lower, say 200 EFW. In despoblados and alquerías that had a
       higher return per vecino than these limits, one can be reasonably certain that part of the land was being worked by men from nearby
       towns. Of course, if despoblados and alquerías showed no vecinos at all, all the labor was being done by outsiders. For example, the
       despoblado of Riolobos in the rich plains (zone SB) had land producing 4,530 EFW (63,390 reales) according to the catastro summary and
       only one vecino. At one full-time farmer for each 300 EFW, it needed fourteen additional farmers. Cente Rubio (zone SB) had no vecinos,
       but with land producing 1,603 EFW, we can posit that it employed five or six full-time farmers from outside. San


                                                                                          ― 659 ―



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
