Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       share of the production in the despoblados and alquerías reached the national market than in the adjoining towns. Whether the tenants
       paid in grain or sold grain and animals to pay in currency, more of their harvests and livestock were diverted from local consumption.
       Despoblados monetized and commercialized agriculture. No doubt they had been doing so since they first appeared at the end of the
       Middle Ages.


       4

       The complaints of extortionary rents in Salamanca and other provinces that reached the crown in the 1760s roused the interest of the
       royal counselors. In 1769 the corregidor of Salamanca surveyed the situation under his jurisdiction. From the replies to his questions, he
       drew up a list of 202 "despoblados," among which he included alquerías and even a number of lugares and several villas, all of which he
       judged to fit within the meaning of the term. He reported 302 vecinos living in them but said that they could support 1,692 vecinos, if
       properly resettled. His estimate was surely optimistic; in some places he proposed settling 30 to 70 families, and he apparently did not
       make clear that much of the land was being tilled by residents of neighboring towns who would have to be among the settlers or lose
       their leases. He responded, no doubt, with what he believed his superiors in Madrid wanted to hear. [39]
              Carlos III at once appointed a superintendent for the resettlement of

       [39] García Zarza, Despoblados, 91–92. Pages 142–47 give the corregidor's table. I have not been able to locate all his despoblados.
       Most fall in Zones SA, SB, and SC.


                                                                                          ― 667 ―
       despoblados in Salamanca province, [40] but before any concrete steps were taken the Conde de Aranda was sent to Paris as ambassador,
       Olavide fell, and the project languished. A royal cédula of 1781 revived it, establishing juntas de repoblación (resettlement boards) in
       Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo. The first consisted of the royal corregidor, the alcalde, and other representatives of the city. A further
       order of 1784 spelled out the procedure the juntas were to follow.[41] One can see the hand of Campomanes behind the project. He had
       recently become president of the Mesta, and he was using his position to weaken the restrictions that sheep, raisers enforced on the use
       of the land. The cédula stated that resettlement would eventually return to farming all land that had once been arable. To prevent a
       future reversion to pasture, the cédula put strict limits on the use of the land.
             According to the regulations, settlers (colonos) would get enough arable to plant 22.5 fanegas a year, this being considered what a
       yoke of oxen could plow. The actual extent would depend on the number of years in the local crop rotation. The plots would be designed
       as large as possible, while giving each settler equivalent amounts of different qualities of land (what is now called parcellary concentration
       was already in the minds of the royal planners). The new colonists would also get the use of pastures and waste, but pastures not
       required by the colonists would be left to the graziers. In keeping with all Carlos III's projects for internal colonizing, strict rules
       prevented the union of different holdings or their exploitation by outsiders. Impartial experts would determine how much rent each settler
       or grazier would pay to the owner, but the total rent currently being received for a despoblado could not be increased. Each settler was
       required to build a house within two years and pay the owner a small permanent quitrent (canón ) for it in addition to the rent of his
       land. Although the owners kept title to the despoblados, control over the renting and use of the land was taken out of their hands. Most
       large owners, either noble or clerical, would have their property in entail. The reform did not break the entail of despoblados, but it
       created an overriding entail of a different kind.
             The royal reformers aimed to avoid the Ricardian trap by fixing the rent and the Malthusian trap by keeping the lots at family size,
       but in doing so they created a rigid system that was bound to hinder economic

       [40] RC, 28 Nov. 1769, cited in ibid., 89.

       [41] Nov. rec., VII, xxii, 9 (15 Mar. 1791), repeats this RC. See García Zarza, Despoblados, 95–98.


                                                                                          ― 668 ―
       development. If the harvest on a fanega of land averaged about 4.5 fanegas of wheat, as in Pedrollén, a labrador would collect about 100
       fanegas of wheat a year, gross. Seed, tithes, and rent would bring this down to between 50 and 65 EFW, a bare minimum for a family of
       five. On better land, the return would be higher, but the project, even under favorable conditions, would severely limit the contribution of
       the colonos to the national market. The owner's share would still be commercialized, but it would not increase as new land was put under
       the plow. The ideal of the reformers was to turn despoblados into ordinary villages; we have just seen that this meant reducing per
       capita production and the proportion going to the owner and to the market. In the long run there was little in it even for the peasants.
       The reformers might try to exorcise Ricardo; they had no way to expel Malthus. [42]
             A number of candidates applied for settlement in various despoblados, but few achieved their wish. Those who benefited from
       existing conditions maneuvered to gut the program. Owners labeled the process confiscation (despojo ), appealed to the courts, and
       directed threats at prospective colonists. Towns whose vecinos already farmed the despoblados joined in the complaints, while the large
       graziers worked behind the scenes to dissuade the juntas from taking action. In 1787, after years of petitioning, the sexmeros of the
       partido of Salamanca were given a vote in the junta. One from each of the four cuartos of the partido, they were elected biennially by
       the alcalde and one regidor of each town together with the large tenants of the alquerías and despoblados. They represented the existing
       exploiters of the land rather than the owners, but they too spoke in opposition to resettlement, arguing that the proposal had been
       conceived without attention to local conditions. Many despoblados did not have sufficient arable land to support a new town, they insisted
       correctly. [43]
             The extant records of the operation indicate that the junta de repoblación in Salamanca sent the Council of Castile proposals for
       resettlement of forty-eight despoblados and alquerías. At least twenty of them in our study area were selected for colonizing along with
       five other small places not officially despoblados or alquerías.[44] Miñano shows that twelve of these actually registered some growth in
       population by

       [42] García Zarza observes that the niggardliness of the concessions virtually condemned the reform to failure (ibid., 98, 124).

       [43] Ibid., 93–95, 111–12, 126–32.

       [44] Ibid., 102, 105–6, 110–11. García Zarza does not name the places. See also Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 394.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
