Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                                                                                          ― 661 ―
       few married couples, who would include the current large tenants like the one at Pedrollén and their wives.
             Beyond these general characteristics, however, Table 18.6 reveals that not all small places were alike. For the first time alquerías
       and despoblados appear with different features. Over a third of the despoblados had no vecinos at all; this was true of only four
       alquerías. The latter, in other words, had permnanent personnel, at least a guard, the montarraz. Permanent residents also furnished a
       larger portion of their labor needs. With 217 vecinos for 78 alquerías, almost 3 per place, they needed only 137 additional full-time hands
       from outside. Despoblados barely averaged 1 vecino and needed over one and a half times as many farmers from outside. The owners of
       alquerías seem to have supervised their exploitation much more than those of despoblados.
            There was a difference among regions too. In the rich plains north and east of Salamanca city (zones SA and SB), the despoblados
       needed 5 times as many outside farmers as they had vecinos, whereas in the poor plains (SC, SD) and in the adjacent hilly zone, SF,
       they were more nearly self-sufficient. The despoblados of the rich plains zones were scattered among relatively large towns. [33]
       Demographic pressure, we saw, drove the peasants of La Mata and Villaverde to break soil in neighboring despoblados. There was
       evidently less pressure in the poor plains.
              In the 1750s, the time of our data, neither La Mata nor Villaverde had overflowed much into the despoblados; the flood would come
       later in the century. Asked to report on the possibility for resettling the despoblados, the corregidor of Salamanca in 1769 replied that
       they could support six times as many vecinos as they then had.[34] Table 18.6 estimates that in the 1750s the despoblados were
       employing between two and three times as many farmers as there were vecinos. The examples of La Mata and Villaverde indicate that as
       the century wore on, the depopulated places were accommodating more and more nearby farmers. No doubt their soil was less productive
       than that of neighboring villages or they would not have become abandoned, but as population grew they were being reincorporated into
       the overall pattern of agriculture.
            In most cases, however, they were not being repopulated, only recultivated. Events of earlier centuries had concentrated the
       population in fewer units. The units were now growing and expanding their radius

       [33] Excluding despoblados and alquerías, the mean town size in the zones was rich plains, SA 300, SB 310; poor plains, SC 140, SD
       170; SF 240.

       [34] The report dealt with the whole province, including the partido of Ciudad Rodrigo (García Zarza, Despoblados, 91 and Table, 143–
       47).


                                                                                          ― 662 ―




                                                                                  Figure 18.1.
                                                                 Salamanca Plain, Population Structures of Small
                                                                Places and Medium-Sized Towns (see Appendix T)
            of cultivation rather than undergoing fission. The regions of deserted villages in France experienced the same phenomenon.[35] It
       would be tempting to ascribe the choice to the peasants themselves, kept in their

       [35] Pesez and Le Roy Ladurie, "Deserted Villages," 85. See also Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 393–94.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
