Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

               Poor Plains



                   SC                         11                          1,094                       61



                   SD                         12                          638                         44



                  Hilly



                   SE                         19                          596                          3



                   SF                         11                          846                         54



                 Sierra



                   SG                         25                          485                         25



                   SH                         26                          400                          0



                   SI                         17                          486                          0



           SOURCES. AHN, Hac., Catastro, Salamanca, estados seglar, eclesiástico, and eclesiástico patrimonial.



            a Total income from land divided by the total number of men reported in the catastro to engage in
                                       agriculture: labradores, hortelanos, jornaleros.



                                                     b From Table 18.1.




                                                                                          ― 665 ―
       rías have the highest readings in per capita income, although they include the three zones with the poorest soil. It seems correct to
       conclude that despoblados and alquerías raised the mean productivity of agricultural labor in these zones because the productivity of
       farmers was greater here than in the neighboring towns, thus reinforcing the assumption made above. One can recall that Pedrollén had
       the highest per capita income of all our towns, though little went to the laborers.
             One might be led to conclude that alquerías and, especially, despoblados were a boon to the vecinos of nearby towns, who could
       expand their income on land where the marginal productivity of their labor was higher than that in their towns. On the other hand, the
       Ricardian model we found applicable to individual towns in Part 2 would postulate that the excess return from the depopulated places
       would go to the owners, who could benefit in high rents from the competition among prospective tenants. As population increased in the
       towns and exploitations became subdivided by inheritance or new leases, young farmers would be looking for any solution to the
       economic squeeze. They would pay high rents for entradizas, even though these required a greater input of their own and their draft
       animals' time in travel. In Part 2 we concluded that the rent for Narros jumped 50 percent in three decades as the town councils of La
       Mata and Carbajosa de Armuña competed for its use. [36] Nearby, the vecinos of Villaverde paid about 38 percent of the harvest as rent
       in the despoblados of La Cañada and La Cañadilla at midcentury, whereas the rent for land in Villaverde was about 31 percent of the
       harvest, itself a high rate.[37] Rents kept going up, but harvests did too. Our information on harvests is sporadic, and the ratio of rent to
       harvest in any specific year depended greatly on the size of the harvest. In 1789 the ratio for these despoblados was 34 percent; the rent
       established for La Cañada in 1803 was 37 percent of the good harvest in 1801 (1803 was a famine year). In 1805 rents were lowered,
       harvests were good, and the ratio for La Cañada and La Cañadilla together was 22 percent.[38] One gets the impression that owners and
       tenants were agreed on a rent equal to 35 to 40 percent of the harvest, higher than any recorded in the towns. Owners clearly gained,
       but peasants in the rich zones might get more return for their labor too, since per capita harvests were two to three times as high in the
       despoblados, if my earlier reasoning is valid.

       [36] See above, Chapter 7, section 7.

       [37] See Chapter 8, section 1, and Table 8.10.

       [38] From above, Chapter 8, section 5, and the Villaverde tithe register (AHPS, Hacienda, libro 167).


                                                                                          ― 666 ―
       In the poor zones some labradores faced rack rent, to judge from complaints to the crown.
             These examples on the whole support the Ricardian model. Although peasants who succeeded in getting leases to despoblados
       received a greater marginal return for their labor than they did in their villages, especially at the end of the century when inflation raised
       the price of their harvests, most owners exerted themselves to siphon off any excess per capita income, once the rigidities of the
       situation were overcome. This fact explains why peasants did not move into the despoblados: the owners did not let them because they
       sensed that a permanent settlement would soon reduce the marginal productivity of labor and the share the owner could extract.
              We can now understand the economic motivation behind the creation of despoblados. A corollary of this conclusion is that a larger




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
