Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

                   SG                           25.3                        9.8                       37.5



                   SH                           31.8                        7.4                       41.5



                    SI                           9.7                       32.9                       45.8



              Specific cities



                         Salamanca city (adjoining



              SA, SB, SC)                      (15.3)a                      9.3                      (7.5) a



         Alba de Tormes (in SB)                  5.2                       10.8                       16.6



            Ledesma (in SD)                      6.6                       58.8                       71.6



              Béjar (in SH)                     24.4                      125.6                      167.8



          Barco de Ávila (in SI)                23.5                       19.5                       47.5



            Piedrahita (in SI)                  (6.0) a                    28.0                       20.3



                                          NOTE. See Appendix U for population figures.



                                                          a Decrease.



       would appear to have been growing faster than the poor plains between 1786 and 1826, but the pattern is reversed between 1826 and
       1857. One might argue for some exogenous explanation—the Napoleonic war, for example—or one may simply suspect the accuracy of
       Miñano's figures for 1826. Even if a consistent pattern were to appear, however, one cannot know whether population growth was a sign
       of prosperity or was producing a Malthusian squeeze on resources, as it did in La Mata in the late eighteenth century.
             A greater indication of the economic effect of the nature and size of exploitations may be deduced from the demographic behavior of
       the local urban centers. If the countryside were furnishing a market, it should


                                                                                          ― 678 ―
       have spurred the growth of the centers of distribution. The main ones were the cabezas de partido. Salamanca city was the economic
       focus for most of the plain. Its population declined in the quarter century after the disentail of Carlos IV and still had not recovered its
       1786 level by 1857 (Table 18.9). The first census that shows a larger population is 1877. Alba de Tormes, which shared the leadership of
       the rich plains with Salamanca, grew much more slowly than its zone. On the other hand, Ledesma, capital of a poor plains zone with
       despoblados that evolved into dehesas, grew more rapidly than its zone. Obviously the rate of population increase depended on many
       variables, but there is no indication that the rich plains of Salamanca offered a rural market that might have decisively supported an
       industrial revolution.
             The sierra zones provide another check. The return from the land per vecino in agriculture was low, but the land was mostly in local
       hands, and disentail increased the peasants' share of it. Patterns of land purchase showed a more egalitarian society and less involvement
       in the market, despite the production of wool and flax. Even a casual visit to the area reveals houses in the towns and villages that
       betoken former prosperity, and dates on lintels indicate the period of the construction of many to be the eighteenth and early nineteenth
       centuries. In the nineteenth century, these areas appear to have planted their linen fields with potatoes, increasing food production but
       not marketable income. [62] Despite this apparent well-being, the peasants provided little market for outside goods, to judge from
       available indications. With the exception of Béjar, which enjoyed a manufacturing boom, the cabezas de partido did not keep up with local
       population growth.
             This line of reasoning, admittedly inconclusive, does not support the theory that Spain had the potential for an industrial revolution
       based on a peasant prosperity that could come from a wide distribution of land. A more tenable argument can be made that the términos
       redondos and the dehesas they evolved into, by specializing in animal husbandry, offered an economic stimulus. Even if the owners
       invested none of their income in productive enterprises (a fact that is assumed rather than known, some may have bought railroad stock,
       while the mere fact of creating dehesas involves some investment in the land), their role may have been beneficial. By drawing income
       from the countryside to the city, they encouraged urban growth. Economic historians have distinguished between cities as engines of
       growth and parasitic cities that suck

       [62] Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos," 89.


                                                                                          ― 679 ―
       the surplus from their hinterlands through tithes, rents, and feudal levies. Madrid has been identified as the prime example of such a
       parasite. [63] Although most of our big buyers, the purchasers of despoblados, lived in Salamanca city and other places nearer than
       Madrid, their role fits that of an elite fueling parasite cities.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
