Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       2

       In Salamanca province there were eighty-five buyers in Level 4, divided by sex and title as in Table 19.1. I have been able to identify the
       residence (vecindad ) of fifty-six of them. [2] Thirty-seven lived in Salamanca city, thirteen in other towns of the province, and six outside
       the province. The capital of the province had 66 percent of those whose residence is known. Although that of twenty-nine buyers is
       unidentified, it is likely that many of them also lived in Salamanca city, in view of the nature and location of their purchases. Only one
       other place in the province, Ledesma (zone SD), cabeza of the largest partido after that of Salamanca city, had two big buyers. Alba de
       Tormes (SB), Béjar (SH), and Barco de Ávila (SI), also cabezas de partido, had one each, and the other eight were found in secondary
       towns. To judge from the disentail, Salamanca city, with its cathedral, university, provincial administration, and regional market,
       dominated the province not only in comparison with other towns in the province but with the rest of Spain.
              The big buyers known to be living in Salamanca city were a distinguished group. Only one lacked the appellation don or doña. I
       have

       [1] To compound the inherent difficulties, I had a suitcase stolen containing most of my notes from extended research in both provinces.
       Although I reassembled most of the material lost on this occasion, my resources permitted me to make only an abbreviated search of the
       notarial records for a second time.

       [2] For the large buyers in Salamanca I have used the following sources: AHPS, Contaduría, libros 850–56; Sección Notarial, legajos
       3463, 3464, 3470, 3626, 3629, 3844, 5637, 5908, 5909, 5912, 5913.


                                                                                                ― 683 ―


                                 Table 19.1. Level 4 Buyers, Jaén and Salamanca Provinces



                                     Untitled



                               Men         Women            Don a       Doña        Priests b    Other      Total



              Jaén              29              0            108          6            7          1c            151



           Salamanca           18d              0             59          4            4           0            85



                                                SOURCE. AHPM, deeds of deposit.



               a This column includes two titled aristocrats in Jaén and two titled aristocrats in Salamanca.



        b Only those persons identified as priests in the deeds of deposit. Some unidentified priests may be listed
                                                    under "Don" (see Appendix O).



                                 c The hospital of the Order of San Juan de Dios in Andújar.



                            d Salamanca "Men" includes two "unnamed" buyers (see Chapter 15).



       gleaned additional information about all but seven and have grouped them as shown in Table 19.2. Four were clergymen, two of them
       prebendaries of the cathedral. (The latter included don Lorenzo Piñuela, the second buyer in both La Mata and Villaverde.) At least four
       and maybe a fifth belonged to the faculty of the university. Six were involved in various levels of government, including two notaries
       (escribanos). Of these, two served the crown as administrators of the Consolidation Fund (the concept of conflict of interest had not yet
       developed), and two others were associated with the municipal government: one was the widow of a former regidor whom we have met
       as the buyer of half the término redondo of Pedrollén and the other was don Antonio Rascón, Vizconde de Revilla y Barajas, a hereditary
       regidor. Another six were in the legal profession. Seven were engaged in business, as merchants, stewards (administradores) of landed
       estates, and a farmer of church revenues. (Among the merchants was don Josef Puyol, fourth buyer in La Mata, and don Francisco Alonso
       y Moral, biggest buyer in Villaverde.)[3] Agriculture was represented by a landowner and a livestock owner. The only person not styled
       don or doña was one of the stewards.
              The church, the university, the state, and the municipal council, the

       [3] The two brothers don Josef and don Manuel Puyol made all their purchases together, appearing in the deeds as "D. Josef Puyol y
       hermano, vecinos y del comercio de Salamanca" (for example, AHPS, Contaduría, libro 851, f. 322). A contemporary list of merchants of
       Spain dated 1806, now in the archives of the Banco de España, even names them this way (Archivo del Banco de España, legajo 708).
       Evidently partners, I have considered them as a single buyer.


                                                                                                ― 684 ―


                     Table 19.2. Occupation of Level 4 Buyers, Vecinos of Salamanca City




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
