Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       populous, extensive, and productive than the ordinary alquería. Narros was even bigger, richer, and after the resettlement of 1789, more
       populous. As a group these eight places had active economies in 1750. Their mean annual return was 1,700 EFW, and only one produced
       less than 600 EFW. Only this last needed no outside labor; the other seven had twelve vecinos and, by my estimate, required the labor of
       forty nearby farmers. [52]
             Disentail provided the opportunity for individuals to establish themselves as farmer-owners in them, something the royal
       colonization had failed to do. The kind of person who rented tierras entradizas now took the opportunity to buy them. Two vecinos of La
       Mata fit this description, Josef Rodríguez and Julián Gómez, who joined forces to buy some fields in Narros. [53] It is hard to identify such
       people in the Madrid records because the deeds seldom give their residence. Gabriel Gómez, who purchased eight fields in the despoblado
       of Malpartida (SC), could have been a nearby labrador, for he was not called don. Antonio Angozo was a vecino of Zaratán, where he
       bought the huerta mentioned above and a house.[54]
             The people who bought entire términos redondos or shares in them were quite different. The majority belonged to the top level of
       buyers and had no intention of farming themselves. They were addressed as don and lived at a distance, half of them in the city of
       Salamanca, three in Ledesma, cabeza de partido, a few in other big towns, three outside the province. They bought not to farm but to
       invest, letting others do the dirty work. Most of these individuals will appear again in the next chapter on big buyers, so we need pursue
       them no further here. With them were some lower-ranked buyers, about whom we can tell very little. Nine made only one purchase,
       acquiring shares in various términos redondos, all located in the poor zones, SC, SD, and SF. Two men and a woman lacked the don or
       doña. Not large investors in disentail, they chose to become partners in ownership of a despoblado, where,

       [52] These places were SA, Narros; SB, Castañeda, Pinilla, Revilla de Cantalpino, Sordos; SC, Malpartida, Pedro Martín, Zaratán.

       [53] C28355, C29393. See Table 7.24.

       [54] C21233, A7552.


                                                                                          ― 674 ―
       since they were minor shareholders, the burden of administration would lie in other hands.[55] Others in this range, five men and one
       woman, made more than one purchase, usually acquiring arable plots as well as shares in despoblados. Buyers interested in términos
       redondos came from all kinds of social and economic categories. They resembled each other only in that all had money to spend and
       chose a despoblado as a sound investment.

       6

       Today as one travels southwest from Salamanca through the Charro district or west past Ledesma toward Vitigudino, one is struck by the
       welltended dehesas with their neatly trimmed live oaks, their stone walls, and their herds of black cattle. Most of these, as the students
       of Salamanca point out, were despoblados in the eighteenth century. [56] There is a tendency to read back the present situation and think
       of the despoblados as estates devoted to livestock throughout modern times, providing riches for idle absentee owners. The protests
       directed to Carlos III by owners of large herds who rented despoblados reinforce this image. They show, however, that in the eighteenth
       century, the ownership of land and livestock was in separate hands; today the landowner is also proprietor of the cattle. Cabo Alonso has
       proposed that disentail permitted tenants to acquire the property and thus unite land and livestock in the same hands.[57] The
       information developed here suggests a different course of events. In the eighteenth century there was little specialization in most
       despoblados. They produced grain and raised cattle and sheep as a secondary activity, differing little from the towns around them. No
       perceptible change had occurred by the end of Carlos IV's reign or, according to information developed by Cabo Alonso, even by the time
       Mendizábal revived disentail in the 1830s. In our deeds of disentail the term término redondo is applied to sixteen places, dehesa to only
       three, all of them in the rich plains zones, not the primary area of today's dehesas.
            Specialization in livestock and the development of the live oak dehesa would appear to be a development of the nineteenth century,
       an economic response to urban growth and the railroads. [58] It corresponded to

       [55] A2719, A4534, C18271, C21844, C24826, C51294, C53903, C53970, C59214.

       [56] Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos"; García Zarza, Despoblados.

       [57] Cabo Alonso, "Antecedentes históricos," 75–76, 88.

       [58] Little is known about the course of livestock production in the nineteenth century. See Vicens Vives, Historia 5 : 240–42.


                                                                                          ― 675 ―
       the extension of olive groves in Jaén. Both involved production for the market based on the exploitation of comparative factor
       advantages, which deemphasized arable farming. Olive groves in Jaén and pasturage in the poor plains of Salamanca had long traditions;
       the change represented a new emphasis, not a new departure. The evidence available for this study indicates that the extension of olive
       cultivation began in parts of Jaén before the catastro and spread to other zones in the second half of the century. In Salamanca it would
       appear that the turn to pasturage took place during the demographic lows of the late Middle Ages and the seventeenth century, with an
       emphasis on sheep. In the eighteenth century there was a recovery of arable farming, only to be followed in the nineteenth by a return
       to livestock, this time directed not at the market for wool but for meat, and secondarily for fighting bulls.[59] Owners took over the
       management of the operation, expelled the tenants, and acquired livestock.
             Economic forces, not the disentail, were primarily responsible for the change. Did the disentail of Carlos IV play any role? In the
       long run, no doubt it did. It took property away from religious foundations and put it into private hands, which were looking for income
       and would perceive the advantages of change when the time came. More important, it broke the entail on these properties. When the
       process was completed by the abolition of vínculos and mayorazgos in 1836, the division of términos redondos into fixed shares would be
       unfrozen. One active owner could now buy out his partners and exploit the property aggressively. We know very little of the details of the
       process, however.
            The reform of Carlos III did not work because it conflicted with established interests and current practice at all levels. Disentail did
       work because it joined crown and active economic forces in common objectives. Has the result been bad? Certainly there would appear to
       be more social justice in a prosperous peasantry than in well-kept estates enriching absentee owners. Carlos III's advisers considered the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
