Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

              Recently, E. A. Wrigley has questioned whether any city could play the role of parasite. Even though the per capita income of
       peasants might increase momentarily if the exactions of cities were suppressed, he argues cogently, the real issue is not the immediate
       result but the potential for growth in the future. "To consume the surplus in the countryside, rather than surrender it for consumption in
       cities to meet the needs of a ruling urban elite, is no doubt gratifying to those whose bellies are filled as a result, but it is reasonable to
       view it as a small matter where the surplus is consumed, and a much more serious matter that it is disposed of, whether in town or
       country, in a way which makes it improbable that the next generation will be any better clad, housed or fed than the present."[64] In
       preindustrial economies, specialization of function was the primary means of increasing total production; it was replaced later by
       technological advance. For specialization there must be transport. The cities offered the needed market to stimulate improvements in
       transportation and agricultural specialization and thus lay the basis for industrial growth. To pursue Wrigley's argument further, "As Adam
       Smith emphasized . . . the ultimate source of most wealth remained the land and the most effective way of ensuring that the investment
       of capital added to productivity was to invest it in agriculture. It was because the growth of towns helped to liberate more fully the
       productive capacity of the countryside that their growth was important. The existence of towns made it both feasible and sensible for
       agricultural producers to specialize." [65]
             The argument can readily be extended to the case at hand. In the despoblados and the dehesas that replaced them, the owners cut
       as big a share as they could from the pie, and most of this entered the market. To increase the number of tenants would have reduced
       the owners' slice and retarded specialization, and a reparto would have gone even further in this direction. The owners must have sensed
       as much when they fought Carlos III's attempt to settle farmers on despoblados. By con-

       [63] Ringrose, "Perspectives," 77–81; Ringrose, Madrid and the Spanish Economy, chap. 13 (esp. 324).

       [64] Wrigley, "Parasite or Stimulus," quote on 298.

       [65] Ibid., 301.


                                                                                          ― 680 ―
       trast, in their own way, the peasants of La Armuña obtained their reparto. By the twentieth century the arable plots had passed into their
       hands, and even several alquerías had been sold to groups of peasants. Absentees had found more profitable uses for their capital. [66]
       But these peasants, who looked so promising, did not produce a market for industrial goods. Rather, their wheat monoculture, cultivated
       with increasingly outmoded technology, depressed them into economic dependency on the advanced regions of Spain. [67] They suffered
       also from the grip of Malthus, as had the medieval settlers of the future despoblados and as any new settlers would have done, whom a
       reparto of despoblados in the nineteenth century might have produced. Desamortización of the despoblados proved to be a more effective
       engine of economic progress than the luckless reforms of Carlos III. The Ricardian trap can appear more unjust than the Malthusian trap
       because it is inflicted on the peasantry by identifiable individuals whose power and style of life arouse our sensibilities, but considered
       dispassionately it is more favorable to the ultimate improvement of society and no more painful. The way to exorcise Malthus was through
       Ricardo, and then both could disappear.

       [66] Cabo Alonso, "La Armuña," 376–78, 401–3, 411. This is a truly fine study of the evolution of our "Armuña zone."

       [67] See Sánchez Albornoz, "Castilla en el siglo XIX."


                                                                                          ― 681 ―




       Chapter XIX—
       The Big Buyers
       One subject remains before this study is complete. Part 3 has sought to analyze the evolving agrarian structures of Jaén and Salamanca
       provinces, stressing the patterns that can be discerned from a quantitative analysis of the catastro, censuses, and sales by disentail. It
       has shown the critical importance of the largest buyers for understanding the forces behind the economic changes. Chapter 15 concluded,
       one recalls, that the Level 4 buyers in both provinces, that is, those few large buyers who spent half the total amount, were engaged as a
       group in commercial activities before the disentail and showed a preference for acquiring disentailed properties that were oriented toward
       production for the market. In other words, they represented the capitalistic sector of the two provinces. We saw also that they had a high
       proportion of men addressed as don, members of the social and professional elite. What remains is to look more closely at these
       individuals, almost all of whom escaped us in Part 2 because they resided in larger places than its seven towns.
           The deeds of deposit recorded in Madrid tell us whether a buyer was addressed as don, doña, or by a more selective title.
       Sometimes the deeds add the residence, and if a buyer had a high position in government or armed forces, it may appear. Beyond this,
       however, the deeds of deposit, our primary source for the study of disentail at the provincial level, tell us nothing about these individuals.
            To learn more about them, one must turn elsewhere. Most promising and accessible are the notarial records of the two provinces.
       (Spanish notaries kept copies of all the documents they witnessed, and those that


                                                                                          ― 682 ―
       have withstood the erosion of time are now assembled in the provincial historical archives.) These records are far too extensive to be
       searched in full for this study, but the archives of the contadurías de hipotecas, provide a way into them. The contadurías, those offices
       established by Carlos III in the partidos to record in abbreviated form all exchanges and liens of real property, noted the residence of the
       buyers of disentailed properties, indicating the date and the notary of the original deed of sale. A review of them shows if the buyers
       engaged in other transactions involving real property in the area. Since an individual tended to rely on one notary to handle all his affairs,
       one can discover other activities of a buyer by looking through the records of the notary who recorded his purchase of disentailed
       property. At best, this approach is hit-or-miss and time-consuming, but it does permit one to draw conclusions about this important
       group of people.[1]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
