Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       the disentail to acquire a portion of a término redondo in zone SD, arable fields in four towns north, south, and west of Salamanca city, a
       pasture in the foothills of the Sierra de la Peña de Francia in the south of the province, plus a number of properties unlocated in the
       deeds of deposit. [70] Meanwhile he used his influence to obtain a lease—in perpetuity—for a vast pasture called Sierra Menor owned by
       the city and located on the northern slopes of the Sierra de la Peña de Francia. It contained 1,140 huebras (over 500 hectares), and the
       vizconde got it for only 1,140 reales a year. [71] He would appear to have owned large herds in at least two parts of the province, for
       which he was acquiring extensive pastures through purchase and lease, while at the same time receiving rent in kind from arable plots
       located in many different places.
              Whatever their status—clergymen, laymen, aristocrats, peasants, or religious institutions, local residents or absentees, old or new
       owners—they all followed a similar approach to landowning: spread your properties widely and hold various types of land. The pattern
       had its roots deep in the old regime and was still very much in force. According to the generally accepted explanation, no rational, or
       even irrational, economic planning lay behind the aristocratic practice of scattered estates. Critics have explained it by pointing to the
       institution of the mayorazgo, which was developed with the primary purpose of protecting future generations of a titled family from the
       ravages of a spendthrift heir and thus maintaining Spain's nobility from economic decline. [72] When two heirs to mayorazgos married,
       their estates would be brought together in

       [68] See Artola, Contreras, and Bernal, Latifundio, 32–48 and Map 3. Nader, "Noble Income in Sixteenth-Century Castile," 417–21,
       describes how a vast network of properties was built up from New Castile to Granada.

       [69] Pelagarcía, see AHPS, Contaduría, libro 855, f. 167 (1805).

       [70] TR Zafroncino, Madrid C14699, 14700 (1802); arable, C12683, C13158, C17953 (1802), AHPS, Contaduría, libro 853, f. 96 (1802);
       unlocated Madrid C14645 (1802), C50319 (1806), C51247 (1807).

       [71] AHPS, Contaduría, libro 855, f. 84r–v (1804).

       [72] This is the explanation offered by Carr, "Spain," 48–49. It is a commonplace.



                                                                                          ― 704 ―
       the hands of succeeding generations, much as Charles V brought together his vast empire across the face of Europe. If royal marriage
       alliances produced dynastic monarchies, aristocratic marriages produced what might be called dynastic landholdings.
             These vast estates have been roundly denounced. To read the economic history of Spain is to hear repeatedly the dirge that its
       grandes, who enjoyed their princely incomes without caring a fig for the condition of their estates or the suffering of their peasants, were
       over the centuries responsible for the low productivity of Spanish agriculture and the poverty of the countryside. Unable to live on more
       than a small portion of their estates, they gave up any attempt to be resident owners and escaped to Madrid, center of the royal court
       and of social intercourse with their peers, leaving their estates and their peasants to the mercies, neither tender nor enlightened, of their
       stewards.
             Structurally one may well compare the aristocratic penchant for broadcasting their estates to the well-known feature of north
       European open-field farming, the scattered collections of strips worked by individual peasant households. Its inefficiency has also been
       frequently censured, both by eighteenth-century agricultural reformers like Arthur Young and by later economic historians. Scattered strips
       wasted the time of the peasants and their draft animals in unnecessary trips back and forth across their village fields and raised the cost
       of fencing to prohibitive levels even where local law and custom might have permitted enclosure. Recently, the economic historian Jan de
       Vries has compared the economic advantages of integrated peasant family farms to the disadvantages of exploitations consisting of
       scattered strips. In contrast to aristocratic entails, which are blamed for assembling excessively large holdings, the strip system,
       according to de Vries, led to unchecked distribution of the parcels among heirs and resulted in individual exploitations that could not
       engage the full labor of the owners or support their families.[73] The arguments hold equally well for the irregular scattered plots of
       Castile.
             Some people in Spain were aware of the arguments in favor of concentrated ownership. In 1803, one may recall, the king
       authorized owners of mayorazgos and other lay entails to sell their outlying holdings in order to purchase disentailed properties nearer
       their main estates, "to facilitate . . . the gathering of the scattered estates that belong to them, in which [possibility] they have so much
       interest because of the savings

       [73] De Vries, Dutch Rural Economy, 1–17.


                                                                                          ― 705 ―
       in cost of administration and because of the advantage of being able to attend themselves to achieving the improvement of which the
       estates are capable, with great potential benefit to the public welfare from the advance and general development of agriculture."[74] How
       many noble owners took advantage of this offer is not known. The example of the large Salamanca buyers suggests that very few were,
       like Alonso y Moral, convinced of the benefits of concentration.
             Opportunity, of course, controlled to a certain extent what they could buy, but so many properties were going on sale that they
       could pick and choose, as Alonso y Moral did. The explanation lies not in constraint or even accident, but in conscious motivation. Their
       strategy implied little direct involvement with the farming of their lands. They did not intend to inspect their holdings in person or through
       their stewards, certainly not regularly. Instead they were happy to sign leases with tenants who took full charge of what went on in the
       fields and fulfilled the wishes of their landlords by presenting their rent in kind or in coin each year on the appointed day. Miguel Artola
       argues correctly that the policy of great owners of leasing their lands to others who carried out the direct exploitation was a rational
       economic decision when their properties were so dispersed that they were perforce absentee owners in most places. [75] His implication is
       that the dispersal forced the policy on the owners. The example of the buyers in Salamanca indicates that the policy was accepted
       wisdom and governed the creation of estates, both great and small, rather than vice versa.
            In an attempt to explain the enigma of why the system of scattered strips common to English villages was established in the Middle
       Ages and preserved long after the development of markets for agricultural products had shown the advantages of consolidation, Donald
       McCloskey has argued that farmers practiced it because it diminished the risk from natural disasters and consequent poor harvests.
       Scattered strips were an economically rational arrangement in an age that did not yet know crop insurance.[76] Fifty years ago Marc
       Bloch reached much the same conclusion with reference to the pattern of scattered strips in France: "If the plots were dispersed . . .




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
