Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       purchases within the cultivated zones of their towns, but almost all kept them within clearly defined geographic and economic units that
       centered on nucleated settlements. In Salamanca purchases were spread over regions stretching two or three times more each way, and
       many villages could lie between the properties of a single buyer.
             The villages of the wide plains of Salamanca were economically dependent on the provincial capital, whereas Jaén city had much
       less impact on the units politically under it. Although this difference can be associated with the distinct buying patterns, one has the
       impression that the Jaén buyers, many of them already local landowners, saw themselves as managers rather than investors. They may
       well have intended to oversee the actual farming more than the religious institutions whose place they took. Chapter 16 showed us that
       Jaén province had been expanding its olive groves and commercializing its agriculture for many decades, and its landowning class was
       aware of the potential for further growth. Purchasers, especially large purchasers, would have a more-than-average share of this
       awareness. Desamortización provided an opportunity to accelerate the development of Jaén agriculture.
             The last chapter showed that it hastened commercialization in Salamanca, but here it was through buyers who were not prone to
       management, and almost in spite of them. The commercialization of the countryside progressed in the nineteenth century in the términos
       redondos, despoblados that became cattle ranches devoted to the production of meat. Their owners planted them with live oaks,
       surrounded them with stone walls, and produced the magnificent estates visible today. Arable farming on small plots became a less
       attractive investment, as the growing population of the villages pressed more and more against the limits of production. By the end of
       the century, the absentee owners had sold off the plots to the peasants, no doubt seeking to transfer their capital to more obvious
       growth sectors. Thus, ironically, Alonso y Moral, the one buyer with a clear sense of commercial purpose, was setting out on a dead-end
       road in acquiring his thousand arable plots. The buyers with


                                                                                          ― 711 ―
       the investor's mentality, who hedged their bets by purchasing both despoblados and scattered plots, found themselves on one main road
       even as the other led them nowhere. Commercial expansion would not hit the open-field villages until the parcellary concentration of the
       Franco era produced larger, economically viable holdings and state credit permitted a technological transformation: modern agricultural
       machinery, deep-well irrigation, and a smaller, more efficient labor force. Then sugar beets, soy beans, and sunflowers, modern
       commercial crops, would replace wheat, with its large component of subsistence consumption.
             At the top level of buyers the disentail attracted the established elite of the old regime. Where these were men who already were
       experiencing the opportunities of a wider market, as in Jaén, disentail would be an impetus toward more rapid development. Where, as in
       Salamanca, the elite that produced the buyers looked on the land as an investment in a sure but stable source of income, the effect of
       disentail would be much less radical. New land was being put under the plow, as we have seen, but in the despoblados and términos
       redondos, not in the nucleated villages, which already cultivated all their land. Here was the growth sector, and here, later, would be the
       sector of development toward livestock, but the buying patterns of the purchasers of términos redondos show that they were not aware
       of the difference. The lesson came to later generations. Once again we see that disentail could act as a catalyst for change, but the
       changes it led to—agricultural as well as social— depended on existing conditions, one of which was the mentality of the people with
       money to invest in land.


                                                                                          ― 712 ―




       Chapter XX—
       Between Two Ages
       On Friday evening, 18 March 1808, reports reached Madrid of rioting in Aranjuez and, on Saturday afternoon, of the discovery and arrest
       of Manuel Godoy, believed by large numbers of Spaniards to be the cause of their country's ills. The populace was already alarmed by
       news that French troops were approaching the capital after occupying various cities in the north of the country, reputedly on a mission to
       protect Spain from a possible British invasion. The news from Aranjuez drew a crowd to the palace of Godoy—today the ministry of war
       on the Plaza de Cibeles—which it entered and sacked, tossing into a huge bonfire his papers, paintings, and precious furniture. That
       evening, while Carlos IV was signing his abdication in Aranjuez, the crowd spread through Madrid, laying waste the houses of Godoy's
       relatives and supporters and those of royal officials to whom the public allocated a share of the blame for its suffering. These included
       the residences of Manuel Sixto Espinosa, director of the Consolidation Fund, and Miguel Cayetano Soler, secretary of hacienda.
             No one was more responsible than Soler for the desamortización carried out by Carlos IV. He had been named secretary of hacienda
       in the dark spring of 1798, replacing the much-heralded Francisco de Saavedra, who in his few months in office had failed to restore the
       royal credit. Soler it was who convinced the king to sign the decrees of 19 September 1798 that set disentail in motion, arguing that only
       this measure could save "the stability and very existence of the government." Soler then drew up the detailed instructions to carry out
       the sales, and during


                                                                                          ― 713 ―
       the last ominous decade of the old regime, he held responsibility for royal finances, drawing upon himself opprobrium for the fiscal
       catastrophes and the attack on church property. The mob that sacked his house set out to find him. According to Godoy's memoirs, they
       encountered him leaving church after hearing mass, accompanied by a monk, and assassinated him. Such was the recompense of the
       angry citizens of Madrid for his struggle to save the king's credit and reform the property structure of Spain, the only mortal atonement
       they exacted in these days of rioting.[1]
              Next to their desire to obtain recognition of the accession of Fernando VII at home and abroad and their concern over the presence
       in Spain of Napoleon's forces, the fiscal crisis was the most immediate worry of the young king's advisers. They sought to cast the blame
       for it on the administration of the Consolidation Fund. On 22 March a royal order closed the fund and placed its affairs in the hands of
       the Council of Castile. [2] At this news, the opponents of desamortización spread the report that Fernando VII had stopped the sale of
       ecclesiastical properties. This was but wishful thinking, for the new king needed this source of funds as desperately as his father had. On
       12 April the Council of Castile published a letter discrediting the rumor and informing the public that "the sale of secularized ecclesiastical
       properties and the other affairs and taxes of Consolidation will continue as heretofore."[3]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
