Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       everyone had some hope of avoiding the full impact of the natural or human disasters—hailstorms, plant diseases, devastation—that
       might descend upon a place without

       [74] RC, 3 Feb. 1803. AHN, Hac., libro 8555, no. 6375.

       [75] Artola, Contreras, and Bernal, Latifundio, 49–51.

       [76] McCloskey, "Persistence of English Common Fields."


                                                                                          ― 706 ―
       destroying it completely." [77] In his study of the agrarian economy of early modern Poland, Witold Kula applies a similar explanation to
       the vast dispersed estates of the Polish nobility. While they created difficulties and expenses of administration, they provided a form of
       insurance from natural calamities and the destruction of war. Since most disasters would affect only part of the country at one time, the
       nobleman could use the product of his unscathed properties to rebuild those that had been devastated.[78] A letter of Pliny the Younger
       written at the end of the first century after Christ reveals that the policy of distributing one's landholdings may be of very ancient origin.
       Debating whether to buy a fine rural estate contiguous to one he owned, and intermixed with it, which would provide the advantage of
       using the same agent for both, he reasoned, "I don't know whether it is prudent to venture so much of one's property under the same
       climate, and to the same casualties; it seems a more sure method of guarding against the caprices of fortune, to distribute one's
       possessions into different situations."[79]
             Spanish society of the old regime was permeated with a timeless folk wisdom that admonished anyone who looked to the land for
       his income not to put all his eggs in one basket. Scattered aristocratic estates dominated Spain at the national level, and scattered plots
       dominated the grain districts of Castile at the village level. In between, ecclesiastical owners and big buyers dispersed their holdings
       throughout their regions. Glorified peasants, they turned the plains around Salamanca into a vast three-field system. The mentality that
       preferred dispersal ran the social gamut from top to bottom. Scattered plots were not the creation of peasants alone. Indeed, in most
       instances, the peasant rented his plots in a set from a larger owner, very likely a religious institution before disentail and an individual
       afterwards. In turn the predecessors of the current owners may have received them as a series of bequests or purchased them from
       peasants, with the actual origin of the dispersal being lost in time, in Spain as in northern Europe.
             In a classic passage, Marc Bloch described how the medieval French lord in the process of substituting rent for labor dues from his
       serfs transformed himself from the manager of a business—an entrepreneur, if you will—into a stockholder in the land. [80] Our wealthy
       Castilian buyers acted like the later medieval lords, but it would be a mistake to

       [77] Bloch, Caractères originaux 1 : 56.

       [78] Kula, Economic Theory, 146.

       [79] Pliny, Letters, book 3, letter 19.

       [80] Bloch, Caractères originaux 1 : 100–101: "Il cesse d'être un chef d'entreprise. . . . Il est devenu un rentier du sol."


                                                                                          ― 707 ―
       see only the past in their behavior. Quite the contrary, they can be likened also to modern investors who spread their portfolios to hedge
       their bets. The rent these men received in fanegas of wheat or reales de vellón hardly differed from dividends on blue-chip stocks. While
       the harvest of the farmer rose and fell, the yield to the owner remained relatively fixed, depending only on the stability of the markets
       for grain and currency. The farmers had to come to Salamanca to sign the lease and to deliver the rent; transactions costs were minimal
       for the owner. Theirs was a strategy of investors, not managers.

       6

       Dispersal had its limits, however, as our maps indicate. The religious institutions had established the economic control of Salamanca city
       over the surrounding plains, and the new buyers, with rare exceptions, stayed within this orbit. Political administration appears to have
       reinforced transportation networks and the markets in determining the shape of different ecconomic regions. Don Francisco Sánchez
       García (Map 19.4) bought widely but kept within the partido of Ledesma. The peasants around El Mirón bought within their much smaller
       partido. An observation of Jaén province is eloquent in this respect, for here the acquisitions of the large buyers did not range as broadly
       as those of their Salamanca counterparts.
             In Jaén province 744 people made more than one purchase in the disentail. Of these, the Madrid records give evidence of only 37
       (5 percent) buying in more than one town. They included only 19 (13 percent) of the Level 4 buyers. These documents state the location
       of properties for only half the sales; [81] nevertheless, it is clear that buying across town lines was the exception, not the rule.
       Furthermore, almost all those who bought in more than one place acquired property in adjacent towns, usually centering on a cabeza de
       partido. Ten bought in Jaén city and adjoining towns such as La Guardia and Los Villares, 6 in Baeza and its neighboring towns, 3 in
       Andújar and places adjacent. Cazorla was another such regional center although not a cabeza de partido. It dominated the southeastern
       corner of the province and had 4 such buyers. When the residence of the buyer is known, in all but one case it is the leading town. Jaén
       province, in other words, appears to have been made up of a collection of small local economies through which some buyers,

       [81] Of 2,831 purchases made by multiple buyers, that is, an average of 3.8 purchases per buyer, 1,377 are located.


                                                                                          ― 708 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
