Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       buyers were either priests or titled don. Although I have no further information on them, they recall the hidalgo and clerical notables of
       Baños and Lopera. Since the wealth of the province was in land, one can be reasonably certain that most of these buyers, scattered
       through the large agricultural towns of Jaén, were members of the local landowning oligarchy, who took advantage of disentail to
       strengthen their position.
             Only three Level 4 buyers from outside the province have fallen into my net. One was don Josef Pérez Caballero, member of the
       Royal Council of Hacienda resident in Madrid, the biggest buyer in Baños. Another was the just-mentioned army officer of Córdoba. The
       third was don Francisco de Paula San Martín y Coello, a prebendary of the cathedral of Seville. [23] Only the last turns up in the Madrid
       records; the others became known through the town studies in Part 2. This means that other large outside buyers may lie hidden behind
       local agents. Yet their number is unlikely to be great. Jaén was not subject to extensive outside ex-

       [21] See Appendix W for details.

       [22] Lopera, La Iruela, Sabiote, Ibros.

       [23] AHPJ, Protocolos, libro 2183, ff. 20r–23v (1802), Madrid C14301 (1802).


                                                                                          ― 691 ―
       ploitation, but it is significant that the three who have become known point again to the church and state as sources for investment
       capital.

       4

       It is impressive how traditional these groups of large buyers appear. In Jaén city the church, the crown, the municipality, the navy, land,
       cloth trade. When one adds the hidalgo elite of the other towns, one has a good sample of the upper crust of Andalusian society of the
       old regime. So too in Salamanca, priests with fat benefices, university professors, city councillors, servants of the crown, grain merchants.
       Buyers from outside were high officers in the royal government and armed forces, clergymen, a court lawyer, a Bilbao merchant, a
       grande. Government, church, land, and commerce were the major sources of capital for these big investors, although one must assume
       that some wealth also was inherited.
            Merchants were an important minority, but one should not think of them as a rival group to the established elite. Almost all were
       dons, and indeed merchants were fully entitled to the honor. Since the seventeenth century the kings had authorized hidalgos to be
       members of the mercantile consulados of the major commercial cities, and the Bourbon kings rewarded successful merchants and
       manufacturers with hidalguía.[24] Nobility could be purchased by wealthy commoners. The famous expatriate and renegade priest, José
       María Blanco, tells us that his father, a rich merchant of Seville, in midcentury bought a privilege of nobility for himself and his heirs.[25]
       The Bank of Spain preserves a list of large merchants of the monarchy in 1806 and 1807, where the majority, but not all, appear as
       dons.[26] We may assume that the merchant-dons among our buyers were either legally hidalgos or considered themselves to be their
       equals.
            Conversely the established elite was not divorced from business. The doctor don Josef Pando, professor of civil law at the university,
       had a second vocation (or was it his first?) in administering the property of others. In 1799 he obtained, or renewed, the contract to be
       steward (administrador) of the Marqués de Almarza, owner, we saw, of Arauzo, the largest despoblado of the province. He had two
       guarantors (fiadores), a

       [24] Callahan, Honor, Commerce, and Industry, 15–31.

       [25] Blanco y Crespo, Letters from Spain, 68 (the person described is himself).

       [26] Archivo del Banco de España, legajo 708. I owe this information to David Ringrose.


                                                                                          ― 692 ―
       municipal regidor and don Anselmo Prieto Hermosino, a merchant of the city and also a Level 4 buyer. [27] He renewed the contract in
       1803, this time using as backers another faculty member and don Josef Iglesias de la Casa, about whom we know only that he was a
       Level 3 buyer. [28] Pando also administered the property of a priest, precentor of the cathedral, and at one point acted as fiador, placing a
       lien on his properties, for the steward of the Royal Asylum of Salamanca. [29]
            There was a network of wealthy vecinos of Salamanca who guaranteed fulfillment of one another's contracts, always, no doubt, for a
       consideration that does not appear in the contracts. Another member of it was doctor don Antonio Reyrruard, also of the university. He
       stood guarantor for a patrono (trustee?) of a religious endowment, [30] and in 1789 he had been involved in founding the Compañía de
       Comercio of Salamanca, an association of clothiers and jewelers, although in what capacity is not clear. [31] Don Pablo Reyrruard—from
       the unusual name probably an immediate relative of don Antonio—was fiador for the farmer of royal taxes in the large town of
       Cantalapiedra and also administered the property of a large landowner. [32]
             The desamortización gave many of the big buyers an opportunity to line their nests. Doctor don Francisco de Candamo, a member
       of the university community, not only bought for himself but acted on occasion as agent for Trespalacios before the latter moved from
       Madrid to Salamanca. [33] Notaries also got into the act. Don Carlos María Pérez Albarez de Rueda, a notary distinguished by the
       ownership of a vínculo, acted as an agent,[34] while don Juan de Andraca, a notario mayor of the ecclesiastical court of Salamanca, lent
       money to buyers of disentailed properties in the form of mortgages. The latter also had business relations in Segovia, but the nature is
       not stated. [35] These men all belonged to

       [27] AHPS, Contaduría, libro 850, f. 475r (1799).

       [28] Ibid., libro 854, ff. 5v–6r (1803).

       [29] AHPS, Sección Notarial, legajo 5912 (Bellido, 25 Oct. 1803); Contaduría, libro 855, ff. 57v–58v (1804).

       [30] AHPS, Contaduría, libro 851, ff. 2r–3r (1800).

       [31] Larruga, Memorias, 30 : 46: "Doctor Reiruard" signs a request to the corregidor to authorize meetings of the company.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
