Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain




                                                                                Map 19.5.
                                                Properties of the Convent of Corpus Christi, Franciscan Nuns of Salamanca




                                                                                   Map 19.6.
                                                            Properties of the Colegio de Nuestra Señora de la Vega,
                                                                        Augustinian Monks of Salamanca


                                                                                          ― 702 ―
       thirty (Map 19.6). [64] The nuns of Saint Bernard, monastery of Nuestra Señora del Jesús, richer than any of the above, owned a number
       of despoblados as well as many arable fields. Their income in 1800 was 1,467 fanegas of wheat and 19,358 reales in cash (at 50 reales
       per fanega another 387 EFW), plus minor payments in chickens and straw, delivered from twenty-four places, eighty kilometers east to
       west and ninety north to south. Their property reached into Zamora, Toro, and Ávila provinces. [65]
             It is true that religious foundations obtained much of their property through bequests, and the luck of the draw could determine
       where they would receive gifts. Yet the account books show that they occasionally bought and sold properties, so that their holdings were
       not absolutely frozen. Also they could encourage contributions that would fit their plans. They had a clear preference for properties that
       they could rent for a return in grain, a commodity that could be consumed or easily marketed. Of this sample, only the monastery of
       Nuestra Señora del Jesús had wide holdings in pastures and despoblados that brought in cash. Religious institutions were not, of course,
       averse to owning despoblados and términos redondos. In the previous chapter we saw how many they had and how many were
       disentailed. But even though most of them liked to receive good, white candeal wheat, they liked to see it come in from a wide circle
       around Salamanca city. The new secular owners seem to have inherited their concept of estate building from the religious orders.
            The great noble houses of Spain had also traditionally spread their holdings, sometimes across different regions of the peninsula. We
       saw that the Duque de Alba, or, in our time, the Duquesa de Alba, was señor of five partidos of Salamanca and had estates there. The
       duque also was largest landowner in five places in Andalusia and señor in nine others. [66] The Duque de Medinaceli was the largest
       landowner in twenty-four towns located in three of the four provinces of Andalusia and had other estates hardly less notable in Catalonia
       and other parts of Spain. Just running this vast establishment kept thirty accountants busy in Madrid.[67] The Duque de Medina Sidonia,
       the Duque del Infantado, the Du-

       [64] Ibid., libro 10653.

       [65] Ibid., libro 10668.

       [66] See above, Chapter 17, section 2; Artola, Contreras, and Bernal, Latifundio, 42, 54.

       [67] Artola, Contreras, and Bernal, Latifundio, 42, 54, and Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 96.


                                                                                          ― 703 ―
       que de Osuna, and numerous more modest grandes and other titled aristocrats followed the same pattern to a greater or lesser
       extent. [68]
             This study does not provide us with a map of a grande's estates, but we can observe some of the activities of a minor local titled
       aristocrat, don Antonio Rascón, Vizconde de Revilla y Barajas, vecino of Salamanca with a hereditary office of regidor. I do not have a list
       of his property prior to disentail, but it included at least one despoblado in the Charro district (SC), which he rented out.[69] He exploited



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
