Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

             The state of Spain's finances goes far to explain the decision of Napoleon to intervene directly in the struggle to determine who
       would rule the country. He induced Fernando VII to come to him at Bayonne, in southwest France, and there on 6 May forced him to
       return the crown of Spain to his father:, who ceded it to the French emperor. Napoleon in turn bestowed it on his brother Joseph and
       sent him off to Madrid to occupy his new throne.
           In the face of the popular revolt that greeted his accession, Joseph Bonaparte sought to institute policies that would save his crown.
       Among

       [1] Godoy, Memorias 2 : 249 n. There is some confusion about the fate of Soler. Marti Gilabert, Motín, 81, 204, accepts Godoy's account.
       Antonio Escudero, Cambios ministeriales, 41–43 and Cuadro sinóptico, says Fernando VII confirmed Soler in his position on 19 March
       (before his death as reported by Godoy) and he was not replaced until 15 October, by the Junta Suprema Central. Escudero refers to the
       records of the Sección de Estado in AHN. Artola, España de Fernando VII, 3–4, says Fernando VII replaced Soler with Azanza and ordered
       his goods confiscated. He gives no references. Godoy was not a witness to events in Madrid on 19 March, but a number of his intended
       audience would have been, and he had no desire to bring discredit on his memoirs by an obvious false statement.

       [2] Circular, 23 Mar. 1808, AHN, Hac., libro 6013.

       [3] Circular, 12 Apr. 1808, ibid.


                                                                                          ― 714 ―
       these, he proposed to continue disentail under the laws promulgated by Carlos IV. He also extended the process to the properties of
       other owners, notably the religious orders, the military orders, and the Inquisition, all of which were abolished, and the properties of the
       Spanish grandes who were supporting the popular rising against him. He converted these forms of wealth into "national properties,"
       copying a French term that Carlos IV had not used. Compared to the tremendous mass now available for disentail, Joseph's government
       was able to sell little, even in the provinces that it controlled, and what it did sell went at low prices for vales reales or equally
       discredited cédulas hipotecarias, which Joseph issued. The properties were disposed of without auction, largely to members of his
       government, French army officers, and some individuals who sought to curry favor with his regime. This was one desamortización that
       had little permanent effect. On his return in 1814 after the defeat of Napoleon, Fernando VII annulled Joseph's sales, while most buyers
       fled the country to escape reprisals. [4]
             In contrast to Joseph, the supporters of Fernando at the outset of the war made the end of disentail one of their priorities. The
       rising in La Coruña on 30 May 1808 led to the creation of a provincial junta of Galicia, which met for the first time on 5 June. The next
       day its first act was to ask for contributions from the clergy and wealthy laymen and to stop the sale of ecclesiastical properties, "in view
       of the generosity of their owners." [5] We do not know if juntas that headed the uprising in other provinces also suspended the disentail.
       On 25 September the Supreme Central Junta, composed of deputies of the provincial juntas, came together in Aranjuez. One of its most
       anguishing problems was to find money to supply the Spanish armies and maintain the state apparatus. Yet its early decrees included
       one, of 16 November 1808, that suspended the sale of all ecclesiastical properties covered by the decrees of 1798 and the papal bull of
       1806.[6] Thus the lines were drawn. Joseph Bonaparte would use the wealth of the church to save the credit of the state; the Central
       Junta, in the name of Fernando VII, would protect the church against further plunder.
             Some Spaniards were not satisfied with the end of disentail and wanted to recover what had been sold under Carlos IV. Their
       efforts lasted almost ten years but proved futile. The decree of the Central

       [4] See Mercader Riba, "Desamortización en la España," and for a specific example, Porres Martín-Cleto, "Aproximación a la
       desamortización." For the legislation of Joseph Bonaparte, Coleccion de los Reales Decretos.

       [5] García Rámila, "España ante la invasión francesa," 523.

       [6] RC, 16 Nov. 1808, AHN, Hac., libro 8059, no. 6964.


                                                                                          ― 715 ―
       Junta of 16 November 1808 nullified the sales paid for in vales reales for which a notary had not yet issued the deed of sale. Two
       months later, however, the junta had to revoke this very modest concession because experience had revealed that the vales reales in
       question had already been spent for the needs of the state and "ultimately because it would compromise the public faith and the
       reputation of the sovereign, who has declared these sales inviolable." [7]
             Facing continued defeats by French troops, the Central Junta in January 1810 convoked a meeting of the Cortes of the nation and
       then disbanded. The Cortes met at Cádiz in September. The opponents of disentail now turned to them for help. A small book addressed
       to the Cortes by Juan de la Reguera Valdelomar, a judge of the Chancery of Granada, voiced their sense of outrage at the measures of
       Carlos IV. He titled it Petitions for the Redress of Grievances Inflicted in the Fatal Reign of Carlos IV Directed to the Spanish Nation
       Assembled in General Cortes. Reguera asked the Cortes to annul the sales of properties of obras pías, hospitals, the Jesuits, other
       ecclesiastical bodies, and the Colegios Mayores, as well as family entails. Such an act would mark "the happy beginning of the nation
       restored through its meeting in general cortes" and would undo the ravages emanating from the decrees of 19 September 1798, "fateful
       day, harbinger of the ruin of Spain, which disguised tyranny under the mask of sovereign authority and hid the face of greed behind the
       cape of the general good. . . . Cruel day on which the pitiful poor, healthy and ill, were despoiled of all the comforts ministered by the
       charity of their brothers. . . . Sacrilegious day, on which the largest part of the property and the income of the churches was usurped." [8]
             The Cortes of Cádiz, dominated by the spiritual heirs of the reformers of Carlos III's day, turned a deaf ear to such petitions. On the
       contrary, the Liberals of Cádiz talked of renewing the disentail, despite its association in the public mind with Godoy and Joseph
       Bonaparte. They voted to guarantee the national debt, both the part inherited from the old regime and the part occasioned by the war
       against Napoleon, with the sale of the "national properties" (copying Joseph Bonaparte's term). They did not carry over the legislation of
       Carlos IV but limited the backing for the debt to estates of partisans of Joseph, of the military orders, of the crown not used as
       residences by the royal family, and of any monasteries and convents that the war would leave permanently closed.[9] The

       [7] RC, 27 Jan. 1809. ibid., no. 6972.

       [8] Reguera Valdelomar, Peticiones, 1–5, 168.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
