Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       the social and political structure of the country blamed desamortización for much of what had gone wrong. One such person was Joaquín
       Costa, the prominent enemy of the oligarchic government that ruled Spain after 1876 and critic of the agrarian philosophy of Jovellanos
       whom we met in Chapter 2. Strongly influenced by the American reformer Henry George, he believed that the only basis for a successful
       democratic revolution in the nineteenth century would have been an egalitarian distribution of the land, achieved by a division of the
       properties in entail among farmers under permanent leases. The only good measure he could identify in the whole process was the law of
       1813 of the Cortes of Cádiz, "which called all citizens to the enjoyment of the land." Its failure "involved the failure of the entire
       revolution." [21]
             From the other end of the political spectrum, Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo, eloquent defender of the role of Catholicism in the history
       of the country, denounced the motives behind desamortización and its effects:


            The church lost, but the state gained nothing. In the last analysis the only ones who have benefited are not the Spanish farmers and landowners but a profiteering
            horde of speculators and gamblers on the market. Lacking the generous feeling of the former owners and interested only in despoiling the land they have seized, they
            have done nothing to ameliorate the decline, the backwardness, and the poverty of the tenants. Instead, with the passage of time, they have called into being in the
            pastures of Extremadura and the



       [19] According to Table 5.5 the total value of all properties in Castile at the time of the catastro was 1,248 million reales. Table 5.4
       shows the value of ecclesiastical properties as 237 million reales, 19 percent of the total. There are no comparable figures for the
       kingdoms of Aragon.

       [20] See Herr, "Significado de la desamortización," 82–83 n. 76.

       [21] Costa, Colectivismo, 156 (chap. 3, sec. 17).


                                                                                            ― 719 ―


            fields of Andalusia the terrible specter of what is known as "the social question," never before visible in Spain even in the distance. [22]



              The judgment that disentail was nothing but a vast political maneuver that crushed the peasantry so that an unprincipled mob of
       speculators might wax rich became a commonplace among succeeding generations of Spaniards. According to the accepted view, Spain
       lost its chance for a true agrarian reform and instead was saddled with the later problems of the countryside. Despite the intentions of
       Spanish liberals, desamortización accentuated social inequality, making large properties larger and reducing the peasants to hungry
       laborers.[23] The English historian Gerald Brenan further darkened the picture. In his classic work, The Spanish Labyrinth, he observed
       another consequence: by taking away the property of the church the liberals deprived it of economic independence. The clergy found
       itself forced to turn for support to the powerful sectors of society, thereby abandoning the lower classes to the prophets of anarchism
       and violent revolution. [24]
             With the progress of historical writing, Menéndez Pelayo's profiteering horde of speculators, founders of the new Spain, was baptized
       with the more familiar name of bourgeoisie. The father of the contemporary Spanish historical school, Jaime Vicens Vives, described
       desamortización as "the political measure imposed by the bourgeois revolution." [25] More recently, Francisco Tomás y Valiente, in his
       history of the legislation affecting disentail, concludes: "All of them [the projects to divide land among the poor] failed, and the only one
       that prospered was the one that most suited the interests of the bourgeoisie, which in this way consumed its revolution by means of the
       desamortización."[26] This widely accepted interpretation of Spain's nineteenth-century disentail thus not only preserves the vision of it as
       a national disaster—the failure of a democratic revolution—but incorporates it into a general pattern of modern history: Spain, like other
       Western countries in modern times, passed from a feudal-agrarian stage to a bourgeois-capitalist one. The bourgeois revolution in Spain
       took place in the nineteenth century. Because the triumph of capitalism is based on the freedom of exchange of

       [22] Menández Pelayo, Historia 6 : 229–30, 238.

       [23] Such is the verdict, for instance, of Ramos Oliveira, Politics, Economics, and Men, 54–60, and more recently, Simón Segura,
       Desamortización, 282–83, 295–96, and Tomás y Valiente, Marco político.

       [24] Brenan, Spanish Labyrinth, 43–47, 188–92.

       [25] Vicens Vives, Historia 5 : 94.

       [26] Tomás y Valiente, Marco político, 162, and Tomás y Valiente, "Recientes investigaciones."


                                                                                            ― 720 ―
       the factors of production and the rights of private property, its achievement in Spain involved the liquidation of communal farming
       practices and the entail of landed estates. The bourgeoisie effected the desamortización and profited from it at the expense of both the
       old landowning class and the peasantry. Such is this account.

       2

       For over two decades, historians of modern Europe have been challenging the simple interpretation of the nineteenth century as the age
       of bourgeois triumph. Antonio Gramsci perhaps deserves credit for discovering, in his meditations in a prison of Mussolini, that the
       bourgeoisie, rather than draw the other sectors of society into a conflict with the traditional landowning estate, joined with the older
       ruling class to dominate the new parliamentary political structure; but he believed that this was a peculiar Italian phenomenon, a betrayal
       of the bourgeois role exemplified in the French Revolution.[27] It fell to the English historian Alfred Cobban to deny that the French
       Revolution itself, that archetype of modern upheavals, resulted from the ascent of a specific bourgeois class based on a new form of
       economic activity and that it brought such a class to power.[28] Nor, his colleague F. M. L. Thompson has argued, did the industrial
       revolution produce the political and social triumph of the bourgeoisie even in England, that most advanced of countries, at least not
       before the end of the century. [29] Since the 1960s, many historians have further discredited the accepted view of a nineteenth-century



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
