Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       bourgeois revolution, substituting a picture of the continuing empire of an older aristocratic class both socially and politically, even where
       industry was replacing agriculture as the leading economic sector. Still in awe of courts and titles, new industrialists and moneyed
       merchants deferred to the dominant social stratum, mimicked its attachment to the land, welcomed the brides it proffered, and ultimately
       rejoiced in the legitimation of titles of their own. Rather than a victorious struggle of capitalist class against feudal, the nineteenth century
       witnessed the embrace of the new bourgeois by the old aristocrats. [30]

       [27] Gramsci, "Notes."

       [28] Cobban, Social Interpretation of the French Revolution. Cobban had earlier announced his new view in Myth of the French Revolution.

       [29] Thompson, English Landed Society.

       [30] For convincing descriptions of the successful "embrace" (the term is Thompson's), see the chapters on Britain (F. M. L. Thompson)
       and Germany (Fritz Stern) in Spring, European Landed Elites; Mayer, Persistence of the Old Regime. A vision of the embrace in Spain
       appears in Bernal and la Peña, "Formación de una gran propiedad agraria," 157;and more generally in Herr, "Spain," 104–5. The embrace
       even appears in new interpretations of Latin American history, notably in Cardoso and Faletto, Dependency and Development, 66–69 (the
       authors see the initiative coming from the newer economic statrum).


                                                                                          ― 721 ―
       The present study indicates that a similar critical rethinking of the Spanish case is in order, for it does not support the contention that
       desamortización was the idea and the instrument of a new bourgeoisie. The spirit that conceived the measure, which inspired Jovellanos
       and Soler and before them Campomanes and Olavide, was a desire to serve their monarch and people. Some historians have seen in
       Jovellanos an agent of the rising bourgeoisie, but the process by which he reached his famous Informe de ley agraria, which popularized
       the idea of economic freedom in property relations, involved a logical development of ideas on political economy. Class interests did not
       motivate the reformers, except insofar as their conception of the evils of entail led them to criticize a legal institution that, while available
       to all classes, was manifested most prominently by titled aristocrats and ecclesiastical bodies.
             The characteristics of the buyers do not support the accepted interpretation either. The buyers appear to fall into three distinct
       categories, distinguished by the source of their wealth and their position within the economic structure. Among the biggest purchasers in
       the regions studied, those who held positions within church and state are conspicuous. The two largest buyers in La Mata, that prosperous
       village in the Armuña district of Salamanca, were a military officer resident in Madrid and a prebendary of the cathedral of Salamanca. In
       the neighboring Villaverde, the same prebendary and an advocate living in Madrid until he moved to Salamanca in 1803 were the second
       and third buyers. The person who acquired the 60-percent interest in the despoblado of Pedrollén was the widow of a regidor of
       Salamanca city. The story in the towns of Jaén is much the same. In Baños the largest purchaser (he bought over a quarter of the
       properties sold) was a member of the royal Council of Hacienda, resident in Madrid; in Lopera it was a lieutenant colonel in the army,
       who lived in Córdoba. Analysis of the big buyers in the two provinces validates the finding. [31] One of the top purchasers in Salamanca
       was the enemy of Godoy and Jovellanos, the man who displaced the latter as secretary of grace and justice, José Antonio Caballero. Of
       the vecinos of Salamainca city who were among this group in their province, over one-third were members of the clergy or the university
       faculty or held state or municipal offices (Table 19.2). The information on Jaén

       [31] See above, Chapter 19.


                                                                                          ― 722 ―
       is less complete, but we found that of the big buyers who resided in the provincial capital whose position is identified, 60 percent were
       associated with the church, the state, or the municipality (they were a third of all the big buyers living in that city, including those whose
       occupation is unknown [Table 19.3]). There is no assurance, of course, that the funds these individuals used to make their purchases
       came primarily from their positions; they may have been independently wealthy. No doubt some of them were, especially among the
       clergy, as we found in our Andalusian towns, but enough such persons appear among the leading purchasers to conclude that for many
       of them their incorporation into church or state provided the wherewithal for their acquisitions.
             They reveal an important feature of the economy of old-regime Spain. A major portion of the gross national product flowed into the
       coffers of the monarchy and the church, from taxes, tariffs, and tithes (of the tithes, the tercias reales went to the king, where he had
       not given them away) and in the case of the church also from rents and seigneurial dues. The transference of this flow to the royal
       bureaucracy and armed forces and to the members of the clergy and other ecclesiastical employees was a major factor in the national
       economy. Madrid flourished out of this redistribution of income, while the city produced few tangible products in return, as David Ringrose
       has demonstrated. [32] The impact of this administered economic flow accounted also for the prominence of state and church officials
       among our buyers. To judge from our cases, state and church were more powerful forces than commerce or industry in allocating the
       national product to individuals, for the only merchant we have found purchasing on a national scale was don Martín de Ganá of Bilbao,
       who was a major buyer in Salamanca, with purchases spread seventy-five kilometers across the province. [33] The monarchy, the church,
       and to a lesser extent, local government gave the economy of old-regime Spain the peculiar characteristic of redistributing wealth to
       persons who were not engaged in production or distribution of either agricultural or manufactured goods. This redistribution was justified
       mainly by services of an administrative, military, or religious nature. It did not take the form of social services, as in a modern welfare
       state, although the church and its foundations imparted charity and the crown gave some aid to the victims of natural disasters.
       Redistribution benefited not the needy but those who were—or whose official position

       [32] Ringrose, Madrid and the Spanish Economy. On the role of the church in the redistributive economy, see Callahan, Church, Politics,
       and Society, 46–52.

       [33] See above, Chapter 19, section 5 Josef Mateos Delgado of San García may also have been a merchant of this type.


                                                                                          ― 723 ―
       made them—a wealthy sector. The first category of buyers is thus the beneficiaries of the old-regime redistributive economy.
            The other two major categories of buyers represent the two poles of the dual agricultural economy that existed in the two provinces
       under study. At one extreme were the local and regional notables, who drew income out of the marketing of products of the soil and



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
