Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       [38] Marx, Capital, vol. 1, part 8: "So-called Primitive Accumulation."

       [39] Bloch, French Rural History, 231–32.


                                                                                          ― 726 ―
       personally engaged in tilling the land and raising the livestock and providing the products consumed locally. Most of them were called,
       and have been called here, labradores. The category also included some market gardeners (hortelanos), who, like the labradores, were
       independent farmers, and a few hired hands and animal herders, who worked for wages and their keep. We can think of them collectively
       as the peasantry, although this study has used the term sparingly. They also produced for the market, either because they paid tithes
       and rent in kind, which was later marketed, or because they had to sell their own products in order to make these payments in money.
       Some were engaged in commercial agriculture for their own account, such as the wealthy labradores of the Armuña villages, the tenant
       farmer of Pedrollén, and the owners of large flocks of sheep in the sierra town of El Mirón. The socioeconomic pyramids of the various
       towns reveal that the more successful of these men had net incomes not far off those of the rank-and-file notables of Jaén. Their share
       of the purchases of disentailed properties increased directly as the distance of their towns from urban centers. They dominated the
       process in the partido of El Mirón and in the out-of-the-way Andalusian town of Navas.
            Because they counted on their own labor to produce their harvests, they acted differently when they bought. Naturally they could
       not buy Andalusian cortijos, despoblados of Salamanca, or large collections of arable plots in La Armuña, but they welcomed
       announcements of small sets of arable plots and labor-intensive exploitations like irrigated huertas and cortinas. For these they were
       prepared to bid against each other until they paid in hard currency more than the assessed value, and this meant half as much again as
       the minimum bid allowed. They acted, in fact, in the classical way that the Russian economist A. V. Chayanov would predict, thinking of
       the product they would obtain and not the labor needed, for the labor of the family was not a variable input cost but an overhead. The
       food and clothing of the family members was roughly the same however much they worked. Not that the peasants were devoid of
       entrepreneurial spirit. In Navas, the small labradores were turning some of their grain fields into olive groves. In La Armuña they
       experimented regularly with different rotations, seeking what would return the most, and they were eager to take up new leases in
       nearby despoblados. Those who bought fields also managed to acquire leases to plots that their neighbors had been farming, thus doubly
       improving their station within the village economy.
              These three categories do not exhaust the buyers. Some in La Ar-


                                                                                          ― 727 ―
       muña were muleteers, toilers in the rural growth industry that has played a large role in our story, some in Jaén were bakers, others
       perhaps craftsmen. But the three categories identified above constitute the major sectors that responded to the offer of ecclesiastical
       lands. It is no coincidence that they also resemble the three groups that were distinguished by the different geographic extent over which
       they scattered their purchases.[40] First are the buyers whom we found acquiring lands at considerable distance from their places of
       residence, such as the residents of Madrid who bought in Salamanca or Jaén. In spreading their purchases over a wide area, they
       mimicked on a modest scale the aristocratic houses, whose scions also resided in the royal capital. The demands of Madrid were creating
       an integrated market for agricultural products in Castile and Andalusia, and these buyers had learned how to exploit it. Most of the men
       whom we have met who fitted this description belong to the category of buyers who drew their wealth from the redistributive activity of
       the royal government as members of the royal bureaucracy or armed forces. Of course some men who bought on a national scale got
       their capital from elsewhere. Don Martín de Ganá, the Bilbao merchant was associated with the productive economy, although the
       documents do not say what he bought and sold.
              Below the men with a national vision were the buyers who scattered their acquisitions within the limits of regional economies. They
       belong mostly to the second category of buyers identified above, the landowners and others engaged in the marketing of agricultural
       products. Here, we found, they had a precedent for their pattern of purchase in the distribution of properties of the large ecclesiastical
       institutions located in the provinces, widely scattered but limited to local economic regions. They were presumably responding to
       previously acquired familiarity with their province or partido.
             Finally, the peasants limited their purchases to their own village and those around it, not only because they had less to spend, but
       because they had walked and worked here since childhood and could not now travel further afield to till the land. They replicated in their
       own hands the allotments of scattered plots they had previously rented, which had long formed the characteristic of arable agriculture in
       northern Castile, as in most of Spain and western Europe. They had little choice in the matter, of course, since this is how the
       exploitations existed and were put on the market. Most buyers at all three levels, I have argued, were

       [40] See above, Chapter 19, section 5.


                                                                                          ― 728 ―
       responding to an accepted wisdom that held that however rich one might be, one should spread one's possessions widely to minimize the
       risks from natural and other disasters.[41]
             All three categories went back far in time, and none could be readily called a bourgeoisie, except for some of the merchants and
       administrators. The top two levels were clearly engaged in a market economy, and in this respect were capitalists. One may well ask, is
       this absence of a bourgeoisie from among the buyers not the effect of a specific situation of Spain during the last decades of the old
       regime? When the absolute monarchy had been destroyed by the War of Independence and the Liberal revolutions that followed, was not
       the later desamortización of Mendizábal and Madoz the means whereby the bourgeoisie came to power? After all, the historians and
       polemicists who have denounced desamortización for this achievement hardly knew about its beginning under Carlos IV, on which the
       above conclusions are based.


       3

       The vision of desamortización as the fulfillment of the bourgeois revolution was formulated before much active research on
       desamortización had been carried out. In recent decades it has become the favorite topic for investigation in the history of nineteenth-
       century Spain, itself an area of study that has opened up only in the last generation. A careful bibliography on desamortización made in
                                                                                                                                  [42]




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
