Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       livestock and took the opportunity of disentail to extend their estates or move directly into ownership. At the other extreme were those
       who labored in the fields and directed their harvests primarily to local consumption, although their tithes and rents reached the wider
       market, usually through the hands of the notables. The wealth of both these groups came from agriculture, which was the most
       productive economic activity in Spain. Agricultural prosperity strengthened the ability of both groups to respond to the opportunity of
       disentail. The second group, those who labored in the fields, however, faced the combined Malthusian and Ricardian trap, the fact that
       more mouths or higher rents were always a potential, if not an actual, threat to consume any addition to their output. The success of
       their response to disentail depended in large part on their particular stage of the Malthusian and Ricardian cycles. [34]
             Although they did not produce the goods with their own hands, the notables acted as a hinge between the people who did the work
       of farming and the outside world. They included the leading landowners and their administrators and those men who otherwise dealt in
       the products of the soil. It would require a tedious investigation into notarial records, of which this study has only scratched the surface,
       to come close to identifying all the buyers who were landowners, but we have seen good evidence that landowners were a major portion
       of the more important buyers. In Salamanca province there was a strong positive correlation between outside ownership and the
       proportion of disentailed properties bought by outsiders (Figure 17.2), and outsiders on the whole were far bigger buyers than local ones.
       This is not proof that the outside buyers were already owners, but it does suggest that their wealth came out of agriculture, and
       undoubtedly many of them were already owners. In Jaén the records of notaries and registers of real estate show that a number of
       purchasers served as administrators of estates or were engaged in the farming of royal taxes and ecclesiastical revenues. [35] Many of
       them were landowners too, for they guaranteed the fulfillment of their contracts with their own real property as collateral. And where the
       notables

       [34] See above, Chapter 14.

       [35] See Table 11.23, Baños; Table 12.17, Lopera; Table 13.14, Navas.


                                                                                          ― 724 ―
       were not owners, agriculture formed the ultimate source of their income. This was true also of merchants, like don Francisco Alonso y
       Moral of Salamanca, whose wealth came from dealing in grain and hides.
             The notables included the local oligarchies or elites. Many, if not most, of them were entitled to the honorific don before their given
       names. Heading them were the hidalgos of Old and New Castile and Andalusia (where hidalgos were fewer than in the north), like the
       petty oligarchs of Baños and Lopera. Among them would be the poderosos, those villains who peopled the complaints directed to the
       Council of Castile in the days of Carlos III, [36] but they were a more numerous group than the poderosos. Surprisingly few titled
       aristocrats have appeared among the buyers. It is likely that some used agents, whose names appear on the deeds of deposit recorded in
       Madrid in place of the true buyer, but this cannot be the full explanation. Titled aristocrats do not appear to have shared the land hunger
       of the layers just beneath them, perhaps because of their already extensive holdings.
             The local clergy also belong among the notables, in terms of social status and economic position, even though they owed most of
       their wealth to the redistributive economy of the church. The income from tithes and from the properties belonging to the capellanías and
       benefices placed even the curates of villages like La Mata, Villaverde, and El Mirón on a higher plane than the body of their parishioners;
       and in Jaén many priests belonged by blood to the notability. In fact, members of the secular clergy were expected to have property of
       their own, for the catastro of midcentury divided real property into three categories: secular, ecclesiastical, and eclesiástico patrimonial,
       the private possessions of individual clergymen. We found one priest of Baños who had to produce real property as collateral before he
       was entrusted with the administration of the estates of his capellanía.[37] Our towns in Jaén do not confirm Gerald Brenan's belief that
       the clergy of Spain was close to the common people until desamortización deprived its members of independent income and forced them
       into an alliance with the upper class. Desamortización, if anything, by depriving clergymen of the source of their fat emoluments,
       discouraged the scions of wealthy families from entering the church and brought the priests closer to the common people.
              Some of the lay notables had found their way to the trough of the church or monarchy in the contracts they obtained to farm tithes
       and

       [36] See above, Chapter 1, section 4.

       [37] See above, Chapter 11, n. 48.


                                                                                          ― 725 ―
       taxes; but the wealth of this group came primarily from the market of agricultural products. A market economy had existed for centuries
       in foodstuffs—no urban community is possible without it—and it was expanding in the eighteenth century because of demographic and
       urban growth. As Marx recognized long ago, the first large English capitalists, those who made profits from their capital investments and
       the labor of others, were landowners. [38] Across the Channel, in Marc Bloch's forceful words, "In France, as in England, it was agriculture
       rather than industry that first provided a platform on which capitalism (for want of a better word) could display the disingenuous illusions
       and cruelty of its admirable and creative genius, decked out in the naivete of youth."[39] The analysis applies at least as well to Spain
       and certainly to Castile, because of the central role of agriculture in its economy.
             Even though the notables whom we have encountered were capitalists, most of them were not entrepreneurs. They followed the
       practice of aristocratic houses and large religious establishments of not concentrating their holdings. This was especially true of the large
       buyers in Salamanca, who spread their purchases so widely that there was no way they could manage them directly or ask an
       administrator to visit them regularly. The Salamanca merchant Alonso y Moral was an exception, for he demonstrated an appreciation of
       the benefits of specialization, limiting his purchases to arable fields in specific towns of La Armuña. This does not mean that the other
       large buyers did not respond to demands of the market or to changing relative costs of the factors of production. Owners of despoblados
       at the end of the century leased part of their pastures to nearby labradores to be broken for grain harvests. In Jaén, unlike Salamanca,
       many large buyers took a direct role in managing their holdings. Their society had long been familiar with cortijos and olive groves,
       estates whose production was oriented to the market and required a relatively low labor input, and they preferred to acquire these
       properties. Aware of the commercial potential in olive oil, landowners were busy turning grain fields into olive groves, even though this
       meant they sacrificed ten or more years' income from the land. But where there was no demonstrated gain to be achieved from new uses
       of the land, the notables let the peasants follow accepted practices and took their profits in the form of rent.
              The third category of buyers was found mainly among those who spent small amounts of money. They came out of the sector that
       was



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
