Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       monarchy as a whole. And yet the original patterns of disentail held firm, with the mass of rural properties going to regional elites and
       village labradores, who got their wealth out of the land, directly or indirectly. If a glittering bourgeoisie was attracting the limelight at
       center stage, it was, at least in part, as a product of desamortización, rather than desamortización being its creation.

       4

       If desamortización was not brought on by a bourgeois revolution in Spain, how does one analyze its causation? The evolution of rural
       society in two provinces at the end of the old regime, which is the core of this book, provides some evidence on this score. The story told
       here began with the growth of population. Demographic expansion was common to eighteenth-century Europe. It probably resulted from
       the disappearance of the plague, increased agricultural output, more effective central governments, better communications, changes in
       the nature of warfare, and other developments that helped induce an economic revival of the Atlantic world. Higher birth rates and lower
       death rates were a natural response. Some of the demographic growth nevertheless remains unexplained by the obvious economic forces,
       for in Spain it took place not only in the periphery of the peninsula, already well integrated by maritime communications with the rest of
       the Atlantic world, but also in the central meseta, a region little affected by the developments just noted until the nineteenth century.
       Although historians will continue to seek explanations for the eighteenth-century beginning of the modern population explosion, for the
       purpose of analyzing the process that led to desamortización, demographic growth, whatever the reasons behind it, can be posited as an
       independent and underlying cause. This proposition should come as no surprise, for a number of historians in the past generation have
       singled out population as an independent or quasi-independent force in European history. The names of Walter Abel, Emmanuel Le Roy
       Ladurie, and Douglass North come to mind, among other. [62]

       [62] Abel, Agrarkrisen und Agrarkonjunktur; Le Roy Ladurie, Paysans de Languedoc; North and Thomas, Rise of the Western World. Abel
       and Le Roy Ladurie attribute the long agrarian cycle of early modern Europe to demographic fluctuations; North and Thomas the evolution
       of European economy and political structure in the Middle Ages and early modern period to them.


                                                                                          ― 734 ―
       In the present Spanish case, demographic growth can be seen to cause at least two other kinds of developments. A first effect was to
       change the factor relations in agriculture, depressing the price of labor relative to land, while inducing a rise in the market prices for
       agricultural products. The result was to make land an attractive investment and encourage the expansion of commercially oriented
       agricultural production, which involved new uses of land: pasture to arable, arable to olive groves, and so on. Complaints had reached the
       Council of Castile from various parts of the peninsula about high rents, with accusations about the exorbitant demands of the poderosos
       who dominated the local economies, and we have found some support for the complaints in the accounts of religious institutions that
       owned land in the towns of Salamanca.
             The desire for land led persons at all levels associated with agriculture to respond eagerly to disentail. The massive sale of
       ecclesiastical properties under Carlos IV's decrees of 1798 is proof of the widespread desire for land. By 1805 the Consolidation Fund, in
       charge of the sales, was running out of the properties first designated for disposal and had to turn to those of hospitals, asylums, and
       similar charitable foundations, originally exempted from the process. Another example of the land hunger is the success of the buyers of
       the lands in defending their purchases against attempts to annul the sales, finally winning their case in 1817. During the war against
       Napoleon, as mentioned earlier, local governments met their urgent needs by selling land of the town council, often in a shady fashion, to
       village potentates. Although these sales were strictly illegal, the buyers managed to resist all later attempts to return the land to the
       villages. [63] After 1823 the government of Fernando VII tried to annul the desamortización of the revolution of 1820, yet the buyers
       established their titles under Isabel II.[64] These are but explicit evidence of the powerful demand for land present in all levels of Spanish
       society.
             Events in Spain were part of a general Western development at this time. Everywhere a basic change was taking place in the
       relation of individuals to agricultural production and the land. One feature was the abolition of serfdom and the "feudal" obligations of
       peasants to their lords where they still existed, notably in central and eastern Europe, although the most famous example was the night
       of 4 August 1789 in the

       [63] See n. 10 above.

       [64] See Mateos Rodríguez, "Desamortización en Sanabria."



                                                                                          ― 735 ―
       French National Assembly.[65] Another feature of the development was to put land into private hands, and among the private hands into
       those that would produce more for the market. The case of English parliamentary enclosures is best known and has long been understood
       as a measure to make agriculture more productive and hence more commercial. Spaniards like Jovellanos, who argued for the benefits of
       private property and the right to enclose plowed fields, knew something of the English case. In the 1790s a development much closer to
       them was the decision of the French revolutionaries to sell ecclesiastical estates to pay the royal debt. The motivation for this legislation
       has been usually described as anticlericalism developed during the Enlightenment, together with a belief in the advantages of private
       property. Historians have tended to overlook the fact that the Revolution began because of the need to bolster the royal credit. The
       members of the National Assembly would hardly have made the decision to sell the estates of the French church if they had not believed
       that there was a strong demand for land, which would produce much income for the state from this step. In France as in Spain, a pull
       was present to make the auctioning of church properties a promising way to resolve the royal debt, and the pull in both countries went
       back to a rise in population. [66]
            It has been shown that the curve of the volume of English enclosures coincided closely with the price curve for wheat, [67]
       convincing evidence that the desire to profit from high agricultural prices induced English landowners to modify local property
       arrangements and in the process pick up a share of the village commons. In Spain, disentail also coincided with high grain prices. Earl
       Hamilton's figures show that in the five years 1796–1800 grain prices were the highest they had ever been, following an upward trend
       that went back to midcentury. [68] This was not the first coincidence between prices and desamortización. The properties that had
       belonged to the Jesuits went on sale in 1769, and sales

       [65] Blum, End of the Old Order, describes this development throughout Europe.

       [66] Alexis de Tocqueville is one who recognized the importance of the high price of land at the time of the Revolution: "'Land is always



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
