Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [51] Simón Segura, Desamortización en Gerona; Simón Segura, "Desamortización en Barcelona." In Barcelona a large proportion of the
       property sold under Mendizábal was urban, and Barcelona merchants were conspicuous among the buyers of both urban and rural
       properties. The article does not distinguish these categories quantitatively.

       [52] Pardo Tomás, "Desamortización." A significant number of merchant landowners of Valencia city and local titled aristocrats appear
       among the buyers. The studies referred to in the paragraph do not analyze the buyers in the way I do; the conclusion is my own. My
       reasoning is explained in part in "Significado de la desamortización," 76–79.


                                                                                          ― 731 ―
       tido of Olmedo of Valladolid province, located to the northeast of Salamanca, Germán Rueda Hernanz has investigated the identity of the
       buyers of properties disentailed from 1821 to 1891, using not only the records of desamortización but lists of voters, taxpayers, and
       property owners. [53] Almost all the local buyers he finds to be labradores, but they range from "potentates," relatively wealthy
       landowners living in the partido capital who bought hundreds of arable plots, down to tenant farmers who seized the opportunity to buy
       the plots they had been renting. The local buyers obtained 51 percent of the land sold (by area, not purchase price), and those of
       bordering rural areas another 10 percent. As one would predict from my findings for Salamanca, they bid very high for their purchases
       (two and three times the assessed value), especially the smaller buyers, and they took over 80 percent of the vineyards and irrigated
       horticultural plots, whereas they got less than their share of pastures and pine groves (a local specialty).
             The rest of the buyers lived in the city of Valladolid or in Madrid. Buyers in the provincial capital were professional people, involved
       in law or politics, while of those in Madrid, we know only that some had moved there from Valladolid. A study of the province as a whole
       in the years 1836–53 shows that the more distant a region was from the city of Valladolid, the lower the share of land purchased by
       residents of the city. It would appear that, as in Salamanca, the urban residents, middle-range buyers, extended their purchases within
       an economic region that the city dominated, but little beyond it. [54] Most of the buyers in Valladolid had disposed of their properties by
       1879, and so had the buyers resident in Madrid. Rueda calls these people speculators and bourgeois, but he points out that they
       accounted for only 40 percent of the land and that the rest cf the beneficiaries were people directly engaged in agriculture.[55]
            The nature of the persons who bought on a national scale, that is, outside their economic region, is of interest because it reveals
       whether they continued to rely on wealth redistributed by the church and state, as

       [53] Rueda Hernanz, "Beneficiarios del proceso desamortizador."

       [54] Rueda Hernanz, Desamortización, en Valladolid, 178–79. Urban buyers predominated in all levels of purchasers in the zone around
       the city and in all but the lowest level of purchasers (those buying under 20 hectares) in those zones of the province south and east of it.
       In the distant zones of the province to the northwest and southwest, local buyers predominated at all levels. Unfortunately Rueda does
       not distinguish between urban buyers living in Valladolid and outside the province, but the majority lived in Valladolid. This impressive
       monograph has established the author as the leading historian of desamortización of his generation.

       [55] Rueda Hernanz, "Beneficiarios del proceso desamortizador," 65–66.


                                                                                          ― 732 ―
       at the end of the old regime. Some of the Madrid residents who bought in Navarre in the desamortización of Mendizábal were local people
       who had moved to the national capital as public servants or deputies, and others were high army officers, who may have become familiar
       with the region during the Carlist War. Their occupations suggest that their capital came from redistributed wealth or was of Navarrese
       origin.[56] The role of Madrid residents increased as time went on and changed in nature. [57] They were major purchasers in Ciudad Real
       after 1855, not only for resale but to keep and exploit, using local administrators. [58] The most famous buyers were the Safont brothers,
       José and Manuel, members of a wealthy Catalan family now resident in Madrid, who acquired properties in the four Catalan provinces plus
       Madrid, Toledo, Segovia, Salamanca, Seville, and Mallorca.[59] Evidently merchants, their activity shows that commerce and perhaps
       industry were beginning to challenge the state as sources of large wealth. But their brother Jaime, who bought land in various towns of
       Catalonia and houses in Madrid and Seville, was an administrator of ecclesiastical properties in Barcelona. [60] Acting as agents and
       brokers in the purchase of disentailed properties became a recognized occupation, and speculation, that is, buying with the intention of
       reselling, took an increasing share of the sales. These activities centered in Madrid, in part because bidding on all major properties could
       be made there as well as in the provincial capitals. [61]
            In the middle of the century enterprising Spaniards were exploiting a number of opportunities presented by the activities of the
       government: railroad shares, elegant suburbs called ensanches, mines, banks, and, no doubt, although we know little about it, military
       contracts. To make a business of buying and selling national properties, whether for oneself or for others, fitted naturally into the ethos of
       the period. Desamortización at its height was a different kettle of fish from what it had been at the end of the old regime, but then the
       Spain of Isabel II and the Moderado order, which brought together the old aristocratic landowning sector with newly enriched urban
       groups, was not the Spain of the en-

       [56] Donézar, Desamortización en Navarra, 307–8.

       [57] Simón Segura, "Desamortización en Ciudad Real," 98–102, 108.

       [58] Donézar, Desamortización en Navarra, 284; Simón Segura, "Desamortización en Barcelona," 130.

       [59] Simón Segura, Desamortización en Madrid, 96; Porres, Desamortización en Toledo, 416. José Safont was born in Vich in 1803 and
       had brothers who stayed in Catalonia (Simón Segura, Desamortización en Gerona, 24n).

       [60] Simón Segura, "Desamortización en Barcelona," 127.

       [61] Simón Segura notes that Madrid buyers became particularly important in the provinces after the desamortización of 1855; under
       that of Mendizábal, local buyers dominated in the provinces ("Desamortización en Ciudad Real," 98).


                                                                                          ― 733 ―
       lightened Bourbons, who had tried, however unsuccessfully, to control the oligarchies in defense of the producing sectors and thus of the



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
