Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       1981 found 12 titles between 1900 and 1959, 21 in the 1960s, and 135 in the 1970s, plus another 21 theses in progress.         The
       influential Instituto de Estudios Fiscales of the ministry of hacienda supported conferences on the theme in 1977 and in 1982; in the
       latter seventy-nine papers were presented.[43]
             This fascination with the subject has led to questioning of the role of the bourgeoisie as the prime mover of desamortización,
       although the interpretation still has its defenders. [44] I have explored the issue before, proposing that, far from succumbing to a new
       bourgeois class, the Spanish landed elite in the nineteenth century maintained its economic

       [41] See above, Chapter 19, section 5.

       [42] Rueda Hernanz, "Bibliografía" (I do not count the entries that are tangential to desamortización).

       [43] "Desamortización y hacienda pública," Madrid, March 1977, and "Jornadas de desamortización y hacienda pública," Universidad
       Internacional Menéndez Pelayo, Santander, 16–20 Aug. 1982. Francisco Tomás y Valiente directed both conferences.

       [44] The most prominent is Tomás y Valiente. Besides his classic book, Marco político, he upholds this position in "Recientes
       investigaciones." He elaborated further in his concluding remarks to the 1982 Santander conference, "Reflexiones finales."


                                                                                            ― 729 ―
       control over the countryside and political control over the central government.[45] A summary of the arguments will place the present
       conclusions in better perspective.
             The position in favor of desamortización as the instrument for a bourgeois revolution relies on two major arguments. The first
       amounts to a matter of definition. According to it, the bourgeoisie may be the same segment of society as the former "feudal" class; not
       its social origins or the origins of its wealth determine its identity but the way in which it exploits the economy. Antonio Miguel Bernal,
       who has worked extensively on conditions in the nineteenth-century Spanish countryside, explains the position in this way:


            I really believe that this type of owners [the new and old Andalusian landowners of the nineteenth century who exploited the land to supply the domestic and foreign
            market] can be considered a "bourgeoisie" because their economic power is tied not so much to the direct ownership of the land as to the system of exploitation of the
            land. . . . The system of property does not matter as much as the fact that they hold economic decisions in their hands. . . . The control of production, the control of
            labor, political control are all in the hands of this group of exploiters of agriculture. I believe that these are three essential requirements for any bourgeois group.[46]



              Effectively, this line of reasoning maintains that the dominant class in a capitalist economic system is a bourgeoisie, whatever its
       other characteristics may be. If the capitalist class and the bourgeoisie are defined as synonymous,[47] then of course one need not raise
       the question whether capitalism was introduced by the rise of the bourgeoisie or vice versa. It does not help our understanding of what
       happened in history, and yet it is amazing how commonly the argument in favor of a nineteenth-century bourgeois revolution is reduced
       to this tautology. In the present case it is not even correct in its premises, because nobles under the old regime, both the hidalgos of
       Lopera and the titled aristocrats who owned cortijos in Navas, one of whom was its señor, controlled production, labor, and the local
       political power. The Spanish case supports those like Marx who find the origins of capitalism in the large landowners of the old regime.
              The second basis for holding that desamortización formed part of a

       [45] "Significado de la desamortización"; "Spain"; and "Elite terrateniente."

       [46] Remark made during a discussion published in La question de la "bourgeoisie", 77–78. The entire discussion, 77–86, is of great
       interest. Bernal's position did not find unanimous support.

       [47] As, for instance, Wallerstein does in Modern World System, 351: "The capitalist class (the bourgeoisie ) has claimed to be the
       universal class."


                                                                                            ― 730 ―
       bourgeois revolution is substantive, namely that research into specific regions has regularly found that a major portion of the rural
       properties were bought by residents of cities, such as provincial capitals and, above all, Madrid. Since these purchasers obviously did not
       till the soil themselves and furthermore did not have aristocratic titles (although many had the honorific don ), the authors class them as
       bourgeois. This conclusion begs the question of the provenance of the capital they used for their purchases, for if it came out of land they
       already owned, desamortización was not producing a new class but simply reinforcing an old one. This study has revealed how the
       increasing commercialization of agriculture under the old regime could produce the necessary savings.
             In fact, on closer scrutiny, the mid-nineteenth-century process appears very similar to the one that had already taken place under
       Carlos IV. There continued to be three main types of buyers, those who bought on a national scale, among whom residents of Madrid
       predominated; those who lived in provincial cities and spread their purchases around local economic regions, centering on their cities; and
       the small rural owners and tenants, who bought in their towns and those adjoining, more numerous than the first two types although the
       total quantity of their purchases was less. The last group was more common in the north, where villages were small, and the share of the
       total sales that went to them increased in direct relation to the distance of their villages from urban centers. In general, the wider the
       area in which a buyer operated, the larger the properties he acquired. Although none of the studies explicitly develop this pattern, one
       can deduce from them that it approximates what happened at different times in Ciudad Real (New Castile), [48] Alava (Basque
       Provinces),[49] Navarre,[50] Gerona and Barcelona (Catalonia), [51] and Valencia. [52]
              The studies just mentioned all deal with a limited period. For the par-

       [48] Simón Segura, "Desamortización en Ciudad Real."

       [49] Extramiana, "Quelques aspects du désamortissement."

       [50] Donézar, Desamortización en Navarra, 279–309. He divides the buyers into "the rich of Madrid" (royal counselors, bureaucrats, army
       officers, and bankers) and a "regional middle class," which includes both the residents of the four major cities of the province and the
       leading taxpayers of the rural towns.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
