Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       engaged in agriculture was higher in plains zones with many despoblados than in the plains zones where villages predominated, even
       though the value of the harvest, hectare for hectare, was considerably higher in the village zones. Most of the excess product of the labor
       of the peasants who worked the despoblados was not going to them but to the owners, a result of the Ricardian squeeze we identified
       throughout our towns. The

       [81] Defenders of the small individual farm include McPhee, "A Reconsideration of the 'Peasantry,' "13 and passim, and Robert Forster,
       "Obstacles to Agricultural Growth," 1600–1603.

       [82] O'Brien and Heath, with Keyder, "Agricultural Efficiency."

       [83] See above, Chapter 18, section 3.


                                                                                          ― 747 ―
       larger exploitations monetized and commercialized agriculture. A reparto would not have solved the problem of high prices in the cities,
       for it would have reduced the share of the harvests reaching the market. It might temporarily have given the peasants a larger income,
       but the case of La Mata indicates that no redistribution could keep up with population growth and raise the standard of living of peasants
       permanently. Jovellanos showed the mind of a development economist in his reasoning, but our evidence indicates that his desire to
       create small family farms did not respond to the needs he wished to meet. He was not conscious of the Malthusian trap.

       6

       Since disentail did not produce the results Jovellanos anticipated, the question remains, what were its effects. The beneficiaries of the
       sales, we have seen, were primarily people who drew their resources either from the redistributive economic force of the state and the
       church or from the productive force of agriculture. The latter could be the notables of the towns of Jaén or the absentee exploiters of the
       Salamanca plains or the more successful labradores. In the process, the relative position of the strata was not transformed, but it was
       modified. As a group, the labradores of Armuña who bought lands increased their total harvests by more than the produce of their newly
       owned fields, evidence that they were also being awarded more leases. They were distancing themselves from their fellow vecinos. By
       taking over ecclesiastical properties, the successful members of the Jaén elites increased the power of the elites as a whole within their
       municipios but did not alter the nature of society. In Navas, a town without a strong hidalgo sector, the labradores peujaleros were
       among the gainers, creating a stronger local group vis-à-vis the absentee aristocratic owners. One result of desamortización under Carlos
       IV was to strengthen the upper sectors of local rural society, who held a middle position beneath the truly powerful sectors of the
       country, the aristocrats and other owners of latifundia and the top echelons of church and state. The term rural bourgeoisie suggests
       itself, but because it implies a specific conceptualization of the process of social and economic transformation, I prefer not to use it.
           Large buyers of lands that the ecclesiastical owners had leased would continue to lease these lands to labradores and others. But
       whenever a buyer acquired lands that had been leased to farm as his own property,


                                                                                          ― 748 ―
       the proportion of the property available to rent declined. Thus desamortización had the added effect of reducing the class of renters,
       increasing the division between the local upper group and the wage earners. The changes may have been hard to detect at first, but over
       the long run, desamortización would have the effect of increasing local social and economic distinctions.
             The statement has become commonplace that the entire process of desamortización reduced the lower agricultural classes to the
       level of penurious day laborers, because it deprived them of the use of the common lands, a resource that provided them some
       independence from the control of the landowners. The rise of rural anarchism has been seen as a direct response to the loss of this
       resource.[84] This interpretation rests largely on the assumption that the smaller labradores and the jornaleros benefited from the
       common lands before desamortización. The information provided in this study, coming primarily from the catastro, tells us little on this
       score, but it does offer some insights. There are two issues involved. The legislation of Carlos III was motivated by the desire to create
       more independent small farms out of the common lands and baldíos, which were expected to provide needed food for the cities. The
       failure of his reforms resulted in large part from the opposition of local oligarchies to giving an independent source of income to the men
       who worked for them. [85] The example of the término privativo of Baños indicates that even where a specific royal grant had long entitled
       every vecino to plant a crop on municipal land, in practice very few jornaleros did so, whereas a number of wealthy vecinos had carved
       out of the término privativo cortijos that had become effectively their private property. For whatever reason—whether because the
       jornaleros lacked the tools and capital to farm or because they wished to avoid conflict with their superiors or because the alternative of
       temporary employment elsewhere presented less challenge—they preferred to work in nearby towns during their harvest season.[86] If
       Baños is typical, the indication is that since few Andalusian jornaleros cultivated crops on municipal lands before desamortización, they
       did not lose any effective right to farm as a result of it.
            The use of public lands for farming was only one issue, however, though the most discussed under Carlos III. Tierras de
       aprovechamiento

       [84] Brenan, Spanish Labyrinth, 108–10; Hobsbawm, Primitive Rebels, 80; Gilmore, "Land Reform and Rural Revolt."

       [85] See above, Chapter 1, section 5.

       [86] See above, Chapter 11, section 4.


                                                                                          ― 749 ―
       común were counted on also to furnish pasture for the animals of all vecinos. In addition, poor vecinos by tradition had the right of
       derrota, pasturage for their animals on privately owned fields after the harvest.[87] In the small towns above the Salamanca-Albacete
       line, vecinos appear to have maintained the right of pasturage on municipal lands down to the present century. Where the issue was
       more relevant is on the other side of the line. My sources have nothing to say about the use of pastures by individual vecinos, but they
       do suggest that the loss of grazing rights did work some economic hardship on the lower classes of Andalusia. In the three towns of Jaén
       at the time of the catastro, the number of jornaleros who owned animals exceeded those without, and locally owned animals were
       pastured within the town limits,[88] so the question of pasture was a real one. Demographic growth, the extension of commercial farming,



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
