Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       hold on their inferiors, circumvented the royal orders. The king also undertook the colonizing of vacant regions in the Sierra Morena and
       Andalusia. The colonies took root, and their organizers claimed vast harvests of grain, yet the problem of supply continued. An attempt of
       the 1780s to repopulate despoblados in Salamanca province had very limited results, again because of the resistance of the large owners.
             These experiences convinced the advisers of Carlos III, of whom the most important was Campomanes, to explore conditions in the
       countryside in the hope of discovering a new agrarian law, which would end the legal barriers to agricultural efficiency and in the process
       organize rural society on a more just foundation. On their advice, Carlos III issued instructions to the intendants to survey the situation in
       their districts and propose reforms and then requested opinions on their reports from local authorities and royal judges. The resulting
       opinions and recommendations were frequently at cross-purposes with each other. Various municipal authorities defended the traditional
       municipal and royal controls of grain markets and bread prices, and some of them urged an additional control over rents. Other
       informants, more modern in their outlook, like Olavide, intendant of Seville and director of the recently established colonies,
       recommended a measure of economic freedom for landowners but hung tenaciously to ultimate royal control of the economy through
       guidance of the ways that freedom would be implemented; at least one person, the dean of the Audiencia of Seville, Francisco Bruna,
       writing before Adam Smith had published his Wealth of Nations, proposed absolute freedom to owners in the use or renting of their lands.
             The incompatibility of the various kinds of advice given to the crown goes far to explain the failure of the royal government to
       devise a policy out of these recommendations and its decision to turn to the Royal Economic Society of Madrid for a solution. During the
       decade that this body struggled with the problem, Adam Smith became known to interested Spaniards, and many of the confused minds
       inside the Economic


                                                                                          ― 739 ―
       Society welcomed the logical simplicity of the tenets of laissez-faire. When Jovellanos recommended a solution to the agrarian law that
       rested on economic freedom, drawing on Smith but echoing the judge Bruna, his proposal won majority support of the society not only in
       1787, when he first voiced it, but in 1794 when he presented it at length in his momentous Informe de ley agraria. Given wide publicity,
       Jovellanos's work convinced the royal advisers that the end of legal restrictions on the transfer and use of land was the most pressing
       need for the improvement of agriculture.
             Many thinking Spaniards, like many thinkers elsewhere in the West at the time, believed that the most productive farmer as well as
       the most reliable citizen was the small landowner. Inspired by this belief, the Informe de ley agraria foresaw that, everywhere physical
       conditions permitted, the abolition of entail and the freedom to exchange private property would in the course of time produce a country
       of prosperous owners of family farms, since, as the most productive users of the land, they would be able to pay most for it on the open
       market. The redistribution of the countryside into small farms might take time, but the working of economic laws would make it
       inevitable. Although Jovellanos was not directly involved in the decrees of disentail of 1798, his line of thinking was instrumental in the
       decision of Soler and Carlos IV.
             The conviction that legal restrictions on the ownership and inheritance of real property were economically deleterious molded more
       than the decision to disentail ecclesiastical property. The decrees also empowered owners of secular mayorazgos and vínculos to sell their
       lands and deposit the proceeds in the Amortization Fund. At the same time, they facilitated the liquidation of permanent and temporary
       liens on property (censos or cánones), by payments made in vales reales. Other legislation authorized owners of mayorazgos to sell
       entailed estates far from the main body of their holdings in order to buy land nearby, to simplify management and improve agriculture.
       Owners of mayorazgos were also permitted to "buy" properties out of entail by depositing their assessed value in the Amortization Fund.
       The mayorazgo, destined by its terms for the oldest son or in default of a son for a collateral heir, would henceforth take the form of
       deposits in the royal fund, while the current holder of the mayorazgo could leave the real property that he had bought out to one or
       more of his other children. Siblings would vie for parental love, customs would improve, and property would circulate. Carlos IV and Soler
       did not venture to attack religious or lay entails in the form of royal obligations, but their acts pointed logically in


                                                                                          ― 740 ―
       the direction of abolition, and within three decades legislation would catch up with logic. By then, landowners had discovered the benefits
       of free property.
             Although the train of events that led to the Informe de ley agraria and the decrees of Carlos IV began with concern over the need
       for more food supplies, this causative force is quite different in nature from the demand for land that motivated the purchasers. Here we
       have a clear example of the role of ideas in history. Nothing in the agricultural or land market or in demographic growth determined that
       the classical economic doctrine of laissez-faire would become popular at this time. The success of the new doctrine lay in the
       contemporary infatuation with rational solutions to human problems and the belief that the evils of society were mostly the effect of laws
       and institutions inherited from times when rulers did not listen to reason. The other solutions for an agrarian law proposed in response to
       the royal inquest were all more involved, less purely logical, and therefore less convincing to contemporaries who believed themselves
       enlightened.
             Nor, as already noted, can one attribute the popularity of the new economic doctrine to the appearance of a new social class. The
       men who made or applauded these decisions were not typically bourgeois; most belonged to the well-established sectors of society. They
       were servants of the crown, joined by some aristocrats, landowners, and prelates of the church, such as the members of the Economic
       Society of Madrid who applauded Jovellanos's proposals. If anything marked them, it was a desire to serve their country and make the
       interest of the public their guiding star.
             History seeks to recount and explain the sum of the activities of the individuals alive in the place and time it is dealing with, but the
       historian is obviously unable to discover the relations among all their experiences, their thoughts, and their actions. What the historian
       can hope to do is to identify the main forces affecting the lives and behavior of the people in question, analyze the apparent relationships
       among the forces, and assign to each its role in the events of the time. Such a historical analysis is not an abstract exercise, however,
       but should reflect the reality of the past age, because the evidence that the historian uses comes from the people of the time, as is the
       case here. On these terms, the conclusion to this story is that ideas had a life of their own, independent, at least analytically, of changes
       going on in society. The demographic evolution and the shortage of food decided the government to take action in the agrarian sphere,
       and the new economic doctrine determined the


                                                                                          ― 741 ―
       form of the legislation. In the terms of Aristotelian philosophy, population changes were an efficient cause, and new economic theory




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
