Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       and desamortización would all affect the situation. One can anticipate that as population increased, most new members of the towns
       would belong to the class of jornaleros, and their very numerical growth would weaken their economic position and ability to resist the
       demands of landowners. Very likely the proportion of jornaleros who owned animals declined, but those who did would suffer from a law
       of 1853 that abolished the right of derrota[89] and from the disentail of municipal lands carried out according to the Madoz law of 1855.
       They did not necessarily have to give up their animals, but they would henceforth have to compensate the owners for the right to
       pasture. The declining position of the jornaleros resulted much more from demographic growth, which made labor cheaper and more
       vulnerable. Because desamortización could be associated with specific acts of legislation, however, the popular mind attributed to it the
       effects of more general developments that were increasing social distinctions, and anarchist activists could exploit this belief.
             The desamortización of Carlos IV, we have seen, accelerated the commercialization of agriculture and the process continued in later
       periods. [90] One is left with the paradox that most observers of Spanish agriculture judged it backward for the next century or more. In
       part, of

       [87] Gilmore, "Class Consciousness," 152. On the derrota, see Vassberg, Land and Society, 13–18.

       [88] AHPS, Catastro, resp. gen. Q 20, asked how many animals the vecinos owned and if any were pastured outside the término. I take
       the silence on this last question, except in La Mata, to mean they were pastured locally.

       [89] Brenan, Spanish Labyrinth, 109n.

       [90] Vicens Vives, Manual, 585–86; Anes, "Agricultura española," 256–62. On a specific region, the province of Valladolid, Rueda
       Hernanz, Desamortización en Valladolid, 355. I discussed the question in "Significado de la desamortización," 90–91.


                                                                                          ― 750 ―
       course, backwardness exists in the eyes of the beholder. Compared to the situation in 1800, the one in 1900 was certainly more
       specialized and commercial, and Spain, if behind northwest Europe, was more advanced than vast parts of the world. Yet the accusation
       has some validity. Although desamortización did increase the land market, other conditions remained that hampered progress. Change in
       farming methods in central Spain could not begin in earnest until the advent of the railroads after midcentury made it easier to compete
       with world areas linked to the sea. [91] Even greater change would be introduced in the twentieth century with the appearance of
       automotive transportation, artificial fertilizers, and irrigation, both artesian and canalized. We saw how these developments affected La
       Mata, replacing the traditional grain monoculture.[92]
             The brakes were institutional as well as technological. The most obvious was the pattern of tiny scattered plots found throughout
       Castile. Large holdings in the plains around Salamanca city involved not single exploitations but the assemblage of collections of
       numerous arable plots, to be rented out to local farmers. One of the aspects of eighteenth-century enclosure in England was the
       redistribution of properties into larger units that could be fenced economically. The process was expensive, requiring special teams of
       experts and often entailing tension and conflict among the local owners. In the desamortización of Spain there was neither time nor
       money for surveys, which indeed would not have been useful since the plots for sale were surrounded by others that were not. All the
       evidence uncovered here indicates that under Carlos IV properties were sold as they were already defined, except that some large sets of
       plots were subdivided. After 1855 commons and wastes were divided before they were sold; otherwise the practice was undoubtedly to
       sell properties "as is." Since, worker for worker, large exploitations were already more productive than small plots, the continued
       existence of the plots kept the marginal productivity of labor low.[93] It was no accident that the collections of plots assembled by the big
       buyers of Salamanca in 1800 were disposed of to the local peasants by 1900. After 1950 a concerted state program of parcellary
       concentration reassembled tiny scattered holdings into tracts on which modern

       [91] See Ringrose, Madrid and the Spanish Economy, 192.

       [92] See above, Chapter 7, section 11. On the persistent grain monoculture of Castile in the nineteenth century, see Sánchez-Albornoz,
       "Castilla en el siglo XIX."

       [93] The best theoretical explanation of the economic disadvantages of scattered strips or plots is de Vries, Dutch Rural Economy, 4–17.



                                                                                          ― 751 ―
       agricultural machinery could be used efficiently. Until then, however much the land market was freed, the creation of large contiguous
       blocks was virtually impossible.
              Later observers of the Spanish rural scene, however, pointed their fingers most accusingly at the attitude of the large owners, who,
       they protested, preferred to sit back and enjoy an adequate income from their estates rather than pitch in to find more productive
       methods of exploitation that would benefit everyone. Again, our findings lend some support to this charge, although not in the censuring
       form of this criticism. When large buyers spread their purchases around a broad area, with the outlook of investors rather than
       entrepreneurs, they were following accepted wisdom, which is understandable as a method of avoiding risk from natural or human
       disasters. Unable to supervise directly the exploitation of their properties, they were content to rent them to local farmers, as the
       religious institutions had done before. At the end of the old regime, the practice did little economic harm because, given the technology
       of the time, direct supervision by the owners could produce little if any improvement. Even the reformers who wished to see the Spanish
       countryside peopled with small farmer-owners did not foresee them introducing better methods, only being more diligent in the use of
       those that were practiced. Nevertheless, as I argued earlier, this investor mentality could persist when technological improvements,
       notably the railroad, became available, slowing response to new possibilities. It helps account for the accusations leveled later at Spanish
       landowners, but it is a condition whose cause cannot be laid at the doorstep of desamortización, which, if anything, favored the more
       venturesome of the people associated with the agricultural market economy. It thus even helped to destroy the older mentality.
            This conclusion has a bearing on another common criticism of the process of desamortización, that it diverted private savings from
       more economically productive investments. In particular, it has been suggested that it contributed to slowing industrialization in Spain in
       the nineteenth century, by comparison with its northern neighbors.[94] This argument loses much of its force for two reasons. First,
       buyers who were searching for a safe investment and finding it in the traditional form of land were not likely to put their savings into
       undertakings with which they were unfamiliar and trust the management of strangers.

       [94] Giralt, "Problemas históricos," 389–93; Nadal, Fracaso de la revolución industrial, 83–84.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
