Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       audience were so convinced that desamortización would effect a reparto of its own, one may well ask where they went wrong.
             Drawing on the findings of this study, one can propose a number of answers. At the simplest level, one can with hindsight say that
       Jovellanos,


                                                                                          ― 744 ―
       giving expression to the thought of the men of the Enlightenment and the classical economists, had too uncomplicated an understanding
       of the workings of human society. He argued persistently that bad laws were responsible for the social evils he observed, most
       specifically the laws of entail, and that the proper modification of the laws would produce the desired change in society. Furthermore, the
       most important laws needing change were those involving the use of the factors of production. He was convinced that economic freedom
       would introduce the most productive form of economy by the simple working of the marketplace. His Ley agraria was somewhat more
       complex than this, for he argued that one should abandon the corrupt society of the city for the purifying air of the country, but he
       believed that economic freedom, by bringing prosperity to agriculture, would draw people back to the bosom of Mother Earth.
             Things were far from this simple. The decrees of 1798 worked to introduce economic freedom into Spanish rural society, but they
       produced little change in the society itself. Our study of seven towns demonstrates that, even when property was made free, social
       structures were "sticky," difficult to change. Customs and attitudes were too ingrained to be altered by legislative fiat. The more
       prosperous labradores of the Salamanca plains acquired plots of their own, but in Jaén the social layer that labored and the one that
       owned would remain the same, and property would move very little vertically between layers. What disentail produced was an
       acceleration of change, not a new direction.
             The experience of Carlos III's efforts at agrarian reform should have warned Jovellanos, for the king could not obtain significant
       compliance with any decree that threatened the position of the rural oligarchies. Soler and Godoy had the same trouble with new taxes
       that affected these groups adversely. The taxes were not paid, except perhaps in token fashion. Desamortización succeeded because it
       found a welcome among the sectors that Jovellanos and Soler wished to weaken. One can say that it succeeded because the push and
       pull factors coincided. When they were working at cross-purposes, that is, most of the time, the pull factor, the forces coming out of
       society, proved stronger than the push factor, the theories and objectives of the government. Social structures were closer to an
       immovable mass than royal decrees were to an irresistible force. The weakness of the crown's side was in a lack of linkage between the
       central government and local society. The king's authority might be absolute, insofar as no one could challenge it legally or effec-


                                                                                          ― 745 ―
       tively at the center, but the king lacked the machinery to enforce his wishes, for power at the local level rested with those who controlled
       municipal institutions, and these were the local notabilities.
             After the mid-nineteenth century, with popular sovereignty and parliamentary democracy, the potential was present to overcome
       the resistance of the wealthy rural sectors. The latter then discovered how to keep their property even without entail. They developed the
       phenomenon of the cacique, the agent and defender of the interests of the local established groups. By political control, the wealthy
       sectors or the caciques acting for them could hound critics and troublemakers and remove judges and officials who looked too closely into
       how owners handled workers or paid their taxes. Caciquismo made sure that the deputies chosen to parliament would not enact
       unwanted laws and that the reform measures that did get written or that came down from the past would not be carried out if they hurt
       the dominant sectors. [79] By insuring that the legislature and the ministry were bound to the established sectors, these sectors became
       even more invulnerable than in the old regime. Caciquismo represented a more effective linkage of central government to local society
       than the bureaucracy of the absolute monarchy, because it replaced conflict between the two. Through political control, the wealthy
       owners forestalled the working of a free economy and kept their properties in the family without entail. The first reason that Jovellanos's
       optimistic prediction that by abolishing entail "the natural vicissitudes of fortune will make [properties] pass rapidly from one owner to
       another" [80] was not fulfilled was that it placed too much confidence in the word of the written law, overlooking the power of the
       accepted political culture, which condoned a phenomenon like caciquismo.
             The second reason Jovellanos's vision did not materialize is that he misconstrued the economic realities of rural Spain. Economic
       freedom did indeed bring change. But change was already going on, for, as noted above, both owners and tenants were responding to
       market incentives. Jovellanos did not perceive the changes in progress. Throughout this study we have found that disentail accelerated
       economic developments, because it gave those who were getting the most out of agriculture the opportunity to control more land directly.
       If Jovellanos had not been so convinced that entail prevented rational change, he might have realized

       [79] See Herr, "Spain," 112–19, for a discussion of caciquismo and the political control of the nineteenth-century elites.

       [80] Jovellanos, Informe, 98.


                                                                                          ― 746 ―
       that the high price of food was inducing the commercialization of agriculture and that economic freedom would accelerate the trend, to
       the benefit of the dominant groups.
             Indeed, there is good reason to believe that the family farms he longed for would not have increased the food reaching the cities,
       the need that inspired the reforms in the first place. Despite the prevalent tendency in the world toward larger exploitations, there are
       those who contend that even today small farms can be more productive than large ones. [81] Their arguments echo the conclusions put
       forward in the 1920s by Chayanov, but in these terms the question at hand is badly phrased. At the stage of economic development in
       which Spain found itself in the nineteenth century, it required that a large share of agricultural output reach the market. A small farm
       tended by a dedicated family might produce more per hectare than a large one, but freed from the Ricardian trap, the farmer and his
       household would consume much of the additional product, with the result that the surplus available to feed other sectors might decline. A
       strong case has been made for English farming being more economically productive than French in the nineteenth century, not because
       English farmers got more per acre out of the land but because they did so in larger exploitations with fewer men. It was not the
       productivity of land that counted but the productivity of labor. The French peasant farm might be the ideal of agrarian reformers, but it
       kept too many men on the land, depressed investment, and created an inadequately capitalized agriculture. Indirectly it put a damper on
       French industrialization. [82]
            This study has been able to test whether large or small exploitations produced a greater surplus in one instance, a comparison of
       the despoblados of Salamanca with the neighboring villages of small peasant farmers. [83] It found that the mean product per man



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
