Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                                                                                          ― 752 ―
       Railroads, perhaps, might attract them, with a proper royal guarantee (although the continual discount in the market value of royal bonds
       revealed how shaky even such a guarantee could be), but not new industries.
             Second, much of the "investment" in disentailed properties involved the exchange of depreciated royal notes for solid buildings and
       grounds. Between 1800 and 1808 the Consolidation Fund received about twice as much in vales reales at full face value as in hard
       currency (Table 5.2). To judge from the example of a district of the province of Valladolid, the proportion paid in depreciated royal
       obligations remained at this high level through the desamortización of Mendizábal (in 1821–23 only royal notes were accepted), but it
       declined after 1855, when government paper was accepted for only its market value.[95] Whether at market value or at full face value,
       however, this paper had little use as a resource for industrialization, especially for the purchase of capital goods abroad. Furthermore, the
       most likely sources for productive investment were the large buyers, notably those whom historians like to label speculators. Yet, as we
       have seen, under Carlos IV these persons were making most of their payments in depreciated paper, and this evidently remained the
       case up to midcentury. [96] Small buyers, who struggled with each other for arable plots, huertas, and cortinas, paying in solid coin, were
       not a potential source of funds for industrial development.
              Royal governments used land to compensate the public for the resources that had been expended in wars against the French
       revolutionaries, Great Britain, Napoleon, the rebels in Spain's colonies, and the Carlist opponents of Isabel II. In each case the decision to
       go to war was taken (or had been forced on the government) before the desamortización took place; the choice of war or development
       was never presented, at least not before 1850. Given the realities of the situation, one cannot logically make the charge that
       desamortización drew large amounts of capital out of private hands, where it was a potential source of productive investment, and placed
       it in public hands, where it was put to the noneconomic uses of war.[97]
            Desamortización did not fulfill the high hopes of Jovellanos for rural reform or produce all the economic growth that was possible.
       Neverthe-

       [95] Rueda Hernanz, "Beneficiarios del proceso desamortizador," 88–90 and Cuadro 11.

       [96] Tables 15.4 and 15.5 for the purchases in Jaén and Salamanca provinces under Carlos IV. For later periods, Rueda Hernanz,
       "Beneficiarios del proceso desamortizador," 91.

       [97] Rosa, "Property Rights," makes this charge in the case of southern Italy. It is implied in the criticisms of Spanish desamortización
       noted above.


                                                                                          ― 753 ―
       less, if one looks at the reality of the situation, one cannot not label it a failure. A distribution of the Spanish countryside into small farms
       was impractical, and, to judge from the evidence uncovered here, it would have led to less rather than more production for the market,
       thus delaying urbanization and industrialization. In fact, by freeing a large proportion of the land of Spain and redirecting much of it into
       the hands of men who oriented it toward current market demands, desamortización did encourage economic growth. One can hardly
       believe that the religious institutions whose lands were sold would have been more innovative than most new owners. As for the common
       lands, whose loss Joaquín Costa lamented and indirectly attributed to Jovellanos, the redirection of their use would certainly have been
       slower if they were left untouched. Desamortización was more a catalyst for processes already under way than an independent agent of
       change, but when the good and the harm it accomplished are balanced on a scale, the good comes out on top.

       7

       One can perceive a broad lesson for the modern history of the West in this story of court and country Spain. In other Mediterranean
       countries and in Latin America, as in Spain, the forced sale of ecclesiastical and public properties was one of the most important aspects
       of the introduction of modern economic freedom. To learn how it began in Spain, who was behind it, and who benefited from it thus
       expands our understanding of the triumph of economic liberalism. The example of Britain, leader of the industrial revolution, has caused
       historians to conclude that laissez-faire was a product of the rise of commerce and industry and the appearance of a bourgeoisie based
       on them. Spain, however, was very different from Britain, and yet it accepted a version of economic freedom at the same time as Britain.
       The British case thus does not provide the full explanation for the rise of laissez-faire economics.
             In Spain the process leading to the freedom of exchange in real property can be traced back to demographic expansion beginning in
       the mid-eighteenth century, especially urban growth, which increased the demand for marketable agricultural products. The relative value
       of land rose, attracting a potential public for disentail. At the same time, high food prices, by creating a threat to public order, forced the
       royal government to consider how to increase agricultural output.
              Here the role of ideas came into play. The enlightened sectors of so-


                                                                                          ― 754 ―
       ciety, including the royal advisers, accepted the doctrine that laissez-faire was the only rational rule for economic activity. Without the
       new economic thinking one cannot explain the attack on entailed property. However much the groups actually or potentially engaged in
       the agricultural market were hungry for land, they could not introduce legislation, nor were they likely to propose the new doctrine on
       their own. The pattern of their purchases shows that their mentality was far more traditional than that of Jovellanos and Soler, who
       carried the day with the enlightened elite and the king. Once the established groups saw economic freedom in action, however, they fell
       under its spell. They became aware that laws of entail, which had been established to protect their interests, were in fact working against
       them. Their pull joined the push from the royal government to carry forward the undertaking with remarkable speed.
             The resemblance of the Spanish experience to major aspects of the introduction of freedom of property in England and France—
       enclosure in the one and the confiscation and sale of ecclesiastical properties by revolutionaries in the other—leads to the proposition
       that, just as in Spain, the explanation for the rise of economic liberalism elsewhere lay not simply in the beginnings of the industrial
       revolution and the rise of a commercial and financial bourgeoisie but at a deeper level in the interaction of demographic expansion and
       enlightened rationalism. The effects of demographic expansion made people aware of the disadvantages of restraints on factor and
       commodity markets, while enlightened rationalism gave economic freedom the aura of natural law. And economic liberalism, in thought
       and in action, was instrumental in the triumph of modern capitalism and the transformation of the old regime into the contemporary



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
