Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       provided the formal cause for desamortización and the other acts freeing property.
              If, in time-honored historical terminology, these were underlying causes, the immediate cause for the initiation of ecclesiastical
       disentail in September 1798 was the crisis in royal finances brought on by the wars of the French Revolution. Following the declaration of
       hostilities with Britain in October 1796, traffic with the empire in America fell victim to the British navy, royal revenues declined, military
       expenses skyrocketed, and the resulting deficits threatened public faith in the royal credit. Offerings of loans were not fully subscribed;
       exactions on the clergy and wealthy landowners produced more resentment than return; and the vales reales, circulating royal bonds that
       served as paper money for large payments, were exchanged far below par. Soler, won over by the arguments put forward by Jovellanos,
       convinced the monarch that the disentail of church properties was the last resort to avoid possible threats to his throne and assured him
       that the measure would benefit both the state and the people.
             Since the 1760s the reformers had been calling for the redistribution of the baldíos, which by common accord belonged to the king,
       not ecclesiastical properties, whatever their harmful effects might be. The immediate cause for the switch to the latter as the object of
       the first major desamortización was the imperative need for money and the fact that ecclesiastical estates, actively used and providing
       income to their owners, could bring in a good price, far more than baldíos, which would require inputs of labor and capital before they
       could be fully exploited. At first sight the crown intended no harm to the church. The measure promised the institutions that they would
       not lose income, since 3-percent interest on the sale price might well be more than their current net return. Until around 1806, when the
       Consolidation Fund fell behind in its payments, the institutions had little cause for complaint.
             But many persons were aware that royal paper was more shaky than solid land and buildings. The king had to take measures
       against members of the clergy who denounced the disentail as an attack on the church or found more subtle ways to sabotage the
       process. Why was the Spanish church the first major owner to suffer from desamortización? It is not usual to think of it as weak. An
       obvious reason is the ideology of the Spanish enlightenment. Enlightened ministers like Campomanes and Jovellanos and publicists like
       Luis Cañuelo, editor of El censor,


                                                                                          ― 742 ―
       criticized the idle and perhaps debauched life of the religious orders and the neglect of their lands, harmful to the economic welfare of
       the country. [75] Jovellanos complained bitterly, "What is left of [Spain's] former glory except the skeletons of its cities, once populous
       and full of factories and workshops, of stores and shops, and now only peopled by churches, convents, and hospitals, which survive amid
       the poverty that they have caused?"[76] Goya mocked the gluttony and hypocrisy of monks and priests in his Caprichos.
             Anticlerical criticism was directed in part at the charitable institutions, precisely those that the decree of 1798 earmarked for
       despoiling. Beginning with Campomanes and his associate Bernardo Ward in the middle of the century, various reformers called for the
       care of indigents, orphans, cripples, and the aged to be transferred to the state. In their eyes, the methods of the religious asylums and
       hospitals only served to prolong and worsen the condition of these persons.[77]
             With this spirit present in the government, the decision to turn to the property of the church to guarantee the safety of the crown
       came easily. On its side, the church did not present a united front. Priests were conscious of the interests of their families as well as of
       their institutions. Those like the Andalusian clerics whom we found in the towns of Jaén were members of local elites, owed their positions
       to their social connections, and were motivated by family interests. The priests with more modest origins, common in the north, thought
       in terms of their heirs, nephews being the most likely, whose place in society many of them were already furthering by supporting their
       education. [78] Many of the sales went to priests. In addition, a number of clergy, those labeled Jansenists, were convinced that the
       wealth of the church was harmful to its mission and thus could approve of desamortización on religious grounds. In these ways, the
       divided loyalties of members of the clergy meant that the church was not an independent force; it was more vulnerable to arguments in
       favor of despoiling it than its imposing position suggested.
             Just as in 1798, the later applications of desamortización were all expressly directed at reducing the national debt. As a result,
       historians have frequently seen the guarantee of the public credit (and, not inciden-

       [75] Sarrailh, Espagne éclairée, 628–61; Herr, Eighteenth-Century Revolution, 183–93.

       [76] Jovellanos, Informe, 100.

       [77] Sarrailh, Espagne éclairée, 526–35; for Campomanes, Laura Rodríguez, Reforma, 109–11.

       [78] See Herr, "Comentario," 276.



                                                                                          ― 743 ―
       tally, the repayment of loans owed to the bourgeoisie) as the primary motivation for it. The debt was, however, as this study should
       make clear, only the immediate inducement, the push that made the king jump in the river. The river was there because land was in
       high demand, and the road that led the king to it was the evolution of thought in the Enlightenment. Desamortización came out of a push
       and a pull. The immediate push was the need of the king for money, the long-term push, the belief among his leading advisers and the
       influential sectors of society that economic freedom and private property were the panaceas for the problems of both the state and
       society. The pull was the demand for land among those Spaniards who had money, because the rising price of foodstuffs made land a
       productive investment. We saw above that these people owed their available capital primarily either to the economic flows redistributed
       by the state and the church or to income from the commercialization of agriculture.

       5

       Jovellanos believed that freeing property relations and the land market would make properties pass rapidly from one owner to another
       and bring into existence a society of small landowners. With this expectation, desamortización fits into the fiscal and economic policies
       pursued by Soler and Godoy. Wherever possible, the counselors of Carlos IV sought to find a solution for the state's need for money that
       would lay the burden on the large landowners and the church, leaving the more productive sectors of society unscathed.
             Critics of desamortización like Costa have blamed it for the failure to achieve the yeoman society of the dreams of the advisers of
       Carlos III and Carlos IV, which remained the ideal of agrarian reformers down through the Second Republic. By the time the liberal
       economist Alvaro Flórez Estrada was criticizing developments in the 1830s, he saw the only solution in a redistribution of land by the
       state to small farmers, a reparto, as it was called. The critics of desamortización have held up the concept of reparto as the opposite side
       of the coin, the proper solution to the evils of the Spanish countryside, which desamortización only magnified. Since Jovellanos and his



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
