Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       situation changed markedly since the catastro? Was the cédula of 1796 so confusing to contemporaries that each locality chose to enforce
       it as it saw fit, bowing to pressures? I incline to believe the explanation is a combination of errors in the catastro and local ad hoc
       decisions on how to enforce the cédula.
              Unable to form a clear picture of which lands were exempt from tithes, what date the abolition of exemptions went into effect, and
       what owners managed to escape from the abolition, for La Mata I have fallen back on its tithe return for 1799. Here the new tithes were
       20 percent of the total partible tithes and in addition to them. In calculating the size of harvests for La Mata from tithe returns after 1799
       (when the quantity of new tithes was no longer specified), I assume that the partible tithes are one-fifth more than would have been the
       case under the old system. Farmers still paid one-tenth of their crops; the increase comes from levies on lands previously exempt. This
       case and the example of the payments of the first tither, which were included in the partible until 1760 (Appendix G), should serve as a
       reminder to those historians who make long-term calculations of harvests from tithe records that they must follow legislation and
       practices carefully, or they will record as changes in harvest levels what were merely changes in the lands subject to tithes and the
       institutions receiving them.


       [4] AHPS, Hacienda, libro 167, ff. 68r–73v.

       [5] See Table 8.3.


                                                                                          ― 787 ―




       APPENDIX K—
       INCOME FROM RAISING LIVESTOCK
       Since the catastro states the number of larger animals of each vecino and of towns as a whole but does not give figures for the annual
       births or slaughter of animals, to calculate the income from breeding animals has been one of the most perplexing problems of this study.
       The catastro respuestas generales of some of the towns studied state the value of animals, others do not, and one, of Navas, states not
       the value but the annual product (esquilmo ) of the animals. Table K.1 gives the values reported in the catastro.
             After much trial and error I have adopted the following method, which I have applied to all the towns studied. [1] First one obtains
       the number of adult females of each kind in the town. Where the catastro does not provide this number, I have posited a percentage of
       the adult animals that are female, based on the evidence from the towns where this information is recorded. Next I have estimated the
       number of surviving young per adult female of each kind per year. To take into account the poorer breeding and hygienic conditions in
       the eighteenth century, the method assumes that the annual birth and survival rate of animals was then approximately half the early
       twentieth-century rate, using for the latter statistic that provided by the major Spanish encyclopedia.[2] For pur-

       [1] I am greatly indebted to Gonzalo Anes, who has profound knowledge of the past history and current practice of Spanish agriculture,
       for discussing with me at length the problems I found in applying the information in the catastro to an estimate of income from raising
       livestock. He is not responsible, however, for any weaknesses in my method.

       [2] Agricultural historians of England emphasize that common grazing and uncontrolled breeding in the early modern period resulted in
       endemic livestock disease and frequent abortions. See Chambers, "Enclosure and Labour Supply," 331; and McCloskey, "Persistence of the
       English Common Fields," 85. A small basis for comparison for these rates comes from Trow-Smith, History of British Livestock Husbandry.
       A large sheep-raiser of south England in the early seventeenth century expected one grown lamb ("teg") per ewe per year (ibid., 247), a
       slightly higher rate than the 0.8 lamb adopted in Table K.2.


                                                                                          ― 788 ―


                                       Table K.1. Value of Animals, Mid-Eighteenth Century



                                           La Mata      Villaverde Pedrollén (reales         El Mirón
                                                                 de vellón)                               Navas (esquilmo



             Mare (yegua )                                                                                         70



              Colt (potro )                  80a                                                60



          Mule, male (mulo )                350 b                                              140



           Mule, fem. (mula )               200 c                                              240



        Donkey, male (pollino )                                                                 20



        Donkey, fem. (pollina )                                                                 20                 20d



              Cow (vaca )                                                                                          30




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
