Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



             Goats               90                 .80                                     4                6



              Pigs               60                     7.00                                24             20



         SOURCE. Column A based on maest. segl. and maest. ecles. for towns studied in Part 2. Columns B and C
                    based on Enciclopedia universal ilustrada. Columns D and E based on Table K.1.



           a Based on assumed life expectations: cattle, eight years; horses, ten years; donkeys, fourteen years;
                                                     mules, fifteen years.


       poses of determining individual or town income, it does not matter if the young are consumed or sold, but one must deduct from gross
       births those that serve to replace work animals that die of old age (using life expectations predicted for the eighteenth century). No
       income, or hardly any, would accrue to owners from the carcasses of aged adults. For sheep and goats one must add to total income that
       from wool and cheese. Using the prices given in the catastro for the young of the different species, and that of wool and cheese (the
       amount of wool per sheep and cheese per goat or sheep appears in some of the tithe registers), I have established an expected annual
       income per adult female of each species. From the animal population recorded for each town one can then estimate the annual income
       derived from livestock. Table K.2 gives the rates on which I have based my calculations.
             The figures for income per female from breeding given in Column D are well below the esquilmo reported in Navas, except in the
       case of sows. The esquilmo may include sources of income I have missed, such as milk, and possibly labor. Since milk is a legitimate part
       of town income, and Table K.2 is based on many unknowns, I have revised the estimated income of each female animal to take account
       of the information in Navas, as shown in Column E.
             Obviously the figures in the table represent only an approximation. The true figures varied in any case from region to region and
       year to year. They do, how-


                                                                                            ― 790 ―
       ever, permit a calculation of the income from animal husbandry. The results, while inexact, are probably in the right order of magnitude.
       In most towns the income from animals was considerably less than that from harvests, so that errors in the calculation of the former do
       not affect seriously the estimates of per capita incomes of towns or the different sectors within them. Animal income formed a large share
       of the total in Pedrollén, El Mirón, and Baños. As a result, the estimates of town and per capita income in these three places are liable to
       greater error than elsewhere.


                                                                                            ― 791 ―




       APPENDIX L—
       RELATIVE LABOR NEEDS FOR GRAIN FIELDS AND OLIVE GROVES
       Information on the labor requirements for various crops in Spain is available in two published works: Juan Martínez Alier, La estabilidad
       del latifundismo, 345–51, Appendix 1, and José Manuel Naredo, La evolución de la agricultura en España, 33–37, Cuadros 4, 5. They
       provide estimates for man-days per year for each harvest or the absolute cost of labor per year in pesetas. From this information, one
       can calculate the relative cost of labor for grain fields and olive groves (Table L.1).
             From these estimates, the mean ratio of the cost of labor on olive groves to grain fields is 1.12 : 1. However, the first estimate
       obtained by Martínez Alier for labor in groves appears well out of line. Discounting it, the ratio of labor requirements is 1.26 : 1.
            These ratios are based on the labor on grain fields in the year they are planted. The table gives two estimates for labor (mainly
       plowing) of the fields in fallow years. They indicate a mean ratio of labor during fallow year to labor in harvest year of 0.34 : 1. Thus, if
       there are two harvests in three years, the average annual labor is 0.78 of the harvest year labor; if one harvest in three years, it is 0.45
       (assuming one year without plowing).
            Table L.2 gives the annual income for different quality grain and olive land in Baños in 1752, the cost of labor based on the
       percentages shown in Table 11.11 and the above information, and the resulting ratio of cost of labor on olive groves and grain fields for
       each quality land. The general consistency of the ratios in the last columns of the two tables gives confidence in Table 11.11.


                                                                                            ― 792 ―


                                      Table L.1. Labor Requirements for Grains and Olives



                                                                                                       Labor olives/
                                               Man-days        Woman-days           Total days a       Labor grains



            Córdoba Province 1934 b



                     (hectare)




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
