Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       for a person subsisting in poverty on odd occupations, they could be serious. Those owing censos owned real property, of course, in many
       cases the house they lived in, and so were not the poorest members of their group.
            The catastro records few censos on the property of outside owners. Five of the eighteen nonresidents together owed 142 reales. In
       one case the payment represented 19 percent of the net income from his property in Navas; for most the proportion was much smaller.
       Neither of the dukes resident in Madrid had a censo on his property in Navas, at least so far as the catastro records.
             Debts owed for business transactions, as for the purchase of animals or real property to be paid off in a few installments or for the
       right to farm ecclesiastical revenues or royal taxes, do not show up as censos and are not included in the catastro, even when real
       property was pledged as collateral. Nevertheless, the conclusion is evident that in Navas and probably in a vast majority of Castilian
       towns, the servicing of debts was not a major concern. In the old regime, private exchange still operated pretty much on a cash basis in
       rural communities, far removed from the extensive indebtedness now incurred by individuals in advanced countries for mortgages, the
       purchase of automobiles and household appliances, charge accounts, credit cards, and the like. The crown, of course, operated very
       differently. For centuries its income was pledged in advance, and it was heavily indebted to its vassals and foreign houses. The
       desamortización was undertaken to prevent its debts from threatening the stability of the monarchy.


                                                                                          ― 797 ―




       APPENDIX N—
       COMPARATIVE STATISTICS OF SEVEN TOWNS
       Certain statistics developed for each of the seven towns merit being tabulated together for purposes of comparison and because of their
       usefulness to scholars.
             The yield-seed ratios for grains and some pulses (Table N.1) have been derived from the information in the catastro. This source
       states the harvest in grain for one unit (usually a fanega) of each different quality of land (resp. gen. Q 9 and the introduction to maest.
       segl.) and the amount of seed needed to sow one unit of each quality of land (resp. gen. Q 12). Table N.1 also states the rotation for
       each quality of land, since this has an influence on the yield. [1]
             Another way in which yields are frequently measured, especially today, is in hectoliters of grain per hectare of land. Table N.2 gives
       the expected yield in the year of harvest, using the conversion 55.2 liters = 1 fanega of volume and the metric equivalent of the local
       fanega of area shown in Table N.5. For some towns the reported tithes have shown the predicted yield to be inaccurate. Estimates based
       on the reported tithes are shown in the last column of the table, but they are also approximations, because the extent of each quality of
       land sown with each crop can only be based on the use described in the catastro, which the tithes show is not always accurate.


       2

       In calculating the income of vecinos of the seven towns, I have used as a measure the equivalent value in fanegas of wheat (EFW),
       converting harvests of other crops and income from other sources into this unit, using the local prices reported for the crops in the
       catastro. The measure could be misleading if the prices were indeed very local, varying widely from one place to another. Table

       [1] For comparable statistics on other times and places in Europe, see Slicher van Bath, Agrarian History, Tables 2, 3.


                                                                                          ― 798 ―




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
