Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

               C. Identified priests making one purchase                              24                  37


          D. Estimated unidentified priests (C/(C + D) = B)                           33                  21


                       E. Number of dons in province                                 873                  501


         F. Percent of dons that may be unidentified priests                         3.8                  4.2
                                (D/E)

             D shows how many unidentified priests there were if the deeds gave the title pbro. to the same proportion of priests who made one
       purchase as they did to those who made more than one purchase. The percentage of priests would rise from 1.9 percent to 3.2 percent of
       all purchasers in Jaén and from 2.5 percent to 3.5 percent in Salamanca in Table 15.7. That is, I may have identified only 60 percent of
       the priests who bought properties in Jaén and 70 percent in Salamanca. Proportionately more of the missing priests would belong in the
       lower levels, since they would have made fewer purchases.
            Since all unidentified priests would be called don, I would have placed them in this category of buyers. Elimination of the priests
       wrongly placed in this category would bring it down little, however, about 4 percent in each province (F).


                                                                                           ― 809 ―




       APPENDIX P—
       THE ZONES OF JAÉN PROVINCE
       I have divided Jaén and Salamanca provinces into zones on the basis of present-day information. Some of these consider permanent
       conditions, such as the topography; some, conditions that have varied little since the eighteenth century, such as the structure and
       relative size of the towns; some, conditions that may be the result of recent developments, such as land use and crops observed in the
       1960s and early 1970s. Nevertheless, one can be confident that the zones differed among each other in social, demographic, and
       economic structures in the eighteenth century. In Jaén the differences in crops were more marked two hundred years ago, because
       nowadays olives and grain are found almost everywhere. Map 16.1 shows the zones.

       Rich Basin Zones

       Zone JA (Andújar)

       About thirty kilometers as the crow flies before reaching the Córdoba border, the Guadalquivir, which has run down to here between
       narrow banks, enters a broad, flat vega with alluvial soils. Three towns are located close by the river: Andújar, the largest and central
       one, Villanueva de la Reina twelve kilometers upstream from it, and Marmolejo ten kilometers downstream. They are large towns; in
       1786 they averaged 3,960 people (see Table 16.2), and all were under royal jurisdiction. They enjoy the varied agriculture of an irrigated
       valley, but it is narrow and most of their términos are rolling hills of the basin, with the rich, red soil typical of the Sierra Morena region,
       for the ranges lie close to the north. Their landscape is lower and gentler than the términos of most other towns in the province. This is
       Andújar (JA) zone.


                                                                                           ― 810 ―

       Zone JB (Arjona)

       The towns of the western portion of the province south of the river belonged in the eighteenth century to the military Order of Calatrava.
       Five of these formed Arjona (JB) zone. We have studied one of them, Lopera. The most impressive towns are Porcuna, on the Córdoba
       border, and Arjona, due south of Andújar. They sit in twin hills that are the major elevations of a low ridge running from southwest to
       northeast. Beyond Arjona to the east, the ridge descends slightly to Higuera de Arjona. These were military towns, and signals could be
       sent from hill to hill. North of the ridge, the contour drops down to the broad valley occupied by Lopera and to Arjonilla, not far away on
       a gentle slope facing north. Although below the ridge, both towns are well above the river towns of Andújar zone. These five places make
       up Arjona (JB) zone. The soil is mostly a grey-brown marl, typical of the basin, turning red as it descends to the river, well drained, and
       very rich. Today legumes and grain are planted close to the towns, but elsewhere olives dominate. Arjona is reputed to be one of the two
       richest olive towns in the province (the other is Martos).

       Zone JE (Linares)

       On the other side of the river and further upstream is Linares zone (JE). Although not properly in the basin of the Guadalquivir, lying
       rather on a tableland between the foothills of the Sierra Morena and the Guadalquivir and Guadalimar rivers, it can be grouped with the
       rich zones of the basin because of its soil of fertile marls. Between Linares and Bailén is a rough, hard limestone wedge, difficult to
       cultivate, which gives the zone a deceptive appearance of infertility. This sector is used mainly for grazing, but wheat fields and olive
       groves divide between them the rich, rolling hills around it. Of its four towns, Jabalquinto is at the top of an elongated hill, or loma; the
       others are on the rolling tableland. Bailén is where the Andalusian highway forks, one prong heading west to Córdoba and Seville, the
       other south to Jaén and Granada. Linares, an important place for centuries because of its lead mines, and Bailén, famous for its pottery,
       are the dominant places. They averaged 4,200 people in 1786. The other two towns, lacking industry, averaged only 380. Linares was
       royal. The Duque de Arcos had jurisdiction over Bailén, the Marqués de Fuente del Sahuco over Tobaruela, and the Marqués de
       Jabalquinto over that town.



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
