Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       Tomé, both of them in the eighteenth century subject to Cazorla. Slightly to the south, in a valley of its own at the foot of the sierra, is
       Quesada, an elegant town under royal jurisdiction, with a laid-out central square, surrounded by rolling upland countryside, devoted today
       also to olives and grain. The three towns of Cazorla zone (JI) averaged 3,520 people in 1786, not as big as the towns on the western
       slopes of the sierras but bigger than those of Mancha Real zone.


                                                                                          ― 813 ―

       Sierra Morena Zone

       Zone JJ (Baños)

       Except around Bailén and Linares, the basin of the Guadalquivir does not extend north of the river. At the west, near Andújar, the Sierra
       Morena almost reaches the river. North of Bailén and Linares, the sierra is gentler, crossed by the main road to Madrid, and the rolling
       hills can be cultivated. Until Carlos III created the colonies of Sierra Morena in the 1770s, the upper reaches of this tongue had only small
       settlements. Two towns, located above Bailén and Linares, occupied the base of the tongue and form Baños zone (JJ). We have studied
       Baños, sitting on the southern tip of a long hill that juts out from the sierra. Vilches is located to the east, on a saddle between two hills
       rather like humps of a camel, with the inevitable medieval castle, dominating a plain on either side. The two towns were almost identical
       in size and averaged 1,690 people in 1786. Both were realengo. Their soil is the rich, red, sandy soil typical of the foothills of the Sierra
       Morena, although portions of Baños have light tan marl of the Guadalquivir basin. The plains beneath the towns are partly in olives, partly
       arable, but the campiña of both towns is limited and rapidly gives way to monte, scrub growth and the wilderness of the Sierra Morena.
       The Sierra Morena zone is unlike any other in Jaén.

       Rich Loma Zones

       Zone JK (Baeza)

       East of Linares, a set of rivers flows out of the Sierra Morena, southwest to the Guadalquivir. Two of these, the Guadalimar and the
       Montizón run almost parallel to the Guadalquivir, looking on the map like fingers of a withered hand, for forty or fifty kilometers. Between
       these three rivers the land rises in two rounded, elongated hills, or lomas, rising out of the flat banks of the rivers, their cross-sections
       resembling normal curves. Gentle valleys cut the sides of the lomas, and spaced out along their summit are most of the towns that own
       this territory.
              The southern of the two hills, the Loma de Ubeda, between the Guadalquivir and the Guadalimar, is tlhe more impressive. The twin
       cities of Baeza and Ubeda dominate it, only nine killometers apart, but in the eighteenth century each was the capital of a partido
       extending far beyond the loma. The first important places of Andalusia to fall to the Christians, they are elegant centers with impressive
       public buildings and seigneurial residences of the Habsburg age.
              Scattered around the western slopes of the loma beneath Baeza, their ruined towers rising like a brood of young chicks under the
       maternal city, were six smaller places, Begijar, Lupión, Ibros (legally divided in two: Ibros del Rey and Ibros de Señorío), Canena,
       Mármol, and Rus. They form Baeza zone (JK). Baeza had 8,880 people in 1786, the other six fewer all together, averaging 1,080. The
       territory of Baeza extends south across the river to meet that of Mancha Real. Although some parts of the loma are too steep and rough
       to cultivate,


                                                                                          ― 814 ―
       most of it is rich marl, grey to light tan in color, good for olives, wheat, and legumes. Today wheat is common at the top of the loma,
       olives in the middle slopes where the plow moves with greater difficulty, and wheat again by the river; but the pattern is more irregular
       than this generalization suggests. The jurisdiction was also varied. Baeza and four towns were royal; the Marquesa de Camarasa had
       Canena; the Duque de Santisteban del Puerto, Ibros de Señorío; and Marmol belonged to a religious endowment (patronato de legos).

       Zone JL (Ubeda)

       Ubeda zone (JL) makes up the central and highest section of this loaf. The distance between the Guadalquivir and Guadalimar rivers is
       greatest here, about twenty kilometers, and there is more flat land between the loma and the rivers. The settlement pattern differs from
       Baeza zone, for it consists of three large fortified towns, Ubeda, Torreperogil, and Sabiote, clustered near each other on individual crests
       at the top of the loma. Ubeda had 10,720 people in 1786, the others averaged 2,080. The término of Ubeda extends north and south
       down both slopes; Torreperogil faces south, reaching down to the river across from Cazorla, and Sabiote has the corresponding northern
       face. The soil is light tan, probably the richest of the loma, with olives, grains, legumes, and today in Torreperogil some vines. Sabiote
       was of the señorío of the Marquesa de Camarasa; the others were royal.

       Poor Loma Zones

       Zone JM (Villanueva)

       Another cluster of three towns, over twenty kilometers away, occupies the northeastern end of the loma, which from here trails off into
       the sierras and low passes to Albacete. The loma falls off more sharply to the rivers, so that the flat riverbanks all but disappear, leaving
       a narrower zone, about fifteen kilometers in breadth. The town of Iznatoraf is a spectacular sight, sitting high on an isolated peak, its
       location and its Moorish name testifying to its ancient origin. Below it, on the highway along the ridge of the loma, are two newer and
       larger towns: Villacarrillo and Villanueva del Arzobispo. The archbishop in question is Toledo's; like Cazorla across the river, these three
       towns belonged to his señorío. Villanueva is the largest of the three (mean population of the three in 1786 was 3,000), and the zone
       (JM) is named after it. It is in a valley, the only town of the loma with such a location, perhaps because it was founded when the danger
       of war had vanished. The soil here is poorer than in Ubeda zone, a grey and tan marl like that of the rest of the loma, except that there
       is some red earth of the Sierra Morena on the northern slopes below Villanueva. It is today devoted to grains and legumes, with
       comparatively few olive groves. Here and also in the other zones of the loma cortijos and smaller houses are scattered on the slopes
       below the ridge.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
