Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



       Poor Basin Zones

       Zone JC (Santiago De Calatrava)

       South of the Porcuna-Arjona ridge, the land drops off slightly and then rises in a gentle slope toward the southern sierras. This is the
       flattest region of the Guadalquivir basin in Jaén. Santiago de Calatrava zone (JC) consists of five towns scattered across this plain, not all
       contiguous, for administratively part of the plain belongs to bigger places located at the edge of the sierra. Two towns be-


                                                                                          ― 811 ―
       longed to the military order: Higuera de Calatrava and Santiago de Calatrava. Farther east two others, Escañuela and Villardompardo,
       were in the señorío of the Conde de Villar don Pardo. Finally the tiny place of Fuente del Rey, almost in a no-man's-land, was under royal
       jurisdiction.
            Here the soil is also gray-brown marl, but great stretches are saline in character—its major stream is the Arroyo Salado—less
       favorable to agriculture than the soils of Arjona zone. Today grain is more common than olives. In the eighteenth century its towns were
       comparatively small. The mean size in 1786 was 370, while that of Arjona zone just north was 2,180.


       Zone JD (Mengíbar)

       Bordering these zones to the east is Mengíbar zone (JD), made up of five towns running northwest to southeast along a low, gently
       rolling plateau that slopes north toward the Guadalquivir. Four towns sit back from the river about one to four kilometers, while the fifth,
       Cazalilla, is at a greater distance. Mengíbar, Cazalilla, and Villargordo were royal; Torrequebradilla belonged to the señorío of the Conde
       de Torralba y de Talara, and the fifth, Espelúy, to the Duque de Santisteban del Puerto.
             This zone represents a prolongation eastward of the flat Santiago de Calatrava zone and like it is marked by salinity and a relative
       lack of fertility. The Guadalquivir here cuts into the surrounding terrain and offers little usable riverbank. A narrow fringe of alluvial soil
       borders the Guadalbullón river, which rises in the southern sierra and enters the Guadalquivir near Mengíbar, but it is insufficient to
       overcome the general infertility of the zone. In 1970 much of this zone was still used for grazing sheep and goats, and the rest was
       planted in grains and legumes. This is one of the poorest regions in the province; in 1786 the towns averaged only 510 people.


       South Basin Zones

       Zone JF (Martos)

       Lying between these basin zones and the southern sierras are a fringe of rich olive lands. At the west are the two impressive towns of
       Torredonjimeno and Martos, both under the Order of Calatrava in the eighteenth century, large municipalities with a mean population in
       1786 of 5,570. Martos zone (JF) is dominated by the imposing Peñon de Martos, a sheer peak rising alone behind the city. The rich lands
       of the two towns circle this peak and go back to the Sierra de Jabalcuz to the east. Except near the towns, the zone is today virtually
       monopolized by olives, stretching in awe-inspiring patterns across the rolling landscape and back as far as possible into the sierra. With
       Andújar, Martos is judged today one of the two richest olive towns of Jaén. The soil of this zone is largely a saline marl, being an
       extension of the plain of the poor basin zones. Although excellent for olive culture, it is not very good for grains, and, as Chapter 16
       shows, its soil appears to have had a direct effect on the evolution of its agriculture.


                                                                                          ― 812 ―

       Zone JG (Jaén)

       The next major place east of this zone is Jaén, capital of the province. With a population of 15,380 in 1786, it was the largest city of the
       province, but it did not dwarf the other towns in the way that Salamanca, almost identical in size (16,440), did the myriad tiny villages
       under its jurisdiction. Jaén sits against the Sierra de Jabalcuz facing north on the basin and dominates the center of the province. Its
       término stretches toward the river until it reaches the smaller towns of Mengíbar zone. Here the predominant marl of the basin gives way
       to extensive terraces of alluvial soil, now filled with grain. Elsewhere the land is better for olives than grain, and the silver-gray trees
       take over as one approaches the sierra and climb up into it behind the city. Torre del Campo, 2,210 people in 1786, ten kilometers west
       of Jaén, is very similar in its setting on the edge of the sierra, and I have placed it in Jaén zone (JG). Both were under royal jurisdiction.

       Zone JH (Mancha Real)

       Proceeding east along the northern slopes of the sierras, one comes next to Mancha Real zone (JH). Mancha Real is an early modern new
       town, with streets set out in rectangular pattern. Less rich than Martos, with towns averaging only 1,800 inhabitants in 1786, this is still
       an impressive zone. It lies beneath the Sierra Mágina, the highest of the province. Jimena, Garcíez, and Jódar sit in the foothills, and
       their términos stretch north in gentle rolls sprinkled with casas de campo. Olives give way to grain as one approaches the river. Near
       Mancha Real there are extensive patches of rough salty land, which reminds us of Mengíbar zone, to the west. The four towns, Mancha
       Real, Garcíez, Jimena, and Jódar, had four different lords: the king, the Conde de Garcíez, the Marquesa de Camarasa, and the Marqués
       de Jódar.

       Zone JI (Cazorla)

       Except along the river, a salty stretch of near desert, through which the railroad from Madrid to Granada was driven in the nineteenth
       century, separates Mancha Real zone from the towns at the eastern end of the province. Yet once past this barren land, one enters a flat,
       rich plain of marl that lies beneath the Sierra de Cazorla, source of the Guadalquivir River and one of the wildest ranges in Spain. Cazorla
       sits at the base of its sierra, an elegant town watched over by towers and castles of former ages, and the smaller La Iruela nestles just
       above it on the road into the mountains. In the eighteenth century they belonged to the jurisdiction of the archbishop of Toledo. Between
       them they divide the plain, rich in olives and grain, so extensive that it includes two large permanent villages, Peal de Becerro and Santo



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
