Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain



                                                                                          ― 815 ―

       Zone JN (Santisteban)

       The second loma, parallel to and north of the Loma de Ubeda, between the Guadalimar and Montizón rivers, is lower and shorter and of
       different geological character, predominantly limestone, hard and difficult to cultivate. Its four towns sit in saddles near the crest of the
       hill, once protected by fortifications that are now in ruins. The southern hillside rises up fairly sharply, and untilled monte of live oaks
       successfully fends off the advancing armies of olive trees, but north of the loma the Montizón valley, the flattest stretch in the entire
       province, is made up of the reddish sandstone soil typical of the Sierra Morena. Today the valley of the Montizón is still mostly plowed for
       grain, while olives occupy the summit and slopes of the loma, where the terrain permits. The Sierra Morena rises just beyod the Montizón
       River, still wild and empty. Running west to east are the four towns, Las Navas de Santisteban del Puerto (the subject of Chapter 13,
       now called Las Navas de San Juan), Santisteban del Puerto, Castellar de Santisteban, and Sorihuela. Their mean population was 1,000.
       The first three were in the señorío of the Duque de Santisteban, Sorihuela of the archbishop of Toledo. Since they are very similar, I have
       grouped them in one zone, Santisteban del Puerto (JN), although it is almost as long as Ubeda and Villanueva zones together. Going west
       from it one comes to Vilches and Baños, and the zone, despite its form as a loma, has much in common with these two towns in the
       foothills of the Sierra Morena. It seems proper to think of Baeza and Ubeda zones (JK and JL) as rich loma zones and Villanueva and
       Santisteban zones (JM, JN) as poor loma zones (although one might also group Baños and Santisteban zones [JJ and JN] as foothills of
       the Sierra Morena).

       Sierra Zones

       Zone JO (Bedmar)

       The sharp mountains of the south of the province produce a different type of region. The mountains themselves are barren, and the
       zones consist of valleys and hillsides of different extent and asperity. The next two zones are little more than extensions into the hills of
       the southern edge of the Guadalquivir basin. One of these is the result of a short, sharp, isolated range, the Sierra de Monteagudo, that
       rises at the southern edge of Mancha Real zone. The valley behind the range flows into the basin near Jimena. Sitting in it is Bedmar, and
       on the southern edge of this valley, up the slope of the Sierra Mágina almost as far as one can cultivate, are Torres and Albanchez. Their
       mean size in 1786 was 1,260. All three towns of Bedmar (JO) zone have the characteristic lack of level land of the sierra. The rocks and
       soil are reddish, or yellow marl, and today the valley, beneath the towns, where not too rough, is dominated by olives. Albanchez
       belonged to the Order of Santiago (its only place in Jaén) the others to two señoríos, of the Marqués de Bedmar and the Marquesa de
       Camarasa.


                                                                                          ― 816 ―

       Zone JP (Pegalajar)

       The city of Jaén is at the northern base of the impressive Sierra Jabalcuz. From it three roads lead south to Granada. The old main road
       circled around the sierra to the west, passing through Torredonjimeno and Martos. The present one, the main road from Madrid to
       Granada, veers east on leaving Jaén but soon turns south up a narrow valley between the Sierra de Jabalcuz and the even more
       impressive Sierra Mágina. Finally, there is a secondary road that heads due south from the city, fighting its way through sierras and
       rough terrain until it joins the old main road just before it enters Granada province.
             Los Villares is the first town on this last road, thirteen kilometers from Jaén. It sits in a rough valley just over the first rise. The new
       main road skirts under another town, built long ago to protect Jaén from attack from the rear and named aptly La Guardia. Just beyond
       it, up a hill across the road is Pegalajar, the largest of these towns, whose name the zone bears (JP). Finally, before reaching
       Torredonjimeno, the old main road passed beneath Jamilena. All four are sierra towns with little flat land, on valleys that open into the
       Guadalquivir basin, independent of each other yet close enough to Jaén to be under its economic influence. They were fair-sized towns; in
       1786 their populations averaged 1,290. Today their hillsides are devoted to olives of varieties suited to the sierra, although Los Villares
       has also a rich huerta with fruit trees and Jamilena grows some wheat. Marls give way to limestone as one moves into the hills behind
       these towns and around Los Villares. Jamilena, like the other towns in this part of the province, was of the Order of Calatrava. Pegalajar
       was royal, the other two had as lords the Marqués de Ariza and the Vizconde de Villares.


       Zone JQ (Cambil)

       Passing La Guardia, the present main road to Granada turns abruptly south along the edges of the Guadalbullón river for thirty
       kilometers to the border of the province of Granada, part of the time squeezed between threatening cliffs of granite. The soil is thin and
       patchy alternating marls and limestone, and the few towns in the district have taken advantage of what little terrain can be tilled. Carchel
       and Carchelejo are in valleys above the road, where there is water and room for some olives and wheat. Cambil, the largest town, is in a
       verdant valley off to the east of the road, with good irrigation but hardly any flat land. Finally, just before the road enters Granada it
       passes Campillo de Arenas and Noalejo. The valley is broader here, but even today the land is used largely for grazing, although there
       are a few olives and some grain. The towns of Cambil zone (JQ) belong most distinctly to the sierra of those in the province, with a small
       average population in 1786: 1,080. All the towns belonged to the king except Noalejo (señorío of Marqués de Castel Moncayo).



                                                                                          ― 817 ―

       Southern Valley Zones

       Zone JR (Alcalá La Real)

       The old road to Granada is very different indeed, for it skirts the high sierras to the west. After passing the Peñon de Martos, it turns
       south, rises over a pass, and enters the first of a series of rounded valleys with rough, broken basins and hillsides often good only for



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
