Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       early modern period. Farther south, in the partido of Alba de Tormes, the plain is less flat and the soil cover thinner, brown to light tan in
       color, and is broken by patches of rough, gravelly earth that even today are used for meadows of live oaks (dehesas). The towns are
       smaller and closer together, and there are fields enclosed by stone walls (cortinas) around the town nuclei. Finally the strip across the
       river from Salamanca city is an ancient alluvial plain inside a major bend in the Rio Tormes. In the eighteenth century, the demographic
       structure of the zone was similar to that of La Armuña, with seventy-five villas and lugares and fifty-nine despoblados and alquerías.
       Although its soil was not as consistently rich as that of La Armuña, the two zones can be characterized as "rich plains zones."



                                                                                          ― 820 ―

       Poor Plains Zones

       Zone SC (Charro)

       The region southwest of Salamanca city is known as the Charro district. It stretches out on either side of the road to Ciudad Rodrigo and
       reaches south as far as the first mountain ranges. In the eighteenth century it included most of the Cuarto de Peña Rey and Cuarto de
       Baños, the largest cuartos of the partido. The region forms Charro zone (SC). Most of the zone consists of thin, brownish gray soil over a
       shale base. After leaving the provincial capital toward the southwest, one finds the land undulating in long, low waves, about five
       kilometers from crest to crest, with occasional outcroppings of shale. Farther along, the land becomes flatter and the soil redder and
       richer, on a sandy base, reminiscent of Alba zone. In the vicinity of the city of Salamanca, the plain is devoted to grain. The soil cover
       over most of the zone, however, is too thin to hold water well, and although easy to till, is of a high acid content, unsuitable for wheat
       and better devoted to live oaks and pastures. In the eighteenth century the farmers planted in a three-year rotation called cultivo al
       tercio. Despite the soil, they grew wheat as the most marketable harvest, and also rye to feed their livestock.[3]
             The region today has many latifundia devoted to cattle raising, with dehesas enclosed by stone walls built out of shale. In the
       eighteenth century the zone was filled with tiny settlements and had few towns of any size. Of its 189 census units, only 35 had a
       population over one hundred. One hundred twenty-seven were classified officially as alquerías and despoblados, plus another twenty
       despoblados without population at all and hence not in the census. One of these we have seen before: Pedrollén, a despoblado with ten
       people in 1786.


       Zone SD (Ledesma)

       Due west of Salamanca city and north of Charro zone is Ledesma zone, bordering on the province of Zamora in the north and stretching
       south to the Rio Huebra. Its main axis is the road from Salamanca to Vitigudino, but the zone stops just short of Vitigudino because the
       plain breaks off at this point into rolling, hilly land. In the eighteenth century the heart of the zone was the eastern half of the partido of
       Ledesma. This is flat, open country, characterized by thin, sandy soil over a granite base, rocky outcroppings, and occasional stone walls.
       These are the poorest soils in the province; they hold water badly, erode easily, and contain little organic matter. They are, however,
       easy to till, and as a result, much used for grain, primarily rye, although only a small portion can be planted each year. There are also
       broad expanses of dehesas, for which the region is more properly suited.
            The small size of the settlements reflects the poverty of the land. In the eighteenth century there were fifty-five despoblados and
       alquerías and only eighty-two villas and lugares. The villa of Ledesma, capital of the partido, lying on the Rio Tormes not far downstream
       from Salamanca, dominated the zone politi-

       [3] García Fernández, "Champs ouverts," 693–95.



                                                                                          ― 821 ―
       cally and socially, as Salamanca city dominated the plains around it. Ledesma had 1,850 people, three times the population of the next
       town in the zone. As a whole, Ledesma zone had many similarities with Charro zone, and the two can be grouped together as poor plains
       zones.

       Hilly Zones

       Zone SE (Aldeadávila)

       Once one leaves the plains, the zones become strikingly different. Lying between Ledesma zone and the Portuguese border was the
       western half of the partido of Ledesma, a region of rolling hills and glaciated granite outcroppings. The soil is predominantly light tan with
       occasional red earth, an extension of the flatter plains to the east. Separating it from Portugal, the Rio Duero flows at the bottom of a
       sharp canyon several hundred meters deep, and bordering on the river are a number of large towns, the most prominent of which in the
       eighteenth century was Aldeadávila, whose name I apply to the zone (SE). Vitigudino lies just inside the eastern limit of the zone, and
       the road north from Vitigudino to the Zamora border marks its eastern boundary. On the north the Rio Tormes separates it from the
       province of Zamora, on the south the Rio Yeltes from the partido of Ciudad Rodrigo.
             Besides the difference in terrain, the region is also wetter than the tableland, since the moist winds from the west reach it first. The
       rainfall on the edge of the Rio Duero is about 575 millimeters per year, 50 percent greater than at Salamanca city. Furthermore, the
       temperatures are less extreme and permit the growth of olive, almond, and fruit trees near the Portuguese frontier. Unlike the plains to
       the east, this zone has large nucleated towns. Most are surrounded by small plots (cortinas) fenced in by stone walls, for garden crops
       and hay. Grain is grown beyond the cortinas. Where the terrain is less favorable, there are today dehesas, and the river canyons, which
       cut deep into the landscape, such as that of the Rio de las Uces near its confluence with the Duero and that of the Duero itself, can be
       used for little but grazing. Today many sheep are raised in the zone. Overall, however, its aspect reflects greater prosperity than the
       region between it and Salamanca, a condition that has been true for centuries. In 1786, the mean town population was 440, second
       highest of the zones in the province (see Table 17.2), but no town was large enough to dominate the zone, while Ledesma and
       Salamanca were too far away to do so. Most of it was part of the señorío of the Duque de Alburquerque, but two towns in the west
       belonged to the military Order of Santiago.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
