Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       grazing that form Alcalá la Real zone (JR). The soil is reddish in these valleys, the marls tainted with lime and limestone outcroppings in
       the upper hillsides. The land is much better adapted to olives than to grain. Cultivation today is much more mixed than in other zones:
       legumes, grain, olives, poplars, and fruit trees giving way to scrub growth that serves to feed goats in the rougher parts. The passes
       between the valleys are high, and cultivation stops beneath the summits. Alcaudete occupies the first valley; Castillo de Locubín sits on a
       small rise in the basin of the second; and Alcalá la Real is high on a hill between the third and fourth valleys, with its impressive Castillo
       de la Mota protecting the southern entrance to the province. A ciudad belonging to the king (along with Jaén, Baeza, and Ubeda), it was
       a major city in the eighteenth century, second in the province after Jaén, with 11,280 people in 1786 (the three towns averaged an
       impressive 6,340). Locubín was also royal, but Alcaudete was under the jurisdiction of the Condesa de Oropesa y Alcaudete.

       Zone JS (Huelma)

       Two towns even more isolated than these three form the last zone. Huelma and Cabra del Santo Cristo lie behind the Sierra Mágina near
       the border of Granada province. In size they were smaller than the towns of the previous zone (2,420 average population). Huelma is in a
       broad irrigated valley, almost a vega, the only one outside Andújar zone (JA). Most of its territory, however, is hillside that is used today
       for olives and wheat. Cabra del Santo Cristo turns its back to the Sierra Mágina and faces east on the dry plain that cuts through the
       southeast of the province, isolating Cazorla zone from those to the west. It has much the same cultivation as Huelma but lacks its
       irrigated valley. As in the previous zone, the soil consists largely of marls with a lime content. The soil is very light in color above Huelma
       but is reddish brown around Cabra. Cabra was royal; Huelma belonged to the Duque de Alburquerque.


                                                                                          ― 818 ―




       APPENDIX Q—
       THE ZONES OF SALAMANCA PROVINCE
       The plain around Salamanca city is a relatively arid tableland—the average annual rainfall near the city is about four hundred millimeters;
       it has a continental climate of extreme variations—the mean maximum daily temperature in January is 7.4° centigrade and in July is
       30.6°. I have divided the plain into four zones, lying almost at the cardinal points of the compass from the city, except that one, instead
       of lying south, is southwest (see Map 17.1).

       Rich Plains Zones

       Zone SA (Armuña)

       The zone to the north is the richest of the four and includes the towns of La Mata and Villaverde, with which we have become familiar. It
       coincides closely with the former division of the partido of Salamanca called the Cuarto de Armuña, and this region is still known as La
       Armuña. [1] The core of it is a gently rolling plain about twenty kilometers north to south and thirty kilometers east to west, with deep
       red or red and brown soil, consisting of Terciary and Quaternary sediments low in acidity. It is one of the most fertile districts in
       Castile. [2] The soil is heavy and clayey, with a layer of loam on top. When wet, it becomes a sticky mass that is hard to plow, and when
       dry, it breaks into hard, unwieldy lumps. Until the advent of tractors in the 1960s, yokes of slow and powerful

       [1] The administrative divisions of the province under the old regime are shown in maps in Mateos, Salamanca. The names of the towns
       in the eighteenth-century administrative districts and the jurisdiction over each town are specified in España dividida en provincias, and
       Nomenclatoródiccionario.

       [2] Information on the soils of Salamanca from Diputación Provincial de Salamanca, Suelos.



                                                                                          ― 819 ―
       oxen had to be used for plowing. The deep soil, however, resists long dry spells well and requires little fallow (one recalls that in La Mata
       and Villaverde the fields were sown every other year). For centuries La Armuña has been devoted to grains and legumes.
             Near the northern boundary of the province, the land becomes rough and broken and the soil loses its water more rapidly. It is
       suitable for dry growth of trees and brush, the typical Spanish monte, so that pasturage replaces farming. This part of Armuña zone (SA)
       was of little demographic or economic importance in the eighteenth century and has little role in our study.
             Nucleated towns dot its plain (in the eighteenth century thirty-three of these, called villas and lugares), the distance between them
       averaging perhaps only two or three kilometers. Their houses cluster low on the landscape, and many are dominated by granite churches
       with heavy square towers. Between these nuclei lie nothing but open fields and, nowadays, occasional clumps of trees. There are no
       stone walls, no fences, no obvious markers to divide one field from another or one town from another. In the eighteenth century not all
       the territory belonged to the towns. There were also twenty-nine large estates (alquerías and despoblados), such as Narros, which the
       townsmen of La Mata settled in 1789.


       Zone SB (Alba De Tormes)

       The zone occupying the portion of the tableland to the east of Salamanca city is far more extensive, about thirty kilometers east to west
       and sixty north to south. It includes the eastern cuarto of the partido of Salamanca, called Valdevilloria, that portion of the partido of
       Alba de Tormes lying between the Rio Tormes and the border of Ávila province, and also a strip of land south of the river across from the
       city of Salamanca. Since Alba de Tormes zone (SB) is larger than Armuña zone, it is not surprisingly somewhat more varied in geographic
       structure. The larger part of it has deep sandy, clayey soil, able to store water, well suited to grains and legumes, a feature that justifies
       grouping it all in one zone. The soil is easier to till than that of La Armuña, but less rich, with a three-year rotation still common in 1960.
             The northern part of the zone, in the northeast of the province, drains northward into the Rio Duero. It is the flattest and richest
       portion, marked by deep, red earth. Here the towns are relatively large and far apart, and several boast impressive brick churches of the




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
