Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       Zone SF (Salvatierra)

       About ten kilometers due south of Salamanca begins a rough upland region that stretches south to the sierras and cuts a gash into the
       plain between the zones of Charro and Alba de Tormes. On the east it drops down toward the Rio Tormes, but the valley of the Tormes
       itself lies in Alba zone. In the eighteenth century the southern portion of this zone formed the tiny partido of Salvatierra, belonging


                                                                                          ― 822 ―
       to the señorío of the Duque de Alba. Much of the rest of the zone lay in the partido of Alba de Tormes, also under his jurisdiction. Only a
       small part of Salvatierra zone (SF), in the northwest, was in the partido de Salamanca and so owed allegiance directly to the king.
            The soil is thin and marked by outcroppings of shale, and over the centuries the inhabitants have used its flat stones to build
       houses and stone walls. Today the impression is of dedication to grazing and the cultivation of cortinas, although in the south the land is
       good enough to farm profitably. It is a poor region, twenty-six of its forty-eight catastro units were despoblados and alquerías so that the
       average population of its towns was small, only 140 in 1786.


       Sierra Zones

       Zone SG (Miranda)

       The shale of Salvatierra and Charro zones belongs geologically to a massive wedge of sedimentary rock that extends northward into the
       province from Extremadura, splitting the granite zones of the northwest of Salamanca province from the granite mountains of the Sierra
       de Gredos in the southeast. The first ranges south of Salamanca city rise in this sedimentary wedge and mark the southern edge of
       Charro zone. These are a part of the Sierra de la Peña de Francia, which runs on a northeast-southwest axis. Beyond this sierra, the
       rivers flow south into the Rio Tajo, the major one being the Rio Alagón. The upper basin of the Alagón is in Salamanca province, and the
       western portion of this basin, drained by the Rio Francia, contains the eighteenth century partido of Miranda del Castañar, the señorío of
       the Conde de Miranda, the core of Miranda zone (SG). This zone also includes the towns on both slopes of the Sierra de la Peña de
       Francia, north of Miranda, which were located in the Cuarto de Peña Rey of the partido of Salamanca. The border between Salamanca and
       Extremadura here ran farther north than today, so that the picturesque town of La Alberca, now preserved as a national monument, was
       not then part of the province of Salamanca. Most of the towns around it are in Miranda zone, however.
             The zone consists of a series of fairly steep hillsides and sharp valleys, with little useful flat land. Although a shale base
       predominates, there is an island of granite around Miranda. Soil cover is thin and easily eroded, while rainfall is heavy, typical of the
       central sierras, about fifteen hundred millimeters per year, over three times that of the tableland around Salamanca. Summers are hot
       and dry, however, and vegetation must be capable of resisting drought. Climate and terrain are propitious for forests, and originally the
       cover was mostly oak (roble), in contrast to the live oak (encina) of the drier plains. People have altered the forest, introducing first
       chestnut trees (as reflected in the name Miranda del Castañar, "of the chestnut woods") and recently pines and eucalyptus. Beneath the
       trees ferns and other undergrowth abound.
            At the same time, the villagers have introduced extensive grazing, especially of goats, which have destroyed much of the forest and
       brought on erosion of the thin top soil. By the mid-twentieth century many slopes were barren or covered


                                                                                          ― 823 ―
       with scrub growth of herbs and flowers. On the other hand, with the bottoms of the valleys too sharp to cultivate, the inhabitants have
       devoted great effort to terracing the hillsides. As a result the Sierra, as it is known in the province, consists of islands of human activity
       set in the eroded or forested hills. Each island has a nucleated town, sitting on the top of a hill or well up a slope, surrounded by terraces
       and hillside fields. The terraces are devoted to such valuable plantings as vines, olives, and fruit trees, including figs and other
       Mediterranean fruits, or to irrigated vegetable plots (huertas). The hillside fields, many of them surrounded by stone walls, can grow the
       same products or serve for irrigated meadows, while those towns lucky enough to have rounded hill tops plant them in grains.
             The towns themselves are relatively large (in 1786 they averaged 280 people) and have their typical serrano style: strong stone
       houses with protruding wooden balconies that almost meet over the narrow streets. Dates carved over the doors show that many of the
       houses were built under the old regime, and not a few have coats of arms cut in the stone, indicating that they belonged to hidalgos.
       Miranda del Castañar is noteworthy in this respect. Despite the rugged terrain, the urban features suggest that this was a prosperous
       region with a more complicated social structure than that found in the plains zones.


       Zone SH (Béjar)

       To the east of Miranda zone is a gap between the Sierra de la Peña de Francia and the more imposing Sierra de Béjar, which is the
       westernmost mass of the Sierra de Gredos, the highest of the central ranges. Through this gap passes the highway from Salamanca to
       Extremadura and Andalusia, a route that has been important since the Romans. Where the road crosses the saddle between the ranges
       is Béjar, in the eighteenth century a villa and cabeza de partido. The region around it I have labeled Béjar zone (SH). It coincides almost
       exactly with the old-regime partidos of Béjar and Montemayor, señoríos respectively of the Duque de Béjar and the Marqués de
       Castromonte.
             The zone has a granite base, is humid, and has temperature extremes similar to those of Miranda zone. Originally it too had an oak
       cover, some of which still remains along with many chestnut trees. In contrast with the sharp hillsides and valleys of Miranda zone,
       however, its principal feature is a number of broad valleys suitable for cultivation or meadows. Except for one in the northeast, which
       feeds into the Tormes, they drain into the Rio Alagón, so that most of the zone is in the Tajo watershed. The broadest valley is of the Rio
       Sangusín, northwest of Béjar. It is several kilometers wide and flat, lying between hillsides with glaciated granite outcroppings. Southwest
       of Béjar are two other broad valleys, belonging to the Rio Cuerpo de Hombre and the Rio Baños. The Cuerpo de Hombre flows past the
       town of Montemayor, and its valley was the core of the eighteenth-century partido of this name. Finally, northeast of Béjar there is the
       valley of the Rio Becedillas, tributary of the Tormes. Today the provincial boundary is at the watershed between the Tormes and the
       Alagón, and this valley is in the province of Ávila. Béjar itself sits on a ridge at the top of the Cuerpo de Hombre valley, where the roads
       from the four valleys meet.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
