Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

       [1] See Moxó, "Fin du régime seigneurial." For the full story: Moxó, Disolución.



                                                                                           ― 827 ―
       case of Navas (see Chapter 13), a town of the Duque de Santisteban del Puerto. This duke was señor of more towns in the province than
       any other lord. The catastro attributed to him as señor of Navas only fifty reales per year from fines (penas de cámara) and thirty reales
       for the right of ordenanza.[2] The rest of his income in the town came from his cortijos and other properties, treated the same as those in
       Navas of the Conde-Duque de Benavente. The catastro specifically attributes the pastures and wastes to the municipal council, not to the
       duke, as one would expect if his were a señorío territorial. The very troublesome nineteenth-century distinction was not the basis for the
       different economic effects of señorío found here for the eighteenth century.

       [2] Navas, resp. gen. Q 2.


                                                                                           ― 828 ―




       APPENDIX S—
       INDEX OF LANDOWNING CONCENTRATION IN SALAMANCA
       The Gini coefficient of concentration is frequently used as a basis for comparing concentration of landholding, but it is a very unreliable
       measure, as becomes evident from the following example drawn from the data on sales under desamortización in the different zones into
       which the provinces were divided.
             If all the purchasers in a zone spent equal amounts, the line in Figure 15.1 would be a straight diagonal from 0–0 to 100–100. As
       the inequality between the smallest and largest purchasers increases, the curve falls further away from this diagonal. The Gini index of
       concentration measures the distance of the curve from the diagonal, on a scale of 0 to 100. I attempted to use Gini indexes of
       concentration of the sales in each zone of Salamanca province as a way to compare the zones. Although it became clear that there was
       greater concentration among the purchasers in some zones than others, the data were not reliable enough to rank the zones. A number
       of sales involved more than one purchaser (as was the case in the sale described in the introduction to Part 1). The Madrid notarial
       records on which my analysis is based do not say how much each purchaser paid. For lack of this information, I have divided the price
       paid for sales involving more than one purchaser equally among them. If the shares are made substantially unequal, as was no doubt
       frequently the case, the Gini concentration indexes change so much as to alter the rankings of the zones, thus demonstrating the futility
       of this analysis. This was also the case for the Jaén zones.
             As a different index of concentration of landowning in the zones of Salamanca province, I fell back on a comparison of the income of
       the largest property owner (hacendado mayor) and the mean income of other property owners. From the catastro, the income of the
       hacendado mayor and the total income from agriculture in the zone are known, but not the number of individual owners.
            For an approximation of the number of owners, I substituted the number of properties. This statistic is not available either, but it
       can be estimated from the number of men engaged in agriculture recorded in the catastro summary, using


                                                                                           ― 829 ―
       the categories "labradores, hijos y mozos," "jornaleros," and "hortelanos" (market gardeners). [1] I added the number of labradores with
       their "sons and servants" and one-half of each of the other categories. In Part 2 we saw that many men called jornaleros in Salamanca
       were independent peasants who differed from labradores only in not owning a yoke of oxen. The proportion of jornaleros who farmed land
       on their own would differ from zone to zone, as would the number of sons and servants per labrador, but I found no way of making
       distinctions among the zones. The totals that resulted provide an estimate of the number of different exploitations in each zone.
            While many owners owned more than one exploitation (some religious endowments, for instance), this is my best estimate of the
       number of properties in each zone. A ratio of the mean income of these owners and that of the largest owner can then be calculated.
       Since the purpose is to obtain a comparison of the zones, the correct ratio is not essential so long as the bias is similar everywhere.


       [1] AHN, Hac., libro 7476, letra G.



                                                                                           ― 830 ―




       APPENDIX T—
       POPULATION OF SMALL AND MEDIUM PLACES, SALAMANCA PLAIN, 1786


                                   Single                    Married                   Widowed



          Age Group         Male            Female    Male         Female       Male        Female        Totals



                                     Zone SA: Places of population under 20 (N = 18)




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
