Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                                                                                          ― 824 ―
       Despite the fact that these are broad, open valleys between spurs of the Sierra de Béjar, they are little used for plowing. The
       predominant crop is hay to feed cattle, grown in wide meadows or, near the towns, in cortinas. Fruit is a rival harvest, however, except
       in the Sangusín valley. The Becedillas valley is the most balanced in crops, yet even here today apples and cattle are its major products.
       The southern valleys, which are warmer, have more Mediterranean fruits and olive trees. The large town of Hervás, second in size to
       Béjar in the zone, today in Cáceres province, lies at the top of the southernmost of the valleys and is surrounded by orchards. Its streets
       of whitewashed houses look Andalusian rather than Serrano. In 1786 this zone had the largest mean town population of all, 570. Even
       without Béjar, an industrial town of woolen mills and 4,230 people, the mean suggests a prosperous agrarian economy.

       Zone SI (Piedrahita)

       Before the reorganization of provincial boundaries in 1833, the province of Salamanca extended eastward into what is now Ávila province
       to include two important valleys. The most extensive is the upper valley of the Rio Tormes, which has its source near the eastern end of
       the Sierra de Gredos and flows westward beneath the northern slope of the sierra for about forty kilometers before turning north toward
       the tableland of Salamanca. The other is the valley of the Rio Corneja, which is north of the Tormes valley and separated from it by the
       Sierra de Villafranca, considerably lower than the mighty Sierra de Gredos. The Corneja, about thirty kilometers long as the crow flies, is
       a tributary of the Tormes. The entire region rests on a granite base associated with the central sierras.
            These two valleys form Piedrahita zone (SI). In the eighteenth century the zone consisted of three partidos. The lower part of the
       Tormes valley formed the partido of Barco de Avila; the valley of the Corneja and the upper reaches of the Tormes valley and nearby
       towns of the sierra were the partido of Piedrahita, and on the northern edge of the valley of the Corneja was the partido of El Mirón,
       which is studied in Part 2. All three partidos belonged to the señorío of the Duque de Alba.
              The two valleys differ in their aspect. The Tormes valley has gentle slopes but no useful river basin until it broadens out shortly
       before the river turns north. Along the narrow upper valley, towns are located on the northern, sunny side, well up from the river, the
       houses snuggled together as if for warmth; around them cluster cortinas, and beyond these are open pastures. Many cortinas are
       irrigated meadows, a few have fruit trees today, while others are plowed for grain or potatoes. Between the towns there is open country,
       used for grazing sheep and brilliant with wild flowers in springtime. In contrast, close to its source the Rio Corneja flows into a broad, flat,
       oval basin about fifteen kilometers long and almost ten kilometers wide at its broadest point. This basin is dominated by the cabeza de
       partido, Piedrahita, on the southern rim. Other towns lie around the edge of the valley or along the river in the center of it. Except on its
       margins, the basin lacks the stone walls common in the rest of the zone. This broad expanse makes farming easier than in the Tormes
       valley, and much of it is plowed for grains, as are the uplands of the partido de Mirón lying


                                                                                          ― 825 ―
       above it to the north. Nevertheless, the soil is relatively thin, and some of the basin is devoted to meadows and pasture for cows.
             Although the two valleys differ, they have some common characteristics. Heavy precipitation in the form of rain or snow in winter is
       followed by summer drought. The soil is thin and, as in Béjar zone, conducive to pasturage and irrigated meadows. Many cattle are raised
       and until recently yokes of oxen were used for plowing. There is, however, far less forest cover than in Béjar. The broader parts of the
       Tormes valley near Barco have oaks, and here and in the Corneja depression men have planted encinas to create dehesas, but most of
       the uncultivated hillsides are expanses of underbrush. The high sierras, which occupy much of the area, are of little economic value,
       except that their melting snows feed the streams throughout much of the summer. The towns are nucleated, typically dominated by
       churches with square granite towers. The older houses are mostly of cut stone, with red-tiled roofs, but lack the attractive wooden
       balconies of Miranda zone.
             The three sierra zones share sharp, irregular terrain, thin soil, heavy winter precipitation, and relatively large nucleated towns, but
       they have also characteristics that set them apart. The valleys in Miranda zone are narrow, forcing the use of terracing and permitting
       very little open plowing. The valleys of Béjar are broad like those of Piedrahita, but they are devoted primarily to pasturage and where
       possible to fruit and olive trees. Piedrahita zone has the best balance between animal husbandry and farming.


                                                                                          ― 826 ―




       APPENDIX R—
       TYPES OF SEÑORÍO LEGO
       Chapters 16 and 17 make the distinction between two different patterns of señorío (seigneurial jurisdiction). One kind produced income
       for the señor primarily from jurisdictional rights and alienated royal income such as taxes and the royal share of the tithes, and the other
       produced little such income but was accompanied by extensive real properties from which the señor received income from rent paid by
       tenants or the sale of the harvests. The former was prevalent in the province of Salamanca, the latter in Jaén.
             This is not the distinction found most commonly in the writing on señorío, which is based on the legislation of the nineteenth
       century that abolished señoríos. When the Cortes of Cádiz decreed the abolition of señoríos on 6 August 1811, they distinguished
       between "señoríos jurisdiccionales," which were abolished, and "señoríos territoriales," which were converted into the private property of
       the señor. The former were judged to represent an alienation of royal rights and authority, which were now to be recovered by the
       nation. The latter were considered private property to be guaranteed henceforth like that of any other citizen, and the dues paid
       previously by the subjects became ordinary rents. This distinction remained the basis of the definitive abolition of señorío on 26 August
       1837. Unfortunately, the distinction was not so clear in the terms of the original grants as the lawmakers assumed, and it led to many
       cases at court between former señores and their towns. [1] It would be convenient to think that the difference noted in this study between
       señorío accompanied by large real property and that whose income came primarily from jurisdictional rights and the collection of alienated
       royal imposts was the same as the distinction between territorial and jurisdictional señoríos adopted in the laws abolishing señoríos.
       Unfortunately, this does not appear to be the case. The large properties of señores in Jaén were not part of their rights of señorío, to
       judge from the




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
