Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


       GLOSSARY
       A

           Alcalde— Leading official (mayor) of a community (municipio ) with its own council.

           Algarrobas— Carob beans

           Alqueria— A large property of arable and pasture with a small number of permanent residents who tend it (Salamanca).

           Aranzada— A measure of land, an alternative to the fanega.

           Arriero— Muleteer.

           Arroba— Measure of liquid volume, 12.56 liters.

           Arroba— A measure of weight, 11.5 kilograms.

       B

           Baldío— Barren land, waste.

       C

           Cabeza De Partido— The capital town of a partido.

           Campiña— The cultivated land of a town located beyond the ruedo; also the valley of the Guadalquivir, in contrast to the sierra
       (Jaén).

           Campiñuela— Same as campiña, first meaning.

          Capellanía— An endowed ecclesiastical preferment requiring the performance of specified masses or other religious acts; or the
       endowment (such as real property) whose income goes to the holder of the preferment.

           Casa De Campo— A residence located in an olive grove (Jaén).

           Cebada— Barley.

           Censo— An obligation entailing payment of interest and guaranteed by a lien on a piece of real property. See Appendix M.

           Censo Perpetuo— A permanent censo, whose contract does not allow for its being paid off.

           Censo Redimible— A censo that the debtor may redeem by paying off the capital value.

           Centeno —Rye.

           Cillero —Recipient and distributor of the town tithes (Salamanca).


                                                                                          ― 840 ―

           Cortijo— A large estate dedicated to the cultivation of grain, which has only a few permanent residents (Andalusia).

           Cortina— A small field on the outskirts of a town enclosed by a stone wall (Salamanca).

           Coto Redondo— An administrative unit that is owned as a single property (although the ownership may be divided into shares).

           Cuarto Dezmero— Fourth tither, whose tithes have a different recipient than the rest (Salamanca). Compare partible.

           Cuerda— A measure of land, used as a variant of fanega (Jaén).

       D

           Dehesa— A pasture planted with live oaks.

           Desamortización— Disentail, freeing of real property from legal entail, and in the case of ecclesiastical or public property in the
       nineteenth century, its appropriation and sale by the state.

           Despoblado— A "depopulated place"; a separate administrative unit with few or no permanent residents.

           Diezmos— Tithes.

           Diezmos Privativos— Tithes that are paid fully to the owner of the land.

       E

           Encina— Live oak.

           Escaña— Saint Peter's corn, a sweet, inferior grain.

       F



http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
