Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain

           Respuestas Generales— The answers to the forty questions posed at the beginning of the catastro of each municipality.

           Ruedo— The cultivated land lying immediately around a town nucleus.

       S

           Senarero— A marginal farmer, for whom farming is a secondary occupation.

          Señor— Lord; a person to whom, or to whose ancestor, the king has granted hereditary rights of jurisdiction over a certain territory
       and who is entitled to specified payments from the residents of the territory.

           Señorío— The territory under the jurisdiction of a señor.

           Senorío Eclesiastico— A señorío whose lord is a religious prelate or official.

       T

           Término— Town limits; the area covered by the smallest recognized administrative unit.

           Término Redondo— A término held as a single property; see coto redondo.

           Tierra— Arable plot.

           Tierra Entradiza— An arable plot in a despoblado cultivated separately from the main body of the property, as by a tenant farmer
       resident outside the despoblado (Salamanca).

           Trigo— Wheat.

           Trigo Candeal— First-class wheat.

       V

           Vales Reales— Interest-bearing government bonds circulating as legal tender. See Appendixes C and D.

           Vecino— Head of household; permanent legal resident of a municipality (town).

           Verdes De Centeno (orde cebada)— Rye (or barley) harvested green for fodder. See herren.

           Villa— A municipality of intermediate administrative status between a lugar and a city (ciudad ).

           Villa Eximida— A town which is administratively independent of the partido within which it lies geographically.

           Vínculo— A legally entailed property.

           Viuda— Widow.

           Viuda Labradora— The widow of a labrador, still running an independent agricultural exploitation.


                                                                                          ― 843 ―




       BIBLIOGRAPHY
       Primary Sources

       Archival and Unpublished Sources

          Archivo del Banco de España.
       Legajo 708. List of Spanish merchants (1806–7).

           Archivo General de Simancas (AGS).

                Dirección General de Rentas, Primera Remesa, Única Contribución.

               Respuestas Generales.
       Libros 323–27. Provincia de Jaén.
       Libros 502, 518, 530. Provincia de Salamanca.

               Mayor Hacendado.
       Libro 328. Provincia de Jaén.
       Libro 536. Provincia de Salamanca.

              Comprobaciones.
       Legajos 1399–1411. Provincia de Jaén.

                Legajo 1980. Relaciones del vecindario, casas, comunidades, iglesias y pueblos de las 22 provincias, y la orden circular.

                Legajo 1982. Noticias del número de puramente labradores . . . exclusos sus hijos y mozos.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
