Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


           Fanega— Measure of volume, 55.20 liters.

           Fanega— In most regions, the basic measure of land, about one-half hectare, but varying from region to region. See Appendix N.

           Fiador— Guarantor of a contract, surety.

       G

           Garbanzos— Chick peas.

       H

           Habas— Fava beans, broad beans.

           Hacendado Mayor— In a municipality (town), the owner who receives the largest income from his real property or rights of señorío
       or both.

           Herren— A grain crop, usually barley or rye, harvested while still green and used for fodder.

          Hoja— A "field" in a two- or three-field system, a large section of the término consisting of many individual plots all cultivated in the
       same rotation.

          Horros— A payment made by the tenant to the owner of an agricultural exploitation in lieu of tithes, from which this property is
       exempt.

           Hortelano— Owner or tenant of a huerta, a vegetable and fruit farmer.

           Huerta— An irrigated plot used for vegetables; at times an orchard.

       L

           Labrador— A husbandman, a farmer with a plow team. In Andalusia also a large tenant farmer.

           Linar— Enclosed field used for growing flax.

           Lugar— A town or village; the lowest administrative unit with its own government.

       M

           Mayorazgo— A legally entailed estate belonging to a lay family.

           Monte— Uncultivated land, woodland, usually used for pasture.

           Mozo— A hired farm laborer living in the household of his employer, a farm servant, farm hand.

       O

           Obra Pía— An endowment to support religious services, a shrine, a charitable institution, a confraternity, or the like.

           Oficial— Journeyman, assistant craftsman.


                                                                                          ― 841 ―

       P

           Partible— The common tithe fund, destined for the different individuals and institutions that receive a regular share of the parish
       tithes (in opposition to the horros or diezmos privativos ). See Appendix J.

           Partido— The administrative region beneath the level of a province.

           Patronato De Legos— An endowment to provide income for a clergyman, whose nomination was in the hands of a layman
       (frequently the heir of the founder). Compare capellanía.

           Pegujalero or Labrador Pegujalero (also Peujalero)— A small farmer, a step below a labrador.

           Pobre De Solemnidad— An officially recognized indigent.

           Presbítero— Priest.

       R

           Realengo— Term applied to a territory or municipality directly under the jurisdiction of the king. Compare señorío.

           Regidor— A member of the municipal or town council.

           Regidor Perpetuo— Holder of a hereditary office of regidor.

           Rentero— Tenant farmer.




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
