Rural Change and Royal Finances in Spain


                                                                                      10.
                                                 The Parish Church of La Mata. One product of the prosperity of this village
                                              in the second half of the eighteenth century was the decision of the vecinos in
                                               1791 to beautify their modest church with an impressive belfry, or espadaña,
                                             a major accomplishment for this community of some 350 people. It stands out in
                                             contrast to the square towers of an earlier age found in the surrounding villages,
                                               but like all such towers, the espadaña is crowned by a storks' nest, to which
                                           a pair of birds return annually in the spring to produce their young. (Photo RH, 1980)




                                                                               11.
                             El Mirón. In the eighteenth century this small community was a cabeza de partido. The picture is taken
                          from beneath the ruined tower, or castillo, which dominates the town, looking north across its rocky upland
                            arable land. Note the cortinas enclosed by stone walls on the edge of the town nucleus. (Photo RH, 1964)




                                                                                   12.
                                          Baños. A perspective from the Moorish castle of the main plaza of this Andalusian
                                       town, with its parish church, town hall (on the right), and in the eighteenth century the
                                         houses of the heads of the top families, the center of municipal life and focus of the
                                      power of its elite. In the upper right one can observe a small portion of the plain beneath




http://publishing.cdlib.org/ucpressebooks/view?docId=ft4d5nb394;chunk.id=0;doc.view=print[1/22/2011 11:30:51 AM]
