4                   1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


that would restore to French arms the luster which had become tarnished
in defeat. Chroniclers rendered dazzling descriptions of the years of ascend-
ancy and explained away the defeats suffered from 1812 onward with allusions
to treason, defection, incompetence, and chance, not to mention the weather
in 1812.
    The Memorial de St. Helene, the History of the Consulate and the Empire
by Thiers, and the works of Pelet, Fain, Norvious, Bourienne, Sarazin,
Segur, Vaudancourt, Marbot, and many others succeeded in keeping alive
among the French the memories of the great times of world supremacy and
also in formulating the Napoleonic legend. Even in our own time, modem
works such as the West Point Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars^ have perpetuated
those traditions. In general, however, these works often failed to depict
some of the realities with historical fidelity.
    It   was not until the defeat of 1870 that the French looked backward in
earnest in a search for the principles Napoleon had formulated, principles
which seemed to have gotten lost. This gave rise to a new style of general
staff-sponsored military historical study and resulted in some outstanding
works; they will probably never be improved upon because the mechanisms
which produced them no longer exist. Among the writers of these works,
                                             ^



the French and Germans were easily the most prolific. They offered both a
framework and a background against which thousands upon thousands of
detailed studies in books and periodicals, as well as personal narratives in
memoirs, diaries, and journals, could be used and evaluated by academicians
and special-interest groups alike.
       In 1908, Kircheisen,^ who attempted to put together a bibliography of
the Napoleonic era, estimated that more than 200,000 books, articles, and
                                                                Although
essays had been devoted to the military history of the era alone.
this might not appear all that impressive to modern eyes, which have seen
as many as 10,000 titles published in a single year, this was a staggering
number in 1908. Horward"* estimates that another 20,000 studies on the
topic have been added since.




The Napoleonic era, however, was not simply one of conquests and military
events.    It   also witnessed,   on a grand scale, the rise of nationalism and a
direct confrontation  between national and dynastic interests. Ultimately,
the wave of French nationalism set into motion by the French Revolution
begot a nationalistic response from the rest of Europe. And even though
this   remained largely latent in Napoleon's time,       it   nevertheless cast long
shadows across events from 1812 onward. Napoleonic Europe was every bit
as complex as modern-day Europe, and the French empire was enmeshed in
