12                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


time, the French colonial adventures in the Caribbean were failing. Thus,
by 1803, the storm clouds began to gather again.
     If   money was the root of all evil and Britain used so much of it to keep
the enemies of France in the field, then. Napoleon reasoned, why not strike
at the very roots of these subsidies by shutting down the markets of British
commerce? The Egyptian failure had,         for the   time being, ruled out any
possibility of conducting overland expeditions against India.      But if it was
possible to close Continental ports to British traders, this     might strike a
serious blow at them even as it might (and indeed did) stimulate French
commerce. Unfortunately, closing the ports would involve a long, drawn'
out methodical process that was not at all to Napoleon's liking. 'It might do
as a last resort, but meanwhile, more direct action might offer a quicker
solution.
     This situation gave rise to the military encampments along the English
Channel, where the bulk of French combat forces was massed to train for
an invasion of the British Isles. Nelson's victory over the combined French
and Spanish fleets at Trafalgar in October 1805 rendered any such invasion
plans useless. But the time the army had spent in the Channel encampments
had been highly beneficial for its state of training, reaching a level it was
never to achieve again in years to come. The Austrians and Russians would
be the first to feel the brunt of this new French military machine. But before
this happened, Napoleon had another surprise in store for his adversaries.
     Coaxing the senate into proclaiming him emperor in May 1804, Na^
poleon now entered the dynastic club of European monarchs. Perhaps the
French were tiring of the shaggy-haired Jacobins, perhaps they were begin-
ning to miss some of the old pomp and circum.stance, even if they would
not welcome a return of all the old evils. Perhaps somber airs were out of
step with the newly found power and prestige of the republic.      As it was, a
plebiscite showed that the nation approved of the appointment with a land-
slide response.

    On December 2, 1804, Napoleon placed Charlemagne's crown, com-
mandeered from Aachen, onto his own head. In doing so, he finally realized
an old dream whose reality had been denied to all the French monarchs
who had gone before, but he also placed his foot squarely into an area that
had for long been a traditional Hapsburg preserve. The Hapsburgs were,
after all, the legitimate successors to the Holy Roman Empire. The Austrians
received another jolt when, in May 1805, Napoleon placed the Lombard
crown of Italy on his head, made himself king of Italy, and installed his
stepson, Eugene Beauhamais, as viceroy.
    On his way back to France in July, he also picked up Genoa in passing.
The Napoleonic game of imperial monopoly was gaining momentum even
