                                                                                 .




6              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the event. His proclamation of 1813 merely put an official stamp on an
issue that had already been taken out of his hands.
    In Spain, a homogeneous population had expressed its will against French
tyranny as the French had during their own earlier revolution. In the Rhine
Confederation, however, realpolitik continued to keep rising anti'French
sentiments in check for a while.   Still,   even here the fabric was decidedly
uneven and not easily reduced to a common denominator.
     Beyond this circle stood mercantile Britain, which waged what was
largely a war in defense of its economic interests, and Sweden, which lent
its services for the possession of Norway.

     Thus, the student of history, m search of a leitmotiv, is bound to have
a  difficult time. Even though there were no neutrals anywhere, there was
also little clash of ideologies. The conflict was one of interests, and these
ran at cross-purposes everywhere. Given this general background     — with so
many players and pawns in the game, with so many perspectives from which
                                                 —
even the simplest of events might be viewed there can be little wonder
that this era spawned nearly a quarter of a million books and articles. Such
an abundance can well result in confusing, as much as enlightening, the
issues.

    For the British, the view of the Napoleonic wars is dominated by Wel-
lington, the Peninsula, and Waterloo, not to mention Nelson and Trafalgar;
for the Austrians,   by Archduke Charles and Aspem; for the Prussians, by
Bluecher, the Katzbach, and Belle Alliance (the Prussian       name for Wa-
terloo); and for the Russians, by Kutuzov, Borodino,    and the Beresina. Nor
were the lesser actors on the Napoleonic stage lacking their share of heroes.
The era produced them in wholesale fashion, their magnitude varying only
with the viewer's perspective. In France, the names of Napoleon's marshals
became inextricably bound up with the glorious milestones that were Aus-
terlitz, Jena, and Friedland.

     Last, but far from least, is the overwhelming image of Napoleon himself,
bringing into sharp focus all the encumbrances of romance and legend. Here,
the problem for the historian is exacerbated by the fact that Napoleon the
general. Napoleon the statesman, and Napoleon the emperor all represented
different facets of Napoleon the man. Of these, only Napoleon the general,
one of the great captains of all time, had the stature to gain a unanimous
positive vote. Yet the genius of Napoleon the soldier, wrapped in romance
and legend, is so overpowering that it constantly cuts across the image of
the other Napoleons, frequently obscuring the underlying realities.
    But if the whole of the Napoleonic era thus offers a rich palette from
which the historian may extrapolate an endless variety of views, then the
events of the 1812 Russian campaign offer an equally rich microcosm of
