10                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


political coloring, the Directorate   thought it wise to send this potentially
dangerous young man off somewhere, before he developed a taste for political
power. The sideshow in Italy, where the Austrians still maintained an army,
was thought to be the perfect place. Surely, Jourdan and Moreau would
settle with the Austrian main forces, operating north of the Alps, in Ger-

many. But that was not to be the case.
   Firing up a ragtag army that was down on its heels, living a hand-to-
mouth existence because Paris had very little to give. Napoleon now had
the opportunity to put into effect his own ideas on how to run a campaign.
The comparatively small army of Italy was just the right sort of instrument
on which he could cut his teeth. Within one year both Austria and the rest
of Europe learned two things about Napoleon: the way he conducted a
campaign and the sort of treaties he imposed.
                                —
    The decision fell in Italy not, as expected, in Germany. The Treaty
of Campo Formio, concluded in October 1797, took the Austrians out of
the war. Napoleon conducted the negotiations as though he had done this
sort of thing all his life. The price was high.   Hapsburg Austria and Bourbon
France may have been at swords' points for centuries, but it was now Na-
poleon and republican France that would incur the wrath of Austria.
     On the whole, the French republic had done ver>' well against the First
Coalition arrayed against it. Prussia had already renounced its claims against
all territories   west of the Rhine. Austria was forced to cede possession of
Wallonia (the Austrian Netherlands), known today as Belgium. At the same
time, recognition of the former United Provinces of the Netherlands,      now
styled the Batavian Republic, as a "sister republic" of France      was forced
through.
     In northern Italy,   Napoleon had added materially to these gains with
the establishment of yet another dependency, the so-called Cisalpine Re-
public, patched together from several Italian principalities. In addition to
this,   Venice was forced to yield the Ionian Islands, thus affording France a
naval base at the doorstep to the Adriatic Sea.
   Napoleon was given a hero's reception when he returned to Paris in
December 1797, even though the Directorate viewed him with an even
greater sense of foreboding than before. Thus, when he advanced his project
for an invasion of Egypt,    which was to be the first step toward opening an
overland route to India, the very heart of British economic power,      it was

eagerly accepted.     The Egyptian adventure turned out to be a fiasco. For
once, Napoleon had miscalculated, and he got his first real lesson about
British seapower. In Egypt, he faced the possibility of being stranded on the
wrong side of the Mediterranean, which proved to be a place ruled by the
British navy. The situation could have easily been Napoleon's undoing, but
