                                                                              —
                                       Prologue                                 5


a net of particularist interests which must be understood if the events them-
selves are to make sense.
      Napoleon was riding the crest of a wave of French nationalism unleashed
by the revolution, but he had harnessed it and given it direction. He had,
to put    it   in the simplest terms, replaced republican nationalism    with his
own dynastic interests, even as a flock of other, minor dynasts was riding
on his coattails. These dynasts, in their turn, regarded the nationalistic force
as a   danger to their own particularist interests, even as they began to feel
its   pressures stirring among their own people.
       Yet the Napoleon who constantly appealed to the forces of French na-
tionalism thought he could also effectively suppress similar stirrings toward
a national identity in the rest of Europe.    However, by the time the Russian
campaign had run its course in 1812, the princes of the Rhine Confederation
had cause to look toward their own futures with some apprehension. The
Napoleonic alliance still offered security of a sort, but the common man
was becoming as weary of the continuing military demands as were the
French themselves. What would become of the princes if Napoleon was to
fall from power? The response, when it came from dynastic Europe beyond

Napoleon's orbit, and against him, had distinctly nationalistic overtones,
even though it continued to be dominated by dynastic interests. Thus, the
Grand Alliance of 1813, binding together the three main characters
Hapsburg, Romanov, and Hohenzollem            —
                                             still furnishes an object lesson

about the difficulties attending allied undertakings of any sort.
   The Austrian emperor, apprehensive about nationalistic stirrings in his
own polyglot state, carefully avoided anything that might arouse or give
vent to the passions of his people. He was even reluctant to raise a strong
militia because this     would have,   in effect,   armed the nation. Instead, he
conducted an old-fashioned cabinet war in true dynastic fashion, with all
its   limited objectives, thereby contributing more than a little to the anemic
pursuit of the 1813 campaign. His war aims went no further than a con-
tainment of Napoleon behind the Rhine.
       The Russian tsar, on the other hand, once he saw the means at hand,
was prepared to settle for nothing less than Napoleon's downfall. Still, his
was not the national war nineteenth-century historiography tended to make
of it.Even modem Soviet historians were rather lukewarm on the subject
until    specter was resurrected during World War II to foster a holdout
         its

mentality against the invading Germans.
    The Prussian king, too, was not enthusiastic about a national war, but
like it or not,he got one. The independent action of one of his generals at
the close of Napoleon's Russian campaign had already compromised him in
that regard, and the mood of the nation prevented him from repudiating
