                 Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                  13


as the enmity of Austria deepened. Again, he had put his foot into yet
another Austrian preserve, and no one in Vienna beUeved, even for a
moment, that the Austrians had seen the last of this French parvenu. Thus,
before the year was out, the Austrians were in the field again, reacting to
what they justly perceived to be a "clear and present danger."
    Under the leadership of the younger Pitt, who had returned to office in
April 1804, Britain had succeeded in resurrecting what was now called the
Third Coalition. The self-made Carolingian emperor and Italian king had
gone too far. That the Austrians would come out fighting again was to be
expected. Russian intervention was secured because Napoleon's sphere of
influence had also drawn dangerously close to Russian interests in the Bal-
kans.
    Napoleon was ready. The army of England had been training long enough
by the Channel coast. It was time to use it.
    In a lightning campaign during the closing months of 1805, Napoleon
took the first and most important step toward the realization of his goals
when he trounced the Austrians and Russians at Austerlitz. This "Sun of
Austerlitz" was to beam warmly upon his intention to finally give shape to
his idea of the "Three Germanics," an idea rooted deeply in the past.
    The military histories have frequently bypassed the question of how a
nation professing liberty, equality, and brotherhood, which had rid itself of
one dynasty and risen to its own defense against intervention from outside
dynastic reactions, could undergo an apparently seamless metamorphosis into
a conquest society. Likewise,   many studies fail to address how Napoleon,
in the name of dynastic interests, not only could continue a trend that had
begun long ago in Bourbon France and had been picked up again by the
revolutionary governments but also could now carry it to a conclusion by
himself. Fiedler, a German military historian, summarizes the part the re-
public played in this when he points out: "After the era of enlightenment
had already awakened ideas of a national identity among all the Europeans,
the [French] revolution permeated its own nation with the belief that it was
the vanguard of the achievements of civilization for all mankind."'
    The Terror, however, and the excesses committed by the republican
soldateska were not well received beyond the French borders. To the contrary,
the tangible aspects of all this "liberty, equality and fraternity," quite apart
from the official dynastic reaction, had elicited a popular negative response
as well. "As a result," Fiedler goes on, "this ideological universalism changed

into an egotistical nationalism.   The republic, enforced by the democratic
left,   was no longer content with securing against the outside the victory
that had been won within but embarked upon the road to conquest in order
to enhance the ideological substance of the revolution with territorial gain."^
