                      )


            *


                 Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                 11


his luck continued to hold.     (He had felt that a lucky star was guiding his
fortunes; now he could well start believing in it in earnest.) Departing Egypt
on August 24, 1799, he landed in France on October 9, after being becalmed
on the Egyptian coast for a couple of weeks. Fortunately, the doldrums had
also immobilized the British scouts and raiders that were cruising everywhere.
    Arriving in Paris on October 15, Napoleon once again found the gov-
ernment in a state of ferment. It was time to take an active hand in the
nation's political affairs. In a game that anyone seemed to be able to play,
he now decided to become a player himself, rather than remain the pawn
of men he didn't respect. When he made his first concrete political moves,
he fully justified the suspicions of the Directorate, which had twice delib-
erately sent him off to distant parts. The final result of these moves was the
new Constitution of the Year VIII, enacted in December 1799, which also
made Napoleon the first consul of France.
    However, the Austrians had not gone away. Predictably, the Treaty of
Campo Formio had been little better than a truce. It was spring 1800, and
the Austrians were on the march again both to the north and to the south
of the Alps. Napoleon, who now had a choice, opted to seek the decision
in the Italian theater of operations. It had served him well before, and it
would do so again. Arriving in Italy, he restored the erstwhile Cisalpine
Republic, now called the Italian Republic, and marched on to Marengo,
the most controversial of his victories. This might have spelled an end to
yet another coalition war, but British subsidies kept the Austrians fighting.
It   was left to Moreau, who commanded in Germany, to put an end to it
with his victory at Hohenlinden on December 3, 1800. This led to the
Treaty of Luneville in February 1801, and it made Moreau the hero in the
eyes of a war-weary French public. The turn of events was an embarrassment
to Napoleon and probably gave rise to his lifelong campaign to make of
Marengo something it had never been: one of his greatest, if not the greatest,
of his victories. (It was not until 1804 that Napoleon was finally able to rid
himself of Moreau's embarrassing presence, when the latter was implicated
in a royalist plot.
      Meanwhile, the British,   also wearying of the   war that they had been
carrying on single-handedly since the Austrians had bowed out, made peace
at Amiens in March 1802. It was not to be a lasting peace, but Napoleon
used this breathing spell to set about refining all the skills the republican
armies had gained in their long series of campaigns. In addition. Napoleon
the statesman saw to the territorial expansion of France. Piedmont and the
Swiss canton of Wallis were annexed, along with the island of Elba. His
failure,   however, to negotiate a trade agreement with the British and their
refusal to return the island of Malta soon created new tensions.   At the same
