                                             Prologue                                   7


their own. In a campaign that lasted only 5 months and 21 days, the mightiest
army the world had ever seen was all but totally destroyed. For a long time,
the Russian winter was allowed to bear the brunt of the blame for this
monumental failure, and this was entirely understandable. Even though the
killing frost did not descend until the very end, when the campaign had for
long been a failure and the remnants of the Grand Army were in full retreat,
the freezing cold was the last and most profound impression the survivors
brought away with them.
     The idea of the winter and the suffering it had heaped upon the shoulders
of the human wreckage fleeing back into Poland at once took hold of the
imagination of an astounded Europe, which was unable to think of a better
explanation for the disaster that had overtaken the Grand Army.                 The se-
verity of the Russian winter was eagerly seized upon by the French and by
Napoleon himself to explain away the awesome failure. Thus, the legend
of Napoleonic invincibility was kept alive, and the glory of French arms
remained unblemished. Only God and the elements were stronger. But the
"Sun of Austerlitz" no longer shone quite so brightly.
     The bill for Napoleon's Russian debacle would be presented in 1813.
Attempting to bring down the Russians by means which had, by 1812,
become conventional for Napoleon, he had simply overreached himself.
However, the story of how he had set his sights too far ahead did not begin
with the mobilization for his march into Russia. Nor did it begin when the
first Grand Army crossed the Rhine in 1805. By then. Napoleon had long

made himself the instrument of French policies which reached back, far
beyond the French Revolution, into the times of Richelieu and the Thirty
Years' War.




                                             NOTES
1.   Esposito, V.J., and Eking, J. R. A Military History and Atlas of the Napoleonic
     Wars (popularly known as the West Point Atlas of the Napoleonic Wars). New
     York. 1965.
2.   With the coming of the atomic age, the study of military history fell out of favor
     in many military establishments. Particularly in the U.S. armed services, the
     fields of business administration,     corporate management, and computer sciences
     were deemed of greater importance than the military arts and sciences. For an
     interesting view on the subject, see "Musket and Quill," by Col. L. J.   Matthews,
     in Military Review, vol.     16, no.   1,   Fort Leavenworth, 1981.
3.   Kircheisen,    F.   M. Biblio^aphie des Napokonischen Zeitalters. Berlin, 1908-1912.
4.   Horward, D. D., ed. Napoleonic Military History. A Bibliography. London, 1986.
