                  Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                  9

been formed largely on British initiative and were heavily reliant upon British
subsidies. Bound together by a complicated patchwork of alliances, treaties,
and accommodations, the military images of these coalitions were as varied
as the political backgrounds that had brought them into existence. But time

would prove Austria and Britain to be the mainsprings that drove the contest
onward, even though the cast of characters would change virtually from one
campaign to the next.
   Against this background of military events, an internal political contest
was raging within the young French republic. In its course, a succession of
men stepped into the power vacuum created time and again by plots, coun-
terplots, and the paranoia of the Terror, their careers, like shooting stars,
flaring brightly and then becoming extinct almost as quickly as they had
appeared.
    In the midst of these upheavals, a young artillery captain named Na-
poleon Bonaparte appeared on the scene during the siege of Toulon, a
Mediterranean harbor the British had occupied at the invitation of French
royalists.   At once recognizing the weakest point in the enemy's defenses,
he advanced a scheme designed to bring the siege to a speedy conclusion.
When he met with resistance, he promptly went over the heads of his
superiors. His plan was a brilliant success.   Toulon fell and the British lost
their foothold on French soil. This affair gave Napoleon's military career a
quick boost. Raised to the rank of a temporary major during the siege
operations, he was made a brigadier general as soon as a warrant could be
obtained from Paris.
    But these were the days when France was full of hopeful young men like
Napoleon who had leaped through the ranks and up the ladder of command
far in advance of their years. Still, Napoleon had gained the attention of

important men on the Committee of Public Safety in Paris, men such as
Paul Barras and Lazare Camot (the latter would eventually reorganize the
armies of the republic). Recalled to Paris in 1795, Napoleon declined to
accept a command in the Vendee, in western France, where royalists were
in revolt. He sensed that chasing a bunch of rebellious peasants, even if
they were royalists, would hardly enhance his newly won reputation or
advance his ambitions. They were, after all, Frenchmen.
    Soon, however, he was to do something worse. In October of that same
year he confronted one of the most powerful forces of the revolution, the
Paris mob, and gave it his celebrated *Vhiff of grapeshot."
    With Prussia and Spain dropping out of the First Coalition against France
in 1795 and the British beyond the reach of the land-bound French armies,
only the Austrians remained in the field to carry on the fight. Since Na-
poleon's intervention against the Paris mob had invested him with a certain
