14                  1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


This explains how the cooperation of the masses           — who had   just risen to the

cries of "/a partie est en dangerr        — was   for the first time secured in wars of

aggression. But         it   does not explain why the main thrust of this aggression
turned east, toward the Rhine River and Germany.
     When Danton, one of the leaders of the revolution, declared at the
beginning of 1793 that nature had fixed France's boundaries on the Rhine
and that "no power on Earth shall keep us from our goal," he was expressing
an idea that had its roots deep in Bourbon dynastic thinking. A strong case
may be made for the fact that precisely this kind of dynastic ambition left
severalEuropean provinces, from the Alsace in the west to West Prussia
and the Baltic Provinces in the east and various points in between, on the
wrong side of ethnic and national boundaries, creating problems that have
militated right into modem times.
    In 1629, Cardinal Richelieu had already drawn up his well-known memo-
randum delineating the necessity for French intervention in German affairs.
Thus, when Napoleon declared to a Prussian negotiator, "I shall play the
part which Richelieu assigned to France,"^ he was simply expressing a policy
that had been prevalent in France over the previous two centuries. Oman,
the eminent British historian, commented that one of the curious aspects
of German history was that the Hapsburgs consistently failed to summon
the combined might of the German empire to put an end, once and for all,
to the constant French aggressions against its western territories."* The rev-
olution had not even interrupted, much less derailed, the dynastic objectives
of the ancien regime. Thus, when Napoleon announced on another occasion
that "the annihilation of the German nationality was an essential feature
of his policy, he was again merely reducing to a phrase what had been the
essence of French policy since Richelieu."
                     and even some before his time, had always found
     Just as Richelieu,
helpmates among the south German princes, who had made fishing in the
particularist backwaters of the Thirty Years'           War so profitable for France,
so too did Napoleon find rich and fertile soil for intervention. These German
princes, according to Barraclough, worked their principalities like a landlord
works his farm.^ They regarded the idea of a national identity among their
subjects and those of neighboring states as a danger to their own particular
interests,   because it would ultimately strengthen the political cohesion of
the Holy Roman Empire and weaken their own independence. In short, any
nationalistic stirrings smacked of Hapsburg domination. Prussia was, at this
point,    still   far   away from even entering into the equation. Thus, with
Napoleon apparently restraining a general surge toward nationalism by re-
turning France to the dynastic fold (even if he was a parvenu), the German
princes not only saw in him a release from Hapsburg apron strings but thought
