24               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


of a pen at Fontainbleau, the entire German North Sea coast was annexed
and also incorporated into metropolitan France.
   This last move was ostensibly part of the further tightening of the Con-
tinental blockade.    Still,   without so much as a *'by your leave," the neo-
Franks of other sequestered territories were now joined by a sizable block
from the German lowlands. Napoleon's mastery of Europe appeared com-
plete. Only Spain and Russia remained as unresolved problems. Spain was
already living up to its reputation as the festering sore in the side of Na-
poleon's empire, and the Treaty of Tilsit was beginning to look more and
more like what it had always been beneath the surface: a truce rather than
a settlement of the Russian situation.
     All this proved problematic for Napoleon's objectives toward the least
accessible of his adversaries, the British. If the blockade was ever to become
really effective, the British expeditionary force supporting the Spanish in-
surrection would have to be ejected from the Iberian Peninsula. For the
moment, however, the British posed no immediate threat. The Russian
matter appeared more serious.
    The Russians were economically far too dependent upon foreign trade
to permit the French emperor to continue inserting his hand so deeply into
their affairs. Russia was rich in natural resources but had poorly developed
industries.   Thus, the Continental blockade was choking the flow of foreign
exchange the country required in order to obtain the needed manufactured
goods. All other considerations aside, the Russians could hardly continue
to participate in Napoleon's power game without courting severe economic
depression.   The situation was driven by more than merely Alexander's loss
of interest in being Napoleon's man.
     There was little the French emperor could do for the moment to counter
such a defection except, of course, to introduce sharper tones into the
diplomatic exchanges. At the same time, the situation lent renewed currency
to Napoleon's old idea of hitting the British     where it would really hurt:
India. But apart from all the logistical problems that the overland trek would
involve, directing such a crippling blow against the motherlode of British
commerce would require the willing cooperation of a compliant Russia. It
meant seizing the overland routes to India, ejecting the British from the
Iberian Peninsula, and closing the Strait of Gibraltar    —   a tall order,   even
for Napoleon.
     For the moment, however, these actions were        all   abstractions. Still,
Napoleon perceived himself to be in an invincible position. Who was to
stand against him? To the emperor, what happened today, tomorrow, or
the day after was up to him and him alone       —
                                            all the others could do was
