20               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     Again, the friendship of the tsar demanded a price on the diplomatic
front. It would be necessary, for the time being, to give the Russians a free
hand in their advances along the lower Danube. This, at least, was the
tenor of the meeting at Erfurt, which was to shore up the Treaty of Tilsit
once more.
     Napoleon found no laurels in Spain. The British expeditionary force,
the only suitable objective for the Grand Army, successfully avoided a lethal
confrontation.   As a result, Napoleon decided that the further conduct of
operations in Spain could be handed back to his subordinates. It was time

to return to France and see to the security of the throne,which appeared
imperiled by succession plotters. He foiled them easily enough, but new
laurels were needed to shore up the flagging interest and support of the
French nation. Again, the Austrians obliged.
     The hawks among the Austrians, burning to avenge their grievances
against Napoleon, pushed Archduke Charles into yet another attempt to
take the measure of the French, even though he thought the time was
not yet ripe. Napoleon was hardly surprised by these events, even if their
timing was most inopportune. He wasted no time in reconstituting the
Grand Army, which was called the Army of Germany this time because
there was now also an Army of Spain. But this was merely a passing tech-
nicality.
     The Austrians stood alone. The hoped-for insurrection in Germany never
materialized, except for some sporadic events.
    That the recently Bavarianized Tyroleans would rise against their new
masters was to be expected. They still considered themselves Austrians, and
their country was going to war. Their leader, Andreas Hofer, was to die in
front of an Italian firing squad at Mantua.
    In Prussia, Major von Schill took his regiment of hussars into the field
without permission in the hope of sparking a general insurrection. He died
on a street pavement in Stralsund under the guns of Dutch and Danish
troops. His head was severed from his grossly mutilated body and sent to
Jerome Bonaparte in Kassel as a trophy, and eleven of his officers fell before
a firing squad of Nassauers in Wesel.
     A free corps of Brunswickers, raised by their deposed and exiled duke,
found itself isolated in southern Germany and succeeded in making a dash
across the face of the country all the way to the North Sea, where the men
were rescued by the British. One could hardly have arranged a more striking
symbolism for the German impotence bom of disunity.
   As for the archduke and his Austrians, he managed to do something no
one else had done before: He handed Napoleon a clear-cut check at Aspem/
