                 Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                      21

Essling.   A few weeks later, at Wagram, Napoleon redressed the balance,
but decidedly not in the grand style of the past. And no one knew this
better than Napoleon himself.    The Austrians of 1809 were nothing like
those of 1805.
   The 1809 campaign marked the beginning of a developing pattern.
Napoleon was   — and would continue   to be   — the   greatest captain of his time,
but the days when he could simply roll over the opposition were passing.
Even as the quality of his own armies was being diluted by the continuing
demands placed upon them, the opposition was learning to cope. But if
Napoleon took any notice of this at all, he was far too confident in his own
abilities to give these matters more than a passing thought. Still, Wagram

held no fond memories for him.
    Despite the Erfurt agreements. Napoleon had gotten little satisfaction
from Alexander, other than keeping Prussia dormant, in his role as a go-
between. But the Prussian king, who would still exhibit considerable relyc-
tance to join in the fray in 1813, would hardly have stirred so much as a
finger in 1809. Indeed, the main reason for Alexander to have entered into
any agreements with Napoleon had been his desire to keep a hand in the
game in order to forestall any more calamities on the scale of the Spanish
Bourbons. If Napoleon had looked upon the domination of Germany as a
focal point of his objectives, the tsar was no less interested. It could hardly
be in Russia's interests to see either the Hapsburg or the Hohenzollem
monarchy plowed under in the style of what had happened in Spain and
Portugal.
    Even so. Napoleon appeared to do everything in his power to deepen
Alexander's growing suspicions and dismay.        And even if he did notice
Alexander's reactions, he probably didn't care very much anyway.            A Na-
poleon could only march to the sound of his own drums.
    Because of its defeat in 1809, Austria now had to part with its lUyrian
provinces of Goerz, Istria, Carinthia, and Carinola. Napoleon's mastery over
Italy was complete.

    Included in the Austrian treaty was a clause that would hand Western
Galicia, with its 1.3 million inhabitants, over to the grand duchy of Warsaw.
Such an enlargement of the Polish state, sitting right on the Russian door-
step, was totally unacceptable to the Russians. Thus, even if many historians
claim that the relationship between Napoleon and Tsar Alexander had begun
to cool soon after its high point at Tilsit, this last bit of Napoleonic horse
trading definitely marked the end of the honeymoon and put the final stamp
upon Alexander's growing disenchantment. The air of Franco-Russian re-
lations was becoming downright frigid.
