                   Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                  17


difficult to dazzle Alexander's vanity,      and the tsar easily succumbed to the
overtures of his imperial "brother" or "cousin." It is doubtful that Napoleon's
motives were anything but opportunistic, yet the price paid for this "friend-
ship" was far too high for a man who had become thoroughly accustomed
to having his way. Not only was Napoleon forced to moderate his intentions
toward Prussia, but he also had to abandon Finland and Turkey to Russian
interests. Of course, he didn't think that Alexander would benefit all that

much from the possession of Finland, since that was sure to incur the enmity
of Sweden. And there was always the possibility of doing something indirectly
by retarding the advance of Russian interests in the Balkans.
    As for the Prussians, they had no bargaining power whatever. Thus,
they did not come away nearly so well, even though Napoleon probably had
not yet made up his mind about their ultimate disposition. Still, it is fairly
certain that the idea he expressed to Metternich, the Austrian plenipoten-
tiary,    during negotiations in 1813   —   that the HohenzoUems might be given
a                              —
  duchy along the Vistula hadn't occurred to him on the spur of the
moment. At the same time, however". Napoleon did not neglect the idea
of driving a wedge between the Russo-Prussian relationship by presenting
Alexander with a small portion of the territories Prussia had been forced to
cede.
    Tilsit represented a pivotal point in Napoleon's       ascendancy.   Many see
it as   both the beginning and the high-water mark of the "friendship" between
Napoleon and Alexander. Some also think, not without justification, that
Tilsit saw Napoleon at the very apex of his power. Even though his march

would continue unchecked for some time, the difficulties would begin to
mount and nothing would ever be as easy in the future as it had been during
the previous three years.
    Napoleon may have been forced by the Austrians and Russians to shelve
his project for the invasion of Britain in 1805, but Nelson's stunning victory
at Trafalgar finally    put an end to the plan.      The time for the economic
assault, even if it was only a second-best approach,     appeared to have come.
The unqualified success of the Prussian campaign of 1806 would furnish an
even better starting position for what had until now been only an imperfect
attempt. Napoleon had already issued a decree from Berlin on October 21,
1806, proclaiming the Continental blockade, but the effort was somewhat
premature. His military success against the Russians in 1807, however,
coupled with his unquestionable personal diplomatic triumph over Alex-
ander, offered the possibility of making it a reality at last. With a compliant
Russia and a defeated Prussia, the entire Baltic could now be fitted into the
system. All that remained was to bring Sweden and Denmark into line.
        One of the immediate results of Alexander's agreement to join the block-
