                Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                15


that exchanging domination from Vienna for that from Paris would guarantee
the independence they craved.
    The immediate result of the Austrian defeat in 1805 and the flooding
of south Germany with French troops was the creation of the Rhine Con-
federation, headed by Napoleon as its protector. With the exception of
Frederick of Wuerttemberg, who did not relent until French troops inundated
his capital city, all the south German princes flocked willingly into Napo-
leon's embrace.
   At this point. Napoleon had already gone a giant step beyond Richelieu's
fondest dreams. But the edifice of Napoleon's grand design would not be
complete until Prussia was brought down and Saxony and northern Germany
were brought into the fold. Then the creation of the three Germanics would
be an accomplished fact: All that was not Austria or Prussia would be the
Rhine Confederation. The first two would counterbalance and neutralize
each other, and the latter would be wholly in Napoleon's hands. Germany
would thus be effectively removed as a threat to Napoleonic ambitions.
    The Treaty of Pressburg, which had officially ended the war of 1805
against Austria, was signed on December 26. It did not put an end to the
Third Coalition, but it added Istria and Dalmatia to the kingdom of Italy
and ceded the Tyrol to the Bavarians, a gift that was to spell more trouble
than good for the latter. The Tyroleans, after five centuries under the
Austrian crown, did not take kindly to being handed over to the Bavarians.
    More importantly, however, the war had finally put an end to the old
Roman empire and had made possible the creation of the Rhine Confed-
eration, which became official with the signing of a treaty on July 12, 1806.
With the Holy Roman Empire passing from the scene, Austria was now
forced to recognize the rulers of Bavaria and Wuerttemberg as kings, even
as those of Baden and Hesse- Darmstadt were elevated to the rank of grand

dukes. They, as well as others in the new Rhine Confederation, were re-
warded with territorial gains as well, with the sequestration of church ter-
ritories providing a   major medium of exchange.
    Even as all of this was in progress. Napoleon had sent Massena, probably
the ablest of his marshals, to settle with Naples. The Neapolitan Bourbon
army, however, promptly fled to Sicily and safety behind the wooden ram-
parts of the British fleet.
    At about the same time, the Batavian Republic saw itself elevated from
the status of "sister republic" to that of a kingdom for one of the imperial
brothers, Louis Bonaparte.    Not only did an empire have no use for such
"sisters," but tying up the Netherlands in proper dynastic fashion also pro-

vided Napoleon with better insight into Dutch ledgers.
    The Austerlitz campaign had left the Russians suitably chastised but far
