           *
                Napoleonic Europe: The Years of Ascendancy                  19

settled their scores with the   exchange of this or that border province.    It

would not have done for either the Bourbons or the Hapsburgs to eliminate
each other outright. The princes, great or small, all ruled by "divine
right"— at least, they believed they did. Thus, they might seek to curb each
others' power and influence, but they would hardly question each others'
right to exist. To do so would have placed one's own legitimacy in question
and disturbed the established order. Thus, Napoleon's high-handed mo-
nopoly game did not fail to shock the European dynastic club, no matter
on which side of the fence one stood.
    While his "friends" experienced a certain unease over this cold wind
blowing through their audience chambers, the Spanish venture was a mis-
calculation for Napoleon on yet another score. Disposing of the Bourbons
had been simple enough, but unlike the case in politically fragmented Ger-
many, in Spain a red-hot wave of fierce nationalism struck at the French.
For the first time. Napoleon was faced with a situation for which even he
had no ready-made solution.
    Until then. Napoleon had waged war against regular military establish-
ments that, even under the best of circumstances, had found it difficult to
replace themselves. Now he was faced with a national insurrection by a
politically and religiously united people in a country ideal for guerrilla war.
Indeed, it is the Spanish tongue that has invested this style of warfare with
its universalcognomen: The term "guerrilla" is a diminutive of the Spanish
guerraj meaning "little" or "minor" war.
    Today, with the benefit of hindsight and with present-day experiences
of this kind of resistance, we know that Napoleon could not possibly have
succeeded where even modem military establishments armed with twentieth-
century technology have failed   —   especially not while the forces of the re-
sistance  had outside help. And this the British provided. As it was, the
French columns marching into Spain in 1807 and 1808 were not those of
the glorious Grand Army, which had never tasted defeat. They were, for
the most part, an ad hoc collection of immobile cadre and depot battalions,
hastily filled up with raw recruits.
    Eventually, Napoleon was forced to put in a personal appearance in
Spain with parts of the Grand Army. In order to do this with a reasonable
degree of safety, however, he first had to reassure himself about the tsar's
continued cooperation. This was especially important since it was no longer
a secret that the Austrians were making a spectacular recovery and that
their military establishment was being modernized under the leadership of
Archduke Charles, the Austrian emperor's brother. They were obviously
arming for another round.
