16                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


from defeated. Nor did the Prussians keep Napoleon waiting any longer.
Put off at first by the Austro-Russian defeat at Austerlitz, they now suddenly
decided to take on Napoleon all by themselves. They joined the coalition
in 1806,    and instead of hanging back and waiting for the Russians to come
up, they boldly marched forward, right into the jaws of disaster. Jena and
Auerstaedt became the milestones of their defeat, which was to furnish the
grist for   the mills of controversy over the relative merits of the old linear
order and the new column tactics.
     In a headlong pursuit of the Prussians  which sent Napoleon and his
Grand Army east, all the way to the Vistula, the emperor suddenly saw
himself brought up short for the first time by conditions which proved to
be beyond even his control. He was reminded in no uncertain terms that
there were limits to how long and how well an army could support itself
from the land. A more skilled opponent could easily have landed him in
serious trouble.
     In Poland, the emperor met the Russians again, but the engagement was
not another Austerlitz. Instead, at Eylau, Napoleon ended up on the wrong
side of a thrashing, and the victory he claimed stood on no more solid ground
than his possession of the battlefield.    To add some spice to the soup, a
relatively small Prussian detachment (the main army had already been beaten)

had taken a decisive hand in the battle.
    Friedland, the battle fought on June 14, 1807, put an end to the war.
There was no question about who won this one. Napoleon did. But for the
Grand Army, the overall cost of the 1806 and 1807 campaigns had been
dear, cutting deeply into the substance which had made the army of 1805
the best Napoleon had ever commanded. Russian losses had been heavy as
well, but the Russians were standing on their own doorstep. Indeed, the
scope of Napoleon's operations had again expanded to such a point that he
would have been hard-pressed to field a sufficiently powerful army against
the Russians in Poland if the newly gained troops of the Rhine Confederation
had not undertaken the lion's share of secondary but necessary tasks.
    Napoleon had won, but he had not been able to deliver a knockout
blow. Although Prussia had been overrun and was totally at his mercy, he
had beaten only a Russian army. Behind it still stood the whole of Russia,
which, as far as Napoleon was concerned, would remain totally beyond reach
for some time to come.
    Thus, when Napoleon made peace with the Russians at Tilsit, he was
not in a position to wring as much from them as he had from his previous
adversaries. All he could really do for the time being was put a good face
on things and seek to further his ends by heaping flattery upon the Russian
tsar by pretending friendship and admiration for him. It was, of course, not
