18              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


ade was the British preemptive strike at Copenhagen and the Danish fleet;
this drove the Danes into the Continental system before the year        1807 had
run its course. Another year passed before the Russians, after wresting Fin-
land away from Sweden, pressed the Swedes into joining the blockade as
well. The Treaty of Fredrikshamn, ratified in Paris in 1809, ensured Swedish
cooperation through the promise of returning Anterior Pommerania to the
Swedes as compensation. With this agreement, Napoleon's string of successes
radiating from the Treaty of Tilsit were just about played out.
     In the interests of bringing the events in northern Europe to a temporary
conclusion in an uninterrupted sequence, events taking place on the opposite
end of the Continent have been bypassed. It is now necessary to return to
them.



Even while the tones of his friendship for Alexander continued to hit high
notes, Napoleon knew that the Russian question had merely been shelved,
not by any means settled. Meanwhile, the Iberian Peninsula had to be
integrated into the blockade if it was to become effective.
    King John of Portugal, who had maintained close relations of long stand-
ing with Britain, had balked at joining the blockade. This at once prompted
Napoleon to dispose of him. In October 1807, he concluded an agreement
with Spain to divide Portugal between them, provided French troops had
permission to cross Spanish territory to eject the House of Braganza. John
VI fled to Brazil, and Napoleon declared him deposed.
    But Napoleon had not yet finished. Next to feel the ax were the Spanish
themselves. Talleyrand was     still   in Berlin, sorting out the affairs of the
Prussians and letting them know just how much their defeat was going to
cost them,   when Napoleon advised him that he meant to dispose of the
Spanish Bourbons as well. This was yet another act that could hardly endear
the French emperor to the rest of dynastic Europe. Even those who still
basked in the sunshine of his friendship must have come to the realization
that they no longer ruled by divine right, or even by the will of their people,
but by Napoleon's permission alone.
     Although the wars of the previous centuries had been dominated by
ideological struggles, the seventeenth century had already been marked by
the beginning of struggles for naked power and territorial aggrandizement,
led by France, the first nation-state of Europe. Still, even the Age of Reason
subscribed to certain universal ideas, tacitly accepted by     all.   Princes and
monarchs, scrambling for power and domination, fought what have been
termed "cabinet wars" with clearly defined and limited objectives; they
