          *

                             Europe from 1810                               25

react to his initiative. As always, however, the realities were more complex
and subject to a multitude of secondary influences.
     At first. Napoleon had sought to achieve Russian cooperation through
an alliance by marriage. But when Alexander had dawdled over Napoleon's
suit for the hand of his sister. Napoleon had promptly turned to the Austrians

and married the daughter of the Austrian emperor. If he thought that this
marriage might at last offer security from that quarter, however, he had
miscalculated. In a day and age when the bartered bride had become a
common medium of dynastic exchange, the Hapsburgs could no longer be
appeased, much less bought, by such a marriage of convenience. Besides,
the proposed transfer of Western Galicia into Polish hands ran contrary to
both Austrian and Russian interests.
    Such an enlargement of the territories of the grand duchy of Warsaw
bore all the earmarks of a French staging area in the eyes of anyone who
cared to look. It was time for the Russians to draw up plans for the campaign
that was sure to come. Napoleon was quite aware of these undercurrents but
hardly concerned. If the Russians chose to go after him, all the better. The
time of being content with mastery over only half of Europe was coming to
an end, especially since things   in   Spain were   at last   beginning to look
promising.
   At Tilsit, Napoleon had suffered from what Clausewitz would later term
the "crisis of victory." Although he had overrun Prussia, he had merely
handed yet another defeat to a Russian army and lacked the means of
achieving more. His military machine had been in dire need of repair, and
the inadequacy of his logistics had been driven home to him in no uncertain
terms. The victors were going hungry. But he had spent the years since 1807
profitably. The military power he now held in his hands seemed greater than
ever before, and he was still arming.
    But the Russians were wide awake to the threat now. The Treaty of
Vienna in 1809 may have come as a rude shock, but French intrigues in
the Balkans were no longer a secret either. Thus, when Napoleon again
reached into Germany, incorporating the estuaries of the Ems, Weser, and
Elbe rivers into the French empire during December 1810, Alexander became
convinced that a peaceful coexistence with a predator of Napoleon's stripe
would be impossible. As if to hammer home this point to Alexander, Na-
poleon sequestered the duchy of Oldenburg, its duke an uncle by marriage
to Alexander himself.  When the latter attempted to intercede. Napoleon
offeredpayment but refused to give up the duchy. These were no longer
matters of statesmanship. In those days. Napoleon simply took what he
wanted and invoked the law of might makes right whenever it suited him.
