                         )




30              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


magnitude not seen in the west since the days of the Roman empire. From
the Atlantic coast, the English Channel, and the North Sea to the banks
of the Tiber in Italy, the French empire comprised 310,000 square miles
with about 42 million inhabitants.-^ Added to this must be the rest of Italy,
with the exceptions of Sicily and Sardinia.       Then there were the Rhine
Confederation and the grand duchy of Warsaw, with another 17.5 million
inhabitants, as well as Switzerland,   Illyria, and Denmark-Norway. Even
Austria, with more than 20 million people,     and Prussia with a population
of about 5 million   —after the Treaty of Tilsit  —were forced to do yeoman
service, because they had no other choice.
    Still, there were clouds on Napoleon's horizon. The war in Spain had

again taken a turn for the worse, and no end appeared in sight. Nor had
the Austrians given up on getting back at Napoleon. Although there was
an Austrian auxiliary corps in the Grand Army, it wasn't to do Napoleon
as much good as it might have. Throughout the campaign, the Austrians
never lost touch with the Russian court. Moreover, by the terms of a secret
agreement between Vienna and St. Petersburg, the Austrians would not
strengthen their corps beyond the numbers originally demanded by Napo-
leon. (Thus, contrary to the belief widely held until modem times, Schwar-
zenberg's lackadaisical conduct of operations was not entirely due to his own
anemic qualities as a commander. Napoleon's suspicions, on the other hand,
stood on firm ground.
     In northern Germany, especially in Prussia, the relentless economic
pressure   and continued exactions by the French had literally ruined the
existence of hundreds of thousands. The oppression generated a smoldering
resentment that needed but a spark to flare into an open conflagration.
   Nor was the situation in the Rhine Confederation on all that much of
an even keel. The princes might still be firmly in Napoleon's comer, but
their people   were also wearying of the continued material demands that
supported Napoleon's endless ventures.
     Even France, after 20 years of unabated war, was beginning to show
signs of fatigue.   Not only were French finances in dire shape despite the
incessant milking of both the allied and the vanquished, but the population
was showing increased resistance toward renewed military service. There
were as yet no draft cards to burn, but the prevailing attitudes were not
unlike those of our own Vietnam era, which were serious enough to con-
tribute to the halting of the Vietnam venture. For the French nation, the
days of a "clear and present danger" had long passed.     Not only were Na-
poleon's republican and royalist opponents becoming restive again, but even
some of his followers were beginning to despair of ever seeing the return of
a lasting peace. Despite the glitter and glory of the empire and a tightfisted
