                               Europe from 1810                                31

police regiment, the roots of the Napoleonic regime had not yet sunken all
that deeply. Only the Polish nation looked forward to the coming war with
great expectations.   It was going to be   their war, with nothing less than the

restoration of the Polish state at stake.
   None of these storm clouds, however, threatened to burst unless the
Russian venture failed and Napoleon's juggernaut was seriously damaged.
But Napoleon did not believe for an instant that this was even within the
realm of possibility. He had already beaten the Russians twice, and he was
certain he could do it agaiji. Nor did Napoleon envision a fight to the finish.
As in the past, he expected that the Russians would come forward to meet
him. Then, with his usual quick, sharp hammer strokes, he would bend
Alexander to his will.
    That he would be able to make a quick end of the Russians was the first
and most serious delusion to which Napoleon would succumb. He had
become far too contemptuous of his adversaries and far too accustomed to
easily imposing his will on others. Still his contempt would not have been
                                            >


all that misplaced had the campaign simply been a matter of dealing with

the Russian army. However, it was not the Russian army that would turn
out to be his sternest and most relentless opponent. The real challenge
would come from different quarters.
    In an extensive dissertation on critique, Clausewitz states that while one
might certainly judge an event by its outcome, the event can be justly
critiqued only on the basis of information that was available at the time,
not with the benefit of hindsight. Thus, a judgment of Napoleon's actions
with respect to the Russian campaign may be made only on the basis of
matters that ought to have governed Napoleon's thinking as he contemplated
the excursion into the vast expanses of Russia.
    In 1812, Russia could already be considered a most dangerous opponent
in a defensive   war that would enable the country to bring all its natural
resources to bear.   At that time, European Russia had a homogeneous pop-
ulation of about 34 million people, and they saw the tsar as both their
political and their spiritual head. As in Spain, any foreign penetration would
raise the specter of a national war, mobilizing the resources of the people.

Although the country did not offer the type of natural terrain that would
facilitate a guerrilla war such as that in Spain, the vast Russian expanses,

once they were brought into play, could literally swallow up an army of half
a million men. In addition, the vast forested areas, sparsely populated tracts,
and poor network of roads added difficulties for any invader that could easily
be exploited by the defender.
    Certainly, these implications were crystal clear to so seasoned a cam-
paigner as Napoleon. This      is   probably why, up to the very   last,   he had
