34               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


zogen, however, d'Allonville wanted to open the war with a quick offensive
toward the Oder. Since Napoleon had not yet finished arming for the
oncoming campaign, d'Allonville thought there would be sufficient time to
disarm the Poles and drag the Prussians into the war. Then, as soon as
Napoleon brought his superior forces eastward from their main staging areas
along the Rhine and in the German lowlands, a systematic fighting retreat
could be made. Both Wolzogen and d'Allonville agreed that a decisive
confrontation with Napoleon was to be avoided and that a scorched-earth
policy and guerrilla operations were to go hand in hand with this retreat,
thereby making it difficult for the invader to subsist oft the land.
    D'Allonville further assumed that the thrust of Napoleon's attack would
be aimed at Moscow, the spiritual capital of Russia, which he felt should
be covered by the retreating Russian army. Wolzogen disagreed. He wanted
to see the formation of two separate armies with diverging lines of retreat.
The armies would cooperate with each other so that if one came under
attack, it would operate defensively while the other switched to the offense.
(This idea was to reemerge in full bloom in 1813.) The suggested objective
of Wolzogen's retreat was a fortress or fortified encampment.   He had pro-
posed Riga, Drissa, Bobruisk, and Kiev as likely points for such a scheme.
The major flaw in this plan was that it did not envision continuing operations
beyond the Dvina, Beresina, and Dnieper rivers, thus eschewing the utili-
zation of the vast Russian expanses to effect a fragmentation and dispersal
of the enemy's forces. Moreover, it left the most likely direction of the
attack, Moscow, without a stronghold.
    While both the tsar and General Barclay were suitably impressed by
Wolzogen's and d'Allonville's plans, Barclay and Phull had already worked
up proposals of their own. Together all the plans bore eloquent testimony
to how little the essence of Napoleonic warfare was understood in the Russian
high command.
     Barclay saw the oncoming campaign simply as an extension of the cam-
paign of 1807. Neither he nor Phull had the vaguest notion about the means
Napoleon was gathering or about the grandiose scale on which the decisive
events would be played out. Like Wolzogen and d'Allonville, Barclay and
Phull did not even consider the possibility of carrying the war beyond the
lines of the   Dvina, Beresina, and Dnieper. Notwithstanding his consider-
ation of a retreat into the Russian interior during the 1807 campaign, Barclay
had either drifted away from this mode of thinking or, tar more likely, had
never envisioned that the coming campaign would occur on such a grand
scale. Indeed, such a retreat would have hardly been necessary in 1807,
when Napoleon had already found it difficult to maintain himself in Poland
