26              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     Yet Napoleon could certainly resort to grace and charm whenever he
was of a mind to do so. Thus, it is easy to understand how Alexander, at
least for a while, could have come under the spell of the French emperor's

flattery,which was even further enhanced by the glittering aura of success
that surrounded Napoleon in 1807.
    By 1810, however, an intense dislike for the man and all that he rep-
resented had taken hold of the Russian tsar. This feeling was actively nur-
tured by those around him, Russians as well as men like von Stein, a
Hanoverian in the Prussian service, and Pozzo di Borgo, a Corsican who
served the Hapsburgs. Eventually, this dislike would turn into an irrecon-
cilable enmity. For the moment, however, Alexander contented himself by
answering Napoleon with tit for tat.
    On December 31, 1810, he officially declared Russia to be no longer
bound by the Continental blockade, thereby reopening a gap larger than
the one Napoleon had just closed. Alexander's action was more than a
reaction to Russia's own needs; it was an open act of defiance. Moreover,
with it came the demand that Napoleon renounce all attempts to fully restore
the Polish state. The gloves had come off.
    This left Napoleon in something of a quandary that rested squarely with
the Polish question. If and when he was ready to settle with the Russians,
Polish cooperation would be all important. His adversaries had not been
decefved on that score. Poland was indeed to be his staging area, and in
return for this cooperation, the Poles expected nothing     less   than the re-
constitution of their state.
     Even in retrospect, it is still not clear what Napoleon's real intentions
toward Poland were. Nor does there seem to be a consensus on what the
Poles expected.   From the looks of it, they were to exchange their current
nominal ruler, the king of Saxony, for Jerome, Napoleon's brother. But the
latter, upon arriving in Poland on the eve of the Russian campaign, wasn't

at all sure that, in the exchange of his present kingdom of Westphalia for
Poland, he was getting the best of the bargain. To his wife, Katharina, he
wrote on May 31, 1812 that he thought Westphalia was worth more than
Poland. Nor was Katharina eager to exchange her residence in Kassel for
one in Warsaw. At the same time, the grand duke of Wuerzburg also turned
up as a possible candidate for the Polish crown, while in 1813 Napoleon
suggested to Mettemich that he figured on giving the Prussian Hohenzollems
a duchy along the Vistula in exchange for their own territories, as already
mentioned. Thus,    it   appears questionable that independence and self-rule
for the Poles would have come from Napoleon any more than it would from
Austria, Prussia, or Russia. National stirrings had no place in the Napoleonic
design for empire, and that, for better or worse, did not exclude the Poles.
