                               Europe from 1810                               27

     Thus, Napoleon did not respond to Alexander's demand to renounce
any attempts to restore the Polish state. He could afford neither to accept
conditions nor to make concessions. He       —
                                            who had changed the face of
Europe, who had disposed of established dynasties like so much excess
baggage   —
          had to remain on a forward course. He had enemies everywhere.
As soon as the sails of his ship of state lost the wind, he stood in danger of
foundering on the reefs which lurked just beneath the surface, both at home
and abroad. It was, however, not yet time for war. Neither Alexander nor
Napoleon was ready. Instead, a diplomatic feud ensued.
    Napoleon, of course, understood that a showdown by force of arms with
the Russians on their home ground would be anything but easy. But while
his actions over the previous several years had caused the failure of his efforts
to secure Russian cooperation by diplomatic means,      he still hoped that his
military reputation might suffice to bring    them around anyway. Unfortu-
nately, the Russians were justly suspicious of what might lie beyond any sort
of political compromise or accommodation with Napoleon.
     The thought advanced in a recent work^ that much of what happened
in   1812 came down simply to the personal relationships between the two
principal players. Napoleon and Alexander, and that the two might have
settled matters personally, man to man, makes light of the realities. Of
course Alexander might have relented, but only at the expense of Russian
sovereignty. Of course Napoleon might have backed away, but when did
he ever? Both men suffered from insecurities that were deeply rooted in their
respective environments. That is, none of the events that transpired in the
direct relationships between France and Russia took place in a political
vacuum. Napoleon had leaped up the ladder of military command and made
what we would today call a lateral entry into the European dynastic club,
and the tsar of all the Russians had literally stepped over the corpse of his
assassinated father to take on what was surely the most dangerous job in
dynastic Europe (his father, after all, was not the only tsar whose reign was
terminated in such fashion whenever the establishment was displeased).
    Neither man was free from the political demands of his own environment.
Napoleon could keep his throne secure only as long as he justified his
existence in the eyes of the French nation by remaining a winner, and he
could also feel the eyes of a dozen European capitals on his back. And
Alexander? He might have been bom to legitimate rule, but he could not
afford to do anything that might cause sensitive Russian egos to look small
in the eyes of western Europe. Thus, without even entering into questions
of moral justification, it is clear that each man, despite all the power he
wielded, found himself impelled to follow a relatively limited course of
action.
