                             Europe from 1810                              29

view. Realizing that the Russians considered Finland vital to their      own
security,he desisted from pursuing its recovery. It would have been an
unequal struggle that Sweden could have sustained only with outside help
and at the expense of its own independence of action. However, in re-
nouncing all Swedish claims upon Finland in favor of Russia, he also directly
contradicted the aspirations of his newly adopted nation. Doing so took
courage, more than Napoleon thought he possessed, but perhaps the stakes
had for once been high enough for even Bemadotte to take a firm, albeit
unpopular, stand.
    In a treaty concluded on March 24, 1812, Russia and Sweden mutually
recognized their respective possessions. Russia also promised to compensate
Sweden for the loss of Finland by lending military support to wrest Norway
from the Danish crown. Obviously, Sweden could not participate in the war
everyone now knew was coming. But Alexander had the double security of
knowing that no potential threats would materialize on his northern flank
and that the tens of thousands of troops thereby freed would be available
for use against theimpending French invasion.
   In another sideshow on the extreme opposite flank, things were going
awry as well. French intrigues with the Turks to impede the furtherance of
Russian interests in the Balkans had been temporarily suspended on Na-
poleon's own initiative in the wake of the Erfurt accords in 1808. The British
had been quick to intercede in the diplomatic void this created; as a result,
Russia and Turkey concluded the Treaty of Bucharest on May 28, 1812,
suspending hostilities on the Turkish front, even as the Grand Army was
massing in Poland. Thus, at least for the time being, the Turks were out of
the picture as well, freeing even more Russian troops.
     Napoleon still held the military initiative, but he was not mastering the
developing political situation. He had been counting on simultaneous di-
versionary actions on both Russian flanks, from Sweden in the north and
Turkey in the south. But his rigidness with Bemadotte and his inattention
to the Turks had spoiled the broth. The Russians could now focus their full
resources on the coming showdown. The Swedish and Turkish failures would
cost Napoleon dearly. But he was to learn of these events only after his
Russian campaign was already under way.
     A Russian treaty with the Spanish govemment-in-exile, concluded on
July 20, ensured only moral support and was plainly a paper tiger. But a
promised subsidy to Russia of £100,000 from Britain was decidedly tangible.
Still, Russia would have to throw everything against the coming assault, as

the adversary looked strong enough in June 1812 to turn the world upside
down.
     The power potential of the resources at Napoleon's command was of a
