28                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN



Even as this direct confrontation between Russia and the French empire was
building, seemingly unrelated events were being played out elsewhere. Even-
tually, these   would synergistically add up to a whole greater than the sum
of its parts in the effect the events were to exercise upon the war of 1812.
One of these situations involved Sweden.
     As late as January 1812, Napoleon drove the Swedes into the arms of
Russia with his occupation of Swedish Pommerania. Ostensibly, this was a
punishment for Sweden's more or less open disregard for the Continental
blockade.
     Napoleon's relations with Prince Bemadotte, once a political rival in
Paris,   had never been cordial. Indeed, Napoleon had been anything but
pleased when the Swedes selected this erstwhile French marshal to succeed
their childless king. But what had come as an unexpected and rather nasty
surprise was the sudden backbone Bemadotte now exhibited. The new Swed'
ish crown prince,no matter what else he might have been, was nobody's
fool. He was a man not well understood by his times, and most of the bad

press he received in both France and nineteenth-century Germany was quite
undeserved.     To read his character, one had to look deeply into his back-
ground.
     Personally brave and a commanding figure, capable of winning the loyalty
of those around him, he had both the intellect and some of the qualities of
which leaders are made. Unfortunately, these traits were marred by the fact
that he became excessively cautious whenever he found himself in command,
faced with making important decisions. This defect had already enabled
Napoleon to step right past him and seize power in France, even though
Bemadotte had been politically better connected. His indecision had also
cast long shadows over his military career, both as a corps commander and
in 1813 as an army commander.
    One of the by-products of the Treaty of Tilsit had been a renewal of the
old struggle between Sweden and Russia for the Baltic. In February 1808,
Alexander had declared war against Sweden, ostensibly because its king,
Gustav IX, one of Napoleon's confirmed enemies, had refused to join the
Continental blockade. The real issue, however, was the possession of Fin-
land. The Russians had wanted it, and Napoleon had given his consent, no
doubt hoping that they would have a difficult time of it. But the war was
over in a comparatively short time, and the Treaty of Fredrikshamn, already
mentioned, left Finland in Russian hands.
   Perhaps it was the cautious Bemadotte who decided to let matters con-
ceming Finland rest. Certainly, both his sharp intellect and the fact that
he was not a native Swede enabled him to take a dispassionate long-term
