36                   1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Sebesh'St. Petersburg and the Vitebsk-Moscow roads.            PhuU believed that
the mere existence of this camp, modeled vaguely on Frederick the Great's
encampment at Bunzelwitz, from whence he had succeeded in keeping the
vastly superior Austrians in      check in 1761, would suffice to paralyze the
enemy's operations.
       If  camp induced the enemy to split its forces, the Russian army
            the
should break out and fall upon whatever detachments the enemy had left
to cover the camp. If the enemy failed to split its forces, the enemy should
be prompted to do so by having the right flanking corps operate against
those forces. Phull thought it likely that the enemy would have already split
its   forces even before arriving in front of Drissa, in order to facilitate ob-
taining subsistence from the land. Thus, as the enemy's main force ground
itself      down against the Russian main army in and around the Drissa camp,
the second Russian army and the Cossacks' were to operate against its flanks
and rear. In the event the enemy directed its main attack against the second
army, that army was to withdraw to Bobruisk.
    This plan, which was accepted by the tsar, contained none of the ele-
ments that were to give the Russians such unexpected and extraordinary
success later on: the desire to unite the two western armies in undamaged
condition; the continuous contact with the southern provinces, which con-
tained the heart of Russian resources; the utilization of the Russian interior
to precipitate the dispersal of the enemy's forces; and the attempt to prolong
operations until the onset of winter.
       The adoption of Phull's plan (of which Barclay was not immediately
informed) and the fact that the location of the magazines envisioned op-
erations only within the boundaries of the three-river line offer clear proof
that Alexander's often-quoted remark that he would "make no peace, even
if    he was pushed back all the way to Kazan," was merely a figure of speech
to underline his resolution, not his intent.
    The Phull plan did not, and indeed could not, make any mention of
the Danube Army or the Finnish Corps, since these did not become available
for consideration until after operations had gotten under way.        There were,
nevertheless, expansive plans for their employment at that time.        However,
since       none of these plans were ever implemented because of the totally
changing situation, they need be only briefly outlined as follows: The Finnish
Corps was to support the Swedes         in their   conquest of Norway. Having
accomplished this, they were to continue acting together to create a diversion
in northern       Germany. The Danube Army was even expected to carry op-
erations into northern Italy.
       This is where matters stood for a time,     as the   two adversaries slowly
moved toward a final confrontation.
