                              The Gathering Storm                           35

and when an advance even to the often-mentioned three-river line would
have been out of the question without further extensive logistical prepara-
tions.
    Barclay's plan, drawn up near the end of 1810,     saw the operations area
divided in two by the Pripet Marshes and assumed that the enemy's main
objectives were on both sides of the marshes. Thus, he proposed the for-
mation of two armies to cover these areas, with the northern army having
a special flanking corps; an intermediary corps was to link the two m.ain
forces. The war was to begin with a short offensive thrust into enemy territory

to ravage the borderlands, thereby impeding the enemy's attack.       Faced by
superior forces, both main forces were to retreat to cover their respective
areas.   The tsar, however, apprehensive about his great adversary, wanted
to take the offensive only in the event Napoleon opened his attack with
the destruction of Prussia. Alexander stood his ground on this even when
Barclay renewed his proposal in the summer of 1811, pointing to Welling-
ton's success with a scorched-earth poUcy in Portugal.
    Unable to sell the idea of what might today be called a "forward defense,"
Barclay and PhuU, the former "enlightened" by the latter, now proposed to
cover the western border provinces with a flanking position on the basis of
the "lines of operation" thesis once advanced by von Buelow, a famous
Prussian theorist. This had called for such a position to be taken on Prussian
territory,   which, however, was presently officially neutral. Instead, Barclay
and Phull insisted that this position be taken on Russian territory, in the
area of Szaly. But this would result in the loss of whatever forces were placed
there, since the enemy would simply back them up against the Baltic.
    Phull, at least at the beginning, thought Svenciany, due east of Kovno,
offered a good position. But he saw the actual defense line, where the enemy
was to be stopped, along the three-river line as well. With this in mind,
Phull presented the tsar with his own plan in the spring of 1812. The "Drissa"
plan, as it is known, was in some parts reminiscent of Wolzogen's original
proposal, but it was altered several times before ending up, roughly, in the
form described here.
   Assuming that Napoleon's main force would cross the Niemen not at
Kovno but at Grodno (Phull had no doubts whatever about this), from
whence he could turn either toward Vilna or Minsk, he was to be faced by
an army in either of these directions. In the former direction, which Phull
deemed Napoleon's most likely choice, he would be met by an army of
120,000 men; in the latter, by an army of only 80,000 men. If the attack
went in the direction of Vilna, the larger army was then to be concentrated
and led back into the fortified camp of Drissa, which could defend both the
