40                  1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


tended to worry the Prussians. But even that view made no sense, because
everyone knew that Prussian officers, in and out of uniform, were constantly
coursing about the Saxon encampments, even while the Russian and Prussian
ambassadors leisurely viewed all that was going on from a front-row seat in
Dresden.
     "If Napoleon merely intended to worry the Prussians," observed Funck,
"he could have easily accomplished this in a manner far less costly to the
army and the country by extending the Saxon cantonments to include the
Wittenberg district as well as the Upper and Lower Lausitz,"^ thereby easing
the density of the concentration without impairing        its   operational effec-
tiveness.
     In this fashion, the year 1811 ran its course. While the Saxons sat, the
allies    began to mobilize. Some of Napoleon's veteran cadres set out on a
long march that would take them all the way from sunny Spain to Moscow,
with a return trip across plains where the freezing temperatures (as low as
— 27° Reaumur, about — 29°F, recorded in Vilna on December 7, 1812)
and bitter winds were as deadly as canister fire and grapeshot.




               1812: A YEAR OF UNBIDDEN GUESTS

For Napoleon, the        new year broke on a note of great expectations. His
military machine was now grinding toward the ultimate objective of making
him the undisputed master of the European continent. Inwardly, he must
have thrilled at the prospect of wielding an army whose likes not even he
had seen before.
     It   was, however, not so much the traffic created by the massive troop
movements that was apt to draw the attention of the civilians in the coun-
tryside as    it   was the ubiquitous sight of the agents of the commissariat.
Combing through the farms, they were buying up (on credit, of course)
grain, which was then moved to collecting points and mills, from whence
mile-long wagon trains were heading in unending streams toward the depots
in the army's future assembly areas.
     By the time the winter snows were turning into spring rains, the troops
began to move in earnest. The diarists rarely fail to praise the hospitality
of the Germans, who took the weary soldiers into their homes and provided
coffee so that they might       warm limbs stiffened by cold and rain. Many
managed to fill their canteens with more potent liquids, designed to keep
up their spirits on the march.
   These early birds, however, were the lucky ones. As the traffic increased
and more and more troops began to pass long the same roads and crowd
