                              The Gathering Storm                           37


                       FRENCH PREPARATIONS
The differences in the modus operandi of the Russians and of the French or,
rather, of Napoleon, for the French had very httle to do with this, clearly
indicate that     Napoleon was the aggressor on the political as well as the
military front.   The Russians, in response to the situation, saw themselves
in an entirely defensive posture, in which they attempted to develop con-
tingency plans to meet virtually every conceivable move Napoleon might
make against them. The French emperor clearly held the initiative. But one
would seek in vain for a similar theoretical engagement on Napoleon's part.
He had no need for this. Had he been asked, he would have probably replied:
"1 will pretend an attack against Moscow on a front sufficiently broad to

carry it out in earnest. And when the Russians come to me, I will pin them
and then we will see how it goes. Once 1 have destroyed their army, 1 will
dictate a peace."
   This is not to say that there were no preparations being made in the
Napoleonic camp. But these were concerned wholly with bringing the French
formations earmarked for the campaign up to operational strength, seeing
to the mobilization of the allied contingents, formulating the organization
and deployment of the Grand Army, and preparing for its logistical support.
At the same time, action continued to proceed on the diplomatic front.
    The levies of 1810 and 1811 were sending a steady flow of replacements
to the unit cadres already in Germany. Even though the call-up of the class
of 1812 was supposed to flesh out the units remaining behind, most of the
men were sucked into the reserve and replacement formations for the Grand
Army. At the same time, most of the regiments assigned to the Grand Army
were ordered to form extra field battalions.
    In the beginning of 1811, troop movements were starting to get under
way all over Germany. In time-honored fashion, the troops themselves,
going this way and that, had little if any idea of what was afoot. This emerges
from the speculations made by many diarists. Unlike the authors of memoirs,
who wrote long after the fact but occasionally claimed a foreknowledge of
events, the diarists jotted down the events and their thoughts about them
as they occurred. The newspapers of the time, too, had nothing to say about
an impending Russian campaign.
    Among the first to march eastward were a number of battalions from
the Rhine Confederation, sent to reinforce the garrisons of Danzig and
various other places. Most thought they were being sent to guard the Baltic
coast,   where they were to enforce the Continental blockade because the
Prussians could not be relied upon to do this with sufficient zeal. The first
French march battalions moved forward to fill up and reinforce the garrisons
