                             The Gathering Storm                             39

rot, sonone were fit to be used. Thus, when the Saxons marched to war
in worn-out uniforms, it was not because their king or the treasury had not
provided for a proper new issue. This corruption was a cancer that beset
every miUtary establishment whose size was large enough to make accoun-
tancy difficult to oversee. Napoleon's military was to suffer from this as well,
on a correspondingly larger scale. But this was still in the future. There were
other, more immediate problems.)
    With about l^.QI^)^ troops concentrated into a relatively small area for
nearly an entire year, the resources of the surrounding countryside were soon
exhausted. Food prices rose so sharply that the rank and file was soon reduced
to a diet consisting mainly of bread and water, because their meager pay did
not allow more and because there were as yet no magazines from which they
could be provisioned. The bulk of the army had been mobilized and placed
on operational status even as it was expected to continue its subsistence on
a peacetime footing. Funck,^ a Saxon general, states bitingly that at the
same time, it was seen fit to continue docking the soldiers' pay for the forced
purchase of such parade-dress fripperies as pompons and plumes, procured
on the initiative of the individual unit commanders. The cavalry was es-
pecially hard hit. Even though it was issued hard fodder (oats), only monetary
allowances were given for the purchase of hay or straw. As with the foodstuffs,
the allowances were totally out of step with the inflationary prices.
    Officers,   up to the rank of captain, were each allowed only two pack-
horses.   At the same time, however, they were expressly ordered to carry
along the unnecessary luxuries of full gala-dress uniforms. Infantry officers
were allowed to stow their kits on the battalion baggage wagons. All in all,
this microcosm was a dress rehearsal of the difficulties the Grand     Army as
a whole was to suffer. Even while some Saxon districts, stripped of their
garrisons, complained over the loss of a market for their produce, the districts
to the right of the Elbe were cleaned out. As for the endless wagon columns
streaming into the area of concentration, only the contractors, commissariat,
and innkeepers benefited from them. The soldiers went hungry. Funck was
of the opinion that the entire quartermaster administration was not unhappy
over the mountains of paperwork all this unnecessary movement of supplies
created, as it wonderfully muddled the already murky waters even further.
   As to the purpose of this massive concentration of the Saxons, no one
was certain. A corps of l^S^^^ men stood ready to commence a campaign,
but everyone was keenly aware of the fact that it stood alone. The Bavarians
were still at home and the nearest French troop concentrations, apart from
various garrisons, stood all the way downriver around Hamburg, the main
French depot on German soil. The prevailing view was that the Saxon
concentration was just another bit of Napoleon's political chicanery, in-
