42                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Thus, the countryside was stripped bare and frictions quickly ensued. Es-
pecially for the Wuerttembergers, a series of incidents set an ominous tone
for the future.
     According to the official report of General Woellwarth, in command of
the Wuerttemberg cavalry, the magazines established on Polish territory had
been closed to the cavalry from the start. Moreover, his troops were passing
through an area in which no preparations whatever had been made for their
arrival and through which others had already passed before. It was well
known to Woellwarth's men that the Polish peasantry had precious little
surplus food and forage and that they had already been forced to give up
most of what they had to stock the French magazines. Only the noble estates
and manors still possessed the means to supply the troops passing through.
These, Woellwarth states emphatically, rarely condescended to hand over
anything, even against properly executed receipts, and the local prefects,
who were supposed to act as go-betweens, deliberately made themselves
scarce.
     On reaching the Vistula, the Wuerttemberg cavalry was ordered to halt
and sent into cantonments in an area already depleted. Again, the magazines
were closed to the cavalry. Woellwarth sent the French official from the
commissariat (intendance, in French) who was assigned to him to the nearest
magazine on several occasions, only to have him return empty-handed, with
the explanation that the contents of the magazine were reserved for the
Guard Corps and French troops passing through. Again, the troops were
forced to fend for themselves.
     This set the stage for Marshal Ney's order, issued from Thorn, that on
the emperor's orders enough livestock was to be requisitioned in the cavalry
cantonments and the areas immediately to their rear to supply the entire
                                                  —
Wuerttemberg division with meat for 20 days about 800 cattle. The order
also demanded that this be accomplished by June 2, at which time the
division would be expected to march, that is, within 48 hours.
    The commissioners were sent out at once to get in touch with the local
prefects, but none of these worthy gentlemen were to be found.   They had
all gone off to pay their respects to the emperor, who was expected to pass

through on his way to Thorn. Not that these prefects didn't know what was
afoot. They had already declared, even before the order was issued, that
they would be unable to assist and that they would leave their districts to
the discretion of the troops.
     For a time,   it   appeared as though Napoleon already had a quarrel with
the Wuerttembergers.       A general, representing himself as one of the emperor's
adjutants, appeared at Woellwarth's headquarters on May 27, just prior to
the issue of Ney's order, and presented a complaint about the Wuerttem-
