44               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


How each obtains what he needs is his own affair. However, every excess
will   be punished and the brigadiers are especially held responsible."^ This
came at a time when the taking of so much as a single bale of hay at once
raised cries of thievery and robbery! But there were brighter sides as well.
       Funck states that when the Saxon corps arrived in the Lublin area,
everything was in exemplary order. The local prefect, Prince Jablonovski,
was everywhere, seeing to everything and assisted by an excellent staff.
Unfortunately,  when Funck reported to Reynier how perfectly the prefect
had organized everything, he unwittingly did the man a great disservice,
because the French general at once threw all of Jablonovski's efforts out the
window, just as he had done in Radom, where the local authorities had also
gone to extraordinary lengths to see that everyone was well served. Every-
thing had to be done over again, not because it was necessary but because
Reynier wanted it that way. What had been collected at one place had to
be taken to another, and from there to someplace else, and the only result
was that the troops were kept waiting for supplies that had been depoted
correctly in the first place. Funck attributes this irrational behavior to the
fact that Reynier allowed no initiative on the part of anyone and always
insisted on regulating everything with his own despotic orders, more often
than not made in total ignorance of the situation.
       When Reynier arrived to take command of the Saxons in March 1812,
he was already highly unpopular with them. This went back to the days in
1809 when he commanded the Saxons for the first time, taking over from
Bemadotte, who had maintained far better relations with his foreign sub-
ordinates. In making one soldier's assessment of another, Funck, who cam-
paigned twice under Reynier as a general officer, offers a more intimate view
of this strange man than the platitudes normally found in the capsule bi-
ographies.   He describes Reynier as being a pragmatic soldier who possessed
all the instincts that   make a first-class combat commander. Still, Funck did
not think that Reynier had even one of all the other talents necessary to
run the affairs of an army.
       Napoleon once described Reynier as a man of talent but one who was
better fitted (as a combat officer) to handle an army of 20,000 or 30,000
men than to command one of 5,000 or 6,000. Funck offers the key to this
apparent contradiction      when he states that Reynier could hardly drill a
battalion and was totally lacking in matters relating to drill and elementary
tactics.   He had a stutter. This, no doubt, had caused this man, described
by Funck as educated and widely read, with an extraordinary talent for
languages (which he could read but dared not speak), to firmly turn his back
on these things during his formative years as an officer. The aftermath of
the revolution had taken him through the lower ranks in a breeze, without
