38                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


of the Prussian fortresses, which had remained in French hands ever since
the war of 1806.
      The actual mobiUzation orders for the Rhine Confederation contingents
did not go out until December 11, 1811, around which time the other allies
were informed as well. The treaties obligating the Austrians and Prussians
to furnish contingents were not concluded until early in 1812, but these
were mere formalities, settling the final details. The Army of Spain was also
called upon to furnish som.e of its sorely needed veteran cadres, including
the Vistula Legion, which was called home to provide more backbone for
the rapidly expanding Polish army.




                               THE SAXONS
First to leave their garrisons and to mass in the field were the Saxons.   With
the exception of the Regiment Gardes du Corps and the artillery, which
remained behind in Dresden for the time being, the entire Saxon army
assembled to the east of the Elbe during March 1811. Massed in the area
of Grossenhain-TorgaU'Luebben, only the regiments normally billeted there
remained in their peacetime quarters. The war was, as yet, an entire year
in the future.
      Tactically, this was of great value to the Saxons, because not only the
individual units but also entire brigades could be exercised. Lacking anything
else to do, they set about this with a vengeance.   The cavalry especially had
a splendid opportunity to make use of the barren plains in the area.      As a
result,   the Saxon military machine, at least, was well oiled.
   This arrangement, however, had a dark side as well. Since the troops
had left their garrisons in campaign order, they had not been allowed to
take along anything that could not be fitted into the packs of the infantry
or the cantle packs of the cavalry. Thus, every man had to wear his best
issue every day.    And this, thanks to the shameless corruption of the quar-
termaster services, was to have repercussions well after the campaign had
gotten under way. (When the army finally marched into Russia a year later,
it   carried   on its wagons an entire new issue of uniforms that were to be
given out in June, right around the time the campaign got under way. But
the gentlemen of the supply services, in a conspiracy reaching all the way
back to Dresden and the ministries, decided to withhold the unifonns until
some of the expected campaign losses set in; the redundant uniforms could
then be saved and resold to the treasury the following year. However, this
clever plan came to naught. Alternating periods of heavy rains and tropical
heat right at the start of the campaign caused the uniforms to mildew and
