                            The Gathering Storm                            41

into the same areas, the days of milk and honey were dwindUng fast. Still,
few complained about their passage through the fertile German provinces.
But all, especially the Germans from the Rhine Confederation, noted the
drastic change when, marching eastward, they crossed into Prussian territory.
"Quiet," "distant," "sullen," "openly hostile," and "angry" are the adjectives
used most often in the diaries to describe the mood of the population there.
   In Pommerania, the old- Prussian air became downright oppressive.        A
young lieutenant from the Regiment Dukes of Saxony avoided Frederick's
Square in Stettin: "1 didn't want to walk past Old Fritz's statue standing
there," he explained, "because of the accusing stare he gave me." Wuert-
tembergers, who ran into an old Prussian parson to the east of the Oder,
got a sermon as well. The parson warned: "There are too many of you. The
Russians will let you in. And when you weaken, you will do battle with
cold and hunger. And then the Russians will begin to fight!" The French
themselves often got more than an earful. Even though few of them un-
derstood German, they could hardly fail to notice the hostility. Things
worsened when the French began requisitioning horses from the farms,
67,000 of them in Prussia alone, along with thousands of men summarily
commandeered as teamsters.
    By the time the bulk of the army had passed east into Poland, reserves
and march battalions coming through Prussian territory frequently were
subjected to more than mere verbal abuse. In East Prussia, brawls erupted
everywhere. Major Horadam,     who commanded one of the battalions from
Frankfurt on the Main, was a veteran from the Spanish peninsula, where
he had learned to read the signs. He commented, "All that is missing here
are the mountains to make guerillas." Thus, minor hostilities were already
under way even before the Grand Army had crossed the Russian frontier.
    Poland experienced its share of troubles as well when the bulk of the
army began to concentrate there and remained in place for several weeks.
The grand duchy of Warsaw was not by any means a rich country. The
Poles, enthusiastic about the coming war, which held for them the promise
of the reconstitution of Poland, had dug deeply into their meager resources
to raise an army of astonishing proportions. Now, the Napoleonic juggernaut
came rolling in, swallowing up both their army and their country. The
conditions the Grand Army witnessed in Poland filled many, no matter
from which part of Europe they hailed, with a sense of foreboding even
before they set foot on Russian soil.
     Only the officers, who generally found quarters in the manor houses,
still found some of the amenities to which they were accustomed. For the

rank and file, the privations of war were already descending with full force.
Living conditions in Poland were depressing; the poverty was oppressive.
