                                            )




                                The Gathering Storm                         43

bergers that he claimed was from Napoleon, who was still in Dresden.    When
Woellwarth followed up on the matter, it turned out that the "adjutant"
was no adjutant at all, but General Kraczinsky, the commander of the Polish
lancers of the guard, who were standing nearby. Woellwarth doesn't say so
in his report, but it seems that the local gentry had heard about Ney's order
even before it was issued and had appealed to the Polish general, who
happened to be nearby, to set up some impediments against its execution.
(A later confrontation between Woellwarth and Kraczinsky became heated
when Murat, who would command the French cavalry reserve in the coming
campaign, arrived unexpectedly at the very moment of Woellwarth's de^
parture. According to the latter, Kraczinksy at once ran up to Murat's coach
to complain about the Wuerttembergers.
  When Ney's order arrived, it seems that the Wuerttembergers, many of
whom were of peasant stock themselves, knew exactly where to find 800
cattle in a short time. They left the peasants alone and went straight to the
manor houses and noble estates, turning up what was needed in far less time
than expected. In the ensuing hue and cry, no one came to Woellwarth,
who held the requisition order issued by Ney. Instead, everybody looked to
Kraczinsky, even as Napoleon himself approached Thorn and ran head-on
into a horde of complaining landowners, who accused the Wuerttembergers
of looting and robbery.
    To make matters worse, in another, unrelated incident, a fistfight broke
out between Wuerttembergers and French light infantrymen over an argu-
ment about some wagons. It must have ended badly for the French, because
Ney demanded that the Wuerttembergers involved be court-martialed.
    None of this was, in itself, unusual; similar incidents took place all over
the assembly area. But Napoleon, making what can only be described as a
grandstand play to impress the Poles, decided to make an issue of the pur-
loined cows (an issue which Segur was to immortalize, with all its inaccu-
racies,   in his often-quoted   memoirs). Even worse, however, was the fact
that Napoleon apparently believed his own propaganda. This was a bad start
for the Wuerttembergers.   During the early weeks of the campaign. Napoleon
was to target them with his pique by assigning them the worst march positions
in the rear of the army's columns.
    But Napoleon was far from being the only master of "doublespeak."
Another piece of jabberwocky on the subject of requisitioning and foraging
came from Colonel Langenau, Reynier's Saxon chief of staff in VII (Saxon)
Corps. Calling all the adjutants of this corps to the headquarters at Radom,
he declared: 'The regimental or battalion commander who lets his command
go without adequate food and forage for so much as a single day, will be at
once relieved of his command and sent home because of incompetence.
