              *
                               The Gathering Storm                            51

isproven by the fact that Bagration's Second Army was moved closer to
Barclay and away from the Austrian frontier before the end of May.
        At that time, Napoleon was still in Dresden, where he held court over
his vassals in a glittering levee that was to signal unity to all. His arrival at
Posen, in the staging area, on May 30 signaled the start of the army's
movement away from the Vistula and toward Niemen, which formed the
border between Poland and Russia. He arrived in Koenigsberg on June 12.
   Napoleon had studied every bit of printed material to be found on the
Russian theater of operations. A Russian general staff map of western Russia
had been obtained and passed on to the topographical section, where it was
copied, with all the Cyrillic characters translated, and distributed to all the
general commands.    Of course, all the roads, be they proper highways or
mere trails, looked alike on this map. Indeed, most turned out to be little
better than what one would today call country lanes or forest paths. Still,
agents had been busy collecting all sorts of data, so Napoleon had become
reasonably well informed about general conditions in the operations areal
        He was also informed in some detail about Barclay's army, which had
been assumed to be standing near Vilna with nearly 150,000 men. But he
still   thought Bagration's army numbered 100,000 men, because he had not
yet learned that it had been split and that only part of it was marching via
Brest'Litovsk to join Barclay.      Nor had he yet learned that Bagration had
been replaced by Tormassov in Volhynia and that a new army was forming
around him and the troops left behind.
        This was the situation in which Napoleon made his original plan of
operations. His main force was to pass around the enemy's right and push
the enemy to the south, that is, in the very direction of its richest resources,
in order to clear the road to Moscow. Recognizing that Moscow was both
the national and spiritual capital of Russia, Napoleon had thus made it the
objective of his operations.   It   was there, at the very latest, that he would
make peace. He had prepared his great successes of 1800, 1805, 1806, and
1807 with this same kind of movement, enveloping the enemy with the
bulk of his forces. But certainly, he hoped to accomplish most of the long
march to Moscow after he had effectively destroyed the Russian army's
capacity to resist.
        Accordingly, the second week in June saw his forces concentrating in
distinct groupings that were to be reflective of the tasks to which they would
be set:


        Napoleon himself, with the Guard, I, II, and III Army Corps and I and
          II Cavalry Corps, including headquarters (222,400 men and 652 guns)

          massed between Koenigsberg and Goldap in East Prussia.
