                              The Gathering Storm                           53

with the Austrians via LubUn;         it   was hoped that this would induce the
Russians to separate their armies even further. On the other hand, Napoleon
                                Jerome could draw the attack upon himself,
still expected a Russian attack. If

then Eugene could thrust into the Russians' flank, with Napoleon sweeping
into their rear via Vilna.
   Soon, however, Napoleon began to think an attack by the Russian
Second Army was unlikely, unless it came soon. On June 16 Jerome was
advised that   if   the emperor should succeed in isolating that army, then
Jerome would be able to attack simultaneously with Napoleon. On the 21st,
however, the emperor advised Jerome that he would probably draw him in
toward Grodno with his entire army. This move would shift the center of
gravity of Napoleon's operations onto a more northerly course, pointing to
a crossing of the Niemen by the central army group at Kovno.
   Crossing at Kovno was favored for several reasons. The locale was ideal.
Not only did the bend of the river in that area project it into the Russian
positions, but its confluence with the Vilia at that point would offer control
of both banks of the      latter.   This was quite important, since Napoleon
expected to use that river to bring supplies by water as far as Vilna.
   There was as yet no plan; that would come as the situation developed.
Napoleon's intention, however, aimed in the following direction: He would
hold back his right echelon while his strong left broke through the Russian
right wing.  That way, he could place himself across the lines of commu-
nication of the Russian center and left.
    This idea has met with the approval of most critics. It may, however,
be fairly asked if it would not have been better to do the opposite, that is,
to take the right shoulder forward and, instead of trying to separate Bagration
from Barclay, push the former into the latter and then pin both against the
Drissa.   This would have made all the more sense once Napoleon learned
that the enemy intended to retreat in that direction anyway. He would then
have only had to help them along. This, however, would have required that
Jerome's army group be substantially reinforced and deployed much further
south than Grodno so that it might get around Bagration on the upper
Niemen. Napoleon's great numerical superiority made this entirely possible,
indeed virtually imperative. As it was, his operations base was entirely too
narrow for a hostile penetration beyond Smolensk.
    Had Napoleon thus succeeded in pushing both western armies against
the Drissa, he would have separated them from their communications with
the southern and central provinces of the Russian empire, the seats of its
greatest resources, and opened the road to Moscow as well. Furthermore,
given Napoleon's great numerical superiority, had he been able to bring the
