                             "



46               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


accordance with Barclay's original plan) still stood near Lutzk in Volhynia.
It   was forced to hang back this far because the staging area of the French
forces still ran along the entire length of the Vistula, affording as yet no
hint as to the direction their advance would take.
      When an enemy offensive in the southerly direction of Shitomir and
Kiev was no longer thought likely, there was no reason why this Second
Army should not be shifted into the area of Volkovisk, which would satisfy
PhuU's plan. This was done in May.
      When this move was accomplished, Bagration's army was substantially
weakened because he had to leave behind a considerable number of troops
to form the Third (Reserve) Army under Tormassov. The reserves that had
originally been earmarked for this purpose were slow in arriving, and Al-
exander, despite Austrian assurances,     still   thought it necessary to keep a
watchful eye in the direction of Austria. Tormassov's instructions were
simple: "to observe the Austrian border and to withdraw in the face of an
attack by superior forces.
      These measures immediately disturbed the equal or near equal strength
the two western armies were supposed to have in PhuU's plan. In order to
restore the balance, at least partially, Doctorov's intermediary corps was to
join Bagration instead of Barclay.   It   was the general opinion at supreme
headquarters that Barclay would still have sufficient strength to defend Drissa
even without Doctorov. This may explain why Doctorov's corps, whose role
had become redundant when the Second Army was brought closer to the
First, had not already joined Barclay at this time.

     Barclay, however, was not at all agreeable to PhuU's plan when he heard
of it. Not only was he reluctant to give up his own plan, but he was prepared
to act on his own judgment and initiative, should this become necessary.
Just how he wanted to see operations run emerged from an instruction he
sent to St. Priest, Bagration's adviser; it had been worked up at the beginning
of the year, when the Second Army stood near Lutzk. This instruction still
concerned itself primarily with an offensive into Poland and then dealt with
the contingencies if the enemy's main force turned against either of the
western armies, the right flanking corps or Doctorov's intermediary corps.
In such an event, whichever army was under attack was to withdraw, re-
spectively, to Drissa, Bobruisk, Riga, or Kiev. At the same time, the others,
not under direct attack, were to take vigorous offensive action: Barclay
himself possibly against the enemy's flank and rear, Bagration into Poland.
Despite the fact that the tsar was more than ever against an offensive when
the conclusion of the Franco-Austrian alliance became known, Barclay con-
tinued to hope for one and was diametrically opposed to PhuU's ideas of
retreating.
