50                    1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


             The Cossacks pushing forward in the direction of Bialystok
             27th Infantry Division (another 8000 men) approaching Vileyka

     •    Third (Reserve) Army, under Tormassov: 38,000 men, 4000 Cossacks,
          164 guns
                 Still concentrating,   with its main force around Lutzk and Sacken's
                   corps in southern Volhynia.


Thus,     as of June 20,       1812   — when the news of Napoleon's    arrival in   Ko-
enigsberg was received at supreme headquarters          — the Russian     field forces

amounted to 183,250 men, 15,000 Cossacks, and 938 guns.




                                NAPOLEON DEPLOYS
By the end of May, Napoleon had deployed the Grand Army along the
              449,000 men with 1146 guns were ready to open the cam-
Vistula. In all,
paign, more than twice what the Russians could muster at that time. The
positions were as follows:


     I   ^Davout),      II   (Gudinot), and III (Ney) Corps stood along the lower
         Vistula, between Thorn and Elbing, with the Guard Corps (Mortier)
         still   approaching.
     IV (Eugene) and VI (St. Cyr) Corps stood near Plozk.
     V (Poniatowski) Corps was near Warsaw.
     VII (Reynier) and VIII (Vandamme) Corps were further upriver.
     The Austrian Auxiliary Corps stood near Lemberg.
     X (Macdonald) Corps, with the Prussians, stood at Koenigsberg in East
         Prussia.


Napoleon had deliberately deployed on so broad a front in order to keep
the Russians up in the air about the true direction of his attack and induce
them to spread their forces as well.
     To ensure that they were properly deceived, Schwarzenberg was to cir-
culate the rumor among the Russians that 100,000 Austrians were massing
at Lemberg.   However, in view of the fact that the Austrians and Russians
had never lost contact, it is doubtful that this had any effect at all, even
though Alexander had positioned an observation corps to watch the Austrian
frontier. This latter corps was more of an insurance policy than an expression
of the idea that real trouble might develop there. That none was expected
