52               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     Echeloned to the right rear was Eugene, the viceroy of Italy, with IV
       and VI Corps and III Cavalry Corps (80,600 men and 1 78 guns) around
       Rastenburg.
     Still further to   the right and rear was Jerome, the king of Westphalia,
       with V, VII, and VIII Corps and IV Cavalry Corps (79,400 men and
       192 guns) near Warsaw.
     Macdonald's X Corps (32,500 men and 84 guns), intended to operate
       on the army's extreme left flank along the Baltic, was still around
       Tilsit.

     Schwarzenberg and the Austrians (34, 100 men and 60 guns) were around
       Lublin.


While Napoleon himself was to envelop the enemy right, Eugene was to
pin the Russians in front. At the same time, Eugene was to cover Napoleon's
own right against a Russian offensive and support Jerome, in case the latter
was attacked on the far side of the Narev. Overestimating Russian initiative,
Napoleon was convinced that such an attack by the Second Western Army
would probably come from the central area of the Bug River.
    In the meanwhile. Napoleon's agents and informers brought news to
Koenigsberg of some changes that had taken place on the other side since
the end of May. The picture unfolding now placed Bagration in the area of
Volkovisk and had Barclay's forces stretched out from Lida to Keidany, with
his reserves near Svenciany. Napoleon also learned that field fortifications
were being thrown up at Dunaburg and Drissa, that only Cossacks stood
between the two western armies, and that only weak forces stood in Volhynia
under Tormassov and Kamensky.
    This gave him a better picture of the enemy's intentions and made it
clear that, in view of the Russians' apparent concentration toward their own
right, it might be difficult to get that flank.   On the other hand, the Russians'
greatly extended position invited a breakthrough at some point with con-
centrated force, similar to his opening gambits in 1796, 1808, and 1809.
With this in mind. Napoleon decided to cross the Niemen near Kovno with
his main force and make straight for Vilna, right in the center of Barclay's
area of deployment.
     Eugene, echeloned to the right rear, was to move toward Seiny.          Still

covering Napoleon's own right and forestalling the possibility of a Russian
offensive via Olita or Grodno with a thrust of his own, he would also be
widening the gap between the two Russian armies.
     Jerome had a dual mission along the Narev. On the one hand, he was
to make the Russians believe that he would be conducting a joint offensive
