48                      1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the peace negotiations with the Turks in order to make Alexander more
compliant to Napoleon's demands. This was not because he was Napoleon's
man but because he did not think that the Russian army could stand up to
the emperor. Kutuzov reasoned that a military defeat at the hands of Na-
poleon would have more dire consequences than a political accommodation
with him.
     In the meanwhile, the tsar decided to assume command himself. After
the defeats of 1805 and 1807, Alexander had lost confidence in his own
military abilities.        By 1813, he had learned enough to be able to make some
sound military judgments. After fumbling at the Battle of Dresden by rein-
forcing Schwarzenberg's indecisiveness with his own, he inserted a decisive
hand in the events leading to the Battle of Kulm. Early in October 1813,
when the allies and Napoleon were groping toward each other, Alexander
gave Schwarzenberg a lecture on how operations should be run, bluntly
asking him why the cavalry, which ought to be in front of the army, was
trailing a day's march to its rear.
     Historians love to berate Alexander for his interference in military mat-
ters,   and with regard to 1805 and 1807, they are right. His vanity had led
him astray. But those were the years of his apprenticeship. The journeyman
one may observe in 1813 was only just emerging during the closing stages
of the 1812 campaign.            It   would be foolish to assume that a man, virtually
any man,       as close as     he was to the decisions being made, and the results
that ensued from them, should have learned nothing at all. Yet the repu-
tation of the imperial dilettante, garnered in 1805                and 1807,   sufficed to
pigeonhole Alexander as a meddler.                And such his reputation remained,
especially in the eyes of military historians.
     Still,   it   is   quite true that early in 1812 his apprenticeship in military
matters had not yet been completed. Thus,               it   did not help at all when, at
the very beginning of the campaign, the plans of his military mentor, Phull,
turned out to be a fiasco. It would have hardly been possible for Alexander
to make a worse choice than Phull, who was a theoretician of the worst sort
with some remarkably curious ideas about war. Clausewitz said that he knew
of no other ranking personage who would lose his head quite so quickly as
would Phull. But Alexander was not by any means alone in his error of
judgment. There were others, in Russia and elsewhere, who also thought
highly of Phull. Certainly, as a theoretician, skilled at the art of discourse
and dissemblage, Phull was bound to be uncommonly persuasive in con-
vincing Alexander.
     Exasperated and, once again, unsure of himself, Alexander gave up and
decided to leave the running of the war in the hands of the generals.
Unfortunately (or fortunately, in terms of the ultimate outcome), he failed
