                             The Gathering Storm                            45

this fundamental shortcoming ever rising to the surface. Thus, he who could
not deploy a battalion, much less a brigade, nevertheless showed an adept
hand at handling larger formations and had experienced seventeen cam^
paigns as a general officer to hone this natural talent. He had developed a
keen sense of divining the enemy's intentions even during the opening moves
of an action.
    From his physical infirmity, however, radiated other handicaps which
militated against him in his role as a commanding general. In time-honored
fashion, he had learned to cope with his speech impediment by speaking in
a soft, singsong manner with often indistinct enunciations,      which made it
difficult to understand what he was saying, particularly for those whose native

tongue was not French. Because of this, Reynier shut himself away from
those around him with a remote, aloof, and brusque manner and cultivated
the habit of firing off verbal orders and then turning away before anyone
had the opportunity to comment or ask questions. His bearing was stiff, but
not commanding, and he was suspicious of everyone around him. Abhoring
anything relating to military formalities, discipline, administration, or ele-
mentary tactics, he felt at home only with the artillery. He knew nothing
about cavalry and wasted it senselessly. But that, according to Funck, was
a shortcoming he shared with many French generals.
   Napoleon, of course, was quite aware of the fact that Reynier was less
than popular with the Saxons. But he also knew that Reynier was a better
general than most of his marshals and that he did not have a surfeit of such
men, capable of independent command. The same was true of St. Cyr, who
was soon to take command of VI (Bavarian) Corps. He, too, was unpopular
with the foreign troops placed in his charge, but they were to help him win
his marshal's baton before the Russian campaign had run its course.




                THE RUSSIANS CONCENTRATE
As the Grand Army at last caught up to the Saxons and was converging on
Poland, the Russians were putting Phull's plan into action as soon as the
tsar arrived at supreme headquarters in Vilna on April 22. Orders were issued

at once to prepare the field fortifications at Drissa,but time had grown too
short to turn  Dunaburg into a fortress capable of supporting the Drissa
encampment as Phull had envisioned.
   At this time, the First Western Army under Barclay already stood as-
sembled with its main force around Vilna; its right wing, under Wittgenstein,
near Keidany; and its left (the intermediary corps of Barclay's plan), under
Doctorov, near Lida. Bagration and the Second Western Army (also in
