                            The Gathering Storm                          47

    Barclay, however, was not the only one who didn't care for PhuU's ideas.
All the ranking officers in the army registered their disapproval as soon as
the ideas became known. Everyone thought the challenge could be met and
complained about the proposed retreat and the great distance between the
two western armies. A large party, including the currently unemployed
Benningsen, who had been in command of the army in 1807, was now
joined by Barclay and demanded that a battle be offered at Vilna.
    Other plans, some of them rather adventurous, were submitted to the
tsar by a horde of dilettantes, including the duke of Wuerttemberg, a close

relative; Count Armfeldt, a diplomat; Paulucci,   an Italian marquis and an
accomplished spinner of intrigues; and young Count Chemishev, an adju-
tant; to name but a few.   They all clamored to be heard.
   The growing resistance against PhuU's plan soon changed into plots to
bring him down, creating a state of confusion at supreme headquarters. As
a result of this, Alexander's confidence in PhuU was visibly shaken,
                                                                   ev^n
though none of the others at headquarters were able to come up with any
convincing counterproposals that didn't involve an offensive of some sort.
Consequently, PhuU's plan remained in place. But his proposal that the
Second Army and Corps Doctorov be sent back toward Minsk (that is,
toward the defensive line) even before commencement of hostilities, was
refused. This would have gone against Barclay's own offensive plans, which
he continued to carry in his pocket. It would also have widened the gap
between the two armies. To PhuU's even greater distress, the parties who
wanted to see the two western armies united were beginning to gain the
upper hand.
   In the midst of all this, news arrived that the French were beginning to
move away from the Vistula and toward the Niemen, which at that time
marked Russia's western border. It was also learned that Napoleon himself
had arrived in Koenigsberg on June 12. The time for planning and arguing
was past. This was reality. The French emperor was taking command of the
juggernaut massing at the Russian doorstep. But who was to take command
against him?
   The leading candidates were Generals Mikhail lillarionovich Golenish-
chev'Kutuzov and Levin August Benningsen. Both had already been beaten
by Napoleon. Not even his subsequent success against the Turks could let
Kutuzov forget his defeat at Austerlitz. On the other hand, Benningsen was
a German.   Acontrary character, he was given to intrigue and was widely
unpopular among the Russians as one of the murderers of Tsar Paul, Al-
exander's father.
   Kutuzov, aging and ailing, had just been relieved of his command of the
Danube Army by the tsar because it was thought he had deliberately delayed
