54                      1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


two Russian armies to battle, the outcome could have hardly been in doubt.
Indeed, their destruction would have been a distinct possibility, thereby
knocking out the core of the entire Russian force then available for a defense.
    Nor would there have been much of a refuge for the armies thus defeated,
and the road to St. Petersburg would have been open to the French as well.
With a single stroke, the two western armies would have seen themselves
boxed into a comer and cut off from the vast expanses of the Russian empire.
This would have been the sort of move one might expect from Napoleon,
who had always reached for the "brass ring" instead of aiming at partial
successes. It will forever remain an open question whether Alexander, despite
his personal aversion to Napoleon, might have faltered and whether his
resolution to resist might have dissipated had Napoleon successfully carried
out such a maneuver.
    This kind of success, which would have shunted aside the bulk of the
Russian combat forces, might have made it impossible for the Russians to
make the kind of retreat they ultimately did, a retreat apparently without
a finite limit or objective.        In addition, this retreating "strategy" of the
Russians,     if   it   may even be called that, had been forced upon them by
Napoleon's attempt to keep them separate in the first place.
       Thus, Napoleon's attempt to repeat his masterpiece of 1796, when he
had succeeded in placing himself between the Austrians and Piedmontese
in northern Italy (if he even thought of this analogy), was a mistake under
the entirely different spacial conditions of the Russian theater. This was so
especially because Napoleon's reputation (which had not yet come into
existence in 1796) and his great numerical superiority would naturally force
his opponents to be cautious and prevent them from facing him with anything
less    than their united forces.
    Of course, had Napoleon opted to go the route of pushing the two Russian
armies northward and into each other, he would have been required to make
a substantial rearrangement in his deployment. Additionally, the poor and
                                         Niemen, extensively wooded
sparsely populated country along the upper
and covered by swamps, would have presented considerable difficulties for
the movement of masses. These, however, were not insurmountable obsta-
cles.

       That Napoleon did not choose this alternative may have been due largely
to the reasons already noted. First, he thought Alexander lacked the moral
fiber to    conduct a drawn-out war, which would surely take place          if   the
expanses of Russia were brought into play.          He still believed that all he
needed to bring Alexander to his knees were some decisive military strokes
or, as a last resort, the capture of Moscow. Added to this must be the fact

that this would be the first time the vastness of the Russian empire would
