                             The Gathering Storm                            49

to specify   who was to be in command when he departed from supreme
headquarters. Thus, it devolved upon Mikhail Bogdanovich, Count Barclay
de Tolly to take the helm by default, but this was easier said than done.
From the start, Barclay's authority had been undermined by the tsar's pres-
ence at supreme headquarters, even though most of the tsar's orders had
passed through Barclay's hands in his capacity as minister of war. Now, the
general stepped into the vacuum left by the tsar's departure without being
specifically ordered to do so.
    Barclay was a capable officer, personally brave and cool-headed, but he
lacked the abilities needed to handle the tasks of a supreme commander.
This was exacerbated by the fact that his long-time chief of staff, General
Count Yermolov, was not the sort of man who could give him sound military
advice. At the same time. Colonel von Toll, his quartermaster general and
a man of considerable talent, could gain no more influence over Barclay
than anyone else.
    Moreover, Barclay's cold and unbending personality prevented him from
overcoming the difficulties posed by the fact that he was not a Slav and
thus was a thorn in the eye of ethnic Russians. His distant and brusque
manner alienated him even further from those around him. Far worse, both
Bagration and Tormassov, two full-blooded Russians, were his seniors in the
service.   Of these, the gallant Bagration, popular throughout the army, was
an aggressive fighter, but far better suited to leading an advance guard than
running the affairs of an entire army.
    With the crisis still unresolved. Napoleon's arrival in Koenigsberg found
the Russian army deployed as follows:



   •   Imperial headquarters: at Vilna.

   •   First Western Army,   under Barclay: 104,250 men, 7000 Cossacks, 558
       guns
           The right, under Wittgenstein: Corps near Keidany
                                           I


           The center: 11, III, and IV Corps at Orsziszki, Novi-Troki, and
              Olkieniki; I and II Cavalry Corps at Vilkomir and Smorgoni;   V
              (Guard) Corps at Svenciany
           The left, under Doctorov: VI Corps and III Cavalry Corps at Lida
           The Cossack Corps, under Platov: at Grodno
   •   Second Western Army, under Bagration: 33,000 men, 4000 Cossacks,
       216 guns
           The main force: VII and VIII Corps and IV Cavalry Corps assem-
              bled around Volkovisk by 20 June
