60                   1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the years following,     it   was found that this measure resulted in the cavalry
being fragmented into too many small detachments, so it was taken out of
the divisions to form larger formations of its own.       The infantry divisions,
however, retained their artillery. By 1805, a cavalry brigade had been given
to each army corps.       With the growth of the Grand Army, entire cavalry
divisions were eventually assigned to the army corps, ideally at the ratio of
three infantry divisions to one of cavalry. Everything, in excess of these
requirements was massed into the cavalry reserve. These measures, of course,
went hand in hand with the development of doctrines that had changed
the divisional unit from an administrative to a tactical entity.
    In Italy, Napoleon had already experimented with the idea of grouping
divisions, by twos and threes, as needed, into army corps, which were to
be commanded by lieutenant generals. When the latest Austrian war was
brought to a successful conclusion with the Treaty of Luneville in February
1801, the first consul was able to devote himself in earnest to the reshaping
of the army.     The as yet unsettled Egyptian question and the continuing
naval war by Britain gave Napoleon the opportunity to enlarge the army
again.
     During the Austrian war, the army had made do with an annual draft
call of 30,000 recruits.      Now the draft was doubled, with 30,000 being called
twice every year, for an annual total of 60^000 men. Thus, between May
1802 and May 1805, no fewer than 210,000 men were called to the colors,
even though the army had been fighting only a sit-down war.
   The bulk of this additional manpower went into the invasion force
gathering in the encampments along the English Channel. Styled the Armee
d'Angleterre,   it   was to become the proving ground for the new divisional
and corps organizations and the only real basic training facility on a grand
scale the French military establishment would ever experience.' Although
Nelson's victory at Trafalgar in October 1805 put an end to all pretense of
invading the British Isles, the years in the encampments along the Channel
coast would put their stamp on the Grand Army yet to be.
    On the left flank, at Brest, Augerau was in charge. The main force was
deployed along the Pas de Calais, with Ney in charge of the camps around
EtapeS'Montreuil, Soult around Boulogne- Ambleteuse, and Davout in Oost-
ende-Dunkirk. On the right flank was Marmont's group at Utrecht. Along
with Mortier's force, which had stood in the Nymwegen- Breda area until it
was sent off to occupy Hanover in 1803, these would eventually become
the Grand Army of 1805.
    Even though the techniques of embarkation and debarkation stood high
on the training agenda for a while, the troops in these encampments did
experience a considerable amount of brigade, division, and even corps drills.
