                              )




                         The French Military Establishment                     61

Typically, however, this period failed to produce anything in the way of
standard directives,     much less a new field manual. Napoleon, who had
neither the background nor much interest in matters relating to elementary
tactics, was content to leave such matters to his subordinates. He did, on

occasion, issue a general directive and eventually effected a reorganization
of the infrastructure of the infantry battalions, which was designed to affect
tactical   employment and limit the number of skirmishers to be deployed
under normal circumstances. But that came later. On the whole, the army
continued to operate on the basis of empirical experience, with the last of
the old royal army's regulations (published in 1791) being invoked only for
the most basic evolutions, and even then only with uneven frequency,
depending upon who was the man in charge. Thus, the standards and training
methods along the Channel coast differed from one encampment to the
next. As was to be expected, Marmont's, Soult's, and Davout's troops drilled
often; those under Ney, for example, not nearly so much.
    On the most fundamental level, however, this massing of the bulk of
the army's combat elements in the Channel camps did provide Napoleon
with the welcome opportunity to isolate these men from the republican
influences of the civil population. In this way, the army could be whipped
into shape, disciplined and reinfused with the older ideas of soldierly profes-
sionalism.
    In this the commanders succeeded, even though the results would be
something of a mixed blessing. The soldiers' years of isolation, first in their
native country and later as conquerors in Germany, had given rise to what
Morvan^ termed the miles gloriosus (the glorious soldier), a subject often
greeted with silence by the romantics. Nevertheless,  it was real. (By 1808,

when elements of the Grand Army marched across France on their way to
Spain, the villages and townships in their path were dismayed, some ap-
parently even petitioning the authorities to reroute the marching columns
to avoid their districts.
   By 1803, the new organizations as established in the Channel encamp-
ments were extended to cover the entire French military establishment,
which became the Imperial Army when Napoleon took the emperor's crown
for himself in 1804. In the same year, most of his lieutenants, who had been
in command of the Channel encampments, were among those who received
their marshal's batons.       But even if this Army of England was fated never to
cross the English Channel,        it   was to make history in 1805, when the Aus-
trians   appeared in the field for yet another contest with the French. By
then, this organization of several years' standing was ready to face its first
test on    the battlefield.
    In the course of their training, the formations of each encampment had
