64               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     During our own Vietnam era, one could observe the fhassive flight of
the sons of the well'to-do into colleges and universities to escape the draft.
When, some years later an attempt was made to merely reinstitute draft
registration,   one could again observe the well-dressed scions of the bour-
geoisie,   attended by batteries of lawyers, appearing in front of television
cameras in protest.    It   was no different in Napoleonic France. Even the
popular rising of 1813 in Prussia saw strong elements of middle-class youth
resisting entry into the army. Special Jaeger volunteer units had to be created
to make military service palatable for them.
     Most importantly, however, just as the American nation of the Vietnam
era perceived neither a "clear and present danger" nor itself as a "nation in
arms"   — the Vietnam war     was, after all, an old-fashioned cabinet war     —   so
did the French nation no longer view         itself as   being under attack.   And
among those who continued to support Napoleon's imperial ventures, many
continued to do so only as long as things went well and added to the glories
of France. Thus, as the draft calls went on through 1808, 1809, and 1810
and were increased to 120,000 in 1811 and 1812, and as the demands placed
upon the National Guard to do yeoman service continued to rise, the number
of refractaires (draft dodgers) also rose.
     For years, there had existed in France a phenomenon that Morvan,
quoted earlier, described as the armee roulante.         It   consisted of hordes of
soldiers traveling back and forth across France with improper travel orders.
That is to say, the travel orders were genuine, but the men to whom they
had been originally issued had exchanged them along the way for the orders
of men going in a different direction. In this fashion, they would course
back and forth without ever arriving at their destinations.
    By 1812, when the army was being beefed up even further, thousands
of these illegal travelers, along with other draft dodgers, were picked up in
dragnets specially set up for this purpose and were stuffed into penal regiments
such as the Regiment de Re and de Walcheren. No fewer than five regiments
were formed in this fashion; they eventually became the 131st, 132nd, and
133rd Line Regiments and the 35th and 36th Light. Also included in these
were some Spanish and Portuguese prisoners of war, as well as French soldiers
who had ended up in the stockades for sundry reasons. Most of these troops
ended up in the Grand Army of 1812. Funck,'* who met with some of them
in Russia, found their appearance less than reassuring and had serious doubts
concerning their military value.



The total French military establishment at the foundation of the Grand
Army of 1812 numbered about 800,000 men.^ Of these, about 220,000 men
