                     The French Military Establishment                     63

few had held commissions. All but the youngest officers (about 600) and
about half the rank and file had campaigned before.
    However, even the victories of Austerlitz, Jena, Auerstaedt, and Fried-
land, not to mention the battering at Eylau, had torn huge gaps into the
ranks of the Grand Army's cadre. At the same time, the ongoing expansions
of the Guard Corps, as well as the creation of numerous new line formations,
constantly diluted the remaining cadres even further. This process of dilution
proceeded at a faster pace than did the creation of new veterans by successive
campaigns. Things got even worse when, from 1808 onward, a great number
of provisional units had to be formed and the depots were stripped for the
Spanish venture, which would become a constant drain, regardless of what
transpired elsewhere.
   Thus, by 1812, there was already a shortage of good regimental officers,
even though the ranks of the sergeants had been combed over and over and
the National Guard had been raided to find suitable lieutenants. At the
same time, there was an ever-growing resistance against the incessant drafts;
this was despite the fact that, given the size of the French population, these
demands were not excessive.
    In economic terms, the Grand Army, the most powerful and effective
military instrument of the empire, had also cost the least. From the time it
crossed the Rhine in October 1805 until it was expelled from Germany in
December 1813, its upkeep had rested on the backs of the German prin-
cipalities, friend and foe alike. Even Napoleon's brother Jerome, the king

of Westphalia, complained bitterly about having to keep up remittances to
the French treasury while he was forced to support French garrisons fully as
large as the army he had been ordered to maintain as his contribution to
the Rhine Confederation.^
    Although the material costs of the Grand Army imposed only a negligible
burden upon the French nation, matters stood differently when it came to
the human costs of the French military establishment as a whole. By Sep-
tember 1807, that is, in the 2 years following the outbreak of the Austrian
war, another 420,000 men had been called up, as the annual draft had been
raised to 80,000 men. To accommodate this, the draft age had been lowered
from 20 years and 4 months to 18 years and 6 months. Such a draft was not
by any means insupportable for a nation numbering about 29 million in
1806. However, numerous exemptions and the purchase of substitutes by
those who were drafted had narrowed the draft base, and the rising cost of
substitutes (which came hand in hand with the increased drafts) hit the
middle class right where it hurt the most—   in the pocketbook. Then as later,
in France as elsewhere, the bourgeoisie was as quickly inclined to complain
about the costs of the military as it was disinclined to serve.
