62                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


become accustomed to functioning as operational entities. Thus, despite the
fact that they were of quite unequal size, Napoleon did not tamper with this
arrangement by shifting some of their constituent elements around, simply
in the interests of achieving uniformity. Far more interested in preserving
their identity and the established relationships with their respective com-
manders, he left them intact. The unequal size of the different army corps
that resulted from this was to remain a characteristic throughout the Na-
poleonic era. Their size was as much a reflection of the emperor's confidence
in the military abilities of the men he placed in charge of them as it was of
the tasks to which they would be put.
     In this way, the Armee d'Angleterre,    when mobilized for the war of
1805, became the Grand     Army.  Its constituent army corps, entirely due to
the circumstance of the sequence in which they had originally been placed,
were identified by Roman numerals. Commencing on the right with Ber-
nadotte (who had replaced Mortier), whose troops became I Corps, the
numbering proceeded in counterclockwise fashion, across the Channel front,
to Augerau on the left, whose troops now formed VII Corps.
    Henceforth, the Grand Army and its numbered army corps would remain
the first string, the starting team of the French military establishment.
Whenever it took to the field, it would always be commanded by Napoleon
himself. Over the years, the Grand Army was to grow from one campaign
to the next, not only through the growth of its French constituents but
mainly through the inclusion of increasing numbers of foreign troops. Al-
though the Grand Army of 1809 was officially termed the Army of Germany,
because there was also an Army of Spain, this was a mere technicality. In
1812,   it   became the Grand Army again, and would remain so in 1813 as
well.
    The Grand Army was only a part of the French military establishment.
The two were not identical. This is a point that should be understood,
particularly by American readers, who, with the example of the Grand Army
of the Republic in mind, tend to see the two bodies as one and the same.




The Grand Army of 1805, as yet quite a national army, was the best Na-
poleon ever commanded, not only because it had had years of training along
the Channel coast but also because it contained the largest cadre of veterans,
both officers and rank and file. Half the generals had already held com-
missioned rank in the royal army. Indeed, three-fifths of the staff officers
(the modem-day equivalents of the field grades    — majors   to colonels)   and
about half of all the officers had seen service in the old army, even if very
