                               The Gathering Storm                               55

be brought into play in its full extent. Just as the Russians themselves had
as yet no idea of the advantages offered by their own country, so too did
Napoleon underestimate its inherent dangers. He thought these could be
minimized by the very size of his army, which he obviously considered too
large to be swallowed up by the terrain.
    By this point. Napoleon had too often been able to impose his will upon
others and had consistently been able to bend circumstances to suit his
objectives. In doing so, he had often made the difficult seem far easier than
it had actually been. His successes had made him succumb to the great field

marshal's most dangerous illusions: underestimating the opposition and seeing
things as he wanted them to be, not as they were.
    Thus, for the first time Napoleon the general had lost the eye for what
was possible, something that Napoleon the statesman had lost long before.
In Spain, the general had demonstrated this ability for the last time, when
he saw at once that he could leave the conclusion of that war to his lieu-
tenants; the statesman had already lost it when he thought that getting rid
of the Portuguese Braganzas and the Spanish Bourbons would suffice to make
him the master of the Peninsula. Indeed, he had already lost it when, by
decreeing the Continental blockade, he thought he could subordinate the
economic interests of the whole of Europe to his own.
    In Russia, there could be no question of leaving matters in the hands
of subordinates in the event of a national insurrection or a drawn-out war.
There, he had put himself and his reputation for omnipotence on the line,
and that made his errors all the more dangerous. Of these, underestimation
of his adversary, the Russian tsar, was the first error. Underestimation of
the difficulties the operations area would pose was the second.           And from
these two sprang the third, a faulty operations concept,       if   not a plan, that
was to turn the entire campaign into a failure.




                                      NOTES
1.   Brabant, A. In Russland und in Sachsen, 1812-1815. Dresden, 1930. Uncensored
     material from Funck's papers, which were declassified only after Saxony became
     a republic after World War 1.
2.   Ibid.

3.   The conditions under which Charles XII of Sweden had marched to Poltava were
     so different that no valid conclusions could have been drawn from this.
