                           The French Military Establishment                       67


                               The Allied Contingents
On the whole, the allied contingents have received a mixed press from
writers steeped in the Napoleonic romance.           However, their services were
certainly appreciated by almost all French military historians. Indeed,           men
like    Marshals Victor and Mortier spoke well of them, particularly of the
German troops they commanded. Even so, apologists have often struck
condescending notes and, by rote, consider them to have been only second
best to the national French troops.
       Of course, whenever Napoleon needed a spanking boy and some allies
were handy, they would provide a ready-made scapegoat (as, for example,
in the incident with the Wuerttembergers in Poland, in which Ney and the
French commissariat were actually the perpetrators). Napoleon,             as   was to
be expected, was quite insensitive toward matters concerning the pride of
others.    On more than one occasion, when addressing the troops, he would
extol the virtues of the French soldiers above all others, even as troops from
the allied contingents stood within earshot. However, some historians have
pointed out that, Napoleon, not being a Frenchman himself, took a rather
detached and somewhat cynical view of his own adopted nation, so why
should he be sensitive toward others'?
       Certainly, the princes in his retinue, especially those of the Rhine Con-
federation, shared his views in this direction.  The revolution was history,
and the people, as in the days of the old regimes, had once again become
the objects rather than the partners of government. The only change was
that they now got at least some lip service. However, the more omnipotent
the French empire grew, the broader the contact of French troops with friend
and foe alike, and the more Napoleon talked, the more the commoner was
made aware that he was not French. Even if, as stated earlier. Napoleon
had made it an object of his policy to destroy the German identity, the
results were militating in the opposite direction.
    Still, the evidence as it emerges from hundreds of diaries kept by Na-

poleon's German veterans (of which many found their way into print) is
mixed, to say the least. Their evaluations, based on the sociological back-
grounds of the writers alone, invites a study in itself. However, even a
cursory survey yields some general trends.
       First,   there were the regular soldiers, who lived in a tight little world of
their own. They found it easy to admire and, indeed, be part of Napoleon's
winning ways. In particular, they liked the easygoing way in which the
French conducted their day-to-day affairs and the relatively loose discipline.
It was by far preferable to the tight discipline    and "spit and polish" generally
experienced in their own armies.
