72              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     The Westphalians     Westphalia was one of Napoleon's artificial crea-
tions. Formed after the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807, the kingdom included various
German territories, among them Brunswick, parts of Hanover, Hesse-Kassel,
and the bishoprics of Paderbom, Hildesheim, and Magdeburg. The West-
phalians, by this time termed neo-Franks by their fellow       Germans, held
their new king, Jerome, in little esteem.
     On the whole, the Westphalian contingent of 24,000 men in 22 bat-
talions and 2 1 squadrons consisted of good soldiers with a numerous veteran
cadre. Still, they were lacking any kind of national cohesion beyond being
collectively referred to as Westphalians.
   Jerome was not entirely lacking in military talents, as he had shown in
more modest circumstances in 1806. But he was in command of his corps
only during the opening stages of the campaign; he left in July to return to
Westphalia. Thereafter, the corps passed in quick succession first to Tharreau
and then to Junot. This was a serious mistake. The latter, one of Napoleon's
oldest friends, was by 1812 an alcoholic in an advanced state of mental
decay.   He was no longer fit to command troops. As a result, Westphalian
performance fell far short of its potential.


     The Bavarians    This, the largest of the Rhine Confederation contin-
gents, numbered some 30,000 men in 30 battalions and 24 squadrons, nearly
90 percent of the entire Bavarian field army. Of these, about 5000 men, or
one-sixth, were recruits from the Tyrol, which had only recently become
part of Bavaria and which had just risen in a bloody insurrection in 1809.
    These men cared about neither the Bavarian king nor Napoleon. Their
hero was Andreas Hofer, the rebel leader who had fallen before a firing
squad at Mantua. Thus, the Tyrolean recruits harbored strong resentments
against both the French and the Bavarians, a situation that did not bode
well for the Bavarian corps. The veterans among the Bavarians had their
own share of misgivings. They had already participated in the campaign of
1806-1807 and thus had a good idea of what to expect.
    As a result, desertion, while not the highest in the army, was nevertheless
the highest among the German contingents. Coupled with a rising tide of
disillusionment with the Napoleonic cause was the adverse effect exercised
upon the Bavarians by their French commander, Gouvion St. Cyr.
    The Bavarian corps was positioned in the left flank of the main army
group and thus did not take part in the advance on Moscow. Instead, it was
burned out in a series of grinding actions around Polotsk, a pestilentious,
fever-ridden tract of land that has become known as the Bavarian grave.
During the final stage of the retreat, the Bavarian corps disappeared virtually
without a trace.
