                       The French Military Establishment                      71

army, not dissimilar to the French in this respect.    The situation was ex-
acerbated by the fact that, like Russia, Poland lacked a broadly based middle
class, so the army forever suffered from a chronic shortage of good noncoms.

      As everywhere else, the march into and out of Russia cleaned house:
Only the fittest survived. Thus, the decimated remnants, particularly those
of the Polish cavalry, who were familiar with the country, climate, and
language, became the safe-conduct of what was left of the main army group.
They served with distinction at vSmolensk and Borodino and played a major
role in making the crossing of the Beresina possible.
      The Lithuanians, about 12,000 strong, were added to the Polish army.
These troops, however, had been formed only after the campaign was under
way. Thus, their military value was dubious.
    Not counting these latter formations, the Polish army numbered 54
battalions and 62 squadrons.


      The Italians   TTiis 30,000-man contingent, organized into 18 battalions

and 16 squadrons, was largely made up of veteran troops. Indeed, its cadre
mainly consisted of old-time republicans, who had been with the colors since
revolutionary times. National pride and esprit de corps ran exceptionally
high in these formations, and their commander in chief, Eugene, was very
popular with the rank and file.
      In the course of the campaign, the Italians performed extremely well at
Malo-Jaroslavets, where they suffered heavy losses. Their decimated rem-
nants, however, were     still   counted among the combat-worthy and stood,
once more, in the firing line at the Beresina.

      The Neapolitans     About 11,000 Neapolitans formed the bulk of the
33rd Division, under Detres, which came up quite late in the campaign with
Augerau's XI Corps. Unfortunately, these men from the sunny south of Italy
did not in any way measure up to their cousins from the north.          Nor did
they take kindly to the Russian winter. Numbering 11 battalions and 5
squadrons, the cadres of this respectable force had already given the Bourbons
no joy, had fought against the French in 1806, and had no love for Napoleon.
Their desertion rate exceeded even that of the Spaniards.
      The Neapolitans did not penetrate deeply into Russia; they melted away
without having fought in any major action.      When they came upon the
shattered remnants of the retreating Grand Army,      its   sight was apparently
more than they could bear.
   Napoleon selected the Neapolitan Horse Guard to form part of his escort
when he left the army behind to speed on to Paris. The Neapolitans lost
all   their horses long before the emperor's retinue reached the Rhine.
