68                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     An excellent case in point is furnished by Karl Schehl,^ a neo-Frank (a
cognomen often applied to the inhabitants of annexed territories), who
enlisted as a boy musician with the French 2nd Carabinier Regiment just
prior to   its   departure for the Russian campaign. Life as a boy bandsman,
what few months of it he experienced, was pleasant indeed. But his words
become shrill when he devotes the last chapter of his memoirs to the com-
paratively harsh life in the Prussian horse artillery, where he found himself
when his home territory' became Prussian again after the war.
     The reactions of the recruits, who suddenly found themselves in the
army, appear to have been conditioned largely by their civilian backgrounds.
Certainly, unpropertied individuals, stableboys, grooms, day laborers and so
on, whether from town or country, were apt to find military life, French or
otherwise, easier than what they had left behind. But men from such social
backgrounds rarely wrote memoirs.
     The great bulk of the written materials comes from men of middle- and
upper-class backgrounds, and here, attitudes were more complex. These men
were, on the whole, well educated and well read and thus better informed;
among them, the ideals of the revolution had found broad, if generally tacit,
acceptance. But there were also many who realized that the revolution was
history. They could see that whatever the revolution might have wrought
in France, what had actually come their way was something different al-
together. Much of this, however, was colored again by how well things were
being run at home.
    At the same time, the aftershocks of the Reformation and the Thirty
Years' War had not yet fully abated, and the German nation was religiously
divided like no other in Europe. Thus, the Protestant north was generally
slower in accepting things French than was the Catholic south.
     But these were ideological undercurrents. Day-to-day relationships were
part of the real world.    And in that sphere, as the years passed, many of the
better-educated scions of the bourgeoisie, and certainly some of the high-
ranking officers in the army, were beginning to weary of the offhanded and
frequently high-handed treatment accorded them by the French in general.
While it was easy to follow, even to worship, a Napoleon, particularly for
a military man, it was not nearly so easy to constantly submit to the airs of
far lesser men. Worst of all was the constant economic pressure that was

exerted to finance Napoleon's schemes. It knew no boundaries and affected
friend and erstwhile foe alike. Nowhere was the change wrought by prolonged
contact with the French more starkly drawn than in Prussia.
    In 1806, the Prussian civilian population had stood aside politely while
the French emperor struck a mortal blow at their own king's army. Even if
the Prussians did not openly approve of the coming of the French, they
