                         The French Military Establishment                       73

      The Saxons About 22,000 strong, in 24 battalions and 32 squadrons,
the Saxons ranked with the best troops in the campaign. Their commander,
Reynier, was highly unpopular with the Saxons and strongly prejudiced
against the Germans, but he was also a man of fmstrated ambitions. He had
commanded a division in Egypt, only to see other men, junior to him,
advance to the highest rank in the army.
   Although the choice of Reynier to command the Saxons again in 1812
might have been questionable, the Saxon contingent suffered even worse
from internal troubles. These ranged from the ambitious Thielemann, who
managed to have his cavalry brigade detached from the Saxon corps and
thus left it critically short of cavalry, to a profiteering cabal that reached
all   the way from Langenau, Reynier 's Saxon chief of staff, back to Dresden
and the ministries. The scheme about the issue of the uniforms, mentioned
earlier, was only part of an entire network of machinations designed to

defraud their own king and country. As a result of these problems, the
Saxons did not do as well as they might have in the campaign.
    This corps, part of the southern flanking force, never advanced beyond
Volhynia. Thus,     it   avoided sharing in the disastrous disintegration of the
Grand Army. The Saxon corps did its duty, but not one iota more. However,
Thielemann's brigade, the Saxon cuirassiers, often described as being "the
most beautiful heavy cavalry in the Grand Army," had its day of glory at
Borodino with the taking of the Raievsky redoubt.


      The Wuerttembergers        This veteran contingent of 14,000 men, or-
ganized into 14 battalions and 16 squadrons, formed a division in Ney's 111
Corps.    They rendered excellent service even though they were not enthu-
siastic   about Napoleon or the campaign. Hard-nosed professionals, they
performed with distinction in every action up to the Battle of Borodino.
      The unfortunate incident in Poland that, incidentally, also served to
discredit Ney has already been discussed in some detail.  As a result of the
accusations, the Wuerttembergers drew the worst assignments and positions
in the order of march. By August, the contingent had dwindled to no more
than 4000 effectives. Coupled with this were losses from several engagements
around Smolensk between August 14 and 19 and the Battle of Borodino on
September 7. On November 29, Napoleon took note of about thirty Wuert-
tembergers who were still in marching formation.



      This brings up the last three of the German contingents that were at
least of brigade size, those from Baden, Berg, and Hesse. They were in many

ways the cream of the crop      — and not merely of the   foreign contingents.
