74               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      The Badeners    This force of 7000 men in 7 battaUons and 4 squadrons
is   generally regarded as having been the best of the German contingents.
All were excellent soldiers who performed well even though they hardly had
the opportunity to enter into combat as an integrated unit. Their battalions
were scattered all over; the grenadier battalion was assigned to watch over
Napoleon's war chest.
      The remnants of the Baden Field Brigade did get to see their day at the
Beresina, where they stood shoulder to shoulder with the last and toughest
of the Poles and some of the other "poor country cousins'' in a legendary
rear-guard action.


      The Bergers  The grand duchy of Berg furnished 7000 men in 7 bat-
talions and 4 squadrons. Of these, all the infantry was in IX Corps, while
the lancer regiment was attached to the guard cavalry.
      The Bergers, all good professionals, many of them ex-Prussians from
Cleve, shared all the bloody actions at the Beresina with the Poles and the
Badeners. Even at Kovno, when all had fallen apart, the Bergers still marched
with their colors.


      The Hessians    These were not the sons of the Hessians who had been
brought across the Atlantic during the American Revolution; they would
have been found mostly among the Westphalians. This contingent came
from Hesse- Darmstadt, and all were old-style professionals in the eighteenth-
century mold. Numbering 5000 men in 6 battalions and 3 squadrons, their
excellence was attested to by the fact that one regiment was attached to the
Young Guard while another served at imperial headquarters.
   As such, the Hessians were engaged only during the retreat. At that
time, in the ranks of the guards, they performed with distinction at Krasnoi
under the personal command of their young hereditary prince.


      Together, the contingents discussed above accounted for more than
three-quarters of the foreign troops. There were also a few small contingents
from other areas, as follows:


                         Wuerzburg        3 battalions
                         Mecklenburg      3 battalions
                         Frankfurt        3 battalions
                         Saxon duchies     7 battalions


      The Prussians    In addition to these there was a Prussian contingent of
about lOyOOO men in 20 battalions and 24 squadrons. Of these, one hussar
