70                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      This outline does not represent an exhaustive study of the complexities
that went into the attitudes and the morale of the allied contingents. But
•what held true for the Germans as a whole also held for most of the others,
especially the Neapolitans.     Only the Poles entered into the war with their
eyes wide open and their expectations running at a fever pitch.
      That is not to say that the foreign troops in the Grand Army of 1812
did not perform well. However, Napoleon's desire to step onto the stage
with an overwhelming force had seen to it that the foreign contingents also
contained many raw troops. Still, on average, the foreign troops of the
Grand Army contained larger veteran cadres and thus had a higher perfor-
mance standard. In general, they were among the last to relinquish the
bonds of order and discipline, and most did so only after all else around
them had already fallen apart.
      Nevertheless, the ingredients of internal strife were present from the
start.   It   was reflected mainly in the often-strained relationships with the
French commanders and especially with the French commissariat. The prob-
lems ran the gamut from passive resistance to open confrontation.
      As to the individual allied contingents, these varied greatly in size and
composition. They ranged from entirely Polish, Saxon, Bavarian, and West-
phalian corps     — of which only the   Poles were commanded by a native son
—    to Italian and Wuerttembergian divisions, as well as brigades and indi-
vidual regiments appended to various major formations. The Poles and Ger-
mans provided an uncommonly large proportion of cavalry formations, many
of which had been split away from their own forces and dispersed throughout
the Grand Army.
      The allied contingents are discussed individually in the following sec-
tions.




      The Poles      The largest single national contingent among the foreign
troops was the Poles. Against the promised reconstitution of their state,
most Poles went to extraordinary lengths to accommodate the Grand Army
passing through their territories. In addition, the Poles raised some 75,000
soldiers,     not counting the Vistula Legion or the lancers in the Imperial
Guard. None went into the war with more enthusiasm. It was going to be
their war, and they followed the emperor's colors willingly. In number, they
were second only to the French, unless the various German contingents are
taken collectively.
      Even though the grand duchy of Warsaw was impoverished, it raised the
highest percentage of troops in proportion to its population. This brought
on so rapid an expansion that the Poles had to be regarded as a conscript
