                        The French Military EstabUshment                         69

certainly regarded them with open interest.    It took them no more than a

couple of years to reaUze that their country   had  become just another cow
to be milked by Napoleon. Their king, Frederick William III, had been no
Frederick the Great. If they had felt themselves bound to the idea of Prussia,
it had been to the state and its institutions, not to this king.

     By 1812, the Prussian nation had done an about-face. The king had
become a partner in his people's suffering. While Napoleon had not incurred
the enmity of the Prussian nation by waging war against its king, it had
become hostile when he became its master by remote control. Thus, he had
achieved by 1812 what he had failed to do in 1806. The rising of the Prussian
nation in 1813 was something Frederick William could have never accom-
plished by decree. Only Napoleon could take the credit for that.
     Thus, in Prussia and elsewhere. Napoleon had gathered allies and sub-
jects, but he had made very few friends. This, of course, was reflected in

the allied military contingents.
    The vast majority of the allied soldiers, just like their French counter-
parts, marched and fought for the same reasons that they had before and      —
would again, after Napoleon was gone: because they were soldiers, because
they were ordered to, and because that's what soldiers are expected to do.
At the same time, however, the allied soldiers had sworn allegiance to more
than a dozen different colors, and their sovereigns were tied to Napoleon's
coattails for reasons that were largely remote and obscure, reasons that were
barely if at all understood by the majority of the rank and file. This was not
so with the officers, who were on the whole very much aware of the world
around them.
    Thus, the idea of a common cause, and even more so the objective of
the coming campaign, was meaningless to most of the allied rank and file.
Moreover, the veteran soldiers of all ranks     — and they were    still   numerous
                                 —
among the allied contingents had serious misgivings about a Russian war.
As is generally the case, only the young and inexperienced, which included
many of the junior officers, thought they were heading for a great and glorious
adventure.
    Still,   regardless of a soldier's personal outlook,   whenever Napoleon put
in a personal appearance, his charisma never failed to elicit shouts of "Vife
V empereur     Nor were these insincere. Napoleon's personal presence exerted
a powerful magnetism. But the popular historians who take delight in ren-
dering glowing and romantic recitals of such occasions also fail to note that
these expressions of enthusiasm were but manifestations of the moment.
They would wane after the first missed meal, rarely survive the first bad
bivouac, and vanish in a puff of smoke when the first cannonball tore through
a formation.
