78              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


    At the start of the campaign, Marshal Victor's IX Corps remained behind
in Prussia.However, by July 4 it was ordered to divide itself in the manner
shown in the order of battle in Appendix V and to follow the army into
Russia. The 1st Reserve Division was also temporarily assigned to this corps
and soon followed in several echelons, to be broken up and divided once it
arrived at the front.
     The troops remaining behind were designated XI Corps, and command
was given to Marshal Augerau. The Neapolitan division continued to remain
in Prussia and northern Germany but eventually joined the corps.    Another
two divisions from this corps ultimately joined the field army as well.
     The first of these. Division Durutte, is of interest because it contained
the penal regiments mentioned earlier, along with the hapless Wuerzbur-
gers,   who could hardly have relished this assignment. Most likely, they
fulfilled the role of field gendarmes for General Durutte,   because they could
probably be relied upon to deal much more harshly with the refractaireSy
should the occasion demand         it,   than would another French unit. Also,
the bad example of the troublesome units would not be quite so contagious
for a foreign unit as   it   would be for another unit composed of their own
countrymen.
    The second division sent forward was Loison's, known as le division
princiere because it contained the contingents from the small German duchies
in addition to one Saxon regiment and the so-called Erfurt Brigade, made
up of the erstwhile garrison of that town.
     Morand's French-Saxon brigade was detached and remained in Stralsund,
while 2 battalions and 5 squadrons of Neapolitans were attached in its stead.
They arrived in Vilna between October 21 and 23 and soon got the op-
portunity to relieve the Baden troops of their rear-guard duties.
     Added to all these must be the march formations, generally said to have
totaled 80,000 men. But that figure includes the 1st Reserve Division, so
about 68,000 would be more correct. This includes some 4200 Poles from
the Vistula Legion, attached to the guard; more Wuerttembergers of III
Corps, who came from Danzig but went only as far as Minsk; more West-
phalians of VIII Corps, who had remained behind in Pillau and joined their
contingent only shortly before the retreat began; the 5800 Austrian replace-
ments already mentioned; approximately 44,000 march troops, among them
26,000 French and 9000 Poles (among the latter were three newly formed
battalions, which became the garrison of Smolensk); and, finally, the 14,000
troops raised in Lithuania.
     Thus, the total strength of the reinforcements that reached the Grand
Army in the course of the campaign was:
