                       The French MiUtary EstabUshment                        79

    141,200 men (with 96 guns)
     21,500 men (with 130 guns, the trains, and the siege park
               intended to invest Riga)
    162,700 men (with 226 guns)


This brings the total number of troops who eventually crossed the Russian
border in the course of the campaign to approximately 612,000 men, with
1242 field pieces and 130 siege guns.
    Added to this number must be about 25,000 civilians: officials accom-
panying the army, their staffs, and the grooms and servants of imperial
headquarters and the higher-ranking           There was an even larger
                                          officers.

number of horse handlers and grooms who had been summarily comman-
deered, more often than not by force. Finally, there were about 184,000
army horses and another 150,000 requisitioned horses (67,000 from Prussia
alone) that hauled the army's supplies.
    This somewhat lengthly exercise in military bookkeeping explains why
so many different numbers appear in the literature on the subject. Although
most of the numbers are usually correct, they are sometimes not sufficiently
qualified.




In this discussion of men and materiel,      it   is   important to note that the
French artillery had to face special problems during the Russian campaign.
    In general, the draft teams were far too light, especially since only four
draft horses   were allowed for each 6-pounder and six horses for each 12-
pounder, as well as their respective ammunition caissons, which were almost
as heavy as the guns. This might have sufficed for comparatively short hauls

on the generally well surfaced and properly drained roads in central Europe.
However, for the Russian campaign, the guns and caissons had to be taken
clear across Germany and Poland just to reach the staging areas between
the Vistula and the Niemen. As a result, the horses were worn out by the
time the Niemen was reached, even though the campaign was only just
getting under way. This occasioned losses among the artillery as well as the
army train horses at an explosive rate as soon as the army entered Lithuania.
There, the road network, if it may even be called that, consisted mainly of
little   better than wagon tracks and forest paths,     which had been improved
only in the immediate vicinity of such major towns as Kovno, Vilna, and
Vitebsk. To make matters worse, alternating spells of heavy downpours and
tropical heat quickly turned the roads into a wagoner's nightmare.
   The materiel of the artillery was very good. However, the proportion of
heavy guns was far too small. The reintroduction of the regimental guns
