                       The French MiUtary EstabUshment                       75

regiment was attached to I Cavalry Corps and one lancer regiment to II
Cavalry Corps. Two artillery companies were attached to the Guard Corps.
   The entire Prussian contingent consisted of well-trained professionals
who performed well. They formed the bulk of Macdonald's X Corps on the
northern flank. Following the debacle of the central army group, their
commander, Yorck, played a pivotal role in the events that would eventually
force Frederick William's hand.


   The Austrians        The Austrian Auxiliary Corps of about 30,000 men
consisted of 32 battalions and 50 squadrons.
   Prince Schwarzenberg, who was in command, was under the constraints
of secret agreements between Vienna and St. Petersburg, as already noted.
Thus, Napoleon who had received little help from the Russians in his 1809
war against Austria, now got just as little help from the Austrians against
Russia. Was it due to duplicity? Self- interest? Self-preservation? Any of these
motives may be cited as the cause, depending entirely upon the viewer's
perspective.
   The Austrian contingent was also composed of veteran troops and was
capable of doing far more than it did.



               The Organization of the Foreign Contingents
The internal structure of most of the foreign contingents had long been
assimilated into the French model by 1812.      However, the Austrians con-
tinued to use their light infantry in the old way, while the Prussians obtained
their skirmishers from the third rank.
    Several of the contingents had grenadier battalions, which were elites
obtained in the same fashion as those in the French infantry. That is, they
replenished themselves from the line and did not directly introduce recruits
into their ranks.   Other military establishments also had elite light infantry
formations, like the French voltigeurs. However, several establishments main-
tained entire such battalions, whereas the French did not maintain them
above the company level, the so-called French voltigeur regiments of the
Young Guard notwithstanding.
   Some, such as the Saxons and Westphalians, had regimental artillery,
which Napoleon had reintroduced into the French army before the start of
the 1809 campaign. While the infantry battalions throughout the Grand
Army, French and foreign alike, generally numbered from about 650 to more
than 800 men, the complements of the foreign cavalry squadrons ran con-
siderably less than those of the French, normally from about 125 to 150
sabers each.
