84                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


of war   —   a fact that powerfully illustrated Napoleon's oft-quQted maxim that,
"In war, the moral relates to the physical as three to one."
     In 1799, during the War of the Second Coalition, Massena's republican
soldiers were rudely reminded of the Russians' apparent inability to under-
stand they were beaten before they had been physically knocked down.
Thinking they had the Russians bottled up in one of the Swiss canyons, the
French were severely shocked when, instead of laying down their arms, the
Russians closed ranks and with their heads bent low and bayonets leveled,
the walls of the canyon echoing their shouts of "urrah," they sent the French
republicans scrambling up the slopes to get out of their way.
     In the centuries past and, indeed, even in the present century, the
Russians may have lacked the tactical agility of their western adversaries,
but the latter have generally agreed that the Russians were as tough an
opponent as one could ever hope not to meet.
   The new Russian army that emerged from a backward medievalism oc-
casioned by some two centuries of Mongol domination was essentially the
creation of Peter the Great. The tireless reformer, better known to the west
for his   hands-on effort to become a shipwright and for the building of a
Russian fleet, began the reconstruction of the army long before his eyes
fastened upon the sea.
     No doubt, this Peter, as a young prince, set an example for Frederick
WiUiam of Prussia, who formed his grooms and servants at the royal Wus-
terhausen estate into a toy regiment. From this beginning sprang the Giant
Grenadier Battalion, which,        far   from being the foible an amused Europe
thought it to be, became the training school of the army. Peter had similarly
cut his teeth with such apparent child's play when he formed his Potjeshne.
What was tested in play went into the making of the two premier regiments
of the Russian army, the Preobrashensky and Semenovsky, named after the
towns in which they were garrisoned.
     In his attempts not only to reform but also to accelerate the pace of the
reforms, Peter reached beyond the borders of Prussia to find all the special
talents that were in short supply at home,       and this included soldiers. As a
result, a great    many itinerant officers   — and they were numerous      in those

days   —found ready employment      in Russia. Many among them were Germans,
who would soon predominate when they were joined by the numerous Baltic
Germans who would become national, if not ethnic, Russians. They were
to play an important role in the Russian army right up into our own century,
even while they continued to be a thorn in the eye of every proud ethnic
Russian aristocrat. This created a perpetual dichotomy within the Russian
army, pitting the ethnic Russians against the national Russians      —   foreigners,
who were mostly Germans. Interestingly, despite        all   the smoke, despite all
