76              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


     In addition to the French troops and the foreign troops^ in French pay,
the allied contingents provided 272 battalions and 262 squadrons, comprising
about 278,000 men.



                                 Replacements

The assembly of the foreign contingents had placed heavy burdens upon the
allied military establishments, leaving behind in most cases little more than
weak depots with untrained recruits. Thus, very few replacements could
follow the mobile units. The great majority of those from the allied contin-
gents who did were Poles. This was because of the Poles' belief that the war
was their war, and also because of their country's proximity to the operations
area,which made it possible for such a second effort to become effective.
Toward the end of the year, about 7500 replacements, mostly Bavarians and
Westphalians, did become available. But none got even as far as the Russian
border.
     Austria and Prussia were both capable of sending substantial replace-
ments, but neither was remotely inclined to do so unless pressed. However,
by the time the issue had become acute. Napoleon's scramble for sheer
survival had already begun.    The Austrians did eventually send 5 battalions
and 6 squadrons, totaling 5800 men, toward the end of October. These,
however, were merely intended to keep Schwarzenberg's corps up to strength
by replacing some of his formations, because the Austrians did not use march
battalions, which were intended to be broken up and distributed upon arrival.
They, too, never reached the area of operations.
    There were manpower reserves elsewhere as well, such as in Naples. But
these were so far from the scene of the action that they no longer mattered
once the Grand Army began its retreat.
    On the other hand, the 14,000 troops raised in Lithuania were formed
into 16 battalions and 22 squadrons. Except for five of the squadrons, which
were raised to become a third lancer regiment in the guards, and thus taken
into French pay,   all   these units were considered part of the Polish army.
But here, too, the time element was such that these troops had little military
value.




                                 SUMMARY
To recapitulate, the Grand Army marching into Russia, as well as all the
units organically assigned to   it   (including the reserves already mobile and
under way when the campaign started) totaled:
