80              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


had not only caused far too much fragmentation but also introduced a large
number of light calibers as well.
     In an effort to stiffen the firepower of the infantry, Napoleon had returned
to the old system of assigning gun sections directly to the regiments or,
rather, the brigades, even though the sections were known as the "regi-
mental" guns. These sections, however, required greater mobility, since they
were intended to operate up front, with the infantry, and thus their guns
had to be light enough to be manhandled whenever the situation demanded
it. Even though there was sufficient ordnance in the depots, there were not

enough artillery personnel, much less the necessary draft teams, available
to have both a regimental artillery and an undiminished field artillery. As
a result, many 6- and IZ-pound guns were left behind, while a great many
old 3- and 4'pounders, no longer considered standard, were dusted off and
pressed back into service.
     An excellent example of how this affected the weight of the artillery is
furnished by a status report of the artillery in the central army group (in-
cluding Vlll Corps) as of October 7.      It   reads as follows:


                     58 12 -pounders
                    264 6 -Pounders
                     32 4-pounders (with the Young Guard)
                    122 3-pounders (regimental guns)
                     10 6-inch, 4-line howitzers
                    119 6-inch, 6-line howitzers
                    605 field pieces


     On the plus side was the fact that all the artillery equipment was uni-
formly of Griebeauval design, which offered the well-known advantage of
maximum caliber at minimum weight. However, the French artillery still
had not introduced the crucial standardization of wheels, which had long
been a part of Liechtenstein's reforms of the Austrian artillery. This stan-
dardization made the wheels of all the artillery's gun carriages, limbers, and
caissons freely interchangeable. Instead, even the purpose-built French ve-
hicle park still included at least twenty different sizes and types of wheels
—  a severe handicap when the deeply rutted column roads in Lithuania
began to take their toll.



Finally, a summation of the Grand Army in national or ethnic terms indicates
that not half, as    is   commonly stated, but only about a third of the force
Napoleon took into Russia actually consisted of French troops:
