94               1812: NAPOLEON»S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


and topical, and how soldiers equipped with muzzle-loading, smoothbore
muskets might have operated on the firing line became a matter of purely
academic interest.
    Another part of the problem is the fact that elementary tactics continue
to be the eminent domain of the fighting soldier and the junior officer who
leads him in combat. In a game played out on the firing line, where friend
and foe are often separated by no more than a few hundred paces of no-
man's land, such soldiers share a front-row view in an arena where the truth
is made up of 99 percent empirical experience and where academicians tend

to show the theorist in his worst light. As a result, when the subject of
elementary tactics did come up for an airing in post-Napoleonic times,
academicians generally played the role of ideologues (e.g.. Gore Vidal) or
theorists (e,g., Siegfried Fiedler) who tended to intellectualize the practical.
This, in turn, gave rise to some amateurish notions that were rooted in a
general lack of knowledge about practical details, which also gave Schwarz
cause to complain in his massive work on eight centuries of infantry tactics.   ^




Some of these notions even found an echo in the works of military men
(e.g., Fiedler again) who ought to have known better.

     Thus, researchers must peel away layer after layer of apocrypha, even in
some original source materials, to arrive at a semblance of the elementary
tactics as seen and experienced on the Napoleonic battlefields. The diarists
generally jotted down their impressions in telegraphic style. They had neither
time nor room for belaboring the obvious. Thus, it is only on rare occasions
that a diarist includes a remark that might have a bearing on the subject.
    Most misleading can be the memoirs, often written years, even decades,
after the events described.   Here, the memories of old campaigners, colored
by the. passage of time, display a marked tendency to describe the actions
they had witnessed as they ought to have gone rather than as they actually
went. Skirmishing actions often become pitched firefights, giving the impres-
sion of deployed firing lines blazing away at each other at point-blank range.
General advances of the masses are usually described in phrases such as "The
battalion advanced against the enemy with leveled bayonets." Such state-
ments are factual enough in themselves, but they don't tell what happened
next. Thus, they generally leave the reader with the impression that the
advances culminated     in pitched    hand-to-hand combats, which, in      fact,

almost never took place. Even the memoirs of general officers generally yield
very little on the subject of elementary tactics. These were, after all, the
responsibility of the lower command echelons.
     This leaves the best, albeit rarest, of primary sources: the after-action
reports of company and field grade officers.    These no-nonsense narratives
are extremely difficult to find.   Most of the originals have been lost. A few
