                              The Russian Army                                91


strength of the army prior to mobiUzation amounted to no more than about
half of the 630,000 men shown for the active army by Shuravski. In this
fashion, the numbers cited by Shuravski may be reconciled with those shown
by Bogdanovich and others.




                                SUMMARY
All things considered, the Russian army of 1812 was a good one, enhanced
by its uniform national fabric and organizational structure. An important
advantage it enjoyed over its adversary was the matter of replacements, both
in relative and absolute terms. These went a long way toward redressing the
great imbalance of numbers that existed during the opening stages of the
campaign.
    Uneducated and of simple peasant stock, the Russian soldier had little
imagination that might run away with him in touchy situations. But he was
also brave, obedient, and frugal, and he was fighting on his own ground.
This explains why the army, despite the disheartening retreats and even
after the dreadful bloodletting of Borodino, never lost its poise or relinquished
its combat-readiness.   Therein reposes the reason for the success of the cam-
paign.   Even when sorely pushed, the army never fell apart.
   The mass of the Russian officers were regarded as being crude by their
western counterparts. With the exception of the guards officers, who came
from the high Russian aristocracy   — some of whose members found
                                                                also        their
way into the more distinguished cavalry      regiments — the majority of the
officers were relatively uneducated.   This alone explains why the foreigners
were not to be pushed aside, no matter what the personal feelings of the
ethnic Russians. As it did with the Poles, the absence of a broadly founded
middle class made it difficult for the Russian army to obtain an adequate
corps of noncommissioned officers.
    The cavalry was well founded and, if well led, could perform outstand-
ingly.At that time, the Cossacks were still entirely irregulars and were not
counted upon in a formal battle, but they were quite effective in the conduct
of guerrilla warfare. Despite the frequently disparaging remarks made about
them by many diarists of the time, they were highly efficient against foragers
and stragglers. More than anything else, they created among the retreating
enemy troops an aura of apprehension and even outright fear about becoming
isolated and caught. On balance, the Cossacks probably did more direct and
indirect damage to the Grand Army than did the regular Russian army.
Most of the bad press they received at the hands of numerous survivors of
the campaign (criticism that perpetuated itself in future writings) was the
