                              The Russian Army                              85

the cabals, these foreigners remained and continued to penetrate into the
highest ranks simply because they were better educated. In his introduction
to the reprint of Stein's History of the Russian Army,^ Ellfeldt,   one of the
best modem experts on the subject, points out that even in 1881, when
Germans constituted only 1.1 percent of the Russian population, they held
41 percent of the higher commands in the Russian army.
    Against this background of perpetual strife between the German-speaking
foreigners and ethnic Russians, the army's re-Prussianization under Tsar Paul,
who reigned from November 6, 1796 to March 11, 1801 (when he was
assassinated), has occupied the minds of many modem historians. Much of
what they have to say bears a tinge of the polemic. Thus, in the effort to
show some sort of cause-and-effect relationship, some historians have left
many of their readers uncertain as to whether the mental disturbances from
which Tsar Paul suffered were the result of his fascination with Frederick's
Prussian army or, conversely, whether it was his mental infirmity that caused
this fascination.
    Paul, however, did tum back the clock.     When he ascended the throne,
instead of appointing a commission to see to whatever reforms might be in
order, as had been done by his predecessors,   he threw himself into the task
personally.And his military instincts were certainly those of a "gaiter-
button" mentality: He was a martinet, very much given over to outward
appearances. (This streak, incidentally, remained alive in the Russian army
right into    modem times. Entire formations were matched by the soldiers'
height, their hair color, whether or not they wore mustaches, etc.) Paul's
reforms, however, were very much the result of his own perceptions. While
he temporarily changed the outward appearances of the Russian army, he
also initiated some accomplishments of a more lasting value.
   The Russian artillery was reformed into an integrated organization that
was ahead of its time. Another step forward came with the institution of
twelve inspections (or divisions), which bore the names of their garrison
districts.   Even though this arrangement,   like the initial   French division
system, was modeled on the Prussian inspection system established by Fred-
erick the Great, the Russians originally labeled them "divisions," then briefly
reverted to the term "inspections," and finally renamed them "divisions"
again, on the French model. As in France and Prussia, these divisions were
not of uniform composition and were entirely of an administrative nature.
That is, in the field the army still deployed in the fashion of the linear era.
    Under Alexander, who ascended the throne on March 11, 1801, the
army entered into a phase of constant expansion and changes, wrought to
a large degree in response to events taking place in the west. Even though
the storm clouds loomed ever larger on the horizon, Russia, by virtue of its
