                                                                                —
                                The New Ways of War                               99

made it possible to resist cavalry, and the musketeer no longer found it
necessary to put down his firearm and reach for his sword when entering
into close combat with other infantrymen.
        The interior ballistics of the smoothbore musket, however, were such
that individually aimed fire at distances greater than 100 paces was virtually
useless.     Since the ball was slightly smaller than the diameter of the bore, it
would flutter when propelled forward by the powder charge, bouncing in
random fashion against the inside of the barrel; the last contact before the
ball left the muzzle would determine the actual direction of its flight.      As a
result,      the shotgun effect of the volley was intended to achieve what indi-
vidual fire could not.
        At the same time, the process of loading and firing had improved to
such an extent that the musketeer formations were again flattened out
first    into four ranks and then three   —   to increase the frontage and make   it

possible to bring all the muskets to bear without the need of defiling through
the ranks. The shallow depth of these new linear formations demanded fast
loading if an adequate fire reserve was to be maintained. This was facilitated
by the new fashion of retaining so-called standing armies during peacetime;
these were populated by professional soldiers and could be subjected to
considerable amounts of drill.
        Even though the Prussian model of rapid-fire drill was to capture the
imagination of succeeding generations, and fast guns were considered the
acme of perfection, quick fire was not by any means the only difficulty facing
the military establishments of the era of linear tactics. Actually, there were
four problems:


        1.   Training the individual soldier to a high standard of proficiency with
             his musket

        2.   Designing the infrastructure of the battalion (now the basic tactical
             unit) for the purposes of both deployment and fire control

        3.   Finding the best means for moving these battalions,      now deployed
             in long, thin lines, forward in the face of enemy fire

        4.   Developing the best means of deploying an entire army into a linear
             battle order



        All this had been worked out fairly well by the turn of the eighteenth
century.       The common soldier was sufficiently proficient in the use of his
musket to deliver what was demanded of him. For the purposes of movement,
the battalion had been vertically divided into divisions, platoons, and even
