                            The New Ways of War                             95

can still be found in secondary sources, notably in regimental histories
published during the first half of the nineteenth century, but these works
are almost as rare as the original reports themselves.
    This, of course, raises the question of just how important elementary
tactics are within the larger framework of combat techniques.     The answer
to this is that they are nothing less than crucial. Many historians, especially
military   men, are of the opinion that when the reins started to slip from
Napoleon's hands, the problem began on the elementary tactical level, where
things failed to go as expected with increasing frequency.
    It   appears sheer heresy to say that even Napoleon, the great master of
the battlefield, did not exercise nearly as   much tactical control over his
battles as cultists and romantics would have us believe. The image of the
commander in chief, standing atop a hill in magnificent isolation, manip-
ulating the army at his feet like so many puppets on strings, is overwhelming.
But it is also largely a mirage. The commander in chief might set the tasks
for his corps and division commanders, but it was left to the brigadiers to
actually carry them out up front. They were the men who made the final
dispositions of their combat elements and who decided in precisely what
fashion a given objective was to be attained. And it was the success or
failure of their endeavors that would eventually ripple up the chain of com-
mand.
    The commanders, in their turn, could order measures to exploit, redress,
or counter, but the fate of their orders would also be determined by the men
up front. No matter how brilliant an operational or major tactical concept
was, it would achieve nothing if the attacker (or defender) failed to impose
his will upon the enemy on the firing line. Thus, it would probably be
accurate to say that while a commander in chief could win or lose campaigns,
his direct influence could not nearly so often win or lose battles.
    The commander in chief was responsible for the condition of the army,
         and state of training, its organization and its channels of command.
its morale

He could direct its movements, concentrate his forces in the right place at
the right time, institute strategic or operational moves, and determine how
many reserves to hold back and how to use them when the opportunity or
need presented itself. All of this was no mean task. But it could do no more
than give victory a better-than-even chance. After all was said and done,
it was up front, on the firing line, where success or failure was determined,

and it was there that chance played its strongest hand.
    In an attempt to avoid this inescapable element of chance, the era
preceding the French Revolution had sought to reduce war to a science, in
which everything could be calculated and predicted beforehand. It was
believed that maneuvering and the control of strategic lines of points would
