           *

                             The New Ways of War                             103


side of the battalion front,    which was to cue him. The situation became
altogether impossible under battlefield conditions. The fire of the battalion
guns, usually two in every interval between the battalions, as well as in-
coming fire from the other side,       raised a   cacophony that soon made a
shambles of the orderly firing sequence.
   This is what Berenhorst,^ a well-known Prussian critic of the Frederician
army, had in mind when he said, "Once or twice around, then it was every
man for himself. " And that is exactly what happened when the officers and
noncoms were being knocked out of action. The result was "battlefire!" A
dirty word in the Prussian dictionary, it meant firing at will.
    This, of course, didn't hurt firepower at all. The individual rate of fire
probably even increased, and the thousandfold rote of repetition probably
still caused every   man to continue taking his three long paces forward before
he leveled his musket to fire. That is, battlefire didn't even halt the forward
progress of the Prussian firing lines until the range became quite close. What
made battlefire a dirty word was that it spelled the loss of fire control; and
with this came the loss of tactical control.
    This was a problem even when the lieutenants were still around, con-
ducting the fight of their platoons. Even in the best of times, once the
lieutenants and their platoons had taken the bit,     it   was next to impossible
to get them to stop firing and make a bayonet attack. Instead of an orderly
chain of command, working from the top down, it generally became a matter
of fifty or more platoons, each fighting its own battle. This was the ''lieu-
tenants' battle."
    Frederick dealt with this problem by replacing the platoon fire with the
so-called general discharge, the battalion volley.    It   was much less compli-
cated and even the less well trained replacements could still manage three
volleys per minute. Most importantly, however, fire control had been taken
out of the lieutenants' hands and moved up to the battalion.
    Yet, for all this business of firepower, Frederick himself stated on several
occasions that the real task of the infantry was to close quickly and to push
the enemy from the ground on which he stood.          Once this was done, the
enemy's formation was broken and the rest would follow as a matter of
course. Frederick saw in firepower not so much a means of doing physical
                         —
damage to the enemy even though this could be real enough but rather—
a means of causing disruption, confusion, and disorganization and of easing
his own infantry's way in going the last 300 paces.
    Directly linked to firepower was yet another problem involved with the
linear order:   Once a firing line was engaged, there was little chance to
disengage it in orderly fashion. The lines were difficult to move forward and
even more difficult to move to the rear, even though old Field Marshal
