102              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


   Of course, these tall soldiers with their longer arm spans found it that
much easier to handle the muzzle-loading muskets, thus further accommo-
dating the demands for speed and more speed. Soon, they could fire three
times a minute on command. Indeed, during the years from 1745 to 1763,
when the Prussian army underwent the most rigorous and hard-nosed combat
training (devoid of all the baroque parade-ground artifice), properly trained
Prussian musketeers were expected to fire off six rounds a minute, firing at
    The best of them would even manage to get the seventh round rammed
will.

down the bore.
      Historians and even military men have frequently taken umbrage with
these claims, labeling them "exaggerations." Today, however, such claims
need no longer rely on contentions made a couple of centuries ago. There
are literally thousands of experienced modem muzzle-loader shooters, notably
in the American North South Skirmishers Association,                 who dismiss these
objections made by men ignorant of the workings of the muzzle loader. They
don't think that three rounds a minute on command               is    an exaggeration,
and many say that six rounds, firing at will, are entirely within reach.
      However, quick fire was not the only new wrinkle in the Prussian system.
It   was the new platoon fire that finally struck a balance between fire and
motion. That      is,   once the Prussian battalion was ordered to commence
firing,   the platoons stepped off at the "slow march," starting a steady se-
quence of forward movement that was interrupted only by the brief halt to
fire before starting up again.   (One may still observe such a slow march being
performed by the British Brigade of Foot Guards during the annual Queen's
Birthday Parade in London,        when the colors are trooped.) Divided into
eight platoons, the battalions front had the platoons fire off, starting from
both flanks inward in the rotation of 1-8-2-7-3-6-4-5 and then starting over
again with 1-8 until halted. The lieutenants in charge of the platoons would
see to it that they were always one command behind the platoon preceding
them in the rotation.
      Obviously, such a fire-control system required an extraordinary' amount
of drill.   Even though this platoon fire worked well on the parade ground
(to the consternation of visiting foreign militaries),   it   appears to have gone
well on the battlefield only during the battles of the First and Second, as
well as the opening stage of the Third, Silesian Wars.        It eventually fell   into
disfavor.
    There was another, even more telling reason why the Prussians practi-
cally abandoned platoon fire in all but the elite guard and grenadier for-
mations. It had frequently resulted in what has occasionally been called "the
lieutenants' battle." Platoon fire on the left and right made it problematic
for a lieutenant in charge of a platoon to listen for the platoon on the other
