                              The New Ways of War                             101

mations.    It   was notably the Prussians and the British who eventually es-
chewed fire by ranks and leaned, instead, in the direction of platoon fire.
That is, ultimately deployed in three ranks, the entire platoon would deliver
its salvo at once, alternating with the platoons to the left and right in

accordance with various schemes.
   The difficulty came when this fire, whatever the means of control, was
                                 A formation could hardly fire and move
to be brought forward offensively.
at the same time.     What was generally done was that after having fired once
or twice, the formation reloaded, took several steps forward, realigned, fired,
and then moved on again. In this fashion, one or both lines would gradually
grope their way forward until the range closed to the point where casualties
really began to mount and one side or the other decided that enough was
enough. The British, for example, had their platoons in the battalion front
grouped into "fires," that is, first, second, and third, with each consisting
of two or three platoons spaced across the front. Thus, whenever a "fire"
had delivered its volley, the battalion would advance, then halt for the
second fire, and so on.
    This was the general fashion in which all armies of the linear era fought.
However, there were a multitude of different firing systems (which have
gone unmentioned here) because the tacticians of that era sought to develop
a specific type for each and every tactical eventuality that might arise in an
action.
    It   was left to the "royal corporal," Frederick William I of Prussia, and
his drillmaster. Prince Leopold von Dessau, to recognize that the true po-
tential firepower of the fusil, still a new weapon, had not yet been achieved.
In finding a way to achieve that potential, these men also found the means
of elevating their state, which was then of a third-rate magnitude at best,
into the forefront of the European power game.
    Quality over quantity was the guiding principle of their reforms. Prussia
was a poor country. It could not hope to match the states around it musket
for musket.      Thus, the chase began.   Drill   saw to it that the Prussian mus-
keteers could shoot faster than their potential adversaries. In the interests
of this, the hickory ramrod, which broke too easily, was replaced with one
made of iron. An extra inch or so of barrel gave the Prussian musket greater
hitting power and an improved effective range. And while the rest of Europe
made the "royal corporal's" mania for tall soldiers and his giant Potsdam
Grenadiers as much the objects of hate and derision as the butts of jokes,
the front ranks of his musketeer battalions quietly filled with men who were
on average, between 5 feet 8 and 5 feet 10 inches tall. This was not a
common sight in European armies, where many men under 5 feet 5 inches
stood in the front.
