100                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


sections so that it might march in division, platoon, or section fronts. In
the proximity of the enemy, this was done with sufficient intervals so that
a front could be formed simply by having the subdivisions make a simul-
taneous left turn.
      An army deploying in this fashion was said to be executing a parallel
march. This had to be conducted at some distance from the enemy's front,
if the   enemy was already deployed; lest he disturb one's own deployment at
a critical time. Of course, the enemy had to be to the left of one's direction
of march. If circumstances placed him to the right, then the order of march
had to be inverted so that the right guide (he was the pivot and point of
dress upon whom every formation and every movement hinged) as well as
the first company would end up on the right, where they belonged, even
when a right turn was made. This was of great importance throughout the
era of formal mass tactics, because this was the way soldiers trained and it
was considered imperative that a soldier should stand in his accustomed
place, especially in combat. Thus, the order of battle was predetermined
even as an army assembled for a campaign, and that order was never lightly
disturbed afterward.
      If the   army was to deploy with a parallel march to the left or right, two
columns, one for each echelon, were sufficient. The cavalry, generally de-
ployed on the flanks, might form columns of its own.            march went
                                                               If the

against the center of the enemy's deployed line, then four infantry columns
were required. Once the heads of these columns, marching side by side,
reached the expected line of departure, the two on the left, marching in
inverted order, would turn left to form the left wing while the two on the
right,   marching in regular order, would form the right.
      This brief discussion has not explored all the options, but it should suffice
to explain how complicated and tricky the linear order was and how much
training was required to execute even the relatively simplest movements.




Up to this point, there was generally little difference between the way things
were done in one army and another. The exception was fire control: An
entire book could be devoted to the many ways that this was handled by
the French, British, Austrians, and Prussians. Without going into tedious
detail, the various methods of fire control might be summarized as follows:
    The battalion was divided vertically, as was done for the purposes of
marching and deploying, but it was also divided horizontally, that is, by
ranks. Thus, a constant rate of fire was obtained not only by having the
vertical subdivisions, that is, the divisions and platoons, alternate with each
other but also by alternating fire by ranks within any or all of these for-
