96                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


afford sufficient leverage to eliminate the need for direct confrontations in
battles that were as chancy as they were costly.
     Tolstoy carried these ideas to the extreme when he maintained that
battles revolve around the individual confrontations between thousands of
men, organized into hundreds of formations, commanded by dozens of gen-
erals.    He thought that battles are basically unintelligible to those who take
part in them because the individual's horizon is limited to what he can see,
which is but a fragment of the whole. Thus, he concluded, generals delude
themselves when they claim that they can control the uncontrollable and
predict the unpredictable, because the events are generated by so         many
disparate elements. This had the ring of the extreme to those in search of
theorems and maxims. But Tolstoy's remarks bear more than a grain of truth,
as any living soldier who has ever participated in a major battle will readily
attest.

     What was it, then, about the wars of republican and imperial France
that was     new? Certainly not the stratagems so dear to the theorists: the
operations on interior lines and across lines of communications, the flank-
ings, the     envelopments or breakthroughs, which are so often invoked by
historians in their attempts to get to the bottom of Napoleon's formula for
success.    Although these were an integral part of the emperor's military tool
kit and he demonstrated his ability to use every one of them time and again,

they were not by any stretch of the imagination something new.
     What was new, quite apart from Napoleon's natural and acquired talents,
was the infrastructure of the military machine bom of the revolution, which
made it possible for him to exploit these talents to their fullest extent.
During the years of Napoleon's ascendancy, the backbone of this infrastruc-
ture rested squarelyupon a concomitant system of elementary tactics for
which the opposition had no immediate answer.
     Before these elementary tactics can be properly evaluated, something
must first be known of the old approach so that the impact of the new may
be better understood.




            THE PROCESS OF TACTICAL EVOLUTION
Throughout military history, firepower and offensive power have stood in
an inverse relationship. From bow to musket, as the proportion of missile
weapons increased, the resultant combat forms became increasingly static.
Indeed, until the advent of modem technology, only the Asian horse archer
had ever succeeded in effectively combining firepower and movement. (The
