                                                                                 )

            *

                           The New Ways of War                                       97

devastating effect of this combination can be readily measured by the impact
of the Mongols when they came west during the thirteenth century.
    In ancient times, the Greeks and early Romans relied upon the speed
and boldness of their attack to carry cold steel to the enemy. During the
more advanced stages of their evolution, the Roman legions resorted to a
slower, more grinding mode of combat, obtaining missile support virtually
at the point of contact, when the rear ranks hurled their pila over the heads
of the front ranks. However, while the Greeks were able to run down the
static Persian foot archers with the speed and boldness of their attack, the

Romans, despite all their military successes, never developed an effective
answer to the mobile horse archer. The marriage between firepower and
mobility continued to remain the exclusive domain of the horse archer.
   In fifteenth-century Europe, the bold advance with bare steel again
reigned supreme.   The swift charge of the Swiss pike squares was all but
unstoppable, until the immobile artillery,   still   in   its   infancy, was able to
reach out far enough with shot of sufficient weight to inflict crippling losses
on the deep formations of pikemen before it was overrun.
    The English or Welsh foot archer, for all the potential destructiveness
of his longbow, could no more take the field unsupported by infantry than
could the artillery. His unquestionable firepower could only defend or support
the attack of others who were equipped for close combat.            Still,   the rate of
fire the archer could develop might have easily enabled         him to come forward
with an attack carried with bare steel, once an appropriate tactic was de-
veloped. However, as long as the bow remained a viable weapon, archers
were forever in short supply. Years of conditioning and practice were required
to produce an archer capable of making effective use of a heavy war bow.
   As a result, the course of tactical evolution was soon driven in another
direction. Firearms,   even though they were still quite primitive and un-
handy, offered a better alternative because a man could easily be taught to
use one effectively in no time at all. Before long, as the quality of firearms
and the methods of their construction improved, it was found that, unlike
the situation with the archers, money could buy as many arquebusiers
and musketeers as one could afford. Supply had found the means to meet
demand.
   At first, these new firearms were decidedly inferior to the bow, the early
matchlocks being cumbersome affairs. Fired by inserting a burning slow-
burning match into an open firing pan, they had to be handled with con-
siderable care lest the charge be set off accidentally. This made for a slow
rate of fire and left the musketeer virtually helpless during the comparatively
long time it took to reload his musket. Two rounds a minute was tops under
