98                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


ideal conditions.     A skilled archer could let six, eight, or even more shafts
fly   during the same time, and probably with greater accuracy at anything
above a hundred paces. Thus, it even the foot archer had forever stood in
grave danger of being run down by a determined attack, then the musketeer
was fair game indeed. His weapon was no more than an expensive club
between firings. These       intervals of danger could be    minimized onlv    if   a
formation of musketeers was divided into several groups that fired in rotation.
Ultimately, as the number of musketeers grew, they formed into companies
of 60 to 100 men, commonly ranked six to eight deep. Firing by alternating
ranks, about half were expected to be loaded and ready at all times, rep-
resenting the fire reser\'e, while the remainder either were firing or were at
various stages of reloading. This meant that tewer muskets were fired at any
given time, but it guaranteed an available tire reserve during moments of
crisis.    This arrangement, bv itselt, was not enough to keep the cavalry at
arm's length. For that,     it   was necessar\' to have the pikemen standing by in
case the modest firepower of the musketeers failed to turn back a cavalrv'
attack.
      It   the musketeers made anv offensive movement at all,     it   was slow and
                The complicated business of loading, firing, and defiling
easily disturbed.
through the ranks was cumbersome and worked best when the formations
remained in place. Intended for striking from a distance, the musketeer was
as yet imperfectly equipped to offer direct contact with the enemy,        whether
offensively or defensively. For that, the pikes were still needed; they could
not abandon their charges at any time.
      Thus, the pikes, still splendid offensive weapons, were tied to the mus-
kets,      whose numbers nevertheless grew rapidly as ever more tirepower was
sought.      With the static element of the intantr>- constantly proliferating in
this fashion, the history of the Thirty Years'      War already recorded ver\' few
instances of infantry actually entering into combat against other infantr\-.
As during medieval times, the footsoldier had virtually reverted to his role
of furnishing a breakwater against the cavalry.
      Toward the end of the seventeenth centur>', this situation changed dras-
tically with the confluence of improved firing mechanisms and prewrapped

paper cartridges, which speeded up the loading process. This made it possible
to reduce the      depth of the musketeer formations down to six or even five
ranks, since the quickened pace ot reloading demanded less of a fire reserve.
And it was the advent of the bayonet that finally consigned the pike to
oblivion. Thus equipped, the new musketeer formations were now on their
own. (They were actually armed with the new flintlock fusil, which quickly
acquired the cognomen of its heavier precursor. ) Thus, the early eighteenth
centur>' saw the intantr\' entering into an era of pure tire tactics. The bayonet
