104                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Lehwald made a textbook demonstration of such a difficult tactical maneuver
against the Russians at Gross Jaegersdorf (on July 30, 1757). This is why the
predetermined point and direction of attack were so important in linear
tactics   — and    totally unlike the      Napoleonic style, which would generally
open on a probing note to determine where the center of gravity might
develop to greatest advantage. In the linear battle, the all-out attack came
right up front in head-through-the-wall fashion, Like a bullet fired from a
gun, there was          little   chance to alter the line's thrust, once   it   had been
committed.
       The second line in the linear battle order was not a reserve in the modem
sense.    It   was generally composed of second-string regiments and more of a
fire   reserve than a tactical reserve, even though Frederick might have used
his well-drilled battalions in the latter fashion. He had shifted the emphasis,
however, from fire control to rapid deployment, and he had trained his army
to do this in the direction of its march.
       Actually, the latter-day French assault column, formed on the center,
was a microcosm of what Frederick might do with an entire army. Thus,
with the proper arrangement of his columns, they could head straight for
the enemy line, fanning out from the center (or from one flank, in the
manner of the latter-day column of divisions).
    Characteristically, these new wrinkles in Frederick's bag of tricks were
an addition       to,   rather than a replacement for, the old ways. Thus, his
celebrated victory at Leuthen with the so-called oblique order was entirely
a result of local circumstances. Beginning with             an old-fashioned parallel
march, which set up a frontal attack in echelon, that is, with each battalion
stepping off 50 paces after the one to its right, it became an oblique attack
only after each of the battalions made a slight wheeling movement to its
left   in the course of its advance.         With the lever thus applied to the left
wing of the Austrian battle array,            a stunning victory   was gained over an
opponent at least twice as strong.
       All of this, of course, has a deceptively simple ring to it, but any officer
who has ever maneuvered masses of men, even on the comparatively be-
nevolent confines of a parade ground, will appreciate the amount of drill
and coordination that had to go into pulling off such maneuvers, and then
over uneven terrain and under fire! (The plains that the linear battle is said
to have sought were not exactly parade grounds.) Ideally,              all this   was to
happen so fast that even if the enemy finally saw it coming, he would have
little chance to react effectively.

     The grand success at Leuthen was to implant itself firmly into the minds
of future generations of Prussian officers. It reached a point where both the
