                                The New Ways of War                         107

     Lynn, in his work on the motivation and tactics in the army of revo-
lutionary France,      1791-1794/ compiled an outstanding list of references
citing examples of the use of the line in combat. They are gleaned from, the
French War Archives and other official sources, as well as some memoirs
of participants. His listing documents the use of the line on no fewer than
fifty 'five   occasions.   Of these, however, only seven instances point toward
an offensive use of the line, and two of these are doubtful or confusing.
Moreover, these examples largely represent a record of tactical failure rather
than of success. The remaining instances indicate the use of deployed lines
on defense (thirteen examples), on defense in retreat (seven examples), on
defense during the passage of defiles (two examples), as a waiting or prelim-
inary formation (seventeen examples), in support of light infantry (six ex-
amples), and, finally, as receiving or covering positions on the march (three
examples).
     Even the great confrontations with the Prussians at Jena and Auerstaedt
in 1806 yield very few mentions of an offensive use of the line by the French.
Often-cited examples are those of the 105th French Line and 16th Light
Regiment at Jena, as well as the 111th Line at Auerstaedt. But the general
narratives give a somewhat different picture. They usually speak of the
advance of the columns as soon as the combined effect of the tirailleur
(skirmishing) fire and the French artillery caused the Prussian lines to waver.
This, too, points toward the static and defensive, rather than offensive, use
of deployed battalions. But then again, the harassing effect of the well-
planned and well-executed skirmishing actions, the smoke screen they laid
down, and the effective use of a strong artillery obviated the offensive use
of the line until the constant decline of the training standards of the infantry
gradually caused it to fall into disuse.    As the rank and file eventually lost
the knack of deploying and advancing under fire, there was also a decrease
in the    number of officers who had experienced the handling of deployed
battalions in training or on the battlefield. If the echelon attack had become
the panacea for all occasions in the minds of the Prussians, then the column
soon became the pervasive cure-all for the French.
     Certainly, the new tactics took the battles out of the plains, which the
linear order had sought, and put them into more richly structured terrain.
With equal certainty, this brought on a correspondingly rich variety of
combat situations. But was Oman, the noted British military historian and
chronicler of Wellington's peninsular campaigns, really as far off the mark
about the French penchant for column attacks as Elting,^ one of the best
American connoisseurs of the Napoleonic armies, believes? And did General
Bugeaud's often-cited description of how such a column attack would ma-
terialize represent an isolated incident or a general modus operandi? These
