                              The New Ways of War                             109


               RUNNING: A TACTICAL PROBLEM
Throughout the era of formal mass tactics, running had no place in the
military dictionary unless it described something the enemy was doing when
trying to get away. The need to maintain order in the ranks was so over-
powering that even deployments from column into line or from the line
back into column were conducted at a walk, lest formation be lost. Only
the skirmisher, operating out of ranks, was allowed to adjust his movements
to the needs of the situation.
    But the self-preservation instinct provided, and always will provide, a
powerful incentive to run from danger. Nobody, including the soldier,          is

immune to this. And it is on this issue that the ideals consistently faced
the most determined assaults of reality.
    In the military, discipline and peer pressure have always provided pow-
erful tools for steeling the soldier's resolve to stick it out.   These, however,
were not by any means sufficient in themselves, unless backed by combat
forms and the rote of their practice, which aim to equip the fighting man
with methods designed to minimize the dangers of combat and reinforce his
self-confidence. For this reason, definitions of tactics   — and they have been
numerous   —   generally stress two objectives: (1) practicing combat forms that
provide for the maximum use of one's own arsenal and (2) protecting the
soldier as much as possible against the impressions of combat, that is min-
imizing the effects of the enemy's efforts. In an offensive situation, these
ideas appear contradictory, almost to the point of mutual exclusion. Still,
throughout history, every military establishment employing a rationalized
system of combat has sought to come to grips with this contradiction, each
in its own fashion.
    In modem times, we see the rifleman attempting to cross open ground
under fire, either by creeping along on his belly, making use of whatever
low cover may be available, or by dashing from one cover to the next,
pursuing an erratic course. Such elementary techniques offer the rifleman a
temporary haven of relative safety and enable him to recharge his psychic
batteries, to steel himself for the moment when he might again break cover
to make his next move under extreme mental stress.
    This is indeed elementary. Everyone knows that a small target is more
difficult to hit   than a large one and that a stationary target is easier to hit
than a moving one. Only a fool would stand up and amble across open
ground under fire. Yet this is precisely what the military establishments of
the eighteenth century expected their infantry to do in order to accommodate
the requirements of linear tactics. That      is,   the infantry was expected to
