110              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


literally waltz downrange at an ambling cadence of about 45 paces per minute

as,   densely ranked and elbow to elbow, they went up against the enemy's
deployed firing lines.
      Although the mass conscriptions of the Napoleonic era made the re-
placement of a good musket a more difficult proposition than finding a warm
body to carry it, the linear era tended to husband its human resources more
carefully. This may again sound contradictory. But the eighteenth century
saw no way out of the dilemma posed by linear tactics, which was extremely
wasteful of the carefully trained      manpower the system demanded. Even
though defense was better than offense, if the attacker meant to move forward
and carry the fight to the enemy, then he had to accept the cost. And,
whether attack or defense, the linear battle was so costly that eventually it
was thought better to achieve success without having any battles at all. But
that was a theory that never achieved any lasting results. Still, the idea had
its adherents. Even Frederick the Great endured constant criticism from his

younger brother. Prince Henry, a master strategist himself, who accused him
of "battling, battling, constantly battling!"
      Obviously, defense was the stronger form of combat, and he who could
stand and await another's attack held the high card.       It   requires   no great
military expertise to realize that a firing line which remained in place could
throw more lead than one which was trying to combine its fire with move-
ment. Thus, despite all the improved methods for fire control, in the end
it   always came down to the same thing: At some point, the attacker had to
face the music. And he had to do it standing or walking upright, in effective
range, because there was no way in which a musket could be properly loaded
by a kneeling man, much less by one lying on the ground. Russian roulette
offered far better odds, as may readily be calculated from the battle casualties
linear armies were forced to accept over and over.
      The interior ballistics of the smoothbore musket caused the ball to pursue
an erratic course, so individually aimed fire was considered useless and the
shotgun effect of the volley was relied upon. This meant that the men had
to stand together, elbow to elbow, three ranks deep at least, to accommodate
both firepower and fire reserve. If they were to do this effectively, there had
to be order in the ranks. The military, in effect, attempted to turn ordinary
men into duelists without extending to them the social status and morale
that fortified the sense of honor of the aristocrats, who engaged in such
practices. Instead,   it   was thought that discipline, dressage, and more dis-
cipline were the only viable means of instilling in the ordinary man some-
thing that ran totally contrary to his instinct for self-preservation. In an era
in which the common man was the object rather than the partner of his
government and in which the army was the king's rather than the nation's,
