                             The New Ways of War                                 113

event was over until the next effort, by other brigades, by other divisions,
was made. It would not be on that day, because the sun was setting. All
the while, artillery, well handled on both sides, offensively and defensively,
played the part of the great spoiler. For the masses,    life    in the small-arms

fire   zone was short, and this must be understood if the tactical imagery of
the era dominated by the muzzle-loading musket is to make sense.
    Ever since the Seven Years' War, the Austrians had increasingly relied
on the battalion guns (placed in the intervals of the infantry battalions) to
lend an ever more effective hand. Attacking infantry had no answer against
grape and canister at 300 paces, unless it could bring its own guns along to
take on the enemy's gunners. Thus, if the Austrian gunners '*stuck to their
guns," as they did at Kolin and Prague, the oncoming infantry lines had
little   chance of driving home their assaults. However,        if   the gunners lost
their nerve, as they did on other occasions, then the Austrian infantry had
equally little chance to cope with Prussian musketry.
       Even when things went well, the sternest discipline and quick fire could
do no more than delay the inevitable point of dissolution for perhaps another
minute or two. These, of course, could be crucial and enough to turn a
bloody mess into a success. However, during the linear era, which sought
to deliver its Sunday punch up front, it was the elite, the best men, who
were the first to bleed white (whereas Napoleonic warfare tended to save
them for last). They might succeed by the boldness and resolution of their
attacks, but when that wasn't enough, they would tend to hang in just long
enough in moments of crisis to suffer crippling losses.
    This brought on a decline in the quality of the Prussian infantry similar
to what the Napoleonic armies would experience later, except that in Fred-
erick's time it came much faster because of the more limited human resources

involved. On the other hand, this decline was compensated for by the
meteoric rise of the Prussian cavalry in the hands of brilliant training masters
such as Zieten and Seydlitz, and this occurred at a time when the fusil had
already made the traditional cavalry charge problematic, to say the least.
Napoleon was not to benefit from such a phenomenon. He lacked both the
raw materials and the cavalry commanders to make it happen on a sufficiently
broad scale. As a result, when his infantry went on a downward spiral, the
cavalry preceded it at an even faster rate.
       Thus, the linear era perceived the peak of its perfection in the ability
to bring deployed firing lines forward into the small-arms fire zone in perfect
order and in total response to command. That was the ideal, but it was only
rarely achieved. Of course, this was to be accomplished at the stately cadence
of about 45 short paces per minute, which was deemed best for bringing the
lines forward in    good order. This caused Bleckwenn'^ to characterize these
