                             The New Ways of War                               105

oblique and the echelon attacks came to be regarded as a panacea that would
                       Old Fritz himself had never quite seen it that way.
serve for all occasions.
    From the foregoing, it becomes self-evident that the column, which was
to dominate the next stage of tactical evolution, was not by any means
something new. Everyone used it during the linear era. In a tactical sense,
however, it was regarded as nothing more than a means of moving troops
and deploying them into the linear order.
    Still, many people who were theoretically and practically engaged in

matters of warfare, including men such as the Mareshal de Saxe and Folard,
had long pondered the use of the column as an offensive weapon. They
envisioned bringing it forward into the small-arms fire zone in the manner
of a battering ram to pierce the thin firing lines. Frederick himself was aware
of this. The very sight of these thin lines begged for such an offensive.
   However, the column lacked the firepower needed to go up against a
deployed firing line, and Frederick's own experiences with attempts to bring
his infantry forward without musketry certainly caused him to shy away from
such methods. Also, some historians think they see an example of Folard's
grande colonne in the primary sources describing the attempted French ad-
vance at Rossbach. This, too, must have set a bad example for the Prussian
king.
    Be this as it may, the time for the offensive use of the column had not
yet come.   When its time did finally arrive, the tactic was employed far more
as a child of necessity than as a product of planned evolution. As the human
resources changed, so the face of battle had to alter its appearance.




                        IDEALS AND REALITIES
Although the foregoing touched mainly on the technical aspects of linear
tactics, some of the problems attending linear combat methods have been

raised. They were seldom discussed because they did not conform to the

ideals.   Theoreticians, in quest of theorems, frequently intellectualizcd the
ideals and were prone to eschew the realities because they generally tended
to complicate matters.      Thus, Berenhorst's remarks about battlefire, even
though they were admittedly overcritical   — and notwithstanding the      fact that
other militaires as well, admitted that platoon fire inevitably degenerated
into battlefire   — were not happily received by many.   In this, the theoreticians
were reinforced by the contemporary military publications, which were gen-
erally reticent    on the subject; if they mentioned it at all, it was only in
passing remarks because the subject was considered an aberration. Official
