108              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


are crucial questions that are not easily answered out of hand but must be
approached one step at a time.
      In the end, the great confrontations, the battles, always came down to
the same old question:     How well did the attacker get through the small-
arms fire zone? Even today, the "last 300 meters" is a concept that looms
large in the rifleman's world, despite the fact that it lies deeply buried beneath
the counts of the tanks, guns, aircraft, and other hardware that are so dear
to the modem military analysts because they make good copy. Major English,
in his work on infantry,^ observes that while there     is   copious literature on
the supporting combat arms and their nuts and bolts, next to nothing is to
be found on the infantry. Thus, the surfacing of a term such as the "last
300 meters" must have come as an all-but-forgotten reminder to military
readers, except, of course, former riflemen.
      The last 300 meters roughly describes the zone in which the other
rifleman's fire becomes effective, the area where combat indeed becomes a
personal matter between men. Every soldier who survived the ordeal of
coming out of the trenches in 1916 to charge into no-man's land knew
exactly what that zone was. And all the supporting weaponry that has been
developed since then can ultimately be said to have been designed for one
purpose: to ease the rifleman's way in going the last 300 meters.
      During the eighteenth century, the small-arms fire zone was generally
regarded as covering about 250 to 300 paces. This was the maximum range
at which the musket was thought to be effective.      That is, with the musket
barrel leveled horizontally, the ball would strike the ground at a distance of
about 200 to 250 paces when fired with a normal powder charge. Of course,
a musket ball would carry much farther than that. If the ground was hard,
the ball v/ould bounce or ricochet and, in two or three bounds, reach about
400 to 500 paces. If the musket was aimed high, the ball, flying in an arc,
could reach a distance of 1000 paces or even more. The practical effects at
such distances were considered questionable    — and rightfully so. The modern
assault rifle can also shoot a great deal farther than 300 meters, but at that
range, a man makes a small target. Even a firing line appears to be composed
of dwarfs.
      What is nevertheless surprising is that the small-arms zone has not changed
all that much over the past two centuries. Certainly, the difference between
300 paces and 300 meters bears no relationship whatever to the comparative
quantum leap from the smoothbore musket to the modem rifle. However,
even though time has not appreciably changed the depth of the small-arms
fire zone, the conditions under which the infantry was expected to cross it

have altered drastically.
