                                The New Ways of War                               111


one could hardly rely on lofty emotions to fortify the soldier's response. This
was especially so in times that still saw substantial numbers of itinerant
adventurers in the ranks of all the armies.
    Thus, the draconic discipline that characterized the linear era (not by
any means in Prussia alone) was deliberately designed to make taking on
one's own establishment a more difficult and dangerous proposition than
facing the enemy. The individual accounted for nothing. Frederick himself
gave voice to this when he said, 'That I should live is not important, but
that I should serve is!" Thus,     if the   militaires of the old regimes thought a
well' trained musketeer was important and worthy of preservation, this was
so because he represented a valuable property and a considerable investment
in time and money, not because of humane considerations.
    As a result, the ideals of the time saw armies of peasant soldiers (mostly
farmhands, stableboys, grooms, etc.         —   certainly not propertied landowners)
in the ranks, commanded by the younger sons of the aristocracy, who would
not inherit and thus largely saw in military service the last justification for
their estate. Thus,    the rank and   composed of men who had been
                                        file,

accustomed to obeying orders from the time they were old enough to un-
derstand them, was commanded by men who had been just as accustomed
to giving them. This practice, according to Vagts,^ prevailed in the British
army right into modem times.
   For all that, moving forward the thin firing lines of the linear era re-
mained a serious problem. Once the range shortened to anything under 250
paces, that is, when the troops entered the small-arms fire zone, life became
precarious.    The difficulties of maintaining order in the ranks and keeping
the men from breaking into a trot     — whether       forward, to get it over with in
a hurry, or to the rear, to get     out — increased with every      step.   Sooner or
later,   these difficulties became overwhelming.
    As a result, life in the small-arms fire zone was short, even during the
best of times. Once the masses came forward, it was only a matter of 2, 3,
or 4 minutes, before the decision came. By then, either the attacker had
gained the ascendancy,     if   he was still coming on, or he knew it was time
to get out and let the other fellows have a go at it, if the defender still held
his ground. This is a point generally lost in the narratives of battles, especially
during the Napoleonic era (in which these problems continued to remain
operative). During that period, the sustained action of skirmishers, fighting
dispersed and from cover, and the advance of the masses are generally melded
together, giving rise to totally false images.
    Once the masses came into the effective range of massed musketry,
casualties    mounted at an explosive rate, as was witnessed over and over
again during the linear era.     If the false    image of a sustained firefight under
