106                   1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


after-action reports deliberately suppressed any mention of it.           The bottom
line of all this, of course,       is   that there was a great deal more battlefire in
Frederician battles than is commonly admitted.
      This is neither new nor unusual. Homer is held to have tampered with
the primary source material available to him (but lost to posterity) to bring
it   into line with his own notions of what was, to him, the classical age.
Archaeological findings fail to support him on many details. Historians, too,
have not always paid attention to what was actually set down by the original
chroniclers; they often saw not what was actually said but what they only
thought was said. (For example, the questions raised by some modem his-
torians about Isokrates' account of the Battle of Dipaea (in Archidamus) are
themselves open to question.)^ Thus, the detailed study of every era of
military history is beset by its own problems, some of them already contained
in the original source materials, others created by posterity.

      In more modem times, the great Frederick himself threw up some smoke
screens when he admonished his infantry to "move in quickly on the enemy,
put a volley into his ribs at twenty paces and charge home with the bayonet."
Call it wishful thinking, an ideal, or whatever         — never
                                                           it      quite came to pass
that way.         When he did give way to this idea and ordered the infantry- to
drive      its   attack home at the quick march, without bothering to fire, the
attempt caused some of his best soldiers to be literally blown away by the
platoons. Ideals and realities never got on well together.
      Even the Napoleonic era was rife with false images and idealistic con-
ceptions. This was despite the widespread literacy among combatants of all
ranks,   which resulted in a plethora of personal narratives (notably absent
in earlier times). Nowhere is this more evident than in the arguments raised

over the relative merits of the column and the line. There can be no question
whatever that even during the peak of the Napoleonic era, the line never
lost its place in the scheme of things.

    The only way the infantry could maximize its firepower was by deploying
into line. At the same time, it was self-evident that anything done to shorten
the front of the infantr>' battalion in the interests of increased maneuver-
ability was done at the expense of its inherent firepower. An effort was made

to compensate for this by using skirmishers and by resorting to the mixed
order, that is, by deploying a mixture of columns and lines into the front,
thereby retaining the advantages of both.
      It   is,   however, on the issue of how the battalions deployed into line
came into action, that the imagery of the ideal persistently cuts across the
realities.       Thus, the ordre mixte is a fact of life, but it is difficult to find a
narrative from the opponents of either the republican or Imperial armies
that speaks of the advance of deployed French firing lines.
