112              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


such circumstances were pursued to a logical conclusion, then two deployed
firing lines would have quickly reduced each other to thin skirmishing lines,

while a column attempting to face a line would have ensured its own de-
struction.
      The issue of how strong defensive musketry might have been remains
generally distorted by the layman's vision of the muzzle-loading musket's
technical limitations.   To modem man, long accustomed to repeating and
automatic firearms, one, two, or even three rounds per minute is nothing
to write   home about. However, once one comes to grips with the idea of
500 or 600 men, packed into a front of about 200 paces, able to throw
anywhere from 1000 to 2000 rounds per minute, then the image alters
drastically, even in the eyes of a modem soldier. This approaches the cyclic

rate of modem machine guns and exceeds the effective rate of most.
    As to the relative accuracy of two such disparate instruments as the
musketeer battalion and the machine gun, surely many veterans can recall
seeing the effect of a burst from a modern machine gun sprayed all over the
side of a bam. Only in the movies do these guns stitch the rounds as neatly
as a sewing machine.
      But this relates only to the effects of a single deployed musketeer bat-
talion.One Austrian officer likened the Prussian musketry at Mollwitz (in
1741) to an unceasing thunder. Von Angeli, a noted Austrian historian,
presents an even more graphic eyewitness account in his description of the
action around Baumersdorf (July       5,   1809), a focal point of the Battle of
Wagram. His narrative states: "One exchanged musketry at very close range.
The enormous din, as wave upon wave of musketry constantly erupted, and
the even greater iron rattle of lOyOOO muskets (ramrods) being worked in
such close proximity,    is   completely beyond the imagination. Everything,
even the thunder of the numerous cannon, seemed insignificant amid the
raging storm of the so-called smallarms."^ Elsewhere, an Austrian regimental
padre stated that a battery standing on the flank of his regiment could not
even be heard during the climax of the small-arms fire storm.
    It was over in minutes. Even though Napoleon had made haste in pre-

paring for the assault to exploit an apparent weakness in the Austrian line,
to the accompaniment of the skirmishers and artillery of both sides it had
taken more than an hour. But the assault by the masses, once it came, was
over in no time at all. Assault columns came in, faltered, and fell back,
even as others coming up renewed the attack, only to be beaten off as well.
Still other columns never even got up to the last 300 paces. The attempts

of some to deploy into line under fire turned into a shambles.
     Skirmishers, grimly hanging on, covering the withdrawal of the shattered
columns, prolonged the action, or at least the impression of it. But the main
