114             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


affairs as "ballets   accompanied by fireworks." His obvious^ sarcasm is lost
only on those who fail to realize how deadly the linear battles were for the
infantry,   who sweated under powdered wigs, pipe clay, and uniforms that
were as uncomfortable as they were spectacular.
      The next era, rocked by great political upheavals, was to find new
solutions to old military problems, even if it was not able to entirely divest
itself of the old.




              FROM HORDE TO COLUMN TACTICS
When the revolution erupted in France, the French royal army was de-
molished from within almost as effectively as the political institutions of the
old order. Not only did it lose the vast majority of its officers in the wake
of the terror, but even the rank and file walked away from the colors in
large   numbers. By the time the eyes of the republican government once
again looked upon the army as a means of national defense, rather than as
one of the objects of the revolution, the army had become but a shadow of
its former existence. However, even then, it continued to be viewed with

suspicion. Rather than bringing it back up to strength, the decree of January
28, 1791, ordered the formation of the National Volunteer Battalions.
      Unlike the old regular regiments, who still wore the Bourbon white,
these new volunteer battalions were to be dressed in blue coats, so that no
true republican      would find it difficult to tell them apart. Eventually, the
new "blue" battalions were integrated into the line in the course of the first
reorganization at the planned ratio of one white and two blue battalions per
regiment. These, however, were known as demi- or half-brigades; the very
term "regiment" had become reactionary. By then, the old "white" army
had been allowed to disintegrate to such an extent that it was no longer
possible to give each of the new half-brigades one of the remaining white
battalions.
    The great depletion of the old (white) regiments, quite apart from the
effects of the revolution itself, had been further exacerbated when many of
the rank and file who had remained eventually decided to escape the more
rigid disciplinary standards still prevailing in the old    white battalions by
transferring to the volunteers.    Not only was life there more pleasant, but
promotions also came quickly to anyone who could boast of some previous
military experience.
      Of course, constant efforts were made to bring the new volunteer bat-
talions into some sort of order. Like all else, they encompassed both a good
and a bad side. On the one hand, the first call for volunteers had brought
