116              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


screen laid down by the skirmishers. The advance could capitaUze on what-
ever confusion the most forward elements might have caused in the enemy
line.   Unfortunately, more often than not, an extended firefight would grad-
ually suck in the columns of the second line, with or without the consent
of their commanders     — an unthinkable   state of affairs in an army of old-style
regulars. Eventually,    dense swarms (or hordes) would feel emboldened to
make a run at the enemy's deployed lines. But there, the neophytes of the
new order would run up against a line drawn by the fire discipline of the
old order. Crossing this line was not easy    — not then, not    later.

      Even General Bugeaud's often-recited description of a French column
attack in Spain continues to bear testimony to this reality. There, Wellington
unpacked an old method of dealing with frontal assaults (the Austrians had
already done this successfully against the Prussians), and the real surprise is
that the French obliged him so often, even if they did not always do so. At
the same time. Napoleon himself was to learn at Wagram in 1809 that
frontal assaults against deployed firing lines were adventures fraught with
frustration.
      At this point, it is appropriate to ask what the difference was between
a   column attack and a horde attack.      Who cared, as long as both came
forward with equal resolution? But here again, the same forces were at work
as those that had already caused the Prussians to frown at battlefire.     A unit
in orderly formation was still an instrument in the hands of its officers and
noncoms. That is, the officers on the flanks and the noncoms in the closing
rank of each successive company in the battalion column would take notice
at once if a man hung back or attempted to leave the ranks. However, once
the column took the bit and the trotting began, the first thing to fall apart
was the formation. Ranks became intermingled; oversight and control were
lost.   This, in its turn, brought other things into play.
      Not every man was a natural-bom hero; not every individual was equally
psyched (or pumped) up for the occasion. Thus, some would hang back as
soon as the opportunity presented itself. However, even all those who were
psychologically up to the occasion were not made of the same stuff.         A 25-
pound pack jumping around on a trotting man's back, a 10-pound ammu-
nition pouch and attached paraphernalia bouncing on his right hip, a hanger
(short sword) on his left hip, and a 10-pound musket in his hands would
cause the breath of many a soldier to run short after only about 50 paces.
If the   run went to 100 or more paces, especially over uneven ground or,
worse yet, up an incline, things began to get serious. Thus, even those who
were still bravely going forward were being spread apart, if for no other
reason than the fact that some were stronger, fitter, and better runners than
