                                                                            —
118                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


fusion as well as casualties. During the wars of the republic, this system
worked reasonably well, but not well enough to cause the opponents of the
young republic to have any serious doubts about their own military capacities.
     However, once the flaws were worked out of the modus operandi of the
old republican armies during the encampments along the English Channel,
the world was in for a stunning surprise. The French had learned to maximize
the combination ot the masses with the preparatory action of the skirmishers,
even as the artillery came into action with powerful batteries to take a direct
hand as well.
    Since the Seven Years' War, the artillery had played an ever more
decisive role and the battalion guns, firing canister at ranges under 600
paces, did more damage than the musketry, unless the attacker brought his
own guns along. By that time, the Austrians had developed the tactic of
awaiting the Prussian attacks on high ground; half a century later, Wellington
employed the same tactic against the French in the Peninsula. Ascending
even the gentlest of slopes turned the manhandled battalion guns into dead-
weight, so the Prussian infantry generally ended up going it alone over the
last several hundred paces.

     By Napoleonic times, much of the preparatory artillery fire was being
handled by what used to be the position artillery; the French were deploying
ever stronger batteries, because neither the skirmishers nor the columns had
any real firepower of their own. Even though other reasons have been cited
for their abandonment of the battalion guns in favor of deploying batteries
(not the least of which was that artillery was better handled by artillerymen
than by infantry officers), the French now customarily sent their battalions
to operate in terrain that    made taking the guns along highly problematic
anyway.
      Still,   a defensive line holding the high ground continued to present
problems even for the new artillery formations because it was never easy to
unlimber the guns on a slope to give close support to infantry going uphill.
The last noteworthy example underlining this difficulty occurred when Na-
poleon's guards attacked Wellington's center at Waterloo in 1815.
      It   has become conventional to say that Napoleon reintroduced the bat-
talion guns (now called the regimental artillery) in 1809 because the infantry
had lost its firepower. But that explanation does not really address the heart
of the problem. It appears more realistic to say that the Napoleonic infantry,
even the celebrated Grand Army of 1805, never had any real firepower
at least, not in terms of what the linear era understood firepower to be.

Thus, some thought should be given to the idea that the Austerlitz campaign
of 1805 and the Prussian war of 1806-1807, which had placed the reins
