122              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


opposed to the deployment march, which was done at about 100 cadence,
or the advancing pace of the old linear order, which was done at around
45. Sometime during the first decade of the nineteenth century, the quick
march, at about 109 paces, came into use in Prussia and elsewhere. This
comes close to the modem 114 cadence as practiced in the U.S. Army
today.
      The final phase of the tactical infrastructure of the battalion came in
1808, when the effectiveness of the French army was already beginning to
pass its peak.   At that time, the battalions were organized into four fusilier
companies, each nearly twice the size of the old companies, with the elite
companies (grenadiers and voltigeurs)      similarly enlarged.   This released a
large number of company officers and noncoms for new formations and gave
formal expression to the idea that no more than a third of the battalion
should normally be dissolved for skirmishing actions. This, of course, rep-
resented the norm; right up to the end, the French infantry exhibited a
remarkable flexibility on the use of the skirmishers.
      The 1808 reorganization also spelled the end for the specialized nature
of the light infantry regiments, which had been dispersed throughout the
infantry divisions to provide the bulk of light infantry duties (i.e., anything
not associated with service in the battle line, which, of course, included
skirmishing). Although they continued to maintain their light infantry tra-
ditions, these regiments were not singled out for special replacements.
      Thus, the infantry battalion became a self-contained tactical entity,
capable of conducting all forms of infantry combat with its own resources.
This was the theory. In practice, the considerable tactical skills and initiative
displayed by the French infantry and its lower command echelons, as long
as their standards remained up to par,    permitted an infinite variety on the
basic    themes to fit any imaginable situation. Incessant campaigning and
repeated expansions, however, diluted the substance and gave rise to in-
creasingly uneven performances.
      Further impairing the effects of the French skirmishers from 1808 onward
was the fact that their opponents were beginning to deploy skirmishers of
their    own, with the results already mentioned earlier.     Still,   the French
continued to maintain an edge mainly because they tended to deploy their
skirmishers quicker and in greater numbers than did their opponents.
      At the same time, the idea of a standard infantry, capable of all forms
of combat, was making progress, particularly in the Prussian army, where
the skirmishers, instead of forming separate units, stood in the third rank
throughout all the companies in the battalion. In this way, the rank and
file was in  more or less constant elbow contact with the elites, whose presence
set the    example for the rest. This arrangement also helped prevent the
