124              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


behemoth was not largely occasioned by the difficulties encountered in
bringing the deployed infantry battalions forward in reasonably good order.
      Thus, the line, the mixed order, and the deployment schematics were
merely recommendations of how units might be employed to interact and
support each other to maximum effect. In practice, it usually happened quite
differently and was subject to all sorts of factors, not the least of which was
the terrain.
      But this flexibility was the very backbone of the new system. It offered
the artful commander a far greater range of options than was ever possible
in the linear era. Experience and formal training could be helpful, but they
were not necessarily essential at the higher levels of command, which called
for a different set of skills. Is there a better example than Napoleon himself?
But they could also be the undoing of excellent combat commanders who
had made enviable reputations for themselves at the lower levels of com-
mand. Thus, most of Napoleon's marshals were capable combat commanders,
but very few showed any aptitude for holding independent command. On
the other hand, some of his best general officers never achieved that rank.
    On the whole, however, even though Napoleon's top soldiers were en-
tirely self-made men, those who had a formal background in military edu-

cation generally came off best. Still, his veteran officers were practical men,
seasoned by years of campaigning, who had largely thrown away the old
books, even if they were too busy to write new ones. (No new drill manual
was produced during Napoleon's reign.)
      But this was the very crux of the new system of war. The discussion so
far has focused on mechanics,   but these new mechanics were extraordinarily
important, because the linear system of warfare could not possibly have
produced a Napoleon. However, while they became the wheels of the Na-
poleonic juggernaut, they were neither the engine that drove        it   nor the
column that steered it. And this is what had lulled the opponents of the
French republic into a false sense of security. They had seen the wheels and
even the parts of the engine and adjudged them good but not overwhelming.
During the years from 1801 to 1805, however. Napoleon had assembled all
the parts of the engine and tuned it to perfection. What he then unveiled
during the Austerlitz campaign in 1805 was good enough to simply roll over
the opposition.
      Obviously, the new system was not the result of a planned evolution,
from theory to practice, but the sum total of a vast amount of experience
gained by many men at various levels of command. By the time Napoleon
came to the fore, there were entire platoons, even companies, of such men
who had survived the hard school of the revolutionary wars. And these men
were to be as indispensable to Napoleon as the new system was.
