                                     The New Ways of War                                     123

constant drain of the best men out of the companies, a problem that con-
tinuously impaired the effectiveness of the French fusilier companies, es'
pecially when the French infantry entered into its period of decline.
      For once, however,        it   appears that Napoleon took a cue from his ad-
versaries.   The French had continued to deploy in three ranks until the eve
of the Battle of Leipzig, when, on October 13, 1813, the emperor ordered
Berthier to issue the following order:


      Include in the army order that as of this day the emperor orders the entire
      infantry of the army to form up in two ranks instead of three, in that His
      majesty regards the fire and the bayonets of the third rank useless.                When
      the battalions form up in closed columns of divisions this two rank formation
      will offer six ranks     and three firing lines [the elite companies obviously
      included in this two company front formation], this is sufficient and has the
      additional advantage that the battalion frontage will be increased by a third.
      An additional advantage         is   that,   coming on the eve of a battle, the enemy
      as yet unaware of this will estimate the-army before him to be a third stronger
      than it actually is.^^


      The language of this order implies that a deployed firing line no longer
figured in Napoleon's tactical thinking. Indeed, except for initial deployment
or a defensive posture, the ordre mixte, so dear to the theorists, had become
as much an illusion for Napoleon as platoon fire had become for Frederick
after Kolin    and Prague. Only veteran units that had escaped the drains of
incessant campaigns might still hope to execute any movements at all in
line formation. In this respect, the schematics of battle deployments                      seen
so often in Napoleonic literature can be highly misleading.
      That Morand, for example, would have been able to produce two bat-
talions capable of advancing in line formation in the action against the great
redoubt at Borodino in 1812 is doubtful in the extreme, given the general
condition of I Corps. Yet this is precisely what is implied in the schematics
showing the deployments for this battle.                  It   is   far   more likely that these
battalions were deployed in a line intended to dissolve into strong skirmishing
lines. This is not only a more sensible mode for an attack against breastworks

but also a more plausible one under the circumstances. The great depletion
of the French battalions at that stage of the Russian campaign made it more
practical to entirely dissolve a few battalions for such purposes than to weaken
all   of them further by detaching the remaining elites from the columns.
      The schematics for Macdonald's giant hollow square at Wagram indicate
that it was headed by two echelons, each consisting of four battalions de-
ployed in line abreast. One must wonder if the lumbering advance of this
