                              The New Ways of War                               119

into Napoleon's hands,   had also taken the cover off the new and refined
French tactical system. The element of surprise had gone out of its modus
operandi.
   The Austrians, the British, the Prussians, and the Russians had all been
beaten in their initial encounters with the new French army. The only
difference was that the British and Russians had somewhere to run, whereas
the Austrians and Prussians, whose countries were overrun, did not. But all
of them, without exception, proved tougher the second time around. Their
infantry was no longer apt to be rattled by what had once been the unfamiliar,
and the French infantry was to find them a more difficult proposition all
the way around. The Russians offered a glimpse of this in 1807, and even
the remaining Prussians made a much better showing than they had in the
campaign of the previous year. In 1809, the Austrians dealt a reverse at
Aspem (Lobau), and Napoleon had no fond memories of his victory at
Wagram. And in the peninsula, Wellington, the first to take the field after
the initial round of defeats, had already found a way of dealing with the
French mode of operations.
    Seeking the high ground in a defensive posture, as the Austrians had
already done against Frederick, Wellington avoided the effects of French
artillery preparations    by having his firing lines step back from the crest.
When they finally did come a few paces forward to meet the French assault
columns with musketry, their elevated position generally offered them good
insight into their field of fire, notwithstanding the skirmishers' smoke screen.
Indeed, on the face of a slope, it probably did more to obscure the attacker's
than the defender's vision.
   But the most important change was that Napoleon's opponents now also
began to deploy skirmishers of their own. The immediate effect of this was
twofold: First,   it   tended to keep both sides' skirmishers at arm's length,
thereby reducing the damage and confusion wrought on the massed for-
mations in their rear. Second, the potential damage of the skirmishers was
further impaired by the circumstance that, in addition to being kept at a
greater distance, they now also expended at least part of their energy sniping
at each other.
    General Bugeaud's graphic account of a French column assault has been
repeated many times.        Stripped of its enshrouding verbiage, the essential
description reads: *'Very soon     we got nearer, crying 'Vive lempereur! En
avantl   A la bayonetteV Shakos were raised on the muzzles of our muskets (!),
the column began to double         (!),   the ranks got into confusion   (!),   the
agitation produced a tumult (!), shots were fired as we advanced (!)." This
covers, in a nutshell, just about everything said on the subject so far.         A
