                           The New Ways of War                            117

others. This was a problem even for cavalry charges ridden on entirely sound
horses.
   At some point, some men would fire off their muskets. Those in front
might halt to level their weapons; others, in the rear, would simply fire
them off into the air in acts of defiance. Inevitably, there came that point
when the hardiest souls in front would suddenly find themselves within
hailing distance of a deployed firing line,   which was waiting with muskets
loaded and ready. And the better the fire discipline of the waiting line, the
longer the officers in command could wait before ordering fire. The shorter
the range, the more devastating the effect of the volley when it came.
    The sight of such a firing line, suddenly up close, could make the most
intrepid front-runner feel very much like a man standing alone in the middle
of a football field in an empty stadium. It would cause many men to stop
short, and the rest of the upcoming mass of winded men would telescope
into each other, suddenly creating a confused press in which a well-timed
volley could create havoc. Often, such a volley would be no more than a
send-off, fired into a crowd that was already falling back.
    This was an ideal situation in the eyes of the defender. Yet it occurred
in endless variety on hundreds of occasions when the infantry masses clashed,
during the times of both the republic and the empire.
    From the start, it was the skirmishers' mission to ease the columns' way
into the small-arms fire zone. By dint of circumstances, these skirmishing
actions, preceding the formal attack, loomed large in French tactics. Indeed,
it had been the tactical ineptitude of the republican volunteer battalions

that had brought them onto the battlefield in wholesale fashion.
    But once the French learned how to control this preparatory phase of
the action better and how to keep the masses from being sucked into action
prematurely, their tactical successes began to assume more definite shape.
Above all, they learned to take the action out of the open country, which
favored linear tactics, and carry it into more richly structured terrain. The
landscapes of northern Italy and the Dutch lowlands, dissected by hedges
and fences, provided ideal proving grounds. This did not happen all at once,
however, and the performance of various republican armies remained quite
uneven for some time. It was only during the consulate, when the bulk of
the French combat forces were subjected to a considerable amount of formal
training, much of it aimed at tighter control of the skirmishing action, that
a dramatic improvement began to manifest itself.
    The skirmishers, preceding the columns and fighting in open order, made
use of whatever cover presented itself but were elusive targets even when
in the open. They became expert at harassing the enemy and causing con-
