120              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


lack of discipline had caused the columns to break into a run, even when
they were not under direct fire; muskets were fired off; formation was lost;
column became horde     — back   to the hard days.
      The British historians Oman and Fortescue believe French commanders
did this deliberately because they did not think their men were capable of
deploying into this line once they came into the small-arms fire zone and
they thought that to do so before reaching the zone would be useless, since
the firing lines could not be brought forward in good order.   Commandant
Colin and Hillaire Be Hoc, French historians, claim that launching the col-
umns in this fashion was the result of errors in judgment. They point out
that many surviving battle orders stress the need to deploy into line before
contact is made with the enemy and that the commanders merely attempted
to bring their columns in too close before this was ordered.
      The historians are probably all correct in their assertions. The latter
are merely attempting to explain that     which was already implicit in the
contentions of the former. Deployment was indeed possible, but the move-
ment of the resulting firing lines was problematic in the extreme. The only
difference between the British and French views is that while the British
claim that the columns were run in deliberately, the French claim that
deployment was delayed until it was too late. Both probably occurred with
sufficient frequency to prevent either being labeled right or      The
                                                                 wrong.
fact is that the movement of deployed firing lines remained as much an
illusion for the Imperial French armies as it had been for the republicans.
Such maneuvers could be achieved only with the sort of drill no French
       —                                      —
army not the republic's, not the empire's had known since the days of
the ancien regime. Thus, even when a deployment was effected, what would
happen to the columns would happen faster yet to a line. There was never
sufficient dressage, except in a few elite formations, that could effectively
overcome this.
   Even if the troops had such capacities on the battalion level, where
would the brigadiers, capable of handling a deployed front of several bat-
talions, come from? Once Napoleon's string of military adventures got under
way, the army had all it could do to put an unending stream of replacements
through basic training and battalion drill. Where does one hear of the French
army conducting maneuvers and brigade drills? Even Davout's efforts to
institute regimental training schools after the 1809 campaign remained still-
bom when the preparations for the Russian campaign occasioned renewed
expansions and dislocations of formations. Indeed, the opportunity for the
Saxons to engage in brigade drills, when they were taken out of their quarters
and concentrated in the field in 1811, was so unusual that Funck made
special mention of it at considerable length. There is no mention of such
