                             The New Ways of War                             115

a new breed of soldier to the colors,       men filled with a kind of zeal and
devotion to a cause that had been all but unknown in the armies of the
ancien regime. Their spirit might have produced excellent material for a real
reconstitution of the army.     On the other hand, the efforts to rebuild the
army were severely hampered by the continuing attitude of the republican
government, in which hysteria prevailed over anything that was even vaguely
reminiscent of the old order   —   in particular, the army, the instrument of the
old order's power.
       Arriving in the field to defend the young republic against the armies of
an alarmed dynastic Europe, the blue volunteer battalions exhibited no lack
of courage, spirit, and devotion to their cause. But when they attempted to
deploy for action in the manner of the old order, to meet the enemy on his
own terms, the results were generally pathetic and occasionally disastrous.
Yet fight they did, as well as they could. Even if their tactics failed, the
sheer volume of their numbers certainly had a sobering effect on the rank
and file of the other side.
    Of course, there was no way in which these new republicans could be
subjected to the kind of harsh discipline that had been the trademark of the
old linear system, at least not so long as the revolution was still a going
concern. In his own perceptions, the common man had just participated in
a revolution to rid himself of precisely such things. There were those in
authority who thought that a good republican could beat the stuffing out of
a blockheaded soldier of the old regime        any day. Thus, the medium of
discipline, drill,   and more discipline and drill, so necessary to the linear
order,    was light-years away. Also, the rank and file was no longer disposed
to render the sort of unquestioning obedience that had been a major operative
ingredient of the old ways.
    However, while the linear order provided insurmountable difficulties for
the  new republican armies, the column, not new by any means, offered
workable solutions. Teaching the new recruits to form up and march in
column formations was easy enough (relatively, of course). So was the
deployment into line. But when attempts were made to move these lines
forward in an offensive movement, everything fell apart in short order.
Dissolving into long, dense skirmishing lines, the men at once sought what-
ever cover was to be found and started a standing firefight at distances
considerably greater than the 300 paces regarded as the outside line of
optimum effect for the musket. However, in places where some sort of cover
facilitated a closer approach, the skirmishers would work their way in and
fire   with correspondingly good effect.
       Something could be made of this situation if the columns waiting in the
second line could be brought forward quickly under the cover of the smoke
