                                The New Ways of War                             121

          maneuvers ever being conducted by the French army between
large-scale
campaigns after the Channel encampments. Moreover, the great majority
of the generation of brigadiers who might have participated in such exercises
between 1801 and 1805 no longer stood at the same posts in 1809. And
the notion that any brigadier could effect such evolutions simply by giving
the appropriate commands, without his    —     or the troops under his
command — ever having benefited from the opportunity           to practice on the
drill field,   must be relegated to the realm of fantasy.
    Thus, one sees Marcognet's battalions deploying into line at Waterloo,
and, from       all   accounts they did this reasonably well. Even the advance
appears to have been orderly. Significantly, however, the formation resulting
from this was a white elephant that hearkened back to Folard's idea of the
grande colonne: The deployed battalions were not placed abreast in a line
but, instead, were stacked up in a column of such proportions that it had
virtually no room for maneuver.




The road from horde to column tactics was a rocky one, but several distinct
phases do emerge from the mountain of confusing and often contradictory
sources.
        During the first phase, massive swarms of skirmishers dominated the
scene. But they had difficulty in consolidating whatever gains they made
because there were usually only a few, mostly white battalions still in column
formation who might have accomplished this.
    The second phase was characterized by a considerable reduction of the
skirmishers, as command gradually succeeded in maintaining better control
of the troops. This, in its turn, increased the number of supporting columns
still    in hand.     These were generally deployed in two lines, checkerboard
fashion, with the second line        on the intervals of the first.   Ideally, these
intervals      were to be sufficient to allow the columns to deploy into line
without causing any to be squeezed out.
        The third phase was largely the result of the long encampments on the
English Channel front. By then, the elite companies of each battalion were,
by designation, charged with all manners of service detached from the col-
umn, and this included skirmishing. At this stage, the effective combination
of the skirmishers and the columns proved a fatal combination for the military
establishments of the old order.
        With speed of movement an essential factor of these new tactical forms,
the injunction against running, a dominant factor throughout the era of
formal mass tactics, had been somewhat accommodated by the pas de charge.
This was done at a cadence of between 132 and 140 paces per minute, as
