134                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      When the bugle called upon the skirmishers to form up, the third ranks would
simply make a right- and left-face, respectively, and file out to the flanks. There,
they formed up, looking no different from the French column, as may be readily
seen in Figure 3. The Schuetzen Captain has mounted his horse, and the battalion,
its   companies now of only two ranks, have formed in closed order.
      Figure 4 illustrates the gradual deployment of the skirmishers in front of the
Prussian column, with their supporting sections and platoons.            At this stage, the
French looked no different, but they were generally more aggressive in deploying
their skirmishers in full strength at a faster rate.
      The Russians generally deployed their jaeger platoon at the right front of the
column in the 1st company position. However, even at full strength, the Russian
skirmishers had no more than about a quarter of the strength of their opposite
numbers in the French or Prussian battalions.



The trend toward a standard infantry, skilled at all forms of combat, had been
emerging since 1808, when the French light infantry regiments became such in
name only. Throughout the Napoleonic era, the French would occasionally dissolve
entire battalions into open order,      whenever the tactical situation called for it.
      Finally,   at Gross Goerschen (Luetzen), when the Prussians unexpectedly ran

into Ney, they did not bother calling out the skirmishers but simply sent the leading
companies of the columns forward.



A new tactical element came near the close of the Napoelonic era with the institution
of the    column with a 2-division front.       It   has generally been assumed that this
arrangement came into use only during the postwar era, but the general order issued
by Napoleon on the eve of the Battle of Leipzig contradicts this. According to the
order, the battalion deployed in the following manner:


             2/fusilier 4     1 /fusilier   4    2/fusilier 3     1/fusilier 3

             2/fusilier 5     1/fusilier 5       2/fusilier 2     1/fusilier 2

             2/voltigeur 6    1/voltigeur 6      2/grenadier 1    1/grenadier    1




       This increased the fire front without entirely yielding the maneuverability of
the column or taking on the difficulties of moving a line. At the same time. Napoleon
ordered the companies to deploy in two instead of three ranks, which is how he
arrived at the increased frontage with three firing lines.




All the illustrations presented here assume that the battalions were at their full
organizational or planned strength. In practice, however, the battalions rarely ap-
peared in the field with their complements up to par. From the day the troops left
their quarters, operational noncombat losses would occur, due to illness, fatigue, or
