                            The New Ways of War                                 125

    During the days of the Unear order, the field army had been a unitary
entity, and the great majority of the officers who had commanded its con-
stituents had been reduced to the role of mere mechanics. Their jobs entailed
nothing more than seeing to it that the parts of the military machine en-
trusted to their care were well greased and functioned smoothly. Their powers
of decision on the battlefield had been next to nil.     The linear system had
reduced them to simple conduits for the transmission of orders from above.
With the exception of the hussars, even a cavalry officer had to reach general
rank before he was ever called upon to make an independent decision. It
was not that these men lacked the intelligence or capacity to make decisions.
Rather, the demands of the system had bred it out of them. Thus,           it   was
not merely the rank and file that had been reduced to an unthinking au-
tomaton. The officers had been subjected to the same influences.
   As a result, when the junior officers were confronted with what were to
them unorthodox combat forms, they tended to find themselves either unsure
about what to do or hesitant to act without orders. At the same time, the
senior officers, mostly hide-bound traditionalists, realized too late that their
excessive reliance upon the old methods had been misplaced. This, of course,
communicated itself at once to the rank and file, causing them to lose
confidence in their officers.
    Thus, there had been moments even at Jena and Auerstaedt, where the
Prussian firing lines had advanced briskly, brushing the skirmishers aside,
as expected, as they confronted the French masses and inflicted heavy cas-
ualties,only to find themselves unsupported at the critical moment. This
was despite the fact that their commanders had sent virtually all their light
troops (the fusilier battalions) off on all sorts of detached assignments, mainly
because the commanders had either failed to understand their proper use or
resented their presence because they had been too long removed from the
authority of the line officers. These were the      moments when the linear
system, deprived of the services of the light troops that should have been
available on the firing line, had failed to provide the means to exploit a
local success,   even while the new order found the means to redress the
setback.
    The monumental failure of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstaedt in
1806 continues to serve as the textbook example of the confrontation be-
tween the old and the new. But the failure was due far less to a disparity
between tactical systems than it was to the inability of its commanders to
realistically foresee the implications of the new tactical system to their fullest

extent.    And the frantic, last-minute attempts to bring the Prussian army
closer to the new system could not penetrate the heads of generals who had
grown old in the service, deeply immersed in the ruts of the past.
