126                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN



In the    new system of war, each battaUon, each brigade          — every   tactical
unit   — was an     articulated fighting entity that could change its shape and the
direction of its attack virtually at will.   Most importantly, these constituent
          new order were in the hands of tactically self-reliant officers
units of the
who knew how to make use of this flexibility and how to use their own
judgment in adapting themselves to whatever a situation demanded.              It is

impossible to overemphasize this point. Here, the tools and the craft had
gone into the shaping of each other. These men were the motor that drove
the wheels of the new tactical system. Collectively, they embodied a po-
tential that merely awaited a Napoleon to maximize it.
      This, then, brings up Napoleon and the role he was destined to play.
Although generations of historians have analyzed his campaigns, they have
come up with little more than what others had already done before him.
Nor does a classification of his battles into envelopments, breakthroughs,
or whatever offer anything new or revolutionary. Instead, one might look
at the way in which he did what others had already done before.         And here,
the matter of style     — not of what but of how one does something—        so often
invoked in Prussian military thinking, rises to the fore at once.
      That Napoleon was an artillery officer is an accident of history, but the
style of warfare he developed from this background certainly is not.         He did
very little to advance tactics or the grammar of war except to occasionally
alter a detail here or there.    He left these things to his lieutenants, who were
already experienced in such matters. Yet he changed the face of war despite
the fact that he had very few tactical skills.
      Trained in the artillery sciences, he had a keen grasp of the principles
of physics and the concepts of energy and force. No one understood better
than he the relationships of mass, time, and distance that went into the
creation of energy. This much emerges clearly from his methods of con-
ducting a campaign or a battle.
      The French army, as it emerged from the crucibles of the revolutionary
wars, with    its   modular structure in the hands of capable and experienced
soldiers, was perfectly suited to the talents of Napoleon. Large armies broken

into units of manageable proportions could be moved quickly along separate
roads and swiftly concentrated with forced marches to           accommodate the
requirements of distance, time, and mass, creating his own brand of energetic
warfare. But this concept of force         and energy did not end with a rapid
concentration on the battlefield.
   Napoleon might arrive with a set of ideas in mind, but generally a
concrete plan would take shape only after he saw what was developing on
the field itself, what his probing attacks revealed, or what mistakes the
