                                The New Ways of War                                   133

was 25 files and the company's was about 54 files, counting the officers and noncoms
on the flanks.
    The small group behind the center consisted of the drummers and, if present,
the band. Figure 1 also illustrates the special case of the color section being present.
After 1808, there was only one color per regiment, regardless of the number of
battalions in the regiment. This section was inserted in front, between the platoons
of the 3rd and 4th fusilier companies, so that the flanks of these leading formations
extended somewhat beyond those of the rearward formations. The color sections
generally included the eagle bearer, 2 eagle guards, and the 6 farrier corporals of
the battalion (one from each company).



                           The Prussian Assault Column
The outward appearance of the Prussian column, shown in open order in Figure 2,
hardly differed from that of the French column. However, the Prussian rearward
echelons did not close behind the color section, so the two half-battalions appear
quite distinctly.
        In the Prussian front, the platoons were slightly larger, with 84 musketeers
forming 28 files. However, with the exception of a single noncom on the outer
flank of their respective platoons,      all   the other officers and noncoms formed the
4th (closing) rank. In Figure 1    ,
                                       showing the French column in closed order, these
can be seen only at the rear of the column, but in the open order in Figure 2 they
are clearly visible.
        There were three mounted officers in the Prussian battalion: the battalion com-
mander, the adjutant, and the **Schuetzen Captain," whose mount was led behind
the battalion until the skirmishers were called out.       And this brings up the funda-
mental difference between the French and Prussian columns: While the French kept
their elites in separate companies,      which constantly drained the fusilier companies
of their best men, the Prussians had their elites form the third rank of their line
companies (a system that has often been misunderstood by critics).
        In either system, the skirmishers always had to be appropriately deployed before
they could be used, so there were no inherent disadvantages in one system or the
other. The clear advantage of the Prussian system, however, was that the companies
were not deprived of their best men        — veterans and m.en of   superior ability. This
was advantageous not only because the posture of the elite would rub off on the rest
of the company in the day-to-day grind of the service but also because the company,
if   detached for whatever reason, would continue to benefit from having these men
still   in the ranks.
