                            The New Ways of War                               127

enemy was making or had already made. Once his plan developed, Napo-
leon's understanding of the concepts of energy and force would erupt again.
Massive batteries, massive infantry columns, and, on occasion, massive
cavalry columns would hurl cannonballs, both real and figurative. Just as a
cannonball could breach a wall by the concentration of great energy and
force onto a small area, so did Napoleon emulate its effects by managing to
create rapid concentrations of force at his chosen point of attack, achieving
local superiority even if he did not enjoy the overall advantage in numbers.
At his best, Napoleon would handle his reserves like an enterprising captain
might handle a horse battery during moments of crisis and decision. Of
course, things might occasionally not work out as planned. Enveloping forces
might be delayed or go astray. Things up front might not go as expected.
But as long as Napoleon held the wind gauge, the very momentum of the
new system and the energy he breathed into it would ride roughshod over
obstacles.
   But this was only one side of Napoleon: the general. There was also
Napoleon the leader of men, who had an excellent, seat-of-the-pants un-
derstanding of troop psychology, even if neither the term nor the discipline
had yet come into being. He could step down into the rank and file and
move freely among the common soldiers, making eye contact and drawing
them into conversations, which would take on a continued life as they were
repeated around the campfires. After he became emperor, he deliberately
eschewed the trappings of rank. It may hardly be claimed that this affectation
originated with him, but it worked;     it   endeared le petit tondu all the more
to his soldiers. Collectively, this was all part of the stuff that had,   time and
again,    made it possible for him to ask more of the troops than could be
expected   —and get it.
    There can be little doubt that the new system of war would have even-
tually forced the European monarchies into a reappraisal of the old order.
But the fact that this came about in such precipitate fashion was due entirely
to Napoleon, the master gunner,       and the concepts of force and energy he
applied to this new system.
    Yet, for all this, these new ways of war exercised little control over the
ultimate outcome of the 1812 campaign, even though the Russians probably
possessed fewer skills than any of Napoleon's other adversaries. Instead,       it

was Napoleon's own failure to foresee the difficulties the Russian theater of
operations might offer and to adapt his success formula to these conditions
that caused the great captain to stumble. Thus, the failure of logistics, which
stood at the root of the greater failure,     may not be entirely placed at the
feet of the clumsy supply services,   and much less may it be blamed on the
winter.
