                                 The New Ways of War                                 129




             THE ANATOMY OF COLUMN TACTICS
The column first appeared in the firing lines during the last decade of the eighteenth
century. From that time until well past the Napoleonic era, its presence on the
battlefield was so ubiquitous that a general knowledge of its structure and of how it
might actually operate in combat is essential to an understanding of the military
events of those times. In order to give the reader a better "feel" of what the columns
were all about, they are rendered here in terms of the men who gave them shape
and substance, rather than as the blocks and diagrams that are generally found in
descriptions of the various tactical evolutions.
      Thus, the illustrations accompanying this analysis have been drawn to scale and
reflect an accurate head count,    according to the tables of organization, as it existed
in terms of the   1808 reorganization of the French infantry and as it cast itself down
in the   1812 regulations of the Prussian army. The placement of the charges, that
is,   the officers and noncoms,   is   in accordance with the 1791 regulations (the last
published in France before the onset of the revolutionary and Napoleonic wars)
which continued to remain in force, especially in matters relating to such details.
Indeed, the only drill manual ever published during the Napoleonic era was the one
produced for the Westphalian army; while reflective of prevailing doctrine, the
manual was still strongly based on the old 1791 regulations.



During the early stages of column tactics,       it   was customary to form the "column
divisions." That   is,   the 8 companies of the battalion (each with about 90 men in
30 files) were formed up in the following order:


                              2nd company        1st company

                              4th company        3rd company
                              6th company        5 th company
                              8th company        7th company


   Two companies constituted a division, and the name stuck, even after the
companies became as large as the erstwhile divisions. Hence, the so-called division
column had a 2'Company front and later a 2-platoon or 2'Section front. In this
"column of divisions," the first company, standing on the right flank, constituted
the stationary pivot, or point of dress. When the grenadier company, which might
be tacked onto the column anywhere, was joined by the voltigeur company, the
two could be added to the battalion column in any imaginable fashion, to the front,
sides, or rear.
