144                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


ducement. An oncoming war or battle, bad officers or noncoms, bad food,
bad anything might cause a man to run. And the proximity of protective
mountains, forests, or borders always offered a strong inducement. At the
same time,    it   must be understood that desertion was rampant mainly and
particularly among the international professionals, who had already become
footloose. If an indigenous peasant-soldier engaged in desertion,   he would
be cut off from home and family because his action would soon become
known in his native canton or district.
    Given such circumstances, letting men go off on foraging expeditions
would have amounted to an open invitation to run, even for many who
ordinarily would not have dared to even think about it. To prevent this
from happening, once the army went into the field, it was kept in formation.
Thus, the eighteenth-century soldier marched, camped, ate, slept, fought,
and occasionally died in formation. It was an effective way of keeping track
of everybody. And this meant that the army had to be provisioned from
magazines.
    Of course, in the eighteenth century the army's supplies were obtained
as much  through foraging and requisitioning as they were through purchase.
That's how many of the forward magazines were stocked. However, whether
by requisition or free purchase, such matters were generally handled through
the intermediary offices of agents and contractors, not in the ad hoc, free-
for-all   fashion that became the custom of the French armies during the
revolution.
      Thus, the full truth about the revolutionary armies requires noting that
even though they might have been politically reliable, they were themselves
anything but free from desertion. Quite the contrary. Even the shortfall
between the levies and the number who actually reported to the colors set
new heights. However, unlike the carefriUy trained soldier of the old order,
these raw new soldiers had become just about the cheapest commodity for
war. The mass levies had seen to that. Thus, it might be added that it was
not simply the high-toned phrase of "political reliability" that afforded the
republican soldier greater freedom of movement. As ever, the realities were
more complex than that.
    Still, even with the new system, it was found that unless the divisions

marched along separate roads and at a reasonably fast pace, foraging alone
was no longer practicable. As soon as the presence of the enemy forced the
concentration of masses and as soon as the rate of advance slowed, the
immediate countryside was quickly stripped bare and the foragers were forced
to course ever further afield in search of provender.
      In this respect, the population density and the extent to    which the
country was cultivated also played an important role.   A generally accepted
