                                      Logistics                               139

of his campaigns also gave rise to a dangerously false sense of security in the
French commissariat that would eventually have dire consequences. Of course,
Napoleon's own style of warfare, which generally banked on muddling through
somehow on the sheer momentum of his operations, contributed to this as
well.
    It    has been noted from time to time that Napoleon, coming from the
artillery,   often exhibited a disregard for the infantry's capacities, frequently
demanding marches that would drive it to the limits and, occasionally,
beyond. As long as his armies contained large numbers of veterans, their
conditioning, coupled with Napoleon's drive, could carry the rest along.
But when the conscripts began to outnumber the veterans by a large margin
and when the momentum stabbed into a vacuum, Napoleon's manner of
driving the troops turned back on him. This, in a nutshell, was to be the
story of 1812. (In 1813, as well, his young conscripts would fill the hospitals
by the tens of thousands. Both campaigns produced some of the highest
operational noncombat losses on record.)
     However, even if all was glitter and glory on the surface of Napoleon's
unchecked march during the years of his ascendancy, the winter of 1806-
1807 flashed the first warning      —
                                    and the danger came with the lack of
adequate logistics. It was then and there when Napoleon realized that if
logistical troubles ever became linked to operational problems at the same

time, things could get serious, even for him.
     As it was, these early campaigns, in which everyone managed to get by
                        —
one way or another with copious use of field expedients and a lot of help
                    —
from the enemy had a debilitating and eventually disastrous effect upon
the generals, the army administration, and the commissariat. Even as Na-
poleon finally strove to create an efficiently functioning system of army
trains, the administration and commissariat had become lulled into a false

sense of security. The experiences gained in the agriculturally rich Dutch
Lowlands and the German provinces had accustomed them to the idea that
the need to survive would force the troops to see to their own necessities
and that, come what may, their ingenuity would enable them to succeed.
It had always worked before, and the moments of crisis, if and when they

arose, had always passed as quickly as they had come. A campaign had yet
to fail because the army ran short of supplies. All this gave rise to a laissez-
faire attitude that would eventually result in outright incompetence, further

exacerbated by the ever-present corruption.
     It   was to be an inept supply administration, marching to the sound of
a different    drummer and totally lacking an orderly system of distribution
(even when supplies were available) that became a direct and totally un-
necessary cause of the loss of thousands upon thousands of troops during the
