140               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Russian campaign and a major contributory cause of the dissolution of the
Grand Army. This dissolution was already in an advanced stage even before
the army had fought any major actions.
      It   remains to be seen, however,   how these shortcomings at the top
manifested themselves at the bottom, in the rank and file of the army.



The fact that the soldier constantly had to see to his own needs consistently
weakened the bonds of an already lax discipline both in the French repub-
lican and Imperial armies. The revolutionary battle cry of "liberty, equality,
and fraternity" had already become deeply etched into the consciousness of
the old republican soldiers, who became the veteran cadre of the new Im-
perial Army. They were bound to transmit much of this and more to new
generations of conscripts, who, themselves, came from a population that
had not yet forgotten these tenets.
    Not even a staunch disciplinarian like Davout, one of Napoleon's most
capable marshals, ever succeeded in eradicating these attitudes from his own
commands. They had become part of the customs and traditions, and a
particularly beloved part at that. And, as modem soldiers still learn during
their indoctrination, customs and traditions have greater staying power than
regulations. A regulation may be amended or abolished with the stroke of
a pen, but customs and traditions have a way of perpetuating themselves,
assuming a life of their own.
      Indeed, the times when it was thought that the true "republican spirit"
was a superior substitute for discipline and training were not all that distant
in the past. One minister of war, Bouchotte, thought to see the real enemies
of the revolution among the aristocrats of the old officer corps in particular
and all officers in general. He deemed it necessary to "protect" the young
republicans against their influence and authority!
    His was not by any means a lone voice. Platoons of watchdogs, com-
missaires (the forerunners of the infamous Soviet Kommissars of our own
time), were out in the army, looking over the shoulders of every officer. It
was often a case of damned if you do and damned if you don't for the
commissioned defenders of the republic. At times, they were forced to walk
a tightrope, with the guillotine beckoning from all sides. On the one hand,
extreme punishment was threatened if an officer exerted too much discipline
upon his charges, and, on the other, a directory gone wild also saw treason
behind every military failure at the front.
      Eventually, Camot's reforms made inroads into the worst of this non-
sense, although he did this at considerable risk to his own person. At least,
he began to replace some of the worst republicanisms, often bordering on
