                               The New Ways of War                                  137

accidents.   The number of such losses varied in direct proportion to the difficulties
of the march, the distances covered in the daily stages, and the weather. Conse-
quently, the strength of the battalion columns diminished even before they came
under enemy fire on a day of combat. Generally, the columns were considered fully
functional as long as they did not fall much below 60 percent of full strength. The
Russians in 1813 continued with battalions numbering no more than 250 men. Once
units reached such levels of depletion, amalgamation, that is, joining two or more
battalions together, was the answer.
      As the illustrations clearly indicate, a shortage of 100 or 200 men in a battalion
would hardly be noticeable to an observer standing at ground level. That is, it would
require careful study for an uneducated observer to notice that a few files were
missing in the front and that the third ranks of the individual companies were rather
thin.That this is true is supported by the fact that unskilled observers, throughout
       have shown a marked tendency to overestimate what they were seeing. So
history,
much, then, for the all-important "impressions of war," the psychological factor.



This discussion has presented a broad outline of the anatomy of the column and its
function at the elementary tactical level. Although the exact numbers and details
might have varied from one military establishment to the next, these specifics did
not matter a great deal in the practical aspects of tactics. The differences between
a 700-man and a 900-man battalion pertained mainly to how long a battalion might
retain its operational effectiveness on campaign before it reached critical mass, that
is,   before its functions in combat became seriously impaired.
      The French and Prussian columns were selected for comparison primarily because
the Prussian system, emerging from the reforms after the debacle of 1806, is generally
regarded as the best distillation of the Napoleonic experience, just as the Prussian
1812 manual has been pronounced the best to emerge from the Napoleonic wars.
