                                     Logistics                               141

sheer lunacy, with the concepts of duty, discipline, and competence. But
he could only begin what Napoleon was still trying to finish in the Army
of England when it massed in the Channel encampments. However, even
after the worst excesses were curbed and were replaced with sensible laws,

the relationships between the common folk and the established authorities,
as well as those between the common soldier and his officers,        would never
again be quite the same.
   Of even greater and more lasting effect, because they fell right into line
with the necessities and realities of the incessant wars fought by republican
France, were the resolutions by the Committee of Public Welfare with regard
to the upkeep of the army. Because the government was perpetually out of
money,   it   was decreed that the war should support the war. That is, the
republican armies were ordered to see to their own upkeep in the occupied
enemy territories.
   If this    idea was a child bom of necessity, then typically republican zeal
again went far beyond reason with        its   exhortations,   which branded any
moderation exercised in      this respect- to    be not merely disobedience but
downright treason, endangering ultimate victory. The enemies of the rev-
olution were to be punished not merely militarily but economically as well.
This heralded a return to practices that bore more than passing resemblance
to the lawless soldateska of the Thirty Years'   War. It was here where the
making of Morvan's' miles gloriosns began. Typically, much of this kind of
"provisioning" was conducted in ad hoc fashion, every man for himself, and
continued even after more organized forms of "contributions" were exercised
from the top. Every general officer and the vast majority of staff officers,
not to mention tens of thousands of veterans from the ranks, had participated
in this evolution and had carried its memory over into the Army of England
and the Grand Army of 1805. A custom had become tradition, and the
borderline between foraging and looting had become all but indistinct.
    This, then, represented the dark side of the relationship between logistics
and discipline in the French armies of the Napoleonic era. And nothing
that radiated from this dark side was good. It would be an injustice to say
that every French soldier gave himself over freely to these practices, but the
restraints controlling the "run of the herd" had become seriously weakened.
Eventually, these ad hoc "requisitioning" habits were officially discouraged,
because the troops had fallen into the even worse habit of summarily ab-
senting themselves from their formations whenever nothing was to be found
immediately at hand.
    Thus, as early as 1805, when Davout sought Napoleon's permission to
resort to execution by firing squads in an attempt to curb the worst offenses,
the object of his ire was not so much the looting as it was the fact that an
