                                      Logistics                             143

the helm. But none such was available. Thus, despite Napoleon's consid-
erable efforts, the French supply services never even remotely approached
the standards of the army's combat forces.
     Of course, modem analysts are of the opinion that, by modem standards,
all such efforts were actually doomed from the start. The scope of Napoleon's

operations and the magnitude of his forces had raced ahead of their time
and had thus become an anachronism. To keep forces of several hundred
thousand men, hundreds of miles distant from their bases, adequately sup-
plied was patently impossible until the advent of the telegraph and railroads.
    As matters stood, neither horse-drawn transport nor the roads over which
such transport was to travel were up to the task      —unless water transport
could lend extensive support. In Continental Europe, however, most rivers
run on a north-south axis, while almost all of Napoleon's operations ran
east-west. Thus, the Danube, for example, was able to render excellent and
timely service during Napoleon's 1809 campaign, but that was the exception
rather than the rule. The Baltic might have fumished access to the estuaries
of all the rivers running south to north, but even coastal traffic was running
the gauntlet under the guns of the British navy.




The idea of letting armies support themselves off the land was bom as much
of necessity as of expediency.   It   has been often said that this was possible
only with the new kind of politically reliable republican soldier the French
revolution had wrought. But this is merely a half-truth and, as such, beguiling
for the casual observer.
    The armies of the old order always included large numbers of "professional
volunteers" who would habitually drift from one engagement to the next.
The rate of their drifting was govemed not so much by the duration of their
enlistment contracts as by the opportunity to terminate these unilaterally.
That is, given half a chance, they would go "over the hill" just as soon as
they collected and spent their hand money. They would then move on to
another army and start the process all over again. In eighteenth-century
Europe, with its numerous military establishments, such practices became
an industry in their own right.
    This was a cancer that affected all the armies of eighteenth-century
Europe, and Strachan-^ offers some illuminating statistics that are not gen-
erally   found together in one place.He notes that one out of every four
soldiers deserted   from the French army durmg the Wars of the Spanish
Succession and 70,000 more during the Seven Years' War.            At the same
time, the Russians lost 80,000 men in the same fashion and the Austrians
62,000. Of course, the beckoning enlistment bonuses weren't the only in-
