142                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


astonishing number of his troops had gone off on unauthorized "foraging"
expeditions.      A similar request made by him in 1812 was unenforceable
because, as Morvan asserts, it would have required the shooting of a quarter
of the army. Thus, these conditions were regretted and were even militated
against on occasion, but in the end they were accepted as being unavoidable.
Indeed, the Prussians were fond of saying that Napoleon could hardly insist
that his men should not loot when he was himself a thief on the grandest
scale imaginable.
      It   would, of course, be incorrect to take Morvan's portrait of the dark
side as being representative of the sum total of the imperial soldier.   At the
same time, however, his discussion of these matters must not be dismissed
as the contention of a single individual. Rather, he was one of the few who
were willing to speak of things which the chroniclers of Napoleon's glories
preferred to sweep under the rug or which they merely touched upon in
passing. These were, after all, characteristics that cast their shadows across
the entire body of Continental literature produced outside France on the
subject of the Napoleonic era, though they could find no echo in the
romances of those subscribing to the Napoleonic legend.
    It is an inescapable truth that from the time the French armies crossed

the frontiers of France into neighboring countries, they began to incur debits
in the name of foraging, requisitioning, and contribution. Payment for these
would be extracted at every step along the way of the long retreat that began
in Moscow during October 1812 and ended in Paris in March 1814.




                              SUPPLY SYSTEMS
The change from the old linear order to the new system of war was not so
much a replacement of the old by the new as it was a shift in emphasis, in
which the old never lost its value. Similarly, it was learned thac while the
new system of foraging worked well in the short run, it became fraught with
danger in the long unless it was combined with the old magazine system.
Unfortunately for Napoleon's armies, the tactical and operational solutions
regarding how to employ the new masses effectively in the field came faster
than those regarding how to keep them well fed.
    Napoleon himself wasted little time in recognizing the problem. But
whereas his genius was forever focused on the battlefield, his style of per-
sonally running everything could not possibly oversee the correct execution
of his ideas in what might be termed the fringe areas of his immediate
concerns. The supply services especially    — which were not an object of    his
constant scrutiny     — would have   required a man of initiative and ability at
