                                      Logistics                                      153

the greatest part as unthinking as a typewriter, simply copied whatever was
placed before them.        And when the originals disappeared, who could tell
the difference?
      But if the story of the administration and the supply services during the
Russian campaign      is   dismal, there   is   one story about a small cog in the
machinery of the Napoleonic military Juggernaut that stands out like a
beacon. A train officer from Baden, one Lieutenant Hammes, departing
from Karlsruhe in July with a convoy of forty-one wagons loaded with sup-
plies,   accomplished what appeared to be a miracle at the time. Successfully
bringing every one of his wagons over a trek of more than 1 100 miles, from
the Rhine to the Beresina, he had prevailed where many others had failed.
Making his way over impossible roads and preserving his charges against
marauders from the ranks of both friend and foe, he found his destination,
the Baden Field Brigade,       on the eve of the Battle of the Beresina. Well
shod and fed, the Badeners were the envy of their intrepid companions, the
Poles and Swiss, who all fought a legendary stand there.
                                           —
      With a hundred more like him a small number, when compared to
the   size of the Grand Army      —
                               the rank and file surely would have fared
better, to say the least. Certainly, the central army group would have re-
turned to the Niemen in far better shape than it did.




                            RUSSIAN LOGISTICS
The Russians had also prepared for the oncoming confrontation. Since theirs
was a defensive posture and the war was expected to be carried to them,
they could avail themselves of fifteen already existing collecting points.
     new magazines were established along the roads leading from the
Still,

Niemen to St. Petersburg, Moscow, and Kiev. These, however, were con-
centrated in the western border districts, since no one expected the deep
penetration into Russian territory that would eventually take place. In a
very short time, about 1.2 million hektol iters        ^'^
                                                             of flour, a like quantity of
grits,   and about 1.6 million hektoliters of oats were collected there, with
more arriving constantly.
      In addition, reserve magazines were established along the expected routes
of operations at intervals of about an 8 days' march. These were too far
apart, and the quantities gathered in any one place were too large. As a
result,the precipitous French advance prevented all but a small portion of
these supplies from being saved. The French managed to lay their hands on
some, but most ended up being destroyed. Thus, the Russians were to suffer
