154                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


some shortages as well, but these were generally short-lived and not nearly
so severe as those suffered by the French.
   Not only Napoleon was plagued by an inept and corrupt commissariat;
Alexander fared no better. However, although the Russians had their horror
stories as well, theirs did not result in a failed campaign.
      The Russians also had to help themselves with requisitioning, but unlike
the case with the French, this was not done in an ad hoc fashion by letting
the troops take matters into their own hands. And, certainly, they were at
an undeniable advantage, operating on home territory.
   In order to keep the army well supplied with ammunition, fifty-eight
reserve parks were deployed in three successive lines. Of these, the first was
the so-called mobile line, which included twenty parks stretching in a line
from Dunaburg, via Bobruisk, to Kiev. Each was to be equipped with 534
horses and the necessary wagons.           The second line, reaching from Pskov,
via Smolensky to Briansk, had nineteen depots, where laboratory commands
from the artillery prepared cartridges.        Finally, a third line, reaching    from
Novgorod to Kaluga, also included nineteen parks, where the bulk materials
for the production of ammunition were collected. These second and third
lines had no transport of their own but were to requisition what they needed
locally.
      According to a report completed by the inspector of artillery, bearing a
dateline of July 22, 1812, the three depot lines held 296,000 artillery car-
touches, 44 million rounds of small-arms ammunition, and a total of 17,500
cwt of powder. Another 102,940 cwt were stored in the other parts of the
empire, and a further 18,000 cwt were prepared during the summer.
        In this fashion, the two protagonists of the approaching           drama had
prepared for what was to come. Each had worked out his own plans,                      at-

tempting to take into account all possible eventualities. And, as is usually
the case in massive undertakings such as this promised to be, an unexpected
sequence of events took charge. As action and reaction took the reins out
of the hands of the main actors, nothing came to pass as planned, thus
lending renewed emphasis to the Clausewitzian dictum that "as soon as the
first   shot is fired,   all   plans come to naught."




                                          NOTES
 1.     Morvan.
 2.     Strachan, H. European Armies and the Conduct of War. London, 1983.
 3.     Montesquiou-Fezensac, R. Souvenirs Militaires de 1804 a 1814.   Paris, 1863.
