                                   Logistics                                        151
           0-




ever, nothing was to go as planned, because Napoleon had failed to take
into account conditions that were totally different from what he had known
so far.
    To begin with, heavy rains turned what were but poor tracks in the best
of times into bottomless mires, which exhausted the horses right from the
start.The wet green fodder, unripened grain, and half-rotten straw from
the thatch roofs didn't do them any good either. The results were every sort
of sickness, ranging from diarrhea to constipation. Worst of all was the
bloating caused by the wet green fodder.        If   the horses were   still   strong
enough, running them hard for a while would fix them up again. However,
if they   didn't have the strength anymore, their intestines would burst. Ba-
varian Staff- Auditor Stubenrauch saw hundreds of such horse cadavers, with
their burst stomachs and intestines, lying around the bridges of Pilony. And
the diaries of other Bavarians resound to the stench of 1600 such cadavers
around Vilna. The diarists had good cause to remember, because their biv-
ouacs were within smelling distance of this grisly scene.
    As a result, the most advanced magazine in the operations area during
the attacking phase was Vilna. Beyond that point, the army was on its own.
The farther it marched beyond Vilna, the more illusory became the idea
that a shuttle transport system might keep the army supplied in the sparsely
populated expanses of Russia. In the wake of forced marches, the organic
train battalions quickly lost touch with the formations they were supposed
to provision.   Even the baggage was generally late in reaching the bivouacs.
Not even during the approach marches through Prussia and Poland were
the troops properly supplied. In an effort to keep the rearward magazines
filled, the commissaires constantly remanded the troops to forward magazines

that had not even been established yet.
   During the retreat, when the magazines, by then well stocked, might
have facilitated the survival of thousands of men, the absence of an orderly
and flexible distribution system exacerbated the problems of what was left
of the army.    An inept administration, on top of everything else, not in-
formed of the oncoming retreat, had also done nothing to collect supplies
from the relatively untouched areas to both sides of the Smolensk-Moscow
road. Even when the Cossacks moved in on the rearward lines of communi-
cation, the administrators did nothing and even allowed the trains, gathered
in the area     around Smolensk, to   fall   into their hands.   Finally,      no   at-
tempts were made to make the supplies that were on hand accessible,
nor was anything forward to meet the returning army, even after its approach
became known.
    Unfortunately, the bulk of the troops passing through were stragglers;
they had no officers to duly execute the hon en regie that was demanded
