148                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


infantry battalion and cavalry regiment. The remaining wagons of the Breidt
Company, about 200 in number, were to remain at the disposition of the
army commissariat. The artillery, of course, had no problems in this respect,
because it had ample room to off-load its food supplies onto the gun limbers
and battery wagons,         as long as the horses   were well fed and the roads
reasonably good.
   Between the batteries and the corps artillery parks, the estimated max'
imum ammunition supply for a day of battle was carried, with a like quantity
held in reserve in the grand park of the army. Here, the reserves of infantry
ammunition were kept as well, along with all sorts of spare parts for the
artillery equipment. In 1806, the grand park numbered 400 vehicles. This

number, however, was subject to constant change and grew as the size of
the Grand Army increased. In Russia, there were to be more than five times
as many.
      If the   trains were large,   then the baggage hauled along by the officers,
from the marshals on down, also increased with every campaign, assuming
enormous proportions by 1812. On campaign, from one year to the next,
every officer, within the limits of his means (and in whatever way he could
improve upon these whenever the opportunity presented itself), attempted
to carry along as many of the comforts and luxuries of home as the pecking
order permitted. In 1806, only one wagon was allowed for the officers'
baggage of each infantry battalion and cavalry regiment. However, this limit
existed only on paper and not at all in the brigade, division, and corps staffs.
As one campaign followed the next, the limits placed upon the officers'
baggage were increasingly honored in the breach, and the unofficial baggage
train grew from year to year.
      On the whole, however, the Grand Army was considerably better off
in   1806 than it had been in 1805. Particularly after Jena and Auerstaedt,
with the corps separating widely and marching fast in pursuit of the Prussians,
all went well until the Vistula was reached.      There, things rapidly went from
bad to worse.
   The French had gone into winter quarters there, but the Russians gave
no rest until after the Battle of Eylau had been fought. Then, even though
he could claim a victory when the Russians withdrew. Napoleon was himself
forced to withdraw behind the Passarge River to go into winter quarters for
a second time. Even at the outset of this winter campaign in East Prussia,
Napoleon had admitted, "Conditions have forced me to return to the mag-
azine system."^ And on March 12, 1807, he wrote: "At the moment, the
fate of Europe and all further calculations depend upon the question of food.
If only   I    have bread, it will be child's play to beat the Russians."^
      Operations in eastern Europe had brought about a complete breakdown
