                                    Logistics                                147

is    to say, this company had been contracted to furnish the draft teams and
drivers necessary to haul the wagons that were to be suppUed by the depots.
These wagons, however, ended up being largely nonexistent. As a result,
even though it appears that Breidt adhered to its part of the bargain, only
163 wagons were available, which were formed into six brigades instead of
the thirty originally planned. As a result, about 1000 wagons had to be
requisitioned from the farms in the Alsace. This took time, and November
came around before the first wagonloads reached the army.
    Under these conditions, the order that each corps was to carry four
rations of bread and another four of rusk (zwieback) could not be carried
out. Thus, as soon as the troops crossed the Rhine, foraging began in earnest,
even while the army was still in friendly territory. The first discordant notes
in foreign relations were already being struck even as the Grand Army began
its   triumphal march.   When Marmont, in charge of 11 Corps, complained
about the situation, the emperor replied on October 11: "In all of his reports.
General Marmont speaks to me only of his supply difficulties.      1   repeat for
him: In the expeditionary and invasion war the emperor wages, there are
no magazines and it is up to the commanding generals to obtain their
provender from the territories through which they pass."'*
       In the further course of the Ulm-Austerlitz campaign, there followed
alternating periods of abundance     and privation. As was to be expected,
without a guiding hand, more was wasted than was actually used during
periods of plenty.    That wastage would have gone a long way toward alle-
viating the lean times.
    Even before Napoleon reached Ulm, and despite what he had told Mar-
mont, it was abundantly clear to him that an army of 200^000 men, even
in the best of circumstances, could not maintain a hand-to-mouth existence
for any length of time. Thus, on October 24, 1805, he wrote to the com-
missary general of the army: "Until now we have marched without magazines.
Circumstances have forced us to do so. Here, the season was extraordinarily
advantageous to us; however, although we are continuously victorious and
found potatoes on the fields, we constantly suffered from great want. During
a season when no produce is to be found on the fields or if we were to sustain
but a few reverses, the lack of magazines would have the direst conse-
quences.




In the wake of the experiences of 1805, the emperor was more circumspect
when he set out to campaign against the Prussians in 1806. Apart from
having 10 days' rations ready on the upper reaches of the Main River, the
assembly area of the army, he also accorded two supply wagons to each
