146               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


today, fixed by regulations and uniform general orders binding throughout
the army. Instead, in the course of numerous campaigns, a general method
had developed that took the place of an orderly system. It varied from one
place to the next and could never divest itself of an ad hoc character that
altered with time and circumstances. From time to time, the commanding
generals would issue supply directives, but it was usually left to the lower
echelons to fend for themselves.
      When planning his operations. Napoleon generally paid close attention
to matters involving time and distance. But when      it   came to logistics, he
frequently tended to skate over the details, trusting in his ability to drive
the infantry hard.    And he got away with it as long as the troops held up.
At other times, he would keep his intentions secret and would issue his
orders so late that the commissariat couldn't respond in time even when
conditions were favorable. Still, he expected that his orders would be carried
out, or, at least, he pretended that they would be. This, in turn, undermined
the confidence his subordinate commanders had in his logistic measures.
   The campaign of 1805, conducted with the best army Napoleon ever
commanded, culminated in the grand victory at Austerlitz. But even as the
"Sun of Austerlitz" beamed brightly, its glare tended to wash away the
shadows cast by what was to be a dress rehearsal for things to come. Referring
to October 6, 1805, Fezensac wrote in his Souvenirs Militaires:^ "Thus the
first   day of bivouac was also the first day on which looting was done." On
the 16th, before Ulm, not a picket, not a sentry remained at his post. In
the streaming rain, the men simply sought shelter and many remained there.
Life behind the lines and beyond supervision was thought to be more com-
fortable by     an astonishing number of men.   On October II, Davout had
requested permission to place a few of these marodeurs in front of a firing
squad, to make an example of them.
        Napoleon, then as later, was quite aware of these disorders. However,
despite the occasional attempt to raise the standards of discipline, he con-
sidered them to be embedded in the army's modus operandi and preferred
to regard     them as occasional lapses and an inevitable by-product of war.
Indeed, war has often been regarded as the great spoiler of armies, then this
certainly held true for those of Napoleon.




                    THE ORGANIZATION OF THE
                               ARMY TRAINS
During the Austrian war of 1805 the movement of supplies for the army
had been in the hands of a civilian contractor, the Breidt Company. That
