                                    Logistics                              149

of the Breidt Company's services.One might reasonably ask how it could
not have failed. However, as on other occasions, when Napoleon needed
a scapegoat,he did not look too far to find one: "It is not easy to find
something worse than the transports of the Breidt Company."^ Somewhat
later, he says of the same company: "It consists of a pack of charlatans who

do nothing; better to have none than such people."^ He might have also
looked to the administration and the commissariat, but he was constantly
at war with them as well. However, as it was, the experience in eastern
Europe spelled the end for civilian contractors. On March 26, 1807, Na-
poleon issued the orders that would militarize the transport services of the
army.
     Utilizing the material of the Breidt Company to start with,   he ordered
the formation of eight train battalions. Each of these was to have 140 wagons,
organized into four companies. By 181 1 the number of battalions had already
                                         ,




risen to thirteen,   even as the battalions themselves had been enlarged to
include six companies with more than 200 wagons between them. However,
even with Napoleon's resources, putting these battalions onto wheels was
far more difficult than putting them on paper. Most of the original equipment

of the Breidt Company had already followed the army from the Vistula all
the way to Spain, and the wear and tear of incessant service continuously
caused critical losses of both horses and wagons.
     Despite the existence of the train battalions, the new war against Austria
in   1809 again posed difficulties. Coming at an inopportune time, no more
than 300 wagons were available, and these could load only a 2'day supply
of bread for 150,000 men. Campaigning in southern Germany, however,
for once had the advantage of having some waterways flowing in the right
direction. Thus, the    Danube and Lech made it possible to move massive
quantities of supplies by water into forward magazines, sufficient to sustain
lOOyOOO men for 2 months. To this end, marine labor companies and sailors,
totaling about 2500 men, were hurried into southern Germany to conduct
the barge traffic along the Danube.




With the experience of 1807 in mind, Napoleon went to considerable lengths
to secure his expedition into Russia in 1812, even though he did not, at
any time, envision a rapid penetration all the way to Moscow (notwith-
standing some statements to this effect, which are occasionally quoted). To
Davout he wrote: "The result of all of my movements will concentrate
400,000 in one place. Then there will be nothing to be expected from the
land and one must be self-sufficient.
    With this in mind, the Guard and the first four corps, which were made
