150              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


up mostly of French divisions, were each to be served by their own train
battalion. In all, these were to carry 34,000 hundredweight (cwt)^^ of flour
on 1740 wagons, of which about 1500 were drawn by four-horse teams. Two
battalions were equipped with 1200 wagons of special light construction to
facilitate their movement over poor roads. These had a further capacity of

12,000 cwt. Two ox'drawn battalions with 600 wagons also had a capacity
of 12,000 cwt. Since the corps thus equipped numbered about 240,000 men,
this would provide a 25 -day supply of bread.
    When this supply is added to the 4 days' rations the troops were to carry,
there was bread on hand for 29 days. In addition, the draft oxen in the two
above-noted battalions were intended to become a fresh meat source once
the supplies they hauled were consumed. Unfortunately, these animals, who
had never been accustomed to traveling farther than from the bam to a field
or pasture, dropped dead long before their wagons ever reached the troops
for whom they were intended.
    In all, once the army went beyond the Niemen, a total of seventeen
French train battalions with about 6000 vehicles were able to carry a 40-
day supply. This, and whatever the army could obtain by foraging, was
deemed sufficient by Napoleon to cover the operation.
      But these were merely the military preparations. As already noted, about
150,000 draft horses were commandeered in Germany, along with about
25,000 civilian horse handlers and an indeterminate number of wagons.
Some of the drivers were turned loose after a hundred miles or so, others
had escaped long before then, and some, along with all the horses and
wagons, were never heard from again.
      Backing these mobile supplies were well-stocked magazines in Warsaw,
Modlin, Thorn, Bromberg, Marienburg, Elbing, and Danzig. Of these, the
one at Thorn contained 100,000 cwt of flour, while the one at Danzig had
300,000 cwt. A bakery installed in Thorn could bake 60y000 bread rations
a day, and in Danzig 2 million portions of rusk were kept ready to be sent
by water along the Baltic coast and from there up the Niemen.
    In the operations area, Vilna was to be the main magazine because it
was linked to the Baltic by water. Two large water transports were made
ready; they included not only victuals but also bridging and siege equipment.
As a result of the dry summer, however, the Vilia, the final link in the
chain of waterways, was navigable only as far as Kovno, so there still re-
mained an overland trek of 65 miles.
    The emperor had thus gone to considerable lengths to secure adequate
supplies for the army. In view of the massive number of horses necessary to
keep this juggernaut moving, the opening of the campaign was delayed until
June, when it was thought that there would be a sufficiency of grass. How-
