152              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


against the issue of supplies. Thus, the officials in charge of the magazines
stubbornly stuck to regulations despite the sight of men dying in the streets.
The blame for this idiotic behavior, however, cannot simply be laid at the
feet of the magazine administrators. The situation stemmed from the abysmal
lapse on the part of the French high command and from its total failure to
exert a strong hand.   It   was business as usual: ''Every man for himself."
      This does not, by any means, exonerate the hordes of marauders who
had absented themselves from their units and were now collecting along the
line of retreat. But it did result in the loss of additional thousands of men
who might have again become soldiers at some time in the future, when
they would be sorely needed. The greatest irony of all was that the supplies
the commissariat denied to its own men either were destroyed or ended up
in the hands of the Russians, who inherited 4 million rations in Vilna alone!




A discussion of the supply services would not be complete without making
mention of the pervasive corruption at the highest levels of the adminis-
tration. This was not an exclusively French problem, but it was here where
both the best and the worst existed side by side. Napoleon's own corre-
spondence is shot through with complaints, running over the entire course
of his reign.
      Nor would it be correct to assume that corruption was a condition merely
characteristic of the Napoleonic era. Ever since ancient Rome, the upkeep
of the armed forces represented the largest single line item of the budget.
This put large amounts of cash into circulation, which attracts dishonesty
as honey attracts bears. The Roman emperors had already complained about
this.   In many places, collecting taxes, carrying them to central collecting
points, and disbursing them to their designated purposes was like attempting
to carry water in a sieve.
      Not even our own nation has been immune to this. During the American
Civil War, sharp Yankee traders considered fleecing the government to be
a legitimate business pursuit.    Even though the methods might vary, from
"Five Percent Myers" of World War II infamy to the more recent scandals
involving major defense contractors, the end effect has always been the
same: The nation, the soldier, and, ultimately, the taxpayer got less than
their money's worth.
      Whereas today's shaving of points is a very sophisticated business,      it

must be understood that the Napoleonic era didn't have any of those simple
tools such as carbon paper, stencils, or, for that matter, typewriters. Every-
thing was written by hand. Copies were executed by hand as well, which
made it possible to alter documents virtually at will. Batteries of scribes, for
