                                      Logistics                                  145

rule was that a density of about ninety inhabitants to the square mile was
necessary to support a large army passing through.            Still,   an army's size
remained limited by its rate of movement. If it moved too slowly or remained
in place too long, the countryside would soon be stripped bare. The proximity
of large towns and cities was, of course, helpful, since such population centers
already had mechanisms for the gathering of food in place. But it was soon
learned that even in well-populated areas it was a good idea to send about
8 days' worth of rations after the army as soon as       it    departed.    Even the
revolutionary armies, as soon as they ventured far afield, were forced to
establish forward magazines.
    How massive the task of supplying an army in the field was is illustrated
by the following example: To make an army of about 250,000 men with
100,000 horses entirely self-sufficient would require about 4000 wagonloads
of supplies per day. This daily wagon requirement would increase with each
day's march as the army distanced itself from its magazines, even as the draft
animals necessary to haul these supplies would themselves consume moi'e
and more of what was being brought forward. Indeed, the feed and fodder
to keep the 100,000 horses moving would amount to about twenty (!!) times
the weight of the flour for the bread rations of the 250,000 men.
    This points out the central concern in the movement of large armies
reliant on horse-drawn transport.      Even in our own time, the weight of the
fuel necessary to keep the supply columns moving remains a primary factor
of logistics. In the nineteenth century, the term "horsepower" was still taken
quite literally,   and acquiring the necessary feed and fodder for the animals
was even more difficult than feeding the troops. It was next to impossible
to haul sufficient quantities of green fodder, hay, straw, and oats. As a result,
the cavalry,   artillery,   and trains always relied heavily on the resources of
the country through which they passed. And this, then, illuminates another
problem.
    By its very nature, the cavalry was in a much better position to course
far afield in search of feed and fodder.  Not so the artillery. Road-bound, it
was heavily dependent upon whatever was within ready reach. However,
by the time the supply trains came up in the wake of the army, the roadside
would be stripped and every nearby bam emptied. Thus, if the cavalry began
to suffer shortages, the artillery was already worse off and the trains were in
dire straits. They would be the first to suffer, and this would hit the infantry
hardest. As a result, the combat elements were always eager to lay their
hands on whatever transport they could find for their own, exclusive use.
In 1805, they even commandeered the wagons of the commissariat and
prevented them from returning to fetch new loads.
    Under Napoleon, there never existed a supply system as we know it
