164                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


crossing the river. The officers of the infantry and cavalry columns, of course,
were loathe to see themselves separated from their baggage trains,         as this
meant the trains would not arrive in the bivouacs until long after nightfall,
at best.     Some might even take a day or two to catch up. If the brigadier
or, perhaps,      even the division commander was present, things would be
settled quickly. If he had gone ahead, matters would be settled by whoever's
column was closest and ready to roll.
      Meanwhile, the great press of densely packed columns, expanding and
contracting in the endless stop-and-go movement, brought tempers to a
boiling point     — until rain cooled them down again. A hussar from the 2nd
(Prussian)      Combined Regiment in Nansouty's I Cavalr>' Corps described
another scene:


      Our corps was drawn up and ready to be reviewed by the emperor, before
      commencing its march. Both, however, were delayed by a thunderstorm,
      whose coming had gone altogether unnoticed in the bustle of preparing for
      the crossing. Suddenly, the thunder cracked and the rain came down in
      sheets. We quickly wrapped ourselves into our overcoats and patiently waited
      for the end of the torrent.
          The coincidence of this with the first important undertaking of the war
      did not fail to stir the superstitions of the common soldiers. Nor were the
      officers entirely immune.   Whispers quickly passed through the ranks. "This
      is   a bad sign!" "Few will return!"
            This mood was fittingly interrupted by the trumpeters' choirs of the
      French cuirassier regiments. Defying the storm, they sounded lively tunes
      and blaring fanfares. One could hardly conceive of a more fitting use of
      military music.
         But it was the sight of the enormous masses rolling toward the bridges
      and away from them on the other bank which restored the spirits even of
      the doubters.^


      "And the scene after nightfall," relates a French soldier, "was even more
impressive, the glimmer of a thousand campfires illuminating the sky creating
impressions upon the mind, which could not possibly be matched by what
the eye could see in daylight."^
