160                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN



With Kovno, on the Russian side of the Niemen, marking the point where
the central army group was to cross the river, the small village of Alexioten,
on the Polish side of the Niemen^ became the focal point toward which all
of the army's constituent parts moved. By June 23, on the eve of the crossing,
the Guard and Davout's 1 Corps were in place, with Oudinot's 11 Corps and
Murat's reserve cavalry close at hand. Ney's 111 Corps, which had originally
been scheduled to cross the Niemen a bit farther south, at Prenn, was ordered
to close up to the central army group so that it would not be isolated in the
event of an immediate counterattack by the Russians.
      It is difficult   for the   modem observer to conjure an image of more than
120,000 men, with tens of thousands of horses, thousands of wagons, and
dozens of artillery batteries, all concentrated into an area of only a few square
miles. And these numbers merely encompass the forces immediately at hand
for the crossing at Alexioten. It had already been a major feat on the part
of Marshal Berthier and his staff to bring all these troops across Germany
and into Poland, ending up in the right places at the right time. But that
had been the comparatively easy part, since the constituent elements of the
Grand Army had moved in relatively small units along many different roads.
From here on in, everything would be much more difficult. Now it became
a matter of assembling and moving entire army corps. The casual observer
might well think that this was done simply by having the men gather up
their belongings, fall into ranks, and then follow the order "Right face!
Forward March!" Nothing could be further from the truth.
    It took time to gather the troops from their bivouacs and billets (if they

had any) and form up the battalions; assemble the brigades and divisions,
with their organic artillery and baggage trains in place; and then to have
all   step off in their designated order of march. But all this merely set the
stage for the march, which was yet to begin.
         one thing for an individual or even a small group to accomplish a
      It is

15'mile hike in about 6 or 7 hours, allowing for a midday rest and about a
lO-minute break every hour or two. For a division or an entire army corps,
a IS-mile march was a long day's work, because the picture changed com-
pletely when long marching columns stepped onto the road, with wagons
and artillery in their midst. A bad section of road, a narrow point, a balking
horse, a frozen or broken wagon wheel, a broken axle          —
                                                            these and an ex-
tensive catalog of other potential mishaps could create obstacles and bot-
tlenecks: Traffic would back up as the formations telescoped into each other,
and the resulting stop-and-go pace was far more debilitating for man and
horse than was a long but uninhibited march.            And then, of course, the
weather exercised its influence as well.
