162             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


wagon, formed a column about 3 to 4 miles long. However, even if a man
walking by himself might cover 3 miles in an hour, an entire division, for
all   the reasons stated above, would take much more than an hour to file
past a given point along the road. This       is   what the French called the
decoulement (the runoff; from decouler: to flow or to stream), that      is,   the
time required for a formation to defile past a given point or, for that matter,
to vacate a bivouac or campsite.    And this involved only a single division.
      Davout's I Corps in 1812 numbered five such divisions, which included
a total of about 70^000 men   — more than the      entire army the Austrians had
put into the field during the Battle of Leuthen in 1757. However, the
presence of five divisions multiplied the problems just outlined by more than
a factor of five.   When several strong marches were strung together, the
problems could multiply exponentially, especially if the pace was forced and
the columns were kept on the road to extend the marching stages beyond
the norm of about 15 miles per day.
      In terms of the decoulement^ Davout's five divisions actually formed a
column longer than an ordinary day's march. His leading division would
arrive at its objective even before his last division would leave the previous
night's bivouac.    But this did not necessarily afford the rearward elements
several extra hours of rest before commencing their day's march. Instead,
they would have spent most of their day packed and saddled up, waiting to
be    moved from one place to the next, inching their way closer to the
designated road, before they would actually start off to complete their day's
marching stage (unless two or more columns were to march simultaneously
along different roads). This, in addition to other problems encountered on
the march (such as foraging along roads where others had passed before)
was another major reason why the rearward positions in the marching order
were always undesirable. Such problems, however, were still another day or
two in the future when Napoleon's central army group concentrated across
from Kovno for the crossing of the Niemen.



With the points (military parlance for the leading elements) of his own army
group held back and out of sight from the opposite river bank. Napoleon
exchanged the gray overcoat he usually wore for a Polish hussar's cloak and
rode along the Niemen to make a personal reconnaissance and to finalize
the exact locations where the bridges were to be laid down. On this occasion
a fleeing hare caused Napoleon's horse to shy and throw him. This incident
and the thunderstorm of the next day furnished grist for the mills of the
superstitious. Even though Napoleon laughed off both events, we will never
know how he, a firm believer in his own "lucky star," really felt about them.
