                            Crossing the Niemen                            161

    During the eighteenth century and the era of linear tactics, it had been
customary for an army to conduct its operational marches by breaking the
battalions off into platoon fronts. That is, about twenty to twenty-five men
marched abreast. With the intervals between the platoons closed, the col-
umn was relatively short. Only when the troops came into the proximity of
the enemy's forces were the intervals between the platoons opened suffi-
ciently so that the battalions could make a front simply by having the pla-
toons execute a simultaneous right or left turn to form the line. Passing over
bridges or through towns, the platoons could be further broken off into sec-
tions or half-sections to negotiate any bottlenecks that presented themselves.
   Unlike more modem practice,       in  which the troops simply form into
three ranks, make a right face, and march off in the desired direction, the
linear order broke the front into increments of whatever width was deemed
appropriate and then stacked these like a deck of playing cards. Marches
conducted on such broad fronts were possible in eighteenth-century Europe
because the roads were actually quite wide by modem standards. That as,
the original tracks made by wagon traffic had gradually widened as, partic-
ularly after heavy rains, subsequent traffic simply passed around bad spots
in the road, thus adding a few feet here and a few more there. However,
as villages grew into towns and towns into cities, the increasing commercial
traffic brought about a constantly growing network of improved roads. Pro-

vision was made for proper drainage of the roadbeds, which had been given
foundations of stone, sand, and gravel. An immediate result of this was that
the roads became narrower, generally providing for the comfortable passing
of two-way traffic at low speed. A well-traveled main road might have three
lanes. Even today, as soon as one ventures away from the superhighways,
the dimensions of many of these roads are still clearly marked by the trees
that had been planted along their sides to protect them against the elements.
     Thus, by the times of the Napoleonic wars, there were few roads left
that could accommodate marches conducted with platoon fronts. Of course,
it was possible to march cross-country, or, as was frequently done, to leave

the road to the wagons and guns and have the infantry march alongside.
But this was at all times a field expedient, hard on the feet and shoes of
the infantry. Only those who have long fallen out of the custom of making
long overland marches make light of this reality.
   In Russia, these problems were magnified not merely by the extremes of
weather conditions the troops experienced but also by the fact that much
of Lithuania was heavily wooded and the roads shown on the maps were,
in reality, little better than wagon tracks, often so narrow that a wagon had
to pull up to the side to let another pass.   Under such conditions, a Napo-
leonic infantry division of about 10,000 men, with man, horse, gun,       and
