                                  Crossing the Niemen                          163

    With the bridge sites selected, the construction of three pontoon bridges
began after nightfall near the village of Alexioten, across from Kovno. A
company of engineers was sent across to prepare the opposite bank; two
companies of infantry covered the bridgeheads. The job was completed in
about 3 hours, and Morand's division from I Corps went across at once,
followed soon by the rest of Davout's I Corps and Murat with the reserve
cavalry.
    They found no resistance. The few Cossack detachments that had been
in the area withdrew in the direction of Vilna. Thus, Napoleon spent the
early morning hours reviewing the defile of his troops as their columns rolled
toward the bridges with their customary shouts of "Vii^e Vempereur'' and "Vive
Napoleon."
    The emperor had pitched his tent on a piece of high ground that afforded
a fairly good oversight of the area where the marching columns drew together
as they headed for the three bridges, which could be seen in the near distance.
It is    often said that he held a review of his army group from there, but this
was impossible because the columns rolled by hour after hour. He did come
out from time to time, however, to watch them going by; on occasion, he
would sally forth to review one or another formation as it was drawn up
awaiting its turn for the crossing.
        Still, it   was an event of much pomp and circumstance, which found its
echo in the press of the times. Expressions such as "streams of lava" described
the endless columns winding toward and away from the bridges, and the
columns of cuirassiers with         their burnished breastplates   were likened to
"perambulating citadels." Seen from the distance, the sight was impressive,
but up close, there was neither pomp nor glamour.
        Lieutenant von Brandt, a latter-day Prussian general, but at the time a
member of a Polish regiment, painted a vivid picture of some of the scenes.^
TTie baggage wagons had been pulled out of the columns that were drawn
up for a muster and review by the emperor, so every brigade and division
must have assembled a sizable vehicle park of its own. Of course, it was not
a formal parade.  The idea was to get the army across the river. As the
columns rolled past the spot where the emperor stood, all the participants
tried to make a brave show of it. At the same time, however, everyone
wanted to get across the bridges ahead of everyone else, and this resulted
in unbelievable confusion at the bridgeheads. The army gendarmes did their
best to keep order, but to little avail as they met with resistance and outright
disobedience. Everybody tried to pull rank on everybody else.
   Major crises arose whenever baggage columns arrived at the bridges.
Heated arguments would ensue with the artillery officers, stationed by every
bridge, who naturally claimed precedence over the wagons when it came to
