            —
170                  1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


    Things were no better in the Bavarian corps, where apothecary Gras-
mann reports 129 sick on July 8, 200 on the following day, and 345 by 13
July.    Under these circumstances, even the more disciplined Germans were
beginning to leave men behind in large numbers.
      But it was not merely the sick who were being left behind. Deserters
were beginning to leave their formations in even greater numbers, looting
everything they could lay their hands on, terrorizing the population, and
thus stoking its anger against the French and their allies. The men from the
lUyrian and Portuguese formations had already deserted in wholesale fashion,
just as great numbers of Spaniards had found refuge among the Roman
Catholics of Silesia. This was all the more alarming since the attitudes of
the Lithuanians were to play a considerable part in the fate of the Grand
Army.'
      The Lithuanians were of a somewhat more sober disposition than the
easily  inflammable Poles. Still, many members of the Lithuanian-Polish
nobility had pitched in right up to the end in the fervent hope of recon-
stituting Greater Poland. But the common people, who stood quite removed
from all such political considerations, had no head for these grandiose ideas.
They were outraged by the devastation caused by the Grand Army, which
had descended upon them like a swarm of locusts. "Nowhere an inhabitant,"
complained Brandt, the Polish officer, on the 27th, just 2 days after the
crossing of the Niemen. "A nearby village had disappeared almost entirely.
The troops arriving ahead of us had dismantled it to satisfy the needs for
their bivouac." However, the official requisitioning details did not treat the
civilians any better.     Things were already worse than they had ever been in
Poland. Thus, by the time Vilna was reached, the estimated losses of the
Grand Army from all causes already added up to about 25,000 men.
    Even more alarming was the condition of the French cavalry. Not only
were the Poles and Germans far more effective than the French at keeping
their mounts fit for service, but the French light cavalry was hopelessly
outclassed by the Russians, even when the former enjoyed numerical su-
periority. The reconnaissance patrols Murat sent forward learned the hard
truth of this on the very first day after the Niemen had been crossed.
      For this reason. Napoleon, who didn't want to see his cavalry run down
or exposed to unnecessary losses, had an order issued from Vilna on June
29 that prohibited the sending forward of weak detachments over long
distances  ''de toute petite groupe isoke''    —
                                            and in terrain that could not be
overseen.    If it   became necessary to do so, then the cavalry was to have an
infantry backup. This, of course, drastically curtailed the reconnaissance
activities of the cavalry and curbed its initiative.    Such a restriction became
even more troublesome          later,   when it grew increasingly difficult to get
