168               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


situation develop. Late in receiving news of the opening of hostilities, Doc-
torov had not concentrated his VI Infantry- Corps around Olszani until the
27th.    From there, he marched off in the direction of Djunaszev. This was
the same direction taken by Pahlen's III Cavalry Corps, which had stood
in   an advanced position forward of Lida but was now marching toward
Lebioda.
      Alexander had been in Svenciany since the 26th. Even though the signs
had been visible everywhere that the war was about to begin and even
though the direction of the enemy's attack was no longer a secret, both still
came as a surprise at imperial headquarters. Everyone was troubled over
Doctorov's exposed position and wondered whether or not Bagration had
actually advanced to attack, but no one seemed to know what orders should
be issued. The campaign was only two days old when the first orders deviating
from the original plan were issued. Platov was to be sent to Lida and on to
Smorgoni, while Barclay was directed to order Bagration back to Minsk, via
Slonim     — something Phull had wanted   to do earlier.   On the 28th, however,
these orders were changed again.
      Since the occupation of Vilna was not yet known about in Svenciany,
it   was deduced from Macdonald's and Oudinot's movements that the main
French force had turned against the Russian right. As a result, in order to
save time, orders were sent directly to Bagration          — and repeated   2 days
later  —
       sending him toward Vileyka, via Bielitza or Novogrodok, where he
would be closer to Barclay. A later communication indicates that this was
not done with the object of uniting the two western armies but, rather, with
the notion of enabling them to have "the center of the empire at their
backs." To this day, no one is quite clear what this was supposed to mean,
but the nebulous phrase does illustrate the sort of muddle-headed thinking
that prevailed in the Russian headquarters at that time.
      Ney's occupation of Suterva further strengthened the opinions held at
imperial headquarters, despite Barclay's report that Napoleon had entered
Vilna.     Such a lack of clarity and resolution was bound to make a bad
impression on the entire army.




Thus,    as Barclay   made his retreat, the French entered Vilna on the 28th
after a light skirmish. It was still morning when Napoleon made his formal
entry into the town.
      The march into Lithuania had gone through a barren and heavily wooded
countryside that offered even less forage than that in Poland.       Two forced
marches from the Niemen had exacerbated the supply situation, which had
already gone from bad to worse even       upon arrival at the Niemen, as the
