                                 The Road to Vilna                            171


civilian informers in Russia      and when much of the information obtained
from them about the Russian armies turned out to be false or outdated.



The wedge Napoleon had driven forward was intended to separate the two
Russian armies. However, he had no idea to what extent he had succeeded.
The blame for this rested squarely with the French cavalry, which had plainly
not been up to the task of maintaining contact with the enemy to observe
his movements. Setting aside the guard cavalry and the cavalry divisions in
the army corps, Murat had 30,000 horsemen under his               command.   Yet,
despite this crushing superiority, contact with the enemy, hardly won, had
been lost again. As a result. Napoleon thought Barclay's First Army was
safe    and   in retreat   toward the Dvina, and he was   still   uncertain about
Bagration. Thus, he halted at Vilna with the Guard.
                        some clarity and possibly widen the gap between
       In order to obtain
the two Russian armies, he sent two strong columns forward. Murat, with
the Infantry Divisions Friant and Gudin of I Corps, Nansouty's I Cavalry
Corps (minus Cuirassier Division Valence), and Montbrun's cavalry corps,
was sent in the direction of Niemenczin. Davout, with the remainder of
his corps (Infantry Divisions Morand, Desaix,     and Compans and two light
cavalry brigades), theGuard Lancer Brigade Colbert, and Cuirassier Di-
vision Valence (from I Cavalry Corps), was to go toward Michaliszki and
Oszmiana.
       At the same time, Ney was ordered to cross to the right bank of the
Vilia near Suterva and march toward Maliaty so that he might support either
Murat or Oudinot. He arrived there on July 2. But the marches in torrential
downpours, which extended over the whole of Lithuania during those days,
had taken a heavy toll of his troops, as already noted. Worst of all, Ney
had been forced to leave behind most of his artillery, as the guns were
hopelessly mired and the horses, their numbers diminishing by the hour,
were too weak to pull them out.
    As if forgotten, Eugene had spent all this time standing in place at
Pilony, on the left bank of the Niemen. He finally crossed near Prenn on
June 30. Of Jerome's army group, which had been spurred on by Napoleon,
VII (Saxon) Corps was on its way to Bialystok, while the remaining three
corps were marching toward Grodno. The cavalry points arrived at Grodno
on the 29th, but the infantry was still a long way off.
    On July 1 Murat reached Niemenczin and Davout had Morand's division
                 ,




in Michaliszki. The remainder of Davout's troops were in Oszmiana, where
his light cavalry had a brush with parts of Doctorov's III Russian Cavalry
Corps, which was on its way to Djunaszev. This renewed contact with the
