172              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Russians gave Napoleon news of Doctorov's march, but he thought Doctorov
was Bagration, with Jerome on his heels.       He should have known better,
since the distances involved made this practically impossible.
      Napoleon acted at once on this news. On the morning of July 1, he
ordered Davout, reinforced with Grouchy's III Cavalry Corps (minus Di-
vision Doumerc) to move into the enemy's flank via Oszmiana. At the same
time, Nansouty's cavalry corps (minus Division Valence) was to march to
Michaliszki, where it was to join Division Morand of Davout's corps, which
was already there, to block the march of the reported column.
      Napoleon realized his error the very next day, July 2, when he learned
of the identity of the column. But he still had no news of Bagration and
thought that he had to be farther away than Doctorov. And that brought
his intent to isolate and destroy Bagration to the fore again.
    Davout was to take the troops he had in hand at Oszmiana and march
toward Minsk. There, he was to receive Bagration, who would be driven
toward him by Jerome. In addition to the troops he already had, the Polish
Vistula Legion was now assigned to him as well, so Davout had a force of
about 43,000 men.^ Eugene, who was sharply reprimanded for dawdling at
Pilony, was ordered to      make haste as well and get to Novi-Troki. From
there,he was to go on to Oszmiana, replacing Davout and thus also taking
a hand in cutting off Bagration.
   This was exactly the kind of maneuver at which Macdonald and Oudinot
had already failed on the left wing against Wittgenstein.



On the Russian side, the various corps of First Army reached their designated
line by July   L They rested on the 2nd, on which day Doctorov's corps and
Pahlen's cavalry arrived as well. Doctorov had already made a forced march
from Djunaszev to Svir, succeeding, not without sacrifices, in staying ahead
of Nansouty, of whose approach he had learned only at the very last moment.
      Despite the fact that the opening of hostilities had surprised the Russians
in their far-flung positions, all the corps of FirstArmy had succeeded in
evading the threat of being isolated and run over and were now concentrated
in their designated line.   Only a detachment under Dorochov and Platov's
Cossacks (11 Cossack regiments and 1 Cossack battery, totaling 4500 men,
with 12 guns) had failed to make the connection, going toward Bagration
instead. Platov had been late in receiving the orders of the 26th and 27th;
as a    consequence, he had not left Grodno until the 29th, heading in the
direction of Lida.
       As already noted, Bagration had concentrated his army around Volkovisk
by June 20. Still waiting for permission to make a thrust in the direction of
