                              The Road to Vilna                              167

much time and had too far to go; all everyone got out of this maneuver was
the exercise.   And the unrelenting heat was worse than the rain had been.
   Napoleon no longer expected the Russians to make an early offensive.
So on the 24th, the day of the crossing, orders had been sent to Jerome
stating that he was to attach himself to Bagration. The latter, according to
a report from Schwarzenberg,   had been marching toward Vilna since June
17. He was to accomplish the order by marching to Grodno with three of
his corps, while Reynier's Vll (Saxon) Corps was to march to Bialystok via
Brok and Tykoczin.



At   the Russian headquarters in Vilna,       galloping couriers   had already
brought news of Napoleon's crossing by the evening of the 24th. Before the
night was out, orders were sent to Bagration and Plato v to make an immediate
offensive, while First Army was ordered to withdraw into the Sokol-Sven-
ciany-Kobylniki line. Each corps was to get there quickly by its own indi-
vidual route.   Only III and IV Infantry Corps, coming, respectively, from
Novi'Troki and Olkieniki, were to assemble at Vilna.
    Alexander left Vilna on the 26th, thereby giving Barclay a free hand.
However, the two last-mentioned corps left him with only about 25,000
men in hand, since the rear guard of IV Infantry Corps (4 battalions, 8
squadrons, 1 Cossack regiment, and 1 battery) under Dorochov could no
longer come to Vilna directly but had to evade in the direction of Olszani
and Woloczin. Napoleon's surprise had been complete.
    Right up to the end, Barclay had hoped to fight a battle at Vilna. Even
at this late stage, the thought of offering some kind of resistance there briefly
flashed through his mind, but the idea was hopeless. His patrols were already
informing him that Napoleon was approaching by forced marches, so he
ordered that the magazines be set on fire and that the Vilia bridges be
dismantled. He began his own retreat toward Niemenczin during the early
morning hours of the 28th, even as the points of the French cavalry were
approaching.
     On the extreme Russian right, Wittgenstein had reached Perkele on the
same day, thereby eluding the danger posed by Macdonald's and Oudinot's
approaches. But it had been close: His rear guard, supported by elements
from 1 Cavalry Corps, which had stood near Vilkomir, had become embroiled
with Oudinot's advance guard. In a lively action near Develtovo, the French
cavalry quickly learned that it would face a difficult task in dealing with the
Russian cavalry  — and the campaign was only beginning.
     On the whole. First Army had made a good getaway. Only on the Russian
left, where Doctorov had VI Infantry and III Cavalry Corps, did a precarious
