174             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


on the next day. His infantry, on the other hand, did not make it until July
3, by which time VII Corps had reached Bialystok.
    TTie tropical heat, followed by the heavy rains, which began on the 27th
in that area, combined with the atrocious supply situation, had already
precipitated heavy losses in men and horses in this army group as well. Funck
relates that, due to the bad roads, the trains were generally a day's march
to the rear. Even when they did manage to catch up to the troops, they
would generally not arrive in the bivouacs until the small hours of the
morning. By now, V and VIII Corps alone had lost 9Q00 men between
them   — one-sixth of   their strength. And these are the lowest estimates! Even
the Polish cavalry in     V Corps, mostly green formations as well, had lost
about 1000 horses. Given these circumstances. Napoleon's summons not-
withstanding, Jerome thought it necessary to halt at Grodno to allow his
army to rest and reassemble. He did not send Latour-Maubourg's cavalry off
to Novogrodok until July 4, followed by the infantry on the 6th. Also on
the 6th, Bagration was already marching from Koreliczy to Mir. And the
sun was burning again.
    Around this time, the tensions between Jerome and General Vandamme,
a capable officer, broke out into the open. Jerome had been resentful of
what he considered Vandamme's interference, which was supposedly based
on Napoleon's authority. The emperor had assigned Vandamme to VIII
Corps and Jerome's army group so that Jerome might avail himself of the
general's experience. However, as was Napoleon's custom, he had failed to
define a clear pecking order.
   Now, Jerome relieved Vandamme of his command over VIII Corps and
handed it to Tharreau, the French senior division commander in the corps.
Both Jerome and Vandamme dispatched officers to Napoleon to present
their grievances. Meanwhile, Vandamme continued to accompany the army
as far as Bielitza, claiming that it was beyond Jerome's competence to relieve
him of his command. Jerome wrote to his queen: "I had to relieve Vandamme
of his command because he was guilty of various things, looted, stole and
passed out slaps and kicks to everyone.     .   .   .   His name elicits unbelievable
hate around the countryside and the inhabitants are incredibly terrified of
him."^ General Ochs, a Westphalian in command of 24th Division, paints
a different picture. He says that VIII Corps had good relations with Van-
damme and respected his military skills and that his insistence on an iron
discipline was paired with a great deal of solicitude for the welfare of the
troops.
      As is usually the case, there was probably some truth on both sides.
Vandamme did look after his troops. That is the mark of the good soldier
he was. On the other hand, Vandamme had incurred the wrath of the
