                                  The Road to Vilna                           169

distances to the rearward supply bases had steadily increased (not that any'
thing could have caught up with an army making forced marches).
    Most debilitating had been the constant stop-and-go and the resultant
press as the columns telescoped into each other. The thunderstorm at the
crossing was followed by other downpours, turning the tracks      —
                                                               some diarists
claim that there were no roads as such in Lithuania     —
                                                     into bottomless mires.
Wagon wheels sank into mud up to the hubs; horses dropped from exhaus-
tion; men lost their boots. Stalled wagons soon became obstacles, forcing
the troops to make their way around them and halting other wagons and
the artillery columns. Then came the sun, which would bake the deep ruts
into canyons of concrete,       where horses would break their legs and wagons
their wheels. Lieutenant Mertens, from Wuerttemberg, who was with Ney's
III   Corps, gives this account:


      Until lanovo   la   town north of the Kovno- Vilna road], the heat was op-
      pressive and the dust stifling. In the afternoon, the thunder would roll and
      we were drenched to the skin.
          On 28 June, the rains settled in and the first order of the day was to
      build some huts.    Our exertions on this and the days following were the
      reason for the outbreaks of dysentery and influenza, which soon ran through
      the ranks without let-up and thinned them more effectively than enemy
      shot.
          The rain held on through the 29th and left us in dire straits. On the
      30th, we left our swamp-camp at the crack of dawn and on the 1st of July,
      many more men and horses fell victim to the mud. On the 3rd, the sun
      greeted us again, but the dysentery raged so badly that several hundred sick
      had to be brought to Maliaty, where a field hospital had been hastily es-
      tablished.



    Mertens kept his diary with typical Teutonic efficiency, never failing to
mention the date, time, place, and weather when he made his entries. Thus,
we know that thunderstorms again erupted on July 6 and that by the 9th
the heat and humidity had again reached oppressive magnitudes, interspersed
with torrential downpours. The weather remained gruesome for several more
days, and men were beginning to die from sunstroke and heat prostration.
    Indeed, the crown prince of Wuerttemberg reported to his father that
from July 15 to 29, twenty-one men had died in the bivouacs. But he never
got to sign the report himself, because the dysentery felled him as well, as
itwould the general who took over command from him. The entry on July
18 reads:"The entire camp reeked of peppermint and Hofmann's drops,
which stuck in our noses like the stench of cadavers."
