                              The Road to Vilna                          173

Warsaw, he had received news of Napoleon's advance and the order to
operate against his flank quite late. Completely in the dark, he had stood
fast at Volkovisk until June 28, when he received Barclay's order of the

27th, initiated by the tsar on the 26th, to withdraw to Minsk. He marched
at once, reaching Zelva by the 30th.   There, the order sent to him directly
from imperial headquarters arrived, sending him to Vileyka, either by way
of Bielitza or Novogrodok.
   The negative aftereffects of these conflicting orders have already been
discussed.   That is, Bagration was loathe to sublimate himself to Barclay's
command from the start, and he now readily assumed that Barclay was
entirely responsible for all the confusion. The original orders, calling upon
him to make an offensive into Poland, had been properly amended by those
issued through Barclay's headquarters on the 27th. But these last orders had
gone over Barclay's head (without his knowledge) and, as a result, stood in
conflict with the last orders received by Second Army. Thus, Bagration's
reaction was inevitable.
    Marching via Slonim over bottomless roads (the rains had set in there
as well  by the 29th), Bagration reached Novogrodok by July 3. There he
was joined by the 27th Infantry Division, freshly arrived from Moscow. On
the 4th, he reached Nikolaiev, his designated crossing point of the Niemen.
Parts of his army had already made the difficult crossing and were entering
the forests and swamps between the upper Niemen and Vileyka when Plato v's
Cossacks reported that Wisznev was already held by Davout. At the same
time, other reports warned of the approach of additional forces from the
directions of Grodno and Zelva. Bagration at once did an about-face, reach-
ing Koreliczy on July 5 and Mir on the 6th. If Platov and Dorochov could
delay the enemy at Voloczin, he could make it to Minsk.
    Platov, who had gone from Lida to Voloczin to join Dorochov, who was
on his way to Kamen, learned of Davout's approach in Ivie. Since Dorochov
had reached Voloczin ahead of him, Platov followed Bagration toward Ko-
reliczy. Dorochov, who had also been directed to Minsk by Bagration,

succeeded in getting there by means of an extraordinary forced march from
Kamen.




There can be no doubt that Bagration would have ended up in an extremely
difficult position at Nikolaiev had Jerome been on his heels, as Napoleon

had ordered. However, due to Jerome's rearward starting position, which
was entirely in accordance with Napoleon's own dispositions, the points of
Jerome's cavalry did not reach Grodno until June 29, with its mass arriving
