                              The Road to Vilna                             177

was a highly charged relationship between the two army commanders, in
which Bagration carried out Barclay's orders reluctantly and, at that, only
partially.




Alexander was not the only one dissatisfied with the poor results of the
operations so far. Napoleon also had no cause to be happy with the results
achieved against Bagration, and he laid all the blame on Jerome. The drama
between the two imperial brothers was brought to a conclusion only a week
later when, on July 16, Jerome left the army.

    Du Casse^ says that Napoleon had already used harsh words on July 10
and gave Jerome permission to go home, but Jerome wouldn't hear of it. At
the same time, the communiques between the observers in the diplomatic
corps with the Grand Army and the princes of the Rhine Confederation
and Prussia were buzzing with Vandamme's intrigues on the one hand and
Poniatowski's and Reynier's complaints about Jerome on the other.
    On July 13, Jerome sent one of his adjutants to Davout to confer with
him on the imminent junction of their forces. On the evening of the 14th,
Jerome was thunderstruck when the adjutant returned and reported that
Davout, handing over a copy of Napoleon's secret order of the 6th, had
informed him curtly that he was now in command of the entire right wing.
     Historians who have specialized in researches on the two main characters
of this sideshow have different views of the incident. However, Kleinschmidt's^
contradiction of Mazade,^ who makes claims for Davout's tactful handling
of the situation,   may certainly be upheld on the basis of corollary infor-
mation. That Davout and Jerome had no liking for each other went back
to the days when Davout was in charge of the French troops garrisoned in
Westphalia. Furthermore, when Napoleon was unhappy with Davout's per-
formance during the days of Minsk, Davout gladly absolved himself of any
responsibility for the failure to catch and stop Bagration by implying that it
had all been Jerome's fault.
     Still, Davout must have had misgivings about Jerome's possible reaction,

as well as about the fact that he had revealed Napoleon's secret orders
prematurely, since their content was not to become known or effective until
all the corps of the right wing were assembled. Furthermore, there was always

the possibility that if Jerome felt greatly affronted, this feeling might trans-
plant itself to Napoleon by proxy. Therefore, Davout wrote a very civil
letter to Jerome on the 15th, informing him of Napoleon's orders in obviously

more courteous terms than he had used with his adjutant. But Jerome marched
off anyway.
    His departure was no loss to the army. Jerome did not have the talents
