                               The Road to Vilna                           179

at the Niemen, the cadavers of 10,000 horses already littered the road from
there to Vilna. The artillery, in particular, since its teams were too light to
begin with, had left behind thousands. Even though horses had been taken
from the army trains to keep the artillery rolling, eighty guns were left behind
in Vilna. ^




When Napoleon reached Vilna on June 28, he halted there to organize a
provisional government, to turn the town into an advanced base,         and to
harness the military resources of the country. His lieutenants were sent off
in all directions to find the enemy and clarify the situation. In the making
of these arrangements. Napoleon committed a fatal error.
    On June 26, the Polish Diet had convened in Warsaw and, amid the
cheers of an enthusiastic crowd, had proclaimed itself the General Confed-
eration of All Poland and had declared the union between Poland             and
Lithuania. Napoleon's recognition of this might have stirred the enthusiasm
of the Poles even further, bringing in yet larger numbers of volunteers. Even
though the Treaty of Vienna contained a clause obligating Austria to cede
Galicia in exchange for the lUyrian provinces in the event Greater Poland
was reconstituted. Napoleon hedged. His attitude put a noticeable damper
on Polish enthusiasm.
   Napoleon was in a quandary. He still believed that Alexander would
come to heel after the first decisive blows were struck. However, despite
this self-delusion,   he did not think that Alexander would ever hold still for
handing Lithuania over to the Poles.
    The Prussian Osten-Sacken presents the problem in a deliciously Clau-
sewitzian manner that is sure to exercise the passions of modem ideologues
because it revolves around the great military theorist's contention that war
is a continuation of politics by different means and that political objectives

must govern all military objectives. Unfortunately, the good Clausewitz
failed to provide posterity with a surefire formula for how to distinguish a
political from a military objective. This has misled many    modem historians
into citing some curious examples in support of Clausewitz's theorem.
    According to Osten-Sacken, the task that Napoleon the head of state
posed for Napoleon the commander in chief of the army, that is, the over-
throw of Russia, was difficult enough as it was. He goes on to maintain that
Napoleon committed an error when the statesman prevented his general
from utilizing as important a means as the unreserved cooperation of the
Poles. Once the war had begun, the first order of business was to win. And
in order to win, every means had to be employed. All else could be settled
later. Thus, Osten-Sacken maintained, one error begot the next.
