                             The Road to Vilna                             183

obviously, Frederick's injunction against dueling had gone only skin deep
because a new generation of "Death's Heads" now entered into a free-for-
all.The tavern resounded to the clank of steel on steel, punctuated by some
pistol shots. Not waiting for the rest of their detachment, "Wild Raven"

and his bon sahreurs threw themselves into the fight and methodically cut
the Cossacks down to size. The saber fight raged through the tavern and
ended in the wine cellar, where the last of the Cossacks were finally cornered.
    Word of this action immediately got around and became the subject of
one of the patriotic picture postcards of the times. As for "Wild Raven,"
he is said to have become the very first officer to receive the cross of the
Legion of Honor during the Russian campaign.
    Macdonald's main mission now was to cover the Niemen, which had
become the water artery for the movement of supplies to the army. At the
same time, he was to keep the garrison of Riga in check and to threaten a
crossing of the Dvina in order to engage Barclay's attention. Eventually, he
was to reduce Riga. Napoleon put great store in having this accomplished,
because he wanted this strong point on the lower Dvina to anchor his right
flank.




During the interim. Napoleon ordered Eugene and St. Cyr's Bavarians into
the gap left by Davout's advance against Minsk; they were to form a reserve
for Murat's columns moving toward Drissa and to form a link with Jerome's
army group in the south. Eugene's IV (Italian) Corps reached Dveniki on
the 10th after making a difficult lateral march over secondary tracks in a
country where the main roads were often secondary themselves. This again
took a terrible toll of the horses. St. Cyr and his VI (Bavarian) Corps had
a comparatively easy time of it. They halted at Anusziszki while the Guard
remained behind    in Vilna with   Napoleon. By July 6, the emperor had
formulated the plan described below.
    Barclay was to be held in front with demonstration by Murat, Oudinot,
and Ney. Meanwhile, Napoleon himself, with the Guard and the two corps
under Eugene  — who was to be joined by Davout and Jerome, once Bagration
was either eliminated or shunted too far south to take a hand- would  —
advance toward Polotsk or Vitebsk. This would envelop Barclay's left flank
and cut him off from both St. Petersburg and Moscow, this bringing on the
final decision. It was toward this end that Napoleon had given Davout
command of his own as well as Jerome's forces. (Of course, Davout had also
not been informed that Jerome was in ignorance of this. ) But Napoleon did
not want this important movement to be set up in his absence. He therefore
postponed carrying out his plan, because he thought he should remain in
