                                The Road to Vilna                                175

German citizenry with some of his draconic measures during his tenure in
Hamburg. When he was captured at Kulm in 1813, only the intercession
of some officers prevented him from getting a beating at the hands of the
Russian soldiers who had captured him. So there was some fire beneath the
smoke.
    Because he wanted to prevent an open break with his brother at the
moment, Napoleon upheld Jerome's authority and sent Vandamme home.
This was entirely a military choice, rather than a display of brotherly affec-
tion. Given the well-known intransigence and independent-mindedness of
the marshals in their dealings with each other. Napoleon thought it was
more expedient at the time to replace a corps commander than to attempt
to find a man who could replace Jerome and command the army group.
However, his choice of Junot who arrived on July 30 to take over VIII Corps
from Tharreau's temporary command was a bad error that was to have its
consequences at Smolensk.
    Napoleon was angry with Jerome, but this anger did not have its source
in the incident with Vandamme. It had been brewing for a long time, miich
of it rooted in the emperor's disapproval of his younger brother's frivolous
nature.    Admittedly, Jerome might have been oversolicitous toward his
troops   — perhaps one   day's rest instead of two would have sufficed, perhaps
he should have marched on, as Bagration had done        — but     it   was completely
impossible for him to reach Koreliczy with sufficient force to block Bagration.
The place was more than 100 miles away.
    Napoleon, however,       still   did not have a clear insight into the true
situation because he was not accurately informed of all the              main actors'
respective positions.    He was highly indignant about his brother's extended
delay at Grodno and had Berthier, his chief of staff,      tell    Jerome so in no
uncertain terms on July 6. In order to put more unity and some life into
the action, he had Jerome placed under Davout's command on the next
day. In Napoleon's time-honored fashion, the order was for the               moment
secret; of course,   Jerome was not informed of this either.



While these events were being played out in the central and southern army
groups, Schwarzenberg's Austrians,        who represented the right flank of the
Grand Army, had crossed the Bug near Drohiczyn on July 3 and reached
Pruzany. Their light troops spread out all the way to the Muchavetz and
Pina, capturing a large stockpile of supplies in Pinsk.
    As for Bagration, his army had reached Mir on July 6, as already noted.
When Dorochov reported to him there that Davout was closing in on Minsk,
he changed his direction again, going to Bobruisk via Slutzk. Uniting with
