180              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      One might well ask, Was defeating Alexander a political or merely a
military objective? Indeed, was the political objective to defeat him or to
appease him? At Tilsit, in 1807, Napoleon had accomplished both because
the situation had arisen out of a military standoff. Napoleon's eye, at that
time still undimmed by self-delusion, had clearly perceived the limits of
what was obtainable. But the stakes had changed. Napoleon's reluctance to
commit himself on the Polish issue is all the more ironic since, in 1812, it
became obvious that the future of Polish aspirations was apparently in Al-
exander's, not Napoleon's, hands.




Meanwhile, Barclay continued his retreat in the direction of the camp at
Drissa.   When Ney appeared at Maliaty and Murat made contact with the
rear guard,it seemed unwise to stay in the Sokol-Svenciany-Kobylniki line,

where the entire army had stood assembled by July 2, with Doctorov's arrival,
    Barclay was now convinced that a battle at Svenciany was out of the
question and that, instead, the junction of his and Bagration's armies had
to be the first order of business.   On the following 2 days, the retreat was
therefore carried to the far side of the Disna. Phull thought this was being
done too slowly. All that remained on the southern bank of the Disna was
Ostermann-Tolstoy,^° with IV Infantry and II Cavalry Corps. Imperial head-
quarters had moved to Vidzy on July 3. It was there, at Vidzy, on the evening
of July 4, that an incident occurred that would finally discredit Phull and
shake the tsar's confidence in him to the very breaking point.
      A report had just been received indicating that strong enemy forces were
threatening to envelop the left wing of the army. This at once gave rise to
the fear that the Guard Corps and Doctorov might become isolated and be
beaten. Alexander had Phull asked for his opinion, but that worthy gentle-
man completely lost his head. Literally running around in a circle, he ranted
on that Barclay had precipitated the entire dangerous situation because he
had been too slow to retreat. Having no idea what to do next, Phull then
announced that since his advice had not been followed from the start, he
would now wash his hands of the entire business.
      Clausewitz, who was present at imperial headquarters, advised that the
orders given to the Guard and Doctorov not be changed.         He was of the
opinion that the report that had so alarmed everybody was erroneous. Sub-
sequent events were to prove him correct.
      The retreat was continued on the 5th, and Murat's advance guard, which
had arrived in Svenciany on the 4th, ran into the Russian rear guard on
the next day. This brought on a lively action around the village of Koczer-
giszki, which ended with the Russians withdrawing across the Disna.
