176               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Dorochov on the 7th at Novi-Sverzen, he assembled his entire army, now
more than 45,000 men,^ around Niesvicz on the 8th and remained there
on the 9th and 10th, because his own troops were as desperately in need of
a rest as were the French.
      On July 8, Platov's rear guard brushed off an attack by Polish light cavalry
at Koreliczy and stayed around Mir.      There, his cavalry laid an ambush on
the 9th in which a Polish lancer brigade of IV Cavalry Corps was severely
mauled. Substantially reinforced, the French came back on the 10th to hand
the Russians a beating. Instead, they suffered another thrashing by Platov,
who, on this occasion, was himself supported by Russian regular cavalry.
    In the meanwhile, Davout had arrived at Minsk on July 8, but he had
driven his troops too hard. The blistering heat, which had set in again on
the 6th, and the supply situation that attended every forced march had
reduced his force, originally more than 40,000, to less than 30,000 men.
The Vistula Legion and Colbert's lancer brigade had not yet caught up. On
top of all else, the troops that made it to Minsk were in such a state of
disarray that it took Davout, the stem disciplinarian, 3 days to restore
order.   He had to bring all his authority to bear to prevent further mass
desertions and excesses. In view of this situation and his numerical weakness,
Davout considered himself incapable of confronting Bagration before Jerome
came up.
    Under these circumstances, Bagration might possibly have succeeded in
breaking through at Minsk. (Later, Alexander reprimanded him for having
failed to make the attempt.      Many feel the reprimand was justified, but this
view can be upheld only with the benefit ot hindsight.) But Bagration was
in a very difficult situation,   and neither he nor Davout had been given the
opportunity to study each other's morning reports. Thus, Davout thought
Bagration had 60,000 men, while the latter thought Davout had 70,000,
with more behind him, about whom he was no better informed. Because of
the presence of strong French cavalry, which was actually far ahead of
Davout's infantry columns, Bagration could hardly know that Davout had
merely reached the Slonim-Novogrodok line by the 10th, especially since
the Cossacks and the Russian line cavalry did not do well at reconnaissance
themselves.
      Moreover, he thought Davout's columns were the French main force;
this was a significant factor in Bagration's continuing course of operations.
The constant stream of amendments to his original orders had already shaken
Bagration's faith in Barclay's conduct of the campaign.        Now he believed
that Napoleon's main force was coming after him, and he saw himself left
in the lurch by Barclay's ineptitude.  He even thought all Russia had been
betrayed,    and he saw salvation only in Barclay's recall. The result of this
