                               The Road to Vilna                           181

      The 4th was also a red-letter day for the Prussian hussars. Surely, the
Prussians were anything but enthusiastic about Napoleon or his cause. Still,
the action furnishes an excellent example of how soldiers, once their profes-
sional pride is placed on the line, will rise to an occasion even if doing so
is   against their own convictions. The 2nd Combined Hussars had been split
away from their contingent serving with Macdonald and been assigned to
Nansouty's I Cavalry Corps, part of Murat's advance guard on the 4th.
      When the heads of the French cavalry columns approached the Disna,
the Russians set fire to the bridge at Kosziany and withdrew to the village
on the other side of the river. There, they dismounted their carabiniers,
who barricaded themselves and prepared a defense. It was the job of the
French cavalry to force a crossing over a narrow ford running alongside the
burning bridge and to drive the Russians from the village.
      The 16th (French) Chasseurs, who attempted to do just that, lost their
composure when they came under the fire of the Russian skirmishers; they
flooded back in disorder, claiming that it was impossible to get into the
village.   Now it was the Prussians' turn. They made a good crossing, only to
be driven back into the river by a sudden charge of Russian hussars, armed
with lances. Major von Zieten      at   once ordered the trumpeter to signal
"Front!"  The command was obeyed. In the ensuing melee, the Russians
were beaten; following on their heels, the Prussians broke into the opening
of the barricades, through which the Russians had come, and cut down the
dismounted Russian defenders. Tearing through the village, they came out
on the other side and ran into a dismounted Russian regiment of dragoons,
which was completely dispersed. One Prussian was killed and twenty-four
were wounded. The Russian losses ran to over 100 men. It was the first
occasion during the campaign in which the Russian cavalry was actually
bested in combat. This notwithstanding claims to the contrary by the ro-
mancers who see nothing but an unbroken string of successes for the French
cavalry, based    on no more solid ground than the fact that the Russians,
fighting rear-guard delaying actions, generally broke off the    engagements
whenever the time was ripe.
   The Russian retreat continued without further difficulties. Wittgenstein
marched via Braslav to Druia, where he crossed the Dvina on July 10. The
main column went via Leonpol, with the different corps arriving one by
one in the fortified camp of Drissa between the 9th and 1 1th of July. Doctorov
came via Stary Kriuky. While the corps of the main column were to occupy
the camp itself, Wittgenstein and Doctorov were to extend the position on
the opposite, the right, bank of the Dvina. Because of the extraordinary
heat,   more than 90°F, the Russians made their final marches during the
moonlit nights, letting the troops rest during the day.
