178               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


to play the role of a commander in chief, nor was he a good subordinate.
Indeed, his appointment to so important a post had been entirely due to
Napoleon's chronic lack of men who had both the necessary talents and the
proper stature in front of their peers. In Napoleon's absence, the marshals
were prone to bicker, and the emperor was very much aware of this state
of affairs. For this reason,   men like Murat, Eugene, and Jerome, by virtue
of their connection to the imperial family, were time and again called upon
to fill posts of independent command, even though the army had men better
fitted for such tasks. Still, the treatment meted out to Jerome by Napoleon

was unjust.
      As the reader can see from this (and will see from other incidents yet
to come), the Russians were not alone in suffering from internal frictions
that threatened to interfere with operations.




While the operations of his reinforced right wing were in progress, Napoleon
remained in Vilna with his center, content with having his left wing stay
in touch with Barclay.
    The campaign itself was barely 2 weeks old, but already the conditions
of the Russian theater of operations were taking their toll. From the start,
the troops had been forced to march in dense columns, over bad roads,
through poor and almost arid country. Poorly supplied even before the
campaign had actually gotten under way, most of the men had already
consumed the 4 days' iron ration they carried in reserve for days when the
supply columns failed to catch up with them. As a result, hungry and thirsty
men had been pushed into making extraordinary marches in weather that
could only make things worse. Starting between the 27th and the 29th of
June, depending on the location of the different army groups, thunderstorms,
followed by torrential downpours, had extended all over Lithuania; they
lasted until about July 5, when tropical heat set in (the exact dates again
varying with the different locations). The heat was to last until the second
half of August.
      Already, thousands upon thousands of stragglers floated in the wake of
the army. Most of them wouldn't turn up again until the retreat got under
way. Many more thousands populated the field hospitals, from whence very
few would ever be returned to duty. Many had already died from the heat,
exhaustion, and disease. Even Mortier, whose Young Guard was better taken
care of than the line, let alone the foreign troops, wrote home that several
of his men had died from starvation on the way to Vilna.
    Things were even worse with the draft teams, which were so important
to the army. Not in the best condition even by the time they had arrived
