182                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


   Murat followed slowly and did not reach Zamosza, where Nansouty had
been directed as well, until the 13th. While Murat remained there with the
three infantry divisions of I Corps, Nansouty's cavalry was sent forward to
Czerk and Montbrun's II Cavalry Corps went toward Druia. Ney reached
Drisviaty on the same day. Oudinot had gotten as far as Sokol on the 12th
and went on, reaching Dunaburg by the 13th. There, he made an anemic
attack against the 3000'man garrison defending the place, but he was beaten
off. He then proceeded upriver on the 14th to get closer to Murat. Napoleon

had not sanctioned Oudinot's try for Dunaburg, because this would have
removed him too far from the army. He now placed both Oudinot and Ney
under Murat's command for the next phase of operations.



On the extreme northern flank, Macdonald had remained in Rosieny for a
spell after failing in his attempt against Wittgenstein and had pushed a few

columns into Courland. He then advanced the Prussian division to Szavly,
while Grandjean's division advanced against Smigli, where Macdonald him-
self arrived on the 14th.

      It   seems as though there was some sort of telepathy that linked the two
combined Prussian hussar regiments, because on the very day of the crossing
of the Disna, where the 2nd Regiment had shown a kind of performance
that hearkened back to the days of Frederick the Great, the 1st Regiment,
the famed ''Death's Heads," mounted a commando-type operation that might
have come right out of the script of an adventure movie.
    At Poniewicz, some 50 miles south of Bauske, there was a Russian
magazine known to be prepared for instant destruction. The fuses were laid
and ready to be fired. Guarding it were forty Cossacks, a company of veterans,
about 120 men, and a few regular soldiers. The hussars were sent to make
a try for it. Lieutenant Raven, appropriately known as "Wild Raven," took
an advance party of fifty hussars and marched some 30 miles ahead of the
regiment. About 12 miles from his destination, Raven took his detachment
off the road and went cross-country to avoid sentries and patrols. When his
troopers arrived at Poniewicz, they quietly dismounted and overcame the
sentries guarding the fuses without alarming the rest of the garrison.
   While the fuses were being rendered harmless, it was learned that almost
all   the Cossacks were in the local tavern.Raven quickly had the place
surrounded while he and a handful  of hussars dismounted and entered the
tavern. His demand that the Cossacks surrender was happily refuted as sabers
flew from their scabbards. Another irony. Decades ago, Frederick the Great
had complained about the regiment's predilection for dueling and had sent
a tough new commanding officer to help them mend their ways. Quite
