184            1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Vilna until some sort of decision had fallen against Bagration. While his
halt at Vilna, during the first few days, was justified by the condition of his
army and his desire to see what developed against Bagration, his interests
demanded that he follow Barclay sooner rather than later to deliver a decisive
stroke.
    Napoleon could not possibly expect Barclay to remain in happy ignorance
of the danger he was in. Instead, the emperor should have done everything
in his power to push Barclay and stay ahead of him. He knew very well that
even without Davout and Jerome he was strong enough to deliver a crushing
blow against the Russian main force, no matter what the cost. Thus, his
faulty plan of operations, which awaited the outcome of what was but a
subsidiary operation, resulted in another error. On the 9th, Napoleon re-
alized that his plan was foiled when he learned that Bagration had fallen
back to Bobruisk, and he finally decided to send forward to the Dvina the
forces he had held back at Vilna.
    The Young Guard marched at once, reaching Glubkoye by the 14th.
The next day, Eugene marched, reaching Smorgoni on the 12th; he stayed
there until the 14th and then moved on to Dokszitzi. For the time being,
the troops of the Old Guard continued to remain in Vilna, where they were
joined by the Bavarians, until they too departed on the 14th to join the
Young Guard at Glubkoye. Once again, the entire army was advancing. But
Napoleon's inactivity at Vilna had cost valuable time that could not be
regained.
    On the right wing, Davout, who by now had also taken charge of Jerome's
army group, was directed toward Mohilev. But he was minus Reynier's Vll
(Saxon) Corps, which had been ordered back on the 11th to cover Poland
and the right flank. This was done to free the Austrians, who had nearly
twice his strength, for operations closer to the center of the action. Napoleon
had become distrustful of the Austrians; he thought he would be able to
keep a better eye on them by bringing them into the game. He had also
learned that another Russian army was assembling around Lutzk under Tor-
massov (it was, in fact, completed by the 14th), but he did not think that
this could involve any   important forces.



The end of Napoleon's stay in Vilna, which represented the first interruption
of the general advance, also defines the first phase of the campaign. The
results obtained thus far had to be entirely unsatisfactory. Even though many
military writers consider Napoleon's campaign a success up to this point,
one must ask why. Because he had not been effectively opposed? Because
he held a sizable chunk of Russian territory? Napoleon had hoped to open
