                             Drissa and Beyond                           189

campaign against the Danes in Norway. This made it possible to bring the
bulk of the Finnish Corps to the Dvina.
     Other measures now became necessary as well. Some 10,000 reservists
had already arrived in Drissa, far fewer than had been expected. Wintzin-
gerode was ordered to gather the best of what was available in the recruit
depots to form a reserve corps around Smolensk. This was to include 17
battalions, 8 squadrons, and 4 artillery companies. Similar orders went to
Miloradovitch, then the governor of Kiev. He was to form another reserve
corps at Kaluga, numbering 54 battalions, 26 squadrons, and 14 artillery
companies. These were to become the nucleus of a large reserve army to be
formed from the militia. In order to replenish the recruit depots after this,
a draft was ordered on July 13 calling upon the western provinces to furnish
five men out of every 500 souls.
     Barclay abandoned the Drissa camp and crossed the Dvina on the 14th,
leaving behind Wittgenstein, who was reinforced to about 25,000 men. This
left First Army with little more than 82,000 men.^ These departed on the

16th, making a rather leisurely march toward Vitebsk via Polotsk. Witt-
genstein,   now also in charge of the 3000'man garrison of Dunaburg under
General Hamen, was to cover the road to St. Petersburg from a position
between Druia and Drissa. These measures put an end to the central idea
of PhuU's plan of making the fortified camp at Drissa a focal point of the
Russian defense against the invasion.



Alexander's self-confidence, which had not been all that strong to begin
with, was   now at a low ebb. Any confidence there may have been had
vanished with the demise of Phull's plan, so the tsar decided to leave the
army and go to Moscow. From there he could direct whatever further mea-
sures were to be undertaken in defense of the empire.   Some sources claim
that he was gently induced to leave so that the generals could get on with
their business.
    Unfortunately, he neglected to name a commander in chief to direct
the overall effort against Napoleon. Therefore, actual command devolved
upon Barclay in his capacity as the minister of war. When Alexander left
the army from Polotsk on July 18, he warned Barclay to see to the preser-
vation of the army since Russia had no other. But, failing to take with him
all the soothsayers and hangers-on, he left Barclay saddled with their con-

tinued presence at headquarters, which greatly added to the latter's diffi-
culties.

   Alexander arrived in Moscow on July 24, and he stayed there for a
week before returning to St. Peterburg. From Moscow, the orders were issued
