                              Drissa and Beyond                           193

     During the night of July 23-24, Bagration concentrated his entire force,
including Platov's and Dorochov's detachments, so he now had more than
^OyOOO men. However, despite his superior numbers, he     —
                                                          reluctantly   —
                                                                      did
not renew his attack on the next day. He had his orders from the emperor,
and they directed him to join Barclay.
     Some of the other reasons occasionally advanced for Bagration's failure
to go after Davout must be dismissed as nonsensical, nothwithstanding Al-
exander's censure for not going right through Davout. Indeed, Bagration
might have even welcomed finding his road to First Army blocked after an
unsuccessful attack, because the desire to elude Barclay's authority continued
to remain uppermost in his mind.     He had already entertained the idea to
march into the Ukraine, where he wanted to raise recruits to reinforce his
army so that he might operate against the flank and rear of the French.
    Barclay must have sensed Bagration's reluctance to join him when he
sent Wolzogen, one of his adjutants, to confer with Bagration. It took all
of Wolzogen's powers of persuasion and a pointed reference to Alexander's
orders to keep Bagration from embarking on his own adventurous plans. In
any event, Bagration withdrew to Staroi-Bichov, crossed the Dnieper there,
and marched via Mstislavl to Smolensk, where he arrived on August 3.
Platov and Dorochov, who had already crossed at Vorkolabov, joined First
Army via Dubrovna and Liuboviczi.
    Given the weakness of his forces, Davout had to be glad that Bagration
did not renew his attack on the next day; he could not even think of pursuing
him across the Dnieper. However, the weakness of his forces cannot be
blamed on Jerome's actions and the turmoil caused by Jerome's departure
from the army; much less can it be said that things would have turned out
differently if Napoleon had allowed Davout to take all five, instead of just
three, of his divisions in I Corps for his excursion against Bagration. These
are fruitless speculations for apologists; they could be carried on endlessly.
After all, it could also be said that if Bagration had not been forced to give
up a large part of his Second Army to form a reserve army, the situation
would have gone differently again.
     Davout remained in place at Mohilev until Poniatowski came up on the
28th. Then, anticipating Napoleon's order, he marched upriver to a point
across from Dubrovna, where he crossed the Dnieper on August 2 and had
his troops go into cantonments on the left bank.    At that time, the West-
phalians under Junot, who had arrived to take charge of VIII Corps on July
30, stood in Orsza. Finally, IV Cavalry Corps under Latour-Maubourg arrived
in Mohilev on August 5, coming from Glusk via Berezino. However, he
and Division Dombrowski of V Corps, which was attached to him, were
sent to Rohaczev at once. They arrived there on August 9 to observe Bobruisk
