194              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


and the Russian Corps Oertel, which was standing along the Pripet near
Mozyr. These moves finally put an end to the attempts to isolate and destroy
Bagration's Second Army, as the forces that had been earmarked for this
purpose were positioned to support Napoleon's operations against Barclay
in the center.
    While the events just described were transpiring on the right wing of
the army, Napoleon went after Barclay with his center and left. As already
noted, the emperor's plan, formulated around the 6th, aimed at having
Murat pin Barclay frontally at Drissa, so that Napoleon himself could take
his center toward Vitebsk or Polotsk, thereby enveloping Barclay's left flank
and cutting him off from St. Petersburg and Moscow. This plan had been
set into motion on July 9, when the forces of the center, held back at Vilna,
began their march toward the Dvina in the direction of Beszenkoviczi, where
the river changes its course from a southwesterly to a northwesterly direction.
     Napoleon departed from Vilna during the night of July 16-17, leaving
Maret and the entire diplomatic staff behind. Appointed the emperor's
deputy, Maret was empowered to issue orders even to the generals left in
charge of the communications areas in the wake of the army. Actually, by
the time he left Vilna, Napoleon had given up on the idea of catching
Barclay at Drissa and was ready to settle for driving him toward St. Petersburg
while Davout pushed Bagration across the Dnieper. He still entertained the
hope of keeping the two Russian armies apart. With regard to his plans,
this had so far been the sole positive result of the entire campaign.
     At the very moment he left Vilna, however, Napoleon received news
of an incident that had involved Sebastiani's division of 11 Cavalry Corps,
which had arrived in Druia on July 14. There, during the dawn hours of
the 15th, Wittgenstein's cavalry, crossing the Dvina during the night, had
fallen upon Sebastiani's bivouacs. A French and a Polish hussar regiment
caught the brunt of the attack and suffered heavy losses before the Wuert-
tembergers could come to their aid. Sebastiani had been forced to draw back
to Slobodka. This incident renewed Napoleon's hope that Barclay might
make an offensive after all, and the emperor took measures at once to meet
such an attack with strong forces. The corps that had already advanced
beyond Svenciany were halted, while the others were ordered to come up
fast. On the 1 7th, when he learned that the Russian cavalry had withdrawn

across the Dvina again. Napoleon recognized his error, and the army resumed
its advance on the 18th.

     On that same day, in Glubkoye, Napoleon received news that Barclay
had abandoned the camp at Drissa and marched off in the direction of
Polotsk. This made the time Napoleon had lost all the more regrettable.
There was only a small hope that he might get to Vitebsk ahead of the
