188              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


army had pointed out the strategic disadvantages of the position at Drissa,
particularly the fact that the forces deployed in the     camp could easily be
bypassed and bottled up there, notwithstanding PhuU's contention that this
was an unacceptable option for Napoleon.
      Now, one of the tsar's senior adjutants, Colonel Michaud, a capable
engineer officer, informed Alexander that the camp fortifications were not
of state-of-the-art design. The faulty layout of the redoubts meant that they
weren't even mutually supporting. Nor were the redoubts themselves much
good. Their profiles were too low. There were other technical shortcomings
as well. Worst of all was the field of fire the redoubts offered. In several
places, wooded terrain came far too close allowing the enemy a covered
approach. The inside of the camp also left more than a little to be desired.
There, deeply cut ground would impede the internal movement of reserves
from one threatened spot to another. Just above and below the camp were
fords that would facilitate an easy crossing of the river by enemy forces.
Directly in back of the camp flowed the deeply bedded Dvina, across which
three bridges had been laid. The bridges were covered by bridgeheads that
were too small, poorly situated, and not even completed. Indeed, in the
event of a precipitate evacuation of the camp, the bridges would pose greater
difficulties for friend than for foe.   The Bunzelwitz Phull had in mind could
have easily become a Pima, the place where an entire Prussian corps was
captured during the Seven Years' War. Alexander could see          all   this for
himself, and he envisioned PhuU's plan collapsing like a house of cards.     He
was by now fully aware that it would be impossible to face the French in
the open field unless the two western armies were united.
      Meanwhile, Barclay had learned from an adjutant that Napoleon was
attempting to drive a wedge between him and Bagration. This bore the
earmarks of an envelopment of his left flank. As a result, Alexander now
gave Barclay permission to withdraw to Vitebsk, where Bagration was to
join him. Orders were sent off to Bagration at once, directing him to effect
this junction via   Mohilev. This put an end to PhuU's plan. The effort to
unite the two western armies would lead both of them deeply into the Russian
interior.   This was to lend a new and, in the end, decisive character to the
entire campaign.  The urgency of the situation, as it was then perceived,
also put an end to all the far-flung secondary operations. The Army of the
Danube, freed by the Peace of Bucharest, was ordered to Volhynia as soon
as the sultan ratified the treaty, which he did on July 15. There would be
no offensive into Italy, as had been projected in some of the earlier plans.
    A few weeks later, at a meeting in Abo that was held on August 27 to
31, Russian agreements with Sweden were finalized and Bemadotte con-
sented to the recall of the Russian forces that were to have supported his
