                                     The Road to Vilna                       185

his offensive with a crushing          blow to scatter his opposition and destroy
Wittgenstein and Bagration, but he had been disappointed in all his aims.
With the expenditure of considerable energy, he had merely succeeded in
preventing the juncture of the two Russian armies          — and only temporarily
at that.   This was actually a negative result. It would have been better if he
had allowed the two to unite and face him as early as possible.
      With his operations plan already a failure, the only possibility in the
immediate offing was that he might still deliver a crushing blow against
Barclay. Infinitely more troublesome had to be the fact that this theater of
operations obviously presented severe obstacles to his usual method of con-
ducting a campaign       —   fast   marches and concentrated masses.
                                                                   If he closed

his mind                     and
            to these realities    did  not  intend to alter his methods  to suit
them, then he was bound to ruin his army and defeat himself.
    The scene in the wake of the Grand Army was even less reassuring than
the state of operations. By the end of July, the central army group under
Napoleon was already down by about 65,000 men and the corps under
Davout by over 30,000. More than 50,000 marauding deserters had spread
themselves out across Lithuania alone. Many had congregated into bands,
taking over the country manors of the nobility and even entire villages.
Some were well organized and far more efficient than when they had been
with the colors. They set out pickets against friend and foe alike and made
travel along the lines of communication troublesome for the train columns
and dangerous for individuals.
    Thus, across the entire rear areas of the Grand Army there already ensued
a struggle that can only be described as an out-and-out guerrilla war. The
local peasantry, army detachments, and these bands of outlaws were pitted
against each other in a free-for-all that knew no allegiances. And not many
more weeks would pass before the Cossacks joined the action.




                                         NOTES
 1.   Holzhausen, P. Die Deutschen in Russlandy 1812. Berlin, 1912.
 2.   At the beginning of the campaign, these troops numbered as follows:

                                                                Men

               First   Army corps                               31,000

               Grouchy 's two divisions and Div. Valence        10,000
