                                 Drissa and Beyond                             191

    Bagration continued his retreat on the evening of July 10, reaching
Slutzk   on the    13th.   There, he learned that the enemy was already at
Sviszlocz. This impelled him to hurry, and he speedily covered the 100 miles
to Bobruisk with five forced marches, arriving there on the 18th. Along the
way, his rearmost elements had again been molested by the points of the
French advance on the 13th. This called for some discouragement by the
Russians to slow up the French. Once more, Platov turned around and
fought another cavalry action near Romano vo on the 14th, and again La tour-
Maubourg's cavalry corps was turned back with help from Vassilchikov's
regular cavalry.




When, on July 9, Napoleon issued his detailed plans for an offensive against
Barclay, the latter was thought to be concentrating at Drissa and ready to
make a fight there. Davout was to shift to the north, in the direction of
Borisov and Orsza, while Jerome, supported by Schwarzenberg, was to stay
on top of Bagration. By July 11, Napoleon decided to send Davout as far
east as Kochanov. From there Davout could operate either northward, in
the direction of Vitebsk, toward Orsza, which was just a short march to the
northeast, or southward toward Mohilev. Reynier and his Saxons, who had
gotten as far as Stoloviczy, were now ordered to turn around and go back
to Slonim to operate independently, covering Warsaw against Tormassov's
army, which was known to be assembling to the south of the Pripet Marshes.
With Reynier thus taking over the chore of covering the extreme right of
the army, Schwarzenberg was to march across his rear and insert himself
into the advance closer to the center.
    But by July 13, Davout had received orders to march east toward Mohilev,
while Grouchy 's 111 Cavalry Corps was to go northeast to Kochanov and
from there on to Babinoviczi to form a link with the main army group. At
that time, both Grouchy and Colbert's Lancer Brigade of the Guard would
pass back into the control of the main army.  It was around this time when

Davout thought he saw a chance to strike a decisive blow against Bagration.
Davout had left Minsk on June 13, leaving one of his regiments behind
temporarily to garrison the city, which was earmarked to become a major
forward depot. That regiment was to be relieved by a march regiment coming
up from the rear. Pajol's detachment was left in Igumen to keep an eye on
the direction of Bobruisk.
    Davout reached Mohilev from Igumen on July 20 and took the place
after a light skirmish     with the lone garrison battalion stationed there.   He
came upon a veritable bonanza of supplies, which the Russians had failed
to destroy in the confusion, but this windfall was negated by the fact that
