192              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the march from Minsk to Mohilev had again caused heavy losses in men
and horses. Grouchy's III Cavalry Corps, on its march toward Kochanov,
took Borisov on the 15th, ejecting its defending force, three weak garrison
battaUons under Colonel Gresser, who had then also gone off in the direction
of Mohilev.




Bagration reached Bobruisk on July 18. There, on the following day, he met
Prince Volkonski, another of Alexander's adjutants, who carried the dispatch
mentioned earlier that ordered Bagration to seek a junction with the First
Army via Mohilev and Orsza. In order to reach Mohilev ahead of Davout,
Bagration sent General Raievsky forward on the same day with VII Infantry
Corps and parts of IV Cavalry Corps under Sievers, The rest of the army
followed on the next day, along with the Bobruisk garrison of six reserve
battalions, which were incorporated into the army. By the 21st, Raievsky
had gotten as far as Staroi-Bichov, and from there he sent his cavalry forward
to check out Mohilev. They were in the nick of time to receive Gresser's
detachment of the three reserve battalions Grouchy had ejected from Bor-
isov. Also heading for Mohilev, but from a more northerly direction, these

battalions now had Davout's cavalry hot on their heels. But instead of
catching up to Gresser, Davout's cavalry got yet another unpleasant surprise
when it encountered Sievers's horsemen and was chased back to Mohilev
with substantial losses. All of this made it patently clear that the French
were already in Mohilev.
      Davout, no longer certain that he had the strength to overcome Bagra-
tion,    was nevertheless convinced that he must block his path or at least
make an attempt to do so, even though he had no more than 17,000 men^
at best, and had no expectation for any timely reinforcements. Finding no
suitable position at Mohilev,   he went a short distance south toward the
village of   Saltanovka (Saltaitka), where he found an excellent position
behind a tributary of the Dnieper, which provided an anchor for his left
flank.
      Bagration ordered Raievsky^ to attack this position on the 23rd. Since
both forces were fairly evenly matched, Raievsky could not drive Davout
out. All that the Russians could do was withdraw in the direction of Dash-
kova. Davout made only a feeble pretense at a pursuit, because he knew
that Bagration was somewhere behind Raievsky and had no desire to en-
counter his superior force. Davout was also aware that he had lost more
than had his opponents. That it had been a stiff fight is attested to by the
casualties: about 2500 Russians and 3400 French.   For the latter, this amounted
to about 20 percent of the troops.
