198                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

Smolensk before nightfall. Thus, the First Army was in Smolensk a day
before Bagration, who arrived on the 2nd and was followed by his Second
Army on August 3.
    Napoleon's attempt to keep the two armies separated was now a complete
failure. He had wasted July 27 waiting for the rest of his army to arrive.

With the exception of IV Corps, which had come only as far as Uszacz, the
army's advance had been delayed by the fact that the corps were marching
in a single column from Beszenkoviczi rather than advancing by different
routes that would converge on their objective.
      It is justifiable   to speculate about why Napoleon had not made straight
for the Vitebsk-Smolensk road via Senno once he learned that the Russians
had left Drissa, which meant he had little chance of catching up with them
at Vitebsk. Going straight for the Smolensk road, he might have blocked
them there after keeping Murat on their heels. Yet he failed to do this even
after he should have realized that it was as much in the interests of the
Russians to avoid a battle as it was in his to force one. Worse, he had fallen
victim to a fairly plump ruse, and he was unable to make up his mind to
attack with the corps he had in hand while there was still time. The risk
involved was hardly unacceptable in view of the forces he had. Just as his
subordinates had failed in his play against Bagration, so had Napoleon himself
failed to take on Barclay. He had been angry with his subordinates over the
former and blamed them for their failure, even though it had been largely
the result of his asking too much of them. He now had even better reason
to be angry with himself. He could have avoided his own failure, but he
had not done all that was possible because, at the decisive moment, he had
lacked resolution. His hesitation had prevented him from having the battle
he so desperately wanted, and it saved the Russian army.
    When the departure of the Russians became known on the morning of
the 28th, the French immediately advanced to Vitebsk. Since not a trace
of the Russians was found there, Murat was sent toward Agapanovszina and
Ney toward Rudnia. When Murat ran into the Russian rear guard, Eugene,
who had at first followed Ney, was sent after Murat. Because Napoleon now
thought he had the entire Russian army before him, he also pulled up the
Guard. The situation was clarified on the next day, when it was learned
that the Russians had not crossed the Dvina but had gone to Smolensk.
Napoleon then gave up the pursuit and returned to Vitebsk.
                             —
    The extreme heat the mercui7 hit 95°F on July 28— and the great
supply difficulties made         it   necessary to interrupt operations again.   Kovno
was 250 miles to the rear, and the magazines along the Vistula were twice
that distance. In addition, the supply columns in the wake of the army were
