                                  Drissa and Beyond                             197

    Now, however,     it   was necessary to concentrate the army, but since
Doctorov and Pahlen still had not come up, Barclay needed to gain yet
another day, July 25. Therefore, Konovnitzyn, with a newly formed rear
guard, ^ was ordered to impede the enemy's progress on that day as much as
he could. In this fashion, the events of the previous day were repeated. Step
by step, from one position to the next, Konovnitzyn succeeded in holding
up the French advance troops all day until, toward evening. General Tutsh-
kov I received him with the rest of III Infantry Corps near Dobreika. During
the night, both Tutshkov and Ostermann crossed the Luczessa and returned
to the   main position, while Doctorov and Pahlen also came in from the
other side of the river.
                                                  and Russia when, during
   It was a stroke of good fortune for both Barclay

the same night, Bagration's dispatch arrived, reporting that he had been
unable to break through at Mohilev because Davout was there in force and
that he would have to evade him by going farther to the right. This infor-
mation robbed Barclay of the hope that the Orsza-Smolensk road would be
covered, and it gave him as good an excuse as any for not making a stand
against Napoleon at this time, notwithstanding the clamoring of all the
saber rattlers at his headquarters.    Still,   Yermolov, Barclay's chief of staff,
pressed for a war council, at which it was decided, not without opposition,
to continue the retreat. In view of the enemy's presence, however, this was
easier said   than done.   It   would be necessary to deceive the French into
believing that the army intended to stand and fight. Toward this end, the
army was ordered to remain in place until midday on the 27th. Meanwhile,
an advance guard under Pahlen^° was sent across the Luczessa during the
night. It was to make a step-by-step defense of the forefield to keep the
French away from the main position.
    The ruse worked well beyond expectations. Napoleon was busy through-
out the 27th, preparing for the battle he had so ardently sought. For this
reason, the action by the French advance guard'* was not strongly pursued,
even though Division Broussier from IV Corps had been drawn into the
action as well. As a result, Pahlen was able to maintain himself much longer
than expected, so the retreat did not begin until after 4 p.m., when the
army departed in three columns. The cavalry remained behind long enough
to receive Pahlen and, once disengaged, broke up into three rear guards,
one for each of the columns that had gone before. This put an end to the
delaying action. In 3 days of fighting, the Russians had lost 3500 men; the
French losses were probably the same.
    Doctorov's column arrived in Smolensk on July 31; the remaining col-
umns arrived the next day, after rejoining at Porietchie. Platov also reached
