196             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


24th.   On the next day, orders went to Bagration, in the name of the tsar,
to make an advance against the enemy's right.
   In order to delay the French advance, Barclay sent Ostermann forward
on the 24th with IV Infantry Corps, ^ reinforced with some cavalry. Toward
Beszenkoviczi, the French cavalry points were encountered and driven back
while Ostermann took a position near Ostrovno. There, a lively engagement
ensued on the 25th between Ostermann and Murat's advance guard, con-
sisting of Division Delzons of IV Corps and Nansouty's cavalry.^
      Of course, the cavalry had been the first to arrive on the scene and
Murat, his blood up, was impatiently awaiting the arrival of the infantry,
for better or worse, because the Russian    advance troops stood under the
cover of brush and trees. An hour passed before some Italian light infantry
arrived   on the double. Although worn-out, they were hounded into the
attack at once, but they could make no headway until some artillery arrived
on the scene. Then, the Russians were slowly pushed back to a point where
it was possible for the arriving infantry masses to deploy on the open ground.

    Unexpectedly, one of the Italian infantry regiments was in trouble. Two
Russian guns, unnoticed by the edge of a stand of trees, had opened fire
and found the range, landing several well-placed hits. The infantry was
already severely shaken when Russian dragoons swept around the trees and
into the breaking infantry, doing a great deal of damage. Suddenly, the
entire wing was in danger. Murat's time had come at last. Placing himself
in front of the nearest cavalry regiment, the 9th Lancers,   he led them in a
wild charge that restored the action and forced Ostermann to withdraw to
Kakuvaczino, where he was received by Division Konovnitzyn from III In-
fantry Corps.




The advance of the French army made Barclay's march to Babinoviczi im-
possible. Instead, he now intended to fight a battle in the Vitebsk position.
With this in mind, an order was sent to Bagration to make haste toward
Orsza and prevent the enemy from going past that point toward Smolensk
and thus into Barclay's rear.
    Barclay's army, after the detachment of Tutshkov's column and the
combat losses of the 25th, barely came to more than 75,000 men. Since
Napoleon had more than 135,000,^ Barclay could have hardly escaped a
terrible beating. Apparently, Barclay had permitted himself to become in-
fluenced by the aggressive mood of the army, as well as by the strutters and
posers who continued to clutter his headquarters, because the position at
Vitebsk was not even a good one.
