                               Drissa and Beyond                                    195

Russians, unless Barclay would do the unlikely and                make an attack via
Beszenkoviczi.   On the right, Eugene, now joined by the Bavarian cavalry,
had gotten only as far as Dokszitzi by the 18th; he was given a spur by
Napoleon. In the center, the Guard, which had already been reunited at
Glubkoye on the 16th, was followed at a distance by St. Cyr. On the left,
Murat with V and HI Army Corps and 1 and II Cavalry Corps had gone
from Zamosza to Disna, from whence he had sent Montbrun to reconnoiter
the opposite banks of the Dvina on the 20th. Murat then followed to
Beszenkoviczi. To Murat's left, Oudinot's II Corps had been directed to
Drissa, which it reached on the 22nd. There, Oudinot's troops had the
unwelcome task of undoing what the Russians had wrought. After the earth-
works there had been leveled, Oudinot went on to Disna as well.
    On the 23rd, the points of Eugene's IV Corps reached Beszenkoviczi,
situated on the western bank of the Luczessa (actually, its south side at this
bend of the river), and drove out some Russian light troops there. On the
next day, the rest of the corps arrived with Murat's cavalry reserve. When
patrols reported that Russians could be seen marching on the other side of
the Luczessa, Eugene sent a light cavalry brigade to ford the river at once
and ordered that a bridge be laid down. This was just finished when Napoleon
arrived and joined the pursuit. He rode with them for 2 hours until it was
ascertained that the Russian army had already gone past and that the force
ahead was merely Doctorov's corps. When Napoleon returned, he sent
Montbrun's cavalry across the river to conduct the pursuit, while Murat was
ordered to take Nansouty's corps toward Vitebsk along the left bank of the
Dvina.
    By evening and all through the night, the entire central army group was
massing at Beszenkoviczi. Only Oudinot and St. Cyr were still coming up.
On the 25th, the entire army advanced in a single column. At its head
marched Murat with Nansouty's cavalry, followed by Eugene, then the Guard
and I Corps, with Ney's III Corps bringing up the rear. The Wuerttembergers
were at the tail end.
    Since the 23rd, the main force of the Russian First Army had stood
behind the Luczessa at Vitebsk.      Its   assembly had been completed by the
24th, with only Doctorov and Pahlen still coming up. Because of a false
report that Bagration had already seized Mobile v, Barclay thought that the
junction of the two armies was secured.       Still   underestimating the strength
of the French, he now considered a joint offensive with Bagration. However,
he soon discovered his error   — about Bagration,      that is   — and decided   to wait
at Vitebsk for the arrival of supply columns from Velish before moving on
via Orsza to link with the Second Army. To prepare for this movement, he
sent a detachment under Tutshkov IIP ahead toward Babinoviczi on the
