200                   1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


came at a time when he was no longer able to prevent the junction of their
forces anyway, and it was made after the initial attempts to keep them apart
had taken far too great a toll of his forces.
   At that time, Oudinot's II Corps stood in the area of Polotsk, facing
Wittgenstein and a great deal of trouble. From there, on August 4, the
marshal sent a plea for help, which caused Napoleon to divert St. Cyr's VI
(Bavarian) Corps^^ to his assistance.




The results of the campaign thus far not only were unsatisfactory but had
to give reason for grave concern. Not a single blow had been landed on the
enemy. Instead, as will be seen, Napoleon's detachments under Oudinot

and Reynier had even been handed setbacks. Napoleon's sole success so far
had been the occupation of a large but poor patch of enemy territory, for
which he had paid an exorbitant price. Despite the fact that most of the
troops had yet to lay eyes on the enemy's main force, the army had already
lost 130,000     men and 80,000 horses. Oudinot's, Ney's,^^ and St. Cyr's corps,
as well as the reserve cavalry and the divisions of I Corps with Davout,had
suffered the most. In particular, the shrinkage of the cavalry' in the main
and in Davout's army groups, from 62,147 to 38,722, must have been
adversely felt in so large a theater of operations.
   The reasons for this frightening meltdown of the army rested in part
with the army itself and in part with Napoleon, who had not paid- sufficient
heed to the difficulties the country would offer. The poor discipline of the
troops   —   partly resentful, partly youthful   and inexperienced   — has already
been noted,      as   has the poor performance of the commissariat.     The lion's
share of the blame for the deterioration of the army belongs to the com-
missariat, however, because even when it functioned,       it   did so inadequately
and incorrectly.
    Given the poverty of the country, the oppressive heat, the forced marches
conducted with great masses, and the daily bivouacs in areas that had little
water, much of it bad or deliberately spoiled, the troops were bound to
become doubly sensitive to the lack of proper supplies. Sicknesses of epidemic
proportions hit everywhere, especially in VI Corps,       Men tell by the thou-
sands, and so did the horses, who were lacking feed as well. Other thousands
absented themselves from the army to find sustenance wherever it was to
be had, and when they did find it, they had little desire to return to the
misery prevailing along the column roads.          As already noted, more than
50,000 stragglers drifted around in Lithuania alone. Napoleon had even
authorized the nobility there to use their serfs to round up as many stragglers
as possible and to hand them over to the nearest garrisons.
