                                Drissa and Beyond                            199

unable to stay in touch. Worst of all was the shortage of water along the
march routes. Due to the parching heat, the groundwater level had receded;
the wells that were found soon yielded little better than liquefied mud,
which the men strained through cloth and drank anyway. This gave rise to
all sorts of intestinal disorders.   The surgeon general of the Wuerttembergers,
Schuntter, described the bivouacs of the 25th Division as looking like hos-
pitals.   Suicides were being reported all over the army.
    Entire villages were going up in flames, which, in view of the disorder
prevailing everywhere, was not at all surprising. In the droughtlike condi-
tions, even a single spark would set the thatched roofs of the cottages ablaze.
Captain Borcke, a Westphalian with Jerome's corps, explained that this was
not generally done on purpose but occurred because the great need drove
the men to carelessness.  As a result, every hour, single buildings went up
in flames that,more often than not, turned entire villages and even sizable
towns into blazing infernos. The causes were often innocuous: Here, men,
who had obtained some flour, overheated an oven in the attempt to bake
their own bread; there, a small fire lit under a beehive to get at the honey
was left unattended. These were the sorts of things that often brought on
disaster.

    On the other hand, one hears stories from the cavalry, which was often
far afield from thecolumn roads, reminiscing about roasted chicken, beef-
steaks, and omelets. But these were the exceptions. On the whole, the
march route of the army led through a barren wasteland, made worse by the
actions of both friends and foe. Not a little of this damage was, of course,
perpetrated by the Russians themselves, as they gradually implemented their
scorched-earth policy. This was done in the deliberate effort not only to
destroy the sources for subsistence but also to incite the hatred of the Russian
peasantry,    who were abandoning their land in droves, with entire com-
munities seeking refuge in the         forests.   In the hot and dry weather, the
Cossacks would set entire abandoned villages ablaze simply by firing a pistol
at a thatched roof at short range.       On the whole, privations had reached a
point where even the members of the Guard,              who were always accorded
preferential treatment     and were the first to receive supplies, looted the
abandoned buildings of Vitebsk.
    As a result. Napoleon had Berthier write on July 29 that "unless the
enemy forces other measures, the army is to have a rest of 7 or 8 days, in
order to establish magazines." Of course, in the apologists' opinion Napoleon
halted operations at Vitebsk partly because he finally wanted to make it
possible for Barclay and Bagration to unite and he believed the halt might
embolden them to accept a battle. If this was indeed so, then his decision
