                             The Chase Resumes                            207

pedition, as well as the Danube Army (which had been operating against
the Turks), would reinforce the Russian effort against the French. These
events were bound to strengthen Alexander's resolve.
    However, passing into a renewed attacking phase. Napoleon did not go
straight for the enemy but, instead, opted for a wide strategic envelopment,
such as those of Marengo, Ulm, Jena, and Regensburg. In a sweeping move-
ment to his right, he intended to gain the left flank and rear of the Russians
and thereby push them off the Moscow road. This made it necessary to cross
the Dnieper twice.
    Clausewitz calls this maneuver "the most incomprehensible event" of
the entire campaign. The famed Prussian theorist was of the opinion that
Napoleon should have gone straight for Smolensk via Rudnia a direct—
approach, which would have taken him to his objective more quickly. St.
Cyr, in his memoirs, thought Napoleon should have concentrated toward
his left and gone around Barclay's right. Even though both alternatives would
have spared Napoleon a twofold crossing of the Dnieper, each one was
impractical. Clausewitz's proposal ignores the fact that on the basis of Na-
poleon's experience so far, the emperor could expect that Barclay would
again avoid a confrontation (Napoleon could not possibly know of the
conflicting crosscurrents at work in the Russian headquarters, which tended
to force a fight on their commander in chieO- St. Cyr's idea would have
resulted in separating Napoleon even further from Davout and would have
offered Barclay yet another opportunity to slip away.
    To prepare for his wide strategic envelopment. Napoleon had already
directed Eugene to extend himself to his left in order to attract Barclay's
attention to his own right. At the same time, Davout made a move toward
Dubrovna, attended by a great deal of commotion, to reinforce the suggestion
that a concentration toward the Russian right was indeed under way. Junot
and Poniatowski had instructions to remain quiet. In order to support this
move across the Dnieper, the line of operations had to be changed as well.
Instead of running via Glubkoye, it now led via Orsza, Borisov, and Minsk
to Vilna, where the establishment of magazines was ordered, along with the
strengthening of the defenses of these places.



As to the Russians, their two western armies were now united and numbered
113,119 men and 8000 Cossacks,' including Wintzingerode's reserve corps
of 7000 men,   which was broken up and distributed when it reached the
armies. Of its 17 battalions, 10 went to First Army, which was now up to
77,712 men, while 7 went to Second Army, which now numbered 43,407
men. The cavalry of the reserve corps was sent to Miloradovitch in
