212               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


long passed the point where strategic moves played a central role in his
operations. As his military means had grown, so had his propensity to seek
battle. He intended to cross the Dnieper on a front of about 15 miles near
Orsza. However, the planned envelopment had now been reduced to a simple
insurance policy to force the battle that had so far eluded him.    A battle was
the only thing that mattered any longer.     If the   Russians could be forced to
fight,    they would lose, and all of Napoleon's difficulties would evaporate.
A victory would reanimate the army and free the way for an unopposed
march to Moscow, presumably the final objective of the war.
    The Russian offensive, however, had already ground to a halt, and this
was the signal for Napoleon to pass to the attack himself. He intended to
cross to the south side (left bank) of the Dnieper and capture Smolensk,
thereby cutting the Russians off from a retreat to Moscow.
    On August 13, Davout assembled his corps at Rasana, on the left bank
of the Dnieper, covering the construction of four bridges there and at Chom-
ino. Poniatowski came as far as Romanovo on that same day, with Junot,
coming from Orsza, in tow. Latour-Maubourg was sent back to Mohilev on
the 14th and was to follow the army via Mstislavl. Division Dombrowski,
reinforced with a light cavalry brigade,^ was to keep an eye on Bobruisk and
Corps Oertel, which stood near Mozyr.
    Meanwhile, the main army group marched off to the right, its movements
screened against observation from Babinoviczi by the great forests running
eastward from the Beresina.     As additional insurance, Pajol's light cavalry
division (he had taken over from Sebastiani) was left behind as well.        On
the 13th and 14th, the entire army group crossed the Dnieper.  Minus IV
Cavalry Corps (which did not depart from Rohaczev until the 14th) and
Pajol's division. Napoleon now had about 186,000 men,^ including 31,700
cavalry. The advance began on the 14th, again in a single, large column:
Murat up front with the three cavalry corps, which still mustered about
15,000 sabers; then Ney, Davout, and Eugene; with the Guard bringing up
a distant rear. Poniatowski and Junot were making a simultaneous advance
from Romanovo.




                      THE ACTION AT KRASNOI
It will be recalled that Bagration had reinforced Neverovsky's division with

some cavalry and left it at an advanced position around Krasnoi to cover in
the direction of Orsza. Ney arrived in front of Krasnoi at about 3 p.m. When
the points of Murat's cavalry were fired upon by Neverovsky's advance troops,
