                              The Chase Resumes                          211

massing between Babinoviczi and the Dnieper. Thus, on August 13 and 14,
the army marched to Volkovaia, where Barclay was to meet the expected
French offensive in an advantageous position. But the army was still in a
foul mood and under the impression that it had been cheated out of a
victorious offensive.
      Bagration, who had taken it upon himself to return to Smolensk on the
12th, was ordered to get back into line and take part in the battle that was
expected to take place on the 15th    — Napoleon's Day   (a French holiday).
Bagration, however, took so much time complying that his main force had
only gotten as far as Nadva on the 14th. Indeed, Raievsky had gotten no
further than 10 miles from Smolensk. Bagration had no idea how fortuitous
it   was that he had not ordered Raievsky to march until that day.
      The Russian advance forced Napoleon to move somewhat sooner than
he had intended. However, during the time the army was in its quarters
around Vitebsk, its condition had visibly improved. Indeed, drawing in
various detachments, as well as many stragglers who were finding their way
back to their units, had even increased the number of effectives. The im^
provement was partly due to the rest the forces had received but mostly to
the better supply situation. Not only were the train columns catching up to
the army again, but the windfalls of captured Russian magazines in Velish
and Surash had placed valuable resources relatively close at hand. It even
became possible to issue the troops 7 days' rations in advance when they
resumed their march again.
   As soon as Napoleon heard of Sebastiani's affair at Inkovo, he ordered
Ney and Eugene, as well as the three divisions of Davout's I Corps, which
had remained with the central army throughout operations so far, to con-
centrate at Liozna, along with Murat's reserve cavalry. But Eugene had to
give up one of his cavalry brigades (Guyot's),   which was reinforced with
three Hessian battalions taken from the Guard Corps. They were to remain
in Vitebsk to keep an eye on Wintzingerode.
    Once more, heavy thunderstorms were dumping sheets of rain onto the
countryside, and the artillery promptly got stuck again. But the infantry,
no doubt relieved by the cooler temperatures, forged ahead, and the assembly
was completed by August 11. Even though the Guard was still on its way,
100,000 men were already massed in the area where Barclay was expected
to attack. This again furnishes proof of how little the Russians knew about
the French positions or the strength of their forces, even at this advanced
stage.   At the same time, Davout was ordered to bring up Junot and Ponia-
towski as far as Liuboviczi, in the event the Russians were to press.
      For Napoleon, this was a highly satisfactory development, to say the
least. It   appeared as if the Russians wanted to fight at last. Napoleon had
