208               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Kaluga, where a reserve army was forming. Thus, in the course of the
campaign, both armies had received about 20,000 replacements, while the
losses    came to about 30,000. Of these, about 7000 were combat losses;
the remainder were due to illness and desertion, the latter particularly from
the Polish-Lithuanian troops.
    First   Army stood on the right bank of the Dnieper, and the Second on
the left. The latter had moved Division Neverovsky, reinforced with some
cavalry, forward to Krasnoi to cover against Orsza,   and its line of outposts
ran, in an arc,   from Katan by the Dnieper to Cholm on the road to Pori-
etchie.    On the extreme right, around Dukovtshina, stood Wintzingerode
with a raiding detachment consisting of 1 dragoon and 3 Cossack regiments.
    Now that the Russians were so closely concentrated, they were beginning
to experience a serious supply pinch and a general lack of water.They had
                        —                    —
gone beyond the outer or rather, the inner perimeter of their magazines,
which meant that far more supplies were destroyed than were used, although
the French managed to lay their hands on some. Consequently, the Russians
were forced to requisition. Being on their own ground, they had a great
advantage over the French. Orders were issued for every household to furnish
a fixed quantity of zwieback, grits, and oats, which were to be delivered to
designated collecting points, where the army trains would take over. Sup-
plies,   however, were not the major problem.
    The proximity of the two western armies brought Barclay and Bagration
so close together that the air fairly bristled with electricity. Bagration in-
dulged himself in a great deal of pompous and patriotic rhetoric, laden with
innuendos and reproach, even while he made a grand gesture of subordinating
himself to a man who had less seniority than he had. However, not even
Alexander was deceived by this; the tsar laced his imperial authority with
a large dose of diplomacy and forbearance to dampen the roar of the Russian
bear.
      Barclay managed to get in a few ripostes of his own in a duel of words
that threatened to degenerate into a verbal brawl. Although he and Bagration
met in an air that is best described as frigid, they did attempt to draw up
some plans for united action. However, the differences between the two
made it impossible for anything useful to emerge. The two western armies
may have been united in body, but they were still as divided as ever in
spirit. Barclay's quandary was exacerbated when Constantine, the tsar's

brother, returned from St. Petersburg, providing a rallying point for all the
troublemakers who continued to cling to headquarters.
    The armies were united, but what should be done? In a letter to Barclay,
Alexander expressed his hope for an offensive, but he failed to make this
an order. The army wanted to fight as well, especially after news of Witt-
