                              The Chase Resumes                            205

    But the idea also had its negative aspects, which Napoleon outlined to
those around him at his headquarters. He saw the French army as an in-
strument for the offensive and believed it was not nearly so well suited for
a defensive war, the waging of which would be further complicated when
the rivers froze.   He also did not think that the army would take kindly to
wintering in a hostile country. Above all, however, he was concerned about
the impression such a decision would make upon a Europe that had become
accustomed to his lightning strokes. A halt in midstride would surely be
interpreted as having been forced upon him by the actions rather than the
passivity of the Russian army, and it would stir up all the enemies of France.
"Nothing," said Napoleon, "is more dangerous to us than a prolonged war."
    It was dangerous    not merely for France but for the emperor himself. His
position with the French nation demanded an early continuation of oper-
ations. This was the main consideration that drove him forward. If he were
to postpone operations now,     when misadventures had already occurred on
both flanks, his decision would raise the specter of the Spanish campaign,
which was already a serious drain on the empire. It would also raise the
question of whether the French nation, already showing signs of war weari-
ness, would be willing to support two such costly efforts. Not only was
Napoleon's political opposition beginning to gain renewed impetus, but even
his supporters were beginning to wonder if there would ever be an end to
these wars.
    These were the reasons that pointed toward the timely resumption of
the advance. Such a course was also very much in line with Napoleon's
character. He did not simply need new laurels     —   he craved them. He was
so full of himself, his will to dominate was so boundless, that his overweening
pride demanded the humiliation of his enemies and the quickest possible
realization of his plans. Nothing that had happened so far could induce him
to put all this off for another year.
    Of course, at this point, his resources were such that he could still hope
to force a timely conclusion of the     war at a single grand stroke. Despite
heavy   losses.Napoleon still had command of 314,000 men.^ Of these,
199,000, were under his own and Davout's command, and 115,000 were in
the detached forces. Moreover, most of these men were the old soldiers, the
fittest, who had survived the hardships and exertions and could be expected

to hold up better under whatever was yet to come. That is. Napoleon
expected that from here on the operational noncombat losses would not
continue to run as high as they had.
    In addition. Napoleon could count upon substantial new reinforcements.
IX Corps, with about 3 1 ,000 men, was already across the Vistula and heading
toward the Niemen. There were another 30,000 men in march formations
