210               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Velish, that strengthened his beUef that his right was in danger.        It   was an
erroneous report that placed strong enemy forces at Porietchie. Tutshkov
was turned around at once and sent back to Stabna before the night was
out, while Doctorov waited at Prikas-Vidra for Bagration's arrival. While
he was waiting, Doctorov's advance guard, ^ supported by Pahlen's III Cavalry
Corps, had a smart action around Inkovo and Molevo-Boleto.
      Sebastiani's division was still in its bivouacs, recovering from the marches,
when it was again hit with a surprise attack at dawn. And, again, it seems
that the French cavalry was caught unprepared. The diarists are unanimous
in stating that it was Subverie's brigade, consisting of a Polish, a Prussian,
and a Wuerttembergian regiment, that attempted to save what could be
saved. Major von Werder, the commander of the Prussian Ulans, received
the Officers' Cross of the Legion for covering the retreat with his lancers
until Montbrun came up to restore the action. The Wuerttembergers, when
roused from their bivouacs, had saddled up and gone off toward the sound
of the trumpets without waiting to take down their picket lines.          A while
later,when some of them were being chased back, they ran into the pickets;
several men (and their mounts) were brought crashing down and were taken
prisoner by the Russians. During this same action, a Polish officer was hit
in the thigh by     an arrow, while a Wuerttemberger caught another in his
clothes.   Loosened by Kirgiz or Kalmuck horse archers, both arrows were
saved as souvenirs and were great conversation pieces around the campfires
for some time to come.  Even though nobody mentions any particulars, the
consensus in Subverie's brigade appears to have been that on that day,
Sebastiani, a Corsican, lost what little love his foreign troopers had left for
him.
      Although the French cavalry had again suffered serious losses. Napoleon
was pleased because the action gave him a clue as to what Barclay's intentions
might be. The opposing armies had been completely out of touch with each
other for several days, and Napoleon had received no information.
    Meanwhile, on August 9, Tutshkov remained in place while Doctorov
marched to Moszinki and Bagration to Prikas-Vidra. This change in direc-
tion, and Barclay's indecision, which it reflected, again elicited general
displeasure and exasperation throughout the Russian army. Matters got worse
when news of the successful cavalry action against Sebastiani got around,
as this seemed to furnish clear proof of what might have been expected from
a resolute offensive.   When Barclay halted the advance altogether, a storm
of protest arose. Voices were even heard loudly accusing him of treason.
      But it was not until the 12th, after he had already lost 4 days on the
road to Porietchie, that he could be induced to return to the road to Rudnia.
By then, incoming reports no longer left any doubts that the enemy was
