                                                                                 —
                               The Chase Resumes                               209

genstein's and Tormassov's success began to circulate. Indeed, the occasion
appeared auspicious. The extraordinary supply problems that had befallen
the Grand Army were now known to the Russians, and the French were
estimated to have no more than 150,000 men. Given the broad front Na-
poleon presented, it was thought that he could concentrate no more than
about 75,000 men if an attack was made against his center        —   that is, in the
direction of Rudnia- Vitebsk. If the action was successful, the Russians would
hold the interior line and could then go after Napoleon's wings, which would
be isolated and widely separated.
      Toll made this proposal to Barclay but could not get him to agree. The
general wanted to do no more than hold Smolensk with Second Army while
First operated against Porietchie, where he assumed there were strong enemy

forces.    Only after these were beaten would he try for Rudnia.
      Once Barclay expressed his opposition to Toll's plan, Constantine and
Bagration were all for it. Constantine was so enthused by the plan that he
called a war council on August 6, at which Toll's proposal was accepted.
But it was not until evening, after the meeting had broken up, that Barclay
finally gave in, with the proviso that the operation would be carried no
farther than a day's     march from Smolensk. However, Barclay agreed not
because he was convinced that the plan was a good one but simply because
he did not think that he could uphold his objections in the face of Con-
stantine and Bagration, not to mention the aggressive mood of the army.
Even if Barclay's worries about his right flank were unfounded and he should
have been more worried about his left, it must be admitted that an offensive
at that time was highly problematic.       A resolute advance against the center
of an apparently widely deployed enemy army might promise some success,
but   —   especially against a Napoleon   — could not
                                            it           offer a lasting advantage.
On the other hand, a defeat, even a mere setback, would put the Russian
army into a critical position and bring Russia to the brink of disaster. As-
suming that the Russian assessment of Napoleon's strength was correct
                  —
and it was not he would still have had enough men to exploit a success.
Thus, the possibilities of the little that might be gained were completely
out of proportion to the magnitude of the risk.
   However, the decision had been made, and on August 7 the Russians
advanced in three columns into the country north of the Dnieper. The right,
under Tutshkov I, went toward Kovalevskoie; the center, under Doctorov,
toward Prikas-Vidra; and the left, under Bagration, toward Katan. To cover
the road to Orsza against Davout, only Division Neverovsky"* had been left
at Krasnoi,     an oversight that almost proved fatal.
    The advance, however, soon bogged down. During the night of the 8th,
Barclay received a report from Wintzingerode, who had advanced toward
