                                                                         —
206            1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


that had come that far as well. At the same time, the new Polish-Lithuanian
formations numbered about 23,000. Finally, about 2600 Wuerttembergers
and Westphalians had been left behind in Koenigsberg and Danzig. All these
added up to well over 86,000 additional men, and there were others. Under
Augerau's command were another 55,000 men in Prussia and the bordering
provinces; their own reinforcements, about 19,500 men, either were on their
way or would soon be available. Thus, it was possible to bring up more than
28,000^ of these as well. An additional 22,000 men were in march formations
that were still on their way to Poland, and another 5800 Austrians were
earmarked as replacements for Schwarzenberg's corps.
    Given these circumstances, Napoleon could see no reason for halting
his advance. Indeed, he felt the situation demanded that he continue. This,
then, was exactly what he did, even though he was aware of the disgruntled
mood of the army: From the generals on down into the rank and file, there
were men who obviously had reservations about making a deeper penetration
into the vast Russian expanses. Smarting from his lack of success so far and
needing to justify himself. Napoleon had thrown open for discussion among
his intimates the question of whether the   campaign should be continued.
He had asked for their opinion, and they gave it to him. There was, to say
the least, no enthusiasm. It was unfortunate that Napoleon chose this time,
when his luck appeared to have deserted him, to do something he had never
done before. It was bound to undermine the confidence of his generals. "An
expedition such as ours," he told them, "never succeeds unless it is done in
a single move." They did not appear convinced.
    The only direction a continuing advance could take was toward Smolensk
and Moscow, the same direction the retreating Russian army had taken
and the Russian army itself, not some geographic point, had to be the
objective. There would be no profit in secondary operations. A thrust at
St. Petersburg instead would only lead through even more barren country

than that which the army had just traversed. Indeed, it was to be hoped
that the road to Smolensk and beyond would offer better resources than had
been encountered so far. Therefore, the march to Smolensk was agreed
upon.
    But if a march to Moscow was to be accomplished within the year, then
the army needed to be on its way soon. The weather could be counted upon
for only another 2 months, and Moscow was still 350 miles away. Moreover,
the Russian diplomatic success with Finland and Turkey now became known,
making it all the more imperative that a military decision be forced before
the effects of the agreement came into play. That is, Sweden could now be
expected to shed its cloak of neutrality and step into the Russian camp.
Also, the eventual intervention of the troops freed from the Swedish ex-
