                                The Chase Resumes                                   213

Ney sent forward infantry from Ledru's division; they had no trouble ejecting
the Russians in short order, leaving the town in the hands of the victors.
    Unfortunately, the Russians had demolished the bridge, so Murat's cav-
airy had to negotiate the stream through fords. Still,        it   was a small stream,
and Murat was across in no time. He chased off the Russian cavalry and
captured part of Neverovsky's artillery     — the   first trophies of the entire   cam-
paign.     The Russian general then pulled together his two columns of about
6,000 men, most of them recruits; they assembled into a huge square, which
drove Murat to distraction. Running his cavalry willy-nilly up against this
infantry mass, by the squadron, by the regiment, he raged on and on without
plan. This was despite the fact that the Russians were withdrawing through
oat fields, where every dip in the ground obscured their vision and field of
fire.

        It was not until Neverovsky's   men came up against a palisade fence when
the real trouble began. While his rearmost elements maintained a murderous
fusillade, the leading troops scaled the fence and spread out along the other

side to give covering fire while the rear scrambled across.          Wanting to seize
the opportunity, Murat sent a Wuerttembergian regiment forward. But the
fence,  which had at first been an obstacle for Neverovsky's infantry, now
served splendidly to keep the cavalry at bay. Although he left many of his
men behind, Neverovsky was able to reform his columns undisturbed and
make his getaway in good order.
    It was only at this stage when a horse battery of the Wuerttembergers

came up and laid some damaging fire on the retreating Russians, but it was
too late. Neverovsky reached a defile ahead of Grouchy, and that was the
end of the affair. The Russians had lost about 1500 men, the French barely
500. Murat was forced to give up the chase even before the Russians reached
Korytnia because his horses were exhausted and could hardly walk. The hon
sabreur had done it once again, and one must ask why he had not made
timelier use of his numerous horse artillery.
    Neverovsky was able to continue his retreat on the 15th without further
mishap and was received in the afternoon by Raievsky's corps, which had
come up at a run. In view of his own weakness, however he had only     —
sixteen battalions, roughly 13,000 men in all          —
                                                  Raievsky could not even
consider making a stand in the open field. Thus, everyone returned to
Smolensk during the night of the 15th without further disturbance, while
Murat and Ney, who formed the head of Napoleon's huge column, had
gotten as far as Lubna. Eugene, who had halted to allow the Guard to pass,
reached Siniaki.
        Neverovsky had informed both Barclay and Bagration of the French
