    222                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

    fords was obscured from the enemy's view. For the success of his plan,
    it was immaterial whether he crossed at Smolensk or Pruditchevo. The
    risk was acceptable, provided a sufficient rear guard was left to observe

    Smolensk.
          It   appears, however, that the emperor no longer had the quickness of
    eye and decision of times gone by. Indeed, it seems that the continued failure
    of his plans    —   first,      on Bagration; then those on Barclay; and
                                 his designs
    now his advance against both           — had stunted
                                                  his taste for strategic maneu-
    vers. There would be further indications of such lapses as the campaign pro-

    gressed. Instead of adapting his operations to the changed conditions.
    Napoleon insisted on forcing a crossing through Smolensk. It almost ap-
    pears as if he felt that his reputation in the eyes of the army, especially the
    allied contingents,          was at stake.   He had to enter Smolensk through the
    front door.
          He might have done that with speed and resolution. Instead, he wasted
    the 16th waiting for the army to assemble, even though he must have known
    that even if he succeeded, crossing the river through Smolensk, in the face
    of the enemy's concentrated forces, would be difficult and costly. Then he
    wasted the 17th waiting for the enemy to make a virtually impossible move,
    for no better reason than the fact that it would have suited him splendidly
    if the     enemy had indeed attempted the impossible. After the Russians evac-
    uated Smolensk, he still might have scored a great success, but he let the
    18th pass as well without doing anything.
          Despite the fact that he saw parts of the Russian army withdrawing on
'

    the 17th, he still clung to the idea that Bagration and Barclay, now with
    all their forces in hand, would give him a battle. But the entire campaign

    had been pinned on such a hope. Instead, as at Vitebsk, he again allowed
    the strongly desired battle to drift off into the indeterminate future.




                     VALUTINO AND STRAGAN BROOK
    By 3 a.m. on August 19, the bridges of Smolensk had been reconstructed.
    Ney crossed, positioning himself beyond the St. Petersburg suburb, between
    the St. Petersburg and Moscow roads. He remained there for several hours,
    because patrols had located Russian troops retreating along both roads. These
    were Korff's along the St. Petersburg road and Karpov's Cossacks on the
    Moscow road. Murat then forded the river with the reserve cavalry right
    behind Ney, sending Grouchy along the St. Petersburg road, while he himself
    took Nansouty's and Montbrun's corps along the Moscow road.
       Tutshkov's southern column"^ of the First Army blundered into a difficult
