218                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

rear-guard action. Only VI Infantry Corps and the 3rd Division of III Infantry
Corps joined the 27th Division, which was already in the city; there were
about lOyOOO men in all.^ They were not even able to make use of their
entire artillery because of the great difficulty of deploying the guns on the
walls.
    As noted, Barclay deployed outside the city, in front of the St. Petersburg
suburb, by the road to Porietchie. His front faced south, toward the city.
At 4 a.m. on the 17th, Bagration marched along the Moscow road and
made a front behind the Kolodnia, facing west.
    Napoleon was deployed in a wide semicircle at the foot of the heights
surrounding the city. Ney was on the left; Davout was in the center, with
the Guard behind him; and Murat and Poniatowski were on the right. Junot,
once he arrived, was behind Poniatowski.
    Doctorov began his defense with a sally, which drove the French points
out of the suburbs. This was followed by a rather desultory cannonade, with
neither side concentrating on anything specific. Apparently, Napoleon was
hoping that the Russians would break forward out of the city and make a
major attack, but this was even less likely now than it had been before.
Thus, each side waited for the other to make a move, and they both ended
up doing nothing.
   Toward noon. Napoleon received reports of strong Russian columns
marching away on the Moscow road. They were parts of Bagration's army.
He rode off at once to see for himself and realized that, once again, Barclay
did not intend to stand and fight. He then decided to do what Barclay had
already half expected him to do: cross the river above Smolensk and attack
the Russians on the other side.
      However, due to the poor state of the French cavalry and the general
lack of information from spies, valuable time passed before suitable fords
were found. (The idea of constructing bridges in the face of the enemy
appeared too chancy a proposition.) Worse, Napoleon had to expect that
the Russians might break out of Smolensk and fall upon his rear right in
                       The only action that appeared feasible at the
the middle of a crossing.
moment was to pin down the Russians by making a serious attack against
the city. Napoleon had spent half the day hoping for something that wasn't
about to happen, and it was 2 p.m. before he ordered the attack.
      First,   the weak Russian cavalry, which had come out of the city again,
was driven back; then Ney, Davout, and Poniatowski launched simultaneous
attacks against the suburbs. After 3 hours of stiff fighting, the suburbs were
taken; some troops even succeeded in penetrating the covered walk in front
of the city walls. There, the attack ground to a halt in the face of Russian
