           *                  The Battle of Smolensk                           221



Napoleon was not satisfied with the results of the 17th and intended to
renew the assault against Smolensk on the 18th. He, too, was confronted
with arguments and remonstrations from his generals, but again it seems
improper to say much more than that, because it is quite difficult to determine
how much of what has been written afterward about the conversations has
been influenced by hindsight, self- justification, and posturing.
    Still, the emperor's problems were real enough. He spent the day com-

pleting the assembly of the army for yet another crossing of the Dnieper.
The supply situation also demanded his attention again. Since the last
crossing of the river, thousands more stragglers had fallen behind. Napoleon's
lack of operational activity   —   indeed, his entire behavior since his arrival at
Smolensk    — was most    curious.
    Upon resuming his offensive, he had assembled his forces with admirable
speed.    No matter what one might think of his plan, he had put it into
execution with flawless precision. However, at the decisive moment, when
he arrived at Smolensk and recognized that the enemy's measures, aided by
local circumstances, had foiled his original intentions, he lapsed into in-
activity when he should have redoubled his efforts.        Neither the ignorance
of local circumstances nor the inability to secure the services of local agents
and spies, which presented his generals with great difficulties, can suffice to
explain this failure any more than can the fact that the army had its own
difficulties.   Thus, there remains no recourse but to seek the explanation in
Napoleon himself.
   If his plan was to succeed, then speed was of the essence. Thus, when

he found Smolensk occupied, he had to either do everything in his power
to seize it quickly or, without waiting for the complete assembly of his army
(i.e.,   on the 16th), take his main force across the river above the city. In
view of the irresolution the Russians had exhibited so far, he might very
well have taken such a risk. An immediate and thorough reconnaissance of
the Dnieper, a little over 300 feet wide at this point, would have revealed
that a crossing was possible even without the bridge train,        which had ap-
parently not yet arrived.  As it turned out, there was a ford just above the
city and two more at Pruditchevo. By the time they were eventually dis-
covered, the time to capitalize on them had long passed.
    Even if Napoleon had not thought it prudent to ford the river imme-
diately above the city with a strong part of his army, the conditions at
Pruditchevo were not merely advantageous but ideal. Not only was there a
ford that was quite wide and usable by all arms, because the dry summer
had resulted in a low water level, but all the raw materials for bridge con-
struction were locally at hand as well. More than that, the location of both
