220                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


together friend and foe with impartial finality. Inside the city, entire blocks
had been turned into ashes, containing the carbonized remains of the wounded
who had been unable to flee the flames. Everywhere in the streets were
corpses that had been rolled flat by guns, caissons, and wagons. This, in
brief, describes the horrific scenes painted at great length in so   many diaries,
both by the combatants and by those who entered the city after the fighting
was over. As always, the street fighting had been a thankless sort of struggle
where victory was measured in the taking of a building and defeat in its loss;
where the respite after success lasted only until the drumbeat of approaching
reserves was heard; where the enemy could be lurking behind every window,
and a cannon, double-loaded with canister, could be waiting around every
comer. All this, and more, is contained in the term ^'seC'Saw action," so
often used in describing street or town fighting. Such action has little in
common with a battle in the open field, where, by comparison, everything
seems clear and uncomplicated.



For Barclay,   it   was now high time to leave. The march had to be made to
the left. Although military historians never fail to make mention of whether
a march was to be made to the right or to the left by a deployed army, the
true significance of this escapes the vast majority of casual readers.       Even
though it has already been noted in Chapter 7, it is appropriate to repeat
here that all formations,    down to the last company, deployed dressing on
their right guides. Thus,    when an army reformed into columns again and
the march was to go to the left, this was more difficult than simply going
to the right, because every battalion, brigade, and division now had to turn
back on, or enfilade,   itself so that the head of the column would be up

front, where it belonged.
    The march was to be made in two columns. The northern column under
Doctorov stepped off at 7 p.m. and took the Porietchie road. The southern
column under Tutshkov took the St. Petersburg road around 9 p.m., leaving
Korff II behind with a strong rear guard. Both were to reunite at Solovieva-
                                          ^



Pereprava. Bagration, in a rage over Barclay's decision to retreat, did not
wait, but took off on the     Moscow road during the morning hours. All he
left   behind to cover the road was General Karpov II with four Cossack
regiments,   who stood on the Pruditchevo Heights. Somewhat farther on,
Prince Gortshakov was left with the rather weak 2nd Grenadier Division of
VIII Infantry Corps, reinforced with some cavalry from VII Infantry Corps
(10 battalions and 8 squadrons), in case the former had to be received.
Bagrat ion's unconscionable abandonment of the Moscow road was bound
to put the First Army into grave danger.
