                          The Battle of Smolensk                          217

    Raievsky had about 17,000 men and 74 guns' available for the defense.
While the infantry and artillery took its position in the suburbs, the cavalry
remained out in the forefield.
    Both Murat and Ney appeared on the heights in front of the city about
8 a.m. on August 16. Grouchy at once went forward and drove the Russian
cavalry back into the city, while Ney deployed for an attack. By about 9
a.m., Napoleon himself appeared on the scene with Davout's corps. If Na-
                                       —
poleon was intent on taking Smolensk when he could see how weakly the
city was defended  — the time to advance energetically was now, before the
Russian main force arrived. Instead, he limited himself to a useless cannonade
and a few infantry attacks, which could hardly have accomplished more
than making certain that the Russians meant to make a serious defense.
Meanwhile, he awaited the arrival of the rest of the army.
    By the 17th, 140,000 men were in place. Only Eugene and Junot were
missing. The former, left behind as a rear guard at Siniaki, had come as far
as Korytnia, where he took up another rear-guard position on the L6th.

Junot was supposed to have arrived by 8 a.m. on the 17th, but letting himself
be led astray by a "guide," he had gone in a circle and did not arrive until
5 p.m.
   Napoleon's unfortunate hesitation on the 16th had afforded Barclay and
Bagration the time they needed to bring up their armies. The first elements
of Second Army moved into the city during the course of the day, and First
Army arrived toward evening, after a forced march of 30 miles.
   The terrain around Smolensk favored the Russians, since it was unlikely
that Napoleon would attempt to force a river crossing in the immediate
vicinity of the city.  Even so, there remained the danger that he might do
so further upriver, thus blocking the road to     Moscow, which ran closely
parallel to the right bank of the Dnieper for a bit more than a mile. It would
have been wise for the Russians to march off at once and leave Smolensk
defended by a rear guard. But the mood of the army precluded the idea that
the "Holy City," which contained important relics of the Russian Orthodox
church, should be yielded without a struggle. Besides, an old belief, dating
from the Polish wars, maintained that "he who has Smolensk also has
Moscow."
    For once, Bagration and Barclay appeared to act in unison. The former
was to occupy the city, and the latter was to deploy east of the city along
the Kolodnia. However, if Bagration and the entire Russian army expected
Barclay to accept a battle now, they were to be disappointed again. He had
already decided to withdraw just as soon as the Moscow road was secured
and the supplies in Smolensk were either removed or destroyed. Thus, the
"battle" that took place on the 17th was in reality nothing more than a
