                                                    ^




224             1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


approach, Tutschkov at once took his tired troops (3200 men, with 12 guns)
back along the Moscow road toward the advancing French and took a
position behind the Kolodnia. There, Ney attacked his position toward noon
with Razout's division. Ney's troops, however, arrived only gradually, and
Tutshkov was himself reinforced by another 2200 men and 6 guns.^ These
reinforcements had already gotten as far as Bredichino when Yermolov or-
dered Tutshkov 1 to send them back. As a result, Tutshkov 111 was able to
maintain himself until only about 3 p.m. at which time he withdrew behind
                                                ,




the Stragan Brook, where he was received by fresh forces.
     A stiff action ensued along the banks of this brook. It             is   referred to as
the Battle of Valutino-Gora or the Battle of Stragan Brook; Valutino-Gora
is   the place where the    first    encounter occurred. This action eventually
involved all of 111 and IV Infantry Corps and I Cavalry Corps on the Russian
side; not counting the Cossacks, 23,000 men^ were involved.   On the French
side, Murat and Ney had, at first, 27,500 men, who were joined by another
8000 from Gudin's division from I Corps.
    While the action was in progress, Junot (who had crossed the Dnieper
at Pruditchevo) stood by watching, figuratively speaking, with his hands in
his pockets. At this point, one may no longer say that the man was merely
mentally disturbed; he was an alcoholic in an advanced state of deterioration
(within a year he went completely insane and killed himselO- Regarding
Stragan Brook, Junot states that he stood in a "superb position, in the rear
of the enemy's left," but he fails to explain why he did nothing, despite the
fact that he and Murat had heated exchanges over this. Again, the romances
are fairly low key about the subject, but anyone who cares to look at the
sources can learn   all   about     it   from the Westphalians       — from the    division
commander, Ochs, right down into the rank and file.
    Here, one is again struck by the fact that despite all the resentments
and grievances, once the action was joined everything was forgotten and
winning was more important than anything else. From his nearby battalions,
Junot heard shouts that said, in effect, "Let's go       what are we waiting
                                                         .   .   .




for?" He became so enraged over this that he started to curse and threatened
to have anyone else who opened his mouth shot. Some claim that only the
discipline of the Westphalians prevented an open mutiny. When Murat
came galloping up, he was greeted with a thunderous "hurrah!" But nothing
came of this, except a verbal battle between Murat and Junot, while the
real one was raging in plain sight of the entire corps. The only thing Ochs
could wring from Junot was permission to clear out a nearby patch of woods
covering the Russian left flank. The most interesting footnote to this is that
after his violent encounter with Murat, Junot left for a nearby manor, which
had already been commandeered for him, and sat down to have breakfast.
