                               The Battle of Smolensk                            223

situation,  due entirely to Bagration's high-handed action. During a very
difficult night march through forested terrain, Tutshkov's column had sep-

arated.   The rearmost part, all of II Infantry Corps and parts of IV Infantry
Corps, had been late getting off the mark and went astray in the dark. By
morning, between 5 and 6 a.m., it suddenly found itself only about a mile
away from the St. Petersburg suburb. After three hours' march, the troops
were almost back where they had started. The situation was critical. The
entire column,    still   stuck on difficult forest paths, was in great confusion.
Korffs rear guard was far off, and the enemy was in cannon range.
    It was a stroke of good fortune that Barclay himself was present with the

column. As always in difficult situations, he kept a cool head. Ordering the
column to about-face, he left Duke Eugene of Wuerttemberg with a weak
rear guard^ at Gedeonovo while the column headed along the road to Gor-
bunovo, as originally ordered.
    Fortune again militated in favor of the Russians when Ney and Murat,
uncertain about the enemy's line of retreat, did not make immediate use of
the time directly after their river crossing. As a result, the French were even
more surprised than the Russians when the latter's column suddenly turned
up so close to them, and it was nearly 8 a.m. before the French mounted
any attacks with substantial strength. However, the timely arrival of four
Russian hussar regiments enabled Duke Eugene, who had made a tenacious
defense despite his lack of numbers, to fall back to Hapanovchina in good
order. There, he was received by two battalions from II Infantry Corps.
Soon after, Korff was able to get past the danger point as well, and he closed
up without further mishap.
    As soon as Napoleon heard of the action, he sent Davout across the
river, where he took the same position that Ney had held after his crossing.

Junot was ordered to cross at Pruditchevo, where the fords had at last been
discovered. The Guard, Eugene, and Poniatowski remained on the left bank
at Smolensk.    Once aware of the presence of Russian forces on the Moscow
road. Napoleon recalled Ney and sent him off in that direction.         Napoleon
himself, expecting nothing more than a rear-guard action, returned to Smo-
lensk.
    Meanwhile, Prince Gortshakov had withdrawn along the Moscow road,
leaving only Karpov's Cossacks behind, as soon as the latter had been
approached by the points of Tutshkov Ill's advance guard^ of the First Army's
southern column at about 8 a.m. Since it had taken Tutshkov nearly 12
hours to make this march of only about 15 miles over forest paths,          it   was
hardly to be expected that the entire column would be able to pass the
dangerous junction with the Moscow road before nightfall.
    Recognizing the importance of this junction and informed of the enemy's
