                              The Battle of Smolensk                           219

reserves. Unfortunately, the attackers neither found the breaches in the wall
nor recognized the weakness of the citadel.
       Napoleon brought up more artillery, 150 guns in all, but they weren't
able to put so much as a dent into the old brick wall, even though twenty-
six    12-pounders tried to do just that. Repeated infantry attacks failed again,
with heavy losses sustained, especially by the Poles. Napoleon then deployed
a battery of sixty guns on the right flank in order to lay enfilading fire on
the bridges in the city and thereby stem the flow of reinforcements from the
north side of the river and silence a Russian battery on the opposite bank.
At the same time, he had the howitzers throw grenades into the city to set
its wooden buildings on fire. But the Russians refused to give way, and the

fighting went on unabated until nightfall. The Russians lost about 6000
men, the French more than 9000.
       Despite the fact that the French had been unable to penetrate the inner
city,   Barclay was justified in evacuating it once the Moscow road had been
secured, because his strategic position was untenable.       If Napoleon forced   a
crossing of the Dnieper above the city, the army would be in great danger.
But once Barclay's decision to retreat became known,           all   the resentment
stored up in the army broke out into the open.      A number of generals, headed
by an emotionally overwrought Constantine and also by Benningsen, con-
fronted Barclay and attempted to force him to make a stand.           A letter from
Bagration expressed the same sentiments.       It   was a turbulent scene. Even if
less    than half of what has been written about these events at headquarters
is   true,   then some weighty accusations flew through the air. But Barclay
stood his ground. In doing so, he not only displayed an inordinate amount
of intestinal fortitude but also saved the army and Russia.
       The evacuation of Smolensk got under way during the night of August
17-18, while the bridges across the Dnieper were dismantled. Only the St.
Petersburg suburb on the north side of the river continued to be occupied.
       On the 18th, Barclay remained in his position on both sides of the
Porietchie road because his troops    —those who had fought as well as those
                                                    —
who had made the forced march on the 16th were in desperate need of a
rest. The day passed relatively quietly. That is, it did for the armies at large.

For Korff, who had been left in the bridgehead to defend against a French
attempt to cross into the St. Petersburg suburb, and for Ney, who attempted
to do just that, it was another hard day. Splashing through thigh-deep water,
the Wuerttembergers and what was left of a Portuguese battalion succeeded
in getting across, only to be blasted back by the withering musketry of KorfPs
jaegers.     Many who thought they had survived the battle of Smolensk didn't.
       The suburbs of Smolensk presented a gruesome sight, death having thrown
