            *
                             A Change in Command                          233

could look into the blood-red sun without injury to the eyes and that a
Westphalian saw men, even officers, attempting to slake their thirst by
drinking their own urine. A Saxon dragoon observed that the sun had
bleached out the skin of the horses: Horses that had left Saxony as dark
bays had turned into isabellas; dark bays had become mouse-colored; and
blacks were now light bays.
       On the other hand, food was not a problem. "All the farms were full of
harvest," writes Lossberg, a Westphalian major.    "The regiments bake their
own bread and if we can't find flour, we take the grain to the local mills,
which are numerous hereabouts, to have it ground." Of course. Napoleon
had wanted to equip the troops with hand mills from the start, but the first
of these did not arrive until after the retreat had already gotten under way.
    There was also a plentitude of livestock. However, this benefited only
the troops at the head of the marching order, who quickly expropriated
everything in sight and often deliberately ruined whatever they didn't use.
Honey also became a problem. Apparently, it was harder on the weakened
stomachs of the soldiers than were the stings of the angry bees. (Though
the faces of some men were swollen beyond recognition, and a few who had
been too careless even died.) But that, save for the bees, was the good side.
Accounts by Chambray and other eyewitnesses also refer to the new character
the war was now assuming. The Russians were becoming aroused, their
fanaticism fanned by the barbaric behavior of the Grand Army. The pillaging
army rolled forward, and what the soldiers couldn't use, they burned.



To return to the action; Grouchy's cavalry had reached Dukovtshina on the
army's left, and Eugene took the same direction, joining him at Dorogobush.
On the right, Poniatowski had gone through Belkino; further to the right,
Latour-Maubourg was still several marches to the rear at Jelnia. The Guard
leftSmolensk on the 23rd, followed by Junot, who had remained on the
battlefield of the 19th.Napoleon himself did not leave Smolensk until the
night of the 25th, when he received news from Murat that the Russians
stood in front of Dorogobush. It was time to assemble the army again.




Despite the fact that Barclay had retreated again on the 20th and 21st, he
was firmly convinced that the time to offer a battle was at hand, even though
he didn't expect to win. Indeed, he didn't even think he could wait for the
arrival of Miloradovitch's reserves. Instead, Barclay ordered him to take a
supporting position at Viasma as an insurance policy in the event of a defeat.
He had already sent officers ahead from Smolensk to find suitable positions
