234                  1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


where a battle might be fought. They had come up with two possibilities:
One was behind the Usha, west of Dorogobush; the other was southwest of
Gshatsk. Both were along the great Moscow road.
    The First Army occupied the Usha position on the 22nd. Bagration,
who had already gone as far as Dorogobush, was summoned back. But the
prince now denied his cooperation with all sorts of subterfuges. He ranted
at Toll, who had selected both positions, and sent him packing. Thus, the
First    Army could do little else but retreat again on the 24th. By the time
it got   to Dorogobush, Bagration had already gone 15 miles farther to Brash-
ino.    This put an end to the adventurous plan of attempting to risk a battle
with barely 90y000 men against Napoleon's 145,000.
       What was one to make of Bagration's behavior? He constantly clamored
for a battle, only to end up foiling every attempt to have one. He did this
several times and,           at least   on one occasion, put Barclay into a serious
position.       But his reasons were really quite simple. The intrigues of his party
to unseat Barclay had by now reached all the way to St. Petersburg.             The
very     last   thing Bagration wanted to do was to fight a battle on Barclay's
initiative.      This was bound to blunt the thrust of the conspiracy. At the
same time, it was not sufficient for Bagration to think Barclay was wrong.
The army had to think so as well. Hence, all the noise. The only thing
that may be said of this in Bagration's behalf was that, unlike the connivers
of Benningsen's and Yermolov's stripe, he sincerely believed that Barclay's
ill   will and incompetence would plunge Russia into disaster and ruin.
   With Murat and Platov dueling on the 26th and 27th, Barclay and
Bagration both made it to Viasma by the latter date. Again, Barclay wanted
to make a stand; again, Bagration objected. When no suitable position
offered itself anyhow, the retreat was continued on the 28th.       On the evening
of the 27th, by a special order from Alexander, General Konovnitzyn, one
of the finest generals in the entire army, had been given charge of the rear
guard, which was also strongly reinforced.           An immediate result of this was
that the French advance was slowed up considerably.
       On the 29th, at Zarevo-Saimishtshe, Barclay again wanted to fight and
Bagration didn't.          Not that the position there was any good. Contrary to
popular belief,       it   was not behind the swamp, which could be crossed only
over a single dam, but in front of it.           Nor was there actually a swamp in
existence at the time, because the hot weather had dried it up completely.
       The two united armies numbered 95,734 men, not counting the Cos-
sacks. In sharp contrast to the French, this force          had sustained no losses
other than those suffered in combat. This was despite the fact that the
Russians had been little better off than the French, since no one had even
remotely considered the possibility that operations would be carried so far
