                              The Battle of Smolensk                        225

After he had gone, the Westphalians did get to take some part in the action,
and some of the cavalry went with Murat. But without central direction,
their actions turned out to be chaotic and episodic. As a result of all this,
Ney and Murat were reduced to making frontal assaults that were not worth
the sacrifices they demanded. The fight, which reached its peak of intensity
with the arrival of Gudin's division, burned itself out by nightfall.
    II Russian Infantry Corps and Morand's division from I French Corps

did not arrive on the battlefield until after the action was over. The Russians
lost about 5000 men, the French 8768, including General Gudin, the first

general officer to be killed in action during the Russian campaign. That the
Russians did not suffer a total defeat is entirely due to the fact that Napoleon
had returned to Smolensk instead of remaining with his corps up in the first
line. As a result, given the well-known intransigence and insubordination

of Napoleon's top-echelon commanders, there was no unified conduct of
the action.
       Despite the fact that Junot was one of Napoleon's old favorites, from
the days of Toulon, the emperor was beside himself and, for a moment,
contemplated relieving Junot of his command.. He decided against this and,
typically, transferred his ire to the hapless Westphalians, innocent bystanders
in more ways than one, who were given the task of cleaning up the battlefield.
It   must, however, be kept in mind that Junot certainly was no longer in
full   possession of his faculties.




The Russians, who had bivouacked behind the Jarovenka, just beyond the
battlefield,   continued their retreat by 4 a.m. on the 20th, and the reunited
First   Army crossed the Dnieper on the next day. Bagration was already a
day's march ahead at Michailevka. The losses of both sides during the fighting
from the 14th to the 19th had been high. The Russians had lost more than
14,000 men, the French more than 19,000. Ney's corps had again been hit
hardest.     But the French losses were not confined to the ones suffered in
action. Because of renewed supply difficulties, thousands had again left the
ranks.    The net result was that the French army had been down by 30,000
since the 13th.
       For the Russians, the days of Smolensk represented the critical point of
the entire campaign. Had the army been beaten there, the results would
have been far worse than those of Borodino. Given the direction of the
attack and the still great superiority of the French, this could have led to a
total destruction of the     western armies, since there would have been no
finite limit for a pursuit.     But Barclay had remained steadfast against his
fellow field marshal, the tsar's brother, and all the other noisemakers at his
