232             1812: NAPOLEON\S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


2000 men, was hardly able to contain Wintzingerode's raiding detachments.
To deal with this situation, Division Laborde of the Young Guard (minus
the battalions seconded for security duties at imperial headquarters), about
4500 men, with 400 cavalry from V Corps, was left in Smolensk. Meanwhile,
Division Pino, Italians from IV Corps, and Division Pajol from II Cavalry
Corps, about 6000 infantry and 1500 cavalry, were sent to Vitebsk. This
left Napoleon with 115,278 infantry and 33,797 cavalry, a total of 149,075

men, of which Latour-Maubourg's 4000 cavalrymen were still to come up.
     Given these circumstances, it was doubly necessary to have a strong
reserve at Smolensk to fill the gap that would be left in the center by the
advance against Moscow. At this point, however, only about 5000 to 6000
men in march formations were on their way there. Victor, who was already
on his way to Kovno, was ordered to take his corps of 31,000 men^ to
Smolensk. He crossed the Niemen at Kovno on September 3 and arrived
in Smolensk on the 27th with 25,000 men, after detaching a Saxon brigade
and leaving some troops in Vitebsk and other places. His mission was to
form a reserve for both the main army and the flanking corps, especially St.
Cyr's by the Dvina. Napoleon was less concerned about Schwarzenberg.
     Before leaving Smolensk, Napoleon again went to considerable pains to
secure the supply situation. He ordered that magazines and hospitals be
established, but again the French administration did not accomplish           its

assigned task even by half.
      While Napoleon was still in Smolensk, Murat crossed the Dnieper at
Solovieva-Pereprava on August 22 with the reserve cavalry, closely followed
by Davout and Ney. This caused the Russian rear guard under Plato v and
                                                            ^



Rosen to draw back to Michailevka, where a brisk delaying action ensued
in the afternoon that resulted in no advantages for the French.
    Since the army had entered old Russia, the scene greeting the troops
had undergone some changes. The march now led through fertile regions,
where the rye stood tall in the fields. The roads were better as well, especially
the Smolensk-Moscow road, which was grand in comparison to what had
been seen so far. A three-lane avenue, lined with a double row of birch on
both sides, it would have given pleasure had it not been for the blistering
heat and the fact that it was largely off-limits for the infantry, who had to
march along its sides. Worse, the dust churned up by the marching columns
caused eyes and throats to bum, and water was still hard to find. As long
as the Dnieper was near, water could be obtained; away from the river, it
was back to the way things had been before. The men drank from every
well and every puddle, no matter how revolting and odious the water might
be—  and no matter how sick they got. The entries in Mertens' diary for
August 25, 26, 28, and 31 say that the air was so thick with dust that one
