                                 A Change in Command                                     231




The hope for a decisive battle was to pull Napoleon to the gates of Moscow;
it   carried with   it   the promise that peace would also be found there. This
was despite the fact that Napoleon's hopes for a battle had already been
dashed twice and his hopes for a peace in Moscow were entirely arbitrary.
He might have thought differently had he not closed his eyes to the tenacious
defense the Russians were making and the local enmity that met the French
everywhere once the army entered into old-Russian territory.
      What if the Russians did not retreat to Moscow but headed south, perhaps
in the direction of Viasma or Kaluga? Could he then continue his advance
against Moscow, or would he be forced to turn around, unless he was to
follow them into indeterminate distances?
      Surely, the decision to go on did not come easily to Napoleon.                A mishap
now would have far greater consequences than would an interruption of the
campaign. That he was aware of this emerges from a letter outlining the use
of Victor's corps as a reserve at Smolensk.               It says:   "If I   can not find the
peace I seek there, then my retreat, supported by a strong reserve, will be
made secure and I will be forced to make haste." It was a high-stakes game,
and Napoleon, spoiled by luck, like a true gambler, placed everything on
one card without weighing the risks too much. However, Clausewitz warns
that "the possibility of success       is   the   first   law of any undertaking." For
Napoleon, this possibility had receded into a nebulous distance at this point.
Things being as they were, Napoleon's decision to press on from Smolensk
would prove to be the pivotal mistake of the entire war.



The means Napoleon had in hand for a continuance of his advance were
not in any way sufficient for the task. The main army group (including
Latour-Maubourg's cavalry corps, which was still coming up, and Pajol's
division, but not Dombrowski's division) had numbered 286,000 men at the
crossing of the Niemen and 191,500 at the departure from Vitebsk; now,
on 23 August, it was down to only 161,475 men.' Yet no decisive victory
had been won, and some stiff fighting would probably occur before Moscow,
270 miles from Smolensk, could be reached.
   However, not even all of these forces were immediately available. Until
the march formations from the reserve came up, Smolensk had to be gar-
risoned with first-line formations. It was also necessary to send a strong

detachment back in the direction of Vitebsk because the covering force left
there (3 Hessian battalions and 8 squadrons from IV Cavalry Corps), about
