230             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


given the width of the front, an advance from Smolensk would take place
on a much narrower operations base. This became all the more dangerous
because a continued advance   —
                             the direct-line distance from Kovno to Mos-
                          —
cow was about 575 miles created so long line of communications that it
would be impossible to effect a quick concentration of the army at any
threatened point. If Napoleon continued his advance, he would surrender
the tactical advantage he had enjoyed, as well as the security of his line of
communications, which was doubly sensitive now, in view of the great
distances involved. If the enemy capitalized on this Achilles' heel, the French
army was doomed to grind itself down even without help from the Nordic
winter.
    However, regardless of the extent to which Napoleon overestimated his
own strength and underestimated not only the enemy's strength but also
the dangers that lay ahead, he could not quite ignore them. Thus, at Smo-
lensk, he began to have his first doubts about the outcome of his undertaking.
    As he began to waver, he drew his intimates into conversations, ex-
pressing his intention to halt the campaign. These men, who knew the
mood of the army better than he did, at once agreed with him. The army
desperately needed a rest, and not merely for a few days. The heat and the
lack of food and water, which had also given the Russians a great deal of
trouble at Smolensk, were unbearable.
    Such second thoughts, however, could not really take firm root in Na-
poleon. General Bonaparte could have halted at Smolensk and postponed
the conclusion of the campaign to the next year, hut for the emperor this
was next to impossible. The same political and personal considerations that
had governed his decisions in Vitebsk were at work at Smolensk as well.
They called for a continuation of his advance. It was the statesman who
pushed the field marshal and caused him to stumble, and it was the field
marshal's error that permitted the statesman to override him. If, and only
if, the continued advance was a viable military proposition, it was also
demanded. But the military decision had to be the governing factor.
    At this point Napoleon received some good news. Schwarzenberg had
beaten Tormassov at Gorodeczna; and St. Cyr, who had taken over from
Oudinot, had beaten Wittgenstein at Polotsk. The new great dangers that
would arise in these places were still latent. Above all, there was Murat's
report that the Russians were withdrawing in good order and appeared re-
solved to fight a battle as soon as they found a good position. This possibility
attracted Napoleon like a magnet. Deciding to go forward, the emperor met
all objections with the comment "The wine has been poured, it must now

be drunk."
