236               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


great captain's equal, but he possessed the insights needed to play the role
of a Fabius Cunctator (the man who had delayed Hannibal's march against
                                                                 —
Rome). Fully cognizant of his opponent's superiority, he sought even more
                            —
than he had in the past to reach his objective not through risk and daring
but by avoiding a direct confrontation and by simply outlasting Napoleon.
    There can be little doubt that Kutuzov's greatest achievement was that
he saw the change in the wind long before nearly everyone else did. He was
already aware that, at worst, the winter would come to his aid in driving
the French out of Russia. Thus, what Barclay had done because he could
not do otherwise Kutuzov now did with deliberation. He had a strategy, and
his implementation of this strategy was greatly eased by the fact that, unlike
Barclay, he was in complete charge and had the confidence of the army.
His second-greatest achievement was that he knew how to hold on to this
confidence despite his shortcomings and weaknesses, even when things con-
tinued to go wrong for a time. Kutuzov had a natural shrewdness and knew
exactly how to play the Russian character.     A braggart by nature, he would
brashly proclaim himself the victor even when he was beaten, and he never
tired of telling those around him that the French were already finished,   no
matter what     they did.   And since he knew this to be true, he was able to
give free rein to his braggadocio, no matter how he actually felt about facing
Napoleon in a battle. Thus, nature had fully equipped him to reap without
effort the harvest which Barclay had sown and which circumstances had

ripened to become the savior of Russia.
    With Kutuzov, Benningsen returned as chief of staff to the army he had
just left.   This was hardly a fortunate choice. But though his abilities were
highly debatable, Benningsen knew how to win Kutuzov's approval, espe-
cially in the beginning.     This was despite the fact that Kutuzov rightfully
distrusted Benningsen,      who was angling for an independent command. As
a result,    Kutuzov often left Benningsen in the dark about his intentions.
Indeed, Kutuzov's paranoia generally prevented him from confiding in any-
one. The fact that this did not result in a major disaster was largely due to
the efforts of Colonel von Toll. Kutuzov had great confidence in him and
brought him into his headquarters, where he soon exercised a decisive in-
fluence on the course of operations, something he had never been able to
achieve while serving in Barclay's headquarters.
    Alexander must have at last caught on to some of the ill wind that had
been blowing Barclay's way, because he never entirely abandoned him.
Barclay was left in command of First Army. However, Kutuzov's suspicious
nature tried to constrict him even there. Totally misreading Barclay's char-
acter, he expected that the general would allow the slight he had received
to reflect itself in his leadership of First Army. Therefore, the rear guard
