242              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


number of diarists make mention of the frosty touch in the breezes that
wafted through the bivouacs at night. Napoleon was among the first to catch
a cold, which was to bother him severely during the coming battle.
      In the afternoon, Murat ran into Konovnitzyn near Gridnevo and a
steady action ensued.   It   lasted until nightfall,   when Konovnitzyn, his right
flank threatened, withdrew to the Kolotzkoi cloister.         The next day, Sep-
tember 5, brought a repeat performance, and Konovnitzyn withdrew again
when Eugene appeared in his right flank. He made an unhindered getaway
through Borodino into the Russian main position because Napoleon, who
was present, ordered that he be left alone so that Gortshakov's detachment,
placed in front of the Russian main position's            left   wing, would get the
undivided attention of the forces present. The detachment was deployed
near the village of Shevardino, where a large earthwork had been thrown
up in front of the Russian army's left wing. Napoleon saw at once that its
guns would have created difficulties for a continuing pursuit of Konovnitzyn's
detachment. This marked the beginning of the action of Shevardino, in
which Davout was to commit Morand and Friant with their divisions to
support Murat's advance guard. ^
   The Shevardino redoubt, of the usual pentagon shape, was an earthwork
armed with a battery of twelve guns. As was to be the case in the upcoming
Battle of Borodino, the redoubt served as a sort of citadel for Gortshakov's
infantry,   which was deployed around it at a distance of several hundred
paces.
      Napoleon ordered the cavalry to drive off their opposite numbers, which
they did until they were brought up short by the Russian artillery. Then the
infantry of Compans's division,       who were part of Murat's advance guard,
attacked and made their way into the redoubt. But this merely marked the
beginning of the action. The earthwork changed hands several times before
final possession   was claimed by the Spanish regiment in Friant's division.
Darkness was beginning to fall when Poniatowski^ appeared on the old
Smolensk road and threatened to envelop the Russian left. This marked the
end of the action. The Russians withdrew into the darkness, leaving several
guns behind.
   Most sources claim that the French suffered only about 2000 casualties,
which is not far from the truth, but this number includes only the ones
sustained in the fighting for the redoubt at Shevardino. In contrast, the
same sources cite about 7000 Russian casualties, but this is a count of the
total casualties sustained in all the actions, including those against Konov-
nitzyn over the previous 2 days. Actually, the French casualties covering
the same period came to about 4000 men.
      That the affair at Shevardino almost became a battle was due entirely
