                                    Borodino                                 241



Murat and the French advance guard arrived in Gshatsk on September 1
and occupied the town after a Ught skirmish. Napoleon himself got there
just a short while later, while the army was still a march behind.
    Again, day after day, the densely packed columns were marching through
dry stretches of country while the mercury topped the 90°F mark.            The
Russians had already stripped the countryside on their way through, so the
French had to look far and wide to come up with anything. Napoleon made
the infantry march alongside, not on the great Moscow road, so that the
road itself would be open to facilitate the free movement of the artillery and
train columns.     However, given even this advantage, the commissariat still
left virtually   everything to be desired. There was meat but no salt or sup-
plemental comestibles; there was flour but no bread. Above all, there was
a general lack of water. Suicides were rampant again.      On September 1, a
heavy rain brought relief from the heat, but it was killing the army with
kindness: It lasted for 3 days without letup. The bottom went out of the
road once more. Thousands of horses faltered and collapsed, and the corps
commanders again became insistent that it was impossible to advance further.
The army, which on its departure from Smolensk had numbered 149,075
men, was down to 133,819, including Latour-Maubourg's cavalry and 7321
men who were detached on foraging expeditions. Most of the latter, however,
were to return before the battle.
     In little more than a week, the army had lost another 15,256 men, of
which only a small fraction can be accounted for by the security detachments
left behind and by the combat losses sustained in the advance guard. The

vast majority were victims of the weather and the marching conditions it
had brought about. However, the army was modestly reinforced by the return
of Pajol's division, which still had 1400 troopers. Together with Pinot's Italian
division and Guyon's brigade, coming from Vitebsk, Pajol's troopers had been
sent after Wintzingerode and had actually pursued him as far as Ivanoviczy,
at which point they had left off to return to the army. But Pajol was the only

one to make it back in time for the battle; Pinot and Guyon did not arrive
until afterward. In all, the central army group on September 2 numbered 90,507
infantry, 29,219 cavalry, and 15,493 artillerymen, with 587 guns.

     Expecting that the new Russian commander would at last offer him the
battle he desired. Napoleon let his army rest around Gshatsk on September
2 and 3. Only the Westphalians had to make a short march on the 3rd to
close up with the rest of the army. In the meantime, the foraging detachments
and as many stragglers as could be rounded up were brought in.
     The sun came out again on the 4th, but the great heat had gone with
the rain. It was a beautiful day. As if to give an early warning, however, a
