                                    Borodino                                  243

to Bagration's pugnacity. The Russian bear's fighting blood had been up and
he kept on feeding reinforcements into the action until Poniatowski's arrival
and the oncoming night put an end to it. He had fallen into the trap of
defending an advanced position long after it had accomplished its purpose,
which was to give the army time to occupy its main position.
     The two western armies were now completely assembled, with the ex-
ception of a few Cossack regiments. Taking into account the losses of the
last several days, their total came to 103,000 men, with 637 guns. In ad-

dition, there were about 7000 Cossacks, as well as the militia already men-
tioned, which was not to figure in the fighting.^
     The present strength of the French army at Borodino, on the eve of the
first general battle it was to fight in this campaign, may be realistically set

at about 124,000 men, with 587 guns.^ This was all that was left of this
portion of the Grand Army, which had numbered 286,000 men*^ just 11
weeks before. Even though the French army was numerically stronger and
even though the rigors of the campaign had trimmed away the weakest and
left only the hardiest elements, the army was still at a disadvantage. This

was largely because the horses of the cavalry and artillery were in poor
condition and because the artillery included 160 three- and four-pounders,
which left its broadside weight at a disadvantage of 3800 pounds to the
Russians' 4800. A moment of virtual equilibrium had now arrived, in which
the two forces were, at last, to take each other's measure in battle.




Benningsen, now Kutuzov's chief of staff, had sent Toll out to scout for a
suitable position. This was not quite as simple as it sounds. Clausewitz, who
was with the Russian headquarters throughout this phase of the campaign,
points out that the Russian terrain in the operations area was not rich in
the sort of features that make a good position, that is, ground features that
favor a defense.   The areas where the great swamps are found were also
extensively forested. As a result, it was difficult to find clearings large enough
to deploy substantial masses of troops. Where the forestation was less dense
(e.g., between Smolensk and Moscow),       the terrain was flat, lacking distinct
heights or deeply cut valleys. The cultivated fields were not in any way
fenced and thus could be crossed everywhere. Not even the villages offered
good strongpoints, because they were composed entirely of wooden struc-
tures, which could be easily set on fire with grenades thrown from howitzers.
The more open terrain in front of Moscow did not offer an unobstructed
view in any direction, because small stands of trees and wooded patches
dotted the ground everywhere. Thus, there was no great choice of positions
available to Kutuzov. Indeed, at this point,      it   was Borodino or nothing.
