                           A Change in Command                               237

under Konovnitzyn was taken away from him, even though it consisted
entirely of troops from First Army. But this could hardly be considered a
bone of contention, because Kutuzov commanded both armies. Therefore,
the rear guard became Kutuzov's business as well. But Kutuzov also meddled
in Barclay's affairs in other ways.
   Justice demands the recognition of Barclay's achievement in saving the
army, actually against its will, and handing it over to his successor unim-
paired.   At the beginning of the war, the ratio of forces had stood at 3 to
V against him. A battle at that time would have led to the destruction of
both western armies because there was nothing to receive or protect them
after such a disaster. All of Russia would have lain open before the invader,
with nothing to impede the consolidation of his victory. Barclay had pre-
vented this from happening by his continuing retreat, but in doing so, he
had drawn upon himself the anger of the entire nation.
    But the power ratio had been reduced and now stood at 5 to 4.^ On top
of this, the strategic situation of the Russian army was vastly superior. Even
as the French had distanced themselves from their power bases, the Russians
had drawn closer to their own. Winter was nearing, and the time gained
had made it possible for the flanking armies to prepare a dramatic turnaround
that would prove virtually fatal for the central army group. Barclay deserved
to reap what he had sown. In time, the Russian army would realize that its
harvest would have been richer had he remained in command, rather than
being replaced by Kutuzov.      Due to the infirmities of old age, crafty old
Kutuzov turned out to be as unfit for the battlefield as he was for the pursuit
of the retreating French. However, Barclay heard precious        little   of this
laudatory assessment during his own lifetime.
    On August 29, Kutuzov arrived at Zarevo-Saimishtshe, greeted by the
thunderous cheers of the soldiers. His appearance alone raised the morale
of the army at once. Although he pompously announced that the retreat
had come to an end, he actually had no choice in the matter. As little as
he relished a direct confrontation and as unnecessary as it was in reality,
the mood of the army made such an event a necessary evil. He had to offer
a battle, not only because an attempt had to be made at denying the French
entry into Moscow but also because he had been appointed specifically to
put an end to the retreat.
    The fickleness of fate willed that his very arrival at Zarevo-Saimishtshe
would once again postpone the battle Barclay had meant to fight there.
Even though the position was not so good that Barclay's enemies would have
found it difficult to persuade Kutuzov to abandon it, the very insinuation
that Barclay might claim the credit for a victory because he had selected
the site was enough to do so.
