         *                    A Change in Command                           235

into the interior.     Adding to this total was the arrival of reinforcements,
although these were not as numerous as had been expected. Miloradovitch
had reached Gshatsk with 15,589 men; they were to remain there as a
backup, underlining Barclay's lack of faith in the outcome of a battle.
    Dependent upon the goodwill of his fellow army commander, lacking
the confidence of his subordinates, threatened by overwhelmingly superior
forces commanded by one of the greatest captains of all time, Barclay had
conducted his operations to the best of his knowledge and abilities under
the greatest difficulties imaginable. In doing so, he had by and large made
the correct choices, even if he was not aware of having done so. His actions
had not so much expressed any inner convictions as they had constantly
betrayed timidity, frequently paired with irresolution, in the face of his grand
opponent. As a result, Russian pride and conceit had been deeply wounded,
making his position untenable. General opinion, blind to the improving
situation,   clamored for Barclay's replacement by a full-blooded Russian.
Indeed, the lack of confidence and authority that had attached itself to his
person demanded that, in the interests of the army, a change in supreme
command be made at once.
    All Alexander knew of the        affairwas what had been fed to him by
Barclay's enemies. Barclay's reserve    had prevented him from speaking for
himself. The tsar could only give in and appoint a board of inquiry. Before
he had even learned of the events at Smolensk, he had appointed Kutuzov,
who had been made a prince just a few days before, to the post of commander
in chief over all the Russian forces fighting against the French. It was neither
confidence in his abilities nor respect for his character that prompted Al-
exander's choice. Just a few weeks earlier, he had relieved Kutuzov from his
command over the Danube Army because of his political intrigues. Naming
him to this post instead had become a political necessity, because he was
the only man who could be considered for the post who was also a Slav.
    Kutuzov was 67 at the time, but his body and spirit had already aged
beyond his years. He was so obese that he could hardly ride a horse, and
then it could only be at a walk. There was no fire left in his spirit. Added
to this was a weakness of character, increasing with his age, that often made
him dependent and irresolute. He was, of course, not lacking in military
abilities, but these were geared more to the past than to Napoleon's new

style of warfare. Not exactly of daring nature even in his younger years, his

experience of Napoleon at Austerlitz had been so overwhelming that the
very name exercised a paralyzing influence over him.
    Although Kutuzov was hardly the man to be played against a Napoleon,
general opinion, which hoped to see another Suvorov in him, had not erred
after all when   it   demanded his appointment. He might not have been the
