244                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


There was no other place between there and Moscow that could have even
pretended to offer the status of a "position."
    The Russian position at Borodino ran in a shallow arc. Its right, ex-
tending almost to the Moskva, was covered in front by the Kalotsha, a
tributary that flowed into the Moskva not far beyond the extreme right of
the position.   Its   center receded back from the Kalotsha near the village of
Borodino and extended via Semenovskoye toward Utiza.
     Even though the right wing of this position was strongly favored by the
terrain and virtually unassailable, Kutuzov packed First Army into this side
and left the weak left, which hung in the air without anything to anchor
it, to be defended by Bagration's far weaker Second Army. Both Bagration

and Barclay had strongly argued against this, but Kutuzov was not to be
budged. A large earthwork had been thrown up in front of the center, a
short way upriver and across from Borodino. Since it was in front of Raiev-
sky's division, it became known as the ''Raievsky's redoubt" or the '*great
redoubt." Three more redoubts, thrown up in front of Bagration's position,
are collectively known as "Bagration's redoubts." These were intended to
give the left wing of the Russian position the strength that was lacking in
the terrain.   It   was only when Poniatowski was seen approaching along the
old Smolensk road during the night of September 5- 6 that III Infantry Corps
was taken out of the First Army's reserve and moved over to extend the
Russian left as f^r as Utiza.
    This is the way things remained, even though Kutuzov had received a
sensible proposal to shift his army after dark on the 6th so that Bagration
would have been massed around Utiza and the more powerful First Army
would have been positioned between Bagration and Gorki. This v/ould have
resulted in the naturally strong right flank being covered by only a few line
troops, the Cossacks,  and the militia who, from a distance, would look like
regulars in reserve, and thus would have freed the bulk of the First Army
to reinforce the center and left. In all, the Russian position extended for
about 11,000 paces. However, since the right was never attacked, all the
action took place on a front of about 6500 paces, and most of the heavy
fighting concentrated on a front of considerably less than 2 miles. As a
result of this, the excellent Russian artillery, much of it massed with the
FirstArmy, voluntarily yielded its considerable superiority because a large
portion of it never came into action. This allowed the weaker, but expertly
handled, French artillery to become the decisive factor in the battle.
    Although Davout had suggested an enveloping movement around the
Russian left. Napoleon stuck to the frontal attack, both because he feared
that the Russians might run again and because he did not want to take the
two of Davout's five divisions assigned to Eugene's IV Corps away from
