252               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the guns of the great redoubt) put Wathier's cuirassier division at the head
of the assault that was about to take place.
      Barclay had observed Eugene's preparations for the coming attack and
had gathered whatever troops he could to defend against it. Ostermann was
to bring forward the troops of IV Infantry Corps, but the French batteries
at Semenovskoye were taking a heavy toll of them even as they were moving
into the line. The last of the guards and everyone that could still sit on a
horse was brought up. But the French artillery was the dominant factor,
both by pouring its fire into these reserves and by acting as a counterbattery
as well. Colonel Nikitin's horse batteries, which had taken a hand in the
recapture of the great redoubt, had already lost 93 gunners and 113 horses
and had seven of their gun carriages smashed.
    Seeing the Russian infantry columns coming forward, Caulaincourt or-
dered Wathier's cuirassiers to charge, and he rode along with them. Passing
to the right of the redoubt, before the columns were up, his cuirassiers
succeeded in crashing through the open throat at its rear. The Russian
infantry gave them musketry at short range. A musket ball severed Cau-
laincourt's jugular, killing him. But in the dense press, horses shot         down
and kicking were almost as lethal as the musketry. The cuirassiers were
forced out.
   Now Latour-Maubourg's heavies — Lorges cuirassiers, Saxons, West-
phalians,   and Poles   — came   up.   The Marquise de Chambray, the author of
the first important work on the Russian campaign, immortalized the Saxon
Gardes du Corps by creating a controversy that went on for decades: He
credited Caulaincourt's cuirassiers and not the Saxons with the final capture
of the redoubt.
    The Saxons had been in action before noon, in connection with Murat's
and Ney's attacks against the ground in and around Semenovskoye. Since
then, the Saxons and the rest of their brigade had spent some 2 to 3 hours
coursing back and forth in a futile effort to escape the Russian artillery by
making it difficult for the Russians to find the range. All the while they
were roundly cursing Murat and Napoleon for leaving them sitting around
and doing nothing better than furnishing a target for the Russian guns.
About 2:30 p.m., they were ordered to support Eugene's attempt to retake
the Raievsky redoubt.
      Thielemann now took his brigade, 8 Saxon and 2 Polish squadrons, up
against the redoubt, attacking         it   simultaneously from three sides. Again,
the melee centered around the throat of the redoubt, where the troopers
were driven back. But several officers and noncoms, superbly mounted, had
managed to drive their horses up the steep face of the redoubt and get inside
through the gun ports. Although they were no more than about ten men,
