250               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Bonami's brigade was either trampled underfoot or flattened against the
embrasures. Barclay himself had been in the forefront of the attack. Bonami
was down, bleeding from twenty wounds. The young Russian artillery chief,
Kutaisov, who had accompanied Yermolov, met his end there. This was a
fateful strike against the Russian artillery, which felt the loss of his skills
throughout the rest of the day.
   At this point, the Raievsky redoubt was back in Russian hands, but Ney
and Davout held Semenovskoye and had deployed strong batteries on the
heights there. Prince Eugene of Wuerttemberg was coming through the bush
of Knaskovo with four line regiments, about 3600 men, to plug the gap in
the center when the shot from the French batteries at Semenovskoye began
to reach his ranks.    The French Eugene's batteries also found the range of
this Russian support column. The Russian Eugene had been about to deploy
for an attack against the     Raievsky redoubt, but Yermolov was already on
his way in. Barclay, as cool and as level-headed as always, rode up to the
prince and, while under the cross fire of the French batteries, calmly pointed
out an alternate target, a strong French infantry column moving forward
between Semenovskoye and the redoubt. If it succeeded in breaking through,
then the center and left were finished. The prince said afterward:


    Actually, it was a walk into Hell. In front of us was a mass of indeterminate
   depth, even as its front was impressive enough. To the left, a battery, the
   full   extent of which we could not determine, but which the French say
   contained 80 guns. And everywhere French cavalry, waiting to cut off our
    way back. To insure a retreat I attached a battalion from Tobolsk to both
   flanks of the deployed regim.ent Volhynia.     Some distance to the rear, the
   second brigade followed in columns.
          In this order we went straight for the enemy mass, while the huge battery
    hurled its balls at us. The grisly cannonade claimed Generals Schroeder and
    Rossy.    The two regiments in front, Volhynia and Tobolsk,        lost several

    hundred men and I had three horses shot out from under me in a very short
      time.
          Despite these heavy losses, the division continued to advance and the
      enemy did not even await our arrival but withdrew again, even as our
    dragoons rushed past us to threaten their flank as well as the battery.^'


   While this was going on, the French Eugene was preparing for his second
assault of the Raievsky redoubt. Miloradovitch,        who was in charge of its
defense, did not think he could face the assault without reinforcements.
Therefore, Barclay again found his own Eugene, the Wuerttemberger who
