                                     Borodino                              245
            s


there.   This would have been necessary in order to act on Davout's plan.
Thus, it was left to Poniatowski's weak corps to make the enveloping ma-
neuver by itself. As a result, Eugene had more troops than he could effectively
use, while neither Davout nor Poniatowski had enough to effectively carry
out their assigned tasks.
   The main attack was planned for the center, where Davout was to go
against Bagration's redoubts with three divisions from his corps.       Behind
Davout's right, Murat was to support his attack with Nansouty's, Montbrun's,
and Latour-Maubourg's cavalry corps and the light cavalry of I and II Army
Corps. Behind his left, Ney was to do likewise with his own III Corps, as
well as Junot's VIII Corps, which had been placed under his command on
that day. Ney was supposed to keep an eye on its commander and to prevent
another lapse such as the one that had occurred at Smolensk. However,
Junot was to be quite his old self.
    Simultaneously with Davout, Eugene was to deliver another main attack
with his own IV Corps, the two remaining divisions of I Corps, and Grouchy's
cavalry.    He was to take Borodino, cross the Kalotsha, and then take on the
Raievsky redoubt and keep the Russians busy there. Both attacks were to
be supported by powerful batteries, with the guard held in reserve behind
the center.
    In order to fully understand Napoleon's intentions,    it   must be kept in
mind that Napoleon had not been able to have a good look at the Russian
position.       He was under the impression that the Raievsky redoubt and Ba-
gration's redoubts all stood on the same stretch of high ground.




                                 THE BATTLE
Both commanders were up and about at the crack of dawn. Kutuzov, sur-
rounded by a horde of priests and popes bearing the holy relics brought from
Smolensk, had already made a religious procession through the bivouacs.
His address to the troops spoke of the Holy Virgin, Heaven, tyrants, and
the sword of St. Michael, making the defense of the homeland a religious
duty.    Napoleon could not even think of striking such notes in front of his
erstwhile republicans. Instead, he spoke of glory, Austerlitz, the promise of
winter quarters, and a happy return home. Thus, both sides accommodated
the spiritual needs of their troops with something that seemed appropriate
to the situation.
     About 6 a.m. on September 7, 1812, three French batteries roared to
life. With a 102-gun salute, they announced the opening of one of the

bloodiest battles of the entire nineteenth century.
