                                   Borodino                               247

pounders in the direction of Semenovskoye at the forced march pace. Bag-
gehuffsvudt's corpswas sent to Tutshkov on the extreme left to replace
Konovnitzyn's division. In the meanwhile, Bagration had a bad time. The
French had thrown strong cavalry masses at his infantry after it had been
thrown out of the redoubts. Duka's 2nd Cuirassier Division now broke for-
ward with Neverovsky's infantry division in tow. Murat was in trouble at
once and had to save himself by fleeing into a battalion of Wuerttembergers,
who were holding the left redoubt. This was the point at which both Davout
and Ney reported that Bagration's redoubts had been taken but that they
would be unable to hold them without reinforcements. And this was also
the point at which Napoleon refused to turn loose any of his guards.
     All sorts of reasons—  his cold, poor health, declining powers, and in-
creasing weight  —  have been invoked to explain away Napoleon's failure to
send in the guards. But his refusal may have simply been based on the fact
that he was unwilling to commit his last ace in the hole so early in a battle,
let alone 1000 miles from home. After briefly toying with the idea of sending

in Claparede's division of Polish veterans from the Vistula Legion, he decided
to commit Friant's division, which was still standing by the edge of the
woods around Utiza in support of Compans and Dessaix.
     However, even before Friant was able to come up, Bagration renewed
the attack with the guards Barclay had sent from the right. General Pelet,
who was probably with the 48th Line Regiment, a brigade in Friant's division,
witnessed the Russian counterattack and wrote this description:


   As Bagration's supporting troops arrived, they were fed into the action,
   boldly advancing over the bodies of the fallen to retake the lost redoubts.
   The Russian columns moved in accurate response to the orders from their
   commanders and were, themselves, living bastions. As soon as they emerged
    into the   open terrain, our canister knocked them down, but these brave
    warriors let nothing bother them and continued to come at us as before.   It

    was during this attack, when Prince Bagration was mortally wounded.


    The Russian losses were enormous, as canister tore through their ranks
again and again. Wolzogen, in his memoirs, relates running into a lieutenant
with a troop of between thirty and forty men. When the colonel told the
lieutenant   somewhat testily to get back to his regiment, the lieutenant
replied:   "This is the regiment!" The Russian Regiment Lithuania had lost
956 men in about an hour.
    About 11:30, Friant's division took a hand in the action, and the Ba-
gration redoubts were taken for the fourth and last time. But the French
could make no headway against the low ground around Semenovskoye.
