248                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


    Strong artillery was brought forward to support a massive cavalry attack
by Murat. Nansouty's corps was to pass around the right of Semenovskoye,
Latour-Maubourg's around the left. Here again, Murat proved himself to be
a brave cavalryman but not even remotely a Seydlitz.         The two corps were
not committed in a coordinated attack, so only Latour-Maubourg was able
to score  some minor successes. However, the final taking of Bagration's
redoubts had forced the entire Russian line back to the edge of the woods
behind the Russian main line.
    It was a stroke of good fortune for the Russians that due to the great

clouds of dust and the powder smoke generated by hundreds of guns, neither
Murat, Davout, nor Ney was aware of the fact that the Russians were in
full disarray,   with hardly any of their formations still intact. In view of their
own losses and exhaustion, Davout and Ney did not believe that they could
advance any farther without reinforcements.
    But Napoleon had refused their request.          He was not present at the
decisive point, having remained behind, atop the redoubt of Shevardino,
until about 4 p.m. Like Kutuzov,   he was very far removed from the action
and took practically no hand in the course of the battle. He had, however,
given his army a better- than-even chance for success, while Kutuzov seems
to have had little concern about its outcome except, perhaps, the hope that
it wouldn't go too badly. The behavior of both men certainly lends credence

to Tolstoy's tirade against the commanders in chief.
    The events related so far, however, describe only half the battle. When
Davout had advanced against Bagration's redoubts, about 6 a.m., Eugene
had sent his columns against Borodino. Advancing with overwhelming force,
Delzons' division soon ejected the Russian Guard Jaeger (light infantry) from
the town. Following on the heels of the retreating Russians, those of Delzons'
assault columns that had not broken up and turned into howling mobs going
through Borodino now did so as they ran over the Kalotsha bridge, across
the sunken road on the other side, and up the slope toward Gorki.             The
sight of these men so surprised a Russian battery halting on top of the hill
that it took off without firing a shot.
    However, as soon as the fleeing Russian defenders of Borodino were
received and the front was cleared, the mass of French soldiers suddenly
found themselves facing deployed Russian lines. The Russian columns came
forward and drove the entire horde, which had been the first brigade Delzons
had committed to action, back across the Kalotsha. However, the Russians
following across the bridge were not able to reform to make a determined
try at the village. Delzons had strongly established himself in Borodino and

was not about to let go again.
      In the meanwhile, Morand's division had crossed the dry bed of the
