                                      Borodino                                     253

they created such confusion inside the redoubt that the rest of the brigade
renewed its attack by driving their mounts forward once more. The horses,
however, could only be made to walk, since the charges ridden during the
course of the day had left them thoroughly winded. But by then the infantry
was up and able to help break into the redoubt as well, saving the handful
of Gardes du Corps who were still swinging their sabers and engaging the
attention of most of the Russian defenders inside.
    This, the decisive part of the action, had been totally immersed in the
legends woven about the death of Auguste Caulaincourt, beginning with
Napoleon's 18th Bulletin, covering the battle and crediting Caulaincourt's
cuirassiers with the taking of the Raievsky redoubt, and Chambray's account,
repeating this assertion. Chambray's massive work on the campaign remained
the prime and only comprehensive source on the Russian campaign until
well past the middle of the nineteenth century. As its circulation spread,           it

was bound to gain the attention of the Saxons, as well as other participants,
who knew differently. As a result, the ensuing controversy enhanced the
reputation of the Saxon Gardes du Corps even further by publicizing an
event that might otherwise have simply merged into the fabric of the battle.
Still,   the Caulaincourt legend exhibited a remarkable capacity for survival,
as legends are wont to do.
    The fight for the Raievsky redoubt and the Russian position around it
lasted less   than an hour. Even so,    it   is   generally regarded as having been
the fiercest struggle in a battle that saw a great many brutal encounters,
thanks to the proverbial tenacity of the Russian soldier. By about 3 p.m.,
however, both sides were so exhausted that the fighting ceased; only the
artillery of both sides continued to ply its trade.

    Napoleon refused to commit the Guard; only Uvarov's unexpected sally
into the French left had induced him to dispatch a few batteries of the

Guard's     artillery.     who was acutely aware of the Russian army's
                         Barclay,
condition, was quite apprehensive that such an attack might come as a coup
de grace.    When none appeared, he sent Wolzogen to Kutuzov to ask for
instructions. Barclay told Wolzogen:         "Get the answer in writing. One has
to be careful with Kutuzov." Wolzogen's description of his mission is laced
with biting sarcasm:



     I   rode for a long time, before 1 found the prince.    I   finally located him by
     the Moscow road, about half an hour's ride behind the army, surrounded
     by a suite which seemed to be an entire auxiliary corps. It appeared to consist
     almost entirely of wealthy young Russian nobles, wallowing in all sorts of
     rich delicacies and who seemed to be totally unconcerned about the seri-
