254                  1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      ousness of what was taking place. Toll was among them as well and was in
      the process of devouring a capon.
          When   1   reported the condition of the army and that, with the exception
      of the right, all important posts had been lost and that the regiments were
      exhausted and falling apart, Kutuzov shouted: "With what ruddy sutleress
      did you liquor yourself up that you make such a preposterous report? I myself
      know best the condition of the army! The attacks of the French have been
      victoriously turned back everywhere, so that I will place myself at the head
      of the army tomorrow. ..."
          All the while, his eyes traveled around, challenging his audience, who
      eagerly nodded their agreement.     I   was put out over this treatment.   I   had
      only reported what 1 had seen with my own eyes while 1 knew that he had
      spent the entire day in the rear of the army in the company of champagne
      bottles and delicacies. But as soon as 1 regained my composure, 1 saw through
      Kutuzov's sly subterfuge.
          Those around him were to remain in ignorance of the true condition
      of the army, so that they might not brand the bulletin he was about to issue
      a lie. Moreover, he was aware that Napoleon had suspended the action after
      failing to win a complete victory in a fight that had lasted from 6 a.m. to

      5 p.m.   and that he would hardly start up again this late in the day. So
      Kutuzov still had the battlefield, at least until morning.'^



      So Barclay received his orders: Unless Napoleon decided otherwise, the
Russians were to undertake nothing; Doctorov was to take Bagration's place;
and all the necessary preparations should be made for Kutuzov to attack the
French on the next day. Barclay, of course, had no idea how any of this
was to be accomplished. The army had shot its bolt.
    There had been a third focal point of action in the grand melee that
was the Battle of Borodino. While the possession of the Bagration and
Raievsky redoubts was being hotly contested, Poniatowski and his Poles had
fought a battle of their own. He carried Utiza with his first assault, but by
8 a.m. he had already been ejected. Then Junot's Westphalians were sent
in to fill the gap in the line; linking up with Poniatowski, they helped him
retake the village. It was around this time that Tutshkov 1 had been forced
to send Konovnitzyn's division to reinforce the position at Semenovskoye.
      The forests and bush growths around Utiza gave Poniatowski a difficult
time and greatly hindered his advance.         Tutshkov was in a difficult
                                                 Still,

situation and in danger of being cut off. This was when Barclay had sent
Baggehuffwudt (generally called Bagavout in the French and English liter-
ature) to his aid, along with Konovnitzyn, who was again shifted farther to
the left.
