                                                          )




                                  Borodino                                249

Semenovka Brook. The two battalions deployed at the foot of the rise,
which was surmounted by the Raievsky redoubt, probably dissolved into a
powerful skirmishing line. Eugene, seeing that an assault from the north
side would be too difficult, had the remainder of his force cross the Kalotsha
on three bridges and then advanced against the Raievsky redoubt from the
south side. The redoubt was armed with cannon. At its foot stood light
infantry. To the right and left, there were four infantry battalions on each
side. Morand's skirmishers could make only slow headway against the Russian

jaeger until Eugene deployed strong artillery. Between them, they slowly
pushed the Russians back toward the redoubt.
    The crossing of the Kalotsha, however, had delayed the main attack
against the redoubt until about 10 a.m. At that time, Broussier and Morand
advanced together, supported by a blistering artillery barrage. Bonami's bri-
gade, the 30th French Line, spearheaded the French attack. At the critical
point, the Russian guns ran short of ammunition.    The gunfire abated, and
the attackers were in. This resounding success could have had dire conse-
quences for the Russians. If the attack was pressed on here, then the Russian
line would have been pierced. It was around this time that Ney was wrestling
with the Russian guards and Bagration was wounded.
   This was to be Yermolov's moment. Barclay was busy attempting to rally
the Paskevitch regiment, which was fleeing from the redoubt. When Kutuzov
was informed that Ney had taken the Bagration redoubts for the third time
and that Bagration had been carried off unconscious, he is said to have
turned to Yermolov, the chief of staff of First Army, and said, "My dear
fellow, see if something might be done there." Yermolov rode off at once
in the direction of the left wing. On the way, he ran into Colonel Nikitin,
the chief of the artillery reserve. "Take three horse batteries," he told him,
"and don't lose sight of me!" Passing to the rear of the Raievsky redoubt,
he saw that the Russian troops were flooding back in disorder and that the
French had gotten in. Deciding that the most useful thing he could do would
be to retake the redoubt, he had the horse artillery unlimber and fire into
the open throat of the redoubt. Although Bonami's men had captured eigh-
teen guns, there was no ammunition for them, so they could not reply. (It
had not yet been possible to bring up any French guns.
    Once the Russian guns were firing, Yermolov seized upon any troops he
could find. For the moment, this was only the 3rd Battalion, Ufa Regiment.
With it, he gathered up what stragglers he could and mounted a vicious
bayonet attack against the open throat of the redoubt; at that very moment,
two jaeger regiments, brought personally by Barclay, arrived. Without firing
a shot, the Russian columns came on.      With no canister to impede their
advance, they rolled into the rear of the redoubt, and what was        left   of
