246              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      Compans's division was passing through the near side of the bmsh around
Utiza to go up against the southernmost and strongest of the three Bagration
redoubts. To its left, a little farther back, covered by the stands of trees and
low growths for the time being, came Dessaix's division. Behind Compans
came Friant's division in support. When Compans emerged from the woods,
he was received with a murderous barrage of canister from the Russian
artillery, which included a large number of 12 -pounders. The French doggedly

pushed forward, passing through the dried-up bed of the Kamenka Brook.
As soon as the skirmishers of the leading brigade had pressed in, the columns
came forward, but they quickly ran afoul of the Russian guns. Both Compans
and Desaix were seriously wounded and down.
   Davout, who was with General Sorbier, who directed the fire of the
French artillery, saw the attack of Compans's leading brigade wavering. He
went up to Compans's division, where he placed himself in front of the 57th
Line Regiment (actually a brigade of five battalions) and went off in the
wake of the brigade up front, whose columns had fallen apart in the withering
fire from the redoubt. He did not get far before his horse was shot out from

under him. Davout landed so hard that Sorbier thought he had been killed
and sent a message to Napoleon informing him so. The emperor sent Rapp
to replace Davout, but the latter was already back on his feet. Davout took
the 57th (Teste's brigade) forward again when Teste was shot down in yet
another failed attempt on the redoubt. All of this, however, reads a lot
faster than it actually happened.   Rapp had arrived in time to have another
try with the 61st Line, a regiment he had once commanded in Egypt          (and
now also a brigade of five battalions). He renewed the assault only to receive
his twenty-second wound around 7 a.m. By about 7:30 Davout had possession
of the southern redoubt.
      When Bagration, a good man up front, saw that the French were going
after his redoubts in force,   he seized hold of all troops that were close at
hand and brought them up quickly, before the French in and around the
redoubt could sort out and reform their broken formations. Out with the
French, in with the Russians. However, Ney, never far from a good fight,
came up with one of the brigades from Ledru's division, the 24th Light
Infantry, and together with Davout's leading two divisions made a rush
that drove the Russians from all three redoubts before they had a chance to
reorganize.
      Badly outnumbered, Bagration did what was, for him, a difficult thing
to do: Not even bothering to ask Kutuzov, who stood on the height of Gorki
with his glittering entourage of "do-nothings," Bagration went straight to
Barclay for the help he desperately needed. He had come to the right address.
Barclay at once sent 3 guard regiments, 8 grenadier battalions, and 24 twelve-
