                                      Borodino                             251

fought on the Russian side, and asked him to move his second brigade farther
to the right so that it might support Miloradovitch in case he needed help.
    In the meanwhile, Kutuzov's apathy had allowed a splendid opportunity
to simply slip by. Quite early in the morning, Platov and his Cossacks had
begun to search for a place where the Kalotsha might be forded. When they
found a ford and crossed to the other side, they discovered to their aston-
ishment that there were no French forces other than a weak cavalry brigade
under Omano in front of the Russian right. Platov immediately sent his
adjutant off to Gorki to request the necessary support to make something
of this unexpected windfall. Toll saw the point at once, but Kutuzov seemed
totally disinterested. According to Clausewitz, he appeared to be in a trance,
mumbling the same phrases over and over as he listened to Toll. In the
end, all that was provided for the venture was Uvarov with about 2500 light
cavalry of the Guard. By the time they and their twelve guns had crossed
the river,   it   was almost noon. Two miles farther south, Eugene was just in
the process of concentrating his masses for the second assault against the
Raievsky when he was informed that Borodino and his left flank were threat-
ened. Eugene at once took some of Grouchy's cavalry to see for himself and
promptly ran into Uvarov's first attacks. But Uvarov could do little more
than cause a few moments of anxiety. Without infantry and artillery, he
could not even think of making a serious attack against Borodino or of
crossing the Voina.      As a result, the only thing that came of Platov's dis-
covery was the delay of Eugene's attack to recapture the Raievsky redoubt.
On the other hand, Kutuzov and the Russians may hardly be faulted for
not having made more of this apparent windfall, because they simply could
not afford to take sufficient troops out of the main line for such a venture
once the French attacks had started. Moreover, Kutuzov knew that he
had to fight a defensive battle, banking on the proverbial tenacity of his
infantry to hold out. Trying to capitalize on Platov's discovery of the ford
with sufficient force to cause serious trouble would have precipitated a li-
quid tactical situation, at which the French were far more adept than the
Russians.
   Because of this interlude, it was not until 2 p.m. when Napoleon ordered
Eugene to renew his attack against the great redoubt. Broussier's, Morand's,
and Gerard's divisions were to form the assault columns for a frontal attack
against the Russian line, with Chastel's light cavalry division on the left.
The right, facing the Raievsky redoubt, was left to the cavalry. While the
redoubt was subjected to a withering fire from Ney's batteries near Seme-
novskoye, the cavalry opened the assault. Caulaincourt,who now com-
manded II Cavalry Corps in place of Montbrun (who had already fallen to
