262               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

delet, Lagrange,        and Destrees, Dragoon Brigade Cavaignac, and the six
cohorts in Bremen, to which another six were to be added.
   This was the measure of the Grand Army's second wind. Napoleon
concentrated most of the troops into the communications Une of the central
army because his flanks did not trouble him unduly at this time. His lack
of concern was based entirely on the assumption that the imminent occu-
pation of Moscow would attract all the Russian forces to concentrate there.
That, at least,    is   how he described the situation in a letter to Maret on
September 10.
   The losses sustained at Borodino were slowly being replaced. First to
rejoin the army were Division Pinot and Brigade Guyot, which arrived right
after the battle   with 7000 men. Laborde's division of the Young Guard,
another 4000 men, was on its way from Smolensk. Another 7600 men,
march formations, and various security detachments were also ordered up
from Smolensk. This came to more than 18,000 men, who either had arrived
already or were due shortly. Victor's IX Corps had crossed the Niemen on
September 3.
   Minus some temporary detachments, Victor had 28,000 men, of whom
a 3000'man Saxon brigade was left behind in Minsk to cover the magazines
established there. Since Napoleon was convinced that he would have to
draw upon this corps and even Dombrowski's division, an additional strong
reserve was to be massed at Smolensk. Thus, that city became the objective
of all the security detachments, march formations, and reserves called up
from the rear areas and Germany. The rear-area garrisons were to be left
entirely in the hands of the Lithuanians, who drew bitter complaints from
Napoleon over their slowness in raising the new formations. As a result,
some of the march formations continued to be absorbed in the rear areas,
along with others entirely composed of stragglers who had been rounded up.
    In the meanwhile, the Russians had continued their retreat without
undue haste. The first extensive stage was a march to Vaseomo on the 1 1th,
followed by marches to Mamonovo on the 12th and to Fili on the 13th.
Wintzingerode's detachment- had accompanied these marches in the right
flank of the army, withdrawing via Svenigorod. Due to heavy losses, many
battalions and squadrons had to be amalgamated, and the combined gren-
adier formations were broken up. II and III Cavalry Corps were united into
one.
      At this time, the militia was also placed into the third ranks of the
infantry battalions. In this connection, most sources dote on the idea that
most of these men were armed only with pikes. Since the image lends itself
nicely to the concepts of patriotism and heroism, even military men often
repeated the story. They ought to have known better. Similar stories con-
