264                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


much or very little or, as others would have it, either had everything or
nothing. Everyone either was connected to the great families or served them.
The small middle class consisted mainly of merchants and those who provided
skilled services for the nobles or for the government. Many of these people
were foreigners.
     To describe the Russian aristocrats as "conspicuous consumers" would
be something of an understatement. Apart from government employees, the
bulk of Moscow's population in 1812 served the palaces in various capacities.
This is underlined by the summer exodus of the nobility; when the nobles
took their service entourages along, the population of the city was reduced
by about 28 percent. Yet even          this statistic   does not include everyone
connected with the palaces, because staffs remained behind to look after
these empty "townhouses."
     In addition to maintaining residences in St. Petersburg (because it was
fashionable to be wherever the tsar was in residence), the great families
duplicated their lavish domiciles in their summer residences outside Moscow
and, often, on their vast agricultural domains. There, amid thousands of
serfs,   they lived in a grand style. To put it plainly, this very thin elite layer
atop the Russian social strata was all that counted. The rest of the population
was considered of little consequence. Indeed, the question has been raised
as to    why Napoleon didn't turn the entire campaign around by simply
                                               Many feel that he, himself
circulating a declaration emancipating the serfs.
the soh of a revolution, shied away from this because he could not be certain
of what might have come of such an action.
     Once word of what had happened at Borodino got around, the nobles
at   once put their serfs to work stripping their Moscow residences of all
valuables. Nobody believed that the French could be stopped at this point.
By the time Kutuzov's troops had passed through the city, the rest of the
Muscovites had taken their cue as well. The merchants, with their ears
glued to the ground on which the aristocracy walked, had already gone.
Thus, almost everything of consequence was already secured when Rostop'
chin opened the jails and had the fire-fighting equipment destroyed. About
10,000 Russian soldiers wounded in the battle needed to be moved, but
there were no wagons or draft teams left because everything that had wheels
had been used to transport the property of the wealthy.
    That large quantities of foodstuffs were left behind is quite understandable
because much of it was dispersed in many places. But that large amounts of
military stores were abandoned instead of being secured for the militia is
not so easily explainable. There was probably no transport available for these
either.
      Putting aside the moral aspects of the       abandonment of Moscow,       its
