                                       Borodino                                  255

     Around 4 p.m., when fighting along the entire line was beginning to
flag, Ochs led his Westphalian division forward to dislodge Baggehuffwudt,

who stood atop the grave mound behind Utiza. As soon as Poniatowski took
note of this, he renewed his attack as well. With the extreme Russian left
also pushed back, the fighting flagged in this sector too. It was over.
      The French artillery had fired 60,000 rounds^^ and the infantry had
expended nearly 2 million cartridges.



The losses on both sides were enormous. The French had lost about 28,000
men, including 49 generals. The Russian losses ran to about 52,000, that
is,   half the line troops. This included not only about 1000 prisoners but also
about 8000 men who had become separated from their formations during
the fighting and who eventually found their way back to their units over
the next several days. Four generals had been killed and another eighteen
were wounded, including Bagration and Tutshkov I, both of whom were to
die of their wounds.
    That the French success obtained'from the battle was not commensurate
with the sacrifices it exacted was entirely Napoleon's fault.   Had he been
willing to commit his guard, the bulk of Eugene's forces (which had not
been overtaxed), and Junot's Westphalians (who had seen relatively little
fighting), the Russian army, severely shaken, would have been destroyed.
Apart from a large number of batteries, which had never become engaged,
it had no untapped reserves left. Worse, it was backed up against the Moskva

in a line that ran parallel to   its   line of retreat.   Thus, despite the fact that
the "brass ring" was within his reach and despite the fact that he, better
than anyone else, understood that success had to be exploited with every
last ounce of strength. Napoleon had done nothing. He, who had until now
given too little care to the preservation of his army, suddenly became ex-
cessively cautious.
      Clausewitz maintains that Napoleon no longer felt wealthy enough (in
terms of troops) to commit his guards. But what would he have risked? After
the battle, his army still numbered 96,000 men, whereas the Russians had
only 52,000, not counting the Cossacks and militia. Thus, even in the event
of a mishap, the loss of another 5000 or 6000 men would not have weighed
in the scales all that heavily. But in the event of a success and with the
two western armies destroyed, it would have been totally beside the point
if Napoleon arrived in Moscow with 6000 fewer men.

    There has been much speculation about Napoleon's failure to act. Pos-
sibly because    he had remained too far away from the action, he had failed
to take note of the dissolution that had overtaken the Russian army.           How-
