260               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      But it was Kutuzov who had told Wolzogen,    am going to place myself
at the head of the arniy and drive the enemy from Russia's sacred soil. " The
note he handed him to take back to Barclay spoke of renewing the battle
with the enemy on the next day. Everyone, including Barclay, thought that
Kutuzov could not possibly mean this, and even if he did mean it for only
an instant, then it was only because he was so far to the rear that he had
no idea what the world looked like half an hour's ride away. Or did he? It
must be remembered that from the start he thought the battle was unneC'
essary. More than a century and a half has passed and the question is still
raised in every discussion of the Russian campaign and the Battle of BorO'
dino. The old fox indeed! He knew exactly what he was doing, and he knew
exactly what he was saying. And subsequent events were to prove him right.
Soon after, he did order the retreat, as he probably knew he would all along.
It began before the hours of daylight on the morning of September 8. The

troops marched in two columns, with Miloradovitch leading one via Mos'
haisk and Doctorov leading the other along the old Smolensk road.
    Beyond Moshaisk, near Shukovo, the army halted and sorted out its
shattered formations. Despite the heavy bloodletting, it had never lost its
composure even during the retreat. This was possible mainly because the
army did not consider itself to have been beaten. Partly, this was Napoleon's
fault, not merely because he had failed to deliver the coup de grace but also

because he had ordered his points back at nightfall in order to avoid dis-
turbances during the hours of darkness. As a result, the average soldier, who
had no encompassing view of the situation, was under the impression and
ready to believe that the fight would be renewed at the next opportunity,
as Kutuzov had indicated.
      In view of all this, it is difficult to find fault with either Kutuzov's words
or his actions.   The wily old campaigner knew that no matter how bad the
situation might look in the short run, his estimate would be correct in the
long. The short and the long: These concepts serve splendidly in describing
the difference between Napoleon and Kutuzov. Napoleon was the master
of the short run, but Kutuzov understood the long. Campaigning by the
shores of the Black Sea, Kutuzov had learned about distances, sparsely
populated tracts, and the effects these exercised on the troops.         Still,   Na-
poleon's decision to pull back his outposts at nightfall gave Kutuzov the
opportunity to claim victory in his initial report to the tsar. This was to
have far-reaching consequences.
      Reflecting the   mood of the army, the resistance Platov's rear guard^
offered was so determined that Napoleon, who had intended to be in Mos-
haisk on the 8th, had to remain at Borodino. For its part, Murat's reserve
cavalry had suffered so badly in the battle that the horses could hardly be
