256                   1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


ever, he did come forward to have a look for himself after the redoubts had
been taken and his forces had established themselves in what had been the
Russian main line of defense. By then, however, the Russians had drawn
back to the next ridge line. Seen at a distance of several hundred yards,
their densely     packed masses probably looked more formidable than they
actually were.      It   seems that even his marshals were not too certain about
just how badly the Russians had been shaken, although they had been much
closer to the action.        The incessant movement of large masses of infantry
and cavalry had raised a considerable amount of dust in the air, not to
mention the powder smoke generated by the firing of hundreds of artillery
pieces.     The combined effects of dust, smoke, and battle fatigue probably
impaired their vision as well. This appears to be borne out by the fact that
when Napoleon did express the thought of sending in the Young Guard
Division, Murat, who had been all over the battlefield, added his objections
to Berthier's, claiming that nothing less than an all-out attack would do.
In this way, the day ended with Napoleon half expecting to fight yet another
battle on the following day.
      Of the two salient ways in which a field marshal can exhibit his mastery
on the battlefield       — recognizing the most advantageous       of the main
                                                               direction
thrust and properly using the reserves      — Napoleon showed none Borodino. at
Instead,     he simply used superior masses to press the enemy's front, and he
made no use whatever of his reserves, not even when his troop superiority
had exhausted itself and the time had come to complete the success that
had been achieved. Thus,           it   must be admitted that at Borodino,           as at
Smolensk, the great captain did not function at the peak of his capacity.
Once again. Napoleon's indecision robbed him of the opportunity to destroy
the enemy, a move which might have created the right climate for a peace.
He would not receive another chance.




                                          NOTES
 1.   The rear guard now included:



       Battalions             Squadrons

       14                                      of 3rd Inf. Div.,   Ill   Inf Corps

        12 (jaeger)                            of II, IV, and VI Corps
