                               Only 70 Miles to Go                            263

tinue to persist about the Prussian Landwehr of 1813. There        is,   however,
no concrete evidence that such weapons ever actually appeared in a mobile
field unit.




As already noted, Kutuzov had declared that he would fight another battle
in defense of Moscow.      But the army was far too weak, and the position at
Fili   could hardly be called a position.   A war council, which met on the
13th, decided to retreat through  Moscow and on to Ryasan. This was a
difficult decision for Kutuzov, who had already implied in his first report

that the battle at Borodino had been won.
       Here, for the first time. Toll apparently expressed a thought that should
have been aired long before: to retreat not in an easterly direction but,
rather, in a southerly one. It was an idea that was to yield great results later
on.     Only Benningsen, who had lost all of his influence since Borodino,
spoke against a retreat and even suggested an offensive, but he appareritly
did this only after he was certain that Kutuzov had made up his mind and
would stand firm. His suggestion, however, was obviously an attempt to get
the tsar's attention and to recommend himself as a future commander in
chief, just in case giving up Moscow might cost Kutuzov his job. There are,
of course, nearly as many accounts of this conference as there were
participants   —and as many versions of what was said there, most of them
self-serving. But the decision to retreat definitely emerged from the meeting,
and beyond it stood the abandonment of Moscow.
     Immediately after the army had passed through Moscow, taking almost
all the population along with it, Rostopchin, the governor of the city, was

ready to put his own plans into operation.




Moscow in 1812 was a sprawling city of about 250,000 inhabitants during
the fall. Throughout the winter months, when the nobles and their serfs
returned from their country estates, the population would increase by about
100,000. To the eyes of the western visitor, the city represented a curious,
colorful,   and exciting mix of east and west. Rising out of a sea of single-
story    wooden houses, many little better than huts, were the great stone
palaces of the aristocracy (a legacy of Peter the Great's westernizing reforms)
and the compact, multiturreted Orthodox churches, with their onion-shaped
domes clustering atop narrow-shouldered arches (the legacy of traditional
Russian architecture). The palaces, situated in large gardens, were not nearly
so     numerous as the six cathedrals and 1500 churches that tended to the
souls of the Muscovites.    As elsewhere in Russia, a citizen either had very
