                              Only 70 Miles to Go                        261

made to do more than walk. On the 9th as well, when the Russian army
continued its withdrawal to Semolino, its reinforced rear guard maintained
itself in Moshaisk until afternoon; at that time the rear guard was forced to

evacuate, leaving behind about 10,000 wounded,       who had been brought
there after the battle.   On that same evening, the rear guard was again
reinforced and placed under Miloradovitch's    command, because Kutuzov
feared that the enemy might press too closely. Thus, the rear guard was so
strong that on the 10th,   when the main army withdrew behind the Nara
at Krutiza, it was able to throw back the French advance guard at Krimskoye,
each side losing about 2000 men in the encounter.



It   was also on the 10th when the French army finally departed from the
battlefield.  Davout was in the lead, followed by Mortier with the Young
Guard; then came Ney, with the Old Guard bringing up the rear. On the
day after the battle, Pino's division and Guyon's brigade rejoined Eugene,
who was to march on the left, toward Rusa. Poniatowski was to the right,
on the Moscow-Kaluga road, marching toward Fominskoye. The entire army,
not merely the cavalry of the advance guard, was bone-weary, its exhaustion
exacerbated by hunger.         had there been any energy left, there would
                          Still,

have been a spring in the steps of the troops. Few absented themselves from
the army after the battle, because El Dorado, that is, Moscow, was just
beyond the horizon; its promise of rest, plentitude, and loot was beckoning
these tired soldiers onward like a magnet.
    As at Smolensk, Junot's Vlll Corps was left behind at Moshaisk, while
some 5000 of his men cleaned up the battlefield. The dead had to be collected
and, if possible, buried. Still serviceable weapons (left by the dead and
wounded), especially the muskets, which were forever in short supply, had
to be reclaimed. Napoleon had ordered extensive measures especially for the
care of the wounded, but few of these were ever implemented because, as
usual, there was a lack of everything —  manpower as well as materials. The
lot of the wounded, especially the Russians, was sad, and just as many died

from starvation as died from a lack of care.
    Napoleon was still ailing and stayed in Moshaisk until the 12th. Worried
about arriving in Moscow with insufficient strength, he busied himself
with ordering up all available forces. The great majority of detachments,
large and small, from almost all the army corps with the central army were
called in, and IX Corps, which had been left behind in Germany, was now
brought up as well. Most of these troops arrived between October 8 and 15,
even though a few small formations were diverted to other uses. The only
troops remaining in Prussia and northern Germany were the Divisions Heu-
