                               Only 70 Miles to Go                               267

         At the same time, everyone became aware of a large crowd milling
     around in the square behind the arsenal, which became more agitated by
     the minute. This, together with the scene in front, caused Murat to order
     up some artillery. They unlimbered and three rounds was all that was required
     to disperse the mob and clear the square with unbelievable speed.
                                                                         ^




     There was no longer any mistaking the increasingly hostile mood of these
crowds who were thought to be the inhabitants. They are described by the
various diarists as being furtive, shaggy, ragtag, and defiant.          They were
actually mostly the sweepings of the Moscow jails, turned loose by Rostop-
chin. As one diarist described them, "These were Rostopchin's guards, which
the noble Russian, next to Herostrat and Nero, the most famous arsonist
of the world, had pulled from the city's dens of iniquity and the darkest
chambers of the Muskovite jails to warm the enemy's stay in their fair city."
    This, by and large, constituted the entry into Moscow. It was, to say
the least, something completely beyond Napoleon's experience. There was
not the faintest resemblance to the entries he had made elsewhere, as in
Vienna and Berlin. That is, the martial show was there, but there was no
one to admire it. His triumphal entry into Moscow had all the excitement
of a troupe of actors playing to an empty house.




                                      NOTES
1.   The rear guard consisted of 4 jaeger regiments from II Corps, 1 Hussar regiment,
     the Cossacks, and 1 horse battery, with 12 guns. On the 9th, these were joined
     by Uvarov's I Cavalry Corps and then 6 infantry regiments and 1 battery from
     VI Corps. Division Dufour (ex-Friant) of 1 Corps had 17 battalions.
         Murat's advance guard included the entire reserve cavalry (194 squadrons)
     and possibly also the light cavalry of 1 and III Corps (40 squadrons), although
     the light cavalry is not mentioned elsewhere.
2.   After sending a Cossack regiment to Wittgenstein, Wintzingerode's detachment
     had only 1 dragoon regiment and 2 Cossack regiments left. On September 10,
     however, it had been reinforced with 1 hussar regiment and 2 Cossack regiments,
     with 2 guns. Temporarily, there were also 500 infantrymen.
3.   Holzhausen, Paul (ed.), Mit Napoleon in Russland.' The memoirs of H. von Roos.
     Stuttgart, 1911.
