                             Only 70 Miles to Go                          265

material aspects, in terms of the only Muscovites who really counted, posed
more of an inconvenience than a sacrifice. The brunt of the exodus fell, as
ever, on the small middle class. The rest of the population, maintained
largely on a subsistence economy, merely moved with their jobs. These
people had gone out to the summer estates, along with whatever government
there remained. This must be kept in mind if one is to understand why the
spontaneous dislocation of nearly a quarter of a million people, even if it
was only of a few weeks duration, did not devastate the city for a generation
to come.




Miloradovitch's rear guard remained behind to cover the withdrawal of the
Russian army. Since the French advance guard exhibited a noticeable re-
luctance to start any real fighting in the city, for fear that it would go the
way of Smolensk (where only 350 of about 2250 buildings remained habitable
after the fires had gotten started), arranging a truce had been easy. Under

its cover, Miloradovitch made a clean getaway.

     In the afternoon of September 14, just hours after the departure of the
Russian rear guard. Napoleon arrived in the Moscow suburbs after having
waited in vain for some sort of deputation to come out and meet him. Still
hoping that one would eventually show up, he set up temporary quarters in
Dorogomikov. The eleventh hour had already struck, as Napoleon himself
admitted. Actually, however, it was already too late, since he could no
longer hope to maintain himself in Moscow. But it was absolutely necessary
to grant the troops an extensive rest, lest the army fall completely apart.
Barely 100,000 strong, its open seams were showing everywhere as the bonds
of discipline were visibly loosening even more than they had been.
     The troops, however, no matter what their native language, were elated.
Moscou! Moskau! Moskal Here were winter quarters, rest, food, and all the
other things that make a soldier's heart beat faster at the end of a campaign.
Every man had his own personal dream version of what the city held in
store for him.
   Napoleon halted by the side of the road as the regiments rolled by on
theirway into the city. When Claparede's division, the Vistula Legion,
passed, Brandt noticed that the emperor's eyes constantly strayed toward
the city, as  he was expecting something or someone from there. But a
               if

Polish captain next to him remarked:  "He can wait there for a long time.
The Russians would rather go to Siberia than make peace now." Still, after
a while, a deputation of some merchants who had stayed behind in the city
appeared. After all, some sort of pro forma showing could be made to protect
sensibilities and imperial egos.   Somewhat relieved. Napoleon made the best
