274              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


occurred in this area.   It   took place when, as a result of the Treaty of Abo
between Alexander and the crown prince of Sweden, the Finnish Corps
became freed for operations against the French. General Steinheil landed
in Reval on September 23 with 10,500 men. On their march to join Witt-
genstein, Steinheil's troops passed through Essen's area of operations,       and
Essen promptly secured their aid in mounting a major operation against the
Prussians.   Essen   now had about 27,000 men at his disposal against the
Prussians' 14,000,    who,    in their observatory role,   were widely dispersed.
This presented him with a splendid opportunity to mount an offensive
operation against them and to throw them back across the Aa.            He might
even be able to get his hands on the siege artillery park, which had arrived
at last, because the Prussians, going overland, might find it difficult to quickly
move its heavy artillery equipment out of harm's way.
    The Russians assembled 22,200 men with 27 guns for the operation. Of
these, a secondary column was to go against Mitau, which the Prussians had
already vacated, while the main thrust was to be delivered in the direction
of Ruhenthal. This gave rise to a series of actions between September 26
and October 1 in the area around Bauske. The most important of these was
fought on the 29th,    when the Prussians were joined by a detachment of
Grandjean's division,'"* which had been brought up on the double from
Friedrichstadt by Macdonald. As a result of these actions, the Russians were
driven back along the entire line. Their cumulative loss was about 5000
men, whereas the Prussian losses came to barely 1200 men. The Prussians
under Yorck had not yielded. On the other hand, Alexander had just cause
to be dissatisfied with Steinheil, especially over the fact that he had split
his forces and sent a column against Mitau instead of concentrating his
operations against the Prussians' main forces. In the wake of these actions,
everyone lapsed into inactivity once again. Macdonald, now at Eckau with
the Prussians, was content to stay behind the Aa, where he was temporarily
joined by one of Grandjean's brigades. And even though it hardly needed
it, the siege train v/as given a good rest as well. Macdonald did not even

attempt to lay siege to Riga.
      The Russians were not unhappy about this lack of initiative on Mac-
donald's part. Steinheil brought his corps back up to 9500 men by syphoning
off replacements from the garrison of Riga.      Then he continued his march
to Wittgenstein, leaving Paulucci, who had taken over from Essen, with
only about 8000 men to defend the fortress.The guerrilla war now resumed.
It was interrupted only between September 16 and 19, when Macdonald

came out in force and threw the Russians, who had extended themselves as
far as Friedrichstadt,   back into Riga.
