272              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Kiev and Kaluga. Napoleon thought         this   would be possible because he
believed that Tshitshagov was still far from the scene.




                 DOMBROWSKI'S DETACHMENT
Apart from Tormassov's reserve army, there was still II Reserve Corps, under
Oertel, which, since the beginning of the war, had stood near Mozyr by the
Pripet, as noted above. Including some troops that had joined it since then,
itnumbered about 12,000 men, with 22 guns.^ To keep an eye on this corps
and the Russian SOOO-man garrison of Bobruisk, *° Division Dombrowski'^
of V (Polish) Corps, reinforced with a cavalry brigade from IV Cavalry
Corps   —in all, about 7000 men, with 24 guns    —
                                                had been left behind. With
such weak forces, Dombrowski was expected not only to cover the area
between the Dnieper and the Beresina but also to protect Minsk against a
possible coup by Oertel. At Minsk, now a main depot for the French, General
Bronikowski had only a few march formations and depots, which were
temporarily joined by detachments from I, III, and IX Corps, as well as the
1st   Reserve Division.   At a later date, some new Lithuanian formations
appeared as well.
      Leaving a strong detachment to cover Mohilev, Dombrowski took the
rest of his troops to Sviszlocz on the Beresina.   From there, he sent most of
his cavalry to Glusk to cover the Minsk- Bobruisk road and to patrol as far
as Mozyr.
      To put an end to Dombrowski's activities and to suppress an insurrection
the appearance of the Poles had caused in Glusk, Oertel took some of his
troops^^ to make a sally against Glusk, while another detachment under
Zapolsky'^ advanced against Pinsk. The intention, obviously, was to intim-
idate the Polish segments of the population in these areas.
      Dombrowski had just sent strong reinforcements to Mohilev, because he
thought his detachment there was threatened by a Russian insurrection.
Thus, he went to the aid of his cavalry outposts at Glusk with what few
troops remained, but he was forced to fall back to Sviszlocz in the face of
Oertel's superior force. The Russian, however, showed little enterprise and
returned to Mozyr, directing Zapolsky to go there as well.
   That was the end of operations in this area for the time being. Dom-
browski was too weak to effectively control and oversee an area of several
hundred square miles, and Oertel was content to limit himself to guerrilla
operations that kept the French exercised.
