                                 The Flanking Forces                           271

    By 5 a.m. on the 12th, Reynier's attack was under way, but he ran into
trouble at once because his weak corps had been reinforced with no more
than a cavalry and an infantry brigade by Schwarzenberg. Brigade Sahr
blundered into a dangerous swamp, where some men sank in up to their
necks and had to be rescued. Its commander, Sahr, described by Funck as
a man who went quite mad at the very sight of the enemy, had gone straight
ahead, swamp or not, as soon as Schwarzenberg had asked him to support
the Austrian Regiment Colloredo, which had come under heavy attack.
    For 12 hours, the Saxons struggled in a swamp forest, much of which
was negotiable only over stick dams, while the fight degenerated into a series
of small actions that ended only with nightfall. Still, Tormassov was not
able to maintain himself in the face of Schwarzenberg's strength. Also, the
direction of Schwarzenberg's attack threatened his line of retreat. In view
of this, he was indeed fortunate that Schwarzenberg's lack of resolution had
built him a golden bridge to Kobryn.       He had lost about 3000 men, Schwar-
zenberg about 2000      — 900 of them Saxons.
        Just as Tormassov had failed to exploit his earlier success, so did Schwar-
zenberg now fail to make the most of his own. Even though Tormassov had
to fight several actions, notably on the 16th at Divin and on the 25th at
Vizva, he made his retreat without haste, pulling in his detachments as he
went along. Behind the Styx, his army took a strong position at Lutzk on
the 29th and awaited the approach of the Danube Army, which had left
the Walachia (present-day southern Rumania) on July 31. Once these troops
arrived, the Russian forces in the area would add up to about 66,000 men,
not counting another 15,000 who either were part of Sacken's detachments
or would come up later.
    Schwarzenberg had stopped his pursuit at Vladimir because of a premature
report of Tshitshagov's arrival with the Danube Army (which, in fact, did
not come up until September 20). Sending his troops into cantonments, he
failed tomake use of his superior numbers before these Russian reinforce-
ments arrived. Despite his losses, his force, joined by several detachments,
still   numbered 41,000 men, of which more might have been made. There
now ensued a pause in the operations, which the Russians filled by actively
pursuing a guerrilla war.
        Schwarzenberg's lackadaisical conduct of operations did serious damage
to Napoleon's interests.     Of course, the emperor had an entirely false image
of the Russian forces operating in Volhynia, thinking that they numbered
no more than lOyOOO men, mostly poor reservists. Thus, his vision toward
the south was no better than it had been to the north. After Schwarzenberg's
successful encounter with Tormassov, Napoleon had even considered having
Schwarzenberg make an offensive into southern Russia in the direction of
