                            The Flanking Forces                           273


              THE SIDESHOW IN THE NORTH:
                   RIGA AND POLOTSK
On the extreme Russian right, the fortress of Riga and its fortified Baltic
seaport facility at Dunamunde covered the Russian flank and denied French
shipping access to the Dvina. The man in command there was Lieutenant
General von Essen I, who had disposed of about 12,000 men at the beginning
of the campaign. Lieutenant General Lewis, with about 6000 men, stood
to the southwest of Riga at Mitau.
    As already noted. Napoleon placed great value upon the capture of Riga,
because this would have opened the Dvina to water transport, making it
possible to carry massive quantities of supplies deeply into the operations
area. In addition to securing the extreme northern flank,   Macdonald had,
above all, been charged with its capture.
    Division Grandjean, which was composed mostly of Poles but also had
a collection of Bavarians and Westphalians,  had reached Smigli and Pon-
iewicz on July 14 and Jakobstad by the 21st. From there, a regiment was
sent to occupy Dunaburg in early August. This was done to secure the
southern flank for the advance against Riga and to observe the Dvina line
between Macdonald's own forces and those of Gudinot, who were operating
to the south and on the left flank of the main army group. Graewert's
Prussians, leaving various detachments along their route, were to make the
actual advance against Riga itself.
    On the 19th, the Prussians ran into Lewis's detachment at Eckau and
sent it back to Riga.  They then moved forward and positioned themselves
on the left bank of the Dvina, in front of the fortress, on the Dahlenkirchen-
Olai'Schlock line. The Russian garrison, supported by the fleet, made some
sallies, which generally failed. Only on the 22nd did the Russians manage

to gain a local success around Dahlenkirchen. At the very start of these
operations. General Graewert, who had been ailing, handed his command
over to General Hans David Ludwig von Yorck. This routine event was to
have far-reaching consequences at the end of the campaign.
   Given the weakness of the Prussian corps and the absence of the siege
train,which did not arrive until September, the Prussians could do little
more than observe the fortress from the left side of the river and conduct
some guerrilla operations. At the same time, Macdonald, who was with
Grandjean's division in Jakobstad, was suffering from a lack of initiative and
of specific orders from Napoleon. Lapsing into apathy, he also failed to lend
active support to Oudinot's operations against Wittgenstein.
    Since the events with X Corps transpired in total isolation from the rest
of the campaign, it may be noted at this time that only one major interruption
