                             The Flanking Forces                           269

gathering in Volhynia, Napoleon soon decided to pull the Austrians in
toward the main army; Reynier's Saxon VII Corps was to take their place.
Schwarzenberg, instead of waiting for the Saxons, simply marched off, meet-
ing up with them at Slonim on July 19.
   Reynier's VII Corps had numbered over 17,000 men^ at the beginning
of the campaign, and the task Napoleon had set for Reynier was anything
but simple.   With a force of not quite 16,000 men and 50 guns,^ he was
expected to cover a line almost 300 miles long, stretching from Brest-Litovsk
to Pinsk and Mozyr.   To do this effectively, it would have been necessary
for him to occupy all three places. Since Reynier did not think he was strong
enough to do this, he decided, quite sensibly, to limit himself to the coverage
of Brest, the point nearest to the operations base. Thus, like the Austrians,
he would also deploy his main force at Pruzany and push two strong advance
guards forward, one to Yanov and another via Kobryn to Brest-Litovsk.
   On the Russian side, Tormassov had pulled together his widely scattered
forces around Lutzk by July 14   — about 38,000 men and 4000 Cossacks, with
161 guns. On the 17th, he moved in the direction of the grand duchy of
Warsaw. At this time, however, orders from Alexander directed him into
the rear of the French forces facing Bagration. This, then, caused him to
turn against Reynier, who stood in the way.
    Tormassov left Sacken's corps behind to keep an eye on the Galician
border. But Sacken had to give up half his infantry to Oertel's corps (standing
near Mozyr to guard the eastern edge of the Pripet Marshes), while Tormassov
took along half his cavalry and artillery. This indicates that security of the
Austrian-Galician border did not rate highly on the list of priorities. But
Tormassov also had to leave a strong cavalry detachment under Crushtshev
along the upper Bug to observe the Polish border. This left hardly more
than 33,000 men at Tormassov's disposal.^ However, he still had twice
Reynier's strength.
    Detaching a column in the direction of Janov and Pinsk, Tormassov was
able to induce Reynier to advance his main force toward Autopol. He then
took his own force toward Kobryn while a further two secondary columns
went against Brest-Litovsk, which was quickly occupied on the 25th.
    The Saxon Brigade Klengel,"^ from Reynier's corps, had been on its way
to Brest but was pushed back in the direction of Kobryn. There, on the
27th, a sharp action took place; Tormassov's main column was also involved.
Attacked from all sides, Klengel was overwhelmed.^ Russian sources state
that the brigade surrendered with 2458 men and 8 guns,        which were left
over after the action. But Funck states that there was no surrender as such,
that there were only 1900 men,      and that these had simply been overrun.
