270              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


This latter figure seems more likely, since Funck places the strength of the
Saxons after Kobryn at 14,700 men.
   This incident was entirely the result of high-handed orders by Colonel
von Langenau, the Saxon chief of staff of VII Corps. Issued without Reynier's
knowledge, the orders led to disaster when Schwarzenberg departed from
Brest before the Saxons were in place, leaving Klengel's brigade isolated and
unsupported. The loss of Klengel's brigade left Reynier in a precarious po-
sition.   He stood near Autopol, only 15 miles from Kobryn, with fewer than
15,000 men^ and with his sole line of retreat threatened. Tormassov, how-
ever,  made no further advance (he later claimed this was due to supply
difficulties). As a result, Reynier was able to slip his head out of the noose

with a forced march to Slonim.
    Tormassov halted at Autopol and sent his raiding parties coursing widely,
as far as Warsaw and Bialystok, sending waves of fear rippling across Poland.
Indeed, the situation appeared so dangerous that Loison, then the governor
of Koenigsberg, took 10,000 men to Rastenburg, poising them for a move
against Bialystok, should it become necessary.
      Reynier's accident caused      Napoleon to drop the idea of bringing in
Schwarzenberg, who had already turned around anyway to answer Reynier's
call for help. Instead,   the Austrian was placed in charge of the entire force,
including the Saxons, which now came to about 43,000 men. Their mission
was to operate against Tormassov and force a battle on him.
      When Tormassov received news of their advance on August 1 1 he began
                                                                        ,




to concentrate his troops. However, with another 13,000 men detached, in
addition to Sacken's and Crushtshev's forces,         all   he could muster at the
moment were 18,000 men.^ But instead of evading a confrontation until
some of his detachments came up, he thought he was strong enough to make
a stand in a position near the village of Podubno, behind a marshy riverbed.
While Schwarzenberg, who disposed of about 42,000 men,^ spent the 12th
standing before the Russians' unassailable front, Reynier was to cross the
riverbed above, that      is,   in a direction west of the Russian left, to attack
their flank.
      During the night before the attack, the Saxons were suddenly roused by
the sounds of a wild cavalcade heading toward their bivouacs. Drums rolled
and bugles blared as the Saxons formed up in time to watch about forty
horses careening past with a group of Austrian officers in hot pursuit.         It

turned out later that the horses, apparently frightened by wolves, had torn
themselves loose from the picket lines of an Austrian hussar regiment and
gone straight for the Saxon campfires. As the frenzied horses passed through
the camp, some of the Saxon officers' horses joined their stampede.           The
next day, the Austrian regiment still listed a dismounted troop.
