266              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


of it. These merchants weren't the government, but they were something.
Thus, he received them with the grace and charm that was part of the other
side of his character.
      But no one was deceived. From the high ground on the near side of the
city, endless processions could be observed,     heading in an easterly direction
along every road. They were hardly the Russian army,          much less Milora-
dovitch's rear guard. Roos, the regimental surgeon with the Wuerttemberg
contingent in Ney's III Corps, described the scene as follows:


   As we marched through the streets leading to the Moskva, not a soul was
   to be seen. The bridge had been demolished, but we rode through the river,
   which was about axle-deep to the guns or a bit more than knee-deep for
   the horses. Once beyond the river, a few inhabitants could be spotted in
   doorways and windows, watching us, apparently without interest. Further
   on, we encountered some handsome buildings of stone and wood. Occa-
   sionally, there were ladies and gentlemen on the balconies and our officers
   gave friendly salutes, which were returned with equal grace. Still, we saw
   but few inhabitants and around the palaces only such who appeared to be
   servants.
       By nightfall, we also encountered a few tired Russians soldiers, stragglers
   on horse and foot, as well as baggage wagons which had fallen behind. We
   let   them pass unhindered.
         Our march progressed slowly through winding streets, where the out-
   landish architecture of the churches, with their multiple turrets and exterior
   decorations caught our eyes, as did the palaces sitting amid gardens.       We
   crossed a market place, where the stands were open, with the merchandise
   in disorder and scattered all over the street, as   though looters had gotten
   there ahead of us.
         Often, our column ground to a halt.    And soon, the sensitive noses of
   our troopers smelled out the fact that most of the Russian soldiers, fast asleep
   on the ground everywhere, had spirits in their canteens. Since no one was
   allowed to dismount, the troopers used their sabers to cut the straps tying
   the canteens to the soldiers' packs and hoisted them aboard with the small
   hooks most had filed into their sabertips. In this artful fashion, one obtained
   strong drink, which had been rare for some time.
         All the while, Murat rode up and down alongside our column and if he
   wasn't there, his eyes were.   He was at the head of our column, when we
   arrived in front of the arsenal.                                 coming
                                      Its gates were open and people were

   out, carrying arms while others were pushing past   them to get in. An
   argument ensued at once, as soon as Murat's adjutants rode up, which got
   quite loud as soon as some rode into the arsenal.
