278              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


country- no service, because now St.    Cyr was able to take charge. He was
not a pleasant man, as tar as the Bavarians were concerned, but he was far
more talented than the bon sabreur he replaced.        St.   Cyr didn't retreat.
Instead, he completely deceived Wittgenstein by sending back the baggage
trains.   The Russian did not consider himself to be nearly as superior as
Oudinot thought he was. Thus, he never really intended to physically push
the French back across the EX'ina. Rather, he had hoped to accomplish this
with demonstrations threatening an attack. He now thought his ruse had
been successful when he saw the French baggage trains moving out on the
morning of the 18th.
    By afternoon, however, St. Cyr had quietly moved the bulk of II Corps
back across the river, and he suddenly attacked with such force that Witt-
genstein recoiled with heavy losses. But the success had required heav^
fighting in which the Bavarians, already gravely depleted, were involved in
heated, close combat in and around the fiercely contested farm complex of
Prismenzia. There they found themselves repeatedly isolated when Legrand's
division, to their left, yielded its ground to the Russians several times. Most
of their field grade officers became casualties. The 9th Bavarian Infantr\',
now commanded by a captain, finally carried the complex with a bayonet
attack.
      But Wittgenstein did not go quietly. As a parting shot, to cover his
getaway, he turned loose his cavalr>'. With darkness about to settle in, this
achieved its desired effect. St. Cyr was suddenly in danger of being cut down
in the ensuing confusion, and he saved himself only by diving into a ditch.
In the end. Merle and his Swiss infantr>% which made up the 9th Division,
finally   broke the Russian cavalry- attack.   On the flank of the Swiss, tw^o
Bavarian guns put on such a splendid exhibition of rapid fire that the Russians
were deceived into thinking they were an entire battery. Wittgenstein, who
had lost 5500 men, took his corps, now down to about 16,000, back into
the fortified position of Sivoszina, only 20 miles from Polotsk.
    St. Cyr, however, did not exploit his success. He had lost about 3000

men, which left him with about 29,000, but these were totally exhausted.
He, too, believed Wittgenstein was much stronger than he actually was, so
he limited himself to a short advance that was undertaken by VI Corps on
the 22nd, 4 days after the battle. After that, he again united both corps at
Polotsk and dug in for a determined defense.
   Napoleon was quite pleased with the way things had gone at Polotsk
and rewarded St. Cyr with a marshal's baton. Despite the fact that there
was little love lost between St. Cyr and the Bavarians, he was nevertheless
unsparing in his praise of their conduct in the battle, and Napoleon re-
sponded by sending sixty crosses of the Legion of Honor for them. Among
