276                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


inovo. Promptly reinforced, Kulnev, a capable cavalry officer, was able to
force his way out of the woods so that he might find the room to deploy.
But the French, for their part reinforced by Verdier's division toward evening,
were able to hold on in Jakabovo.      On the following day, the 31st, the
Russians renewed their attacks at 3 a.m. Wittgenstein had virtually his entire
corps, about 23,000 men,^^ in hand, while Oudinot had only about 20,000.^^
      Since the terrain prevented Oudinot from deploying all of his artillery,
his counterattacks collapsed in the face of the superior Russian artillery, and
he was finally forced to give way to Wittgenstein. To cover his withdrawal
across the Nishtsha, Oudinot positioned his reserves on a line of heights on
the near side of the river, near Kliastitza. However, this village fell to the
Russians as well by 8 a.m., sending the French back across the stream in
considerable disorder. Fortunately for the French, the Russians were too
exhausted to continue the pursuit. Oudinot continued his retreat across the
Drissa and took a position behind the river at Oboiarszina.    When Kulnev,
supposedly reinforced to 12,000 men, attacked this position on August        1,

he was badly beaten. This defeat was,       in turn, partially redressed   when
Oudinot sent only Verdier*s division across the Drissa to pursue the Russians.
Pressing forward rashly, the French suffered a sharp reverse when they un-
expectedly encountered Wittgenstein's main force at Golovshiza. There,
Verdier,   left   without support, was severely mauled. This so intimidated
Oudinot, who thought that Wittgenstein's numbers were vastly superior to
his own, that he retreated back to Polotsk.
      For the time being, Wittgenstein followed Oudinot as far as Sivoszina,
but he withdrew to Rasizi when he was advised by General Hamen that
Dunaburg had been occupied by strong enemy forces. Rasizi offered a good
central position from whence he could act against either Macdonald or
Oudinot. In 3 days of fighting, the Russians had lost 4300 men and 9 guns.
The French losses were somewhat fewer, Wittgenstein's resolute behavior
was to have far-reaching repercussions throughout the campaign. His bold-
ness suggested a substantial numerical superiority and secured for him the
initiative, which he would never again yield.

    As a result of these actions, Napoleon sent VI (Bavarian) Corps*^ to
reinforce Oudinot. Its commander, St. Cyr, was one of the most capable
general officers of the entire army. Departing from Beszenkoviczi on the 4th,
the Bavarians arrived in Polotsk on August 7. Both because it had been hit
hard by disease (especially dysentery) and because its cavalry had been
detached to IV Corps, the Bavarian corps numbered only about 13,000
effectives, despite the fact that it had yet to see the enemy. With St. Cyr's
arrival, Oudinot's force increased to 36,000 men.

    However, even now Oudinot's renewed offensive quickly ground to a
