280              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


convalescents   —   his force stood at 27,000 men again.   By then, however, the
consequences of his failure to consolidate the victory that had gained him
his marshal's baton were making themselves felt. He might have done much
greater damage to Wittgenstein had he continued to strike while the iron
was hot and while he possessed the necessary strength to do so.
      The lack of French success at the Dvina, despite the fact that the French
had sufficient force there, must, for the most part, be traced back directly
to Napoleon. On the one hand, the force he sent against Riga was too weak
to do what it was expected to do and too strong to do what it ended up
doing. On the other hand, and far more importantly. Napoleon had neg^
lected to place 11, VI, and X Corps under a single command. Had an army
been formed out of these three corps, Riga could have been held under
observation while joint operations against Wittgenstein would surely have
achieved far-reaching results. At the very least, Napoleon's left flank would
have been secure.
    At the root of this problem, of course, was the proverbial lack of discipline
among the marshals. These military and social parvenus had been catapulted
into fame and fortune during the upheavals of the revolution. As a group,
they were men of quite uneven talents. Years of having honors and adulation
heaped upon them had done nothing to restrain their egos. Of course, they
would readily subordinate themselves to Napoleon, the tap root of their
existence. But as soon as they were expected to cooperate when the master
was absent, they placed the jealous guardianship of their prerogatives above
the tasks set for them and began to bicker among themselves.         It   took the
musket ball of a Russian soldier to bring about the placement of 11 and VI
Corps under a unified command, with positive, even if temporary results.
But this did not bring Macdonald even an inch closer to supporting either
Oudinot's or St. Cyr's operations, although there had been opportunities
for   him to do so. Thus, Macdonald's corps was totally switched out of
operations against Wittgenstein, while St. Cyr did not get to do much of
anything against the Russians either.
      That Napoleon did not even attempt to put these corps under a unified
command from the start may be explained by the fact that he had no clear
idea of the extent of Wittgenstein's forces and had arbitrarily assumed that
the Russian was weak. After the fight at Kliastitza, however, he should have
recognized his error. There was still time to rectify the situation.      It   was an
omission that was to cost him dearly.
      As a whole, the commanders of the French flanking forces, uncoordi-
nated and each acting as he saw fit, had failed to seize the initiative while
they still had the combined superior strength to do so.       Now the moment
was approaching when Russian reinforcements would begin to balance, and
