                                  The Flanking Forces                               279

the men who had not lived to enjoy the honor was old General Deroy, a
veteran campaigner who had been popular with the rank and file.              He was
killed in action,       and his elevation to the rank of a count of the empire and
a donation of 30,000 francs reached him only posthumously.
      This action led to a pause in operations that would            last until    mid-
October, despite the fact that the two opponents were so near to each other.
However, only Wittgenstein was to benefit from this hiatus, as substantial
reinforcements were coming his way. These consisted mainly of elements
from the Finnish Corps and the militias of St. Petersburg and Novgorod,
which had been the first to achieve a reasonably mobile status. These new
arrivals would gradually increase Wittgenstein's force to 50,000 men.              Con-
versely, while Wittgenstein's situation improved from one day to the next,
St. Cyr's deteriorated.       The intense guerrilla war against constantly growing
superior forces, coupled with the chronically disastrous shortage of supplies,
steadily drained his forces.
    However, it was the locale itself that would prove to be the undoing of
St. Cyr's men, French and Bavarians alike. Mosquito ridden and fever

infested,   even the Russians had pulled their peacetime garrisons out of the
area during the summer months. As everywhere in Lithuania, the water was
brackish and contained all sorts of living organisms, so it couldn't even be
used for cooking. All this was accompanied by thick swarms of flies. "One
could hardly manage a spoonfull of soup without swallowing some of these
pests," relates a diarist.     The stories in a hundred other diaries and memoirs
expounding upon the highly dubious virtues of downtown Polotsk and its
surrounding recreational areas can still turn a modem reader's stomach. The
filth was overwhelming:        The human habitations showed evidence of having
been shared with livestock and looked like unkempt stables. The careless
disposal of human and animal excrement, as well as rotting garbage, attracted
every sort of rodent and insect.        It is   not surprising that Wittgenstein left
the French alone there. No doubt, he was familiar with the locale, but even
if   he was not, there certainly were men in his command who were. Witt-
genstein could be content to sit back and let nature take its course.
      However, St. Cyr now had an opportunity to show what he could do
to create order out of chaos. Not only had his generalship provided his troops
with some breathing space (never mind how bad the local air was), but he
had also retarded the rate of defection among the troops by resorting to an
organized requisitioning system. He divided his rear area into zones and had
them systematically combed with positive results.
   St. Cyr stated that in the beginning of October his two corps numbered
only 17,000 men. This is probably not entirely accurate, because in mid-
October     —   after   the arrival of 5000 reinforcements,      march   troops,    and
