                               The Flanking Forces                           277

halt again.     With St. Cyr moving toward Valnitzy, Oudinot moved toward
the Svolna, where he ran into the Russians. In the ensuing action, neither
side gained a river crossing. The Russians lost 700 men; the French are said
to have lost 1500, which seems a bit high for an inconclusive fight. Despite
the fact that no decision was reached, Oudinot again went all the way back
to an area behind the Drissa.




Now it was Wittgenstein's turn to attack again. Reinforced by Hamen's
erstwhile garrison of Dunaburg,     which had evacuated the place and left it
to Macdonald, he now had 22,000 men.^° He put these to use at once,
spending the days from the 14th to the 16th pushing Oudinot back to
Polotsk.      The difficult withdrawal caused Oudinot substantial losses, not
so much from the nearly constant rear-guard actions as from the fact that
the night marches through forested terrain caused men to go astray by the
hundreds (quite a few were picked up by the Russians). In 3 days, the
Bavarians alone lost about 2000 effectives.
      Finally, at Polotsk, a battle was fought.   The city sat astride the Dvina
at   its   confluence with the Polota, which was little more than a brook but
flowed in a deeply cut bed, as did the Dvina at this point. Oudinot,        who
still believed Wittgenstein   had superior forces, did not want to expose himself
to the possibility of a defeat with the Dvina at his back, so the battle that
eventually developed was merely a rear-guard action to cover his retreat.
He had already sent part of his force across the river, so the opposing forces,
22,000 Russians and 19,000 French,^* were almost equal.
      With only about half the French forces remaining on the Russian side
of the river, the Bavarians barricaded themselves in Spas and the farm
complex of Prismenzia, which lay a few hundred paces in front of the village.
The farm was only a collection of wooden structures, but Spas included a
stone manor house and several other stout buildings that were suited for a
strong defense. On the 17th, the Bavarians held on to the farm and village,
thus preventing Wittgenstein from breaking out of the wooded terrain that
encircled Polotsk, which was at the center of its approximately l-mile radius.
      Nothing had been gained or lost. Despite the fact that Oudinot had
fought with one hand held behind him, the Bavarians had not budged and
his own corps had hardly been engaged. Still, after wrangling with St.       Cyr
over how the action ought to be conducted, he decided to retreat anyway.
He was the marshal, whereas St. Cyr was only a division general. It was at
this point that fate intervened. Oudinot was wounded by a stray musket ball
as he was supervising the preparations for the withdrawal.
      The Russian who wounded Oudinot on the evening of the 17th did his
