                             The Flanking Forces                           275


                           WITTGENSTEIN
When the First Western Army left Drissa on July 16, going to Vitebsk,
Barclay had left Wittgenstein behind. With his corps reinforced to 25,000
men, with 108 guns,^^ Wittgenstein was to place himself between the Druia
and Drissa to cover the road to St. Petersburg against any secondary oper-
ations the French might mount in that direction. Wittgenstein might have
lacked the ability to handle a large command under difficult circumstances,
but he was well suited to handling an independent command such as this
one.   He was a daring soldier and had the insight to permit himself to be
guided by the good advice of men like d'Auvray and Diebitsch       II. The

defenses of Dunaburg, intended to be a major strongpoint in the area, were
nowhere near complete, and the city could not have withstood even the
assault of a field army lacking siege equipment. Its Russian garrison consisted
of about 3000 men in ten reserve battalions under General Hamen.
    Napoleon had left Oudinot's II Corps behind to deal with Wittgenstein.
Reinforced with Doumerc's cuirassier division, Oudinot's force numbered
about 28,000 men, with 114 guns. The French marshal, whose numerous
wounds furnished ample proof of his personal courage, was not exactly one
of the coryphaei among the French marshals, but he was an excellent corps
commander. That is, he functioned excellently under direction but lacked
the resolution and enterprise necessary for an independent command.
    Napoleon had grossly underestimated Wittgenstein's strength, assuming
his infantry to number only about 10,000 men. Thus, he ordered Oudinot
to take the offensive against him. As a result, Oudinot advanced from Polotsk
along the St. Petersburg road toward the end of July, in total ignorance of
Wittgenstein's whereabouts.
    Wittgenstein had planned to cross the Dvina at Druia and fall on Oudi-
not's rear. In the meantime, however,    he had learned that Macdonald was
about to cross the river at Jakobstad. Apprehensive that Oudinot and Mac-
donald might mount a combined operation against him, Wittgenstein turned
around and moved toward Sebesh. On his way there, he learned that Oudinot
was headed in that direction as well. (The information had come out of an
encounter his advance guard cavalry had with Corbineau's cavalry near
Valnitzy on July 28.) Wittgenstein decided to attack at once to clear his
own way to Sebesh.
    Oudinot still had no idea where Wittgenstein was when he arrived in
Jakabovo on the afternoon of the 30th with Legrand's infantry division and
Castex's light cavalry brigade. There, he came under attack from Wittgen-
stein's advance guard under Kulnev,    who had crossed the Svolna at Kater-
