                                        Moscow                                289

      •   As this was being accomplished on the flanks, Kutuzov's main army
          was to drive the French central army group into their arms.


It has    been claimed with justification that this plan was rather artificial and
that it would have been more appropriate to send all reinforcements marching
in the direction of Kutuzov's main army.        But it must be kept in mind that
Alexander was under the impression that Napoleon had been beaten and
was already retreating. In such a case, it would have indeed been correct to
bring all forces to bear by the most direct routes. Still, in the end the plan
did succeed, even if its success did depend largely upon the enemy's mistakes.
It   would, of course, have produced even greater results had someone other
than Kutuzov been in command.
      However, the sobering truth about Borodino came to Alexander soon
enough. In the midst of the celebrations, the news, first of the retreat and
then of the loss of Moscow, arrived like a stroke of lightning. Following on
the heels of the elation over the supposed victory, the depression over what
was seen as a defeat was all the greater. The idea that the French had
occupied Moscow overshadowed all e(se, including the more detailed ac-
counts of the battle, as well as the news of the burning of the city.
      The so-called French party, led by Chancellor Rumanzov, had been in
favor of a peace treaty and now raised         its   head again. Even the dowager
empress and the passionate Grand Duke Constantine, presumably Alex-
ander's successor, both spoke of peace, though both were Napoleon haters.
But Alexander was the one who counted, and he soon regained his com-
posure, due in large part to von Stein's efforts. Replacing the tsar's initial
                                    Moscow from the intruder as soon as
distress was his firm resolve to wrest

possible and to exact revenge on Napoleon, the source of this great mis-
fortune. By the time Colonel Michaud delivered Kutuzov's official report of
the battle, Alexander had recovered so much that he is said to have ex-
claimed: ^'Napoleon or I,      I   or he!" His words reflected the attitude of the,
Russians, embittered by the burning of Moscow, for which the French were,
of course, blamed.
      At the same time, Alexander was annoyed about Kutuzov's machina-
tions. Having already sent Prince Volkonski to the army to find out what
was really going on, he now also ordered that a board of inquiry convene
under Field Marshal Saltykov to look into Kutuzov's behavior. Yet whatever
one may think of Kutuzov's actions, he had achieved one thing: Once the
    excitement had passed, the loss of Moscow was less keenly felt and
first

Borodino continued to be perceived as a victory, because the news of the
loss of   Moscow had blotted out all the reports of what had actually transpired
