294              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

the Oka, and the French would not need to deploy strong forces. The main
army was to follow only in the event that, against all expectations, the
Russians made a stand by the Pachra. Napoleon had given up on going after
them in force not only because his army was exhausted but also because he
had no great desire to again follow them for indeterminate distances. Twice
on the 28th, and once after that, he decided to take the entire army to the
Motsha because he had received indications from Murat that the enemy
meant to stand there. But he gave up on the idea as soon as the information
was discovered to be inaccurate.
     Once it had been decided to go behind the Nara, the Russians reached
Babenkovo on the 27th. There they were joined by 7700 recruits. Milora-
dovitch, who had closed up to Raievsky, drew back to Tshirikovo after a
stiff brush with Bessieres. There he got into another scrap on the 29th, this

time with Poniatowski, but he stood his ground, as his cavalry showed a
marked superiority over the French and their tired horses. Ostermann, who
had crossed the Motsha on the previous day, also had a skirmish on the
29th.
    The Russian army reached the camp of Tarutino on October 2. The rear
guard under Miloradovitch had been joined by Ostermann on the           1st.   It

had another action on the 2nd and again on the 4th, when Miloradovitch
was forced to evacuate his position near Spas-Kuplia but maintained himself
behind the Tshemishnia near Vinkovo. By the 6th, the main army was
concentrated in the camp, and only Miloradovitch remained on the left
bank of the Nara with 11/111 and IV Cavalry Corps. Nearby, only about 5
miles from the Russians, Murat made camp with his advance guard. After
the losses in the various engagements, he had about 23,000 to 24,000 troops
left.   Bessieres returned to Moscow with Colbert's lancer brigade.   The rest
of his troops,^ who had been joined by what was left of the Bavarian cavalry,
remained near Voronovo in support of Murat.
    Napoleon made a serious mistake in permitting the Russians to remain
in a position that was closer to Moshaisk and Gshatsk (both on his line of
retreat)   than was his own. The poor condition of his army was no excuse.
An offensive was all the more indicated because of the expected approach,
via Kaluga, of the  Danube Army, which, however, he estimated at only
20,000  men.  Until  it arrived. Napoleon held the advantage in numbers.

Even without Junot, he had 95,500 men at the end of September (see
Appendix XIV), while the Russians had no more than 60,000, not counting
Cossacks and militia. Napoleon even thought they had only 50,000. Also,
toward the end of September, the weather improved again. It was clear,
even if the nights were getting colder. One can only assume that his con-
