290               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


at   Borodino.   As a result, Kutuzov, strange as it may seem, continued to
retain the confidence of the nation. Indeed, the juxtaposition of Barclay
and Kutuzov may hardly be improved upon as an example of how important
and decisive it is for a commander in chief to have the confidence of both
the army and the entire nation.
    Alexander's resolve to stand firm, which might easily have been replaced
by a depression had he known the truth about Borodino from the start, was
entirely justified.   An impartial assessment of the situation, as Volkonski was
to receive from Toll, could hardly call for a different course of action. Despite
the difficulties of the    moment, the opportunity was too great not to be
exploited to the full once it was accepted that there could be no peaceful
coexistence with Napoleon, that nothing lasting would be gained by giving
in to him.   There could be no doubt whatever that the moment would soon
come when Napoleon would be forced to retreat, despite his victory at
Borodino. For this reason, Alexander held on to the operations plan he had
adopted. The changed circumstances had not really changed the nature of
the plan, merely the timing of its execution. There would be no appease-
ment.
     With the decision made, the necessary measures were taken, especially
the reinforcement of the main army with the recruits still available in the
depots of the interior, as well as the strengthening of the flanking armies
with the Danube Army and the Finnish Corps. All but a few of the de-
tachments that were still abroad and the          militias of St.   Petersburg and
Novgorod, which were already in sufficiently serviceable condition to be
made mobile, were also called in. At the same time, a corps was assembled
at Novgorod      under General Novak.     It   was thought possible that, despite
the distance, a move on St. Petersburg might develop from the direction of
Moscow. All that stood at Novgorod at the moment was Wintzingerode's
flying column, reinforced to 3200 cavalry, but        it   was impossible to scrape
more than 6000 men together for Novak's corps. This, however, was not
all. Since the reserves already assembled at the start of the war had nearly

all been committed, the formation of new reserves^ was ordered in the

beginning of October (and again in December), although these men would
not be available until spring. There was no shortage of manpower. The real
difficulty was finding the necessary cadre and the arms and accoutrements

to equip them.
     After the evacuation of Moscow, the Prussian main army had withdrawn
along the road to Ryasan. The flight of the Muscovites had so clogged the
roads that the army was forced to halt on September 15, despite the proximity
of the enemy. Miloradovitch's rear guard was no more than 5 miles from
the city; the army itself was no more than 10 miles away. Turning over the
