                                      Moscow                                 287

voluminous correspondence of 1813 clearly reveals a man who had already
retreated into seeing the world around him not as what it was but as what
he wanted it to be. He was trying to prop up himself as much as those to
whom his correspondence was directed. Similarly, in 1812 he was already
deceiving himself into believing that Alexander would come around after
all;   he rationalized that the tsar could not do otherwise because he, Na-
poleon, had taken Moscow.
       Part and parcel of this self-delusion, of course, was the fact that he did
not yet perceive his own situation to be quite        as desperate as   itwould
eventually become. It is one of the attributes of genius to see resources where
ordinary men do not. A genius who is spoiled and blinded by success,
however, will tend to see resources where, in fact, none exist. These non-
existent resources, coupled with the emperor's overblown self-regard and
underestimation of his opposition, probably explain Napoleon's entirely ar-
bitrary assumptions about the strength and intentions of his adversaries and
his increasingly consistent overestimation of his      own strength. He places
mass and numbers above their content. The Grand Army he brought into
Russia underlines this; it contained a-s much chaff as it did wheat.
       Vastly superior military resources had changed the artful master gunner
turned general, who could handle his army as a skillful commander would
handle a horse battery, into an ordinary gunner who simply relied on the
weight of his ordnance to batter down whatever stood before him. This
reliance on numerically superior force   ("God is on the side of the biggest
battalions") did not begin in 1812;      had been built into the Napoleonic
                                         it

concept from the start. However, as the means had increased, their appli-
cation had become increasingly less artful.
    Thus, Napoleon could still believe that his situation in Moscow was
better than it actually was, especially since he still had superior numbers.
At the end of September his strength reports showed 307,000 men (see
Appendix XIII), of which 59,000 were still coming up; a further 43,000
would become available by the end of the year. Against this, he assumed
that the Russians had only 120,000 men (50,000 under Kutuzov, 30,000
under Wittgenstein, and about 20,000 each under Tshitshagov and Tor-
massov). Actually, including the Cossacks and militia, they had 193,000
men (more than half again as many as Napoleon assumed), ignoring various
garrisons. But those of Riga and Bobruisk alone came to about 21,000 men,
and the whole would be joined by another 92,000 men in December.
    In his scheme of things. Napoleon could see no danger where numbers
were concerned. This, however, was not so when his decisions had to take
into account the condition of his troops and the disadvantages of his strategic
position, which offered numerous weak points to his opponents, who were
