292                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


that, at the moment,   he still feared an attack from Napoleon and that he
had, from the start, pinned all his hopes for victory on the coming of winter
and the gradually cumulative effect of a vigorous guerrilla war. At least for
the time being, he was not in a position to mount an offensive, nor did he
intend to launch one any time soon.
    The Russians had been able to make their flank march from Borovskoi
to Krasnaia-Pachra (the Pachra is only 20 miles from Moscow) undisturbed,
because the tired and worn-out French army had lost all contact with them
and had halted in Moscow. Only Murat was sent along the Ryasan road to
follow the Russians with a strong advance guard. ^ Murat, however, assumed
that the war was as good as over. He even remained in Moscow at first,
thinking the Russians had gone beyond the Oka, in the direction of Ryasan.
Thus, despite the strong cavalry forces involved, the pursuit had been rather
lax, and the pitiful condition of the horses contributed more than a little

to the loss of contact with the Russians. There had been a lot of rain in
the second half of September, and the tired horses had become bogged down
again.
      It was not until September 20     that Napoleon was advised by informants
that the Russian army stood         on the Tula road, near Podolsk. This was
startling.   He at once recognized the inherent danger of this new line of
retreat the    enemy was taking. Once his cavalry had confirmed the infor-
mation,      he decided to throw the Russians back across the Oka.           On
the 22nd a report arrived from Sebastiani, sent on the 21st, stating that the
Russians were withdrawing along the road to Ryasan.           To confuse matters
further,   news arrived that the Cossacks had captured a convoy on the Mos-
haisk road.    It   was high time to clarify the situation.
    Napoleon ordered Murat, who had rejoined the advance guard on the
22nd, to take his main force along the Ryasan road, while Poniatowski was
to investigate along the Tula road as far as Podolsk. A newly formed column
under Bessieres'* was to check out the old Kaluga road in the direction of
Disna.     Owing to the army's general exhaustion, none of these columns
pursued their missions energetically. Bessieres reported only a weak Russian
detachment near Disna on the 22nd; he occupied the place on the 25th.
Poniatowski found Podolsk free of the enemy on the 24th. But Murat's news
was the most important: He found nothing but Yefremov's Cossacks on the
road to Ryasan. Then he continued to Podolsk to join Poniatowski. There
was still no sign of the Russian army. Only the reports of informers placed
it   on its way to Kaluga.
      At the same time, hordes of Cossacks appeared everywhere, and the
French cavalry with its worn-out horses could not even begin to cope with
them. At times, the Cossacks even interrupted communications with the
