288              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


consistently able to avoid his attacks. Thus, it was inevitable that even
Napoleon would soon begin to experience a sense of insecurity that, in a
manner of speaking, he had already brought with him. This was all the more
inevitable as the burning of Moscow carried with it unmistakable messages
from the Russians. With each passing day, the hope of an accommodation
with the Russians dwindled, and it had to become clear to Napoleon that
he would have to take the first step   — the
                                        to     rear   — something   against which
every fiber in his being rebelled. Still, he continued to hope, because there
was little else he could do.
   Alexander, back in St. Petersburg, had no intention whatever of backing
down, even though the mantle of rhetoric clothing this resolve was of a far
more patriotic and uplifting nature than it was reflective of his personal
antipathy against the French emperor. Alexander had been disenchanted
with Napoleon for a long time, even before the war began. Now there was
no reason on earth (except in Napoleon's mind) for the tsar to change his
mind again, certainly not with the French emperor standing in Moscow at
the head of a hostile army.
     Indeed, when the situation of September 1812 is viewed in such ele-
mentary terms, one can only wonder about the mind-set of Napoleon, who
believed he could simply let bygones be bygones with yet another treaty,
written with the blood of 100,000 soldiers and dried with the ashes of two
cities and a hundred towns and villages. If he expected this of Alexander,

whose" head was not on a block, with the sword hovering above his neck,
then all the historians who have ever spoken of Napoleon's delusions of
grandeur need no further proof of his intellectual and emotional derange-
ment.
    Prompted by Kutuzov's initial report, Alexander had at first thought that
Borodino was a Russian victory. He had already rewarded the victor with a
marshal's baton and was looking forward to a vigorous pursuit of the success
gained. In order to give this pursuit direction, he had ordered that an
operations plan be drawn up containing the following salient features:


      •   The flanking armies, together with the substantial reinforcements
          coming their way, were to press the French detachments that were
          in front of them back toward the border.

      •   Then Tormassov and the Finnish Corps, the latter reinforced by the
          Riga garrison, were to keep these detachments in check while Tshit-
          shagov and Wittgenstein joined hands across the French          line of

          communications.
