                                     Moscow                                293

outlying detachments and began to show up in the Moscow suburbs.           On
the 22nd, Napoleon had to send a detachment of 250 dragoons to the Beresky
estate,    15 miles from Moscow, to secure communications with Moshaisk.
On the 23rd, St. Sulpice had to follow with the guard dragoons because the
situation was too dangerous to wait for the assembly of 1500 cavalry from
the march squadrons, which were to eventually gather there.       At the same
time, Junot in Moshaisk and Baraquey d'Hilliers in Smolensk were ordered
to cover all transports with strong escorts. The capture of further transports,
including two march squadrons,^ and an ambush of the guard dragoons on
the 25th, which added nothing to their reputation, forced Napoleon to add
1000 infantry to his post.^ At the same time, Omano was placed halfway
between Moscow and Beresky with Broussier's infantry division and strong
cavalry.
    The news of Murat's and Poniatowski's approach had caused Kutuzov to
cover his right by also sending Ostermann-Tolstoy to Niemtshinino with
IV Infantry and II Cavalry Corps. For the same reason, Raievsky, who, like
Miloradovitch, had withdrawn a bit farther, had sent Paskevitch's division
farther to the right, to the banks of the Motsha at Satino.
    The opinion at the Russian headquarters was that a French attack would
occur in the direction of Podolsk, so the detachments that had been sent
against the Moshaisk road were recalled.      To avoid such an attack, a war
council was held on the 26th. Toll's recommendation to withdraw to Ta-
rutino, behind the Nara, was accepted, despite the fact that this went against
the tsar's operations plan. Again, Benningsen wanted to attack in the di-
rection of Podolsk, while Barclay, who did not think a French attack would
materialize, wanted to stand pat. Toll, however, prevailed with his idea that
the army should avoid any and all confrontations with the enemy until the
expected reinforcements arrived and that, above all, Kaluga, a main depot
and the place where the reinforcements were assembling, should be covered.
    On the same day, September 26, Murat confirmed that the Russian army
stood on the Kaluga road. From this. Napoleon at once inferred that Kutuzov
was awaiting Tshitshagov's approach via Kaluga, because this conformed
with his notions. Bessieres's suggestion that the enemy might advance against
the Moshaisk road was, to Napoleon, out of the question, because the
emperor did not think the Russians were in any condition to make such an
offensive. Still,   he ordered Bessieres not only to support Murat but also to
keep an eye on the Moshaisk road and to start the rumor that Napoleon
himself was following.
    Murat, now united with Poniatowski and with III Cavalry Corps (trans-
ferred to him from Bessieres's column), was to advance against the Russians.
Hopefully, this action alone would induce the enemy to withdraw behind
