286               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


fact that the altar   implements and other church paraphernalia were made
of precious metals, which immediately attracted the attention of the looters.
Indeed, Napoleon had a systematic sweep made for the church silver, which
ended up in his war chest, the mobile treasury.
    Napoleon had taken quarters in the Kremlin on the 15th. But by after-
noon of the next day, he was forced to leave the inner city because the fires
threatened to isolate him from his troops. He temporarily set up his head-
quarters in the Petrovski Palace, outside the city, but he did not remain
there. Even before all the fires had burned themselves out, he made his way
past the ashes and gutted buildings and back into the Kremlin,      which had
escaped the fires.
   Not only the army's hopes had gone up in smoke. The energy, tenacity,
and resolution radiating from the ruins of Moscow bore their own unmis-
takable messages, and none of these could be regarded as the harbingers of
peace. Once hopes for peace were dashed, a timely retreat would have been
in order. After failing to do so twice, at Smolensk and Borodino, Napoleon
no longer had the means of destroying the enemy's power to resist, and
wintering in Moscow was out of the question.
    Indeed, time was now of the essence.    A French emperor should not be
sitting in the   middle of a hostile Russia, 1000 miles from his power bases,
with an army of only 100,000 men. The Russians,        sitting atop their own

resources, were bound to regain more than they had lost so far, and they
would do so day by day. Only if he availed himself of their momentary
weakness could Napoleon hope to lead what was left of his army into a more
tenable position without suffering serious disturbances during his retreat.
   This, however, would have been an admission of defeat. Napoleon,
however, had spent the last several years making and unmaking kings and
had altered the face of Europe. He was not yet ready to admit defeat to
himself,   much less to the world. No matter how high his self-esteem may
have been and how grossly he may have misread the mood of nations, it
was clear to him that a defeat would do serious damage to his reputation.
Here, unlike in Spain, he was the man at the helm, and whatever came of
the Russian campaign would attach itself to his person. That this posed an
inherent danger to his fortunes was clear to him, even if he could not possibly
predict how serious it would eventually become. For these reasons, he was
bound to stay in Moscow as long as there was even a glimmer of hope that
he might, after all, find some sort of accommodation that would make it
possible for him to come away from this misadventure with no more than
a black eye.
      Of course, no modem psychoanalyst ever had the opportunity to pry
into Napoleon's      mind to find out what he really thought. However,      his
