                                   Moscow                                 291

city to the enemy without a fight had made a bad impression on the troops
and loosened the bonds of discipline, which had, until then, been exemplary.
It was not until the army arrived in the camp of Tarutino that its composure

was fully restored.
     Kutuzov was quite aware that something should be done to wipe away
the demoralizing effect the abandonment of the city had exercised upon the
troops. Thus, he accepted Toll's recommendation that he turn southward,
even if only to save the magazine stores around Kaluga. The fact that both
the Moskva and the Oka usually spill over their banks in the fall and make
crossings difficult also played an important part in the decision. The swollen
rivers would make it that much more difficult for the French to follow if
they should be of a mind to do so. Thus, the army recrossed the Moskva to
its right (western) bank on the 16th and reached Podolsk on the 18th. On

the 20th, the flank march was continued; Krasnaia-Pachra was reached on
the 21st. Miloradovitch was pushed forward in the direction of Moscow as
far as Desna. There, despite being only 15 miles from the city, he remained

unobserved for quite a while. To cover the Moscow-Ryasan road leading
past Kutuzov's flank, Raievsky's infantry took a position at Lukovkina, his
cavalry at Podolsk. Strong cavalry detachments were now being sent forward
against the Moscow-Smolensk road to interrupt Napoleon's line of com-
munications. A flying column of 2000 cavalry^ was formed under Dorochov,
who set up his base at Shtshaparovo. From there, he sent raiding parties
against the Moscow roads.
   Even before Borodino, Kutuzov had ordered Tormassov to march into
the rear of the main French army as soon as he was relieved by Tshitshagov.
From Podolsk, he reversed these roles, which would have called for an
extensive march by Tshitshagov. Now Tshernishev arrived with the tsar's
operations plan, which Kutuzov was obliged to follow. Indeed, he did so
gladly, because since   Borodino he was even less inclined to have a con-
frontation with Napoleon than he had been before.       Now he could hope
that Wittgenstein's and Tshitshagov's operations would induce Napoleon to
leave Moscow without any direct action on his part.     The only change he
recommended regarding the tsar's plan was that the date on which the two
armies were to meet at the Beresina be pushed back from the 22nd to the
27th of October.
   The plan had been drawn up when it was thought that the French had
been beaten at Borodino. Under the circumstances, however, it was clear
that Kutuzov's 50,000 men were hardly enough to drive Napoleon out of
Moscow at once, but that's what Kutuzov would have been forced to ac-
complish were he to be at the Beresina by the 22nd. Despite the fact that
the truth about Borodino was now out, he could hardly admit to the tsar
