                                The Russians Regroup                           299

guard was formed under Miloradovitch, as Tormassov took command of the
corps de hataille. (See Appendix XVII.)




While the Russians made optimum use of the breathing spell allowed by
Napoleon, the French let the time pass without taking advantage of the
superior strength they still had. Napoleon allowed the rest of September to
go by, hoping for an accommodation with Alexander.             At the same time,
his own situation deteriorated from one day to the next.           He soon realized
that he would need something more than the mere possession of Moscow
to force a treaty. Thus, during the early days of October (the exact date is
not known), he drew up plans for a massive demonstration against St.
Petersburg.                                                    »




    •   Victor and St. Cyr, reinforced to lOyOOO men, with march troops
        and one of Macdonald's divisions, were to take a position along the
        lower Dvina.

    •   Napoleon, with another 10,000   men (the Guard, plus I and IV
        Corps), would operate against Veliki-Luki, while Ney and Murat
        were to cover his rear against Kutuzov.

    •   Should these maneuvers fail to yield the desired results, the army
        would winter between Smolensk and Riga (he counted on its capture
        by then) and would advance against St. Petersburg with 300,000
        men the following spring.

    Napoleon's stepson Eugene was the only one who thought the plan was
workable.       The remainder of the commanders declared that the army was
still in dire   need of rest and that Moscow still offered ample resources. Should
a retreat become necessary,       it   would be more advantageous to proceed in a
southerly direction.      At the same time, it would still be possible to deliver
damaging strokes against the Russians.
    Even though he wasn't convinced. Napoleon gave in, remarking upon
something he had not himself heeded, that "peace could hardly be expected
from those who had set Moscow on fire." For this same reason, a move
toward St. Petersburg, 250 miles from Veliki-Luki, would hardly have suc-
ceeded. Failure was all the more likely since the army would have to make
another march of over 350 miles through poorly cultivated country and
could hardly be expected to arrive there in good condition.
    Having given up on the military front, Napoleon made a last-ditch effort
on the diplomatic front when he sent General Lauriston off to the Russian
