304                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


which was to have started on that day. As soon as the final choice was
made, however, preparations began. Broussier's division of IV Corps and
the Italian cavalry, in Beresky until now, were to be the' points along the
new road to Kaluga. As an intermediate post, the Italian guard cavalry was
deployed at Shtshaparovo, along the same road. Baraquey d'Hilliers was sent
to Yelnia to collect supplies for the army.
    Still,   even though time was of the essence, another 2 days passed before,
on the 18th, the retreat actually began. Two events made it impossible to
put matters off any longer. The first snow had fallen on the 15th, and in
the early morning of the 18th Murat had been attacked and beaten at
Vinkovo. Winter was approaching, and the Russians had sent a warning.
    As already noted, Murat had arrived in Vinkovo on October 4. There,
the advance guard took a position only 5 miles from the Russians but
about 50 miles from Moscow. Due to the incessant actions along the lines
of the outposts and to the guerrilla war, not to mention the exhaustion
of the troops and the logistical problems, Murat had only about 20,000
men left, with 187 guns.^ However, the sorry condition of the horses meant
that his cavalry and artillery were of only limited use. Indeed, the 187
guns were now nothing short of a burden. The only support he could pos-
sibly   expect in his exposed position was from the detachment at Voro-
novo, 10 miles from Vinkovo, but that detachment was barely 6000 men
strong.^
   Jt would be an understatement to say that Murat's position in the im-
mediate proximity of a fivefold superiority was dangerous. It was all the more
so since his force stood on the     left   bank of the Tshemishnia and his left
flank floated in the air. On top of this, despite the fact that the enemy was
so near,     and in the fashion typical of Napoleonic armies, security measures
were careless and virtually nonexistent. Murat was quite aware of his pre-
carious position, but he did nothing to improve          it   other than advising
Napoleon of its shortcomings. In response, the emperor authorized Murat
to withdraw beyond the defile of Voronovo, behind the Motsha, if he felt
he couldn't maintain himself at Vinkovo until the 15th, at that time the
projected date for the retreat.
      Murat, however, did not avail himself of this opportunity to improve
his position. Instead,    he asked for permission to march to Borovsk, along
the march route Napoleon had selected. On the 14th, however. Napoleon
refused this request, because he thought that such a flank march was too
dangerous for Murat and because he himself had just considered taking this
road with the army.
