300               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


headquarters on October 4. Lauriston did manage to meet with Kutuzov,
but nothing came of it. The latter might have shied away from meeting
Napoleon again on a battlefield, but he was far too shrewd not to see what
stood behind Lauriston's mission. At the same time, he was quite aware of
Alexander's desire to see the French expelled from Russian territory as quickly
as possible. Negotiations could only delay Napoleon's expected withdrawal
from Moscow, once he realized that no peace offers would be made and
none accepted.
    Thus, Kutuzov made certain that he left no doubt whatever in Lauriston's
mind. Napoleon got the point and gave in to the inevitable.    A letter written
to Victor on October 6, the day of Lauriston's return, indicates that Na-
poleon was fully aware of the fact that his position had become untenable.
He expressed the conviction that Tshitshagov and Tormassov would unite
(which had already happened) and that Schwarzenberg would not be able
to stand against them.    He also feared that the tsar would reinforce Witt-
genstein to such a point that Macdonald and St. Cyr would be forced back
from the Dvina.
    But it was not simply the situation on his flanks that was forcing Napoleon
to retreat.   The situation of the main army group was what Clausewitz has
described as "strategically debilitated." Just as Napoleon had neglected to
adequately secure his flanks in the wider sense, so too, contrary to his actions
in the past, had he failed to pay careful heed to his own line of commu-
nications. Even if coverage of its entire length, 575 miles to Kovno, was
not necessary, it would have been imperative to secure the line at least back
to Smolensk, 270 miles away. Up to that city, at least, the width of his
operational base, as well as the more favorable disposition of the civilian
population, offered better security. But all this came to an end at Smolensk.
All Napoleon had done to secure this critical stretch was to establish a
stronger post at Moshaisk, 70 miles from Moscow, with Junot's weak West-
phalian corps and to leave smaller garrisons in Gshatsk, Viasma, and Do-
rogobush. The smaller garrisons generally consisted of only a weak battalion
and two guns. In between, there were only a few isolated posts that usually
had no more than 100 men, who would dig in as best they could.
    Now the consequences were making themselves felt. The enemy's light
troops no longer confined themselves to swarming around the outposts of
the French army. More than a dozen raiding detachments, most of them
consisting of one or two Cossack regiments but some with regular light
cavalry as well, operated around Viasma and Moshaisk; some even entered
the Moscow suburbs from the north, east, and south. The French lines of
communication were pierced everywhere. Small detachments were wiped
out and captured; small transport columns and poorly secured magazines
