                              The Russians Regroup                            303

surance from Napoleon that the French were in a bad way.           He simply did
not reply.
      Meanwhile, the French position continued to deteriorate. On October
10,   Dorochov (5 battalions, 4 squadrons, and 2 Cossack regiments) took
Vereia,  which contained a French magazine and a Westphalian battalion,
by storm. This marked the beginning of an all-out guerrilla war that turned
the entire French army into a garrison under siege. It was no longer a matter
of choice or even of time. Napoleon had tarried too long, and now he had
to get out. Even his plan to winter at Smolensk was no longer feasible. How
deeply Napoleon was depressed over his misfortune is reflected in his unusual
vacillations concerning the choice of his line of retreat. He had three options
at his disposal:


      •     Via Volaklamsk, Subtsov, and Bieloi toward Vitebsk

      •     Via Moshaisk, Viasma, and Dorogobush to Smolensk

      •     Via Kaluga, Yuhnov, and Yelnia, also to Smolensk


      The first of these led through poorly cultivated tracts that had, however,
been left untouched by the war. This route was also the most convenient
and would have allowed a head start against a pursuit by Kutuzov. The
second led along the way the army had come, through areas leached and
stripped bare during the advance.       The third led through relatively well
cultivated regions that had also remained untouched by the war, but it was
also the route that could most easily be blocked by the enemy. If Napoleon
chose this option, he would have to be prepared to fight his way through.
This would have been the most preferable route         if,   and only if, he still
thought his army was capable of seeking another decision by force of arms.
Ending the campaign with an offensive action would take the sting out of
a failed campaign, raise the morale of the army,     and lend credence to the
claim that whatever was done afterward was done by design and not by the
enemy's force of arms. The political value of this at home was not something
to be overlooked.      That Napoleon would opt for this route, rather than the
first     one, which would have saved his army but not his reputation, was to
be expected.      As long as he had a choice in the matter, the central route
did not even enter into his considerations. Its exhausted countryside would
have doomed the army.
        But Napoleon vacillated. Having first decided on Kaluga, he changed
his mind on the 14th, deciding on Bieloi instead, only to return to his
original choice on the 15th. This, however, occasioned a delay of the retreat.
