                                The Russians Regroup                        301

were taken. Even the smaller march formations suddenly found themselves
under attack and defeated.
      The Russian raiding parties were able to claim that they had brought in
15,000 prisoners by mid-October. Thousands more had been killed, not only
by the Cossacks but also by the enraged peasantry, whose cruelty occasionally
knew no bounds. Some men had been crucified; others had been buried
alive or wrapped in straw and set on fire. As could be expected, these horrors
were answered by the French with other horrors in moments of reprisal.
      Since the cavalry had been run into the ground through Napoleon's own
fault,   it   proved impossible to put an end to this sort of guerrilla warfare.
The commandants in Moshaisk and Smolensk could only be warned not to
let   any transports march without a strong escort and not to send small
detachments at all. Of course, since the middle of September, the number
of troops along the Moscow-Smolensk road had steadily increased. Thus,
on October 6, Baraquey d'Hilliers was ordered to hold on to twelve battalions
of reinforcements coming up (see Appendix XV), which were to be deployed
in Dorogobush, Viasma, and Gshatsk. However, it took time to implement
even these belated measures, and none were ever completely carried out.
As a result, the situation of the army, cut off from nearly all its commu-
nications, became ever more precarious. Few supply transports got through,
and the troops in Moscow were reduced to foraging again. And this practice,
in view of prevailing conditions,  became ever more dangerous and costly.
    Although there were rather large stocks of food in Moscow, the com-
missariat, in time-honored fashion, had failed to secure them and see to
their orderly distribution. Again, abundance and waste walked hand in hand
with opulence and privation. With the burning of Moscow and the looting
that took place amid the flames, a lack of discipline was again rampant,
causing some diarists to liken the situation to a "witches' sabbath."
    In the beginning of October, Napoleon decided to expand the canton-
ments of the army, that is, to spread its quarters out over a larger area. This
would facilitate the upkeep of the troops and make the Russians believe he
was settling in for the winter. Of course. Napoleon had no such intentions,
and Kutuzov was not taken in even for a moment. Still, the guard cavalry
detachments were taken back into Moscow, while Ney's and Delzon's di-
visions of IV Corps were sent to Bogorodsk and Dmitriov, respectively, to
set up housekeeping in those locations by October 10.
      While the troops in Moscow were beginning to experience a shortage
of supplies again, the situation was even worse outside the city. Murat was
supposed to draw his rations from Moscow, but there was no transport to
move them. Since the advance guard was also in constant friction with the
Russians, it was down to about 20,000 men by October 18, despite the
