298                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


      It    would have been better had Kutuzov limited himself to his role as
commander in chief and left Barclay in charge of the new First Western
Army. The continuing split of command, even after the division between
the erstwhile two western armies had been eliminated, was disadvantageous.
But    it   would have been entirely against Kutuzov's nature to have done
anything else. Besides, even though he pretended otherwise, he wanted to
rid himself of Barclay, and in this he succeeded. The reorganization, which

became effective when the army reached Tarutino, stripped Barclay of his
role as an army commander. This was more than he was willing to swallow,
which is exactly what Kutuzov had hoped for. On October 4, tired of the
incessant frictions, Barclay left the army, leaving Kutuzov in command of
both the supreme headquarters and the corps de batailk. Yermolov remained
as the chief of staff of the latter; Benningsen held the same post at supreme
headquarters.
      During the stay of nearly 3 weeks in the camp of Tarutino, the army
received important reinforcements. First to arrive were about 10,000 Don
Cossacks.^ Then, 33,581 recruits arrived in several echelons, along with
more Cossacks. By mid-October, the army again numbered about 94,000
men, including the militia, and about lOyOOO Cossacks (see Appendix XIV).
And these numbers would grow by several thousand more in the near future.
Since it was impossible to bring all the battalions and squadrons up to
operational strengths and useful standards, a substantial number of battalions
and squadrons were stripped of all but their cadre and sent back to Kaluga,
Tula, and other collecting points, where they were to be rebuilt.^ The troops
that had been pulled out of the formations sent back were used to replenish
those remaining with the field army. Also broken up and redistributed to
the line were twenty-one united grenadier battalions. Several other regi-
ments saw themselves reduced to a single battalion. In the cavalry, no
regiments were, as yet, sent back to be reconstructed, but most saw a re-
duction in the number of their squadrons.
      As a whole, the troops were well provided for in the camp of Tarutino.
There was plenty of food, and new issues of clothes arrived as well, including
woolens and fur vests, which would stand the troops in good stead during
the coming winter. The spirit of the army, flagging since the abandonment
of Moscow, improved visibly. The arrival of the replacements and the suc-
cesses of the light troops did much to raise morale, and the veterans succeeded
in transplanting this higher morale into the recruits.   The army was, in all
respects, ready to have another go at the French. By the time of the departure
from the camp of Tarutino, the army had increased to 97,000 men (including
only 5500 militia) and 20,000 Cossacks, with 622 guns.^ The army would
again be reorganized when it marched. In place of the reserve, an advance
