302              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


arrival of some replacements.    The cavalry, in particular, was in a bad way.
As a result of all this, and despite the arrival of 30,000 replacements and
reinforcements (see Appendix XV), the army as a whole .was only a few
thousand men stronger on October 18 than it had been upon its arrival in
Moscow. Including Junot's corps, it numbered only 108,000 men, with 569
guns. Worse, the condition of the army, rather than improving during its
stay inMoscow, had only gotten worse. The cavalry and artillery horses,
whose condition had been poor on arrival, were now useless.



As noted earlier, when Napoleon learned on October 6 that Lauriston's
mission had failed, he immediately decided to retreat. At that time, he was
thinking of making Smolensk his objective. He hoped to winter there and
to augment his forces by drawing on the newly raised levies of the 1813
draft (ordered from Moscow) and by summoning his allies to the counter
once again. With the army strengthened, he would renew his offensive in
the spring. Preparations began at once. On the 6th, Napoleon ordered that
the sick and wounded be sent back. A directive went out to Victor that
ordered him to position himself between Smolensk and Orsza so that he
could support either Schwarzenberg or St. Cyr, as needed. Baraquey d'Hilliers
was ordered to assemble another 12,000 men in Smolensk, in addition to
the garrison and the twelve battalions already mentioned.     The object was
to have a reserve for the army even if Victor had to go off in support of one
or the other flanking force.   On October 10, Baraquey d'Hilliers was advised
to be ready to go forward to     meet the army, but he was to do this along
secondary roads, which would be scouted first, in order to avoid clogging
the already overused main road.
      However, the start of the withdrawal kept being postponed from one
day to the next, partly because the preparations, which had been started
too late, were not complete but also because Napoleon still clung to the
hope that something might happen, after all, that would make the retreat
unnecessary. For a man who had become accustomed to having his way for
all too many years, the acceptance of the idea that the initiative had passed

from his hands did not come easily. He still hoped to intimidate Alexander,
to make him believe that he might stay in Moscow. Once he began his
retreat, it would all be over. There could be no turning back.
     When Napoleon circumvented Kutuzov by having a Russian noble, who
had fallen into the hands of the French, hand-carry a letter to Alexander,
he not only stripped himself naked but also exposed the sorry conditions
that had prompted him to take this step. But Alexander needed no reas-
