314               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


attacked from two sides. If he retreated, he could expect an immediate attack
from Wittgenstein.   He decided to hold on until nightfall. Fortunately for
St. Cyr, a thick fog descended, which forced Steinheil, who was now only

about 4 miles away, to halt. This, in turn, caused Yashvil, who could observe
the action across the river, to delay his own attack, which had been just
about to begin.
   When darkness descended, St. Cyr began his withdrawal at once, first
extracting his numerous artillery out of its positions. However, his attempt
to make a quiet getaway failed when a French general committed the blunder
of ordering that the huts of his division's encampment be set on fire. This
aroused the attention of the Russians, who came forward at once.
   Lieutenant Legler, a Swiss officer, claims that the fire which signaled
the attack had been set by deserters, and he casts an interesting sidelight
when he says that the Russians were full of vodka and that, during their
attacks, they had their backs (read "courage") tickled by the Cossacks' pikes.
The Swiss defended the town itself until past midnight. Apparently, the
Bavarians were involved in the battle as well. Brutal house-to-house fighting
ensued.   The defenders held out as long as they could hear the rumble of
the guns and caissons crossing the two boat bridges. Again, the wounded
of both sides perished by the hundreds as Polotsk went up in flames.
   But St. Cyr made good his retreat. The bridges were burned at about 3
a.m., but the Swiss rear guard held on until about 4 a.m., when the last of
the men were ferried across the river in pontoons saved from the bridges.
Even though St. Cyr had brought his army across the river, he was still in
a precarious position. Not only did Steinheil threaten his continuing retreat,
but St. Cyr had to expect that the victorious Wittgenstein, his crossing
covered by Steinheil, would come roaring across the river to finish what he
had started.
   But Steinheil himself was in an exposed position. The destruction of
the Polotsk bridges had left him isolated and, at least temporarily, cut off
from support by Wittgenstein. It was imperative that St. Cyr avail himself
of this opportunity. Since he was wounded, he charged the Bavarian Wrede,
temporarily in command of VI Corps, with the task.^ Wrede attacked before
daybreak. Since Steinheil's advance guard had gone beyond the narrows of
Yekimanya, where the road from Disna crosses the Uszacz, and had neglected
to take any security measures, Wrede succeeded in surprising him at 5 a.m.
on the 20th. The result was a total defeat, which cost the Russians at least
1800 prisoners alone. It would have gone even worse for the Russians but
for Amey's ineptitude, which completely bungled his part of the attack.
Steinheil, fearing that he was under attack from St. Cyr's entire force, ran
