310             1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


well, Schwarzenberg could not assemble even 30,000 men. Although he
was able to turn back a feeble attempt by the Russians to cross the canal in
front of his position, he thought it best to vacate his ground because Essen's
and Langeron's corps threatened to envelop his right flank. Thus, on Sep-
tember 30, he marched to Opolin, only weakly pursued by the advance
guard of the Danube Army and Essen's corps. Schwarzenberg continued his
retreat. Crossing the Bug at Vlodava on October 1, he marched along its

left (western) bank to Brest-Litovsk, where he recrossed to the right bank

and took a position behind the Muchavets to wait for Siegenthal's division
to close up again.
    Even as Tormassov and Tshitshagov made ready to attack the position
at Liuboml, Tshemishev arrived with the tsar's operations plan (drawn up
after the Battle of Borodino). It recalled Tormassov and charged Tshitshagov
with the task of pushing Schwarzenberg back into Poland, leaving Sacken
to face him with the reserve army. The admiral was then to draw Oertel's
corps into the Danube Army and march to the Beresina via Minsk.
    Tshitshagov now took the new Third Western Army, formed from the
combination of the two armies, and continued his offensive. Following
through on the operations plan, he took his right wing, the erstwhile reserve
army, forward to threaten Schwarzen berg's left and induce him to retreat
into Poland, while he moved against Brest-Litovsk with full force.
   This put Siegenthal's division and Mohr's brigade into difficulties, be-
cause Oertel had just ordered General Zapolsky to drive them out of Pinsk.
The advanced Russian right wing threatened Siegenthal's communications
just when he wanted to move from Ratno to the Bug. Siegenthal only barely

succeeded, but Mohr was forced to go back through Pruzany to Bielove
before he could make the connection again via Drohiczyn.
      In the meanwhile, Tshitshagov had continued his advance to Brest-
Litovsk, where he faced Schwarzenberg on October 10. He intended to make
a frontal attack with his     main force, while Lambert's and Voinov's corps
were to envelop his   left.   Fearing he would be backed into the swamps,
Schwarzenberg evaded this blow and crossed to the far side of the Liesna
during the night of the 11th. There, he denied the Russians a crossing with
a series of lively engagements. Still, Schwarzenberg wanted more of a safety
margin. During the following night, he marched off again, recrossed the
Bug, and took another position near Drohiczyn, where Mohr's brigade finally
caught up as well. This brought the strength of Schwarzenberg's force, which
had suffered substantial losses, back up to 33,000 men (24,000 Austrians
and 9000 Saxons). In the Drohiczyn position, he thought he would be able
to cover the grand duchy of Warsaw as well as the communications of the
