                            The Russians Regroup                            305
            *

At the Russian headquarters, Toll was just as aware of the French advance
guard's precarious position as he was of the careless fashion in which the
French handled their security. He had succeeded in getting Kutuzov to agree
to a surprise attack. Even though the commander in chief still shied away
from any tactical confrontations with the enemy, he knew that the tsar
expected him to act energetically and that this was a comparatively safe
opportunity to achieve something that would restore his somewhat tarnished
reputation.
    Indeed, a letter of October 16 indicates that Alexander was not entirely
pleased with Kutuzov's lack of activity, which all the carefully worded phrases
in his dispatches could not cover up.   Above all, the tsar wanted the French
out of Moscow, and yesterday would be a better time than tomorrow. Thus,
time and circumstances were on Toll's side, and Kutuzov gave in.
    The attack against Murat was to be launched on the 17th, but it was
postponed to the 18th because Yermolov, the chief of staff of the army, was
nowhere to be found and thus the issue of the necessary orders had not been
made. Now Konovnitzyn was put in his place. Unfortunately, the attack o{
the 18th, while successful, fell considerably short of expectations.
    According to the plan, the left wing (V, VI, VII, and VIII Corps with
the two cuirassier divisions), accompanied by Kutuzov, was to place itself
behind Miloradovitch's advance guard (II/III and IV Cavalry Corps) in two
columns.    The latter had been left in place to deceive the enemy. The
advance guard was not to attack until the right wing, consisting of three
columns under Benningsen (II, III, and IV Infantry Corps, I Cavalry Corps,
and 10 Cossack regiments), had gone around Murat's free-floating left.
   But Benningsen's movement failed because he lacked sufficient energy.
The enemy was completely surprised at daybreak, so the first two of his
columns (the cavalry with II and III Infantry Corps) gained some success.
However, since IV Infantry Corps was late, Benningsen did not exploit his
initial success but halted and settled for the ground he had taken, even after

the third column at last arrived. This made Kutuzov cautious, not because
he was jealous of a success that Benningsen might gain (as has often been
maintained) but simply because he himself was not overburdened with en^
ergy. Thus, despite Miloradovitch's and Yermolov's pleas (Toll was with the
right wing),    Kutuzov halted his own advance. As a result, Murat got off
lightly,   with the loss of only 2000 men and 36 guns, and he wasn't even
pursued. The Russians had lost about 500, far too many for what had been
gained. Their infantry, stuffed with recruits, had shown itself to be still quite
awkward.
    The action brought about a total break between Kutuzov and Benning-
