                                                                                                                 —
                                     The Flanks Begin to Waver                                                  311

French main army. He wanted to wait at that position for the arrival of his
own reinforcements from Austria and Durutte's division.
   Durutte's division was made up mostly of draft evaders, stockade inmates,
and a solid sprinkling of Spanish and Portuguese prisoners of war. Although
these regiments eventually received ordinal numbers, they were, at that
time,       known by their erstwhile island garrisons (Belle Isle, Walcheren, de
Rhe). Funck says of them:


   On 1 November ... we were met by several battalions from Durutte's
   division.         These were poor troops, scraped together, conscripts, 15 and 16
   year olds [the Germans consistently underestimated the age of the French
   conscripts], totally lacking military training or discipline, the officers in-
   experienced, the better among them displeased with their assignment [to
    these regiments].        .   .   .   And this, if        I   recall correctly   .   .   .       Regiment de Rhe,
   under Colonel Maury                   .   .   .   was said to be the best of the lot.
                The commanders were full of bluster and quite discourteous toward us
    .   .   .   exhibiting their disdain of us at every opportunity. From the start, there
   was nothing but trouble with them and the only way to coexist was to be
   equally rude and let them know one was not intimidated.
      The other regiments, one of which bore the title Mediterrane, were
   much worse, the dregs of the French army. Mostly lllyrians and Spaniards,
   who had been impressed. To them, the war was nothing but an opportunity
    to loot; and they did this openly, under the eyes of their officers and especially
    the Spaniards committed the worst excesses against women. Reynier always
    had them march in the center, between the two divisions      after midnight,                .   .   .




    they would come into the villages to loot. The sentries could no longer
    handle them, the central guard had to fall out every time. Restoration of
    order was possible only with a formal attack. And even though I prohibited
    my men from using their bayonets, 1 permitted the use of the musket butts.
        A single battalion of Wuerzburgers, decent and proper men, were the
    sole exception. Durutte's division was said to number 6,000 men. There
    were but 4,000 of them before they had their first look at the enemy. They
    were only infantry and had no guns.^


These were the reinforcements with which the Saxons had been saddled
and that seems the only proper expression. They had to keep as much watch
over them as over the Russians.
    Fortunately, Tshitshagov did not think he could follow up on his success
because this would have conflicted with Alexander's operations plan. Nor
did he think he could start his march to the Beresina without first taking
extensive logistical measures. Since this required some time, he had his
