                          The Flanks Begin to Waver                        313

   On October 16, close to the day Napoleon decided to leave Moscow,
Wittgenstein passed to the attack again.   The tsar's operations plan called
upon  him  to drive the French in front of him toward the border and then
to leave the enemy to the attention of Steinheil and the Riga garrison while
he took his main force to the Beresina and the French main line of retreat.
There, he and Tshitshagov were to block the enemy.
   To carry out this plan, Wittgenstein formed his army into three columns.   ^



The right, under Yashvil, was to go against Polotsk along the right bank of
the Polota and keep St. Cyr occupied. Meanwhile, Wittgenstein would cross
to the left bank of the river at Yurovitshi and move against Goryani, 15
miles above Polotsk, where he would cross the Dvina.   To induce St. Cyr
to cross to the left of the Dvina, Steinheil was to threaten his line of
communications by crossing to the left of the Dvina himself at Pridruisk,
55 miles below Polotsk, and then marching toward the town. A bridge was
laid at Disna to facilitate communications between Steinheil and Wittgen-
stein. To cover this bridge, two strong detachments were sent to Goryani

and Disna. The one at Disna would become the advance guard for Steinheil's
Finnish Corps.
   As soon as the Russian advance became known, the French outposts
were withdrawn toward Polotsk. This brought on some brushes on the 17th,
when the Russians crossing at Yurovitshi were briefly delayed. St. Cyr was
firmly resolved to hold on at Polotsk and to retreat only after the bulk of
the enemy's forces had crossed the Dvina.       To secure accurate information
about what was afoot, St. Cyr sent all but five squadrons of his cavalry to
the left side of the Dvina. Doumerc's division was to watch the river above
Polotsk, while Corbineau's brigade, reinforced with three weak battalions,
was to watch below. These were the opening moves leading to the second
Battle of Polotsk.
    While Yashvil advanced against Polotsk along the right of the Polota,
Wittgenstein attacked along the  left side. His initial objective went no

further than securing the construction of the bridge at Goryani against a
possible French sally, but     when it proved impossible to build the bridge
there, he decided to move on toward gaining a decision. However, his attacks
failed in front of St. Cyr's field fortifications.   Thus, he remained quiet on
the 19th and waited for Steinheil's arrival.
    On the 18th, Steinheil had gotten as far as Polyudoviczy, 20 miles from
Polotsk, while his advance guard reached Uszacz. Corbineau lacked the
strength to stop Steinheil's continuing advance on the 19th, and a column
(1 infantry brigade and   1   cuirassier regiment) under Amey, which had been
sent to support him, had no better luck. St. Cyr's situation was now getting
serious. It was only 3 p.m. If he stood fast,   he incurred the danger of being
