312                  1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


troops go into cantonments around Brest-Litovsk without undertaking any
action during the interim.
    This brought on another hiatus filled with guerrilla actions in which the
Russians were becoming increasingly aggressive. General Tshaplitz (4 bat-
talions,   12 squadrons, IVi Cossack regiments, and         1   battery) sent shock
waves through Lithuania, disturbing even the formation of the militia there.
On October 20, during a raid on Slonim, he scattered the lancers there,
who were in the process of being formed up to become the 3rd Regiment
Chevaulegers Lanciers of Napoleon's Imperial Guard. Tshemishev (7 squad-
rons and 3 Cossack regiments         — about 1800 men with 4 guns) went    into the
French rear areas,       as far as   Vengrov and Siedlice, twice spreading terror
through Warsaw. Indeed, he created so much commotion that Schwarzen-
berg was forced to attack Essen,          who had been sent forward to receive
Tshemishev. This brought on a sharp action between Reynier and Essen on
October 18 near Biala, in which the Russians were brought up short. These
raids, however, yielded an important bit of information for the Russians in

that they exposed the fact that the Poles no longer exhibited a great urge
to arm. The earlier enthusiasm was evaporating because Napoleon had shown
himself to be insensitive to their national aspirations.
      However, even as operations in the Grand Army's southern flank had
confined themselves to the so-called little war (or, as the Spanish called it,
the giten/k)), renewed rumblings were heard in the north.




                    WITTGENSTEIN ENHANCES HIS
                           REPUTATION
While Schwarzenberg was rooted into place on the left, the situation on
the right flank was beginning to deteriorate. After Polotsk, Wittgenstein
had stood back, barely a day's march from St. Cyr, without being in any
way molested by the latter. With reinforcements constantly dribbling in,
his army, barely 16,000 men, with 98 guns, after the lost battle, had grown
to about                with 158 guns.^ In addition, the Finnish Corps, at this
time still coming up along the right bank of the Dvina with 9500 men and
18 guns under Steinheil, was also slated to join Wittgenstein. Thus, the
latter soon    had 50,000 men, with 176 guns. Against these, St. Cyr could
muster     little   better than half that numiber.   Despite reinforcements, the
                                and disease (running to epidemic propor-
guerrilla war, supply difficulties,
tions among the Bavarians) had reduced his force to about 27,000 men."^
This, and the danger of his position, caused St. Cyr to reinforce Polotsk
with earthworks.
