                          The Flanks Begin to Waver                       309

than risk a war that, he was convinced, Russia would lose. However, by the
time the admiral arrived, the peace had been concluded (on May 28).
    After the treaty had been ratified by Alexander on June 23 and by the
sultan on July 15, and after it was decided that instead of operating in upper
Italy,   the Danube Army would join operations against Napoleon, Tshitsha-
gov departed from the Danube on July 3 1He arrived at the Styx in three
                                            .




echelons on September 19, 20, and 21. The forces now united there with
Tormassov numbered 60,000 men, including about 6000 to 7000 Cossacks,
with 223 guns.^ Additionally, Osten-Sacken's corps, with only about 4000
men left after detachments and transfers, stood at Shitomir to watch the
Austrian border, and General Lueders's column of 11,000 men was           still

coming up.
    Against this force, Schwarzenberg could muster only 41,000 men, with
107 guns. His main force, including Vll Corps, reinforced with Kosinsky's
brigade (? battalions, 3 newly formed lancer squadrons, and 3 squadrons of
the Warsaw militia   — about 5000 men) stood
                                        ,       in the area of Vladimir. Di-
vision Siegenthal and Brigade    Mohr (in all about 5000 infantry and 900
cavalry) stood along the Kovel-Ratno Toad and at Pinsk, respectively. For
the moment, Schwarzenberg could not count on any reinforcements. About
6000 Austrian reserves had been mobilized, and Durutte's division of XI
Corps (13,600 men) had been ordered to march from Berlin to Warsaw.
But none of these would arrive in Warsaw (Durutte) or Volhynia (Austrian
reserves) before the end of October.
    Kutuzov had ordered Tshitshagov to operate against Schwarzenberg and
Tormassov to go against Napoleon's right flank even before Borodino. How-
ever, the two Russian commanders had decided instead to mount a joint
offensive against Schwarzenberg. In doing so, the left wing, formed by the
Danube Army, was to be taken forward to crowd Schwarzenberg away from
the border and into the Pripet Marshes.
    After mounting the operation, the Danube Army crossed the Styx on
the 22nd of September, the reserve army on the 23rd. On their approach,
Schwarzenberg withdrew to Liuboml. As the Russians continued to follow
him, Kutuzov sent new orders from Podolsk. Tormassov was to remain facing
Schwarzenberg, while Tshitshagov was to join the main army via Mozyr and
Mohilev. However, even now the two generals did not think they should
follow this order, since they expected Schwarzenberg to offer them a battle
at Liuboml.
   The Austrian had indeed intended to make a stand in this strong position.
However, since the Poles (Kosinsky's brigade) had been pushed through
Vladimir and were forced to withdraw to the weakly garrisoned fortress of
Zamoscz and since Siegenthal's division and Mohr's brigade were absent as
