                  The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo-Jaroslavets                    323

time was not nearly sufficient to recharge the psychic batteries of the men,
especially not when such a hiatus in action came deep inside hostile enemy
territory.   Nor were the conditions in Moscow conducive to such a moral
reconstruction, especially since a large part of the troops there had been
forced to see to their own needs in the ad hoc fashion of every man for
himself (a policy that had long been typical of the French army on foreign
soil). That this system had, even in relatively good times, reflected adversely

on the discipline of the French troops has already been explored. In Moscow,
this problem was exacerbated by the absence of the civilian population. It

was, after all,    much easier to loot an abandoned house than an occupied
one, in which the plunderer might come face to face with the hapless owner.
As a result,      the population's abandonment of Moscow and          its   suburbs,
coupled with the inevitable letdown experienced by the troops after what
they thought was the conclusion of a difficult and strenuous campaign, had
removed the last vestiges of restraint. Even the Old Guard, the soldiers
among soldiers, had taken part in the looting. The situation had reached a
point where not even Napoleon could halt the decay of discipline.
    The men of Murat's advance guard had seen little of Moscow, and for
them the previous several weeks had been only a continuation of the pri-
vations suffered since the beginning of the campaign. Thus, when some of
them first laid eyes upon the columns coming out of Moscow, they could
hardly believe what they saw. According to one diarist, the entire column
took 30 hours to pass.
      In three broad columns, on and alongside the old Kaluga road, the once
mighty juggernaut rolled on, with the cavalry columns on the                left,   the
infantry on the right,     and the artillery, trains, and baggage in the center.
Several observers thought that the spectacle resembled a giant Oriental
caravan more than it did an army. Intermingling with the army and joining
the retreat were the foreign merchants and their families, who could expect
            having fraternized and even traded with the invaders. Every
reprisals for
army vehicle was loaded down not only with foodstuffs but with loot as well,
to such an extent that the axles threatened to give way. But that was only
the half of it.The baggage trains of the ranking officers had taken on
gargantuan proportions, and now many of the junior officers had some sort
of cart in addition to their packhorses.
      Even in ordinary times, most of the generals and staff officers had main-
tained sumptuous standards of housekeeping in the field        — sumptuous,         that
is,   at least in the eyes of the rank and file and even the junior officers.       Now
each general had several new carriages, hansoms, droshkys, four-wheelers,
and two'wheelers, as well as two or more supply wagons to carry his personal
gear,   not to mention a string of saddle horses. All of this was presided over
