324                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


by a cook and one or more personal servants, as well as grooms and drivers,
none of whom were military personnel. Including the refugees, among whom
were several hundred women and children, these noncombatants have been
estimated to have numbered about 32,000 people.
    Even though restrictions had been set upon the baggage trains of the
formations, none existed where the staffs were concerned. Thus, many of
the staff officers, whose means were now augmented by what had been
commandeered during the campaign, had retinues which rivaled those of
the generals. Even the rank and file had commandeered every imaginable
kind of conveyance to haul away anything that seemed to have some value.
It is    unlikely that even a single useful vehicle remained in Moscow or for
several miles around.
    Some of the officers had made an effort to see that their men obtained
whatever clothing might prove useful for the coming winter. Most of the
officers had acquired every conceivable kind of fur coats and capes,        which
were to be had for a pittance in and around Moscow. Unfortunately, the
mass of the rank and file had rid themselves of almost all necessities in order
to carry useless junk. Best off were those who had commandeered items of
female apparel for their ladies at home. Although the ladies never got to
see any of the clothes, they did get to see their men again: In a month's
time, these garments provided life-giving warmth to the soldiers who donned
them to keep out the biting cold. Other soldiers weren't as fortunate. One
diarist tells of a Westphalian, for example, who was sitting by the roadside
sometime in November or December offering a large chunk of silver, ham-
mered into a cube, for a slice of bread. He found no takers.
    Soon, the army began to take on the multicolored, unmilitary image
that was to become engraved in the memories of those who witnessed its
passing. As the trek rolled on to the south, more noncombatants and strag-
glers collected around the trains; they were joined by the sick and wounded

who had been left behind on the way in. These would be among the first
to perish, giving the army a dreadful preview of its own future.
        Often, the wagons traveled in four columns abreast. Thus, at every
bottleneck in the road, such as towns, villages, and bridges, they would jam
into each other.     And at these places, the field gendarmes of the army were
waiting to weed out the unauthorized vehicles hauled along by the battalions.
Naturally, the gendarmes were most effective at the bottom of the pecking
order.     The rank and file lost all their spoils, except, of course, what they
could carry on their backs.
        The entrepreneurs in the rank and file, getting wind of these checkpoints,
stopped their carts by the roadside and opened shop, offering their goods at
bargain prices. Some of these were rather successful and were probably the
