322                   1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the veterans, and those who had become veterans over the previous several
months. The infantr>' still looked good, but the cavalr\' was in abominable
condition. Four thousand unhorsed troopers had already been formed into
infantry- battalions.      All that really remained usable were the 4600 men of
the guard cavalr>'; they had not participated in Murat's follies and conse-
quently were in fairly good condition. The horses of the remaining 10,700
cavalr>' and especially those ot the artillery- were of limited use, being largely

on the point of collapse. This was all the worse since the Russians had many
good cavalry-men, in the face of which the French were all but helpless.
Napoleon now paid for Murat's reckless expenditure of the cavalry- on the
way in. Now, when they were needed most, the army no longer had any
eyes and ears; it marched blindly toward its doom.
      The artillery- was even worse off than the cavalry. General Lariboissiere,
the artiller\' chief, as well as other senior officers, had recommended that
some ot the artillery be left behind so that what was taken might be better
equipped with the necessary- draft teams and ammunition; there was only a
single day's battle supply left for the entire     artiller\-.   Indeed, 569 guns for
about 100,000 men was far too much artillery, especially in view of the
condition of the horses, which were already exhausted when they crossed
the Niemen in June.         Ot course, Nap>oleon scoffed at the notion, declaring
it   unworthy of the French army. On the one hand,               this artilleryman   was
loathe to part with any ot his guns.         On the either, any guns lett behind
would become trophies, like captured colors and standards, tor the Russians.
Napoleon was not about to permit that to happen, no matter how useless
the guns were to him. To leave them behind would have been another
admission of defeat. Yet, as happens so otten, he who wanted to save
everything would end up saving nothing.
      But worst of all was the alarming deterioration of discipline. Rather than
regaining      its                                    Moscow, the army had
                     posture during the extended stay in
gotten worse. This was not exactly a new phenomenon. It had already
occurred in 1806, when the stamina and the marching capacity of the army
were greatly diminished after its prolonged stay in Berlin        —
                                                            and this was atter
a victorious campaign. Now, after marches ot Herculean proportions and
without the experience of even a sense of victory, the situation was even
worse.      No amount of disciplining, not even Davout's brand ot summary-
justice,    could halt the decay.
      It   has been noted that, of all the aspects of military histor\', the lessons
it   has to teach on the subject ot troop psychology are the most important
because they are of the most lasting value. It becomes obvious that although
the weeks spent in Moscow might have enabled the troops to regain some
of the physical energy- they had expended on their march to Moscow, the
