                             The Flanks Begin to Waver                        315

all   the way back to Disna, where he recrossed the Dvina on the next day
and rejoined Wittgenstein.
    Losses had been heavy on both sides: about 8000 for the French and
12,000 for the Russians. Unfortunately for the French, St. Cyr had been
wounded so badly that he had to turn over command to General Legrand,
but Wrede, who was a corps commander, refused to take orders from a
division general. As a result, Legrand, his pride wounded, passed command
on to Merle, who accepted with the proviso that he would not be required
to give orders to Wrede. St. Cyr, who had remained with the troops,
attempted to intercede without avail.
    Despite their final success, the French were no longer able to hold the
Dvina line. II Corps, for the moment a formation in name only, as the
division commanders now emulated the marshals in bickering with each
other, withdrew to the Ula; its main force at Czasniki, Division Legrand,
which now also operated independently, because its commander did not
want to subordinate himself to Merle, his junior, went to Beszenkoviczi.
Wrede, "in order to preserve his troops from a catastrophe," contradicted
the orders which Legrand had given him and which had been confirmed by
St. Cyr. He took the 2000 to 3000 remaining Bavarians toward Glubkoye,
that is, in the direction of Vilna.
      St. Cyr's wounding and the eccentric retreat precipitated by the indis-

cipline of the commanding generals reduced the forces facing Wittgenstein
by more than half. Wittgenstein, quite apart from the importance of his
victory,   was able to redress his losses through his union with Steinheil and
the arrival of a few reinforcements.    He still had command of 39,000 men.
      Thus,   at the very   moment Napoleon began his retreat from Moscow,
the situation in the rear of the French main army took          on a dangerous
complexion. On the right, Schwarzenberg had been pushed into a defensive
stance by forces nearly twice his own strength, while the enemy made ready
to turn part of this superiority against the French line of retreat. The situation
on the left had become just as bad. There, the fragments of St. Cyr's army
were also no longer able to keep the Russians away from the main line of
retreat.

      Again, the lack of a unified command in the rear and on the flanks
exacted its punishment. Given the distance between these formations and
Napoleon's headquarters, it would have been imperative to conduct unified
operations at least on the left, where relatively substantial forces had been
deployed.
      The situation called, above all, for ensuring the security of the main
line of retreat. Despite Schwarzenberg's faulty measures, this would still have
