                        The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo'Jaroslavets      333

mained in place. Added to this must be the fact that until Malo'Jaroslavets
the army had advanced; its confidence in its leadership had been intact,
and the army had still perceived itself to be invincible. Now, however, it
turned its back on the enemy, and with this move came the loss of self-
confidence. The final deterioration would soon follow.
    Thus, when Napoleon finally began his retreat to Moshaisk, the march
was bound to be far more destructive than it would have been had he gone
that way in the first place. Not only had he robbed himself of what he had
hoped to gain by going to Malo-Jaroslavets, but he had also failed to seize
the opportunity the enemy had offered him at the last moment. His genius
had dimmed under the pressure of his first major failure, which was so
overwhelming to him that it was impossible to restore the confidence of
those around him. This, in turn, had reinfected him. Thus, he fell into
using the sort of half measures he had always punished his adversaries for
using. As at Vitebsk, Smolensk, and Borodino, his power of decision had
deserted him. These lapses, following each other at ever-shortening inter-
vals, mark the decline of the genius. Although he was still lacking an

energetic opponent who would exploit these lapses, he had to cope with
the disadvantages of his own situation, disadvantages that he had brought
upon himself. In this campaign, the great captain was not to be defeated
by the enemy but by his very own mistakes.




                                           NOTES
1.   Left behind were about 3500 to 4000 men of Young Guard Division Laborde,
     4000 dismounted cavalry men, and 500 men of mounted cavalry brigade, an
     artillery company and two engineer companies.

2.   These included:
     The Vistula Legion
     2 divisions and the light cavalry of 1 Corps
     The light cavalry of 111 Corps
     2 Bavarian cavalry brigades of IV Corps
     V Corps
     I,   II,   III,   and IV Cav. Corps
3.   The reinforcements were as follows:
     VI Inf. Corps (7th and 27th Inf. Div.)
     Dorochov's detachment: 51 battalions, 4 squadrons, and 3 Cossack regiments,
          with 8 guns
