                The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo-Jaroslavets              329

and engaged at once. Again, a seesaw ensued, with neither side gaining a
lasting advantage.
    By afternoon, the Guard and Davout arrived. Napoleon, who had sped
ahead, placed them to the north of the town, across the road to Borovsk,
and sent Gerard's (ex-Gudin's) and Compans's divisions to support Eugene.
   Somewhat later, the Russian main army arrived. Raievsky, who was on
the scene first, attacked at once, while the rest of the army placed itself
south of the town, across the Kaluga road. Finally, Miloradovitch arrived
as well.   After the reconnaissance, he had been forced to make a long march
to arrive on the battlefield,   where he took his place on the extreme right
of the Russian army. There can be       little   doubt that Kutuzov could have
arrived much sooner, but he had still hoped to avoid a direct confrontation.
Attempting to do so without being obvious, he had allowed the troops to
take a long rest at Spaskoye.
    The fight for the burning town lasted until 11 p.m., that is, 18 hours.
On the Russian side, two additional divisions had been fed into the action,
but the French eventually succeeded in expelling them. Although the French
managed to turn back a final Russian attack, the possibility of a further
French advance, beyond Malo-Jaroslavets, was now out of the question.
The total number of troops committed to action came to about 24,000 on
each side."^ The losses had been heavy: about 8000 for the Russians, including
General Dorochov, and about 6000 for the French, including General Del-
zons.
    The Russian infantry, more than half of it consisting of recruits, had
fought well but had been awkward in its tactical movements. Likewise, the
Russian high command had not shown any skill whatever in making use of
the favorable terrain. During the night, Kutuzov drew back a couple of miles
and left only his advance guard in front of Malo-Jaroslavets. Although a
tactical success may have eluded him, he had nevertheless achieved his
purpose by blocking the road to Kaluga.
    Napoleon, who had returned to Gorodnia with his guards, was now in
a very difficult position.   With the road to Kaluga closed, he could either
fight his way through or retreat. But while Kutuzov had regained the numbers
he had lost at Borodino, the French cavalry and artillery, the decisive factors
there, could no longer be counted upon.         Under these circumstances, the
idea of a battle was risky, to say the least. If, as Clausewitz puts it. Napoleon
had not believed that he was sufficiently wealthy to commit his guards at
Borodino, then now, after hundreds of thousands had been sacrificed to the
march on Moscow, he no longer had the wherewithal to risk a battle with
the Russian main army. Nor was the idea of a retreat all that attractive.
Now it would be necessary to march to Smolensk via Moshaisk, but that
