332                1812: NAPOLEON»S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

on the evening of the 24th, the stress of the previous few days had been
too much for him. The immediate presence of Napoleon continued to in-
timidate him, and the threat of an attack, which had hung over his head
all day long, had finally brought the scales down on the side of caution

again. Since he was still unaware that Moscow had been abandoned by the
French, he did not see Napoleon's movements as the beginning of a retreat,
as Toll did; rather,    he thought they were the start of an offensive against
Kaluga. This idea was reinforced when, in the course of the day, news came
in of an action fought near Medyn. The Cossacks had attacked a detachment
sent forward by Poniatowski, and it was thrown back with the loss of five
guns. Again, he saw in this the opening move of yet another French en-
velopment.
       Thus, against Toll's pleas to attack or, at least, to stay in place, Kutuzov
opted to retire to Gontsharevo and Detshino, where he intended to take
his next position covering Kaluga. This move was under way by 5 a.m.            on
the 26th. Only Miloradovitch,        who had returned on the 25th, reinforced
with fourteen Cossack regiments, remained in contact with the French.
       Napoleon, who had gone forward again on the morning of the 26th to
have another look, received news of the enemy's withdrawal even before
the army had started on its retreat. Once more, fortune opened its arms to
him by removing the obstacle that had blocked his way to Medyn. If he
took the mass of the army along the road to Yuhnov via Medyn, while the
trains were placed on the main road with the necessary escort, then it was
still possible to save the army, especially if he could see his way clear to

getting rid of part of his artillery to facilitate the movement of the rest.
     The fact that he did not do this raises the question of whether his mind
was fixed on the idea that Yuhnov could be reached only via Kaluga or
whether he shrank away from executing a flank march to Medyn because
the Russian advance guard was so near. Had Napoleon, contrary to his usual
habit, not underestimated the power of his own reputation and, perhaps,
overestimated the enemy, the Russians might have continued their with-
drawal. Even if Kutuzov did not abandon Kaluga, Napoleon might still have
been able to execute his flank march without being disturbed by the enemy.
   Although explanations can be found for Napoleon's decision not to
attack, less evident are reasons for the unfortunate march to Malo-Jaroslav-
ets.    had been made on the assumption that Kutuzov had not marched
        It

from Tarutino and that he had ordered the occupation of Aristovo simply
because he had feared a French envelopment. The detour had cost the French
far too much. The supplies hauled along from Moscow, and what had been

consumed on the way, would have sufficed the army as far as Viasma, and
the supplies now being hauled from Dorogobush to Yelnia could have re-
