330                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


route led through country that had been stripped bare on the way in. In
addition, no preparations whatever had been made for the army to pass that
way. The few magazines there were totally inadequate.            With Moshaisk 50
miles away, and Smolensk 240 miles beyond Moshaisk, such a march would
precipitate the most serious losses imaginable.
   It      was a difficult decision. At first. Napoleon appeared ready to try his
luck with another attack     —    possibly in the hope that Kutuzov would draw
back voluntarily     — because Ney had    arrived in Fominskoye and was ordered
to move to Borovsk. There, he was to leave the Vistula Legion and the
Wuerttembergers to cover the parks and the baggage and place himself
between Malo-Jaroslavets and Borovsk. This plan lasted only until 5 p.m.
on the 25th, when Gourgaud advised the emperor that the Russians had
not budged. Now Napoleon became uncertain and sought the advice of
Murat, Bessieres, and Mouton-Lobau, the latter known throughout the army
for his cold-nosed courage. Murat and Ney, expectedly, held out a hope for
victory, but they also feared the consequences of even a success and thus
recommended a retreat. Lobau bluntly told Napoleon to retreat at once, via
Moshaisk, and not only to Smolensk but all the way back to the Niemen.
   Napoleon was still not convinced. At daybreak he went up to the outposts
to have a look for himself. There, only the timely appearance of the four
duty squadrons     —          the emperor had raced
                      as usual,                        without waiting
                                                         off                      for
anybody      — saved him from             the hands of
                                  falling into                  Cossacks,
                                                               Kaisarov's
wholiad gone around the French right during the night, capturing eleven
guns. Armand de Caulaincourt, Napoleon's master of horse and brother of
Auguste Caulaincourt (who had been killed at the Raievsky redoubt at
Borodino), painted a vivid, if somewhat less "colorful," picture of the in-
cident.
   Once Napoleon had decided to have a look for himself, he wanted to
take off at once into the predawn darkness, without giving those who were
charged with the security of his person a chance to react. Fortunately,
Berthier and Bessieres arrived just in time to help Caulaincourt persuade
the emperor to wait until dawn, because the Guard had arrived in its bivouacs
after dark and no one was certain just where the other corps were.          But after
a message arrived advising that some peasants and prisoners had brought
news that the Cossacks had withdrawn, there was no holding him any longer.
Accompanied by only a few officers and his customary picket of ten or twelve
chasseurs, who guarded his person around the clock, the emperor took off
in his coach. Caulaincourt relates:


      It   was hardly dawn when, three-quarters of a mile from headquarters we
      found ourselves face to face with some Cossacks. ...
