326             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


see no danger in choosing the Kaluga road.      Did he still hope to strike fear
into his enemies by his name and reputation alone?
    Napoleon had selected the new Kaluga road because he still hoped to
slip past the Russians at Tarutino. On the 15th, he had placed Broussier's

division of IV Corps at Fominskoye to become a sort of point for the army;
but for the start of the march, Napoleon had taken the old Kaluga road,
which led to Tarutino. Many critics have seen this as a manifestation of his
uncertainty, but this view is not entirely correct. Rather, Napoleon did this
so that the army would be ready quickly to receive Murat after he had been
attacked by Kutuzov and so that it would be prepared if Kutuzov followed
up on this and passed to the offensive. If the Russian commander meant to
do this, then the advance to the Pachra offered the army the possibility of
giving him a defensive battle under favorable conditions    — and a defensive
battle was all that could still be expected of the artillery. This could hardly
have brought about a decisive turn, because the enemy could be destroyed
only in an offensive battle.   And that was no longer in the cards. But any
kind of a win would certainly have been useful and would have given Na-
poleon at least some modest advantages.
     But Kutuzov did not come forward. Thus, in view of the army's condition,
Napoleon was entirely correct in deciding not to go farther in the direction
of Tarutino but, instead, to turn aside and reach the new Kaluga road as
quickly as possible. In keeping with this plan. Napoleon changed the di-
rection of his march on October 20; covered by Murat and Ney, who had
remained in place by the Motsha, he turned right to Fominskoye. The points
arrived there on the 21st.   Morand and the rear guard got as far as Desna.
    Up to this point, the weather had been good. The nights were getting
cold, but the days were still sunny and warm. On the 22nd, a light rain set
in   and the roads promptly became difficult again, sending the train and
artillery horses to the brink of oblivion.   Chambray thought that if the rain
had lasted for 24 hours, the greatest part of the artillery and train would
never have succeeded in getting beyond the secondary side roads that con-
nected the Tarutino and Kaluga roads.
    On the 22nd, the greatest part of the army was assembled at Fominskoye,
where Murat and Morand closed up as well. To secure communications with
Junot in Moshaisk, Poniatowski was sent to Vereia, upon the holding of
which Napoleon placed great value. Ney, reinforced to 15,000 men and the
disproportionately large number of 110 guns, stayed behind on the Motsha,
near Tshirikovo. Remaining there on the 22nd, he was to screen the with-
drawal and then assume the rear-guard duties. He did not march until 1
a.m. on the 23rd.
    During the night of October 22-23, Mortier also left Moscow and marched
