328              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


who, like the artillery, were quite good. It was, however, quite characteristic
of Kutuzov that as soon as he heard of the French army's movement, he
ordered the governor of Kaluga to take      all   the necessary precautions to
prevent any of the supplies there from possibly falling into French hands.




                         MALO-JAROSLAVETS
On the French side, Eugene, who had also been assigned III Cavalry Corps,
marched at 2 a.m. on the 23rd. His van, Delzons' division, reached Malo-
Jaroslavets on the same day. Even though he found it occupied by Doctorov's
Cossacks, Delzons was able to take the town easily; he had it occupied with
two battalions. The rest of Eugene's troops did not go far beyond Borovsk,
where Napoleon arrived on the same day.
   Ney and the rear guard made a difficult night march over rain-soaked
secondary roads to Buykassovo. Poniatowski occupied Vereia, with Mortier
on his way there via Fominskoye. Junot was still in Moshaisk.
    Napoleon did not think Kutuzov had marched from Tarutino; he assumed
that the Russian had ordered the occupation of Aristovo because he feared
a French envelopment. Thus, Napoleon hoped to get to Malo -Jaroslavets
ahead of Kutuzov, secure the crossing of the Lusha there, and take the army
across on the 24th. In this way, he hoped to reach Kaluga prepared to fight
a battle for its possession so that he might base himself at Yelnia.
      Assuming that his plan would be successful, he directed Junot in Mos-
haisk to send everything available there, by way of march formations and
replacements to Vereia. General Teste, the governor of Viasma, was ordered
to send Evers, with a detachment of 4000 march troops gathered in Viasma,
to Yuhnov. Victor, informed of the evacuation of Moscow and the march
to Kaluga,   was assumed to be in Smolensk. He, too, was ordered on the
24th to take the Saxon-Polish Division Girard to Yelnia, where Baraquey
d'Hilliers's division had collected large amounts of supplies. Napoleon, how-

ever,   was to be bitterly disappointed.
      Platov, speeding ahead of the main army, had already appeared in front
of Malo-Jaroslavets, but he had immediately turned aside to cross the Lusha.
Doctorov followed, arriving around 5 a.m. on the 24th.      He had made it
despite getting a late start from Aristovo, where he    had had to wait for
orders, and then being further delayed by having to throw two bridges across
the Provta near Spaskoye. Doctorov attacked at once and threw out the
two French battalions there. This marked the start of a bitter fight in which
the French attempted to hold on despite the Russians' great superiority. At
last, between 10 and 11 a.m., the viceroy arrived with the rest of his troops
