                The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo^Jaroslavets                           331

       It   was still so dark that we were alerted only by their shouts, and were
   almost upon them before we could see them.       It   was so unexpected to find
   them inside the lines where our Guard were bivouacked that (I must admit)
   we paid little heed to the first shouts. It was only when the shouting increased
   and closed in around the emperor that General Rapp            .came back to the
                                                                     .   .




   emperor and said "Halt, Sire! The Cossacks!"      .   .  Only the clash of arms
                                                             .




   and the shouts of men fighting indicated the direction of the skirmish, or
   even that we had fallen in with the enemy.
       The emperor was left alone with the Prince of Neuchatel [Berthier] and
   myself. All three of us dismounted and] held our swords drawn. As the
   fighting was near and shifting closer towards him, the emperor decided to
   move on several yards, to the crest of the rise, so as to see better. At this
   moment, the remaining chasseurs of the picket caught up with us; and the
   squadrons in attendance     . came up immediately after. ^
                                   .   .




    There must have been quite a few Cossacks, because Caulaincourt goes
on to state that the four duty squadrons had a hard fight on their hands
before it was over. Worst of all, it had apparently all happened inside the
French pickets   —if, indeed, there had been any. Such lapses on the part of


the French were quite common. Caulaincourt had good cause to complain,
as he continues:



   If these details had not the testimony of the army and of so              many trustworthy
   men to confirm them, they might be called in question. And how, indeed,
   can anyone believe that a man of such foresight, a sovereign, and the greatest
   captain of all time, could have been in danger of capture five hundred yards
   from his headquarters?^


    After this incident, Napoleon spent the rest of the day scouting around
and did not return to Gorodnia until 5 p.m. There, another conference
with his intimates resulted in the same conclusion: Retreat to Moshaisk.
Only Davout expressed a preference for going to Medyn. But the Russians
blocked the direct route there, so it could have been reached only by a
detour via Vereia. However, the Russian cavalry was known to be on the
Vereia road as well, not to mention that this route called for the crossing
of several rivers. And perhaps Kutuzov would again get to Medyn ahead of
him. So, on the 26th, the decision was made to march to Moshaisk. This
decision, one of the most fateful of Napoleon's entire career, would send
his army to its doom.
    Kutuzov also decided to withdraw on the same day. Even though he had
made up his mind to have a battle and had written the tsar of his resolve
