                       The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo^Jaroslavets          325

ones who much later, when hunger and cold set in, were able to pull rolls
of gold coins from their pockets and thus achieve minor miracles wherever
peasants were still to be found. Even in the worst of times, hard cash could
generally secure at least some provisions in the villages and towns. Indeed,
the question has been raised as to why the French commissariat didn't avail
itself of the free purchase system, a tried and proven method.      But that would
have been asking the leopard to change his spots.
   As great as the trains had become, they were completely inadequate to
take care of the army's needs. There was not enough food, clothing, or, for
that matter, ammunition.           The foodstuffs found in Moscow had not been
properly distributed. Instead, those        who had direct access had wantonly
ruined whatever they could not use themselves, while others had next to
nothing.
     All these were difficulties that no amount of leadership could surmount
at this late date,        because the foundations were lacking. The failings of the
commissariat and the consequent erosive effects upon the discipline of the
troops were problems that would not lend themselves to any quick remedies
even in ordinary times. To have attempted to accomplish anything really
effective in the middle of a campaign was completely out of the question.
The only hope for survival rested with the fighting power of the army. Thus,
it   seems inconceivable that Napoleon had not done more to restore             its

strength at least to the extent that was still possible.        Napoleon and his
generals had habitually overlooked many of their soldiers' transgressions.      If,

even now, the emperor did not think he should insert a stronger hand because
he did not want to compromise their loyalty and his own popularity, he
should have at least sent off the trains well in advance of the army and by
the direct route to Moshaisk. Then he could have reached Malo-Jaroslavets
by the 2 1st or 22nd instead of on the 24th.
      Since the army was thus hardly in a condition to weather a collision
with the enemy, a fact that a man of Napoleon's experience could hardly
have overlooked, the choice of the road via Kaluga-Yuhnov-Yelnia to Smo-
lensk was decidedly wrong.  had to be clear to him from the start that this
                                    It

                                                      If he did not deem
route would surely give rise to serious confrontations.
his army in condition to weather heavy fighting, then he really had no
choice at all. Only the road via Subtsov and Bieloi offered any hope of
getting by without serious trouble.
   To have any chance of success in taking the route he did, Napoleon
would have had to rid the army of its trains and following, that is, to reduce
it   to   its   bare   minimum. The question immediately arises of whether one
should be more surprised by the emperor's powerlessness, the indiscipline
that had taken hold of his troops, or his self-delusion,        which appeared to
