                    The Retreat Begins: Moscow to Malo'Jaroslavets          327

to Vereia,     where he was due on the 24th. In a fit of rage, Napoleon had
ordered him to destroy the Kremlin and all public buildings in the city, with
the exception of the orphanage. Mortier, or those charged with the execution
of the order, seem to have had other things on their minds, because only
superficial    damage was done. (One is reminded here of Hitler's order to
destroy Paris in 1944 and his generals' unwillingness to do so.)
       But that order and another to shoot Russian prisoners who could not
keep up with the army, plus the systematic destruction of every town and
village the army passed through, offer a clear indication of Napoleon's mind-
set.   The nature of such orders is far removed from the sober discussions of
his operational decisions and the neatly compartmentalized descriptions of
the horrors, the nonmilitary aspects, that necessarily mark all the accounts
of the 1812 campaign. There certainly was a connection between the army's
behavior and the violent reaction this begot from the Russian peasantry,
but Napoleon may not himself be held blameless in all of this.
       Right from the start of Napoleon's retreat, it became noticeable that the
                       its great superiority, failed to keep its own high
Russian cavalry, despite
command advised of whatever moves the French made. This was to happen
time and again. Funck, in an assessment of the Russian cavalry, says that
the Cossacks had no skills at systematic reconnaissance.      The light cavalry
of the line, however, customarily left these matters to the Cossacks and,
consequently, ended up developing no skills of its own in such matters.
       Thus,   it   was only on the 19th that Kutuzov learned from Dorochov,
who then stood at Katovo, that strong enemy formations were around Fom-
inskoye.    On the 21st, news followed that the French were advancing along
the old Kaluga road. Dorochov had assumed that the French main force was
around Voronovo. To clarify the situation, Doctorov, reinforced by Doro-
chov and the cavalry of VI Infantry Corps, ^ was sent to take Fominskoye
on the 22nd, but he got only as far as Aristovo on that day. By 9 p.m.,
however, he learned from Dorochov and Seslavin, the capable raider, that
the French were making a flank march from the old Kaluga road to the new
one. On the basis of these reports, which arrived at Russian headquarters
by 2 a.m. on the 23rd, Toll's recommendation that the French be intercepted
at Malo'Jaroslavets was accepted because it was uncertain whether Borovsk
could be reached in time.
       Doctorov took off at once with four Cossack regiments galloping ahead
of him, followed by Platov's Cossacks in the afternoon. By evening, the
main army was on its way, after a reconnaissance in the direction of Vo-
ronovo found no French on the old Kaluga road.
   The army now numbered 97,100 men and 20,000 Cossacks, with 622
guns (see Appendix XVIII). Among the line troops were 10,700 cavalry
