336               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


was false, he was nevertheless so disquieted by the idea that he went to the
van of the army and henceforth remained there.
    Napoleon's personal behavior, which had given way to complete pas-
sivity, caused even Thiers, the architect of the Napoleonic legend, to remark:



      In the midst of his guard, which marched at the point, consuming what
     little food there was,   leaving only dead horses for those who came behind.
     Napoleon saw nothing of the retreat and wanted to see nothing because
     that would have forced      him to see the terrible results of his errors. He
     preferred to refute them and insisted instead  — [5 statute]miles     distant and
     without admitting to its plight   — on complaining about the guard
                                                                    rear       instead
                      ^
     of leading it.


     On October 29 and 30, the greatest part of the amy passed over the
battlefield of Borodino. It still presented a frightful sight and had a depressing
effect on the doomed army. Cadavers, both equine and human, were visible
in quantity everywhere.       Half decomposed, then dried out and mummified
by the fall winds, their density marked the spots where the action had been
especially heavy. The redoubts themselves were ringed by walls of bodies.
The graves of some who had been buried were already overblown by mounds
of drifting leaves and could hardly be identified. Only the rough-hewn
monument Ney had ordered erected for his friend Montbrun still stood.
Among the allied soldiers, a bitterness against the man who had plunged
them into this colossal folly began to rise to the surface.
    In the days following, the entire army was back on the main road,
marching in a single column that, even though it had shortened, was still
40 miles long. The maneuvering had come to an end; from here onward
engagements would be mainly artless confrontations. They have military
interest only because they show how much resistance desperate men can
put up when fighting for survival. Soon, the first harbinger of the horrors
to   come manifested itself. The winter, long overdue, at last checked in
during the night of October 27-28,    when the thermometer sank to 23°F
(-4°R).
    As yet, there were only isolated instances of shortage and want, but the
supplies the troops had carried along were beginning to run out.    The am-
bulatory sick and wounded, who had dragged     themselves  along as best they
could, began to be abandoned by the hundreds (along with vehicles that
had either broken down or lost their draft teams). There had been neither
the necessary transport nor the personnel to look after these men. Indeed,
their chances for survival would have been far better had they remained
behind, but that was something no one had been prepared to do. Thus,
