344               1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


in support near Tsuginovo. From there, Ney was ordered to make a short
march in order to give Eugene a chance to close up. The viceroy had been
forced to ford the Wop under the most difficult conditions' on the 9th (his
rear guard crossed on the 10th) while on his way to Dukovtshina. The ford
was becoming unusable when Platov arrived. This gave rise to a panic that
caused thousands of stragglers, thirty-seven guns, and all the baggage to fall
into the hands of the Russians. In the ensuing pursuit, Platov captured
another twenty-three guns. With only 6000 men and 12 guns left, Eugene
continued his march to Dukovtshina and arrived there on the 10th. To do
this,   however, he first had to fight his way past the advance guard of Count
Kutuzov's raiding corps, which had left Moscow on November 3. This action
cost Eugene another 500 men and 2 guns. Hearing of the loss of Vitebsk,
Eugene departed for Smolensk during the night of November 11-12 and
arrived there   on the 12th, after being surrounded by swarms of Cossacks
and losing another two guns along the way. Ney, who had spent the 12th
at Tsuginovo, had a sharp action with Karpenkov. Over the next 2 days,
he fell back into the St. Petersburg suburb of Smolensk, where he replaced
Davout. These actions resulted in the loss of another twenty-nine guns.
      The losses the army had suffered since leaving Moscow were frightful.
Numbering 107,955 men, with 569 guns, on October 18, it had been joined
by another 15,000 men, with 18 guns.^ Of this total, 44,000 men had been
lost. Of these losses, only a small fraction were combat losses, sustained in

the actions of Malo-Jaroslavets, Viasma, and several lesser scrapes. More
than two-thirds of the men lost had either been captured or fallen victim
to starvation and cold. Of the remainder of the army group, about 35,000
had left the ranks and become stragglers. Most of these had thrown away
their arms and mingled with the noncombatants and refugees, who had
attached themselves mostly to the baggage trains. They followed the army,
encumbering its movements and exacerbating the supply difficulties without
adding anything to its fighting power. Even greater was the loss of horses.
In addition, 138 guns^ had been lost so far, and another 140 would soon be
left behind in Smolensk.

     In Smolensk, Napoleon expended considerable energy in an attempt to
get the army back into some sort of condition. With the help of the supplies
and reinforcements there and by pressing several thousand stragglers back
into the ranks, he achieved some reconstructive work.          He reorganized the
remainders of formations into temporary units, issued fifty rounds of am-
munition for every musket, and provided each corps with 6 days' rations
(and the Guard with 14 days' worth). The corps, however, received only
meat, flour, rye and liquor   — no bread, zwieback,   salt,   or other comestibles.
Distribution of supplies was made only upon the presentation of a bon en
