                                Back to Smolensk                          339

Egypt, in order to minimize losses to the Cossacks,   who were everywhere,
day and night. On the 2nd, the points got to just beyond Semlevo. Ney,
who was now to assume rear-guard duties, remained in Viasma. He was to
relieve   Davout because Napoleon was dissatisfied with the latter's perfor-
mance, complaining that he halted every time the Cossacks made an attack,
thus holding up the main force. The viceroy and Poniatowski hung back,
halting in Federovskoie to receive Davout, who was still far to the rear.
   The French army was in a precarious position. Only Napoleon, with the
Guard and the Westphalians, had a head start. Ney, still in Viasma, had
the Russian main army only 20 miles away on his flank. If the Russians were
to go straight on to the city, it could hardly be expected that either Eugene,
Poniatowski, or Davout, the latter accompanied by Miloradovitch on his
flank, could get there in time to help him. Even though this dangerous
situation called for Napoleon's presence and even though the emperor was
very much aware of the plight of his rearward corps, he continued his forward
march on November 3. Murat and the Guard reached Slavkovo, while Junot
got to Dorogobush.
    Meanwhile, Miloradovitch advanced against the main road from the
south. His cavalry encountered Davout's points between 8 and 9 a.m. near
Maximovo, just as Davout's main force, under severe pressure from Platov,
was emerging from Federovskoie. Since Eugene and Poniatowski had already
marched off, Davout was in serious trouble. Fortunately, Eugene noticed,
and he ordered an about-face at once. Thus, when the Russian infantry
approached from the south around 10 a.m., Davout had already passed
behind Eugene's receiving position. Eugene made a right turn and faced the
Russians, but he was pressed back via Myasoyedova. Since Napoleon was
not present, the French generals, none of whom would willingly subordinate
themselves to another, held a council and decided that the situation called
for a continued retreat.^
    Eugene and Poniatowski were the first to depart, around 2 p.m. Since
they were under constant attack from the Russians, their retreat was not
made in the best of order. However, Ney was ready to receive them at
Viasma. Davout followed, but the posture of his troops had steadily dimin-
ished during the time they had spent as the rear guard. Now, under pressure
from the enemy, they fell apart altogether and streamed through Viasma in
great disorder. After nightfall,   when the last of them had gone, Ney also
evacuated the burning city, but the disengagement was bought only at the
cost of another stiff fight.   To Napoleon, a complaining Ney wrote later,
"Better measures would have led to better results." Once again, three com-
manders had held a council and come up with nothing better than the
realization that they would have to continue their retreat. Typically, the
