342               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


drop in earnest, down to 5°F ( — 12°R), and with this cold wave came the
snow, causing the roads to ice over. The horses were weak and had not been
sharp-shod, which would have given them traction on the ice, so they again
fell   by the hundreds.   Once they were down, whether from exhaustion or
just a plain slip, there was no getting up from the ice.
       In the days following, the weather became milder again, but on the 7th
the temperatures began to drop once more. This time, the cold was inten-
sified   by the rise of a sharp north wind, which sent the wind-chill factor
plummeting even as the continuing snowfall covered man and horse with
a crust of ice.   During the night of November 8-9, when the thermometer
                    300 men froze to death in a single bivouac. Desperate
registered 5°F again,
men who fled to the campfires of the Russians were generally accepted with
              —
compassion not all, but a great many. The Russian soldiers paid little
attention to them and usually marched off in the morning, leaving them
behind. Then the peasants came and began their gruesome work.
    Even though the winter of 1806-1807 had been colder and had lasted
longer in many areas than that of 1812-1813, the troops had been far better
equipped and supplied in that earlier campaign. Now they lacked everything.
Inadequately protected against the cold, with their      immune systems and
powers of resistance weakened by hunger and exertions, they continued
marching day after day and bivouacking night after night. Even the strong
became weak, the healthy sick.
       Since the action at Viasma, Platov, with Miloradovitch just behind him,
had followed the French along the main road. At Semlevo, Platov turned
off to the right, leaving Miloradovitch directlybehind the French. The
Russian main army rested at Bykovo on the 4th. There, Toll's recommen-
dation that the army march to Orsza via Yelnia and Krasnoi was accepted.
This move would prevent the French from taking the southernmost road to
Smolensk, which led through relatively untouched countr>'side. At the same
time, Tshitshagov, Wittgenstein, and Oertel were ordered to coordinate
their movements with those of the main army. On the 5th, the army started
on its way toward Yelnia.
   On the 6th, Napoleon reached Michailevka, where troublesome news
awaited him, from Paris as well as from Victor. In Paris, a conspiracy led
by General Malet had broken out during the night of October 22-23. Even
though it had been put down after only a few hours, it once again exposed
the shaky underpinnings of Napoleon's rule at home. It also filled him with
dire forebodings concerning the future of his dynasty if something were to
happen to him. It was probably at this point when the idea of leaving the
army and speeding on ahead to Paris began to occupy his thoughts.
   Of more immediate concern was the report from Victor. He had suffered
