340             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


retreat was conducted by three separate commanders rather than permitting
one to coordinate the movements of all.
    Of the 37,500 French still under arms, including about 3000 cavalry
hardly worthy of the description, about two-thirds had been engaged. Of
these, about 4000 had been killed or wounded. In addition, the Russians
had picked up several thousand prisoners, nearly all of them stragglers, and
three guns. The strength of the Russians, who had lost about 1800 men,
was placed at 23,500 m.en and 3000 Cossacks by Bogdanovich. This includes
the two cuirassier divisions, which had been sent forward from the main
army but which did not take part in these combats. Other sources place the
number of Cossacks at 10,000. However, given the poor value of the Cos-
sacks in formal actions, their actual number was immaterial. Still, Bogda-
novich's numbers appear somewhat low.
     While the action was in progress, Kutuzov had taken the Russian main
army, about 60,000 men, from Dubrovna, barely 20 miles from Viasma, to
Bykovo. Despite being urged by Yermolov, Konovnitzyn, and Toll to take
the army to the scene of the action, Kutuzov had sent only the cuirassiers.
Had Napoleon been in Kutuzov's place, he would hardly have missed the
opportunity to deliver an annihilating stroke to the enemy. He would have
sent his entire cavalry to Viasma early in the morning, with the infantry
moving in its wake as fast as it could be driven. Kutuzov's failure can be
explained only by the fact that despite the Cossacks who were swarming
around the French on all sides, it was only after the action at Viasma when
he learned of the state of dissolution prevailing among the French.       How
suddenly this dissolution had set in is best illustrated by the fact that these
same corps, which had mustered 73,283 men when they departed from
Moscow just 2 weeks earlier, were down to about 37,500 effectives at Viasma.
The combat losses sustained during this period, however, hardly came to
more than 6000 men.
    On November 4, Eugene, Poniatowski, and Davout got as far as Semlevo.
Ney's rear guard, which was the only corps apart from the Guard that still
maintained a semblance of order, was somewhat farther back. Indeed, the
continued existence of I, IV, and V Corps was in dire peril due to the
pervasive disorder that had taken hold in those corps. Fezensac, an eye-
witness, reports that only the men in the Italian Guard still maintained
order. The rest were dispirited and worn out, and most of them had thrown
away their arms after their formations had dissolved.
    Napoleon, who had learned of the events of the 3rd but did not as yet
know much about the details, halted at Slavkovo; the Westphalians were
at   Dorogobush. Thinking it was time to put a damper on the offensive-
mindedness of the Russians, he formulated the somewhat adventurous plan
