                                Back to Smolensk                           343

a reverse against Wittgenstein at Czasniki on October 3 1 and had withdrawn
to Senno, only 30 miles from the main army's line of retreat.   On November
7,   Victor was ordered to recapture Polotsk without delay. In order to impress
upon him the need to do so, Napoleon even gave him a hint of the army's
condition. "The emperor and the army will be in Smolensk tomorrow, worn
out by a march of 120 road hours        .the army's cavalry is on foot."
                                            .   .




Closemouthed as Napoleon now was (in contrast to normal times) in order
to hide his feelings, this was the only admission of the army's dire straits
that he could wring from himself.    Macdonald and Schwarzenberg were left
completely in the dark about the true condition of the central army group,
which was an extremely serious error considering the general lack of initiative
on the part of these commanders on the flanks.
    On this day, when the first stragglers from the Guard were observed,
the greatest part of the French army crossed the Dnieper at Solovieva-
Pereprava. Eugene, who was to link up with Victor via Dukovtshina and
Vitebsk, had already crossed at Dorogobush. Ney was overtaken by Milor-
adovitch along the Osma and pushed to Dorogobush. There, he made a
stand to give the army the time it needed to cross the Dnieper, but he was
finally forced to retreat, leaving six guns behind. After this action, Milor-

adovitch left the main road when he was ordered to close up to the main
army by marching left toward Liaskova. Since Platov"^ was already following
the viceroy toward Dukovtshina, all that remained on the main road was
Grekov P with part of the Cossacks and Yurkovski with some regulars from
Miloradov itch's advance guard.
    Napoleon reached Smolensk on November 9. There, he received news
of the Russian occupation of Vitebsk. In Smolensk, the army was reinforced
by about 7500 men^ from the city's garrison and from Baraquey d'Hilliers's
division, which was still arriving from Yelnia. The last echelon of this
division. Brigade Augerau (Jean Pierre Augerau, a brigadier; not the mar-
shal), was unable to close up in time and was surrounded in Liaskova on
the 9th, where its 1740 men had to lay down their arms. While the Guard
remained in Smolensk on the 10th, Junot's Westphalians and the Poles
under Zaionczek (who commanded in place of Poniatowski, who had been
taken ill) were pushed about 5 and 7 miles, respectively, along the roads to
Yelnia and Mstislavl. Unfortunately, they were unable to prevent Russian
raiders from taking several magazines near Smolensk and about 1500 cattle,
which had been gathered there for the army. Several transports coming from
Mstislavl were also captured. Only a single transport of 200 oxen reached
Smolensk.
   Ney's rear guard, which was now faced by only weak forces under Grekov
and Karpenkov,^ still stood at Solovieva- Pereprava on the 10th, with Davout
