338            1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


tained a clear image.   It   was long overdue. Typically, Platov was totally
lacking in his discharge of light cavalry duties and almost always limited
himself to doing whatever the moment suggested; he sent reports only in
exceptional circumstances. However, on the basis of his      last report,   the
army was finally aimed in the proper direction, that is, toward Viasma.
Platov now tacked himself directly onto Davout's heels, picking up twenty
guns, most of which had been left behind because there were not enough
horses left to haul them.
   In the meanwhile. Napoleon continued his drive to the west. The head
of the column, the Young Guard and Westphalians, reached Viasma on the
31st. There, the army was joined by the local garrison and Evers's column,
which was now broken up. The troops were returned to their respective
corps, and the Hessians were incorporated into the Guard. Davout's rear
guard had gotten only as far as Gridnevo, 60 miles to the rear. Constantly
scrapping with the Cossacks, he had been forced to leave behind the guns
mentioned above, as well as many vehicles. A large number of ammunition
caissons were blown up, so that they would not fall into the hands of the
Russians; the thunder and flashes of the explosions sent shock waves of fear
through the stragglers, who were unaware of what was going on. Still, even
now. Napoleon brushed off Ney's repeated suggestion that they leave some
of the superfluous artillery behind and use the draft horses that would thus
be redundant to make the rest of the column more mobile.
   In Viasma, Napoleon received more disconcerting news. Tshitshagov
had driven Schwarzenberg to Brest and St. Cyr had vacated Polotsk, forcing
Victor to come to his aid. This put the line of retreat in great danger, with
no help in the offing. Even worse was the news that due to Victor's departure
from Smolensk, Baraquey d'Hilliers had not received his change of orders
and was still in Yelnia, along with the supplies that were to have been moved
back to Dorogobush. Of course, Victor's departure put an end to all notions
about wintering in Smolensk and ending the retreat there.
    Since Eugene made contact with Miloradovitch on November 1, while
passing through Zarevo-Saimishtshe, it became necessary to slow down and
give Davout a chance to close up. While the army made short marches,
Davout had to make a 30--mile forced march, fighting an engagement with
Platov along the way. Despite Miloradovitch's immediate proximity and a
necessary halt to do some bridge construction, the ingenious Davout suc-
ceeded in passing through the defile of Zarevo-Saimishtshe in the dead of
night. Miloradovitch had missed a splendid opportunity to do some serious
damage.
    Napoleon spent November 1 in Viasma. There, he ordered that hence-
forth the troops were to march in closed squares, as they had once done in
