                               Back to Smolensk                                337

even though the retreat was only a few days under way, the wreckage, both
human and material, was already beginning to mark the path of the army.
It started to poison the morale of the troops,   and the loose bonds of discipline
began to weaken even further.
   Fighting broke out between the Westphalians and the Young Guard
when the latter attempted to help themselves to supplies that had spilled
out of an overturned wagon belonging to the former. Also, the tail of the
army, the stragglers, began to grow in alarming proportions as more and
more men dropped out of their formations. But as the privations intensified,
the ranks of the stragglers began to thin out again.
    On top of everything, the Cossacks were pressing in from all sides, and
there was no longer any cavalry to hold them back.         If not for   their path-
ological fear of musketry, they would have gone after the formations.        How-
ever, for the time being, there were plenty of stragglers to hold their attention,
and it was these men who first suffered at the hands of the Cossacks.
    The numbers of these unfortunates will never be known. Many met with
horrible deaths by torture, although this was done not so much by the
Cossacks as by the enraged peasants, who were beginning to reemerge from
their hiding places.   But all, Cossack and peasant, were greatly embittered,
especially over the murder of hundreds of Russian prisoners, who were being
shot in droves on Napoleon's orders when they could no longer keep up
with the marching columns. The reason advanced for this atrocity was to
prevent the Russians from learning about the condition of the French army.
This, and Napoleon's order that the rear guard was to bum every village
and town along the way, leaving desolation in its wake, helped ensure that
the French who fell behind met with little compassion or sympathy.
    On the Russian side, the pursuit continued to be mainly in the hands
of the Cossacks. Kutuzov, still not fully convinced that the ogre was actually
retreating, kept his army at a prudent distance.      Not until the 29th did he
receive confirmed news indicating that Moscow had indeed been evacuated
and that the French were in full retreat to the west.
    Understandably, the Russians believed that the retreat would go toward
Subtsov and Bieloi, the northern route, which would have posed no obstacles
for the French.   The pursuit was to take the Russian army on a parallel
course. Only Platov was to stay directly on the heels of the French. For this
purpose, his Cossack corps was reinforced with         some infantry.^ Another
column was formed under Ozarovski^ to go toward Yelnia.
    Thus, when the Russian army finally marched on the afternoon of the
29th, the direction it took did not put it on a collision course with the
French. Instead of heading for Viasma, it went to Moshaisk. On the 30th,
when Kutuzov reached Kremenskoye, the Russian headquarters at last ob-
