                              Back to Smolensk                             341

of laying an ambush for them between those two towns. Soon, however,
he realized the impossibility of this as he learned of the true condition of
the forces that were still to the rear, and he returned to Dorogobush on
November 5 with Murat and the Guard. The other corps got to Slavkovo.
Ney, who was not to permit himself unnecessary delays, as Davout had done,
got as far as Semlevo, where he had another brush with the Russians. The
army was still stretched out in a column 25 miles long.
    During the following days, the army pressed on toward Smolensk, 65
miles away from Dorogobush. Now hunger began to set in. The Westphalians
had drawn their last meager rations on the 4th, and they, being at the head
of the column, fared much better than those in the rear. The fact that they
were devastated at a rate faster than the rest of the troops is most likely due
in large part to Junot.   There have been claims made (and not only by
Westphalians) that his troops, instead of being allowed to find what little
shelter was to be had, were forced to bivouac out in the open, night after
night, to protect their French   commander's private caravan loaded with
loot.

    Horse and dog meat had already become staples of the soldiers' diet.
The men would pounce on fallen artillery or train horses almost the instant
they were down and sometimes would cut them up without bothering to
first give them the coup de grace. Only the Guard had still received a little

flour in Gshatsk, Viasma, and Dorogobush. The condition of the army now
became extreme because the Cossacks, swarming everywhere, made it im-
possible to spread out in quest of forage. Starvation began to reap a grim
harvest at an ever-accelerating rate. To leave the columns in quest of food
was a daring undertaking, but the overwhelming need again and again pushed
men into attempting it.
   Away from the columns, a gruesome death awaited most of them. As
in Spain, the worst excesses had overtones of religious fanaticism.   Invoking
the name of God, the aroused peasants committed unspeakable cruelties and
almost every kind of torture imaginable to prolong the agony of their victims.
In this they were morally abetted by the fact that the average Russian believed
that all west Europeans were unbaptized heathens who had been led into
holy Russia by the anti-Christ. This     is   the   way the situation had been
presented to the uneducated population; from St. Petersburg, Moscow, and
the Russian army headquarters, manifestos attesting to these "facts" were
circulated in every market square.
    As the French columns moved on, the deterioration of the weather
steadily addedits effect to the hunger. The winter had been rather late in

coming, but the temperature dropped to 23°F during the night of October
27-28 and to 14°F on November 1. On the 4th the temperature began to
