                                                                             1




352             1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

Cossacks, but he was too late to save the magazines there. Junot arrived
later on the 14th.
      Kutuzov could have been in Krasnoi by the 16th. Instead, he took his
time about it and ordered a day of rest for the troops. Only the advance
guard (16,000 men) under Miloradovitch was sent to Rshavka, which was
on the main road. The Russians got there just as Napoleon's Guard was
passing. Miloradovitch was again not at all informed about the enemy, and
the resolute posture of the guards, who might have been nearly as strong as      ^


the Russians, filled him with caution.   He left the road Open and made do
with a cannonade. Still, he got his hands on about 2000 stragglers and 1
guns, which had been left behind.
   On the French side, Zaionczek reached Liady while Napoleon with the
Guard met the Vistula Legion and Junot's troops in Krasnoi. Davout and
Ney were still in Smolensk, where some lively fighting took place in the
St. Petersburg suburb with Platov's Cossacks. Finally, the French withdrew
into the city, leaving another eight guns behind.
      On November 16, Napoleon learned from a prisoner that Kutuzov was
nearby.   He recognized the danger at once. Trusting in the Russian's irre-
solution, he instantly made a decision that would have been sheer madness
in the face of any other    opponent but offered the only possible solution
under the circumstances, unless he wanted to abandon Eugene, Davout, and
Ney, whose arrival he was awaiting. Thus, he had Zaionczek and Junot
continue their retreat to Dubrovna and Liady, respectively, while he, aided
by improving weather conditions since the Hth, deployed the Guard, the
Vistula Legion, and the reserve cavalry (all 400 members of it that remained).
In all, he had about 14,000 infantry and 2200 cavalry, with 50 guns.
   Kutuzov was not to disappoint him. The Russian had been made even
more cautious by Ozarovski's summary ejection from Krasnoi; now the knowl-
edge of Napoleon's personal presence totally paralyzed him. Despite his
                        —
overwhelming strength even without Ostermann (who had been left be-
hind) and Miloradovitch, he still had 35,000 men, including an excellent
cavalry and artillery— he did no more than take his army forward to Shilova,
which was barely 5 miles away. However, even this appeared too dangerous
                                '




to him, so he ordered Miloradovitch, reinforced to about 17,000 men with
some of Ostermann's cavalry, to close up to his right at Merlino. In addition,
Miloradovitch was ordered not to become embroiled in any serious fighting.
No action took place on this day until late afternoon, when Eugene's depleted
column (only about 5000 men, not counting stragglers, with 17 guns) ap-
proached from Korytnia. But then the action heated up and continued until
after nightfall. It was only thanks to Miloradovitch's all-too-scrupulous ad-
herence to Kutuzov's orders, which held back his own commanders, espe-
