350                  1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


action and succeeded in handing Wittgenstein a reverse, this would surely
make a suitable impression on the Russians and bring them up short. And,
of course,    it   was also imperative that Wittgenstein be pushed away from
Napoleon's threatened line of retreat. Thus, in the letter of the 11th, the
emperor informed Victor that the army's march to Orsza could only proceed
slowly, but he also directed him to push Wittgenstein into a retreat. It was
made clear to Victor that the army's continued progress hinged on his
offensive,    and while the condition of the army could not pass without
mention, this was attenuated by presenting the Russians as being no better
   The letter contains another interesting aspect. In spurring Victor to
off.

make haste, Napoleon implies that Kutuzov might join Wittgenstein via
Vitebsk and that,       if this   were to happen, they could be mastered only in a
main battle, which, in view of the advanced season, was no longer possible.
Chambray is quite justified in wondering whether Napoleon was misled by
the situation or whether he deliberately suggested this possibility to urge
Victor to act.
       It seems,   however, that Napoleon had drawn the wrong conclusion from
the capture of Vitebsk. Perhaps he thought at first that Kutuzov had crossed
the main road to join Wittgenstein and that only raiders had remained to-
the south of Smolensk. But then Kutuzov's movements and the statements
of prisoners, which no longer left any doubt about Kutuzov's approach, caused
Napoleon to assume that Kutuzov was merely awaiting the evacuation of
Smolensk to go to Vitebsk from there.
       Napoleon's dispositions for the continuance of the retreat make it clear
that he did not believe the road to Krasnoi was threatened. Otherwise, he
would have marched on the right (northern) side of the Dnieper and kept
his army closer together. Soon, he was to be robbed of this illusion as well
as the one concerning his estimate of the condition of the Russian army.

    Napoleon wanted to make the stay at Smolensk as short as possible once
itbecame clear that the city could not serve as a center for winter quarters.
He wanted to be off by the 11th but had to wait for Eugene to catch up.
Thus, only the Poles stepped off on that day, followed by Junot with the
Westphalians, the dismounted cavalr>% and the artillery park. On the 13th
the Vistula Legion departed, followed on the 14th by the emperor with the
Guard and the cavalr>\ Eugene, Davout, and Ney, the latter reinforced with
one of Davout's divisions, were to follow at l-day intervals. Again, Ney was
to destroy whatever could be destroyed.          The intention was that retreating
in echelons would ease the march,   which had been made more difficult by
the large numbers of stragglers and vehicles and by the new cold wave that
had set in. (On November 13, the thermometer had descended to               — 6°F,
or     — 17°R.) Of course, given the weakness of the leading echelons, the
