                                  Krasnoi                               351

retreat would be possible only if the main road were not threatened by the
enemy. However, since this was not the case, the order of march, with each
corps separated from the next by a day's march, was an open invitation to
disaster.

    The Russian main army, on its march to Krasnoi via Yelnia, reached
Tshelkanov, a place along the Smolensk-Mstislavl road, on the 13th. To
cover against the direction of Smolensk, Ostermann took a position at
Lutshniki, while Miloradovitch, preceded by Ozarovski's flying column, went
as far forward as Tshervonnoie in the direction of Krasnoi.   There, Orlov-
Dennisov had already intercepted a large French convoy and taken 1000
prisoners. A detachment from V Corps, which had departed on the 11th,
was on its way to Mohilev to reorganize there with march troops when it
was ambushed. After losing several hundred men, Zaionczek was forced to
continue his march via Krasnoi to reach Orsza. On the right bank of the
Dnieper Platov stood in front of Smolensk, where Ney had been pushed by
Grekov and Karpenkov. Count Kutuzov's column reached Dukovtshina.
    Even at this stage of the French retreat, Russian headquarters continued
to be poorly informed about the enemy. On the basis of reports in hand,
the French were thought to be retreating in three columns, one via Kasplia
to Vitebsk, another via Liuboviczi to Babinoviczi, and a third via Krasnoi
to Orsza. Under these circumstances, it was believed that the Russians would
become involved with only a third of the enemy, and without Napoleon's
personal presence at that. Thus, Toll had been able to talk Kutuzov into
making an attack against what was thought to be the southernmost column.
Once this was destroyed, the enemy's main force was to be annihilated
between the Dvina, Dnieper, and Beresina in an action in conjunction with
Wittgenstein. Tshitshagov, whose slow movements had evoked displeasure
at headquarters, was not counted upon.
    Rolling toward Krasnoi, Miloradovitch reached Grigorkovo, while Oza-
rovski drove the weak French garrison out of Krasnoi.    Now, except for a
few detachments, the entire Russian army was on the right bank of the
Dnieper, quite close to the main road, where the separate echelons of the
French army were passing after again having suffered heavy losses from the
bitter cold.However, over the previous few days the Russians themselves
had not been immune to the weather, despite the fact that materially they
were considerably better off. Still, without the Cossacks, they numbered
60,000 men (other sources place them at about 50,000). But these men
were in excellent condition with a large cavalry and 500 guns.
    On the French side, Claparede and his Vistula Legion had overtaken
Junot and now formed the head of the column with the rest of the Poles.
When Claparede reached Krasnoi, he had no trouble expelling Ozarovski's
