354               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


and Davout were all sate. But the halt dozen actions, which have become
collectively known as the Battle of Krasnoi, had been costly. The Russians
had taken 6000 prisoners, again mostly stragglers, and 45 guns, some say as
many as 70, had been left behind. In addition, the Guard is said to have
buried twelve ot its guns in Krasnoi.
      The number ot stragglers taken prisoner might have been greater it not
for an episode that, despite its seriousness, was not without humor. Observing
a column of stragglers at the tail end of the Guard who were being singled
out and brought to bay by a horde ot Cossacks, General von Stockmayer
rode back and whipped them into a semblance of formation.          As the line
was forming, perhaps 300 more stragglers were gathering,         most of them
unarmed. They shouldered ramrods and sticks, and the few who still had
muskets acted out the role of skirmishers and fired them off while the ofticers
among them, and others who had ridden up as well, discharged their pistols.
The Cossacks were so intimidated by this apparent show ot force that they
rode off and allowed the stragglers to catch up to the columns of the Guard
again.
      Also coming into the toreground around this time is the mysterious tate
of Hiller's Saxon horse batter>', which became something of a mists- legend.
On September 30, the Saxons had the mistortune of shooting down the
highly unpopular Colonel Serron, Latour-Maubourg's chief of staff. Although
it   was proved to have been an accident, they incurred Latour-Maubourg's
ire until they regained his contidence at Voronovo.   Atter the Saxon cavalrv',
m dire straits itself, had been forced to give up twenrs'-two of   its   horses to
keep the batters' rolling, it was last seen in the area around Krasnoi. At that
time, all the crews were on foot and there were only two horses left tor each
gun, so the drivers and gunners stepped into the harnesses as well to give
the horses a hand. As a result, the batten' always fell behind at evers' march
stage.Roth von Schreckenstein, one of the most frequently quoted diarists,
especiallyon the taking ot the Raievsky redoubt, thought he overheard
Captain Hiller reporting to Thielemann, the Saxon brigadier, that he had
been forced to give up trs ing to save the guns; Hiiler emphasized that the
Russians would not have an easv time tinding them, because atter ruining
the guns, he had ordered them thrown into a pit. But Schreckenstein is not
certain,   and an air of mysters' continues to hang over the demise of this
intrepid troop. Another report claims that on November 18 the entire batter\'
disappeared into a swamp and was never seen again.        A third stors' claims
that the last ot its gunners had died in a blazing bam.   There was, however,
not a single soul lett ot the batters''s personnel to deny or confirm any of
these stories.   As Holzhausen put it, Batters' Hiller. like a ship in a storm,
was lost with all hands aboard.
