                                   Back to Smolensk                             345

regie,      duly executed by an officer. But it was far too late for such measures.
The stragglers, who no longer had any officers to issue them with these bons,
came up empty and were driven to commit the worst excesses, which ended
up in bloody riots. For example, 300 entirely useful horses, who had hauled
the supplies into Smolensk, were slaughtered in the streets for their meat.
Warehouses still containing stores went up in flames, while the stores of
others were spilled into the streets and trampled underfoot by rioters.
    Still, the attempts to restore the army did bring the number of combatants

back up to about 49,000 men^° (37,000 infantry, about 5100 cavalry, and
7000 artillery personnel). Despite the 140 guns that had to be left behind,
the army still had 300; this was far too many, in terms of both available
ammunition and draft teams. For this reason, another 112 guns would have
to be abandoned on the very next march.
    The Guard and I, 11, and IV Corps (the latter had been reissued new
guns to replace those that had been lost) were still in passable condition.
On the other hand, the Poles and Westphalians, the latter now joined by
the dismounted cavalry, numbered only a few hundred men. The cavalry
was in particularly bad condition. What was left of the Polish and German
cavalry was formed into a cavalry corps under Latour-Maubourg. Over the
next few days it shrank from 1900 to about 400.            The rest of the cavalry,
that is, the troopers who still had horses, were with the corps.
      This was the extent of the repairs Napoleon had been able to make
during the brief stay at Smolensk. Of course, the material damage suffered
during the previous several weeks was far too great to be undone with the
resources Smolensk had to offer. But had the reorganization revitalized the
moral strength of what was left of the central army group? Only time would
tell.




                                       NOTES
1.    Thiers, L.A. Histoire du consulat et de lEmpire. Paris 1845-1869.
2.    The column included 1 jaeger regiment,     1   hussar regiment, and 4 Cossack
      regiments, with 6 guns.
3.    The Russians' strength at Viasma was as follows:


                                       Men

II   Inf.   Corps                      7,000

IV Inf. Corp                           7,000
