                                Krasnoi                                353


cially the pugnacious Eugene of Wuerttemberg, that the action was broken
               and Eugene the viceroy was able to reach Krasnoi without
off at nightfall
being pursued. Still, apart from another several thousand stragglers, the
French had lost 1500 men and Eugene had to leave the rest of his guns
behind. Of the corps remaining behind, Davout and four of his divisions
had marched as far as Korytnia, bivouacking nearby. Ney and Division Ricard
(ex'Friant) from 1 Corps were still in Smolensk.
    On November 17, Kutuzov believed that Napoleon had gone, so he
allowed Konovnitzyn and Toll to talk him into at least another attack against
the rear guard of the French. Tormassov, with the bulk of the army,^ was
to envelop the French right via Putkova and to block the road to Orsza.
Gallitzin was then to go against Krasnoi via Uvarovo. Miloradovitch was
to take a position at Larinovo, let Davout pass, and then also advance
against Krasnoi. For the time being, Ostermann was directed against Kor-
ytnia, but he was then ordered to march to Tolstiki along the Yrove-Krasnoi
road.
    Napoleon, however, was still there.. Only Eugene's corps, hardly fit for
another action, had gone. But Napoleon sensed that the situation called
for something more than just standing and waiting. If he attacked, he would
draw Miloradovitch in, thus clearing the road for Davout. And thanks to
Kutuzov's supine measures, Davout's corps, 7500 men with 15 guns, not
counting stragglers, also got past the Russians and joined Napoleon. Realizing
his dangerous position,    Davout had taken his corps from its bivouac at 5
a.m. and had to endure only Miloradovitch's long-range cannonade.
     By then. Napoleon had already engaged Kutuzov's weak center under
Gallitzin. Also marching at 5 a.m. the emperor had anticipated the Russians
                                   ,




with his thrust at Uvarovo. By a stroke of luck Kutuzov learned of Napoleon's
continuing presence and at once ordered a halt of Tormassov's enveloping
movement. Miloradovitch, who might yet have made something of this
affair, did not press either. As a result. Napoleon, who soon learned of

Tormassov's interrupted envelopment, was able to continue his retreat. It
would have been altogether too daring to wait for Ney's arrival.
     The Young Guard battalions suffered heavy casualties when they with-
drew from Uvarovo, where they had spent hours standing in the midst of
the Russian artillery fire. It was almost noon when Miloradovitch was finally
allowed to follow  — after there was no longer any doubt of the French with-
drawal. Three hours later, all he found was the rear guard, Friedrichs's
division of Davout's corps, which was totally destroyed.
     Ozarovski, unable to block Napoleon's path by himself, had to stand
aside and let him pass. Reaching Liady on the same day. Napoleon is said
to have exclaimed "Oh, mon etoileV when he realized that he, the Guard,
