                               The Flanks Cave In                        361

Polotsk and sending a column of about 5000 men under Vlastov to keep an
eye on Macdonald, Wittgenstein took up the pursuit with 30,000 men.
Taking his time about it, he didn't arrive in front of Czasniki until Oct-
ober 31.
      There, Victor had assembled 30,000 men. Legrand's division of 4000
was not present because it had been accidentally misdirected to Boiszikova.
Also absent was Foumier with the IX Corps cavalry, some 2000 men. Victor
knew he had to engage Wittgenstein, but he wanted to do so with full
strength, so he decided to postpone his attack to the next day. Wittgenstein,
however, unaware of Victor's presence, attacked II Corps, which was only
10,000 strong due to Legrand's absence. The Corps stood in an advanced
position on the   left   bank of the Lukomlia at Czasniki, but it was driven
back toward Victor. As Wittgenstein came up, he became aware of Victor's
presence and settled for limited success, making do with a cannonade across
the river, which continued until nightfall. The French had lost 800 men,
the Russians about 400.
      Victor was no less impressed by Wittgenstein's brass than Oudinot and
St. Cyr had been. Thus, despite the fact that it was urgent to push the
Russian back, Victor withdrew to Senno early in the morning on November
1. In doing so, he unwittingly stepped aside to let Wittgenstein and Tshit-

shagov unite across the French main line of retreat.
    St. Cyr, who was still with his corps despite his wounding, was so

disgusted with Victor's action that he left the army so that he could con-
valesce as far away as possible from the fools who seemed to be all around
him. Victor soon did see the error of his ways. On the 4th and 5th, he
marched to Czereia, but the opportunity to thrash Wittgenstein with a
superior force had passed once and for all. Wittgenstein spent the next
several days conducting harassing operations with various columns.     How-
ever, the sharp cold had set in again, forcing everybody to seek shelter. The
French also began to feel logistical pressure again. By November 10, Victor
and Oudinot (the latter had resumed command of his corps even though
his wound had not yet healed) were down to 25,000 effectives.
      Wittgenstein also began to experience the effects of the cold, but not
quite on the scale of the French. Not only were the Russians better supplied,
but they were more accustomed to the climate and its hardships.       At the
same time, Wittgenstein was able to make good on his losses. Thanks to
Macdonald's inactivity, he had been able to recall Vlastov's detachment.
Novak's detachment, which had been forming up at Pskov, was now also
on its way to Vitebsk.
   Napoleon at once saw the danger of Victor's mishap at Czasniki. Thus,
he had Berthier send him an order on the 7th directing him to keep Witt-
