364              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

of the main army's condition at the time. In army jargon, that is a reason,
not an excuse.   A victoiy has far-reaching consequences, and for this reason
alone he could not unnecessarily leave a victory in the hands of the enemy.
Also, the better he thought the situation of the main army to be, the more
ready he should have been to risk a reverse. That he desisted from executing
an envelopment via Boiszikova at Smoliany underlines his weakness when
it came to facing Oudinot. This is especially damning since Napoleon himself

had pointed out to him that executing the envelopment was the only possible
way to succeed. The frontal attack offered no such promise and was thus a
mistake. He demonstrated his awareness of this in his uncertainty regarding
the point of attack. Contrary to many narratives, which make light of this
action, the extent of his losses indicates that   some serious fighting must
have taken place. That he did not continue his costly and useless efforts in
a situation in which he had to avoid a defeat at all costs (in contrast to his
behavior at Czasniki) is entirely understandable. Oudinot's behavior, how-
ever, stands convicted on its own merits. His untimely return to the army
was decidedly a misfortune.
      Victor's offensive against Smoliany was to be supported by Wrede, whose
Bavarian corps had shrunken to 2600 men but was reinforced by a few march
troops. In the beginning of November,   he had withdrawn to Daniloviczi.
So that Wrede might support Victor vigorously, Maret, Napoleon's deputy
in Vilna, assigned to him Brigade Coutard, which had been held back from
IX Corps, and Brigade Franceschi, which had been assembled from march
troops. This brought his corps back to 12,400 men,^ but these troops did
not come together until November 13. At that time, Wrede advanced to
Dokszitzi, but it was already too late. There, he remained in place not only
because he wanted to avoid falling into the middle of the victorious army
but also because the extreme cold caused his troops so much trouble that
he feared for their continued existence. Only Brigade Corbineau was sent
back to II Corps.
      The number of forces under Oudinot, Victor, Wrede, and Macdonald
that were still present in this operations area gives rise to the question of
what turn events might have taken had these men been in the hands of an
energetic commander in chief. Even if the tsar's operations plan did not
become fully operational, mainly because of its inherent artifice (Clausewitz
called it curious and impractical). Napoleon's situation was bad enough. But
no matter how great the threat was from Wittgenstein's position at Czasniki,
the threat posed by Tshitshagov was far more serious.
