                                The Flanks Cave In                          363

main army would arrive at the Beresina. If Napoleon was now joined by
Victor and Oudinot, Wittgenstein stood in danger of being overrun and
thrown into the swamps of the Beresina. Thus, Tshitshagov was left to his
own devices, while Wittgenstein had to limit himself to following the enemy
he was supposed to have blocked so that he might cut off and isolate some
of its elements.
   Even if this critique of Wittgenstein's actions is partially justified, one
must not overlook the factors that speak in his favor. To begin with, it
would have been very difficult for him to push St. Cyr toward the border
because of the direction of the Finnish Corps' approach, which virtually
demanded an envelopment of the French left. On the other hand, going in
the opposite direction would have taken him away from this reinforcement.
Finally, it had proved to be impossible to lay a bridge above Polotsk, and
the Finnish Corps had become so weak after various detachments that it
could no longer carry out the part assigned to it in the operations plan. For
the Finnish Corps to succeed, it would have been necessary for Wittgenstein
to detach some of his own forces to flesh the corps out again, and this would
have presumably left him with insufficient force to face Victor's IX Corps.
Once these points are taken into consideration, it is difficult to deny Witt-
genstein his due. In part, his failures lay beyond the reach of his abilities,
but he at least attempted to redress this with resolute actions.
    Viewing Wittgenstein's performance within the context of the whole,
Clausewitz summed it up in the clearest terms. When Clausewitz arrived at
Wittgenstein's headquarters during those very days, he found a sense of self-
confidence and proud accomplishment, which stood in stark contrast to the
mood at Kutuzov's headquarters. He believed that Wittgenstein and the
men around him were morally equal and often superior to the enemy and
that the general had more than merely discharged his duty in this theater
of operations.   He says:

    If one   added up the three French corps which had been deployed against
    Wittgenstein, these came to represent a mass of 98,000 men. All that had,
    until then, fought      under Wittgenstein hardly exceeded 75,000 men   (in-
    cluding several thousand militia).
        Thus he had, in fact, neutralized a superior mass of the enemy from the
    actual offensive,had yielded no terrain and had, quite to the contrary,
    gained such a preponderance that he was prepared to take part in the plan
    developed in St. Petersburg. Such a result against French troops and Bona-
    partist generals deserves the aura of a glorious campaign.^


    Wittgenstein's opponent, Victor, deserves no such praise. His withdrawal
from Czasniki has been excused on the ground that he had not been aware
