356              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


his escape   was a moral success. The Russians would not be able to claim
the annihilation of an entire army corps and the capture of a- French marshal,
one of the most famous of all at that.
   The actions around Krasnoi had cost the Russians no more than 2000
men. Against this, about 6000 French had been killed and 26,000 captured.'^
The prisoners, with the exception of those from Ney's corps, were almost
entirely stragglers. More than 200 guns had been lost, including 112 aban^
doned during the first march. The rest had been saved only thanks to
Kutuzov's aversion to facing Napoleon. The Russian commander's behavior
speaks for itself, so no further words need be lost on the subject. Despite
the fact that he had daily evidence of the French army's state of dissolution,
he refused to believe it and also wanted to avoid driving Napoleon to the
point of desperation. But what were the risks, had he gone at the emperor
offensively? At worst, a few thousand French might have broken through.
Now he began to sense that the army's mood was turning against him, just
as it had against Barclay. His teacher, Suvorov, whom he could imitate only
            made the final judgment when he said, "A powerful stroke
superficially,
would have saved three years of spilled blood." And, indeed, if Napoleon
had not brought 2000 officers out of Russia, who would command the cadre
for thenew formations of 1813, the Russians and their allies would have
been spared 3 more years of war.
    Yet it is extremely doubtful that Kutuzov's vision extended as far as that
of many of his critics,  who viewed the situation from the advantageous
perspective of hindsight. He had been against the war from the start because
he feared it would be lost. However, when he was recalled to assume com-
mand, he was one of the very first, among those whose opinion counted,
to see that Napoleon was already holding a losing hand. The rank and file
could easily forgive him for not flogging them into combats he thought
unnecessary. With the coming of winter, the mere presence of the Russian
army was grinding up the French war machine in a manner previously unseen.
    At the same time, he had been charged with driving the French out of
Russia and certainly perceived this as his mission. And that was exactly
                     —
what was happening with or without his help. It was also obvious to him,
even if it was not to others, that Napoleon would not be coming back soon.
    That Russia would eventually carry the war beyond its own borders and
expend as much energy as it had in the country's defense was far beyond
the old general's expectations in 1812. This was a new element that began
to gather momentum only when Yorck's independent action indicated that
Prussia would be driven into the war,   whether the Prussian king wished it
or not. Russia might defend itself effectively by waging a war of attrition,
but thoughts of offensive action could be fostered only with outside help.
