362              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

genstein at arm's length.   *The safety of the army depends upon it, every
day's delay is a disaster. For^\^ard!" These were the words that reached Victor
on November 10. The marshal didn't hesitate for a moment. The next day
saw him marching against Wittgenstein. Victor knew that the position
behind the Lukomlia was strong, and he wanted to envelop it via Boiszikova
with IX Corps while Oudinot made a frontal attack, pinning Wittgenstein
in place.  Oudinot disagreed; he wanted to forego the flanking movement
and rely entirely on a frontal assault. Despite Napoleon's order, which had
precisely spelled out the kind of maneuver he wanted to make, Victor gave
in to Oudinot, partly because he was worried about leaving the Orsza road
open and partly because Oudinot's subordination was loosely defined. It was
a stroke of misfortune for the French that Oudinot had not remained on
the sick list for a few more days.
      Wittgenstein concentrated as soon as he learned of Victor's advance.
Near the small village of Axenzi, his advance guard ran into the entire
cavalry of IX Corps and was thrown back to Smoliany, despite being rein-
forced. There, a greater clash took place. Victor had only reluctantly given
in to Oudinot and did not think that much would come of a frontal attack.
Moreover, since he was apprehensive over the possible consequences of a
setback, he did not pursue the assault with great energy. Thus, although his
infantry- succeeded in taking Smoliany, the attack against the Russian right

was turned back. In the end, the Russians even recaptured the town.
      Oudinot, who could have forced the decision by enveloping the Russian
right,   allowed himself to be bogged down at Poczavizi by a weak Russian
detachment and limited himself to an artillery duel. Each side ended up
losing about 3000 men. On the next day, Victor withdrew; II Corps went
toward Czereia, while IX Corps marched toward Krasnogura, where it halted
on the 17th.
      Wittgenstein had fared no better. Impressed by the French attack, he
failed to pursue his own success and sat still at Czasniki. The situation offers
yet another proof of how initiative can deceive the enemy and obscure a
difficult situation. From this point onward, the operations of the French
main army became interlocked with those of Victor and Wittgenstein, so
they may no longer be discussed separately.
     Despite his repeated successes, Wittgenstein has been accused of not
having understood the task that was set for him in the tsar's plan of oper-
ations. He was to have pushed the enemy toward the west, leaving the
Finnish Corps to face it while he took his main force to meet Tshitshagov
in the rear of the French main army. Since he had not succeeded with the
first part of the plan, he could not now block Napoleon's way to Borisov

because he could not possibly know in what condition the wreckage of the
