                                     Krasnoi                                355

   In the meanwhile, Kutuzov, unaware that Ney was still behind, pulled
Ostermann in to Tolstiki and had Tormassov advance to Dobroie. Gallitzin
was left in Krasnoi, where Miloradovitch joined him by evening. Instead of
mounting a pursuit, Kutuzov busied himself with reorganizing the infantry
corps. The tsar wished to have the two grenadier divisions combined into
a grenadier corps, and this gave Kutuzov a splendid excuse for allowing more
distance to come between himself and Napoleon. Thus, with the exception
of Ney's Corps, all the French troops had gotten past the Russians, although
a great many stragglers had been lost. In the end, even Ney managed to
save a small part of his corps. When he at last left Smolensk during the
night of November 16-17, his corps, including Ricard's division, numbered
8000 infantry and 300 cavalry, with 12 guns; it was followed by about 7000
stragglers. Two Wuerttembergian battalions with a few guns had already

gone ahead with the foremost echelon and were following the Guard when
the episode with General Stockmayer occurred. Ney reached Korytnia on
the 17th.
   Platov, who had picked up another- 2000 stragglers and 2000 more men
in the hospitals of Smolensk, not to mention the 140 guns left behind there,
sent Grekov^ after Ney with some of the Cossacks. Platov then crossed the
Dnieper in order to reach Orsza ahead of Napoleon.
   Even though Davout had informed Ney of Eugene's defeat before he left
Smolensk, Ney continued his march on the 18th,         still   expecting to find
Napoleon in Krasnoi. There, at 3 p.m., instead of meeting the emperor,
he ran into Miloradovitch. In the dim light of a gray day, he came upon
the Russians quite unexpectedly, and they were no less surprised than he
was. Once again, Platov had failed to report. After a brief initial success,
Ney had to give way with heavy losses. With only 3000 men left, he drew
back in the direction of Smolensk. The Russians failed to pursue and soon
lost sight   of him. Thus, after a few hours' rest in a deserted village,   Ney
turned toward the Dnieper and found a spot near Syrokorenie where the ice
seemed just thick enough to allow a crossing during the night. But the ice
gave out when the vehicles attempted to cross. Only 1500 men collected
on the other bank. The rest, as well as all the vehicles and guns, remained
behind.
    After an adventurous march and constant scrappings with the Cossacks,
Ney reached Jakabovo on the 20th. From there he marched on at 9 p.m.,
after only a few hours rest, to the Vitebsk-Orsza road.   There, shortly after
midnight, he found Eugene waiting for him (a courier had managed to slip
through the Cossacks to advise the viceroy of Ney's coming). He had 900
men left; together with the 300 Wuerttembergers, who had gone ahead, his
corps was now reduced to only 1200 men. But for both Ney and the French,
