358                    1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


imminent union with Victor. Thus, he decided that only Miloradovitch and
the detachments already sent ahead would continue the pursuit, while the
main army would continue its march to the lower Beresina. He wrote to
Tshitshagov on the 22nd, assuring him that with Oertel's and Lueders's
columns, he would be strong enough even without Wittgenstein to confront
Napoleon. He emphasized that Tshitshagov was to make certain that Na-
poleon did not evade him via Igumen. This stands in curious contradiction
to Kutuzov's instructions of the 18th. Perhaps the truth had at last dawned
on him when he learned of the condition of Napoleon's forces from the
French prisoners and as their increasing head counts were coming into
headquarters. At any rate, this left only Miloradovitch on Napoleon's heels.
In all, he had about 32,000 men, including the Cossacks (see Appendix
XIX). The main army now made a slow march in the direction of the lower
Beresina and did not cross the Dnieper until November 26, at Kopys. There,
3 light cavalry regiments (those of the guard)              and 12 batteries were left
behind to replace themselves, while the bulk of their manpower was dis-
tributed to the remaining formations.
      Kutuzov's vision of the situation emerges from a letter he sent to Tshit-
shagov on the 25th. In it, he says: "Napoleon would probably go toward
Bohr and draw in Victor and Oudinot, who were to be followed by Witt-
genstein, and then attempt to reach Vilna via Borisov. For this reason
Tshitshagov was to occupy the defile of Zembin. The main army would go
to Beresino, as        much for logistical reasons as to forestall an enemy move
toward the south."
    That Kutuzov failed to be up front with his leading elements turned out
to be a serious error. That Napoleon would be able to make yet another
getaway at the Beresina was very much due to the absence of a unified
Russian command.




                                            NOTES
1.

     Kutuzov:   III,   V, VI, and VIII Inf. Corps and cuirassier corps.
     Miloradovitch:      II   and VII Inf. Corps and I Cav. Corps
     Ostermann: IV Inf Corps and II/III and IV Cav. Corps
2.

     Ostermann: IV Inf Corps and IV Cav. Corps
