                                      Krasnoi                             357

   Kutuzov, mentally and physically exhausted and fragile, had only a few
months of life left. Even as late as December 1812, he could not possibly
have imagined how much weight Russia would bring to bear in a continuing
war against Napoleon in 1813. Thus, no matter how much truth there may
be in all the criticisms posterity has heaped upon Kutuzov's head, his own
views were, within the context of his own time, not without merit. Here,
one is again reminded of Clausewitz, who maintains that the outcome of
an event may indeed provide the basis for a critique but that judgment may
be made only on the basis of information that was, or should have been,
available at the time the event transpired.
   As for Napoleon, credit must be given where credit is due. As soon as
he recognized the error of his measures during the retreat, he wasted not a
moment in correcting what he could. On the 17th, he was once again the
great captain.   It is   nothing short of amazing that, having been shaken to
the very marrow of his existence, he was able to rise to the occasion once
more. So, too, did his generals, the viceroy, Davout, and especially Ney
show themselves worthy of the honors he had heaped upon them.
    It was a grand stroke of good fortune, within the framework of the greater

disaster that had descended upon Napoleon, that Kutuzov did not exploit
his victory at Krasnoi. Instead of pursuing vigorously, he remained in place
on the 18th and 19th, keeping only his raiding detachments on the heels
of the French. Kutuzov wanted to go in the direction of Kopys with the
main army because he thought Napoleon was headed for Minsk and would
turn farther south if he saw that his road to Minsk was blocked. Kutuzov
wanted to prevent this with a parallel march.
    Thus, Tshitshagov was directed on the 18th to link his communications
with the main army via Minsk and Kopys; Wittgenstein was ordered to
withdraw behind the Uszacz, at worst even behind the Dvina(!) should he
be threatened by the French main force. But drawing Tshitshagov in toward
the main army and authorizing Wittgenstein to withdraw behind the Dvina
would have meant a clearing of the road for the retreating French. Was this
to be the result of the victory of Krasnoi? What had become of the soaring
phrases of the tsar's plan, which spoke of trapping Napoleon inside Russia?
Fortunately, the situation of the Russians had been far too advantageous for
Kutuzov to be able to spoil it entirely. Thus, Tshitshagov did not withdraw
to Kopys, nor did Wittgenstein go and hide behind the Dvina.
    At last, on the 21st, the main army marched; but on the 22nd Kutuzov
had it rest again. Reports coming in from Platov showed that Napoleon had
made good use of time, so it was no longer possible for the main army to
catch him. For once, however, Kutuzov underestimated the French. He no
longer thought that their main army had any fighting power left, despite its
