374                 1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

in,   the rain on the 20th did not help the situation.          The rate of dropouts
increased even further, and it was now due principally to an increasing loss
of morale: The troops had lost hope that the endless marches would ever
come to an end.
   The wet bivouacs made everything even worse. Serious illness claimed
numerous victims. Others simply collapsed from exhaustion and stayed down,
their adrenaline refusing to flow any longer. Still others, driven to desper-
ation, committed suicide or suffered complete nervous breakdowns. What
the troops needed the most       —
                            a long rest         —
                                         they could not have. The Russians
and the winter did not permit it. Even the stay in Moscow had not nearly
sufficed to restore the army either physically or morally. No one rested
                                              The march back from
securely hundreds of miles within hostile territory.
Moscow had been even worse. On the advance through Russia, the alter-
nating spells of intense heat and heavy rain and of plenty and starvation
had been debilitating. However, the ultimate horror came now, on the
retreat, with the cold and with the knowledge that when the body began

to feel comfortable, death was only a short while away. The cold that struck
on the way out of Russia was a far more effective killer than the heat and
rain had been on the way in.
      It was   among the stragglers where the misery struck first. The men who
dropped out of their formations also abandoned what little help they could
have received had they pushed on. In the magazines they came up empty
time and again.          The commissaires of the supply administration mulishly
stuck to regulations made at another time, in another place. Orders were
orders, and they have always provided a haven for the nonentity. But neither
the commissaires nor the stragglers should be judged too harshly. Long before
the army got to Smolensk,          life   had already become a matter of survival of
the fittest and every man for himself. Thus,           when the stragglers began to
take matters into their own hands, the resulting riots often saved the men
from the commissariat the trouble of destroying the stores. And when strag-
glers did manage to lay their hands on some supplies, they spoiled more
than they took and cared little about others who came up empty.
    It would be fruitless to seek a common denominator among the men

who dropped out of the ranks. Some were exhausted and unwilling to con-
tinue carrying their packs and muskets, which was the price of staying in
the formations,      if indeed   they still merited being called formations. Others
were angry.      Still   others no longer cared.    The psychological surrender ex-
ercised an even greater effect than the physical.          If the fittest   at the heads
of the columns stepped out strongly, the columns would stretch out even
under normal conditions, forcing those at the end to run every so often in
order to catch up. Now the time for running was past, and the columns just
