                                                                             —
368              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


evacuated Minsk at once. With only about 1000 men left to him, including
484 men of the 7th Wuerttembergian Infantry, he withdrew to Borisov. A
number of civilians of the administration and commissariat, along with many
soldiers, supposedly 1000 in all, fled to Vilna, where their arrival caused a

panic because the Russians were thought to be on their heels.
      Dombrowski, who had sped ahead of his troops, would have landed
himself in a difficult situation had Oertel been roused from his languor long
enough to advance against Minsk as well. But Dombrowski made an about-
face and with forced marches took his troops to Borisov, where he joined
Bronikowski on November 20. Including the Borisov garrison, Dombrowski
now had about 5500 men,^ with 20 guns; some of these men were still
coming up. Leaving most of the artillery and all of his cavalry in Borisov,
he took his infantry across the river to occupy the bridgehead on the right
(western) bank. Unfortunately for the French, the Russians had neglected
to finish the earthworks there, although they had been started before the
war. They were intended to cover not only the bridge but also a defile,
about 1000 paces long, leading through swampy bottomland. The work that
had been done had been allowed to fall into disrepair. What was Dombrowski
to do in the face of Tshitshagov's approach?
    Tshitshagov's advance guard occupied Minsk on the 16th. Large stock-
piles of supplies and about 6000 men, almost all of them sick, wounded,

and stragglers, fell into its hands. For the time being, he halted there because
of Schwarzenberg's advance against Volkovisk as well as exaggerated reports
about Victor's strength. This made Oertel's failure all the more vexing. By
the 18th, however, more reassuring news arrived, including that from Ku-
tuzov about the disorderly retreat of the French army. In addition, a letter
from the tsar arrived that summoned the admiral to become more active.
The advance guard departed on November 19, followed by the admiral,
whose troops marched in two columns on the 20th. Only a weak detachment
was left behind in Minsk. There appeared to be nothing that would prevent
Tshitshagov from arriving at the Beresina with his army (still 35,000 strong),
as called for in the operations plan.
      Back in the center and along the French main army group's line of retreat
toward the Beresina, the situation had become quite dangerous for Napoleon.
At Czasniki stood Wittgenstein with more than 30,000 men against the
22,000 under Oudinot and Victor, who stood at Czereia and Krasnogura.
Coming toward Borisov was Tshitshagov with 35,000 men. He intended to
wrest Borisov, the most important crossing point of the Beresina, from
Dombrowski, who was attempting to hold it with about 5500 men. The
                                  —
                             the army detachments under Schwarzen-
remainder of the French forces
berg, Wrede, Loison, and Macdonald, altogether more than 90,000 men
