                                   The Beresina                              373
            *

whose rear guard had been attacked by Borosdin in Liady, was to remain in
Dubrovna; there, he was to receive Ney, who was known to have turned
toward the Dnieper after faihng to break through at Krasnoi.          The losses
sustained during these days, despite the fact that only the Russian raiders
were on the heels of the main army, were extraordinary. Arriving in Orsza,
the army, without Ney, had only 18,300 men^ in the ranks.           Even so, the
state of the troops   —   starving, dressed in rags,                 —
                                                    and bone-weary was such
that the worst was to be expected. Even the Guard, upon whose cohesion
all else hinged, had fallen into disarray and was beginning to feel demoralized.

Hour by hour, day by day, its columns were getting longer as more and more
men slowed down or took a break from the endless marching whenever they
were of a mind to do so. Orders were carried out reluctantly          — if at all.

Indeed, things got so bad that Napoleon addressed the Guard with a speech,
reminding the men of their past glories and of the fact that they were the
Guard and should therefore set the example for the rest of the army. It made
the desired impression, even if the effects were only temporary. While at
Orsza, Napoleon had some of the regimental colors burned; although some
of their eagle capitals were saved, some would be lost later. In all, twelve
regimental eagles are said to have been lost during the Russian campaign,
but the scorekeeping in this matter has always remained open to argument.
    The army's stay at Orsza lasted only a couple of days, more or less,
depending on the order in which the columns arrived. During that time an
attempt was made to restore some semblance of order among what was left
of the troops. The magazines there were well stocked, so the troops in the
ranks were fed and even received some foodstuffs to take along on the march
to the Beresina.    At the same time, the fragments of the remaining infantry
formations were amalgamated to form at least a few combat-worthy battal-
ions.^ As for the cavalry, there was not much left to reorganize.      To ensure
draft teams for the few guns that remained, the baggage train, already greatly
depleted, was further reduced.  Two pontoon trains, which had been left
behind in Orsza during the advance, were burned because Napoleon thought
that the crossing at Borisov was secure.       It   was to prove a stroke of good
fortune that General Eble^ did not feel nearly so assured and therefore saved
two field forges, two wagonloads of coal, and another six wagonloads of tools
and iron fittings. He even made each of his pontoniers carry some spikes,
clamps, and at least one tool.
    However, the efforts at halting the continuing decay of the army proved
futile.   Despite the fact that the country now being traversed had been neither
depleted nor deserted by its population, that the troops had drawn supplies
from the magazines in Dubrovna and Orsza, and that the weather had become
mild again, the ranks continued to thin. And even though a thaw had set
