                             The Flanks Cave In                            367

Schwarzenberg's continuing behavior, however, makes it doubtful that he
would have acted differently even if he had known the whole truth.
    In addition, the true situation continues to be obscured by the fact that
the Austrians, unwilling allies of Napoleon from the start, were playing a
double game. The Russian and Austrian courts never really lost touch with
each other throughout the campaign. Thus, it is certain that Schwarzenberg
had directives from Vienna in addition to his orders from Napoleon.
   Unmolested by Schwarzenberg, Tshitshagov made his march to the Be-
resina without encountering resistance, because Victor's departure left the
entire center unprotected. Napoleon was now paying the price for having
consistently underestimated the strength of the Russian forces on his flanks.
Thus, he thought it sufficient to send Durutte's and Loison's divisions to
help the forces already present to keep Volhynia and Lithuania in check.
Now, with Tshitshagov approaching Minsk, all that was left in the center
were a few weak garrisons and Dombrowski's division.
   Minsk, which had been made into a depot, was held by 5700 men under
General Bronikowski. Most of these     \yere   raw Lithuanian troops and a
collection of depot formations. With Vilna now bare of troops, and with
Coutard's and Franceschi's brigades in transit to Wrede and the foremost
echelon of Loison's division not arriving until the 21st, Dombrowski's di-
vision was Bronikowski's only hope for support.
   Due to the arrival of some replacements, Dombrowski had about 6500
men,   in addition to the garrisons of Mohilev    and Borisov,   at that time.
When Victor marched off to St. Cyr, Dombrowski was ordered to call in
his detachments and to concentrate by the Beresina.   He received this order
on October 28 and was making ready to comply when another order directed
him to Minsk at once. He departed with the troops he had in hand, 2300
infantry and 300 cavalry, with 12 guns, and reached Smeloviczi on November
15. He had ordered the remainder of his detachments to follow him there.

    The news of the Russian approach had created a great deal of activity
in Minsk. Bronikowski asked Maret for help (he had none to give) and sent
General Kosezki with a French battalion and Lithuanian troops (said to have
numbered 3000 infantry and 500 cavalry) to Novi-Sverzen where they were
to cover the crossing of the Niemen. On November 13, Lambert showed
up there with the advance guard of the Third Western Army. Kosezki had
made the error of positioning himself in front of the defile, and his raw
Lithuanian recruits were summarily chased off with heavy losses. Lambert
did not settle for this but mounted an energetic pursuit, catching up to
Kosezki at Keidarov, where he destroyed the entire detachment. Only Ko-
sezki and about 100 of his cavalry escaped back to Minsk. Bronikowski
