                             The Flanks Cave In                            365


                            TSHITSHAGOV
The admiral was last observed preparing for his march to the Beresina. Once
his logistical preparations were complete, he started out for Minsk on October
29 at the head of 29,000 men, most of them from the erstwhile reserve
army. Along the way, he was joined by another 9000 men, the last echelon
of troops from the Danube Army, which swelled his force to 38,000 (in-
cluding the Cossacks) with 180 guns.
   Oertel,   whose force numbered about 15,000, had been ordered to join
Tshitshagov at Minsk. Instead, he sent only a 3000'man detachment and
remained standing at Mozyr, doing absolutely nothing. He was soon fired
and replaced by Tutshkov II. Tshitshagov had also ordered Sacken, who
was to remain behind to face Schwarzenberg, to send Essen's column, but
it did not come up in time. To carry out his task against Schwarzenberg,

Sacken had been given 27,000 men, with 92 guns. The Ukrainian Cossacks
and other reinforcements, coming to about 5000 men, with 60 guns, were
sent to him as well. This was thought sufficient to keep Schwarzenberg away.
    In southern Volhynia, Muffin-Pushkin had taken over from Sacken. His
troops consisted of Repninski's and Witte's detachments. The former de-
tachment, reinforced with troops from Lueders, had about 4500 men and
was delegated to keep an eye on the upper Bug and the grand duchy of
Warsaw. Witte, with about 2500 Cossacks, observed the Galician border.
    Tshitshagov reached Slonim on November 6. There, he learned of Na-
poleon's departure from Moscow and the capture of Polotsk by Wittgenstein.
The extreme cold made him halt on the 7th, but he marched again on the
8th and sent Tshemishev forward with his Cossacks to get in touch with
Wittgenstein. Raising havoc among the Lithuanians, capturing couriers,
freeing prisoners, and disturbing the arming of the insurgency, Tshemishev
did far more than merely get in touch with Wittgenstein. When Schwar-
zenberg heard of Tshitshagov's departure on October 29, he marched on
the same day, following him. The orders given to Schwarzenberg amounted
to "See to it that the Russians in front of you will be unable to march against
me." After leaving Drohiczyn, he failed to catch up to Tshitshagov, despite
the fact that the Russian had taken his time and did not arrive in Slonim
until the 14th. Reynier's VII Corps had been left behind near Volkovisk to
cover against Sacken's approach. With the arrival of the 5800 Austrians
and the 9000 men of Durutte's division (sent by Maret), which were attached
to Reynier, Schwarzenberg now had 47,000 men.
    Learning that Schwarzenberg had crossed the Bug at Drohiczyn, Sacken
followed at once, even though he knew he lacked the strength to engage
him. Leaving a small detachment at Brest, he reached Yzabelin on the 14th
