366              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


and faced Reynier, who held Volkovisk, while the outposts skirmished.
Sacken took Reynier by surprise and captured the town in a night attack,
but he was unable to dislodge Reynier from his main position on the high
ground north of Volkovisk. Renewing his attack on the 15th, Sacken sud-
denly realized that he was in a precarious position.
    As soon as Schwarzenberg learned of Sacken's attack on the 15th, he
turned around to lend a hand, leaving only 6500 men to cover Slonim
toward the direction of Minsk. When the Austrians appeared in Sacken's
flank and rear on the 16th, the Russians were in trouble.. Attacked on three
sides,   they were able to extricate themselves only thanks to Reynier's lack
of energy. Sacken now withdrew toward Brest with Reynier following on
his heels and Schwarzenberg attempting to get ahead of him along the main
road to Pruzany. But Sacken made good his escape after a sharp action in
front of Brest on the 25th. This was the end of the pursuit, because orders
from Maret directed Schwarzenberg to continue on to Minsk at once. But
the Austrian did not "speed" to his objective until the 29th. Sacken had
gotten away, supposedly with a loss of 10,000 men and parts of his artillery
and baggage.    Now Essen started his march to join Tshitshagov, But the
Austrian presence in Pinsk forced him to detour around the southern edge
of the Pripet Marshes, thus precluding any possibility of his still taking a
timely part in this campaign.
      That Schwarzenberg did not continue his march to Minsk, sending at
the most only part of his cavalry to Reynier's aid, was a major error. Instead
of tying down Tshitshagov, he permitted himself to be tied down by Sacken.
Even if he had turned around at once after the action of Volkovisk, he still
would have been unable to appear at the point of decision by the 27th. The
225 miles from Volkovisk to Borisov led through poor country, and additional
difficulties were posed by the increasingly deteriorating weather. Even so,

his very   approach might have sufficed to paralyze Tshitshagov. Certainly,
he could have prevented at least part of the disaster at the Beresina. Following
Sacken with his entire force robbed him of any possibility of taking a hand,
or even making his influence felt, in the decisive actions. In this way,
Napoleon was denied the presence of more than 40,000 men who might
have taken events on the Beresina onto a different course.
   In behalf of Schwarzenberg, it has been said that he could not possibly
have predicted the consequences of his absence, since Napoleon had left
him in the dark about the condition of the main army. This is entirely true.
For this reason. Napoleon bears part of the blame for Schwarzenberg's failure
to appear. Even so, the Austrian knew the emperor well enough to be able
to discern some of the truth between the lines of his rounded phrases.
