380              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


arrival,   they found that practically no preparations had been    made and
hurriedly started to collect the necessary construction materials. Trees were
cut down and the abandoned village of Studienka was dismantled to provide
the necessary lumber.
    During the night of the 24th, while he was still in Losnitza, Napoleon
received word from Victor stating that he himself was withdrawing there.
This would mean giving up the road to Studienka. Angry, Napoleon ordered
Victor to leave only a rear guard on the Kolopeniczi-Losnitza road and to
take two divisions to Kostritza, on the road from Lepel to Borisov. There,
Victor was to attack the enemy in case the Russians did not attack first.
    When he issued this order, Napoleon expected that Victor would occupy
Kostritza by afternoon. This would enable Napoleon, during the following
night, to force a crossing with the Guard,    II,and IX Corps and thereby
close his campaign with a successful operation. But before he arrived at
Borisov at 2 p.m. on the 25th, he received more unwelcome news from
Victor. The marshal claimed that the new orders had not reached him until
he was already on his way to Losnitza and that by then he considered them
impossible to execute, so he was therefore continuing his march to Losnitza.
Victor now received orders, couched in unmistakable terms, that at least
held him in place at Ratuliczi. But the road to the bridge still remained
open to Wittgenstein.
     In the meanwhile, the rest of the army was drawing near the crossing
site. On the evening of the 25th, Davout and Eugene were still in or east

of Losnitza, Victor was at Ratuliczi, and Napoleon and the Guard were in
and around Borisov, with Ney and Junot on their way there. After nightfall,
Oudinot took his corps from Borisov to Studienka, where the bridge con-
struction was to start around 10 p.m. However, even this deadline could
not be met because, despite their labors, Eble and Chasseloup had been
unable to complete their preparations. The situation appeared all the more
desperate because the road was open for Wittgenstein to go straight to
Studienka, which he could reach at any time. Also, numerous campfires
observed across the river appeared to indicate Tshitshagov's presence. The
French also had to expect that Kutuzov would arrive sooner or later.        It

seemed totally beyond reason that, in fact, the Guard and II Corps held a
ten-to-one superiority at this, the decisive, crossing point.
    At the moment, the chances for escape appeared dim. Murat suggested
that Napoleon slip out during the night in disguise and try to make a getaway
under the escort of some loyal Poles. Everyone saw the danger of the situ-
ation: The army might be trapped, and Napoleon along with it. Just in case
an attack might materialize, Oudinot's entire artillery (40 guns) was deployed
on the heights of Studienka and reinforced with parts of the Guard artillery
