                                    The Beresina                            377

which Victor broke off as soon as he noted the presence of stronger forces.
He then went to Dokutshin, leaving only Margrave WilUam of Baden at
Baturi with an infantry and cavalry brigade. This was contrary to Napoleon's
orders, which arrived during the night of the 24th and which would have
sent   him to Baran. Victor thought that going there was too dangerous;
unaware of Napoleon's intention to cross at Veselovo, he marched instead
to Losnitza and then withdrew to Shavry. There, he was joined by the
margrave, who had been pushed out of Baturi by Vlastov, who commanded
Wittgenstein's advance guard.
     Through the union with Victor, Oudinot, and Dombrowski, the main
army's strength rose to 35,000 effectives again (not counting a similar number
of stragglers) with 250 guns. Napoleon did his best to keep the core of his
army at this level. Two battalions were formed with unhorsed cavalry troops
ers, and two squadrons were formed with cavalry officers who still had horses

but no commands. They were combined with the 150 cavalrymen who were
still left   to Latour-Maubourg. Part of Oudinot's excess artillery was parceled
out to the other corps. The trains were again reduced in order to keep the
guns rolling and to increase the mobility of the army.
     Still,   Napoleon could not stem the ongoing disintegration, which had
again cost the army several thousand men without an action being fought.
On the 24th, after 5 days of thaw, the cold returned, with the temperature
dropping to 14°F — 8°R). On the 26th, the first day of the crossing, the
                      (


army numbered only 31,000 men, with 250 guns (see Appendix XX), and
there were about 36,000 stragglers. The sight of the pitiful remnants of the
once huge central army group had a terrible effect upon the morale of Victor's
and Oudinot's troops, who were still in relatively good condition but who
were now also becoming infected by the general demoralization.
    With this ragtag army. Napoleon had to make his way past an enemy
that was surrounding him on three sides. Tshitshagov still had 31,500 men;
Wittgenstein had more than 30,000; and Miloradovitch had more than
25,000. The main army itself accounted for another 39,000 under Kutuzov
and Tormassov. Slipping past the enemy was one of the most difficult tasks
Napoleon ever faced. He accomplished it mainly because his proverbial luck
favored him once more with a grand gesture and also because his very
presence visibly intimidated the Russian commanders, who had no inkling
of just how badly the French army had fallen apart.
    Miloradovitch didn't cross the Dnieper until the 23rd; he reached To-
loczin, 35 miles from Borisov, on the 25th, the eve of the Beresina crossing.
Yermolov, who had crossed the Dubrovna on the 21st, got only as far as
Maljevka, that is, about 8 miles, by the 25th. Platov, too, had not been
very active. He was about 12 miles from Borisov on the 25th. Since all of
