                                 The Beresina                                383

attack with everything    on hand, because he could assemble only about
lOyOOO men at that time.
   On the eastern bank, Victor had deployed Girard's infantry division and
Foumier's cavalry brigade near Studienka to meet a possible attack from
Wittgenstein. To deceive the Russian, Napoleon specifically ordered Victor
to leave Partouneaux's 4000 infantry        and Delaitre's 400 cavalry at Stary-
Borisov. But instead of going against Victor, Wittgenstein continued his
march to Borisov, even though the sound of gunfire told him where the
action was. Afterward, he claimed that bad roads had dictated his course.
Thus, on the 27th, he settled for pushing Partouneaux, who had lost his
way, in the direction of Borisov. The ever- industrious Seslavin had already
arrived there, so Partouneaux was caught in the middle and had to lay down
his arms. Only his rearmost element, 1 battalion, with 4 guns, managed to
get away.
    Back at the crossing, the stragglers began to pour across again, but at 4
p.m. two more trestles of the large bridge gave out. It took 2 hours to repair
them, and the number of stragglers began to pile up, creating an impenetrable
chaos. Eble and the other officers    at-   the crossing attempted to maintain
order, but their efforts were in vain. The stragglers, long bereft of discipline,
became an increasingly desperate and ugly mob. At sundown on the 27th,
the approaches to the bridges had become totally clogged with vehicles
facing every which way. Curiously, however, by nightfall the stragglers
became totally disinterested in the bridges, lit their campfires, and settled
down for the night. They could not be moved and did not make use of the
bridges even when they were repaired and empty.
    During the night of the 27th, the rest of I and IV Corps crossed the
river and went on at once toward Zembin. But in the morning, on the 28th,
Napoleon sent Division Daendels back to the left bank because he had
decided to hold the bridges open for another day. Considering the fact that
apart from Victor only stragglers remained on the eastern bank, it would
have been better for all concerned had Napoleon ordered him across, burned
the bridges, and continued his march on the morning of the 28th. Given
the situation. Napoleon could no longer expect a lasting success. Indeed,
the only success he could achieve at this point would be the saving of that
which he still had in hand. Thus, he should have avoided taking any risks
with the troops still remaining in the ranks simply to save some more
stragglers. Of course, like any soldier, and that's what he still was at heart,
he had a deeply seated aversion to leaving anything behind, be it men or
guns. And this aversion had both psychological and material roots.       On the
one hand,   like   any commander, Napoleon was loathe to leave his men
