378              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


these advanced only about 7 or 8 miles on the 26th, only Yermolov, Platov,
and the tireless Seslavin, who had been sent to establish communications
with Tshitshagov, could take part in the actions fought by the Beresina.
Even so, they were still too far off to take a hand during the first day of the
crossing and did not arrive until the second.
      Wittgenstein, who obviously overestimated Napoleon's strength, was so
intimidated as to be hardly recognizable. Having fallen short of the task set
for   him in the operations plan, he now hesitated to risk his newly won
reputation. Since he was somewhat better informed about the general state
of affairs, he would have been the best man to oversee the situation. Yet,
despite his numerous cavalry, he was not aware of just how bad the state of
the French really was.At the same time, the action at Losnitza had made
him cautious. Also, the direction of Oudinot's departure misled him into
thinking that the emperor intended to cross south of Borisov. (Wittgenstein,
of course, was unaware that Oudinot's move had been made in contradiction
to Napoleon's orders.) Thus, he failed to thrust his victorious army into the
center of the French army's wreckage. On the 25th, both he and his advance
guard arrived in Baran, barely 10 miles from the crossing site chosen by
Napoleon and the road left open by Victor, who had continued his retreat
to Losnitza that morning. Even so, Wittgenstein did not go to Studienka
on the 26th but only to Kostritza, barely 5 miles away and not even in the
right direction, because he still thought Napoleon would cross south of
Borisov. He, too, did not arrive at Studienka until the 27th.
      Thus, for the time being, Tshitshagov was on his own, and he, too,
cleared the road for the enemy at the decisive moment. Since his precipitate
surrender of Borisov had made it impossible to join hands with Wittgenstein
in the rear of the French,    he partially corrected Wittgenstein's error by
standing on the far bank of the Beresina, across from Borisov. Upriver,
across from Studienka, stood Tshaplitz.^ Below, near Gury-Uczevzy, stood
a cavalry detachment under Orurk^ that was reconnoitering as far as Beresino.
After assuming that the French were in a total state of dissolution (which
had caused Tshitshagov to issue a handbill with a reward on Napoleon's
head) Tshitshagov received a sharp jolt on the 23rd when Oudinot retook
Borisov, and it caused him to swing to the opposite extreme. Estimating the
French at 10,000 (the raw number was not off the mark), he thought it
possible that Napoleon would attempt a forced crossing at Borisov in order
to go to Minsk. And this possibility, then, stood at the bottom of his
measures.
      In the meanwhile, circumstances arose that made Tshitshagov believe
that Napoleon would attempt a crossing below Borisov       — which was Na-
poleon's actual intention for a short while. He received a report from down-
