384              1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


behind; on the other, he was well aware that many, no matter what their
present state, could become useful soldiers again. Soon, however, it became
impossible to save many more of the stragglers anyway. Had he cut his losses
at the right time, the   Guard, Oudinot, Victor, and Ney would have still
retained their combat- worthiness, and the consequences for all, including
the stragglers, would have probably been somewhat milder.     At this point,
the stragglers were responsible for their own predicament. Remaining deaf
to the pleas of the officers  who had tried their best to move them, the
stragglers   had refused to make use of the bridges when they were unused
during the hours of darkness.
    After Tshitshagov had laid a pontoon bridge during the night of the
27th and had had a conference with Wittgenstein, both of them finally
made a simultaneous attack, the latter reinforced by Yermolov's and Platov's
troops. Despite the bitter cold and a strong north wind, the entire day was
filled with heavy fighting.   On the French side, the Poles and Germans, who
now constituted the mass of the infantry, surpassed themselves, especially
on the right (western) bank, where the favorable terrain prevented the
Russians from bringing much artillery into action. Victor and Ney fully lived
up to their reputations as combat commanders, conducting their actions
with skill and resolution. Here, where the fighting was heaviest, the French
success was also the greatest. Since light stands of timber covered most of
the ground, only the Borisov-Zembin road offered the Russians a good field
of fire, but for no more than two guns.     The French, on the other hand,
commanded a rise where nine guns could be deployed.
    Tshaplitz, reinforced by the infantry of the advance guard, attacked the
French forward positions, took Stachov by noon, and advanced against the
main position. There, a standing firefight ensued that lasted until about 2
p.m., when Tshitshagov sent Sabaneyev forward with two more divisions.
Oudinot's infantry began to waver, even as Oudinot himself was wounded
again, and fell back. But the infantrymen were received by Ney, who stood
behind.
      The Russian infantry, dissolving into great skirmishing swarms in the
overgrown terrain, suddenly found itself charged by Doumerc's cuirassiers
and 1500 men were taken prisoner. The Russian cavalry waded in to restore
the action, but the advance had come to a halt, even though the firefight
lasted into the night.   A simultaneous attempt by Platov to make for the
Gaina bridges, which Tshaplitz's detachment had failed to destroy on the
26th, became bogged down in the swamp.
    On the French side, only 10,000 men had come into action. It had not
been necessary to use the Guard. The Russians had eventually committed
