376                1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


    Tshitshagov, carrying out his part of the operations plan, took the great-
est part of his army across the Beresina at Borisov and pushed his advance
guard to Losnitza.       The advance guard failed to reconnoiter and instead
attacked Oudinot without waiting to be reinforced. As a result, it received
a good thrashing. Deciding to exploit the moment, Oudinot made for Bor-
isov,   where he caught the Russians unaware and summarily ejected them.
Unfortunately for the French, the Russians had destroyed the bridge at
Borisov, and since they held the far bank in force, there could be no thought
of repairing it. Still, Oudinot had deflated Tshitshagov's self-confidence and
reduced him to a passive role.
   The loss of the Borisov bridge heightened the danger facing the French.
Wedged between three hostile armies, the French could not attempt a
breakthrough against any of them. Only some adroit maneuvering offered
a chance for survival.      And this depended on the quick construction of a
bridge   — one   for   which no material had been gathered and one that the
enemy, holding the opposite bank, was sure to disturb.
    As soon as he heard of the loss of Borisov, Napoleon ordered Oudinot
to provide a crossing above or, better yet, below Borisov. This soon turned
out to be impossible due to terrain difficulties. At the same time, a review
of the tactical situation indicated that the army's best chance was to march
in the direction of Vilna, via Zembin, slipping through between Tshitshagov
and Kutuzov. Thus, during the night of November 22-23, Napoleon ordered
Oudinot to construct bridges and a bridgehead near Veselovo, where the
road to Zembin crossed the Beresina. Although the bridge there had been
destroyed, a ford was said to be nearby.
    On November 23, Napoleon reached Bobr with the Guard. On arriving
there, he directed Victor to occupy the road to Lepel and prevent Witt-
genstein from going against Oudinot. At the same time, Oudinot reported
the recapture of Borisov, the destruction of the bridge there, and the fact
that Corbineau's brigade had forded the river at Studienka, finding it to
have little depth there. Therefore, on the morning of the 24th, Generals
Eble and Chasseloup,^ as well as all the pontoniers and engineers, were
dispatched to Oudinot with the equipment Eble had wisely saved.
    Around this time, a new corps was formed for Ney. It was composed of
the remaining men of his own corps, V Polish Corps, and the garrison of
Mohilev; they were soon joined by the Vistula Legion. With this corps, Ney
was to support Davout and Eugene (who had again suffered serious losses
against Kutuzov) in order to give Napoleon time to have the bridge laid.
In the meanwhile, Victor, who had barely 12,000 men left after Oudinot's
departure, had withdrawn to Baturi. Wittgenstein followed him to Czereia
but sent his advance guard to Kolopeniczi. There, a lively action developed,
