382               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


a cannon and a howitzer were brought across, along with a few ammunition
caissons.  By 4 p.m. the rest of Oudinot's artillery and that of the Guard
came across the larger bridge. The guns and wagons bumping over the round-
log covering of the bridge shook it so badly that some of the supporting
trestles began to settle more deeply into the mud bottom, causing its cover

to undulate. After Oudinot was safely across. Napoleon was reluctant to
follow because he expected Wittgenstein to appear at any moment. At
nightfall, however, he sent Ney across with his 3700 infantry and 300
cavalry.
      The first crisis came at 8 p.m. when two of the trestles under the large
bridge gave way. Eble was worried about getting enough of the exhausted
engineers together to do the repair job, but he was in luck. He found them
all   bivouacking nearby. But he roused only half of them and left the rest
sleeping. At 2 a.m. on the 27th came the next crisis: Another three trestles
collapsed,    and these were in the deepest part of the river. Now the other
half of the engineers, whom Eble had wisely left sleeping, were called in to
make repairs. It was 6 a.m. when the bridge was once again open to traffic,
but it continued to be a shaky structure that threatened to give way again
at any time. Eugene reached Niemanitza on the 26th; Davout made it to

Losnitza by nightfall. Victor marched to Borisov, leaving Division Partou-
neaux and Delaitre's cavalry brigade behind near Losnitza to form a new
rear guard.
      During the early morning hours of the 27th, the first stragglers pressed
their way across the bridges in considerable disorder. The disarray caused
many of them to be pushed mto the Beresina, which was not very deep but
was ice cold. Then they had to stand aside, as Napoleon took the Guard
across   — about 5000   infantry and 1400 cavalry   — and   established his head-
quarters in Sanivki. Still on the eastern side of the river were Victor, with
about 10,000 infantry and 800 cavalry; Davout and Eugene, each with about
1200 men; and the bulk of the stragglers, intermingled with the baggage
train.  Only now did the Russians appear at the crossing site in some force.
      On the right (western) bank, Tshaplitz had turned around as soon as he
heard of the crossing, but he took his time about it. Meeting Komilov's
troops between Stachov and Brili, and some reinforcements sent by Lan-
geron, he now had 5000 men together. But they included only about 2800
infantry, which was hardly sufficient to make any headway against Oudinot's
7000, who had gone as far as Stachov. (Langeron himself did not show up
until nightfall had put an end to the fighting. ) Tshitshagov, learning from
Orurk that nothing was going on to the south, had turned around as well,
                                He refused Tshaplitz's suggestion that he
but he got only as far as Borisov.
