                                   The Beresina                              375

got longer. In this fashion, many men became stragglers quite unwittingly,
and the psychological surrender eventually prevented them from hanging
on. At first, they might be an hour or two late getting to the bivouacs.
Then they would arrive after nightfall and fail to find their units. Finally,
they would give up even trying to reach the bivouacs; they would simply
plod on as best they could. But when the cold camic, it struck with impartial
finality. Disease might bring   down the weak and debilitated, but hypothermia
could bring down even the strongest.
    Despite the constant attrition among the hordes of stragglers who fol-
lowed every column, their numbers did not diminish, because being a strag-
gler was a sort of halfway stage for the men destined for oblivion. As stragglers
were lost at the tail end, falling victim to the privations, the Cossacks, or
the peasantry, their numbers were constantly replenished by other men who
continued to fall out of the ranks of the formations. The formations had
been reduced by another third by the time the army reached the Beresina."^
    For a while, the hordes of stragglers increased. All the way to the Vistula,
numerous men (actually maraudeurs, i.e., deserters) who had left the army
in June and July were congregating alc^g the line of retreat. There had been
50,000 in Lithuania alone. When they heard that the army was retreating,
they began returning by the thousands.
    On the 20th, Napoleon reached Barami, where he learned of Ney's
escape. Davout, who had waited 24 hours to receive Ney, withdrew to Orsza
before the approach of the Russian raiders. There, he crossed the Dnieper
on the same day and destroyed the town's two bridges. Since his corps of
4500 men was still the largest at that time, he continued to perform rear-
guard duties. Even though the entire army was now back across the Dnieper,
it was still in great danger. Not only was it pursued by a superior and

victorious enemy, but two other hostile armies, insufficiently contained,
threatened the line of retreat and a difficult river crossing was yet to be
made under the eyes of the enemy.
    Napoleon had misgivings about the crossing at Borisov. In Kamionka,
he thought that if Borisov was lost and no other usable crossing point was
found, the army should march toward Lepel. How justified his misgivings
were would be quickly revealed. On the very next day, news of the loss of
Borisov was received. Lambert had made his move on the morning of the
21st before Oudinot could come up. Apparently, the sentries posted by
Bronikowski had fallen asleep and were ambushed. Dombrowski had only
about 2000 men left. The Russians had lost about 2000 as well, including
Lambert, who had been mortally wounded. However, on the 22nd, Oudinot
got as far as Losnitza, where Corbineau's brigade, which had been carried
off by Wrede, rejoined him. They forded the Beresina at Studienka.
