                                  The Beresina                               381

by morning. But Napoleon's star had not yet dimmed. Daybreak on No-
vember 26 revealed that the opposite bank of the Beresina had been virtually
deserted by the enemy. Thus, around 8 a.m., forty cavalry troopers, each
with a voltigeur mounted behind him, crossed over to form a skirmishing
line on the far side. Under its cover, another 400 men from Dombrowski's
division were ferried across in three small boats. Supported by the fire of
the grand battery on the heights of Studienka, this small detachment pushed
Komilov's weak column toward the south.
    It   was another grand stroke of good fortune for the French that the
Cossacks had not destroyed the three successive wooden bridges that led
the Zembin road across the Gaina Swamp on the far side of the Beresina.
Had they done so, the crossing of the Beresina at Studienka would have
been useless, because without those bridges the swamp could not be crossed,
despite its ice cover.
   Two bridges were laid across the Beresina simultaneously, the one to
the north being merely a footbridge. The larger one, about 200 yards to the
south, could accommodate the vehicles and guns.         Each was supported by
23 trestles, or horses, which required just about all the stout lumber available.
Only sticks, thin boards, and straw were to be had for the bridges' covering.
Neither of the bridges had a railing, and the larger one was just wide enough
to accommodate the wheels of a gun carriage.
   Colonel Chapelle, a French engineer officer, compiled a detailed report
about the constiuction of the bridge. According to the reports, the Beresina
was 354 feet wide at the crossing site, with its depth varying from about 7
to 8 feet in the center.   Thanks to the frost, the ground was hard, so it was
possible to get across the marshy banks,   which were about 100 paces wide.
Otherwise, the vehicles would have been unable to reach the water's edge.
The 23 trestles constructed for each bridge varied in height from 3 to 9 feet,
which gives a good indication of the depth of the muddy bottom, into which
the trestles sank quite deeply. With the trestles set at about H-foot intervals,
the lumber used for the stretchers, about 16 to 17 feet long, had a diameter
of between 5 and 6 inches, and there had not been enough time to hew
them square. The covering consisted mainly of sticks,        15 to 16 feet long
and about 3 to four inches in diameter. For the smaller bridge, the roofing
boards of the houses in Studienka had been used in a triple layer, since they
were less than an inch thick. They were so weak that their surfaces were
awash when they bent under the load of troops passing over. The construc-
tion of a third bridge had to be dispensed with because there was not sufficient
lumber.
    The smaller bridge was completed by 1 p.m., and Oudinot was sent
across first with 5600 infantry and 1400 cavalry.     By exercising great care,
