                                 The Beresina                             379

river that   Oudinot, who was creating a diversion there, was preparing to
lay a bridge (not true) and that the Austrians were advancing against Minsk
(also not true).   On top of this, Wittgenstein had remarked that Napoleon
might turn south. (Similar suggestions from Kutuzov did not arrive until the
26th.) Thus, on the 25th, Tshitshagov took his main force south to Sza-
baszeviki in order to be at the center of a 55 -mile stretch that he thought
would contain the likely crossing site. Only Langeron's weak corps^ remained
across from Borisov. Tshaplitz was still at Studienka but was soon to join
Langeron, leaving only some pickets behind.
    But on the same day, Tshitshagov, who seemed to be glad to have any
excuse for avoiding a confrontation with Napoleon, received other news
that made him uncertain again. He was told that Schwarzenberg had been
beaten by Sacken and was retreating to Vilna. Also, Wittgenstein informed
him of Victor's and Oudinot's movement and stated that he himself was
going to Kolopeniczi and accelerating his march to the Beresina. Tshitshagov
now became cautious; he ordered Tshaplitz to stay at Studienka, with Lan-
geron to support him if necessary.
   Langeron, however, was not informed of these new orders, and as he
could observe numerous campfires around Borisov, he repeated the orders
for Tshaplitz to join him.  Although Tshaplitz was also observing numerous
campfires around Studienka, he nevertheless obeyed Langeron's orders on
the 26th. He had also seen the French scouting the banks, obviously in
search of a crossing site, and he reported this at once to Tshitshagov and
Langeron. Still, all that remained at Studienka was a weak detachment
under Komilov.^ Even if Tshitshagov bore the responsibility for all this, part
of the blame must be laid at Tshaplitz's feet for not having disobeyed Lan-
geron and stood his ground on the basis of what he had seen. His behavior
indicates, at the very least, a serious lack of initiative.
   Oudinot wanted to march to Studienka, his chosen bridge site, on the
evening of the 23rd. But General Aubry, who had scouted the site himself,
did not think the terrain there was suitable in the face of the enemy observed
across the river at Brili. Thus, Oudinot faked preparations above and below
Borisov, but he    had the preparations at Studienka proceed at a far too
leisurely pace. Napoleon, who had hoped Oudinot would cross on the 24th,
became apprehensive and sent him a stern note on that day, telling him it
was imperative that he should cross before the day was out. However, even
here, the error of a subordinate commander. General Aubry, turned out to
be fortunate. A crossing would have been exceedingly difficult on the 24th
or even the 25th, since the enemy had not yet departed.
    Bridge construction at Studienka started in earnest on the 25th, when
Eble and Chasseloup returned from their diversionary operations. On their
