392              1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


Warsaw, Glogau, Dresden, Erfurt, and Mainz, he galloped into Paris on the
night of December 18-19. In passing through Warsaw, he halted just long
enough to cast about for more troops, but the gloss of the Polish romance
had worn thin. From Dresden, he demanded another 30,000 men from the
Austrians and 10,000 from the Prussians. But the time had passed when he
could simply raise a finger to gain compliance.



Napoleon has been roundly criticized for leaving the amiy. While this may
be a valid criticism of Napoleon the general, Napoleon the emperor and
head of state also had other concerns that demanded his attention. For one
thing, his throne had been threatened by the conspiracy. Also, his personal
presence in Paris would be helpful when the bulletin of Molodeczno arrived,
whereas his presence among the troops could no longer help the army.
    St. Cyr put it best when he wrote later that a Napoleon on the defensive

did not possess the superiority of a Napoleon on the offensive and that, at
this point, the emperor's potential for raising reinforcements was of far greater
importance for the army. He ended his dissertation by pointing out how
many men Napoleon had succeeded in mobilizing in just 3 weeks after his
arrival in Paris, thereby making his departure from the army quite beneficial
for the army. Indeed, the     need to raise new troops alone justified his de-
parture. Everything had been lost, so everything had to be replaced: officers,
soldiers, horses, arms,   accoutrements, uniforms, and the money to pay for
all   these essentials. But now Napoleon also had to pay the price for not
having taken any precautions whatever for the event of a failure. Never had
France been in so dire need of an army as it was now.
      Another factor complicating Napoleon's position was the fact that the
entire foundation of his political  power in France rested on his military
renown. Thus, it was essential that he recover his military status as quickly
as possible, despite the catastrophe he had just suffered.     And this is where
the winter, late but devastating, came to his rescue. The bone-chilling cold
was the final, and strongest, impression brought back by the survivors; the
debacles suffered by the army in the heat,      thirst,   and hunger of July and
August were relegated to the realm of ancient history, privations only dimly
remembered. The frigid winter enabled the general, who had thrown away
an army of hundreds of thousands, to claim that only God and the elements
were stronger than he. More importantly, for the reasons just stated,        this

claim found an echo among the survivors.
      Although in military circles the truth circulated soon enough, the general
public did not perceive even a glimmer of the realities until the Napoleonic
era was no longer a topic of current interest.     The glory of the capture of
