394                 1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the Poles had been ordered by Napoleon to go via OUta to Warsaw so that
their formations might be rebuilt there.    While Murat, accompanied by the
rest of the marshals,     ran on ahead under the protection of the Guard, Ney
attempted to hold back the Cossacks with the remainder of Loison's and
Wrede's troops. This ended with their total destruction at Ponari. Whatever
the French had succeeded in bringing this far      — the guns, baggage, and
trophies   —   was all lost there.
    On the same day, the 10th, the Russians occupied Vilna, where they
found 15,000 stragglers, including 5000 sick and wounded, as well as 141
guns.   Of the guns, 41 were found in the arsenal and 100 were collected
from the streets of the city and from the foot of the heights at Ponari.
Kutuzov and the main army also arrived in Vilna on the 10th. The misery
the Russians found in Vilna again defies description, contrasting starkly with
the festive air and the good life that had prevailed in the city just a few
days earlier.
    The entire diplomatic following of the Grand Army had remained in
Vilna, and their presence had also attracted most of the Polish high aris-
tocracy, who whiled away their days in endless rounds of receptions, dinners,
and balls. Napoleon had been so successful at concealing the true condition
of the army that the news of the disaster arrived only with the first refugees.
And then it had the effect of a bombshell.
    When the Russians arrived, nearly all the houses were filled with the
sick and wounded; the yards served as repositories for the dead bodies.    The
walking dead, wrapped in rags, wandered through the streets. At one church-
yard alone, 8000 cadavers were said to have been piled up and covered with
snow, which the cold soon turned into a shroud of ice.
    From Vilna onward, the Russian cavalry again sufficed to chase the
French across the Niemen. Ney attempted to hold the bridge at Kovno, but
this turned out to be a futile gesture because both the Niemen and the Vilia

were frozen over. The Russians entered the city on the 14th. Upon reaching
the Niemen, the Russian pursuit, which had lasted nearly 2 months and
had covered about 575 miles, came to an end. The French losses had been
enormous; the army was destroyed.
    The rest of the French, including the Poles and Lithuanians, who crossed
the Niemen numbered somewhere between ^0,000 and 45,000.             On their
way to the Vistula, they were joined by a few thousand more who had not
participated in the campaign. However, all that remained in the ranks were
400 men of the Old Guard and 600 of the Guard cavalry. All else was
dissolved. What had once been corps, numbering in the tens of thousands,
were now only bands of 50 or 60 men. In a final manifestation of martial
spirit, they gathered around the eagles, colors, and standards that had been
