386                1812: NAPOLEON^S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


stuck in the mud of the riverbed before they had gone very far. The drivers
abandoned their charges, thereby creating new barriers against which the
floating ice floes piled up.
      Around 5 p.m. the shooting abated, but the unraveUng of the press at
the bridgehead progressed at a painfully slow pace. General Eble put his 150
engineers to work to create a path for IX Corps so that it might get across.
Selecting a line of approach, they overturned the wagons nearest the bridge
and then, one by one, extricated the others along the path. The wagons
that still had serviceable teams were sent across; those that didn't were
manhandled onto the bridge and dumped into the river. The horses that
were still harnessed to broken wagons were cut loose and run across, a small
number at a time, to prevent any further traffic jams. On both sides of the
avenue thus created, openings were made to permit the movement of people
and vehicles. Occasionally, the crack of a pistol or musket was heard, calling
the mob to order. Most, but not all, of these shots were fired into the air.
Ithad not been possible to move all the horse cadavers out of the way, so
some were literally rolled flat and stamped into the ground, adding to the
grisliness of the scene.
      Finally,   toward 10 p.m., IX Corps made its own crossing in good order,
taking along all its artillery. By   1   a.m.   all   the troops were across, and the
bridges were empty again. As soon as the gunfire had stopped, the stragglers
had again lit their campfires and settled in for the night. An hour or so
after the struggles to get onto the bridges, nobody seemed interested at all.
This, of course, had been all the better for IX Corps, which did not have
to fight any crowds. After his corps had crossed, Victor spent half the night
moving among the campfires, attempting to rouse the stragglers, urging them
to cross the river. Eble even had some of the wagons set on fire to induce
those around them to move, but he had no better luck than Victor. At 6:30
a.m., the marshal pulled in the last of his pickets and took them across the
bridge. This, at last, stirred the stragglers to activity. In no time at all,
the press of the day before repeated itself. Eble had been ordered to bum
the bridges at 7 a.m., but not until 8:30 could he finally bring himself to
do it. Thousands were left behind on the eastern bank of the Beresina. In
the long run, however, this was to be a kinder fate than what awaited those
who had managed to cross.


On the 29th, Napoleon marched at 6 a.m. with the Guard, followed by
Victor, who had crossed between 6:30 and 7 a.m., bringing up the rear of
the French. The losses had been extraordinary. Wittgenstein alone had taken
about 13,000 prisoners, mostly stragglers, some 5000 of whom were waiting
