                             The Final Curtain                            391

29 and 30 to reorganize their shaken troops. Kutuzov, who did not cross the
Dnieper until the 26th, pretended to be upset and feigned disbeUef when
told of Napoleon's crossing of the Beresina. However, he remained true to
his character to the last, again interrupting his   march until he received
confirmation of the news that Napoleon had continued his retreat.
   While the Russians lumbered forward. Napoleon spent most of his time
spinning plans that were bound to come to naught. At first, he still hoped
to halt the flight ahead of Vilna with Loison's division of 14,000 men, which
had assembled there between November 21 and 23, and with Wrede's corps,
which still had 5000 men (although Napoleon thought there were more).
Schwarzenberg, who had been told only about Ney's and Victor's success of
the 28th but nothing of the army's condition, was directed by Maret to draw
close. Macdonald was told nothing.
     But all of Napoleon's hopes had already been dashed by December 3,
when Molodeczno was reached. At the same time. Napoleon's decision to
leave the army was ripening. The conspiracy in Paris, even though it had
been quickly suppressed, required his presence there, and better sooner than
later. A bulletin was issued from Molodeczno on the 3rd to prepare the

world for what had happened. It blamed the winter for the disaster, and an
astonished Europe readily believed it. How could it have been otherwise?
After that, the mold was quickly cast. On the 5th, in Smorgoni, Napoleon
advised those around him that he would dash ahead to Paris and raise an
army of 300,000 men. Murat was to be in charge of the army, and Berth ier,
very much against his will, was directed to collect what was left of it at
Vilna. The army was to maintain itself there and withdraw across the Niemen
only if it became necessary.
     Although he could hardly have believed that Vilna could be held at this
point in time. Napoleon did hope that Murat, with the help of what was
left of the flanking armies, could maintain himself on the Russian side of

the Niemen until he would return with a new Grand Army. Napoleon placed
great value upon this. If Murat could keep the front that far east, it would
be possible to prevent the full extent of the debacle from becoming all too
obvious and, at the same time, to retain the resources of Poland and Prussia.
Finally, it was important to have a forward staging area for the new campaign.
Napoleon was firmly resolved to redress his defeat and have another try at
the Russians come spring.
    That the Russians would beat him to the punch and pass to the offensive
was completely beyond his expectations, especially since he had grossly
overestimated the losses they had suffered in the campaign. Nor did it occur
to him even for a moment that his vassals were on the point of rebellion.
    Napoleon left the army on December 5. Via the waystations of Vilna,
