                                 The Beresina                               385

15,000 men and lost nearly 7000, a testimony to the bitterness of the fighting
and the staying power of the Russian infantry.
    On the left, Victor's 6000 men occupied a line of heights that ran behind
a stretch of bottomland, about 700 paces wide. Wittgenstein's advance guard
attacked the points by 5 a.m. and threw them back, but it was 10 a.m.
before he was ready to attack the main position. Here, too, the action wore
on and took a dangerous turn for the French only when Berg's and Fock's
corps entered the fight.
    Toward 1 p.m., the Russians at last succeeded in taking a small but
strategic patch of woods,  from whence they could envelop the French left,
while their artillery could fire at the bridges. However, the weak French
cavalry, composed of barely 350 German troopers, made Wittgenstein's
attack falter. The Russians had brought 14,000 men into the action on this
side of the river (Steinheil was still busy disarming Partouneaux's division),
and these suffered severely. Here, too, the action eventually abated into a
cannonade that lasted into the night.
    While the fight was raging on both sides of the river, the scene at the
bridgeheads defied description. As soon as the battle had started, hundreds
of vehicles and thousands of panic-stricken stragglers had again created an
impenetrable maze, described by Colonel Chapelle as being about 1500
meters wide and about 400 meters deep. Radiating from the large bridge
like a starburst, more than a dozen columns of vehicles had telescoped into

each other, creating a massive blockage, with horses and wagons facing this
way and that. Many drivers, attempting to wheel out of their columns, had
only made matters worse. Pressing into this mass were thousands of stragglers,
terrifying the horses even as solid shot and grenades from the Russian artillery
landed among them again and again. The cannonballs left particularly bloody
trails as they smashed through men, horses,   and vehicles, the latter sending
razor-sharp wood splinters flying off in all directions.
    IX Corps, which was covering this mass of humanity, stood fast, but its
frontage was insufficient to prevent the Russians from deploying even more
guns to fire at the bridges and into the melee at the bridgehead. Had
Napoleon burned the bridges and marched in the morning, none of this
                       —
would have happened and he would not have lost thousands more of his
remaining good troops.
    Men, and even women and children, who had survived until now were
being trampled underfoot. Hundreds drowned while trying to swim across
the Beresina. Others managed to cross, but their wet clothing marked them
for serious illness and even death in the freezing temperatures. Many drivers
had run their horses and wagons into the river, but the vehicles became
