                              The Final Curtain                              393

Moscow and the inconclusive bloodbath of Borodino, which was now touted
as a   grand victory, completely obscured the catastrophe of the Beresina.
Thus, Napoleon came away from the Russian disaster with his reputation
enhanced rather than diminished.
    If, however. Napoleon may be exonerated of the charges leveled against

him for leaving the army, he may be seriously faulted for his appointment
of Murat as commander of the army during his absence. Murat would make
an excellent "spanking boy" if things continued to go wrong, but he was
ill-suited for heading the attempt to salvage what could be saved. Murat

was a bon sabreur. His flamboyance made him popular with the troops, a
useful attribute for a leader of men. Brave to the point of recklessness, he
was a good man at the head of a charge. But he was not a commander in
chief,   not even an ideal cavalry commander. His range of excellence and
ability was far too narrow for that.   Off the battlefield he lacked any of the
talents of a   commander. Eugene, who was to relieve him, was also not
the right man for the post. He had already shown in 1809 that he lacked
the necessary attributes of a commander in chief. But with the marshals
perpetually bickering   among themselves in the absence of their master,
Napoleon could not put Davout in charge, even though he would have been
the best man for the job. With Davout at the helm, Napoleon might have
had a better starting position in 1813.
    As Napoleon headed for Paris, the flight of what remained of the central
army group continued. However, his departure caused such a loss of posture
that even the men of the Old Guard began to throw away their muskets.
Barely 2000 of its men were still together. All else had dissolved. It was no
longer possible to form even a rear guard. When Loison, Wrede, and a few
of the rear-area garrisons joined the column, they were at once caught up
in the dissolution of the rest. Loison's division, 14,000 strong on its departure
from Vilna, lost 3000 men on the way to Oszmiana. Taking over the rear
guard from December 6 to 8, the division lost another 7000 men when the
thermometer bottomed out at — 29°F ( — 27°R). Even the remaining 4000
diminished by the hour. Wrede fared no better. The 2000 men who joined
the column on the 9th disappeared altogether. Hunger, cold, and Cossacks
took them all. But, above all, the enemy was the cold. Thus, Napoleon
had no trouble whatever throwing its cloak over the real disaster of the
Russian campaign.
    On the 8th, Murat reached Vilna. Macdonald and Schwarzenberg were
finally ordered to withdraw from Vilna to Tilsit and Bialystok, respectively.
There was no longer any possibility of holding anything. All in all, the army
had only 4300 men^ left in the ranks. Thus, the mere appearance of Cossacks
sufficed to send it flying toward Kovno on the 10th.     Only what was left of
