                                 The Beresina                              387

at the bridgehead after they had been cut off by the burning bridges.      The
number of those killed in action, from starvation, or by the icy cold cannot
be calculated. The Guard, for example, which had not come into action at
all, lost about 1500 men out of 3500. The total of French losses can only

be estimated as being about 30,000. Only twenty-four guns had been taken
by the Russians, but a number of others had been thrown into the river.
     Still, no matter how great the losses, much had been saved. Napoleon,

his generals, and thousands of officers and veteran soldiers had escaped
oblivion. Without this cadre. Napoleon could not have rebuilt the Grand
Army in 1813. The number of those saved is generally estimated at nearly
40, 000 of whom about 12,000 infantry and 2000 cavalry had maintained
         y




order right up to the end. Also saved, at least for the time being, were 200
guns, the war chest, and a large part of the baggage.
    That this had been at all possible is explained by Clausewitz as follows:


    Chance certainly favored Napoleon somewhat, but in the main it had been
    done by the reputation of his arms. Wittgenstein and Tshitshagov were both
    afraid of him, his army and his guards, just as Kutuzov had feared them at
    Krasnoi. Kutuzov thought he could gain his ends without fighting, Witt-
    genstein did not want to place his newly gained reputation on the line and
    Tshitshagov did not want to expose himself to another check. These were
    the moral powers which armed Napoleon when he extricated himself from
    one of the most difficult situations a general had ever faced. Of course, it
    was not the moral potential alone. The strength of his spirit, the martial
    virtues of his army, which not even the most destructive elements could
    fully overcome, were to show themselves once more in all their lustre.



There is little, if anything, that might be added to Clausewitz's assessment
of the events that had transpired during the march from Krasnoi to the
Beresina. To do so would simply add up to rephrasing what the great military
philosopher has already said.
    If   anything, the tracing of events during this period has always been
difficult.   Napoleon himself had ordered that many of his documents be
burned during the brief stay in Orsza, and more were lost on the way to the
Beresina, as well as during the crossing.
    As for Napoleon, he once again lapsed into the passive depression from
which he had only briefly, albeit brilliantly, emerged during the days of
Krasnoi. That this mood continued to keep hold of him until his departure
from the army cannot be denied. Also, it must be regarded as a serious,
even if entirely understandable, error that he did not depart with his army
on the morning of the 28th, no matter what one might think of it subjec-
