404                                Epilogue


that ran totally contrary to Napoleon's nature, and it would have demanded
at least two campaign seasons, which was politically unacceptable. Europe
was expecting another lightning stroke in the grand Napoteonic style, and
the nymbus of Napoleon's military invincibility stood at the very foundation
of the pax Napoleon, such as it was.
    In all of this, it must be patently clear that all plans for bringing Russia
to heel     were based on the premise that Alexander's resolve to continue
fighting would collapse as soon as his forces suffered a serious defeat. There
can be no other sensible conclusion.
    Looking back upon the events of 1812 with the benefit of hindsight and
the experiences of more recent times,    it   appears unrealistic in the extreme
to envision a takeover of the Russian giant by military means alone.  Even
if the scheme  advanced   by Osten-Sacken  succeeded  in full measure, how
long could Napoleon sustain a force of 400,000 men 1000 miles from its
support bases if the Russians continued to resist? Was he to fight a war of
attrition   under such circumstances? Hardly. Again, an arrival in Moscow
with sufficient force to im.plement Osten-Sacken's scheme could aim only
at inducing     Alexander to seek a political accommodation.        It   could not
possibly have imposed a military solution.
    Everything hinged on the Russian resolve to hold out.         If the   Russians
gave up, then all things were possible.       If   they did not, then no military
solution was to be had. This then, the misreading of the Russian resolve,
was the source of Napoleon's greatest miscalculation.
     There remains the idea, advanced by some, that Napoleon might have
put Russia into turmoil with a declaration of emancipation for the Russian
serfs. But that would have precipitated a situation not unlike the one France

had experienced during its own revolution. There was no telling where that
would lead.



As stated earlier, Clausewitz thought it quite appropriate to judge an event
by its outcome, but he also said that it could be critiqued only on the basis
of information that was available at the time the event transpired. That is,
second thoughts based on hindsight can never provide a fair and accurate
basis for criticism.
      On a geographic basis alone, and with the Spanish experience in mind,
surely Napoleon's topographical engineers could advise him that Russia in
Europe alone was about six times the size of the Iberian Peninsula or met'
ropolitan France and thus was capable of swallowing even an army as large
as the    one he was proposing to lead into Russia. And just as surely. Na-
poleon's military experience must have         made him acutely aware of the
