                               The Final Curtain                             397

the French back across the Niemen. This is what he had been charged with,
and he had done it.
    Since matters with the central army group had settled themselves for
the time being, all that still needed to be done was to eject Macdonald and
Schwarzenberg.     The latter had sufficient strength to maintain himself at
Slonim, where he arrived on December        7.   Indeed, he   still   might have
achieved considerable results. However, on the 14th, he retreated volun-
tarily after   being accurately informed about conditions in the center and
after being advised about the true attitudes of the cabinet in Vienna.     Thus,
he placed no value whatever on winning any success for Napoleon but sought
only to retrieve his corps in good condition. He was already on his way
when Murat's order directing him to Bialystok arrived. He made it there by
the 21st. However, acting on orders from Vienna, he had already entered
into confidential negotiations with the Russian generals in front of him, so
he did not stay in Bialystok. Contrary to Murat's orders, he went to Pultusk,
arriving there on the 29th. He remained in Poltusk with his Austrians, while
Reynier was sent to Czamoglov to cover Warsaw.
    Mettemich had already embarked upon his politics of mediation, which,
for the moment,  came to no more than a tacit armistice between the Aus-
trians and the Russians. The idea was to induce Napoleon to give in and
make peace should his military position deteriorate further. This secret
defection, which left the Austrians with a foot in both camps, was the first
step in this direction.




Meanwhile, the Russians in the southern sector, like those in the center,
had gone into winter quarters. But in the north, the Russian high command
planned a last major stroke against Macdonald. He had refused to lend
credence to the news coming from the center and had not dared to take it
upon himself to withdraw without orders. Thus, he had remained in the
area around Mitau and did not even begin to draw back until December 18
and 19. The Russians now wanted to avail themselves of this opportunity.
    Wittgenstein was to march from Czervonny-Dwor and Niemenczin on
the 17th, via Keidany and Yurborg, to block Macdonald's retreat. Mean-
while, Lewis and Paulucci were to follow Wittgenstein with columns formed
from the Riga garrison. Unfortunately for the French, Macdonald's corps,
upon which the possibility of holding the Niemen line rested, contained
the least trustworthy elements of all, the Prussians, who made up two-thirds
of the force. Yorck, one of the more noteworthy generals in the allied camp,
was a fiery patriot and Napoleon hater. Although he had repeatedly turned
back overtures from the Russians since the retreat began, he now saw that
