402                                  Epilogue


news in recent years, are generally viewed on large-scale maps, where the
span of a hand may cover a thousand miles and telescope vast distances into
insignificance. Numbers such as 300, 400, or 500 miles are likely to become
abstractions unless they are translated into more meaningful terms. For
example, the distance from Berlin to Moscow, 998 miles as the bird flies,
is roughly equal to the 1100 road miles from New York City to Omaha,

Nebraska. However, even this comparison will have meaning only to those
who have covered such a distance by automobile, not by airplane or railroad.
    Even those who remember from their school days that Russia covers
about one-sixth of the earth's land surface are still apt to be at a loss when
the Russian landmass     is   measured by more familiar parameters. Few,       for
example, are aware of the fact that the distance from Berlin to Vladivostok,
the Russian seaport on the Sea of Japan,        is   equal to the distance (in the
opposite direction) from Berlin to San Francisco.
    It   must be obvious that even Napoleon and the men around him could
have had only a vague notion about such distances and that only those who
had traveled extensively inside Russia would have had even an inkling of
the practical problems the movement of troops on such a vast scale would
present. Surely,   Napoleon could calculate how many marches would take
his army to Moscow,    and his envoys and ambassadors to the Russian court
in St.                       knew the roads there as well as any western
          Petersburg certainly
traveler.   As to the rest of Russia, that remained largely terra incognita,
illurninated by secondhand hearsay. Although Napoleon had gathered a
considerable amount of intelligence about Russia, the realities were some-
thing else again. Even though he had gotten a taste of the east European
winter in 1806-1807, he could hardly predict what the Continental summer
might hold in store for his troops.
    Of course, it was the emperor's fondest wish that the Russians would
come to meet him somewhere near their western frontier so that he might
smash their armies with one or two of his patented master strokes. Had they
not done so, twice before, when their own country wasn't even in immediate
danger? But anything that happened beyond that had to be three parts gamble
to one part certainty. This appears to be contradicted by the great care
Napoleon took in laying the logistical foundations for his Russian venture.
However, massive though his logistical preparations were, they were in-
tended to feed an army of equally massive proportions. Thus, for a while,
even after the campaign had gotten under way, he must have expected to
make most of the march to Moscow as the conqueror of a nation already
defeated and bowing before him.
    From the start, it was obviously impossible to overrun so much Russian
territory that a substantial portion of the Russian army would be effectively
