                                    Epilogue                                403


separated from its depots and the resources it needed to continue waging
war. All Napoleon could do was drive a wedge deeply into Russia.^ Even at
that, the wedge aimed in the direction of Moscow would cover only some
of the poorest tracts of Russia in Europe, not by any means its most fertile
and populated provinces. And once this wedge was driven so deeply that
its point reached Moscow (which Napoleon had correctly recognized as the

national and spiritual hub of Russia), then the invader was bound to present
the defender with a pair of enormous and correspondingly sensitive flanks.
Indeed, most critics agree that once Napoleon ventured beyond Smolensk,
the base of the wedge he had driven was already too narrow and an open
invitation to disaster.
    In light of these considerations, the idea advanced by Osten-Sacken
offered a far better chance for a military success: Napoleon ought to have
taken his right shoulder forward in an attempt to throw the two Russian
armies into each other and then pin them against the Baltic.        As matters
stood, however. Napoleon's best hope for such a success was that the Russians
would stand and fight it out on their western frontier. Failing in this, the
next order of business, according to- Osten-Sacken, would have been to
arrive in Moscow with sufficient strength to continue holding the initiative
and to dictate the further course of events. Interestingly, the Prussian, who
reflected the thinking of the Prussian general staff around the turn of the
century, thought that Napoleon should have succeeded in this had he paid
better heed to the condition of his army and desisted from driving it into
the ground.
   This poses a deliciously Clausewitzian dilemma about the nature of po-
litical and military objectives in war.   Modem historians dote on the Prussian
military philosopher's maxim that political objectives should, at all times,
govern military considerations. But how does one distinguish one from the
other? Clearly, the motivations that drove Napoleon onward beyond the
point of military prudence were political rather than military. Yet, in the
end, the military failure that sprang from this brought political failure in its
wake.
    Osten-Sacken pointed out that a more methodical approach should have
enabled Napoleon to reach Moscow with his army still numbering about
400,000 effectives. He thought that about half of these would have sufficed
to control   Moscow and its surrounding tracts, while the other half, after
subtracting about 20,000 men to garrison the line of communications, should
have been divided into three roughly equal parts. Of these, one should have
covered Smolensk, another should have covered Volhynia, while the third
should have kept Wittgenstein in check, ignoring Riga altogether.
    However, this would have called for the sort of methodical campaigning
