                                The Final Curtain                                399

in   Westphalia was smoldering,    it   was beginning to boil in Prussia.   It   was
only a question of time before it found an echo in Russia.
     Tsar Alexander had long recognized that he would have to beat Napoleon
to the punch rather than sit still and wait for the next assault from a wiser
and more prudent Napoleon. Thus, he resolved to carry the war to Napoleon
until the emperor was thoroughly defeated and overthrown. At this point,
however, this intention was mostly a personal matter. Neither the army nor
the nation were greatly excited over any such prospect. Nevertheless, Al-
exander forged ahead with his preparations. On December 12, he ordered
a new and extensive draft call, 8 men from every 500 souls, as well as the
creation of numerous new reserve formations and a substantial expansion of
the line cavalry.
     Until now, Alexander had been reluctant to break the resistance of those
around him against carrying the war beyond the borders of Russia. This had
been due mainly to his lack of success in winning support for, and backing
of, his   own insufficient resources through positive responses from Berlin and
Vienna. Now Prussian participation had become a distinct possibility. Yorck's
action had incited a popular response that King Frederick William could
neither ignore nor suppress. At first, the Prussian king had repudiated Yorck's
high-handed action. After all, there were still French garrisons all over
Prussia.   But after the first dust had settled on the matter, it had to be clear
to   him that he no longer had any choice at all.         Yorck's defection was
sufficient to bring Napoleon's ire down on the heads of the Prussians again,
even if the king were to repudiate the Convention of Tauroggen. Thus, for
better or worse, the Prussians would have to prepare to defend themselves.
But first, the French presence in Prussia had to be reduced.
     Alexander had now succeeded halfway. Austria would need more con-
vincing, because Mettemich would allow no hostile moves until Austria was
adequately rearmed. But the tsar was already on the move. His vision was
clear. However, even modem historians occasionally still allude to the idea
that his sole motivation was his vanity and his self-perception as the savior
of Europe. But in the face of the underlying hard realities of the continuing
Napoleonic presence in Europe, such a view may hardly be upheld. Despite
all of his posturing,   Alexander did what he knew had to be done.
     Tshitshagov and Platov had already been ordered to join Wittgenstein
in pursuit of Macdonald.      On the Russian New Year's Day of 1813, the
Russian main army also crossed the Niemen.          The Wars of Liberation had
begun, and their military events would eclipse even those of 1812.
