398               1812: NAPOLEON'S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN


the time had come to do something that might lead toward casting off the
yoke Napoleon had placed upon his nation. Since he could not possibly get
his king's approval to seek any kind of accommodation with the Russians,
he took it upon himself to act. Macdonald's faulty disposition tor the retreat
had left Yorck trailing behind the leading echelons of X Corps with most
of his troops. Availing himself of this opportunity, Yorck unilaterally con-
cluded what has since become known as the Convention of Tauroggen with
General von Diebitsch from Wittgenstem's corps. In doing so, he detached
his corps from the Napoleonic juggernaut and declared himself neutral.
      The Russians had placed great store in the possibility that this would
happen, and Alexander had long prompted Essen and Paulucci to get in
touch with Yorck      for reasons that   were   as   much political as they were
military-.   Now it had finally happened, after the Prussian general received
confirmed news of what had occurred in the center. Most French historians,
taking the Napoleonic party line, have regarded this event as simply an act
of Prussian treacher>'. Others have tended to treat it as a local matter. But
it   was, in effect, a pivotal incident that went tar beyond the immediate
military consequences.     The defection ot the Prussian corps reduced Mac-
donald's force to only a few thousand men, Poles, Bavarians, and West-
phalians, with whom Macdonald himselt barely managed to escape.
      With the passing ot X Corps, all chances tor holding on to the Niemen
line were gone. All the French could do was retreat to the Vistula.          But this
was only the immediate result of Yorck's action. Now it also became evident
how daring it had been of Napoleon to leave the Prussians, embittered by
years ot French exactions, armed and in his rear. He had not been unaware
of the Prussian potential. The severe military restrictions he had placed upon
the Prussians in the Treaty of Tilsit and the watchdogs he had put in place
to guard its provisions speak for themselves. Napoleon had also read Frederick
William quite correctly. He was certain that there would be no daring moves
from him. But now this obscure Prussian general had dared to do what his
king would not, thereby igniting a spark that was to inflame anti-Napoleonic
passions across the whole of northern Germany.
      These passions had been there, however, burning beneath the surface,
even before news of the Russian debacle began to circulate. For example,
in Hanover the police commissioner observed most of the congregation
walking out of a church before a te deum was offered for the Battle ot
Borodino; nor had the commissioner himselt liked the sermon. On October
1,   his follow-up report indicated that in the other churches, the reaction
had been even more pointed. In several places, most of the congregation
had clapped their hymnbooks shut with a bang and walked out in the middle
of the te deum, visibly demonstrating their displeasure.    '   But if public opinion
