                                    Epilogue                              407

the fact that this had not been due to the men who commanded them was
completely beside the point.
     It is   also doubtful that the Grand Army Napoleon assembled in Saxony
in   1813 would have fared any better in Russia than had the juggernaut of
1812, even as the Russians of 1813 performed better than those of 1812.
And the massive logistical support the British threw into the Prussian Baltic
ports in 1813 could just as easily have gone a bit farther up into Russian
ports. Also,     the difficulties and obstacles posed by the Russian expanses
would not have been any different from those of 1812, except that the
Russians might have capitalized on them from the start.
    The military machine Napoleon the artilleryman had created was per-
fectly suited to fight short, violent campaigns, but whenever a long- term
sustained effort was in the offing, it tended to expose feet of clay. Napoleon
had virtually invented mass armies. However, even though he knew how
to wield these masses better than any man of his time, learning how to
effectively support  them in the field did not come nearly so easily. In the
end, the logistics of the French military machine proved wholly inadequate.
The experiences of short campaigns had left the French supply services
completely unprepared for what they were to face in Russia, and this was
despite the precautions Napoleon had taken. There was no quick remedy
in the offing that might have repaired these inadequacies from one campaign
to the next. Even in 1813, when another campaign was fought out in a far
more limited space and when massive depots along the Elbe River were
never more than a few marches distant, the Napoleonic armies often went
hungry and operational noncombat losses continued to be enormous. The
limitations of horse-drawn transport and the road networks to support it
were simply not up to the task.
     Indeed, modem militaires have long been in agreement that Napoleon's
military machine at its apex, and the scale on which he attempted to operate
with it in 1812 and 1813, had become an anachronism that could succeed
only with the use of railroads and the telegraph. And these had not yet been
invented.
