                 NOTE ON ARMY STRENGTH REPORTS
The numbers cited in the various strength reports at a given date usually represent
an amalgam of actual numbers and estimates. This is due to the fact that the strength
reports did not usually arrive at the headquarters on the same day (some units might
be one or more days' marches distant). Thus, the aggregate strength of an army, as
it was known at headquarters on any given day, always consisted in part of estimates.

And, being transitory, that is, of use only until the next series of camets or reports
came in, many ended up being at least in part misplaced or lost. This was true
                                       where much was deliberately destroyed
especially at French Imperial Headquarters,
when Napoleon ordered a great many records to be burned at Orsza, when the
central army group prepared for its march to the Beresina.
     Due to researches made in the course of the nineteenth century, we are today
more accurately informed about details relating to exact strengths at any specific
point in time than were Napoleon or the Russian commanders in chief. Still, what
was lost in 1812 remained lost, and researchers had to resort to interpolations gleaned
from surviving reports of earlier and later dates and from ancillary sources, such as
notations made in the memoirs of some corps and division commanders. This ac-
counts for the "slippage" encountered in attempting to reconcile some detailed
numbers with aggregates. And it is for this reason that most of the researchers
generally give round numbers when citing aggregate strengths. Armies were, after
all, living organisms and their numbers fluctuated by the day, even by the hour.




            NOTE ON GENERAL COMMAND POSTINGS
Whenever, in the lists that follow, the name of the officer appointed to a command
post is not given,   it is   because: a) the brigade or unit was operationally split so that
no official appointment was made; b) the officer appointed to the post changed
often; or c) the name of the officer is no longer ascertainable. Generally, whenever
such a brigade acted as a unit, the ranking officer present would exercise the com-
mand function.
