406                                 Epilogue


Kutuzov an army that was still in combat-worthy condition. Barclay received
very little credit for this accomplishment or for his stellar performance at
Borodino during his lifetime. If he received any satisfaction at all, it came
from Bagration's deathbed admission that he had been wrong and that
Barclay had done the right thing after all.
       As the Grand Army rolled on toward Moscow, it was only a matter of
time before the Russians became fully aware of its internal state of dissolution.
But not everybody in command on the Russian side truly appreciated the
significance of this.That was left to Kutuzov. This crafty old campaigner
also had a thorough understanding of the elements of time and distance,
even if his perceptions were totally different from those of Napoleon. Na-
poleon translated these elements into force and energy, whereas Kutuzov
translated them into difficulties and problems. And just as Napoleon's views
were entirely appropriate for the blitzkriegs he had become accustomed to
waging, so, too, were Kutuzov's views quite appropriate for the conditions
prevailing in the Russian theater of operations. Campaigning on the southern
frontiers of the Russian empire had made him acutely aware of the importance
of adequate logistics and the difficulties they posed. Thus, he was among
the very first of those in positions of authority to see clearly that Napoleon
was destined to run back out of Russia faster than he had come in, even if
not a single battle was fought.
   The stand the Russian army made at Borodino had been forced upon
him by those who failed to see the situation as clearly as he did. It was a
mere gesture of appeasement toward the hawks in the Russian high com-
mand, serving the psychological rather than the military needs of the mo-
ment. This clear perception of the realities of the situation must always be
invoked in assessing Kutuzov's subsequent behavior, even if his apprehen-
sions about facing Napoleon in battle ruled his actions. Borodino did nothing
to lessen the experience of Austerlitz. The real arguments against Kutuzov
center largely on his failure to completely destroy Napoleon's central army
group and possibly make Napoleon himself a prisoner of war. This would
have indeed precluded the necessity of renewing the war against him in
1813 at further enormous cost in human lives and misery.
    A completely different set of arguments centers on the idea that Na-
poleon might have come back to Russia for a second attempt if Murat or
Eugene had displayed better generalship, if Yorck and the Prussians hadn't
defected, if the Austrians had been loyal to the cause, and so on. However,
such "what ifs" tend to negate the other side's responses. Everyone agrees
that the Russians were tenacious fighters. They had faced the ogre at Bor-
odino and come away bloodied but unbowed. By the end of the campaign
they had tasted the sweet smell of success, even of outright victory. And
