                                       Glossary                                   411


of the regular military establishment. These infantrymen generally dressed in
green coats or otherwise displayed some green uniform elements; above all, they
displayed the hunting horn, which became emblematic of such formations. The
term "jaeger" thus came into general use in the Teutonic language orbit, as well
as in Russia, while it entered the Romanic languages as chasseurs       (French) and
cacciatores (Italian) in its various forms.

light    This term refers to all those troops who were primarily intended to fight
in open order. In contrast, line troops, in the sense of the linear order,       were
intended to fight in line formation.

line     In a generic sense, this term refers to all those troops who, in contrast
to irregular formations, were part of the regular military establishment.        The
term, however, originated during the linear era, when formal tactics centered
on the linear formations, which could be properly employed only by regular,
well-trained professional troops.

points     These are the most forward elements of a military formation. They act
as scouts and lookouts to prevent ambushes or surprises.

tirailleurs    These were skirmishers who fought in open order.

trains     As the transportation services of the army, the trains were charged with
the hauling of all supplies.

ulans     These were cavalrymen armed with lances. The term is thought to have
derived from the oghlani, the bodyguards of the khans of the Krim Tatars; the
oghlani were young Tatar nobles who were armed with lances.        The term "ulan"
entered the European language orbit through the Poles,          who excelled in the
use of the lance.

voltigeurs     From the French voltiger (to flit, to fly, to flutter about), this term
refers to the regular French light infantry soldiers of the line,   who were specif-
ically trained to fight in open order.   A company of such voltigeurs eventually
became an organic part of each line infantry battalion; it was designed to perform
light infantry tasks detached from the column or line, in conjunction with the
grenadier company. Thus, the voltigeurs began to represent a sort of halfway
point on the road toward a standard infantry, trained to conduct all types of
infantry combat.
       With the institution of these light companies, the French light infantry
regiments, originally designed to perform      all light   infantry tasks for the line
regiments, lost their purpose. Thus, after the 1808 reorganizations, the light
regiments lost their special status, retaining only their traditions, uniform dis-
tinctions,    and titles: Their grenadiers were called carahiniers, and as they now
had voltigeur companies of their own, the center or line companies retained
the title of chasseurs.
