                                     Epilogue                             405


military implications of driving a wedge so deeply into a hostile Russia that
its   apex reached all the way to Moscow.
       In short, anything that might have made a Russian campaign feasible
had to be based on the idea that the Russians would give up the fight long
before the army reached Moscow. If they did not, then there was nothing
that could make an invasion work. As it was. Napoleon, his blood up for
the kill after his unchecked advances, failed to read these fundamental signs,
which ought to have given him pause. Quite probably, the continuing
withdrawals of the Russians misled him into thinking that they lacked the
stomach to face him. Even today. Napoleon's cheering section sees nothing
but victory in his advances into Russia and hails every inconclusive brush
with the Russians' rear guards as yet another glorious victory. Time and
again,   it   must have seemed to Napoleon that the moment of decision was
just another leap ahead    — from Vilna to Vitebsk to Smolensk, pushing him
onward beyond the point of no return. When he did finally awaken to the
fact that the worst might happen, the situation had become very much a
matter of "in for a penny, in for a pound." This concept was already evident
at    Smolensk, where Napoleon exhibited an unmistakable lack of his cus-
tomary decisiveness, as if he already believed that what was happening was
inevitable anyway. This must have come as a tremendous shock to him, he
who had made all Europe bend before him like reeds in a wind. His self-
confidence severely shaken, other lapses were soon to follow: first in Moscow;
then during the retreat, when only the desperate situation at Krasnoi briefly
revived him; and again after the first day of the Battle of Leipzig in October
1813.    It   has become conventional to say that his genius had deserted him
during those moments, but perhaps the opposite was true. Perhaps his genius
saw the future all too clearly, and this caused the emperor, who had been
so favored by his "lucky star," to experience despair and hold     on in the
desperate hope that somehow a solution might offer itself, that the enemy
might yet make some incredible blunder. Above all, however, he might
have simply refused to accept the truth, because the next move would en-
tail   an admission of failure. This could hardly come easily to a man like
Napoleon.



As for the Russians, their greatest stroke of good fortune reposed in the fact
that the plans they had formulated for the defense of Russia proved un-
workable even before they were put into execution. The greatest feat of the
Russian high command during the French offensive was that Barclay, no
matter what he did or did not do, never lost his head, even in the face of
vociferous critics at his own headquarters.     He was able to hand over to
