410                                         Glossary


repute by the French soldier         — and deservedly
                                                  However, the idea that the
                                                        so.

poor reputation of Napoleon's armies, which resulted from foraging and requi-
sitioning, can be blamed entirely on the intendance alone, must be regarded as
a half-truth at best.

Cossacks       These were irregular tribal cavalrymen who, in the Russian army,
fulfilled   the role hussars played in central Europe. By the time of the 1812
campaign, the hussars had long been "regulars," but the Cossacks continued
to be listed separately on army returns. This practice reflected their irregular
status.


dragoons      These were considered mounted infantrymen throughout most of the
eighteenth century, and rode horses of inferior quality. However, as they were
increasingly used in the line by the end of the century, they came to be regarded
as line cavalry in their own right. Curiously,           Napoleon reversed the general
trend, in progress elsewhere in Europe, toward a standard, all-purpose cavalry
by reemphasizing the differences among the various branches of the mounted
arm.

flying column       Generally a raiding party of unspecified size, a flying column
could run to several thousand men. Operating only on general directives, it did
not have a fixed base of operations and was not responsible to any intermediate
headquarters; i.e.,   it     was detached and hence "flying."

grenadiers      It is thought that grenadiers originated      in the Swedish army during
the Thirty Years' War,          when Regensburg (Ratisbon) was under siege in 1634.
On that occasion, a special volunteer force was culled from the infantry to hurl
grenades during the siege operations. Since the hand grenades were heavy, fickle,
and thus dangerous to handle, their manipulation called for strong daredevils.
Eventually, every company added several such extra-pay elites to its roster. They
were eventually brigaded into companies and battalions, retaining both their
title   and elite status long after the throwing of grenades had ceased to be their
primary function. The cognomen had become honorific.

hussars      Originating in Hungary, hussars first appeared in Continental military
establishments as irregular cavalrymen, designated primarily for the little, minor,
or guerrilla war, i.e.   ,   for raiding, scouting, and security services. Reflecting their
irregular status, they were,        throughout much of the eighteenth century,       listed

separately on all army returns.


jaeger      Derived from the German word for "hunter," this cognomen entered
military parlance during the Thirty Years' War, when a formation of 300 sharp-
shooters was raised among the Hessian game wardens and forest rangers,                who
were collectively termed Jaeger (as they continue to be to this day). From that
time onward, the term "jaeger" almost invariably described elite light infantry
