420                                    Appendix II


instead, for 50 files (6 corporals and 144 fusiliers) in the deployed line. That is, the
old companies had become platoons, of which the new companies had two.
    Even though under the new establishment each regiment was' to have 1 depot
and 3 field battalions, this was nowhere uniform. The Spanish venture had already
required the mobilization of the depots of many regiments, although the depots were
reformed after their departure for Spain. When the army prepared for the Russian
campaign, the table of organization of most French regiments designated to partic-
ipate   was raised to five field battalions each. This measure was bound to further
dilute the veteran cadre of these units (most of which were assigned to          I   and II
Corps).  The situation was further exacerbated when the remaining cadre of the
center companies was called upon to man the elite companies of all the new battalions
with the best of the available manpower.



                              THE LINE CAVALRY
The line cavalry consisted of:

        2 carabinier regiments
      14 cuirassier regiments
    24 dragoon regiments
        9 lancer regiments
      12 hussar regiments
    28    light horse regiments (chasseurs a cheval)


The normal complement of a cavalry regiment was 5 squadrons, each consisting of
202 horses    in the   heavy cavalry and 256 horses in the     light (lancers,   hussars,
chasseurs). Compared to the other Continental military establishments, these French
squadrons were rather large and divided into two companies each. Elsewhere in
Europe, the company formation had been abolished as a subunit of the squadron,
but the latter remained somewhat larger, having about 150 horses on average. Only
in the British cavalry did the troop (the equivalent of the company)       continue to
play a role. Unlike the situation with the ad hoc formations of the infantry that
marched into Spain with 1000-man battalions, bloated with green conscripts, things
were never so simple with the cavalry. Thus, the Spanish venture gave                rise   to
combined cavalry formations. These consisted, on the one hand, of companies
gleaned from the depots of several regiments and, on the other, of larger formations
split away from their parent units to form so-called second formations, which were

identified by the designation bis following the unit's ordinal number.
    Generally, the cuirassier regiments were considered the best among the French
cavalry, with the exception of the low-numbered hussar regiments, which had main-
tained an eighteenth-century mercenary character and still attracted the cream of
the volunteers from     all   comers of Europe.   On the whole, however, the French
cavalry was not held in great respect by its adversaries.   Most of its celebrated feats
can be credited to the "foreigners" who served under its colors.
