                                          Appendix II                                419

introduced into these regiments. This, of course, necessitated depot faciUties to
process, train,and equip the inductees.
    The standard complement of the Guard cavalry regiments was 5 squadrons, with
the exception of the chasseurs, who, together with the attached Mameluke squadron,
numbered 10 squadrons.
        The reason the chasseurs of the Guard had such a large complement was that
they were, by designation, the emperor's escort; a squad of chasseurs accompanied
him wherever he went. This picket, which consisted of an officer and twenty
troopers, was always saddled and bridled, 24 hours a day. The men were drawn from
the duty squadron, which was rotated daily. Owing to the special circumstances of
the Russian campaign, the strength of this escort in attendance was increased to
four squadrons,       two each from the light and heavy cavalry, which rotated every
other day.*
        In time, the remainder of the Guard cavalry regiments took on extra squadrons
as well; the regiments that had so-called Middle Guard squadrons by      1813 were the
first   to do so.   These squadrons must have begun life as depot formations at a time,
after 1809,     when it was no longer prudent to denude the line cavalry of veteran
troopers.




                              THE LINE INFANTRY
The line consisted of 107 line regiments and 31 light regiments, as well as 5 penal
regiments. Even though there were only 107 line and 31 light, the ordinal numbers
identifying these units ran to 130 and 34, respectively, because the shuffles during
the reorganizations had       left   vacant 23 numbers in the line and 3 in the     light.

Eventually, the penal regiments were assigned numbers as well.
        By 1812, the organizational structure of the infantry regiments already repre-
sented a compromise because of the growing lack of adequate overhead staffs and
regimental depot facilities. That is, since the regiment no longer fulfilled a role in
the tactical structure of the brigade, whose basic units of maneuver were the bat-
talions, the regiment had become an administrative entity, responsible for collecting,
equipping, and training the replacements. Thus,         it   was more convenient to have
the depots raise extra battalions rather than to attempt to create new regimental
overheads.     As a result, the increases in the number of regiments during the years
leading to the buildup for 1812, and again in 1813, were not at all representative
of the increases in the French infantry's manpower,      much of which went into the
extra battalions of the existing regiments.       Many of the new regimental numbers
that did come into being originated with the incorporation of the Dutch and the
annexed territories, the so-called neo-Frankish units.
        The reduction of the number of companies per battalion in 1808, from 10 to 6
companies (4 fusilier, 1 grenadier, and 1 voltigeur company), had freed many non-
coms and company officers for new formations, even though the strength of the
battalions actually increased. Whereas the old fusilier company had placed 25 files
(6 corporals and 69 fusiliers) into the line, the post- 1808 table of organization called,
