                                       Appendix II                                 421

    According to Pelet-Narbonne, who puts it rather blandly, the bulk of the French
cavalry was mounted on cold-blooded stock (this situation improved somewhat when
the depots of the cuirassiers were moved to the north German lowlands) and its
greatest virtue reposed in the fact that it was accustomed to operate in very large
formations.^ Taking the analysis a step further, Friederich says that there was nothing
wrong with the French cavalry troopers' courage but states that the men lacked the
innate sense of care necessary to keep their horses in serviceable condition        on
campaign.^ But it is Napoleon himself who informs us that "Le Francais nest pas
                  '*
homme de cheval

                              THE ARTILLERY
The French artillery was organized into:

     9 foot artillery regiments, each of 22 companies
     7 horse artillery regiments,   each of 6 companies
    12 artillery train battalions


The complement of the foot companies was 120 men; that of the mounted and train
companies was somewhat less.
    At this time, almost none of the European military establishments manned the
                  army mobilized; at that point, the guns and their associated
batteries until the
equipment were drawn from the depots. In peacetime, only a few drill batteries were
kept in hand to train the recruits.
    Unlike the infantry and cavalry, which gradually fell victim to the drains and
dilutions occasioned by incessant campaigning and expansions, the artillery remained
a constant throughout, never yielding its high standards of quality and performance.
This branch, from which Napoleon himself sprang, was excellently officered at all
levels of command and was well trained. This, of course,       was also due to the fact
that the artillery was hardly ever subjected to the, at times, crippling losses that
were the lot of the infantry. Additionally, the artilleryman generally traveled light,
off-loading his pack onto the battery vehicles at every opportunity. Thus, notwith-
standing the grinding marches, which might debilitate the draft horses, the artillery
personnel was hardly ever subjected to excessive operational noncombat losses.
    The foot batteries generally consisted of 8 pieces (6 guns and 2 howitzers). The
horse batteries usually had only 6 pieces. The gun crews were drawn from the artillery
regiments, while the artillery train provided the teams and drivers. The battalions
of the artillery train were also commanded by artillery officers.
    Also part of the artillery were:


       3 pontoon battalions, totaling 28 companies
    147 companies Coast Guard {gardes cotes)
     33 companies fortress artillery (canoniers sedentaires)
      19 companies artificers
       6 companies armorers
