446                                     Appendix VI


      The heavy battery: 8 twelve -pounders and 4 twenty-pound unicorns
      The light battery: 8 six-pounders and 4 ten-pound unicorns
      The horse battery: 8 six-pounders and 4 ten-pound unicorns

The unicorns were a Russian specialty. So-called gun-howitzers, they were intended
to be dual-purpose weapons, since their barrels were somewhat longer than a how-
itzer's   barrel but shorter than a gun's. Their performance fell short in the smaller
calibers but proved quite serviceable in the heavier calibers. Thus, unicorns with a
shot weight of 10 pounds and above continued in service for quite some time.
      Also attached to the artillery was the artillery pontonier regiment, consisting
of 2 battalions, each of 4 companies, and totaling 2063 men.



                              TECHNICAL TROOPS
The technical troops consisted of 2 pioneer or engineer regiments, each with 2313
men in 3 battalions.


                   GARRISON AND LOCAL TROOPS
Included in this category were a large number of troops designated for service in the
interior and Asian border districts.
    The Inner Guard, in 40 companies located in 40 district capitals, numbered
about 17,000 men. Not part of the Inner Guard were:


      10 garrison regiments
     20 garrison battalions (in all about 30,000 men)
     84 invalid companies


The invalid companies fell into three categories:

    Mobile invalids. Totaling 6204 men in 35 companies, the mobile invalids were
          distributed to the Guard, palaces, factories, hospitals,    and arms depots to
          perform various duties.
     Serving invalids.   These invalids were still on active duty.
    Nonserving invalids. Divided into 535 commands, the nonserving invalids were
          distributed to the garrison battalions and the Inner Guard, the district capitals
          and the fortresses. These commands averaged 2 officers and about 46 men
          each.


The siege artillery, laid up in the arsenals of St. Petersburg, Riga, and Kiev, numbered
180 guns.
     In addition to these artillery depots and the garrison infantry, there was also an
engineer corps and 57 fortress engineer commands (about 2000 men), as well as the
cadet training facilities and 3 instructional grenadier battalions.
