462                                 Appendix VII


When the siege of Riga was raised, the following columns were formed from the
garrison:


    Detachment Lewis: 12 battalions, 4 squadrons, 3 Cossack regiments, 3 batteries,
      and 1 free corps.
    Detachment Paulucci: 7 battalions, 1 Cossack regiment, IV3 batteries, and 1
      free corps.



                                 GARRISONS
The garrisons were as follows:



              Dunaburg'                                              10 bns.
              Borisov^                                                3 bns.
              Bobruisk*                                              18 bns.
              Kiev                                                    6 bns.^
              In southern Russia, 12th Cav. Div.                     16 sqns.^


              'When Dunaburg was evacuated, the garrison joined Witt-
               genstein.
              ^When Borisov was evacuated, the battalions went to Ba-
               gration's Second Army, where they were disbanded and dis-
               tributed.
              *When Bobruisk was evacuated, 6 battalions went to Bagra-
               tion'sSecond Army, where they were disbanded and dis-
               tributed.The remainder were formed into a column near
               the end of the campaign.
              ^The 6 battalions joined 11 Reserve Corps in November and
               were replaced with 6 recruit battalions.
              ^The use of these squadrons is not documented. They ap-
               parently represent the difference between the full establish-
               ment strength (80 squadrons) of the 6th and 7th Cavalry
               Divisions and the 64 squadrons the erstwhile Danube Army
               brought into the central operations area.



                     TROOPS OF THE THIRD LINE
                                         Depots
The number of recruit depots cited in the sources varies from 33 to 41. The number
of men these processed, however,    is   well set at about 95,000.
    These depots contained the fall 1811         which was used to form the 4th
                                               levy,
Battalions and 5th or 11th and 12th Squadrons, respectively. A few battalions were
formed into reserve regiments. However, with only a few exceptions (Danube Army,
Sacken, Wittgenstein, and II Reserve Corps), they were eventually disbanded and
used to replenish the line units already in the field.
