Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/campaignoftrafalOOcorb 


THE  CAMPAIGN 
OF  TRAFALGAR 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 
DRAKE     AND     THE     TUDOR 

NAVY  :  with  a  History  of  the  Rise  of 
England  as  a  Maritime  Power.  With 
Portraits,  Illustrations,  and  Maps.  2 
vols.     Crown  8vo,  16s. 

THE    SUCCESSORS    OF   DRAKE. 

With  4  Portraits  (2  Photogravures)  and 
12  Maps  and  Plans.     8vo,  21s. 

ENGLAND  IN  THE  MEDITER- 
RANEAN: A  Study  of  the  Rise  and 
Influence  of  British  Power  within  the 
Straits,  1603-1713.   2  vols.   8vo,  24s.  net. 

ENGLAND     IN     THE    SEVEN 

YEARS'  WAR  :  A  Study  in  Combined 
Strategy.  With  14  Maps  and  Plans.  2 
vols.     8vo,  21s.  net. 


LONGMANS,  GREEN  AND  CO. 

LONDON,    NEW  YORK,   BOMBAY,    AND   CALCUTTA 


^ 

..^ 

^«,i» 


'Z 

«*?« 


'4 


-    4 


2^ 


:!:- 


1    ^^ 


5  - 

^   1' 


/ 


.#■ 


^ 


y 


ffl**;!?  jfij^^p^v^  !^- 


/ f^nnwai 


THE   ATTACK   AT    TRAFALGAR 

Frojii  a  contevtporary  fna?i7iscnpt  pla?i  in  the  possession  of  the  Author 


EXPLANATION    OF    THE    PLAN 


BRITISH 


Weather  Division. 

1.  Victory  loo. 

2.  T^meraire  98. 

3.  Neptune  98. 

4.  Conqueror  74. 
Leviathan  74. 
Britannia  100. 
Orion  74. 
Ajax  74. 
Spartiate  74. 
Agamemnon  64. 
Minotaur  74. 
Africa  64. 


Lee  Division . 

1.  Royal  Sovereign 

2.  Mars  74. 

3.  Belleisle  74. 

4.  Tonnant  80. 

5.  Colossus  74. 

6.  Achille  74. 

7.  Belleroph^n  74. 

8.  Revenge  74. 

9.  Defiance  74. 

10.  Thunderer  74. 

11.  Defence  74. 

12.  Swiftsure  74. 

13.  Polyphemus  64. 

14.  Dreadnought  98. 

15.  Prince  98. 


100. 


Cruisers. 

1.  Euryalus  36. 

2.  Phoebe  36. 

3.  Sirius  32. 

4.  Naiad  38. 

5.  Pickle  10. 

6.  Entreprenant  10. 


^ 


THE  CAMPAIGN  OF 
TRAFALGAR 


BY 


JULIAN   S.  CORBETT,  LL.M. 

LECTURER    IN    HISTORY    TO    THE    ROYAL 
NAVAL    WAR    COLLEGE 


WITH  CHARTS  AND  DIAGRAMS 


LONGMANS,    GREEN    AND    CO, 

S9    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON 

NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY,  AND  CALCUTTA      < 
1910 

All  rights  reserved 


C6T 


TO 

MY    WIFE 

ON    HER    BIRTHDAY 

OCTOBER  21 


PREFACE 


In  the  most  recent  bibliography  of  the  Waterloo  campaign, 
that  prepared  by  Professor  Oman  for  the  Cambridge  Modern 
History,  there  appear  little  short  of  a  score  of  works  entirely 
devoted  to  its  elucidation.  For  the  Trafalgar  campaign  our 
English  language  cannot  boast  a  single  one.  Of  the  battle 
itself  there  are  studies  innumerable,  serious,  fanciful,  and 
anecdotic  ;  but  the  fact  remains  that,  though  its  centenary 
is  past  and  gone,  no  British  pen  has  ever  been  set  to  the 
task  of  producing,  from  the  vast  store  of  material  that 
exists,  anything  like  a  reasoned  Staff  account  of  the  crown- 
ing chapter  in  the  history  of  naval  warfare.  We  have,  it  is 
true,  Mr.  Newbolt's  delightful  volume,  The  Year  of  Trafalgar; 
but  that,  although  it  contains  the  best  study  of  the  battle 
that  has  yet  appeared,  makes  no  pretence  of  dealing  ex- 
haustively with  the  policy  and  operations  which  led  to  it. 
The  truth  is  that  for  all  the  spade  work  that  has  been 
devoted  to  it  in  recent  years  by  Sir  John  K.  Laughton,  Mr. 
Leyland,  and  others,  the  subject  has  been  left,  so  far  as  the 
Service  and  the  public  are  concerned,  in  the  same  comparative 
darkness  that  enshrouds  the  bulk  of  our  naval  history. 
Nelson's  share  of  the  work  has  received  ample  justice. 
Indeed  the  campaign  has  scarcely  ever  been  approached 
except  from  his  standpoint.  And  yet  till  nearly  the  end  his 
share  was  comparatively  small.  Until  in  the  last  month  of 
his  life,  when  he  resumed  command  of  the  restored  Mediter- 
ranean station,  he  had  a  bare  dozen  of  the  line  and  a  score 
or  so  of  cruisers  under  his  flag,  while  during  the  year  there 
were  in  commission  and  reserve  well  over  a  hundred  of  the 
line  and  four  hundred  cruisers. 

Nor  is  this  all.  The  military  side  of  the  campaign  has 
been  left  in  even  greater  obscurity  than  the  naval.  In  the 
course  of  the  year,  besides  the  troops  in  the  East  and  West 


viii  PREFACE 

Indies,  we  had  something  like  50,000  men  engaged  in 
active  oversea  operations.  Only  a  fraction  of  these  touched 
Nelson,  and  where  they  did  their  deflecting  influence  on  his 
strategy  has  been  almost  entirely  ignored.  Indeed  it  is  not 
too  much  to  say  that  the  controlling  fact  that  the  campaign 
of  1805  was  a  combined  campaign  and  not  merely  naval, 
has  never  been  given  its  due  importance.  Still  less  has  it 
been  realised  that  it  was  essentially  an  offensive  campaign, 
and  not  merely  a  campaign  of  defence  against  invasion. 
The  failure  to  grasp  these  cardinal  facts  has  clouded  even 
Nelson's  action  and  exposed  him  to  criticism  which  he  did 
not  deserve.  How  much  more  then  has  it  clouded  the 
rest ! 

It  is  not  that  a  minute  study  of  the  campaign  detracts 
in  the  least  from  Nelson's  greatness.  High  as  such  a  study 
lifts  the  reputation  of  his  colleagues,  Nelson  still  remains 
the  greatest  of  admirals.  The  fascination  of  his  dazzling 
personality  still  dominates  the  judgment,  and  it  is  only  by  a 
severe  and  persistent  effort  of  resistance  that  we  can  hope 
to  see  things  in  their  true  proportion  and  real  meaning. 
If  we  would  read  the  lesson  aright  not  only  must  we  keep 
Nelson's  part  in  due  subordination,  but  we  must  also  con- 
tinually forswear  the  calling  of  the  sea  and  closet  ourselves 
with  Pitt  and  Melville,  with  Barham  and  Castlereagh.  It  is 
with  them  alone  we  may  watch  the  inward  springs  at  work, 
by  which  the  fleets  at  sea  were  really  controlled,  and  mark 
the  flow  of  intelligence  from  spies  and  cruisers  and  embassies 
that  set  them  in  motion  or  stayed  their  action. 

For  such  a  detailed  study,  as  most  of  our  military  cam- 
paigns but  not  one  of  our  naval  have  received,  the  time  has 
been  ripened  by  the  publication  of  a  large  proportion  of  the 
essential  documents.  For  the  diplomatic  influences,  which 
in  this,  as  in  most  campaigns,  provides  the  master-key,  we 
have  Mr.  Holland  Rose's  Select  Desimtches  relating  to  the  Third 
Coalition  against  France,  1804—5,  edited  for  the  Royal  His- 
torical Society,  though,  as  the  editor  unfortunately  omitted 
to  note  the  dates  on  which  the  despatches  were  received, 
their  connection  with  naval  and  military  instructions  has 
been  impossible  to  trace  without  collation  with  the  originals. 


PREFACE  ix 

To  this  collection  must  be  added,  besides  the  well-known  cor- 
respondence of  Napoleon  and  Talleyrand,  Mons.  P.  Coquelle's 
Napoleon  et  Angleterre  (1803-13),  and  Mons.  Charles  Auriol's 
La  France,  V Angleterre  et  Naples  (1803-6),  both  invaluable 
works. 

For  the  naval  side  we  have  Mr.  Leyland's  Bespatclies  and 
Letters  relating  to  the  Blochade  of  Brest,  1803-5,  edited  for  the 
Navy  Records  Society,  and  the  Cornvjallis  Fapers,  recently 
published  by  the  Historical  MSS.  Commission  from  the  collec- 
tion of  Mr.  Cornwallis  Wykeham-Martin  {Various  Collec- 
tions,  .\o\.  \\.  1909).  But  for  the  most  valuable  published 
material  by  far  we  must  acknowledge  our  debt  with  humi- 
lity, if  not  with  shame,  to  the  French  War  Office.  The 
monumental  works  of  Colonel  Edouard  Desbriere,  entitled, 
Frojets  et  tentatires  de  d^barquement  av.x  lies  Britanniques 
(1793-1805)  and  La  Campiaign  Maritime  de  Trafalgar,  pub- 
lished under  the  direction  of  the  Section  Historique  de 
I'Etat-major  de  I'Armee,  contain  the  first  attempt  to  form 
a  real  Staff  history  of  the  campaign,  and  although  they 
make  no  pretence  of  dealing  adequately  with  the  unpub- 
lished English  material,  they  place  us  for  the  first  time  in 
a  position  to  see  the  campaign  as  it  really  was.  My  debt 
to  these  volumes,  increased  as  it  is  by  Colonel  Desbriere's 
courtesy  in  personally  elucidating  points  that  were  obscured 
by  faulty  transcripts,  is  almost  beyond  recognition.  A  similar 
w^ork  from  the  Spanish  side  is  still  in  progress  in  the  Bevista 
de  Marina  by  General  Galiano,  a  lineal  descendant  of  a  Tra- 
falgar hero.  It  is  useful  in  supplementing  Colonel  Desbriere's 
volumes,  although  most  of  the  important  Spanish  docu- 
ments were  generously  communicated  to  the  French  Staff 
by  General  Galiano  for  Colonel  Desbriere's  use. 

Amongst  manuscript  sources  only  recently  accessible,  we 
have  the  Pitt  Papers,  deposited  at  the  Public  Record  Office, 
and,  still  more  valuable,  the  Barham  Papers,  which  have  been 
entrusted  for  publication  to  the  Navy  Records  Society.  To 
these  latter  I  have  been  permitted  access,  and  have  received 
invaluable  assistance  in  examining  them  from  the  editor, 
Sir  John  Laugh  ton. 

The  labour  of  working  through  the  mass  of  ship's  Logs 


X  PREFACE 

and  Journals,  the  Admirals'  and  Captains'  letters,  and  the 
other  rich  material  in  the  Admiralty  Archives,  and  of  sub- 
sequently reducing  it  to  narrative  and  critical  form,  has 
necessarily  been  great;  but  in  attempting  the  formidable 
task  my  path  has  been  smoothed  by  many  ready  helpers. 
My  thanks  are  specially  due  to  Captain  Hudleston,  R.N., 
for  placing  at  my  disposal  his  researches  into  the  system  of 
naval  defence  in  home  waters ;  to  Mr.  Perrin,  the  Admiralty 
Librarian,  for  help  in  every  direction,  and  particularly  in 
preparing  the  Schedule  of  Signals  recorded  as  having  been 
made  at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar ;  and  to  Lieutenant  Keate, 
R.N.,  for  assistance  in  preparing  the  track  charts  from  the 
Logs. 

Of  these  charts,  which  have  now  been  constructed  for  the 
first  time,  and  which  are  the  necessary  basis  of  all  strategical 
criticism,  it  must  be  explained  that  they  should  not  be 
taken  as  absolutely  correct.  Except  where  otherwise  indi- 
cated the  tracks  are  simply  plotted  between  noon  positions, 
and  owing  to  the  uncertainty  of  longitude  observations, 
even  these  positions  are  sometimes  only  approximate.  This 
is  especially  the  case  with  the  smaller  cruisers,  whose 
neglected  movements  are  not  infrequently  vital  to  a  correct 
view  of  fleet  operations,  such  as  Orde's  retreat  from  Cadiz 
and  Nelson's  final  decision  to  chase  to  the  West  Indies.  In 
the  important  case,  for  instance,  of  the  Iris,  which  observed 
Villeneuve's  final  movement  from  Ferrol,  no  one  on  board 
seems  to  have  been  able  to  work  out  a  longitude  at  all. 
At  least  none  are  entered  in  her  master's  log,  and  in  run- 
ning down  from  Ushant  she  made  Cape  Penas  instead  of 
Ortegal,  nearly  a  hundred  miles  to  the  westward. 

In  plotting  the  French  tracks  the  difficulty  of  reaching 
precision  has  been  even  greater.  They  are  primarily  based 
on  the  charts  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere,  but  unfortunately 
these  charts  are  not  quite  worthy  of  the  rest  of  the  work. 
They  have  required  careful  correction  from  the  positions  and 
courses  recorded  in  the  documents  themselves.  Sometimes 
these,  too,  are  obviously  false,  especially  in  the  case  of  Ville- 
neuve's retreat  from  Ferrol  and  Cadiz ;  and  in  these  cases 
the  track  shown  is  that  actually  observed  and  reported  by 


PREFACE  xi 

our  cruisers.  When,  as  occurs  in  the  most  doubtful  cases,  two 
or  more  of  such  cruisers  working  independently  give  co- 
inciding observations,  the  positions  and  course  reported  are 
taken  as  correct. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  movements  and  instructions  of 
these  cruisers,  and  indeed  the  whole  system  of  scouting  and 
intelligence,  will  be  found  an  interesting  feature  of  the 
book.  Hitherto,  owing  to  the  unfortunate  precedent  set  by 
James,  cruiser  work  has  usually  been  divorced  from  the 
major  operations  to  which  it  belongs  organically,  and  we 
have  known  little  about  it  beyond  the  frigate  actions  that 
were  fought.  To  naval  officers,  and  indeed  to  all  serious 
students  of  naval  warfare,  history  so  written  must  have  a 
flavour  of  unreality  that  is  little  short  of  repellent.  What 
they  require  is  a  co-ordinated  account  of  the  movements 
of  all  classes  of  ships  engaged  in  each  operation,  and 
a  clear  knowledge  of  the  instructions  and  intelligence 
under  which  it  was  carried  out.  In  short,  if  Naval  History 
is  to  establish  itself  as  a  matter  of  real  instructional  interest, 
students  must  be  able  to  find  in  accounts  of  the  old  cam- 
paigns at  least  an  indication  of  what  they  would  look  for 
in  a  report  on  manoeuvres  to-day. 

No  one  can  approach  our  Naval  History  from  this  point 
of  view,  even  in  the  tentative  and  imperfect  manner  that 
has  been  attempted  in  the  following  pages,  without  feeling 
how  defective  is  the  bulk  of  what  we  now  possess.  It  is 
scarcely  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  whole  requires 
rewriting  on  Staff  lines.  But  it  is  unlikely  that  so  large  and 
technical  a  task  can  ever  be  done  adequately  except  by  an 
Historical  Section  at  the  Admiralty.  The  need  for  such 
a  Section  is  crying.  Buried  in  our  Naval  Archives  is  a  mass 
of  lore,  a  body  of  matured  tradition,  such  as  no  other 
country  in  the  world  possesses ;  but  it  lies  dormant  and  for- 
gotten, a  wasted  power  of  incalculable  force,  that  might  be 
ours  behind  the  guns  and  ours  alone.  But  to  re-awaken 
that  tradition,  to  make  it  a  living  thing,  as  it  was  to  Barham 
and  Cornwallis  and  Nelson,  to  render  it  once  more  the 
active  force  that  gave  them  nerve  and  initiative,  and  that 
certainty  of  touch  which  seems  now  almost  miraculous,  is 


xii  PREFACE 

beyond  the  reach  of  individual  effort.  It  needs,  no  less 
than  the  most  technical  and  material  parts  of  the  naval  art, 
a  laboratory  where  civilian  and  naval  experts  can  work  side 
by  side  to  supply  each  other's  defects  and  ripen  each  other's 
ideas. 

It  has  indeed  been  suggested  that  a  Professorship  of 
Naval  History  at  a  University  might  supply  the  need.  But 
however  such  a  chair  may  succeed  for  Military  History  or 
for  forming  a  sound  national  opinion,  for  the  practical  needs 
of  the  Service  it  seems  foredoomed  to  failure.  What  is  of  the 
sea  must  breathe  the  breath  of  the  sea.  Without  it  it  will 
pine  in  academical  speculation.  In  salt  water  the  old  naval 
tradition  was  born,  and  by  salt  water  alone  can  it  be 
nourished.  Sever  the  work  of  revival  from  the  Admiralty 
and  you  sever  it  from  the  well-spring  of  that  intangible 
spirit  which  is  our  peculiar  asset.  It  is  ours  alone  if  we 
choose  to  use  it.  The  most  perfect  organisation,  the  most 
scholarly  research,  the  most  elaborate  technical  science, 
cannot  supply  its  place.  It  is  the  product  of  centuries  of 
naval  warfare,  and  it  is  we  who  have  the  centuries  behind 
us.  The  atmosphere  they  have  engendered  is  the  soul  of 
the  matter,  and  nowhere  out  of  intimate  touch  with  the  fleet 
can  its  inspiration  be  assured. 

Some  day,  it  may  be  hoped,  the  truth  may  be  realised. 
Some  day,  perhaps,  we  shall  recognise  the  value  of  the  force 
by  which  alone  we  may  bend  again  the  bow  of  Odysseus ; 
and  then  a  Historical  Section  will  seem  as  indispensable 
a  national  asset  as  an  experimental  tank  or  a  laboratory  for 
high  explosives. 

J.  S.  C. 


CONTENTS 


I.  Pitt's  War  Policy 
II.  Napoleon's  First  Miscarriage 

III.  Opening  of  the  Campaign 

IV.  Villeneuve's  Evasion    . 
V.  Lord  Barham  at  Work 

VI.  Nelson's  Dilemma 
VII.  How  Nelson  made  Sure 
VIII.  Collingwood's  Flying  Squadron 
IX.  Modifications  of  Napoleon's  Plans 
X.  Restoring  the  Command.    Ferrol  and  the  Straits 
XI.  Operations  in  the  West  Indies    . 
XII.  How  Lord  Barham  met  the  Crisis 
XIII.  Cornwallis  opens  Brest 
XIV.  Calder's  Action     .... 
XV.  Movements  after  Calder's  Action 
XVI.  General  Situation  at  the  Crisis 
XVII.  The  Masterstroke 
XVIII.  The  Solution  of  the  Crisis. 
XIX.  The  Return  to  the  Offensive 
XX.  Securing  the  Communications 


PAGE 

1 

27 

43 

57 

69 

89 

100 

110 

124 

144 

154 

172 

185 

193 

208 

226 

239 

255 

272 

297 


XIV 


CONTENTS 


XXI.  The  Deadlock  at  Cadiz 
XXII.  The  Main  Fleets  in  Contact 
XXIII.  Nelson's  Plan  of  Attack 
XXIV.  The  Battle  of  Trafalgar     . 
XXV.  End  of  the  Naval  Campaign 
XXVI.  Conclusion     .... 


PAGE 

317 
333 
342 
360 
397 
408 


APPENDICES 

A.  Pitt's  Instructions  to  Lord  G.  Leveson-Gower    .  427 

B.  Further  Instructions  to  Lord  G.  Leveson-Gower  439 
a  The  Trafalgar  Signal,  1816         .         .         .         .  445 

D.  Lord  Nelson's  Memorandum          ....  447 

E.  Lists  and  Plans  showing  the  Manner  of   Engaging 

at  Trafalgar    ......  450 

F.  Schedules  of  Signals  recorded  at  Trafalgar  .  454 


INDEX 


465 


CHARTS   AND   DIAGRAMS 


1.  The  Attack  at  Trafalgar       .....      Frontispiece 

From  a  contemporary  manuscript  plan  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Author.     See  p.  452,  No.  6. 

2.  Chart  showing  Orde's  retreat,  with  Craig's  advance 

to   Lisbon    and   movements  of   cruisers   with 

intelligence    .......  To  face  p.    57 

3.  Chart  showing  Nelson's  chase  of  Villeneuve,  with 

Inset  of  operations  in  the  West  Indies,  March 

to  June  1805 ,,  154 

Nelson's  track  is  from  "  A  Chart  of  the  Atlantic 
.  .  .  wherein  is  delineated  the  track  of  H.M. 
Fleet  commanded  by  the  late  Viscount  Nelson, 
K.B.,  in  pursuit  of  the  Combined  Fleet.  ...  It 
is  copied  from  his  Lordship's  original  MSS. 
and  his  Lordship's  directions."  by  William 
Faden,  August  12,  1807:  in  the  Royal 
United  Service  Institution  Library.  Ville- 
neuve's  track  i.s  adapted  from  the  rough  chart 
in  Desbriere's  Projets  et  Tentatives,  v.  683. 

4.  Chart  to  illustrate  operations  previous  and  subse- 

quent to  Calder's  action,  July  22nd,  and  the 
great  concentration  at  Ushant,  August  15th, 
together  with  Allemand's  movements,  July 
15th  to  August  16th ,,         184 

5.  Plan  of  Calder's  action,  July  22nd        .  .  .         ,,         193 

6.  Chart  showing  operations  from  August    10th  to 

30th.  Calder's  retreat  to  Ushant  and  return 
in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve.  Villeneuve's  sortie 
from  Ferrol  and  retreat  to  Cadiz,  with  cruiser 
movements    .......,,         254 

Villeneuve's  approximate  course  is  plotted  from 
Reille's  Journal  and  the  reports  of  British 
cruising  ships. 

7.  Chart   to    illustrate   the   operations  to   intercept 

AUemand,  with  course  of  Baird's  expedi- 
tion from  the  end  of  August  to  the  middle 
of  October ,,302 


xvi  CHARTS    AND    DIAGRAMS 

8.  Plan   of   Trafalgar  attached    to    the    Report   of 

Captain    Prigny,     Villeneuve's     Chief-of-the 

Staff Jo /ace  i?.  360 

Reduced  from  the  plan  given  by  Desbricre,  Tra- 
fahjar,  Docuvunts  Annexes,  p.  142,  from  the 
original  in  Archiv(s  dc  la  Marine,  BB'*,  237. 

9,  Diagram  to  illustrate  the  intention  of  Colling- 

wood's  signal  for  the  Larboard  line  of  bearing  Page  369 

10.  Diagram  to  show  how  the  Allied  Line  became 

convex   ........  Page  377 

11.  The  Attack  at  Trafalgar.     Position  of  the  com- 

bined   Forces    of    France   and   Spain   at    the 
commencement    of    the     action,     21st     Oct, 

1805 To  face  p.  384 

From  Craig's  Plan.     See  p.  450,  No.  4. 

12.  Sir  Richard  Strachan's  action,  November  4i:h      .         ,,         402 

Reduced  from  the  plan  attached  to  the  Report 
of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir  le  Pelley  as  given 
by  Desbriere,  Trafahjar,  Documents  Annexes, 
p.  308,  from  the  original  in  Archives  de  la 
Marine,  BB^  237. 

13.  Diagram  of  the  Trafalgar  signal  .         .         .  Page  445 

From  the  Signal  Book  of  1816. 


THE     CAMPAIGN     OF 
TRAFALGAR 


CHAPTER   I 

PITT'S  WAR  POLICY 

When,  in  May  1804,  Pitt  returned  to  power  it  was  with  a 
determination  to  conduct  the  lingering  war  on  the  grand 
scale  of  his  father  and  by  his  father's  strenuous  methods. 
Treasured  among  his  papers  of  the  time  is  an  eloquent 
apostrophe  urging  him  to  rise  up  and  take  the  place  that 
had  been  held  by  William  the  Third,  by  Marlborough,  and 
by  his  father :  to  set  himself,  as  they  had  done,  at  the  head 
of  Europe  against  Europe's  great  oppressor,  to  stir  the  faint 
hearts  of  the  Powers  into  united  effort,  and  to  remove  from 
England  the  reproach  that  she  had  not  produced  a  war 
minister  since  the  great  days  of  Chatham. 

The  people,  realising  how  the  country's  strength  had 
grown  with  the  war,  were  looking  to  him  to  give  expression 
to  their  rising  spirit ;  to  teach  them  not  only  how  to  pro- 
tect themselves  from  invasion,  but  how  in  the  consciousness 
of  their  strength  to  strike  down  their  arch-enemy  as  they 
had  been  wont  to  do  in  old  days.  In  this  spirit  he  gathered 
up  the  reins,  and  began  at  once  to  lay  his  widespread  plans 
to  give  the  war  a  new  and  more  worthy  presence. 

Ever  since  we  had  broken  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  our 
attitude,  in  effect,  had  been  one  of  defence.  Napoleon's 
unblushing  contempt  for  his  diplomatic  engagements,  and 
his  unconcealed  belief  that   by  sheer  truculence  he  could 


2  PITT'S   AVAR   POLICY  1803 

force  us  out  of  the  European  system  altogether,  had 
driven  Addington's  peace-loving  Government  to  declare 
war.^  To  wage  it  was  another  thing,  and  it  quickly 
proved  to  be  beyond  their  capacity.  From  the  first 
they  were  dominated  by  the  elaborate  threat  of  invasion 
by  which  Napoleon  seized  the  initiative.  Seeing  how 
weak  was  the  army,  it  paralysed  all  hope  of  offensive 
action  in  Europe,  and  our  confident  enemy  could  make 
merry  over  a  country  that  went  to  war  to  show  that  it 
could  defend  itself 

Such  offensive  operations  as  were  within  their  resources 
had  been  purely  maritime — directed  against  the  sea-borne 
trade  of  France  and  her  minor  colonial  possessions.  At  the 
outbreak  of  hostilities  our  military  strength  in  the  West 
Indies  was  considerable,  for  the  garrisons  which  had  been 
in  occupation  of  the  French  islands  captured  in  the  late 
war  had  not  yet  returned.  These  were  well  employed  in 
retaking  St.  Lucia,  which  had  come  from  long  experience 
to  be  regarded  as  the  key  of  the  naval  position  in  the 
Leeward  Islands.  So  high,  indeed,  did  it  stand  as  a  naval 
position  that  the  question  of  its  retrocession  had  almost 
wrecked  the  peace  which  ended  the  Seven  Years'  War. 
But,  not  content  with  this  legitimate  opening,  the  Govern- 
ment, in  spite  of  the  bitter  lessons  of  the  last  war,  proceeded 
to  occupy  Tobago  and  the  four  Dutch  settlements  of  Deme- 
rara,  Essequibo,  Berbice,  and  Surinam.  All  these  sickly 
stations  required  garrisons,  and  the  result  was  to  demobilise 
a  serious  proportion  of  our  slender  military  force,  and  still 
further  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  a  more  active  policy  at 
home.'^ 

For  these  adventures  Addington  and  his  friends  are 
now  blamed  without  mercy,  but  candour  and  a  reasonable 
knowledge  of  the  political  conditions  should  temper  the 
habitual  attitude  of  superiority  which  their  critics  are  wont 
to  adopt.  To  begin  with,  we  had  in  any  case  no  hope  of 
being  able  to  use  our  army  in  Europe  with  effect  single- 

^  For  the  recent  French  recognition  of  Napoleon's  responsibility  for  the 
renewal  of  the  war,  see  P.  Coquelle,  Napoleon  and  Evyland,  translated  by  G.  D. 
Knox.     1904. 

^  Fortescue,  County  Lieutenants  and  the  Army,  p.  10. 


i8o3  OUTBREAK   OF   THE   WAR  3 

handed,  and  at  that  time  we  were  single-handed.  And  in 
the  second  place,  the  opening  moves  against  the  Dutch 
colonies  were,  in  fact,  a  direct  blow  at  the  object  we  had  in 
view.  The  real  cause  of  the  war,  as  is  now  admitted  on 
both  sides,  was  Napoleon's  shameless  behaviour  to  the 
United  Provinces  in  breach  of  the  Treaty  of  Luneville. 
Before  the  ink  was  Avell  dry  he  had  reduced  Holland  to  the 
condition  of  a  subject-ally  of  France.  His  similar  behaviour 
in  Northern  Italy  and  Switzerland  intensified  the  resentment 
his  breach  of  faith  aroused ;  but  the  virtual  annexation  of 
Holland  was  what  made  a  renewal  of  the  war  inevitable. 
It  touched  our  traditional  policy  to  the  quick.  The  menace 
to  our  position  in  the  Narrow  Seas  was  one  we  had  never 
been  willing  to  endure.  Now  our  reply  was  a  refusal  to 
evacuate  Malta  as  provided  by  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  and 
so  the  war  broke  out  again.  It  was  therefore  a  perfectly 
logical  opening  to  strike  at  the  Dutch  colonies.  It  was  a 
blow  that  could  be  dealt  rapidly,  and  was  well  calculated 
to  teach  any  man  but  Napoleon  the  lesson  he  could  never 
learn.  It  told  him  plainly  that,  if  France  could  find  no 
room  for  England  in  the  councils  of  Europe,  there  would  be 
no  room  for  a  French  empire  beyond  the  seas. 

But  in  political  effect  the  West  Indian  conquests  proved 
of  no  avail,  and  in  the  actual  war  they  counted  for  nothing 
except  in  one  not  unimportant  direction.  The  captured 
islands  were  a  hotbed  of  privateering,  and  privateering  was 
always  the  chief  danger  to  our  sea-borne  commerce.  Long 
experience  had  shown  that  it  could  not  be  dealt  with 
effectually  by  pelagic  operations  alone.  Addington's  policy, 
therefore,  has  at  least  the  justification  not  only  of  having 
dealt  a  direct  blow  at  French  commerce,  and  therefore  at 
her  finance,  but  also  of  having  adopted  the  most  effectual 
method  of  protecting  our  own.  And,  be  it  remembered,  it 
was  the  retention  of  our  financial  position  that  eventually 
enabled  us  to  beat  Napoleon  down ;  it  was  our  sole  hope  of 
securing  allies :  and  furthermore  our  only  possible  means  of 
offence  for  the  moment  was  against  French  sea-borne  com- 
merce. It  was  a  form  of  attack  particularly  embarrassing  to  a 
ruler  like  Napoleon,  whose  chief  aim  in  consenting  to  a  peace 


4  PITT'S   WAR    POLICY  1804 

had  been  to  restore  his  finances  and  his  fleet.  It  is  there- 
fore perhaps  too  narrow  a  judgment  to  condemn  the  West 
Indian  operations  out  of  hand  merely  because  they  seem  to 
sin  against  the  principle  of  concentration,  and  were  a  form 
of  war  which  of  itself  could  never  decide  the  issue.  Where 
a  maritime  empire  is  concerned  caution  is  required  in  apply- 
ing the  simple  formula}  of  continental  strategists.  Oceanic 
and  continental  war  differ  widely  in  some  of  their  cardinal 
conditions.  It  is  not  enough  to  apply  the  maxims  of  the 
one  ^1^  to  the  intricacies  of  the  other,  and  Addington's 
detractors  should  at  least  indicate  in  what  direction  the 
troops  employed  could  have  been  used  more  profitably  than 
in  strengthening  the  position  of  the  navy  and  lightening 
its  burden.^ 

Every  one  was  quick  to  see  that  something  more  drastic 
must  be  done  in  the  future,  and  Pitt  rose  to  power  on  a 
wave  of  opinion  that  the  hour  for  a  change  was  at  hand. 
The  military  forces  at  home  had  considerably  increased. 
We  began  the  war  with  a  home  army  of  little  more  than 
50,000  regulars;  by  the  summer  of  1804  we  had  87,000, 
besides  80,000  militia  and  343,000  volunteers,  or  over  half 
a  million  men.  Pitt's  first  measures  were  directed  to  in- 
creasing the  regular  force  still  further  ;  but  even  so,  offence 
against  such  a  poAver  as  Napoleon's  was  impossible  single- 
handed.  Only  in  alliance  with  the  great  military  states  of 
the  continent  could  his  father's  methods  be  used,  and 
simultaneously  with  the  ripening  of  our  striking  energy 
alliances  came  in  view. 

It  is  here — in  the  negotiations  and  preliminary  action 
for  securing  these  alliances — that  we  find  the  key  of  the 
Trafalgar  campaign.  To  treat  it  as  the  mere  expression 
of  the  old  policy  of  defence  against  invasion,  which  Pitt  had 
resolved  to  abandon,  is  to  seek  for  its  meaning  in  vain. 
Yet  it  is  on  these  lines  the  bulk  of  criticism  runs,  with  the 
result  that  the  real  teaching  has  been  almost  entirely  buried 
in  a  mass  of  erroneous  strategical  deduction.     Through  all 

*  Colonel  Henderson,  when  head  of  the  Staff  College,  used  to  lav  down 
the  rule  that  "  the  first  duty  of  the  J3ritish  army  was  to  assist  the  navy  in 
getting  command  of  the  sea."  And  in  this  case  the  assistance  was  real  and 
enduring. 


iSo4  HIS    ENTENTE   WITH    RUSSIA  5 

this  accumulation  we  must  dig  if  we  would  recover  the 
most  precious  treasure  that  naval  experience  has  ever 
fashioned,  and  the  first  step  towards  recovery  is  to  seek  a 
simple  understanding  of  Pitt's  policy  of  military  alliances. 
When  Napoleon  was  trying  to  browbeat  Addington's  Govern- 
ment over  their  refusal  to  evacuate  Malta — trampling  on 
every  decency  of  international  comity — he  had  openly 
boasted  that  he  had  left  England  without  an  ally  in 
Europe.  She  seemed  to  him  helpless.  In  his  almost 
crazy  self-confidence  he  believed  he  could  prevent  the  old 
causes  producing  the  old  effects  and  tread  underfoot  the 
fundamental  laws  which  had  given  England  her  place  in 
international  politics  ever  since  the  European  system  had 
begun.  Ignored  by  him,  these  laws  began  to  reassert  them- 
selves almost  immediately,  and  even  before  Pitt  came  back 
to  power  Russia  had  already  made  advances.  Convinced  by 
Napoleon's  action  in  Holland,  Italy,  and  Switzerland  that 
he  had  not  abandoned  for  a  moment  his  ambitious  dreams 
of  European  empire,  she  Avas  bent  on  forming  a  defensive 
league  to  thwart  his  design. 

It  was  where  the  danger  touched  her  most  nearly  that 
England  and  England  alone  could  give  effective  help. 
Napoleon  was  known  to  be  cherishing  a  purpose  to  overrun 
the  Ottoman  Empire  by  way  of  Albania  and  Greece,  and  for 
this  reason  Russia  had  maintained  a  small  squadron  and  a 
military  outpost  in  Corfu  and  the  Ionian  Islands.  We  were 
as  deeply  concerned  in  Napoleon's  design.  For  us  Turkey 
was  but  a  step  on  the  path  to  India,  and  for  this  reason 
also  we  had  clung,  in  the  face  of  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  to 
our  hold  on  Malta.  There  was,  moreover,  another  common 
interest  at  stake.  It  lay  in  Southern  Italy,  Avhich  Napoleon 
was  openly  threatening,  and  which  he  seemed  bent  on 
making  the  starting-point  of  his  Near  Eastern  enterprises. 
Russia  had  taken  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  under  her  special 
protection;  and  by  a  tradition  as  old  as  Cromwell,  the 
denying  of  the  Two  Sicilies  to  France  had  become  as 
much  a  dominant  note  of  our  maritime  policy  as  the 
integrity  of  the  Low  Countries  had  been  from  time 
immemorial. 


6  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1804 

Naturally,  then,  the  Russian  overtures  were  well  received 
in  London,  and  just  as  Pitt  came  to  power  Woronzow,  the 
Czar's  ambassador,  was  able  to  say  that  a  large  Russian 
force  from  the  Black  Sea  would  be  sent  to  the  Ionian 
Islands  or  to  Italy  as  circumstances  might  require,  and 
that  the  Czar  hoped  his  Britannic  Majesty  would  order 
a  corps  of  troops  to  be  kept  at  Malta  in  readiness  to  act  in 
conjunction  Avith  those  of  Russia.^ 

It  is  here  we  pick  up  the  thread  that  led  directly  to 
the  decision  at  Trafalgar.  Slender  as  it  proved  to  be,  it  is 
the  only  sure  guide  through  the  labyrinth  of  the  campaign. 
The  splendour  and  tragedy  of  the  great  day  of  reckoning 
had  long  cast  this  guiding  line  into  obscurity.  Yet,  so  far 
as  human  judgment  can  tell,  without  the  entanglement 
it  Aveaved  about  Napoleon  the  most  famous  naval  battle 
in  history  would  not  have  been  fought.  It  was  an 
effort  to  cut  himself  free  from  it  that  cost  Napoleon  his 
fleet ;  and  unless  we  keep  it  securely  between  our  fingers 
we  must  wander  in  error  through  the  thronging  movements 
of  the  year  and  never  reach  their  real  meanmg.  Let  us 
trace  the  spinning  of  it  till  its  strands  were  securely  twined. 

The  idea  that  was  in  the  Czar's  mind  w^as  to  form,  with 
British  assistance  and  above  all  with  British  subsidies,  a 
great  defensive  league  with  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Sweden. 
Whether  all  or  any  of  those  Powers  could  be  induced  to 
join  was  doubtful.  The  formation  of  the  league  must  at 
least  take  much  time,  during  Avhich  Napoleon  might  greatly 
strengthen  his  position.  But  in  any  event  Russia  and 
England  could  act  together  at  once  to  bar  his  advance  in 
the  Mediterranean.  Under  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  he  had 
agreed  to  evacuate  the  Neapolitan  ports  of  Otranto  and 
Taranto,  in  the  south  of  Italy.  But  he  had  now  reoccu- 
pied  them,  and  from  these  points  was  not  only  threatening 
the  Levant  across  the  Adriatic,  but  was  in  a  position  to 
strike  a  sudden  blow  through  Calabria  at  Sicily.  It  was 
vital  to  the  situation  that  any  such  catastrophe  should  be 
prevented;    and    thus    the    idea   of  British   troops  in   the 

'  J.  Holland  Rose,  Schct  Despatches  rdat'auj  to  the  Third  Coalitiun  (Rojal 
Historical  Society,  I'JUi),  p.  ix. 


i8o4  IMPORTANCE    OF    SICILY  7 

Mediterranean  became  as  it  were  the  symbol  and  test  of 
Pitt's  purpose.  When  he  pressed  that  the  league  should 
be  offensive  and  for  immediate  action,  the  Czar  at  once 
reminded,  him  that  with  respect  to  reinforcing  our  garrisons 
in  the  Mediterranean  and  assembling  a  corps  of  troops  to 
act  in  Italy,  Pitt  had  announced  a  delay  of  two  or  three 
months,  not  having  as  yet  sufficient  troops  available  for 
an  expeditionary  force.  Admiral  Sir  John  B.  Warren,  who 
was  then  our  ambassador  in  Russia,  immediately  replied  that 
a  large  part  of  the  garrisons  of  Malta  and  Gibraltar  could 
be  spared  at  once  and  that  the  remainder  of  the  British 
troops  would  soon  follow  if  the  Czar  would  only  propose  to 
enter  into  a  treaty  to  unite  the  Powers  into  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance.^  Within  a  month  Russia  had 
decided  to  send  an  ultimatum  to  Napoleon  demanding  the 
evacuation  of  Apulia,  the  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of 
Italy,  compensation  to  the  King  of  Sardinia  for  what  had 
been  taken  from  him,  and  the  evacuation  of  North  Germany. 
If  there  were  no  satisfactory  answer  in  twenty-four  hours 
his  ambassador  was  to  leave  Paris.'^  Following  on  this 
resolute  step  Pitt  sent  out  Lord  Granville  Leveson-Gower  to 
replace  Warren  in  order  to  negotiate  a  regular  alliance,  and 
the  special  instructions  he  carried  Avere  first  to  clear  up  a 
misunderstanding  that  had  arisen  as  to  the  British  view  of 
Russian  action  in  Italy.  Pitt  wished  the  Russians  at  once 
to  seize  the  passes  leading  into  Calabria  from  Taranto. 
The  Czar  thought  he  was  being  urged  to  drive  the  French 
out  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  single-handed,  and  Leveson- 
Gower  was  to  assure  him  England  knew  that  was  impossible 
till  Austria  joined.  But  if  he  attempted  the  lesser  opera- 
tion two  thousand  troops  from  Malta  w^ere  ready  to  assist 
at  once.  The  immediate  British  object  was  solely  to 
prevent  France  seizing  Sicily  by  a  coup  de  main  through 
Calabria.  For  without  Sicily  as  a  base  of  supply  the 
position  of  our  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean  would  be  very 
difficult  to  maintain. 


1  Warren  to  Harrowbv,  July  24,  1804  :  Eose,  Select  Despatches  relating  to  the 
Third  Coalition  (Eoyal  Historical  Society,  3rd  Series),  vol.  vii.  p.  25. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  32,  August  14. 


8  PITT'S    WAR    POLICY  ,804 

The  words  in  which  these  instructions  were  conveyed 
to  Lcveson-Gower  by  Lord   Harrowby,  who  was  then  Pitt's 
Foreign  Secretary,  are  worth  recording  and  remembering, 
for  in  them  lies  the  exphmation  of  much  naval  strategy,' 
and  in  particular  do  they  afford  the  key  of  Nelson's  attitude 
to  the  Neapolitan  question,  and  the  complex  naval  problem 
which  it  involved.      The  actual  situation  at  our  point  of 
contact   with    Russia    turned   upon   the   command  of    the 
Mediterranean,   and   that  depended   on   Nelson's   power   of 
controlling  the  Toulon  fleet— not  necessarily  of  blockading 
it,  but,  as  he  preferred  to  say,  on  "holding  it  in  check" 
till   it   could   be   met   and  destroyed.     ''It   would  become 
doubtful,"  wrote  Harrowby,  in  directing  Gower  to  insist  on 
the  importance  of  immediate  action,  "  whether  the  blockade 
of  Toulon  could  be  maintained  as  effectually  as  it  has  been 
hitherto  [if  Sicily  were  lost] ;  and  in  case  the  French  fleet 
should  escape  from  that  port   and  be  able  to  detach  any 
considerable  force  to  the  Adriatic,  the  Russian  Government 
would  do  well  to  consider  the  danger  to  which  their  own 
squadron  in  those  seas  would  be  exposed,  and  the  oppor- 
tunity which  would  be   afforded  to  the  French  of  making 
a  successful  attack  upon  Albania  and  the  Morea." 

These  were  exactly  Nelson's  ideas.  He  was  not  of 
course  blockading  Toulon  closely,  but  endeavouring  to  watch 
the  Toulon  fleet  in  such  a  way  that  if  it  attempted  to 
get  to  the  eastward  and  endanger  what  it  was  his  special 
province  to  defend,  it  would  certainly  be  brought  to  action. 
For  this  purpose  Gibraltar  and  Malta  w^ere  of  little  use.  As 
bases  they  were  wrongly  placed.  What  was  wanted  was 
one  that  Avould  enable  him  to  retain  continuously  the  only 
position  that  was  interior  to  either  line  of  operation  the 
French  might  adopt,  whether  westwards  out  of  the  Straits, 
or^  eastwards  agahist  Naples  and  the  Levant.  It  was  for 
this  reason  he  always  insisted  that  Sardinia  and  Sicily  were 
the  keys  of  the  strategical  situation. 

"You  will  receive,"  Harrowby 's  instructions  to  Gower 
went  on,  "  the  assurances  which  were  given  by  me  to  Count 
Woronzow,  that  exertions  would  be  made  to  increase  the 
disposal    force   of   the    garrison   of   Malta:    and   you   may 


i8o4  SARDINIA  9 

express  a  hope  that  a  reinforcement  of  5000  or  6000  men 
will  have  reached  it  in  a  few  months.  These  troops  will 
have  eventual  orders  to  act  in  the  defence  of  Sicily,  of 
Calabria,  or  of  Turkey,  as  circumstances  may  require  .  .  . 
but  it  seems  necessary  that  their  attention  should  be 
specially  directed  to  the  defence  ...  of  Sicily."  ^ 

The  despatch  ended  accordingly  vvdth  a  renewed  sug- 
gestion that  Russian  troops  should  be  sent  at  once  to  co- 
operate with  the  Calabrians,  whom  we  had  been  supplying 
with  arms,  and  to  assist  them  to  hold  the  passes  while  the 
British  troops  from  Malta  occupied  Messina. 

The  new  ambassador  also  received  special  instructions 
to  press  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  Sardinian  Kingdom 
in  Piedmont  as  a  barrier  to  France  in  the  intended  settle- 
ment of  Italy.  The  aggrandisement  of  the  House  of  Savoy, 
as  a  means  of  preserving  the  balance  of  power  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, had  become  a  constant  of  British  policy.  The 
military  importance  of  the  Sardinian  Kingdom  was  recog- 
nised universally,  but  in  British  eyes  its  naval  value  was 
no  less ;  and  ever  since  Nelson  had  been  in  command  in 
the  Mediterranean  he  had  been  pressing  the  strategical 
value  of  Sardinia  on  the  Government.  So  soon  as  the 
new  administration  was  fairly  in  the  saddle  he  had  re- 
ceived orders  frankly  endorsing  his  ideas,  and  on  the  very 
day  Leveson-Gower's  instructions  were  signed,  Nelson  was 
acknowledging  the  Government's  directions  to  have  a  special 
care  for  Sardinia.^ 

The  British  proposal,  which  was  based  on  separate 
lines  of  operation,  did  not  commend  itself  to  the  Russian 
Government.  They  wanted  a  much  larger  force  and  joint 
operations  in  Italy  itself  under  one  commander:  but  in  view  of 
Napoleon's  threat  from  Boulogne,  Leveson-Gower  had  to  say 
that  an  increase  of  the  British  force  in  the  Mediterranean 
was  as  yet  impossible.^     Meanwhile  Pitt  was  devoting  him- 

1  Harrowby  to  Gower,  October  10  :  Rose,  'Third  Coalition,  p.  45. 

2  Nelson  to  Marsden,  October  10,  1804  :  Nicolas,  vi.  227.  See  also  Earl 
Camden  to  Nelson,  August  29  [Ibid.,  p.  228n),  informing  him  that  the  threat 
of  invasion  will  prevent  their  sending  an  expedition  to  the  Mediterranean 
before  winter,  and  that  meanwhile  they  are  despatching  an  officer  to  Sardinia 
to  report. 

^  Leveson-Gower  to  Harrowby,  November  28  :  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  72. 


lo  PITT'S    WAR    POLICY  1804 

self  with  iill  his  energy  to  increasing  our  disposal  force,  and 
was  still  doing  his  utmost  not  only  to  strengthen  the  regular 
army,  but  to  take  measures  to  render  the  home  defence 
secure  in  the  hands  of  the  territorial  forces.^  Russia,  after 
some  demur,  admitted  the  strength  of  the  British  arguments, 
and  on  the  promise  of  8000  troops  in  a  month  or  two,  she 
consented  to  co-operate  at  once  from  Corfu  with  20,000, 
])rovided  the  whole  force  was  commanded  by  a  Russian 
General,  and  that  England  furnished  the  necessary  trans- 
port. To  this  arrangement  the  British  Government  assented, 
and  before  the  end  of  the  year  Sir  James  Craig,  who  had 
been  commanding  the  Essex  defence  district,  was  ordered 
to  prepare  the  necessary  force  for  Malta. 

Concurrently  with  the  arrangement  of  the  military 
convention,  the  negotiations  for  a  regular  alliance  Avere 
proceeding,  but  with  constant  difficulties,  owing  to  the  vacil- 
lating attitude  of  Austria,  and  the  mutual  suspicions  of  all 
the  Powers  concerned.  Russia  could  not  reconcile  herself 
to  England's  retention  of  Malta,  and  England  suspected 
Russia's  real  aim  to  be  the  partition  of  the  Turkish  Empire. 
Austria  was  clearly  more  concerned  with  recovering  the  old 
Hapsburg  possessions  in  North  Italy  than  with  the  libera- 
ation  of  Europe ;  and  as  for  Prussia  she  had  obviously  no 
end  in  view  but  the  filching  of  Hanover.  Even  Sweden 
was  only  prepared  to  move  in  return  for  an  unconscionable 
British  subsidy  that  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  service 
it  was  in  her  power  to  render. 

To  Pitt  the  position  was  galling  in  the  extreme.     For 

1  Amongst  other  measures  that  were  adopted  at  this  time  was  the  erection 
of  the  Martello  Towers  on  the  threatened  coasts,  not  in  a  spirit  of  passive 
defence,  but  in  order  to  set  free  an  effective  striking  force.  Another  was  the 
digging  of  the  Hythe  Military  Canal.  This  work,  which  seemed  to  be  designed 
to  stop  an  army  which  had  crossed  the  Channel,  came  in  for  much  ridicule  by 
the  "  blue  water"  men  of  the  day.  Writing  in  September  1805,  from  Hythe 
to  the  Viceroy  ofilreland,  Charles  Yorke  says  his  regiment  is  "at  work  in  the 
mud  of  a  large  ditch  called  the  Royal  Military  Canal,  which  is  said  to  be 
intended  to  prevent  the  French  penetrating  into  the  country  .  .  .  when  they 
shall  have  crossed  another  ditch  somewhat  wider  and  rather  more  difficult  to 
pass"  (Rt.  Hon.  Charles  Yorke  to  Earl  of  Hardwicke  :  Add.  MSS.  3750G). 
Military  opinion  would  probably  regard  this  criticism  of  the  work  as  super- 
ficial. It  was,  of  course,  intended  to  delay  the  advance  of  a  force  that  had 
landed,  and  give  time  for  the  concentration  of  the  territorial  forces  which 
had  been  arranged,  just  as  the  Martello  Towers  were  intended  to  delay  the 
lauding. 


i8o4  HOME   DEFENCE   SYSTEM  ii 

as  the  winter  came  on  the  situation  of  England  greatly 
improved,  and  gave  promise  of  freeing  her  arms.  Her 
defensive  system,  as  of  old,  was  showing  itself  to  be  im- 
pregnable, and  the  fear  of  invasion  was  giving  way  to  a 
fierce  desire  to  be  revenged  on  the  man  who  had  put  her 
to  so  much  alarm  and  expense. 

The  system  that  had  been  adopted  was  that  which  had 
so  often  proved  its  strength,  and  which  no  trick  or  device 
had  ever  availed  to  break  down.  Facing  the  army  of  in- 
vasion from  the  Texel  to  Havre  was  a  swarm  of  sloops 
and  gun-vessels,  rendering  the  passage  of  Napoleon's  flotilla 
impossible  Avithout  battleship  support.  Our  own  flotilla 
was  strengthened  w^ith  a  small  battle  squadron  sufficient  to 
deal  with  the  Dutch  battle  squadron  in  the  Texel,  or  with 
any  small  division  that  might  escape  the  vigilance  of  our 
squadrons  that  were  blockading  the  enemy's  Atlantic  ports. 
The  whole  was  under  the  command  of  Lord  Keith,  with 
his  headquarters  in  the  Downs,  and  subsidiary  bases  at 
Yarmouth  for  watching  the  Texel  and  at  the  Nore  for 
Dunkirk.  The  general  plan  of  defence  w^as  to  hold  back 
the  bulk  of  the  defence  flotilla  on  our  own  shores  with 
coast-defence  vessels,  or  "  block-ships,"  as  they  were  called, 
as  rallying  points.-^  Small  advanced  cruiser  squadrons 
Avatched  the  French  movements,  and  seized  every  oppor- 
tunity of  striking  at  the  enemy's  flotilla  as  it  tried  to 
concentrate  in  the  ports  of  departure,  Boulogne,  Etaples, 
Wimereux,  and  Ambleteuse.  At  the  Channel  Islands  was 
an  independent  cruiser  squadron,  under  Rear -Admiral 
Saumarez,  effectually  preventing  the  passage  of  transports 
from  that  direction,  and  barring  a  raid  on  the  islands. 
But  it  also  had  the  important  function  of  acting  as  a  link 
between  Keith  and  the  Western  Squadron,  by  which  the 
whole  position  was  covered.^  This  squadron,  which  was  in 
fact  the  main  fleet,  was  under  Cornwallis,  and  was  holding 

1  The  original  arrangement  was  :  Margate  Roads,  1  or  2  of  the  line  ;  Queen's 
Channel,  2;  King's  Channel,  2;  Goldamore  Gate,  1;  Buoy  of  Rough,  "a 
frigate  to  communicate  "  {i.e.  by  semaphore  telegraph)  ;  Hoseley  Bay,  "  a  ship 
of  force."  Eventually  they  were  done  away  with,  and  their  crews  devoted  to 
a  number  of  hired  cruisers. — Admiralty  Sec.  In-letters,  537. 

2  Barham  to  Cornwallis,  August  15  :  CornwaUis  Pcfpcrs,  Hist.  MSS.  Com., 
Various  Collections,  vi.  p.  411. 


12  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1804 

the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  and  blockading  Brest  with 
extension  squadrons  before  Kochefort  and  Ferrol  where  a 
French  division  had  taken  refuge.^ 

In  this  way,  in  accordance  with  long  tradition,  the  fleet 
kept  a  firm  hold  upon  the  invading  army — the  funda- 
mental postulate  of  all  defence  against  oversea  invasion — 
and  nothing  could  shake  it.  Napoleon,  it  is  true,  believed 
— as  others  had  believed  before  him — that  it  might  be 
possible  to  break  that  hold  by  surprise :  by  the  sudden 
intrusion  of  a  battle  squadron  from  a  distance.  Cornwallis, 
he  assumed,  could  easily  be  evaded,  for  he  would  be  held 
fast  to  Brest  by  the  exigencies  of  the  blockade.  This  belief 
was  due  to  a  failure  to  understand  the  function  of  our 
Western  Squadron,  as  Norris  and  Anson  had  laid  it  down 
more  than  half  a  century  before.  Napoleon  regarded  it,  as 
many  do  to  this  day,  as  a  squadron  blockading  Brest, 
whereas  it  was  in  reality  a  squadron  holding  the  approaches 
to  the  Channel  for  all  purposes  of  home  and  trade  defence. 
The  blockade  of  Brest  Avas  incidental,  as  were  the  blockades 
of  Rochefort  and  Ferrol,  and  in  no  circumstances  of 
reasonable  Avar  risk  could  a  serious  hostile  squadron  enter 
or  even  approach  the  Channel  until  the  Western  Squadron 
had  been  brought  to  action  and  defeated.  The  mere  con- 
fronting of  that  squadron  Avith  superior  force  had  been 
found  useless  over  and  over  again.  The  naval  campaigns 
of  1779  and  1782,  in  particular,  had  proved  this  car- 
dinal fact  up  to  the  hilt,  and  French  naval  opinion  had 
grasped  it  almost  as  securely  as  it  was  held  by  our  oaa'u 
Admiralty. 

The  actual  light  in  which  the  situation  was  regarded 
by  the  British  Government  is  clearly  seen  in  the  instruc- 
tions Avhich  Lord  Melville,  Pitt's  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
issued  to  Cornwallis,  when  in  August  1804  he  returned 
from  his  leave  to  the  command  of  the  Western  Squadron. 
At  the  end  of  July  he  had  come  ashore  for  a  rest  from  the 
strain  of  the  blockade,  leaving  his  second,  Sir  Charles  Cotton, 

'  Pitt  had  offered  this  command  to  Lord  St.  Vincent,  "which,"  he  says, 
♦'  I  spurned  at,  unless  Mr.  Pitt  unsaid  all  he  had  said  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons against  me." — Cornwallis  Papers,  ibid.,  p.  418. 


i8o4  THE   WESTERN   SQUADRON  13 

in  command.  It  was  only  for  two  or  three  weeks.  The  in- 
vasion crisis  appeared  to  be  at  hand,  and  so  fully  did  he 
possess  the  confidence  of  the  Admiralty  and  the  country 
that  neither  could  be  easy  in  his  absence.^  Throughout  his 
leave,  Melville  was  in  constant  communication  with  him,  and 
the  instructions  of  August  24th  were  the  outcome. 

After  reciting  that  the  intelligence  indicated  immediate 
action  by  the  Brest  Squadron,  the  instructions  pointed  out 
that  it  might  take  one  of  two  directions.  The  determining 
factor  would  be,  whether  or  not  the  squadron  sailed  with 
a  landing  force.  If  it  did  not,  it  would  mean  that  its 
object  was  to  cover  an  invasion  by  the  Grand  Army. 
"  This,"  the  instructions  say,  ''  seems  a  very  desperate  at- 
tempt, and  is  likely  to  terminate  in  the  destruction  of  their 
fleet,  if  they  should  be  able  by  any  unforeseen  events  to 
elude  your  vigilance,  and  thereby  to  make  their  way  up 
Channel."  So  disastrous  had  been  every  previous  attempt 
of  this  kind  that  the  Admiralty  did  not  think  a  repetition 
likely.^  "  But,"  they  continue,  "  if  the  existing  Government 
of  France  is  determined  to  risk  everything  in  this  long- 
menaced  attempt  against  this  country,  we  are  not  at  liberty 
to  calculate  solely  on  what  is  rational  or  probable,  but  we 
must  likewise  keep  in  view  such  contingencies  as  may  be 
barely  possible,  and  such  as  passion  and  intemperance  may 
give  rise  to."  Cornwallis  was  therefore  to  keep  up  the 
closest  possible  blockade  of  the  enemy,  and  to  take  measures 
so  that  if  by  luck  they  escaped,  he  could  follow  and  destroy 
them.  He  was  further  warned  that  if  their  real  intention 
was  to  enter  the  Channel  and  cover  the  passage  of  the 
Grand  Army,  they  would  use  any  means  in  their  power  to 
mislead  him.  Thus  accurately  did  the  Government  pene- 
trate the  inmost  thoughts  of  Napoleon,  for  it  was  precisely 
on  this  possibility  of  misleading  Cornwallis  that  his  scheme 
was  based. 

The  various  possibilities  of  the  case  were  met  in  the 

1  Melville  to  Cornwallis,  July  29,  1804 :  Blockade  of  Brest  (Navy  Record 
Soc),  ii.  38. 

-  The  leading  cases  were  the  Armada  in  1588,  and  the  French  attempt  to 
invade  from  Dunkirk  in  1744.  In  both  cases  the  intruding  fleet  was  only 
saved  from  destruction  by  the  weather  and  a  sauve  qui  pent. 


14  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  ,804 

following  manner.  If  the  whole  squadron  escaped  and  Corn- 
wallis  lost  touch,  he  was  to  proceed  off  the  Lizard  where  he 
would  be  certain  to  hear  if  it  had  passed  up  Channel.  If 
it  had  not  done  so,  he  was  to  take  station  off  Cape  Clear,  or 
such  other  point  on  the  Irish  coast  he  thought  advisable. 

If  only  a  section  of  it  put  to  sea  and  it  carried  troops, 
its  objective  would  be  Ireland,  and  he  was  to  detach  an 
equal  force  to  act  as  before  explained.  If  such  a  detach- 
ment sailed  to  the  southward  and  without  troops,  the  object 
Av^ould  probably  be  a  junction  with  the  Mediterranean  fleet. 
If  the  detachment  was  no  more  than  five  or  six  ships  with 
troops,  the  objective  would  be  in  the  West  Indies,  and  he 
was  to  detach  thither  an  equivalent  force. 

He  was  also  to  consider  the  possibility  that  the  saihng 
of  the  whole,  or  the  greater  part  of  the  squadron,  might 
mean  raising  the  blockades  of  Rochofort  and  Ferrol.  He 
Avas  to  deal  with  such  a  movement  by  directing  the  two 
Admirals  concerned  "  to  form  a  junction  with  their  two 
squadrons  on  the  north  coast  of  Spain,  or  elsewhere ; "  and 
he  was  to  give  them  a  rendezvous  for  that  purpose.  He 
was  also  to  arrange  for  his  cruisers  to  bring  them  timely 
warning,  and  for  reinforcing  them  from  his  own  fleet  to  the 
extent  the  strength  of  the  escaping  force  might  demand. 
If  either  Admiral  was  forced  by  the  appearance  of  a  superior 
enemy  to  raise  his  blockade,  he  was  to  join  the  other,  and 
they  were  to  wait  in  company  for  the  reinforcement.  Direc- 
tions follow  for  the  general  manner  in  which  the  blockade 
of  Brest  is  to  be  conducted,  but  in  spite  of  their  minute- 
ness they  conclude  with  a  saving  clause,  by  which  it  was 
sought  to  hit  the  mean  between  tying  an  Admiral  to  the 
main  lines  of  the  plan  of  campaign  and  leaving  him  a  free 
hand.  "  We  are  aware,"  it  runs,  "  that  many  circumstances 
may  occur  to  which  these  instructions  are  inapplicable,  and 
for  which  no  provision  is  made.  In  these  cases  you  must 
use  your  discretion  and  judgment  for  your  guidance,  giving 
us  the  earliest  information  of  your  proceedings  through  our 
Secretary."  ^ 

1  Draft,  "Instructions  to  Admiral  Cornwallis  :  Secret,  Aug.  24,  1804," 
signed  by  Melville,  Garabier,  and  Colpoys. — Barhavi  Papers.  For  Cornwallis's 
own  precis  of  the  long  document,  see  Blockade  uf  Brest,  ii.  48. 


i8o4 


INVASION   ABANDONED 


IS 


These  sagacious  and  comprehensive  instructions  cannot, 
of  course,  be  regarded  as  purely  the  work  of  Lord  Melville. 
They  were  almost  certainly  settled  in  concert  with  Corn- 
wallis  while  he  was  ashore,  and  they  reflect  not  only  his 
views,  but  probably  also  those  of  Sir  Charles  Middleton, 
who,  as  Lord  Barham,  was  to  be  the  ultimate  director  of 
the  campaign,  and  who,  as  we  shall  see,  was  even  at  this 
time  unofficially  the  confidential  adviser  of  the  First  Lord. 
They  therefore  may  be  taken  as  the  highest  expression  of 
the  living  strategical  tradition  as  it  existed  after  the  great 
maritime  wars  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  as  such  they 
deserve  the  most  deferential  study.  Over  and  above  the 
strategical  exposition,  it  will  be  observed  that  they  afford  a 
characteristic  example  of  the  extent  to  which  the  Admiralty 
was  accustomed  to  control  the  action  of  Admirals  in  home 
waters,  and  that  they  also  reveal  how  little  the  Board 
regarded  the  invasion  as  a  serious  danger. 

How  far  Napoleon  ever  realised  the  impracticability  of 
his  scheme  must  remain  doubtful.  Sometimes  he  said  he 
had  never  intended  it  seriously;  at  others,  that  he  only 
failed  by  bad  luck  and  the  incompetence  of  his  Admirals. 
All  that  we  can  assert  with  safety  is  that  no  great  master 
of  war  ever  so  fatally  miscalculated  the  possibilities  and 
limitations  of  invasion ;  and  no  great  administrator  ever 
failed  so  completely  in  organisation  as  Napoleon  did  with 
the  arrangements  for  passing  the  sea  with  his  Grand  Army. 
Nothing,  not   even  the  army  itself,  was  ever  ready.^     So 


^  The  final  return  of  the  state  of  the  Grand  Army  on  the  coasts,  and  its 
flotilla  (Aug.  1-15)  was  as  follows: — 


Ports. 

Flotilla. 

State  of  Army 

Units. 

Capacity. 

Keady. 

Etaples  .... 
Boulogne 
Wimereux 
Ambleteuse    . 

365 

1153 

237 

173 

Men. 
27,000 
73,000 
16,000 
15,000 

Horses. 

1390 

3380 

769 

673 

Men. 
20,000 
45,000 
13,000 
15,000 

Horses. 
1200 
1500 

131,000 

6212 

93,000 

1700 

-Desbri^re,  Projets  et  Tentntives  de  debnrquement  anx  lies  Britanniques,  v.  465. 


1 6  PITT'S  WAR   POLICY  ,804 

glaring,  indeed,  was  the  breakdown,  that  wherever  the 
Napoleonic  legend  is  still  unsullied,  the  only  admissible 
explanation  of  the  astounding  confusion  in  which  the 
arrangements  sank  ever  more  deeply  is  that  so  great  a 
captain  can  never  have  intended  the  operation  seriously. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  as  the  autumn  came  on,  and  Napo- 
leon began  to  feel  the  toils  that  Pitt  and  the  Czar  were 
weaving  round  him,  he  let  go,  and  was  absorbed  in  making 
himself  Emperor.  For  the  winter  at  least  the  whole  pro- 
ject was  abandoned.  Large  sections  of  the  flotilla  were 
dismantled,  the  ports  of  departure  were  neglected,  and  the 
Channel  sands  began  rapidly  to  devour  the  millions  they 
had  cost  to  make.  After  eighteen  months  of  undisturbed 
effort,  with  a  century  of  experience  behind  him,  he  had 
failed  to  solve  even  the  initial  problem  of  the  operation; 
and  to  save  his  face  before  his  disappointed  country  and 
demoralised  army  he  faced  about  against  Austria. 

Under  pressure  from  the  Czar,  her  attitude  to  France 
was  stiffening.  She  was  even  beginning  to  mass  troops 
and  form  magazines  at  the  head  of  the  Adriatic  and  in 
the  Tyrol,  with  intent  to  strike  directly  at  the  possessions 
Napoleon  had  seized  in  Northern  Italy ;  and  as  the  negotia- 
tions between  England  and  Russia  drew  to  a  head,  it  looked 
as  though  she  had  definitely  made  up  her  mind  to  join  the 
League.  In  Napoleon's  eyes,  at  least,  the  outlook  was  too 
dangerous  to  be  ignored.  He  was  not  prepared  to  face  a 
continental  coalition  in  British  pay.  To  keep  up  the 
threat  of  a  great  invasion,  Avhich  hitherto  had  served  his 
turn  so  well,  was  no  longer  possible,  yet  by  hook  or  by 
crook  England  must  be  kept  quiet.  The  means,  as  he 
thought,  were  ready  to  his  hand.  Spain,  as  always,  must 
be  the  tool  of  French  ambition.  Terrorised  into  openino- 
her  ports  to  French  ships,  she  had  for  long  worn  her  neu- 
trality to  shreds.  A  Httle  increase  of  pressure  would  be 
enough  to  make  her  throw  off  the  rags  and  appear  in  arms 
at  Napoleon's  side.  The  pressure  was  applied,  and  with 
the  normal  result.  Pitt  snatched  up  the  time-honoured 
weapon  Avhich  his  father  had  not  been  permitted  to  employ. 
A  blow  at  the  rich  treasure  trade  of  Spain  before  declara- 


i8o4  SPAIN   DECLARES   WAR  17 

tion  of  war  liad  been  our  regular  procedure  in  like 
circumstances  ever  since  Drake  set  out  to  strike  it  in  1585, 
and  failed,  "  the  reason  best  known  to  God."  Again  and 
again  it  had  been  used,  though  seldom  with  success,  and 
yet  we  never  tired.  Before  September  was  out,  orders  were 
speeding  to  Nelson  in  the  Mediterranean  and  Cochrane 
before  Ferrol  to  seize  the  home-coming  galleons  of  Monte- 
video. A  new  squadron  also — of  which  came  much  heart- 
burning— was  formed  under  Sir  John  Orde  to  blockade 
Cadiz  and  the  Andalusian  coast ;  and  in  November,  Com- 
modore Moore,  in  command  of  a  special  cruiser  squadron, 
had  seized  four  treasure  galleons.  Spain  immediately  de- 
clared war,  and  Napoleon's  new  plan  took  shape. 

Spain's  declaration  meant  for  him  nominally  an  increase 
of  his  fleet  by  thirty-two  of  the  line.  It  represented  with 
the  Dutch  a  three-power  coalition,  to  which  our  navy  as  it 
stood  was  barely  superior.  But  Pitt's  prompt  action  had 
caught  Spain  unawares  and  unready,  and  the  utmost  Napo- 
leon could  hope  was  that  she  might  have  some  twenty-five 
of  the  line  fit  for  action  by  the  spring  of  1805.  Till  then 
he  must  do  the  best  he  could  Avith  his  own.  Action  of 
some  kiad  was  imperative  in  order  to  divert  the  attention 
of  the  British  fleet  from  his  coasts.  He  could  even  hope  to 
provoke  in  England  an  outcry  for  peace ;  for  well  within  his 
power  was  a  counterstroke  at  her  colonies.  Thus  originated 
that  famous  movement  to  the  West  Indies — not  with  any 
idea  of  a  crushing  return  upon  the  Channel,  but  simply  in  a 
desperate  effort  to  shatter  Pitt's  position  and  to  get  the  British 
fleet  off  his  back,  while  he  faced  the  threatened  coalition. 

In  the  plan  of  operation  which  he  had  just  abandoned 
it  had  been  the  part  of  the  Toulon  squadron  to  evade 
Nelson,  take  a  wide  sweep  round  Cochrane  at  Ferrol,  release 
the  Rochefort  squadron,  and,  thus  reinforced,  to  take  an- 
other wide  sweep  round  Cornwallis  at  Brest  and  rush  the 
Channel.  Under  the  new  scheme  for  colonial  attack,  the 
Toulon  and  Rochefort  squadrons  Avere  to  sail  independently 
Avith  a  force  of  troops  to  the  West  Indies.  There  they  Avere 
to  recapture  the  Dutch  islands,  reinforce  the  French,  take 
all  they  could  from  the  British,  and  then  return  together  in 

B 


1 8  PITT'S    WAR   POLICY  1804 

the  spring  to  fall  upon  Cochrane,  bring  out  the  Ferrol 
squadron,  and  proceed  to  a  French  port.  At  the  same  time 
Ganteaume  at  Brest  had  orders  to  embark  a  third  military 
force,  and  seizing  the  first  opportunity  of  getting  out,  to 
operate  a  descent  on  Ireland  and  then  to  carry  on  north- 
about  and  liberate  Marmont's  corps  in  the  Texel. 

It  is  always  difficult  to  say  with  confidence  what 
Napoleon  really  intended  by  the  tangle  of  schemes  he 
spun.  Knowing  himself  to  be  surrounded  by  traitors — 
even  at  his  Council  table — his  only  resource  was  to  manu- 
facture plans  for  their  benefit  Avhich  he  never  intended 
to  use.  In  this  case  there  can  be  little  doubt,  from  all 
the  circumstances,  that  Ganteaume's  orders  were  intended 
for  British  spies  in  order  to  keep  alive  the  threat  upon 
the  points  where  we  were  most  sensitive ;  while  those  of 
Villeneuve  and  Missiessy  with  the  Toulon  and  Rochefort 
squadrons  were  genuine.  The  idea  is  obvious.  While  a 
bare  threat  on  Ireland  or  Scotland  was  sufficient  for  his 
purpose,  nothing  short  of  a  real  attack  on  the  distant  West 
Indies  would  avail  to  deflect  British  strategy.  The  whole 
was  clearly  a  plan  to  take  the  place  of  his  abortive  invasion. 
It  was  designed  to  embarrass  the  British  Cabinet  and  prevent 
them  using  their  fleet  and  army  together  against  him 
in  Europe  while  he  was  cutting  Austria  out  of  the  half- 
formed  coalition. 

What  he  saw  beyond  the  point  at  which  in  the  spring 
he  would  have  the  three  squadrons  concentrated  in  a  home 
port  we  cannot  tell.  Probably  he  saw  nothing  clearly. 
He  was  too  great  a  captain  not  to  know  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  plan  beyond  the  shock  with  Austria.  The 
rest  must  depend  upon  the  issue.  In  all  probability  his 
sole  idea  was  to  have  his  Avhole  war  strength  under  his 
hand  for  what  was  to  come  after.  It  may  be  also  that  he 
was  beginning  at  last  to  learn  the  truth,  Avhich  all  his 
predecessors  had  reached  by  painful  experience,  that  there 
was  no  way  of  striking  England  down  except  by  a  fair  and 
successful  fight  for  the  command  of  the  sea ;  and  for  this, 
with  Spain  ready  in  the  spring,  he  could  indulge  at  least 
a  hope. 


i8o5  NAPOLEON   SUGGESTS   PEACE  19 

His  faith  in  the  steps  he  had  taken  for  intimidating 
England  is  evidenced  by  his  next  move.  At  the  end  of  the 
year  urgent  orders  went  down  to  Villeneuve  and  Missiessy 
to  get  away  at  once,  and  no  sooner  were  the  couriers  gone 
than  he  made  overtures  to  George  the  Third  for  peace,  and 
sent  to  Vienna  a  rough  demand  for  an  explanation  of  the 
Austrian  military  movements.  While  he  waited  for  the 
answers  he  explained  his  whole  attitude  formally  to  his  new 
Council  of  State.  By  the  universal  testimony  of  his  rela- 
tions, his  most  intimate  friends,  and  his  most  capable  and 
best-informed  enemies,  he  at  this  time  believed  he  had 
escaped  gracefully  from  having  to  attempt  the  invasion 
of  England.  No  one  who  aspired  to  rule  France  could 
aftbrd  to  ignore  the  old  war-cry  of  the  Republic — l)e- 
lenda  est  Carthago !  Austria  it  seemed  was  about  to  give 
him  a  pretext  for  escape  without  loss  of  prestige,  but 
he  had  to  justify  to  his  Council  the  terrible  cost  which 
his  pose  had  involved.  "  For  two  years,"  he  said,  "  France 
has  been  making  the  greatest  sacrifices  that  it  is  possible 
to  ask  of  her.  .  .  .  But  to  be  able  to  assemble  such 
forces,  to  have  20,000  artillery  horses  and  full  equipment 
it  was  necessary  to  find  a  pretext  for  creating  and  con- 
centrating them  without  giving  the  continental  Powers 
cause  of  alarm :  and  this  pretext  was  furnished  by  the 
project  of  a  descent  on  England.  .  .  .  For  two  years  I 
have  not  been  able  to  tell  you  this,  but  that  nevertheless 
was  my  sole  aim.  You  know  it  now  and  you  see  the 
explanation  of  many  things.  But  we  shall  not  have  war, 
and  I  have  just  opened  direct  negotiations  with  the  King  of 
England  for  a  treaty  of  peace."  ^ 

He  had  scarcely  made  this  remarkable  declaration  when 
the  British  answer  came.  His  new  title  of  Emperor  was 
still  unfledged,  and  all  his  vanity  was  concentrated  in 
getting  it  recognised.  The  British  answer  was  addressed 
to  "  The  Head  of  the  French  Government "  ;  it  was  signed 
not  by  the  King  but  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  it  con- 

1  The  authority  for  this  is  the  Mcmoires  de  Miot  de  Melito,  ii.  244,  which 
the  French  Staff  accept  as  trustworthy.  See  for  this  and  an  admirable 
summary  of  the  whole  situation,  Desbri^re,  Projets  tt  Tentatives  de  debar- 
qicement,  iv.  336  et  seq. 


20  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 

taincd  a  curt  refusal  to  treat  apart  from  the  other  Powers 
and  especially  Russia.  It  was  an  answer  that  could  only 
arouse  all  that  was  ugly  in  Napoleon's  character;  and 
to  make  matters  worse,  it  was  followed  immediately 
by  a  peaceful  note  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  which 
snatched  from  his  hands  every  pretext  for  attack.  In  the 
moment  of  his  anger  he  found  himself  rudely  thrust  back 
upon  his  desperate  enterprise — with  his  fleet  dispersed  and 
irrevocably  engaged  beyond  the  Atlantic,  with  his  army 
sullen  and  demoralised,  his  Channel  ports  choked  with  sand, 
and  his  flotilla  demobilised.  His  prestige  and  honour  were 
more  than  ever  bound  up  in  the  invasion,  and  the  means  at 
his  disposal  lay  in  more  bewildering  confusion.  This  and 
not  escape  was  all  his  confident  truculence  had  earned 
him,  and  there  was  nothing  left  but  to  pretend  at  least  he 
meant  to  go  on  with  it,  Avith  half  the  costly  work  to  do 
over  again. 

Pitt's  rough  and  even  insolent  reply,  which  is  almost 
universally  condemned,  Avas  exactly  on  a  level  Avith  the  Avay 
his  father  had  dealt  Avith  Choiseul,  and  aa'ouM  have  dealt 
AA^th  Spain.  In  both  cases  transparent  chicanery  Avas  met 
Avith  an  almost  brutal  bluntness.  Knowing  Avhat  avc  do 
and  Avhat  Pitt  knew.  Englishmen  Avill  easily  pardon  it. 
They  Avill  see  in  it  the  reflection  of  the  rising  spirit  of  the 
nation,  the  confidence  in  its  increasing  poAver,  the  high 
belief  in  its  mission  to  awaken  Europe,  and  the  conviction, 
henceforth  unshaken  till  the  end,  that  there  Avas  no  Avay 
of  restoring  tranquillity  and  freedom  to  the  Continent  till 
Napoleon  Avas  crushed  by  force  of  arms. 

The  situation  Avas  ripe  for  a  determined  stand,  and 
negotiations  for  the  league  had  proceeded  so  far  that  in 
loyalty  Ave  could  no  longer  act  alone.  On  November  6  th  a 
defensive  alliance  had  been  concluded  betAveen  Russia  and 
Austria  in  case  of  any  further  French  advances  in  Germany, 
Italy,  or  the  East,  and  both  poAvers  Avere  arming  to  give  it 
effect.  Prussia  Avas  still  holding  back  in  hope  of  securing 
Hanover  as  the  price  of  deserting  the  cause  of  Europe ;  but 
Sweden  had  consented  to  place  England  in  possession  of 
Riigen  and  Stralsund,  so  as  to  give  her  a  sea  base  for  oper- 


iSos  THE    MALTA   QUESTION  21 

ating  in  that  direction  in  concert  with  Russia.  The  Anglo - 
Russian  negotiations,  moreover,  had  made  so  much  progress 
that  the  main  terms  of  the  alliance  were  agreed  between 
Pitt  and  Woronzow  in  London ;  and,  simultaneously  with 
the  harsh  rebuff  to  Napoleon's  overtures,  a  formal  jprojet 
cValliance  was  forwarded  to  Leveson-Gower  in  St.  Petersburg.^ 

The  progress  of  the  negotiations,  however,  was  not  un- 
chequered.  Craig's  expedition  continued  to  be  for  Russia 
the  test  of  England's  inclination  and  ability  to  carry  out  her 
part  of  the  proposed  bargain,  the  pledge  that  she  was  not 
playing  the  merely  selfish  part  of  turning  Napoleon's  efforts 
away  from  her  own  frontiers.  A  renewal  of  the  British 
suggestion  that  troops  from  Malta  should  occupy  Messina 
while  the  Russians  operated  in  South  Italy,  had  been  received 
with  grave  suspicion  ;  but  on  England's  promising  frankly  to 
let  her  troops  act  under  a  Russian  General  in  any  part  of 
Southern  Italy  the  clouds  were  cleared.  There  still  remained, 
however,  the  question  of  our  retention  of  Malta  when  the 
final  re-settlement  should  come.  It  was  a  point  upon 
which,  unfortunately,  it  was  impossible  for  England  to  give 
way.  It  was  for  Malta  she  had  gone  to  war.  With  the 
Far  East  looming  larger  and  larger  in  her  idea  of  empire 
and  the  discovery  of  Napoleon's  designs  on  the  Ottoman 
dominions,  Malta  had  become  the  keystone  of  her  policy  as 
rigidly  as  Gibraltar  had  been  to  William  the  Third. 

On  this  point  the  whole  affair  came  near  to  wreck.  In 
the  British  2'^'^oj^i  ^'^^  draft  treaty  nothing  had  been  said 
about  Malta  at  all.  But  in  St.  Petersburg,  where  simul- 
taneous negotiations  were  going  on,  the  Czar  by  withholding 
his  ratification  endeavoured  to  force  Leveson-Gower  to  admit 
a  separate  article  on  the  point.  The  Czar's  idea  was  to  use 
the  whole  treaty  as  a  means  of  forcing  Napoleon  by  way  of 
armed  mediation  to  submit  to  the  arrangement  of  Europe 
at  which  the  treaty  was  aimed.  Obviously  if  the  British 
Government  insisted  on  the  retention  of  Malta  the  proposed 
mediation  must  fail.  He  therefore  demanded  that  Ensf- 
land  should  agree  to  evacuate  the  island  if  Napoleon  insisted 
on  it  as  a  condition  of  a  general  peace.     Leveson-Gower, 

^  Eose,  Third  Coalition^  p.  90. 


2  2  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 

who  had  strict  instnictions  on  the  point,  firmly  refused  to 
admit  the  addition.  The  Czar  could  not  beheve  that  Pitt, 
his  new  idol,  could  share  the  obstinacy  of  his  envoy.  He 
therefore  referred  the  treaty  back  to  London,  with  a  positive 
declaration  that  unless  the  proposed  terms  were  inserted 
he  would  decline  to  ratify.  Pitt  -vvas  aghast.  There  were 
other  modifications  on  which  he  was  prepared  to  give  way, 
but  on  the  question  of  Malta  he  would  not  budge.  In  his 
eyes  it  was  the  keystone  of  the  whole  fabric.  Relations, 
therefore,  became  strained  to  breaking-point.  To  all  the 
entreaties  and  protests  of  Woronzow,  Pitt  replied  that  France 
was  always  one  of  the  greatest  military  powers  that  had 
ever  been ;  her  dominion  already  stretched  from  Cadiz  to 
Civita  Vecchia,  and  she  was  doing  her  utmost  to  make  the 
Mediterranean  a  French  sea.  Nor  was  that  all.  The 
French  meant  to  conquer  the  w^hole  Ottoman  Empire,  and 
hoped  to  thrust  the  English  out  of  India.  The  liberty  of 
the  Mediterranean  and  the  independence  of  the  Levant  and 
Egypt  demanded  our  retention  of  Malta.  In  a  word,  the 
security  of  Southern  Italy,  of  the  Ionian  Islands,  and  of  all 
the  possessions  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  were  bound  up  in 
England's  being  firmly  set  in  the  stronghold  of  the  old 
Naval  Knights.  Woronzow  was  unmoved.  Persistence  in 
the  demand,  he  said,  would  break  the  alliance  which  had 
just  been  agreed  for  the  salvation  of  Europe.  "  It  will  not 
save  Europe,"  Pitt  broke  in.  "  The  Mediterranean,  the 
Levant,  and  Egypt,  will  be  in  the  power  of  France  the 
moment  a  British  squadron  ceases  to  have  for  a  base  a  good 
port  protected  by  formidable  fortifications.  .  .  .  So,"  he 
concluded,  "  whatever  pain  it  causes  us,  and  it  is  indeed 
great,  we  must  give  up  the  hope  of  seeing  the  alliance 
ratified,  since  its  express  condition  is  our  renunciation  of 
Malta.  We  will  continue  the  war  alone;  it  ^vill  be 
maritime."^ 

Here  we  have  a  clear  exposition  from  Pitt's  own  lips  of 
the  lines  upon  Avhich  he  hoped  to  fight  the  Trafalgar  cam- 
paign and  the  objects  it  w^as  to  achieve.     The  war  hence- 

^  De  Martens,  Rccucil  dcs  Traites,  vol.  ii.  pp.  110-111.     For  the  whole 
negotiation,  see  ibid.,  pp.  75  et  seq. 


i8o5  HE    INSISTS   ON   MALTA  23 

forth  was  to  be  for  the  freedom  of  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  riparian  PoAvers,  and  it  was  to  be  no  longer  a  mere 
maritime  Avar,  but  a  war  by  land  as  well.  WoronzoAv  was 
as  firmly  persuaded  as  Pitt  that  Malta  Avas  a  necessity  to 
the  British  Empire  ;  and  Lord  Mulgrave,  who  had  succeeded 
Lord  Harrowby  as  Secretary  of  State,  could  press  the  point 
Avith  a  clear  conscience  in  the  interest  of  Europe.  The  Czar 
would  have  had  the  Knights  of  Malta  restored,  but  Mulgrave 
pointed  out  that  the  sole  reason  Avhy  Charles  the  Fifth  had 
established  them  in  the  island  Avas  to  protect  Christendom 
against  its  common  enemy.  This  they  had  no  longer  the 
poAver  to  do.  Great  Britain,  as  the  leading  naval  poAver 
Avith  no  territorial  ambitions  on  the  Mediterranean  shores, 
Avas  their  legitimate  successor ;  for  it  was  only  as  a  British 
port  and  arsenal  that  Malta  could  hope  to  check  in  that 
quarter  the  progress  of  the  present  common  enemy  of  Europe. 
"  His  Majesty,"  Mulgrave  concluded,  "  in  reserving  to  him- 
self the  possession  of  Malta,  consults  the  interests  of  Europe 
in  common  AAdth  his  oAvn  by  the  retention  of  this  only 
exception  to  the  national  sacrifices  which  accompany  his 
Majesty's  great  and  almost  unlimited  exertions  in  the 
common  cause."  Considering  not  only  Avhat  the  other 
PoAvers  Avere  expecting  for  their  reward,  but  hoAv  long 
England  had  been  bearing  the  burden  alone,  and  that  she 
was  agreeing  to  subsidise  half  Europe,  the  price  she  asked 
can  scarcely  be  called  excessive.^ 

Such,  broadly  speaking,  Avas  the  strained  diplomatic 
situation  A\^hen  Napoleon  and  Pitt  each  developed  the  open- 
ing moves  of  their  respective  plans  of  campaign.  The  day 
the  treaty  Avas  signed  Villeneuve  Avas  leaving  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  a  Aveek  later  Craig  sailed  to  all  appearance 
straight  into  his  arms. 

For  months  longer  the  uncertainty  continued,  and  some 
understanding  of  the  complexities  which  the  delay  in  the 
ratification  entailed  is  necessary  for  any  profitable  study  of 
the  campaign.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  real  misunder- 
standing.    The  Czar  had  set  his  heart  both  on  our  evacua- 

1  For  the  whole  of  Mulgrave's  despatch,  which  defines  exactly  the  British 
attitude  as  it  affected  Pitt's  war-plan,  see  post,  Ajipcndix  A,  p.  425. 


2  4  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 

tion  of  Malta  and  the  reform  of  our  Maritime  War  Code,  and 
each  condition  he  personally  regarded  as  a  sine  qua  non  of 
the  alliance.  In  particular,  Pitt's  continued  insistence  on 
the  retention  of  Malta  only  confirmed  his  doubts  as  to 
England's  disinterestedness.  To  our  ambassador's  protesta- 
tions of  sincerity  he  kept  pointing  to  the  delay  in  the  sail- 
ing of  Craig's  expedition.  But  at  last  news  came  that  it 
was  actually  on  its  Avay  in  the  full  strength  that  had  been 
promised,  and  with  instructions  that  were  entirely  satis- 
factory. The  unratified  alliance  was  thus  partly  performed, 
and  the  Czar's  position  became  more  difficult  to  hold.  All 
he  could  now  ask  was  that  Craig  should  not  actually 
commence  any  operations  in  Italy  till  he  had  concerted 
measures  with  General  Lacy,  Avho  had  been  appointed  to 
the  supreme  command  at  Naples.^  This,  too,  was  agreed. 
Pitt  moreover  ratified  the  whole  treaty,  Avith  the  exception 
of  the  added  clause  about  Malta,  and  on  this  he  even  gave 
way  a  little.  He  was  ready,  if  the  peace  of  Europe  were 
found  to  depend  on  it,  to  evacuate  the  island  on  certain 
conditions,  one  of  which  was  that  Minorca  should  be  ceded 
to  England  in  its  stead.  But  this  concession  was  only  to 
stand  if  Napoleon  accepted  the  terms  of  the  allies  at  once 
and  peacefully.  As  the  result  of  successful  war,  England 
would  still  insist  on  the  retention  of  Malta.  The  Czar  was 
not  immediately  convinced.  Still  he  fought  for  his  own 
dream  and  the  reform  of  the  British  Maritime  Code,  and 
eventually  it  was  not  till  July — by  a  most  unhappy  delay — 
that  his  hesitation  ended  and  the  ratification  w^as  signed." 

In  proceeding  Avith  the  study  of  the  campaign  it  must, 
therefore,  be  kept  firmly  in  mind  that  at  its  outset  the 
dominant  factor  in  the  war  was  still  undetermined.  No 
design  or  act  of  statesmen  or  of  high  officers  must  be  judged 
apart  from  this  controlling  deflection.  Neither  Pitt  nor  the 
Admiralty  could  tell  whether  to  design  the  campaign  as  a 

^  He  was  an  officer  of  Irish  extraction.  He  signed  his  name  "  Lacy." 
(See  his  letter  of  July  8th,  enclosed  in  Elliot's  despatch  of  August  9th,  F.  0. 
Sicily,  25.)     Foreigners  spelt  it  "  Lasci "  or  "  Lascy." 

-  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  pp.  110,  143,  151.  Pitt's  views  on  the  military 
situation  as  it  stood  without  Prussia,  and  his  ideas  as  to  how  the  British  army 
should  be  used,  were  explained  in  detail  in  a  despatch  to  Leveson-Gower, 
drafted  in  July.     See  post,  Appendix  B,  p.  439,  where  it  is  set  out  in  full. 


iSo5  THE    RUSSIAN    ALLIANCE  25 

single-handed  effort  or  on  the  great  linos  of  co-operation 
with  one  or  more  of  the  jirst-class  military  Powers.  With 
this  caution  it  may  be  well  to  give  at  once  the  leading  terms 
of  the  treaty,  as  it  was  eventually  concluded. 

By  the  first  article  Russia  undertook  to  do  her  utmost 
to  form  a  league  of  the  continental  Powers,  and  in  concert 
with  them  to  provide  a  force  up  to  half  a  million  men. 
The  second  declared  the  objects  to  be :  to  force  the  French 
to  evacuate  Hanover  and  North  Germany;  to  establish  the 
independence  of  Holland  and  Switzerland ;  to  re-establish 
the  King  of  Sardinia  in  Piedmont,  and  to  secure  the  integ- 
rity of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  and  the  evacuation  of  the 
whole  of  Italy,  including  the  island  of  Elba.  By  the  third 
article  England  undertook  to  further  the  common  cause 
with  her  forces  by  land  and  sea,  and  to  provide  transports 
for  moving  the  allied  troops  as  the  plan  of  operations  should 
require,  and  also  to  provide  subsidies  at  the  rate  of  a  million 
and  a  quarter  for  every  hundred  thousand  regular  troops 
the  allies  put  into  the  field. 

Here,  then,  Avas  the  great  new  factor  of  the  changed  war 
policy  which  influenced  it  from  the  outset.  The  British 
fleet  was  no  longer  to  be  used  merely  for  maritime  operations. 
England  bound  herself  to  use  it  in  furthering  a  vast  con- 
tinental war.  Should  Austria  alone  join  the  league  the 
main  active  theatre  for  our  fleet  and  army  must  be  on  the 
Italian  coasts  and  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  where 
Nelson  had  long  been  clamouring  for  military  action.  If 
Prussia  joined  we  should  be  forced  to  act  in  the  North  Sea 
and  the  Baltic,  where  we  already  had  secured  a  footing  at 
Rugen  and  Stralsund. 

The  second  new  factor  was  that  henceforth  the  war  was 
to  be  what  strategists  call  "  an  offensive  return."  It  was 
the  realisation  of  the  spirit  which  Pitt  had  inherited  from, 
his  father,  and  of  the  advice  with  which  Dumouriez  had 
concluded  the  famous  project  of  defence,  presented  to  the 
British  Government  about  the  time  Pitt  had  come  to  power. 
'■'  It  is  time,"  he  said,  "  to  cut  the  thread  v/hich  holds  the 
sword  of  Buonaparte  suspended  over  England.  .  .  .  Nought 
is  more  perilous  than  perpetual  defensive,  nor  offers  a  vaster 


26  PITT'S   WAR    POLICY  1S05 

field  for  attacks  of  all  kind,  whether  near  or  remote,  on  the 
part  of  a  foe.  .  .  .  Whither,  I  ask  you,  would  this  everlast- 
ing defensive  warfare  tend  ?  ...  How  could  the  Powers  of 
Europe  ever  take  heart  anew  if  this  system,  so  nearly  akin 
to  fear,  were  fated  to  endure  much  longer.,  .  .  .  Doubtless 
it  behoved  to  attain  to  the  olfensive  methods  through  the 
defensive  first ;  but  if,  from  this  year  on,  attack  does  not 
supersede  resistance,  then  you  will  see  the  chances  augment 
very  speedily  in  favour  of  Buonaparte."  ^ 

To  approach  the  Trafalgar  campaign  without  these  two 
factors  clearly  in  view  is  to  misconceive  it  from  end  to  end. 
To  judge  it  as  a  defensive  campaign,  to  regard  Trafalgar  as 
having  been  fought  purely  for  the  security  of  these  British 
Islands  is  to  misjudge  the  men  who  designed  it,  and,  above 
all,  the  men  who  fought  it  with  such  sure  and  lucid  com- 
prehension. For  them,  from  first  to  last,  the  great  idea  was 
not  how  to  avoid  defeat,  but  how  to  inflict  it.  England  had 
found  herself  again.  The  spirit  of  Marlborough  and  Chatham 
was  stirring  ;  she  was  striving  to  strike,  and  no  longer  waiting 
for  the  blow — to  strike  for  Europe  and  not  only  for  herself. 
To  think  of  her  as  only  bent  on  her  own  security  is  to  lose 
the  whole  grandeur  of  the  theme ;  to  misinterpret  the  bold 
confidence  with  which  her  seamen  took  risks,  apparently 
reckless.  The  lack  of  clear  grasp  as  to  how  the  great 
campaign  was  conceived  has  led  lesser  men  in  a  later  age 
to  brand  those  strokes  of  genius  as  blunders  of  ignorant 
men.  It  is  time  such  things  should  cease.  Let  us  rather, 
in  tracing  the  broad  sweep  and  subtle  interlocking  of  their 
moves,  humbly  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  giants  who  dared  to 
make  them.  So  may  w^e  learn  what  men,  inspired  by  a 
living  naval  tradition  and  ripened  with  the  maturity  of 
long  war  experience,  could  achieve  by  right  understanding, 
by  instructed  fearlessness  of  risk,  and  by  intelligent  sub- 
mission to  the  central  idea  on  which  the  great  war-plan 
was  designed. 

^  Kosc,  DuMOuricz  and  the  Defence  of  Eiicjland,  p.  2G0. 


CHAPTER  II 

NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE 

The  first  move  of  the  campaign  was  made  by  Missiessy  from 
Rocliefort.  In  response  to  the  urgent  orders  to  get  to  sea 
which  Napoleon  sent  down  the  day  his  overtures  for  peace 
started  for  London,  he  embarked  his  troops  to  the  number  of 
3  5  0  0  at  the  Isle  of  Aix.  Here  it  was  the  Rochefort  squadrons, 
owing  to  the  shoals  in  the  river,  had  always  to  complete  for 
sea.  To  blockade  the  Atlantic  ports  securely  during  the 
winter  Avas  not  regarded  by  the  British  Admiralty  as  a 
possible  operation  of  war,  but  Missiessy  was  being  watched 
by  a  detachment  of  the  Western  Squadron  under  Sir  Thomas 
Graves,  an  officer  who  had  distinguished  himself  as  Nelson's 
second  at  Copenhagen.  As  his  duties  also  embraced  the 
blockade  of  Bordeaux  to  prevent  stores  passing  northward 
to  the  invasion  ports,  he  had  to  cover  the  ground  from  the 
Isle  d'Yeu  to  the  mouth  of  the  Gironde,  not  far  short  of  a 
hundred  miles.  To  supply  his  squadron  at  sea  was  more- 
over impossible,  and  it  so  happened  that  just  as  Missiessy  had 
his  orders  to  sail  Graves  found  it  necessary  to  take  his 
battle  squadron  into  Quiberon  Bay  to  Avater,  Quiberon  being 
the  road  we  had  always  used  as  an  advanced  base  for  the 
Rochefort  division  ever  since  Haw^ke's  great  victory  in  1759. 
Captain  Patrick  Campbell  in  the  Doris  frigate  was  left  to 
keep  observation.  On  January  8th  he  ran  inside  for  a  closer 
view,  and  found  Missiessy  busy  embarking  his  troops  and 
stores.  Hurrying  out  again  he  met  the  Feluc  schooner  fresh 
from  Graves,  who  informed  him  of  the  Admiral's  where- 
abouts, and  Campbell  sped  northwards  to  report  his  news, 
leaving  the  Felix  in  his  place. 

On  the  11th  all  was  ready  at  Aix,  the  wind  was  easterly 
with  thick  weather  and  snow,  and  Missiessy  decided  to  weigh 


2  8  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE         jan. 

in  the  early  afternoon  so  as  to  run  through  the  blockading  line 
in  the  night.  Luck  and  good  judgment  gave  him  a  com- 
plete success.  He  believed  indeed  that  he  had  run  entirely 
clear,  but  he  counted  without  the  Felix  who  was  too  vigilant. 
Next  morning  she  sighted  the  French  squadron,  counting 
one  three-decker,  four  seventy-fours,  and  five  cruisers.  All 
day  she  shadowed  them,  and  under  cover  of  night  left  them 
streaming  northward  on  a  rising  south-westerly  wind  about 
fifty  miles  south-west  of  Isle  d'Yeu,  and  ran  for  Quiberon. 

jMcanwhile  the  Doris,  on  her  way  to  join  Graves,  had  also 
sighted  the  French  squadron,  and  under  a  press  of  sail, 
Avhich  led  to  severe  casualties  in  her  rigging,  she  had 
reached  Quiberon,  but  only  to  find  Graves  had  sailed. 
Hearing  he  was  somewhere  south-west  of  Belleisle,  she  tried 
to  beat  out  again,  and  in  doing  so  ran  on  a  sunken  rock. 
All  night  she  toiled  at  the  pumps,  and  at  last  succeeded  in 
mastering  her  leaks.  Then  came  the  Fdiv  to  report  the 
enemy's  position,  and  Campbell  grew  desperate.  A  south- 
westerly gale  was  blowing  up,  and  he  knew  Graves,  accord- 
ing to  the  regular  practice,  would  bear  up  into  the  bay 
for  refuge,  and  then  he  would  be  unable  to  move.  At 
all  hazards  he  must  be  stopped  before  it  was  too  late. 
Scarcely  able  to  keep  his  ship  afloat,  and  with  his  rigging 
badly  damaged,  Campbell  struggled  to  beat  out  against  the 
rising  gale.  It  proved  beyond  his  power ;  he  had  to  bear 
up  and  anchor,  and  two  days  later  the  Doo^is  foundered, 
all  hands  being  saved  by  the  Felix.  On  the  16  th  Graves 
appeared.  The  Felix  signalled  the  enemy  was  out,  and  the 
Admiral  immediately  hauled  his  wind,  and  made  a  great 
eftbrt  to  turn  back.  But  he  had  run  too  far.  In  the  teeth 
of  the  raging  gale  he  could  not  weather  Belleisle,  and  there 
was  nothing  for  it  but  to  bear  up  and  anchor.^ 

All  this  time  Missiessy  was  struggling  out  of  the  Bay, 
suffering  all  kinds  of  disasters  aloft,  but  still  holding  on 
with  the  utmost  determination,  and  so  got  clear  away.  In 
the  British  fleet  no  one  knew  what  to  make  of  it.  Some  of 
his  early  disasters  had  been  witnessed  by  the  cruisers,  and 

1  Blockade  of  Brest  (N.R.S.),  ii.  158-16G.     Desbricre's  Projets  ct  Tcniatiies, 
iv.  306. 


1 


Jan.  escape    of    MISSIESSY  29 

the  general  opinion  was  that  the  furious  weather  must  have 
forced  him  back  into  Rochefort,  or  L'Orient,  or  even  Brest. 
Brest  indeed  Avas  believed  to  be  his  destination,  and  the 
northerly  course  he  had  been  forced  to  take  confirmed  the 
impression.  Cornwallis  was  not  there.  He  had  been  driven 
by  the  gale  to  run  for  Plymouth,  and  did  not  return  till  the 
end  of  the  month.  Even  so  it  was  a  full  week  before 
the  weather  permitted  the  three  ports  to  be  looked  into, 
and  then  Missiessy  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  That  the 
Rochefort  squadron  was  bound  for  the  West  Indies  entered 
no  man's  head.  Who  indeed  would  have  guessed  that 
Napoleon  was  throwing  away  the  game  for  which  he  had 
played  so  high,  by  involving  his  fleet  in  colonial  expeditions  ? 
No  one  out  of  intimate  touch  with  the  political  situation 
could  have  been  expected  to  divine  the  truth,  and  naturally 
enough  it  was  at  headquarters — the  centre  of  information — 
that  the  situation  was  first  penetrated. 

But  even  in  London,  Missiessy's  destination  was  a  matter 
of  inference.  The  information  hovered  between  the  West 
Indies  and  the  Mediterranean.  To  the  Cabinet  the  latter 
destination  must  have  seemed  the  most  probable,  because 
it  was  the  one  they  feared  the  most,  since  the  negotiations 
with  Russia  for  joint  operations  in  South  Italy  were  just 
taking  shape.  Their  first  precaution  accordingly,  on  hearing 
of  Missiessy's  disappearance,  was  to  provide  for  the  re- 
inforcement of  Nelson,  should  it  prove  that  the  enemy's 
squadron  had  entered  the  Straits.  It  was  done  in  the 
usual  way.  On  February  14th,  Cornwallis  was  ordered  to 
send  Sir  Robert  Calder,  his  third  flag  officer,  with  six  of 
the  line  from  the  Brest  blockade  to  relieve  Cochrane  off 
Ferrol  and  Cochrane  Avas  to  take  six — a  force  equal  to 
Missiessy's — and  pursue  him.  He  was  to  call  at  Lisbon 
for  information,  and  if  none  was  to  be  had  to  speak  Orde 
off  St.  Vincent,  who,  since  the  breach  with  Spain,  had  been 
watching  Cadiz  with  five  of  the  line.  If  Missiessy  had 
gone  to  the  Mediterranean  he  was  to  follow  him  and  join 
Nelson.  If  there  was  no  news  he  was  to  call  at  Madeira, 
Cape  Verde,  and  finally  Barbadoes.  There  he  was  to  take  up 
Commodore  Samuel  Hood,  who  commanded  on  the  Leeward 


30  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE         jan. 

Islands  station.  If  still  there  was  no  news,  he  was  to  send 
three  of  the  line  to  reinforce  Dacres  at  Jamaica,  but  if  he 
heard  the  enemy  had  gone  to  their  northern  base  at  St. 
Domingo  he  was  to  send  six  to  Jamaica.  In  pursuance  of 
these  orders,  Cochrane  sailed  from  Ferrol  on  Calder's  arrival 
at  the  end  of  January  after  Missiessy  had  been  already  a 
week  at  Fort  de  France  in  Martinique.^ 

In  the  Mediterranean  Napoleon's  sudden  change  of  pur- 
pose caused  the  campaign  to  open  in  equal  bewilderment. 
When  Villeneuve  received  the  urgent  orders  of  January  2nd 
Nelson  was  cruising  close  before  Toulon.  He  had  appeared 
there  on  December  2Gth  for  a  reconnaissance,  having  received 
information  that  Villeneuve  was  "  embarking  troops  and  pre- 
paring for  some  immediate  expedition."  ^  He  was  in  one 
of  the  worst  of  his  shifting  moods.  The  Swifisitrc  had  just 
joined  with  despatches  that  told  how  the  most  lucrative 
part  of  his  command  had  been  taken  from  him.'^  By 
tradition  the  Mediterranean  station  extended  outside  the 
Straits'  mouth  as  far  as  Cape  St.  Vincent,  covering  the 
route  of  the  rich  Spanish-American  trade.  But  so  soon  as 
Pitt  had  made  up  his  mind  to  strike  at  Spain  he  determined 
to  change  the  usual  distribution  of  the  fleet.  The  Medi- 
terranean was  so  far  from  the  centre  of  intelligence  and 
especially  when  its  commander  had  to  fix  his  attention 
upon  its  eastern  half,  that  the  old  arrangement  could  not 
work  smartly  in  the  new  conditions.  Pitt  therefore  sanc- 
tioned the  formation  of  a  new  squadron  to  be  called  the 
"  Spanish  Squadron,"  under  the  direct  control  of  the 
Admiralty.  Its  station  w^as  to  extend  from  the  Straits' 
mouth  up  to  Finisterre,  where  it  joined  hands  with  the 
Ferrol  extension  of  the  Western  Squadron.  The  man  the 
Admiralty  chose  for  this  rich  command  was,  as  we  have 
seen,  Sir  John  Orde,  Nelson's  hete  noir.  He  seems  to  have 
been  possessed  with  the  idea  that  Orde  had  never  forgiven 
him  for  the  Battle  of  the  Nile.  Orde,  being  his  senior,  had 
expected  to  command  the  famous  detachment  himself.     In 

*  Admiralty  Secretary,  Out-Iettcrs  (Secret  Ordei'n),  13(53. 

2  Nelson  to  Marsden,  Dec.   2G,  1804:   Nicolas,  Nelaons  Letters  and  Des- 
patches, vol.  vi. 

3  Nelson  to  Orde,  Dec.  29. 


J 


Jan.  nelson  and  VILLENEUVE  31 

his  disappointment  he  had  behaved  at  the  time  with  some 
insubordination,  and  Nelson  seems  to  have  believed  that 
Orde  owed  him  an  undying  grudge.  Whatever  may  have 
been  Orde's  feelings  under  the  smart,  so  far  as  we  can 
judge,  his  sense  of  injury  was  by  this  time  forgotten  in  a 
genuine  admiration  of  Nelson's  genius.  Possibly  it  was 
this  that  accounted  for  Lord  Melville's  making  an  appoint- 
ment apparently  so  tactless ;  but  more  probably  it  was 
because  permission  was  at  the  same  time  given  to  Nelson 
at  his  own  request  to  come  home  on  sick  leave. 

But  with  the  prospect  of  the  French  coming  out, 
Nelson  had  no  idea  of  availing  himself  of  the  permission. 
He  remained  on,  unaware  of  the  change  in  Orde's  attitude 
towards  him,  and  he  would  have  been  more  than  human  if, 
situated  as  he  was,  he  had  not  resented  the  pecuniary  loss 
the  new  command  involved.  His  letters  indeed  at  this  time 
are  full  of  protests,  somewhat  suspicious  in  their  emphasis 
and  recurrence,  that  prize-money  had  nothing  to  do  with 
his  disapproval  of  the  redistribution.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
the  fact  that  is  of  importance  is  clear — from  first  to  last 
Nelson  regarded  Orde,  with  whom  it  was  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  he  should  co-operate  frankly,  with  a  rooted 
suspicion  that  tended  seriously  to  imperil  the  interests  of 
the  country. 

In  eager  expectation  of  an  action  to  calm  his  troubled 
spirit,  Nelson  remained  before  Toulon  till  January  10th, 
and  then,  leaving  a  couple  of  cruisers  behind,  he  held  away 
for  his  advanced  base  at  Maddalena,  in  the  north  of  Sardinia, 
just  as  Missiessy  was  coming  out  of  Rochefort.  "  With 
respect  to  the  French  fleet,"  he  wrote  to  Hugh  Elliot,  our 
representative  at  Naples,  "  I  wish  to  God  they  were  out." 
His  prayer  was  quickly  answered.  On  the  14th  Villeneuve 
found  the  coast  was  clear.  Two  days  later  he  tried  to 
drive  off  Nelson's  cruisers,  and  on  the  17th,  as  Napoleon  was 
informing  his  Council  he  had  never  intended  to  invade  Eng- 
land, he  put  to  sea  with  eleven  of  the  line  and  nine  cruisers. 
For  two  days  the  British  frigates  shadowed  him,  and  then  in 
the  latitude  of  Ajaccio  both  went  off  to  Maddalena  to  inform 
Nelson  they  had  left  the  enemy  standing  south -south-west. 


3  2  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Jan. 

Why  both  of  them  left  together  contrary  to  the  usual 
practice  is  nowhere  explained,  but  it  appears  to  have  been 
duo  to  the  strength  and  activity  of  Villeneuvc's  frigates. 
To  Nelson  it  made  no  difference.  In  his  opinion  there  was 
but  one  thing  to  do.  With  his  unsurpassed  sensitiveness 
to  the  kernel  of  a  situation  and  his  enduring  grasp  of  his 
place  in  a  war-plan,  ho  permitted  no  possibility  of  a 
diversion  to  influence  his  movements.  He  was  there  to 
command  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  permanence  of  that 
command  hung  on  the  integrity  of  Sicily.  We  have  seen 
how  large  a  place  it  was  then  filling  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Cabinet  at  home,  how  they  were  straining  the  resources 
of  home  defence  to  provide  a  force  to  secure  it.  So  far  as 
England's  capacity  for  actively  assisting  the  coming  coali- 
tion was  concerned,  it  was  the  thrust-block  of  the  ensfino 
Pitt  was  constructing  so  laboriously.  And  for  Nelson,  too,  it 
was  no  less.  In  common  with  all  Europe  he  believed  that 
the  entire  conquest  of  Italy  w^as  Napoleon's  immediate  aim. 
He  could  not  dream  any  m^ore  than  Cornwallis  or  Graves 
how  confused  Avas  the  game  the  redoubtable  enemy  had 
begun  to  pla}^  as  he  felt  his  grip  of  the  situation  slipping. 
Had  Nelson  been  less  certain  than  he  w^as  of  the  point 
where  Napoleon's  most  telling  stroke  could  be  delivered,  wo 
may  still  doubt  if  he  would  have  done  otherwise  than  he 
did.  For  all  his  passion  for  action,  for  all  his  firm  belief 
in  the  destruction  of  the  enemy's  fleet  as  the  solvent  of  all 
difficulties,  never  once  did  he  seek  such  a  decision  at  the 
risk  of  laying  open  a  vital  point.  Never  once  did  he 
expose  what  it  was  his  essential  function  to  defend  for  an 
uncertain  chance  of  contact  with  the  enemy's  fleet.  And  so 
he  acted  now. 

Without  a  moment's  hesitation,  in  the  dead  of  night, 
and  a  north-westerly  gale,  he  led  his  fleet  through  the 
perilous  Biche  Passage  and  sped  down  the  eastern  side  of 
Sardinia  to  bar  Villencuve's  way  to  Naples  and  Sicily. 

The  reasoning  on  which  he  formed  his  decision  he 
explained  to  his  confidant,  Captain  Sir  Alexander  Ball, 
Governor  of  Malta.  Since  easterly  winds  had  prevailed 
for  a  fortniofht  before  Villeneuve  sailed,  it  was  to  be  assumed 


Jan.  nelson   and   VILLENEUVE  33 

he  did  not  intend  to  go  west.  As  he  had  steered  south- 
south-west  and  obviously  wished  to  avoid  an  action,  it  was 
scarcely  less  likely  that  he  meant  to  attack  either  Sardinia, 
Naples,  or  Sicily.  "  However,"  he  said,  "  I  did  not  choose  to 
run  that  risk."  He  had  first  to  assure  himself  the  enemy 
had  gone  to  none  of  these  places.^ 

Having  reached  the  south  end  of  Sardinia,  he  was  faced 
with  a  heavy  westerly  gale  that  held  him  there  till  the  26  th. 
There  his  cruisers  began  to  come  in,  but  with  no  news  of 
Villeneuve's  position.  They  could  only  tell  that  one  ship 
at  least  had  been  disabled  in  the  heavy  weather.  On  this 
Nelson  judged  much  as  Graves  had  done,  but  with  surer 
material.  So  wide  and  complete  had  been  the  sweep  of  his 
cruisers  that  their  failure  to  locate  Villeneuve,  combined 
with  the  evidence  of  the  disabled  ship,  assured  him  that  one 
of  two  things  had  happened — either  he  had  put  back  to 
Toulon  or  had  passed  on  to  attack  Greece  or  Egypt.  These 
two  places  were  second  only  to  Naples,  Sardinia,  and  Sicily 
in  the  defensive  function  that  had  been  assigned  to  him. 
Clinging,  therefore,  to  the  line  he  had  hitherto  followed,  and 
of  whose  correctness  he  had  no  doubt,  he  held  away  for  the 
Morea.  There  he  found  all  quiet.  Nothing  had  been 
heard  of  the  French  squadron,  but  there  was  news  that  the 
French  ambassador  had  just  been  recalled  from  Constanti- 
nople. Egypt,  then,  was  almost  certainly  Villeneuve's 
destination,  and  without  an  hour's  delay  Nelson  carried  on 
to  Alexandria. 

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  had  had  neither  the  luck  nor  the 
determination  of  Missiessy.  With  his  ships  encumbered 
with  troops,  he  found  it  beyond  the  power  of  his  raw  crews 
and  officers  to  face  the  gale.  All  was  soon  havoc  aloft,  the 
fleet  lost  cohesion,  and  Villeneuve,  overcome  with  the  op- 
pression of  an  unlocated  and  redoubtable  enemy,  felt  it  mad- 
ness to  proceed.  He  consulted  General  Lauriston,  a  highly 
trusted  staff  officer  of  Napoleon's,  who  was  in  command 
of  the  troops,  and  together  they  decided  to  turn  back. 
"  Finding  ourselves,"  he  wrote  to  Napoleon  to  explain  his 
conduct,  '^  observed  from  the  first  night  of  our  getting  out 

^  Nelson  to  Ball,  Feb.  11th,  and  see  also  same  to  Melville,  Feb.  14th. 

C 


34  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Jan. 

by  two  English  frigates,  which  could  not  fail  to  bring  down 
on  us  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy,  and  it  being  out  of 
our  power  to  make  much  sail  with  the  ships  so  much 
maltreated,  we  agreed  to  return."  This  was  on  the  19th, 
and  by  the  21st  he  was  safe  again  in  Toulon,  while  Nelson, 
cleared  for  action,  was  still  waiting  for  him  at  the  south  end 
of  Sardinia.  Obviously,  then,  if  Nelson  had  chosen  to  make 
a  dash  for  Villeneuve  directly  he  heard  he  was  out,  he 
might  have  destroyed  or  captured  the  whole  of  the  ships 
that  w^ere  still  with  his  flag.  A  less  correct  officer  might 
well  have  done  so.  But  for  Nelson  it  was  not  good  war. 
The  chance  of  contact  was  far  too  uncertain  to  justify  un- 
covering the  point  of  greatest  danger.^ 

To  Napoleon  the  breakdown  of  his  naval  combination 
was  a  severe  shock.  He  was  still  bent  on  flinging  his  -whole 
fleet  into  colonial  operations,  and  on  January  16  th,  the  day 
before  Villeneuve  sailed,  he  was  busy  drafting  a  scheme  for 
extending  the  attack  to  India.  It  was  to  be  carried  out 
by  Ganteaume  from  Brest.  With  his  twenty-one  of  the 
line  and  nine  or  ten  cruisers  and  six  transports,  carrying 
altogether  15,000  troops,  he  was  to  break  the  blockade  at  a 
favourable  moment,  move  down  to  L'Orient,  where  he  was  to 
pick  up  a  ship  of  the  line,  and  then  to  Rochefort  for  another 
and  2000  additional  troops.  Thence  he  was  to  proceed 
to  release  the  Ferrol  squadron,  which  would  give  him  live 
more  French  of  the  line,  as  many  Spanish,  and  eight  or 
nine  cruisers.  Half  of  them  would  be  armed  en  jliite  as 
transports,  and  would  have  on  board  a  further  6000 
troops,  half  French  and  half  Spanish.  With  this  force 
he  would  proceed  to  Mauritius  where  he  would  find 
3000  men.  He  would  then  have  an  army  of  23,000 
French  and  3000  Spaniards,  with  which  "indubitably,"  as 
Napoleon  wrote,  "  they  will  make  a  terrible  war  on  England 
which  may  bring  about  a  final  decision."     Of  the  probable 

^  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Jan.  21  :  Desbri^re's  Projets  et  Tentatives,  iv.  299. 
An  instance  of  an  otficer's  neglecting  Nelson's  principle  was  Admiral  Samp- 
son's almost  fatal  attempt  to  intercept  Admiral  Cervera  at  Puerto  Rico  in  the 
Spanish-American  War.  It  was  this  immutable  principle,  "  so  imperturbably 
followed,"  as  Colonel  Desbrifire  says,  which  rendered  futile  all  attempts  to 
entice  our  fleet  away  from  the  time-honoured  covering  position  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Channel. 


Jan.  he   alters    the    plan  3  5 

action  of  the  British  fleet  there  is  no  mention.  Its  silent 
elimination  from  the  problem  is  striking.  But  it  was 
characteristic  of  all  Napoleon's  naval  strategy  that,  in 
sharp  contrast  to  his  military  plans,  he  practically  ignored 
his  enemy  or  assumed  in  them  an  incredible  simplicity.^ 

It  was  while  Decres,  his  Minister  of  Marine,  was  working 
out  this  remarkable  vision  that  news  came  of  Villeneuve's 
failure.  It  was  also  the  moment  when  Napoleon  was 
fuming  over  Pitt's  rough  defiance.  The  submission  of 
Austria  had  not  yet  come.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  He  had 
sent  a  challenge  to  Vienna  and  had  failed  to  frighten  Pitt. 
As  the  situation  thus  darkened,  so  his  mind  becomes  almost 
impenetrable,  and  we  can  only  grope  in  it  by  the  light  of 
the  ill-considered  orders  he  gave. 

Missiessy  was  now  beyond  recall,  and  the  first  step 
taken  was  to  warn  him  that  he  would  be  unsupported 
except  for  a  few  more  cruisers,  and  that  the  combination 
with  Villeneuve  was  cancelled.  "  His  Majesty,"  Decres 
informed  him,  "  has  decided  that  the  squadron  under 
command  of  Vice-Admiral  Villeneuve  is  to  have  another 
destination.  .  .  .  Your  operations,  therefore,  become  inde- 
pendent, and  should  be  directed  by  you  in  accordance  with 
your  original  instructions  given  to  meet  the  case  of  your 
not  being  able  to  count  on  the  projected  junction  with 
Vice-Admiral  Villeneuve."  This  meant  he  was  to  throw 
reinforcements  and  supplies  into  St.  Domingo  and  come 
home.    Rochefort,  he  was  told,  would  probably  be  found  open. 

But  what  did  Napoleon  mean  by  the  new  destination 
for  Villeneuve  ?  Clearly  not  the  invasion  of  England. 
Not  a  single  step  had  yet  been  taken  to  reconstruct  the 
shattered  preparations.  Even  without  Austria  and  Russia 
threatening  him  on  his  eastern  frontier  and  in  Italy,  the 
invasion  had  passed  beyond  his  strength,  and  now  was  the 
crisis  of  the  Austrian  threat.  Villeneuve  was  told  to  collect 
his  scattered  squadron,  and  while  he  refitted,  Lauriston  was 
to  disembark  the  troops,  fill  up  his  battalions  to  their 
full  strength,  and  look  out  for  more  transports.     "  At  the 

^  Napoleon  to  Decres:    Desbriere,  iv.  325.     Correftpondance   de  Napoleon, 
X.  117. 


36  NAPOLEON'S   FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Feb. 

end  of  the  month,"  Napoleon  told  him,  "  you  will  receive 
an  order  to  re -embark  for  elsewhere,  for  the  season  is 
past  for  your  former  destination." 

The  day  this  enigmatic  letter  was  written  the  orders 
for  an  Austrian  campaign  were  countermanded.  A  pacific 
answer  had  come  from  Vienna,  but  still — not  for  a  full 
month — is  there  any  sign  that  Napoleon  felt  himself  forced 
to  return  to  the  necessity  of  a  direct  attack  on  England. 
The  French  General  Staff,  after  a  profound  study  of  the 
situation,  suggest  that  he  was  still  bent  on  his  latest 
idea  of  attacking  India,  and  that  Villeneuve  was  to  com- 
bine with  Ganteaume.  By  this  time  he  must  have  had 
his  suspicions  of  the  joint  effort  of  Russia  and  England 
to  bar  his  progress  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean.  What 
could  be  more  characteristic  of  his  methods  than  to  out- 
wit them  by  directing  his  attack  by  way  of  the  Cape  ?  It 
is  indeed  difficult  to  avoid  the  supposition  that  at  this 
time  he  had  come  to  regard  the  invasion  of  India  as  an 
easier  matter  than  the  invasion  of  England,  that  he  was 
realising  the  truth  of  the  paradox,  which  history  proves 
up  to  the  hilt,  that  in  default  of  naval  command  attack 
over  an  open  sea  is  far  lest  difficult  than  over  a  narrow 
sea.  The  simple  reason  is  that  over  an  open  sea  evasion 
of  the  enemy's  defensive  arrangements  is  comparatively 
easy,  as  had  been  proved  by  Heche's  attack  on  Ireland 
and  his  own  adventure  to  Egypt. 

Possibly,  however,  the  whole  scheme  was  only  intended 
for  British  spies,  or,  if  not  originally  so  intended,  was  used 
for  this  purpose  when  it  was  found  to  be  impracticable.  We 
know,  at  any  rate,  that  from  this  time  forward  for  several 
months  he  was  under  the  hallucination  that  he  had  diverted 
our  naval  effort  to  India. 

All  we  can  tell  for  certain  is  that,  whether  or  not  the 
Indian  scheme  was  ever  seriously  intended,  it  was  abandoned 
within  a  few  weeks  of  its  conception.  By  the  end  of  the 
month,  for  reasons  it  is  now  impossible  to  fathom,  he  had 
been  forced  to  take  up  the  invasion  again,  and  was  pre- 
paring the  way  for  it  by  a  naval  combination  scarcely  less 
extravagant  in  design  than  his   Indian  dream.      Between 


Feb.  he  resumes  the  invasion  37 

February  29  th  and  March  4th  he  issued  the  orders  for  his 
famous  concentration  in  the  West  Indies. 

To  explain,  so  far  as  is  possible,  this  startling  return  to 
his  abandoned  project — with  the  conditions  far  more  difficult 
than  before — let  us  see  what  was  uppermost  in  his  mind 
at  the  moment.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  absorption  of 
Northern  Italy  into  the  French  Empire  by  forming  a  new 
Kingdom  of  Italy  out  of  the  revolutionary  states  which 
had  arisen  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  Sardinian,  Austrian,  and 
Genoese  possessions.  The  main  objection  to  this  stroke  of 
policy  was  that,  if  crudely  done,  it  would  force  Austria  into 
action  and  give  a  dangerous  stimulus  to  the  efforts  of  the 
Czar  and  Pitt  to  form  their  coalition.  For  some  weeks, 
therefore,  he  had  been  trying  to  persuade  one  of  his  brothers 
to  accept  the  crown  of  the  new  kingdom,  and  on  their 
steadfast  refusal  he  resolved  to  crown  himself.  Here,  then, 
he  had  to  face  the  certain  irritation  of  Austria ;  and  the 
Anglo-Russian  negotiations  for  joint  military  action  to  pre- 
vent his  further  expansion  in  Italy  were  now  practically 
complete.  The  obvious  move,  therefore,  was  to  use  the 
army  he  was  compelled  to  keep  on  a  war  footing  as  a  threat 
to  England.  It  was  the  only  way  to  prevent  her  putting 
forth  such  strength  in  the  Mediterranean  as  would  make  the 
joint  action  with  Russia  really  formidable,  and  encourage 
Austria  to  burn  her  boats. 

Whether  he  still  believed  in  his  heart  the  invasion  was 
possible  we  cannot  tell.  If  he  did,  it  can  only  have  been 
by  the  well-known  trick  of  his  gambler's  mind,  that  every- 
thing was  possible  on  which  he  had  set  his  desire.  His 
star  had  once  removed  mountains ;  he  had  trusted  it  to 
make  the  desert  flow  with  milk  and  honey,  and  now%  per- 
haps, he  believed  it  could  bridge  the  sea. 

Nothing  less  will  explain  the  madness  of  the  resumed 
attempt.  When  he  first  set  himself  to  the  task  he  put 
the  necessary  military  force  at  150,000  men.  Since  then 
the  strength  of  the  British  army  and  the  w^hole  system  of 
defence  had  greatly  increased — in  numbers,  mettle,  train- 
ing, and  organisation.  Yet,  even  in  view  of  the  clouds  that 
were  darkening  the  opposite  horizon,  he  could  barely  keep 


38  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  fek. 

half  that  number  m  touch  with  the  Channel  coast.  Even 
when,  after  six  months'  preparation,  what  is  called  the 
supreme  moment  came — when,  so  the  legend  goes,  he  only 
failed  by  the  blunders  of  his  Admirals — he  had  no  more 
than  90,000  men  in  reach  of  his  flotilla.  The  arrange- 
ments for  embarkation  and  transport  were  even  Avider  of  the 
mark.  The  ports  were  choked  with  silt,  so  that  many  of 
the  boats,  even  at  high  tide,  were  aground,  and  months  of 
labour  did  little  to  get  the  harbours  clear,  except  in  the 
unimportant  case  of  Wimereux.  In  Boulogne,  after  six 
months'  effort,  not  half  the  units  assigned  to  the  port  could 
get  out  in  one  tide.  The  flotilla  itself  w^as  still  unconcen- 
trated,  entirely  unorganised,  distributed  in  no  relation  to  the 
various  divisions  of  the  army,  and  in  need  of  formidable 
repairs.  The  idea  that  his  organisation  w^as  such  that  he 
could  embark  150,000  men  in  two  hours,  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  myths  of  the  Napoleonic  legend.  The 
utmost  he  ever  even  approached  was  the  bare  possibility, 
in  perfect  w^eather,  of  getting  90,000  afloat  in  from  twelve 
to  eighteen  hours,  but  nothing  like  this  was  ever  actually 
accomplished.^ 

Undoubtedly,  what  caused  him  to  shut  his  eyes  to  all 
these  difficulties  was  the  brightness  of  the  reports  from 
Spain.  Stung  with  the  blow  which  England  had  struck 
before  declaration,  she  was  throwing  herself  into  the  war 
w^ith  unexpected  ardour.  All  that  Napoleon  had  dared  to 
hope  from  her  fleet  bid  fair  to  be  fulfilled.  If,  ashore,  his 
prospects  were  darker  than  before,  at  sea  they  were  far  more 
promising,  and  he  flung  all  his  sanguine  spirit  into  the  naval 
part  of  the  venture,  ignoring  the  rest,  with  w^hich  he  had  no 
heart  to  grapple. 

The  first  indication  of  his  idea  that  an  efiective  concen- 
tration of  his  whole  naval  force  was  possible  in  the  West 
Indies  occurs  in  certain  communications  he  made  to  the 
Spanish  Government  on  February  19th,  but  it  was  not  till 
the  27th  that  the  first  orders  were  issued.  On  that  day 
were  signed  directions  to  Missiessy  cancelling  his  last  orders 
to  return,  and  bidding  him  stay  where  he  was  till  the  end  of 

*  See  Desbriere,  Projets,  vol.  v.,  part  iii.,  chap.  4. 


March        GENESIS   OF   THE    FINAL   PLAN  39 

June,  in  immediate  readiness  to  join  such  forces  as  should 
appear  at  Martinique.  On  the  same  day  Admiral  Gourdon, 
who  commanded  the  French  squadron  at  Ferrol,  was  told  to 
be  ready  to  come  out  with  such  Spanish  ships  as  were  fit 
for  sea,  and  combine  with  a  French  squadron,  which  would 
soon  appear  before  the  port.  Three  days  later  the  main 
orders  went  forward.  Ganteaume  at  Brest  was  told  to 
embark  some  3000  troops  over  and  above  those  serving  as 
marines,  and  to  sail  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  with 
twenty-one  of  the  line,  six  frigates,  and  two  transports  with 
victual  for  Gourdon's  squadron.  He  was  to  make  direct  for 
Ferrol,  endeavour  to  destroy  Calder's  blockading  squadron, 
call  out  Gourdon  by  signal,  and  then  proceed  to  Martinique, 
where  he  would  find  the  Toulon  and  Kochefort  squadrons 
awaiting  him.  There  he  was  to  reinforce  the  garrison  with 
a  thousand  of  the  troops,  and  then,  with  the  rest  and  the  forty 
sail  of  the  line  he  would  have  under  his  flag,  he  would 
operate  his  return  to  Europe  without  losing  an  instant. 
Off  Ushant  he  was  to  attack  any  British  force  he  found 
there,  and  then  push  direct  to  Boulogne,  where  he  would  be 
expected  between  June  10th  and  July  10th.  Such  was  the 
complete  plan  which  Napoleon  hoped  to  achieve,  but  alter- 
native orders  were  given  to  meet  the  case  of  the  Toulon 
squadron  failing  to  appear.  Ganteaume  would  then  have 
twenty-five  of  the  line,  and  after  waiting  thirty  days  for 
Villeneuve  he  was  still  to  try  to  fight  his  way  through  to 
Boulogne.  If,  however,  he  found  that  from  any  adverse 
causes  he  had  less  than  twenty-five,  he  was  to  return  to 
Ferrol,  where  he  would  find  a  concentration  of  all  the 
French  and  Spanish  naval  force  in  Europe  awaiting  him, 
and  thence,  without  entering  the  port,  he  was  to  make  for 
Boulogne  as  before. 

On  the  same  day  went  corresponding  orders  to  Ville- 
neuve. As  Ganteaume  was  to  bring  out  the  Ferrol  squadron 
so  he  was  to  relieve  that  of  Cadiz,  and  to  proceed  with  it 
direct  to  Martinique.  There  for  forty  days  he  was  to 
hold  his  squadron  in  instant  readiness  to  come  out  on 
Ganteaume's  signal,  for  Ganteaume  when  he  arrived  would 
probably  not   anchor;  and  at   the   end    of  that  period,   if 


40  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE       march 

Ganteaume  had  not  appeared,  he  was  to  land  his  troops  in 
the  French  islands,  do  what  harm  he  could  to  the  British 
Colonies,  and  then  take  up  a  station  at  the  Canaries  upon 
the  East  India  trade  route.  Possibly  Ganteaume  might 
meet  him  there,  but  if  he  did  not  appear  in  twenty  days, 
then  Villeneuve  was  to  return  to  Cadiz,  where  he  would  find 
further  orders.  It  will  be  observed  that  these  orders  made 
no  provision  for  the  concentration  at  Ferrol  which  Gan- 
teaume had  been  told  to  expect  if  that  at  Martinique  failed, 
but  possibly  it  was  Napoleon's  intention  to  arrange  for  the 
latter  when  the  situation  was  further  developed. 

Such  was  the  giant  stroke  of  genius,  for  so  it  has  come 
to  be  regarded,  by  which,  as  he  told  Villeneuve,  the  destinies 
of  the  world  were  to  be  changed.  What  did  his  Admirals 
think  of  it  ?  Their  opinion  is  not  on  record.  We  must  be 
content  with  that  of  their  successors,  given  after  patient 
and  exhaustive  study  of  the  whole  question. 

"  Two  escapes,"  says  Colonel  Desbriere  under  sanction 
of  the  French  General  Staff,  "  two  escapes  from  ports 
blockaded  by  a  superior  force ;  two  blockades  to  be  broken, 
at  Cadiz  and  Ferrol ;  a  junction  at  Martinique  already  indi- 
cated to  the  English  by  the  despatch  of  Missiessy — such 
was  the  programme  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  letter  of 
the  instructions.  It  is  useless  for  historians  to  admire 
it.  Such  a  plan  would  be  unworthy  both  of  Napoleon 
and  his  genius,  if  we  could  discover  nothing  deeper 
m  it. 

And  what  is  it  that  is  found  ?  Little  more  than 
another  device  to  save  his  face,  and  escape  from  the  hope- 
less invasion  without  loss  of  prestige.  Since  the  army  of 
Boulogne  must  wait  for  the  fleet,  three  months  was  the 
least  interval  that  must  elapse  before  it  could  think  of 
moving,  and  in  three  months  much  would  have  happened. 
By  that  time  the  air  would  have  cleared.  Napoleon's  course 
would  be  more  sharply  defined.  It  is  pointed  out  on  his 
behalf,  moreover,  that  the  plan  as  it  stands  entirely  ignores 
the  enemy,  whereas  Napoleon's  practice  and  genius  forbid 
us  to  believe  he  did  not  take  the  natural  British  move- 
ments into  serious  account.      He  must  have  known,  it  is 


March  WEAKNESS    OF    THE    PLAN  41 

urged,  how  great  were  the  chances  against  its  success.  "  If 
Ganteaume  succeeded,"  so  runs  the  case  for  the  defence, 
"in  concentrating  an  enormous  fleet  of  forty-eight  sail  in 
the  West  Indies,  a  great  naval  battle  was  inevitable.  It 
might  be  fought  in  American  or  in  European  waters,  but 
with  such  adversaries  as  the  English  it  was  impossible  to 
avoid  it,  and  Napoleon  knew  this  better  than  anybody.  .  .  . 
But  then  the  defeat  of  Ganteaume  ...  it  would  certainly 
mean  the  end  of  the  English  expedition,  but  the  fiasco 
would  not  be  Napoleon's.  On  another's  head  would  lie  the 
responsibility  for  the  check.  .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  a  great 
victory  at  sea — that  meant  the  ruin  of  England,  even  without 
the  descent  being  put  in  operation.  ...  In  short,  the  plan 
of  March  2nd  seems  to  be  of  the  type  which  his  secretary 
calls  themes  a  deux  fins.  The  worst  that  could  come  of  it 
was  the  defeat  in  distant  seas  of  mediocre  squadrons,  a 
defeat  which  would  quickly  be  forgotten  in  grand  victories 
on  land.  But  the  plan  in  no  way  solved  the  problem  he 
had  set  himself,  '  to  make  the  descent  without  being  master 
of  the  sea.'  On  the  contrary,  it  shrinks  from  the  solution 
and  adjourns  it  till  the  moment  when  the  command  of  the 
sea,  having  been  won  by  force,  the  very  question  of  the 
descent  would  no  longer  exist."  ^ 

Such  is  the  most  authoritative  French  view  of  Napoleon's 
actual  intentions.  Had  he  really  grasped  at  last  that  in 
the  face  of  the  British  fleet,  and  its  traditional  strategy, 
the  problem  of  invasion  over  an  uncommanded  sea  was  in- 
soluble ?  Was  he  really  riding  for  a  fall  ?  To  British  ears 
the  explanation  sounds  almost  as  fantastic  as  the  plan.  The 
old  confusion  of  thought  jars  through  the  orders  from  end 
to  end.  While  they  are  mainly  and  ostensibly  directed  at 
securing  permanent  command  by  fighting,  they  harp  through- 
out on  the  possibility  of  securing  temporary  local  command 
by  surprise.  The  grip  of  the  problem  is  as  loose  as  ever, 
and  Englishmen  with  judgment  unoppressed  by  the  Napo- 
leonic legend,  will  rather  see  in  it  the  work  of  a  self-confident 
amateur  in  naval  warfare,  the  blindness  of  a  great  soldier  to 
the  essential  differences  between  land  and  sea  strategy,  and 

1  Desbricre,  Projets,  v.  371. 


42  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE      March 

something  perhaps  of  the  exasperated  despot  who  refused 
to  own  himself  beaten. 

But  the  grandiose  plan  went  forward,  and  while  half  the 
world  was  in  labour  with  it,  on  the  English  side  there  was 
scarcely  a  sign  of  movement.  Nelson  was  hurrying  back  to 
his  post  from  Egypt,  but  everywhere  else  the  squadrons 
were  maintaining  their  silent  vigil;  and,  scarcely  to  be 
noticed  beside  the  stupendous  combination  of  Napoleon,  was 
Pitt's  little  expedition,  painfully  gathering  at  Portsmouth, 
which  yet  was  to  prove  the  insidious  drop  of  poison — the 
little  sting  —  that  was  to  infect  Napoleon's  empire  with 
decay,  and  to  force  his  hand  with  so  tremendous  a  result. 


CHAPTER  III 

OPENING   OF  THE   CAMPAIGN 

Of  Napoleon  s  design  the  British  Government  had  no  suspi- 
cion. All  there  seems  to  have  been  to  disturb  their  home 
defence  and  their  effort  to  push  forward  into  the  Mediter- 
ranean was  the  possibility  of  another  colonial  raid  to  follow 
that  of  Missiessy.  To  meet  this  eventuality,  on  March  2nd 
an  order  was  sent  to  Cornw^allis,  who  was  then  in  Torbay,  to 
form  a  flying  squadron  of  five  of  the  line  and  complete  their 
stores  for  foreign  service.^  This  squadron  was  placed  under 
the  command  of  Collingwood  in  his  three-decker,  the 
Dreadnought;  but  Cornwallis  did  not  detach  it  from  his 
flag,  and  when  he  sailed  on  March  7th  to  resume  his  station 
he  had,  with  ships  joining  on  the  way,  a  fleet  of  twenty-one 
sail,  including  no  less  than  eight  three-deckers.  On  de- 
taching Collingwood  he  would  still  have  seven  three-deckers 
and  nine  others,  and  with  this  force  he  was  to  blockade 
Ganteaume,  who  had  been  definitely  ascertained  to  have 
three  large  three-deckers  and  eighteen  others.  In  other 
words,  Cornwallis  was  expected  to  hold  Ganteaume  with 
sixteen  of  the  line  against  twenty-one. 

In  modern  criticisms  of  the  campaign  it  is  always  taken 
for  granted  that  this  relation  between  the  two  forces  placed 
Cornwallis  in  clear  inferiority.  Whether  this  was  the  view 
of  our  Admiralty  or  of  Ganteaume  is,  however,  by  no  means 
certain.  The  difficulty  of  appraising  the  value  of  battle 
units  was  in  those  days  probably  as  great  as  it  is  now ;  but 
unless  one  can  reach  some  idea  of  the  standard  upon  which 
the  dispositions  of  force  were  made,  all  attempt  to  appre- 
ciate the  strategy  of  the  time  is  idls. 

^  Dreadnought    98,    Tonnant    80,    Mars,    Illustrious,    and    Minotaur   74: 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  203. 

43 


44  OPENING    OF   THE   CAMPAIGN 

One  point  comes  out  clearly  at  once.  From  many  indi- 
cations in  lists  and  despatches  we  can  be  sure  that  neither 
the  British  nor  the  French  naval  staffs  were  content  to 
count  numbers  only.  It  is  obvious  they  attached  some 
special  importance  to  three-deckers  over  and  above  two- 
deckers.  Estimates  of  comparative  force  always  distinguish 
these  vessels  from  the  rest,  and  in  the  naval  correspondence 
of  the  time  the  reason  is  made  quite  clear.  "  We  had  seven 
three-deckers,"  wrote  Nelson's  chaplain  just  after  Trafalgar, 
"  they  only  three ;  but  their  ships  in  general  very  large  and 
carrying  eighty  guns."  "  He  knew,"  says  one  of  Nelson's 
captains  in  the  great  chase  to  the  West  Indies,  "  that  the 
French  had  no  three-decked  ships  in  their  fleet,  and  he 
reckoned  on  the  great  superiority  in  close  action  of  three 
batteries  of  guns  over  two."  When  Hardy,  his  flag-captain, 
came  to  be  First  Sea  Lord  he  inaugurated  a  policy  of  large 
three-decked  ships ;  and  Briggs,  who  knew  him  well  at  the 
Admiralty,  assures  us  "  he  attached  as  much  importance 
to  three-deckers  and  90-gun  ships  as  Voltaire  did  to  big 
battalions  " — that  is,  he  regarded  Providence  as  always  on 
their  side. 

In  France  it  was  the  same.  When,  at  the  end  of 
March,  Ganteaume  was  explaining  to  Napoleon  an  abortive 
attempt  he  had  just  made  to  break  out  of  Brest  and  how 
narrowly  he  had  escaped  being  attacked  at  anchor,  he  said  : 
"  The  enemy  had  three  of  the  line  less  than  us ;  but  he  had 
eight  of  the  first  rank,  while  we  had  only  three."  -^  It  was 
a  plea  that  could  not  fail  to  appeal  to  Napoleon,  for  the 
highest  relative  appraisement  of  three-deckers  that  is  known 
comes  from  his  pen.  Speaking  of  Calder's  action  he  says  : 
"  The  advantage  of  three  three-deckers  against  a  squadron 
that  has  none  is  equal  to  a  difference  of  eight  ships  of  the 
line,  all  enured  to  the  sea  and  perfectly  trained."  ^  So 
extreme  a  view  of  the  relative  superiority  of  three-deckers 
need  not  be  taken  too  literally,  for  Napoleon's  object  in  writ- 
ing the  letter  was  to  give  the  action  an  appearance  of  a 
victory  for  Villeneuve.     But  after  all  allowance  made  for 

^  Dcsbriore,  v.  473. 

2  To  Fouche,  August  9,  1805 :  Correspondance  de  Napoleon  /.,  xi.  72. 


i 


VALUE    OF   THREE-DECKERS  45 

exaggeration  it  confirms  the  high  value  that  in  both  services 
was  set  upon  three-deckers.  This  is  the  more  remarkable 
because  the  new  type  of  80 -gun  two-deckers,  both  in  the 
French  and  our  own  service,  could  deliver  a  broadside  as 
heavy  as  the  second-rate  98-gun  three-deckers,  and  only 
one-seventeenth  less  than  the  first-rates.^  But  over  and 
above  weight  of  metal,  three-deckers  were  regarded  as  having 
other  advantages.  "  When  it  comes  to  boarding,"  writes 
Bigot  de  Morogues,  "  they  dominate  vessels  of  lower  rate. 
The  small-arm  fire  of  large  ships  commands  that  of  small 
ones ;  all  the  shot  plunge  and  get  home  over  the  bul- 
warks." When  British  three-deckers  came  to  be  armed  with 
G8-pounder  carronades  on  the  quarter-deck  and  forecastle 
this  advantage  of  "  command  "  became  of  course  very  great. 
"  Finally,"  Morogues  proceeds,  "  the  crew  can  get  down  to 
board  a  small  ship  more  easily  than  they  can  climb  into  a 
big  one.  In  a  heavy  sea  big  vessels  can  use  their  lower 
battery  more  easily.  If  both  have  to  close  their  lower 
ports  the  advantage  of  three-deckers  will  be  still  greater  in 
respect  of  guns,  for  instead  of  three  batteries  against  two 
they  will  have  two  against  one.  .  .  .  Large  ships,  too,  have 
greater  solidity  and  better  resistance  to  attack."  These 
views  still  passed  current  in  the  British  navy,  or  at  least 
appeared  verbatim  in  all  the  English  text-books.'^ 

To  determine  the  actual  relative  value  of  the  two  types 
in  Admiralty  calculations  is  more  difficult.  Captain  Mahan 
has  called  attention  to  a  passage  in  one  of  Nelson's  letters 
as  elucidating  the  point.  "  Two  [two-deckers],"  he  wrote, 
"  alongside  an  enemy  are  better  than  three-deckers  a  great 

^  In  1805  there  were  two  types  of  the  98-gun  second-rates.  The  newer  or 
18-pounder  type  were  over  2100  tons,  with  a  broadside  of  about  1050  lbs. 
There  were  only  three  in  commission — the  Dreadnought  and  the  Neptune 
and  Temeraire,  Nelson's  two  seconds  at  Trafalgar,  but  two  new  ones  still 
larger  were  completed  that  year.  They  averaged  2277  tons.  The  rest,  of 
which  there  were  eight  in  commission,  were  of  the  12-pounder  type,  that  is, 
they  carried  thirty  "twelves"  instead  of  "  eighteens"  on  their  upper  deck. 
They  ranged  from  1870  to  2000  tons.    These  figures  do  not  include  carronades. 

2  Bigot  de  Morogues,  Tactiqtie  Navale,  p.  27.  The  defensive  power  of 
three-deckers  was  strongly  shown  in  the  Victory  at  Trafalgar.  In  an  un- 
published letter  of  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Scott,  dated  October  27  (of  which  Major 
Marsh,  R.A.,  has  kindly  given  me  a  copy),  he  says:  "On  the  quarter-deck, 
poop,  and  forecastle  the  slaughter  was  immense ;  on  the  other  decks  com- 
paratively nothing;  on  the  lower  deck  only  two  wounded,  and,  strange  to  tell, 
by  musket-balls." 


46  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN 

Wcay  off."  "  This  remark,"  as  Captain  Mahan  comments, 
"  connotes  that  in  current  naval  opinion  one  three-decker 
was  better  than  two  seventy-fours,  conditions  being  similar."  ^ 
Such  a  conclusion  is  perhaps  more  than  the  passage  would 
bear  if  unsupported.  But  it  is  not  without  corroboration. 
For  if  Ave  analyse  the  opposing  squadrons  of  the  campaign, 
we  find  again  and  again,  that  by  counting  three-deckers  as 
two  units,  and  seventy-fours  as  one  unit,  we  get  something 
like  equality  between  the  two  squadrons.  So  constant  and 
so  nearly  exact  is  this  relation,  at  least  for  the  more  vital 
positions,  that  it  is  just  possible  this  was  actually  the  rough 
basis  on  which  our  Admiralty  made  their  distribution.  The 
idea  indicated  is  that,  having  thus  secured  nominal  equality, 
they  trusted  to  the  superior  efficiency  of  our  service  as  a 
whole  for  the  necessary  margin  of  strength.  A  similar 
basis  of  calculation  appears  to  have  prevailed  in  France. 
When,  at  the  crisis  of  the  campaign,  Ganteaume  was  urged 
by  Napoleon  to  make  a  dash  up  Channel  Avith  his  twenty- 
one  of  the  line,  of  which  three  only  Avere  three-deckers,  he 
objected  "  on  the  ground  that  at  any  moment  he  might  be 
confronted  A\dth  thirty  of  the  line  of  Avhich  tAvelve  Avero 
three-deckers,  a  force,"  he  says,  "  Avhich  Avould  be  almost 
double  ours."^ 

On  the  question  of  tactical  values  there  still  remains 
another  point  to  be  cleared  up  before  Ave  can  approach  the 

1  Life  of  Nelson,  ii.  333. 

*  Ganteaume  to  Napoleon,  July  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  640.  The  calculation 
works  out  in  this  way :  30  of  the  line  with  12  three-deckers  =  42  units. 
Ganteanme's  21  with  3  three-deckers  =  24  units.  The  Admiralty  finally  fixed 
the  minimum  force  for  Cornwallis  at  18  of  the  line.  The  three-deckers  varied 
normally  from  5  to  8.  Taking  the  average  number  as  6,  we  again  get  24 
units,  as  against  Ganteaume's  24.  Similarly  when,  on  Missiessy's  return  to 
Kochefort,  Gardner  detached  Graves  to  blockade  him,  he  left  himself  with 
8  three-deckers  and  7  others,  or  23  units  to  watch  Ganteaume's  24;  but 
Gardner's  flagship  was  the  newly-launched  Hihernia  of  120  guns,  the  largest 
ship  in  the  navy.  When  Stirling  from  Rochefort  joined  Calder  in  order  to 
intercept  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  coming  back  from  the  West  Indies,  they 
had  together  15  of  the  line  with  4  three-deckers,  or  19  units.  The  Curlenx 
had  reported  the  allies  to  be  17  of  the  line,  but  they  were  really  20  with  six 
80-gun  ships.  Gardner  before  Brest  at  the  end  of  May  had  10  three-deckers 
and  12  others=:32  units,  including  Collingwood's  squadron  of  2  three-deckers 
and  8  others,  or  12  units.  Under  his  discretionary  power,  therefore,  he  only 
detached  half  Collingwood's  squadron,  which  left  him  with  26  units,  of  whicli, 
however,  3  were  only  sixty-fours. — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  27.  Many  similar 
instances  will  be  noticed  in  the  course  of  the  campaign. 


NAPOLEON'S    ''ALL   BIG-GUN"   TYPE         47 

campaign  with  any  security  of  judgment.  Modem  English 
critics  of  high  authority  have  pronounced  that  although 
the  British  service  was  richer  in  three-deckers,  yet  this 
apparent  superiority  was  discounted  by  the  fact  that,  ship 
for  ship  and  rate  for  rate,  French  ships  were  superior  in 
size  and  weight  of  metal  l^to  the  British.^  This  result  is 
arrived  at  by  comparing  the  nominal  broadside,  or  weight 
of  "rated"  guns  only.  But  this  test  is  misleading  owing 
to  the  fact  that  most  of  the  British  ships  now  carried  a 
formidable  extra  or  unrated  battery  of  heavy  carronades  on 
their  quarter-decks  and  forecastles.  Even  the  largest  class 
of  24-pounder  seventy-fours,  such  as  the  Mars,  carried  from 
tAvelve  to  fourteen  32-pounders,  which  raised  the  weight  of 
the  broadside  at  fighting  range  to  over  1000  Ibs.^ 

As  to  the  undoubted  value  of  the  new  armament  and 
its  logical  consequence,  we  have  the  opinion  of  that  great 
artillerist  Napoleon  himself.  At  the  crisis  of  the  naval 
struggle  nothing  caused  him  more  anxiety  than  the  advan- 
tage derived  by  his  enemy  from  this  carronade  armament. 
In  March  1805,  so  great  was  his  concern  that  he  gave 
Decres  a  definite  order  to  re-arm  certain  types  of  ships  in- 
cluding seventy-fours  on  the  all  big-gun  one-calibre  system. 
"  I  have  several  times  spoken,"  he  says,  "  of  my  project  of 
arming  ships  of  the  line  with  guns  of  the  same  calibre." 
All  light  guns  from  12-pounders  downwards  were  to  be 
abolished,  and  nothing  but  36-pounders  and  36-pound  car- 
ronades retained.  ''  I  think,"  he  says,  "  this  carronade  will 
have  greater  power  than  an  ordinary  18-pounder.  .  .  .  When 
ships  are  firing  at  600  toises  (about  1600  yards),  they  will 
not  do  much  harm ;  at  300  toises  this  volume  of  3 6 -pound 
shot  will  smash  the  masts  and  spars."  Decres  accordingly 
was  to  arm  a  frigate  in  this  way,  and  also  a  seventy-four 
"with  36-pounders  in  its  first  battery,  and  36-pound  car- 
ronades in  its  second,  and  lighter  carronades  on  the  quarter- 
deck and  forecastle.  "  In  this  war,"  he  urges,  "  the  English 
have    been   the   first    to    use    carronades,   and    everywhere 

^  See  particularly  "  Barfleur,"  Naval  Policy,  p.  212. 

2  Many  of  the  smaller  18-pounder  seventy-fours  also  carried  twelve  32- 
pounder  carronades,  e.g.  the  Dragon  (1815  tons)  had  tv^enty-eight  32-pounders, 
thirty-four  18-pounders,  and  twelve  32-pounder  carronades. 


48  OPENING    OF   THE    CAMPAIGN 

they  have  done  us  great  harm.  We  must  hasten  to  perfect 
their  system,  for  the  argument  is  all  on  one  side  for  sea 
service  in  favour  of  the  system  of  large  calibres,  and  we 
ought  to  put  the  calibres  higher  than  36  if  it  were  not  for 
the  difficulty  of  handling  the  shot.  I  specially  desire  that 
you  will  not  lose  sight  of  an  object  so  important.  I  am  per- 
suaded that  a  seventy -four  able  in  this  way  to  fire  seventy-four 
or  seventy-six  guns  with  30 -pound  shot  would  have  an  incal- 
culable advantage  over  a  ship  armed  in  the  ordinary  way."  ^ 
The  trouble  was  to  get  carronades  enough,  and  all  through 
the  year  he  kept  pressing  his  minister  on  the  subject.  "  It 
was  with  carronades,"  he  says,  "  the  English  set  the  Lorient 
on  fire  [that  is,  at  the  battle  of  the  Nile],  and  in  them  they 
have  an  immense  advantage  over  us ; "  and  a  fortnight  later 
more  urgently,  in  answer  to  Decres'  difficulties  in  providing 
them :  *'  The  least  that  can  be  asked  of  the  administrative 
branch  is  that  soldiers  shall  fight  with  equal  arms.  It  is 
the  first  duty  of  a  minister,  and  nothing  can  excuse  his  not 
fulfilling  it.  Have  we  not  disadvantage  enough  without 
that  of  armament  ?  Your  '  ifs  '  and  *  huts  ' — that  is  no 
justification."  Then  a  week  later,  as  the  crisis  approaches 
and  Ganteaume  cannot  move  from  Brest,  more  vehemently 
still :  "  But,  for  God's  sake,  ship  me  some  carronades.  It 
is  only  Avith  guns  you  can  arm  ships  of  the  line,  and  for 
ships  of  the  line  there  is  nothing  but  guns  of  heavy  calibre." 
So  every  w^eek  comes  a  fresh  reprimand.  ''  The  English," 
he  writes  from  Genoa,  as  he  is  about  to  start  for  Boulogne, 
"  without  saying  a  word,  have  practised  this  method.  Here's 
ten  years  Ave  are  behind  their  Admiralty.  ...  I  see  no 
attention  being  paid  to  it."  But  to  the  end  he  could  not 
get  it  done.^ 

It  is  clear  then  that  we  cannot  assume  that  our  superi- 
ority in  three-deckers  was  neutralised  by  the  greater  size 
and  nominal  armament  of  the  French  two-deckers.  How- 
ever low  may  be  our  opinion  of  Napoleon  on  points  of  naval 
tactics  and  strategy,  as  an  authority  upon  gunnery  he 
stands  in  the  first  rank.     It  is  entirely  a  question  of  gunnery 

^  Napoleon  to  Decr&s,  March  13,  1805  :  Correspondance,  x.  221. 
2  Napoleon  to  Decres,  ibid.,  June  2,  13,  22;  July  5,  19. 


March  RELATIVE    VALUES    OF    SHIPS  49 

and  armament,  and  judging  by  these  tests  Napoleon — the 
man  most  nearly  concerned  and  having  through  his  excellent 
naval  intelligence  department  the  best  means  of  knowing — 
had  no  doubt  whatever  that  we  had  stolen  a  march  on  liim 
and  that  ship  for  ship  we  had  a  material  advantage  that 
was  not  fair  to  his  own  men. 

This  opinion  in  the  absence  of  strong  rebutting  evidence 
we  are  bound  to  accept.  We  must  take  it  that  there  was 
nothing  in  the  respective  armaments  to  negative  the  basis 
of  comparison  which  is  to  be  assumed  from  the  actual 
British  distribution,  and  which  is  confirmed  by  Ganteaume 
and  Napoleon,  that  one  three-decker  in  a  squadron  was 
regarded  as  the  equivalent  of  at  least  two  two-deckers. 
Even  the  presence  of  the  powerful  French  80 -gun  ships 
will  not  detract  from  the  general  rule,  for  we  too  had  this 
type  of  ship,  and  any  excess  the  French  had  would  be 
balanced  by  our  first-rate  three-deckers,  while  the  second- 
rates,  that  is  three-decked  ships  under  100  guns,  balanced 
the  seventy -fours. 

With  this  rule  then  as  a  rough  guide  we  may  approach 
the  campaign  with  some  confidence  in  our  ability  to  appraise 
the  relative  values  of  fleets.  As  March  drew  to  an  end  the 
real  campaign  of  Trafalgar  was  about  to  open.  To  appreciate 
the  situation  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  was  to  open 
not  only  with  the  first  moves  of  Napoleon's  great  offensive 
combination,  but  also  with  the  first  moves  of  our  offensive 
combination  with  Russia.  By  the  middle  of  March,  it  will 
be  remembered,  the  basis  of  the  treaty  with  Russia  had  been 
settled  and  the  British  draft  had  gone  to  St.  Petersburg. 
Without  waiting  for  the  actual  conclusion  of  the  treaty 
Craig's  orders  were  issued.  His  force,  besides  300  light 
dragoons,  consisted  of  six  battalions  of  infantry,  two  of 
which  were  to  be  dropped  at  Gibraltar  and  the  rest  taken 
on  to  garrison  Malta,  thereby  setting  free  some  8000 
seasoned  troops.  Forty-five  transports  were  ready  for  their 
reception,  and  for  the  escort  two  of  the  line,  the  Queen,  a 
three-decker,  and  the  Dragon  74,  which  Rear- Admiral 
Knight  was  taking  out  to  reinforce  Orde  before  Cadiz. 
The  instructions  of  Earl  Camden,  Secretary  for  War  and 

D 


so  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN  march 

the  Colonies,  dated  March  28tli,  directed  the  expedition  to 
proceed  to  Malta  unless  in  the  progress  of  the  voyage  extra- 
ordinary circumstances  should  make  it  necessary  to  alter 
the  course.  The  document  was  drawn  in  the  traditional 
manner  of  the  elder  Pitt,  enumerating  every  probable  objec- 
tive upon  which  the  force  might  be  used  with  profit,  so  as 
to  give  the  General  the  freest  hand  to  act  in  accordance 
with  circumstances  as  he  found  them.  But  the  main  purpose 
was  kept  clearly  in  the  front.  "  It  being  of  the  utmost 
importance,"  they  ran,  "  that  Sicily  should  not  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  French,  the  protection  of  that  island  is  to  be 
considered  as  the  principal  object  of  the  expedition."  In 
his  method  of  procedure  Craig  was  to  be  guided  by  Hugh 
Elliot,  our  minister  at  Naples,  who  had  to  consider  the 
possibility  of  having  to  act  with  or  without  the  concurrence 
of  the  King  of  Naples.  In  the  former  case  Craig  was  to  do 
all  in  his  power  to  assist  the  King  to  secure  Sicily.  If, 
however,  the  King  did  not  ask  for  help  and  should  be 
induced  by  France  to  close  his  ports  to  British  ships,  or  if 
the  French  should  attack  the  island  or  even  be  certainly 
known  to  be  preparing  an  attack,  then  he  was  to  use  his 
utmost  exertions,  in  concert  with  Lord  Nelson,  for  the 
defence  of  Sicily,  with  or  without  the  King's  assent.  Such 
was  the  substance  of  Craisf's  instructions — a  clear  enunciation 
of  our  old  policy,  that  the  key  of  the  Mediterranean,  what- 
ever the  attitude  of  its  ruler,  must  not  pass  into  French 
hands.  Upon  so  much  we  were  determined,  and  deter- 
mined, moreover,  with  or  without  the  assistance  of  Russia. 

But  further  "  most  secret  "  instructions  were  given  him 
in  view  of  Russian  co-operation.  Here  again  two  cases  had 
to  be  considered  ;  "  first,  that  of  an  attack  being  made  by  the 
French  upon  Naples  and  his  being  called  upon  by  Mr. 
Elliot  or  the  Russian  commander  to  assist  in  defending 
the  Neapolitan  dominions.  Secondly,  the  case  of  the 
French  forces  being  driven  from  Naples  by  the  Russian 
army  or  withdrawn  with  a  view  to  counteract  the  move- 
ments of  armies  which  might  be  acting  against  France 
in  the  North  of  Ital}^"  In  either  case  he  was  autho- 
rised    on    application    from    Elliot    or     the    Austrian    or 


March  28  CRAIG'S   INSTRUCTIONS  51 

Russian  commanders  to  use  his  force  in  Italy,  if  in  his 
judgment  he  considered  effective  service  could  be  done ; 
and  for  this  purpose  he  might  place  himself  under  General 
Lacy,  the  Russian  Commander-in-chief.  He  was,  however, 
to  bear  in  mind  that  there  might  be  other  services  which 
would  call  for  the  employment  of  his  force,  particularly 
the  protection  of  Alexandria  and  Sardinia,  and  he  Avas 
therefore  not  to  engage  so  far  in  the  continental  campaign 
as  not  to  be  able  to  withdraw  his  force  if  necessary.^ 

Sir  Henry  Bunbury,  who  was  Quartermaster-General  to 
the  expedition,  severely  criticises  these  instructions.  "  The 
different  and  unconnected  objects,"  he  writes,  "  to  which 
Sir  James  Craig's  attention  was  thus  directed,  afford  us 
ample  evidence,  that  the  views  of  the  Cabinet  were  based 
on  no  principle  or  sound  plan  of  operations."  But  clearly 
they  were  based — soundly  enough — on  the  uncertain  diplo- 
matic situation  and  on  its  most  likely  developments.  They 
were  designed  in  relation  to  our  engagements  with  Russia, 
and  at  bottom  were  the  expression  of  a  determination  with 
or  without  her  assistance  to  secure  the  naval  positions  which 
in  Nelson's  view  were  essential  to  the  command  of  the 
Mediterranean.  Could  there  be  any  doubt  that  this  was 
the  connection  and  the  principle  in  the  mind  of  the  Cabinet, 
it  must  be  removed  when  we  know  that  the  day  before 
Craig's  orders  were  signed  a  co-py  of  them  was  forwarded 
to  Nelson.^ 

Besides  the  duty  of  escorting  the  expedition  Knight's 
squadron  was  to  take  down  the  Mediterranean  and  East 
and  West  Indian  trade — all  of  which  went  tooether  as  far 

o 

as  the  latitude  of  Cape  St.  Vincent.  To  pass  this  vast 
convoy  through  in  the  face  of  the  enemy's  undefeated 
fleets  was  no  light  task.  Craig  himself  had  to  traverse 
2500  miles  of  uncommanded  sea  in  the  face  of  five  hostile 
squadrons,  none  of  which  were  too  strongly  blockaded  and 
not  one  of  which  had  yet  been  brought  to  action. 

The  principle  on  which  we  have  always  conducted  such 
operations  is  to  provide,  firstly,  an  escort  strong  enough  to 

'  Bunbury,  Passages  in  the  Great  War,  p.  183.      W.O.  {d),  56,  March  28. 
^  Admiralty  Secretary,  In-letters  {Secret  Orders),  vol.  1363,  March  27. 


52  OPENING   OF   THE    CAMPAIGN  march 

resist  sporadic  attacks  from  minor  cruising  squadrons ;  and 
secondly,  powerful  covering  squadrons  to  prevent  serious 
licet  interruption.  Knight's  squadron  formed  the  escort ; 
Avhile  the  cover  was  provided  by  our  various  blockading 
squadrons.  All  that  was  required  was  to  link  them  up  in 
regular  succession,  and  orders  were  now  issued  for  the  chain 
to  be  formed.  Cornwallis  could  make  sure  of  Brest  and 
Calder  of  Ferrol.  Beyond  the  secure  coast  of  Portugal. 
Orde  was  directed  to  look  out  for  the  expedition  and  sec 
it  safe  past  Cadiz  and  Cartagena  a  certain  distance  up  the 
Straits.  There  Nelson  was  to  take  up  a  position  to  cover 
its  passage  to  Malta  against  any  force  issuing  from  Toulon.^ 
It  was  a  bold  operation,  but  the  risk  had  to  be  run,  and  how 
serious  that  risk  was  we  shall  presently  see. 

As  the  last  preparations  were  being  made  and  the  great 
convoy  was  gathering  at  Spithead,  Napoleon's  widespread 
movement  was  ripe  for  execution.  From  every  blockaded 
port  were  coming  in  reports  that  could  not  be  mistaken. 
Off  Ferrol  Calder  obtained  information  that  the  squadron 
was  to  be  ready  to  sail  on  March  22nd.  On  the  26th 
Ganteaume  w\as  observed  moving  out  of  Brest  harbour 
into  the  outer  road.  Cornwallis  had  just  gone  home 
on  sick  leave :  his  successor  had  not  arrived.  Sir  Charles 
Cotton  had  been  left  in  command  with  seventeen  of  the 
line,  and  he  immediately  moved  close  in,  for  the  Brest 
blockade,  unlike  that  of  Toulon,  was  always  of  the  closest 
possible  kind.^  The  idea  of  keeping  the  French  in  seems 
normally  to  have  dominated  that  of  bringing  them  to 
action,  and  in  the  present  case  nothing  could  have  been 
more  exasperating  for  Napoleon.  His  plan  of  campaign 
rested  on  Ganteaurae's  being  able  to  get  to  sea  without 
fighting.  On  March  24th  he  telegraphed  to  Napoleon  that 
the  enemy  were  in  the  Iroise  passage  and  to  sail  without  an 


1  Admiralty  Secretary,  In-httrrH  {Secret  Ordevii)^  vol.  13G3,  April  G  and  15. 

2  Cotton  had  6  three-deckers,  2  eightys,  and  9  others,  against  Ganteaunie's 
?>  three-deckers,  2  eightys,  and  IG  seventy-fours.  Cotton,  in  his  despatch 
(as  printed  in  BJorhtdc  of  Brest,  p.  217),  says  he  had  7  of  the  line. 
Collingwood  says  17  [Ibid.,  223).  Gardner  was  about  to  join  in  another  three- 
deckei',  Hihcriiia  120,  which  would  give  him  25  units  against  2.|.  For  Gan- 
teaume's  view  of  the  comparative  foice,  see  ante,  p.  46  n. 


I 


March  26         COTTON   AND    GANTEAUME  53 

action  was  impossible.  The  signal  stations  could  only  count 
fifteen  of  the  line  and  he  wished  to  risk  an  action.  "  Success 
is  not  doubtful,"  he  urged.  "  I  await  your  Majesty's  orders." 
"  A  naval  victory,"  Napoleon  replied,  "  in  existing  cir- 
cumstances can  lead  to  nothing.  Keep  but  one  end  in 
view — to  fulfil  your  mission.  Get  to  sea  without  an 
action." 

It   was  under   these   final   orders   that   Ganteaume  on 
March    26th   moved  outside   the   Goulet  or  Gut  into   the 
Bertheaume  anchorage,  which  had  been  heavily  fortified  to 
facilitate  his  escape.     All  he  required  was  a  spell  of  thick 
weather.     Next  morning  it  came  and  he  signalled  to  weigh ; 
but  just  as  he  was  making  sail  the  fog  lifted,  and  in  the  light 
of  a  glorious  spring  morning  the  signal  station  announced 
the  British  fleet  in  the  offing.     Cotton  was  standing  in  on 
a  gentle   northerly  breeze  with  his  whole    seventeen    sail. 
Bound  by  his  orders,  Ganteaume  directed  the  fleet  to  moor 
where  it  was,  and  Cotton  held  on  to  within  five  miles  of 
him.     It  was  more  than  Ganteaume  could  endure.     He  feared 
an  attack  at  anchor,  another  Battle  of  the  Nile,  and  though, 
with  the  wind  as  it  was,  a  return  into  Brest  was  impos- 
sible, he  signalled  to  prepare  to  make  sail.     "  My  position, 
Sire,"  he  wrote  to  Napoleon,  "  on  this  occasion  was  difficult. 
I  found  myself  compelled  to  disobey  the  orders  you  had 
given  me,  as  to  risking  an  action  of  which  the  issue  was 
doubtful."     He  had  actually  made   the  signal  to  cut  and 
form  battle  order  as  convenient,  when  he  saw  Cotton  tack 
and    stand    out  again.     "  Night   closing   very   fast,"   wrote 
Cotton,  "  and  having  previously  placed  Rear- Admiral   Sir 
Thomas  Graves  with  four  sail  of  the  line  and  other  smaller 
vessels  to  keep  sight  of  the  enemy,  I  stood  out  with  my 
squadron."    It  was  a  fine  chance  missed,  a  chance  of  at  least 
putting  the  Brest  squadron  out  of  action  for  the  campaign ; 
but  seeing  Cotton  was  only  in  temporary  command  he  can 
hardly  be  blamed  for  not  risking  the  fleet  in  such  dangerous 
waters  and  for    preferring  to  take   a  more   open   position, 
where,   as   he  said,  "  should  they  proceed  to   sea   I   have 
confident  hopes  I  shall  be  able  to  intercept  them."     But 
Ganteaume  made  no  further  effort.     On  the  third  morning 


54  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN         march 

the  ^vind  came  fresh  from  the  south-west  and  he  was  forced 
to  run  back  into  Brest  for  safety.^ 

As  the  reports  of  these  simultaneous  movements  reached 
the  Admiralty  their  anxiety  centred  on  Ferrol.  It  seemed 
to  be  indicated  as  the  focus  of  the  mysterious  plan  that  was 
obviously  in  the  wind.  Urgent  orders  were  accordingly 
sent  to  Gardner  to  get  to  his  command  at  once  and  to 
reinforce  Calder  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability.  But  the 
danger  Avas  not  there.  Gourdon  was  not  to  move  from 
Ferrol  till  Gantcaume  appeared,  and  in  that  port  too  all 
remained  quiet.  Only  in  Toulon  was  there  any  change. 
"  Get  to  sea  without  an  action,"  Napoleon  had  telegraphed 
to  Ganteaume  on  the  24th.  "  That  which  is  to  join  you  has 
started."  This  was  not  true.  Villeneuve  was  still  in  Toulon 
and  Nelson  was  watching  him  before  the  port ;  but  it 
Avas  characteristic  of  Napoleon's  handling  to  stimulate  his 
Admirals  with  rose-coloured  information.  When  Nelson  had 
satisfied  himself  by  his  cast  to  the  eastwards  that  the  Morea 
and  Egypt  w^ere  safe,  he  returned  in  hot  haste  to  Pula  Roads 
in  the  south  of  Sardinia,  to  meet  his  store-ships.  There 
he  was  kept  by  foul  weather  all  the  first  week  in  March. 
Not  till  the  0  th  could  he  get  to  his  rendezvous  in  the  Gulf 
of  Palmas,  at  the  south-west  of  the  island,  and  next  day, 
having  heard  Villeneuve  was  again  embarking  his  troops,  he 
decided  to  take  the  squadron  up  to  Toulon." 

At  the  crisis  which  had  now  come  he  had  to  act  entirely 
on  his  own  inspiration.  Of  two  successive  despatch  vessels 
which  had  been  sent  him,  one  had  been  wrecked  off  Cadiz 
and  the  other  had  run  into  Villeneuve's  fleet  and  been  cap- 
tured. He  had  heard  nothing  from  home  since  Novem- 
ber, and  his  position  consequently  was  one  of  peculiar 
difficulty.      He   found    at   Toulon    every  appearance    that 

1  Ganteaume  to  the  Emperor  :  Desbricrc,  v.  47o.  Cotton  to  Admiralty : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  217. 

-  From  various  references  in  his  letters  it  appears  that  Palmas  was  Ren- 
dezvous 98.  The  xjosition  south  of  Toulon  was  No.  102.  No.  97  was  "  under 
Cape  St.  kSebastiaii,"  just  north  of  Palamos  in  Catalonia.  A  list  of  Mediter- 
ranean Rendezvous  in  use  at  this  time  is  yet  to  seek.  In  Add  MSS.  34950, 
p.  49,  there  is  such  a  list  issued  by  Nelson  in  September  1805.  It  was  the 
official  list  which  was  used  throughout  the  rest  of  the  war,  but  its  numbers 
differ  from  those  of  the  earlier  list :  e.g.  "  Off  Toulon  "  was  No.  93  in  the  new 
list. 


March  NELSON   LAYS   A    TRAP  55 

Villeneuve  was  about  to  put  to  sea,  but  whither  he  could 
not  tell.  For  a  long  time  past  he  had  believed  that  his 
resolute  covering  of  Sicily  and  the  Levant  would  sooner  or 
later  force  the  Toulon  squadron  out  of  the  Mediterranean. 
Yet  he  still  inclined  to  think  Egypt  was  their  aim,  and  he 
was  still  bound  both  by  his  orders  and  his  own  judgment 
to  make  Sicily  and  Sardinia  his  first  care.  To  cover  both 
the  eastward  and  westward  lines  of  operation  was  im- 
possible, except  by  lying  close  before  Toulon,  and  that  was  a 
station  that  could  not  be  maintained  indefinitely,  nor  while 
it  was  maintained  was  there  any  hope  of  bringing  Ville- 
neuve to  decisive  action.  Nelson  therefore  had  to  make 
his  choice  between  one  line  and  the  other.  That  which  led 
out  of  the  Straits  was  the  line  of  least  danger;  the  line 
of  greatest  danger  was  that  which  led  to  Sicily  and  Naples, 
and  this  one  he  determined  to  secure.  But  the  other  was 
not  opened  without  an  effort  to  force  his  adversary  away 
from  it,  and  entrap  him  into  an  action  which  would  solve 
the  strategical  dilemma. 

On  March  11th  Nelson  laid  down  the  whole  scheme  in 
a  "  Most  Secret  Memorandum."  The  fleet  rendezvous  must 
be  one  that  would  cover  Naples,  Sardinia,  and  Sicily.  Palmas 
was  chosen.  But  before  going  there  he  meant  to  show 
himself  off  Barcelona.  This  was  the  trap.  On  the  one 
hand  it  would  prevent  Villeneuve  stealing  down  the  Cata- 
lonian  coast  out  of  reach,  and  on  the  other  it  would  tempt 
him  to  put  to  sea  directly  to  the  eastward  where  Nelson 
believed  his  real  objective  lay.  Accordingly  he  suddenly 
disappeared  from  before  Toulon  and  nothing  but  a  couple 
of  cruisers  were  to  be  seen. 

On  March  26  th  Villeneuve  received  his  final  orders  to 
sail  for  Martinique  not  later  than  the  morrow.  He  had  just 
heard  Nelson  had  been  seen  off  Barcelona  on  the  17  th. 
"  If  he  maintains  this  position,"  he  wrote,  "  I  shall  have 
great  difficulty  in  reaching  the  Straits."  On  the  evening 
of  the  30th  he  put  to  sea  in  the  Bucentaure  80,  with  three 
other  80-gun  ships,  seven  seventy-fours,  eight  cruisers,  and 
over  3000  troops.  In  order  to  give  Barcelona  a  wide  berth 
he  laid  his  course  to  the  southward  intending  to  pass  out- 


56  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN  March 

side  the  Balearic  Islands.  Next  day  he  found  himself 
shadowed  by  the  two  frigates  that  Nelson  had  left  on  the 
Toulon  rendezvous.  In  the  night  they  disappeared.  So 
far  then  all  was  going  as  Nelson  Avished.  The  trap  was 
acting  perfectly.  The  course  Villeneuve  was  taking  would 
bring  him  well  within  striking  distance  of  Nelson's  secret 
position.  But  at  the  last  moment  everything  Avas  upset  by 
one  of  those  incalculable  chances  which  are  inseparable 
from  naval  warfare.  In  the  morning  Villeneuve  had  the  luck 
to  speak  a  neutral — a  Ragusan  merchantman — and  learned 
from  her  where  Nelson  was.  She  had  sighted  his  squadron 
not  on  the  Spanish  coast  at  all,  but  at  Palmas.  In  the  very 
hour  of  success  the  trap  Avas  sprung,  and  Villeneuve  imme- 
diately altered  his  course  to  pass  inside  the  Balearic  Islands. 
It  w^as  a  stroke  of  ill  luck  against  which  Nelson  had  not 
provided.  A  rigorous  criticism  Avill  say  that  the  chance 
of  Villeneuve's  getting  intelligence  from  a  neutral  was  one 
on  which  Nelson  ought  to  have  counted  in  those  busy  seas, 
and  that  when  he  left  the  inner  Balearic  channel  open  he 
should  have  had  a  cruiser  there  to  watch  it,  especially  as  it 
led  directly  to  Cartagena  Avhere  a  Spanish  squadron  lay. 
Whether  Villeneuve  was  bound  east  or  west  it  was  a  pro- 
bable line  for  him  to  take.  But  from  this  counsel  of 
perfection  Nelson's  schemes  fell  short — perhaps  from  lack 
of  cruisers — and  Villeneuve  was  able  to  run  clear  down  the 
coast  of  Spain  out  of  his  ken.^ 

An  acute  crisis  in  the  campaign  was  the  result.  As 
Villeneuve  thus  successfully  opened  the  great  attack,  Craig 
at  Portsmouth  had  just  completed  the  embarkation  of  his 
force,  and  all  was  ready.  Knight  Avas  only  Avaiting  for  a 
Avind  and  for  the  trade  to  assemble,  and  to  all  appearance 
the  tAvo  hostile  offensive  movements  Avere  about  to  clash  at 
sea  and  precipitate  a  catastrophe. 

>  Nelson  did  apparently  have  a  cruiser  on  Rendezvous  07,  "  off  Cape  St. 
Sebastian,"  and  this  perhaps  he  thought  was  enough  to  locate  Villeneuve  if 
he  tried  to  steal  down  the  coast  of  Spain.  But  as  the  Toulon  squadron 
started  south  to  pass  outside  the  Balearic  Islands,  Rendezvous  97  was  not 
approached. 


GEORGE  PHILIP!  SON  L^'  THE  LONDON  GEOGRAPHICAL  INSTITUTe 

To  race  pa^e  57  Zongmxaxs,  Green,  Sc  Co.  Landinv,Newyark,  Homing  &  CtHcuOa. . 


CHAPTER   IV 

VILLENEUVE'S  EVASION 

As  yet  Villeneuve  knew  nothing  definitely  of  the  great 
combination  he  was  to  carry  out.  So  far  as  he  had  been 
informed  his  mission  lay  wholly  in  the  West  Indies,  where 
he  was  to  operate  against  the  English  islands  and  reinforce 
those  of  France.  All  else  was  under  sealed  orders,  yet  he 
had  been  given  a  hint  that  there  was  more  beyond.  "  The 
Squadron,"  wrote  Napoleon,  "  with  the  command  of  which  I 
have  entrusted  you  is  destined  for  an  operation  of  an  im- 
portance quite  above  that  for  which  I  first  intended  it."  It 
was  with  these  words  that  on  March  22nd  he  prefaced  his 
final  urgent  orders  for  Villeneuve  to  get  to  sea  and  pick  up 
what  Spanish  ships  should  be  found  ready  at  Cadiz ;  and 
as  the  Emperor  penned  the  orders  Nelson  was  anchoring  his 
battle  squadron  at  his  rendezvous  in  the  Gulf  of  Palmas  to 
watch  the  snare  he  had  set. 

As  he  lay  there  waiting  for  the  word  from  his  observing 
cruisers,  the  strain  upon  his  high-wrought  temperament 
grew  each  day  more  intense.  He  was  still  fretting  over  his 
false  cast  to  Egypt,  for  in  his  absence  our  Levant  convoy 
homeward-bound  had  been  cut  up  by  a  cruiser  squadron 
from  Toulon.  Both  the  escorting  vessels  had  been  cap- 
tured, but  only  after  so  stubborn  a  resistance  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  convoy  escaped  into  Gibraltar.  Nelson 
had  just  heard  of  their  being  there,  and  knowing  they 
would  be  exposed  to  an  attack  from  the  Alge^iras  gunboats, 
he  determined  to  detach  Sir  Richard  Strachan  in  the  Renoum 
74,  which  was  due  home  for  a  refit,  to  see  them  clear. ^ 

^  For  Nelson's  "  Order  of  Battle  and  Sailing  "  issued  here,  March  26th, 
see  Hubback,  Jane  Austen' s  Sailor  Brothers,  p.  132.  It  is  for  twelve  ships, 
including  the  Excellent,  in  two  divisions.     See  x>ost,  p.  162. 


58  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  march 

But  anxiety  for  the  trade  was  the  least  of  his  trials. 
As  the  days  went  by  without  a  sign  of  any  movement  from 
Toulon,  he  began  to  think  VillenCuve  was  not  coming  out 
at  all.  "  I  shall  remain  here  a  few  weeks  longer,"  he  wrote 
to  his  friend  Sir  Alexander  Ball  at  Malta,  "  when,  if  the 
French  do  not  put  to  sea,  I  think  it  very  probable  they  will 
lay  up  for  the  summer,  unless  the  Brest  or  Ferrol  and  Cadiz 
fleets  should  come  into  the  Mediterranean."  To  Elliot  he 
expressed  the  same  opinion.  Ill  news  from  Naples  com- 
pelled him  to  face  the  possibility  of  a  powerful  naval  opera- 
tion in  that  quarter  and  was  turning  his  mind  from  Egypt. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  one  of  Napoleon's  first  steps  in 
the  war  had  been  to  order  General  St.  Cyr  to  reoccupy  the 
southern  Neapolitan  ports  which  he  had  evacuated  under 
the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  and  Apulia  ever  since  had  been  in  the 
occupation  of  a  corps  of  observation,  facing  the  Russians  at 
Corfu  and  watching  the  Neapolitan  Court.  At  the  first 
sign  of  Russian  intervention  Napoleon  had  reinforced  it, 
and  St.  Cyr's  standing  orders  were  to  march  on  Naples 
the  moment  the  Russians  moved.^  Vague  rumours  of 
Craig's  expedition  had  further  aggravated  the  situation. 
The  Neapolitans  had  magnified  it  to  20,000  men,  and  were 
arming  in  readiness  to  co-operate.  This  Napoleon  would 
not  endure,  and  St.  Cyr  had  been  instructed  to  demand  on 
pain  of  an  immediate  attack  not  only  that  the  mobilisation 
should  cease,  but  that  Elliot  must  be  expelled.  To  Nelson's 
dismay  Elliot  was  inclined  to  submit.  He  had  just  told 
the  harassed  Admiral  that  his  object  all  along  had  been  to 
temporise  "  in  order  to  gain  time  for  the  arrival  of  the 
foreign  auxiliaries,  Russian  and  English,  which  have  been 
so  long  promised  " ;  and  if  the  King  asked  him  to  retire  to 
Sicily  he  probably  should  do  so.  In  that  case  he  should 
want  a  passage  in  the  Excellent,  the  ship  of  the  line  which 
Nelson  had  been  authorised  to  keep  permanently  at  Naples 
for  the  safety  of  the  Court."  Elliot's  apparently  weak  atti- 
tude completed  Nelson's  depression.     "  France,"  he  wrote  to 

'  Auriol,  La  France,  V Awjlctevre,  ct  Naples,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-(5. 
2  Ibid.,  chap.  V.  and  p.  222  (Alquier  to  Talleyrand,  March  29tli) ;  and 
Nicolas,  vi.  377. 


April  NELSON'S   STRATEGY  59 

Earl  Camden,  "  will  have  both  Sardinia  and  Sicily  very  soon, 
if  we  do  not  prevent  it,  and  Egypt  besides."  Then  he  heard 
that  Villeneuve  had  embarked  his  troops  on  March  21st, 
and  his  spirits  rose.  He  weighed  to  move  to  the  south- 
ward, but  squally  weather  compelled  him  to  take  refuge  in 
Pula  Roads.  On  April  3rd  he  weighed  again,  and  on  the 
following  morning  one  of  his  observing  cruisers  ran  into  the 
Heet  with  news  that  three  days  since,  at  eight  o'clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  31st,  she  had  left  Villeneuve  some  sixty 
miles  south-by-west  of  Toulon,  or  about  300  miles  from 
where  Nelson  was.  He  immediately  moved  to  the  west- 
ward, "  as  I  do  not  believe,"  so  he  said,  "  the  French  will 
make  Toro  .  .  . ;  but  I  believe  if  they  do  not  make  Toro, 
they  will  make  Galita." 

Toro  is  a  little  island  off  the  south-west  extremity  of 
Sardinia,  and  Galita  lies  olt*  the  coast  of  Tunis  just  a  hun- 
dred miles  to  the  southward.  What  then  was  apparently 
in  his  mind  was  that  the  French,  instead  of  making  the 
usual  landfall  for  a  voyage  from  Toulon  to  Sicily,  would 
try  to  get  round  him  by  hugging  the  African  coast,  and 
he  must  cut  them  off.  There  was  still,  however,  another 
cruiser  to  come  in,  before  he  need  commit  himself  to  any 
serious  movement.  In  the  afternoon  she  appeared,  but  only 
to  say  that  in  the  night  of  the  31st  she  had  completely  lost 
touch.  She  had  in  fact  been  thrown  out  when  Villeneuve 
changed  his  course  in  the  night  on  the  Ragusan  s  report 
of  where  Nelson  really  was.  In  the  absence  of  better 
intelligence  Nelson  was  forced  to  play  for  safety.  He 
immediately  decided  to  take  up  a  position  with  his  battle 
squadron  midway  between  Sardinia  and  Galita,  extending 
his  cruisers  so  as  to  cover  the  whole  passage  from  Toro  to 
the  Tunisian  coast,  and  barring  the  way  to  Naples,  Sicily, 
and  Egypt. 

With  characteristic  concentration  of  purpose  he  was 
fixing  his  mind  firmly  on  his  primary  function.  **  The 
French,"  he  explained  to  Lord  Melville  on  April  5  th,  "  could 
not  pass  before  to-day  if  this  be  their  route.  I  must  leave 
as  little  as  possible  to  chance,  and  I  shall  make  sure  they 
are  to  the  eastward  of  me,  before  I  risk  either  Sardinia, 


6o  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

Sicily,  or  Naples :  for  they  may  delay  their  time  of  coming 
even  this  distance,  from  an  expectation  that  I  shall  push  for 
Egypt  and  thus  leave  them  at  liberty  to  act  against  Sardinia, 
Sicily,  or  Naples."  From  this  clear  determination  to  permit 
no  lesser  object  to  loosen  his  grip  on  the  vital  part  of  the 
war-plan  which  had  been  specially  confided  to  his  charge, 
he  never  swerved  for  one  moment.  For  forty-eight  hours 
he  waited  in  the  central  position  he  had  taken  up,  and 
by  that  time  he  could  feel  sure  he  had  eliminated  from 
the  problem  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's  adopting  the 
stratagem  that  he  had  suspected.  Still  there  was  another 
way  in  which  it  was  possible  for  his  adversary  to  throw  his 
troops  into  Naples  or  Messina  by  evasion.  He  might 
double  back  from  the  point  where  Nelson's  cruisers  had 
located  him  and  pass  inside  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  either 
north-about  or  through  the  Straits  of  Bonifaccio.  Till  he  had 
cleared  this  possibility  everything  else  must  wait.  "  I  am 
in  truth  half-dead,"  he  wrote  to  Ball  on  the  6  th,  "  but  what 
man  can  do  to  find  them  out  shall  be  done.  But  I  must 
not  make  more  haste  than  good  speed  and  leave  Sardinia, 
Sicily,  or  Naples  open  for  them  to  take  should  I  go  east- 
ward or  westward  without  knowing  more  about  them." 
That  evening  to  make  the  vital  ground  sure  he  redistri- 
buted his  cruisers,  and  next  day  moved  off  with  his  battle 
squadron  to  take  up  the  position  which  the  new  possibility 
demanded.  This  position  was  at  the  island  of  Ustica,  some 
fifty  miles  to  the  northward  of  Palermo.  His  object,  as  he 
said,  was  "  to  be  ready  to  push  for  Naples  should  they  be  gone 
there  or  to  protect  Sicily."  ^  His  new  station  he  reached 
on  the  7th,  resolved  not  to  budge  from  it  till  he  was  certain 
neither  Sicily  nor  Naples  was  Villeneuve's  objective.  "  I 
must  be  guided,"  he  wrote  hurriedly  to  Elliot,  "  on  my 
further  movements  by  such  information  as  I  may  be  able 
to    obtain:    but    I    shall    neither  go    to    the    eastward    of 

^  The  Dcw  cruiser  distribution  was  as  follows — one  at  Galita,  one  on  the 
coast  of  Africa,  and  one  between  Galita  and  the  shore,  with  instructions  to 
get  information  from  Tunis.  These  three  were  to  stop  Villeneuve  stealing  to 
the  eastward  by  hugging  the  African  coast.  Then  there  were  two  between 
Nelson  and  Toro,  besides  one  to  ascertain  if  the  enemy  had  passed  the 
(Straits  of  Bonifaccio,  another  to  Naples,  and  a  fifth  to  hark  back  and  sec  if 
the  enemy  had  returned  again  to  Toulon. — Nelson  to  Ball :  Nicolas,  vi.  399. 


April  THE   STRAITS   LEFT   OPEN  6i 

Sicily  nor  to  the  westward  of  Sardinia  until  I  know  some- 
thing positive." 

We  are  accustomed  to  dwell  with  exultation  over  Nelson's 
brilliant  inspirations  and  his  fiery  action,  yet  surely  no  great 
commander  was  ever  more  precise  for  "  positive  informa- 
tion," no  one  more  careful  not  to  act  on  mere  intuitions. 
And  surely  no  moment  glows  more  steadily  with  his  real 
genius  for  war  than  this.  In  resolute  singleness  of  purpose 
he  had  narrowed  his  action  down  to  the  utmost  possibility 
of  what  he  was  certainly  able  to  perform,  and  consumed  as 
his  strained  spirit  was  with  thirst  for  action  nothing  would 
induce  him  to  try  for  more  than  his  strength  warranted  or 
to  hazard  the  greater  danger  in  uncertain  possibility  of 
preventing  the  less.  We  can  easily  imagine  what  the  self- 
restraint  must  have  cost  such  a  nature  as  his,  but  he  did 
not  flinch.  Of  all  dangers  the  least  that  could  befall  was 
that  Villeneuve  should  quit  the  Mediterranean  and  abandon 
its  command.  His  duty  was  to  secure  that  command. 
Upon  that  and  the  positions  essential  to  it  he  concentrated 
a  force  which  was  only  just  equal  to  the  task,  as  though  he 
divined  that  upon  the  preservation  of  that  command  the 
whole  of  Pitt's  war-plan  turned — and  the  Avay  out  of  the 
Straits  was  left  absolutely  open. 

So  while  Nelson  waited  resolutely  for  the  one  touch  of 
certainty  that  alone  could  start  him  into  action,  Villeneuve 
pursued  his  way  unmolested — unmolested  but  not  undis- 
turbed. On  his  heels  was  the  menace  of  the  unlocated 
fleet  led  by  the  "  fougueux  amiral,"  as  they  called  him  in 
France.  On  April  7th,  as  Nelson  Avas  taking  up  his  position 
at  Ustica,  he  was  becalmed  off  Cartagena.  There  he  could 
see  Salcedo's  squadron  of  six  of  the  line  apparently  ready 
for  sea,  and  he  sent  in  to  invite  them  to  join  his  flag. 
They  were  willing  enough  in  any  case  to  have  his  escort  to 
Cadiz,  if  he  would  only  wait  till  they  sent  for  permission 
and  got  their  powder  on  board.  But  that  was  more  than 
Villeneuve  dared  do.  In  the  evening  an  easterly  breeze 
came  up  fair  for  a  run  through  the  Straits  and  away  he 
went,  leaving  the  Cartagena  squadron  isolated. 

While  becalmed  off  the  port  he  had  heard  that  the 


62  VILLENEUVE'S    EVASION  April 

situation  at  Cadiz  was  unchanged.  Gravina  was  there  with 
fifteen  of  the  line,  but  of  these  only  seven  or  eight  two- 
deckers  Avere  as  yet  ready  for  sea,  and  he  was  being  watched 
by  Orde  with  a  somewhat  inferior  force  of  one  three-decker 
and  four  others,  of  which  three  were  only  sixty- fours.  For 
Orde  it  was  therefore  a  critical  moment.  His  conduct 
when  the  thunderbolt  fell  on  him  has  been  universally  con- 
demned and  covered  with  contempt.  To  deal  so  with  the 
situation  is  unprofitable.  Let  us  rather  see  what  may  be 
learned  from  an  exact  view  of  his  difficulties  and  of  the  way 
he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  he  did. 

He  was  chafing  even  more  than  Nelson  at  the  strained 
conditions  which  the  division  of  the  Mediterranean  station 
had  set  up.  The  Admiralty,  in  response  to  Nelson's  protest 
against  his  loss  of  prize  money,  had  just  informed  Orde  he 
would  have  to  share  a  proportion  of  his  captures  with  his 
brother  Admiral.  He  had  applied  to  them  as  to  what  he 
Avas  to  do  with  the  treasure  with  which  his  ships  were  laden 
and  this  was  all  the  answer  he  got.  There  were  other 
sources  of  friction  inherent  in  the  situation  which  with  the 
rest  made  it  unendurable,  and  three  days  before  Villeneuve 
sailed  he  had  formally  asked  to  be  relieved.^ 

As  Villeneuve  left  Cartagena  some  store-ships  had  joined 
Orde,  and  since  the  easterly  wind  had  not  reached  him  he 
was  taking  advantage  of  the  calm  to  clear  them.  By  mid- 
day the  work  was  in  full  swing.  Every  ship  had  a  transport 
alongside,  the  decks  were  cumbered  with  casks  and  cases, 
and  the  men  were  at  dinner,  when  suddenly  they  saw  a  ship 
of  the  line  running  before  the  coming  breeze  under  a  press 
of  sail,  firing  guns  and  making  the  signal  for  a  superior 
enemy's  fleet.  It  was  Sir  Richard  Strachan  in  the  Renown. 
On  the  previous  day,  in  pursuance  of  the  mission  on  which 
Nelson  had  sent  him,  he  had  seen  the  homeward-bound 
convoy  clear  of  Cape  Spartel  and  the  Alge<?iras  gunboats 
and  privateers,  and  had  then  turned  back  to  Gibraltar  for 
some  needful  repairs.  As  morning  broke  he  was  off  Tarifa, 
and  so  had  seen   Villeneuve   coming  out  of   the   Straits.^ 

1  Orde  to  Lord  Melville,  March  27  :  Nicolas,  vi.  383  n. 

2  Strachan  to  Nelson,  April  30:  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSB.  3-1929. 


April  SURPRISES    ORDE  63 

Instantly  he  went  about,  and  accompanied  by  his  frigate 
made  for  Orde,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  smart  warning 
Orde  always  believed  he  must  have  been  destroyed. 

The  breeze  that  Strachan  was  bringing  down  had  not 
yet  reached  him,  but  he  made  the  signal  to  weigh,  and 
prepare  for  action,  cast  off  his  transports  with  directions  to 
retire  to  neutral  waters  at  Lagos,  and  then  did  his  best  to  form 
order  of  battle.  As  the  breeze  swelled  his  canvas  he  moved 
away  towards  Lagos  under  easy  sail  and  in  the  larboard 
line  of  bearing — that  is,  in  immediate  readiness  to  form  line 
of  battle,  and  engage  to  cover  the  retreat  of  his  store-ships. 
But  Villeneuve  had  but  one  idea  in  his  mind,  and  with  his 
cruisers  ahead  of  him  he  was  content  to  make  for  the 
mouth  of  Cadiz  Bay,  without  any  attempt  to  molest  Orde's 
deliberate  movement. 

It  was  a  narrow  escape,  but  there  had  been  no  panic  or 
hurry,  no  cutting  or  slipping,  but  a  thoroughly  seamanlike 
retreat.  What  to  do  next  was  the  difficulty.  Ought  he 
to  stay  where  he  was  and  wait  for  Nelson,  ought  he  to 
go  into  the  Straits,  or  ought  he  to  go  north  and  close  on 
the  Western  Squadron  ?  At  Lagos  he  called  Strachan  to 
council.  Strachan,  who  had  just  left  Nelson  and  knew 
how  much  his  mind  had  been  occupied  with  Egypt,  assured 
Orde  that  Villeneuve's  escape  could  only  be  explained  by 
Nelson's  having  gone  again  to  Alexandria.  Then  Orde 
made  his  decision.  He  could  not  doubt  that  Villeneuve 
had  come  to  bring  out  Gravina's  squadron;  and  he  had  just 
heard  the  news  of  Ganteaume's  having  come  out  of  Brest 
into  Bertheaume  Road.  The  indications  in  his  opinion 
pointed  to  a  great  and  dangerous  concentration  of  all 
Napoleon  s  squadrons,  and  on  this  appreciation  there  was 
in  his  eyes  but  one  thing  to  do.  Strachan's  cruiser  the 
Sophie  Avas  ordered  to  Ushant  immediately  to  warn  the 
Admiral,  and  to  inform  him  that  he  himself  would  close 
upon  him,  if,  as  he  said,  nothing  occurred  in  the  morning 
to  prevent  his  doing  so.  "I  shall  make  the  best  of  my 
way  to  join  Lord  Gardner,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  as 
an  immediate  accession  of  force  may  be  of  importance  at 
this  critical  juncture." 


64  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

In  view  of  the  charges  which  were  made  so  freely  by 
Nelson  and  others  against  him,  it  is  important  to  note  that 
it  was  not  his  whole  fleet  he  was  taking  north,  but  only  his 
battle  squadron.  The  whole  of  his  cruisers,  as  we  shall  see, 
were  left  behind  with  carefully  framed  orders  for  keeping 
touch  with  Villeneuve.  Two  days  later — on  April  12th — 
as  he  had  seen  nothing  of  the  enemy  his  view  of  the  situa- 
tion was  confirmed,  and  it  became  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  warn  the  Admiralty  as  soon  as  possible.  Baffling  winds 
were  still  preventing  him  from  doubling  Cape  St.  Vincent, 
the  Sophie  was  still  in  company,  and  he  charged  her  with 
further  despatches  in  which  he  developed  fully  the  appre- 
ciation on  which  he  was  acting.  "  I  am  persuaded,"  he 
wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  the  enemy  will  not  remain  long 
in  Cadiz,  and  I  think  the  chances  are  great  in  favour  of 
their  destination  being  westward  where  by  a  sudden  concen- 
tration of  several  detachments,  Bonaparte  may  hope  to  gain 
a  temporary  superiority  in  the  Channel,  and  availing  him- 
self of  it  to  strike  his  enemy  a  mortal  blow."  Here,  then, 
for  the  first  time  from  an  English  pen  we  have  a  just  ap- 
preciation of  the  real  situation,  and  it  comes  from  this 
despised  officer.  It  was  not  that  he  did  not  realise  the 
importance  of  the  Mediterranean,  but  that  he  felt  the 
danger  was  past.  "  Could  I  have  brought  myself,"  he  went 
on,  "  to  believe  the  fleet  would  return  towards  the  eastwards 
I  should  not  have  hesitated  one  moment  to  risk  passing  the 
Straits,  although  left  ignorant  by  Lord  Nelson  of  his  posi- 
tion and  movements."  With  him  as  with  Nelson  it  was 
a  question  of  the  point  of  greatest  danger,  and  that  he  saw 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel.  "  In  bringing  to  England 
the  large  ships  under  my  command,"  he  says,  "  I  shall 
afford  an  opportunity  to  dispose  of  them  anew :  by  which 
little  can  be  risked,  and  much  might  be  gained  if  the 
enemy's  blow  is  aimed  at  England  or  Ireland." 

For  the  next  two  days  he  laboured  round  St.  Vincent, 
and  then,  owing  either  to  stress  of  weather  or  to  a  desire 
to  sweep  the  ground  he  was  leaving,  he  stood  back  to 
the  south.  By  the  16  th  he  had  stretched  down  below  the 
latitude  of  the  Straits,  and  next  day  he  began  to  make  the 


April  ORDE'S    APPRECIATION  65 

usual  westing  for  a  voyage  north.  In  all  this  time  he  had 
not  found  a  trace  of  Villeneuve,  but  whatever  the  intention 
of  his  movement,  the  result  left  him  convinced  of  the  cor- 
rectness of  his  appreciation.^  He  accordingly  resolved  to 
send  forward  the  Polyphemus,  his  fastest  two-decker,  to 
communicate  his  final  view  to  the  Admiralty.  She  was 
charged  with  a  despatch  in  which  his  appreciation  was 
more  fully  reasoned  in  the  light  of  Villeneuve's  disappear- 
ance. He  assured  them  that  whatever  had  happened  the 
enemy  could  not  possibly  have  got  ahead  of  him  to  the 
northward.  It  was  true  that  his  failure  to  find  Villeneuve 
to  the  westward  might  suggest  a  return  to  the  Mediter- 
ranean, but  he  argued  with  ability  that  the  whole  strate- 
gical conditions  rendered  that  course  the  least  likely  and 
the  least  dangerous.  Villeneuve,  he  urged,  could  not  hope 
to  evade  Nelson  twice ;  and  even  if  he  did  pass  back  into 
the  Straits  reinforced  from  the  Cadiz  squadron,  still  it  did 
not  mean  defeating  Nelson.  The  men  of  the  War  of 
American  Independence  had  too  much  experience  of  the 
preventive  power  that  lay  in  a  well-handled  inferior  fleet ; 
and  of  his  rival's  tactical  genius  Orde  had  the  highest 
opinion.  "  I  dare  believe,"  he  wrote,  "  Lord  Nelson  will 
be  found  in  condition  with  his  twelve  of  the  line  and 
numerous  frigates  to  act  on  the  defensive  without  loss,  and 
even  to  hanof  heavily  on  the  skirts  of  the  enemy's  fleet 
should  it  attempt  any  material  service,  especially  when 
encumbered  with  troops."  It  was  so  Kempenfelt  had  laid 
down  the  power  of  a  naval  defensive  in  the  darkest  days 
of  the  old  war,  and  Nelson's  own  views  to  the  same  effect 
on  the  possibilities  of  retarding  operations  at  sea  are  well 
known. 

Finally,  he  clinches  his  reasoning  with  a  last  penetrat- 
ing appreciation.  "  Besides,"  he  says,  ''  I  am  perfectly  con- 
vinced that  the  French  are  too  well  aware  of  the  advantage 
they  may  derive  in  a  contest  with  us  by  having  their  fleets 
out  of  the  Mediterranean,  ever  to  send  them  back  to  that 

^  This  curious  movement  is  recorded  in  the  Log  of  the  Glory,  Orde's  flag- 
ship, but  not  in  any  of  his  despatches.  The  despatch  he  sent  off  after  making 
it  merely  records,  that  he  had  not  yet  been  able  to  double  St.  Vincent  owing 
to  adverse  weather. 


66  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

sea,  if  they  can  avoid  it."  He  was  absolutely  right  though 
he  did  not  as  yet  know  the  sting  that  was  about  to  be  put 
forth,  which  in  the  end  was  to  make  it  impossible  for 
Napoleon  to  avoid  ordering  them  back. 

It  is  but  bare  justice,  therefore,  to  Orde  to  recognise 
that  his  closing  in  with  his  battle  squadron  was  in  line 
with  the  British  strategical  tradition  of  concentration  on 
the  Western  Squadron  and  that  his  decision  was  based  on 
a  sagacious  penetration  of  Napoleon's  war-plan.  Had  he 
made  the  move  without  taking  every  precaution  in  his 
power  to  keep  touch  with  Villeneuve  he  would  neverthe- 
less have  been  seriously  to  blame.  But  in  fact  he  did  do 
everything  that  the  means  available  permitted,  and  his 
first  care  before  moving  his  battle  squadron  had  been  to 
make  a  thoughtful  disposition  of  the  cruisers  he  was  leav- 
ing behind.  He  had  already  sent  off  a  merchantman  to 
find  Nelson,^  and  before  going  north  he  despatched  a 
cruiser  to  the  West  Indies  and  a  cleared  transport  for 
Madeira  to  warn  the  home-coming  East  Indiamen.  Nelson's 
old  friend,  Captain  Sutton,  of  the  Am'phion  frigate,  with  two 
sloops  under  him,  the  Wasp  and  Beagle,  was  all  he  had 
left  to  watch  Villeneuve.  Sutton  was  directed  to  take 
station  off  St.  Vincent  "  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  enemy's 
movements  and  prevent  vessels  bound  east  of  the  Cape 
from  falling  into  the  enemy's  hands."  If  he  ascertains 
Villeneuve  has  gone  west,  he  is  to  direct  all  ships  of  the 
line  he  may  meet  to  go  to  Ushant;  if  he  has  gone  east, 
then  they  are  to  try  to  join  Nelson.  The  Wasp  was  to  observe 
Cadiz.  The  Beagle,  which  was  already  cruising  between 
Capes  Spartel  and  Trafalgar,  Sutton  was  to  keep  there  to 
hold  the  privateers  in  check,  and  report  enemy's  squadrons. 
But  in  truth  she  was  no  longer  there.  Unknown  to  Orde, 
she  had  already  located  the  enemy,  and  having  failed  to 
find  her  chief,  was  then  well  on  her  way  to  England.^ 

With  a  decision  founded  on  so  well  reasoned  an  appre- 

1  Orde  to  Nelson  :  Add.  MSS.  34929,  April  11. 

2  For  Orde's  despatches  and  cruiser  orders,  see  Admiralty  Secretary,  In- 
letters,  410,  March  19,  April  10,  11,  12,  15,  17,  19  ;  and  for  his  flag-captain's 
report,  which  entirely  confirms  them,  Ralfe,  Naval  Biography,  ii.  75.  For  the 
Beagles  movements,  see  post,  p.  111. 


April  ORDE'S    RETREAT  67 

ciation,  there  seems  little  fault  to  find.  It  has  been 
objected  that  he  might  better  perhaps  have  fallen  back 
with  his  battle  squadron  on  Calder,  and  this  indeed  was 
Avhat  the  Admiralty  ordered  him  to  do  when  they  knew 
what  had  happened.  But  in  view  of  the  prevailing  northerly 
winds,  Ferrol  was  notoriously  hard  to  reach.  The  true 
course  for  Ushant  lay  far  to  the  westward,  and  Nelson  him- 
self was  afterwards  forced  to  take  it  when  he  in  his  turn 
closed  on  Cornwallis.  The  fact  is,  however,  that  in  spite 
of  these  difficulties  Orde  did  try  to  get  touch  with  Calder, 
and  it  was  not  his  fault  that  he  failed.  After  holding  the 
usual  course  north -westAvard  till  the  22nd,  he  found  a  wind 
that  enabled  him  to  reach  north-east,  and  in  three  days  he 
passed  near  the  Finisterre  rendezvous.  There  he  should 
have  found  one  of  Calder's  cruisers,  which  was  always 
stationed  there,  but  the  rendezvous  was  bare.  The  fact 
was  the  Melampus  (Captain  Poyntz)  had  left  it  just  a  week 
before.  By  a  piece  of  extraordinarily  smart  work,  to  be 
related  presently,  he  had  got  news  of  Villeneuve's  having 
passed  the  Straits,  and  had  gone  off  to  warn  Calder.  Before 
he  could  be  replaced  Orde  arrived.  Nevertheless  Orde 
held  on  till  he  was  some  fifty  miles  north-west  of  Ferrol 
and  actually  on  Calder's  station.  Still  there  was  no  trace 
of  him,  and  Orde,  assuming  apparently  that  he  must  have 
had  news  of  Villeneuve  and  fallen  back  on  Ushant,  stood 
away  north  to  do  the  same.^ 

Such  are  the  true  facts  of  this  interesting  case,  and  in 
face  of  them  it  is  bare  justice  to  revise  the  cruel  judgment 
which  has  passed  into  history  upon  Nelson's  hasty  and  ill- 
informed  strictures.  If  Orde  failed  to  do  all  that  might 
have  been  done,  it  was  mainly  due  to  the  disposition  of  his 
scanty  cruisers.  In  the  arrangement  he  adopted  there  was 
one  important  point  he  had  failed  to  reckon,  and  that  was 
the  moral  effect  of  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet  on  the  French 
Admiral's  nerves.  Yet  the  omission  was  pardonable.  He 
was  not  to  guess  that  Villeneuve,  having  risked  so  much  to 
join  Gravina's  fleet,  would  not  dare  to  wait  long  enough  to 

^  Log  of  the  Glory.  For  the  Melampus,  see  her  Log,  and  Gardner  to  Marsden, 
April  22  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  236,  and  post,  p.  73, 


68  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

make  the  junction  complete.  Yet  so  it  was.  At  eight 
o'clock  on  April  9th  the  French  anchored  outside  the 
bay  and  signalled  for  the  Aigle,  a  French  seventy-four  that 
had  taken  refuge  there  early  in  the  war,  and  to  Gravina 
and  the  Spaniards  to  come  out.  By  ten  o'clock  they  had 
begun  to  move,  and  at  one  o'clock  Villeneuve  made  the 
signal  to  weigh.  In  his  eagerness  to  hide  his  tracks  from 
Nelson  he  dared  not  sacrifice  the  obscurity  of  a  single 
night.  After  waiting  less  than  four  hours,  he  held  away 
in  the  dark,  leaving  the  Spaniards  to  straggle  after  him  as 
best  they  could.  Had  Orde  remained  he  might  have 
captured  them  nearly  all,  but  can  he  be  blamed  if  he 
never  thought  such  a  movement  possible  ?  And  yet — if 
he  had  only  waited  to  make  sure,  if  just  for  one  day  he 
had  "  hung  heavily  on  their  skirts,"  as  he  expected  Nelson 
to  do  !  But  his  chance  was  gone,  and  so  it  happened 
beyond  all  calculation  before  Sutton  could  even  begin  his 
observation,  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  were  gone,  and  from 
that  moment  they  were  completely  lost  to  British  ken. 


CHAPTER  V 

LORD  BARHAM   AT  WORK 

At  home,  in  the  centre  of  war  direction,  all  was  confusion. 
No  moment  could  have  been  more  inopportune  for  the 
escape  of  the  Toulon  squadron.  At  the  end  of  the  previous 
year  the  famous  Commission  for  inquiring  into  the  state 
of  the  Navy,  which  had  been  sitting  since  1802,  issued  its 
Tenth  Report,  and  public  opinion  was  startled  with  irrefutable 
evidence  that  certain  irregularities  had  been  permitted  with 
the  Navy  balances.  Lord  Melville  as  First  Lord  was  of 
course  responsible.  He  was  moreover  a  bosom  friend  of 
Pitt,  and  the  temptation  for  the  Opposition  to  raise  a  storm 
was  irresistible.  Just  as  Villeneuve  was  approaching  the 
Straits  it  burst  with  a  formal  indictment  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  Pitt  exhausted  all  his  powers  in  the  defence  of 
the  friend  who  had  been  serving  him  and  the  country  with 
so  much  ability.  So  brilliant  and  impassioned  was  his 
effort  that  he  was  within  an  ace  of  success.  In  the  end  the 
motion  was  carried  against  him,  but  only  by  the  Speaker's 
casting  vote.  Under  the  shock  Pitt  broke  down,  and  as  he 
rose  to  leave  the  House  the  young  bloods  of  his  party 
closed  round  like  a  body-guard  lest  his  enemies  should  see 
his  tears.  Next  day,  as  Orde's  blockade  Avas  being  broken, 
Melville  resigned,  and  the  Admiralty  was  without  a  head. 

Fortunately  there  was  at  hand  a  means  of  preserving 
continuity.  The  veteran  Sir  Charles  Middleton  was  still 
alive,  and  though  just  turned  eighty  was  still  full  of  vigour 
in  mind  and  body.  Throughout  the  War  of  American  Inde- 
pendence he  had  been  Controller,  standing  out  through  that 
period  of  inept  administration  as  the  pillar  of  the  service, 
the  confidant  to  whom  all  the  best  men  afloat  turned  in 

their  distress  and  despair.     During  his  tenure  of  the  office 

69 


70  LORD    BARHAM   AT    WORK 

the  Supply  department  of  the  Navy  had  been  put  at  last  in 
a  fairly  efficient  state,  though  he  himself  was  dissatisfied. 
He  longed  to  see  much  further  improvement,  which  without 
support  from  above  he  had  not  the  power  to  effect.  A  few 
years  later  the  power  he  sought  was  within  his  grasp.  In 
1788  Pitt,  during  his  first  administration,  decided  to  re- 
place Lord  Howe  by  a  civilian.  The  man  he  selected  was 
his  own  inexperienced  and  not  too  capable  elder  brother, 
Lord  Chatham.  He  had  a  remarkable  talent,  however,  for 
smoothing  business  in  the  Cabinet,  and  to  meet  the  inevi- 
table objections  to  the  appointment  of  such  a  man  to  the 
head  of  the  Admiralty,  Pitt  decided  to  offer  the  post  of 
First  Sea  Lord  to  Middleton.  It  was  felt  that  if  Chatham 
were  given  the  veteran  Controller  for  his  chief  professional 
adviser  public  opinion  would  be  satisfied.  Though  Middleton 
had  never  flown  his  flag,  he  was  recognised  as  a  master  of 
the  naval  art  second  only  to  Howe  himself.  "  Sir  Charles 
Middleton's  name  and  character,"  wrote  Grenville,  "  will  hold 
out  a  solution."  Middleton,  however,  in  loyalty  perhaps 
to  Howe,  would  not  lend  himself  to  the  solution  and  declined 
to  serve.^  About  eighteen  months  later  he  went  even 
further,  in  marking  his  disapproval  of  Lord  Chatham's 
appointment  and  the  way  he  was  administering  the  Ad- 
miralty. Regardless  of  everything  but  the  good  of  the 
service,  he  had  laid  the  shortcomings  of  colleagues  and 
subordinates  candidly  before  a  Committee  of  Inquiry.  Un- 
supported by  the  Government  he  found  his  position  impos- 
sible, and  in  February  1790  he  had  placed  his  resignation 
in  Pitt's  hands.  His  evidence  at  the  Inquiry,  he  explained, 
had  created  so  much  jealousy  of  him  in  the  office  that  in 
view  of  the  delay  that  Avas  going  to  occur  in  acting  on  its 
report  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  go  on.  Pitt  and  his 
brother  apparently  tried  to  induce  him  to  remain,  but  he 
was  obdurate.  "The  motives  of  my  resignation,"  he  wrote  to 
the  Prime  Minister  a  week  or  two  later,  "  are  by  no  means 
merely  personal.  I  am  so  firmly  persuaded  that  the  present 
situation  of  the  Navy  Office  could  afford  me  no  means  of 
continuing  any  longer  useful,  that  I  flatter  myself  with  your 

1  stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  i.  377. 


HIS    ANTECEDENTS  71 

and  Lord  Chatham's  candour  in  admitting  the  propriety 
of  my  resignation."^  Later  on,  however  —  in  1794  — 
when  the  new  war  had  broken  out,  he  loyally  came  for- 
ward again  and  accepted  a  seat  on  the  Board  under  Lord 
Chatham,  with  Hood,  Gardner,  and  Affleck  for  his  naval 
colleagues. 

Since  then  he  had  been  unemployed  but  not  unoccupied. 
Melville  was  his  near  kinsman  and  rested  on  him  as  his 
confidential  adviser.  Wilberforce,  indeed,  who  had  found  in 
Middleton's  progressive  mind  one  of  his  earliest  supporters 
in  the  Slave  Trade  crusade,  assures  us  that  "  Lord  Melville's 
plans  for  the  naval  force  of  the  kingdom  were  in  fact  Sir 
Charles's."  '^  Seeing  what  Middleton's  reputation  was  both 
in  the  service  and  the  Cabinet,  and  that  Gambier  the  First 
Sea  Lord  was  his  nephew,  this  is  credible  enough,  and 
indeed  by  no  other  means  can  we  account  for  the  precision 
and  balance  Avith  which  all  the  best  traditions  of  the  service 
had  been  embodied  in  the  strategy  of  the  war. 

A  further  reason  for  Pitt's  insisting  on  the  appointment 
was,  if  we  may  believe  Wilberforce,  that  Melville  himself 
had  named  Middleton  as  the  best  man  to  succeed  him. 
But  it  was  not  without  a  severe  struggle  that  the  minister 
got  his  way.  The  King  wanted  Chatham  again  or  Castle- 
reagh  or  Charles  Yorke,  who  had  been  Secretary  for  War 
under  the  last  administration.  Addington,  from  whose  in- 
adequate hands  Pitt  had  snatched  the  direction  of  the  war, 
had  consented  early  in  the  year  to  join  his  Government, 
with  the  title  of  Lord  Sidmouth,  but  characteristically  he 
expected  further  reward.  Now  he  demanded  the  vacant 
place  for  one  of  his  own  men.  In  the  stress  of  the  war  on 
his  enfeebled  constitution  it  was  more  than  Pitt  could 
endure.  Without  a  sure  hand  at  the  Admiralty  he  must 
break  down.     "  It  is  inconceivable,"  wrote  Woronzow  to  his 

^  Middleton  to  Pitt,  Feb.  8  and  March  15,  1790:  Chatham,  Papers,  Bundle 
111.  He  left  in  Pitt's  hands  a  long  and  detailed  memo,  on  the  reorganisation 
of  the  Board. — Ibid,  and  Bundle  245. 

2  Stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  287,  and  Wilberforce's  Life,  iii.  223.  In  the 
Barhavi  Papers  there  is  also  a  "  Note  for  Mr.  James,"  the  historian,  in  which 
it  is  stated,  "  Mr.  Pitt  coming  to  power,  it  was  decided  by  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord 
Melville  to  consult  Sir  Charles  Middleton  in  all  matters  connected  with  the 
restoration  of  the  fleet." 


72  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Government  in  the  midst  of  the  poKtical  and  naval  crisis, 
"  how  one  man  can  suffice  for  such  a  weight  of  business  and 
fatigue ;  how  he  can  keep  straight  in  his  head  so  many 
tangled  and  heterogeneous  matters ;  how  he  can  disen- 
tangle and  grasp  them  and  develop  them  with  such  singular 
judgment  and  lucidity."  ^  For  a  fortnight  Pitt  hesitated 
under  the  strain.  Then  he  informed  Sidmouth  that  further 
delay  was  impossible  and  that  he  had  submitted  Middleton's 
name  to  the  King.  Sidmouth  and  his  closest  follower,  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  who  was  his  nominee  for  the 
place,  immediately  tendered  their  resignations.  To  all  Pitt's 
other  troubles  was  added  a  ministerial  crisis ;  but  he  per- 
severed, and  finally,  on  promising  Sidmouth  that  Middleton's 
appointment  was  to  be  regarded  "  as  not  for  long,"  both  the 
recalcitrants  consented  to  retain  office. 

So  the  veteran  was  duly  gazetted  as  First  Lord.  To  get 
over  the  difficulty  of  his  not  being  in  Parliament  he  was 
raised  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Barham,  though  the  King,  in 
giving  his  assent,  made  the  remarkable  stipulation  that "  his 
attending  Cabinet  meetings  ought  to  be  confined  to  subjects 
regarding  the  Navy."  ^  Thus  at  the  eleventh  hour  came 
Middleton's  long-deferred  chance  of  setting  his  seal  on  the 
great  work  to  which  he  had  devoted  his  strenuous  life ;  and 
thus  at  the  crying  moment  the  country,  by  Pitt's  firmness 
and  sagacity,  secured  for  her  councils  the  man  who,  for  ripe 
experience  in  the  direction  of  naval  war  in  all  its  breadth 
and  detail,  had  not  a  rival  in  the  service  or  in  Europe. 
Even  Charles  Yorke,  in  spite  of  his  disappointment  in  not 
getting  the  post  himself,  could  say  handsomely,  "  The  news 
to-day  is,  Sir  Charles  Middleton  is  to  be  First  Lord.  I  was 
not  aware  that  at  his  advanced  age  his  health  and  faculties 
were  equal  to  such  a  post.  If  they  are  he  is  indisputably 
the  fittest  man  that  could  be  chosen  to  occupy  it  at  the  time. 
His  abilities  were  always  considered  great,  his  experience 
is  consummate,  and  he  has  few  equals  in  application  and 
method  of  business."  ^    It  was  not,  however,  till  the  last  day 

1  Woronzow  to  Czartoryski :  De  Martens,  Rccveil  dc  Traites,  xi.  109. 
^  Stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  Appendix,  p.  xxiii. 

^  To  Lord  Hardwicke,  Viceroy  of  Ireland,  April  26  :  Ilardivickc  Papers, 
Add.  MSS.  35706. 


April  A    STRATEGICAL    CRISIS  73 

of  April  that  Barham's  appointment  was  confirmed  and  the 
crisis  was  at  an  end. 

In  the  height  of  it — on  the  19th — Craig  and  Knight  had 
put  to  sea.  It  was  high  time,  if  any  good  was  to  come  of 
the  expedition.  Already  the  Czar  had  been  protesting  at 
the  delay,  and  Napoleon  was  just  starting  for  Milan  to 
crown  himself  King  of  Italy.  Now  or  never  was  the  time 
to  act.  Yet  as  Craig  and  his  troops  pursued  their  way 
down  Channel  there  were  flying  across  the  Bay  two  cruisers 
with  the  momentous  news  that  the  Toulon  fleet  had  passed 
the  Straits — too  late  to  warn  the  Government  that  all  had 
gone  wrong.  Villeneuve  was  out,  no  one  knew  where;  neither 
Nelson  nor  Orde  had  received  their  orders  for  covering 
Craig's  passage,  and  Knight  had  only  a  ninety-eight  and  one 
seventy-four  to  escort  the  expedition.  It  was  practically  in 
the  air. 

Not  till  a  week  after  the  expedition  had  sailed  was  the 
alarming  truth  known,  and  then  only  by  the  promptness 
and  decision  of  a  detached  cruiser  captain.  As  Villeneuve 
passed  through  the  Straits,  Captain  Lord  Mark  Kerr,  of  the 
frigate  Fisgard,  was  refitting  in  Gibraltar  with  half  his 
gear  ashore.^  With  prompt  decision  he  hired  a  brig,  put 
a  lieutenant  in  command,  and  sent  her  away  to  find  Nelson. 
Working  all  night  long,  while  Villeneuve  was  hurrying  away 
from  Cadiz,  he  managed  to  put  to  sea  early  on  the  10  th, 
leaving  his  gear  behind  him,  and  determined  to  carry 
the  news  to  Ireland  and  Ushant  with  the  utmost  possible 
speed.^  Outside  the  Straits  not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  was  to 
be  seen.  He  spoke  two  or  three  cruising  privateers,  but 
they  too  had  not  a  word  to  tell,  so  mysteriously  had 
Villeneuve  disappeared.  His  luck  was  incredible,  and  Kerr 
had  nothing  to  carry  with  him  but  the  certainty  that  he 
had  passed  the  Straits.  In  five  days,  in  spite  of  the  north- 
westerly winds  that  had  baflied  Orde's  efforts  to  double  Cape 
St.  Vincent,  he  managed  to  speak  the  Melampus,  the  cruiser 

^  He  had  just  returned  from  escorting  Nelson's  victual  and  coal  ships  to 
Rendezvous  97,  that  is,  under  Cape  San  Sebastian,  on  .the  Catalonian  coast. 
Nelson  to  Capel :  Nicolas,  vi.  409. 

^  Lord  Mark  Kerr  to  Nelson,  April  9 :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  3ISS. 
34929. 


74  LORD    BARHAM    AT   WORK  mril 

which  Calder  kept  stationed  on  the  regular  Finisterre  ren- 
dezvous.^ She  went  off  to  Calder  and  Calder  sent  her  on  to 
Gardner,  leaving  Kerr  free  to  go  straight  on  to  warn  Ireland. 
Calder,  unlike  Orde,  boldly  held  his  ground,  but  his  case  was 
widely  different.  Orde's  blockade  had  been  broken,  Calder's 
had  not,  and  it  was  obviously  his  duty  to  maintain  it  as 
long  as  he  could.  Moreover  he  was  in  no  danger  of  being 
embayed  and  held  to  mercy,  as  Orde  was  in  the  precarious 
winds  of  the  Cadiz  station.  By  no  means  could  a  squadron 
coming  from  the  south  force  him  to  action  if  he  chose  to 
retire.  He  therefore  contented  himself  with  retaining  one 
of  Gardner's  cruisers  to  replace  the  Melampus  off  Finisterre  ; 
and  so,  secure  from  surprise,  he  held  on  confidently  where 
he  was. 

Meanwhile  Kerr  hurried  on  for  Ireland.  Midway  across 
the  Bay  he  had  the  luck  to  meet  a  Guernsey  privateer  lugger. 
He  ordered  her  into  Plymouth  with  a  despatch  for  the 
Admiralty  and  himself  carried  on  for  Cork,  communicating 
his  news  to  Gardner's  outlying  cruisers  as  he  passed.'  It 
was  a  fine  performance.  Few  features,  indeed,  of  these  wars 
are  more  striking  than  the  resource  and  decision  which 
cruiser  captains  showed  in  spreading  intelligence  of  this 
nature  on  their  own  responsibility  and  their  own  grasp  of 
the  situation. 

It  was  through  Gardner  that  the  Admiralty  first  got 
Kerr's  startling  news.  They  had  it  on  the  25th,  just  a  week 
after  Craig  and  Knight  had  sailed ;  and  on  that  day  were 
issued  a  series  of  those  remarkable  orders  which  always 
seemed  ready  for  any  eventuality,  and  which  can  only  have 
proceeded  from  the  rich  store  of  strategical  tradition  that 
was  accumulated  in  the  brain  of  Middleton.  By  that  time 
he  knew  the  King  had  approved  Pitt's  choice,  and  doubt- 
less he  was  already  at  work. 

The  first  thought  was  for  the  safety  of  the  West  Indies. 
A  raid  in  that  quarter  had  long  been  expected,  and  in  the 

^  This,  according  to  the  Signal  Book  (1808),  in  which  tl)e  rendezvous  were 
printed  for  the  first  time,  was  No.  52,  "  six  leagues  due  N.W.  of  Finisterre," 
but  James  says  it  was  at  this  time  38  leagues  N.W.  (vol.  iv.  p.  452).  The  two 
cruisers  actually  met  5  or  6  leagues  S.S.W.  of  Finisterre. 

-  Kerr  to  Gardner,  April  23  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  237. 


April      ORDERS   ON   VILLENEUVE'S   ESCAPE         75 

eyes  of  the  Admiralty  it  was  Villeneuve's  most  likely  object. 
Indeed,  for  some  time  Pitt  had  had  in  his  possession  infor- 
mation from  the  famous  spy,  ''  L'Ami,"  that  an  attack  on 
Jamaica  was  in  contemplation,  and  Missiessy's  voyage  had 
already  indicated  the  West  Indies  as  a  danger  area.  Con- 
sequently Cochrane's  general  instructions  were  immediately 
supplemented  by  orders  that  if  Villeneuve's  objective  were 
found  to  jbe  Jamaica  he  was  to  join  Dacres  at  Port  Royal 
with  his  whole  battle  squadron.  This  would  produce  a  con- 
centration of  eleven  of  the  line,  of  which  one  was  a  three- 
decker,  a  force  strong  enough  to  hold  in  check  Villeneuve 
and  any  Spanish  ships  that  might  have  joined  him  from 
Cadiz,  till  such  time  as  reinforcements  should  reach  the 
station. 

On  this  last  point  they  had  little  cause  for  anxiety.  The 
necessary  reinforcements  would  probably  reach  him  auto- 
matically. It  was  an  old  but  now  forgotten  tradition  which 
throws  much  light  on  Nelson's  great  movement,  that  in 
such  an  eventuality  as  had  occurred  the  Commander-in- 
chief  in  the  Mediterranean  should  send  or  follow  with  a 
proportion  of  his  force  large  enough  to  make  the  British 
squadron  in  the  threatened  area  superior  to  that  of  the 
enemy.  Originally,  indeed,  it  had  been  the  practice  to 
insert  such  a  clause  in  the  Mediterranean  instructions.  In 
1704  Rooke  was  directed  that  if  the  Toulon  fleet  got  out  of 
the  Straits  his  first  duty  would  be  to  follow  it  and  bring  it 
to  action.  As  late  as  1756  Byng's  instructions  contained 
categorical  orders  on  the  point.  Consequently  it  is  no 
matter  of  surprise  to  find  the  Admiralty  expecting  that 
Nelson  would  act  on  the  well-established  tradition,  and  in 
this  spirit  supplementary  orders  were  quickly  framed  for 
him. 

He  was  told  that  Knight's  two  ships,  which  formed  Craig's 
escort,  were  to  proceed  at  once  to  Barbadoes,  "  if  you  have 
not  already  detached  a  number  equal  to  the  enemy."  If  he 
had  done  so,  he  was  to  order  Knight's  ships  to  join  Orde, 
and  Orde  was  to  send  them  on  Avith  Craig's  expedition ;  for, 
of  course,  if  Villeneuve  had  gone  west  there  was  nothing  for 
the  expedition  to  fear  except  the  weak  Spanish  squadron  in 


76  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Cartagena,  which  was  reported  not  yet  ready  for  sea.  There 
was,  moreover,  no  further  need  for  Nelson  to  act  as  cover- 
ing squadron  m  accordance  with  his  orders  of  ten  days 
before.  "Their  Lordships  trust,"  the  new  orders  ran,  "you 
have  had  early  intelligence  of  the  sailing  of  the  Toulon 
fleet,  and  that  you  have  in  consequence  detached  a  number 
of  ships  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy  in  pursuit."  What 
remained  of  his  squadron  he  was  to  send  to  join  Orde 
before  Cadiz,  he  himself  of  course  being  expected  home  on 
sick  leave.^ 

Two  days  later,  however,  a  misgiving  as  to  what  Nelson 
might  do  led  to  further  precautions.  It  was  now  known 
that  he  had  been  in  position  at  Maddalena  about  the  time 
Villeneuve  sailed,  and  the  most  natural  explanation  of  his 
missing  him  was  that  once  more  he  had  gone  to  Egypt. 
The  fear  was,  so  Yorke  wrote  to  Lord  Hardwicke,  "  his  only 
eye  is  directed  eastward,  and  we  shall  find  ourselves  in  a 
great  scrape."  ^  It  was  decided,  therefore,  to  take  steps  to  re- 
inforce the  West  Indies  directly  from  Gardner's  fleet  in  case  it 
should  prove  that  Nelson  had  gone  astray.  The  means  already 
existed  in  the  Flying  Squadron,  which,  it  will  be  remembered, 
had  been  formed  for  special  service  under  Collingwood.  The 
only  difficulty  was  that  Gardner's  fleet  was  not  yet  up  to  its 
full  strength,  and  the  detachment  would  weaken  it  seriously. 
But  the  difficulty  was  faced.  Besides  Gardner's  regular 
reserve  there  were  other  ships  available  which  only  required 
crews  and  fitting  for  sea,  and  wdth  pressure  they  could  be 
ready  in  time  to  replace  the  West  Indian  detachment.  To 
this  end  every  nerve  was  strained  and  every  sacrifice  made. 
The  War  Office  offered  its  help,  and  the  Port  Admirals  were 
informed  that  orders  had  been  issued  for  the  troops  of  the 
garrisons  to  assist  in  the  work.  They  could  apply  to  the 
Generals  for  the  men  they  wanted,  and  they  were  "  to  use 
every  possible  exertion  in  getting  the  ships  ready  for  sea 
with  the  utmost  despatch."  Cruisers  were  freely  sacrificed 
to  the  now  all-important  battle  strength,  and  at  every  port 
authority  was  given  to  draw  upon  any  frigates  that  were  at 

^   Orit-lctters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  April  25. 

2  Hardwicke  Papers,  April  30  :  Add.  MSS.  3u70G. 


April  THE    FLYING   SQUADRON  77 

hand  to  complete  the  complements  of  the  ships  of  the 
line.i 

The  Flying  Squadron  at  this  time  consisted  of  ten 
of  the  line,  and  it  was  decided  to  use  half  of  it  at  once. 
Accordingly  Gardner  was  directed  to  detach  Collingwood 
with  his  flagship,  the  Dreadnought  98,  and  four  two- 
deckers,  and  to  hand  him  sealed  orders,  which  were  to  the 
following  effect.  He  was  to  proceed  with  all  expedition  to 
Madeira,  and  without  anchoring  to  send  in  for  intelligence 
of  the  French  fleet  or  of  any  British  ships  that  had  been 
seen  to  pass  that  way.  If  he  heard  for  certain  that  seven 
or  more  of  the  line  were  in  chase  of  the  enemy,  he  was  to 
return.  If  the  intelligence  was  not  positive,  he  was  to 
carry  on  to  Barbadoes,  join  Cochrane,  and  seek  out  the 
enemy's  fleet.  If  he  found  the  French  had  left  the  Lee- 
ward Islands  and  gone  north,  Cochrane  was  to  shift  his 
flag  to  a  frigate  and  remain  in  charge  of  the  station,  while 
Collingwood  was  to  take  the  whole  battle  squadron  to 
Jamaica,  and  in  concert  with  Dacres  to  defend  the  island 
and  seek  to  bring  the  enemy  to  action.  Finally  he  was 
given  as  usual  a  general  discretion  to  act  as  he  found  best 
on  the  spot,  in  order  to  prevent  an  attempt  on  any  of  the 
British  West  Indian  Islands.^ 

The  meaning  of  the  Madeira  destination  was  that  steps 
had  already  been  taken  to  watch  that  area.  More  than  a 
month  previously,  when  the  precaution  of  organising  the 
Flying  Squadron  was  on  foot,  means  had  been  adopted  to 
supply  it  with  intelligence  of  any  escaping  squadron  it  might 
have  to  chase.  To  this  end  two  frigates  had  been  withdrawn 
from  Keith  and  Saumarez,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  Madeira 
with  all  possible  despatch  and  cruise  from  forty  leagues  south- 
east of  it  to  a  hundred  leagues  north-west.  They  were  to 
hold  the  station  a  month  after  arriving,  and  if  an  enemy's 
squadron  was  sighted  one  was  to  come  home  to  report  and  the 
other  to  shadow  the  enemy  till  his  course  was  determined.^ 

On  the  same  day  that  Collingwood's  orders  were  issued, 

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  152,  April  27. 
2  yiid.,  April  27. 

^  Secret  Orders,   1363,  March   6.     Saumarez   sent  the  Cerberus  away  on 
March  27.     In-lettcrs,  223,  July  15.     See  post,  p.  297  n. 


78  LORD    BARHAM    AT   WORK  April 

corresponding  instructions  went  forward  for  Nelson.  He 
was  informed  that  if  ho  had  made  no  detachment  ColHng- 
wood  would  follow  Knight's  two  ships  to  Barbadoes.  As 
the  effect  of  this  would  be  to  bring  the  squadron  in  the 
West  Indies  up  to  eighteen  of  the  line  with  two  or  three 
three-deckers,  nothing  further  would  be  required  from 
Nelson.  He  was  therefore  to  leave  four  of  his  squadron  with 
Orde  and  bring  home  the  rest,  after  making  due  provision  for 
opposing  any  force  the  enemy  had  left  in  the  Mediterranean. 
At  the  same  time  Gardner  was  told  to  send  down  a  cruiser 
to  get  intelligence  of  Villeneuve's  movements  from  Orde  and 
carry  it  on  to  Madeira  to  meet  Collingwood.i 

It  will  be  seen  that  up  to  this  time  the  Admiralty  had 
little  doubt  that  Villeneuve  was  bound  on  the  original 
mission  which  Napoleon  had  given  him  and  of  which  they 
had  had  intelligence.  As  yet  there  is  no  hint  that  any 
apprehension  of  his  sudden  return  to  the  Channel  was  felt 
at  headquarters,  or  that  Sir  James  Craig's  expedition  was  in 
serious  danger.  The  prevailing  impression  was  that  the 
objective  of  the  Toulon  fleet  was  Jamaica.  It  appeared 
that  Nelson's  resolute  retention  of  his  primary  position 
had  forced  Napoleon  to  play  into  Pitt's  hands.  Denied  all 
chance  of  operating  within  the  Straits,  Villeneuve  had  been 
driven  to  secondary  colonial  ventures  and  had  left  the 
Mediterranean  free  for  the  intended  action  in  concert  with 
Russia.  No  sooner,  however,  had  the  orders  for  the  West 
Indies  been  issued,  on  this  appreciation  of  the  position,  than 
it  was  all  upset.  By  April  30  th  Gardner  had  sent  in  the 
letters  he  had  received  from  Orde.  Picture  for  a  moment 
what  they  meant  at  headquarters.  Nelson  was  no  one 
knew  where.  The  best  information  they  had  was 
Strachan's  opinion  that  he  had  been  thrown  off  the  scent, 
and  was  almost  certainly  on  his  way  to  Egypt.  Orde, 
moreover,  without  having  ascertained  anything  more  of 
Villeneuve's  movements  than  that  he  had  appeared  at 
Cadiz,  was  quitting  his  station.  Neither  Admiral,  there- 
fore, would  receive  his  orders  for  Craig's  security,  and  both 
covering  squadrons  at  the  critical  period  were  out  of  posi- 

^  Secret  Orders,  1363,  April  27. 


April  THE    TWO    EXPEDITIONS  79 

tion.  Whither  Villeneuve  was  bound  Orde  could  not  tell. 
He  might  go  north,  he  might  go  south,  but,  as  we  have 
seen,  his  carefully  argued  appreciation  inclined  him  to  think 
that  the  destination  was  westward  with  a  view  to  doubling 
back  to  the  Channel. 

So  far  as  is  known,  no  one  up  to  this  time  had  seriously 
suggested  such  a  probability,  but  from  this  moment  at 
least  it  was  never  lost  sight  of.  Still,  knowing  what  Pitt 
did,  it  was  quite  as  likely  that  Villeneuve's  orders  were  to 
hold  the  approaches  to  the  Straits  and  destroy  Craig  and 
Knight.  They  and  their  fifty  transports,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  convoys,  were  obviously  in  the  direst  danger  of  annihi- 
lation, and  what  such  a  shock  would  mean  to  the  great 
Coalition  in  the  crisis  of  parturition  was  too  distressing  to 
contemplate.  The  Government  could  scarcely  flatter  them- 
selves that  Napoleon  had  no  suspicion  of  what  was  in  the 
wind,  for  Craig's  expedition  did  not  stand  alone.  At  Cork 
there  was  another  similar  one  assembling  under  Sir  Eyre 
Coote,  which  appears  to  have  been  intended  for  the  security 
of  India.  The  two  together  could  scarcely  escape  French 
attention,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  although  Napoleon  had 
not  yet  divined  Craig's  instructions,  he  had  already  an 
uneasy  eye  on  the  British  military  movements.  Talley- 
rand's smooth  pen  had  been  presenting  them  to  him  as  of 
no  importance,  except  as  evidence  of  the  desperate  political 
position  of  Pitt's  Government.  News  had  reached  the 
French  Foreign  Office  that  at  Lisbon  they  were  in  alarm 
lest  the  Tagus  was  the  objective  of  the  mysterious  expe- 
ditions— a  fear  which  Talleyrand  regarded  as  somewhat 
extravagant.  "  Still,"  he  said,  "  there  is  no  project,  how- 
ever absurd,  which  we  can  safely  reject  as  impossible  in 
the  existing  state  of  opinion  in  England  and  the  embarrass- 
ment of  the  Cabinet.  If  they  must  have  an  expedition  its 
objective  matters  little  to  the  real  motive  for  undertaking 
it ;  and  if,  as  is  possible,  all  that  is  wanted  is  a  display  of 
enterprise,  it  is  still  more  indifferent  whether  it  is  destined 
for  Portugal  or  the  North,  or  for  the  Levant  or  the  Indies."  ^ 

1  Bertrand,  Lettres  inedites  de  Talleyrand  il  Napoleon,  1800-9,  p,  118  :  Lyons, 
April  10. 


8o  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Napoleon  himself  took  the  matter  more  seriously. 
Affecting  to  believe  a  vague  rumour  that  Missiessy  had 
taken  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia,  he  was  persuading  him- 
self and  his  servants  after  his  manner  that  his  original 
mistake  in  getting  the  Rochefort  squadron  entangled  in 
the  West  Indies  was  a  stroke  of  genius.  By  throwing 
British  strategy  into  confusion  and  diverting  attention  to 
distant  colonies  it  was  paving  the  way  for  invasion.  The 
British  expeditions  served  well  to  support  his  attitude,  but 
reading  between  the  lines  of  his  correspondence  we  may 
well  doubt  if  this  was  his  real  view  of  the  enemy's  new 
activity.  Three  days  after  receiving  Talleyrand's  news  he 
wrote  a  memorandum  upon  it  for  Cambaceres,  Arch-Chan- 
cellor of  the  Empire,  whom  he  had  left  in  Paris  at  his 
brother  Joseph's  side  as  the  real  head  of  affairs  during  his 
absence  in  Italy.  This  despatch  breathes  a  different  note. 
"  It  seems,"  he  wrote,  "that  two  expeditions  of  from  5000 
to  6000  men  each  have  left  or  are  preparing  to  leave,  one 
for  the  Great  Indies  and  the  other  for  the  West  Indies. 
They  are  neither  militia  nor  volunteers  they  are  sending : 
they  are  their  best  troops."  The  fact  that  the  threat  of 
invasion  no  longer  availed  to  contain  the  flower  of  the 
British  army  in  England  clearly  was  unexpected  and  annoy- 
ing. "  If  then,"  he  continued,  "  our  flotilla  receives  the 
signal  and  is  favoured  by  six  hours  of  fair  wind,  of  fog,  and 
of  night,  the  English  will  be  surprised  and  find  themselves 
stripped  of  their  best  troops."  ^ 

This  certainly  was  not  what  he  really  thought.  Nothing 
is  clearer  amidst  Napoleon's  shifting  plans  than  that  at 
this  time  he  had  absolutely  abandoned  as  a  hopeless  mili- 
tary operation  the  project  of  a  surprise  invasion  by  the 
flotilla  alone.  He  may  have  believed  it  possible  once,  and 
popular  opinion  in  England  had  believed  it  too.  Now  both 
knew  better.  The  naval  view  had  been  accepted,  and 
Napoleon's  words  can  mean  nothing  but  annoyance  to  find 
that  his  threat  would  work  no  longer.  His  self-esteem 
was  sick,  and  after  his  manner  he  was  treating  it  with  a 
gentle  course  of  self-deception.     He  persuaded  himself  he 

1  To  Cambaceres,  Lyons,  April  13th:  Correspondance,  x.  315. 


April  A    FOG    OF    WAR  8 1 

had  fixed  England's  anxiety  on  her  East  and  West  Indian 
colonies,  as  he  explained  this  same  day  to  General  Pino,  his 
Minister  of  War  in  Italy.  Pino  had  apparently  been  express- 
ing anxiety  about  British  action  in  the  Mediterranean,  but 
Napoleon  assured  him  there  was  now  no  fear  of  England's 
assisting  Austria  except  with  money.  His  threat  on  India, 
he  said,  was  forcing  the  British  Government  to  send  Lord 
Cornwallis  thither  with  several  regiments,  and  they  had  also 
found  it  necessary  to  despatch  eight  or  ten  thousand  men 
to  secure  Jamaica.^ 

Such  at  least  was  the  rosy  picture  he  chose  to  paint,  as 
he  was  about  to  cross  the  Alps  in  quest  of  his  new  crown. 
How  much  he  really  believed  it  is  impossible  to  tell.  All 
we  can  say  with  any  certainty  is  that  he  was  beginning  to 
feel  the  irritation  of  Pitt's  pin-prick.  Probably  he  still 
believed  the  initiative  was  his,  and  had  no  suspicion  as  yet 
that  an  insidious  process  of  wresting  it  from  him  had  begun. 
It  was  of  course  too  much  for  Pitt  to  flatter  himself  he 
had  so  well  deceived  the  master  of  deception,  and  for  him 
Villeneuve's  appearance  in  the  Straits'  mouth  must  mean, 
first  of  all,  that  Napoleon  was  awake  and  after  his  manner 
was  springing  to  meet  the  blow  before  it  could  fall.  If  it 
did  not  mean  this,  there  was  still  Orde's  suggestion,  that  he 
was  bent  after  all  on  attempting  the  invasion,  and  attempt- 
ing it  under  cover  of  a  great  naval  concentration. 

In  a  moment,  then,  the  whole  atmosphere  at  home  was 
changed.  It  throbbed  with  high  tension.  We  can  feel 
the  tremors  still  as  we  handle  the  papers  which  the  crisis 
produced.  Even  Pitt  was  disturbed.  He  had  spent  the 
whole  day  on  which  the  news  arrived — that  is,  April  29th 
— in  the  House  of  Commons.  There  had  been  an  ex- 
hausting and  more  than  usually  acrimonious  wrangle  over 
the  Eleventh  Report  of  the  Navy  Commission.  In  the 
course  of  it  Pitt  had  announced  Middleton's  appointment, 
and  had  been  brutally  accused  by  Fox  of  trying  to  burke 
the  inquiry  into  his  friend's  conduct.  In  the  heat  that 
was  engendered  a  motion  was  made  for  the  institution  of 
criminal  proceedings  against  Melville,  and    nearly  all  the 

^  Correspondance,  p.  317. 


82  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  A1RIL29 

leaders  of  the  Opposition,  regardless  of  the  danger  of  the 
nation,  ruthlessly  tormented  the  Prime  Minister  by  sup- 
porting it.  It  was  a  fierce  struggle,  but  in  spite  of  their 
acrimony,  Pitt  secured  its  rejection.  Overwrought  with  the 
defence  of  his  friend,  he  reached  home  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  morning  to  find  Orde's  news  from  the  coast  of  Spain 
awaiting  him.  There  was  also  a  report  from  his  Paris 
agent  saying  that  the  Toulon  fleet  was  about  to  sail,  that 
its  destination  was  a  mystery,  but  it  was  generally  believed 
to  be  Ireland.  The  spy  himself  had  reasons,  he  said,  to 
believe  it  was  intended  for  Jamaica,  but  in  a  second  report, 
dated  April  l7th,  he  had  assured  Pitt  the  whole  system 
of  Napoleon  was  now^  directed  to  diverting  the  British  Navy 
from  his  real  attack.^  The  intelligence  could  only  confirm 
Orde's  view  that  a  sudden  concentration  on  the  Channel 
was  in  the  wind.  Pitt  could  not  go  to  bed,  and  at  half- 
past  two  he  sat  down  to  give  the  alarm  to  his  new  First 
Lord. 

"  On  returning  from  the  House,"  he  wrote,  "  I  have 
just  found  these  papers ;  they  are  of  the  most  pressing  im- 
portance. I  will  not  go  to  bed  for  a  few  hours,  but  will  be 
ready  to  see  you  as  soon  as  you  please,  as  I  think  we  nmst 
not  lose  a  moment  in  taking  measures  to  set  afloat  every 
ship  that  by  any  means  of  extraordinary  exertion  we  can 
find  means  to  man.  At  such  an  emergency,  I  am  inclined 
to  think  many  measures  may  be  taken  to  obtain  a  supply 
of  men  for  the  time,  which  would  not  be  applicable  to  any 
case  less  immediately  urgent."  ^ 

Barham  had  spent  his  first  day  of  office  in  preparing  to 
set  on  foot  a  reorganisation  of  the  Admiralty  in  order  to  fit 
the  distribution  of  work  to  the  condition  of  the  First  Lord's 
being  a  sailor  and  responsible  for  the  actual  direction  of 
the  maritime  war.^      Perhaps    he  too  was  sitting    up  all 

^  "Secret  Intelligence  from  Paris,"  March  29th,  April  17th:  Admiralty 
In-lettcrs  {Secretary  of  State),  4198,  April  30th. 

2  Sir  John  Barrow,  Autobior/raphical  Memoirs,  p.  264. 

3  Admiralty  Minutes,  256,  April  25th.  This  was  a  minute  requiring 
Marsden  the  Secretary  to  furnish  hini  with  a  detailed  memorandum  on  the 
organisation  and  Stall  of  the  Admiralty,  and  the  distribution  and  course  of 
•work.  The  reorganisation  liarham  founded  on  it  will  be  dealt  with  later. 
See  jpoat,  p.  85. 


April  30  HIS    KE  VISED    ORDERS  83 

night.  At  all  events  in  the  course  of  the  next  day,  April 
30th,  a  whole  series  of  characteristically  lucid  orders  were 
issued,  which  tell  of  acute  tension  and  prolonged  hours  of 
labour.  Those  issued  to  the  Admirals  afloat  are  devoted 
primarily  to  saving  Craig's  expedition,  in  the  second  place 
to  maintaining  the  blockade  of  Ferrol,  and  ultimately  to 
the  traditional  closing  in  on  the  mouth  of  the  Channel  in 
case  Orde's  appreciation  should  prove  correct. 

To  Calder  went  orders  to  retain  Knight  and  his  two 
ships,  instead  of  sending  them  to  the  West  Indies,  if  the 
imperilled  expedition  had  come  in  touch  with  him.  Craig 
and  his  transports  he  was  to  send  back  to  Plymouth  or 
Cork  under  cruiser  escort.  Knight  on  his  part  was  in- 
formed that  the  need  of  the  moment  was  to  reinforce  the 
Ferrol  squadron  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's 
intending  to  break  the  blockade.  If,  therefore,  he  received 
the  fresh  orders  before  he  had  passed  St.  Vincent  with  the 
convoy,  he  was  to  bring  it  back  to  Ferrol,  and  follow  Calder's 
orders  as  above.  If  Calder  was  not  there,  he  was  to  carry 
on  and  close  on  Gardner  off  Ushant.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  had  passed  St.  Vincent,  and  ascertained  that  Villeneuve 
had  left  Cadiz,  he  was  to  shift  his  flag  to  a  frigate,  send  his 
two  ships  of  the  line  to  close  on  Calder  or  Gardner  as 
before,  and  carry  on  with  the  convoy  up  the  Straits  under 
cruiser  escort. 

As  for  Orde,  his  instructions  were  to  leave  his  cruisers 
to  watch  Cadiz,  and  join  Calder  immediately  with  his 
battle  squadron.  He  would  then  be  in  command  of  both 
squadrons,  but  was  to  consider  himself  under  Gardner's 
orders.  This  meant,  of  course,  that  the  blockade  of  Cadiz 
was  abandoned,  and  the  new  "  Coast  of  Spain  "  Squadron 
reabsorbed  into  the  old  Western  Squadron.  It  was  ex- 
plained to  Orde  that  the  object  of  the  new  disposition  was, 
if  possible,  to  maintain  the  blockade  of  Ferrol.  Otherwise 
everything  was  to  concentrate  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel. 
If,  therefore,  it  was  found  that  Calder  had  already  fallen 
back,  Orde  too  was  to  close  on  Ushant.  Assuming,  how- 
ever, that  he  and  Calder  were  able  to  join  hands  on  the 
Ferrol  station  the  blockade  was  to  be  continued,  but  subject 


84  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April  30 

to  this  proviso.  If  they  had  reason  to  beheve  that  a 
combined  French  and  Spanish  fleet  was  coming  to  Ferrol 
"  under  circumstances  in  which  you  may  not  think  you  can 
advantageously  engage  them,"  then  they  were  to  fall  back 
together  on  Gardner  at  Ushant.  Finally  Gardner  was 
directed  to  order  Calder  to  close  on  him  if  the  combined 
fleet  were  reported  to  be  coming  north. ^  If  now  we 
compare  these  orders  with  what  Orde  was  doing,  it  will 
be  seen  that  he  was  anticipating  the  intentions  of  the 
Admiralty  exactly.  Both  he  and  they  were  following  the 
well-known  tradition,  whereby  it  was  secured  that  all  dis- 
turbances of  our  strategical  distribution  only  produced,  as 
it  were  automatically,  an  overwhelming  concentration  at 
the  vital  time  and  place.  Boldly  as  the  fleet  was  spread, 
it  retained  in  the  alert  instinct  of  its  squadronal  com- 
manders a  reflex  power  of  shrinking  back  to  the  centre 
when  any  rough  touch  gave  warning  that  dispersal  was  no 
longer  Avise.  Orde  acted  on  that  instinct,  and  his  action 
was  approved  by  Barham.  It  were  well  to  remember  this 
before  endorsing  Nelson's  hasty  castigations — well  also  to 
remember  that  Nelson  never  repeated  them  when  he  knew 
the  facts. 

In  harmony  with  these  instructions  to  the  outlying 
squadrons,  increased  efi'orts  were  made  to  reinforce  the 
central  division  of  the  Western  Squadron.  The  Prince 
George,  a  three-decker,  was  ordered  to  join  it  immediately. 
Admiral  Rowley  was  sent  down  to  Chatham  to  press  forward 
two  new  seventy-fours  that  were  just  completing,  and  orders 
went  out  to  hire  six  or  eight  fast  vessels  as  despatch 
boats.^ 

The  underlying  ideas  of  the  whole  group  of  orders  is 
not  far  to  seek.  We  have  been  attempting,  they  say,  to 
pass  a  military  force  over  uncommanded  seas — seas,  that  is, 
in  which  no  decision  has  taken  place  ;  our  chain  of  covering 
squadrons  has  been  broken  through  :  therefore  the  expedi- 
tion must  be  withdrawn,  unless  it  has  already  passed  the 
danger  point.     If,  however,  the  enemy's  movement  is  found 

1  Out-ldters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  April  30th. 
-  Admiralty  Minutes,  153,  May  1st. 


May        his  admiralty  organisation         85 

not  to  be  aimed  at  the  expedition,  we  must  assume  it  is 
aimed  at  the  point  of  greatest  danger,  and  we  must  make 
sure  of  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  the  old  focal  point  of 
British  strategy. 

It  was  this  sure  hold  of  British  naval  opinion  on  the 
unbroken  tradition  that  was  to  render  Napoleon's  invasion 
as  impossible  as  all  the  attempts  of  his  predecessors. 
"  Unhappily,"  says  Colonel  Desbriere,  in  speaking  of  the 
discredited  French  belief  in  a  surprise  of  the  Channel, 
"  the  English  had  long  got  wind  of  this  danger,  and  con- 
vinced of  its  gravity  had  given  a  standing  order,  thanks  to 
which  the  entrance  of  the  Channel  was  fated  to  be  held  in 
crushing  force.  All  the  Napoleonic  plans  could  only  dash 
themselves  to  pieces  against  this  primordial  device  so  im- 
perturbably  followed."  1 

So  it  was  that  Barham  began  his  memorable  nine 
months'  administration  ;  but  amidst  all  the  strain  and  stress 
he  found  time  to  give  to  the  Admiralty,  out  of  the  depth  of 
his  long  experience,  the  organisation  for  war  by  which  every 
call  was  to  be  met  so  brilliantly  up  to  the  day  of  final 
triumph.  We  cannot  do  better  than  attempt  to  grasp  his 
system  before  proceeding  further. 

For  himself  he  reserved  no  special  function.  "  The 
First  Lord,"  says  his  Memorandum,  "  will  take  upon  him- 
self the  general  superintendence  and  arrangement  of  the 
whole." 

"  The  senior  or  first  professional  lord,"  it  continued — 
and  this  was  Gambier — "  will  do  the  same  when  the  First 
Lord  is  absent.  His  duty  will  be  also  to  attend  to  the 
correspondence  of  the  day,  but  more  particularly  that  of  the 
ports,  and  all  secret  services  " — that  is,  he  had  control  of 
orders  to  naval  bases  and  intelligence.  "  He  will  minute 
all  such  orders  and  letters  as  may  come  within  his  depart- 
ment and  he  may  see  necessary,  and  deliver  the  same  to  the 
Secretary  to  be  acted  upon." 

His  special  sphere  of  action  is  then  detailed.  "  He  will, 
with  the  approbation  of  the  First  Lord,  dispose  of  the 
movements  of  all  ships  on  Home  and  Foreign  stations,  and 

^  Trafalgar,  p.  3. 


S6  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  may 

give  orders  to  the  Admirals,  Captains,  and  Commanding 
Officers  of  ships  on  service.  He  Avill  distribute  the  seamen 
and  marines.  .  .  .  He  will  attend  particularly  to  the  equip- 
ment of  all  ships  and  vessels  of  every  description."  His 
duties  in  relation  to  supply  were  thus  confined  to  the 
litting  out  of  vessels  already  commissioned  for  active  service 
which  were  thereby  brought  into  his  depai'tment.  He  was 
also  charged  with  seeing  that  his  orders  had  been  obeyed 
by  comparing  them  with  ships'  journals.  Lastly  he  was  "  to 
take  account  of  all  promotions,"  but  the  First  Lord  was  to 
sign  the  commissions. 

Supply  generally  was  in  the  hands  of  the  "  Second 
Professional  Lord,"  who,  so  the  Memorandum  directs,  "  will 
receive  from  the  Secretary  (after  they  are  read)  " — that  is, 
read  to  the  Board  at  its  daily  sitting — ''  all  letters  and  papers 
belonging  to  the  Navy  Board,  the  Transport  Board,  the 
Board  of  Sick  and  Hurt  and  Greenwich  Hospital." 

The  duty  of  the  Third  Professional  Lord  was  to  super- 
intend the  appointment  of  all  commissioned  and  warrant 
officers  "  under  the  inspection  of  the  First  Lord  "  and  to 
keep  all  vessels  complete  with  them.  Vacancies  for 
Captains  and  Lieutenants  were  to  be  "  stated  to  the 
First  Lord." 

"  The  Civil  Lords,"  so  the  paper  concludes,  ''  in  order  to 
keep  the  Professional  Lords  uninterrupted  in  the  various 
important  duties  committed  to  their  charge,  will  sign  all 
orders,  protections,  warrants,  and  promiscuous  papers  daily 
issuing  from  the  office.  They  will  also  assist  the  Board 
with  their  advice."  ^ 

In  working  this  system  Barham  seems  to  have  treated 
his  colleagues  as  a  staff  under  him — the  First  Sea  Lord 
discharging  approximately  the  duties  of  his  Chief  of  the 
Staff,  directing  w^ar  movements  but  also  seeing  the  material 
fit  for  service  so  far  as  regarded  equipping  and  manning 
ships;  the  Second  Sea  Lord  controlling  the  supply  of 
material;  and  the  Third,  the  higher  personnel.  Barham  him- 
self, so  Barrow  tells  us,  never  sat  on  the  Board.     He  seems 

^  AdmiraW/  Minnies,  -06.    The  memo,  its  signed  and  corrected  in  Bar  ham's, 
hand  and  dated  "  May." 


May  his   seclusion  87 

to  have  concerned  himself  only  with  the  larger  move- 
ments of  the  campaign.  '*  Lord  Barham,"  he  says,  "  at  the 
advanced  period  of  his  life  was  satisfied  to  let  things  go  on 
in  their  usual  course,  to  remain  quiet  in  his  room,  to  make 
few  enquiries  and  to  let  the  Board  consider  and  settle  the 
current  affairs  of  the  Navy  amongst  themselves.  In  fact 
he  never  attended  the  Board ;  but  when  any  doubtful 
question  arose  one  of  the  Lords  or  the  Secretaries  took  his 
decision  on  it  in  his  own  room."  ^ 

The  impression  which  the  passage  gives  is  that  Barham 
lived  in  Barrow's  memory  as  little  more  than  a  figure-head. 
But  it  must  have  been  also  in  his  own  room  that  he  pon- 
dered over  the  shifting  strategical  exigencies  of  the  cam- 
paign, anticipating  each  one  as  it  arose,  and  having  always 
ready  in  his  mind  the  necessary  orders  for  squadrons  at 
sea.  They  are  all  preserved  in  the  series  of  "  Secret 
Orders,"  and  all  of  them  that  deal  with  the  main  move- 
ments of  the  war-plan  bear  his  signature.  With  "  the 
current  affairs  of  the  Navy,"  as  Barrow  says,  he  did  not 
concern  himself.  The  highqr  direction  of  the  war  was  one 
man's  uninterrupted  work. 

To  this  he  devoted  himself  with  a  singleness  of  purpose 
which  set  all  etiquette  at  defiance.  In  the  Barham  Papers 
there  is  a  long  "  Communication  to  the  King  "  on  the  naval 
situation  in  September  1805,  which  begins  with  an  apology 
for  his  not  going  to  court.  Owing  to  having,  as  he  says, 
two  Boards  to  superintend,  meaning  presumably  the  Board 
of  Admiralty  and  the  Navy  Board,  he  cannot  wait  upon  the 
King  in  person.     In  November  there  is  another  addressed 

^  Autobiographical  Memoirs,  p.  277.  Barrow  was  a  member  of  the  Board, 
having  been  appointed  Second  Secretary  by  Lord  Melville  in  May  1804.  He 
did  not  write  the  Memoirs,  however,  till  he  was  quite  an  old  man,  after  forty 
years'  service  at  the  Admiralty.  His  memory  failed  him  at  times  in  matters 
of  detail,  but  otherwise  the  book  seems  trustworthy.  The  Second  Sea  Lord 
was  Vice-Admiral  Philip  Patton,  a  man  who  had  made  a  special  study  of  the 
personnel  of  the  Navy  and  had  foretold  the  great  mutinies.  The  Third  Sea 
Lord  was  Captain  Lord  Garlies.  .Besides  the  two  Secretaries  there  were  three 
Civil  Lords,  including  two  former  Secretaries  of  exceptional  ability  and  ex- 
perience. One  was  the  veteran  Sir  Philip  Stephens,  who  had  begun  his 
official  life  as  Lord  Anson's  secretary,  and  had  been  Admiralty  Secretary 
from  1763  to  1795  ;  the  other  Sir  Evan  Nepean,  a  Navy  clerk,  who,  after 
serving  as  Under-Secretary  successively  at  the  Foreign  and  War  Offices,  had 
succeeded  Stephens  at  the  Admiralty  until  1804. — (Sir  J.  K.  Laughton  in 
Dictionary  of  Nat.  Bioy.). 


88  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  May 

to  Pitt  for  submission  to  the  Cabinet,  which  concludes  with 
a  hope  that  he  will  not  be  summoned  to  attend  except  for 
business  connected  with  the  fleet.  There  is  nothing  extant 
which  can  throw  doubt  on  BarroAv's  assertion  that  he  never 
sat  upon  the  Board.  His  practice  seems  to  have  been,  where 
war  direction  was  concerned,  to  draft  the  strategical  orders 
with  his  ow^n  hand,  and  to  send  the  draft  down  to  two  or 
more  of  his  naval  colleagues  for  their  formal  approval  and 
signature.  In  the  truest  sense  he  was  the  real  director  of 
the  naval  war,  but  in  his  eyes  his  functions  as  such  did  not 
exclude  the  control  of  the  larger  questions  of  material. 
For  all  his  concentration  of  effort,  he  maintained,  according 
to  the  old  British  tradition,  a  close  watch  on  the  Supply 
department — that  is,  he  continued  to  control  the  Navy 
Board  while  exercising  the  functions  of  a  Chief  of  the  Naval 
Staff  to  Pitt,  as  the  War  Minister. 


CHAPTER   VI 

NELSON'S    DILEMMA 

During  all  this  time  of  tension  not  a  word  came  of  Nelson. 
So  far  as  headquarters  was  concerned  he  had  disappeared 
as  completely  and  as  mysteriously  as  Villeneuve,  and  there 
Avas  nothing  to  throw  doubt  on  Sir  Richard  Strachan's  con- 
jecture that  he  had  gone  again  to  Egypt.  It  was  not  so.  For 
him,  as  we  have  seen,  there  was  only  one  solution,  and  that 
only  a  partial  solution,  of  the  uncertainties  of  the  problem.  It 
was,  not  to  go  to  the  eastward  of  Sicily  nor  to  the  westward  of 
Sardinia,  until  he  knew  something  positive.  Fixed  in  this 
determination  he  had  taken  up  his  position  at  Ustica  off 
Palermo,  and  there  he  had  to  wait  two  days  before  he  had 
anything  on  which  he  could  act. 

By  April  10  th  a  rumour  had  already  reached  him  that 
a  British  military  expedition  was  on  its  way  to  the  Medi- 
terranean. That  so  great  a  complication  was  to  be  added 
to  his  embarrassment  without  a  word  of  warning  was  past 
bearing  and  almost  beyond  belief,  and  at  his  wits'  end  he 
was  seeking  relief,  after  his  wont,  in  a  letter  to  his  friend 
Ball.  "  I  can  hardly  suppose,"  he  wrote  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, "  that  any  expedition  would  be  sent  to  this  country 
without  my  having  some  intimation,  and  I  have  not  the 
most  distant  idea  of  such  a  thing.  If  they  are  sent,  they 
will  be  taken ;  for  the  French  know  everything  which  passes 
in  England.  However  I  can  do  no  more  than  I  have  done ; 
for  I  am  sorely  vexed  at  the  ignorance  in  which  I  have  been 
kept."  At  this  point  he  was  interrupted  by  one  of  his 
captains  coming  on  board,  and  when  he  sat  down  again  to 
finish  his  letter  the  blow  had  fallen.  "  Hallowell,"  he  con- 
tinued, "  is  just  arrived  from  Palermo.     He  brings  accounts 

that  the  great  expedition  is  sailed,  and  that  seven  Russian 

89 


90  NELSON'S    DILEMMA  april 

sail  of  the  line  are  expected  in  the  Mediterranean :  there- 
fore I  may  suppose  the  French  fleet  are  bound  to  the  west- 
ward. I  must  do  my  best.  God  bless  you.  I  am  very 
very  miserable." 

And  well  he  might  be.  The  stroke  he  had  prayed  and 
longed  for  through  the  weary  months  of  his  vigil  was  about 
to  be  played,  and  played  apparently  so  badly  that  disaster 
seemed  inevitable.  He  could  not  doubt,  any  more  than  the 
rest,  that  Villeneuve's  objective  was  the  doomed  expedition. 
Why  had  he  not  been  warned  ?  He  could  not  tell  that  the 
warning  had  been  sent  the  moment  the  convention  with 
Kussia  had  been  signed,  and  that  it  was  still  far  from  reach- 
ing him.^  All  he  could  know  was  that  his  whole  plan  of 
action  was  upset  by  a  new  factor.  The  position  he  had 
taken  up  would  no  longer  meet  the  case.  When  he  began 
his  letter  to  Ball  he  had  made  up  his  mind  "  to  stand  to- 
wards Madelena  and  Cape  Corse,"  apparently  with  the 
intention  of  ascertaining  whether  Villeneuve  had  doubled 
back,  since  from  all  his  widely  scattered  cruisers  came  not 
a  word  of  the  lost  fleet.  But  now  the  point  of  greatest 
danger  had  shifted  to  the  mouth  of  the  Straits,  and  with- 
out a  moments  hesitation  he  resolved  to  move  westward 
with  all  speed. 

His  idea  was  not  to  proceed  direct  to  Gibraltar ;  for  he 
now  issued  a  "  secret  route,"  in  which  the  flrst  rendezvous 
was  the  south  end  of  Sardinia  (No.  71)  and  the  second 
Formentera,  the  southernmost  of  the  Balearic  Islands."  The 
route  would  suggest  that,  in  spite  of  his  anxiety  for  Craig's 
force,  his  object  was  still  to  make  sure  that  Villeneuve  had 
not  doubled  back  upon  Naples,  and  his  subsequent  actions 
confirm  the  supposition  that  something  of  the  kind  was  in 
his  mind. 

Bitter  as  was  the  cup  of  his  dilemma  it  was  not  yet 
full.     In  spite  of  every  eflbrt  and  the  splendid  seamanship 

^  Craif^'s  orders  with  instructions  to  co-operate  were  contained  in  a  de- 
spatch to  Nelson,  dated  March  27th  {Out-lctters,  Secret  Orders,  i;^63),  but  there 
is  no  trace  in  his  correspondence  with  the  Admiralty  of  his  having  received 
it  till  May  1st  {po,st,  p.  97).  It  was  not  until  April  15th  that  he  received  the 
Admiralty  bag  of  February  16th. — Nicolas,  vi.  404. 

2  Journa/,  April  10  and  16.  In  the  revised  list  of  rendezvous  used  in 
September,  No.  71  was  Tarifa,  No.  80  was  Formentera  west  end. 


I 


April  IS  HEARS    CRAIG    IS    COMING  91 

of  his  hardened  squadron,  he  could  scarcely  make  any  pro- 
gress to  the  westward  at  all.  Persistent  heavy  weather 
from  the  west  and  north-west  held  him  fast  inside  Sar- 
dinia. On  the  11th  he  was  no  farther  towards  Formentera 
than  the  Island  of  Marittimo  off  the  end  of  Sicily.  Next 
day,  full  of  his  old  doubt,  he  sent  two  more  cruisers  to  look 
into  Toulon,  one  to  go  inside  Sardinia  and  the  other  round 
Toro.  By  the  15  th,  after  four  days'  struggle,  he  was  still 
beating  round  the  south  end  of  Sardinia,  and  here  he  was 
joined  by  two  cruisers  from  Naples.  One  was  a  frigate  of 
his  own,  the  Amazo7i,  which  he  had  sent  in  for  news,  and  the 
other  the  Decade,  a  smart  frigate  which  had  just  made  the 
voyage  from  England  in  seventeen  days.  She  had  brought  out 
Colonel  Smith,  one  of  Lord  Mulgrave's  private  secretaries, 
who  had  been  sent  specially  to  Elliot  with  news  of  the 
expedition  and  his  secret  instructions  for  its  employment. 
Elliot  had  hurried  her  on  to  Nelson  at  the  earliest  moment, 
but  her  information  was  already  nearly  a  week  old.^  "  Lord 
Mulgrave,"  Elliot  wrote,  "informs  me  in  great  secrecy  that 
a  considerable  body  of  troops  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  for 
Malta,  for  the  purposes  with  which  you  have  been  so  long 
acquainted.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  Lord  Mulgrave's 
private  secretary,  who  has  brought  me  secret  instructions 
upon  this  head,  conceives  that  the  regiments  will  have 
left  England  a  few  days  after  the  departure  of  the  Deccale. 
Under  this  impression  I  think  it  highly  material  that  you 
should  not  be  ignorant  of  a  circumstance,  which,  if  known 
to  the  French,  may  have  some  weight  with  them  respecting 
the  destination  of  the  Toulon  fleet."  "^ 

To  imagine  Nelson's  feelings  on  reading  such  a  letter  is 
not  difficult.  If  Colonel  Smith's  surmise  was  correct,  if  the 
troops  had  really  sailed  before  the  end  of  March,  it  made 
matters  ten  times  worse  and  the  silence  of  the  Admiralty 
ten  times  more  exasperating.     "  Your  Excellency's  notice," 

1  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parlrr,  i.  281.  The  Decade  had  reached 
Naples  by  the  9th.  She  must  therefore  have  left  England  on  March  22nd 
or  23rd,  that  is,  three  or  four  days  before  the  27th,  the  day  on  which  Nelson's 
instructions  to  co-operate  with  Craig  were  issued.  See  also  Nicolas,  vi. 
406  n. 

2  Nicolas,  vi.  406  n.  The  letter  is  dated  April  9th,  the  same  day  the  Decade 
arrived.    She  had  been  therefore  nearly  six  days  beating  out  to  Nelson. 


92  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  Aprh.  i6 

Nelson  wrote  in  indignant  reply,  "  about  troops  being  sent 
to  the  Mediterranean  is  the  first  word  I  have  ever  heard 
of  it,  nor  have  I  an  idea  that  any  such  thing  could  be  in 
agitation  without  the  Admiralty  telling  me,  in  order  that 
I  might  meet  and  protect  them."  Had  he  been  aware  of 
the  agitation  at  the  Admiralty  over  Melville's  downfall,  he 
would  have  understood  better,  but  of  that  he  knew  nothing 
to  temper  his  anger.  "  Does  your  Excellency  mean,"  he 
went  on,  "  that  you  or  that  I  have  been  long  acquainted 
with  it  ?  If  it  is  yoio,  I  dare  say  it  is  right ;  but  if  /  am 
meant  as  being  in  the  secret  of  the  destination  of  those 
troops,  I  most  solemnly  declare  my  entire  ignorance  as  to 
the  force  or  destination,  or  even  that  07ie  soldier  is  intended 
for  the  Mediterranean.  I  know  certainly  Avhere  many 
thousands  are  wanted;  but,  as  I  said  before,  I  never  will 
believe  that  any  number  of  troops  will  be  risked  inside 
Gibraltar  without  an  assurance  of  my  protection  :  and  that 
I  should  be  directed  to  meet  them  upon  some  fixed  station 
to  the  westward  of  Toulon,  if  not  to  the  westward  of 
Cartagena." 

He  was  not  to  know  the  expedition  w^as  still  windbound 
at  Spithead  as  he  wrote,  or  that  instructions  such  as  he 
sketched  were  just  starting  from  the  Admiralty.  For  all 
he  could  tell  the  troops  were  already  a  fortnight  out ;  and 
before  he  closed  his  letter — at  midday — came  news  from  a 
neutral  just  spoken  that,  nine  days  before,  the  Toulon 
squadron  had  been  seen  off  Cape  Gata  bearing  for  the 
Straits  before  an  easterly  wind.  "  If  this  account  is  true," 
Nelson  ended  in  despair,  "  much  mischief  may  be  appre- 
hended.    It  kills  me,  the  very  thought."  ^ 

The  acuteness  of  the  danger  seems  almost  to  have 
thrown  him  off  his  balance.  Yet  even  so  he  still  held 
unshaken  to  the  line  he  had  followed  all  along.  He  w^as 
resolved  that  even  the  apparent  certainty  of  the  new 
danger  should  not  beguile  him  to  the  westw^ard  till  he 
had  made  absolutely  sure  the  ground  w^as  good  behind 
him.  Accordingly  he  sent  off  yet  another  cruiser  to  look 
into  Toulon,  with  orders  to  meet  him  at  Formentera,  the 

^  Nicolas,  iv.  406. 


April  i6-i8  NEWS    OF    VILLENEUVE  93 

rendezvous  to  which  he  still  held.  She  also  bore  a  letter  to 
the  cruiser  he  had  kept  off  Cape  San  Sebastian  in  the  north- 
east of  Spain,  whom  she  was  to  relieve.  "  I  am  going,"  was 
his  message,  "  to  ascertain  if  the  French  fleet  is  not  in 
Toulon  and  then  to  proceed  to  the  westward,  and  this  is 
all  I  can  tell  at  present."  ^ 

It  was  not  till  two  days  later  that  his  way  was  made 
plain  before  him  and  he  knew  he  had  been  completely  out- 
manoeuvred. He  had  just  left  Toro  when  away  to  wind- 
ward Captain  William  Parker  of  the  Amazon  telegraphed 
that  he  had  spoken  a  Ragusan  who  said  she  had  seen  the 
Toulon  squadron  passing  the  Straits  on  April  8  th,  ten  days 
since.  And  to  add  to  the  vexation  he  reported  that  the 
homeward-bound  Levant  convoy,  which  had  already  been 
caught  once  and  which  Strachan  had  been  sent  to  protect, 
had  left  Gibraltar  only  a  day  ahead.'^ 

Stunned  and  humbled  by  the  news,  Nelson  changed  the 
rendezvous  to  Rosia  Bay  (Gibraltar)  and  sat  down  to 
rearrange  his  plans.  "  I  am  going  out  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean after  the  French  fleet,"  he  wrote  to  Elliot  in  a 
tone  of  resignation  in  sharp  contrast  with  his  last  indignant 
letter.  *'  It  may  be  thought  that  I  have  protected  too  well 
Sardinia,  Naples,  Sicily,  the  Morea,  and  Egypt  from  the 
French,  but  I  feel  I  have  done  right,  and  am  therefore  easy 
about  any  fate  that  may  await  me  for  having  missed  the 
French  fleet."  So  his  pen  wrote  the  words,  but  they  are 
the  words  of  a  man  who  was  neither  sure  nor  easy.  Next 
he  began  an  apology  to  the  Admiralty  for  his  failure. 
"  Under  the  severe  aflliction,"  he  said,  "  which  I  feel  at  the 
escape  of  the  French  fleet  out  of  the  Mediterranean,  I  hope 
that  their  Lordships  will  not  impute  it  to  any  want  of  due 
attention  on  my  part,  but  on  the  contrary  that  by  my  vigi- 
lance the  enemy  found  it  was  impossible  to  undertake  any 
expedition  in  the  Mediterranean."  That  had  been  his  chief 
function,  as  he  saw  his  duty,  but  would  the  Admiralty  and 
the  country  understand  ? 

1  Nelson  to  Thomas,  H.M.  Bomb  jEtna,  April  16th  :    Nicolas,  vi.  404  ; 
and  Nelson's  Journal,  April  16th. 

2  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir   William  Parker,  vol.  i.  284.     Parker  to  Nelson, 
April  18th  :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34929,  f.  170. 


94  NELSON'S    DILEMMA  April  i8 

As  yet  ho  could  not  see  clearly  what  the  ultimate  des- 
tination of  his  fleet  should  be.  He  merely  informed  them 
he  was  going  to  the  westward  and  must  be  guided  by  what 
he  heard  when  he  reached  Gibraltar,  and  that  meanwhile  he 
Avas  taking  precautions  to  preserve  the  command  of  the 
Italian  seas  during  his  absence. 

For  this  purpose  he  formed  the  greater  part  of  his 
cruisers  into  a  squadron  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Hon.  T.  Bladen  Capel,  of  the  Fhaibe  36,  with  instruc- 
tions to  take  station  off  Tore  and  between  that  island 
and  Marittimo  off  the  west  end  of  Sicily,  *'  for  the  purpose  of 
intercepting  any  expedition  which  the  enemy  may  attempt 
against  Sardinia,  Sicily,  and  Egypt."  "  I  only  mention  it," 
Nelson  wrote,  "  as  the  most  likely  place  to  fall  in  with  any 
expedition  which  the  enemy  may  attempt  against  those 
places  from  Toulon,  but  must  leave  this  important  trust  to 
your  judgment  and  to  act,  as  from  certain  circumstances 
of  information  you  shall  judge  best,  to  prevent  their  effect- 
ing a  landing."  The  squadron,  when  it  was  concentrated  as 
intended  at  Tore,  Avould  consist  of  five  frigates  and  a  bomb, 
and  this  force,  with  the  Neapolitan  squadron  and  the 
Excellent  at  Naples,  he  considered  sufficient  for  the  moment 
without  counting  on  the  arrival  of  the  Russians.^ 

So  to  the  last  he  clung  to  the  base  idea  of  his  strategical 
principle.  His  dominant  function  was  to  keep  command  of 
the  Mediterranean.  For  him  that  was  always  the  end ;  the 
destruction  of  the  Toulon  fleet  was  only  a  means.  To  that 
end,  therefore,  he  sacrificed  more  than  half  his  cruisers — 
keeping  only  three  frigates  and  a  couple  of  sloops  with  his 
flag ;  and  not  even  in  the  moment  of  his  passionate  desire 
to  deal  Avith  the  enemy's  battle  fleet,  Avhen  cruisers  meant 
almost  everything,  did  he  suffer  it  to  turn  him  a  hair- 
breadth from  the  higher  purpose.  No  great  captain  ever 
grasped  more  fully  the  strategical  importance  of  dealing 
with  the  enemy's  main  force,  yet  no  one  ever  less  suftered 
it  to  become  an  obsession ;  no  one  saw  more  clearly  when 
it  ceased  to  be  the  key  of  a  situation,  and  fell  to  a  position 
of  secondary  moment. 

1  Nelson  to  Capel,  April  18tb  :  Nicolas,  vi.  408. 


April  19  HIS    FIRST    INTENTION  95 

For  a  real  insight  into  Nelson's  character  as  a  strategist 
there  is  nothing  in  his  career  so  valuable  as  the  period  of 
trial  that  was  now  before  him.  At  no  other  time  are  we 
permitted  to  see  so  deep  down  into  the  well-laid  fomida- 
tions  on  which  his  brilliant  combinations  were  securely 
based.  The  dramatic  attraction  of  his  immortal  chase  has 
led  to  the  growth  of  a  legend  that  it  was  a  stroke  of  inspired 
daring.  But  in  truth  it  was  a  sober  calculation  patiently 
built  up  step  by  step  with  all  behind  made  solid  and  secure 
and  all  in  front  reduced  by  slow  degrees  to  such  certainty 
as  war  ever  permits.  As  a  precedent  for  conduct  in  such  a 
case  there  is  nothing  within  our  knowledge  that  can  com- 
pare with  the  forging  of  the  final  decision — nothing  that  so 
fully  reveals  the  working  of  a  master  mind  in  war.  It  must 
be  followed  day  by  day,  even  hour  by  hour  where  possible. 

The  day  after  he  received  Parker's  report  he  was  still 
only  ten  leagues  west  of  Toro,  but  he  had  recovered  him- 
self and  his  purpose  was  settled.  "  Dead  foul — dead  foul," 
he  wrote  again  to  Ball,  "  but  my  mind  is  fully  made  up 
what  to  do  when  I  leave  the  Straits,  supposing  there  is  no 
certain  information  of  the  enemy's  destination.  ...  I  believe 
this  ill-luck  will  go  near  to  kill  me,  but  as  these  are  times 
for  exertions,  I  must  not  be  cast  down  whatever  I  feel." 
And  again  to  Lord  Melville,  whom  he  believed  still -to  be 
his  chief,  "  I  am  not  made  to  despair — what  man  can  do 
shall  be  done.  1  have  marked  out  for  myself  a  decided 
line  of  conduct  and  I  shall  follow  it  up  well." 

It  has  often  been  assumed  that  this  line  was  to  make 
straight  for  the  West  Indies  on  an  intuition  that  Villeneuve 
was  gone  there ;  but  the  rest  of  the  correspondence  shows 
it  was  quite  the  reverse.  At  a  loss  to  locate  his  enemy 
and  sure  now  that  he  had  left  the  Mediterranean,  he  had 
resolved  if  he  got  no  further  information  to  play  the  old 
safe  game  which  Orde  had  played,  and  which  to  the  experi- 
enced Admirals  of  those  days  was  a  second  nature — a 
golden  rule  when  in  doubt.  So  far  was  he  from  any 
determination  to  proceed  to  the  West  Indies  that  he  had 
resolved  to  close  on  the  Western  Squadron  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Channel. 


96  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  April  19 

In  the  course  of  the  day  Parker  found  the  brig  which 
Lord  Mark  Kerr  had  hired,  and  she  brought  an  important 
new  Hght.  Not  only  was  she  able  to  bring  Kerr's  message 
that  Villeneuve  had  passed  the  Straits  ten  days  before,  but 
she  also  carried  later  news  that  he  had  been  to  Cadiz  and 
left  again  with  some  Spanish  ships  in  company/  Nelson 
at  once  deduced  that  Villeneuve  had  not  gone  to  the  West 
Indies,  and  sat  down  to  draw  up  the  following  appreciation 
for  the  Admmalty: — 

"  The  enemy's  fleet  having  so  very  long  ago  passed  the 
Straits  and  formed  a  junction  with  some  Spanish  ships 
from  Cadiz.  ...  I  have  detached  the  Amazon  to  Lisbon 
for  information,  and  I  am  proceeding  oif  Cape  St.  Vincent 
as  expeditiously  as  possible ;  and  I  hope  the  Amazon  will 
join  me  there  or  that  I  shall  obtain  some  positive  informa- 
tion of  the  destination  of  the  enemy.  The  circumstance  of 
their  having  taken  the  Spanish  ships,  which  were  for  sea, 
from  Cadiz,  satisfies  my  mind  that  they  are  not  bound  for 
the  West  Indies :  but  intend  forming  a  junction  with  the 
squadron  at  Ferrol  and  pushing  direct  for  Ireland  or  Brest, 
as  I  believe  the  French  have  troops  on  board.  Therefore, 
if  I  receive  no  intelligence  to  do  away  with  my  present 
belief,  I  shall  proceed  from  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  take  my 
position  fifty  leagues  Avest  from  Scilly,  approaching  that 
island  slowly,  that  I  may  not  miss  any  vessels  sent  in 
search  of  the  squadron  with  orders.  My  reason  for  this 
position  is,  that  it  is  equally  easy  either  to  get  to  the 
fleet  off  Brest  or  to  go  to  Ireland  should  the  fleet  be 
wanted  at  either  station.  I  trust  this  plan  will  meet 
their  lordships'  approbation;  and  I  have  the  pleasure 
to  say  that  I  shall  bring  with  me  eleven  as  fine  ships 
of  war,  as  ably  commanded,  and  in  as  perfect  order 
and  in  health  as  ever  went  to  sea.  .  .  .  (P.S.)  I  shall 
send  to  both  Ireland  and  the  Channel  Fleet  an  extract 
of  this  letter,  acquainting  the  Commander-in-chief  where 
to  find  me." 

Once  more,  then,  he  was  as  clear-headed  as  ever,  and 
eliminating   minor   matters  was   able  to  detach  with   pre- 

1  Philliraore,  Sir  William  Parker,  i.  284. 


May  I  A   WRONG   APPRECIATION  97 

cision  the  essential  move.  His  spirit  too  was  healed,  and 
his  letter  to  Lord  Gardner  rings  with  the  old  cheery  note. 
He  began  to  see,  as  indeed  it  proved,  that  his  driving  Ville- 
neuve  through  the  Straits  was  a  strategical  success,  and  he 
had  little  fear  for  what  he  would  do  outside.  "  My  dear 
lord,"  he  wrote,  "  if  the  Toulon  fleet  with  that  of  Cadiz  is 
gone  your  road,  the  ships  under  my  command  will  be  no 
unacceptable  sight.  If  you  do  not  want  help,  tell  us  to 
go  back  again.  I  feel  vexed  at  their  slipping  out  of  the 
Mediterranean  as  I  had  marked  them  for  my  game.  How- 
ever I  hope,  my  dear  lord,  that  now  you  will  annihilate 
them."  From  this  time,  moreover,  there  is  no  further  sign 
of  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  Craig's  expedition.  The  news 
of  Villeneuve's  having  been  to  Cadiz  to  form  a  junction 
with  the  Spaniards  must  have  assured  him  that  the  enemy 
had  some  other  and  higher  aim. 

A  week  of  weary  beating  to  the  westward  followed,  but 
it  brought  no  change  in  his  view.  At  the  end  of  it,  in  a 
letter  to  the  Commissioner  at  Gibraltar,  he  expressed  him- 
self as  unshaken  in  his  conviction  that  the  junction  of 
the  two  squadrons  indicated  the  relief  of  Ferrol,  to  be 
followed  by  a  direct  attack  on  the  British  islands,  and  not 
an  adventure  in  the  West  Indies.^  He  was  then  nearing 
the  Straits,  and  with  his  letter  he  sent  the  Decade  forward 
to  Gibraltar  with  directions  to  bring  him  the  last  word 
known  there.  Four  days  later,  on  May  1st,  with  Ceuta  just 
in  sight,  he  received  a  direct  communication  from  the 
Admiralty  which  not  only  explained  their  silence  on  the 
subject  of  the  expedition,  but  gave  him  hope  it  was  safe. 
"  I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter  of  the  1st  of 
April,"  he  immediately  replied, "  acquainting  me  .  .  .  that 
Rear-Admiral  Knight  with  the  Queen  and  Dragon  w^ere  to 
sail  in  a  day  or  two  .  .  .  having  under  convoy  transports 
with  5000  troops  on  board."  It  was  the  long-expected 
despatch  directing  him  to  take  up  a  covering  position.  His 
relief  was  great,  for  now  he  knew  the  troops  had  not  started 
so  soon  as  Elliot  believed.  There  was  good  ground  to 
hope,  as  he  said,  that  as  the  Fisgard  had  left  for  England 

^  Nelson  to  Otway,  April  26th:  Nicolas,  vi.  415. 

G 


98  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  may  4 

two   hours  after  the  French   had  passed,  she   would   have 
arrived  in  time  to  stop  the  expedition  sailing.^ 

On  the  4th,  as  the  wind  still  held  ahead,  he  resolved  to 
anchor  in  Tetuan  Bay  and  employ  the  time  in  filling  up 
with  water,  beef,  and  fuel.  While  thus  engaged  he  received 
the  first  suggestion  of  what  was  really  happening.  It  was 
a  reply  from  Captain  Otway,  the  Navy  Commissioner  at 
Gibraltar,  telling  him  of  the  entire  disappearance  of  the 
Combined  Squadron  and  of  the  general  belief  that  it  had 
gone  to  the  West  Indies.  The  news  certainly  shook  his 
former  conviction,  but  though  it  filled  him  with  new  anxiety 
it  was  not  enough  to  change  his  purpose.  Of  the  sure  intel- 
ligence he  had  hoped  to  get  from  Orde's  cruisers  there  was 
none,  and  no  matter  how  pressing  was  the  danger  in  the 
west,  he  would  not  act  on  mere  rumours.  "  I  cannot  very 
properly  run  to  the  West  Indies,"  he  replied  to  Otway, 
"  without  something  beyond  mere  surmise,  and  if  I  defer 
my  departure  Jamaica  may  be  lost." 

His  attitude  to  the  dilemma  was  well  expressed  by  his 
first  biographers  in  a  noteworthy  passage.  One  of  them, 
McArthur,  knew  him  well  and  had  come  near  to  being  his 
secretary.  The  legend  of  a  heaven-sent  inspiration  was 
already  arising  when  they  wrote,  and  in  their  view  it  should 
be  nipped  in  the  bud  as  fraught  with  danger.  "  It  was 
entirely  inconsistent,"  they  declare,  ''  with  Lord  Nelson's 
great  professional  character  and  regard  for  the  discipline  of 
the  service  to  take  so  bold  a  step  until  he  had  every  reason 
to  believe  they  could  not  have  sailed  in  any  other  direction. 
...  It  is  the  more  necessary  to  make  this  remark  lest  other 
officers,  led  on  by  the  impulse  of  zeal  unsubdued  by  the  re- 
flection he  employed  and  the  splendour  of  resolute  pursuit, 
may  erroneously  indulge  in  a  contrary  idea  to  their  own 
destruction."  ^ 

His  whole  conduct  at  this  juncture  amply  bears  out  his 
biographers'  remarks.  The  West  Indies  became  a  probable 
destination,  that  was  all.  Till  there  could  be  no  room  for 
doubt  he  kept  an  open  mind,  still  resolved  to  close  on  the 

1  To  Marsden,  May  1st :  Nicolas,  vi.  418. 

2  Clarke  and  McArthur,  Life  of  Nelson,  II.  Part,  iii.  94. 


Mays        precautions   BEFORE   LEAVING  99 

strategic  centre,  if  no  sufficient  information  were  forth- 
coming. But  meanwhile  he  prepared  everything  for  the 
possible  eventuality.  On  May  the  5th  he  formally  con- 
stituted his  second-in-command,  Sir  Richard  Bickerton, 
Commander-in-chief  in  the  Mediterranean  during  his  pos- 
sible absence,  with  orders  to  carry  out  in  every  particular 
"  the  Admiralty  instructions  for  the  protection  and  safety 
of  their  Sicilian  and  their  Sardinian  Majesties'  dominions,  as 
well  as  preventing  the  enemy  from  effecting  any  expedition 
against  Egypt."  The  squadron  he  would  have  for  the  work 
must  at  first  be  weak  enough.  Bickerton's  flag  was  flying 
in  the  Royal  Sovereign,  but  she  was  a  first-rate  and  too  valu- 
able to  be  spared.  Nelson  meant  to  take  her  with  him 
and  intended  Bickerton  to  shift  his  flag  to  any  other  ship 
he  chose  in  the  squadron  that  was  to  be  left  under  his 
command.  It  was  to  consist  of  nearly  the  whole  of  Nelson's 
cruisers  and  any  additional  force  that  might  arrive  from 
home.  There  were  over  a  score  all  told,  and  Nelson  him- 
self kept  only  four,  so  careful  was  he  to  make  good  behind 
him  the  ground  committed  to  his  charge. 

As  these  orders  were  being  prepared  the  wind  at  last 
came  fair,  and  he  moved  for  the  Straits  to  pass  on  and  meet 
the  Amazon  from  Lisbon  whence  alone  he  could  hope  to  get 
the  light  which  would  clear  the  fog.  Lisbon  for  the 
moment  was  the  centre  of  information,  and  there,  while 
Nelson  moves  west  on  the  fitful  Levanter,  we  must  look 
before  the  position  can  be  grasped  in  all  its  bearings. 


CHAPTER  VII 

HOW   NELSON    MADE   SURE 

On  the  Tagus  was  being  played  one  of  the  many  under- 
plots of  Napoleon's  vast  contest  with  Pitt.  All  through  the 
long  imperial  struggle  between  England  and  France,  Lisbon, 
the  womb  of  the  Oceanic  expansion  of  Europe,  had  been 
recognised  as  a  point  beyond  price.  Napoleon,  like  all  his 
predecessors,  Avas  resolved  not  only  that  Portugal  must  not 
be  a  British  ally,  but  that  even  neutrality  must  be  denied 
her.  Following  the  precedents  of  the  old  Family  Compact, 
it  was  a  term  of  his  convention  with  Spain  that  Portugal 
must  be  forced  at  least  to  close  her  ports  to  British  vessels ; 
and  towards  the  end  of  February  he  had  sent  off  General 
Junot,  his  aide-de-camp  and  Colonel-General  of  his  Hussars, 
as  ambassador  to  Lisbon  to  see  that  it  was  done.  Junot  was 
long  on  the  road,  for  he  had  first  to  visit  Madrid  to  stir  the 
Spanish  Government  to  greater  naval  activity,  and  not  till 
the  second  week  in  April  did  he  finally  set  out  for  Lisbon. 
It  was  an  evil  moment.  Our  minister  there.  Lord 
Robert  FitzGerald,  was  bracing  himself  for  the  coming 
diplomatic  struggle,  when  on  April  13th  he  received  Orde's 
letters  to  say  he  had  been  driven  off  his  station  by  Ville- 
neuve.  On  the  morrow  Junot  arrived,  and  FitzGerald  could 
not  doubt  that  in  a  day  or  two  he  would  see  the  Toulon 
squadron  in  the  Tagus  and  that  Portugal  would  be  forced 
into  the  Napoleonic  system  while  he  stood  by  helpless. 
"  The  junction  of  the  French  and  Spanish  fleets  at  Cadiz," 
he  wrote  home,  "  will  now  enable  the  ambassadors  of  both 
nations  to  hold  what  language  they  please  here."  There  was 
no  means  of  resistance.  The  Portuguese,  it  is  true,  were 
making  an  effort  to  restore  their  navy  and  had  already 
secured    the    services    of    a    British    officer,    Rear-Admiral 


April  SITUATION    AT     LISBON  lOI 

Donald  Campbell ;  but  he  had  recently  been  sent  to  sea 
with  a  ship  of  the  line  and  three  cruisers  to  operate,  osten- 
sibly at  least,  about  the  Straits  against  certain  Algerine 
pirates  Avho  had  become  troublesome.^ 

The  language  which  Junot  and  the  Spanish  ambassador 
held  soon  made  itself  felt.  Sutton,  the  officer  whom  Orde 
had  left  in  command  of  his  cruisers,  found  he  was  refused 
victuals  at  Lagos.  FitzGerald  protested  and  was  told 
quietly  the  prohibition  would  not  be  enforced.  Quarantine, 
moreover,  was  declared  against  the  British  vessels,  and  Sutton 
found  it  impossible  to  carry  out  Orde's  directions  that  he 
was  to  hire  boats  to  look  into  Cadiz.  He  could  thus  get  no 
intelligence  whatever.  Of  his  sloops  the  Wasp  alone  was  in 
touch  with  him :  the  Beagle  had  entirely  disappeared.  On 
April  24th,  however,  FitzGerald  was  able  to  report  home, 
on  direct  information  from  Cadiz,  that  the  allied  squadrons 
had  been  seen  sailing  westward  on  the  10  th.  He  sent 
the  news  off  immediately  by  the  English  packet ;  and  for 
Lisbon  he  could  feel  easier.  But  not  for  long.  On  May 
2nd  he  was  startled  by  an  express  from  Sutton  to  tell  him 
that  on  April  27th  an  officer  of  the  JVasp  had  succeeded  in 
looking  into  Cadiz  in  a  Portuguese  boat  and  had  found  the 
whole  Combined  Squadron  there.  If  this  were  true,  it 
meant  that  Villeneuve  had  come  back,  and  the  danger  was 
as  great  as  ever.  FitzGerald  could  not  believe  it.  He  had 
just  ascertained  from  a  neutral  skipper  exact  details  of 
the  allied  squadrons  as  they  had  sailed  together  to  the 
westward,  and  the  reports  from  Cadiz  were  that  every  one 
knew  they  were  bound  for  Jamaica.  Still  certainty  in  the 
matter  was  beyond  his  reach,  and  in  his  dilemma  he  fell 
back  on  a  principle  that  is  worth  recording.  The  diplomatic 
and  the  naval  intelligence  were  in  conflict  on  a  matter  of 
moment,  but  the  diplomatic  situation  turned  on  the  situa- 
tion at  sea.  It  was  primarily  a  naval  matter,  and  therefore 
in  consultation  with  Gambler,  the  Consul,  a  man  on  whose 
sagacity  and  knowledge  every  one  relied,  he  concluded  there 
was  no  choice  but  to  act  on  the  assumption  that  the  naval 

^  FitzGerald  to   Mulgrave,  April    13th  and   14th  :    State  Papers,  Foreign 
{Portugal),  vol.  47. 


I02  HOW   NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  4 

intelligence  was  true.  Accordingly  they  decided  together 
to  send  it  home  at  once  and  take  such  action  as  was  in 
their  power.^ 

Immediate  action  of  some  kind  and  on  their  own  re- 
sponsibility was  absolutely  necessary.  They  knew  Knight 
and  Craig  were  at  hand.  Only  a  few  days  before  the 
Orpheus,  a  frigate  that  was  cruising  on  the  station,  had 
gone  out  to  try  to  meet  them  with  a  warning  that  Orde 
was  gone.  If  she  should  fail  to  find  them  and  Sutton's 
news  was  really  true,  they  would  be  sailing  straight  into 
the  lion's  mouth.  At  all  hazards  they  must  be  warned. 
Another  English  packet  had  just  come  in,  and  one  of 
FitzGerald's  staff  was  hurried  away  in  her  with  orders  to 
find  them  out.  Tw^enty-four  hours  after  he  had  gone  the 
expedition  appeared  off  the  Tagus.  Gambler  sped  out  to 
them  with  the  alarming  news.  He  found  the  Orpheus  had 
met  them  the  day  before,  but  they  had  missed  the  packet. 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  In  view  of  what  was  going  on 
in  Lisbon  it  was  an  extremely  delicate  situation.  But 
Gambler  was  at  hand  to  advise  and  Knight  and  Craig  did 
not  hesitate.  While  the  Orpheus  was  sent  southward  in 
search  of  trustworthy  information  as  to  the  actual  situa- 
tion at  Cadiz,  to  the  Consul  was  committed  a  politely  firm 
letter  from  the  two  commanders  informing  the  Portuguese 
Government  that  they  intended  to  take  refuge  in  the  Tagus, 
and  that  if  any  attempt  were  made  to  obstruct  their 
entrance  it  Avould  be  taken  as  an  act  of  hostility.  The 
Portuguese  were  thus  made  as  comfortable  as  possible  Avith 
a  plea  of  compulsion,  and  it  had  the  desired  effect.  No 
opposition  was  offered,  and  next  day  the  expedition  quietly 
anchored  inside  the  harbour  defences. 

The  diplomatic  air  was  immediately  in  a  tempest.  In 
the  eyes  of  Junot  and  the  Spanish  ambassador,  knowing  as 
they  did  that  Villeneuve  w'as  far  across  the  Atlantic,  the 
British  movement  could  have  but  one  meaning.  It  w^as 
obviously  a  device  to  forestall  their  game — a  repetition 
of  the  successful  British  stroke  of  1762.  They  had  been 
expecting  for  some  time  that  this  was  the  real  object  of 

^  FitzGeraid  to  Mulgrave,  May  3rd  :  S.  P.  Foreijn  {Portuyal),  47. 


May  5-8  CRAIG   IN   THE    TAGUS  103 

Craig's  expedition  and  had  warned  Talleyrand  of  the 
danger.^  Their  fear  was  now  turned  into  stern  reality. 
Junot  stormed,  the  Spaniard  threatened.  It  was  a  pre- 
concerted trick,  they  protested,  between  the  Portuguese  and 
Pitt  to  secure  the  forts  with  British  troops,  and  they  vowed 
they  must  have  at  once  either  an  ample  and  satisfactory 
explanation  or  their  passports. 

As  we  know,  Pitt's  military  force  was  far  too  deeply 
engaged  to  permit  him  any  such  design,  but  the  suspicions 
of  the  two  enraged  ambassadors  were  so  far  justified  that 
Craig  Avas  actually  making  arrangements  to  seize  the  sea 
defences  at  the  first  sign  of  a  French  fleet  in  the  offing. 
"  It  would  have  been  excellent  fun,"  wrote  one  of  his  officers 
in  recording  the  curious  incident. 

Aranjo,  the  Portuguese  minister,  was  at  his  wits'  end. 
If  he  could  not  pacify  Junot  and  his  colleague  it  meant  a 
Franco-Spanish  invasion.  If  he  broke  with  the  British, 
retribution  might  come  more  swiftly  still,  for  Nelson  at 
any  moment  might  appear.  He  could  not  afford  to  offend 
either  party.  He  appealed  to  FitzGerald,  hoping  Craig 
did  not  mean  to  stop  long,  and  FitzGerald  could  only  assure 
him  that  the  expedition  would  stay  no  longer  than  the 
day  he  got  further  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  movements 
which  he  was  expecting  hourly  by  the  Orpheus} 

So  the  matter  had  to  rest.  Threaten  as  the  two  ambas- 
sadors would,  they  were  helpless.  Neither  cared  to  take 
the  extreme  step  of  demanding  their  passports,  and  while 
they  still  hesitated  the  tension  was  relieved.  On  the  third 
day  the  Orpheus  came  back  with  confirmation  of  FitzGerald's 
belief  that  Villeneuve  had  not  returned,  and  with  what 
was  still  better,  the  long-expected  tidings  that  Nelson 
had  passed  the  Straits.  Thereupon  Knight  made  the  signal 
to  weigh,  and  prepared  to  go  out  to  meet  him.^ 

Some  fifty  miles  beyond  Cape  St.  Vincent,  the  Orpheus 
had  fallen  in  with  Parker  in  the  Amazon,  Avhom  it  will  be 
remembered  Nelson  had  sent  forward  to  the  Tagus  to  seek 

^  See  ante,  p.  79. 

2  FitzGerald  to  Mulgrave,  May  5th :  8.  P.  Foreign  {Portugal),  47-     Log 
of  the  Orpheus :  Captains'  Logs,  P.  R.  O. 

3  Fitzgerald  to  Mulgrave,  May  8th. 


T04  HOW    NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  6 

the  information  on  which  his  final  decision  was  to  rest. 
Together  they  proceeded  off  St.  Vincent — the  rendezvous 
Nelson  had  given — and  there  Parker  handed  over  his  mails 
and  despatches  to  the  Orpheus  to  be  taken  on  to  Lisbon, 
while  he  waited  to  meet  Nelson  with  the  news  which  the 
Orpheus  had  given  him.  By  this  means  a  couple  of  days 
might  be  saved.  It  was  the  Nelsonian  way,  and  Nelson 
himself  had  been  doing  the  like.  The  fair  breeze  had  come 
before  he  had  completed  his  stores  at  Tetuan,  but  he  would 
not  waste  the  wind.  Off  Gibraltar  it  failed,  and  he  anchored 
again  to  try  to  complete.  But  in  five  hours  it  came  fair, 
and  he  was  away  once  more  for  St.  Vincent,  burning  for 
the  information  which  must  decide  his  course. 

He  was  still,  as  he  said,  as  much  in  the  dark  as  ever ; 
but  since  he  left  Tetuan  the  probabilities  had  changed.  In 
his  letters  to  the  Admiralty  he  no  longer  says  that  if  he 
hears  nothing  he  shall  close  on  the  Channel,  but  that  pro- 
bably he  will  go  to  the  West  Indies.  The  cause  of  this 
change  is  scarcely  doubtful.  At  Gibraltar  he  had  got  into 
contact  with  Admiral  Campbell  and  the  Portuguese  squadron, 
and  Captain  Hargood  of  the  Belleisle  tells  us  he  received 
from  him  "  important  information  as  to  the  destination  of 
the  French  squadron."  Not  a  word  of  this  appears  in 
Nelson's  correspondence,  and  naturally  enough,  since  Camp- 
bell's part  in  it  was  unneutral  service,  which  if  knoAvn  would 
get  him  into  serious  trouble.  What  it  was  w^e  can  surmise 
with  tolerable  certainty.  In  any  case  it  w^as  regarded  as  so 
important  by  Junot  and  his  colleague  that,  on  Campbell's 
return  to  Lisbon,  they  insisted  on  his  dismissal  and  he  had 
to  go  home  to  die  in  poverty  and  neglect.-^ 

Yet  it  was  not  Campbell's  information  that  brought 
Nelson  to  a  final  decision.  There  must  be  greater  certainty 
still  before  he  could  take  the  crucial  step,  and  this  he 
hoped  to  get  off  St.  Vincent  either  from  the  Amazon  or  one 
of  Orde's  cruisers,  Avhich  he  now  knew  had  been  left  to 
watch.  It  was  on  the  evening  of  May  6th,  the  same  day 
he  saw  Campbell,  that  Nelson  had  left  Gibraltar.      Meeting 

1  Allen,  Life  of  Captain  Sir  William  Hargood,  p.  1 1 0.     Clarke  and  McArthur, 
ii.  489,  and  see  ^os^  p.  111. 


I 


May 9  THE   DECISION    MADE  105 

with  light  airs,  it  was  not  till  the  morning  of  the  9  th 
he  had  made  St.  Vincent.  His  destination  was  still  un- 
certain, and  his  stores  for  a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  still 
incomplete.  "  We  have  heard  nothing  of  the  French  fleet 
since  they  left  Cadiz  on  the  10th,"  wrote  Hardy,  his  flag 
captain,  as  they  sighted  the  cape.  "  It  is  therefore  strongly 
believed  by  Lord  Nelson  that  they  are  gone  for  the  West 
Indies,  and  of  course  we  shall  follow  them  if  we  hear  no- 
thing of  their  destination  from  Lisbon,  from  whence  we 
expect  the  Amazon  will  join  to-morrow."  Up  to  this  time, 
therefore,  the  question  was  still  open,  but  after  his  manner 
Nelson  made  the  best  use  of  the  delay  till  certainty  could  be 
attained.  The  storeships  which  Orde  had  sent  into  Lagos 
were  still  there,  and  with  evident  enjoyment  he  decided  to 
move  thither  and  help  himself  to  all  he  wanted.  "  Here 
we  are,  my  dear  Campbell,"  he  wrote  to  his  friend  next  day 
from  Lagos,  "  clearing  Sir  John  Orde's  transports  .  .  . 
completing  ourselves  to  five  months,  and  to-morrow  I  start 
for  the  West  Indies.  .  .  .  Admiral  Knight  ...  is  at  pre- 
sent off  Lisbon  with  the  convoy  of  troops.  I  wish  he  would 
come  here;  but  he  has  been  deceived  by  false  informa- 
tion that  the  Combined  Squadrons  were  still  in  Cadiz — I 
wish  they  were."  ^  In  the  evening  he  moved  back  to  St. 
Vincent,  and  at  ten  o'clock  the  same  night  Hardy  added 
a  postscript  to  his  letter.  "  We  are  noAV  ofl*  St.  Vincent, 
and  his  lordship  has  made  up  his  mind  to  bear  up  for 
the  West  Indies  in  the  course  of  to-morrow."^  Thus 
to  a  few  hours  we  can  tell  when  it  was  Nelson  took  his 
momentous  decision,  and  we  can  tell,  moreover,  exactly  on 
what  information  it  was  taken. 

The  first  light  on  the  actual  situation  that  he  obtained 
was  from  his  old  friend  Sutton  in  the  Amphion,  who  was 
still  at  the  post  where  Orde  had  left  him.  It  was  also  the 
fullest,  though  Nelson  in  his  Journal  would  not  admit  it. 
All  he  says  is  that  at  half-past  seven  in  the  evening  of  the  9th 
she  joined  company,   "  and  I  ordered  Captain  Sutton  under 

1  To  Rear- Admiral  George  Campbell,  May  10th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  431.  Nelson 
in  addressing  the  letter  seems  to  confuse  Donald  Campbell  with  Captain 
George  Campbell,  who  had  been  commanding  the  Canopus  under  him. 

2  Hardy  to  Mansfield,  May  10th  :  Nelson's  Hardy,  p.  127. 


io6  HOW  NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  lo 

my  command,  who  informed  mc  he  had  gamed  no  intelli- 
gence of  the  enemy  since  their  leaving  Cadiz."  But  this 
Avas  not  the  whole  story,  for  Sutton  Avas  able  to  give  him 
negative  evidence  which  could  leave  no  doubt  that  the 
enemy  had  left  European  Avaters.  Two  days  earlier  he  had 
spoken  the  Lively,  a  frigate  that  Avas  little  more  than  a 
Aveek  out  from  the  Channel,  and  this  is  Avhat  she  had  to 
tell.  She  had  left  Spithead  as  late  as  April  27th  and 
only  seven  days  before  her  captain  had  been  on  board 
Gardner's  flagship,  Avhere  he  heard  that  Orde  Avas  falling 
back  on  Ushant,  and  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  Ville- 
neuve.  On  the  morroAv,  as  he  sped  south,  he  had  seen  the 
junction  betAveen  Gardner  and  Orde  actually  made,  and  a 
little  later  he  passed  a  convoy  northAvard-bound  Avhich  had 
not  been  molested.  Nelson  therefore  could  bo  certain  that 
for  more  than  three  Avecks  after  the  Combined  Squadron 
had  left  Cadiz  it  had  not  been  heard  of  anyAvhere  to  the 
northAA^ard. 

Now  according  to  Captain  Parker  of  the  Amazon,  it  Avas 
this  intelligence,  at  least  as  much  as  his  OAvn,  Avhich  caused 
Nelson  to  make  up  his  mind.  Writing  to  his  father  to 
explain  Avhy  the  fleet  went  to  the  West  Indies,  he  says, 
"  Lord  Nelson  was  satisfied  from  the  very  recent  accounts 
from  Lisbon,  as  well  as  from  England,  brought  in  seven 
days  only  by  the  Lively,  that  the  enemy  w^ere  not  gone  to 
the  north,  and  instantly  made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  the  West 
Indies."  ^  Parker  then  believed  that  it  Avas  the  negative 
intelligence  that  had  most  to  do  Avith  removing  Nelson's 
hesitation — that  is,  he  could  be  certain  he  was  not  wanted 
off  Ushant. 

The  Amazon  herself  rejoined  about  an  hour  later,  bring- 
ing all  the  Lisbon  ncAvs.  Amongst  the  papers  handed  over 
to  her  by  the  Orpheus  Avas  the  deposition  of  an  American 
skipper  Avhom  the  Orpheus  had  spoken.  He  had  left  Cadiz 
on  May  2nd  and  Avas  able  to  report  the  exact  composition 
of  the  Combined  Squadron,  the  number  of  troops  it  carried, 
and  the  names  of  the  commanders.  "  The  reports  of  their 
destination,"  he  said,  "  Avere  various.     By  some  it  AA'as  sup- 

1  Phillimore,  Sir  William  Parker,  p.  292. 


May  II  HE    WAITS    FOR    CRAIG  107 

posed  they  were  destined  for  Ireland :  and  by  others,  with 
great  probabiUty,  for  the  West  Indies,  particularly  Jamaica." 
So  perfect  a  confirmation  of  the  intelligence  which  Nelson 
had  from  Campbell,  from  home,  and  from  Lisbon,  must 
have  cleared  away  the  last  shade  of  doubt,  and  then  and 
there  he  sat  down  to  inform  the  Admiralty  he  meant  to  go.^ 

The  only  trouble  was  that  the  enemy  had  now  a  whole 
month's  start  of  him.  Yet  he  did  not  despair  of  being  in 
time  to  save  Jamaica  and  the  other  British  islands.  So 
great  was  his  confidence  in  the  superior  seamanship  of  his 
fleet,  he  was  sure  with  luck  and  judgment  he  could  gain 
many  days  upon  the  chase.  But  every  hour  was  precious 
and  yet  he  could  not  give  the  word  to  go.  He  now  knew 
Craig's  expedition  had  put  into  Lisbon  on  the  false  infor- 
mation that  had  been  received  as  to  Villeneuve's  having  re- 
turned to  Cadiz,  and  his  last  orders  from  home  were  to  see 
it  safe  on  its  way.  From  the  American  skipper's  report, 
moreover,  he  had  learnt  what  the  actual  state  of  affairs  at 
Cadiz  was.  A  number  of  ships  of  the  line  were  fitting 
there  for  sea  in  hot  haste,  and  in  spite  of  his  eagerness  to 
be  gone  he  determined  he  must  await  the  arrival  of  the 
expedition  and  see  it  safely  into  the  Gut. 

Next  morning,  to  his  great  relief,  Knight  met  him  off 
Cape  St.  Vincent  with  the  Admiralty  orders  relating  to  the 
expedition.  These  he  at  once  sent  forward  to  Bickerton  that 
he  might  do  what  was  necessary  to  co-operate  with  Craig,  while 
he  himself  made  such  arrangements  for  the  safe  passage  of 
the  convoy  as  would  justify  his  leaving  the  station  without 
an  hour's  delay.  To  this  end  he  directed  Knight  to  take 
the  transports  down  wide  of  Cadiz  and  Tarifa  and  then  run 
straight  along  the  Moorish  coast  into  Gibraltar.^  Beyond 
that  point  there  was  still  the  Cartagena  squadron  to  con- 
sider. At  all  costs  it  must  be  rendered  powerless;  and 
after  a  short  deliberation,  Nelson  resolved,  in  spite  of  his 
relative  inferiority  to  the  Combined  Squadron,  to  hand  over 
the  Royal  Sovereign  to  Knight. 

^  Nicolas,  vi.  430,  and  note. 

^  Nelson  to  Earl  Camden,  May  14th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  438.     His  instructions 
to  Knight  are  ibid.,  p.  433. 


io8  HOW   NELSON   MADE    SURE  may  n 

No  decision  of  Nelson's  is  more  eloquent  of  his  grasp 
of  the  true  end  and  meaning  of  naval  warfare.  He  was 
about  to  pursue  and  try  to  bring  to  action  a  numerically 
superior  force,  and  Captain  Parker  used  to  say  that  one  of 
the  conditions  on  which  he  relied  for  success  was  that 
Villeneuve  had  no  three-deckers,  and  that  "  he  reckoned 
on  the  great  superiority  in  close  action  of  three  batteries  of 
guns  over  two."  ^  Yet  so  firm  was  his  grasp  of  the  war- 
plan  and  the  place  his  fleet  had  to  fill  in  it,  that  at  the 
last  moment  he  gave  up  a  100-gun  ship  to  secure  directly 
the  true  and  paramount  end  of  his  operations.  In  naval 
warfare  there  is  nothing  more  diflicult  than  a  correct  adjust- 
ment of  action  between  the  ever-competing  claims  of  the 
ulterior  and  the  primary  object — between  striking  directly 
to  secure  the  object  of  the  campaign,  and  using  the  indirect 
but  more  drastic  method  of  a  concentrated  stroke  at  the 
enemy's  fleet.  Here  we  have  a  decision  on  the  point  from 
Nelson  in  the  zenith  of  his  powers,  and  it  is  surely  difficult 
to  overestimate  its  value. 

At  home  the  decision  was  well  received.  "  He  seems 
to  have  acted  most  handsomely,"  wrote  Lord  Hardwicke 
on  opening  Nelson's  despatch  to  Lxland,  "  as  indeed  he 
always  does  for  the  public  service,  in  weakening  his  own 
force  for  the  security  of  the  convoy  under  the  Queen  and 
the  Dragon."  '-^ 

The  same  evening,  some  twenty  miles  to  the  southward 
of  St.  Vincent,  the  two  squadrons  parted  company,  Knight 
to  see  his  convoy  safely  into  Gibraltar,  while  Nelson  bore  up 
on  his  long  chase,  taking  with  him  his  remaining  ten  of 
the  line  and  the  frigates  Decade,  Ami^hion,  and  Amazon.  The 
last  the  Admiralty  heard  of  him  was  by  a  letter  written  on 

^  Pbillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  \.  289. 

-  Hardwicke  to  Charles  Yorke,  June  1st :  Hardwicke  Papers,  Add.  MSS. 
.35706.  Nelson  was  partly  reconciled  to  the  loss  of  the  Royal  Sovereign 
because  she  wanted  docking  badly  and  was  therefore  slow.  But  the  Superb 
was  in  the  same  condition  and  he  took  her  on.  He  informed  the  Admiralty 
that  his  reason  for  detaching  the  Royal  Sovereign  was  to  render  it  impossible 
for  all  the  force  at  Cartagena  to  make  any  impression  upon  Knight's  force. 
Here  then  we  have  further  evidence  of  the  value  Nelson  placed  on  three- 
decked  ships.  The  Cartagena  squadron  consisted  of  six  two-deckers,  and  he 
considered  he  had  enabled  Knight  to  deal  with  it  by  leaving  him  with  two 
three-deckers  and  one  seventy-four. 


May  14  HIS    LAST   WORD  109 

May  14th,  as  he  approached  Madeira,  to  assure  them  that 
even  if  Villeneuve  had  not  gone  to  the  West  Indies,  little 
harm  could  come  of  his  chase.  "  If  they  are  not  there,"  he 
said,  "  the  squadron  will  be  back  again  by  the  end  of  June 
— in  short,  before  the  enemy  can  know  where  I  am."  This 
element  in  the  reasoning  which  brought  him  to  his  decision 
must  not  be  forgotten — the  moral  effect  of  an  unlocated 
fleet.  How  rightly  he  calculated  the  factor  we  shall  see 
presently  in  Napoleon's  inability  to  make  up  his  mind 
where  Nelson  had  gone  or  in  what  quarter  the  "  fougueux 
amiral "  would  reappear,  no  less  than  in  the  paralysis  which 
the  uncertainty  produced  on  Villeneuve's  will. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

COLLINGWOOD'S  FLYING   SQUADRON 

Of  all  parts  of  the  art  of  war  there  is  none  perhaps  of 
higher  value  than  the  interpretation  of  intelligence.  At 
the  end  of  our  long  series  of  maritime  wars  with  France, 
the  faculty  of  interpretation  had  reached  in  the  sea  service 
its  fullest  powers.  So  Avide  was  the  theatre,  so  slow  the 
means  of  communication  and  so  precious  every  rare  item  of 
news,  that  sharp  necessity  had  developed  an  acuteness  of 
sense  that  gives  at  times  an  impression  of  second  sight. 
The  whole  service  was  as  it  were  irradiated  with  an  alert 
sympathy,  a  mutual  understanding  between  the  War  Staff 
and  the  fighting  lines,  by  which  admirals  afloat  seemed 
always  to  see  into  the  mind  of  the  Admiralty  and  the 
Admiralty  to  rest  assured  of  what  the  admirals  would  do. 
It  was  a  factor  in  the  struggle  which  Napoleon  failed  to 
take  into  account,  or  even  to  appreciate.  In  his  over- 
weening self-confidence  he  would  not  believe  that  the 
British  sea  service  possessed  a  strategic  intuition  as  great 
as  his  own  on  land.  Yet  it  was  even  greater  or  at  least 
more  formidable  than  his — for  in  the  one  case  it  depended 
on  a  single  master-mind,  in  the  other  it  was  an  instructed 
instinct  that  was  alive  and  active  in  every  centre  of  direc- 
tion. At  every  turn  of  the  campaign  we  feel  its  quickening 
impulse,  and  nowhere  more  strongly  than  in  the  process  by 
which  the  Admiralty  came  to  the  same  conclusion  as 
Nelson,  and  in  the  action  they  took  in  consequence. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  first  receiving  Lord 
Mark  Kerr's  intelligence  that  Villeneuve  had  passed  the 
Straits,  they  regarded  Jamaica  as  his  probable  objective, 
and  ordered  Collingwood  with  part  of  the  Flying  Squadron 
to  Madeira.     His  instructions  were  to  reinforce  the  West 


April  THE    BEAGLE  III 

Indian  station,  should  he  ascertain  that  that  was  the 
enemy's  destination  and  that  Nelson  had  not  himself 
anticipated  the  movement.  Then  came  Orde's  news,  with 
the  suggestion  that  Nelson  had  been  diverted  to  Egypt  and 
that  Villeneuve's  operations  indicated  an  attack  on  Craig's 
expedition,  to  be  followed  by  a  concentration  at  some 
western  rendezvous  for  seizing  the  command  of  the 
Channel.  We  savv'  also  how  steps  were  promptly  taken 
with  the  object  of  saving  Craig  and  securing  a  counter 
concentration  on  Gardner  off  Ushant. 

But  even  as  the  necessary  orders  were  being  signed, 
tidings  reached  Plymouth  which  gave  a  new  and  clearer 
light  upon  the  situation.  Again  it  came  from  one  of  Orde's 
cruisers,  and  this  perhaps  will  explain  why  the  Admiralty 
took  a  view  of  his  conduct  so  different  from  the  repre- 
hension which  modern  critics  have  made  his  undiluted 
portion.  His  reception  at  home  was  perfectly  normal.  He 
had  requested  to  be  relieved,  and  on  his  arrival  he  was 
directed  to  bring  his  squadron  to  Plymouth  for  a  refit  and 
to  strike  his  flag,  but  his  conduct  as  a  whole  was  approved. 

The  cruiser  in  question  was  the  long-lost  Beagle,  the 
sloop  which  Orde  had  left  with  Sutton  to  watch  the  Straits 
and  which  it  will  be  remembered  had  disappeared  into 
space.  The  mystery  was  now  explained.  On  April  9  th, 
being  then  under  Cape  Spartel,  sheltering  from  the 
Levanter  with  the  Portuguese  squadron  in  company,  she 
had  sighted  some  strange  vessels  passing  the  Straits  on  the 
heels  of  the  homeward-bound  Mediterranean  convoy.  So 
suspicious  was  the  situation  that  after  comparing  notes 
with  one  of  the  Portuguese  cruisers.  Captain  Burn,  her 
commander,  had  decided  to  beat  into  Tangier  for  intelli- 
gence. There  next  day  he  heard  from  the  Consul  that  it  was 
the  Toulon  squadron  to  the  number  of  thirteen  of  the  line 
and  five  frigates  which  he  had  seen  passing  the  Straits,  and 
that  both  Orde  and  the  convoy  were  in  serious  danger. 
Thereupon  he  immediately  made  sail  again  to  look  for 
the  Admiral  off  Cadiz.  Next  morning  outside  the  Straits  he 
saw  the  strangers  again,  steering  to  the  westward,  and  the 
Portuguese  squadron  still  on  the  watch  off  Cape  Spartel. 


112     COLLINGWOOD'S   FLYING   SQUADKON     april 

They  too  must  have  seen  the  movement  westward  or  at 
least  part  of  it,  and  hence  the  importance  of  Campbell's 
information  to  Nelson.  On  reaching  the  Cadiz  rendezvous 
Burn  found  Orde  already  gone,  and  no  trace  of  the  Toulon 
squadron  inside.  But  to  seaward  ho  could  see  the  four 
belated  Spanish  vessels  beating  out  also  to  the  westward. 
It  was  obvious  they  had  just  left  Cadiz,  and  till  the  evening 
of  the  12th  he  kept  them  in  sight.  Having  thus  fixed 
their  course  he  hurried  away  to  try  to  find  the  Admiral  at 
St.  Vincent.  On  his  way  he  spoke  an  American  bound  for 
Toulon,  who  said  he  had  seen  a  squadron  of  five  of  the  line 
to  the  westward.  Accordingly  Burn  stood  out  in  that 
direction,  but  Orde,  as  we  know,  had  turned  south,  and 
though  the  Beagle  beat  north  and  west  till  the  18th  she 
failed  to  get  touch  with  him.  Once,  it  is  true,  she  came 
within  thirty  miles  of  the  squadron,  but  still  finding  no 
trace  of  it,  Burn  decided,  as  soon  as  he  had  made  sufficient 
westing  for  a  fair  wind,  to  hold  away  for  Ferrol.^ 

In  this  Burn  showed  admirable  judgment.  For  Orde 
was  then  to  the  westward  of  him  making  for  the  same 
point.  The  Beagle,  however,  being  more  weatherly  than  the 
squadron,  had  got  a  day  ahead,  and  all  she  found  off  Ortegal 
Avas  one  of  Calder's  cruisers,  the  Indefatigable,  of  which 
Moore,  the  captor  of  the  galleons,  was  still  in  command. 
He  took  her  to  the  Admiral,  who  as  usual,  in  the  wild 
westerly  weather  that  had  brought  the  Beagle  up,  had  taken 
the  squadron  under  Cape  Prior  for  shelter.  Of  Orde  there 
was  no  news,  though  he  was  then  actually  passing  north, 
only  a  hundred  miles  to  the  westward.  Accordingly,  after 
communicating  all  she  had  seen,  the  Beagle  made  her  way 
direct  for  homo,  probably  by  Calder's  orders.  Her  informa- 
tion was  indeed  priceless,  for  it  was  actually  later  and  more 
certain  than  anything  Nelson  had  obtained  before  he  decided 
to  chase ;  and  with  it  she  anchored  in  Plymouth  Sound  on 
April  30  th. 

Her  invaluable  report  was  in  Barham's  hands  on  May 
2nd.     It  was  not  entirely  satisfactory.     Captain  Burn  had 

^  For  the  Beagles  movements  see  Burn's  Report:   Captains'  Letters,  1535, 
April  12  and  25  ;  and  Captains'  Logs,  1530  ;  and  Chart,  ante,  p.  57. 


May  2-4        BARHAM   AHEAD    OF   NELSON  113 

said  nothing  explicitly  of  Villeneuve's  squadron,  but  as  he 
had  looked  into  Cadiz  it  was  to  be  assumed  from  his  silence 
it  was  not  there.  Nor  had  he  seen  the  four  Spaniards 
actually  leave  Cadiz.  Still  the  inference  was  pretty  clear. 
Unfortunately,  however,  he  had  omitted  in  his  report  an 
item  that  w^as  indispensable  for  a  trustworthy  interpretation 
of  his  news.  In  those  days  there  was  no  thought  of  train- 
ing officers  in  a  scientific  method  of  reporting  intelligence, 
and  Captain  Burn  had  omitted  to  say  how  the  wind  was 
when  he  parted  company.  Till  this  was  known  there  must 
be  doubt  as  to  whether  the  course  observed  was  a  true  one 
or  not,  and  before  making  any  fresh  distribution  Barham 
sent  down  for  the  Beagles  log.^  Still  something  could  be 
done.  The  threat  to  Jamaica  was  clearly  intensified.  A 
packet  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  for  the  West  Indies,  and 
that  night  went  off  warning  to  the  Admirals,  with  instruc- 
tions that  General  Myers,  Commander-in-chief  in  the  Lee- 
ward Islands,  had  been  given  authority  to  detach  two  or 
three  thousand  of  his  troops  to  Jamaica  in  case  of  need, 
and  that  Cochrane  was  to  do  all  he  could  to  expedite  their 
transport.^ 

Two  days  later  Barham  had  made  up  his  mind.  He 
had  indeed  a  practical  certainty — which  Nelson  did  not 
arrive  at  till  five  days  later — that  Villeneuve's  destination 
was  the  West  Indies,  and  he  determined  to  act  at  once. 
His  first  step  was  to  tell  Gardner  to  send  away  Collingwood 
and  his  five  of  the  line.  Collingwood's  orders  were,  as 
before,  to  go  to  Madeira,  ascertain  whether  Villeneuve  or 
Nelson  had  passed,  and  act  accordingly,  leaving  word  what 
he  had  done  for  the  Consul  to  send  back  to  Gibraltar  and 
Cadiz.  If  there  was  no  certain  intelligence  he  was  to  go 
straight  on  to  Barbadoes  and  co-operate  with  General  Myers 
for  the  security  of  Jamaica.'*^     As,  however,  the  whole  matter 

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  153,  May  2nd.  Admiralty  to  Admiral  Young,  Com- 
mander-in-chief at  Plymouth,  May  2nd :  "  Captain  Burn  has  omitted  to  say 
how  the  wind  was  when  he  met  the  squadron,  supposed  to  have  sailed  from 
Toulon  on  9th  or  10th  ultimo."  Villeneuve  does  not  record  having  been 
observed. 

-  Oat-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  May  2nd. 

■'  To  Gardner  and  Collingwood  :  Ibid.,  May  4th.  These  are  the  first 
orders  actually  signed  by  Barham. 

H 


114     COLLING  WOOD'S    FLYING    SQUADRON        may 

was  still  uncertain,  Gardner  was  given  discretion  to  detain 
the  detachment  il'  he  thought  it  desirable,  in  view  of  any 
fresh  information  that  might  have  reached  him.  Colling- 
wood's  orders  were  to  be  handed  to  him  in  a  sealed  packet 
at  the  moment  of  sailing  and  not  to  be  opened  till  he  was 
clear  of  the  Channel. 

Before  the  despatches  Avent  out  there  arrived  Orde's 
message  that  he  was  falling  back  on  Gardner.-^  Thereupon 
Knight's  orders  had  to  be  cancelled.  He  had  been  told,  it 
will  be  remembered,  he  was  to  reinforce  Calder  at  Ferrol. 
He  was  now  again  ordered  to  send  his  two  ships  direct 
to  the  West  Indies  as  a  reinforcement  for  Collinofwood,  if 
Nelson  had  not  gone  there.^ 

In  all  these  arrangements  Barham's  grip  on  the  central 
point  was  never  relaxed.  In  spite  of  all  the  distant  calls 
he  clung  to  it  with  a  tenacity  that  was  beyond  Napoleon's 
calculations  and  made  hopeless  all  his  sanguine  attempts 
to  dissipate  our  home  concentration.  After  the  receipt  of 
Orde's  appreciation  pointing  to  a  hostile  concentration  in 
the  west,  Gardner  was  strictly  enjoined  that  all  orders  for 
detachments  such  as  Collingwood's  were  to  be  read  as 
conditional  on  his  having  enough  force  to  keep  eighteen  of 
the  line  with  his  flag.  Subject  to  this  minimum  he  was 
also,  if  possible,  to  keep  Calder's  squadron  up  to  eight.^  At 
the  same  time  corresponding  directions  were  framed  for 
Nelson  in  order  to  provide  for  filling  the  gap  in  the  home 
fleet  which  Collingwood's  detachment  would  make.  He 
was  authorised,  if  he  had  not  followed  Villeneuve,  to  leave 
in  the  Mediterannean  as  many  ships  of  the  line  and  cruisers 
as  were  needed  to  watch  such  force  as  the  enemy  had  in 
Toulon  and  Cartagena.  With  the  rest  he  was  to  proceed 
off  Cadiz,  and  leaving  there  five  cruisers  to  report  move- 
ments to  Calder  and  home,  he  was  to  close  on  Gardner ; 
or  if  he  preferred  he  might  remain  in  the  Mediterranean 
himself  and  send  his  superfluous  ships  home  under 
Bickerton.* 

^  Admiralty  to  Collingwood,  Postscript :  Out-Letters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3, 
May  4th. 

"^  Ihid.  ^  To  Gardner:    Jbid..  May  9th.  *  Ibid.,  May  9th. 


May  it    is    reinforced  115 

The  instructions  for  detaching  Collingwood  reached 
Gardner  on  May  9th.  He  immediately  proceeded  to 
complete  the  necessary  ships  with  stores,  and  just  as 
Nelson  was  making  up  his  mind  to  go  to  the  West  Indies, 
he  sat  doAvn  to  inform  the  Admiralty  that  as  he  had  no 
further  intelligence  he  intended  to  detach  Collingwood  at 
once/  On  the  morroAv,  however,  it  began  to  blow  hard 
from  the  west  with  a  big  sea,  and  the  work  of  completing 
the  ships  for  foreign  service  was  stopped.  Gardner,  there- 
fore, ran  to  the  Lizard  for  smooth  water ;  but  as  the  heavy 
weather  continued  he  ordered  Collingwood  into  Causand 
Bay,  and  after  handing  him  the  sealed  orders  he  himself 
returned  to  his  station  off  Ushant.^  Meanwhile  the 
Admiralty  had  decided  to  increase  Collingwood's  squadron, 
and  on  May  10th  had'  sent  to  Ushant  an  order  that  Gardner 
Avas  to  give  him  nine  of  the  line.^  On  hearing  what  had 
happened  and  that  the  two  Admirals  were  no  longer  to- 
gether, fresh  orders  were  sent  direct  to  Collingwood  at 
Plymouth.  He  was  to  add  to  his  squadron  three  of  the 
line  that  were  on  the  point  of  sailing  with  sealed  orders 
(probably  to  Gardner  or  Calder),  and  as  before  to  go  to 
Madeira,  and  if  he  found  Nelson  was  in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve 
to  return  to  Plymouth.* 

Everything  was  now  in  order  for  making  sure  that  the 
enemy  would  not  have  a  free  hand  in  the  West  Indies  long 
enough  to  do  serious  harm.  Hardly,  however,  were  the 
orders  on  the  road,  when  a  despatch  reached  the  Foreign 
Office  from  FitzGerald  at  Lisbon  containing  the  unlucky 
false  news  that  Villeneuve  had  put  back  to  Cadiz  and 
announcing  that  Craig's  expedition  had  taken  refuge  in  the 
Tagus.  Without  a  moment's  delay  word  went  off  to  both 
Ushant  and  Plymouth  to  stop  Collingwood  until  further 
orders.  Next  day,  in  fear  he  might  be  already  gone,  an 
urgent  demand  went  forward  for  a  frigate  to  go  down  to 
Cadiz  instantly,  find  out  the  truth,  meet  Collingwood  with 

^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  9th:   Blocl-ade  of  Brest,  iv.  255. 
^  Same  to  same,  May  11th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  iv.  258. 
^  Out-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  and  Gardner  to  Marsden,   May  15th  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  260. 

*  Secret  Orders,  1363,  May  14th. 


ii6     COLLINGWOOD'S   FLYING   SQUADRON       may 

her  report  at  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  and  then  bring 
home  his  despatches  Avhich  would  explain  what  he  had 
decided  to  do.^ 

That  they  should  know  this  as  soon  as  possible  was 
vital,  in  view  of  the  fresh  instructions  which  had  to  be 
thought  out  for  him.  The  situation  was  one  of  extreme 
difficulty.  Little  credit  was  given  to  the  report  of  Ville- 
neuve's  return,  but  the  possibility  had  to  be  faced.  If  it 
were  true,  it  would  mean  that  his  first  movement  to  the 
westward  was  a  feint  to  draw  attention  to  Jamaica,  and 
Pitt,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  just  been  warned  by  one 
of  his  most  active  agents  abroad  that  Napoleon  was  intent 
on  making  false  movements  in  order  to  conceal  his  actual 
line  of  operations.  The  supposed  return  to  Cadiz  indicated 
that  the  real  objective  was  either  in  the  Mediterranean  or, 
as  Orde  had  argued  so  forcibly,  the  Channel.  Of  the  two 
the  Channel  was  the  less  likely,  for  Napoleon  was  in  Italy. 
Moreover  it  so  happened  that  the  political  situation  called 
acutely  at  the  moment  for  the  security  of  the  Mediterranean. 
The  convention  with  Russia  was  trembling  in  the  balance. 
A  despatch  from  Leveson-Gower  had  arrived  on  May  9  th — 
the  day  the  last  orders  were  issued  to  Gardner — to  say 
the  treaty  had  been  signed  with  the  objectionable  article 
relating  to  the  evacuation  of  Malta.  It  was  actually,  there- 
fore, in  the  midst  of  the  naval  crisis  that  Woronzow  had  his 
stormy  intervicAv  with  Pitt  in  Avhich  he  had  to  inform  the 
hard-pressed  minister  that  the  Czar  demanded  the  absolute 
and  unconditional  assent  to  the  Malta  article  as  a  sine  qua 
non  of  his  ratification  of  the  treaty.^  Pitt,  so  the  ambassador 
tells  us,  received  his  communication  like  a  thunder-clap. 
To  increase  the  difficulty  of  his  position  he  had  heard  from 
St.  Petersburg  that  the  Czar  was  again  complaining  bitterly 
of  the  British  delays  in  fulfilling  the  promises  of  military 
action  in  the  Mediterranean ;  and  here  was  Craig  hard  and 
fast  in  Lisbon,  unable  to  move.^ 

The  point  on  which  the  Czar  insisted  was  the  one  above 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363,  May  loth  and  16th. 

-  Mulgrave  to  Gower,  June  7th  :   Holland  Rose,   Third  Coalition,  p.  IG"). 
7^.  0.  Bussia,  58. 

^  De  Martens,  Mecueil  de  Traitts,  xi.  109,  and  ante,  p.  22. 


MAY  THE    COALITION    IN  EXTREMIS  117 

all  others  on  which  it  was  impossible  for  Pitt  to  yield. 
Already,  on  first  hearing  from  Gower  of  the  proposed 
new  condition,  Mulgrave  had  been  instructed  to  address  a 
strong  note  of  protest  to  Woronzow.  It  was  absolutely 
essential,  he  Avrote,  to  Great  Britain,  and  particularly  in  view 
of  French  designs  on  Egypt  and  India,  to  have  "  a  secure 
port  in  the  Mediterranean  not  liable  to  capture  on  a  sudden 
attack  at  the  commencement  of  war."  If  his  Britannic 
Majesty  were  disposed  to  sacrifice  Malta  he  knew  he  could  get 
a  separate  peace  that  would  absolutely  secure  his  own  posi- 
tion, but  what  he  wished  to  obtain  was  the  permanent  inde- 
pendence of  the  Powers  of  Europe,  It  was  in  this  note  that 
he  had  claimed  that  England  was  the  legitimate  successor 
to  the  Naval  Knights  of  St,  John  of  Jerusalem.  Charles  the 
Fifth  had  established  them  at  Malta  as  guardians  against 
the  then  existing  enemy  of  Christendom,  and  it  was  only  as 
a  British  naval  port  that  the  old  stronghold  could  serve  that 
purpose  now.^ 

Accordingly  Pitt,  in  reply  to  Woronzow,  told  him  with 
equal  firmness  that  the  Czar's  demand  meant  the  breakdown 
of  the  alliance.  Neither  the  King  nor  he  could  grant  it  if 
they  would.  Any  government  that  consented  to  give  up 
Malta  would  be  flung  from  power  in  a  universal  howl  of 
indignation.  Woronzow  privately  shared  Pitt's  view,  but 
he  continued  loyally  to  urge  the  Russian  case,  till  Pitt  Avas 
forced  to  cut  him  short  with  the  ultimatum  already  recorded. 
His  last  words  should  be  recalled.  "  So,"  he  said,  ''  however 
great  our  grief,  we  are  compelled  to  abandon  hope  of  seeing 
an  agreement  consummated,  since  its  express  condition  is 
our  renunciation  of  Malta.  We  will  continue  the  war  alone. 
It  will  be  a  maritime  war."  ^ 

Thus  at  the  unlucky  moment  when  the  false  intelli- 
gence from  Lisbon  came  to  hand  the  whole  situation  turned 
on  the  command  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  to  leave  the 
enemy  concentrated  at  its  entrance  and  free  to  act  was 
impossible.     It  was  there  Collingwood  must  go,  and  go  in 

^  Mulgrave  to  Woronzow,  May  7th  :  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  145.  For 
the  whole  argument  see  same  to  same,  June  7th,  in  which  despatch  it  was 
repeated  and  developed:  Post,  Appendix,  A. 

-  De  Martens,  op.  cit.,  xi.  Ill,  and  cf.  ante,  p.  22. 


ii8      COLLINGWOOD'S    FLYING    SQUADRON    may  17 

strength.  To  send  him  in  inferior  force  was  to  court  disaster. 
The  probabiHty,  on  Strachan's  report,  Avas  that  Nelson  had 
gone  to  Egypt  and  his  co-operation  could  not  be  counted 
on.  Collingwood  might  have  to  fight  alone,  and  if  he 
fought  the  political  situation  demanded  that  it  must  be 
with  the  assurance  of  a  real  victory.  Sweden  and  Prussia 
were  both  hanging  back,  and  even  the  shock  of  Napoleon's 
coronation  as  King  of  Italy  had  failed  to  stiffen  the  irresolu- 
tion of  Austria.  Nothing  but  a  victory,  decisive  and  in- 
disputable, could  serve  Pitt's  turn.  Anything  less  would 
certainly  destroy  the  faint  hope  that  still  existed  of  forming 
his  great  coalition. 

But  could  he  venture  to  give  Collingwood  the  necessary 
strength  without  loosening  the  hold  on  the  Ushant  position  ? 
The  last  Avord,  it  Avill  be  remembered,  had  been  to  direct 
Gardner  on  no  account  to  reduce  his  force  below  eiofhteen 
of  the  line.  To  give  Collingwood  what  Avas  wanted  would 
bring  the  Ushant  station  below  the  minimum.  It  was  a 
dilemma  that  called  for  the  highest  courage  and  resolution, 
and  the  nicest  balancing  of  risks.  Not  even  the  decision 
which  Nelson  had  just  taken  demanded  a  greater  measure 
of  warlike  virtue,  but  like  him  Pitt  and  Barham  did  not 
Hinch.  In  two  days  they  had  made  up  their  minds  to  run 
the  risk  and  strike  for  the  command  of  the  Mediterranean. 
On  May  I7th,  accordingly,  Collingwood's  final  orders  went 
forward.  At  Plymouth  he  had  already  eleven  of  the  line 
with  his  flag,  but  that  was  not  enough.  He  was  therefore 
to  rejoin  Gardner  and  obtain  from  him  a  flag-officer  with 
another  three-decker  and  two  more  seventy-fours.  With 
this  powerful  squadron  he  was  to  proceed  to  Lisbon,  where 
he  would  find  Knight  and  add  his  two  ships  to  his  com- 
mand. He  Avould  then  have  a  force  of  three  three-deckers 
and  thirteen  others,  and  be  in  a  position  to  proceed  off  Cadiz 
and  clear  up  the  situation.  If  the  Combined  Squadron  Avas 
there  he  Avas  to  blockade  it.  If  he  found  it  had  gone  to  the 
West  Indies  and  Nelson  after  it,  he  Avas  to  reinforce  him  in 
proportion  to  the  enemy's  strength.  The  rest  of  his  force 
he  Avas  to  send  back  to  Plymouth.  If  Nelson  had  not  gone 
he  Avas  to  go  himself  Avith  twelve  sail,  so  as  to  bring  the 


May  17         COOTE'S    EXPEDITION    STOPPED  119 

force  on  the  West  Indian  station  up  to  eighteen ;  and  if  he 
ascertained  the  enemy  had  a  larger  force  than  this,  he  was 
to  take  as  many  more  as  were  necessary.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  found  the  enemy  had  gone  into  the  Mediterranean 
he  was  to  follow  them,  and  in  case  of  meeting  Nelson  he 
was  to  show  him  the  new  instructions  and  follow  his 
orders. 

Corresponding  orders  were  issued  to  Nelson,  on  the 
assumption  that  the  report  of  Villeneuve's  return  to  Cadiz 
was  true.  In  that  case,  if  he  met  Collingwood  he  was  to 
blockade  the  Combined  Squadron  with  twenty  of  the  line, 
but  to  be  at  liberty  to  form  such  detachments  as  he  thought 
necessary  to  watch  Cartagena  and  Toulon. 

Thus  was  the  main  situation  dealt  with,  but  there  re- 
mained further  complexity.  To  add  to  the  difficulty  there 
was  another  military  force  to  protect.  In  view  of  the  danger 
which  seemed  to  threaten  the  West  Indies  it  had  been 
decided  to  divert  thither  the  force  which  was  gathering 
at  Cork  under  Sir  Eyre  Coote  to  reinforce  India.  He 
had  accordingly  been  appointed  Governor  and  Commander- 
in-chief  of  Jamaica,  and  was  under  orders  to  sail  as  soon 
as  possible.  This  resolution  had  been  taken  early  in  April, 
apparently  on  news  of  the  complete  pacification  that  had 
followed  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  successes  and  on  the  reports 
of  the  Foreign  Office  spies  as  to  Napoleon's  real  objective. 
Orders  had  already  gone  to  Commodore  Hood  to  throw 
out  his  cruisers  to  receive  the  expedition,  but  it  was  also 
necessary  to  cover  its  passage  out  of  the  danger  zone. 
There  was  a  suspicion  that  Villeneuve's  real  object  might  be 
to  cruise  about  Madeira  for  the  East  Indiamen ;  if  so,  Coote 
would  certainly  be  caught.  If  possible  he  must  be  stopped. 
But  his  sailing  orders  had  already  gone  forward  and  the 
countermand  might  come  too  late.  Collingwood  was  there- 
fore informed  that  in  going  or  sending  to  the  West  Indies 
he  must  provide  for  covering  the  passage  of  the  expedition 
till  it  was  past  Madeira.^ 

*  Secret  Orders,  1363.  To  Hood,  April  5th.  To  Captain  Woodriff  of  the 
Calcutta  (East  Indiamen's  escort),  April  29th.  To  Collingwood  and  to  Nelson, 
May  17th. 


I20     COLLINGWOOD'S    FLYING   SQUADRON    may  19 

Though  the  effect  of  the  new  disposition  was  to  reduce 
Gardner's  force  to  fifteen  of  the  line  against  Ganteaume's 
twenty-one,  the  risk  was  probably  not  so  great  as  it  appears 
or  beyond  what  a  sound  defensive  basis  demanded.  Of  his 
fifteen  ships  three  were  only  sixty-fours,  which  at  that  time 
hardly  counted  as  ships  of  the  line ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
no  less  than  nine  were  three-deckers/  and  in  Plymouth  and 
Portsmouth  were  Orde's  squadron  and  several  reserve  ships. 
All  of  them  were  actively  refitting,  and  with  a  few  excep- 
tions they  were  capable  of  taking  the  sea  at  twenty-four 
hours'  notice.  Moreover  Barham  had  in  mind  a  device 
which  would  certainly  secure  him  a  respite  of  a  week  at 
least.  It  was  simple  enough.  Gardner  was  instructed,  as 
soon  as  Colling  wood  joined  him,  to  look  into  Brest  with  the 
whole  force  before  he  detached  the  squadron  destined  for 
Cadiz.  Such  a  display  of  strength  could  be  relied  on  to 
keep  Ganteaume  quiet  till  he  was  able  to  ascertain  what 
Gardner's  real  force  was,  and  by  that  time  fresh  ships 
would  be  ready. 

Such  then  was  the  solution  of  the  difficult  strategical 
problem  with  which  Pitt  and  Barham  so  suddenly  had  to 
deal.  Interesting  as  it  is,  it  has  long  been  forgotten,  for  it 
was  destined  never  to  be  carried  out.  The  great  mass  of 
our  old  strategical  lore,  which  served  us  so  well  and  cost  so 
much  to  obtain,  has  passed  into  oblivion  for  similar  reasons. 
Only  by  patient  excavation  can  it  be  recovered,  and  only 
by  the  recovery  of  the  unexecuted  schemes  can  we  hope  to 
be  safe  from  the  danger  of  crude  generalisation  based  on 
the  comparatively  few  cases  that  survived  above  the  surface. 
Two  events  at  the  last  moment  occurred  to  stop  this 
particular  movement  and  to  commit  it  to  oblivion.  As 
Collingwood  sailed  from  Plymouth  to  join  Gardner,  Gard- 
ner received  the  despatches  which  Nelson  had  sent  him 
from  Toro  to  announce  his  intention  of  coming  off  Scilly,  if 
he  heard  nothing  of  the  Combined  Squadron  from  Lisbon.^ 
Gardner  immediately  sent  a  cruiser  to  the  rendezvous  and 

1  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  7th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  278. 
^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  19th,  with  enclosures :    Blockade  of  Brest,  ii. 
26G. 


May  22  MISSIESSY   REAPPEARS  121 

forwarded  Nelson's  despatches  to  tlie  Admiralty  with  a 
request  for  instructions.  The  Admiralty,  however,  decided 
that  no  directions  could  be  given  until  further  intelligence 
of  Nelson's  squadron  should  be  received. 

Close  on  the  heels  of  this  surprise  came  another,  and 
this  time  it  Avas  one  that  called  for  prompter  action.  On 
May  22nd,  as  Gardner  and  Collingwood  were  before  Brest 
making  the  joint  demonstration  which  Barham  had  directed 
as  a  preliminary  to  Collingwood's  parting  company,  word 
came  in  from  Calder  that  one  of  his  cruiser  captains, 
Maitland  of  the  Loire,  had  located  an  enemy's  squadron,  ten 
days  before,  some  five  hundred  miles  to  the  westward  of 
Ferrol.  Shadowing  it  till  nightfall  he  was  chased  off,  but 
not  before  he  ascertained  it  was  the  Rochefort  squadron 
(details  of  which  he  had  obtained  from  an  American)  and 
that  it  was  making  for  Cape  Ortegal.^  With  this  informa- 
tion he  made  off  to  Calder,  and  on  the  14th  found  him  in 
his  usual  position  off  Cape  Prior.  Calder  promptly  assumed 
that  Missiessy  intended  to  make  a  landfall  at  Cape  Ortegal 
on  his  way  back  to  Rochefort,  and  at  daybreak  next  morn- 
ing he  was  off  that  point.  Not  finding  the  enemy  there,  as 
he  hoped,  he  concluded  he  must  have  kept  more  to  the 
north,  and  he  determined  to  make  a  push  north-north-east 
to  cut  him  off  if,  as  he  expected,  he  was  running  down  the 
latitude  of  Rochefort.  This  was  a  move  on  which  he  could 
venture  without  prejudice  to  his  blockade,  for  the  wind  was 
blowing  hard  from  the  south-west,  foul  for  the  Ferrol 
squadron  to  get  out.  In  the  evening,  however,  it  unfortu- 
nately came  into  the  north,  with  every  sign  of  shifting  still 
further.  With  a  chance  of  an  easterly  wind  he  dared  not 
leave  Ferrol  open,  and  he  felt  compelled  to  desist.     There 

1  See  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  22nd  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  275 ;  and 
Maitland's  report :  In-lettcrs,  128.  Maitland  saw  them  on  the  11th  in  "  lat. 
43°  44'  and  long.  20°  48'  W.  (by  chronometer  20°  16')."  With  a  westerly  wind 
they  were  steering  E.  by  S.^jS.  This  must  be  magnetic,  the  variation  being 
about  22^  degrees  W.  True  E.  by  S.^S.  would  have  brought  them  below  Finis- 
terre,  an  impossible  course  for  Missiessy  to  be  steering  on  a  fair  wind.  The 
practice  of  French  fleets  returning  from  the  West  Indies  to  the  Bay  seems  to 
have  been  to  make  the  latitude  of  Ortegal  about  500  miles  W.  and  then  run 
down  it  for  a  landfall.  The  knowledge  of  this  practice  accounts  for  Cald(?r's 
advanced  cruiser  being  where  she  was.  To  his  other  precise  information 
Maitland  added  coloured  representations  of  the  signals  Missiessy  had  made. 


T22      COLLING  WOOD'S    FLYING   SQUADRON    may  22 

was  nothing  for  it  but  to  send  the  Loire  on  to  Gardner  and 
to  take  his  squadron  back  to  its  station.^ 

Here  then  was  news  which  materially  altered  the  situ- 
ation from  what  it  was  when  Gardner  and  Collingwood 
received  their  last  orders.  In  the  first  place  Missiessy's 
inexplicable  reappearance,  coming  as  it  did  when  the  report 
of  Villeneuve's  return  to  Cadiz  was  still  uncontradicted, 
shook  to  their  foundations  the  deductions  on  which  Barham 
was  proceeding.  It  was  Missiessy's  supposed  presence  in  the 
West  Indies  that  gave  colour  to  the  indications  of  a 
campaign  or  a  concentration  in  that  quarter.  What  then 
could  his  sudden  return  mean  ?  And  why  was  he  coming 
back  just  as  Villeneuve  was  going  out  ?  Or  was  it  pos- 
sible that  Villeneuve  Avas  never  intended  to  go  ?  In  the 
second  place — and  this  is  what  concerned  Gardner  and 
Collingwood  most  nearly — it  meant  a  serious  increase  of 
force  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood.  What  ought  they 
to  do  in  view  of  the  discretion  allowed  them  ?  The  two 
Admirals  conferred  together  and  agreed  there  was  no  doubt 
that  the  three-decker  and  four  of  the  line,  which  Maitland 
had  seen,  were  safe  back  in  Rochefort  or  possibly  L'Orient. 
For  Gardner  to  give  Collingwood  the  reinforcement  that 
had  been  ordered  Avould  now  reduce  the  Ushant  squadron 
to  a  dangerous  Aveakness,  and  taking  advantage  of  the 
latitude  which  had  been  originally  given  him  in  case  of 
fresh  information,  he  decided  to  retain  with  his  flag  the  five 
ships  of  Graves's  division  which  formed  the  last  addition  to 
the  Flying  Squadron  and  to  send  Collingwood  down  with 
the  remaining  nine. 

The  reason  he  gave  to  the  Admiralty  Avas  this :  "  As  five 
of  the  enemy's  ships  are  returned  from  the  West  Indies  and 
the  Vice-Admiral  (CollingA\'ood)  is  directed  to  detach  such 
proportion  of  ships  to  the  West  Indies  as  .  .  .  the  enemy 
may  have  sent  there,  fourteen  ships  Avould  be  more  than  he 
Avould  now  require  to  take  down."  As  for  the  blockade 
of  Cadiz,  he  felt  that  it  Avould  not  be  prejudiced  by  his 
action.     "  I  hope,"  he  concluded,  ''  the  steps  I  have  taken 

^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  22nd,  enclosing  Calder  to  Gardner,  May  15th  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  pp.  275-7. 


May  23  IT   SAILS    FOR    CADIZ  123 

will  meet  with  their  lordships'  approbation,  as,  should  it  be 
ascertained  that  the  Toulon  fleet  is  returned  to  Cadiz,  the 
five  ships  I  have  detained  can  very  soon  be  sent  after  the 
Vice-Admiral,  and  probably  reach  the  point  of  his  present 
intended  destination  nearly  as  soon  as  himself."  ^  The 
Admiralty  did  approve  his  conduct,  but  while  waiting  for 
directions  he  did  not  think  himself  entitled  to  use  the 
detained  ships  either  to  blockade  Rochefort  or  reinforce 
Calder  who  badly  needed  relief.  All  he  did  was  to  detach 
Collingwood  on  the  23rd  with  his  nine  of  the  line,  and  wait 
for  further  orders. 

^  Gardner  to  Marsdeii,  May  22nd :  Ibid.,  p.  275.  The  ships  he  detained 
were  Foudroy ant  80  (Graves's  flag),  Wi7idsor  Castle  98,  Warrio7-  74,  Bepulse  64, 
Baisonnable  64. 


CHAPTER  IX 

MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

As  things  actually  stood,  Gardner's  action  exactly  fitted 
the  situation.  May  20th  was  the  day  on  which  Napoleon 
had  to  recognise  that  his  scheme  for  a  concentration  in  the 
West  Indies  had  broken  down,  xifter  urging  Ganteaume 
by  every  means  in  his  power  to  get  to  sea  without  fighting, 
he  had  informed  him,  if  he  could  not  escape  by  midnight 
on  the  20th,  he  was  to  stay  where  he  was  for  a  different 
combination.  It  was  on  the  20th,  too,  that  Missiessy  put 
into  Rochefort,  sick  and  dispirited,  and  with  his  squadron 
entirely  unfit  for  action. 

So  far  as  the  campaign  was  concerned  his  mission  had 
been  a  failure.  When  he  had  sailed  at  the  beginning  of 
the  new  year,  it  had  been  for  the  purpose  of  colonial 
attack  to  which  Napoleon,  having  laid  aside  his  invasion, 
intended  to  devote  his  navy.  Missiessy's  special  function 
was  to  throw  suppUes  into  the  French  islands,  capture 
Dominica  and  St.  Lucia  in  concert  with  the  local  forces,  and 
then  to  raid  and  levy  contributions  on  the  smaller  British 
islands.  In  pursuance  of  these  instructions  he  reached 
Martinique  on  February  20th,  and  next  day,  after  consulta- 
tion with  the  local  officers,  proceeded  against  Roseau,  the 
capital  of  Dominica. 

The  surprise  was  complete.  Appearing  off  the  place 
under  British  colours  he  was  welcomed  as  a  friend.  General 
Prevost,  the  governor,  actually  sent  oflf  one  of  his  staff  to 
do  the  honours,  and  the  officer  did  not  discover  the  trick 
till  he  was  on  board  Missiessy's  flag-ship.  General  Lagrange, 
who  was  in  command  of  the  French  troops,  was  consequently 
able  to  land  with  scarcely  any  resistance,  and  to  seize  posi- 
tions so  good  that  Prevost  found  Roseau  untenable.     He 

124 


March  MISSIESSY'S    RAID  125 

therefore  decided  to  allow  the  local  force  to  capitulate ;  but 
before  Lagrange  realised  the  craft  of  his  move  he  had 
withdrawn  the  whole  of  the  regular  garrison,  and  was  in 
full  retreat  to  a  fortress  in  the  extremity  of  the  island 
known  as  Fort  Cabril.  The  moment  Lagrange  detected 
the  movement  he  saw  its  danger,  and  begged  Missiessy  to 
detach  a  division  to  cut  oif  the  British  retreat.  A  flat 
calm  prevailed,  and  Missiessy  protested  not  a  ship  could 
stir.  Lagrange  begged  for  the  squadron's  boats.  Again 
the  Admiral  refused.  To  risk  paralysing  his  squadron  by 
exposing  its  crews  in  a  military  operation  was  a  responsi- 
bility he  did  not  feel  called  upon  to  take,  and  the  result 
was  that  Prevost  secured  himself  in  a  position  that  turned 
the  tables  upon  the  French.  Fort  Cabril  could  only  be 
reduced  by  a  siege,  and  for  a  siege  the  expedition  was 
wholly  unprepared.  Accordingly  while  news  sped  to  Europe 
of  the  capture  of  the  island,  Missiessy  found  himself  com- 
pelled to  withdraw  and  to  rest  content  with  a  contribution 
of  100,000  francs  from  Roseau,  and  about  a  score  of  small 
prizes  captured  at  their  moorings. 

For  the  present  at  any  rate  no  attempt  was  made  upon 
St.  Lucia.  Missiessy  preferred  to  continue  his  way  north- 
ward for  less  hazardous  operations,  and  after  landing  at 
Guadaloupe  the  troops  which  he  had  brought  to  reinforce 
the  garrison,  he  proceeded  to  raid  the  small  British  islands 
that  lay  beyond.  From  Nevis,  St.  Christopher's,  and  Mont- 
serrat  he  exacted  ransoms,  but  there  his  activity  ended. 
In  his  view  it  was  now  time  to  return  to  Martinique  in 
order  to  meet  Villeneuve  and  combine  with  him  in  the 
larger  operations  which  Napoleon's  instructions  enjoined. 
The  damage  he  had  done  was  considerable.  The  ransoms 
and  thirty-three  prizes  actually  produced  £40,000,  but 
this  of  course  did  not  nearly  cover  the  cost  of  the  ex- 
pedition, and  the  British  position  in  the  Leeward  Islands 
remained  unshaken. 

To  the  French  authorities  the  most  galling  point  in 
that  position  was  the  Diamond  Rock,  a  desert  islet  that 
rose  in  a  rugged  cone  barely  a  mile  from  the  south-west 
point  of  Martinique.     Its  strategical  importance  was  out  of 


126     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

all  proportion  to  its  size.  Not  only  did  it  lie  upon  the 
direct  route  from  Europe  to  Fort  de  France  and  St.  Pierre, 
the  political  and  commercial  capitals  of  the  colony,  but  it 
also  broke  the  coastwise  line  of  communication  between 
those  places  and  the  rich  southern  and  western  districts 
from  which  they  were  supplied.  When  in  1803  Com- 
modore Samuel  Hood,  with  his  broad  pennant  in  the 
Centaur,  was  blockading  Martinique,  the  rock  had  proved 
a  serious  hindrance,  since  the  coastwise  traffic  was  con- 
stantly escaping  his  cruisers  by  stealing  inshore  of  it.  The 
French  regarded  its  splintered,  surf-beaten  shore  and  pre- 
cipitous escarpments  as  inaccessible,  but  Hood  did  not,  at 
least  not  for  his  "  Centaurs."  He  resolved  to  possess  it, 
and  use  it  as  a  "  block  ship  "  and  as  a  base  for  his  inshore 
boat  operations.  He  tried,  and  by  miraculous  skill  in  a 
few  hours  the  thing  was  done.  "  Were  you  to  see,"  wrote 
an  eye-witness  during  the  subsequent  proceedings,  "  how 
along  a  dire  and,  I  had  almost  said,  a  perpendicular  accli- 
vity, the  sailors  are  hanging  in  clusters  hauling  up  a  four- 
and-twenty  pounder  by  hawsers,  you  would  wonder  !  They 
appear  like  mice  hauling  a  little  sausage.  .  .  .  Believe  me, 
I  shall  never  take  off  my  hat  for  anything  less  than  a 
British  seaman."  High  aloft  they  created  and  armed  an 
inaccessible  fastness,  and  below  made  a  little  battery  at  the 
landing-place.  Lieutenant  Maurice  of  the  Centaur  was  placed 
in  charge  with  the  rank  of  commander,  and  the  islet  was 
officially  rated  in  the  Navy  List  as  "His  Majesty's  Sloop, 
Diamond  Rock."  Here  for  two  years  the  little  garrison  of 
a  hundred  men  had  lived  in  pure  enjoyment  a  Robinson 
Crusoe  life  amongst  the  caves,  incessantly  raiding  and  cut- 
ting out,  and  proving  an  unendurable  thorn  in  the  side  of 
Martinique.^ 

The  harrassed  French  governor,  unable  to  touch  it,  had 
been  counting  on  its  reduction  when  Missiessy  and  Ville- 
neuve  should  meet  at  Fort  de  France.  But  by  the  time 
Missiessy  got  back  from  his  expedition  to  the  northAvard,  a 
frigate  had  arrived  with  news  that  Villeneuve's  first  attempt 

1  Naval  Chronic] r.  xii.   205,  and  ix.  201,  where  there  is  a  sketch  of  Ihe 
Rock. 


THE    PLAN    OF   APRIL    11  127 

to  get  out  had  failed,  that  the  combination  was  cancelled, 
and  that  the  Rochefort  squadron  was  to  return  to  France. 
In  Missiessy's  eyes  this  meant  he  was  to  return  immediately. 
In  vain  the  governor  entreated  him  to  devote  a  fragment 
of  his  force  to  the  Diamond  Rock  before  he  left.  In  spite 
of  his  vehement  protests  Missiessy  refused,  and  forthwith 
sailed  away  in  accordance  with  his  programme  to  throw  the 
last  of  his  troops  and  supplies  into  St.  Domingo,  as  he 
passed  on  homeward-bound. 

With  Missiessy's  premature  departure  the  great  combi- 
nation on  which  Napoleon  was  staking  his  success  received 
its  first  serious  blow.  From  the  outset  Napoleon  had  been 
uneasy  that  something  of  the  kind  might  happen,  and 
when,  on  receiving  Austria's  submission,  he  found  himself 
compelled  to  resume  the  invasion  ho  had  sent  a  revocation 
of  Missiessy's  order  to  return.  Villeneuve  was  to  try  again, 
and  Missiessy  was  to  remain  and  meet  him.  The  order  did 
not  reach  Missiessy  in  time  to  stop  him.  Indeed,  as  soon 
as  Napoleon  heard  Villeneuve  had  left  Toulon,  he  realised 
that  this  would  probably  happen,  and  he  set  about  con- 
structing the  first  of  those  interminable  modifications  of  his 
plans  which  ended  not  only  in  reducing  his  Admirals  to  a 
state  of  helpless  bewilderment  as  to  what  he  really  expected 
them  to  do,  but  also  in  leaving  his  own  mind  in  serious 
confusion  as  to  what  orders  he  had  actually  given,  and 
w^hat  they  had  actually  received. 

It  was  on  April  11th — the  day  after  the  junction  at 
Cadiz  was  effected — that  he  drafted  the  new  plan.  As  yet 
he  had  heard  nothing  of  Villeneuve  beyond  the  fact  that 
he  had  left  Toulon,  but  he  did  know  that  Ganteaume  had 
failed  to  get  out  and  that  Missiessy  would  probably  be  on 
his  way  home.  Having  therefore  to  face  the  probability 
that  his  first  combination  would  break  down,  he  fell  back 
on  the  discredited  plan  of  getting  a  surprise  command  of 
the  Channel  by  Villeneuve's  fleet  alone,  and  began  to  paint 
another  of  his  rose-coloured  pictures.  He  assumed  that 
Gravina  would  join  at  Cadiz  with  eight  of  the  line,  and 
there  were  two  more  just  ready  for  sea  at  Rochefort  under 
Admiral  Magon.     These  he  would  send  out  direct  to  Mar- 


1 28     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

tinique,  if  Giintcaumo  failed  to  get  out  by  May  lOth. 
Villeneuve's  fleet  would  thus  be  brought  up  to  twenty-two 
of  the  line,  a  force  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  return 
round  the  north  of  Scotland  into  the  North  Sea,  set  free 
Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch  squadron  in  the  Texel,  and 
come  on  to  Boulogne. 

His  reasons  for  believing  this  plan  feasible  are  a  striking 
example  of  how  entirely  he  failed  to  fathom  either  the 
subtlety  or  the  strength  of  British  strategy.  Villeneuve, 
he  assured  himself,  would  meet  no  force  sufficiently  strong 
to  oppose  him,  because  Ganteaume  would  always  detain  a 
squadron  of  twenty  of  the  line  before  Brest,  and  Missiessy's 
return  would  absorb  another  squadron  to  blockade  him 
in  Rochefort.^  How  hopeless  it  was  to  force  the  British 
government  to  keep  such  a  force  before  Brest  we  have 
already  seen,  and  events  were  to  show  that  no  squadron 
in  Bochefort  could  tempt  Barham  to  weaken  unduly  the 
central  point. 

Sanguine  as  was  the  scheme,  it  was  too  sober  and 
narroAv  to  sit  easily  on  Napoleon's  contempt  of  his  enemy's 
ability.  He  did  not  remain  constant  to  it  for  two  days. 
By  April  13  th  he  had  an  entirely  new  plan  in  his  head. 
The  rumour  that  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia  had  fallen  had 
reached  him  and  he  was  more  sanguine  than  ever.  It  was 
at  this  time,  too,  that  intelligence  of  the  feverish  activity  in 
the  British  naval  ports,  as  well  as  of  the  two  expeditions 
and  of  the  formation  of  Collingwood's  Flying  Squadron, 
inflamed  him  with  the  belief  that  his  devices  had  upset  his 
enemy's  equilibrium,  filled  their  counsels  with  confusion, 
and  that,  in  their  dismay,  they  were  scattering  formidable 
squadrons  and  the  best  of  their  troops  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.2 

It  was,  moreover,  in  an  hour  of  supreme  exultation  that 
the  new  idea  came  to  him.  He  was  on  his  way  to  Italy, 
not  too  sure  of  how  the  French  provinces  regarded  his 
assumption  of  the  Imperial  crown.    He  had  reached  Lyons, 

*  Desbri^re,  v.  507. 

-  Napoleon  to  DecrJis,  April  12th,  and  to  Lauriston,  Cambacdrt'^s,  Talley- 
rand, Murat,  Pino,  and  Decr^s,  April  13th:  Cor resjpondance ,  x,  312-320. 


THE   PLAN    OF   APRIL    13  129 

where,  passing  in  state  through  the  streets,  he  received  an 
ovation.  With  the  shouts  of  the  adoring  populace  in  his 
ears,  he  felt  the  world  was  his  oyster  and  with  his  fleet  he 
could  open  it.  The  possibility  of  securing  the  command 
of  the  Channel  by  an  overpowering  and  unexpected  con- 
centration again  took  possession  of  him,  and  that  night  the 
last  plan  was  cancelled.  Instead  of  waiting  till  May  10th, 
Magon  was  to  sail  immediately,  and  carry  orders  to  Ville- 
neuve  that  if  in  thirty-five  days  from  the  receipt  of  them 
Ganteaume  had  not  appeared  at  Martinique,  he  was  to 
assume  he  had  been  unable  to  break  out,  and  Villeneuve 
with  twenty  of  the  line,  the  least  number  which  Napoleon 
believed  he  would  have,  was  to  return  to  Ferrol.  There 
he  would  raise  the  blockade,  call  out  the  fifteen  of  the 
Gourd  on- Grand  allana  squadron,  and  with  the  whole  proceed 
to  join  hands  with  Ganteaume  off  Brest.  Then  together 
they  would  force  the  Channel  with  an  overwhelming  fleet 
of  fifty-six  of  the  line  and  appear  before  Boulogne.  There 
they  would  find  the  Emperor  in  person,  who  would  himself 
give  them  their  final  orders,  and  "  on  their  successful 
arrival,"  he  said,  "  hung  the  destinies  of  the  world."  ^ 

The  new  arrangement,  of  course,  was  not  to  come  into 
force  if  Ganteaume  appeared.  Villeneuve  was  still  to  wait 
for  him  the  specified  period,  but  not  in  inactivity.  The 
delay  was  to  be  made  good  by  reducing  St.  Lucia,  if  it  had 
not  fallen,  and  such  other  of  the  British  islands  as  were 
within  the  means  and  time  at  his  disposal.^ 

That  a  man  of  Napoleon's  ability  should  have  given 
such  orders  is  only  to  be  explained  by  the  intoxication 
which  the  success  of  his  policy  was  producing.  As  be 
journeyed  in  triumph  towards  Italy,  he  found  France  wor- 
shipping at  his  feet,  and  beyond  glittered  within  his  reach 
the  Iron  Crown.  Austria  and  Prussia  were  ignominiously 
looking  on  in  silence  at  this  last  and  most  flagrant  breach  of 
his  engagements,  and  England,  his  only  active  enemy,  seemed 
at  her  wits'  end.  The  sole  merit  of  the  new  scheme  above 
the  rest  is  that  he  seems  now  to  have  faced  for  the  first 

^  Napoleon  to  Lauriston,  April  13th,  and  to  Villeneuve  and  Decres,  April 
14th:  Ibid.,  pip.  314,  321. 

2  Decres  to  Villeneuve,  April  17th  :  Desbriere,  vol.  v.  p.  513. 


130     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

time  the  real  conditions  of  the  problem.  It  appears  to 
contemplate  winning  a  road  across  the  Channel  by  battle. 
Yet  he  does  not  realise — and  here  lay  its  most  vital  defect 
— that  the  battle  off  Brest  must  be  fought  by  Villeneuve 
alone,  and  that  to  escape  defeat  he  must  come  in  over- 
whelming force.  He  still  believes,  for  all  that  Ganteaume 
and  Decr^s  can  say,  that  Ganteaume  will  be  able  to  co- 
operate, as  though  it  were  a  case  of  two  armies  which  he 
could  move  as  he  would.  Moreover,  in  spite  of  the  tre- 
mendous difficulty  of  the  task,  in  spite  of  the  paramount 
necessity  of  concentration  of  effort,  he  bids  Villeneuve 
squander  his  force  prematurely  in  attempting  colonial 
conquest ;  and  to  complete  the  perversity  of  it  all  he 
assumes  throughout  that  his  enemy  will  do  all  the  foolish 
things  he  Avishes  him  to  do.  Surely  never  was  a  project 
more  contrary  to  the  principles  we  are  accustomed  to  call 
Napoleonic.^ 

It  must  further  be  remembered  that  these  ambitious 
orders  were  signed  before  Napoleon  had  a  word  of  news  as 
to  how  Villeneuve  had  fared  after  leaving  Toulon,  or  of 
what  Nelson  was  doing.  They  left  Paris  for  Rochefort  on 
April  17th.  It  was  not  till  the  20  th  that  Napoleon,  who 
had  just  reached  Italy,  heard  from  Genoa  that  Nelson,  as 
late  as  April  10th,  was  still  south  of  Sardinia  and  not  in 
pursuit.^  Two  days  later  came  news  from  Spain  that  on 
the  same  day  on  which  the  new  idea  had  come  to  him, 
Villeneuve  had  safely  effected  a  junction  with  Gravina  at 
Cadiz  and  had  gone  on  his  way.  It  was  a  disappointment 
that  only  five  Spanish  ships  had  joined  instead  of  the  eight 
he  had  expected,  but  he  immediately  set  about  providing 
the  remaining  ships  of  his  ally  with  a  fresh  part  to  play. 
Still  with  sanguine  infatuation  building  on  the  presumed 
folly  of  his  enemy,  he  was  convinced  that,  as  Nelson  was 
not  in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve,  he  had  been  again  enticed  to 
Egypt.  More  elated  than  ever  with  the  prospects  of  his 
new  plan,  he  determined  to  secure  his  advantage  by  measures 
which  would  hold  Nelson  in  the  Mediterranean.     For  this 

1  For  this,  sec  Desbricre,  v.  517. 
^  Desbricre,  v.  518. 


April  23  FURTHER   ELABORATIONS  131 

purpose  he  would  form  a  new  Toulon  squadron.  We  have 
seen  how  his  first  idea  for  using  Missiessy,  if  he  should  miss 
his  last  orders  and  return,  had  been  to  keep  him  in  Roche- 
fort  to  occupy  a  blockading  squadron.  Now  he  was  minded 
to  bring  him  to  Toulon  and  to  persuade  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment to  let  their  Cartagena  squadron  join  him  there. 
Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace,  was  then  all  powerful  at 
Madrid,  and  Talleyrand  was  instructed  to  approach  him  on 
the  subject  of  the  new  combined  squadron.  "  My  inten- 
tion," Napoleon  wrote,  "  would  not  be  to  order  the  squadron 
out,  but  to  make  it  a  menace,  and  as  I  shall  have  there  [at 
Toulon]  a  camp  of  four  or  five  thousand  men,  I  shall  cause 
the  English  great  uneasiness.  If  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
will  not  adopt  this  course,  then  I  think  the  Cartagena 
squadron  ought  to  go  to  Cadiz."  ^  For  his  purpose  of 
drawing  the  attention  of  the  British  to  the  Mediterranean 
the  alternative  of  a  squadron  at  Cadiz,  controlling  the 
entrance  to  the  Straits,  had  almost  as  high  a  diversionary 
value  as  a  new  Toulon  squadron.  To  increase  the  effect  of 
what  he  hoped  for,  while  waiting  for  an  answer,  he  indus- 
triously scattered  through  the  European  press  reports  that 
Villeneuve  had  evaded  the  British  watch  and  had  landed 
ten  thousand  men  in  Egypt. 

By  such  transparent  devices  he  could  think  to  beguile 
Nelson  and  give  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  a  free  hand. 
Decres  was  therefore  directed  to  send  them  ampler  and 
more  explicit  orders  for  attempting  the  conquest  of  the 
British  Leeward  Islands.  They  were  to  expel  the  English, 
not  only  from  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia,  but  from  St.  Vincent, 
Antigua,  and  Barbadoes  as  well,  and  possibly  even  to  re- 
capture Tobago  and  Trinidad.^  Never  did  even  the  elder 
Pitt  in  his  most  sanguine  moments  devise  a  programme  so 
entirely  unrelated  to  the  time  and  force  available. 

If  the  fault  which  Napoleon  most  severely  reprehended 
in  his  Marshals  was  that  of  making  for  themselves  pictures 
favourable  to  the  enemy,  his  own  besetting  naval  sin  was 

^  Napoleon  to  Talleyrand,  and  same  to  Decres,  April  23rd  :  Correspondance, 
X.  338-9.     Same  to  same,  May  4th  :  Ibid.,  p.  375. 

^  Napoleon  to  Decres,  April  23rd:  Correspondance,  x.  339  341,  and  Des- 
brifere,  v.  522. 


132     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

making  pictures  favourable  to  himself.  The  one  over  which 
he  was  now  gloating  represented  England  trembling  for 
India,  Cochrane  half-way  there,  and  Nelson,  Avith  his  eye  on 
the  French  corps  at  Taranto,  devoting  himself  to  the  defence 
of  Egypt.  The  West  Indies  he  saw  defenceless  till  such 
time  as  a  British  force  superior  to  Villeneuve's  squadron 
could  be  detached  from  the  Home  Fleet.  The  picture  Avas 
false  in  every  line,  but  Napoleon  Avould  not  see  it,  and  hard 
on  the  heels  of  Magon,  who  sailed  with  the  earlier  orders  on 
May  1st,  the  Diclon  frigate  carried  the  new  ones,  bidding 
Villeneuve  and  Gravina  oust  the  English  from  the  West 
Indies  as  a  liors  cVceuvre  to  the  full  meal  that  was  spread 
for  them  in  the  Channel. 

Having  thus  taken  the  first  steps  which  his  unreal 
picture  suggested,  he  produced  in  the  following  week  an 
equally  sanguine  plan  for  Villeneuve's  final  move  on 
England.  It  was  elaborated  in  ever}^  detail,  and  every 
detail  was  rose-coloured.  He  did  not  know  Magon  had 
already  sailed.  The  Iron  Crown  of  Italy  which  he  Avas 
about  to  set  on  his  head  had  filled  the  measure  of  his 
intoxication ;  time  and  space  were  ceasing  to  exist ;  the 
wilderness  of  ocean  over  which  he  was  scattering  his 
squadrons  was  but  a  chessboard  on  which  he  could  move 
them  as  he  would,  to  the  utter  confusion  of  a  purblind  and 
nerveless  adversary. 

For  the  final  movement,  as  he  now  formulated  it,  tem- 
porary command  of  the  Channel  by  surprise  still  had  a 
place,  beside  the  idea  of  real  command,  w^on  in  a  great  and 
decisive  action.  Villeneuve,  after  he  had  returned  to  raise 
the  Ferrol  blockade  and  had  formed  his  junction  wdth 
Gourdon  and  Grandallana,  would  be  left  free  to  choose  the 
method  that  seemed  best  at  the  last  moment.  Napoleon 
still  believed  that  all  that  was  Avanted  Avas  three,  or  on 
second  thoughts  four,  days'  command  before  Boulogne. 
Villeneuve  might  gain  it  either  by  joining  Ganteaume  or  by 
leaving  him  to  occupy  the  main  British  squadron  and  going 
north-about  to  take  the  enemy's  position  in  reverse  doAvn  the 
North  Sea.  It  Avas  not  unlikely  that  the  British  Admiralty 
Avould   direct  its  chief  attention   to  preventing  a  junction 


April  PLAN    FOR   THE   LAST   PHASE 


0  J 


between  the  Brest  and  Toulon  squadrons  and  would  endea- 
vour to  deal  with  Villeneuve  in  detail.  To  this  end  they 
would  probably  move  Cornwallis  out  a  considerable  dis- 
tance to  meet  him.  If  they  did,  it  would  only  facilitate 
his  operating  by  surprise.  Instead  of  approaching  Brest 
he  could  run  round  Cornwallis,  make  the  Lizard,  and  from 
there  rush  the  Channel,  or  if  the  wind  Avere  not  favourable 
he  could  go  north-about  to  the  Texel.  If,  however,  he 
decided  on  joining  Ganteaume  and  a  battle,  he  could  either 
previously  bring  out  the  Rochefort  squadron  on  his  way  to 
Ushant  or  leave  it  where  it  was  to  occupy  its  own  block- 
ading squadron.  If  possible  he  was  not  to  fight  till  the 
junction  with  Ganteaume  was  complete,  but  if  a  preliminary 
action  could  not  be  avoided,  he  was  to  fight  as  near  to 
Brest  as  possible,  so  as  to  permit  of  Ganteaume's  co-opera- 
tion. Lastly,  in  case  events  prevented  any  of  these  plans 
succeeding,  he  could  fetch  out  the  Rochefort  squadron  and 
concentrate  with  the  Cartagena  squadron  at  Cadiz  for 
further  orders.^ 

It  was  an  ingenious  method  of  breaking  the  strength  of 
the  interior  position  held  as  of  old  by  our  Western  Squadron. 
But  as  before  it  w^as  the  design  of  a  soldier,  framed  on  the 
lines  of  land  warfare  and  the  movement  of  armies.  Its 
fatal  defect  w^as,  as  we  shall  see  Decres  presently  pointing 
out,  that  it  made  no  deductions  either  for  the  superior 
mobility  of  fleets  and  the  peculiar  limitations  of  that 
mobility  imposed  by  conditions  of  wind  and  tide.  In  short, 
so  far  as  it  rested  on  a  junction  between  Villeneuve  and 
GanteptUme,  it  Avas  a  plan  based  on  the  false  analogy  of  an 
army  relieving  a  beleaguered  garrison.  If  we  are  investing 
a  fortress  it  is  always  possible  for  the  two  sections  of  the 
enemy's  force  to  co-operate  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  but 
there  is  no  recorded  case  in  sailing  days  of  a  blockaded 
squadron  having  been  able  to  take  eflfective  part  in  an 
action  between  a  relieving  force  and  the  blockaders.^  The 
difficulty  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  a  wind  that  was 

^  For  all  the  above  orders,  see  Desbriere,  v.  iii.  chapters  7  and  9. 

2  For  a  typical  example  of  what  would  happen  should  such  co-operation 
be  attempted,  see  the  case  of  Badiley,  Appleton,  and  Van  Galen  at  Leghorn 
in  1658  :  Enrjland  in  the  Mediterranean,  i.  205  et  scq. 


134     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

favourable  for  the  relieving  force  to  attack  was  usually 
foul  for  the  blockaded  force  to  come  out ;  and  partly  to  the 
fact  that  if  the  blockading  force  moved  away  to  meet  the 
attack  and  left  the  port  open,  still  the  difficulty  which  the 
blockaded  force  always  had  in  locating  the  blockaders,  if  out 
of  sight  of  its  signal  stations,  prevented  its  moving  out 
except  at  great  hazard  until  it  actually  heard  the  engage- 
ment in  progress.  Napoleon,  in  short,  omitted  from  his 
calculations  two  primary  conditions  of  naval  warfare  ;  one — 
that  at  sea  there  was  a  lee  and  a  weather  gage  which  did 
not  enter  into  analogous  problems  on  land,  and  the  other, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  under  a  day  or  two  whether  a 
naval  blockade  has  been  raised  or  not. 

So  things  stood  when  on  May  20th  midnight  sounded 
the  knell  of  the  West  Indian  concentration,  and  the  new 
orders  for  a  concentration  in  home  w^aters  came  into  opera- 
tion. This  was  the  day  Napoleon  had  finally  fixed  as  the 
latest  on  which  Ganteaume  was  to  attempt  to  break  out, 
and  henceforth  the  door  was  shut  on  him  till  Villeneuve 
should  appear  to  open  it.  With  that  Napoleon  had  to  rest 
content  so  far  as  Brest  was  concerned  ;  but  for  Missiessy's 
squadron  to  remain  idle  was  another  matter,  and  since  the 
Spanish  refusal  to  accept  his  idea  of  a  new  Toulon  squadron 
his  restless  mind  was  at  ^vork  again  on  schemes  for  putting  it 
to  the  best  advantage.  He  had  just  heard  from  Spain, 
that  the  Government  had  decided  the  Cartagena  squadron 
must  come  to  Cadiz.  The  reason  is  curious.  If  the  British 
Government  were  at  a  loss  to  fathom  the  meaning  of  Missi- 
essy's unexpected  return,  the  Spanish  Government  had  a 
knot  still  more  difficult  to  untie,  and  much  more  disturbing. 
For  them  the  dominating  fact  was  that  Nelson  had  appeared 
at  the  Straits  at  the  moment  when  Craig  had  reached 
Lisbon.  Craig  they  knew  was  now  waiting  at  Gibraltar,  but 
where  was  Nelson  ?  On  what  was  he  bent  ?  As  Godoy 
remarked  to  the  French  ambassador,  the  answer  to  this 
question  was  nothing  to  the  Emperor  but  everything  to 
Spain.  Nelson  had  last  been  heard  of  off  St.  Vincent. 
He  was  thus  a  month  behind  Villeneuve  and  pursuit 
could  scarcely  lead  to  anything.      Clearly  Spain  must  be 


May  his    views   as    to    CRAIG  135 

prepared  for  a  blow  at  one  of  her  arsenals — probably 
Caraccas  in  Cadiz  Bay.  Salcedo  and  his  squadron  must 
come  round  from  Cartagena  for  its  defence,  and  this  would 
be  done  so  soon  as  they  knew  where  Nelson  was  and  that 
the  passage  through  the  Straits  was  clear.^ 

Napoleon  was  equally  perplexed  as  to  the  meaning  of 
Craig's  expedition,  but  less  disturbed.  As  usual  he  decided 
it  was  going  to  do  what  Avould  most  nicely  suit  his  plans. 
"  The  famous  secret  expedition,"  he  wrote  to  Decres,  "  put 
into  Lisbon  on  May  7th,  and  sailed  again  on  the  10th.  It 
is  composed  of  two  ships  of  the  line,  a  corvette  and  fifty 
transports  carrying  5000  to  6000  men.  It  seems  to  have 
taken  refuge  in  Lisbon  for  fear  of  Villeneuve.  Where  is  it 
going  ?  It  is  a  problem.  My  opinion  is  that  it  has  nothing 
in  reason  to  do  except  to  take  the  Cape  or  to  carry  assist- 
ance to  Jamaica  or  the  Windward  Islands."  If  it  is  destined 
for  Malta,  so  much  the  better.  Nothing  will  prove  more 
strongly  the  ineptitude  of  the  English  Cabinet ;  for  these 
plans  of  continental  operations  based  on  detachments  of 
a  few  thousand  men  are  the  plans  of  pygmies.  If  then  you 
hear  that  this  expedition  has  gone  to  Malta,  rejoice ;  for 
the  English  have  deprived  themselves  of  6000  men  and 
of  a  certain  number  of  ships.  All  the  reports  I  get  from 
England  agree  in  saying  that  the  English  are  embarking 
troops  on  all  sides."  ^ 

This  criticism  of  Pitt's  strategy  has  been  taken  as 
Napoleon's  real  opinion,  and  even  as  a  condemnation  of  that 
amphibious  form  of  war  which  had  become  characteristic 
of  British  methods.  But  such  an  interpretation  is  by  no 
means  certain.  To  begin  with,  no  one  familiar  with  his 
correspondence  can  have  failed  to  notice  a  habit  he  had  of 
branding  movements  which  he  had  not  foreseen  as  inepties 
or  sottises,  and  the  mOre  disconcerting  such  movements  were, 
the  more  contemptuous  was  his  language.     His  success  and 

^  Beurnonville  (French  ambassador  at  Madrid)  to  Talleyrand,  May  14th  and 
16th  :^  Desbriere,  v.  578-81. 

^  i.e.  the  Lesser  Antilles,  in  English  official  parlance  the  "Leeward 
Islands."      See  England  in  the  Seven  Years'  War,  i.  352. 

3  Napoleon  to  Decres,  May  25th  and  June  8th.  Napoleon  wrote  :  "  Ces 
combinaisons  de  mouvements  du  continent,  fondees  sur  des  detachements 
de  quelques  1000  hommes,  sont  des  combinaisons  de  pygmies." 


136     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

sclf-confidcnco  seem  to  have  brought  him  to  a  state  of 
mind,  in  which  he  could  not  or  would  not  believe  his 
own  appreciations  could  have  missed  any  reasonable  event- 
uality ;  and  if  an  opposing  commander  acted  in  a  way 
which  he  himself  had  failed  to  anticipate,  the  only  explana- 
tion he  permitted  was  that  the  man  was  a  fool  and  a 
blunderer.  Such  a  process  of  thought  was  but  a  piece  of 
the  perverse  self-deception  which  was  probably  his  greatest 
defect  as  a  commander.  In  this  case  it  is  unusually  strik- 
ing ;  for  in  a  month  or  two,  as  we  shall  see,  he  was  speaking 
of  the  expedition  in  a  tone  of  serious  alarm.  Moreover  the 
letters  should  not  be  read  alone.  Those  he  wrote  on  the 
same  and  the  following  day,  suggest  that  his  real  feeling  was 
one  far  removed  from  contempt. 

They  were  the  two  busy  days  which  preceded  the  cere- 
mony of  his  coronation  at  Milan,  and  over  the  pageantry  of 
the  preparations  there  is  clear  to  see  the  shadow  of  Pitt's 
coming  coalition,  the  first  doubt  as  to  whether  the  initiative 
of  the  campaign  is  to  be  his  own.  On  the  eve  of  his  great 
stroke  for  incorporating  Italy  in  his  empire,  which  had 
ah-eady  caused  him  so  much  misgiving,  he  sat  pouring  out 
despatch  after  despatch,  filled  with  new  anxiety.  To  Marshal 
Berthier,  his  Chief  of  the  Staff,  there  are  two  for  reinforc- 
ing and  rearming  Corsica  and  his  chief  Italian  ports.  To 
Cambaceres,  his  right  hand  in  Paris,  he  writes :  "  You  can 
contradict  loudly  the  news  that  is  being  spread  of  a  treaty 
of  alliance  between  England  and  Russia.  Make  it  known 
indirectly  on  'Change  and  elsewhere  that  Russia,  on  the  con- 
trary, has  refused  to  listen  to  any  hostile  proposals."  Fouche, 
who  controlled  the  press  bureau,  is  told  to  insert  in  the 
papers  that  at  St.  Petersburg  the  French  are  growing  more 
popular,  that  the  English  are  disliked,  that  the  project  of 
a  coalition  has  fallen  through,  and  that  in  any  case  Russia 
will  not  intervene  and  is  too  remote  to  engage  on  her  own 
account  directly  and  effectively.  ''Be  careful,"  he  tells 
Barbe-Marbois,  "to  read  the  English  papers,  and  to  get 
them  by  the  quickest  way.  Do  not  stop  at  a  thousand 
louis  more  or  less  and  send  me  such  information  as  may 
interest  me,  above  all  the  movements  of  ships  and  announce- 


May  25-8       HIS    UNEASINESS    AT    MILAN  137 

ments  of  all  preparations  of  all  expeditions."  "  Monsieur 
mon  Beaufrere  et  Cousin,"  he  writes  testily  to  Prince  Murat, 
"  what  you  write  me  about  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of 
alliance  between  England  and  Russia  is  nonsense :  it  is 
entirely  false.  These  reports,  which  the  English  spread  to 
get  themselves  out  of  the  mess  for  the  moment,  are  fabrica- 
tions." In  the  evening,  after  the  fireworks  and  illuminations 
were  over,  he  was  even  haunted  with  the  possibility  of  his 
enemy  playing  their  old  game  of  supporting  insurrections  in 
France  itself :  and  he  wrote  again  to  Fouche :  "  In  the  state 
of  disorganisation  and  embarrassment  in  which  England  finds 
herself,  it  is  possible  she  may  seek  to  renew  trouble  in  the 
interior  of  France.  But  I  can't  think  she  will  make  much 
of  it.     That  string  is  worn  out  like  so  many  others." 

It  is  possible  that  his  orders  for  strengthening  the  Italian 
ports  had  their  origin  in  a  desire  to  provide  secure  points  of 
refuge  for  a  small  frigate  squadron  he  was  about  to  send  out 
for  a  cruise  under  his  wayward  brother  Jerome,  who  had 
just  returned  from  his  escapade  in  America  and  in  whom  he 
hoped  to  find  the  Admiral  he  was  seeking.  But  all  the  rest 
of  the  letters  suggest  strongly  that  the  meeting  of  Craig's 
expedition  and  Nelson  gave  an  ugly  turn  to  the  growing 
rumours  of  an  Anglo-Russian  alliance,  and  that  for  the  first 
time  Napoleon  was  forced  to  doubt  whether  his  invasion 
threat  would  so  effectively  paralyse  British  initiative  as  he 
had  expected. 

On  the  morrow  his  preoccupation  with  Craig  at  Gibraltar 
and  the  possibility  of  English  and  Russian  co-operation  in 
the  Mediterranean  continues.  "  It  is  urgent,"  he  writes, 
"  to  get  the  Cartagena  fleet  to  Cadiz  and  to  blockade 
Gibraltar,  if  the  English  do  not  keep  a  superior  squadron 
in  those  seas ; "  and  yet  again  to  Fouche :  "  I  have  already 
told  you  that  the  treaty  of  England  with  Russia  is  false. 
It  is  a  trick  of  the  English  Cabinet.  Their  intrigues 
have  broken  down  completely.  Even  when  you  see  this 
treaty  printed  in  the  English  gazette  and  Pitt  announcing 
it  to  Parliament,  you  can  say  it  is  not  true."  The  same 
day  he  hears  that  the  British  fleet  before  Brest  has  been 
firing  a  salvo,  and  it  gets  on  his  nerves.     He  discusses  it 


138     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

with  Dccres,  is  afraid  it  may  mean  a  regrettable  incident 
for  Magon,  and  he  ends  by  assuring  the  Minister  that 
"  England  is  entirely  abandoned  by  the  continent,  her 
situation  is  worse  than  ever."  ^ 

To  add  to  his  troubles  he  could  get  no  news  of  Missiessy. 
He  had  not  yet  heard  of  his  return.  As  the  Spanish  fear 
of  Craig  had  ended  all  hope  of  a  new  Toulon  squadron,  he 
had  decided  to  send  him  back  to  Villeneuve.  But  as  the 
days  went  by  the  probability  of  his  being  too  late  or  even 
shut  in  by  blockade  grew  more  and  more  disturbing,  and 
Napoleon  began  deluging  Decres  with  projects  for  using  him 
in  some  other  Avay.  In  spite  of  **  the  state  of  disorganisa- 
tion and  embarrassment "  in  England,  everywhere  he  looked 
he  saw  a  British  squadron  in  the  way.  The  problem  was 
how  to  employ  Missiessy  so  as  to  occupy  or  entice  away  an 
equal  British  force  and  yet  have  him  at  hand  at  the  decisive 
moment.  "  If  I  send  Missiessy  to  Cadiz  or  to  Toulon,"  he 
wrote  to  Decres  on  May  29th,  "and  the  English  evacuate 
the  Mediterranean,  it  is  evident  the  English  will  have  on 
the  day  of  the  battle  of  Ushant,  six  more  vessels  against 
me,  which  I  ought  to  make  Missiessy  contain."  There 
was,  to  be  sure,  the  possibility  of  sendmg  him  to  Cadiz 
to  fetch  the  Cartagena  and  Cadiz  squadrons  to  Ferrol, 
but  to  this  course  there  were  two  objections.  He  believed 
Calder  had  ten  of  the  line  before  Ferrol,  and  Missiessy,  if 
he  succeeded  in  rallying  both  the  Cadiz  and  the  Cartagena 
squadrons,  would  have  fifteen.  "  But  is  it  prudent,"  he  says, 
"  to  attack  ten  English  vessels  with  five  French  and  ten 
Spanish  ? "  Moreover  a  concentration  at  Ferrol,  like  all 
concentrations  at  the  wrong  time  and  place,  would  do 
more  harm  than  good.  It  would  attract  at  least  twenty 
of  the  enemy,  and  then  Villeneuve  would  be  unable  to 
get  there  without  fighting  and  the  difficulty  of  the  Brest 
junction  would  be  reproduced.  For  the  same  reason  he 
could  not  send  him  to  Brest,  for  even  if  he  could  slip  in, 
that  again  would  only  lead   to   an  increase  of  the  British 

^  For  the  above  letters  of  May  2oth  to  28th,  see  Correspondance  de  Napoleon, 
X.  441-454.  The  salvo  was  probably  fired  on  news  of  Prevost's  repulse  of 
the  attack  on  Dominica. 


May  29  PROJECTS    FOR    MISSIESSY  139 

force  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel — the  force,  that  is,  which 
it  was  his  special  object  to  reduce.  There  was  no  way,  he 
finally  decided,  but  for  Missiessy  to  operate  an  independent 
diversion.  If  he  was  blockaded  in  Rochefort  he  would 
occupy  at  least  six  of  the  enemy,  and  could  conform  to 
their  movements.  If  on  Yilleneuve's  approach  the  blockade 
was  raised  he  must  go  out  and  make  a  demonstration  on 
the  coast  of  Ireland.  "  This  movement,"  he  writes,  "  will 
give  London  a  lit  of  nerves  {la  crispation)  and  oblige  them 
to  detach  six  of  the  line."  Meanwhile  Missiessy  Avould  dis- 
appear mto  the  ocean  and  turn  up  off  Ferrol  in  time  to  meet 
Villeneuve. 

As  further  reports  began  to  reach  Milan  of  the  rapid 
succession  of  orders  that  had  been  issuing  from  the  British 
Admiralty  since  Yilleneuve's  escape,  the  picture  which 
Napoleon  was  painting  for  himself  gained  in  colour.  "  The 
disorder  of  the  English  is  extreme,"  he  wrote  to  Decres. 
But  if  Napoleon  deceived  himself  Decres  had  his  eyes 
open,  and  on  June  1st  he  sat  down  to  warn  his  sanguine 
master  of  the  serious  mistakes  he  was  making.  "  What 
seems  certain,"  he  wrote  with  grave  sarcasm,  "is  that,  if 
the  English  Government  has  not  divined  your  Majesty's 
thoughts,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  they  have  been 
penetrated  by  the  London  journalists."  ^  He  felt  sure 
Cochrane  had  not  gone  to  India,  but  was  in  the  West 
Indies,  and  he  warns  Napoleon  that  if  Nelson  goes  there 
too  they  will  have  together  eighteen  of  the  line,  "  of  which 
several  are  three-deckers,"  and  that  a  premature  action 
there  is  highly  probable.  "  The  low  speed  of  some  of 
Admiral  Yilleneuve's  vessels,"  he  argues,  "  leaves  little 
hope  that  he  will  be  able  to  avoid  an  engagement.  On 
this  hypothesis  the  die  is  cast,  and  a  fortnight  hence  the 
God  of  Battles  will  have  given  judgment."  Even  on  the 
other  hypothesis  that  Cochrane  was  not  there  and  Yilleneuve 
might  get  away  without  fighting,  his  predicament  would  be 

^  Desbriere,  v.  596.  Decres  quotes  the  Morning  Chronicle  of  May  9th  and 
the  Sun  of  the  16th.  The  May-June  number  of  the  Naval  Chronicle  (vol.  xiii. 
p.  484)  also  published  Napoleon's  intention  to  "  balayer  la  Manche  "  with  sixty 
of  the  line  and  fight  our  fleet,  while  his  frigates  covered  the  passage  of  the 
troops. 


I40     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

even  worse.  Nelson  would  immediately  follow  him  back, 
"  and  if  he  despairs  of  reaching  Ferrol  in  time,  he  will  send 
thither  a  fast  frigate,  and  himself  make  for  Brest,  which  will 
give  the  enemy  an  immense  force  at  that  point." 

To  redress  the  balance  Napoleon  was  of  course  relying 
on  the  junction  between  Villeneuve  and  Ganteaume  being 
made  before  the  "  Battle  of  Ushant "  was  fought,  and  Decres 
as  delicately  as  he  can  tries  to  convince  him  the  thing  is 
impossible.  "  I  will  make  no  comparison,"  he  says,  "  with 
two  columns  of  an  army,  a  case  in  which  the  smallest 
accident  may  often  upset  the  most  nicely  calculated 
junction.  .  .  .  Whatever  the  winds  on  which  Admiral 
Villeneuve  makes  for  Brest  it  is  possible  these  winds  may 
be  foul  for  Admiral  Ganteaume's  fleet.  For  this  junction 
to  operate  with  success.  Admiral  Villeneuve  must  appear 
before  Brest  at  a  moment  favourable  for  the  fleet  to  get 
under  way."  Even  so  it  will  be  impossible  for  Villeneuve 
to  avoid  sustaining  for  a  time  single-handed  the  whole  force 
of  the  enemy.  "  If  Admiral  Villeneuve's  fleet  has  not  force 
sufficient  to  constrain  the  enemy  to  refuse  battle,  he  will 
have  to  measure  strength  with  him  for  at  least  ten  hours 
before  he  can  be  joined  by  the  Brest  fleet.  The  issue  of 
such  an  action  fought  with  such  a  proportion  of  vessels 
will  leave  the  victor  with  an  efl'ective  force  sufficient  to 
sustain  a  second  attack."  In  other  Avords,  if  all  goes  as 
well  as  possible,  no  victory  can  be  expected  to  be  decisive 
enough  to  give  certain  command  of  the  Channel. 

But  he  goes  still  further,  pointing  out  technical  reasons 
why  it  is  impossible  to  hope  that  things  will  go  so  well. 
By  no  process  of  intelligence  will  it  be  possible  to  make 
certain  that  Villeneuve  shall  arrive  when  Avind  and  tide  are 
right  for  Ganteaume ;  in  all  probability,  therefore,  the  Brest 
squadron  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  support  Villeneuve 
till  the  day  after  he  appears.  Moreover  there  was  a  likeli- 
hood of  Villeneuve's  finding  the  enemy  ofl"  Ushant  in  much 
greater  strength  than  Napoleon  has  allowed  for.  It  Avas 
quite  possible  they  Avould  have  not  merely  the  regular 
blockading  squadron,  but  also  the  whole  of  its  reserve,  as 
well  as  the  Ferrol  squadron  and  eventually  Nelson's  too.    He 


June  I  DECRES'    WARNING  141 

reminds  his  master  that  of  the  whole  force  on  which  he 
relies  to  deal  with  such  a  concentration  of  highly  trained 
squadrons,  nineteen  vessels  will  be  Spaniards  just  out  of 
harbour,  commanded  by  inexperienced  officers  and  poorly 
equipped.  Finally  he  begs  that  Villeneuve  may  be  given 
orders  not  to  risk  an  action  unless  he  finds  his  own  squadron 
in  a  superiority  of  at  least  six  to  that  of  the  enemy/ 

It  is  doubtful  whether  this  luminous  appreciation,  with 
its  first  forecast  of  what  actually  happened,  was  ever  com- 
pleted. A  curious  feature  of  it  is  that  though  Decres 
clearly  did  not  put  much  trust  in  Nelson's  being  enticed 
away,  yet  he  dared  not  say  openly  that  he  was  not  the 
simpleton  Napoleon  professed  to  think  him.  Still  he  felt 
bound  to  hint  that  it  was  just  possible  Nelson  might  do 
the  right  thing,  and  he  adopted  a  method  of  conveying  the 
suggestion,  which  was  as  ingenious  as  it  was  delicate.  "  His 
boasting,"  he  says,  *'  only  equals  his  ineptitude  (ineptie) — 
and  I  use  here  the  proper  word — but  he  has  one  striking 
quality,  which  is  to  have  no  pretensions  with  his  captains 
except  for  bravery  and  luck ;  whence  it  follows  that  he  is 
accessible  to  advice,  and  in  difficult  situations,  though  he  is 
nominally  in  command,  it  is  another  who  actually  directs."  ^ 

Whether  or  not  Decr^s  ever  ventured  to  forward  his 
crushing  criticism,  it  certainly  had  no  effect  in  shaking 
Napoleon's  obstinacy.  A  week  later  he  reproved  his 
minister  for  not  having  "  a  mind  exclusive  enough  for  a 
great  operation."  ''  It  is  a  fault,"  he  said,  "  which  you 
must  correct,  for  it  is  the  art  of  great  successes  and  great 
undertakings."  Decres  in  despair  begged  him  to  come  back 
to  France.     "  I  don't  know,"  Napoleon  replied,  "  why  you 

^  Desbriere,  v.  596.     This  document  is  an  unfinished  draft. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  599.  Colonel  Desbriere  observes  on  this  remarkable  paper,  "  In 
all  but  what  concerns  the  gross  error  in  appreciating  the  character  of  Nelson, 
we  cannot  admire  too  much  this  letter  whose  forecasts  were  realised  with 
almost  absolute  precision."  Colonel  Desbriere  would  seem  therefore  to  take 
Decres'  remarks  on  Nelson  seriously  ;  but  it  is  submitted  that  there  really 
seems  no  reason  to  do  so.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  believe  that  a  man  who 
could  expose  in  so  masterly  a  manner  the  strategical  fallacies  of  Napoleon 
and  penetrate  so  acutely  the  British  intentions,  could  really  be  so  bad  a 
judge  of  the  main  personal  factor.  The  awe  in  which  Napoleon's  officers 
stood  of  him,  seems  quite  enough  to  account  for  Decres'  preferring  not  to 
contradict  the  Emperor's  shallow  view  of  Nelson's  capacity,  if  there  was 
another  and  safer  way  of  attaining  the  end  which  he  had  in  view. 


142     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

say  so  much  of  my  return  to  Paris.  Nothing  is  better 
calculated  than  my  journey  to  hide  my  projects  and  cheat 
the  enemy."  Always  this  besetting  dream  of  his  enemy's 
imbecility !  Unconvinced  he  continued  incessantly  to  ela- 
borate his  plan,  in  spite  of  news  that  kept  coming  in  to 
shoAV  how  airy  was  the  castle  he  was  building. 

Salcedo  had  tried  to  get  round  to  Cadiz  in  order  to 
attack  Craig  at  Gibraltar,  but  had  been  forced  by  the 
weather  to  put  back  and  was  now  held  in  his  port  on 
rumours  that  both  Orde  and  Nelson  were  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. The  falsity  of  the  rumours  was  not  penetrated 
by  Napoleon.  He  embraced  them  to  add  colour  to  his 
picture.  For  him  they  meant  a  further  chance  of  weaken- 
ing his  enemy  on  the  Ushant  position.  Missiessy  could 
now  be  sent  to  make  a  demonstration  in  the  North  Sea 
and  off  the  Texel,  and  Marmont  should  emphasise  it  by 
such  a  display  of  activity  ashore  as  would  compel  the 
British  Government  to  take  it  into  account.  The  basis  of 
it  all  was  pure  illusion.  It  was  quickly  demonstrated  that 
owing  to  the  strength  of  the  British  interior  position  be- 
tween Cadiz  and  Cartagena  it  was  impossible  for  the  two 
squadrons  either  to  get  together  or  between  them  to  contain 
a  force  superior  to  their  own.  In  a  week  Salcedo  tried 
once  more  to  get  round  to  Cadiz,  but  only  to  hurry  into 
port  again  in  alarm,  on  tidings  that  Collingw^ood  had  arrived 
to  re-establish  the  command  of  the  Straits'  mouth.^ 

Still  nothing  availed  to  dilute  Napoleon's  optimism,  or 
his  belief  that  he  had  completely  confused  his  enemy  and 
broken  their  concentration.  He  had  heard  that  a  Flying 
Squadron  of  twelve  of  the  line  had  been  detached  from 
the  Ushant  fleet,  and  till  the  actual  announcement  that 
Collingwood  was  blockading  Cadiz  he  believed  he  had  gone 
to  India.  As  to  Nelson  he  was  equally  sanguine.  Though 
he  did  not  know  Avhere  he  was  for  certain,  he  had  little 
doubt  he  was  either  in  England  or  the  Mediterranean,  and 
was  convinced  that  Missiessy's  cruise  would  complete  his 
effort  to  upset  the  equilibrium  of  his  enemy.  "  The  un- 
certainty and  confusion,"  he  repeated,  ''  that   the   London 

1  Beurnonville  to  Talleyrand,  June  13th  and  17th  :  Ibid.,  p.  622. 


June  THEIR    FAILURE  143 

Admiralty  is  in,  declares  itself  on  all  sides.  Orders  and 
counter-orders  and  the  greatest  indecision — that  is  the 
actual  state  of  things."  ^ 

Yet  even  as  he  wrote,  these  orders  and  counter-orders 
over  which  he  was  exulting  had  brought,  not  confusion, 
but  the  quiet  re-establishment  of  the  long  line  of  blockade 
which  Villeneuve's  escape  had  thrown  momentarily  out  of 
gear.  So  nicely  adjusted  was  the  interlocking  of  the  parts, 
so  well  practised  the  hands  at  the  levers,  that  every  un- 
certainty had  been  met  by  a  simple  turn.  Each  part  in 
answer  to  the  adroit  impulse  slipped  smartly  into  its 
appointed  place.  From  the  Texel  to  Cartagena  the  chain 
was  drawn  tight  and  every  gate  was  locked  upon  the 
impotent  squadrons  of  which  Napoleon  had  yet  to  construct 
a  fleet. 

^  To  Decr^s,  June  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  612. 


CHAPTER  X 

RESTORING  THE  COMMAND— FERROL  AND  THE   STRAITS 

To  pass  from  the  imaginative  and  almost  feverish  corre- 
spondence of  Napoleon  at  this  time,  to  the  coolly  calculated 
orders  of  Lord  Barham  and  the  confident  motions  of  the 
British  commanders  gives  an  impression  of  quiet  mastery 
that  is  the  note  of  the  campaign  from  now  onwards. 

Ignorant  that  Missiessy's  reappearance  was  a  mistake, 
the  Admiralty's  first  deduction  from  their  intelligence  was 
that  no  serious  attack  or  concentration  was  intended  in  the 
West  Indies.  It  even  indicated  a  possibility  that  Villeneuve 
was  not  bound  thither  at  all,  and  word  was  immediately 
sent  after  Collingwood  instructing  him  to  go  no  further 
than  Madeira  without  fresh  orders.  On  the  same  reasoning 
Pitt  decided  not  to  divert  Sir  Eyre  Coote's  expedition 
to  the  West  Indies,  and  an  express  Avas  hurried  off  to 
Drury,  who  in  Gardner's  absence  was  commanding  the 
Irish  station,  to  stop  him,  or  supposing  he  had  started,  to 
recall  him  if  possible.^  There  was  a  possibility  that 
Villeneuve  had  gone  to  India  after  all,  as  Napoleon  Avas 
trying  to  make  his  enemy  believe.  But  the  Government 
was  not  to  be  enticed  into  making  so  wide  a  dissipation  of 
its  fleet  except  on  the  surest  evidence,  and  they  contented 
themselves  Avdth  a  warning  to  Sir  Edward  Pellew,  who 
commanded  on  the  station.'^ 

The  discretion  which  Gardner  had  exercised  in  with- 
holding Graves's  division  from  Collingwood  received  formal 
approval,  and  he  was  directed  to  devote  it  to  the  blockade 

1  Out-letters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  May  30th. 

2  Ibid.,  June  4th.  He  was  told  they  had  intelligence  of  the  Toulon  squadron 
having  left  Cadiz  on  April  10th,  and  that  "  ti)0ugh  very  imperfect  it  increases 
the  probaVjility  of  its  destination  being  for  the  East  Indies  or  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope."     An  earlier  warning  to  the  same  effect  had  been  sent  him. 

144 


June  BREST   AND    ROCHEFORT  145 

of  Rochefort,  with  instructions  to  intercept  the  French 
squadron  if  it  put  to  sea  and  to  follow  it  wherever  it  went. 
Gardner  received  the  order  on  June  5  th,  when  Collingwood 
had  been  gone  a  fortnight.  Decres  had  just  heard  of  this 
weakening  of  the  Ushant  fleet,  and  seeing  in  it  a  chance  for 
Ganteaume  to  strike,  was  appealing  to  the  Emperor  for  the 
necessary  orders.  But  Napoleon  would  not  quit  the  plan 
which  seemed  to  be  working  so  well.  He  was  the  last  man 
in  the  world,  for  all  his  faith  in  the  principle  of  destroying 
the  enemy's  forces,  to  hazard  an  action  except  for  some 
clearly  seen  end.  "  To  what  can  a  battle  lead  ? "  he 
replied.  "  To  nothing.  Simply  put  in  the  papers  that 
the  English  have  sent  eight  (sic)  of  the  line  before 
[Rochefort]  and  that  they  have  weakened  by  so  much 
their  Brest  blockade  .  .  .  and  that  it  is  inconceivable  why 
the  French  fleet  does  not  profit  by  the  occasion.  Next 
day,  in  another  paper,  say  that  it  is  most  extraordinary 
that  journalists  permit  themselves  such  reflexions ;  that 
before  condemning  or  approving  the  conduct  of  an  admiral 
in  an  affair  of  this  nature,  they  should  know  what  are  his 
instructions,  and  that  probably,  as  the  Emperor  has  not 
communicated  them  to  the  journalists,  all  their  talk  on 
the  subject  is  quite  futile."  ^ 

The  prompt  closing  of  Rochefort  reduced  all  his  schemes 
for  the  employment  of  Missiessy  to  the  pis  aller  of  conform- 
ing to  the  movements  of  the  blockading  force.  But  in  any 
case  the  squadron  could  not  have  sailed  for  some  weeks — so 
exhausted  were  its  crews,  and  so  great  the  need  of  repairs — 
and  a  fortnight  after  Missiessy  had  put  into  the  port,  Graves 
had  appeared.  With  his  own  80-gun  ship,  two  three- 
deckers,  and  three  others,  he  was  in  a  marked  superiority 
over  what  the  enemy  was  reputed  to  have.  Thus  by  the 
time  Napoleon  knew  Missiessy  was  back  he  was  already 
firmly  held  to  his  moorings.  Graves  indeed,  on  his  arrival, 
found  the  squadron  so  entirely  unfit  for  sea  that  he  forth- 
with submitted  to  Gardner  whether  it  was  necessary  to  keep 
anything  but  a  frigate  off  the  port.  Gardner  replied — and 
the  point  is  interesting  in  relation  to  the  old  practice  of  war 

1  To  Decres,  June  IGth. 

K 


146  FERROL   AND    THE    STRAITS  may 

direction — that  he  did  not  feel  authorised  to  recall  him  or 
any  part  of  his  detachment  without  special  orders  from  the 
Admiralty.  The  orders  he  got  were  to  withdraw  two  ships 
of  the  line  and  to  add  them  to  his  own  squadron  or  to  that 
of  Caldcr  before  Ferrol. 

The  position  of  this  squadron  had  been  causing  Gardner 
some  anxiety.  Calder  had  been  complaining  that  his  force 
was  inadequate  to  watch  the  port.  Besides  his  own  three- 
decker,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  he  had  only  an  80 -gun  ship, 
four  seventy-fours,  and  a  forty-four,  while  Gourdon  and 
Grandallana  had  between  them  eleven  of  the  line  actually 
ready  for  sea,  and  three  more  in  a  forward  state.  To  add  to 
the  inequality,  one  of  Calder 's  ships  had  been  severely 
damaged  aloft,  and  four  others  would  soon  need  relief.  So 
strongly  did  Gardner  feel  Calder's  weakness  that  it  had 
been  his  intention  to  send  him  the  whole  of  Graves's 
division.  This  addition  to  the  Ferrol  squadron,  after  the 
units  requiring  refit  had  been  sent  home,  would  have  given 
it  a  strength  of  ten  of  the  line,  of  which  three  would  be 
three-deckers,  besides  an  80 -gun  ship — a  force  which  by 
the  ordinary  rule  of  calculation  would  have  made  it  superior 
to  the  Combined  Squadron  inside.  The  Admiralty  order  to 
attach  Graves  to  Collingwood  and  subsequently  to  send  him 
before  Rochefort  had  stopped  the  movement,  and  made 
it  impossible  for  Gardner  to  detach  anything  to  Calder 
without  bringing  his  own  squadron  below  the  established 
minimum  of  eighteen. 

His  anxiety,  however,  was  needless.  Barham  was  quite 
alive  to  the  situation  and  had  already  provided  for  it.  The 
nature  of  these  orders  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were 
interpreted  by  the  Admirals  concerned,  are  highly  interest- 
ing. They  afford  a  typical  example  of  what  long  war  ex- 
perience had  established  as  to  the  discretion  which  the 
man  on  the  spot  might  permit  himself  in  reading  his  orders, 
and  the  certainty  and  fearlessness  with  which  officers  in 
those  days  could  weigh  the  spirit  against  the  letter. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Barham's  first  idea  after 
hearing  of  Villeneuve's  escape  was  that  Knight's  two  vessels, 
the  Queen  and  Dragon,  which  formed  Craig's  escort,  should 


MAYI4-I6     BICKERTON   AND    HIS    ORDERS  14; 

proceed  with  Collmg\Yood's  Flying  Squadron  in  chase,  if 
Nelson  had  not  gone  himself.  If  Nelson  had  pursued, 
Knight  was  to  send  both  vessels  to  Orde,  who  was  then 
believed  to  bo  still  on  his  station.  This  was  on  April  27th. 
Three  days  later  came  Orde's  despatch  which  told  of  his 
falling  back  on  Ushant,  and  contained  his  appreciation, 
which  pointed  to  the  probabiHty  of  a  concentration  of  the 
enemy's  squadrons  somewhere  to  the  westward.  To  hold 
the  Ferrol  position  in  strength  was  therefore  of  the  last 
importance,  and  it  became  absolutely  necessary  to  reinforce 
Calder.  Consequently,  it  will  be  remembered,  Knight  was 
instructed  that  if  he  had  not  passed  St.  Vincent  with  his 
convoy,  he  was  to  come  back  to  Ferrol.  If  he  had,  he  was 
to  shift  his  flag  to  a  frigate  at  Gibraltar  and  send  his  ships 
of  the  line  to  Calder,  or  if  Calder  had  raised  the  blockade 
they  were  to  carry  on  to  Gardner. 

The    first  of   these   orders   Knight   received  when   he 
reached  Gibraltar.     By  that  time  Nelson  had  already  de- 
tached Sir  Richard  Bickerton  in  the  Royal  Sovereign,  and 
had  placed  Knight  under  his  orders.     Bickerton  of  course 
decided,  as  Nelson  was  pursuing,   to  keep  Knight's   ships 
with  his  flag.     His  intention  was,  in  accordance  with  Nelson's 
instructions,  to  use  the  squadron  for  covering  Craig's  passage 
to  Malta  and  meeting  a  Levant  convoy  then  due.  He  informed 
the  Admiralty  that  in  taking  upon  himself  to  do  this  instead 
of  sending  the  ships  to  Orde  as  they  had  directed,  he  was 
influenced  by  the  dominant  consideration,   that  when  the 
Admiralty  issued  the  orders  they  did  not   knov/  that  the 
squadron  in  Cartagena  had  become  active,  and  had  already 
once  been  to  sea.     The  whole  tenor  of  the  order  indicated 
that  had  they  known  this  they  would  certainly  have  wished 
Craig's  escort  to  remain  for  his  protection.     Before,  how- 
ever, he  could  act,  the  second   orders  arrived,  as  to  rein- 
forcing Calder ;  whereupon  Bickerton  considered  he  was  no 
longer^  justified  in  using  his  discretion  in  the  light  of  the 
local  situation.      "  I  must  give  up,"  he  repHed,  "  the  objects 
I  had   and  obey,   though  it   will   expose  the   convoy   and 
transports  to  the  [Algeciras]  gunboats  and  the  Cartagena 
squadron.     As  I  certainly  am  not  strong  enough  to  meet 


148  FERROL    AND    THE    STRAITS 

and  attack  this  force  advantageously,  backed  as  it  is  by 
the  Cadiz  squadron,  which  must  amount  to  five  of  the  line 
...  I  do  not  feel  myself  at  liberty  to  deviate  from  their 
lordships'  orders  when  there  is  no  reasonable  hope  of  my 
being  able  by  an  action  with  such  a  superior  enemy  to 
confine  the  Cartagena  squadron  within  the  Straits,  or  to 
prevent  the  junction  of  at  least  the  larger  part  of  them 
with  that  of  Cadiz ;  and  when  it  is  considered  that  their 
lordships'  future  arrangements  will  be  made  under  a  full 
conviction  that  the  ships  of  the  line  under  my  orders  have 
joined  the  squadron  under  Sir  Robert  Calder  or  Lord 
Gardner's  fleet."  His  principle  may  be  thus  enunciated — 
that  in  dealing  with  explicit  orders  no  exercise  of  discretion 
that  may  confuse  the  war-plan  is  permissible  to  an  officer 
on  the  spot,  unless  he  sees  in  the  local  conditions,  unknown 
to  headquarters,  the  certainty  of  delivering  a  decisive  blow 
at  the  enemy's  naval  force  or  possibly  of  paralysing  a  part 
of  it  greater  than  his  own.^ 

The  decision  was  one  which  called  for  the  highest  quali- 
ties of  a  commander.  In  obeying  his  orders  in  spite  of  his 
knoAvledge  of  the  local  situation,  he  was  exposing  an  im- 
portant military  force  to  present  risk  of  being  destroyed  by 
a  combined  attack  from  Cadiz,  Cartagena,  and  Algeeiras. 
Fortunately,  in  the  General  he  had  to  deal  with  a  man  of 
as  high  and  sound  a  military  spirit  as  his  OAvn.  Directly 
he  received  the  orders  he  showed  them  to  Craig,  and  Craig 
in  spite  of  the  dangers  staring  him  in  the  face  agreed 
there  Avas  but  one  thing  for  Bickerton  to  do.  To  make 
the  position  perfectly  clear,  he  sent  home  a  despatch  to 
the  War  Office  to  assure  them  Bickerton's  conduct  to  him 
throughout  had  been  "  most  confidential  and  cordial."  Of 
his  departure  Avith  the  squadron  he  had  not  a  word  of 
complaint.  "  His  doing  so,"  he  says,  "  is  with  my  perfect 
concurrence  and  acquiescence."  Though  he  well  knew  the 
Admiralty  despatch  had  been  written  without  information 
of  how  large  and  active  was  the  enemy's  force   about  the 

1  la-httcrs,  410,  Bickerton  to  the  Admiralty,  May  14th  and  IGth.  Knight 
to  same,  May  15th.  Bickerton's  last  letter  is  minuted,  "Approve  his  pro- 
ceedings under  the  circumstances  he  describes." 


May  17  CRAIG    AND    BICKERTON  149 

Straits,  yet  ho  did  not  feel  justified  in  pressing  Bickerton 
on  that  account  to  vary  his  orders.  The  view  he  took 
was  that  all  the  instructions  which  the  Admirals  had  com- 
municated to  him  had  a  certain  "  general  tendency,"  and 
this,  he  said,  was  "  invariably  that  of  assembling  a  great 
naval  force  to  the  westward,  an  object  which  under  the 
present  circumstances  might  be  of  a  magnitude  to  supersede 
every  other." 

No  utterance  could  more  clearly  reveal  how  intimate 
at  that  time  was  the  sympathy  between  the  best  men  in 
the  two  services  and  how  complete  Avas  their  mutual  under- 
standing of  the  principles  of  combined  warfare.  Faced  as 
Craig  was  with  the  prospect  of  his  force  being  left  almost 
without  defence  in  seas  swarming  with  the  enemy,  he  did 
not  forget  that  for  England  there  was  one  condition  of  affairs 
to  which  everything  else  must  be  subservient.  In  the 
Admiralty  orders  he  perceived  indications  that  the  moment 
was  at  hand  for  a  supreme  decision  in  a  great  fleet  action, 
at  the  vital  strategical  point.  If  so  it  was  a  moment  for 
which  everything,  even  his  own  force,  must  be  risked  ;  and 
he  did  not  flinch.  Not  even  by  a  word  Avould  he  tempt 
his  colleague  from  the  supreme  duty.^  On  the  morrow, 
May  17th,  Bickerton  sailed  with  his  three  ships  for  Ferrol, 
leaving  Knight  in  command  at  Gibraltar  to  make  such 
dispositions  as  he  could  with  the  few  cruisers  and  gunboats 
available  for  the  safety  of  the  convoy  and  the  observation 
of  Cartagena. 

Ten  days  later,  as  Bickerton  neared  Finisterre,  he  met 
Collingwood  coming  down  with  his  nine  ships  of  the  line 
and  a  frigate,  and  was  able  to  place  him  in  possession  of 
the  actual  state  of  affairs.  Collingwood,  as  we  knoAv,  had 
been  given  a  wide  discretion  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  own 
force.  The  two  Admirals  held  a  long  consultation  and  had 
little  difiiculty  in  coming  to  a  conclusion  as  to  how  far 
Collingwood's  orders  might  be  modified  to  meet  the  local 

1  Craig  to  Lord  Camden,  May  16th  :  W.  0.  (1),  In-hticrs,  280.  All  Craig's  de- 
spatches go  to  confirm  the  judgment  of  his  enthusiastic  young  admirer,  Ensign 
Charles  Boothby.  "The  name  of  my  new  chief  I  had  long  known  ;  for  his 
fine  person  and  dark  flashing  eye  had  been  pointed  out  to  me  when  a  boy  as 
belonging  to  the  finest  officer  in  the  service." — Under  England's  Flag^  p.  3. 


ISO  FERROL   AND    THE   STRAITS  may  27 

conditions.  From  Bickerton  Collingwood  learnt  that  Nelson 
with  only  ten  of  the  line  was  in  chase  of  Villeneuve  with 
eighteen.  He  also  learnt  the  important  new  fact  that  both 
in  Cadiz  and  Cartagena  there  were  active  squadrons.  Seeing 
the  comparative  strength  of  Nelson  and  Villeneuve,  and 
that  Cochrane  had  no  more  than  six  of  the  line,  he  ought 
by  his  orders  to  have  despatched  two  of  the  line  after  Nelson 
to  bring  the  whole  naval  force  in  the  Leeward  Islands  up 
to  eighteen  also.  But  in  view  of  the  fact  that  since  his 
orders  were  received  Missiessy  had  returned  and  that  the 
enemy's  force  in  the  West  Indies  was  thereby  reduced  by 
five  ships,  he  decided  not  to  do  so  till  further  orders. 
Bickerton's  urgent  representation  convinced  him  that  the 
situation  demanded  taking  his  whole  force  down  to  the 
Straits  to  secure  the  local  command.  "  In  view,"  Colling- 
wood wrote  home,  "  of  the  active  preparations  in  Cartagena 
and  Cadiz  and  that  a  convoy  is  expected  from  Malta  I  shall 
proceed  off  Cadiz  with  the  utmost  despatch  .  .  .  and  take 
station  there."  He  hoped  their  lordships  would  approve 
this  departure  from  his  orders,  since  the  activity  at  Carta- 
gena w^as  unknown  when  they  were  draw^n  up.  "  I  con- 
sider," he  concluded,  "  the  spirit  of  my  orders  demanded 
that  I  should  not  leave  so  large  a  force  at  liberty  to  sail  in 
execution  of  their  plans."  Here  then  w^as  a  clear  case  of 
modifying  explicit  orders.  They  were  not  merely  ''  instruc- 
tions " ;  and  Collingwood's  despatch  bears  the  Admiralty 
endorsement,  "  Approved  under  the  circumstances."  ^ 

In  consideration  of  Collingwood's  consent  to  take  this 
course,  Bickerton  sacrificed  his  only  cruiser  to  inform  the 
Admiralty.  The  despatches  of  the  two  Admirals  were 
received  on  June  8th  and  instantly  orders  were  returned  to 
them  fully  accepting  their  view  of  the  situation.  Bickerton, 
who  in  obedience  to  his  orders  had  gone  on  to  Ferrol,  was 
to  shift  his  flag  to  the  Queen  and,  leaving  the  Royal  Sovereign 
and  his  two-decker  with  Calder,  Avas  to  go  back  to  the  Straits 
and  place  himself  under  Collingwood's  orders. 

Collingwood  thus   became   Commander-in-chief  of  the 

^  Bickerton  to  Admiralty  and  Collingwood  to  same,  May  27th,  off  Finis- 
terre :  In-letters,  410. 


June  COLLlNGWOOD   AND   BlCKERTON  15! 

regular  Mediterranean  station  from  Cape  St.  Vincent  to  the 
Levant  with  a  force  of  ten  of  the  line  besides  the  Excellent 
which  was  still  on  guard  at  Naples,  and  the  strong  force  of 
cruisers  which  were  exercising  the  control  within  the  Straits. 
His  orders  were  to  establish  a  close  blockade  of  Cadiz  and 
of  St.  Lucar,  the  adjacent  port  of  Seville.  Hitherto,  with 
a  view  apparently  of  conciliating  neutrals,  and  especially 
Americans,  a  commercial  blockade  had  not  been  strictly 
enforced.  But  on  the  urgent  representations  of  the  officers 
on  the  station  of  the  activity  in  the  Spanish  dockyards, 
and  the  abundance  of  supplies  that  were  pouring  in,  the 
two  ports  were  now  definitely  closed. 

While  CoUingwood  occupied  the  Cadiz  station,  Bicker- 
ton,  as  Nelson  had  arranged,  was  to  command  inside  the 
Straits;  but  he  was  to  report  frequently  to  CoUingwood 
and  obey  all  his  orders  for  the  disposition  of  ships.  To 
begin  with,  however,  for  the  special  purpose  of  getting 
Craig  forward  to  his  destination,  CoUingwood  was  to  give 
him  four  of  the  line,  thus  dividing  the  battle  squadron 
between  them.-^ 

This  arrangement  CoUingwood  was  unable  to  carry  out 
in  full.  On  June  8th,  the  day  his  orders  were  being  issued 
by  the  Admiralty  for  the  blockade,  he  had  taken  up  his 
station  before  Cadiz,  but  after  parting  with  Bickerton  he 
had  reconsidered  his  decision  to  postpone  the  execution 
of  his  orders  to  reinforce  Nelson.  On  thinking  it  over  it 
occurred  to  him  that  possibly  Cochrane  might  do  what 
Nelson  afterwards  did — he  might  think  it  his  duty  to  follow 
his  fleet,  and  was  perhaps  already  in  European  waters  on 
Missiessy's  heels.  His  departure  would  seriously  weaken 
the  naval  force  in  the  West  Indies,  and  to  restore  the  posi- 
tion he  now  sent  away  to  Barbadoes  his  two  fastest  seventy- 
fours.  When  therefore,  on  June  22nd,  Bickerton  rejoined 
him  from  Ferrol  he  had  only  seven  of  the  line  instead  of 
nine.  As  there  were  in  Cadiz  two  first-rates  and  two  two- 
deckers,  he  felt  he  could  not  reduce  his  own  force  below 
four.  Acting  however  in  the  spirit  of  the  order,  he  divided 
his  battle  squadron  with  Bickerton,  giving  him  three.     It 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363,  June  8th. 


152  FERROL   AND    THE   STRAITS 

was  a  force,  he  explained  to  the  Admiralty,  inferior  to  that 
in  Cartagena,  but  he  trusted  it  was  strong  enough  to  pre- 
vent Salcedo's  sailing  till  Bickerton  could  be  joined  by  the 
Excellent  from  Naples.  With  this  force  Bickerton  parted 
company,  and  two  days  later  he  appeared  again  off  Gibraltar.^ 
It  was  high  time.  In  his  absence  both  Craig  and 
Knight  had  been  having  many  anxious  hours.  It  was  only 
the  timely  arrival  of  Collingwood,  as  we  have  seen,  that 
saved  the  expedition  from  an  attack  in  force  by  Salcedo, 
but  even  when  he  was  scared  back  their  troubles  were  by 
no  means  at  an  end.  Across  the  bay  they  could  see  the 
Algeriras  gunboats  continually  increasing  in  numbers. 
Knight  did  his  best  with  the  small  force  at  his  command. 
Anchoring  the  convoy  in  close  order,  he  covered  it  with  the 
only  two  cruisers  he  had,  a  frigate  and  the  Beagle,  who  had 
returned  to  her  station,  kept  one  or  two  gun-brigs  and  gun- 
boats patrolling,  and  had  guard-boats  out  at  night.  Camp- 
bell, the  Portuguese  Admiral,  moreover,  had  come  into  the 
bay  and  had  anchored  his  squadron  in  such  a  position  that 
the  Spaniards  accused  him  of  wilfully  covering  the  trans- 
ports from  attack.  He  certainly  kept  Knight  supplied  with 
information  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  By  the  time,  how- 
ever, the  expedition  had  been  thus  exposed  for  a  month 
things  looked  so  threatening  that  it  became  imperative  to 
make  other  dispositions.  General  Fox,  the  governor,  had 
obtained  information  that  an  attack  w^as  intended  in  a  few 
days,  and  that  the  gunboats  at  Algegiras  now  numbered 
forty,  besides  many  more  at  Cartagena.  Together  Fox  and 
Craig  laid  the  facts  formally  before  Knight  and  a  joint  council 
was  held.  The  Admiral  suggested  taking  the  whole  convoy 
to  sea,  and  offered  to  hoist  his  flag  in  the  frigate  for  its  pro- 
tection, if  the  Generals  would  give  him  a  detachment  of 

^  Collingwood  to  the  Admiralty  and  Bickerton  to  same,  June  24th:  In-letters, 
441.  Bickerton  had  the  Qiiccn.  98,  the  Tonnant  80,  Bellerophon  74,  and  Mino- 
taur 74.  The  Cartagena  squadron  was  reported  to  be  two  first-rates,  three 
74's,  and  one  G4.  Bickerton  never  called  the  Excellent  to  his  flag.  Writing  to 
Nelson  on  July  30th  he  says:  "  I  have  not  removed  the  Excellent  from  Naples, 
for  besides  the  uncertainty  I  was  under  where  to  order  her  to  meet  me,  I  was 
unwilling  to  take  a  step  which  might  have  defeated  your  lordship's  measures" : 
Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34'J30.  The  Excellent,  except  for  occasional  spells 
under  sail  for  drill  and  gunnery  practice,  remained  at  her  moorings  from 
Jan.  17,  1805,  to  Feb.  11,  180G.— i/o^  of  the  Excellent. 


June  HOW   CRAIG   GOT   THROUGH  153 

troops  to  complete  the  companies  of  both  his  cruiser  s,  and 
assist  in  arming  some  of  the  transports.  They  readily 
agreed,  and  the  whole  convoy  was  taken  out  of  the  bay  to 
the  eastward  of  the  Rock,  where  it  continued  standing  off 
and  on  across  the  Gut  "  in  delicious  weather."  ^ 

The  device  entirely  succeeded.  The  transports  were 
well  out  of  reach  of  Alge(;dras,  and  the  appearance  of 
Collingwood  off  Cadiz  effectually  deterred  any  movement  on 
the  part  of  the  Cartagena  squadron.  So  far  from  thinking 
of  offence,  Salcedo  was  busy  with  harbour  defences,  and  the 
flotilla  of  gunboats  of  which  Fox  had  heard  was  being 
hastily  equipped  for  the  protection  of  the  port.  Indeed 
the  whole  attention  of  the  Andalusian  authorities  was  fixed 
on  making  prepai;4tions  against  the  attack  which,  since 
Craig  had  put  to  sea,  he  seemed  about  to  deliver  at  some 
undetermined  point." 

In  this  situation  the  convoy  was  found  by  Bickerton  on 
his  return,  and  on  June  25  th,  without  anchoring,  he  led  it 
on  with  a  fair  wind  up  the  Straits.  Hugging  the  African 
coast,  he  detached  the  Beagle  to  report  what  Salcedo  was 
doing.  Off  Cape  Tones,  well  to  the  eastward  of  Cartagena, 
the  Beagle  rejoined,  reporting  Salcedo  at  anchor.  There- 
upon Knight  determined  to  send  Craig  on  his  way  under 
an  escort  of  three  frigates,  while  he  himself  parted  company 
to  constitute  a  covering  squadron  for  the  army's  passage 
by  taking  station  before  Cartagena.^ 

So  in  the  face  of  all  Napoleon's  active  and  undefeated 
squadrons  the  passage  of  the  expedition  had  been  secured. 
The  first  step  towards  Pitt's  enveloping  attack  had  been 
taken,  and  as  Craig  passed  quietly  on  his  way  to  the  west- 
ward all  was  in  labour  with  Napoleon's  counter-stroke.  The 
concentration  for  the  great  invasion  had  begun. 

^  Knight  to  the  Admiralty,  June  17th,  enclosing  Fox  and  Craig  to  Knight, 
June  13th,  Fox's  information,  and  Craig  to  Knight,  June  15th :  In-lcttcrs,  441. 
Craig  to  Lord  Camden,  June  17th  :  W.O.  (1),  In-lctters,  280.  Boothby,  Under 
England'a  Flag,  p.  20.  Bunbury,  The  Great  War,  p.  189.  Knight  to  Nelson 
(enclosing  his  journal),  July  16th  :  NcUon  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34930. 

^  Beurnonville  to  Talleyrand,  Madrid,  June  18th  :  Desbriere,  v.  625. 

2  Bickerton  to  Admiralty,  July  28th  :  In-letters,  411. 


CILIPTER   XI 

OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES 

At  home  the  last  that  had  been  heard  of  Nelson  was  as  he 
approached  Madeh'a,  three  days  after  he  had  parted  com- 
pany with  Craig.  The  Admiralty  had  received  a  short  note 
assuring  them  that  if  he  had  made  a  mistake  and  the  Com- 
bined Squadron  was  not  in  the  West  Indies,  he  could  be 
back  again  off  Cadiz  by  the  end  of  June  before  the  enemy 
could  know  where  he  had  gone,  and  that  then  he  would 
proceed  to  England,  leaving  such  a  force  behind  him  as 
the  service  required.-^  His  faith  in  the  safety  of  his  move 
and  the  influence  of  an  unlocated  fleet  was  fully  justified. 
We  have  seen  how  Napoleon  believed  he  had  not  left 
European  waters,  and  before  the  French  headquarters  were 
sujfficiently  assured  of  his  departure  to  base  any  action  on  it, 
he  appeared  again  at  Gibraltar. 

To  Lord  Camden,  the  Minister  for  War,  who  had  asked 
him  to  give  Craig  his  co-operation  and  advice,  he  had  written 
a  longer  letter  explaining  the  difficulties  of  the  political 
situation.  In  his  opinion — matured  as  it  was  by  the  prac- 
tical experience  of  the  last  war — it  would  be  a  mistake  for 
Craig  to  land  in  Sicily  at  once.  Any  such  move  would  be 
the  signal  for  a  French  advance  on  Naples.  The  King 
would  certainly  not  consent  to  it.  But  the  moment  the 
French  made  a  movement  independently,  our  troops  would 
be  received  with  gratitude.  In  this  advice  Nelson  was 
endorsing  the  Government's  own  view,  nor  had  he  anything 
to  add  except  once  more  to  urge  the  importance  of  securing 
Sardinia.- 

Thus  the  last  thought  they  had  had  from  him,  was  for  the 

^  To  Marsden,  April  14th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  437. 
2  Ibid.,  p.  439. 

IS4 


NELSONS  CHASE  OFYILLENEDVE 

from  William  Faden's  map 

"c4ipied.  froirvTiLe  Lordships  origiruilMS. 

canA  spadal  directicns ." 

PabUsheeL  Aug.U^riaoi. 


British  operautLans  sTwwjhuvred,. 
Irendv  „  „       „  hhiA. 


StORSE  PHILlPtSON  V° 


Zongnvaaia,  Green,  &  Co.  Zcmdarv,Mwl&rk;Bmnhc^  &  CtHaitUi-. 


TNELONDON  GEOGRAPHICAL  IN  STITUTC 

to  Tape  po^e  /54 


May  15  THE    LOST    MEMORANDUM  155 

safety  of  the  station  he  was  leaving  behind.  All  that  man 
could  do,  indeed  all  that  was  necessary,  he  had  done.  To 
speak  of  him  as  having  abandoned  the  Mediterranean  is  to 
misconceive  his  careful  attitude.  Strategically  his  conscience 
was  clear,  and  henceforth  he  could  absorb  himself  freely  in 
what  was  before  him  to  the  westward. 

He  was  already  at  work.  During  the  previous  days,  in 
view  of  a  meeting  with  Villeneuve's  superior  fleet,  he  had 
been  drawing  up  a  tactical  memorandum,  which  he  ordered 
Captain  Parker  of  the  Amazon  frigate  to  distribute  to  the 
fleet  on  May  15th.^  The  nature  of  this  memorandum  is 
quite  uncertain.  Clarke  and  McArthur  believed  it  to  be  one 
they  saw  amongst  Lord  St.  Vincent's  papers,  and  Sir  Harris 
Nicolas  in  his  collection  of  Nelson's  letters  followed  them. 
But  the  document  was  undated  and  there  are  insuperable 
difficulties  in  assigning  it  to  this  occasion.  Interual  evidence 
shows  that  when  Nelson  drafted  the  document  he  was  con- 
templating an  action  against  a  fleet  of  eleven  or  twelve  sail 
with  a  force  about  equal  to  it :  but  now  he  had  before  him 
the  prospect  of  engaging  a  much  larger  squadron  with  inferior 
numbers.  "  I  am  going,"  he  had  written  to  Acton  a  few 
days  before,  "  to  the  West  Indies  where  the  enemy  have 
twenty-four  sail  of  the  line :  my  force  is  very  very  inferior. 
I  only  take  ten  with  me  and  I  only  expect  to  be  joined  by 
six." "  He  meant,  of  course,  Cochrane's  squadron,  and  it 
was  certainly  the  general  expectation  in  the  fleet  that  these 
six  vessels  would  be  united  to  Nelson's  flag  when  he  reached 
the  West  Indies.^  The  loss  of  the  memorandum  of  May 
15th  is  greatly  to  be  deplored ;  for  few  documents  in  Naval 
History  could  be  of  higher  interest  than  one  which  contained 
Nelson's  ideas  of  this  time,  on  dealing  with  a  superior 
enemy. 


1  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  ii.  289. 

•^  Clarke  and  McArthur,  ii.  427  (4th  edition).  For  the  reasons  for  assigning 
the  St.  Vincent  Memorandum  to  1803,  see  Laughton,  Nehons  Letters  and 
Despatches  and  Fighting  Instructions  {Navy  Records  Society),  280-1.  The  fact 
that  it  was  found  amongst  Lord  St.  Vincent's  papers  raises  in  itself  a  strong 
presumption  that  it  was  written  while  he  was  still  First  Lord,  that  is,  before 
May  1804.  In  1805  he  was  playing  Achilles  in  his  tent,  and  Nelson  was  not 
in  correspondence  with  him. 

^  Allen,  Memoirs  of  Sir  William  Hargood,  p.  111. 


156     OPERATIONS    TN    THE    WEST    INDIES      April 

In  order  to  ensure  the  co-operation  of  Cochrane's 
squadron,  he  had  sent  forward  a  frigate  from  Cape  St. 
Vincent,  but  he  was  destined  to  be  disappointed,  owing  to 
the  difficult  situation  of  affairs  in  the  West  Indies.  Cochrane, 
in  his  pursuit  of  Missiessy,  had  reached  Barbadoes  on  April  5  th, 
little  more  than  a  month  before  Nelson  had  left  the  Straits. 
There  he  heard  his  enemy  had  just  been  reported  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  St.  Domingo.  In  these  circumstances  his 
own  inclination  and  the  tenor  of  his  instructions  bade  him 
continue  his  chase,  if  only  for  the  safety  of  Jamaica.  He 
scarcely  waited  to  take  over  the  formal  command  of  the 
station  from  Commodore  Hood :  he  did  not  even  anchor,  but 
leaving  Hood  in  local  command  with  one  of  his  own  ships,  the 
Sjiartiatc,  to  assist  him  in  holding  the  station  and  supporting 
the  local  cruiser  squadron,  he  held  away  with  the  rest — six 
in  number — in  hot  pursuit  and  high  hope  of  an  encounter. 

On  April  9th  ho  reached  St.  Thomas  in  the  Virgins, 
Avhere  he  ascertained  Missiessy  had  already  been  to  St. 
Domingo  and  landed  his  troops.  He  also  received  infor- 
mation that  the  French  were  expecting  a  second  expedition, 
and  that  the  combined  force  was  to  attack  Jamaica.  It 
was  information  too  probable  to  ignore,  and,  little  dreaming 
Missiessy  was  already  ^vell  on  his  way  back  to  Rochefort, 
he  made  up  his  mind  he  would  be  on  the  point  of  return- 
ing to  Martinique  to  join  the  new  comers  from  France  for 
the  grand  attack.  Here,  then,  was  a  fine  chance  of  nipping 
the  combination  in  the  bud  by  intercepting  Missiessy  on 
his  Avay.  Doubling  back,  therefore,  he  passed  along  the 
south  side  of  Puerto  Rico  and  turned  up  into  the  Mona 
passage,  between  that  island  and  St.  Domingo.  There  he 
took  station  expecting  every  hour  to  see  his  adversary  fall 
into  his  mouth.  When,  however,  he  did  not  appear,  and 
all  the  information  Cochrane  could  get  pointed  with  in- 
creasing cogency  to  Jamaica  as  the  point  of  danger,  he  felt 
there  was  nothing  to  do  but  to  act  on  the  instructions  he 
had  received  from  the  Admiralty.  They  directed  that  if  on 
his  arrival  he  heard  the  Rochefort  squadron  had  gone  to 
St.  Domingo,  he  was  to  reinforce  the  Jamaica  station  with 
six  of  the  line.     To  Jamaica,  therefore,  he  decided  to  sail 


May  COCHRANE    AND    VILLENEUVE  157 

with  the  whole  squadron.^  It  was  a  resolution  that  de- 
manded no  little  loyalty  and  self-sacrifice.  For  it  meant 
depriving  himself  of  almost  the  whole  of  his  squadron. 
He  had  no  intention  of  remaining  there  himself.  His 
place  was  on  the  Leeward  Islands  station.  Indeed  he  only 
stayed  the  few  days  necessary  to  hand  over  to  Dacres  five 
of  his  six  vessels,  for  Dacres  had  nothing  else  of  the  line, 
and  then  on  April  25  th,  keeping  only  his  own  flagship 
the  Northumberland  80,  he  began  the  laborious  task  of 
working  his  way  back  to  Barbadoes. 

Such  was  the  situation  when  on  May  14th  the  Combined 
Squadron  appeared  at  Martinique.  Villeneuve  was  im- 
mediately assailed  by  the  military  authorities  to  attempt 
something  against  the  British  islands.  But  there  were 
difficulties  in  the  way.  The  orders  with  which  he  had  sailed 
strictly  enjoined  he  should  go  to  Fort  Royal  and  hold  him- 
self in  readiness  to  join  Ganteaume  the  very  hour  he  should 
appear.  How  then  could  he  entangle  his  fleet  in  combined 
operations  ?  And  apart  from  this  difficulty  he  had  still 
to  face  the  menace  of  an  unlocated  enemy.  A  powerful 
squadron  had  been  reported  about  St.  Domingo  and  Puerto 
Rico.  It  was  of  course  Cochrane's,  but  at  Martinique  they 
knew  not  what,  nor  where,  nor  how  strong  it  was.  Was  it  a 
squadron  from  England  in  chase  of  him,  under  the  impres- 
sion his  objective  was  Jamaica  ?  That  was  Villeneuve's 
first  thought — it  was  impossible  for  him  to  tell.  Mean- 
while what  could  he  attack  with  safety  ?  Dominica  and 
St.  Lucia  were  the  only  islands  within  his  reach,  but  he 
knew  both  were  on  their  guard,  and  the  recent  example  of 
Dominica  showed  they  could  not  be  reduced  by  a  coiiip 
de  main.  Still,  not  being  able  to  bring  himself  to  spend  the 
whole  of  his  forty  days  waiting  in  inaction,  he  decided  to 
send  three  frigates  to  cruise  against  the  enemy's  commerce, 
and  endeavour  to  glean  intelligence  both  from  local  craft 
and  vessels  arriving  from  Europe. 

This  done,  he  turned  his  attention  to  removing  the  dis- 
grace of  the  Diamond  Rock  where  Captain  Maurice  and  his 
crew  were  still  defiantly  installed  and  active.      Their  last 

^  Cochrane  to  the  Admiralty  :  Jn-htters,  326.     April  5,  8,  9,  14,  17. 


158      OPERATIONS    IN    THE    WEST    INDIES        iMay 

exploit — a  favourite  diversion — had  been  to  entice  one  of 
Villeneuve's  belated  Spanish  consorts  close  in  to  the  rock 
by  hoisting  French  colours  and  to  salute  her  with  a  dose  of 
their  twenty-four  pounders.  It  was  beyond  all  endurance, 
and  the  day  after  the  frigates  left,  Villeneuve  sent  against 
the  rocky  "  sloop  "  a  detachment  of  two  of  the  line,  three 
cruisers,  and  a  dozen  gunboats  with  a  force  of  troops, 
under  Captain  Cosmao  of  the  Pluton  74.  It  was  not  till 
the  31st  that  they  were  able  to  reach  the  landing-place. 
Seeing  the  overwhelming  force  opposed  to  him,  Maurice 
abandoned  the  shore  battery,  and  retired  all  his  "  crew  "  to 
his  fastness  aloft.  The  French  at  once  effected  a  landing, 
but  soon  found  themselves  in  a  scrape.  Maurice's  position 
was  absolutely  inaccessible  without  scaling-ladders ;  the 
troops,  who  had  been  sea-sick  for  two  days,  Avere  starving ; 
and  so  heavy  was  the  shower  of  stones  and  musketry  that 
the  defenders  poured  down  that  neither  food  nor  water 
could  be  fetched  from  the  squadron.  Even  the  boat-guards 
could  not  remain  at  their  post.  Many  were  killed  and 
wounded,  and  all  had  to  take  shelter  in  caves  below  the 
fastness.  They  were  themselves,  as  it  were,  besieged,  and 
had  to  watch  three  gunboats  get  adrift  and  break  up  on 
the  rocks.  Day  after  day  the  ships  bombarded  the  garri- 
son, but  till  scaling-ladders  arrived  nothing  could  be  done. 
A  party  of  five-and-twenty  men  tried  Avith  ropes,  but  they 
were  all  taken  prisoners. 

Maurice's  gallant  resistance  was  not  without  result. 
The  day  the  attack  opened  there  arrived  at  Martinique  the 
Diclon,  which  it  will  be  remembered  had  sailed  two  days 
after  Magon,  charged  with  Napoleon  s  new  orders  of  April 
29th  and  a  copy  of  the  previous  orders  which  Magon  was 
bringing.  Her  news  was  that  Ganteaume,  though  hourly 
expected  to  sail,  was  still  in  Brest,  but  that,  as  Nelson 
had  gone  to  Egypt,  Villeneuve  himself  was  not  likely  to 
be  molested.  Villeneuve  also  learnt  that  Magon  had 
sailed  from  Rochefort  with  two  of  the  line  and  800  more 
troops  to  swell  his  force,  and  enable  him  '*  to  continue 
his  attacks  on  the  British  colonies."  This  was  the  order 
which  directed  him  to  employ  his  energies  in  this  way  for 


\ 


June  I        VILLENEUVE'S   ORDERS    ARRIVE  159 

thirty-five  days  after  Magon  arrived,  and  if  at  the  expira- 
tion of  that  period  Ganteaume  had  not  appeared,  he  was 
to  return  to  Ferrol,  and  not  to  the  Canaries  as  was  pro- 
vided by  his  original  orders.  With  twenty  of  the  line  and 
12,000  men,  which  with  the  local  forces  and  his  own  he 
would  have  at  his  disposal,  Napoleon,  as  we  have  seen, 
thought  it  possible  he  might  be  able  to  expel  the  British 
entirely  from  the  Leeward  Islands  and  even  from  Trini- 
dad. The  orders,  however,  concluded  with  a  proviso  that 
these  enterprises  were  to  be  kept  "  subordinate  to  the 
grand  object  of  the  essential  operation  which  was  to  crown 
his  Majesty's  arms." 

Villeneuve  was  aghast.  The  new  orders  assumed  he  had 
been  engaged  already  in  attacking  the  British  islands. 
Apparently  Napoleon  had  forgotten  what  orders  he  had 
given  him.  So  far  from  having  been  told  to  operate 
against  the  British  colonies,  he  had  been  strictly  enjoined 
to  do  nothing  but  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  sail  with 
Ganteaume  the  moment  he  appeared.  If  only,  he  said  in 
his  reply,  he  had  been  told  before  he  might  have  done 
something.  But  now  it  was  too  late.  The  English  had 
been  warned  of  his  coming  by  the  frigate  which  he  knew 
Orde  had  sent  out,  and  they  were  now  on  their  guard 
everywhere.  He  had  even  been  three  days  trying  to  take 
a  paltry  rock.  Fifteen  of  his  original  forty  days  were 
already  expired,  and  as  for  waiting  thirty-five  days  after 
Magon's  arrival,  it  was  out  of  the  question.  His  stores  would 
not  permit  it.  "  Still,"  he  wrote  to  his  exasperating  master, 
"  as  I  see  you  condemn  in  advance  the  inaction  to  which  my 
orders  alone  chained  me  ...  I  will  only  say  it  has  been 
to  me  insupportable.  Be  that  as  it  may,  as  soon  as  the 
Diamond  Rock  is  finished,  we  will  start  to  attack  Antigua  or 
Barbuda." ' 

1  Desbriere,  V.  539-5.  Confusion  has  arisen  by  Villeneuve's  being  supposed 
to  have  written  "Barbade"  instead  of  "  Barboude,"  as  though  he  meant 
to  attack  Barbadoes,  which  was  in  the  opposite  direction  and  far  to  wind- 
ward. It  is  clear  from  his  later  despatch  that  by  "Barbade"  he  meant  the 
island  adjacent  to  Antigua.  See  post,  p.  165,  With  the  experience  of  the 
Diamond  Rock  before  him  he  could  not  have  hoped  to  beat  to  Barbadoes  and 
do  anything  there  in  less  than  a  month,  and  his  stores  permitted  of  no  such 
delay.     "If,"  wrote  Nelson  afterwards,  "Barbadoes  is  the  object  .  .  .  a  fleet 


i6o     OPERATIONS    IN   THE    WEST   INDIES    june4 

All  this  time  the  siege  of  the  "  sloop "  had  been  pro- 
ceeding, and  it  was  not  till  June  3rd  that  any  impression 
had  been  made.  On  that  day  the  French,  having  procured 
the  necessary  scaling  material,  had  succeeded  in  getting  up 
the  back  of  the  Rock.  Maurice  saw  himself  faced  with  an 
assault,  and  by  this  time  he  had  not  a  cartridge  nor  a  drop 
of  water  left.  He  decided  accordingly  that  further  resist- 
ance was  useless,  and  putting  out  a  flag  of  truce,  was  allowed 
to  march  out  of  his  fastness  with  the  honours  of  war.  The 
number  of  his  effective  men  the  French  returns  put  at  107, 
and  he  had  only  lost  two  killed  and  one  wounded.  The 
French  put  their  landing  force  at  260,  but  Maurice  believed 
they  had  1500  ashore  from  first  to  last,  and  that  they  lost 
thirty  killed  and  forty  wounded.  They  themselves  acknow- 
ledge a  loss  of  at  least  fifty.  In  any  case  it  was  a  gallant 
and  useful  defence,  and  when  Maurice  was  court-martialled 
for  the  loss  of  "  His  Majesty's  late  sloop  Diamond  Rock  " 
he  was  honourably  acquitted  with  a  high  expression  of 
admiration.^ 

The  day  after  the  surrender  the  French  detachment 
rejoined  the  flag,  and  as  they  did  so  Magon  appeared. 
Villeneuve,  resolved  not  to  lose  another  hour,  made 
immediate  preparations  to  proceed  northward  against 
Antigua  and  Barbuda.  And  well  it  was  he  did  so,  for 
even  as  Magon  joined  him  the  batteries  of  Barbadoes  were 
saluting  the  Mediterranean  squadron. 

Nelson  had  gained  ten  days  on  his  chase,  and  believed 
he  had  gained  more.  He  was  on  fire  to  be  gone.  The  six  of 
the  line  he  had  expected  were  not  there,  but  Cochrane  was. 
He  had  arrived  only  two  days  before,  after  his  weary  beat 
back  from  Jamaica,  and  the  same  evening  he  was  joined  by 

could  get  there  on  the  average  in  four  or  five  days  from  Martinique.  Therefore 
why  should  they  make  a  passage  of  at  least  fifteen  or  sixteen  days  by  going 
to  the  northward." — Nicolas,  vi.  458.  Spanish  prisoners  taken  in  Caider's 
action  said  the  objective  was  Antigua. — Blochide  of  Brest,  ii.  323. 

^  For  this  interesting  episode  see  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  i.  294,  who 
says  Maurice  had  only  90  men,  and  that  the  French  lost  800 !  Desbrierc,  v. 
541,  gives  Villoneuve's  and  Keille's  accounts.  The  Naval  Chronicle,  xv.  123, 
gives  Maurice's  reports  to  both  Nelson  and  Cochrane,  and  the  French  com- 
mander's report  to  Villaret-Joyeuse,  Captain-General  of  Martinique,  with 
other  official  documents  and  coinments  of  the  local  press.  The  original  of 
Maurice's  report  to  Nelson  is  in  Admiralty  In-letters,  411,  June  6th. 


June 4  FALSE   INTELLIGENCE  i6i 

Laforey  in  the  Spartiate,  who  smce  the  receipt  of  Orde's 
warning  and  the  Admiralty  orders  to  cover  Eyre  Coote's 
arrival,  had  been  cruising  to  windward  on  the  look-out  for 
the  transports  and  convoys  from  home.  Nelson  therefore 
had  now  twelve  of  the  line,  and  the  enemy,  so  he  believed, 
had  only  eighteen,  a  supposition  which  the  local  informa- 
tion confirmed.  Disappointing  as  it  was,  a  superiority  of  a 
third  in  no  way  restrained  his  ardour.  His  only  doubt  was 
where  to  find  them. 

Now  it  so  happened  that  the  day  before  word  had  come 
in  from  General  Brereton,  the  Commander-in-chief  at  St. 
Lucia,  that  the  enemy  had  been  reported  to  him  as  having 
been  seen  passing  Gros  Islet  bay  at  the  north-west  of  the 
island  on  the  night  of  the  28  th,  and  his  belief  was  that  the 
movement  indicated  an  attack  on  Barbadoes  or  Trinidad. 
A  possible  explanation  of  this  unfortunate  piece  of  intelli- 
gence is  that  at  the  Gros  Islet  signal  station  they  had 
seen  the  cruiser  squadron  which  Villeneuve  detached  that 
day,  and  in  the  dark  the  anxious  watchers  had  taken  it  for 
a  fleet.  General  Myers,  commanding  at  Carlisle  Bay,  had, 
however,  no  suspicion  of  its  inaccuracy,  and  immediately 
sent  it  off  to  Nelson  by  his  military  secretary.  As  the 
enemy  had  not  appeared  at  Barbadoes  it  could  only  be 
assumed  they  had  gone  to  Trinidad,  and  by  this  time  they 
would  have  landed  their  army.  Myers,  therefore,  suggested 
that  he  should  be  permitted  to  accompany  the  fleet  with 
2000  men  that  he  had  available.  It  would  mean  a  day's 
delay,  but  Nelson  felt  he  could  not  say  no.  "  I  cannot 
refuse  so  handsome  an  offer,"  he  wrote,  ''  and  with  the 
blessing  of  God  on  a  just  cause  I  see  no  cause  to  doubt 
the  annihilation  of  both  the  enemy's  fleet  and  army." 

He  himself  had  expected  to  find  the  Combined  Squadron 
to  the  northward,  but  the  intelligence  was  precise,  and  he 
felt  himself  bound  by  it.^     Brereton  he  had  known  well  in 

^  A  copy  of  the  intelligence  General  Brereton  had  sent  from  St.  Lucia  was 
given  to  Nelson,  and  at  the  foot  of  it  he  wrote  in  his  own  hand,  "Wrote  by- 
Major  Myers,  Sir  William  Myers'  secretary,  extracted  from  the  General's 
letter,  and  Major  Myers  has  no  doubt  the  intelligence  may  be  relied  on  " 
(Signed)  Nelson  and  Bronte,  June  4th:  Adm.  Sec.  In-letters,  411,  and 
Nicolas,  vi.  446. 

L 


1 


i62       OPERATIONS  IN   THE  WEST  INDIES     June 4 

the  old  Mediterranean  days  as  an  energetic  and  capable 
stafif-officer  in  the  Corsica  operations,  and  felt  he  was  a  man 
to  be  trusted.  On  the  morrow,  therefore,  with  Myers  and 
his  troops  hastily  embarked,  he  sailed  for  Trinidad  in  high 
hopes  of  a  decision. 

In  the  interval  of  waiting  he  had  issued  a  new  order  of 
battle — to  include  Cochrane's  two  ships — which  is  of  con- 
siderable interest,  for  in  it  we  can  detect  a  foreshadowing  of 
the  order  he  used  at  Trafalgar,  at  least  in  two  important 
points.  In  the  first  place,  like  the  order  of  the  famous 
memorandum,  it  was  an  "  Order  of  Battle  and  of  Sailing  " 
in  two  divisions,  modified  from  the  one  he  had  issued  at 
the  Gulf  of  Palmas  in  March.  In  the  second  place,  it 
shows  his  heaviest  ships  not  distributed  in  the  usual 
manner,  but  massed  at  the  head  of  his  own  division  after 
the  fashion  which  Rodney  first  introduced  into  the  Signal 
Book  from  Bigot  de  Morogues,  and  which  Nelson  was  the 
first  to  employ  on  the  day  of  reckoning.  No  accompanying 
tactical  memorandum  is  known  to  exist,  nor  is  there  any 
express  intimation  that  he  intended  to  fight  in  two  separate 
lines,  though  the  actual  disposition  of  the  ships  was  similar 
to  the  one  used  at  Trafalgar  and  would  have  lent  itself  to 
that  form  of  engaging.^ 

In  this  order,  early  on  the  6th,  he  made  for  Tobago, 
which  lay  in  the  direct  course  to  Trinidad.  Captain 
Bettesworth  in  the  Curieux  brig,  one  of  the  station  cruisers, 
had  been  sent  ahead  for  intelligence.  On  the  morrow  off 
the  island  he  met  Nelson  with  an  important  report. 
The  previous  day  an  American  had  informed  the  Tobago 
authorities  that  he  had  been  boarded  off  St.  Vincent  by  one 
of  the  ships  of  the  French  fleet,  and  that  it  had  proceeded 
south.  This  information  was  of  course  false,  and  probably 
intended  to  mislead,  but  unfortunately  it  was  confirmed 
shortly  afterwards  by  the  sight  of  a  private  schooner 
making  the  agreed  signal  for  the  enemy's  fleet  at  Trinidad. 
Surely  never  had  Admiral  worse  luck  than  Nelson  on  this 

^  This  order  of  battle  was  printed  in  Hubback's  Jane  Austen  s  Sailor 
Brothers,  p.  138,  from  Louis's  copy,  but  with  some  obvious  inaccuracies.  The 
following  is    from   Keats's  copy,  preserved  in  the  Record  Office,  Greenwich 


June  5 


NELSON'S    ORDER    OF   BATTLE  163 

occasion.  It  was  not  intended  as  a  signal  to  the  fleet.  It 
was  the  private  arrangement  of  an  enterprising  Tobago 
merchant,  who,  anxious  to  know  what  the  fleet  was,  had 
sent  out  his  clerk  to  reconnoitre,  and  the  signal  he  had 

Hospital  Miscellanea  {Various),  No.  141.  It  was  drawn  up  apparently  on  an 
official  form  which  provided  for  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail. 


Order  of  Sailing  and  op  Battle. 


f      1- 
2. 

Canopus  80  (Rear 

-Adm. 

Louis).                    ^ 

3. 
4. 

Superb  74. 

Van 

5. 

,, 

Squadron. 

G. 

Victory  100  (Nelson). 

7. 

Donegal  74. 

\     Starboard 

8. 

«» 

/      Division. 

9. 

Spencer  74. 

[    10. 

,, 

r   1- 

,, 

2. 

,^ 

3. 

Tigre  74. 

4. 

,j 

/ 

Centre        1 
Squadron. 

5. 

Northumberland  80  (Cochrane).                   ^ 

6. 

,, 

7. 
8. 

Leviathan  74. 

5» 

9. 
10. 

f      1- 

2. 

Larboard 

3. 

^, 

}      Division. 

4. 

Rear 

5. 

,'' 

Squadron. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

^fZ^f mZc  74. 
Conqueror  74. 
Swiftsure  74. 

9. 
10. 

Spartiate  74. 

f 

The  Superb  was  a  very  powerful  ship  of  a  new  type  which  was  copied 
from  the  Pompee,  captured  at  Toulon.  With  her  carronades  she  threw  a 
broadside  of  1000  lbs.  The  Canopies  (a  prize  taken  in  1798)  had  a  broadside 
of  1092  lbs.  The  Victory's  original  armament  {i.e.  without  carronades)  gave 
a  broadside  of  1068  lbs.  The  Donegal  was  also  a  French  prize  of  1798,  even 
larger  than  the  Superb.  After  her  re-armament  with  carronades  she  was 
sometimes  classed  as  an  80-gun  ship.  The  Tigre,  which  brought  up  the  rear 
of  Nelson's  division,  was  also  a  heavy  French  prize  captured  in  1798,  and 
equal  in  force  to  the  Superb,  as  were  also  Bclleisle  and  Spurtiate.  The  rest 
were  small  74's.  The  unequal  distribution  of  ships  in  the  squadrons  shows 
that  the  divisional  and  not  the  squadroual  organisation  was  to  be  used.  In 
actual  sailing  Nelson  did  not  occupy  his  station,  but,  as  the  practice  was, 
led  the  starboard  line.  Under  June  5th  he  enters  in  his  Journal,  "  Directed 
Canopus  to  take  her  station  astern  of  the  Victory  and  the  Northumberland  to 
lead  the  lee  line  agreeable  to  the  order  of  battle  and  sailing  issued  to  the 
Fleet."  With  our  knowledge  of  what  happened  at  Trafalgar  it  may  well  be 
doubted  whether  Nelson  would  ever  have  got  back  into  his  place  if  the  enemy 
had  been  met  with. 


1 64       OPERATIONS  IN  THE  WEST  INDIES   June  7-8 

arranged  for  reporting  a  British  fleet  happened  to  be  the 
same  Cochrane  had  established  for  the  enemy  at  Trinidad — 
a  serious  lesson  as  to  the  dangers  of  amateur  signalling  in 
time  of  war.  Its  effect  was  of  course  to  remove  all  Nelson's 
doubts.  Signalling  to  prepare  for  action,  he  immediately 
hurried  on.  As  he  came  in  sight  of  Trinidad  he  was  mis- 
taken by  the  British  military  posts  along  the  shore  for  the 
enemy,  and  according  to  rule  they  retired  to  concentrate  on 
their  main  position,  firing  the  blockhouses  behind  them. 
The  flames  in  the  dim  morning  light  gave  the  final  touch 
of  certainty.  The  enemy  had  obviously  landed,  and  Nelson 
pushed  on  through  the  Dragon's  Mouth  right  into  the  Gulf 
of  Paria,  assured  he  had  before  him  at  Port  of  Spain  another 
battle  of  the  Nile. 

As  they  opened  the  harbour  and  not  a  sign  of  an  enemy 
was  to  be  seen,  they  could  scarcely  believe  their  eyes,  so 
certain  and  doubly  corroborated  had  been  the  intelligence. 
What  Nelson  felt  not  a  single  letter  reveals.  His  self- 
restraint  is  admirable ;  the  best  of  him  came  out ;  he 
simply  cast  all  intelligence  to  the  winds  and  immediately 
turned  back,  resolved  to  act  on  his  own  judgment. 

Early  next  morning,  the  8  th,  as  he  was  repassing  the 
Dragon's  Mouth,  he  was  met  with  a  despatch  from  Captain 
Maurice  telling  him  that  Diamond  Rock  had  fallen  and 
that  the  Combined  Squadron  had  not  yet  left  Martinique. 
There  was  hope  still.  Maurice  also  informed  him  that  he 
had  been  assured  by  his  captors  that  the  Ferrol  squadron  had 
recently  joined.  This  Nelson  was  sure  could  not  be  true, 
for  had  it  come  Maurice  himself  must  have  seen  it.  "I 
have  my  doubts,"  he  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  Barbadoes, 
"  respecting  the  certainty  of  the  arrival  of  the  Ferrol 
squadron  .  .  .  but,  my  lord,  powerful  as  their  force  may 
be  they  shall  not  with  impunity  make  any  great  attacks. 
Mine  is  compact ;  theirs  must  be  unwieldy ;  and  although  a 
very  pretty  fiddle,  I  don't  believe  that  either  Gravina  or 
Villeneuve  know  how  to  play  upon  it."  ^ 

No  one  knew  better  than  he  the  deterrent  power  of  a 
fleet  actively  in  being ;  and  away  he  held  northward,  intent 

^  To  Lord  Seaforth,  June  8th. 


June 5-6    VILLENEUVE   AND    THE    CONVOY  165 

to  prove  the  truth  of  his  theory.  Next  day  he  was  off 
Grenada.  Maurice's  news  that  the  enemy  had  not  yet 
moved  was  confirmed,  but  shortly  afterwards  he  was  met 
by  a  cruiser  from  Dominica  bringing  word  that  on  the 
evening  of  the  6  th,  three  days  before,  the  whole  Combined 
Fleet  had  been  sighted  off  the  south  end  of  Guadaloupe 
steering  north.  "  Whether  the  enemy's  object  is  to  attack 
Antigua  or  St.  Kitts,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  or  to 
return  to  Europe  time  will  show,"  and  under  a  press  of  sail 
he  carried  on,  giving  successive  rendezvous  at  Montserrat 
and  Antigua. 

This  time  the  information  was  true.  It  was  early  on  the 
morning  of  June  5  th,  as  Nelson  was  steering  to  the  south- 
w^ard  for  Trinidad,  that  Villeneuve  had  moved  north,  *'  with 
the  intention,"  as  he  wrote  in  his  official  report,  "  of  making 
an  attack  on  the  Island  of  Barbuda."  ^  Passing  along  the 
lee  side  of  Dominica  the  French  saw  a  British  convoy  and 
its  escort  under  the  guns  of  a  protected  anchorage,  but 
they  left  it  alone.  Villeneuve  was  bent  on  reaching  Guada- 
loupe to  pick  up  another  battalion,  and  this  done  he  held 
on  his  way.  The  same  night — that  is,  the  6th — when 
Nelson  was  nearing  Tobago — he  was  steering  to  pass 
between  Antigua  and  Montserrat.^  "  At  ten  o'clock  in  the 
morning,"  he  proceeds,  "  after  having  doubled  Antigua,  we 
had  word  in  the  north-north-west  of  a  convoy  of  fourteen 
sail  under  escort  of  a  single  schooner.  I  ordered  a  general 
chase,  and  by  nightfall  the  whole  convoy  was  taken  except 
the  escort  ship."  ^ 

With  the  exception  of  the  reduction  of  Diamond  Rock, 
this  capture  was  the  only  positive  result  of  the  operations 
from  which  Napoleon  hoped  so  much.     It  was  a  convoy 

^  Desbriere,  v.  679.  Colonel  Desbriere  again  reads  the  word  "  Barbade." 
But  his  text  shows  the  letter  has  been  incorrectly  transcribed  in  other  places, 
and  it  is  certain  that  Villeneuve  wrote  or  meant  to  write  "  Barbude "  or 
"  Barboude."     See  notes  below. 

^  The  transcript  which  Colonel  Desbriere  used  reads  ^'  deharquer  entre 
Antir/oa  et  Mont-Serrat,'"  but  he  has  kindly  informed  me  that  the  word  should 
certainly  be  "■  dthouquer''  Anglice  "disembogue."  This  course  would  not  lead 
anywhere  but  to  Barbuda. 

^  Desbriere,  v.  680.  The  Journal  dc  Reille,  as  Colonel  Desbri^re's  trans- 
cript reads  it,  has  "  d  10  heures  du  matin,  etant  sous  le  vent  de  Barbade,  les  vigies 
ont  signals  un  convoi  dc  quin::e  voiles.''^  Here  "  Barbade  "  must  clearly  mean 
' '  Barbuda. " 


1 66       OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES    juni:; 

homeward-bound,  which  had  assembled  in  the  usual  way  at 
St.  John's  Road,  Antigua,  to  await  the  coming  of  the  other 
divisions  from  the  southward  with  the  regular  escort.  But 
the  merchants,  on  hearing  that  the  Rochefort  ships  had 
joined  Villeneuve  and  that  the  Combined  Fleet  with  10,000 
men  was  about  to  attack  the  island,  had  fallen  into  so  un- 
fortunate an  alarm  that  they  had  memorialised  the  governor 
to  demand  immediate  convoy  from  the  local  cruisers.  On  the 
governor's  representations  Captain  Nourse,  the  senior  officer 
at  St.  John's,  had  ordered  Lieutenant-Commander  William 
Carr  of  the  Netley  schooner  to  take  them  home.^  The 
reward  of  their  panic  was  to  fling  their  ships  into  Ville- 
neuve's  lap.  Carr,  of  course,  could  do  nothing.  The  moment 
he  sighted  the  advanced  frigates  of  the  enemy  he  signalled 
his  merchantmen  to  make  away  and  save  themselves,  while 
he  kept  the  Netley  lying-by  to  watch  the  enemy  till  they 
were  within  gunshot.  Then  as  he  ran,  chased  by  two 
frigates,  he  had  to  watch  the  French  fleet  spread  to  pick  up 
his  dispersing  convoy.  By  sunset,  when  he  succeeded  in 
dropping  his  pursuers,  he  had  seen  the  whole  of  it  captured. 
He  was  noAV  in  as  difficult  a  position  as  a  young  officer 
could  well  have  to  face.  He  had  nothing  left  to  escort 
home,  but  he  had  despatches  for  the  Admiralty  from 
Captain  Nourse,  his  senior  officer.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
had  located  the  enemy  and  knew  their  approximate  force. 
What  ought  he  to  do  ?  Should  he  carry  on  home  with  his 
despatches  or  return  and  report  to  the  Admiral  the  vital 
information  upon  Avhich  he  had  stumbled.  In  his  dilemma 
he  took  the  extreme  step  of  opening  the  despatches.  He 
found  in  them  nothing  but  Nourse's  explanation  of  why  he 
had  ordered  the  Netley  home.  All  doubt  was  then  removed 
as  to  the  direction  in  which  his  duty  lay,  and  he  promptly 
decided  to  return  to  find  Nelson.'^ 

'  Captain  Nourse  of  the  Barhadoes  to  the  Admiralty  (In-lcttcrs,  2231), 
enclosing  the  merchants'  memorial  and  the  governor's  request. 

-  Carr  to  Nelson,  June  13th,  enclosed  in  Nelson  to  Marsden,  June  14th  : 
In-letters,  411.  See  below  p.  IBO  n.  James  gives  the  name  of  the  Netley  s 
commander  as  Richard  Harward  and  says  Nourse  was  with  him.  There  seems 
no  authority  for  either  statement. — Vol.  iv.  p.  351.  For  Carr's  previous  exploits 
see  Ibid.,  pp.  248-9.  He  was  still  in  comrannd  of  the  Netley  in  1807  when  she 
was  captured  by  a  French  frigate  and  brig. — Ibid.,  v.  466. 


juNEio  VILLENEUVE    DRIVEN    HOME  167 

At  the  same  time  Villeneuve  had  obtained  equally  im- 
portant information.  From  his  prisoners  he  learned  that 
the  British  Mediterranean  fleet  had  arrived  at  Barbadoes 
twelve  or  fourteen  strong.  It  was  what  he  had  dreaded  all 
along,  and  he  had  no  more  spirit  in  him.  "  This  force,"  he 
wrote,  "joined  to  that  of  Admiral  Cochrane,  which  is  about 
in  these  seas,  would  be  enough  to  balance  the  combined 
forces,  even  if  it  were  not  superior,  seeing  the  strength  of 
the  ships,  of  which  several  are  three-deckers."  In  his  eyes 
it  made  every  enterprise  against  the  enemy's  possessions 
impossible.  The  utmost  he  could  do  would  be  to  go  back 
to  Martinique  and  await  the  time  fixed  for  his  return  to 
Europe,  "  in  painful  inaction,"  as  he  said,  "  disastrous  to  the 
health  of  his  crews."  Even  that  would  take  ten  days  and 
might  expose  him  to  a  battle,  and  where  could  he  refit 
afterwards  ?  Even  a  victory,  which  he  clearly  did  not 
expect,  would  render  his  return  to  Europe  impossible.  The 
truth  was  he  found  himself  brought  up  against  one  of  the 
vital  defects  of  Napoleon's  ill-considered  plan.  There  it 
was  inevitably  staring  Villeneuve  in  the  face,  and  in  his 
distress  he  consulted  Gravina.  The  condition  of  the 
Spanish  crews  permitted  of  but  one  answer.  Ganteaume  or 
no  Ganteaume,  they  must  lose  not  a  moment  in  returning 
to  Europe.  Hastily  the  prizes  were  committed  to  a  frigate, 
the  local  troops  crowded  into  four  other  cruisers  to  be 
returned  to  their  garrisons,  and  on  June  10th  they  held 
away  with  all  speed  for  the  Azores. 

Was  ever  the  weakness  of  surprise  command  more 
strongly  exhibited  ?  Was  ever  clearer  proof  of  how  the 
apprehension  of  counter-surprise  by  an  active  and  un- 
located  force  always  neutralises  its  apparent  possibilities  ? 
''  We  have  been  masters  of  the  sea  for  three  weeks,"  wrote 
one  of  Villeneuve's  most  observant  officers,  "  with  a  landing 
force  of  7000  to  8000  men  and  have  not  been  able  to 
attack  a  single  island."  ^  Yet  Napoleon  could  still  dream 
of  conquering  the  world  by  a  few  hours'  command  of  the 
Channel. 

The  decision  to  which  the  vice  of  the  Emperor's  scheme 

^  Journal  de  Reille :  Desbriere,  v.  681. 


i68       OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES   June  12 

drove  the  two  entangled  Admirals  was  none  too  prompt. 
On  the  10  th,  as  they  were  transhipping  the  troops,  Nelson 
was  signalling  Montserrat  for  his  rendezvous.  Next  day 
he  sent  in  there  for  intelligence,  but  they  could  give  him 
none  of  any  use — nothing  indeed  but  a  report  from  an 
American  skipper  that  the  Combined  Fleet  had  left  Guada- 
loupe  with  the  intention,  as  it  was  supposed,  of  attacking 
Antigua.  To  Antigua  therefore  he  pushed,  but  only  to  find, 
as  he  approached  the  island,  no  sign  of  the  enemy.  He  was 
now  faced  with  the  necessity  of  making  a  decision  at  least 
as  great  and  really  more  difficult  than  that  he  had  come  to 
off  Cape  St.  Vincent  a  month  before.  On  the  morning  of 
the  12th,  as  he  waited  for  his  cruiser  to  bring  news  from 
the  shore,  he  was  again  in  the  same  uncertainty  as  that 
which  had  tormented  him  at  Gibraltar.  From  "  under 
Antigua  "  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty :  "  If  I  hear  nothing 
of  the  enemy  at  Antigua  I  shall  stand  for  Prince  Rupert's 
Bay  [that  is,  back  to  Dominica]  and  form  my  judgment; 
but,  I  feel,  having  saved  these  colonies  and  two  hundred 
and  upwards  of  sugar-loaded  ships,  that  I  must  be  satisfied 
they  have  bent  their  course  for  Europe  before  I  push  after 
them."  Here  was  the  same  inspiration  divining  his  enemy's 
intention  and  the  same  restrained  determination  not  to  act 
on  inspiration  alone.  The  ink  was  not  dry  before  the 
information  he  awaited  was  obtained.  Word  came  in  that 
the  French  troops  which  had  been  taken  from  Guadaloupe 
had  come  back  and  disembarked.  Then  he  was  practically 
sure.  "  Therefore,"  he  wrote,  "  I  am  pushing  for  the  anchor- 
age of  St.  John's  [Antigua]  to  land  the  troops  and  hope  to 
sail  in  the  morning  after  them  for  the  Straits'  mouth." 

Thus  before  he  had  Carr's  intelligence  he  had  practi- 
cally made  up  his  mind,  and  Bettesworth,  in  the  Curieiix, 
was  sent  off  with  his  despatches  to  inform  the  Admiralty 
that  Villeneuve  was  on  his  way  back  and  that  he  was  after 
him.  In  the  evening  he  anchored  at  St.  John's  and  pro- 
ceeded to  disembark  his  troops.  By  morn  on  the  morrow 
they  were  all  ashore,  and  the  fleet  got  under  way.  Scarcely 
had  it  done  so  when  the  Nctley  came  in  to  remove  all  doubt 
from  his  mind  and  report  the  enemy  far  stronger  than  he 


June  13  NELSON    PURSUES  169 

had  thought.  Before  dark  she  had  counted  no  less  than 
thirty-two  sail.^  Carr's  report  of  the  enemy's  force  in  no 
way  altered  Nelson's  intention  to  get  at  them  if  he  could. 
It  rather  raised  his  hopes.  Instead  of  thirty  days,  he  was 
now  only  four  or  five  behind  Villeneuve,  and  there  was 
every  prospect  of  a  meeting.  True,  he  thought  it  probable 
the  Spaniards  would  be  detached  to  Havana,  but  the  possi- 
bility of  their  remaining  with  Villeneuve  was  faced  and  did 
nothing  to  check  the  chase.  He  would  not  even  retain 
Cochrane,  who  was  ordered  to  return  to  his  station.  Nelson 
was  content  to  keep  the  Spartiate,  and  so  had  eleven  of  the 
line  with  his  flag. 

With  this  slender  force  he  was  ready  to  fight,  but  in 
certain  conditions  only.  As  before,  when  he  believed  his 
strategy  had  forced  Villeneuve  from  the  Mediterranean,  his 
object  was  partly  gained  already.  He  had  forced  the  enemy 
from  the  West  Indies,  and  he  could  now  weigh  risks  more 
calmly.  "  Do  not  imagine,"  he  is  reported  to  have  said 
to  his  assembled  captains,  "  that  I  am  one  of  those  hot- 
brained  people  who  fight  at  immense  disadvantage  without 
an  adequate  object.  My  object  is  partly  gained.  If  we 
meet  them  we  shall  find  them  not  less  than  eighteen,  I 
rather  think,  twenty  sail  of  the  line,  and  therefore  do  not 
be  surprised  if  I  should  not  fall  upon  them  immediately. 
We  won't  part  without  a  battle.  I  think  they  will  be  glad 
to  let  me  alone,  if  I  will  let  them  alone,  which  I  will  do 
till  we  approach  the  shores  of  Europe  or  they  give  me  an 
advantage  too  tempting  to  be  resisted."  ^ 

^  Letter  from  an  officer  on  board  one  of  Lord  Nelson's  ships:  Add.  MSS. 
3430,  June  19th;  Nelson  to  Marsden,  June  14th:  In-lcttcrs,  411.  Nicolas  missed 
this  letter  and  it  seems  never  to  have  been  printed.  It  runs :  "  Victory  at  sea, 
June  14th.  The  Nctley  schooner  joined  me  yesterday  morning  about  an  hour 
after  the  fleet  got  under  weigh  [sic)  from  St.  John's  Eoad,  Antigua,  when 
Lieutenant  Carr  came  on  board  and  showed  me  the  accompanying  despatches 
from  Captain  Nourse  of  the  Barbadoes,  addressed  to  you  (which  in  his  hurry 
to  return  to  the  Nctley  he  omitted  to  take  with  him).  I  therefore  judge  it 
proper  to  forward  them  to  you  in  the  state  they  were  left,  and  also  beg  leave 
to  transmit  you  for  their  Lordships'  information  a  letter  from  Lieutenant  Carr 
giving  his  reasons  for  having  opened  the  said  despatches."  The  letter  was 
not  holograph,  but  signed  by  Nelson. 

^  The  authority  for  these  observations  is  not  known.  Clarke  and  McArthur 
give  it  as  the  purport  of  his  remarks  (without  mentioning  their  source  of 
information)  on  one  of  the  occasions  when  during  the  chase  he  assembled  his 
captains  on  board  the  Victory.     There  is  another  traditional  story  on  the 


170      OPERATIONS   IN    THE    WEST    INDIES 

With  these  ideas  in  his  mind  he  disappeared  once  more 
into  the  Atlantic,  leaving  Cochrane  in  no  easy  frame  of 
mind.  So  skilfully  had  the  French  directed  attention  to 
Jamaica  that  he  could  not  share  Nelson's  view.  It  will 
have  been  noticed  that  throughout  all  these  operations  the 
reinforced  squadron  at  Jamaica  had  made  no  move.  They 
had  been  waiting  on  the  defensive  at  Port  Royal  ready  to 
do  their  best  against  the  expected  attack  till  reinforcements 
arrived.  So  far,  it  may  be  said,  they  had  been  enticed 
away,  but  in  fact  they  were  not  off  the  board.  As  we  have 
seen,  it  was  their  presence  in  the  West  Indian  seas  that 
convinced  Villeneuve  he  could  do  nothing.  But  for 
Cochrane  the  menace  still  existed.  Ten  days  after  Nelson 
had  left,  he  was  back  at  Barbadoes  writing  anxiously  to 
the  Admiralty  that  he  was  sure  Jamaica  was  the  objective. 
He  did  not  know,  curiously  enough,  where  Nelson  had 
gone,  but  from  what  he  had  said  in  conversation,  Cochrane 
was  afraid  he  thought  Villeneuve  had  gone  back  to  the 
Mediterranean.^  He  was  naturally  anxious.  He  was  alone 
on  the  station,  for  Hood  had  gone  home  with  a  convoy.  It 
was  not  till  three  weeks  later  that  the  Ramilies  and  Illus- 
trious, which  Collingwood  had  sent  to  reinforce  Nelson, 
appeared  in  Carlisle  Bay,  to  relieve  his  mind.  Yet  no 
sooner  had  they  arrived  than  he  received  a  report  of  the 

point  which  has  never  been  published.  It  was  related  by  Elliot,  after- 
wards Governor  of  St,  Helena,  to  Lieutenant  A.  H.  Hoskins,  K.N.,  afterwards 
Admiral  Sir  Anthony  Hoskins.  He  repeated  it  to  his  flag-lieutenant,  now 
Captain  Mark  Kerr,  who  has  kindly  given  it  to  me  as  he  wrote  it  down  at  the 
time,  as  follows :  '*  On  the  way  back  from  the  West  Indies  Nelson  was  walk- 
ing up  and  down  the  quarter-deck  talking  to  the  officer  of  the  watch,  who 
said,  •  I  wish  we  could  fall  in  with  Villeneuve,  sir.'  Nelson  :  '  Yes,  it  would 
be  very  satisfactory  to  know  where  he  is.'  The  officer  :  '  What  a  glorious  fight 
we  should  have,  sir!'  Nelson:  '  I  don't  think  I  should  fight  him.'  Officer: 
'  Not  fight  him  !  Why  all  the  way  out  you  were  dying  to  get  at  him.'  Nelson: 
'  All  the  way  out  he  was  getting  stronger  and  I  was  getting  weaker.  All  the 
way  home  I  am  getting  stronger  and  he  is  getting  weaker.  If  we  fell  in  with 
him  now  and  fought  him,  I  don't  doubt  we  should  beat  him,  and  it  would  be 
a  great  thing  for  my  personal  glory  ;  but  I  should  be  doing  my  country  a 
great  wrong.  I  know  that  in  a  week's  time  I  shall  get  reinforcements,  and 
he  will  get  none,  and  then  I  must  annihilate  him.'"  The  moral  of  the  story 
is  obvious,  but  as  it  stands  it  is  in  some  details  difficult  to  understand.  By 
Villeneuve's  growing  stronger  on  the  outward  voyage,  he  presumably  referred 
to  his  fleet  shaking  down  by  being  at  sea ;  but  Nelson's  growing  weaker  is 
curious,  since  we  had  a  squadron  in  the  West  Indies  and  the  allies  had 
nothing. 

1  Li-lettcrs,  326,  June  25th. 


I 
I 


1 


July  COCHRANE    PLAYS    THE    GAME  171 

Combined  Fleet  having  been  seen  steering  a  course  which 
pointed  to  its  intended  junction  with  the  Brest  and  Ferrol 
squadrons.  If  Nelson,  as  he  believed,  had  gone  to  the 
Straits,  the  crisis  would  be  acute.  In  a  moment  all 
thought  of  his  own  comfort  was  cast  aside.  With  the 
usual  insight  into  the  mind  of  the  Admiralty  he  decided 
to  send  both  the  ships  back  at  once  with  two  convoys  that 
were  due  to  sail.  "  Every  line  of  battle  ship  that  can  be 
spared,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  from  hence  may  be 
wanted  in  the  Channel,"  and  almost  as  he  penned  the 
words  an  identical  order  was  being  drawn  up  at  the 
Admiralty.^ 

It  was  a  belief  of  the  old  Spaniards  that  Drake  had 
a  magic  mirror  in  which  he  could  see  all  the  movements 
of  his  enemies  and  count  their  numbers.  In  a  sense  it 
was  true,  and  in  that  sense  he  had  handed  it  on  to  his 
successors.  That  mirror  was  the  tradition  he  had  founded, 
and  they  had  polished  it  by  rich  experience  till  it  became 
a  living  instinct  for  naval  war  to  which  every  man  could 
turn  for  guidance.  Cochrane,  one  of  the  least  of  Drake's 
heirs,  could  see  in  it  plainly  the  stress  and  strain  that  was 
prevailing  in  home  waters,  and  it  told  him  the  crisis  of  the 
campaign  had  come,  as  indeed  it  had. 

^  In-lcttcrs,  326,  July  13th  and  17th  ;  Admimlty  Minutes,  154.  The  minute 
enjoining  the  return  of  the  two  ships  with  any  convoys  that  were  ready  is 
dated  July  11th,  that  is,  in  the  same  week  that  Cochrane  decided  to  return 
them  on  his  own  responsibility. 


CHAFIER  XII 

HOW  LORD  BARHAM  MET  THE  CRISIS 

Towards  the  end  of  May  Cornwallis  had  reported  himself 
fit  for  duty,  but  owing  to  the  dislocation  caused  by  Ville- 
neuve's  escape  and  Missiessy's  return  the  Admiralty  decided 
it  was  better  to  postpone  making  any  change  in  the  main 
command.  By  the  end  of  June,  however,  when  the  situa- 
tion had  been  restored,  he  received  orders  to  relieve  Lord 
Gardner,  who  was  to  return  to  his  old  post  at  Cork  and 
resume  the  management  of  the  cruisers  on  the  Irish 
station. 

The  centre  of  disturbance  had  passed  away  westward. 
No  one  as  yet  could  tell  it  was  moving  back  again,  and 
in  the  home  area  there  was  calm.  As  the  hour  approached 
for  which  Napoleon  had  worked  so  long  and  elaborately,  he 
was  more  than  ever  bent  on  lulling  his  enemy  into  security, 
or  at  least  diverting  British  attention  from  his  focal  point, 
He  was  still  in  Italy  employing  the  last  days  of  his  sojourn 
in  developing  the  military  and  naval  resources  of  his  new 
kingdom,  and  in  particular  at  Genoa,  whose  ancient  status 
he  intended  to  revive  with  a  naval  yard  and  arsenal.  His 
continued  absence  so  far  from  Boulogne  would  serve  well, 
he  believed,  to  deepen  the  impression  he  wished  to  create, 
and  seeing  what  was  in  his  mind  he  could  not  approve  of 
Ganteaume's  desire  to  make  continual  sorties.  Such  de- 
monstrations could  only  serve  to  keep  the  enemy  on  the 
alert.  He  even  doubted  the  wisdom  of  keeping  the  ^vhole 
fleet  out  in  the  Bertheaume  anchorage  and  wished  to  have 
some  of  the  ships  sent  back  into  port.  "  My  intention,"  he 
wrote  to  Decres,  ''  would  be  to  lull  the  English  to  sleep  as 
much  as  possible  about  the  Brest  squadron,  in  a  natural 

manner,  however  (sans  affectation),  and  direct  all  their  atten- 

172 


June  MARMONT'S    FUNCTION  173 

tion  on  the  Tex  el.     Write  in  this  sense  to  Marmont 

I  myself  will  cause  a  picket  of  my  guard  to  march  on 
Utrecht,  and  on  my  arrival  in  Paris,  I  shall  announce  my 
departure  for  that  place.  That  will  make  them  afraid  that 
Villeneuve  is  going  there  and  will  induce  them  to  weaken 
before  Brest,  which  is  the  great  point."  He  assured  Decres 
the  trick  would  serve.  "  There's  nothing,"  he  said,  '*  so 
short-sighted  as  the  English  Government.  It  is  a  govern- 
ment absorbed  in  party  politics  {chicanes  inUrieures),  which 
turns  its  attention  wherever  there  is  a  noise."  -^ 

It  was  an  error  not  confined  to  Napoleon  or  to  his  age — 
to  assume  that  the  energy  and  spirit  with  which  British 
politicians  play  the  Parliamentary  game  denote  incapacity 
for  war  and  real  statesmanship,  or  at  least  neglect  and 
blindness  in  large  imperial  issues.  Still  it  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  so  great  a  soldier,  who  was  not  wont  to 
underrate  his  enemies,  could  really  have  expected  by  means 
so  trivial  to  gull  the  old  hands  against  whom  he  was  play- 
ing into  breaking  their  hold  on  the  long-tried  position. 
Yet  he  himself  sent  Marmont  elaborate  orders  on  the 
subject.  "The  English,"  he  wrote,  "have  at  Yarmouth 
no  more  than  three  vessels  of  a  higher  rate  than  sixty- 
fours.  I  want  to  draw  more  to  that  point  to  further  my 
operations."  Marmont  himself  is  to  keep  away  from  the 
Texel,  but  in  the  second  week  of  July  he  is  to  embark 
a  division,  move  the  squadron  as  far  out  in  the  roads  as 
safety  will  permit,  and  arrange  a  mise  en  scene  which  will 
suggest  a  distant  expedition.  Then  on  July  20th  he  is 
suddenly  to  put  all  his  army  in  motion,  get  it  afloat  in 
the  course  of  the  Aveek  and  embark  in  person  with  pilots 
for  the  voyage  to  Ireland  north-about.  The  Dutch 
Admiral  and  his  officers  are  not  to  be  told  the  real 
meaning  of  the  movement.  "  It  will  look,"  he  says,  "  as 
if  you  were  only  waiting  for  a  gale  to  drive  off  the  English 
blockading  squadron  and  let  you  out,  which  will  necessarily 
compel  the  English  to  keep  there  a  squadron  of  at  least 
ten  of  the  line  and  give  them  all  kinds  of  uneasiness." 
Finally,  in  view  probably  of  one  of  the  many  strokes  he 

^  From  Bologna,  June  22nd  :  Correspondnnce,  x.  556. 


174  HOW    BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS  June 

was  contemplating  for  the  Rochefort  squadron,  Marmont  was 
warned  not  to  think  his  embarkation  was  a  mere  parade.  It 
was  quite  possible  it  might  become  a  real  operation.^ 

The  disturbing  power  of  an  army  by  the  sea  with  trans- 
ports and  escort  alongside — a  specially  English  device — is 
often  questioned.  Here  at  least  is  evidence  of  Napoleon's 
faith  in  it — a  faith,  it  must  be  said,  that  was  not  a  little 
justified  by  the  confusing  effect  which  his  garrisons  in  the 
Neapolitan  ports  had  had  upon  Nelson's  judgment;  and  in 
this  case,  as  we  shall  see,  it  did  have  a  certain  effect. 

Though  the  idea  of  combining  the  Rochefort  squadron 
with  Marmont's  corps  attracted  Napoleon's  imagination  for  a 
while,  he  never  regarded  it  very  seriously.  What  he  really 
hoped  to  get  out  of  the  isolated  squadron  for  the  effect  he 
wanted  was  a  raid  as  far  possibly  as  the  mouth  of  the 
Baltic,  which  would  threaten  British  commerce  and  a 
descent  in  Ireland.  The  main  trouble  was  to  find  a  com- 
mander fit  to  conduct  so  daring  and  hazardous  an  enterprise. 
With  Missiessy  Napoleon  was  disgusted,  and  particularly 
for  the  lack  of  energy  and  initiative  he  had  displayed  in 
the  West  Indies.  "  I  choked  with  indignation,"  he  told 
Decres,  "  when  I  read  he  had  not  taken  the  Diamond ; "  and 
again,  "  That  Rock  will  be  an  eternal  monument  of  shame 
to  this  expedition."  He  had  counted  on  the  squadron 
being  out  again  within  a  week  of  its  arrival,  but  in  place  of 
the  news  he  expected  he  received  lamentations  from  the 
old  Admiral  that  he  was  ill,  that  he  doubted  if  he  was  fit 
for  sea  again,  and  that  he  wanted  to  go  to  Paris  to  see  his 
wife.  Unable  to  think  of  any  one  to  replace  him,  Napoleon 
after  his  manner  fell  to  coaxing  and  trying  to  appeal  to  his 
ambition.  Decres  was  to  tell  him  he  was  the  link  on  which 
the  great  combination  depended  and  that  he  could  not  go 
to  Paris.  "  However,"  he  wrote,  "  I  think  Madame  Missiessy 
is  a  reasonable  woman  with  a  little  ambition.  Get  her  to 
go  to  Rochefort.  It  is  only  right  that  Admiral  Missiessy 
should  see  his  wife.  Let  her  make  him  understand  he 
must    finish    the   campaign."  ^     But   all   was    useless,  and 

*  To  Marmont  and  to  Decres,  Parma,  June  27th  :  Correspojidnncc,  x.  566  8. 
2  To  Decres,  Milan,  June  6th  :  Corirspondance,  x.  482. 


June  ROCHEFORT    AND    FERROL  175 

Missiessy  finally  gave  up  the  command  on  the  ground  of 
ill-health. 

Napoleon's  first  idea  Avas  to  replace  him  by  Rosily,  an 
old  officer  whose  reputation  rested  on  his  cruiser  work 
in  years  gone  by  under  SufFren.  But  he  was  tired  of  old 
Admirals  and  resolved  to  inaugurate  a  change.  "  There  is 
no  good  blinking  the  fact,"  he  wrote  to  Decres  before 
Missiessy's  final  resignation,  "  henceforth  I  must  choose 
my  Admirals  from  young  officers  of  thirty-two  years  of  age, 
and  I  have  enough  cruiser  captains  with  ten  years'  active 
service  to  select  six  to  whom  I  may  entrust  commands.  .  .  . 
Meanwhile  make  the  Rochefort  squadron  sail  with  Missiessy 
or  some  one  else."  ^ 

The  man  Decres  chose  was  Allemand,  Captain  of  the 
Magnanime,  one  of  Missiessy's  ships  of  the  line.  He  was 
reported  to  have  shown  high  ability  and  spirit  during  the 
expedition  and,  as  events  were  to  prove,  no  selection  could 
have  been  better.  His  influence  was  felt  immediately.  By 
the  end  of  the  month  there  was  so  much  activity  in  the 
port  that  Graves  was  regretting  the  two  of  the  line  that 
had  been  removed  from  him  on  his  first  optimistic  reports. 
The  squadron  was  accordingly  brought  up  again  to  five  of 
the  line  and  Graves  himself  was  relieved  by  Admiral  Stirling, 
in  the  Glory  9  8 — an  intrepid  officer,  who  had  been  serving  as 
Navy  Commissioner  at  Jamaica  and  had  just  come  home 
on  promotion  to  fly  his  flag  for  the  first  time. 

At  Ferrol  it  was  equally  difficult  to  conceal  the  immi- 
nence of  the  crisis.  Calder's  intelligence  system  was  perfect. 
An  Englishman,  who  had  been  both  British  and  American 
consul  before  the  war,  had  remained  on  in  the  latter  capa- 
city and  was  furnishing  the  Admiral  with  regular  informa- 
tion. Napoleon  had  just  sent  down  orders  that  Gourdon 
and  his  Spanish  colleague,  Admiral  de  Grandallana,  should 
move  the  thirteen  of  the  line,  which  they  now  had  complete 
for  service,  out  to  Coruna,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  put  to  sea 
the  moment  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  appeared.  Before 
Gourdon  could  acknowledge  the  order  and  point  out  its 
impossibility   owing    to    the    lack    of   anchorage    room    at 

^  June  14th:  Ibid.,  p.  563.     Lacour-Gayet,  Louis  XVI.,  p.  661. 


176  HOW    BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS  July 

Corufia,  it  was  in  Calder's  hands.  The  consul  had  sent 
it  out  to  him  by  an  English-American  skipper  who  sailed 
on  July  3rd.  Calder  had  just  been  reinforced  with  the 
two  seventy-fours  which  Graves  had  reported  he  could 
spare  from  before  Rochefort,  but  he  had  had  to  send  home 
his  largest  three-decker,  the  Eoyal  Sovereign,  to  refit.  This 
left  him  with  but  nine  sail  of  the  line,  only  two  of  which 
were  three-deckers.  He  did  not  think  such  a  squadron 
sufficient  for  the  blockade,  but  assured  his  chief  "  that 
everything  in  his  power  should  be  done  for  his  majesty's 
service  with  such  a  force  as  their  lordships  should  deem 
adequate  to  the  critical  service  he  was  employed  upon."  ^ 

Further  south  Collingwood  was  also  on  the  alert,  keep- 
ing a  close  watch  on  Cadiz  with  three  of  his  battle  squadron, 
and  holding  the  Straits  with  the  fourth  off  Cape  Spartel 
and  a  frigate  at  Gibraltar.  Inside  the  Mediterranean 
Bickerton  with  his  battle  squadron  was  in  a  position  off 
Cartagena  to  cover  the  passage  of  Craig's  expedition  while 
his  cruisers  formed  its  escort  and  secured  it  against  an 
attack  from  the  Toulon  frigates.  These  vessels  as  well  as 
others  in  Genoa  were  also  being  watched  by  the  cruiser 
squadron  which  Nelson  had  committed  to  Captain  Capel, 
and  he  had  been  blockading  one  of  them  in  Villefrance, 
the  port  of  Nice.  The  disposition  Capel  had  adopted  was 
principally  directed  to  preventing  any  expedition  passing  to 
Sardinia.  The  Excellent  was  still  at  Naples — a  comfortable 
pledge  of  British  policy  and  a  symbol  of  the  power  that  was 
at  Elliot's  back,  and  Bickerton,  realising  her  political  im- 
portance, had  refrained  from  calling  her  to  his  flag.  At 
Malta,  Sir  Alexander  Ball  had  a  fifty-gun  ship  and  four  or 
five  cruisers  for  the  protection  of  the  Levant  trade.  There 
was  also  a  frigate  at  Constantinople,  which  had  gone  thither 
with  our  Minister,  and  at  Trieste  was  a  brig  for  commerce 
protection.  The  military  command  of  the  Adriatic  was 
further  secured  by  a  Russian  squadron  at  Corfu,  which  by  the 
end  of  July  amounted  to  four  of  the  line  and  ten  cruisers.^ 

1  Gourdon  to  Beurnonville,  Jitly  7th  :  Desbriere,  v.  627.  Calder  to  Gardner, 
July  5th,  and  Gardner  to  Marsd  n,  July  6th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  298-9. 

^  Knight  to  Nelson,  July  iri.h'.  and  same  to  Collingwood,  August  5th: 
Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  3430^' -.Napoleon  to  Decr5s,  June  22,  25,  27  :  Carre- 
gporulance,  x.  555,  564,  568. 


June  28  NAPOLEON'S    APPRECIATION  177 

Such,  then,  was  the  actual  naval  situation  at  the  end  of 
June.  It  remains  to  consider  how  Napoleon  appreciated  it, 
and  we  have  it  all  in  an  elaborate  memorandum  he  prepared 
for  Decres.  He  saw  eighteen  of  the  line  before  Brest,  six 
before  Kochefort,  eight  before  Ferrol,  and  not  more  than 
four  in  the  Mediterranean.  Of  Nelson  and  CoUingwood  he 
knew  nothing.  The  only  information  he  had  was  a  false 
report  that  they  had  met  off  Cape  St.  Vincent  on  May  15  th, 
and  had  then  disappeared.  Possibly  they  had  gone  to- 
gether to  the  West  Indies,  but  he  did  not  think  this  likely. 
He  persuaded  himself  that  while  Nelson  proceeded  there 
alone  to  join  Cochrane,  CoUingwood  had  been  sent  to  the 
East  Indies.  If  this  were  true,  Nelson  would  lose  several 
days  at  Barbadoes  making  his  junction  with  Cochrane  and 
filling  up  his  ships,  and  in  the  interval  Villeneuve,  having 
heard  of  his  arrival,  would  have  time  to  get  clear  away. 
The  only  result,  then,  of  Nelson's  chase  would  be  that 
Villeneuve  would  not  wait  his  allotted  time  and  the  crisis 
would  come  a  little  sooner  than  was  intended.  He  would 
meet  the  situation  by  making  an  earlier  return  to  Boulogne. 
''  I  shall  hasten  my  coming,"  he  says,  "  by  some  days, 
because  I  think  Nelson's  arrival  in  America  may  push 
Villeneuve  to  leave  for  Ferrol." 

Still  he  could  not  conceal  from  himself  that  Villeneuve 
might  be  caught  and  blockaded  in  Fort  de  France,  and  in 
his  heart  he  doubted  whether  the  great  combination  could 
ever  come  off.  His  memorandum  concluded  with  yet 
another  change  of  plan,  in  which  ultimate  reliance  is 
placed  on  the  Brest  squadron  alone.  Two  lines  of  operation 
on  which,  it  might  act  were  submitted  for  Decres'  opinion. 
If  Ganteaume  saw  a  chance  of  getting  out,  should  he  shape 
his  course  as  though  he  were  going  to  attack  Ireland,  but 
instead  of  doing  so,  plunge  into  the  Channel  and  come 
before  Boulogne  with  his  own  squadron  alone ;  or  should  he 
first  go  down  and  pick  up  the  Ferrol  squadron  and  enter  the 
Channel  with  thirty-three  of  the  line  ?  "  It  is  an  involved 
game  (jeu  mile)  no  doubt,"  he  wrote ,  as  indeed  it  was,  "  but 
one  that  will  always  be  somethir  •  to  fall  back  upon,  if 
Villeneuve  gets  blockaded.  .  .  .  Wi  te  of  it  all  the  same  to 

M 


178         HOW   BARHAM    MET   THE    CRISIS        julv  i 

Ganteaume  as  a  general  theme  to  find  out  what  he  thinks."  ^ 
What  Ganteaume  did  think,  as  we  shall  see  presently  in  his 
crushing  reply,  was  that  it  ignored  the  fundamental  con- 
sideration on  which  the  British  system  of  defence  was 
securely  based. 

Two  days  after  Napoleon  had  penned  this  final  apprecia- 
tion, the  outlook  of  the  British  Admiralty  was  cleared  at 
last  by  certain  information  that  Villeneuve  had  been  to 
the  West  Indies.  He  had  reached  Martinique,  it  was 
said,  on  May  13th  with  sixteen  of  the  line.  The  news 
was  brought  to  Liverpool  by  a  "  running  ship " — one  of 
those  adventurous  merchantmen  who  preferred  the  enjoy- 
ment of  a  hungry  market  to  the  unprofitable  security  of 
a  convoy.  Sent  up  to  Pitt  by  the  Mayor,  it  was  in  his 
hands  by  July  1st.  The  same  day  he  forwarded  it  to  the 
Admiralty  with  an  intimation  that  he  had  decided  to  re- 
issue Sir  Eyre  Coote's  orders  for  the  West  Indies.  All  this 
time  the  expedition  had  been  Avaiting  at  Cork  for  instruc- 
tions. Coote  was  now  directed  to  embark  his  troops  imme- 
diately and  the  Board  was  required  to  provide  him  with 
convoy.^ 

This  resolution  of  the  Cabinet  by  no  means  indicates  that 
Napoleon  had  succeeded  in  diverting  Barham's  attention  to 
the  AVest  Indies.  It  was  merely  a  precaution ;  for  the  same 
day  the  news  was  received  the  Admiralty  sent  off  to  Col- 
lingwood  and  Calder  a  Avarning  to  be  on  their  guard  against 
Villeneuve's  sudden  return.^  Barham,  in  the  ripeness  of  his 
rich  experience,  evidently  had  as  little  doubt  as  Napoleon 
as  to  what  would  be  the  effect  of  Nelson's  breaking  in  upon 
the  Caribbean  Sea.  Indeed  every  British  Admiral  in  Eurc 
pean  waters  was  expecting  Villeneuve's  reappearance  some-] 
where.  At  this  very  time  Collingwood  was  writing:  "  I  think] 
it  not  impossible  I  shall  have  all  these  fellows  coming  from] 
the  West  Indies  again  before  the  hurricane  months,  unless] 
they  sail  from  there  directly  for  Ireland,  which  I  have] 
always  had  an  idea  was  their  plan ;  for  this  Bonaparte  hi 

^  To  Decrt^s,  June  28th  :   Correftpondance ,  x.  573. 
-  AdmlraHy  In-lettcrs  {Sec.  of  State),  4199,  July  Ist. 
^  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  July  1st. 


July  7  HIS    FIRST    PLAN  179 

as  many  tricks  as  a  monkey.  I  believe  their  object  in 
the  West  Indies  to  be  less  conquest  than  to  draw  our 
forces  from  home.  The  Rochefort  squadron  seems  to  have 
had  nothing  else  in  view."  ^  And  these  were  the  men  that 
Napoleon  thought  he  had  deceived. 

The  only  uncertain  point  was  the  home  port  for  which 
Villeneuve  would  make.  Should  it  be  Cadiz  or  any  point  in 
the  Mediterranean  there  was  cause  for  considerable  anxiety. 
How  weak  was  the  position  at  the  mouth  of  the  Straits, 
Barham  did  not  know  till  July  7th.  On  that  day  a  despatch 
from  Collingwood  reached  the  Admiralty  informing  them  that 
on  second  thoughts  he  had  obeyed  their  order  to  send  two 
of  the  line  to  Nelson.^  As  he  had  been  told  to  divide  his 
squadron  with  Bickerton,  Barham  correctly  inferred  from 
this  that  he  would  have  only  four  of  the  line  with  his  flag, 
and  the  old  First  Lord  sat  down  in  the  solitude  of  his  room 
to  grapple  with  the  situation.  The  result  was  one  of  those 
priceless  strategical  minutes  in  which  the  old  British  lore 
lies  embalmed  and  almost  forgotten.^ 

It  begins  with  an  exact  statement  of  the  actual  dis- 
position of  the  force  available.  ''Now  off  Brest,  22;  off 
Rochefort,  5  ;  off  Ferrol,  including  2  from  Rochefort,  12;" 
and  two  others  immediately  available,  besides  5  in  reserve 
to  replace  ships  coming  in  to  refit.  This,  he  says,  meant 
from  38  to  40  of  the  line  "  manned  and  stored,"  disposable 
for  Brest,  Rochefort,  and  Ferrol,  that  is,  for  the  "  Western 
Squadron."  What  he  proposed  was  to  detach  immediately 
from  Cornwallis  ten  of  the  line  to  reinforce  Collingwood 
off  Cadiz.  "  Because,"  he  explains,  "  I  take  it  for  granted 
that  only  four  remain  there.  That  makes  a  strong  force 
at  the  very  spot  where  they  may  be  expected."  He  was  at 
one,  therefore,  with  Nelson  as  to  Villeneuve's  most  probable 
destination.     To  this  extent  Napoleon  had  led  them  both 

1  To  Dr.  Carlyle,  July  2nd  :  Bloclcade  of  Bre&t,  ii.  296. 
^  In-lettcrs,  410,  June  8th,  endorsed  "Approved,  July  7th." 
^  This  unknown  document  is  one  of  the  chief  treasures  of  the  Barham 
Papers — a  holograph  in  a  volume  labelled  "  Drafts  of  Orders  and  Statements 
in  the  hand  of  Lord  Barham."  It  is  undated,  but  as  it  is  specially  founded 
on  the  information  of  Collingwood's  havino-  detached  his  two  of  the  line  to 
Nelson,  it  must  have  been  written  on  the  7th  or  8th.  On  the  9th,  as  we  shall 
see,  it  was  cancelled  on  fresh  information. 


i8o  HOW   BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS 

astray,  but  not  for  a  moment  did  Barham  neglect  the  alter- 
native possibility  that  the  Combined  Squadron  might  return 
to  a  French  port  in  the  Bay.  Indeed  his  minute  is  mainly 
devoted  to  providing  for  this  eventuality.  His  plan  for 
dealing  with  it  is  based  on  striking  Villeneuve  before  he 
can  get  within  distance  of  his  destination  whatever  it  might 
be,  or  in  touch  with  any  of  the  three  blockaded  squadrons 
in  Brest,  Rochefort,  or  Ferrol.  It  was  obvious  that  one  or 
more  of  the  blockading  squadrons  must  be  used  for  the 
counter-stroke.  The  problem,  therefore,  was  how  to  deliver 
the  blow  at  a  sufficient  distance  to  seaward  and  at  the  same 
time  prevent  any  of  the  blockaded  squadrons  from  moving. 
The  solution  was  worthy  of  his  genius.  He  would  use  the 
Ferrol  and  Brest  squadrons  for  his  striking  force,  each  on 
its  own  line,  but  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  raise  either 
blockade.  "  Let  the  Ferrol  squadron,"  he  wrote,  "  get  three 
additional  frigates  and  be  ordered  to  stretch  north-north- 
west of  Ferrol  by  means  of  frigates  and  show  themselves 
off  Ferrol  itself  occasionally  and  at  such  undetermined 
periods  as  to  disguise  the  real  object  of  their  cruise."  As  for 
Rochefort,  it  is  to  be  kept  strictly  blockaded  ;  but  he  adds, 
"  Let  the  fleet  off  Brest,  reduced  for  the  moment  to  12  sail, 
but  reinforced  by  the  Defence,  Goliath,  and  Zealous  to  15, 
be  ordered  to  stretch  out  to  the  south-south-west  in  a 
direct  line  for  Cape  Finisterre,  and  by  means  of  frigates 
keep  up  communication  with  the  Ferrol  squadron." 

The  plan  was  certainly  daring,  and  particularly  in  his 
handling  of  the  Brest  squadron.  At  first  sight  it  seems 
to  entail  a  serious  loosening  of  the  defensive  basis  of  the 
campaign.  It  appeared  to  involve,  moreover,  not  only  the 
possibility  of  opening  the  Channel,  but  also  of  the  Ferrol 
squadron  escaping  to  break  the  Rochefort  blockade.  Barham 
was  not  blind  to  this  aspect  of  his  disposition,  but  he  cal- 
culated, and  as  it  was  to  prove  afterwards,  calculated 
rightly,  the  risk  had  no  real  existence.  "  Before  these 
plans,"  he  argues,  "  were  developed  to  the  enemy  the  cause 
for  their  existence  would  have  ceased;  that  is,  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  would  have  returned  for  Europe,  or  the  uncer- 
tainty with  regard  to  their  motions  would  be  at  an  end." 


Julys  ARRIVAL    OF    THE    CURIEUX  i8i 

At  any  rate  the  moral  effect  of  success-  would  be  so  great 
as  to  justify  whatever  risk  was  entailed.  "  The  interception 
of  the  fleet  in  question,"  he  concludes,  "  on  its  return  to 
Europe  would  be  a  greater  object  than  any  I  know.  It 
would  damp  all  future  expeditions  and  would  show  to 
Europe  that  it  might  be  advisable  to  relax  in  the  blockad- 
ing system  occasionally  for  the  express  purpose  of  putting 
them  in  our  hands  at  a  convenient  opportunity."  In  other 
words,  the  moral  effect  would  be  to  relieve  materially  the 
almost  unendurable  strain  of  the  great  blockade ;  for  when- 
ever any  part  of  it  was  temporarily  relaxed  the  enemy 
would  suspect  a  trap  was  being  laid  for  him. 

Such  was  the  masterly  plan  with  which  Barham  in- 
tended to  meet  the  difficult  and  uncertain  situation.  Forty- 
eight  hours  proved  the  soundness  of  his  calculations.  Before 
the  enemy  could  know  what  the  new  disposition  meant,  he 
rightly  judged  the  fog  would  be  cleared  and  it  would  not 
be  wanted.  Before  his  draft  could  even  be  reduced  to  the 
form  of  orders  the  light  came.  For  at  eleven  o'clock  at 
night  on  July  8  th  Captain  Be ttes worth  of  the  Ciorieux, 
direct  from  Nelson,  rattled  up  to  the  door  of  the  Admiralty. 

On  the  7th,  as  Barham  was  quietly  working  out  his 
plans,  the  Cnrieux  was  anchoring  at  Plymouth.  She  had 
made  the  passage  from  Antigua  in  twenty-four  days.  In 
hot  haste  Bettesworth  had  posted  to  London,  but  only  to 
find,  so  the  story  goes,  that  Lord  Barham  had  gone  to  bed 
and  that  no  one  dared  to  rouse  him.  At  an  early  hour  the 
old  man  awoke  and  fell  into  a  fury  when  he  knew  what  had 
been  awaiting  him.  For  it  was  not  only  Nelson's  despatches 
Bettesworth  had  to  deliver,  but  having  taken  a  more 
northerly  course  than  the  Admiral,  who  was  making  for  the 
Straits,  he  had  sighted  Villeneuve  and  determined  his 
course.  It  was  on  June  19th,  as  high  as  latitude  33°  12' 
and  in  longitude  58° — that  is,  some  900  miles  north-north- 
east of  Antigua — that  he  had  seen  him,  and  the  Combined 
Fleet  was  still  standing  to  the  northward.  Till  there  could 
be  no  doubt  Bettesworth  had  shadowed  them,  and  then 
made  all  sail  home  with  his  all-important  news.  That 
Villeneuve  had  stood  so  far  to  the  northward  could  only 


1 82  HOW    BARHAM   MET    THE    CRISIS       juiyq 

mean  he  was  making  for  the  Bay,  and  not,  as  both  Barham 
and  Nelson  expected ,  for  the  Straits.  What  was  to  be  done  ? 
In  half-an-hour  Barham  had  decided. 

The  historian  James,  who  was  provided  with  official 
information  on  the  incident  by  the  First  Lord's  secretary, 
tells  us  that  without  waiting  to  dress  and  growling  that 
seven  or  eight  hours  had  been  lost,  he  wrote  out  the  neces- 
sary orders  and  sent  them  off.  The  story  has  been  doubted, 
but  it  has  certainly  some  foundation.  Amongst  his  papers 
there  still  exists  a  rapid  minute  which  he  dashed  oR'  to 
meet  the  situation.  It  is  written  at  speed  with  several 
interlineations  on  a  small  scrap  of  paper  in  eloquent  con- 
trast to  the  long  memorandum,  which  he  had  just  com- 
pleted. Cadiz  was  no  longer  the  centre  of  anxiety,  and 
with  extraordinary  decision  and  directness  for  a  man  of 
eighty  years  he  recasts  in  half-a-dozen  lines  his  previous 
scheme.  Calder  Avas  clearly  in  the  most  immediate  danger 
and  also  in  the  best  position  for  striking  Villeneuve  before 
he  could  get  a  landfall.  But  to  reinforce  him  from  Corn- 
wallis,  as  he  had  intended,  was  not  w^ithout  danger.  To 
Cornwallis  might  almost  equally  well  fall  the  chance  of  first 
contact,  and  if  he  were  weakened  it  was  now  doubtful 
whether  ships  detached  from  him  to  Ferrol  could  be  re- 
placed from  his  reserve  in  time. 

The  problem  was  thorny,  and  it  is  clear  that  for  a  while 
Barham  was  in  two  minds  about  it.  As  he  first  drafted  the 
minute  it  ran :  "  My  idea  is  to  send  the  intelligence  im- 
mediately to  Admiral  CornwalHs,  who  may  be  directed  to 
strengthen  Sir  Robert  Calder's  squadron  with  as  many 
ships  as  will  make  them  up  to  15."  This  was  in  accord- 
ance with  the  memorandum  of  the  previous  day,  which 
provided  that  "  Rochefort  is  to  be  kept  strictly  blockaded." 
But  on  second  thoughts  it  must  have  occurred  to  him  that 
the  risk  of  weakening  the  Ushant  position  was  too  great 
— that  in  fact  he  was  trying  for  something  beyond  the 
resources  that  were  immediately  available.  The  only  sound 
solution  was  to  concentrate  on  the  two  most  vital  points. 
For  this  the  Rochefort  blockade  must  be  sacrificed,  and 
Stirling  be  ordered  to  join  Calder.    Accordingly  before  com- 


July 9  HIS   AMENDED    PLAN  183 

pleting  the  minute  he  amended  it  in  this  sense,  and  in  its 
final  form  it  ran  as  follows — the  italicised  passages  being 
those  which  he  inserted  :  "  My  idea  is  to  send  the  intelli- 
gence immediately  to  Admiral  Cornwallis  who  may  be 
directed  to  strengthen  Sir  Robert  Calder's  squadron  with 
the  Rochefort  squadroii  mid  as  many  ships  of  his  oivn  as  will 
make  them  up  to  15,  to  cruise  off  Cape  Finisterre  from  10 
^0  50  leagues  to  the  west.  To  stand  to  the  southward  and 
westward  with  his  own  ships,  at  the  same  distance  for  10 
days.     Cadiz  to  be  left  to  Lord  Nelson.      9th  July."  1 

On  the  minute  as  thus  amended  the  famous  orders  of 
July  9  th  were  framed.  No  strategical  decision  has  received 
more  unanimous  applause,  yet  now  that  we  know  Barham 
hesitated,  it  is  open  to  any  one  to  speculate  as  to  which 
was  the  better  alternative.  As  things  turned  out  the  first 
disposition  would  have  met  the  case  amply.  It  would  have 
saved  a  deal  of  trouble  from  the  Rochefort  squadron  and 
that  trouble  might  well  have  been  much  worse  than  it  was, 
for  in  the  weeks  before  Trafalgar  it  seriously  endangered 
Nelson's  communications,  and  not  only  was  it  an  abiding 
menace  to  our  trade,  but  it  came  near  to  losing  us  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Yet  such  judgments  ex  fost  facto  must 
be  made  with  caution.  It  must  be  remembered  that  to 
devote  a  squadron  to  blockading  Rochefort  was  to  play 
Napoleon's  game.  It  was  what  he  expected  and  desired, 
and  if  Barham  in  his  tried  wisdom  refused  to  permit  any 
consideration  to  loosen  his  grip  on  the  Ushant  position  few 
will  be  found  to  assert  he  was  not  right.  "  When  in  doubt 
make  sure  of  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,"  Avas  a  maxim  too 
long  sanctified  by  its  fruits  to  be  lightly  transgressed. 

At  all  events  it  was  approved  at  the  time  by  his 
colleagues.  It  went  forward  as  amended,  and  upon  it  were 
framed  the  following  orders  :  "  Admiral  Cornwallis — In- 
telligence being  received  by  H.M.  Brig  Ciorieux  that  the 
combined    French    and   Spanish   squadrons,  which    passed 

^  Barham  Papers.  "Orders  and  Statements,  1805."  The  last  interline- 
ation must  have  been  made  before  the  minute  was  complete,  for  the  pen- 
ultimate sentence  refers  to  it.  The  important  change  as  to  the  Rochefort 
squadron  must  therefore  have  been  made  before  it  left  his  hands  and  without 
any  one  else's  suggestion. 


1 84         HOW   BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS        July  9 

Antigua  on  the  8tli  ultimo,  had  been  seen  by  that  vessel  in 
latitude  33°  12' N.,  long.  58°  W,  steering  at  first  N.  by  E. 
but  afterwards  altering  their  course  to  N.N.W. ;  and  there 
being  grounds  to  suppose  that  it  is  their  intention  to  make 
some  port  in  France  or  Spain ;  you  are  hereby  required  and 
directed  to  strengthen  the  squadron  off  Ferrol  under  the 
orders  of  Vice-Admiral  Sir  Robert  Caldcr  with  the  ships 
ofT  Rochefort  under  Rear-Admiral  Stirling,  and  to  instruct 
the  Vice-Admiral  to  proceed  without  loss  of  time  off  Cape 
Finisterre,  from  whence  he  is  to  cruise  for  the  enemy  to  the 
distance  of  30  to  40  leagues  to  the  westward  for  the  space 
of  six  or  eight  days.  You  are  further  required  and  directed 
to  stretch  with  the  fleet  under  your  immediate  command 
about  the  same  distance  to  the  south-westward  and  for  the 
same  space  of  time ;  at  the  expiration  of  which  the  several 
squadrons  are  to  return  to  their  respective  stations. — 
(Signed)  Barham,  J.  Gambler,  Garlics."  ^ 

It  was  all  done  in  about  three  hours.  By  nine  o'clock 
in  the  morning  the  Admiralty  messenger  was  away,  and  as 
he  thundered  down  the  Portsmouth  road  Napoleon  was  in 
the  act  of  leaving  Turin  for  Boulogne  "  to  change  the 
destinies  of  the  Avorld." 

^  Barham  Papers.  The  discovery  of  the  text  of  this  order  finally  disposes 
of  the  story  that  Barham  issued  it  without  consulting  his  colleagues.  We  now 
know  both  Gambler  and  Lord  Garlies  signed  it  in  the  usual  way.  The  story 
as  furnished  officially  to  James  the  historian  was  that  Bettesworth  arrived  "at 
a  late  hour  at  night,"  that  "  orders  were  immediately  sent"  to  Cornwallis  to 
recall  Stirling,  &c.  See  "  Note  for  Mr.  James,"  Ibid.  ("  Drafts  of  Orders  and 
Statements  in  the  hands  of  J.  D.  Thompson.")  There  must,  however,  have 
been  some  hurry  and  irregularity  ;  for  the  order  does  not  appear  in  the  series 
of  Secret  Orders  at  the  Kecord  Office.  It  would  look  as  though  Barham  would 
not  waste  half-an-hour  to  have  it  copied  and  that  it  did  not  go  forward  in 
the  usual  way  through  the  Secretary.  The  laconic  form  in  which  the  orders 
were  drafted  bears  no  trace  of  the  established  secretarial  manner. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST 

CoRXWALLis  joined  the  fleet  off  Brest  in  the  Ville  de  Paris 
110^  on  July  7th,  the  same  day  that  the  Curieux  reached 
Plymouth,  and  after  Gardner  took  his  leave  he  found 
nineteen  of  the  line  with  his  flag.  On  the  9  th  the  Terrible 
74,  on  her  way  home  from  Ferrol  to  refit,  gave  him  the 
information,  which  Calder  had  obtained  from  the  American 
Consul,  that  the  enemy  were  under  orders  to  move  to 
Coruna  to  be  ready  for  Villeneuve.  Scarcely  had  he 
received  this  intimation,  which  told  him  that  the  hour  of 
action  was  at  hand,  when  a  despatch  vessel  arrived  from 
the  Port  Admiral  at  Plymouth  Avith  Bettesworth's  news  that 
Villeneuve  was  making  for  the  Bay.  Cornwallis  immedi- 
ately sent  it  on  to  Stirling  and  Calder,  with  a  warning  to 
be  on  their  guard  against  being  surprised  or  caught  em- 
bayed. At  the  same  time  he  was  joined  by  Sir  Richard 
Strachan  in  the  Caesar  80,  whom  he  placed  in  command  of  an 
inshore  squadron  of  five  of  the  line.  But  no  sooner  was  this 
disposition  made  than  Barham's  orders  arrived  to  upset  it. 
By  the  evening  of  the  12  th  the  necessary  directions  were 
on  their  way  to  Stirling  and  Calder,  and  Cornwallis,  having 
left  a  cruiser  squadron  of  six  sail  to  watch  Brest,  was 
moving  out  and  away  to  the  south-westward  in  pursuance 
of  Barham's  plan  of  operations. 

With  his  flag  he  had  now  a  splendid  battle  squadron  of 
twenty  sail,  which,  including  as  it  did  no  less  than  seven 
three-deckers  and  three  80-gun  ships,  Avas  greatly  superior 
to  that  of  Villeneuve  and  Gravina.     His  instructions,  it  will 

^  This  was  not  the  ship  Rodnej'  took  in  1783,  but  a  new  first-rate  built  at 
Chatham  in  1795.  On  her  pre-carronade  armament  she  threw  a  broadside  of 
1236  lbs.    With  her  68-lb.  carronades  it  must  have  been  over  1500  lbs. 

1S5 


i86  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST       July  12-16 

be  remembered,  <as  finally  drafted  were  "  to  stand  to  the 
south-westward  30  to  40  leagues  for  10  days,"  and  he 
interpreted  them  with  the  freedom  that  was  obviously  in- 
tended. At  first  ho  stretched  about  south-south-west,  "  in 
the  direct  line  for  Finisterre,"  as  Barham's  original  orders 
had  provided.  This  course  he  held  for  about  100  miles 
and  then  turned  up  to  the  north-westward,  crossing  the 
natural  approaches  to  Brest  until  he  reached  a  rendezvous 
he  had  given  from  70  to  80  miles  south-west  of  Ushant, 
and  there  he  remained  till  the  evening  of  the  15th.  So  far 
not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  had  been  found,  and  Cornwallis 
seems  to  have  conceived  a  strong  impression  that  they 
were  not  making  for  Brest  at  all.  No  letter  exists  to 
enable  us  to  see  into  his  mind.  All  we  know  is  that, 
leaving  a  cruiser  on  the  rendezvous,  he  now  stretched  away 
south  down  to  the  latitude  of  Rochefort. 

Of  all  the  moves  in  the  campaign  none  will  seem  quite 
so  daring  as  this.  It  will  be  observed  that  it  went  some- 
what beyond  the  orders  which  Barham  had  given  him  ;  to 
stretch  30  to  40  leagues  south-west  of  Ushant.  Cornwallis 
clearly  had  his  own  view  of  the  most  likely  ground  to 
secure  his  chief's  objects,  and  he  saw  it  approximately  at  a 
point  where  the  latitude  of  Finisterre  intersected  the  direct 
line  between  Ferrol  and  Ushant.  In  this  position  he  might 
hope  to  intercept  Villeneuve  on  two  of  his  three  possible 
courses.  It  was  equally  good  whether  the  enemy  made 
Ferrol  and  then  came  on  to  Brest,  or  was  making  for 
Rochefort  direct  and  running  down  its  latitude  in  the  usual 
way.  But  to  all  appearance  it  left  the  direct  line  to  Brest 
dangerously  open  at  the  critical  moment.  Still,  that 
Villeneuve  would  take  the  direct  line  and  not  seek  to 
avoid  an  action  by  a  more  devious  course  was  improbable, 
and  in  any  case  the  approaches  to  that  port  were  well 
covered  by  the  squadron  cruisers.  What,  however,  seems 
the  most  serious  risk  of  all  was  that  the  move  left  Gan- 
teaume  free  to  come  out  and  reach  the  Channel.  The 
danger  looks  all  the  more  grave  since,  as  we  know,  the 
last  word  which  Ganteaume  had  had  from  Napoleon  was  a 
suggestion   that   he    should   attempt  this  very  stroke    the 


juLyio-i6    NAPOLEON   AT    FONTAINEBLEAU  187 

moment  he  saw  a  chance.  Imagine,  then,  the  excitement 
which  CornwalHs's  withdrawal  caused  at  Paris  when  it  was 
reported,  quickly  followed  as  it  was  by  news  of  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  squadron  before  Rochefort. 

On  July  10th,  the  very  day  that  Cornwallis  received 
the  new  disposition,  Napoleon  reached  Fontainebleau.  He 
had  come  in  three  days  and  a  half  from  Turin ;  but  for  his 
eagerness  it  had  not  been  nearly  fast  enough,  and  he  was 
scolding  at  the  state  of  the  roads  and  grumbling  that 
the  Empress  had  insisted  on  stopping  everywhere  for 
her  meals.  Once  at  work  again,  plans  poured  out  from 
him  more  feverishly  than  ever.  The  first  was  one  for 
elaborating  his  feint  from  Holland  by  a  sham  expedition, 
which  Marmont  was  to  prepare  at  Helvoetsluys.^  Next 
were  produced  a  long  set  of  instructions  destined  to  meet 
Villeneuve  off  Ferrol.  Once  more  it  was  impressed  upon 
him  that  his  object  was  to  be  master  of  the  Straits  of 
Dover,  if  it  were  only  for  four  or  five  days.  Wide  discretion 
was  given  him  in  the  means  he  might  adopt.  He  might 
join  both  the  Brest  and  Rochefort  squadrons,  or  either  of 
them,  as  he  saw  fit ;  and,  if  only  the  latter,  he  might  go 
north-about  and  join  the  Texel  squadron.  If  as  the  result 
of  having  to  fight  an  action  he  found  the  object  was  beyond 
his  power  to  attain,  he  was  to  content  himself  with  releasing 
the  Ferrol  squadron  and  taking  it  down  to  Cadiz,  but  on  no 
account  was  he  to  enter  Ferrol.  Clearly  Napoleon  was  con- 
templating failure  with  an  eye  behind  him  on  action  in  the 
Mediterranean,  and  Decres'  draft  of  the  instructions  em- 
phasises the  apprehension.  "  His  Majesty,"  he  wrote  to 
Villeneuve,  "desires  that  the  fleet  under  your  command 
shall  carry  through  the  great  project  of  the  invasion  of 
England,  conceived  so  long  since  by  his  genius,  but  so 
much  time  has  gone  by  since  the  issue  of  your  original 
orders,  so  many  things  may  have  happened,  that  in  his 
wisdom  the  Emperor  considers  he  should  not  give  you  an 
absolute  order  to  that  effect  in  spite  of  his  persistence 
in  this  great  design,  but  rather  rely  on  your  sagacity  and 
boldness."  2 

1  July  IStli:  Desbricre,  v.  639.  ^  j„iy  iq^^^.  jtid.,U2. 


1 88  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST  July  i6 

Finally  Allemand's  orders  were  completely  changed.  In 
all  probability  the  appearance  of  Villeneuve  off  the  coast  of 
Spain  would  cause  the  raising  of  the  Rochefort  blockade. 
Instead,  however,  of  going  out  according  to  his  previous 
instructions  in  order  to  make  diversions  on  the  coast  of 
Ireland  and  in  the  Narrow  Seas,  he  was  to  wait  for  the 
word  from  Gourdon  and  then  go  straight  to  Ferrol.  But 
it  was  all  too  late.  The  day  the  order  was  penned  Stirling 
moved  away,  and  on  the  morrow  Allemand,  seeing  the  coast 
clear,  put  to  sea — under  his  old  instructions.  In  pursuance 
of  them  he  pushed  out  due  west  straight  for  the  point  which 
Cornwallis  had  reached. 

Meanwhile  Napoleon  had  received  another  blow,  which 
may  well  have  been  the  cause  of  the  doubtful  tone  in  his 
order  to  Villeneuve.  Ganteaume  had  sent  him  his  answer 
to  the  theme  he  had  propounded.  If  the  Brest  squadron 
got  to  sea  should  it  rush  the  Channel,  or  should  it  go  first 
to  pick  up  the  Ferrol  squadron  ?  Ganteaume  knew  too 
much  of  his  profession  to  have  the  slightest  doubt  and  too 
much  character  not  to  state  it.  "  If,"  he  wrote,  *'  the  fleet, 
in  leaving  Brest,  was  fortunate  enough  to  elude  the  vigilance 
of  the  blockading  squadron,  there  exists  no  doubt  that  it 
ought  to  make  for  Ferrol  in  preference  to  Rochefort.  .  .  . 
But  if,  in  accordance  with  the  first  part  of  the  question  in 
your  despatch,  we  venture  into  the  Channel  with  no  more 
than  twenty- two  vessels  which  compose  our  fleet,  it  would 
not  be  long  before  we  were  observed,  or  before  the  vessels 
we  had  eluded  would  get  contact.  To  these  they  would  not 
have  failed  to  join  the  whole  of  the  force  at  their  disposal 
on  the  coasts  and  in  the  ports  of  England,  and  then  it 
seems  to  me  the  chances  would  be  against  us.  The  Channel 
is  too  narrow  a  sea  to  allow  of  being  there  without  detec- 
tion or  of  manoeuvring  with  success  in  the  face  of  superior 
force."  Cornwallis,  he  calculated,  had  twenty-one  sail,  of 
which  tAvelve  were  three-deckers,  besides  five  of  a  supposed 
Irish  squadron,  and  fifteen  in  reserve.^     "  To  attempt,"  he 

^  Desbriere,  v.  640,  July  14th.  Ganteaume' s  estimate  appears  to  be  based 
on  a  list  that  was  afterwards  printed  in  the  Naval  Chronicle,  vol.  xiv.  It  is 
an  "  Abstract  of  the  British  Efficient  Naval  Force,"  and  purports,  as  there 
printed,  to  be  corrected  up  to  July  20tb,  but  is  not  so  corrected.     It  gives  for 


juLYiS  GANTEAUME'S   VIEW  189 

continues,  "  an  expedition  so  important  as  that  of  Boulogne 
in  a  sea  so  stormy  as  the  Channel,  and  one  which  is  not 
always  practicable  for  the  boats  employed  in  that  expedi- 
tion, I  think  we  must  be  able  to  count  on  having  the 
passage  free  for  at  least  a  fortnight.  With  only  twenty- 
one  vessels  we  should  be  in  constant  fear  of  seeing  thirty 
suddenly  appear,  whose  force  would  be  nearly  double  that 
of  our  fleet."  ^  Here,  then,  from  Ganteaume's  own  pen  is 
reason  enough  why  the  movement  opening  Brest  entailed 
little  risk.  Did  Barham  see  into  his  mind  when  he  gave 
the  order,  or  Cornwallis  when  he  more  than  obeyed  it  ?  It 
is  not  unlikely.  At  all  events  they  knew  that  since  1744 
no  enemy,  however  numerous,  had  dared  to  penetrate  the 
Channel  with  an  undefeated  fleet  behind  it,  and  in  that  year 
it  was  only  the  weather  that  saved  it  from  destruction  as  it 
saved  the  Armada.  Both  cases  ended  in  a  disastrous  sauve 
qui  pent.  It  was  the  kernel  of  our  traditional  defensive 
strategy,  as  it  stood  firmly  based  on  the  Western  Squadron. 
No  fleet  could  hope  to  reach  Dover  without  being  brought 
to  action,  ,and  the  further  it  got  the  greater  were  the 
advantages  of  the  home  fleet  and  the  more  crushing  the 
results  of  failure. 

To  such  considerations  Napoleon  had  always  shut  his 
eyes,  and  Ganteaume's  reply  filled  him  with  resentment. 
"  I  cannot  in  the  least  understand  Ganteaume's  immobility," 
he  wrote  to  Decres  on  the  18th.  "  How  is  it  possible  that, 
he  who  is  in  possession  of  all  my  projects,  lets  the  enemy 
disappear  without  making  any  movement  ?  I  anticipated 
in  my  instructions  that  the  enemy  must  disappear  from 
Brest.  Now  for  four  days,  it  seems,  they  have  not  been 
seen,  and  this,  added  to  the  disappearance  of  the  Rochefort 
squadron,  can  hardly  leave  any  doubt  about  Villeneuve's 

the  "  English  and  Irish  Channels  "  (that  is,  the  squadrons  of  Cornwallis  and 
Stirling  and  that  of  Ireland),  30  of  the  line,  including  11  three-deckers. 
Those  "  In  Port  and  Fitting,"  i.e.  the  Keserve,  number  9  of  the  line,  includ- 
ing the  Royal  Sovereign,  besides  half-a-dozen  "guard-ships."  The  French 
Intelligence  Department  probably  obtained  the  list  from  some  other  English 
newspaper.  The  Irish  battle  squadron  no  longer  existed  as  a  separate  unit. 
It  had  been  absorbed  into  the  Western  Squadron. 

^  Here  he  clearly  counts  three-deckers  as  2  units.  Thus  30  of  the  line 
with  12  three-deckers  would  equal  42  units.  His  own  fleet  was  22  with  1 
three-decker,  which  would  equal  23  units,  but  only  21  were  ready. 


190  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST  jui.v  i8 

iirriviil."  Ho  was  in  a  fever  of  impatience,  for  he  believed 
the  crisis  had  come  some  days  earHer  than  he  had 
expected.  Decres  was  therefore  to  send  Ganteaume  a 
peremptory  order  to  drive  oft*  the  British  cruisers  and  see 
Avhat  was  behind  them.  If  he  found  the  battle  squadron 
had  moved  far  out  to  meet  Villeneuve  he  himself  was  to  go 
straight  to  Boulogne.' 

Two  days  later  the  Emperor  heard  from  his  spies  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Cwrieux  and  the  news  she  brought.  It  did 
nothing  to  shake  his  belief  that  Villeneuve  was  close  at 
hand.  It  must  be  some  other  news  that  had  led  to  the 
alteration  of  the  British  disposition,  for  he  was  convinced 
the  Admiralty  could  not  have  made  up  their  minds  so 
quickly  and  got  the  orders  off  in  time.  It  must  be  that 
their  home  cruisers  had  located  Villeneuve,  and  he  issued 
orders  for  immediate  action.  Berthier  was  told  to  get  the 
Grand  Army  embarked  at  once.  ''  Every  moment  presses," 
Napoleon  urged ;  "let  the  four  Marshals  know.  There  is 
no  longer  an  instant  to  lose."  The  orders  to  Ganteaume 
were  repeated  with  increasing  emphasis.  Napoleon  himself 
Avrote  him  a  letter  telling  him  he  was  to  go  out  and  fight 
any  force  before  Brest,  if  he  found  it  less  than  sixteen  of 
the  line.  If  the  enemy  were  gone  to  Ferrol  or  far  to  sea 
to  meet  Villeneuve,  he  was  to  go  straight  to  Boulogne. 
"  There,"  he  said  in  his  sanguine  way  and  in  spite  of  what 
Ganteaume  had  written,  "  there  all  is  prepared ;  and  there, 
master  of  the  sea  for  three  days,  you  will  enable  us  to  end 
the  destiny  of  England.  .  .  .  When  you  receive  this  letter 
we  shall  be  in  person  at  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  and  all  will  be 
on  board  and  moored  outside." 

Surely  never  did  a  great  commander  talk  more  wildly. 
Had  he  lost  his  head,  or  was  it  just  a  theatrical  display  ? 
The  picture  he  painted  had  no  relation  whatever  to  the 
actual  possibilities  of  the  situation.  The  flotilla  returns  of 
July  22nd  and  August  3rd  show  that  he  had  filled  the 
ports  of  embarkation  with  over  two  thousand  vessels  of  all 
kinds,  scheduled  to  carry  some  150,000  men  and  nearly 
10,000  horses.-     So  vast  a  throng  of  shipping  fairly  choked 

1  Saint-Cloud,  July  18Lb  ;    Correnpondtmce,  xi.  22.       -  Desbrit^re,  v.  465-6. 


July  20-31         STATE    OF    THE    FLOTILLA  191 

the  ports,  and  yet  more  Avere  under  orders  to  concentrate 
from  the  Flemish  depots.  Elaborate  organisations  existed 
on  paper,  plan  had  succeeded  plan,  all  beautifully  sym- 
metrical but  none  of  them  corresponding  in  the  least  to  the 
conditions  which  actually  existed.  Instead  of  150,000  men 
ready  to  embark,  there  were  only  90,000;  instead  of 
10,000  horses,  there  were  less  than  3000.  Boulogne  itself 
was  blocked  with  transport  for  73,000  men,  and  there  were 
only  45,000  to  use  it.  Worse  still,  no  one  had  any  idea 
how  long  it  would  take  to  get  the  flotilla  to  sea.  The 
movement  had  never  been  tried  as  a  whole ;  no  plan  of 
operation  had  yet  been  settled,  and  it  passed  the  wit  of 
man  to  devise  one.^ 

"  If,  then  " — so  runs  the  judgment  of  those  best  able  to 
decide — "  in  an  organisation  essential  for  the  success  of  his 
enterprise,  where  order  and  rapidity  of  embarkation  were 
factors  of  the  first  importance,  his  genius  indulged  itself  in 
systems  simply  symmetrical,  bearing  no  relation  either  to 
the  actual  state  of  the  troops  and  their  service,  or  to  the 
means  of  embarkation  accumulated  in  the  ports,  we  must 
surely  ask  ourselves  if  he  ever  seriously  intended  to  make 
a  sudden  departure."  ^ 

What  indeed  could  he  have  meant  ?  In  spite  of  his 
assurance  to  Ganteaume,  he  made  no  attempt  to  leave  Paris, 
and  yet  the  orders  were  not  withdrawn.  It  mattered  little, 
for  before  the  Admiral  could  act  on  them,  Cornwallis  had 
completed  his  eight  days'  cast  for  Villeneuve  and  was  back 
again  before  the  port. 

After  reaching  the  latitude  of  Rochefort  on  July  16th 
he  did  not  remain  there,  but  began  working  back  at  once 
towards  the  north-east,  with  his  fleet  disposed  in  battle  order 
and  exercising  battle  tactics.  On  the  18th  he  returned  to 
his  assigned  position  from  thirty  to  forty  leagues  south-west 
of  Ushant,  and  in  this  region  he  remained  cruising  to  and 
fro   in  open  order.     On  the   20th,  as  his  advanced  ships 

^  Appareillage  general  dc  la  flottille  imperiale.  Dispositions  proposees  par  Ir 
chefmilitaire,  August  3rd  (Desbriere,  v.  398).  Of  this  the  Editor  says  :  "Such 
a  report  is  past  comment ;  the  contradictions  and  material  errors  are  altogether 
too  glaring."     For  details  of  the  final  organisation,  see  ante,  p.  15,  note. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  4G6. 


192  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST  July  24 

could  find  nothing,  he  sent  frigates  to  look  into  Rochefort 
and  L'Orient,  while  he  continued  to  hold  his  cruising 
ground  two  days  more.  Then  as  his  allotted  time  was 
expiring,  he  began  to  make  back  to  his  Ushant  position, 
and  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  he  showed  himself  again 
to  the  Brest  signal  stations.^ 

So  Barham's  plan  was  justified  in  the  result.  So  great 
is  the  advantage  of  secrecy  with  a  blockading  fleet  that  he 
might  well  be  sure  that  Ganteaume  would  not  be  able  to 
detect  the  movement  in  time  to  act  before  it  was  over. 
And  if  he  had  done  so  ?  If  he  had  acted  on  Napoleon's 
orders  and  stolen  up  Channel  ?  It  could  only  have  meant 
his  destruction,  as  he  himself  well  knew.  Cornwallis's 
frigates  would  quickly  have  warned  him,  and  with  his 
seasoned  crews  and  knowledge  of  the  Channel  he  must 
surely  have  overtaken  Ganteaume  and  crushed  him  with 
his  superior  force  and  training.  And  if  Ganteaume  had 
reached  Boulogne  uncaught,  and  the  flotilla  with  no  settled 
method  or  organisation  had  tried  to  cross  ?  Why,  then, 
there  must  have  been,  with  the  aid  of  Keith's  squadron  in 
the  Downs,  a  tragedy  almost  without  parallel  in  the  history 
of  war.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  Barham  deliberately 
set  the  trap,  but  trap  it  was ;  and  so  far  as  the  evidence 
goes.  Napoleon  was  only  kept  from  leaping  blindly  into  it 
by  the  crafty  French  seamen  whom  he  treated  with  so 
much  contempt. 

^  Cornwallis's  Journal  and  Log  of  the  V'dle  de  Paris. 


CALDERS  ACTION 

July  22"** 

o    British    Ships 
^  Frcnxh,        m 


^ 


P! 


O, 

P! ! 


!  I 


PiU; 


Defiaarvoe. 


\  ^J^ 


11  • 

12  •* 

13  • 

14  t 

15  ♦ 
•6# 

17  ♦ 

18  # 

20# 


OMaUcv 


%9 

•  8 

•  5 

#3 

>  \^  ^     0^  Glory 

0     0 
0    0 

0  "b  I*rinc&  of  Wales 

■^■Op.TTl. 


% 


agoio 


1  AryonauUbe 

2  Terr-ible 

3  Am-ertccL 

4  Espafuv 

5  SoTLRaphaeL 

6  FirTTve 

7  PhcbOTL 

8  Mont  Blanc 

9  Atlas 

10  Ber-vidjch 


11  Neptujve. 

12  BivceJitauj'& 

13  FoTTntdahle' 
M-  Intrepidje 

15  Scipion 

16  .9>vT/'tsxfcre 

17  Indomptahle 
\eAi/jlG 
\3AchilLe 
20Alg^^zras 


GEORGE  PHILIP*  SOM   L' 


Longmans ,Gre-en  &:  Co  London., Nei^Yark^omb ay  &  Calcutta^ 


CHAPTER   XIV 

OALDER'S  ACTION 

With  Ganteaurne  still  held  fast  in  Brest  it  was  to  Ville- 
neuve  and  the  Ferrol  concentration  that  Napoleon  had  to 
look.  But  there  Barham's  design  had  proved  equally 
successful.  On  July  22nd,  as  Cornwallis  was  closing  in 
again  to  resume  his  close  blockade,  the  blow  had  fallen 
which  was  to  prove  decisive  of  the  campaign,  so  far  at 
least  as  concerned  Napoleon's  offensive  action  against 
England . 

Calder's  action  off  Finisterre  is  one  that  has  been  little 
regarded.  Dimly  seen  in  the  penumbra  of  Trafalgar,  and 
through  the  cloud  of  a  court-martial,  which  had  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  its  tactical  significance  has  escaped  serious 
investigation.  Yet  its  place  in  the  history  of  tactics  was 
surely  worth  appraising,  if  only  for  the  sake  of  the  school 
to  which  Calder  belonged.  The  three  schools  under  which 
the  final  development  of  sailing  tactics  had  taken  place 
were  those  of  Rodney,  Howe,  and  Jervis.  Rodney's,  after  a 
long  and  successful  rivalry,  had  been  supplanted  by  that  of 
Howe.  The  finish  and  precision  which  Kempenfelt's  genius 
had  given  its  system  had  carried  it  beyond  anything  that 
had  yet  been  seen,  and  it  still  dominated  the  service.  Of 
this  school  Nelson  was  an  adherent,  if  indeed  his  eclectic 
mind  can  be  said  to  have  belonged  to  anything  less  than 
all  schools.  He  certainly  had  a  strong  leaning  to  the  free- 
handed school  of  Jervis,  which  differed  widely  from  the 
other  two,  and  it  was  in  this  school  that  Calder  had  been 
trained.  It  is,  therefore,  no  matter  of  surprise  if  a  study 
of  the  facts  should  suggest  that  the  experience  of  this 
neglected  action  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  most  brilliant 
conception  of  the  Trafalgar  memorandum.     In   any  case 


194  CALDER'S   ACTION  July  12-15 

the  indications  of  its  influence  on  the  tactics  which  Nelson 
employed  are  striking  enough  to  call  for  the  closest  atten- 
tion to  every  attainable  detail. 

It  was  in  the  evening  of  July  12th  that  the  cruiser 
which  Cornwallis  sent  to  Stirling  brought  him  his  orders 
to  raise  the  blockade  of  Rochefort  and  join  Calder.^  In 
the  night  he  slipped  away,  and  on  the  15  th,  as  Cornwallis 
was  making  his  bold  stretch  to  the  southward,  Barham's 
second  concentration  was  complete.  Waiting  only  an  hour 
or  two  for  darkness  to  conceal  his  movement,  Calder 
stole  away  in  his  turn  for  his  appointed  station  to  the 
westward,  leaving  a  brig  to  keep  a  close  watch  on  the 
Ferrol  squadron. 

His  own  force  noAv  numbered,  besides  four  cruisers, 
fifteen  of  the  line,  of  which  four  were  of  98  guns,  and 
one,  the  Malta,  a  splendid  80-gun  ship  of  greater  burden 
than  any  of  the  three-deckers."  The  remaining  ten,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Dragon,  a  powerful  seventy-four,  were 
all  small  and  old  two-deckers,  two  being  of  sixty  guns  only. 
Still  as  the  combined  force  he  was  to  meet  was  supposed 
to  number  only  sixteen  with  no  three-deckers,  he  could  go 
on  his  Avay  with  a  light  heart,  so  far  at  least  as  Villeneuve's 
fleet  was  concerned. 

With  what  he  was  leaving  behind  him  it  was  different. 
Stirling  had  to  report  that  at  Rochefort  he  had  left  nine  of 
the  line  and  several  frigates  ready  to  sail,  and  there  was 
now  nothing  to  prevent  their  joining  the  Combined  Squad- 
ron in  Ferrol.  He  knew,  moreover,  that  a  chain  of  signal 
stations  had  been  established  from  Ferrol  westward  along 
the  coast  in  order  to  give  w^arning  of  Villeneuve's  approach, 
and  enable  Gourdon  to  come  out  to  meet  him  the  moment 
he  appeared.  His  only  chance  of  success  then  was  to 
strike  and  crush  Villeneuve  before  he  could  make  the  land 

^  Log  of  the  Glory.  Letters  of  First  Lieutenant  of  Egypticnvc  :  BlncTcadc 
of  Brest,  ii.  318.  At  the  coujt-martial  Stirling  said  he  could  not  remember 
the  date,  but  agreed  it  must  have  been  the  12th. 

2  As  the  Guillaume  Tell  and  the  last  survivor  of  the  Nile,  she  had  struck 
to  the  Foudroyant  in  1800.  Tlie  Malta  by  English  "  Burden  "  measurement 
was  2255  tons  against  an  average  of  2000  of  the  98's,  but  the  OS's,  of  course, 
had  a  higher  "  displacement."  When  she  received  her  carronades  on  being 
brought  into  the  service  she  threw  a  broadside  of  1200  lbs.,  or  about  200  lbs. 
more  than  the  OS's. 


July  12-22         VILLENEUVE'S    APPROACH  195 

and  get  touch  with  Ferrol.  It  was  to  this  end  that 
Barham  had  directed  that  he  should  proceed  off  Cape 
Finisterre,  and  cruise  thence  thirty  or  forty  leagues  to 
the  westward  for  six  or  eight  days/ 

By  July  19th  he  was  already  about  a  hundred  miles 
west  by  north  of  Finisterre.  Here  he  got  fresh  news  of 
Nelson  just  a  month  old.  On  June  1 7th,  when  Nelson  was 
about  six  hundred  miles  north  from  Antigua  in  chase  of 
Villeneuve,  he  had  spoken  an  American  cutter  which  had 
seen  the  Combined  Squadron  on  its  way  home  three  days 
before.  Any  doubt  which  Nelson  may  have  had  of  his 
adversary's  destination  was  thus  removed.  He  believed 
indeed  he  was  hard  on  Villeneuve's  heels,  and  must  catch 
him  before  he  could  make  his  port.  Full  of  this  hope,  on 
June  19th,  he  had  sent  away  the  Martin  sloop  to  warn 
Gibraltar  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Decade  frigate  to 
carry  the  news  to  Lisbon  for  Ferrol  and  Ushant. 

This  news  now  reached  Calder  by  the  Lisbon  packet, 
and  he  began  to  work  north-westward  to  cross  Villeneuve's 
probable  track,  believing  he  must  be  somewhere  close  at 
hand.  Nor  was  he  mistaken.  On  the  12th,  the  day 
Stirling  left  Rochefort,  Villeneuve  had  actually  been  within 
three  hundred  miles  of  the  coast  about  due  west  of  Oporto, 
but  there  the  prevailing  northerly  winds  forced  him  to  go 
about,  and  for  four  days  he  had  to  stretch  back  to  the 
westward  before  he  could  make  his  latitude.'^  It  was  not 
till  the  1 7th  that  he  was  again  able  to  head  to  the  eastward 
for  Ferrol. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22nd  Calder  was  some  three 
hundred  miles  west  by  north  of  that  port.  Here  having 
reached  the  limit  of  his  cruising  ground  he  wore  S.W.  by 
W.,  and  expecting  contact  at  any  moment  signalled  for  the 
fleet  to  prepare  for  action  and  to  close.^  He  had  two 
advanced  ships,  the  Defiance  and  Ajax,  and  his  two  frigates 

^  Court-martial,  Calder's  defence  ;  Naval  Chronicle,  xv.  164.  Lords  of 
the  Admiralty  to  Cornwallis,  July  9th  :  Barham  Papas  {ante,  p.  184). 

2  See  the  chart  in  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  p.  50. 

^  Signal  52:  "  Keep  in  closer  order  by  closing  towards  the  leading  ship  or 
Admiral."  The  fleet  was,  of  course,  cruising  at  the  time  and  not  in  order  of 
sailing.     In  cruising  each  division  followed  its  flag  in  no  regular  formation. 


196  CALDER'S    ACTION  July  22 

spread  as  usual  six  or  seven  miles  ahead,  while  the  Dragon, 
his  best  seventy-four,  had  been  chasing  a  strange  sail  about 
the  same  distance  to  leeward.  The  wind  was  light,  about 
north-west,  and  the  weather  misty  enough  to  reduce  the 
range  of  vision  very  low.  But  shortly  before  noon  the 
Defiance,  was  able  to  make  the  signal  for  a  strange  fleet  of 
twenty-four  sail  and  then  twenty-seven  to  the  south-south- 
west. Caldcr  at  once  bore  away  towards  them  to  the 
south-west,  and  as  he  did  so  he  formed  close  order  of 
sailing  in  two  columns  and  cleared  for  action.^ 

The  noon  positions  of  the  opposed  flagships  show  that 
the  bodies  of  the  two  fleets  were  then  about  sixteen  miles 
apart,  and  so  thick  was  the  weather  that  for  two  hours 
neither  could  make  anything  of  the  other.  Villeneuve 
had  his  squadron  in  sailing  order  in  three  columns,  the 
Spaniards  to  starboard  and  to  leeward,  and  a  light  division 
of  two  of  the  line  and  two  frigates  thrown  forward."^  His 
course  was  about  east  direct  for  Ferrol,  but  when  his  light 
division  reported  the  advanced  ships  of  the  enemy  he  altered 
it  like  Calder  more  towards  them  to  find  out  what  they 
were.  About  one  o'clock  his  light  division  was  able  to 
report  a  British  fleet  of  twenty-one  sail  approaching  him, 
whereupon  he  signalled  to  form  the  close-hauled  line  of 
battle  on  the  Spaniards  and  to  clear  for  action.  At  this 
time  it  became  brighter,  and  the  Defiance  and  Ajax  were 
able  to  make  out  the  strangers  definitely  as  an  enemy 
with  ships  of  the  line.  On  taking  in  their  signal  Calder 
merely  reduced  his  intervals  by  half  a  cable  and  held  on 
as  he  was.^     No  attempt  was  made  to  weather  his  opponent, 

^  By  the  Signal  Book  Instructions  of  1799  the  intervals  in  close  order  were 
to  be  from  1  h  to  2  cables  {i.e.  300-400  yards),  Art.  xix.  p.  121.  Art.  ii.,  p.  127, 
gives  it  at  2  cables,  and  the  distance  between  the  columns  as  a  mile  and  a 
half.  The  diagram  (Plate  I.),  however,  which  gives  a  fleet  of  fifteen  sail 
exactly  the  same  as  Calder's  shows  a  mile  only  between  the  columns.  The 
practice  probably  was  to  vary  it  with  the  size  of  the  fleet.  (See  A  System  of 
Naval  Tactics,  1797,  p.  170.)  Length  of  ships  of  the  line  averaged  about  GO 
yards.  Eight  ships  with  seven  intervals  of  2  cables  gave  a  column  3280  yards 
long — that  is,  1'64  mile  on  sea  reckoning  of  10  cables  to  the  mile.  Calder's 
fleet  in  close  order  must  have  covered  about  Ih  square  miles.  In  open  order 
the  intervals  were  from  ;>  to  4  cables,  which  with  eight  ships  might  give  a  line 
of  over  3  miles. 

-  Galiano,  Rcvinta  General  de  Marina,  1908,  p.  477  note. 

^  Signal  52  :  "  To  keep  in  closer  order."  By  Instruction  xix.,  p.  121,  every 
time  this  signal  was  made  the  ships  closed  half  a  cable. 


July  22 


THE    APPROACH 


197 


his  intention  being  apparently  to  interpose  his  squadron 
between  Villeneuve  and  Ferrol  and  to  engage  him  to 
leeward. 

As  yet  neither  could  make  sure  of  the  other's  battle 
force.  The  Aveather  had  thickened  again  so  much  that  the 
two  fleets  could  only  just  see  each  other  dimly  through  the 
mist.  As  the  Combined  Squadron  formed  the  close-hauled 
line  of  battle  w^ith  the  wind  now  at  west-north-west,  it  w^as 
of  course  heading  to  the  northward.  Gravina  himself  was 
leading,  and  the  two  fleets  thus  held  on  towards  each  other 
for  an  hour  in  the  fog.  It  was  not  till  past  two  o'clock 
that  it  began  to  lift  again,  and  then  Calder's  advanced 
frigates,  w^hich  had  run  down  the  enemy's  line,  were  able  to 
signal  his  exact  force.  Villeneuve  had  ordered  his  light 
division  to  fall  into  station  in  the  rear,  and  the  frigates  had 
counted  from  twenty  to  twenty- two  of  the  line.^ 

To  the  British  Admiral  so  large  a  force  must  have  been 
a  severe  surprise,  and  since  his  reputation  for  hard  fight- 
ing afterwards  fell  so  low,  it  is  agreeable  to  draw  close 
attention  to  the  spirit  with  Avhich  he  dealt  with  the  unex- 
pected situation.  In  effect  that  situation  was  that  he  found 
a  numerically  superior  fleet  coming  up  close-hauled  to  wind- 

^  The  lines  of  battle  were  as  follows  : — 


British. 

Hero  (74)         .        .     Alan  Gardner. 
Ajax  (74)         .         .     Will.  Brown. 
Triumph  (74) .         .     Henry  Inman. 
Barfleur  (98)   .         .     Geo.  Martin. 
Agamemnon  (64)     .    John  Harvey. 
Windsor  Castle  (98)     Chas.  Boyles. 
Defiance  (74)  .         .     P.  C.  Durham. 
Prince  of  Wales  (98)     V.-A.  Calder. 

V.-A.  Nugent 
(Capt.  of  the 
Fleet). 

Will.     Cuming 
(Flag-Capt.). 
Repulse  (74)  .         .     A.  K.  Legge. 
Raisonnable  (G4)    .     Josias  Rowley. 
Dragon  (74)    .         .     Ed.  Griffith. 
Glory  (98)     .         .     R.-A.  Stirling. 

Capt.  Warren. 
Warrior  (74)  .         .     S.  H.  Linzee. 
Thunderer  (74)       .     W.  Letchmere. 
Malta  (80)      .         .     Ed.  Buller. 


Franco-Spanish. 

Argonaute  (80)  Gravina  (flag). 
Terrible  (70)  .     Mondroyon. 
America  (61)  .     Darrac. 
Espana  (64)    .     Monios. 
S.  Raphael  (80)    Montes. 
Firme  (71) .     .     Villa  Vicentio. 

Pluton  (74)      .     Cosmard. 
Mont  Blanc  (74)  Lavillegris. 
Atlas  (74)   .     .     Rolland. 
Berwick  (74)  .     Camus. 
Neptune  (80) .     Maistrol. 
BuCENTAURE  (80)  Villeneuve 
(flag). 

Formidable  (80)  Dumanoir(flag). 
Intrepide  (74) .     Deperonne. 
Scipion  (74)     .     Berenger. 
Swiftsure  (74).     Villemadrin. 

Indomptable(80)  Gourreges. 
Aigle  (74)         .     Hubert. 
Achille  (74)      .     Demeport. 
Algeciras  (74)  Magon  (flag). 


-  ti) 


198  CALDER'S    ACTION  July  22 

ward  of  him,  and  an  action  imminent.  The  last  word  of 
Lord  Howe  and  Keiiipenfelt  on  the  subject  had  been  that 
the  proper  thing  to  do  in  these  circumstances  was  to  attack 
the  van  and  the  rear  to  prevent  being  doubled  on,  and  to 
leave  the  centre  alone ;  or  if  the  organisation  was  in  three 
divisions,  the  centre  was  to  engage  so  much  of  the  enemy's 
centre  as  it  could.^  In  other  words  they  adopted  Lord 
Torrington's  famous  principle.  But  this  Calder  did  not 
choose  to  do.  He  Avas  not  of  the  Howe-Kempenfelt  school. 
His  battle  experience  had  been  gained  as  Jervis's  first- 
captain  at  St.  Vincent  on  the  famous  Valentine's  Day,  and  it 
was  but  natural  that  he  should  share  Jervis's  mistrust  of 
formal  tactics.  Instead,  therefore,  of  accepting  the  recog- 
nised form  of  attack — and  in  spite  of  the  enemy's  force  no 
thought  but  attack  was  in  his  mind— he  chose  to  do  what 
Nelson  did  at  Trafalgar  and  concentrate  on  the  enemy's 
rear  and  centre.  The  effect  would  be  to  engage  the  part  of 
the  enemy's  line  which  Avas  not  yet  formed  and  to  leave  the 
Spaniards  alone.  How  far  these  considerations  Avere  in  his 
mind  Ave  cannot  tell,  but  Ave  may  at  least  credit  him  Avith 
the  bold  and  original  resolution  he  took. 

ToAvards  half-past  three  the  tAvo  fleets  Avere  about  eight 
miles  apart  and  bore  from  each  other  about  N.E.  and  S.W. 
Calder  still  made  no  attempt  to  get  to  AvindAvard,  but  after 
calling  in  his  advanced  ships  he  signalled  to  prepare  to 
ent^ag-e,  and  then  to  form  the  order  of  battle  to  the 
south-so uth-Avest,  a  course  Avhich  led  him  frankly  to  lee- 
Avard.-^  A  fcAV  minutes  later  he  signalled  for  another  point 
to  starboard,  and  then  the  fog  closed  doAvn  again  and  once 
more  the  tAvo  fleets  lost  sight  of  each  other.  When  it  lifted 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  they  found  themselves  running 
nearly  parallel  on  opposite  tacks  just  out  of  gunshot. 


^  signal  and  Tmtructions  (Navy  Records  Society),  pp,  77,  108,  120,  134,  173, 
319,  328-9. 

-  Jaraes  says  at  3.22  he  made  the  sig^nal  "  to  taok  together,"  which  would 
look  as  thougli  he  wanted  to  get  to  windward.  It  was  really  hoisted  with  the 
preparative  and  was  annulled  at  3.30.  At  3.33  he  made  to  the  Starboard 
division  No.  93,  "  Make  as  much  sail  as  can  be  carried  without  breaking  the 
order  in  which  the  fleet  is  formed,"  with  compass  signal  S.S. W.  This  was  the 
regular  movement  in  forming  line  of  battle  to  enable  weather  division  to  get 
ahead  of  the  lee.     At  3.43  "  Line  of  battle  iu  open  order." 


July  22  HIS    ATTACK  1 99 

For  Villeneuve  the  line  Calder  was  taking  could  have 
but  one  meaning.  Dominated  as  French  naval  opinion 
was,  and  as  opinion  must  always  tend  to  be  everywhere,  by 
the  last  great  action,  he  was  convinced  that  the  tactics  of 
the  Nile  were  in  the  British  Admiral's  mind  and  that  Calder 
meant  to  double  on  his  rear.^  It  was  not  yet  in  order, 
and  with  a  view  of  supporting  it  Villeneuve  passed  orders 
up  the  line  to  Gravina  for  the  fleet  to  wear  in  succession 
the  moment  he  heard  firing  in  the  rear.  It  happened,  how- 
ever, that  Gravina  just  then  caught  sight  of  a  French  frigate 
through  the  mist  repeating  the  preparative  signal  that  had 
been  made,  and  luckily  for  Villeneuve  he  began  the  move- 
ment immediately.^  At  the  same  moment  the  Hero,  which 
was  leading  the  British  line — an  old  and  weak  seventy-four 
under  Captain  Alan  Gardner — had  reached  the  enemy's 
centre,  and  Calder,  seeing  the  moment  had  come  for  his 
manoeuvre,  signalled  to  tack  in  succession.  His  object  was 
to  bring  his  fleet  close  under  the  lee  of  the  part  he  meant 
to  engage  and  on  the  same  tack  as  the  enemy,  and  directly 
the  signal  was  hauled  down,  he  hoisted  "  Engage  the  enemy's 
centre,"  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  "  Close  order."  ^ 

Thus  not  till  the  last  moment  did  he  let  his  captains 
know  the  plan  of  attack,  and  it  so  happened  that  the  van 
ships  did  not  take  in  the  determinative  signal  to  engage 
the  centre.  In  the  log  of  Captain  Gardner  it  does  not 
appear  at  all ;  in  that  of  the  Ajax,  who  had  taken  her 
station  astern  of  him,  it  stands  simply  as  "  engage  the 
enemy."  The  fact  was  that  before  the  signal  could  reach 
Gardner  at  the  head  of  the  line  he  had  been  driven  to  act 
on  his  own  initiative.  As  he  led  to  the  northward  along 
the  enemy's  line  he  suddenly  became  aware  of  a  large 
Spanish  ship  coming  down  upon  him  free  upon  the  opposite 
tack.  It  was  Gravina's  own  flagship  as  she  led  the  move- 
ment to  save  the  French  rear.      Here,  then,  was  Calder's 


^  Duro,  Armada  Espanola,  viii.  291. 

^  The  promptitude  with  which  this  manoeuvre  was  executed  is  attributed 
to  the  foresight  of  Gravina's  chief  of  the  staff,  Escano,  in  a  MS.  Elogio  de  Don 
Antonio  Escano,  quoted  by  General  Galiano. 

^  This  meant  anything  from  a  cable  to  half  a  cable  according  to  the 
weather. 


200  CALDER'S   ACTION  july22 

intended  attack  completely  parried.  It  was  too  thick  for 
the  Admiral  to  see  what  was  happening,  nor  could  Gardner 
see  Calder's  flagship.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  If  he  held  on 
the  fleets  Avould  pass  again  on  opposite  tacks,  a  form  of 
engaging  which  had  long  been  condemned  as  incapable  of 
producing  a  decisive  result.  He  determined,  therefore,  on 
his  own  responsibility  to  go  about  and  lead  the  fleet  on 
the  same  tack  as  the  enemy.  Before  he  could  get  round 
Gravina  was  upon  him,  and  gave  him  a  broadside  while  he 
was  still  ill  stays.  Fortunately  the  Spanish  flagship  had 
got  a  list  to  port  from  bad  stowage,  and  her  fire  was  not 
well  enough  directed  to  do  much  harm.  Gardner  was, 
therefore,  able  to  continue  the  movement,  and  in  this  way 
about  five  o'clock  the  action  began,  but  in  an  entirely 
difl'erent  form  from  that  which  Calder  had  intended. 

Immediately  after  opening  fire  Gravina  found  he  had 
reached  the  rearmost  ship  of  his  own  fleet,  and  in  accord- 
ance with  verbal  orders  he  had  received  from  Villcneuve  in 
passing,  he  hauled  to  the  wind  and  stood  west-south-west 
across  the  French  Avake  to  cover  their  rear.  It  was  not 
for  three-quarters  of  an  hour  that  Calder  knew  what  had 
happened.  At  that  time  he  was  hailed  by  the  Ajax,  the 
Herds  second  astern,  who  had  tacked  after  Gardner.  She, 
however,  had  hove-to,  and  getting  engaged  with  two  of  the 
enemy  she  had  been  driven  out  of  the  line  to  leeward,  and 
had  thought  best  to  bear  up  to  Avarn  the  Admiral,  who  had 
just  reached  the  point  for  tacking.^  There  was  nothing  for 
it  now  but  to  confirm  the  movement.  By  this  time  six 
ships  had  followed  Gardner's  lead.  The  flagship  was  the 
seventh,  and  Calder,  hoisting  the  "  General "  to  tack  in 
succession,  went  about  himself. 

Thus  his  well-meant  attack  was  spoiled  by  circumstances 

1  James  (vol.  iii.  360)  says  the  Ajnx  tacked  at  5.45  and  immediately  bore 
up  to  the  Admiral  instead  of  supporting  Gardner,  and  he  condemns  Captain 
Brown  for  his  conduct.  But  Brown's  Log  says  he  began  to  engage  at 
5.3.5,  tacked  at  5.50.  and  hove-to  abreast  of  two  two-deckers,  one"  on  the 
weather  bow  and  one  on  the  weather  quarter,  and  there  remained  "  engaging 
the  enemy  as  they  came  up  out  of  the  fog."  He  certainly  lost  more  heavily 
than  any  ship  of  his  size.  The  Ajax  a  time  must  have  been  ahead  of  that  of 
the  flagship.  James  did  not  observe  this.  He  says  Ajax  tacked  at  5.45,  and 
that  by  5.50  (Calder's  time)  six  ships  had  tacked  ! 


July  22  A     BLIND     FIGHT  201 

over  which  he  had  no  control,  and  by  the  accident  of 
Gravina's  tacking  before  Villeneuve  intended.  Calder  was 
now  committed  to  a  concentration  on  the  van  and  centre, 
an  evil  method  of  engaging  which  led  inevitably  to  a 
counter  concentration  on  his  own  rear  as  the  enemy's  rear 
came  up.  He  had,  moreover,  only  twelve  ships  in  action. 
The  Hero  as  well  as  the  Ajax  had  been  driven  out  of  the 
line  before  he  himself  tacked,  and  the  Barfleiir  98,  the 
fourth  ship,  was  now  at  grips  with  Gravina.  And  not  only 
were  the  two  weak  leading  ships  gone,  but  the  powerful 
Dragon  was  still  beating  up  from  to  leeward,  and  indeed  did 
not  succeed  in  rejoining  till  the  action  was  over. 

The  Malta  in  the  extreme  rear  brought  up  against  the 
twelfth  ship  of  the  enemy's  line,  which  happened  to  be  the 
headmost  of  their  rear,  also  an  80~gun  ship,  carrying  the 
flag  of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir,  but  most  of  the  French 
rear  never  got  into  action.  Thus  after  all  Calder  had  suc- 
ceeded in  attacking  an  equal  part  of  the  enemy's  line,  but 
what  happened  afterwards  no  one  could  tell  even  approxi- 
mately. The  fog  settled  down  again  thicker  than  ever  as 
the  fleets  stood  away  to  the  west-south-west  closely  engaged. 
For  the  most  part  they  could  not  even  see  what  they  were 
firing  at,  and  let  fly  at  the  flashes  of  each  other's  guns. 
Villeneuve  himself  as  he  came  about  did  not  know  whether 
the  enemy  were  to  port  or  starboard.  Friend  could  hardly 
be  told  from  foe.  The  Malta  as  she  rounded  into  action 
tired  on  a  British  frigate.  So  the  blind  tight  went  on  till 
the  night  closed  down  upon  it,  and  it  was  not  till  nine 
o'clock  that  all  was  still. 

By  that  time  the  British  found  themselves  in  possession 
of  the  two  rearmost  ships  of  the  Spanish  squadron,  which 
after  an  heroic  resistance  had  fallen  to  leeward  disabled  into 
the  midst  of  the  British  fleet.  It  was  the  Windsor  Castle  98, 
it  would  seem,  that  had  contributed  most  to  the  success 
and  suflered  most  severely,  losing  her  foretopmast  and 
forty-four  men  killed  and  wounded.  "  She  did  splendidly," 
said  an  oflicer  who  was  present,  and  to  judge  by  the  casual- 
ties, it  was  she  and  another  three-decker — the  Prince  of 
Wales — that  did  most  of  the  damage.      Nowhere  else  was 


202 


CALDER'S    ACTION 


July  22 


mucli  harm  done,  except  in  the  British  rear.  Here  the 
Malta,  in  the  place  of  honour,  with  the  Thunderer  74  next 
ahead,  suffered  the  inevitable  concentration,  but  not  with- 
out inflicting  serious  loss  upon  their  adversaries.  Both 
ships,  however,  were  severely  cut  up,  and  the  Malta  lost  as 
many  men  as  the  Windsor  Castle} 

"  A  very  decisive  action,"  Calder  wrote  in  his  despatch 
next  morning,  "  which  lasted  upwards  of  four  hours,  when  1 
found  it  necessary  to  bring-to  the  squadron  to  cover  the 
captured  ships."  Villeneuve  saw  it  differently.  "  The 
enemy  then  made  off,"  he  wrote  in  his  report.  "  He  had 
had  several  vessels  crippled  aloft,  and  the  field  of  battle 
remained  ours.  Cries  of  joy  and  victory  were  heard  from 
all  our  ships." " 

^  The  following  returns  of  casualties  will  assist  in  showing  where  the  brunt 
of  the  action  fell  : — 


Brtttsh. 

Franco-Spanish. 

Killed 

Wounded. 

Killed.  ^N 

'oiinded 

Hero  (74)  .     .     . 

1 

4 

Argonaute  (80)  . 

6 

5 

Ajax  (74)  .     .     . 

2 

IG 

Terrible  (70) 

1 

7 

Triumph  (74)      . 

5 

G 

America  (61) 

5 

13 

Barfleur  (98) 

3 

7 

Espana  (64)    .     . 

5 

10 

Agamemnon  (G4j 

0 

3 

S.  Raphael  (80.  . 

53 

114 

Firme(71)     .     .     . 

41 

97 

Windsor  Castle  (98 

)      10 

3-. 

Defiance  (74)      . 

1 

7 

Pluton  (74)     .     . 

8 

22 

Prince  of  Wales  (9.^ 

)       ^ 

20 

Mont  Blanc  (74  j 

6 

11 

Repulse  (74)  .     . 

0 

4 

Atlas  (74)  .     .     . 

10 

32 

Raisonnablc  ((')4; 

1 

1 

Berwick  (74)       . 

2 

8 

Glory  (98)       .     . 

1 

1 

Neptune  (80)      . 

1 

7 

Warrior  (74)  .     . 

0 

0 

Bucentaure  (80) 

3 

3 

Thunderer  (74 1  . 

7 

21 

Formidable  (80) 

4 

6 

Malta  (80)      .     . 

5 

40 

Intrepide  (74)     . 

5 

5 

— 



Scipion  (74)  .     . 

0 

0 

41 

158 

Swiftsure  (74)    . 

0 

0 

Dragon  (74) 

Not  inaction, 

Indomptable  (89) 

1 

1 

4  w 

Dunded 

Aigle(74)       .     . 

4 

0 

by 

explo- 

Achille(74)    .     . 

0 

0 

sion 

Algegiras  (74)     . 

0 
155 

0 
341 

f  British  . 

41  killed.         158 

wounded. 

Total.  \  Spanish  . 
1  French  . 

111 
44 

24G 

95 

j  155  killed 

341  w 

ounded 

The  Formidahle  and  Athii^  both  lost  their  captains  killed. 

2  By  far  the  best  account  of  the  action  is  that  given  by  James,  iii.  360  ct 
seq.  That  which  Admiral  Ekins  attempted  {Navtil  Battles,  p.  6G2)  is  grotesque. 
He  says  he  could  get  no  very  clear  or  satisfactory  account  from  the  cap- 
tains engaged,  except  that  all  agreed  it  was  a  very  ill-conducted  action. 
Colonel  iSesbriere,  like  Ekins,  unfortunately  thought  Gravina  tacked  instead 


July  23  AFTER   THE    ACTION  203 

The  claim  of  neither  Admiral  was  ever  endorsed  by 
competent  opinion.  Events,  it  is  true,  went  far,  at  least 
strategically,  to  justify  Calder's  boast  that  the  action  Avas 
decisive,  but  Villeneuve's  vaunt  of  retaining  possession  of 
the  field  had  no  justification.  The  actual  result  of  the 
battle  was  that  Calder  had  maintained  his  position,  barring 
Villeneuve's  approach  to  Ferrol  and  the  Galician  signal 
stations  ;  he  had  captured  two  of  the  line  from  a  superior 
force,  and  had  inflicted  on  his  enemy  three  times  the  loss 
he  himself  had  sustained.  So  far  Calder  had  certainly  won 
a  victory.  His  conduct  in  the  action  received  the  commen- 
dation of  the  Admiralty,  and  was  never  called  in  question. 
He  certainly  believed  he  had  done  well,  and  in  the  early 
hours  of  the  night  sent  word  down  the  fleet  that  he  meant 
to  renew  the  battle  in  the  morning. 

When  day  broke,  however,  he  found  his  fleet  widely 
scattered.  The  van  were  far  away  to  windward  towards  the 
distant  enemy;  the  frigates  and  prizes,  together  with  the 
Windsor  Castle  and  Thunderer,  were  out  of  sight  somewhere 
to  leeward.  To  add  to  his  anxiety  for  their  safety  the 
returns  of  damages  to  rigging  which  he  received  were  so 
serious  as  to  forbid  an  attempt  to  work  to  windward,  and  he 
decided  that  his  only  course  was  to  call  down  the  van  and 
then  bear  up  to  get  in  touch  with  the  cripples  to  leeward. 

As  had  happened  so  fatally  in  Byng's  case  Calder's  first 
spirited  determination  to  renew  the  action  had  been  weak- 
ened by  secondary  considerations  when  the  stir  of  excite- 
ment was  over.  The  despatch  which  he  now  resolved  to 
send  to  Cornwallis  exactly  explains  his  altered  view  of  the 
situation.  "  The  enemy,"  he  wrote,  "  are  now  in  sight  to 
windward  and  when  I  have  secured  the  captured  ships  and 

of  wearing,  and  bis  diagrams  are  therefore  misleading.  General  Galiano  {El 
Comhate  de  Trafalgar)  corrects  this  error  in  his  diagram.  Both  he  and 
Desbriere  give  the  invaluable  report  of  Captain  Escano,  Gravina's  Chief  of 
the  Staff,  which  for  the  first  time  renders  a  trustworthy  account  of  the  battle 
possible  {Trafalgar,  Appendix  of  JDocuments,  p.  3).  Villeneuve's  and  other 
accounts  are  in  his  ProjeU  et  Tentative^,  v.  ch.  xiv.  Mr.  Leyland,  in  his 
Blockade  of  BreH,  vol.  ii.  {Navy  Records  Society),  prints  Calder's  account,  and 
two  fuller  reports  by  officers  in  the  Egyptienne  repeating  frigate.  Calder's 
Journal  is  missing,  but  the  Logs  of  all  the  ships  are  in  the  Record  Office.  In 
addition  to  the  documents  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere,  General  Galiano 
prints  the  reports  of  the  captains  of  the  two  captured  vessels  San  Fa2:)hael  and 
Firme. 


204  CALDER'S     ACTION  July  24 

put  the  squadron  to  rights,  I  shall  endeavour  to  avail  my- 
self of  every  opportunity  that  may  ofter  to  give  you  some 
further  account  of  these  combined  squadrons.  At  the  same 
time  it  will  behove  me  to  be  on  my  guard  against  the  com- 
bined squadrons  at  Ferrol,  as  I  am  led  to  believe  they  have 
sent  off  one  or  two  of  their  crippled  ships  last  night  for  that 
port.  Therefore  possibly  I  may  find  it  necessary  to  make 
a  junction  with  you  immediately  off  Ushant  with  the  whole 
squadron.  P.S.  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  sending  the 
Windsor  Castle  to  you  in  consequence  of  the  damage  she 
sustained  in  the  action."  ^ 

On  the  morrow  no  such  opportunity  as  he  indicated 
occurred.  It  is  true  that  Villeneuve  did  make  some  show 
of  renewing  the  action,  but  he  always  asserted  that  Calder 
refused  to  let  him  close.  Calder,  on  the  other  hand,  main- 
tained that  Villeneuve,  with  all  the  advantai^e  of  the  weather 
position,  refused  to  come  within  reach  of  him.  On  the  24th 
the  wind  shifted  in  Calder's  favour,  but  still  he  made  no 
attempt  to  engage.  The  enemy  was  barely  in  sight  and  in 
his  opinion  it  was  out  of  his  power  to  force  an  action  with- 
out risking  his  prizes  and  crippled  ships  or  permitting 
Villeneuve  to  get  touch  with  the  Spanish  signal  stations. 
His  view  was  that  so  long  as  he  maintained  a  position 
which  forbade  Villeneuve  to  gain  his  object  without  fight- 
ing, he  secured  the  fruits  of  his  victory.  He  always  con- 
tended that  in  this  resolution  he  followed  the  example  of 
Howe  and  Jervis.  Neither  the  one  after  the  First  of  June, 
nor  the  other  after  St.  Vincent,  had  behaved  differently, 
and  yet  neither  Howe  nor  Jervis  had  a  second  equal  and 
unshaken  fleet  threatening  him  from  behind.  "■  Circum- 
stanced as  I  was,"  he  said,  "it  appeared  to  me  to  be 
impracticable  to  force  the  enemy  to  action  with  such 
advantage  as  would  justify  me,  even  if  I  had  nothing  to 
apprehend  but  the  opposing  squadron.  But  Avhen  I  re- 
flected that  sixteen  sail  were  at  Ferrol,  who  might  have 
come  out  to  the  assistance  of  the  combined  fleet,  or  ...  . 
be  pushing  to  England,  the  invasion  of  which  was  an  event 
daily  expected,  I  felt  by  renewing  the  action  I  should  run 

1  Blockade  of  Bred,  ii.  312. 


July  25  HIS   POSITION    MAINTAINED  205 

too  great  a  hazard  and  put  my  fleet  in  a  state  of  danger 
which  I  could  not  have  been  justified  for  doing.  I  therefore 
thought  it  best  to  keep  my  squadron  together  and  not  to 
force  the  enemy  to  a  second  engagement  till  a  more  favour- 
able opportunity.  At  the  same  time  conceiving  that  their 
object  was  to  join  the  ships  at  Ferrol,  I  determined  to 
prevent  them." 

This  he  certainly  did.  On  the  morning  of  the  25  th  the 
two  fleets  were  no  longer  in  sight  of  one  another ;  wind  and 
sea  were  rising ;  and  Villeneuve,  fearing  for  his  shattered 
ships,  resolved  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  hold  up  for 
Ferrol  and  bear  away  for  Cadiz  instead.  Even  this,  as  the 
weather  grew  wilder  every  hour,  soon  seemed  too  great  a 
hazard.  Gravina  was  consulted  as  to  the  possibility  of 
getting  into  Vigo,  and  the  result  of  the  conference  was  that 
they  turned  back  and  ran  for  that  port  for  refuge. 

Of  this  movement  Calder  could  have  no  knowledge. 
His  two  frigates  were  too  deeply  engaged  with  the  crippled 
ships  to  keep  touch  with  the  enemy,  and  all  he  knew  was 
that  the  Combined  Squadron  had  disappeared  to  the 
southward.  In  the  circumstances  he  could  not  but  think 
that  he  had  done  all  that  was  required.  In  a  successful 
action  he  had  maintained  the  vital  Finisterre  position ;  he 
had  foiled  the  Ferrol  concentration,  and  he  felt  that  he 
could  take  his  own  line.  His  first  care  was  to  see  the 
Windsor  Castle  and  his  two  prizes  as  far  to  the  northward 
on  their  way  home  as  would  render  them  reasonably  safe 
from  attack  either  from  Rochefort  or  Ferrol.  This  done 
he  held  away  back  for  the  original  rendezvous  Corn- 
wallis  had  given  him  in  hope  of  getting  in  touch  with 
Nelson,  who  might  be  expected  to  appear  any  day.  If 
Nelson  was  not  to  be  found  it  was  his  intention  to  return 
off  Ferrol. 

What  judgment  must  be  passed  on  Calder's  conduct  ? 
It  is  probably  one  of  the  most  difficult  cases  in  history — 
a  case  of  delicate  choice  between  the  primary  object  of 
destroying  the  enemy's  fleet  and  the  ulterior  object  of 
defending  England  against  invasion.  Most  modern  writers 
condemn  him  out  of  hand  as  a  man  of  little  heart,  who  did 


206  CALDER'S     ACTION  July 

what  was  obviously  the  wrong  thing  from  sheer  pusil- 
lanimity. His  brother  officers,  after  hearing  the  evidence 
for  three  days  and  being  in  touch  with  the  sentiment  of 
that  golden  time,  were  not  so  sure.  For  six  hours  they 
sat  in  secret  and  anxious  debate  before  a  decision  was 
reached,  and  then  they  condemned  him  to  be  reprimanded. 
But  for  what  ?  ''  For  not  having  done  his  utmost  to  renew 
the  said  engagement  and  to  take  and  destroy  every  ship  of 
the  enemy."  With  that  he  was  charged,  and  of  that  he 
was  assuredly  guilty.  But  in  Calder's  view,  to  put  the 
charge  in  that  way  was  to  beg  the  whole  question.  In  his 
view  it  was  his  duty  in  the  circumstances  not  to  renew  the 
action  and  not  to  try  to  destroy  every  ship  of  the  enemy. 
His  duty  was  to  keep  his  fleet  in  being  and  prevent  the 
enemy  getting  to  Ferrol.  The  modern  conception  of  war- 
fare is  such  that  probably  any  tribunal  of  naval  officers 
would  condemn  him  again  to-day,  but  in  those  days  the 
creed  of  the  primary  object  was  not  so  ripe.  To  condemn 
Calder  for  a  mistake  is  one  thing;  to  brand  him  as  a  faint- 
hearted blunderer  is  another. 

He  himself  believed  that,  like  Byng,  he  was  the  victim 
of  popular  outcry.  In  publishing  his  despatch  the  Admiralty 
had  suppressed  the  last  passage  which  hinted  at  the  possi- 
bility of  his  not  being  able  to  renew  the  action.  The 
country  consequently  in  a  condition  of  elated  expectation  was 
looking  every  day  to  hear  of  the  completion  of  the  victory, 
and  what  they  got  was  news  of  a  retreat.  The  revulsion 
of  the  disappointment,  he  always  maintained,  was  what 
hounded  him  to  his  fate.  But  the  truth  is  the  Admiralty 
and  Government  were  at  one  with  public  opinion ;  and  now 
that  we  know  the  soul  of  Barham's  plan  we  can  see  why  it 
was  so.  He  had  taken  great  risks  to  secure  a  great  moral 
result.  His  object  was  to  estabhsh  an  abiding  dread  that 
though  hostile  squadrons  might  slip  out  of  their  blockaded 
ports,  the  penalty  of  their  success  would  be  never  to  return. 
At  the  cost  of  a  sacrifice  admirably  judged  he  had  placed 
Calder  in  a  position  to  secure  that  end,  and  Calder  had  not 
secured  it.  At  the  psychological  moment  he  had  looked 
behind  him  in  confused  anxiety  for  matters  which  did  not 


July  NELSON'S    OPINION  207 

concern  him,  and  for  which  Barham  had  provided  amply. 
It  was  a  lapse  of  warlike  spirit  for  which  it  was  impossible 
to  forgive  him,  and  a  court-martial  was  inevitable. 

His  real  defence  was  never  raised.  It  was,  that  the 
situation,  the  real  inner  intent  of  Barham's  orders,  was 
never  explained  to  him,  and  he  did  not  know  that  his  one 
and  only  duty,  whatever  the  result  to  his  own  fleet,  was  if  he 
once  got  hold  never  to  let  go  so  long  as  he  had  a  tooth  left. 

This  principle — to  fight  to  a  finish  when  in  doubt — has 
become  an  axiom  in  modern  naval  opinion,  but  it  was 
scarcely  so  when  Calder  fought.  The  hardest  part  of  his 
case  is  that  he  fought  the  action  under  one  standard,  and 
was  tried  for  it  under  another.  Between  the  action  and 
the  court-martial  Nelson  fought  and  won  Trafalgar. 
Trafalgar  set  up  an  ideal  of  hot-pressed  action  and  a 
sentiment  of  confident  superiority  which  did  not  exist 
when  Calder  fought,  anywhere  but  in  Nelson  and  his  band 
of  brothers.  Nelson,  of  course,  had  no  doubt  in  the  matter, 
and  deeply  as  he  sympathised  with  Calder  he  put  his  finger 
at  once  upon  the  black  spot.  ''  He  appears,"  so  he  wrote 
to  the  Second  Sea  Lord,  "  to  have  had  the  ships  at  Ferrol 
more  in  his  head  than  the  squadron  in  sight.  .  .  .  He  lays 
stress  upon  other  considerations  than  fighting  the  enemy's 
squadron,  if  he  could  have  done  it,  ivliich  he  denies  to  he 
possible.  I  have  ventured  to  recommend  Calder  to  keep  to 
that ;  prove  it  and  his  character  is  retrieved."  ^  In  Nelson's 
eyes,  then,  the  one  and  only  excuse  for  not  concentrating 
effort  on  the  squadron  in  sight  was  the  impossibility  of 
bringing  it  to  action.  He  himself  would  certainly  have 
gone  at  Villeneuve  again,  and  so  would  Monck  in  older 
days  ;  but  can  we  say  with  any  confidence  there  were  two 
flag-officers  in  the  service  at  the  time  who  would  not  have 
erred  with  Calder,  knowing  only  what  Calder  knew.  The 
better  way,  then,  is  not  to  indulge  in  facile  condemnation, 
but  to  try  to  realise  with  humility  the  tremendous  power 
upon  overAvrought  nerves  of  the  "  considerations  other  than 
fighting"  which  led  him  astray.  So  may  a  man  best 
strengthen  himself  against  doing  likewise  in  like  case. 

^  Nelson  to  Gambier,  Oct.  2,  in  Chatterton's  Memorials  of  GamUer,  ii.  4. 


CHAPTER   XV 

MOVEMENTS  AFTER   CALDER'S   ACTION 

Defensible  or  indefensible,  Calder's  misapprehension  of 
what  Avas  required  of  him  had  brought  to  the  ground 
Barham's  bold  conception  for  a  counter-stroke.  Napoleon's 
plan  to  all  appearance  had  so  far  succeeded  that  we  were 
thrust  back  upon  the  defensive,  and  nothing  in  the  cam- 
paign is  more  interesting  than  the  automatic  manner  in 
which  the  wide-flung  fleet  shrank  back  to  the  strategical 
centre,  to  meet  the  threatening  concentration. 

Nelson  was  the  flrst  to  move.  Convinced  like  Barham 
that  Villeneuvo's  destination  was  Cadiz,  he  had  set  his 
course  from  Antigua  straight  for  Cape  St.  Vincent,  sure 
that  the  best  way  to  bring  his  chase  to  action  was  to  make 
that  landfall  before  him.  "  The  enemy,"  wrote  Captain 
Bayntun  of  the  Leviathan  on  June  21st  to  Nelson,  after  he 
had  got  wind  of  Villeneuve  from  the  American  skipper, 
"  the  enemy  cannot  be  far  ahead,  and  by  our  taking  a  more 
easterly  direction  it  is  possible  (if  he  be  bound  that  way), 
we  may  arrive  off  St.  Vincent  before  him.  Your  lordship 
each  night  forms  a  part  of  his  dreams."  ^  The  Decade, 
which  he  had  sent  on  to  Lisbon,  was  to  meet  him  at  the 
cape.  He  made  it  on  July  17th,  but  of  the  enemy  there 
was  no  news  whatever,  except  that  Missiessy  had  got  back 
to  Rochefort  two  months  since.  Nothing  had  been  heard 
of  Villeneuve,  and  after  sending  to  communicate  with 
Collingwood,  Nelson  moved  down  to  Gibraltar  to  renew  his 
stores.  On  the  20th  he  went  ashore — being  the  first  time 
for  all  but  two  years  that  he  had  set  foot  out  of  the  Victory. 
He  had  still  a  remnant  of  hope  that  he   had   forestalled 

1  Nelson  Papers  :  Add.  MSS.  34930. 
2o8 


juLYiS  NELSON    AND    COLLINGWOOD  209 

Villencuve,  and  would  be  able  to  fight  him  as  he  approached 
the  Straits ;  but  he  now  received  a  letter  of  welcome  from 
Colhngwood  containing  an  appreciation  of  the  situation 
which  differed  entirely  from  his  own. 

Throughout  the  war  Collingwood's  service  had  been  in 
the  Channel,  and  his  ideas  inevitably  took  the  colour  of 
his  station.  This  station  bias  appears  to  be  as  constant  as 
anything  in  war — a  condition  of  the  human  factor  that  has 
to  be  taken  into  account.  Every  commander  is  predisposed 
to  see  in  his  own  theatre  of  operations  the  objective  of  those 
of  the  enemy  ;  und  as  Nelson,  against  the  balance  of  pro- 
bability as  it  seems  to  us  now,  clung  to  his  apprehension 
for  the  Mediterranean,  so  Collingwood  had  not  got  rid  of 
his  preoccupation  with  the  Channel.  It  would  be  unsafe, 
therefore,  to  argue  that  because  in  the  main  he  was  right  in 
this  case  and  Nelson  wrong,  that  his  strategical  penetration 
was  greater  than  Nelson's.  The  view  he  now  laid  before 
his  chief  was  that  Villeneuve's  object  was  to  bring  out  the 
Ferrol  and  Rochefort  squadrons,  and  so  appear  off  Ushant 
with  thirty-four  of  the  line,  and  there  be  joined  by  twenty 
more  from  Brest.  Cornwallis  by  concentrating  the  three 
divisions  of  the  Western  Squadron  would  not  have  more 
than  thirty.  "  This,"  he  says,  "  appears  to  be  a  probable 
plan.  For  unless  it  is  to  bring  these  great  fleets  and  armies 
to  some  point  of  service — some  rash  attempt  at  conquest — 
they  have  been  only  subjecting  them  to  chance  of  loss,  which 
I  do  not  believe  the  Corsican  would  do,  without  the  hope 
of  adequate  reward."  ^ 

Nelson,  however,  still  clung  to  his  waning  hope.  His 
intention  was,  as  he  informed  the  Admiralty,  to  proceed  to 
Tetuan  for  fresh  victuals  and  water.  In  the  meantime,  he 
said,  he  was  sending  to  Collingwood  and  Bickerton  for  the 
orders  they  had  received  in  his  absence,  and  if  he  found 
them  to  contain  nothing  to  the  contrary,  he  would  then, 
after  providing  for  the  blockade  of  Cartagena,  take  station 
outside  the  Mediterranean  and  wait  for  further  instructions. 
If,  however,  he  heard  Villeneuve  had  made  for  the  Bay,  he 

^  Collingwood  to  Nelson,  off  Cadiz,  June  18th  :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS. 
34930.     Printed  in  Nicolas,  vi.  472. 


2IO  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  July  20-25 

would  forthwith  join  the  Fcrrol  or  the  Ushant  squadron,  as 
circumstances  seemed  to  require.^ 

The  interval  he  employed  in  rcstormg  the  situation  in 
the  Mediterranean.  He  could  not  understand  the  existing 
disposition,  with  Collingwood's  fleet  divided  between  Cadiz 
and  Cartagena,  and  nothing  at  all  with  Knight  at  Gibraltar 
to  control  the  Straits.  But  above  all  he  was  concerned  for 
Craig  at  Malta.  He  found  orders  recalling  the  sloops  from 
that  station  to  join  Collingwood.  So  active  were  the 
enemy's  privateers,  and  so  incapable  the  island  of  feeding 
itself  unless  the  adjacent  waters  were  free,  that  he  knew 
this  w^ould  mean  the  starvation  of  the  garrison.  His  first 
letter  to  Barham,  on  hearing  of  his  appointment  as  First 
Lord,  was  to  protest  against  the  arrangement.  He  even 
took  upon  himself  to  cancel  it  and  order  the  cruisers  back 
again.  Nor  did  he  stop  here.  He  reorganised  the  whole 
command  into  three  sections,  and  sent  home  a  requisition 
for  the  force  required  for  each.  Collingwood  was  to  com- 
mand from  St.  Vincent  as  far  as  Cape  Spartel  on  the 
Moorish  coast  for  the  blockade  of  Cadiz  and  Seville.  Knight 
was  to  have  the  Straits  or  Gibraltar  section  extending  from 
Spartel  to  Malaga  with  a  substantial  cruiser  squadron 
under  his  flag.  Bickerton,  whom  he  sent  for  in  person, 
was  to  have  the  rest,  with  explicit  directions  as  to  hoAv  he 
was  to  dispose  his  force  for  the  blockade  of  Cartagena,  the 
defence  of  Sardinia,  Sicily,  Naples,  and  Malta,  and  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Levant  trade.  These  arrangements  were 
completed  on  July  22nd,  and  then  Nelson  moved  out  for 
Tetuan,  little  dreaming  that  to  the  northward  ofl"  Finis- 
terre  another  was  enjoying  the  feast  he  had  prepared  so 
laboriously  for  himself. 

On  the  24th,  still  hungering  for  news — for  not  yet  had 
he  received  one  material  Avord — he  weighed  for  the  ren- 
dezvous he  had  given  off  Cape  Spartel,  where  all  his  cruisers 
were  to  meet  him.  He  had  got  no  further  than  Tarifa, 
just  outside  the  Gut,  when  at  about  half-past  three  in  the 
morning  of  the  25th,  the  Termagant,  a  sloop  recently  out 
from  England,  came  into  the  fleet.     She  had  been  into  the 

^  To  Maisden,  Gibraltar,  July  20th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  473. 


July  25  NELSON    MOVES    NORTH  211 

Tagus  on  her  Avay  down,  and  had  brought  on  a  Lisbon 
newspaper  containing  an  account  of  the  arrival  of  the 
Cicrieux,  and  the  news  she  carried.  Nelson's  mind  was 
made  up  in  a  moment.  Clearly  Villeneuve  had  been  making 
for  the  Bay,  and  thither  he  would  go.  A  strong  Levanter 
was  blowing,  making  it  difHcult  to  speak  with  his  old 
friend  Collingwood.  Important  as  an  interview  was,  he 
would  not  waste  a  breath  of  the  fair  wind.  Word  was  left 
for  cruisers  to  join  him  at  St.  Vincent,  or  if  he  were  not 
there,  at  Ferrol — unless  there  was  reason  to  believe  he  had 
taken  a  different  course.  In  that  case  they  were  to  look 
for  him  at  Ushant  or  Ireland,  or  in  the  last  resort  Spithead. 
So  it  was  that  just  as  Calder  was  moving  to  the  distant 
rendezvous  off  Finisterre  in  hopes  of  meeting  him,  Nelson 
was  making  in  all  haste  to  join  hands  with  him.^  On  the 
second  day  he  was  off  St.  Vincent,  but  here  he  encountered 
the  prevailing  northerly  winds.  To  proceed  up  the  coast 
to  Ferrol  would  mean  interminable  delays,  and  would  in- 
volve the  risk  of  leaving  the  Ushant  squadron  unsupported 
at  the  critical  moment.  In  his  hands,  and  his  hands 
alone,  lay  the  possibility  of  redressing  the  balance  which 
Collingwood  had  calculated  so  anxiously.  There  was  no- 
thing for  it  but  to  reach  wide  to  the  westward,  and  he  sent 
word  to  Cornwallis  that  he  was  coming  to  him,  or  to  Ireland, 
as  intelligence  might  dictate. 

It  was  an  unhappy  decision,  for  which  nobody  can  be 
blamed.  Had  Calder  but  sent  word  to  the  southward  im- 
mediately after  the  action  it  might  have  been  avoided,  but 
he  had  no  cruiser  to  spare.  Had  he  but  sunk  his  two 
worthless  old  prizes  it  might  have  been  done.  As  it  was, 
in  default  of  information,  Nelson  had  to  assume  his  enemy 
had  gone  to  the  north,  and  was  forced  to  make  for  the  point 
of  greatest  danger.  Had  he  but  joined  Calder  what  a  world 
of  acute  anxiety  would  have  been  spared  1  what  successes 
would  have  lain  in  his  path  !     Trafalgar  might  never  have 

^  This  was  not  the  regular  rendezvous  No.  52  :  "  North-west  of  Finisterre, 
six  leagues,"  but  probably  that  mentioned  by  James:  "38  leagues  north- 
west." The  latter  position  was  roughly  in  the  latitude  of  Cape  Ortegal,  and 
about  100  miles  to  the  westward  of  Ferrol. 


212  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION         July  26-31 

been  fought,  and  Barbam's  great  idea  might  have  been 
fully  rcahsed. 

Ahead  of  him  was  a  strategical  tangle  into  which  he 
must  have  torn  Avith  resounding  advantage.  From  the 
Finistcrre  rendezvous  Calder  had  sent  the  Dragon^  his  un- 
touched seventy-four,  to  look  into  Ferrol.  She  returned 
with  the  surprising  information  that  everything  there  was 
just  as  they  had  left  it.  Gourdon  and  Grandallana  were 
still  at  their  moorings,  and  neither  Villencuve  nor  the 
Rochefort  squadron  had  appeared.  Calder  could  only  con- 
clude that  Villeneuve  had  made  for  Cadiz,  and  was  destined 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Nelson  and  Collingwood.  With 
a  quiet  mind  he  accordingly  decided  to  resume  his  blockade. 
His  original  intention  had  been  to  leave  the  Dragon  behind 
him  in  case  Nelson  might  still  be  coming  north,  but  as 
there  was  now  little  likelihood  of  this,  he  took  her  with 
him  and  left  the  rendezvous  bare.  By  July  20th  he  had 
reconstituted  the  blockade  with  fourteen  of  the  line,  but 
two  days  later  he  decided  to  send  home  his  80 -gun  ship, 
the  Malta,  to  repair  her  damages. 

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  found  himself  at  Vigo  in  what 
he  called  "  a  most  distressing  situation."  He  had  neither 
orders  nor  intelligence ;  the  port  was  without  defence  or 
any  means  of  repairing  his  ships  ;  scurvy  and  dysentery 
were  playing  havoc  with  his  crews,  and  besides  the  two 
ships  he  had  lost,  three  others,  as  the  result  of  the  action, 
were  unfit  for  service.  In  this  plight  he  had  summoned 
Gourdon  to  come  to  him,  but  Gourdon  could  only  reply  it 
was  impossible.  He  had  not  yet  been  able  to  get  out  to 
Corufia.  There  was  nothing  for  it  then  but  for  Villencuve 
to  try  to  get  to  him  at  the  risk  of  another  action.  "  May 
a  new  meeting,"  he  said,  "  be  more  fortunate  than  the  first." 
By  hook  or  by  crook  he  scraped  together  a  month's  water 
and  victuals  for  the  fifteen  vessels  which  now  constituted 
his  squadron,  and  on  the  last  day  of  July,  leaving  his  sick 
and  wounded  behind  with  the  three  disabled  vessels,  he 
put  to  sea  intent  on  reaching  Ferrol  without  an  action. 
Outside  on  the  morrow,  August  1st,  he  was  fortunate 
enough     to     find     a    strong    south-westerly    breeze,     and 


July  ALLEMAND  2 1 3 

with  all  speed  he  stole  away  northward,  close  along  the 
shore. 

And  where  was  Allemand  ?  Why  had  he  not  made 
Ferrol  ?  Three  days  after  Stirling  had  disappeared  from 
Rochefort  he  had  put  to  sea,  with  his  broad  pennant  in 
the  Majestueiix  120.  His  squadron  besides  comprised  four 
two-deckers  and  five  cruisers — an  ideal  force  for  the  Avork 
he  had  in  hand.  It  must  be  recalled  that  the  last  orders 
which  had  reached  him  were  to  make  a  demonstration  off 
the  West  Coast  of  Ireland,  and  be  back  at  a  certain  ren- 
dezvous 40  leagues  west  of  Ferrol  in  time  to  meet  the 
combined  squadron  on  its  return  from  the  West  Indies. 
His  main  object,  in  fact,  as  laid  down  by  Napoleon,  was  to 
bring  about  the  long-sought  junction  with  Villeneuve.  It 
was  characteristic  of  Napoleon's  inexplicable  elimination 
of  the  enemy  from  his  naval  dispositions,  that  the  ren- 
dezvous he  fixed  for  the  meeting  was  well  within  the  area 
which  Calder  had  been  directed  to  cover. ^  Indeed,  it  was 
just  40  miles  south-east  of  the  point  where  the  battle  of 
July  22nd  was  actually  fought,  and  the  Emperor's  naive 
surprise  Avhen  he  realised  it  we  shall  see  presently.  The 
time  fixed  was  the  end  of  the  month.  Allemand  was  to  be 
on  the  spot  from  July  29th  to  August  3rd,  but  here  was 
another  miscalculation.  The  order  assumed  that  Villeneuve 
would  not  start  home  till  thirty-five  days  after  Magon 
arrived.  A  possible  interference  by  Nelson  had  been 
ignored,  and  now  Nelson's  hot  pursuit  outwards  had  had 
the  effect  of  driving  Villeneuve  home,  not  only  too  soon  to 
meet  Allemand,  but  too  soon  to  receive  the  despatch  which 
explained  the  new  arrangement  for  his  junction  with  the 
Rochefort  squadron. 

To  make  matters  still  more  confused,  the  effect  of 
Stirling's  blockade  had  been  seriously  to  delay  Allemand's 
sailing  under  his  original  instructions,  and  the  consequence 
was  that  when  he  did  get  away  and  opened  his  sealed 
orders,  he  found  the  time  limited  for  his  Irish  demonstration 
had  already  expired.     It  was  for  this  reason  that  Napoleon 

1'  This  rendezvous  was  also  about  30  miles  south  by  west  of  our  own  dis- 
tant Finisterre  rendezvous,  i.e.  3S  leagues  north-west  of  Finisterre. 


2  14  AFTER    CALDEU'S    ACTION  July 

had  sent  down  an  order  to  stop  him.  It  arrived  too  late, 
and  Allemand  put  to  sea  with  the  old  instructions.  They 
directed  him  to  proceed  Avcst  400  leagues,  so  as  to  avoid 
the  British  squadrons  off  Ushant  and  Ferrol,  and  appear  off 
Ireland  from  the  westward  between  July  4th  and  9th. 
There  he  was  to  cruise  for  a  week,  and  then  run  down  to  the 
Finisterre  rendezvous  to  meet  Villeneuve.  If,  therefore,  he 
followed  his  orders  strictly  he  should  have  begun  to  make 
for  the  rendezvous  the  day  he  left  Rochefort.  But  it  was 
characteristic  of  the  man's  high  spirit  not  to  look  too 
closely  at  the  letter  of  his  orders,  but  to  try  to  do  his  best 
to  carry  out  their  intention.  He  determined,  therefore,  not 
to  give  up  the  Irish  diversion  without  an  effort.  "  Although 
the  term  had  expired,"  he  wrote  to  Decr^s,  "  I  thought,  my 
lord,  that  without  missing  my  first  rendezvous,  40  leagues 
from  Ferrol,  I  could,  with  favourable  winds  and  by  cutting 
short  my  route,  still  show  myself  off  Ireland."  ^ 

With  this  idea  he  held  away  due  west,  as  directed,  all 
unconscious  that,  instead  of  avoiding  the  Ushant  squadron,  his 
course  was  taking  him  straight  to  the  southernmost  point 
Avhich  Cornwallis  had  made  in  his  sweep  for  Villeneuve. 
But  while  he  Avas  preparing  to  weigh,  Cornwallis,  as  we  know, 
had  turned  back,  and  when  Allemand  on  July  19th  reached 
the  fatal  point,  he  found  nothing  there  but  the  Ranger  sloop 
which  Cornwallis  had  left  behind  him  to  try  to  get  wind  of 
the  Combined  Squadron  from  neutral  merchantmen.  She 
was  promptly  captured  and  sunk.  An  examination  of  her 
officers  disclosed  her  mission,  and  put  Allemand  on  his 
guard,  and  next  day  he  issued  a  ruthless  order  that  every 
neutral  that  had  been  in  sight  of  the  squadron  while  on  its 
true  course  was  to  be  captured  and  sunk.^ 

On  the  following  day,  the  21st,  he  found  himself  nearly 
150  leagues  west  of  Rochefort.  The  wind  was  drawing 
into  the  west-north-west ;  it  was  foul  for  him  to  go  on ;  and 
as  yet  he  had  not  traversed  half  the  distance  to  the  west- 
ward which  had  been  laid  down  in  his  instructions.     But  it 

1  August  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759. 

-  Rapport  du  capitaine  Allemand,  July  20th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759.  Between 
this  date  and  August  IGtli,  when  he  reached  Vigo,  he  saw  91  sail.  Of  these 
he  sunk  3  English,  and  no  less  than  22  neutrals. — Ibid.f  p.  785. 


July  21-28  ALLEMAND  215 

was  fair  for  Ireland.  At  the  risk  of  falling  foul  of  Corn- 
wallis,  he  could  shorten  his  route,  as  he  said,  and  make  up 
for  the  time  lost  at  Rochefort.  This  he  resolved  to  do,  and 
hauled  up  to  the  northward.  But  it  was  all  to  little  purpose. 
The  wind  kept  veering  continually  further  to  the  north,  and 
though  for  three  days  he  struggled  on  he  could  make  little 
progress.  True,  he  captured  a  fine  vessel  from  Guernsey, 
from  which  he  got  a  set  of  large  scale  charts  of  the  Irish 
coast,  but  by  the  23rd  he  saw  his  attempt  was  hopeless. 
While  still  over  300  miles  from  his  goal,  he  had  to  heave- 
to  in  a  stormy  northerly  wind  ;  all  chance  of  reaching  Ire- 
land in  the  time  available  was  gone,  and  next  day  he  bore 
up  for  his  Finisterre  rendezvous.^ 

In  all  naval  story  there  is  probably  no  adventure  so 
full  of  fantastic  fortune  as  this  incredible  cruise  of  Alle- 
mand's.  Pursuing  a  plan  that  was  crossed  at  every  point 
by  Barham's  finished  disposition,  he  sped  from  danger  to 
danger  as  his  master's  wilful  blindness  had  doomed  him. 
Wandering  in  the  midst  of  well-disposed  squadrons  hun- 
gering for  his  destruction,  again  and  again  he  escaped  by  a 
hairbreadth — appearing  and  disappearing  like  a  phantom 
fleet — his  every  move  forestalled,  yet  always  sheltered  by 
some  bewildering  turn  of  fortune  or  happy  stroke  of  judg- 
ment. When  we  consider  that  the  whole  episode  was  born 
of  that  little  interlineation  in  Barham's  order,  whereby  he 
altered  his  mind  at  the  last  moment  and  sent  Stirling  to 
Calder,  its  mythical  colour  is  complete.  It  is  as  though 
some  unseen  power  were  resolved  to  remind  the  veteran 
First  Lord  how  helpless  was  his  art  against  the  Fortune  of 
War. 

As  AUemand  had  begun,  so  he  continued  to  the  end. 
His  cruise  had  opened  by  his  making  straight  for  the  spot 
where  Cornwallis  had  been  waiting  for  him,  and  having 
escaped  by  mere  chance,  he  was  running  blindly  into 
Calder's  arms.  But  his  star  was  still  bright.  He  reached 
the  point  of  danger  on  July  28th,  a  day  before  he  was  due, 
and  it  was  also  the  very  day  Calder  had  moved  away  to  re- 
sume the  blockade  of  Ferrol  and  had  left  the  rendezvous  bare. 

^  Rapport  d'Allemand  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759. 


2i6  AFTER    CALDER'S   ACTION  Aug.  i-6 

Here  then  he  remained  unseen  his  allotted  time,  sending 
out  cruising  ships  to  look  for  Villeneuve.  On  August  3rd 
one  of  them  rejoined.  Of  Villeneuve  there  was  no  trace, 
but  she  had  ascertained  from  an  American,  homeward 
bound  from  Bordeaux,  that  on  the  last  day  of  July  Ferrol 
was  blockaded  by  a  squadron  of  fourteen  of  the  line. 
Thereupon,  in  accordance  with  his  instructions,  Allemand 
moved  to  a  second  rendezvous  which  had  been  given  him, 
about  IGO  miles  south-west  of  Ushant  and  just  outside  the 
Ushant-Finisterre  line — in  fact  just  about  the  limit  of 
Cornwallis's  advanced  cruisers.^  At  the  hour  of  starting 
he  found  he  was  being  watched  by  a  frigate — she  was  the 
Guilts,  of  which  more  presently — but  after  his  manner  he 
sailed  a  false  course  east-south-east  till  he  saw  her  disappear 
towards  Ferrol,  and  then  he  was  able  to  proceed  north- 
ward undetected."  As  he  reached  his  point  on  August 
Gth,  another  of  his  cruisers  came  in  to  report  that,  from 
information  obtained  from  a  Swede,  she  had  definitely 
located  a  squadron  of  eleven  of  the  line  with  three  three- 
deckers  cruising  about  60  miles  north  of  Cape  Ortegal. 
As  we  shall  see  this  Avas  also  Calder,  but  Allemand  could 
not  tell  what  to  make  of  it.  He  could  only  conclude  it 
was  another  squadron  in  search  of  him,  and  that  he  must 
have  passed  close  to  it  in  the  night.  He  naturally  became 
anxious.  His  orders  were  to  remain  where  he  was  for  a 
week.  The  idea  apparently  was  that  at  this  point  he 
would  be  able  to  fall  in  with  Villeneuve  after  he  had 
released  the  Ferrol  squadron,  and  would  be  coming  north  for 
Ushant.  But  Napoleon,  in  his  extraordinary  infatuation, 
had  omitted  to  consider  that  this  would  be  exactly  the 
area  which  his  enemy  would  be  watching  most  closely,  and 
so  it  was.  Allemand  immediately  found  himself  observed 
by  a  little  cloud  of  cruisers,  peeping  at  him  over  the  horizon 
or  pushing  their  attentions  home.  In  vain  he  tried  to 
get  hold  of  them  ;  every  one  slipped  nimbly  through  his 

^  Instructions  pour  le  commandant  de  I'escadre  de  Rochefort,  June  9th  : 
Desbriere,  v.  600.  The  second  rendezvous  was  46°  55'  N.,  7°  8'  W.  ;  and  see 
Ibid.,  p.  705,  and  chart,  anti,  p.  184. 

-  Rapport  de  la  Glolrc  and  Rapport  d' Allemand  ;  Desbriere,  v.  763-5. 


AuG.7-11  ALLEMAND  217 

fingers/  All  lie  could  come  by  were  one  or  two  merchant- 
men and  a  British  privateer  cutter  just  from  home.  But 
this  last  capture  only  added  to  his  trouble,  for  he  learnt 
from  her  that  as  she  was  sailing  from  Plymouth  two  Spanish 
prizes  had  been  brought  into  the  Sound.  Evidently  an 
action  had  been  fought,  but  was  it  with  Villeneuve  or 
with  the  Ferrol  squadron  ?  Two  days  later  further  infor- 
mation was  obtained  from  a  Portuguese  prize.  She  had 
been  boarded  a  few  days  before  by  the  Dragon,  and  her 
skipper  could  confirm  the  action.  It  was  Calder  who  had 
fought  it,  against  whom  he  knew  not,  but  he  was  sure  the 
squadron  of  eleven  of  the  line  that  had  been  seen  to  the  north 
of  Cape  Ortegal  was  the  same  which  had  fought  the  action. 
What  then  was  it  that  was  blockading  Ferrol  ?  To  make  the 
position  still  more  diflScult,  the  Portuguese  skipper  had  also 
to  tell  that  he  had  been  boarded  by  the  Phoenix  (a  frigate  of 
which  we  shall  hear  more).  She  appeared  to  be  looking 
for  Calder,  and  had  told  him  that  Villeneuve  had  been 
sighted  by  the  Curieux  flying  homewards  with  Nelson  at  his 
heels.^ 

It  was  more  than  the  harassed  Commodore  could 
endure.  There  were  still  thirty  hours  to  run  of  the  time 
he  was  to  remain  on  the  northern  rendezvous,  but  he 
decided  it  was  madness  to  remain  to  the  end.  *'  My  posi- 
tion in  the  Bay,"  he  wrote  in  his  report,  "  has  become  dis- 
turbing, my  lord.  The  squadron  blockading  Brest  must 
know  my  position  by  the  frigate  which  escaped  the  Arniide 
[i.e.  the  Naiact].  The  squadron  blockading  Ferrol  and  the 
one  which  is  cruising  in  latitude  45°  and  longitude  11° 
[that  is,  to  the  north  of  Cape  Ortegal]  are  also  informed  of 
it  by  the  frigates  which  have  watched  me.  My  station  is 
too  plainly  disclosed  for  it  to  be  prudent  for  me  to  remain 
till  the  13th.     It  is  almost  impossible,  my  lord,  for  a  vessel 

^  For  the  narrow  escape  of  the  Naiad,  see  Captain  Dundas  to  Cornwallis  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  332  ;  and  Rapport  du  Capitaine  de  VArmidc:  Desbriere, 
V.  766.  The  Naiad  had  been  detached  by  Cornwallis  to  the  southward  and 
westward  to  endeavour  to  obtain  information  of  the  Combined  Squadron  on 
August  6th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  331. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  766.  The  Phoenix  had  been  sent  down  by  Cornwallis  shortly  after 
he  returned  off  Brest  to  communicate  with  Calder,  according  to  Barham's 
general  order  to  keep  up  communication  with  Ferrol. 


2i8  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  Aug.  i-8 

from  Villoueuve  to  roach  me.  It  Avill  be  captured  by  the 
quantity  of  enemy's  ships  which  are  cruising  in  every  part 
of  the  Bay."  He  accordingly  concluded  by  saying  he 
intended  to  avail  himself  of  the  discretion  which  his 
instructions  allowed  him,  and  run  for  safety  to  Vigo.  And 
this  he  did  there  and  then,  stretching  far  to  the  westward 
to  get  out  of  harm's  way. 

Except  in  one  important  point  the  actual  situation 
differed  little  from  his  appreciation.  On  August  1st,  the 
day  after  Calder  had  returned  to  the  blockade  of  Ferrol, 
and  Villeneuve  had  left  Vigo  for  the  same  port,  the  strong 
south-westerly  wind  which  was  carrying  the  Combined 
Squadron  so  happily  to  its  destination,  forced  the  British 
Admiral  well  to  leeward  of  the  blockaded  port.  The  result 
was  that  Villeneuve  found  nothing  in  his  way,  and  was  able 
to  run  into  Coruna  without  firing  a  shot.  On  the  following 
day,  in  accordance  with  Barham's  instructions  that  at  the 
end  of  the  specified  period  all  squadrons  were  to  return  to 
their  regular  stations,  Calder  ordered  Stirling  to  return  to 
Rochefort.  If  he  found  the  port  empty  he  was  to  join 
Cornwallis.  Calder  himself  with  his  remaining  nine  ships 
took  the  position  from  40  to  60  miles  to  the  northward 
of  the  port  in  which  the  mysterious  squadron  had  been 
reported  to  Allemand.  Here  he  continued  day  after  day 
laboriously  holding  up  against  strong  south-westerly  winds. 
His  reason  is  nowhere  stated ;  it  was  not  his  usual  practice. 
In  such  weather  his  rule  was  to  run  for  shelter  behind 
Cape  OrtegaU  It  is  to  be  presumed,  therefore,  that  he  was 
looking  out  for  Allemand.  Not  that  he  had  any  definite 
information,  for  the  JSolus,  who  had  just  located  the  Roche- 
fort  squadron,  had  not  yet  reached  him.  But  seeing  how 
anxious  he  had  been  about  it  after  the  battle,  it  is  natural 
he  was  expecting  it  would  make  an  attempt  to  reach 
Ferrol.  He  was  therefore  lying  in  Allemand's  path,  and 
according  to  the  sound  British  method  was  keeping  wide 
of  the  port  of  destination  in  order  to  deal  with  him  before 
his  friends  inside  could  come  to  his  aid. 

Had  he  been  at  the  Emperor's  elbow  he  could  not  have 

'  See  his  Qeneral  Instructions  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  197. 


Aug.  9-13      CALDER    CLOSES  ON    USHANT  219 

judged  more  correctly.  A  direct  movement  on  Ferrol,  if 
Stirling  raised  the  blockade  of  Rochefort,  was  actually 
what  Napoleon  had  enjoined  on  Allemand  in  the  orders 
which  did  not  reach  him.  But  Calder  was  doomed  to 
disappointment.  His  move,  as  we  have  seen,  had  come  to 
Allemand's  ears  and  had  effectually  headed  him  off,  and 
after  cruising  in  vain  for  a  week — that  is,  till  the  9th — 
Calder  sent  the  Dragon  to  look  into  Ferrol  to  see  if  by 
chance  the  Rochefort  squadron  had  slipped  in.  The  same 
evening  she  returned  in  company  with  the  JEohts,  bearing 
news  that  Allemand  was  at  sea  to  the  westward,  and  that 
not  he  but  the  whole  Combined  Fleet  was  in  Ferrol.  To 
remain  with  his  slender  squadron  facing  a  force  of  thirty 
of  the  line  obviously  about  to  sail,  to  say  nothing  of  Alle- 
mand's five,  Avas  in  Calder  s  eyes  useless ;  and,  as  Orde  had 
done  earlier  in  the  campaign,  he  decided  it  was  his  duty  to 
close  on  Ushant.  On  the  10th,  therefore,  he  stood  north, 
leaving  the  Dragon  behind  to  watch  the  port  and  move 
towards  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  to  look  out  for  Nelson. 
Thus  for  a  third  time  Allemand  had  the  narrowest  possible 
escape,  and  his  prudence  in  leaving  the  rendezvous  before 
his  allotted  time  was  justified.  By  his  orders  he  should 
have  held  it  till  the  13  th,  and  on  that  day  Calder  on  his 
way  north  passed  by  it  only  twenty-four  hours  after  Alle- 
mand had  left,  and  nothing  but  his  sagacious  disobedience 
saved  him  from  destruction. 

So  far  as  Napoleon's  plan  was  concerned  the  Rochefort 
squadron  was,  of  course,  still  in  the  air.  Otherwise  to  all 
appearance,  by  the  junction  of  the  other  French  squadrons 
at  Coruna,  the  combination  had  been  so  far  successful.  Still 
the  Admirals  knew  it  was  only  an  appearance.  On  August 
2nd  as  the  Combined  Squadron  were  making  the  junction 
at  Coruna,  the  Emperor  was  at  last  on  his  way  from  Paris 
to  Boulogne.  On  the  3rd,  he  began  issuing  his  final  orders 
from  the  camp  of  the  Grand  Army,  and  on  that  day 
Gravina  and  Villeneuve  were  writing  to  Decres  under 
honeyed  phrases  a  solemn  warning  that  the  Emperor's  plan 
was  impracticable.  "  I  will  say  to  your  Excellency,"  wrote 
Gravina,  "  that  the  plan  of  operations  could  not  seem  better 


2  20  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  aug.  6-8 

conceived — it  was  divine.  .  .  .  But  to-day  it  is  sixty  days 
since  we  left  Martinique,  and  the  English  have  had  plenty 
of  time  to  send  warning  in  advance  to  Europe  and  to 
reinforce  their  Ferrol  squadron.  .  .  .  All  this,  in  my  opinion, 
has  much  disconcerted  the  plan,  brilliant  and  well  laid  as 
it  was.  Now  the  enemy  knows  our  force.  ...  It  is  only 
natural  that  on  our  leaving  here  they  will  not  hesitate  to 
give  us  battle,  and  by  sending  forward  their  scouts  to  warn 
their  Brest  squadron  they  will  be  able  to  shadow  us  and 
choose  their  time  for  a  second  battle  before  we  can  make 
our  Brest  landfall.  In  this  Avay  they  can  defeat  the  plan 
of  campaign,  which  certainly  was  very  fine  and  interesting." 
From  first  to  last  the  French  frankly  recognised  Gravina's 
loyalty  and  courage,  and  coming  from  his  devoted  pen 
such  criticism,  for  all  its  courteous  phrasing,  was  in  the 
last  degree  scathing.^ 

Villeneuve,  ill  and  depressed,  was  entirely  of  the  same 
opinion,  and  besides  endorsing  Gravina's  strategical  views, 
he  gave  Decres  frankly  his  real  estimate  of  his  late  "  victory." 
It  had,  in  fact,  shattered  the  last  remnants  of  his  confidence 
in  the  plan  and  his  squadron.  "  The  enemy,"  he  said, 
"  were  warned ;  they  had  been  reinforced ;  they  did  not 
hesitate  to  come  and  attack  us  with  a  force  numerically 
very  inferior.  ...  In  the  fog  our  captains,  without  experi- 
ence of  an  action  or  of  fleet  tactics,  had  no  better  idea  than 
to  follow  their  second  ahead,  and  here  we  are  the  laughing- 
stock of  Europe."  ""  To  complete  his  despair,  he  had  received, 
as  he  was  entering  Coruila  bay,  one  of  Napoleon's  impatient 
orders,  forbidding  him  peremptorily  to  put  into  Ferrol.  He 
was  to  anchor  at  Corufia,  and  wait  there  for  Gourdon  and 
Grandallana  to  come  down  and  join  him.  The  result  was 
that  Gravina,  who  was  leading,  found  himself  too  far  in  to 
obey  the  signal,  and  was  forced  to  go  on,  while  Villeneuve 
had  hurriedly  to  anchor  at  Corufia  with  half  his  ships 
running  aboard  each  other  in  the  confined  anchorage.  At 
Corufia  there  were  no  stores  or  water  to  be  had,  everything 
was  eight  miles  away  up  at  Ferrol  in  the  depth  of  the  bay ; 
and  there,  to  complete  the  trouble,  Gourdon,  the  Commander- 

1  Desbriere,  v.  775,  August  Stb.  2  ij^id,^  p.  776,  August  Gth. 


Aug.  6  VILLENEUVE   AT    CORUi^A  221 

in-chief,  lay  to  all  appearance  dying,  and  Grandallana  was 
intriguing  to  get  Gravina's  command.  Moreover,  as  the 
squadrons  lay  scattered  between  the  two  ports,  it  was  im- 
possible to  get  them  out  in  one  body,  and  Calder  the  day 
before  had  been  reported  in  the  offing.  Villeneuve  professed 
himself  ready  to  go  out  the  moment  his  fleet  was  revictualled, 
but  it  was  without  hope  of  avoiding  or  winning  an  action. 
''  Eight  of  the  line,"  he  wrote,  "  keep  in  sight  of  the  coast 
at  eight  leagues.  They  will  profit  by  the  lesson  given  to 
Admiral  Orde ;  they  will  shadow  us.  I  shall  not  be  able 
to  close  with  them,  and  they  will  fall  back  on  the  squadron 
before  Brest,  or  that  before  Cadiz,  according  as  I  make  for 
the  one  port  or  the  other." 

The  news  that  Allemand  was  out  and  under  orders  to 
join  him  did  nothing  to  relieve,  what  he  called,  "  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul."  He  had  been  told  of  the  commodore's 
two  rendezvous,  but  knowing,  as  every  seaman  must  know, 
how  ill  chosen  they  were,  he  despaired  of  finding  him  at 
either,  and  Decres,  lost  in  the  confusion  of  the  Emperor's 
orders,  had  forgotten  to  tell  him  that  Allemand's  point  of 
retreat  was  Vigo.  As  the  period  for  Allemand's  holding 
the  Finisterre  rendezvous  had  just  expired,  the  only  chance 
of  getting  into  touch  with  him  was  to  send  to  the  northern 
one,  on  the  fringe  of  Cornwallis's  station.  One  frigate  was 
all  Villeneuve  would  risk  on  the  enterprise,  and  on  August 
6th,  just  as  Allemand  reached  the  rendezvous,  Captain 
Milius,  of  the  Diclon  40,  went  out  with  orders  that  the 
squadron  was  to  come  to  Ferrol,  and  if  Villeneuve  were 
gone  it  was  to  follow  the  further  instructions  that  would 
be  found  awaiting  it.^ 

A  famous  cruiser  episode  of  the  highest  interest  was  the 
result.  On  July  20th,  in  response  to  Calder's  urgent  entreaty 
for  more  cruisers,  and  Barham's  instructions  to  keep  up 
communications,  Cornwallis  had  sent  down  the  Niohc  38. 
On  the  29th,  immediately  after  he  received  news  of  the 
action,  he  despatched  another,  the  JEolus  32,  Captain  Lord 
William  Fitzroy,  and,  later  still,  the  FhoBnix  36.  They  were 
to  look  for  him  on  his  Finisterre  rendezvous.     The  Colics 

1  Desbricre,  v.  729,  note  1. 


222  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  Aug. 4-7 

was  also  charged  with  a  despatch,  which  probably  contained 
Cornwallis's  rendezvous,  as  he  was  expecting  Calder  would 
shortly  come  north,  and  Fitzroy  had  further  orders  to  look 
out  for  enemy's  squadrons  in  the  Bay  as  he  crossed  it.  If 
he  located  one,  he  was  immediately  to  push  on  before  it  to 
report  to  the  admiral  for  whose  station  it  appeared  to  be 
making.^  This  was  the  vessel  wdiich,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
sighted  Allemand  on  August  4th  just  as  he  was  about  to 
leave  his  first  rendezvous;  and  on  the  5th,  having  seen 
him  steer  his  false  course  east-south-east,  had  gone  off  to 
warn  Calder.  On  his  way  down  to  the  rendezvous  Fitzroy 
ascertained  from  the  communicative  American,  by  whom 
Allemand  had  obtained  the  same  information,  that  Calder 
had  resumed  his  blockade,  and  he  accordingly  altered  his 
course  for  Ferrol.  The  result  was  that,  on  the  afternoon  of 
August  7th,  about  60  miles  north-west  of  Finisterre,  he 
sighted  the  Bidon,  who,  after  ascertaining  that  he  was  not 
one  of  Allemand's  cruisers,  turned  and  ran  from  him  off  her 
course  south-west.  Fitzroy  gave  chase  till  dark,  and  seeing 
it  was  impossible  to  close  without  a  long  pursuit,  decided 
that  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the  intelligence  he  bore, 
and  the  clear  tenor  of  his  orders,  it  was  his  duty  to  haul 
off  and  continue  his  mission  to  find  Calder.  And  this,  as 
we  have  seen,  he  did." 

Meanwhile  the  Bidon,  having  run  far  to  the  south-west, 

1  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  July  29th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  328,  and  Log  of  the 
Phoenix.  Fitzroy' s  orders  are  printed  by  James,  vol.  iv.  p.  451-2,  Appendices 
1  and  2. 

2  The  report  of  Captain  Milius  put  the  incident  on  the  8th.  James,  from 
the  Log  of  the  .fi'oZ?ts,  puts  it  on  the  7th,  in  latitude  43°  41',  longitude  10°  11' ; 
that  is,  considerably  to  the  southward  of  the  point  shown  in  Colonel  Desbriere's 
chart:  Frojcts  ct  Tentatives,  v.  731.  Fitzroy's  conduct  led  to  a  violent  con- 
troversy. James,  for  whom  strategical  questions  had  no  interest,  in  his  first 
edition  practically  accused  him  of  cowardice.  Fitzroy  answered  him  in  a 
not  too  judicious  pamphlet.  Captain  Brenton,  in  his  Nav(d  History,  supported 
l<'itzroy,and  James, in  his  second  edition,  returned  to  the  charge  at  great  length 
and  ever  greater  intemperance.  Fitzroy  was  a  tyrannical  and  unpopular  officer, 
but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  blamed  on  this  occasion  by  his  superiors. 
Modern  naval  opinion  would  now  probably  be  unanimous  in  confirming  the 
correctness  of  the  behaviour  of  both  Milius  and  Fitzroy,  on  the  ground  that 
both  were  charged  with  definite  intelligence  duty  vital  to  the  campaign. 
In  contrast  with  Fitzroy's  behaviour,  James  praises  the  Niohe^s,  who,  having 
no  special  information,  chased  a  strange  sail  for  three  days  and  three  nights 
with  the  result  that  she  never  found  Calder  at  all ;  and  yet  he  blames  Milius 
for  engaging  the  Phoenix  later.  For  the  whole  controversy  see  James 
(ed.  1902),  iv.  pp.  54-G5. 


Aug.  io  DIDON   AND    PIKENIX  223 

and  finding  herself  no  longer  observed,  determined  to  make 
another  effort  to  get  north  to  Allemand's  rendezvous. 
Hauling  her  wind  again  to  the  north-west,  she  headed 
almost  straight  for  Calder's  Finisterre  rendezvous,  and  sure 
enough  at  daybreak  on  the  10  th  she  sighted  a  strange 
cruiser  in  the  distance  that  at  once  gave  chase.  Now  it  so 
happened  that  Milius,  like  every  one  else,  had  just  boarded 
the  American  from  Bordeaux,  who  by  this  time  must  have 
been  entering  into  the  humour  of  his  position  with  thorough 
enjoyment.  He  informed  Milius  that  the  stranger  was 
certainly  the  British  cruiser  Phoenix,  on  board  of  whom  he 
had  been  summoned  the  previous  day.  She  had  only 
twenty  guns,  he  said,  but  her  captain  and  officers  had  so 
high  a  conceit  of  her  and  themselves  that  they  would  cer- 
tainly fight.  But  in  fact  the  Yankee  was  lying.  There 
was  sport  in  hand,  and  he  would  not  spoil  it.  It  was  true 
he  had  been  on  board  the  Phcenix,  as  he  said,  but  having 
asked  to  be  shown  round  the  ship,  he  found  her  commander. 
Captain  Baker,  had  disguised  her  to  look  like  a  sloop.  In 
fact,  she  was  a  frigate  of  thirty-six  guns.  But  Baker  had 
bought  some  cases  of  claret  from  him,  probably  at  his  own 
price,  and  having  been  otherwise  handsomely  treated  he 
went  back  to  his  ship  in  high  good  humour,  determined  to 
play  the  English  captain's  game. 

The  result  was  all  that  Baker  could  wish.  The  Didon 
had  now  only  three  days  to  reach  Allemand's  rendezvous 
before  he  would  be  gone,  and  Milius,  believing  he  had 
nothing  but  a  weak  enemy  in  his  path,  determined  to  fight 
his  way  through.  His  decision  will  probably  be  applauded 
as  correct  and  seamanlike.  His  case  differed  essentially 
from  that  of  the  Molus,  He  had  definite  material  intelli- 
gence to  convey  to  a  definite  spot,  and,  unlike  the  A^Jolus, 
he  could  not  get  it  through  in  time  without  clearing  an 
inferior  enemy's  cruiser  out  of  his  way.  To  run  was  to  fail 
in  his  mission,  to  fight  was  to  secure  a  chance  of  success.  He 
chose  to  fight,  and  a  very  famous  cruiser  action  was  the  result. 

Both  the  commanders  and  both  the  frigates  had  the 
reputation  of  being  amongst  the  smartest  in  the  service. 
The  Didon  in   size,  force,  crew,  and  speed  was   decidedly 


2  24  AFTER    CALDER'S   ACTION  aug.  io 

superior.'  Baker,  however,  was  confident,  and  being  deter- 
mined not  to  let  her  escape  him,  manccuvred  to  get  to 
leeward  before  he  would  fire  a  shot.  In  the  process,  so 
brilliantly  was  the  IHdon  handled,  he  was  raked  three  or 
four  times  without  being  able  to  ofVcct  his  purpose.  So 
severely  mauled  was  his  rigging  that  further  mancL'Uvring 
was  impossible,  and  in  desperation  he  ran  straight  at  his 
opponent.  Then  at  last  the  two  vessels  were  fairly  engaged 
side  by  side  at  pistol  shot.  Carronadcs,  grape,  musketry — 
everything  got  home  at  its  best.  A  fresh  attempt  to  rake 
which  the  Didon  made,  and  which  Baker  cleverly  parried, 
brought  them  yard-arm  to  yard-arm,  the  stem  of  the  Didon 
almost  foul  of  the  starboard  quarter  of  the  Fhceiiix.  Both 
men  promptly  tried  to  board,  but  so  superior  was  the 
French  strength  that  it  was  all  Baker  could  do  to  keep  his 
own  decks  free.  For  a  while  it  was  a  rough  affair  of  pikes 
and  muskets,  till  Baker  got  a  gun  to  bear  out  of  his  cabin 
windoAv  with  terrible  effect.  Still  the  action  raged  almost 
muzzle  to  muzzle  till  both  vessels  were  no  longer  under 
control,  and  they  fell  away  from  each  other  breathless  to 
repair  damages. 

It  had  become  calm  with  a  big  swell,  and  each  com- 
mander was  eager  to  be  the  first  ready  to  catch  a  return  of 
the  breeze.  Here  the  Fhxnix  had  the  advantage.  Though 
her  rigging  and  sails  were  in  rags,  her  spars  had  suffered 
the  least.  The  Didon,  it  is  true,  had  lost  nothing  but  her 
maintopmast,  but  so  badl}^  was  her  foremast  wounded  that 
before  it  could  be  secured  she  rolled  it  overboard.  The 
Phoenix,  on  the  other  hand,  was  already  nearly  under  control 
again.     All  essential  knotting  and  splicing  were  complete 

'  James,  who  gives  .a  minute  accoant  of  the  action  (iv.  p.  70),  furnishes  the 
following  comparative  table : — 


Jiroadsidc. 

Crcio. 

Tons. 

Phcenix  . 

.     21  guns,  444  lbs. 

245 

844 

Didon     . 

.     23  \,      563    „ 

330 

1091 

The  Phcenix  affords  a  typical  example  of  the  advantage  of  the  carronade 
armament.  Baker  had  had  her  re-armed  on  the  new  system  with  26  short 
18-pounders,  4  9-pounders,  and  12  32-pounder  carronades.  The  effect  was 
almost  to  double  her  weight  of  metal.  Originally  her  broadside  was  only 
265  lbs. 


Aug.  II  13  BIBON  AND    PHCENTX  225 

as  the  breeze  came  back.  In  a  few  minutes  her  tattered 
sails  began  to  draw,  and  she  was  bearing  down  again  to 
renew  the  action.  The  Bidon  had  already  lost  over  seventy 
killed  and  wounded  ;  she  Avas  absolutely  helpless  ;  and  Milius 
ended  a  gallant  and  well-managed  action  by  hauling  down 
his  flag/ 

Baker  had  won,  but  his  position  was  by  no  means  easy. 
Nearly  all  his  officers  were  wounded;  he  had  less  than  200  men 
to  manage  some  350  unwounded  prisoners,  and  a  dismasted 
prize,  200  tons  bigger  than  himself,  to  get  into  safety. 
Taking  her  in  tow,  he  made  away  to  join  Calder  off  Ferrol, 
but  ere  he  reached  his  destination  he  fell  in  with  the  Bragon 
making  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  to  try  to  fall  in  with 
Nelson,  with  intelligence  that  the  blockade  was  raised  and 
Allemand  at  sea.  Her  news  was  such  as  made  it  madness 
to  try  to  get  north,  and  under  her  escort  Baker  turned 
back  to  get  out  of  harm's  way. 

For  the  supreme  hour  had  come :  everything  was  in 
movement  for  the  final  cast,  and  it  was  Baker  who,  by  his 
fine  action,  had  ensured  that  at  the  crisis  of  the  campaign, 
in  spite  of  Napoleon's  exhaustive  ingenuity,  the  Rochefort 
squadron  should  remain  as  it  had  begun,  lost  and  in  the 
air — in  touch  Avith  no  one,  and  unable  in  any  way  to  affect 
the  issue. 

^  For  further  details   see  James,  iv.  65    et  seq.^  and  Captain  Baker   to 
Cornwallis  :  BlocJcade  of  Brest,  ii.  338. 


I 


CHAPTER  XVI 

GENERAL   SITUATION   AT  THE   CRISIS 

The  turning-point  of  the  campaign  was  at  hand,  but  the 
hour  was  big  with  far  more  than  the  crisis  of  a  campaign. 
A  hundred  years  of  rivalry  for  the  lordship  of  the  sea  was 
drawing  to  culmination,  and  the  protagonists,  as  in  some 
old  drama  of  destiny,  were  fairly  face  to  face  upon  the 
imposing  stage.  On  the  cliffs  of  Boulogne,  at  the  zenith 
of  his  powers,  was  the  greatest  master  of  war  the  long 
struggle  had  produced,  alert  and  straining  for  the  catas- 
trophe amidst  the  sound  and  pomp  of  the  Grand  Army. 
Over  against  him,  unknown  to  fame  and  bent  with  his 
eighty  years,  a  sailor  sat  alone  in  the  silence  of  his  room 
at  Whitehall.  Unseen  and  almost  unnoticed  he  Avas  gather- 
ing in  his  fingers  the  threads  of  the  tradition  which  the 
recurring  wars  had  spun,  and  handling  them  with  a  deft 
mastery  to  which  the  distant  fleets  gave  sensitive  response. 
The  splendour  of  quick  success  and  an  unrivalled  genius 
for  war  was  arrayed  against  hard- won  experience  and  the 
instinct  it  had  bred,  and  it  was  arrayed  in  vain. 

Ever  since  Napoleon  had  realised  with  reluctant  con- 
viction that  to  pass  his  army  across  the  Channel  by  stealth 
or  its  own  force  was  impossible,  he  had  been  exhausting  his 
strategical  ingenuity  to  secure  the  temporary  command. 
He  had  run  the  gamut  of  every  device  his  predecessors 
had  ever  tried.  No  trick  or  compelling  movement  had 
been  neglected  to  dissipate  the  force  that  barred  his  way, 
to  entice  the  persistent  guard  from  its  impregnable  position, 
or  by  surprise  to  fling  upon  it  an  overwhelming  mass  of  his 
own  streno^th.  For  seven  crowded  months  he  had  schemed 
and  striven  with   the  utmost  power  of  his  genius  and  with 


July         EFFECTS   OF    MARMONT'S    THREAT        227 

nearly  the  Avhole  seaboard  of  Europe  at  his  call ;  and  yet 
when  the  hour  came  his  squadrons  were  still  impotently 
divided ;  and  far  from  clearing  the  way  for  their  union, 
his  efforts  were  only  drawing  together  at  the  old  strategical 
centre  practically  the  whole  available  battle  strength  of  his 
enemy. 

For  Barham  and  Cornwallis  it  had  been  a  time  of  acute 
anxiety.  The  mise  en  scene  which  Napoleon  had  directed 
Marmont  to  arrange  in  the  Texel — his  latest  device  to 
loosen  the  British  grip  of  the  Channel — had  had  its  effect. 
Since  the  second  week  in  July  intelligence  reports  had  been 
coming  in  from  Holland  of  a  sudden  activity  in  the  Holder. 
All  transports  had  been  moved  out  to  the  Texel  Roads, 
three  ships  of  the  line  ordered  thence  to  Flushing  had 
been  told  to  stand  fast,  seven  of  the  line  and  four  frigates 
were  ready  for  sea,  and  ammunition  was  pouring  in  along 
the  roads  from  Amsterdam.  Our  agent  was  not  deceived. 
Every  one  believed  it  meant  a  genuine  movement,  "  but  I," 
he  said,  "  am  enabled  to  tell  you  the  truth.  The  plan  is 
now  for  certain  to  risk  a  stroke  on  Ireland,  and  all  that 
is  done  on  our  [that  is,  the  Dutch]  coast  has  no  other 
object  than  to  mislead  the  enemy."  A  few  days  later, 
however,  came  more  emphatic  information  of  Marmont's 
activity,  and  the  Government  felt  they  could  no  longer 
leave  things  as  they  were.^  Then,  as  always,  the  threat 
of  troops  and  ships  in  action  together  could  not  be  ignored. 
They  suggested  naturally  that  Napoleon  was  contemplating 
getting  a  squadron  into  the  Texel  north-about,  and  as 
according  to  the  First  Lord's  calculation,  the  Ushaiit 
squadron  had  then  twenty-five  of  the  line,  it  was  decided 
to  reinforce  Lord  Keith  in  the  Downs,  and  Cornwallis 
was  ordered  to  send  him  three  seventy-fours.^  Keith's 
own  attitude  Avas  one  of  resolute  incredulity,  but  he  told 
the  Government,  if  they  attached  any  importance  to  the 
news,  he  advised   that    Admiral    Russell,   who    under    his 


1  Intelligence  from  Holland,  July  10th,  13th,  and  18th  :  Admiralty  In-letters 
{Secretary  of  State),  4199. 

2  Minutes  of  July  22nd  :  Barham  Papers.     The  ships  detailed  in  the  order 
were  Defence,  Goliath,  and  Zealous. 


228  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS         July 22-6 

orders  was  watching  the  Dutch  coast  from  Yarmouth, 
ouofht  to  bo  directed  never  to  leave  the  Texel.  He 
would  reinforce  him  as  soon  as  possible  and  keep  a  frigate 
at  hand,  so  that  he  himself  could  take  command  if  anything 
happened.  Meanwhile  he  had  ordered  Admiral  Vashon, 
who  from  Leith  was  controlling  the  northern  section  of 
his  command,  to  warn  his  cruisers  on  the  Norwegian  coast 
to  be  specially  vigilant.^ 

The  anxiety  of  the  Government,  however,  increased. 
Four  days  later  information  came  in  from  Lord  Strangford, 
our  chargd- d'affaires  at  Lisbon,  that  Villeneuve's  instructions 
were  certainly  to  return  north- about  and  release  Marmont's 
force  in  the  Texel.^  It  was  intelligence  which,  as  we  know, 
was  not  entirely  without  foundation.  The  idea  was  actually 
one  of  the  alternatives  with  which  Napoleon's  brain  was 
teeming.  Strangford  had  received  the  information  direct 
from  Paris ;  the  Curiettxs  report  of  Villeneuve's  course  en- 
dorsed it,  and  the  danger  became  more  serious.  That  very 
day  the  Admiralty  issued  an  order  to  Cornwallis  that  he 
must  send  three  more  of  the  line  to  Lord  Keith  "  with  all 
possible  despatch,"  and  at  the  same  time  Rear-Admiral 
Drury,  who  Avas  still  in  command  of  the  Irish  station,  Avas 
directed  to  keep  a  vigilant  watch  for  "  any  part  of  the 
enemy's  squadron,"  and  if  anything  appeared  to  send  Avord 
by  fast  sailing  vessels  to  Ushant,  to  the  Admiralty,  and  to 
Nelson  at  Lagos.^ 

Lord  Keith  Avas  still  sceptical.  On  receipt  of  Strang- 
ford's  information  he  replied  that  he  attached  little 
credit   to  it,  but   in  deference   to  the  Government's  vicAV 

^  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July  22nd :  In-letters,  551.  Keith  at  this  time 
had  his  flag  in  the  block  ship  St.  Albans  off  Ramsgate. 

2  Adraindty  Jn-lcttcrs  {Secretary  of  State),  4199.     Received  July  26th. 

^  Marsden  to  Cornwallis  (two  despatches),  July  26th  :  Barham  Papers.  At 
this  time  also  Hawkesbury  from  the  Home  Office  was  pressing  the  Admiralty 
for  lieutenants  to  take  charge  of  a  chain  of  signal  stations  that  was  being 
established  on  the  Irish  coasts,  and  the  Admiralty  had  difficulty  in  meeting 
the  demand.  The  stations  extended  from  Pigeon  House  (Dublin)  to  Bun- 
raalion  in  Waterford,  clustering  closely  round  the  south-east  corner  of  the 
island.  Beyond  Cork  they  began  again  at  Too  Head,  and  continued  by  Cape 
Clear  and  the  Great  l^lasket  as  far  as  Brandon  Head  in  Kerry.  Thence,  at 
wider  intervals,  they  stretched  by  Galway  Bay  to  Malin's  Head  in  the  extreme 
north.  A  list  of  tliem — twenty-sevon  in  number — is  in  Admiralty  la-lrttcrs 
{Secretary  of  State),  4200,  Augus't  5th. 


JULYI7-I8     BARHAM    AND    THE    FLOTILLA  229 

he  had  repeated  his  orders  to  Va.shon,  and  had  instructed 
Russell  that  in  case  of  need  he  was  to  fall  back  to  the 
Dovvns.^ 

Barham's  attitude  to  the  ilotilla  theatre  of  operations  is 
well  shown  by  an  interesting  episode  which  occurred  just  at 
this  time,  and  which  marks  the  sharp  distinction  he  drew 
between  the  defensive  and  the  offensive  parts  of  the  plan 
of  campaign.  The  young  captains  of  the  advanced  cruisers 
were  seizing  every  opportunity  of  striking  at  the  belated 
sections  of  the  French  flotilla  as  they  passed  to  the  ports 
of  concentration,  and  even  at  the  Bouloo^ne  units  when 
divisions  came  out  for  practice.  On  July  17th  and  18th  a 
more  than  usually  serious  affair  of  this  kind  had  occurred, 
as  Admiral  Ver  Huell  was  passing  a  strong  section  from  Dun- 
kirk to  Boulogne.  The  attack  had  been  pushed  home  with 
so  much  energy  and  daring  that  considerable  damage  was 
inflicted  on  Ver  Hu ell's  vessels ;  but  the  movement  was  not 
stopped,  and  the  British  cruisers  engaged  had  suffered  some- 
what severely  from  the  shore  batteries.  Keith  reported  the 
incident,  with  commendation  of  the  brilliant  behaviour  of 
the  officers  concerned.  But  it  was  all  quite  contrary  to 
Barham's  ideas,  and  while  fully  recognising  the  courage  and 
devotion  of  the  attempt,  he  informed  Keith  that  this  kind 
of  operation  was  not  in  accordance  with  sound  strategy. 
He  was  to  understand  that  it  must  not  occur  again.  On 
no  account  were  attacks  to  be  made  on  the  flotilla  under 
the  shore  batteries  by  the  cruisers  of  his  command.  "  It 
may  be,"  he  said,  "  the  means  of  losing  them  when  they 
may  be  required  for  more  material  service."  In  other 
words,  in  the  defensive  area  of  the  British  plan,  the  forces 
were  to  remain  on   the  defensive,  and   on   no   account   to 

^  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July  28th  :  In-lcttcrs,  551.  Keith  had  under  his 
command  at  this  time  four  flag-officers  :  Rear-Admiral  Vashon,  in  one  of  the 
Leith  guardships  ;  Rear-^^dmiral  "  Billy  "  Douglas,  in  the  Leopard  50,  watching 
the  Boulogne  flotilla  ;  Rear- Admiral  T.  M.  Russell,  with  the  Yarmouth-Texel 
division  ;  and  Vice-Admiral  John  Holloway,  in  the  Nore  guardship  for  the 
defence  of  the  Thames.  The  Admiralty,  liowever,  kept  a  ver}'  direct  control 
of  the  distribution  of  the  ships  and  the  general  strategy.  Keith  habitually 
submits  his  proposed  instructions  for  his  flag-officers  to  the  Admiralty,  and 
sometimes  seems  to  request  that  direct  orders  in  accordance  with  them 
should  be  sent  to  the  flag-officer  concerned,  if  the  Admiralty  approved  his 
suggestion.     In-letters,  551-2,  July  22nd  ;  August  15th,  ct  passim. 


230  SITUATION    AT   THE    CRISIS  Aug.  3-4 

attack  except  when  a  clearly  favourable  opportunity  for  a 
counter-stroke  presented  itself.^ 

The  main  function  of  Cornwallis  was,  of  course,  to  cover 
the  defensive  position  of  Lord  Keith,  and  to  prevent  a 
hostile  battle  fleet  from  disturbing  it.  So  impregnable 
indeed  Avas  Keith's  position,  so  long  as  it  was  undisturbed 
from  the  ocean,  that  that  of  CornAvallis  was  the  real  key  of 
the  situation.  For  this  reason  he  had  been  told,  it  will  be 
remembered,  that  all  orders  for  detachments  Avere  to  be 
regarded  by  him  as  conditional  on  his  keeping  eighteen  of 
the  line  Avith  his  flag.  The  second  order  to  send  three 
vessels  to  Keith  Avas  consequently  difficult  to  deal  Avith. 
He  received  it  on  August  4th,  just  after  he  had  heard  from 
Calder  that  Villeneuve  had  disappeared  after  the  action, 
and  that  he  had  resumed  the  blockade  of  Ferrol  and  sent 
Stirling  back  to  Rochefort.  So  far  all  Avas  well,  but  he  had 
noAv  only  just  eighteen  of  the  line  Avith  his  flag;  the 
detachment  Avould  reduce  the  squadron  beloAv  the  prescribed 
minimum.  Nevertheless,  Cornwallis  obeyed  and  sent  aAvay 
his  three  Aveakest  ships,  Avhich  Avere  also  those  best  suited 
to  the  service  on  the  Dutch  coast.^  Apparently  the  dan- 
gerous Aveakness  to  Avhich  the  central  position  had  thus 
been  reduced  Avas  quickly  realised,  for  on  July  30  th  the 
three  seventy -fours  Avere  ordered  to  return  to  CornAvallis's 
flag.^  It  Avas  just  at  this  time  the  Admiralty  received  news 
of  Calder's  indecisive  action,  and  his  OAvn  opinion  that 
Villeneuve  Avould  probably  get  into  Ferrol,  and  that  he 
himself  Avould  have  to  close  on  CornAvallis.  Barham  Avas 
already  of  opinion  that  a  rapid  concentration  of  every 
available  ship  off  Ushant  Avas  the  simple  and  only  solu- 
tion of  the  disturbed  situation.  The  closing  in  of  the 
Western  Squadron  Avas  already  provided  for,  and  on 
August  3rd  an  order  Avas  sent   down   to  Nelson  to  come 


^  Secret  Orders :  Out-letters,  July  21st.  For  the  operations  in  question  see 
James,  iii.  318-?>23  ;  Desbri^re,  v.  418-425;  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July 
18th-23rd,  with  enclosures  :  In-letters,  551. 

'■^  Princess  of  Orange  74  (formerly  the  Washington),  a  Dutch  prize;  Ruht/ 
C)\,  Polyphemus  6i.  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  August  4th:  Blockade  of  Brest, 
ii.  330. 

^  Minute  of  July  30th  :  Barliavi  Papers. 


Aug.  15         CORNWALLIS'S    INSTRUCTIONS  231 

up  and  join  it,  after  detaching  whatever  he  regarded  as 
necessary  to  enable  ColHngwood  to  maintain  the  blockade 
of  Cadiz.^ 

The  broad  strategical  principles  underlying  these  dispo- 
sitions, and  Barham's  fundamental  views  as  to  the  functions 
of  the  Western  Squadron  in  the  war-plan,  are  clearly  indi- 
cated in  a  memorandum  which  he  sent  at  this  time  to 
Cornwallis.  It  will  be  seen  that  his  duties  were  far  from 
being  merely  defensive.  Subject  to  the  primary  exigencies 
of  defence  in  home  waters,  his  fleet  was  the  active  centre 
from  which  minor  counter  attacks  were  to  be  flung  off  as 
opportunity  or  need  arose.  "  I  had  wrote  you,"  the  memo- 
randum runs,  "  a  private  instruction,  when  we  first  heard 
of  the  Rochefort  squadron  being  at  sea,  to  send  four  ships 
of  the  line  to  intercept  them,  but  the  alarm  from  the 
eastward  obliged  us  to  send  those  ships  to  Lord  Keith, 
which  would  otherwise  have  come  to  you."  .   .   . 

"It  is  truly  mortifying  not  to  be  able  to  seize  such 
opportunities  when  they  offer,  and  it  will  be  my 
study  to  keep  your  fleet  as  strong  in  numbers  as  pos- 
sible, so  as  to  allow  you  to  detach  squadrons  for  annoy- 
ing the  enemy,  as  often  as  you  hear  of  them  being  in 
your  neighbourhood  without  waiting  for  orders  from 
home." 

"  As  the  Western  Squadron  is  the  mainspring  from 
which  all  offensive  operations  must  proceed,  it  shall  be 
my  care  to  keep  it  as  strong  and  effective  as  possible." 

"  The  enemy  to  the  eastward  are  active  in  appearance, 
but  as  many  things  must  concur  to  bring  such  an  armament 
tp  sea,  they  cannot  attack  us  unobserved." 
■.     ''  I  hope  you  have  an  opportunity  of  communicating  fre- 
quently with  Sir  John  Saumarez,  so  that  information  of  an 

^  Adyniralty  Secretary  [Secret  Orders),  1363.  Shortly  afterwards  sealed 
orders,  the  purport  of  which  is  unknown,  were  sent  by  Cornwallis  to 
Stirling  andCalder,  but  they  never  reached  them.  Some  confusion  occurred 
over  the  reinforcement  of  Keith.  Goliath  and  Defence  reached  the  Downs  on 
July  30th,  the  day  Barham  ordered  them  back.  On  August  6th  the  other  three 
vessels  had  arrived,  and  Keith  acknowledged  an  order  to  send  them  back. 
This  was  cancelled  next  day  by  telegraph,  and  the  ships  were  sent  to  Russell 
off  the  Texel,  with  whom  thev  remained.  In-lcttcrs,  .'351,  July  23rd,  20th. 
JbicL,  552,  August  6tb,  7th,  Bth. 


23  2  SITUATION    AT    THE    CUISIS  july 

attack  to  the  eastward  may  bo  as  early  as  possible,  in  case 
your  assistance  should  become  necessary."  ^ 

Lord  liarham  therefore,  it  is  clear,  while  holding  reso- 
lutely to  the  main  defensive  position,  was  alert  to  strike  in 
any  direction  the  moment  the  tortoise  should  show  its  head. 
As  for  Pitt,  just  as  little  as  the  old  First  Lord  had  he 
suffered  the  preoccupation  with  home  defence  to  loosen  his 
grip  on  the  main  offensive  intention  of  his  policy.  And 
this  is  a  point  of  the  highest  importance,  if  we  are  to  judge 
rightly  the  masterstroke  by  which  the  situation  was  even- 
tually solved.  Whatever  Napoleon  might  think,  he  had 
failed  to  wrest  the  initiative  from  Pitt's  hands.  The  Treaty 
of  Coalition,  it  is  true,  had  not  yet  been  ratified  by  the 
Czar,  but  during  the  last  week  of  July  news  reached  the 
Government  from  St.  Petersburg  Avhich  pointed  to  a  speedy 
conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The  Czar's  idea  of  the 
Coalition,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  to  use  it  as  an  armed 
mediation  for  forcing  Napoleon  to  abandon  his  intolerable 
policy  of  aggrandisement,  and  to  assent  to  a  general  settle- 
ment of  Europe  on  terms  acceptable  to  England  and  the 
other  Powers.  We  have  seen  how  the  terms  demanded 
by  England  in  regard  to  her  position  in  the  Mediterranean 
were  not  approved  by  the  Czar.  The  last  despatches  from 
Gower,  received  on  July  3rd,  had  announced  that  Austria 
was  equally  irreconcilable  on  the  point,  and  that  although 
she  was  mobilising  her  army  she  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
Russia,  however,  might  possibly  act  alone,  and  the  Ambas- 
sador had  been  given  to  understand  she  was  going  to 
bring  her  force  in  Corfu  up  to  25,000  men.  General 
Lacy  had  actually  reached  Naples,  and  he  seemed  ready 
to  co-operate  with  Craig  in  South  Italy.  Moreover, 
although  the  Czar  would  not  ratify  the  treaty,  he  Avas 
already  acting  on  it.  He  had  arranged  with  Pitt  that 
a  Russian  envoy  charged  with  the  mediation  should  repre- 
sent both  countries.  The  man  chosen  for  the  mission  was 
Novosilzow,  one  of  the  Czar's  most  confidential  servants, 
and  he  was  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Paris.      On  his  way 

'  Baiham  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  15th  :  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi. 
p.  411. 


July  THE    COALITION    RIPENS  233 

he  was  to  stay  at  Berlin  and  endeavour  to  press  the 
halting  Prussian  Government  into  line.^  The  news  which 
now  came  to  hand  was  that  Napoleon's  defiant  annexa- 
tion of  Northern  Italy  had  exhausted  the  Czar's  patience. 
"  Such  an  act,"  wrote  Gower,  "  at  the  very  moment  when 
a  Russian  plenipotentiary  was  expected  in  France  charged 
with  propositions  of  Avhich  the  professed  object  had  been 
the  general  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  is  con- 
sidered so  gross  an  insult  to  both  Sovereigns  whose 
sentiments  that  plenipotentiary  was  empowered  to  declare, 
that  his  Imperial  Majesty  had  judged  he  could  not  .  .  . 
permit  Monsieur  Novosilzow  to  proceed."  An  express 
consequently  had  been  sent  to  recall  him. 

So  far  all  was  well,  but  Gower  had  to  report  that  feeling 
at  the  Russian  Court  was  almost  equally  sore  at  Pitt's  insis- 
tence on  the  retention  of  Malta,  and  his  categorical  refusal 
even  to  consider  a  modification  of  the  Maritime  Code.  To 
Gower's  explanations  and  arguments  they  had  responded 
by  reproaching  him  with  the  fact  that  no  answer  had  been 
received  from  London  to  the  proposition  the  Czar  had  made 
for  an  extended  plan  of  operations  and  an  increase  of  the 
British  subsidy  in  return  for  an  increase  of  the  Russian 
troops.  Fortunately  at  the  moment  a  despatch  arrived 
from  London  frankly  accepting  the  new  proposals,  and 
the  sky  began  to  clear.  Gower  said  he  had  not  been 
able  actually  to  secure  the  ratification,  but  that  he  had 
no  doubt  he  would  be  able  to  announce  it  in  his  next 
despatch.^ 

At  the  same  time  Worontzow,  at  the  Russian  embassy 
in  London,  received  information  from  Novosilzow  at  Berlin 
that  Austria  was  coming  round.  She  was  beginning  to 
realise,  he  said,  that  force  was  the  only  remedy,  and  though 
apparently  acquiescing  in  Napoleon's  seizure  of  the  Iron 
Crown,  was  only  waiting  for  the  right  moment  to  declare 
her  adhesion  to  the  Coalition.     Prussia,  too,  was  inclining 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  June  lOth  :  Foreign  Office,  Russia,  58.  Endorsed, 
"  Received  July  3rd."     Printed  in  Holland  Kose  :  Third  Coalition,  p.  174. 

2  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  June  29tl).  Endorsed,  "Received  July  29th." 
Foreign  Office,  Russia,  58.     Printed  in  Holland  Rose :  Third  Coalition,  p.  18o. 


2  34  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

to  repent  lier  subservience.  "  They  see  more  clearly," 
wrote  the  Russian  envoy  when  he  reached  Berlin,  *•  Buona- 
parte is  no  more  a  guardian  angel,  but  an  out-and-out 
devil,  and  they  are  persuaded  that  this  devil  will  gobble 
Germany  if  they  let  him  alone  and  persist  any  longer  in 
their  inaction."  ^ 

Of  the  effect  this  intelligence  had  upon  Pitt's  mind 
there  is  no  direct  evidence.  But  the  action  he  took  sug- 
gests that  his  quick  eye  for  a  situation  saw  in  it  the 
moment  of  all  others  for  high  action.  Though  England 
was  in  the  crisis  of  her  defence  against  the  long-threatened 
invasion,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  give  new  impetus  to  his 
measure  for  attack.  Certainly  it  was  the  hour  at  which 
England  at  all  risks  should  show  she  had  the  power  and  the 
will  to  strike,  for  all  Napoleon's  effort  to  bind  her  hands. 
What  at  least  is  certain,  is  that  in  the  height  of  the  dis- 
turbance which  the  news  from  the  Texel  was  causing,  and 
regardless  of  the  resulting  strain  on  the  Navy,  Pitt  laid  fresh 
burdens  upon  it.  The  Russian  demand  had  to  be  honoured, 
and  on  July  27th  he  decided  that  the  Commander-in-chief 
in  the  Mediterranean  was  to  concert  measures  with  Craig  to 
carry  out  the  joint  action  in  Italy,  which  the  "  extended  " 
Russian  plan  demanded.  This  meant  providing  transport 
and  escort  for  25,000  troops  from  the  Black  Sea,  as  well  as 
for  the  6000  of  Craig's  force  at  Malta." 

But  this  was  not  all.  For  in  a  separate  despatch  from 
Gower  there  was  news  of  a  fresh  danger  against  which 
England  must  be  prepared  to  strike  alone,  whether  the 
Powers  took  action  or  not.  "  The  state  of  affairs  in  Con- 
stantinople," wrote  the  Ambassador,  "is  at  this  moment 
extremely  critical."  The  Russian  Ambassador  at  the  Porte 
had  sent  his  Government  word  that  General  Joubert  had 
arrived  there  with  a  personal  letter  from  Napoleon  to  the 
Sultan   and  a  large   sum    of  money,  to    secure    adherents 

^  Novosilzow  to  Worontzow,  Berlin,  July  18th:  Holland  Rose,  Third 
CodJition,  p.  182  and  186-7.  This  last  despatch  was  not  actually  communi- 
cated to  the  Foreij:?n  Office  till  Aui2:ust  3rd,  but  its  purport  must  have  been 
known  to  Pitt  much  earlier.     See  next  page,  note  2. 

-  Hawkesbury  to  the  Admiralty,  July  27th :  Admiralty  In-lctters  {Secretary 
of  State),  4199. 


July  BAIRD'S    EXPEDITION  235 

to  the  French  interests.  A  new  Grand  Vizier  devoted  to 
France  had  come  to  power ;  a  typically  indiscreet  Russian 
governor  had  committed  an  untimely  violation  of  Turkish 
territory ;  our  own  Ambassador  had  not  yet  appeared,  and 
the  negotiations  which  had  been  in  progress  for  a  Russo- 
Turkish  Alliance  had  been  broken  offV  Here  then  Avas  a 
recrudescence  of  the  old  danger  which  Nelson  had  scotched 
at  the  Nile,  and  for  all  his  preoccupations  Pitt  would 
not  leave  it  alone.  At  Cork  there  was  still  Eyre  Coote's 
force  waiting  in  inaction.  When  it  was  known  that  Ville- 
neuve  had  left  the  West  Indies,  it  had  been  ordered  to 
stand  fast  a  second  time.  Coote's  appointment  as  Governor 
of  Jamaica,  however,  was  not  cancelled,  and  General  David 
Baird  had  succeeded  him  in  command.  This  force  then 
was  now  disposable,  and  Barham  was  informed  that  the 
Government  intended  to  use  it  for  a  secret  expedition  to 
capture  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  would  consist  of 
between  six  and  seven  thousand  men,  and  the  Admiralty 
was  to  provide  a  battle  squadron  and  cruisers  for  the  escort 
under  Sir  Home  Popham."^ 

For  all  the  serious  state  of  affairs  in  Turkey,  the  idea  is 
open  to  an  obvious  criticism.  If  Pitt  was  really  focussing 
his  plan  of  campaign  on  a  combined  offensive  movement 
against  Napoleon  in  Italy  in  concert  with  Russia,  elementary 
strategy  demanded  that  he  should  concentrate  all  disposable 
force  upon  that  movement.  It  can  only  be  said  it  was  no 
mere  question  of  elementary  strategy.  The  situation  was 
confused  by  the  mutual  suspicions  of  the  parties  to  the  still 
incomplete  Coalition.  Though  its  prospects  were  certainly 
brightening,  the  British  ministers  could  not  suddenly  dismiss 
their  suspicion  that  the  continental  Powers  concerned  were 
perhaps  playing  for  their  own   hands,   and   might  at  any 

1  Same  to  same,  June  29th  :    Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  185. 

^  In-letters  {Secretary  of  State),  4200,  July  25th.  This  order  and  that  last 
mentioned  of  the  27th  were  anterior  to  the  receipt  of  Gower's  despatches,  on 
which  they  appear  so  obviously  to  be  founded.  According  to  the  endorse- 
ment, the  despatches  were  received  at  the  Foreign  Office  on  July  29th.  But  it  is 
alruost  certain  Worontzow  had  received  the  information  they  contained  some 
days  earlier,  and  according  to  his  practice  he  would  have  communicated  it  at 
once  to  Pitt.  Gower  explains  that  he  himself  had  had  the  information  "  some 
days  before  he  had  sent  it  on,"  but  that  he  had  been  prevented  from  writing 
"  by  a  severe  indisposition." 


2  36  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

moment  conic  to  terms  with  Napoleon  and  leave  England 
in  the  lurch.  If  so,  Pitt's  great  scheme  to  cover  India  by 
forcing  Napoleon  back  from  his  advanced  position  in  the 
Mediterranean  would  fall  to  the  ground.  In  so  precarious 
and  unstable  a  diplomatic  situation,  was  it  or  was  it  not 
good  strategy  to  prepare  a  second  line  of  defence  for  our 
Eastern  trade  and  possessions  ?  No  one  but  a  beginner  in 
the  study  of  war  would  presume  to  answer  the  question 
with  confidence.  The  answer  would  seem  to  turn  on  the 
reality  of  the  Turkish  danger,  and  on  the  exact  degree  of 
reliance  that  at  the  time  could  be  placed  upon  the  prospect 
of  the  Coalition.  Of  that  there  Avas  certainly  no  better 
judge  than  Pitt.  In  any  case  the  enterprise  cannot  be 
dismissed  as  a  mere  eccentric  or  sporadic  attack  having 
no  organic  connection  with  the  main  issue.  It  was  in  fact 
an  essential  part  in  the  comprehensive  scheme  of  Imperial 
defence. 

Its  higher  strategical  purpose  was  clearly  set  forth  in 
Pitt's  instructions  to  Lord  Cornwallis,  the  Governor-General 
of  India.  Castlereagh's  despatch,  which  conveyed  them, 
informed  him  that  since  it  Avas  possible  that  India  might 
require  reinforcements  before  they  could  be  sent  out  from 
home,  he  was  authorised  in  case  of  need  to  call  on  Baird 
and  direct  Admiral  Popham  to  cover  the  passage  of  the 
force  against  interference  from  the  French  base  at  Mau- 
ritius. But  it  Avas  only  to  be  done  in  case  of  urgent  danger 
to  India.  "  The  whole  of  this  instruction,"  Castlereagh 
explained,  "  proceeds  upon  the  principle  that  the  true  value 
of  the  Cape  to  Great  Britain  is  its  being  considered  and 
treated  at  all  times  as  an  outpost  subservient  to  the  protec- 
tion and  security  of  our  Indian  possessions.  When  in  our 
hands  it  must  afford  considerable  accommodation  and 
facilities  to  our  intercourse  Avith  those  possessions,  but  its 
occupation  is  perhaps  even  more  material  as  depriving  the 
enemy  of  the  best  intermediate  position  betAveen  Europe 
and  India  for  assembling  a  large  European  armament  for 
service  in  the  East  Indies,"  as  Avell  as  for  the  intercepting 
and  protection  of  trade.  Lord  Cornwallis  therefore,  before 
making  a  call  on  the  expeditionary  force,   Avas  to  consider 


July  THE    EAST    INDIAN    DEFLECTION  237 

fully  on  these  lines  the  relative  advantage  of  summoning 
Baird  to  India  or  holding  the  Cape.-^ 

The  reasoning  is  plain.  In  the  previous  winter,  when 
Napoleon  began  to  regard  the  invasion  of  England  as  im- 
practicable, he  had  formulated  a  plan  for  such  an  attack 
on  India  as  Castlereagh's  despatch  indicated.  Seeing  how 
confident  the  Government  was  in  the  impregnability  of 
their  home  defence,  there  was  every  possibility  that  Na- 
poleon would  shortly  be  forced  back  once  more  on  Colonial 
attack  as  a  means  of  containing  the  British  forces ;  and 
Joubert's  appearance  at  Constantinople  gave  strong  colour 
to  the  apprehension  that  India  would  be  the  possession 
chosen.  If  so,  no  success  in  the  Mediterranean  could 
prevent  his  making  such  an  attack,  particularly  if  he 
secured  the  co-operation  of  the  Porte.  Moreover,  howso- 
ever strong  our  position  in  the  Mediterranean  and  the 
Near  East,  it  would  still  be  open  to  him  to  turn  it  by  way 
of  the  Cape.  So  long  as  it  was  in  the  hands  of  his  Dutch 
vassals  it  was  a  real  danger.  It  gave  him  a  line  of  opera- 
tion at  least  as  formidable  as  that  by  way  of  Egypt  and  the 
Red  Sea,  or  of  Turkey  and  the  Persian  Gulf.  To  mass  all 
our  available  force  on  the  one  line  was  to  leave  the  other 
open.  It  lay  over  an  open  sea,  and  it  was  consequently 
impossible  to  secure  it  by  naval  force  alone,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  narrow  seas  at  home.  It  is  therefore  unsafe  to 
dismiss  the  idea  with  contempt  by  applying  crudely  the 
simple  test  of  concentration.  It  was  in  effect  a  concentra- 
tion of  effort  upon  one  object,  but  from  geographical  exi- 
gencies and  the  existing  political  conditions  it  was  more 
than  doubtful  whether  the  correlative  concentration  of 
force  could  surely  be  effective  on  one  line  of  operations 
only.  In  any  case  the  whole  question  will  serve  as  a 
warning  that  the  broad  combined  problems  of  Imperial 
defence  are  not  to  be  solved  off-hand  by  the  facile  applica- 
tion of  maxims  which  are  the  outcome  of  narrower  and 
less  complex  continental  conditions. 

Such   then  were  the   involved  considerations  through 

^  Castlereagh  to  Cornwallis,  September  10th.     (Copy  communicated  to  the 
Admiralty.)     Admiralty  In-letters  [Sec/reUir y  of  State),  4200. 


23  8  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

Avbicli  Pitt  and  Barhain  had  to  steer  their  course,  as  they 
faced  the  crisis  in  the  Narrow  Seas.  They  are  considera- 
tions which  at  first  sight  may  appear  to  have  little  to  do 
with  it,  but  in  fact  it  will  be  seen  that  they  deter mmed 
the  crucial  movement  which  we  have  now  to  consider  :  and 
no  right  judgment  of  it  is  possible  unless  they  be  kept 
firmly  in  mind. 


I 


CHAPTER    XVII 

THE  MASTERSTROKE 

It  was  on  August  10th  that  Villeneuve  intended  to  begin  his 
final  movement  from  Coruna.  "  I  am  sailing,"  he  wrote  to 
Decres  on  that  day,  "  and  I  shall  make  for  Brest  or  Cadiz 
according  to  circumstances.  The  enemy  observe  us  here  too 
closely  to  leave  any  hope  of  concealing  our  movement."  ^ 

Light  westerly  airs  prevailed,  and  owing  to  part  of 
the  fleet  being  up  the  Ferrol  arm  of  the  bay  it  was  not  till 
the  13th  that  he  had  all  his  force  together  outside.  So 
severe  had  been  the  punishment  which  Calder  had  in- 
flicted upon  the  original  Combined  Squadron,  that  even 
as  reinforced  by  the  divisions  of  Gourdon  and  Grandal- 
lana,  it  only  numbered  twenty-nine  of  the  line.  Of  these 
fourteen  were  the  raw  Ferrol  ships  that  had  had  no  sea  or 
fleet  training  whatever,  and  of  the  whole  number  only 
one,  the  Principe  de  Asturias  120,  was  a  three-decker. 
Six  were  80 -gun  ships  and  the  rest  seventy-fours.  The 
cruisers  numbered  six  frigates  and  four  corvettes.  There 
was  still,  however,  a  fond  hope  that  the  Didon  might 
get  touch  with  Allemand,  and  that  the  addition  of  his 
squadron  would  bring  the  whole  Combined  Fleet  up  to 
thirty-four  of  the  line  with  another  first-rate. 

It  was  precisely  during  these  days  that  the  British 
counter-concentration  was  taking  place  off  Ushant.  Stir- 
ling having  found  Rochefort  empty  came  in  on  the  13th 
just  as  Villeneuve  was  getting  his  squadrons  together  out- 
side Coruna,  and  the  same  evening  Cornwallis's  cruisers 
signalled  the  approach  of  Calder.  Next  morning,  before 
Villeneuve  had  been  able  to  move,  he  joined,  and  the 
following  day,  the  15th,  Nelson  appeared. 

1  Desbriere,  v.  778. 
239 


240  THE    MASTERSTROKE  Aug.  15 

Ever  since  the  9th,  when  he  had  made  enoufrh  westins" 
to  drop  the  northerly  winds,  he  had  been  steering  a  course 
for  his  original  rendezvous  fifty  leagues  west  of  Scilly.  By 
noon  on  the  13th  he  was  about  150  miles  short  of  it, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon  he  fell  in  with  the  Niohe. 
She  was  three  days  from  Cornwallis,  and  could  report  that 
when  she  parted  company  nothing  had  been  heard  of  the 
Combined  Squadron  in  the  Bay.  She  had,  however,  spoken 
a  Portuguese,  who  said  he  had  sighted  it  a  short  time  pre- 
viously steering  north.  Assured  by  the  information  that 
Ireland  was  not  in  danger,  Nelson  immediately  bore  away 
to  the  eastward,  signalling  the  Ushant  rendezvous,  and  by 
six  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  he  was  saluting 
Cornwallis's  flag.^ 

Without  even  calling  on  Nelson  to  report  himself, 
Cornwallis,  on  Barham's  instructions,  ordered  him  and  the 
Victory  home  for  their  long- earned  rest.  Stirling  in  the 
Glory  was  also  sent  in  with  several  other  vessels  that  re- 
quired a  refit.  In  the  end  he  had  some  thirty-six  of  the 
line  with  his  flag,  or  on  their  way  to  join  it,  besides  the 
Dragon  and  Goliath,  which  were  to  the  southward  in  search 
respectively  of  Nelson  and  Calder.  Considering  its  pre- 
ponderance in  three-deckers,  and  its  high  efficiency,  it  was 
a  force  that  completely  commanded  the  situation.  Had 
the  allied  Admirals  come  north,  even  with  Allemand  in 
company,  they  certainly  must  have  been  defeated  long 
before  Ganteaume  could  have  come  to  their  assistance." 

Such  then  was  the  actual  situation.  What  did  Napo- 
leon make  of  it  ?  Did  he  doubt  from  the  first — even 
before  the  concentration  was  complete — that  all  hope  of 
the  invasion  was  at  an  end  ? 

On  August  3rd,  as  we  have  seen,  he  had  reached 
Boulogne,  displaying  an  inspiring  confidence  that  the  com- 
mand of  the  Channel  was  about  to  pass  into  his  hands. 
But  that  is  by  no  means  conclusive  that  he  saw  his  way 

^  Nelson's  Journal,  and  Log  of  the  Victory  [Hardy). 

"  The  number  of  three-deckers  with  Cornwallis  at  the  moment  is  difficult 
to  determine  exactlj'.  But  counting-  tlie  Virtoi'y  and  Glory,  he  must  have 
had  nine  or  ten.  A  return  in  the  Barham  Papers,  dated  August  20th,  shows  the 
Home  Fleet  with  ten  three-deckers  at  sea,  and  five  in  reserve  refitting. 


Aug.  3  NAPOLEON  AT    BOULOGNE  241 

clear  for  attempting  his  hazardous  enterprise.  The  indi- 
cations of  a  coalition  in  his  rear  were  too  ominous  to 
be  ignored.  Austria  was  massing  troops  in  Venetia  and 
the  Tyrol,  constant  communications  were  passing  between 
Naples,  Corfu,  and  Malta,  and  a  levy  en  masse  of  the  Nea- 
politan militia  was  reported  by  St.  Cyr  to  be  going  on  in 
secret.  Before  quitting  Paris  Napoleon  directed  Talleyrand  to 
prepare  an  ultimatum  for  both  the  Austrian  and  Neapolitan 
courts,  and  then,  without  saying  a  word  to  his  ministers, 
he  had  suddenly  left  for  Boulogne.  The  day  after  he  reached 
the  coast,  he  approved  the  text  of  the  Austrian  note,  and 
directed  that  Naples  was  to  be  threatened  with  instant 
invasion  if  the  report  of  the  general  enrolment  proved 
correct.  He  had  no  doubt,  as  he  afterwards  confessed,  that 
these  threats  would  prove  effective,  and  that  he  would  be 
left  free  to  proceed  with  his  invasion. 

Such  was  his  state  of  mind  when,  before  the  ink  of  his 
last  order  was  w^ell  dry,  urgent  Spanish  despatches  came 
in  from  Talleyrand.  They  announced  nothing  less  dis- 
turbing than  that  Nelson  had  almost  certainly  reap- 
peared at  Gibraltar,  and  was  believed  to  have  entered  the 
Mediterranean. 

Talleyrand  made  no  secret  of  what  it  meant.  Ville- 
neuve  was  no  one  knew  where,  and  all  the  far-sighted 
minister  could  see  was  that,  if  he  attempted  to  approach 
the  Channel  under  the  delusion  that  the  British  concen- 
tration Avas  broken,  he  was  doomed  to  destruction.  The 
position  was  alarming  in  the  extreme.  Napoleon's  sudden 
and  quite  unexpected  departure  from  Paris  filled  Talleyrand 
with  dread  lest  his  master's  gambling  spirit  had  got  the 
better  of  him,  and  that  at  last  he  really  meant  to  stake 
everything  on  the  desperate  throw  from  which  he  had  so 
long  held  back.  "  This  unexpected  news,"  he  wrote  to 
Napoleon,  "  has  made  an  impression  upon  me  which  I  try 
in  vain  to  calm.  This  kind  of  agitation  is  only  to  be  en- 
dured by  those  of  your  servants  who  are  supported  by  your 
presence."  Then  he  proceeded  to  tell  his  master  plainly 
that  he  was  beaten.  He  was  sure  that  Nelson  would  come 
north,  and  he  calculated  that   his    arrival  would  give  the 

Q 


242  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  4 

English  a  line  of  at  least  fifty-four  vessels.  "  This  unfore- 
seen concentration,"  he  urged,  "leaves  no  doubt  that  the 
project  of  invasion  is  impracticable  for  the  moment;  but  as 
the  reaUty  of  this  project  cannot  but  gain  the  strongest 
confirmation  by  the  presence  of  your  Majesty  at  Boulogne, 
it  is  probable  it  will  decide  the  English  to  mass  at  some 
Channel  rendezvous,  and  this  disposition  will  give  the 
Combined  Fleet  time  and  means  to  get  into  a  Spanish 
port."  ^ 

Napoleon  after  his  manner  did  not  deign  to  traverse  his 
minister's  conclusions  ;  ho  simply  refused  to  admit  the  facts. 
"  All  this  news  about  Nelson,"  he  wrote  to  Docres,  "  seems 
doubtful.  What  the  devil  could  he  be  after  in  the  Medi- 
terranean ?  Do  they  want  twenty  of  the  line  there  ?  "  At 
this  time,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  he  had  not  heard  of 
Craig's  arrival  at  Malta,  and  not  a  word  of  Villeneuve.  He 
knew  nothing  of  his  arrival  in  Europe  or  of  the  battle.  He 
still  believed  not  only  that  he  had  frightened  his  enemy 
into  an  abject  defensive,  but  that  they  had  no  suspicion  of 
his  great  plan.  "  They  little  know,"  he  added,  "  what  they 
have  got  hanging  in  their  ear.  Everything  here  is  going 
well,  and  certes  if  we  are  masters  of  the  passage  for  twelve 
hours,  England  has  lived.  I  can't  make  out  why  we  have 
no  news  from  Ferrol.  I  can't  believe  Magon  never  reached 
him  [Villeneuve].  I  am  telling  Ganteaume  by  telegraph  to 
keep  out  in  the  Bertheaume  Road."  ^ 

Three  more  days  went  by  and  then  came  news,  not  of 
Villeneuve,  but  again  of  Nelson.  After  watering  and  re- 
victualing  at  Gibraltar  and  Tetuan  he  had  come  back  out 
the  Straits,  and  as  long  since  as  July  25  th  he  had  been 
seen  from  the  Cadiz  signal  stations  making  for  Cape  St. 
Vincent.^     This  same  day,  whether  before  or  after  receiving 

^  p.  Bertrand,  Lettres  inedites  de  Talleyrand  d  Napoleon,  120.  The  French 
Foreign  Office  had  at  this  time  a  department  of  naval  intelligence.  Its  last 
report  was  dated  July  20th,  and  it  showed  that  the  British  had  forty-four  of 
the  line  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  and  France.  In  the  evening  Talleyrand  sent 
tlie  Emperor  "  une  boite  arrangee  conformementh  I'^tat  pr(''sent,"  ibid.,  p.  122. 
A  fortnight  later  Napoleon  wrote  to  him,  "  The  work  that  is  being  done  in 
the  Foreign  Office  on  the  movement  of  the  enemy's  ships  of  the  line  is  very 
useful,  but  it  might  be  more  complete." — Corrcspondancc ,  xi.  146,  August  27th. 

^  August  4th,  Correspondance,  xi.  59. 

3  Desbri^re,  v.  736. 


Aug.  7-13      NAPOLEON   AND    VILLENEUVE  243 

the  news,  we  cannot  tell,  Napoleon  told  Talleyrand  not  to 
send  off  the  note  to  Vienna  before  he  had  seen  it  again,  and 
directed  his  Guard  to  leave  Paris  for  Boulogne.  Then  on 
the  morrow  came  news  at  last  of  Villeneuve.  It  told  of 
his  indecisive  action  with  Calder  and  how  he  had  put  into 
Vigo  to  refit,  but  it  expressed  his  intention  of  proceeding  at 
once  according  to  the  plan  to  join  hands  with  the  Ferrol 
divisions  and  come  on  to  Brest.  Napoleon  chose,  or  at 
least  pretended,  to  see  in  all  this  the  realisation  of  his  hopes. 
He  immediately  had  a  victory  proclaimed,  and  announced 
that  Villeneuve  had  fulfilled  his  mission,  but  at  the  same 
time  he  ordered  his  Guard  to  stand  fast  in  Paris.^ 

He  was  clearly  at  his  wits'  end.  As  the  vigilant  financial 
world  saw  him  apparently  resolving  to  hazard  the  desperate 
throw  his  credit  was  falling  dangerously,  and  he  was  strenu- 
ously trying  to  restore  it  by  elaborating  the  success  of 
Villeneuve's  action.  To  Villeneuve  himself,  Avho  had 
written  in  the  lowest  spirits,  he  sent  word  to  point  out 
encouragingly  that  the  British  success  was  really  insignifi- 
cant, and  that  he  still  hoped  he  would  proceed  with  his 
mission.  He  persuaded  himself,  on  information  from  his 
spies  in  England,  that  the  Admiralty  believed  the  Combined 
Squadron  had  gone  to  Cadiz  or  was  coming  to  the  Texel, 
and  once  more  he  urged  Marmont  "  to  do  the  impossible  " 
to  draw  the  English  in  his  direction.  He  must  occupy  at 
least  twelve  of  the  line.  It  was  indeed  the  impossible ;  for 
ten  days  were  still  to  pass  before  Marmont  saw  half  that 
number  barring  his  exit.  They  were  all  weak  ships  that 
were  fit  for  nothing  else,  and  that  was  the  utmost  force  ever 
devoted  to  him.  The  only  effect  of  the  feint,  as  we  have 
seen,  was  for  a  moment  to  interfere  with  Barham's  arrange- 
ments for  reinforcing  Cornwallis  in  order  to  permit  of  his 
detaching  a  force  to  strike  at  All  em  and. ^ 

By  stubbornly  ignoring  the  news  of  Nelson  and  by 
crediting  the  British  Admiralty  with  childish  simplicity. 
Napoleon  seems  at  this  moment,  if  ever,  really  to  have 
believed  that  his  hour  had  come,  and  for  three  days  was  all 
amiability  and  encouragement.      But  on  the  13th  the  note 

^  Desbri^re,  v.  739,  note.  2  ggg  j^^^  ^  p^  749  ^nd  ante,  p.  231. 


244  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  13 

was  changed.  Word  came  in  from  Villeneiivc  that,  instead 
of  forming  his  junction  outside  Ferrol  and  immediately 
coming  on,  he  had  entered  the  port  before  the  Emperor's 
stringent  prohibition  had  come  to  his  hands.  Napoleon  was 
beside  himself.  It  is  of  this  day  that  Daru,  the  head  of 
his  War  Office  staff,  tells  the  well-known  story.  The  Em- 
peror sent  for  him,  and  he  found  him  raving  up  and  down 
the  room  railing  coarse  abuse  upon  his  unhappy  Admiral. 
Then,  suddenly  stopping,  he  cried,  "  Sit  down  there  and 
write,"  and  with  that  he  dictated  without  a  check  the  whole 
of  the  orders  for  his  immortal  campaign  of  Austerlitz.^ 

Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  the  story,  it  must  not 
be  taken  to  mean  that  Napoleon  had  wholly  abandoned  his 
idea  of  invasion.  It  may  have  been  intended  merely  to 
give  emphasis  to  his  threat  to  Vienna.  The  same  day  he 
ordered  Talleyrand  to  see  the  Austrian  Ambassador  and 
urge  instant  demobilisation  in  the  strongest  terms.  "  Al- 
ready," so  the  minister  was  to  tell  him,  ''  he  (Napoleon)  has 
suspended  the  execution  of  his  projects  of  hostility,  and 
has  recognised  that  he  cannot  cross  into  England  with 
150,000  men  when  his  southern  frontiers  are  menaced."" 

Whether  or  not  he  meant  what  he  said  there  is  no 
sign  yet  that  he  had  admitted  himself  beaten.  That  same 
fevered  day,  with  increasing  passion,  he  poured  forth  letter 
after  letter  to  Decres  with  the  instructions  he  was  to  send 
to  Villeneuve.  By  fair  means  or  foul  the  despairing  Ad- 
miral must  be  heartened,  cajoled,  or  bullied  into  getting  to 
sea  again.  If  this  was  not  the  real  object  of  these  extra- 
ordinary documents — if  Napoleon  really  believed  in  the 
possibility  of  what  he  wrote — he  had  entirely  lost  grip  of 
the  situation.  In  his  frenzy— for  it  was  hardly  less — he 
pictured  the  British  squadrons  deceived  by  his  fancied 
diversions  and  scattered  upon  the  seas — off  Ireland,  in 
the  North  Sea,  in  the  Mediterranean,  everywhere  but  where 
they   were  —  in   the   act   of  gathering  at   the   fatal  point. 

1  For  this  story  and  the  doubts  as  to  its  entire  credibility  see  Auriol,  v. 
p.  452  note  and  493  note.  He  cites  Memoircs  dc  Segur,  p.  158,  where  the  date  is 
given  as  August  13th.  Thiers  puts  the  incident  after  the  23rd,  but  gives  no 
authority  for  his  date  [Consulat  ct  Empire,  v.  4(54). 

-  August  13th;   Cor  res  panda  nee,  xi.  81. 


Aug.  13-15  VIENNA    OR   LONDON  245 

Calculation  after  calculation  of  the  British  force  and  dis- 
position he  showered  upon  Decrcs  and  Villeneuve,  each 
more  groundless,  more  sanguine  than  the  last,  and  all  full 
of  glaring  contradictions  and  false  estimates.  But  his 
lahour  was  thrown  away ;  for  at  that  moment  Villeneuve 
was  already  sailing  from  Coruna  with  his  path  barred  before 
him.  It  was  no  longer  a  question  of  what  he  did  or 
left  undone.  The  game  was  played,  and  Napoleon  was 
outmanoeuvred. 

For  all  his  fierce  refusal  to  admit  the  truth  which 
Talleyrand  had  told  him,  he  was  even  then  preparing  to 
face  it.  On  those  same  critical  days — the  13  th  and  14th 
— he  was  actually  directing  Talleyrand  to  issue  his  revised 
ultimatum  to  Austria.  "  The  answer,"  he  wrote,  "  is  easy  to 
forecast.  It  will  contain  denials,  protestations — in  a  word, 
dilatory  phrases.  That  will  not  do  for  me.  My  decision  is 
made.  I  will  attack  Austria  and  be  at  Vienna  before  the 
month  of  November,  to  face  the  Russians  if  they  show 
themselves."  ^  Possibly  then  he  had  already  half  reahsed 
his  failure.  On  the  15  th,  not  knowing  that  Villeneuve  had 
sailed,  he  wrote  again  in  despair  at  what  seemed  to  him 
the  invincible  ineptitude  of  his  Admiral.  On  his  head  he 
visited  the  results  of  his  own  confused  orders,  and  could  not 
see  they  had  brought  their  own  reward.  His  failure  to 
grasp  the  foundations  of  the  game,  which  every  British 
Admiral  knew  by  heart,  is  almost  incredible  in  so  great  a 
genius  for  war.  In  this  very  letter  he  naively  exposes 
what  can  only  be  called  the  simplicity  with  which  his 
fantastic  plan  had  been  framed.  ''What  I  find  so  extra- 
ordinary in  all  this,"  he  says,  "  is  that  the  place  of  Alle- 
mand's  rendezvous  ...  is  just  the  position  where  the 
battle  was  fought."  Surely  the  barest  knowledge  of  the 
theory  and  practice  of  naval  warfare  would  have  taught 
him  that  that  was  just  the  most  natural  thing  to  expect. 
His  confident  egotism  would  not  recognise  that  he  vv^as 
playing  against  past- masters  of  a  game  at  which  he  was 
only  an  amateur.  What  he  took  for  astute  strategical 
inspirations  were   to   his   opponents   the   commonplaces  of 

1  Aug.  13th,  Corrcspondancc,  xi.  80. 


246  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  is 

their  craft,  and  while  he  stood  fuming  between  bewilder- 
ment and  wounded  sclf-coniidence,  making  confusion  worse 
confounded,  the  men  of  the  old  tradition  were  playing  in 
sure  mastery  high  over  his  head. 

It  was  now  they  delivered  their  masterstroke.  In  all 
the  campaign  there  is  no  movement — not  even  Nelson's 
chase  of  Villencuvc — that  breathes  more  deeply  the  true 
spirit  of  war,  and  yet  nothing  in  it  has  been  more  severely 
criticised.  Let  us  see  then  exactly  hoAv  things  stood.  The 
middle  of  August  was  the  actual  crisis  of  Napoleon's  long- 
prepared  threat.  He  himself  was  at  Boulogne,  alert  to  give 
the  Avord  at  any  moment,  and  the  Grand  Army  and  its 
transport  w^ere  ready  or  as  nearly  ready  as  Napoleon's 
genius  could  get  them.  But  at  the  vital  moment  the  great 
concentration  of  the  British  battle  fleet  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Channel  was  also  complete,  and  it  made  the  movement  of 
the  Grand  Army  impossible.  So  long  as  that  concentration 
held  England  Avas  impregnable,  even  to  the  most  formid- 
able attack  that  had  ever  threatened  her.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  main  fleet  of  the  enemy  was  at  Ferrol  free  to 
come  north,  but  also  free  to  go  south  for  Cadiz  and  the 
Mediterranean.  For  all  Barham  or  Cornwallis  could  tell 
this  was  the  game  Napoleon  was  playing — the  game  that 
Talleyrand  was  actually  urging  his  master  to  play.  In  the 
eyes  of  the  British  Admirals  the  whole  project  of  the  in- 
vasion was  so  desperate  that  they  could  not  believe  it  was 
real,  and,  with  experienced  penetration,  they  detected  in  it 
a  device  to  force  upon  them  a  concentration  off  Brest, 
which  Avould  leave  Villeneuve  free  to  strike  to  the  south- 
ward. To  prevent  such  a  movement  of  the  Combined 
Fleet  was,  as  the  British  war-plan  stood,  no  less  important 
than  to  overwhelm  it  if  it  came  north.  What  then  should 
Cornwallis  do  ?  Should  he  rest  content  with  the  control 
of  the  invasion  theatre  :  or  should  he  strike  to  control  the 
whole  theatre  of  the  campaign  ?  Should  he  be  satisfied 
with  impregnable  defence,  or  should  he  risk  it  to  deprive 
the  enemy  of  all  initiative  ?  "  The  Western  Squadron  is  the 
mainspring  from  which  all  offensive  operations  must  pro- 
ceed."    Lord  Barham  was  even  then  writing  the  words  to 


Aug.  i6        THE    CONCENTRATION  BROKEN  247 

him,  but  the  letter  had  not  yet  arrived.^  There  was  not 
a  day  to  lose  ;  at  any  time  Villeneuve  might  be  moving,  and 
if  Cornwallis  waited  for  orders  from  the  Admiralty  it  might 
be  too  late  to  act.  Surely  higher  responsibility  never  rested 
on  an  Admiral  at  sea.  Yet  there  is  not  a  sign  of  hesitation 
in  the  stout  old  officer.  To  wait  for  orders  was  to  abandon 
the  game.  In  his  room  at  the  Admiralty  Barham  was  tell- 
ing him  to  strike  when  he  saw  the  chance,  "  without  wait- 
ing for  orders  from  home,"  and  he  did  not  wait,  even  for 
the  permission. 

Not  for  more  than  twenty-four  hours  did  he  hold  the 
concentration.  On  the  16th,  the  day  after  Nelson  joined, 
Cornwallis  signed  orders  to  Calder  to  take  eighteen  of  the 
line,  which,  with  the  Dragon  and  Goliath  already  to  the 
southward,  would  give  him  twenty,  and  proceed  off  Ferrol, 
there  to  use  his  utmost  exertion  to  prevent  the  enemy 
sailing  again,  or  to  intercept  them  if  they  attempted  it. 
The  squadron  detailed  included  five  three-deckers  and 
seven  of  Nelson's  squadron,  with  his  second-in-command, 
Rear-Admiral  Louis,  at  their  head  in  the  Canopies  80 — and 
seeing  the  high  condition  of  the  force  contrasted  with  that 
of  Villeneuve's  sickly,  heterogeneous,  and  demoralised  fleet, 
it  may  be  taken  as  fairly  its  equal.  Such  at  least  was 
Villeneuve's  own  opinion.^ 

Though  at  the  time  Cornwallis  believed  on  Calder 's 
report  that  Allemand  had  probably  joined  Villeneuve,  and 
would  have  raised  his  force  to  well  over  thirty  of  the  line, 
he  could  spare  no  more,  but  even  this  danger  would  not 
deter  him  from  the  bold  stroke  the  situation  demanded.^ 
He  had  in  fact  divided  his  fleet,  keeping  the  minimum  of 

^  Barham  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  15th,  ante,  p.  231. 

2  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  344,  347,  and  see  2^ost,  p.  257. 

^  See  Captain  Hallowell  ( Z'l^rc)  to  Nelson,  August  17th  :  Add.  MSS.  34980. 
According  to  him  Calder  reported  that  Allemand  had  joined  Villeneuve  in 
Ferrol,  and  Cornwallis  calculated  the  Combined  Fleet  at  twenty-five  French 
and  thirteen  or  fourteen  Spanish.  See  Captain  John  Whitby  (Cornwallis's 
flag-captain)  to  Nelson,  August  19th  :  Ibid.,  "  It  appears  to  me  nothing  could 
have  been  more  a  propos  than  your  junction  here,  as  it  has  enabled  the 
Admiral  to  make  a  large  detachment,  which  the  posture  of  the  enemy  seemed 
to  make  highly  necessary — for  if  the  Rochefort  squadron  have  got  into  Ferrol, 
the  enemy  have  there  thirty  sail  of  the  line."  Barham  also  had  "  no  doubt 
of  the  Rochefort  ships  being  at  Ferrol."  See  his  letter  to  Cornwallis, 
Wykeham- Martin  MSS. — Bint.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Coll.,  vol.  vi.  410. 


248  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

eighteen  of  the  line  with  his  flag,  of  which  about  ten  were 
three-deckers/ 

This  was  the  move  which  Napoleon  characterised  as 
an  msigne  hetise  when  he  heard  of  it.  "  What  a  chance 
Villeneuve  has  missed!"  he  wrote.  "By  coming  down 
upon  Brest  from  the  open  he  might  have  played  prisoners' 
base  with  Calder's  squadron  and  fallen  upon  Cornwallis ;  or 
with  his  thirty  of  the  line  have  beaten  the  English  twenty, 
and  obtained  a  decisive  superiority." "  It  is  in  this  opinion 
that  so  many  modern  critics  have  followed  him.  Forgetting, 
as  we  shall  see,  under  Avhat  a  smart  of  irritation  he  uttered 
the  snarl,  they  have  solemnly  endorsed  his  testy  criticism. 
We  are  told  that  the  great  movement  is  "  condemned  by 
the  simplest  and  most  generally  admitted  principles  of  war- 
fare," that  it  was  "  a  strategical  blunder,"  "  a  blunder  which 
might  have  proved  fatal,"  and  more  to  the  same  effect.^ 

It  is  a  point  that  goes  to  the  root  of  naval  strategy,  and 
only  by  a  careful  study  of  the  case  in  detail  can  w^e  under- 
stand why  at  that  hour  in  which  the  war  experience  of 
centuries  culminated  the  judgment  of  the  veterans  con- 
cerned was  unanimous,  without  hesitation,  and  clean 
contrary  to  that  of  their  recent  critics. 

As  to  the  risk  involved — the  possibility  of  Napoleon's 
game  of  "  prisoners'  base  " — let  us  first  take  the  official 
British  view.  Certainly  it  was  not  that  the  result  of  an 
action  between  Villeneuve  and  Calder  would  be  as  Napoleon 
professed  to  believe,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  war 
to  support  the  Emperor's  sanguine  opinion.  On  all  the 
evidence  an  action  fought  out  between  the  two  squadrons 
would  have  put  both  of  them  off  the  board,  and  this  Avas 
Nelson's  view.  When  the  division  of  the  fleet  was  known 
he  was  consulted  by  the  anxious  ministers.  '*  This  I  ven- 
tured without  any  fear,"  he  wrote,  "  that  if  Calder  got  fairly 

^  Ganteaume  to  Decrcs,  August  23rd :  Desbriere,  v.  806. 

^  To  Deores,  August  29th  :  Correspondance,  xi.  160. 

^  Influence  of  Sea  Po^ocr  on  the  Revolution  and  Empire,  ii.  176;  Cambridge 
Modern  History,  ix.  226  ;  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.,  Introduction,  p.  xxxix. ;  Laird 
Clowes,  The  Royal  Navy,  v.  119.  It  is  believed  that  no  naval  officer,  except 
Captain  Mahan  has  taken  this  view.  Neither  Admiral  Colomb,  Jurien  de  la 
Gravicre,  nor  Desbriere  shared  it,  and  it  has  been  distinctly  repudiated  by- 
Sir  John  K.  Laughton. 


Aug.  i6  DIVISION    OF    THE    FLEET  249 

close  alongside  them  with  twenty-seven  or  twenty-eight  sail, 
by  the  time  the  enemy  had  beat  our  fleet  somidly  they 
would  do  us  no  harm  this  year."  ^ 

Nor  did  Cornwallis  fear  for  his  own  position  the  possi- 
bility of  "  prisoners'  base."  Besides  the  Dragon  and  Goliath 
he  had  three  cruisers  watching  Ferrol,  as  well  as  two  or 
three  others  in  the  neighbourhood."  "  Should  their  lord- 
ships," he  wrote,  in  reporting  the  detachment  of  Calder, 
"  be  pleased  to  order  the  ships  in  any  other  direction  it 
may  easily  be  effected."  Clearly  he  considered  them  as 
strategically  still  under  his  hand.  In  his  view  they  were 
still  concentrated  in  the  real  sense  of  the  term,  within 
supporting  distance  of  each  other.  "I  have  thought,"  he  con- 
cluded, ''  the  step  I  have  now  taken  might  meet  with  their 
lordships'  approbation,  as  a  means  of  keeping  the  enemy's 
squadrons  in  check,  if  that  from  Rochefort  is  still  at  sea."  ^ 

Now  the  critics  omit  to  observe  that  their  lordships  did 
approve.  It  was  only  natural  they  should,  for  the  moment 
they  heard  of  Nelson's  return  they  sent  Cornwallis  an  order 
to  do  just  what  he  had  done,  with  only  one  small  difference. 
They  were  dissatisfied  with  Caldcr's  conduct  after  the  action, 
and  he  was  not  to  command.  Barham  and  Cornwallis  then 
were  independently  at  one  upon  the  movement — a  fact 
which  should  make  critics  pause.  The  order  was  signed  on 
August  19  th,  and  it  bade  Cornwallis  retain  eighteen  of  the 
line  off  Ushant  and  detach  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  his  own 
second-in-command,  with  two  flag-officers  under  him,  off" 
Ferrol.  He  was  to  give  him  twenty  of  the  line  and  as  many 
more  as  he  might  have  at  his  disposal  up  to  thirty-two.'^ 

It  was  not  that  they  did  not  realise  the  gravity  of  the 
situation  at  home.  Only  ten  days  before  they  had  given 
Cornwallis  formal  warning  "  that  the  enemy  have  it  in 
contemplation  to  attempt  immediately  the  invasion  of  this 
country  from  the  ports  of  Holland  and  Boulogne."  It  was 
the  period  of  spring  tides,  when  the  Dutch  squadron  would 

^  To  Captain  Keats,  August  24th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  16. 

-  Naiad,  Nimble,  and  Iris  had  been  sent  down  specially  after  Calder 
joined.  Hazard,  Rcvohitionnaire,  and  Melampus  were  already  to  the  southward. 
— Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  337,  345. 

3  Ibid.,  ii.  343,  August  16th. 

*  In-letters  {Secret  Orders)   1363.     Signed  "  Barham,  Gambier,  Garlies." 


2 so  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

be  able  to  put  to  sea,  and  in  a  private  letter  to  the  Admiral 
Barhain  had  called  special  attention  to  the  danger.  "  I 
just  write  one  line,"  he  said,  "  to  apprise  you,  ministers 
look  to  an  invasion  soon,  and  have  given  directions  to  all 
the  military  corps.  I  have  done  the  same  privately  to  the 
Admirals  at  all  the  ports.  I  take  it  for  granted  you  will 
take  a  near  station  during  the  spring  tides  in  order  to 
reinforce  the  Eastern  force  if  necessary."  ^  The  imminence 
of  the  danger  then,  such  as  it  was,  was  fairly  faced,  but  none 
the  less  both  Pitt  and  Barham  were  determined  not  to  be 
forced  back  upon  the  defensive — determined  not  to  devote 
to  it  more  force  than  they  felt  gave  them  a  sufficiently 
firm  grip  upon  the  threatened  invasion,  and  determined  not 
to  be  intimidated  out  of  their  offensive  plan  of  campaign. 
To  have  kept  the  fleet  massed  where  it  was  would  have  been 
to  surrender  the  initiative  to  Napoleon,  to  have  acted  tamely 
upon  the  defensive.  And  it  is  curious  that  the  critics 
who  most  severely  condemn  the  movement  are  just  those 
who  are  the  most  fanatical  prophets  of  the  offensive. 

"  This  division  of  the  fieet,"  writes  the  most  weighty  of 
them,  "  which  is  condemned  by  the  simplest  and  most 
generally  admitted  principles  of  warfare,  transferred  to 
Villeneuve  all  the  advantage  of  central  position  and 
superior  force,  and  was  stigmatised  by  Napoleon  as  a 
'  glaring  blunder.'  .  .  .  This  censure  was  just." "  But  how 
did  it  transfer  the  central  position  to  Villeneuve  ?  If 
against  all  probability  he  had  dared  to  face  the  concen- 
tration which  he  knew  was  to  the  north  of  him ;  if  by  a 
miracle  he  had  succeeded  in  eluding  Cornwallis's  cruiser 
screen  and  had  got  between  him  and  Calder,  he  would  in  a 

^  Barham  Papers,  Digest  of  Correspondence^  August  9th;  and  Barham  to 
Cornwallis,  August  10th,  Hist.  JLSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  410. 

^  Mahan,  ^ea  Power  {French  Rcvolulion),  ii.  576.  It  is  only  just  to  the 
learned  and  gallant  author  to  note  that  this  criticism  was  written  before  he 
had  had  any  experience  of  war  direction.  After  he  had  had  such  experience 
he  gave  a  definition  of  concentration  that  seems  incompatible  with  his 
censure  of  Cornwallis  :  "  Like  a  fan  that  opens  and  shuts,  vessels  thus 
organically  bound  together  possess  the  power  of  wide  sweep,  which  ensures 
exertion  over  a  wide  field  of  ocean,  and  at  the  same  time  that  of  mutual 
support,  because  dependent  upon  and  controlled  from  a  common  centre. 
Such  is  concentration  reasonably  understood — not  huddled  together  like  a 
drove  of  sheep,  but  distributed  with  a  regard  to  a  common  purpose  and  linked 
together  by  the  effectual  energy  of  a  single  will." — War  of  1812,  i.  aiG. 


Aug.  i6  DIVISION    OF   THE    FLEET  251 

sense  have  obtained  it,  but  only  in  regard  to  our  defensive 
area.  Looking  at  the  whole  theatre  of  the  campaign,  he 
had  the  central  position  already.  At  Ferrol  he  was  inter- 
posed between  our  main  force  and  Collingwood  with  the 
Mediterranean  fleet.  On  our  keeping  control  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean rested  our  engagement  with  the  Powers  of  the 
Coalition.  Pitt  at  the  moment  was  absorbed  in  fulfilling 
that  engagement.  It  could  only  be  done  by  preserving  the 
initiative  which  we  had  gained  at  Malta  and  Corfu,  and  for 
that  it  was  essential  that  we  should  forthwith  wrest  the 
central  position  from  Villeneuve.  Having  gained  that  posi- 
tion, Napoleon  had  the  choice  of  striking  at  the  Channel 
or  within  the  Straits,  and  as  the  political  situation  had  de- 
veloped in  the  past  weeks,  it  was  vital  to  deny  him  the 
choice.  The  seeds  which  Pitt  had  sown  so  patiently  were 
ripe  for  the  counter-attack.  As  Cornwallis  had  said,  the 
enemy's  fleets  must  be  "  held  in  check  "  and  the  control  of 
military  action  in  the  Mediterranean  placed  beyond  doubt. 
Had  the  movement  not  taken  place,  as  Codrington  wrote  of 
Villeneuve's  fleet  on  the  eve  of  Trafalgar,  "  this  immense 
force  would  probably  by  this  time  have  been  already  in 
Toulon  to  co-operate  with  the  French  army  in  Italy."  ^ 
The  central  position  of  the  whole  theatre,  in  fact,  stretched 
from  Ferrol  to  Brest,  and  it  was  this  position  that  Barham 
and  Cornwallis  decided  at  once  and  simultaneously  to 
re-occupy. 

It  is  obvious,  then,  that  if  the  movement  be  considered 
in  the  light  of  the  whole  situation,  it  was  one  which  has 
ample  justification  in  the  universal  principles  of  strategy. 
But  beyond  those  principles  lay  a  further  vindication  in 
the  special  exigencies  of  maritime  war.  The  case  indeed 
affords  a  typical  example  of  the  frequent  error  which  arises 
from  attempting  to  measure  naval  strategy  by  the  elemen- 
tary maxims  derived  from  warfare  on  land.  The  question 
once  more  was  not  purely  military.  It  was  distorted  by 
the  intrusion  of  commerce  protection.  It  was  the  season 
for  the  home-coming  of  the  great  convoys.  The  concen- 
tration at  Ferrol  directly  threatened  them,  and  the  necessity 

^  Bourcbier,  Memoirs  of  Codrington,  i.  56,  October  16,  1805. 


2  52  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

for  securing  their  approach  was  a  dominant  consideration 
in  Lord  Barham's  mind.  "  Fcrrol,"  he  wrote  to  CornwalUs, 
"  is  the  great  object  till  our  East  India  and  West  India 
fleets  are  arrived,  and  which  may  be  in  the  course  of  a 
fortnight.  The  heavy  frigates,  as  far  as  you  can  spare 
them,  cannot  be  employed  better  than  meeting  them 
towards  the  coast  of  Ireland."  That  is,  he  was  in  the 
usual  way  to  provide  a  covering  squadron  against  the 
enemy's  battle  squadron  and  strengthen  the  convoy's  escort 
as  they  reached  the  danger  area  of  the  home  terminal.  And 
then  Barham  added,  "  We  have  at  this  moment  received 
yours,  and  you  have  entered  completely  into  my  views."  ^ 

It  may  be  urged  by  purists  trained  in  the  continental 
school  that  such  deflections  are  essentially  heretical.  But 
in  truth  each  case  must  be  decided  on  its  merits  as  a 
balance  of  advantage  against  risk.  It  is  for  a  naval  power 
to  command  the  sea  for  all  purposes  if  it  has  the  power. 
In  this  case  we  shall  see,  as  we  proceed,  the  safety  of  these 
particular  convoys  was  an  object  of  so  much  importance  as 
to  justify  any  reasonable  risk,  while  to  sufter  a  concentra- 
tion to  be  forced  upon  us  which  would  leave  the  enemy 
free  to  strike  them  with  impunity  would  have  been  to  admit 
an  inability  in  the  fleet  which  nothing  in  the  situation  could 
excuse. 

And  was  there  any  real  danger  ?  Bold  as  was  the 
division  of  the  fleet,  a  closer  examination  of  the  conditions 
will  show  that  it  was  well  within  fair  risk  of  war.  From 
the  prisoners  taken  in  Calder's  action  the  condition  of  the 
Combined  Fleet  was  well  known.  We  also  knew  how 
inadequate  were  the  resources  of  Ferrol  to  supply  so  large 
a  force  as  Villeneuve's  for  the  time  necessary  for  a  campaign 
in  the  Channel.  His  respect  for  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet 
was  fully  manifest,  and  to  war-ripened  judgments  like  those 
of  Barham  and  Cornwallis  it  must  have  seemed  morally 
certain  that  Villeneuve  would  never  venture  to  come  north 
on  his  own  responsibility.  It  was  true  Napoleon  might 
force  on  him  the  desperate  movement,  but  in  that  case 
there  was  a  consideration  well  known  both  to  Barham  and 

^  Hist,  Mas.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  410. 


AuG.16  ITS    SAFETY  253 

Gornwallis  that  practically  ensured  its  failure.  They  knew 
the  Combined  Fleet  was  so  much  exhausted  and  that 
the  resources  of  Ferrol  were  so  inadequate  to  supply  it, 
that  one  of  two  things  must  happen.  Villeneuve  might 
either  wait  in  the  port  long  enough  to  complete  his  stores 
for  a  Channel  campaign,  in  which  case  Calder  would  be  in 
plenty  of  time  to  blockade  him,  or  he  might  hurry  out  with 
his  supplies  incomplete,  in  which  case  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  him  to  keep  the  sea  long  enough  to  carry  out 
Napoleon's  intentions.  If,  therefore,  he  moved  before 
Calder  arrived,  it  would  mean  almost  certainly  that  he 
was  bound  for  Cadiz  or  to  attack  the  convoys. 

Finally,  if  these  calculations  proved  false — if  Villeneuve 
in  desperation  did  stake  everything  on  the  chance  of  ''  play- 
ing prisoners'  base "  with  Calder  and  striking  a  swift  blow 
at  Cornwallis  alone,  what  would  be  the  results  ?  It  is  usual 
to  assume  that  the  Ushant  fleet  was  inferior  to  that  of 
Villeneuve.  But  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  CoruAvallis 
had  ten  three-deckers  and  the  rest  all  seasoned  ships  of 
eighty  and  seventy-four  guns,  as  against  Villeneuve's  motley 
twenty-nine  partly  French  and  partly  Spanish.  Of  these 
ten  at  least  were  mere  floating  barracks,  and  amongst  those 
ten  his  only  three-decker.^  Now  with  such  a  force  Corn- 
wallis had  two  possibilities  before  him.  If  he  chose  or  was 
forced  to  fight,  the  effect  must  be  that  Villeneuve's  fleet 
would  bo  fit  for  little  afterwards.  If  he  avoided  and  played 
the  old  game  of  Howe  and  Kempenfelt,  moving  to  the  west- 
ward till  Calder  rejoined,  experience  showed  that  Ganteaume 
and  Villeneuve  together  would  not  dare  enter  the  Channel 
without  having  first  brought  him  to  action.^ 

1  On  the  accepted  basis  of  two  two-deckers  to  one  three-decker  the 
tactical  coefficient  of  Cornwallis'  fleet  was  (10x2) +  8  =  28  against  that  of 
Villeneuve  (1x2) +  28  =  30. 

-  The  most  moderate  and  careful  of,  the  critics  takes  a  different  view  of 
the  result  of  Villeneuve's  catching  Cornwallis  alone.  "  It  seems  possible," 
he  says,  "  that  in  such  circumstances  Cornwallis  would  have  had  no  course 
but  to  fly,  and  that  the  great  concentration  of  fifty  ships  in  the  Channel 
might  have  been  brought  about." — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  xxxix.  But  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Cornwallis  would  have  taken  the  traditional  position 
which  Drake  had  inaugurated  and  Howe  and  Kempenfelt  had  recently  adopted, 
and  would  have  hung  to  windward  of  the  enemy  if  they  attempted  to  enter 
the  Channel.  He  might  have  refused  action  except  on  his  own  terms,  but 
it  was  against  all  tradition  and  practice  that  he  should  have  run  away. 


2  54  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  20 

p]very  precaution  to  meet  such  11  situation  was  taken. 
Ciders  of  the  most. urgent  description  had  been  sent  to  the 
Port  Admirals  to  get  everything  to  sea  that  would  float,  and 
Barham  calculated  that  he  had  ready  or  nearly  ready  for 
emergent  service  in  the  Channel  1 5  three-deckers,  4  eighty- 
gun  ships,  and  about  35  other  two-deckers  belonging  to  the 
Western  Squadron  alone ;  and  besides  these  there  were  9 
two-deckers  at  sea  with  Lord  Keith  and  5  more  fitting  in 
the  Thames/  Had  the  worst  happened  that  Barham's 
strategy  risked,  had  Villeneuve  attempted  to  do  what  every 
Admiral  in  Napoleon's  service  knew  to  be  madness,  then 
there  must  have  come  upon  the  enemy  in  the  narrow 
unfamiliar  waters  of  the  Channel — so  dreadful  with  memo- 
ries both  for  French  and  Spaniards — a  catastrophe  more 
terrible  than  the  Armada — more  decisive  than  Trafalgar 
itself. 

^  Barham  Papers,  August  20tl]. 


Loncpnaji-S.  Ctve^n  Se  t'o- LaTtdrtn.,^M^&rk,.{i€fnv:av &- :..ilcuttcu. 


To  feuce  -page  254 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE  SOLUTION  OF  THE  CRISIS 

From  the  above  considerations  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the 
opinion  of  the  responsible  men  the  danger  attending  the 
division  of  the  fleet  was  not  for  a  moment  to  be  weighed 
against  the  decisive  advantage  such  a  division  alone  could 
secure.  The  moral  strength  of  the  British  position  had 
been  accurately  calculated,  but  at  the  same  time  it  must 
not  be  supposed  the  utmost  care  was  not  taken  by  material 
means  to  guard  against  the  remote  probability  of  a  surprise 
from  the  south.  Ferrol  had  not  been  left  unwatched  for  a 
single  day.  On  the  contrary,  Cornwallis  had  taken  elaborate 
measures  to  keep  touch  with  it.  It  was  on  August  9th  that 
Villeneuve  had  begun  to  move  his  fleet  outside,  and  that 
Calder  had  sent  the  Dragon  to  look  into  the  bay.  On  the 
10th  she  had  returned  with  the  JEolus  fresh  from  locatinsf 
Allemand.  Their  report  was  that  all  the  Combined  Fleet 
had  come  down  to  Coruna  with  the  exception  of  eight 
vessels  still  windbound  up  at  Ferrol.  It  was  on  this  report 
that  Calder  had  gone  north  to  close  on  Ushant,  and  no 
sooner  was  he  away  than  the  Nimble  appeared.  She  was  a 
sloop  Cornwallis  had  sent  off  to  communicate  with  Stirling 
and  Calder.  Directly  she  was  sighted  by  Villeneuve's 
cruisers  she  was  chased  oif,  but  not  before  she  too  had  seen 
Villeneuve  at  Coruna.  Five  sail  were  under  way  as 
though  they  had  just  joined — a  fact  which  could  only 
confirm  Calder's  impression  that  Allemand  had  arrived. 
Forthwith  she  sped  back  to  warn  the  Admiral  at  Ushant. 
She  reached  him  early  on  the  14th,  just  after  he  had  had 
the  news  from  Calder.  It  was  now  he  determined  to  divide 
his  fleet,  and  the  Nimlle  was  immediately  sent  down  again 

255 


2  56  THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS       auo.  i8 

with  other  cruisers  to  keep  observation  till  Calder  should 
arrive.^ 

What  it  was  Villencuve  really  meant  to  do  has  always 
been  a  matter  of  doubt.  Did  he  or  did  he  not  intend  to 
make  any  attempt  to  join  hands  with  Ganteaume  ?  In  the 
despatch  he  sent  to  Allcmand  by  the  Didon  he  had  said  if 
he  found  any  difficulty  in  getting  to  Brest  his  definitive 
destination  would  be  Cadiz.-  On  the  10th  he  wrote  to 
Decres  the  letter  already  quoted  :  "  I  am  sailing,  and  I  shall 
make  for  Brest  or  Cadiz,  according  to  circumstances.  The 
enemy  are  watching  us  here  too  closely  to  leave  any  hope 
of  concealing  my  course."^  He  had  no  idea  but  what 
Calder  was  still  off  the  port,  but  this  was  not  the  worst. 
The  moral  effect  of  Nelson's  implacable  chase  had  been 
extraordinary,  and  every  one  in  his  heart  believed  he  was 
somewhere  below  the  horizon  with  Calder,  waiting  till  he 
had  them  well  away  from  their  port  to  strike  his  blow. 
The  last  news  of  him  was  that  he  had  been  seen  speed- 
ing from  the  Straits  towards  Capo  St.  Vincent,  and  the 
inference  that  was  drawn  we  have  in  a  despatch  written 
by  General  Beurnonville,  the  French  ambassador  at  Madrid, 
to  Talleyrand  before  it  was  known  that  Villeneuve  had 
sailed.  "  We  cannot  reasonably  suppose,"  he  argued,  "  that 
the  English  squadrons  are  not  concentrated,  and  to  that 
I  attribute  the  clino^iuG:  of  our  admirals  to  Ferrol.  Nelson 
and  Calder  have  not  less  than  twenty-seven  of  the  line, 
several  of  which  are  three-deckers."  ^  In  the  opinion  of 
Lauriston,  the  General  in  command  of  the  troops  in  the 
fleet,  the  probability  of  such  a  concentration  had  entirely 
upset  Villeneuve's  equilibrium.  "  Indeed,  Sire,"  he  after- 
wards Avrote  to  the  Emperor,  "  the  fear  of  Nelson  has  got 
the  upper  hand  of  him."  The  General  himself  was  not 
free  from  the  oppression.  "  It  will  not  be  long,"  he  wrote 
in  the  same   letter,    "  before  we   have   Nelson  down  upon 

^  Lieutenant  Delafons  to  Cornwallis,  August  lltb  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii. 
334,  and  Lor/  of  the  Nimble,  P.R.O. 

'  Desbri'.Ve,  v.  730. 

"^  Ibid.,  11  i<. 

*  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  Apj).  38,  and  see  Thiers,  Comidat  et  Empire,  v. 
439. 


Aug.  II-I3       VILLENEUVE'S    INTENTIONS  257 

us  ;  for  we  have  learnt  that  with  those  eleven  vessels  he 
has  sworn  to  follow  us,  even  if  it  be  to  the  Antipodes."  ^ 

For  three  days  more  the  westerly  winds  held  the  Ferrol 
division  fast  and  delayed  the  final  concentration.  As  they 
dallied  in  inaction,  every  hour  was  adding  to  the  chances  of 
Nelson  and  Calder  getting  together  to  intercept  them ;  the 
obsession  increased  daily:  and  by  the  13th,  when  the  wind- 
bound  ships  eventually  were  able  to  reach  Villeneuve,  the 
last  drop  of  his  spirit  seems  to  have  ebbed  away.  Lauriston 
at  least  believed  that  by  the  time  the  fleet  was  under  way 
and  the  final  despatches  had  been  sent  off  to  Paris,  Ville- 
neuve had  abandoned  all  intention  of  attempting  to  effect 
the  junction  with  Ganteaume.  ''  We  are  going  definitely 
to  Cadiz,"  the  Admiral  had  said  to  him ;  "  I  have  told  the 
minister  so."^ 

What  Villeneuve  had  really  written  to  Decres  in  his 
last  despatch  was  this  :  "  I  am  about  to  sail,  but  I  don't 
know  what  I  shall  do.  Eight  of  the  line  keep  in  sight  of 
the  coast  at  eight  leagues.  They  will  follow  us ;  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  get  contact  with  them,  and  they  will  close 
on  the  squadron  before  Brest  or  Cadiz,  according  as  I  make 
my  course  to  the  one  port  or  the  other.  ...  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say — to  you — that  I  should  be  sorry  to  meet 
twenty  of  them.  Our  naval  tactics  are  antiquated.  We 
know  nothing  but  how  to  place  ourselves  in  line,  and  that 
is  just  what  the  enemy  wants."  ^ 

In  face  of  this  letter  we  might  well  dismiss  Lauriston's 
story  as  an  intentional  perversion.  His  attitude  was  frankly 
hostile  to  Villeneuve,  and  his  report  was  written  with  the 

^  Desbri(ire,  Trafalgar,  App.,  106,  108.  This  letter  was  not  written  till 
August  21st,  when  they  were  in  Cadiz,  but  it  serves  to  show  the  general  feeling 
in  the  fleet.  Nelson  used  the  expression  referred  to  in  his  letter  to  the 
Admiralty  of  May  7th. — Nicolas,  vi.  428. 

^  Desbriere,  Trafahjar,  App.,  p.  105. 

^  Thiers,  Consulat  ct  Empire,  v.  442.  This  is  the  only  known  letter  of  this 
date  (13th),  The  correspondence  of  Decres  was  destroyed  in  the  Tuileries  fire 
during  the  Commune  after  Thiers  had  worked  from  it.  There  are  traces, 
however,  of  another  letter.  On  September  8th,  Napoleon  wrote  to  Decres  : 
"  After  having  had  the  despatches  of  Villeneuve,  you  ought  never  to  have 
supposed  he  would  come  to  Brest.  He  wrote  to  you,  '  I  am  going  to  Cadiz,'  " 
and  then  he  refers  to  Lauriston's  letter  :  Correspondance,  xi.  183.  Decres,  how- 
ever, in  acknowledging  Villeneuve's  letters  on  September  1st,  implies  that 
they  left  his  destination  uncertain. — Desbriere,  v.  822. 

R 


25  8  THE    SOLUTION    OF   THE    CRISIS       Aug.  13 

avowed  object  of  persuading  Napoleon  to  supersede  an 
Admiral  who  had  lost  his  nerve,  had  entirely  forfeited  the 
confidence  of  the  fleet,  and  was  unfit  to  command  it.  But 
the  General  is,  to  a  great  extent,  confirmed  by  the  most 
careful  and  impartial  authority  we  have — the  Journal  of 
Captain  Escafio,  Gravina's  chief-of-the-stafF.  Under  August 
13th  he  enters  simply,  "  We  sailed  for  Cadiz,"  and  this 
appears  to  have  been  the  general  belief.^ 

Whatever  may  have  been  Villeneuve's  inmost  inten- 
tion, it  is  certain  that  he  recognised  the  movement  he  had 
been  ordered  to  make  as  one  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out 
with  success,  and  probably  without  disaster.  "  Seeing  that 
I  had  no  confidence,"  he  afterwards  explained,  "  in  the  con- 
dition of  my  ships,  in  their  sailing,  and  in  their  poAver  of 
manoeuvring  together,  the  concentration  of  the  enemy  and 
the  knowledge  they  possess  of  all  my  movements  since  I 
reached  the  coast  of  Spain,  leave  me  no  hope  of  being 
able  to  fulfil  the  grand  object  for  which  the  fleet  was 
destined."  ^ 

Every  hour  confirmed  his  depression.  No  sooner  was 
he  well  started  to  the  north-westward,  than  a  sail  was 
reported  to  the  north-east.  He  at  once  went  about, 
signalled  to  clear  for  action,  and  ran  back  under  Cape 
Prior,  keeping  the  port  still  under  his  lee.  The  pre- 
cautions which  Cornwallis  had  taken  were  beginning  to 
work.  The  strange  sail  was  the  Iris  32,  one  of  the 
cruisers  he  had  just  sent  down  to  communicate  with 
Calder.  Immediately  after  leaving  Cornwallis  she  had 
seen  the  Naiad  escaping  from  Allemand's  cruisers,  and 
after  speaking  her  had  proceeded  to  Ferrol  to  inform 
Calder.      Not   knowing  that  he  had  raised   the   blockade, 

^  Desbri^re,  Trafalgar,  App.,  p.  7,  and  Report  of  the  Nimble,  post,  p.  208. 
Decr^s,  even  iu  attempting  to  defend  his  old  friend,  took  the  same  view. 
"  On  August  10th,"  he  says  in  his  report  to  the  Emperor,  "  the  fleet  weighed  ; 
several  vessels  collided  and  suffered  damage.  Numerous  reconnaissances 
were  engrossing  the  enemy's  movements.  The  Admiral  learned  that  Calder 
and  Nelson  had  joined  ;  his  anxieties  redoubled  ;  he  had  only  forty  days' 
victuals.  He  remained  in  the  bay  till  the  13th.  Finally  ...  he  puts  to  sea, 
and  steers  first  W.N.W.,  and  on  the  25th  decides  to  make  for  Cadiz.  It  would 
seem,  from  the  correspondence  of  Vice- Admiral  Villeneuve,  that  he  had  taken 
this  resolution  as  early  as  the  11th." — Desbritire,  Projets,  v.  726  n. 

2  Ibid. ,  v.  786. 


Aug.  14-19  VILLENEUVE    SAILS  259 

she  at  lirst  mistook  the  Combmed  Fleet  for  our  own  Ferrol 
squadron,  but  she  quickly  discovered  the  truth,  and  was 
chased  off  to  the  northward  by  a  frigate.  Concluding,  from 
the  confusion  that  reigned  in  the  enemy's  fleet,  they  must 
be  just  out  of  port  and  on  the  point  of  sailing,  she  stood 
in  again  in  the  morning.  During  the  night  Villeneuve 
had  resolved  to  resume  his  course  and  had  tacked  under  cover 
of  darkness,  hoping  probably  to  conceal  his  movement,  but 
there  again  was  the  Iris  watching  him  as  closely  as  ever. 
This  time  the  whole  light  division  chased  her  off,  but  not 
before  she  had  counted  the  combined  force  exactly ;  and 
when  about  two  o'clock  she  dropped  the  fleet,  she  had  fixed 
its  course  a  little  north  of  west.^ 

By  this  time  she  was  not  alone.  To  the  south-eastward 
had  appeared  Captain  Dundas  in  the  Naiad.  She  was 
another  of  the  cruisers  which  Cornwallis,  on  deciding  to 
divide  his  fleet,  had  sent  down  to  watch  Villeneuve  till 
Calder  arrived.  She  herself  had  sighted  some  of  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  in  the  morning,  and  the  two  captains  seem  to 
have  had  little  doubt  its  movements  indicated  Cadiz  as  its 
destination.  They  decided,  therefore,  that  while  the  Naiad 
carried  the  news  to  Cornwallis,  the  Iris  should  proceed  to 
warn  Collingwood  of  his  danger.^ 

Dundas  reached  Ushant  early  on  the  19th,  and  Corn- 
wallis immediately  sent  him  back  with  another  cruiser,  the 
Hazard,  to  carry  to  Calder  fresh  orders  and  one  of  his  lucid 
appreciations.  "  The  enemy,"  he  wrote,  "  are  most  likely 
bound  for  Cadiz  or  up  the  Mediterranean.  It  is  hardly  to 
be  supposed  that  they  have  provisions  enough  to  enable 
them  to  go  to  any  distant  part.  The  first  object  is  to 
overtake  them  before  they  can  get  into  port.  It  is  not 
likely  they  have  any  troops  on  board,  and,  in  that  case, 
very  improbable  that  they  should  steer  for  Ireland,  nor  do 
I  think  they  would  venture  to  cruise  for  any  time  in  hopes 
of  meeting  a  homeward-bound  convoy."     Calder,  therefore. 


^  Captain  Edward  Brace's  report,  enclosed  in  Captain  Blackwood's 
despatch  of  August  16th  :  Captains'  letters,  1534.  He  gives  the  course  as 
W.   by  N.  ^  N.,  and  the  position  Lat.  44°  17',  Long.  9°  2G'. 

^  Ibid.,  and  Phillimore's  Life  of  Sir  W.  Parker,  i.  303. 


26o        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  20-21 

was  to  "  go  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  instead  of  going  off 
Ferrol."  ' 

No  sooner  were  these  orders  well  away  than  Cornwallis 
received  from  the  Admiralty  secret  information  of  the 
approach  of  one  of  the  convoys  already  referred  to.  It  was 
that  from  the  East  Indies  under  Admiral  Rainier.  He  was 
informed  of  the  secret  route  it  was  to  take,  and  was  directed 
to  have  special  regard  to  its  safety  if  the  movements  of  the 
enemy  suggested  it  was  their  objective.'^  To  Cornwallis 
the  instructions  made  no  difference.  He  had  discounted 
the  danger  already,  and  so  far  as  was  necessary  or  compa- 
tible with  the  higher  strategy,  he  had  provided  for  it.  In 
any  case,  at  this  moment  he  had  other  fish  to  fry. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  21st,  his  advanced  frigate 
signalled  that  the  enemy  were  coming  out  of  the  har- 
bour. The  fact  was  that  for  the  past  two  days  Napoleon 
in  his  last  sanguine  moments  had  been  telegraphing  to 
Ganteaunie  the  most  peremptory  orders  to  get  out  of  Brest 
and  anchor  outside  in  the  fortified  anchorage  of  Bertheaume, 
so  as  to  be  ready  to  put  to  sea  the  moment  Villeneuve  was 
signalled.^  It  was  an  order  that  had  to  be  obeyed,  and 
Ganteaume  was  now  carrying  it  out.  Without  a  moment's 
hesitation  Cornwallis  stood  in  with  his  whole  squadron,  and 
finding  the  French  lying  in  disorder  across  the  mouth  of 
the  port,  he  boldly  anchored  for  the  night  close  in  off  the 
Black  Rocks,  determined  to  attack  in  the  morning  in  spite 
of  the  batteries.  Surely  it  was  not  the  resolution  of  a  man 
who  would  run  away  from  a  force  even  twice  his  strength. 
At  daybreak  both  fleets  weighed  and  formed  battle  order. 
As  they  stood  for  one  another  it  looked  as  if  Ganteaume 
meant  to  accept  battle,  but  just  before  he  came  within 
gunshot  he  tacked  and  held  back  a^^ain.  Cornwallis  made 
a  desperate  attempt  to  close  and  cut  off  his  rearmost  ships, 

^  Cornwallis  to  Calder,  August  19th  :  In-lcttcrs,  129.  Endorsed,  -per  Naiad, 
and  a  duplicate  by  Hazard.  See  also  same  to  Marsden,  August  19tli :  Blockade 
of  Brest,  ii.  34G.  This  was  the  despatch  in  which  he  announced  to  the 
Admiralty  his  division  of  the  fleet,  which  Barham  was  ordering  at  the  same 
time. 

'^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden:   Jn-letters,  120,  August  20th. 

^  To  Decres  and  to  Ganteaume  (by  telegraph),  August  21st  :  Correspond- 
ance,  xi.  105-0. 


Aug.  21         GANTEAUME   AND   VILLENEUVE         261 

but  the  tremendous  lire  of  the  batteries  rendered  it  impos- 
sible, and  he  was  forced  to  retire.  He  had  led  the  attempt 
in  person,  and  was  wounded  by  a  spent  fragment  of  shell, 
a  fact  which  the  tough  old  admiral  did  not  think  worth 
mentioning  in  his  despatch.  The  loss  incurred  was 
trifling — the  gain  was  the  moral  effect  in  checking  any 
attempt  of  Ganteaume's  to  exercise  his  fleet,  and  to 
render  still  more  hopeless  the  prospect  of  his  being  able 
to  make  any  move  to  join  hands  with  Villeneuve  should 
he  appear. 

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  held  on  his  course  apparently 
something  north  of  west,  as  the  Iris  had  reported.^  As  he 
dropped  Ferrol,  everything  was  confirming  his  conviction 
that  an  enemy's  fleet  was  watching  him.  The  various 
British  cruisers,  together  with  the  Dragon,  which,  delayed  on 
her  way  to  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  by  the  recent  westerly 
winds,  was  then  passing  some  thirty  miles  to  the  north 
of  him,  had  been  magnified  by  his  scouts  into  two  of  the 
line  and  two  frigates,  and  were  assumed  to  be  the  inshore 
squadron  of  a  blockading  fleet;  and  to  confirm  this  view 
fourteen  sail  had  been  reported  to  Villeneuve,  apparently 
by  a  mistaken  signal  in  the  north-east.^  Then  eight  more 
were  signalled  in  the  north-west,  but  on  examination  they 

^  His  course  is  very  doubtful.  He  and  all  the  authorities,  including 
Escano,  say  it  was  W.N.  W.  on  a  N.E.  wind.  But  Reille  says  the  noon  position 
of  the  15th  was  about  40  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre,  that  is,  about  55 
leagues  W.  of  Ferrol.  One  means  of  reconciling  this  position  with  the  course 
given  is  to  assume  that  the  positions  are  "  true  "  and  the  courses  "  mag- 
netic." The  variation  about  Finisterre  in  1805  was  about  22^  west  (see  Loy  of 
the  Victory,  August  13th-16th,  where  Hardy  observed  it  each  day,  varying 
from  22°  85'  W.  in  long.,  118°  and  23°  15'  in  long.,  12°  to  22°  49'  in  long.  11°). 
Therefore  a  "magnetic"  course  W.N.W.  would  give  a  "true"  course  just 
about  W.  A  further  corroboration  that  this  was  the  actual  course  is  tliat  it 
led  direct  to  Allemand's  first  rendezvous.  Villeneuve  gives  the  evening  posi- 
tion as  80  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre;  but  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  for 
him  to  have  covered  the  distance  in  the  time.  Another  explanation  is,  that 
although  he  was  steering  about  W.N.W.,  the  combined  effects  of  the  leeway 
and  drift  of  the  Portuguese  branch  of  the  Biscay  current  setting  strongly 
S.S.E.,  may  have  made  his  actual  course  about  W.  In  any  case,  he  cannot 
have  got  so  far  north  of  the  latitude  of  Ferrol  as  he  is  represented  in  the 
French  staff  map  (Desbriere,  v.  782),  for  after  turning  south  he  was  off  Cadiz 
in  eighty  hours.  It  was  a  run  of  550  miles  from  the  latitude  of  Ferrol  (say 
sixty  leagues  west),  giving  a  speed  of  seven  knots,  which  is  the  utmost  his 
fleet  could  have  done,  as  he  had  to  wait  occasionally  for  laggards. 

-  There  is  no  trace  of  these  vessels  in  the  reports  of  the  British  cruisers 
which  were  then  to  the  north-east  of  him. 


262        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  13-15 

proved  to  be  neutrals.^  Then  at  kisl  he  spread  his  wings 
to  the  increasing  north-east  wind  and  left  Ferrol  fairly  to 
leeward ;  but  even  so,  he  was  not  to  shake  olf  the  spectre 
that  haunted  him. 

On  the  13 til,  it  will  be  remembered,  Captain  Griffith  in 
the  Dragon,  proceeding  from  Calder  on  his  mission  to  get 
into  touch  with  Nelson,  had  met  the  Phoenix  towing  the 
Didon,  and  had  turned  her  back.  In  company  they  were 
steering  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  when  next  day  about 
two  in  the  afternoon  the  Dragon  boarded  a  Dane  bound  for 
Hamburg.  With  a  view  probably  of  covering  the  Phoenix 
and  her  prize,  Captain  Griffith  informed  the  skipper  that  he 
was  part  of  a  fleet  of  twenty-five  of  the  line  ;  and  to  increase 
the  impression,  when  he  let  the  Dane  go,  he  played  the  old 
trick  of  making  imaginary  signals  to  a  distant  admiral. 
Scarcely  had  he  completed  his  performance  when  he  was 
aware  of  a  strange  fleet  in  the  east-south-east.  For  an 
hour  or  so  he  watched  them,  while  an  advanced  frigate 
came  up  to  observe  him.  About  six  o'clock,  to  his  great 
satisfaction,  he  saw  her  board  the  Dane  he  had  hoaxed  and 
then  hurry  off  to  join  her  fleet.  The  sun  was  just  setting, 
but  before  it  was  too  dark  he  was  able  to  count  twenty-six 
sail  standing,  as  it  seemed,  about  north-westward.^  Where- 
upon he  and  his  consorts  turned  to  the  southward  away 
from  the  danger  with  all  reefs  out.  Next  morning  nothing 
was  in  sight.  So  dismissing  the  Phoenix  and  her  prize  to 
make  the  best  of  their  way  to  Gibraltar,  Griffith  hauled  his 
wind,  presumably  with  the  intention  of  getting  touch  again 
with  the  fleet  he  had  sighted.^ 

Meanwhile,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  loth,  Villeneuve 
had  received  the  report  of  the  cruiser  that  had  sighted  the 

^  Colonel  Desbricre  is  of  opinion  these  eight  sail  were  "  certainly  Alle- 
mand."  But  Reille  says  that  all  of  them  that  were  examined  were  neutrals. 
At  2  o'clock  A.M.  on  the  14th,  Villeneuve  was  tacking  under  Cape  Prior;  at 
4  o'clock  Allemand  saw  three  suspicious  sail  to  the  N.E.,  and  Colonel  Desbricre 
thinks  these  were  some  of  Villeneuve' s  cruisers.  But  Allemand  says  he  was 
then  in  45°  39'  N.,  13°  31'  W.  {i.e.  11°  11'  Greenwich),  which  was  about  150 
miles  N.W.  of  Cape  Prior:  Projets,  v.  783  ;  Trafalgar,  100. 

2  In  this  Captain  Griffith  may  well  have  been  mistaken.  It  was  nearly 
dark,  and  he  himself  apparently  was  not  seen  by  the  fleet  at  all. 

^  Log  of  the.  Dragon  (Griffith's).  James  (iii.  374)  is  the  authority  for  Griffith's 
trick.  Lauriston  to  the  Emperor,  August  21st:  Desbricre,  Trafalgar,  App., 
p.  107. 


Aug.  15  .      VILLENEUVE   AND    ALLEMAND  263 

British  ships  and  boarded  the  Dane.  Villeneuve  himself 
says  nothing  in  his  despatch  of  the  false  news  that  had 
been  obtained.  All  we  know  is  that,  although  the  prize 
which  the  frigate  had  seen  in  the  possession  of  the  Dragon 
and  Phoenix,  was  believed  to  be  the  Didon,  the  Admiral 
would  make  no  attempt  to  rescue  her.  He  simply  held  on 
as  he  was,  straight  for  Allemand's  first  rendezvous,  on  the 
chance  apparently  that  he  might  have  returned  there.  At 
noon  he  was  close  upon  it,  but  of  Allemand  there  was  no 
sign.^  Yet  in  fact  they  had  been  within  an  ace  of  running 
into  one  another.  At  daybreak  Allemand  on  his  way  to 
Vigo  found  himself  between  that  port  and  Finisterre.^  By 
yet  another  of  the  fantastic  chances  of  his  cruise  he  must 
therefore  have  crossed  Villeneuve's  track  close  astern  of 
him  in  the  night,  both  being  possibly  without  lights,  and 
neither  had  seen  the  other.  Allemand,  however,  now  got 
tidings  from  a  neutral  that  Villeneuve  had  been  to 
Vigo,  and  thither  he  hurried  in  hope  of  getting  definite 
instructions. 

As  for  Villeneuve,  he  continued  to  push  west  further 
and  further  from  his  lost  colleague.  Whatever  his  original 
intention  on  leaving  Ferrol,  there  can  be  little  doubt  he 
had  now  made  up  his  mind  what  to  do.  Neutrals  visited 
had  confirmed  his  worst  fears.  "  It  appears,"  says  Lauriston, 
"  by  all  the  reports  which  various  ships  made  to  us  since 
leaving  Coruna,  that  Nelson  has  gone  north,  having  heard 
of  our  putting  into  Vigo,  and  without  doubt  after  making 
his  junction  with  Calder."  ^  After  all  his  sanguine  master's 
efforts  to  disperse  the  British  fleet — the  fundamental  con- 
dition of  success — it  was  clear  to  him  it  was  more  closely 
concentrated  than  ever,  while  his  own  concentration  had 
failed.  The  consensus  of  all  the  intelligence  confirmed  the 
hopelessness  of  his  getting  touch  with  Allemand.  If  he 
went  north  in  accordance  with  Napoleon's  plan  he  must 
go  with  what  he  already  had,  and  what  he  had  was  a  fleet 

^  Journal  de  Eeille.  "A  midi  ...  40  lieues  Ouest-nord-ouest  du  Cap 
Finisterre":  Deshxiexe,  Projets,  v.  785.  It  is  this  position  that  fixes  Ville- 
neuve's mean  course  from  Ferrol  as  due  west  true. 

*  Allemand's  Journal  :  Ihid.,  784. 

3  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.,  p.  108,  August  21st. 


264        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      aug.  15-16 

only  in  name.  The  movement  from  Ferrol  had  proved  it  to 
be  a  mere  mass  of  ill-assorted  units  incapable  of  acting  as 
a  squadron  at  all.  To  proceed  was  madness.  The  whole 
plan  of  campaign  had  obviously  broken  down.  In  his 
orders  of  July  16th,  which  had  reached  him  at  Ferrol  and 
under  which  he  was  now  operating,  there  was  the  following 
proviso :  "  The  Emperor  has  kept  in  mind  the  case  in 
which  by  eventualities  impossible  to  calculate  the  situation 
of  the  fleet  would  not  permit  you  to  undertake  the  execu- 
tion of  his  plans  which  would  have  so  great  an  influence 
on  the  fate  of  the  Avorld,  and  in  this  case  only  the  Emperor 
desires  to  concentrate  at  Cadiz  a  mass  of  imposing  force."  ^ 
In  Villeneuve's  eyes  the  case  had  arisen.  The  enemy,  as 
he  explained  in  justifying  his  move,  had  obviously  pene- 
trated the  Emperor  s  plan,  and  it  had  failed.  "  Their  con- 
centration of  force,"  he  said,  "  was  at  the  moment  more 
serious  than  in  any  previous  disposition,  and  such  that 
they  were  in  a  position  to  meet  in  superiority  the  combined 
forces  of  Brest  and  Ferrol."  Added  to  this  a  stormy  wind 
had  been  blowing  for  two  days  from  the  north-east ;  it  was 
likely  to  continue,  and  he  dared  not  hold  his  ill-found 
ships  against  it.  Till  nightfall,  therefore,  he  held  on  as  he 
was,  and  when  darkness  came  to  shroud  his  movement  he 
turned  back  to  Cadiz. 

What  Gravina  thought  of  it  we  cannot  tell.  Escano,  his 
chief-of-the-staff,  loyally  draws  a  veil  over  it  all  without  a 
word  of  comment.  That  day  and  the  three  that  followed 
he  enters  all  together  in  his  journal.  "  In  these  days,"  he 
says,  "  there  occurred  nothing  more  noteworthy  than  the 
capture  of  a  merchant  vessel,  which  was  burnt.  We  chased 
all  craft  that  were  sighted,  and  pursued  our  course  down 
the  coasts  of  Galicia  and  Portugal." "  Nothing  more  note- 
worthy than  a  merchantman  burnt !  The  pathetic  loyalty 
of  that  entry !  For  every  man  knew  that  what  had 
happened  was  no  less  than  that  the  whole  initiative  was 
being  surrendered  to  the  enemy,  and  no  one  could  see 
there  was  any  help  for  it.     "  The  captains,"  wrote  Lauriston 

^  Desbriere,  v.  046. 

2  Desbriere,  Trafalrjar,  App.,  p.  7. 


Aug.  I5-I6  CRUISER    MOVEMENTS  265 

to  the  Emperor,  "  have  no  heart  left  to  do  well.  Attention 
is  no  longer  paid  to  signals,  which  are  kept  flying  on  the 
masts  two  or  three  hours.     Discipline  is  completely  gone."  ^ 

His  movement  to  the  southward  was  not  observed  by 
any  British  cruiser,  but  ahead  of  him  was  the  Iris  speeding 
down  to  Collingwood  to  carry  warning  of  what  was  likely  to 
happen,  and  spreading  the  news  far  and  wide  as  she  went. 
Early  on  the  15th,  just  before  she  reached  Finisterre,  she 
had  fallen  in  with  Sir  William  Parker  in  the  Amazon, 
whom  Nelson  had  sent  on  ahead  of  him  off  Ferrol  for 
intelligence.  His  orders  were,  if  he  judged  Nelson  had 
not  gone  there,  to  proceed  off  Ushant  or  Ireland.  Hearing 
the  Iriss  intelligence,  and  that  the  Naiad  was  taking  it  to 
Ushant,  Parker  decided  to  proceed  direct  to  Cork,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  24th,  just  in  time  to  enable  Admiral  Drury 
to  stop  the  East  India  convoy  and  Baird's  expedition  then 
on  the  point  of  sailing.^ 

Meanwhile,  on  the  16  th,  the  Iris  as  she  held  on  for 
Collingwood  fell  in  with  Henry  Blackwood,  king  of  cruiser 
captains,  in  the  famous  Euryalus.  His  presence  there  was 
a  curious  piece  of  the  Fortune  of  War.  He  really  belonged 
to  the  Irish  cruiser  squadron.  At  the  end  of  July,  when 
the  attention  of  the  Admiralty  had  been  directed  to  the 
Texel  and  to  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's  coming  into 
the  North  Sea,  he  had  been  sent  to  Drury  at  Cork  to 
enable  him  to  watch  the  north  coast  of  Ireland.  On  his 
Avay  from  Spithead,  however,  he  had  got  news  of  Calder's 
action  with  the  report  that  it  had  forced  the  Combined 
Squadron  to  go  south  to  Cadiz.  On  reaching  Cork  on 
August  2nd,  he  reported  this  to  Drury,  who  the  day  before 
had  received  an  order  to  inform  Nelson  immediately  at 
Lagos  if  any  of  his  ships  should  succeed  in  locating 
Villeneuve.  Thinking  it  was  now  useless  to  watch  the 
north  coast,  Drury  took  upon  himself  to  send  Blackwood 

^  Ibid.,  p.  108.  Villeneuve  in  his  report  says  he  turned  back  at  a  point 
80  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre,  but  this  is  impossible.  He  could  not  in 
seven  or  eio:ht  hours  run  120  miles  from  his  noon  position. 

^  Life  of  Parker,  i.  p.  303.  Without  anchoring,  Dundas  carried  on  to 
Ushant  "with  a  duplicate  of  the  information,  should  any  unforeseen 
accident  have  prevented  the  Naiad  reaching  Admiral  Cornwallis." — Jbid., 
p.  304. 


266  THE    SOLUTION    OF   THE    CRISIS       aug.  i6 

straight  off  the  station  to  find  Nelson.^  It  was  of  course 
far  too  late  to  find  hini,  and  on  arriving  off  the  Tagus 
Blackwood  heard  from  Lord  Strangford  that  Nelson  had 
left  Lagos,  and  that  he  had  been  seen  on  August 
Sth  a  hundred  leagues  west  of  Lisbon  standing  to  the 
North.2  Strangford  had  also  received  information  of 
Villeneuve's  intentions.  A  spy  of  his  in  the  household 
of  the  Spanish  Ambassador  had  seen  a  letter  of  Gravina's 
written  just  after  the  action,  in  which  he  said,  with  much 
sarcasm  upon  his  French  colleagues,  that  they  meant  to 
go  into  Cadiz,  revictual,  and  get  into  the  Mediterranean 
before  the  British  could  come  up  with  them.'^ 

Whether  this  information  also  was  given  to  Blackwood 
is  uncertain,  but  he  at  once  turned  back  in  hopes  of  finding 
Nelson  off  Finisterre.  So  it  was  he  fell  in  with  Captain 
Brace  in  the  Iris,  and  heard  his  news,  that  Villeneuve  was 
out  and  making  to  the  westward. 

It  of  course  altered  the  whole  situation,  and  Blackwood 
with  characteristic  grasp  and  fearlessness  of  responsibility 
at  once  took  it  firmly  in  hand.  It  was  on  the  Iriss  intelli- 
gence, he  says,  that  he  judged  Villeneuve's  destination  after 
leaving  Ferrol  must  be  to  the  southward,  and  that  he  was 
then  somewhere  close  to  him.  Alone  neither  he  nor  Brace 
could  do  anything  effective.  In  such  circumstances  he  felt 
that  cruisers  must  be  coupled,  and  on  this  sound  principle, 
as  he  explained  to  the  Admiralty,  he  ordered  Brace  to  stay 
by  him.  Cruising  in  company  they  would  try  to  locate  the 
Combined  Fleet,  and  then  if  they  got  touch,  the  ship  which 
proved  to  be  the  faster  should  shadow  it  while  the  slower 
one  carried  the  information  to  the  Admiral.  He  further 
argued  that  he  was  no  longer  under  any  obligation  to  find 
Nelson,  for  Parker  in  the  Amazon  had  learnt  from  the  Iris 
all   he  knew  himself,  and  she  had  gone  to  Nelson's  ren- 

^  For  this  Drury  was  reproved  by  the  Admiralty,  and  told  to  be  more  careful 
how  he  sent  his  cruisers  on  detached  service  for  the  future. — In-lcttcrs,  620, 
August  2nd,  llth,  14th,  16th. 

2  This  was  approximately  accurate,  but  how  Strangford  knew  is  not  stated. 

^  S.P.  Foreign,  Portugal,  vol.  47  :  Strangford  to  Mulgrave,  August  7th.  This 
letter  came  to  hand  on  September  9th,  and  was  sent  to  the  Admiralty  the 
same  day.  Endorsed,  "Send  copy  to  Lord  Nelson":  In-lcttcrs,  Secretary 
of  State, '  4200. 


Aug.  I6-2I  CALDER'S   MOVE    SOUTH  267 

dezvous.  He  therefore  decided,  after  sending  liis  news  into 
Lisbon,  to  proceed  with  the  Iris  to  Cape  St.  Vincent,  as  the 
only  sure  point  to  get  touch  with  the  enemy,  and  wait  there 
forty-eight  hours.  On  the  18  th  he  was  off  the  Cape,  and 
there  he  heard  from  a  Dane  that  there  was  a  large  fleet  to  the 
westward  working  in  towards  him.  It  could  only  be  the 
Combined  Squadron.  His  way  was  now  clear.  He  decided 
at  once  to  stay  where  he  was  and  shadow  Villeneuve,  while 
at  the  same  time  he  sent  off  the  Iris  to  carry  the  news  to 
Ireland,  and  if  possible  to  Cornwallis.^ 

It  was  on  the  19th  she  parted  company,  three  days 
after  Calder  had  received  his  orders  from  Cornwallis  to 
take  his  half  of  the  fleet  to  the  southward.  For  two  days 
he  had  been  held  close  to  Ushant  Avith  baffling  breezes,  but 
now  he  had  caught  the  north-easter,  and  was  surging  across 
the  bay  direct  for  Ferrol  with  his  eighteen  of  the  line. 
Before  him,  believing  as  he  did  that  Allemand  must  have 
found  Villeneuve,  was  the  prospect  of  having  to  encounter 
nearly  twice  his  own  number.  But  there  was  no  sign  of 
the  flinching  of  which  he  was  to  be  accused  for  his  recent 
conduct:  no  sign  of  anything  but  eagerness  to  be  off  the 
port.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  being  then  in  the 
middle  of  the  Bay,  nearly  half-way  to  his  station,  he  spoke 
the  Naiad  on  her  way  north  to  inform  Cornw^allis  that 
Villeneuve  was  out,  and  the  prospect  grew  more  serious 
still.  He  signalled  for  all  flag-officers,  but  after  a  short 
conference  proceeded  under  a  press  of  sail.  His  course 
was  now  more  to  the  westward,  as  though  to  cross  his 
enemy's  track  if  he  meant  to  come  north.  Later  on,  how- 
ever, he  altered  it  again  direct  for  Ferrol,  sending  forward 
the  Attach  gunboat  to  look  into  the  port,  and  by  noon  on 
the  21st  he  was  on  his  old  station  just  north-ivest  of 
Ortegal.^     Here  the  Pickle  met  him  with  information  that 

^  Blackwood  to  the  Admiralty,  August  16th  and  18th:  Captains'  Letters ^ 
1534.     Logs  of  the  Iris  and  Euryalus. 

2  Masters'  Logs,  3673  [Prince  of  Wales).  There  is  no  indication  of  his 
having  had  further  information  when  he  altered  course,  but  at  11.0  a.m.  on 
the  21st  a  large  convoy  of  transports  was  seen,  which,  being  uninjured,  was 
perhaps  taken  as  indication  that  Villeneuve  possibly  had  turned  back.  Or 
his  idea  may  have  been  to  keep  more  to  windward,  so  as  to  be  able  to  reach 
back  to  Cornwallis  if  necessary. 


268        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  21-22 

AUemand  had  put  into  Vigo.  It  was  welcome  news.  It 
meant  there  was  still  a  chance  of  overwhelming  him  before 
he  could  join  Villeneuve.  He  might  well  be  in  the  act  of 
making  the  attempt,  and  Calder  promptly  stood  south- 
westward  Hying  the  signal  to  prepare  for  battle,  and  clear- 
ing for  action.  His  purpose  is  nowhere  expressed,  but  it 
can  be  deduced  clearly  from  his  actual  movements.  In  the 
evening  he  had  taken  a  position  off  the  Sisargas  Islands, 
about  five-and-twenty  miles  west  of  Coruna.  As  this  was 
the  usual  landfall  for  ships  bound  from  Vigo,  and  as  Calder 
still  apparently  believed  the  Combined  Fleet  was  at  Ferrol, 
it  is  obvious  he  was  in  hope  of  intercepting  Allemand  at  this 
point  before  he  could  complete  the  concentration. 

His  judgment  was  as  sure  as  his  action  was  prompt ;  for 
it  so  happened  that  this  was  actually  the  point  for  which 
Allemand  was  making  at  the  time.  Off  Vigo,  on  the  16th, 
he  had  received  Villeneuve's  orders  to  look  for  him  at  Ferrol, 
and  if  he  found  him  gone,  then  off  the  Penmarcks  on  the 
South  Breton  coast.  Next  day  Allemand  had  hurried  away, 
and  ever  since  had  been  trying  to  double  Finisterre  against 
persistent  easterly  and  north-easterly  winds,  on  which 
Calder  had  come  down.^ 

While  he  was  thus  occupied  somewhere  off  Finisterre 
there  came  into  Calder's  fleet  the  JVimblc,  who,  it  will  be 
remembered,  after  bringing  to  Cornwallis  the  first  news  of 
Villeneuve's  sailing,  had  been  immediately  sent  back  with 
fresh  instructions  for  Calder.  Reaching  Ferrol  the  previous 
day,  she  found  Calder's  scout,  the  Attack,  and  learning 
where  the  Admiral  was,  had  made  all  sail  to  him  with 
news  she  had  just  obtained  from  a  Portuguese  skipper.  It 
was  of  the  last  importance.  For  it  told  how  just  a  week 
before  Villeneuve  had  sailed  with  twenty-nine  of  the  line 
and  ten  cruisers,  his  exact  force,  and  that  his  course  had 
been  west  either  for  Cadiz  or  San  Domingo.'-     Thereupon 

'  Allemand  actually  made  Cape  S.  Adrian  (the  Sisargas)  on  August  26th  : 
Journal,  Desbriere,  v.  792. 

2  Log  of  the  Nimbh,  Calder  to  Cornwallis,  August  22nd:  In-lcttcrs,  129. 
Napoleon  was  at  the  time  trying  to  organise  an  expedition  to  relieve  San 
Domingo  which  Villeneuve  had  left  besieged  by  the  black  insurgents. 
Napoleon  to  Decr6s,  August  oth :    Co7' respond ance,  xi.  G3. 


Aug.  22-24  CALDER'S   DECISION  269 

Calder  signalled  to  bear  up,  and  held  on  to  the  westward. 
Apparently  he  suspected  Villeneuve  had  gone  to  Vigo  to 
pick  up  Allemand.  By  nine  next  morning  he  had  doubled 
Finisterre,  and  thence  he  threw  forward  a  chain  of  cruisers 
to  Vigo.  By  yet  another  miracle  he  saw  nothing  of 
Allemand,  who  must  have  been  close  by  to  seaward  of 
him.  At  all  events  four  days  later  the  phantom  squadron 
made  the  Sisargas  Islands,  and  next  day,  finding  Villeneuve 
had  left  Ferrol,  Allemand  held  away  north  to  meet  him  off 
the  Penmarcks. 

In  the  evening  Calder 's  cruisers  reported  that  the 
Rochefort  squadron  had  left  Vigo  four  days  previously, 
sailing  north,  and  at  the  same  time  another  cruiser,  the 
Poulette,  came  in,  who  reported  she  had  been  down  to 
Cadiz  in  search  of  Nelson,  and  had  been  sent  back  by 
Collingwood  a  fortnight  since.  In  all  that  time  she  had 
seen  nothing  of  Villeneuve,  but  thought  it  quite  possible 
that  she  had  passed  him  in  the  night,  and  that  he  might 
be  to  the  southward.  Here  then  for  Calder  was  a  problem 
of  peculiar  anxiety,  little  less  exacting,  indeed,  than  that 
which  Cornwallis  had  just  had  to  decide.  Had  Villeneuve 
gone  north  or  south  ?  Allemand's  reported  course — the 
only  certain  news — must  have  suggested  the  north,  but 
then  nothing  had  been  seen  of  him.  Probably  it  was 
this  persuaded  Calder  that  his  own  intuition  must  be 
correct,  and  he  boldly  decided  to  go  south.  His  explana- 
tion to  Cornwallis  was  this.  Having  no  certain  news  of  the 
enemy,  he  had  resolved  to  bear  along  the  coast  for  St. 
Vincent  and  Cadiz.  There  he  expected  to  find  Collingwood 
if  the  enemy  had  not  passed  that  way.  If  they  had,  and 
Collingwood  had  been  driven  off,  ho  would  have  left  a 
rendezvous,  where  he  would  endeavour  to  join  him.  "  If 
they  have  not  gone  south,"  he  said,  "  I  assume  Admiral 
Collingwood  [who  was  his  senior]  will  approve  my  joining 
you  off  Ushant." 

All  next  day  he  held  on,  having  sent  a  cruiser  ahead  to 
Lisbon  for  intelligence,  and  early  on  the  24th  his  anxiety 
was  at  an  end.  A  cutter  came  in  from  the  ever  active 
Consul  Gambler,  with  information  that  left  no  doubt  that 


270        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS     Aug.  20-24 

Villencuvo  was  in  Cadiz.  Once  more  the  flag-officers  were 
called  to  council,  and  then  away  they  sped  to  lock  the 
door.^ 

The  news  was  true  enough.  By  sunset,  twenty  leagues 
short  of  Cape  St.  Vincent,  Calder  had  the  whole  story  from 
the  Euryalus.  As  Blackwood  had  expected,  he  had  got 
touch  with  the  Combined  Fleet  Avithin  a  few  hours  of 
sending  the  Iris  away.  He  had  been  severely  chased,  but 
refused  to  be  shaken  oif.  Though  he  escaped  capture,  he 
found  it  impossible  to  get  through  the  scattered  throng  of 
ships  to  inform  Collingwood.  He  was,  however,  able  to 
warn  the  Phoenix,  for  whom  there  was  still  no  rest,  and  she 
turned  north  again  for  England  with  her  prize. 

Collingwood  therefore  came  near  to  being  taken  by 
surprise  at  anchor  before  Cadiz.  "  I  must  tell  you,"  he 
wrote  to  his  wife  on  the  21st,  "  what  a  squeeze  we  had  like 
to  have  got  yesterday.  While  we  were  cruising  off  the 
town,  down  came  the  Combined  Fleet  of  36  sail  of  men-of- 
war.  We  were  only  three  poor  things  with  a  frigate  and  a 
bomb,  and  drew  off  towards  the  Straits."  ^  Still  he  had  had 
two  days'  warning  of  what  to  expect,  probably  from  Gam- 
bier.  He  was  dreaming  of  his  family  and  his  domain — "  the 
oaks,  the  woodlands,  and  the  verdant  meads  " — but  he  was 
ready.  His  idea  was  to  keep  the  Straits  open  so  as  to  be 
able  to  fall  back  on  Bickerton  at  Cartagena  and  his  own 
fourth  ship  at  Tangier,  and  force  anything  that  pursued 
him  to  pass  the  Straits.  But  in  truth  he  was  in  little 
danger,  so  low  had  the  spirit  of  his  enemy  sunk.  The 
spectre  of  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet  was  still  haunting  the 
Admiral,  and  his  cruisers,  mistaking  signals,  kept  sending 
in  confused  reports  of  squadrons  in  the  vicinity.  At  the 
last  moment  they  told  how  a  Swede  had  recently  seen 
eiofht  vessels  within  the  Straits  and  twelve  more  at  Gib- 
raltar,  besides  the  three  before  Cadiz.  *'  It  is  Nelson," 
cried  Villeneuve,  "  who  is  there  with  twenty-three  of  the 
line."  Fearing  an  immediate  attack  on  his  cumbrous  fleet, 
his  only  idea  was  to  get  it  into  safety  as  soon  as  possible. 

^  Caldev  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  24th  :  Jn-letters,  129,  and  Lo(j  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales.' 

2  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  356  n. ;  Life  of  Collinywood,  95. 


Aug.  25-30     CALDER   JOINS    COLLING  WOOD  271 

Gravina  with  the  light  squadron  made  a  push  to  cut  off 
Collingwood,  but  he  was  soon  recalled,  and  on  the  20th  the 
whole  fleet  ignominiously  re-entered  Cadiz. 

Next  day,  to  complete  the  exasperation  of  the  French 
and  Spanish  captains,  Collingwood  quietly  resumed  his 
station  before  the  port.  It  was  a  fine  resolution,  especially 
when  contrasted  with  that  of  Orde.  But  it  would  be  unjust 
to  regard  the  two  cases  as  identical.  Orde  had  to  deal  with 
a  fresh  squadron  at  the  outset  of  a  great  adventure ;  before 
Collingwood  was  an  exhausted  force  that  had  failed  in  its 
mission,  and  was  in  retreat.  Somewhere  to  the  north  must 
be  a  fleet  which  had  headed  it  back,  and  that  fleet  must  soon 
be  on  its  way  to  support  him.  Still,  without  disparaging 
Orde,  high  praise  must  be  given  to  Collingwood.  He  at 
least  could  only  guess  how  demoralised  his  enemy  was,  and 
he  expected  them  to  sail  again  at  once.  "  They  are  gone 
into  Cadiz,"  he  wrote  to  Gambler  on  the  20th,  "  for  the 
purpose  of  replenishing  their  ships,  and  are  expected  to  sail 
again  soon,  reinforced  by  eight  from  that  port."  And  again 
next  day  to  his  wife :  "  We  have  been  looking  into  Cadiz, 
where  their  fleet  is  now  as  thick  as  a  wood.  I  hope  I  shall 
have  somebody  come  to  me  soon,  and  in  the  meantime 
I  must  take  the  best  care  of  myself  I  can."  He  had  not 
long  to  wait.  The  moment  Bickerton  heard  what  had 
happened,  though  he  himself  was  sick  ashore,  he  abandoned 
his  watch  on  Cartagena  and  sent  his  ships  to  join  his  chief. 
By  the  28th  the  two  squadrons  were  together  off  Cadiz,  and 
two  days  later  Calder  appeared. 

So  ended  the  insigne  hetise.  Instead  of  waiting  tamely 
on  the  defensive,  Barham  and  his  colleagues  by  sheer  bold- 
ness and  sagacious  penetration  had  secured  both  Channel 
and  Mediterranean.  They  had  refused  to  play  into 
Napoleon's  hands.  Whatever  his  game  might  be  they 
had  it  in  hand,  so  far  as  it  was  possible  for  the  fleet  to 
hold  it.  What  he  had  to  do  must  now  be  done  with  his 
army  alone.  His  whole  fleet — with  the  exception  of  Alle- 
mand's  little  lost  squadron — was  in  fetters,  and  the  great 
crisis  was  at  an  end. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE 

The  campaign  was  now  transformed.  As  between  France 
and  England,  England  had  regained  the  initiative.  In 
technical  phrase,  "  an  offensive  return  "  was  open  to  her.  It 
was  hers  to  attack,  while  France,  so  far  as  England  was 
concerned,  was  forced  back  upon  the  defensive.  It  was  the 
situation  for  which  Pitt  had  been  working  with  so  much 
quiet  perseverance  ever  since  he  came  to  power — the  situa- 
tion which  Napoleon  had  never  yet  taken  into  account. 
As  all  the  world  knows,  the  way  he  eventually  dealt  with 
it  was  magnificent — the  crowning  exploit  of  his  military 
career,  but  his  recognition  of  the  situation  was  slow  and 
stubborn.  The  shock  to  his  pride  and  his  prestige  was  so 
severe  as  to  upset  his  equilibrium — to  blind  him  with 
savage  exasperation  —  and  in  passionate  rebellion  at  the 
treachery  of  his  Star,  he  refused  to  admit  that  Pitt  had 
beaten  him.  For  three  fevered  weeks— just  the  three 
weeks  in  which  Nelson  was  taking  his  uneasy  rest  ashore — 
he  struggled  against  the  humiliating  truth.  When  at  last 
he  faced  it,  he  saw  Europe  a  live  magazine  beneath  his  feet; 
and  Pitt,  instead  of  cowering  before  him  as  he  thought,  was 
secretly  stretching  out  a  linstock  to  explode  it.  Then  in 
his  heroic  recklessness  of  means  he  arose,  and  in  a  desperate 
effort  to  quench  the  insidious  flame  he  flung  away  his  fleet. 
That  in  a  word  is  the  dramatic  conclusion  we  have  yet  to 
trace. 

It  was  not  till  August  22nd  that  Napoleon  knew  that 
the  Combined  Fleet  had  come  out  from  Corufia,  and  that 
his  fierce  denunciations  of  his  Admiral  for  unreasonable 
delay  were  unjustified.  Once  more  he  was  sanguine,  or  at 
least  desperate.     Clinging  stubbornly  to  the  belief  that  it 


Aug.  22  NAPOLEON    BEGINS    TO    SEE  273 

was  still  possible  that  Villeneuve  might  be  coming  on  to 
Brest,  he  telegraphed  to  Ganteaume  that  he  was  not  to 
permit  him  to  enter  the  port  to  re-victual.  He  himself  was 
to  put  to  sea  immediately  his  colleague  was  signalled,  and 
taking  the  whole  force  under  his  command  was  to  proceed 
up  Channel  without  a  moment's  delay.  At  the  same  time 
Decres  was  directed  to  inform  Villeneuve  that  if  after  all 
he  did  go  to  Cadiz  he  was  forthwith  to  get  on  board  two 
months'  supplies  and  come  north  without  a  moment's  delay. 
They  were  surely  counsels  of  despair,  but  he  had  caught 
the  first  glimpse  of  Pitt's  linstock.  Till  that  moment  he 
seems  to  have  had  no  doubt  that  his  truculent  menaces 
would  avail  to  keep  Austria  and  Russia  quiet.  But 
now  he  learned  that  Craig  had  reached  Malta  with  6000 
troops  and  was  already  in  close  communication  with  the 
two  Russian  Generals,  Lacy  at  Naples  and  Anrep  at  Corfu. 
Trivial  as  was  the  force,  it  had  for  Napoleon  a  significance 
that  was  not  to  be  measured  by  its  numbers.  There  were 
reasons  why  it  gave  a  fresh  colour  of  seriousness  to  the 
Austrian  mobilisation  which  he  had  fully  expected  to  see 
dissolve  at  his  demand  as  it  had  done  earlier  in  the  year. 
It  was  clear  some  further  emphasis  must  be  sought  to  give 
weight  to  his  threat.  As  a  counterpoise  to  the  pressure 
which  Russia  was  exerting  on  Berlin,  he  had  already  taken 
the  cynical  step  of  offering  Hanover  to  Prussia  as  the  price 
of  her  support ;  and  he  now  suddenly  demanded  an  im- 
mediate answer.^  Accordingly  on  the  very  day  when  the 
arrival  of  Villeneuve's  despatches  from  Ferrol  had  left  the 
whole  situation  in  uncertainty  he  gave  peremptory  instruc- 
tions that  the  King  must  be  told  to  make  his  choice  at  once. 
If  he  accepted  "  the  present "  Napoleon  offered,  so  the 
ambassador  was  instructed  to  say,  and  it  had  the  effect  of 
overawing  Russia  and  Austria  and  setting  his  hands  free  for 

^  The  connection  between  these  two  events  is  only  a  matter  of  conjecture, 
for  it  is  not  clear  at  what  time  exactly  Napoleon  heard  of  Craig's  being  at 
Malta.  He  arrived  on  July  19th.  Elliot  heard  of  it  at  Naples  on  August 
1st  (Auriol,  i.  387).  On  Aug,  8th  the  French  Ambassador  at  Berlin  made  the 
offer  of  Hanover.  St.  Cyr  wrote  on  the  subject  on  Aug.  15th,  but  onl}'  as 
news  which  he  had  sent  some  time  before  :  Ibid.,  398.  The  first  reference  in 
Napoleon's  correspondence  is  on  Aug.  19th,  when  he  had  already  ordered  St. 
Cyr  to  be  reinforced. 

S 


2  74      THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     Aug.  23 

the  maritime  war,  he  would  be  content.  But  the  offer 
could  only  stand  for  a  fortnight.  Once  ho  struck  his  Ocean 
camp  he  could  not  stop,  and  it  would  be  too  late.  The 
maritime  war-plan  would  have  failed,  and  the  Prussian 
diversion  not  be  worth  the  price.^ 

Whatever  the  connection  of  this  cold-blooded  stroke  of 
diplomacy  with  British  military  movements,  it  is  certain 
that  they  were  causing  Napoleon  some  uneasiness.  The  old 
law  which'  gives  to  such  expeditions  as  Craig's  a  disturbing 
power  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  intrinsic  force,  was 
beginning  to  work — the  old  law  which  Frederick  the  Great 
and  the  Elder  Pitt  had  understood  so  well.  It  was  in  the 
power  of  Craig  to  secure  a  foothold  at  Napoleon's  weakest 
point,  and  it  was  impossible  to  tell  what  was  behind  the 
little  advanced  guard.  Baird  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  to 
the  southward,  but  whither,  the  Emperor  knew  not.  Nor 
was  this  all.  Since  the  end  of  July,  Pitt  had  been  pre- 
paring on  his  father's  principle  to  have  in  readiness  a  much 
larger  force,  "  either  to  menace  or  attack  the  enemy  or 
their  maritime  frontiers."  Castlereagh  thought  it  might  be 
made  up  perhaps  to  35,000  infantry  and  10,000  cavalry, 
and  that  meanwhile  without  any  prejudice  to  internal 
defence  a  corps  of  10,000  men  might  be  concentrated  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Portsmouth  and  Cork,  with  a  suffi- 
ciency of  transports  standing  by  in  constant  readiness  and 
fully  equipped  and  victualled  for  foreign  service.^ 

It  was  an  old  device.  Napoleon  himself  was  even  then 
endeavouring  to  use  it  with  Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch 
transports  in  the  Texel,  and  yet  so  certain  is  its  power  of 
disturbance  that  even  he  found  it  could  not  be  ignored. 
"  Monsieur  Talleyrand,"  he  wrote  the  day  after  he  sent  his 
peremptory  demand  to  Berlin,  ''  the  more  I  reflect  on  the 
situation  of  Europe  the  more  I  see  it  is  urgent  to  take  a 
decisive  line.  I  have,  in  reality,  nothing  to  expect  from 
Austria's  explanation.  She  will  only  reply  with  fair  phrases, 
and  gain  time  to  prevent  my  doing  anything  this  winter. 

^  To  Talleyrand,  Aug.  22nd:  Correspondance,  xi,  107. 

^  Correspondence  of  Castlereagh.    To  the  Duke  of  York,  July  2Gth,  vol.  ii. 
p.  6. 


Aug.  23  NAPOLEON'S    LAST    HOPE  275 

.  .  .  and  in  April  I  shall  find  100,000  Russians  in  Poland, 
supplied  by  England  with  equipment,  horses,  artillery,  &c., 
and  15,000  to  20,000  English  at  Malta,  and  15,000 
Russians  at  Corfu.  I  shall  then  find  myself  in  a  critical 
situation.      My  decision  is  made."  ^ 

Even  so,  he  still  clung  or  pretended  to  cling  to  the  hope 
of  Villeneuve's  appearing  at  the  eleventh  hour.  "  If  he  fol- 
lows his  instructions,"  the  letter  went  on,  "joins  the  Brest 
squadron,  and  enters  the  Channel,  there  is  still  time ;  I  am 
master  of  England.  If,  on  the  contrary,  my  Admirals  hesi- 
tate ...  I  have  no  other  resource  than  to  wait  for  winter  to 
cross  with  the  flotilla.  ...  In  this  state  of  affairs  ...  I  run 
to  the  most  pressing.  I  strike  my  camps  and  replace  my 
war  battalions  by  my  third  battalions,  which  will  still  give 
me  a  sufficiently  formidable  army  at  Boulogne."  Finally 
Talleyrand  was  told  to  prepare  a  manifesto  as  a  declaration 
of  war  against  Austria,  but  it  was  not  to  be  issued.  By  keep- 
ing it  secret  till  the  last  moment,  Napoleon  meant  to  gain  a 
fortnight  on  his  enemy. 

The  truth  is  he  had  received  from  Decres  a  protest  which 
put  the  arrival  of  the  Combined  Fleet  beyond  the  pale 
of  possibility.  The  harassed  Minister  did  not  doubt  that 
Villeneuve  had  gone  to  Cadiz,  and  he  could  not  bring  him- 
self to  forward  him  the  order  to  come  back  with  the  Spanish 
squadrons  in  Cadiz  and  Cartagena.  At  last  his  master's 
extravagancies  had  stung  him  to  something  like  rebellion 
for  the  sake  of  his  own  maltreated  service.  "  At  your 
Majesty's  feet,"  he  wrote,  "  I  implore  you  not  to  associate 
Spanish  vessels  with  your  squadrons.  ...  I  know  no  situa- 
tion more  painful  than  my  own.  I  beg  your  Majesty  will 
consider  that  I  have  no  interest  but  that  of  your  flag  and 
the  honour  of  your  arms.  If  your  fleet  is  at  Cadiz,  I 
implore  you  to  regard  this  event  as  a  decree  of  destiny, 
which  is  reserving  you  for  other  operations.  I  implore  you 
not  to  make  it  come  back  from  Cadiz  into  the  Channel. 
...  I  implore  you,  above  all,  not  to  order  it  to  attempt 
this  voyage  with  two  months'  victuals,  because  Monsieur 
d'Estaing  took,  I  think,  seventy  or  eighty  days  coming  from 

1  Correspondance,  xi.  117,  Aug.  23rd. 


276     THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE     aug.  22-25 

Cadiz  to  Brest,  and  perhaps  more.'  It  is  above  all  at  this 
moment — when  I  may  stop  the  issue  of  orders  fatal,  as 
I  think,  to  your  Majesty's  service — that  I  ought  to  insist 
strongly.  Would  that  I  might  be  more  successful  in  this 
case  than  I  have  been  before  !  But  it  is  misery  for  me  to 
know  the  trade  of  the  sea,  for  this  knowledge  wins  no 
confidence  nor  produces  any  eifect  on  your  Majesty's  plans. 
Indeed,  Sire,  my  position  is  becoming  too  painful.  I  reproach 
myself  for  being  unable  to  persuade  your  Majesty.  I  doubt 
if  any  one  man  could.  May  it  please  you,  for  naval  opera- 
tions, to  form  about  you  a  council,  a  naval  staff' — such  as 
may  seem  fit  to  your  Majesty.  ...  A  Minister  of  Marine, 
dominated  by  your  Majesty  in  all  that  concerns  the  sea, 
must  serve  you  ill  and  become  as  nothing  for  the  glory  of 
your  arms,  if  even  he  does  not  become  harmful." 

A  letter  so  loyal,  so  wise,  so  broken-hearted,  even 
Napoleon  could  not  ignore.  It  was  probably  this  which 
turned  the  scale,  heavily  weighted  as  it  already  was.  On 
the  morrow  the  routes  for  Vienna  were  issued  to  Marshal 
Berthier,  and  on  the  25  th  Napoleon  informed  Talleyrand 
that  all  was  over  with  the  invasion.  As  yet  the  failure  was 
not  laid  at  Villcncuve's  door,  but  frankly  on  his  own  mis- 
judgment  of  the  military  and  political  situation.  ''  I  could 
not  have  believed  the  Austrians  so  stiff,"  he  said ;  "  but 
I  have  been  so  often  mistaken  in  my  life  that  I  no  longer 
blush  for  it."  " 

Though  Napoleon's  front  Avas  now  definitely  facing  to 
the  eastward,  ho  himself  stood  fast  at  Boulogne.  The  move- 
ment had  to  bo  masked.  A  fortnight  had  to  be  gained 
before  Austria's  suspicions  should  be  aroused,  and,  further, 
there  Avas  his  rear  to  secure.  Ho  had  at  last  to  face  the 
fact  that  England  was  no  longer  on  the  defensive ;  her 
army  was  free  to  attack,  and  so  soon  as  all  Avas  in  order  for 
his  chan«:e  of  front  he  beoan  to  s^ive  it  serious  attention. 

'  August  22nd,  Desbriore,  v,  814.  The  occasion  referred  to  must  be  the 
great  but  impotent  concentration  of  the  Franco-Spanish  forces  at  Cadiz  in 
tlie  autumn  of  1780.  D'Estiiing  put  to  sea  on  November  6th  and  ancliored 
at  Brest  on  January  3,  1781.  He  spent  some  time  cruising  off  Cape  St. 
Vincent,  and  liis  actual  passage  thence  to  Brest  was  fifty-eight  days.  See 
Lacour-Gayet,  Marine  sous  Louis  XVI.,  p.  322. 

^  Corrtspondance,  xi.  p.  134. 


Aug.  26-29      THE    INVASION    ABANDONED  277 

Berthier  received  the  marching  orders  on  August  26  th, 
and  next  day  Talleyrand  was  told  to  extend  his  Naval  In- 
telligence Department  to  the  British  land  forces.  The 
head  of  the  department  was  "  to  keep  a  box  with  divisions 
for  all  the  movements  of  the  English  army,  including  the 
artillery,  and  reserving  places  for  the  movements  of  the 
generals  and  staff  officers  ;  "  and  as  soon  as  it  was  ready  he 
was  to  send  him  a  travelHng  duplicate  for  his  own  use.^ 
During  the  next  few  days  he  was  much  concerned  with 
the  subject,  making  arrangements  to  prevent  a  descent 
at  Boulogne  for  the  destruction  of  the  flotilla,  and  bidding 
Marmont  before  marching  eastward  to  assure  the  Dutch 
that  this  same  army  could  be  moved  rapidly  to  their 
defence  if  they  were  attacked  from  the  sea  in  his  absence. 
Duroc,  the  Envoy  who  had  just  been  sent  to  Berlin  to  force 
the  King  of  Prussia  to  a  decision,  was  told  that  Napoleon 
did  not  care  much  whether  he  got  rid  of  Hanover  or  not. 
If  Prussia  refused  it,  he  would  merely  garrison  Hameln 
with  3000  men,  and  he  was  in  hopes  that  he  would  bring 
30,000  or  40,000  English  to  besiege  it.  "  Frederick,"  he  said, 
significantly,  "  did  not  take  long  to  get  from  Prague  to  Ros- 
bach."  ^  Forty  thousand  men,  almost  exactly  Castlereagh's 
figure,  was  the  force  which  he  calculated  England  might  have 
at  her  disposal.^  Napoleon  must  have  put  the  British  disposal 
force  at  a  lower  strength,  for  he  fixed  the  Boulogne  defence 
army  at  25,000  men,  with  officers  and  cadres  enough  besides 
to  form  the  flotila  crews  into  regiments.  "  The  English," 
he  told  Berthier,  "  will  then  be  unable  to  attempt  anything 
with  less  than  40,000  men."^^ 

It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  preoccupations  that  he 
heard  from  London  for  the  first  time  of  the  division  of 
Cornwallis's  fleet  and  gave  vent  to  his  angry  criticism.    Not 

^  Corrcspondanoc,  xi.  146,  Aug.  27. 

2  Ibid.,  157,  Aug.  28. 

^  Castlereayk  Correspondence,  ii.  6,  and  see  ante,  p.  274.  There  is  a  similar 
undated  "  Memorandum  for  moving  the  disposable  force  "  in  the  Pitt  Papers, 
Bundle  243.  It  shows  45,000  foot,  6700  artillery,  and  12,000  cavalry,  requiring 
308,000  tons  of  transport  at  1^  tons  per  man.  On  Russia's  suggestion  that 
peace  might  be  made  with  Spain,  Pitt  was  already  contemplating  the 
possibility  of  using  this  force  on  the  Peninsular.      See  Appendix  B,  p.  444. 

■*  Corrcspondance,  xi.  p.  159,  Aug.  29. 


278       THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept.  i 

only  had  he  failed  to  scatter  the  British  fleet  when  he  did 
not  want  it  to  concentrate,  but  he  had  failed  to  force  it  to 
keep  concentrated  when  he  least  of  all  wished  to  see  it 
spread.  He  saw  himself  outwitted  by  the  seamen  he  de- 
spised, and  his  only  relief  was  to  call  them  egregious 
blunderers,  and  to  begin  to  pretend  to  himself  that  the 
fault  was  all  Villeneuve's  for  missing  so  grand  a  chance. 
Yet  we  can  now  see  that  if  Villeneuve  had  come  north  at 
once  on  reaching  Ferrol,  as  Napoleon  wished,  he  would 
have  fallen  into  the  arms  of  the  complete  British  concen- 
tration. If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had  come  north  after 
the  division  and  had  got  into  the  Channel  by  evasion,  he 
would  have  found  no  army  at  Boulogne.  It  was  not  even 
till  two  days  after  the  order  for  demobilising  the  flotilla 
that  Napoleon  knew  Villeneuve  was  in  Cadiz.  The  decision 
to  attack  Austria  before  she  was  ready  had  been  taken  a 
week  earlier  and  quite  independently  of  whether  his  fleet 
would  come  to  Brest  or  not. 

It  was  on  September  1st  the  news  reached  him  that 
Villeneuve  had  actually  retired  to  Cadiz,^  and  that  same 
evening  the  Euryalus  was  heaving-to  off  the  Needles. 
Blackwood  had  brought  up  his  tidings  in  ten  days  from 
St.  Vincent,  and  that  not  a  moment  might  be  lost  he  left 
his  ship  outside  the  Solent  and  went  ashore  at  Lymington. 
Thence  he  took  a  chaise  and  four  and  galloped  through  the 
night,  rousing  Nelson  at  Merton  in  the  early  morning  with 
his  stirring  news,  as  he  passed  on  his  way  to  the  Admiralty.-^ 

To  the  Government  he  brought  welcome  relief  from  a 
period  of  strained  anxiety.  For  what  he  had  to  tell  was 
not  only  that  Villeneuve  was  in  Cadiz,  but  also — and  this 
Napoleon  did  not  yet  know — that  Calder  had  locked  the 
door  upon  him.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  most  pressing 
anxiety  which  the  partial  success  of  the  French  plan  had 
caused  the  Government  was  not  so  much  for  the  invasion, 
which  they  considered  they  had  well  in  hand,  as  for  the 
military  expeditions  and  the  home-coming  convoys.     The 

*  To  Duroc  (Postscript),  Correspondance,  xi.  157. 

2  Blackwood  to  the  Admiralty  :  Captains  Letters,  1534.  He  submitted  a 
bill  for  £15,  196-.  Od.  for  his  journey,  which  was  allowed.  The  telegraph,  of 
course,  could  not  be  used  at  night  or  in  thick  weather. 


Aug.  22-27        THE   EAST   INDIA   CONVOY  279 

concentration  at  Ferrol  placed  them  in  immediate  danger 
and  the  apprehension  was  seriously  increased  by  Ville- 
neuve's  hasty  sailing  for  Corufia  before  he  could  have 
re-victualled.  The  course  he  had  steered  to  the  westward 
threatened  a  dash  at  the  East  Indiamen.  Or  if  this  were 
not  so,  still  they  might  be  the  objective  of  Allemand.  They 
were  a  source  of  more  than  usual  anxiety.  Not  only  was 
the  convoy  extraordinarily  rich,  but  in  the  Trident  64,  its 
escort  ship,  were  two  men  the  country  could  ill  afford  to 
lose.  One  was  Admiral  Rainier,  who  was  coming  home  in 
command  after  being  relieved  on  the  station  by  Sir  Edward 
PelleAv.  The  other  was  a  passenger — no  less  a  man  than 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  returning  from  his  brilliant  campaign 
against  the  Mahrattas,  the  campaign  which  had  removed 
all  fear  of  effective  French  interference  in  India.  A  secret 
route  had  been  sent  out  to  meet  them  at  St.  Helena,  but 
none  the  less  the  danger  was  disturbing.^ 

The  capture  of  this  priceless  convoy  would  mean  not 
only  the  loss  of  a  brilliant  soldier  but  a  disastrous  blow  to 
the  national  finance,  and  commercial  and  family  influence 
alike  demanded  that  it  must  be  secured  at  any  cost.  So 
great  indeed  was  the  anxiety  that  on  August  27th,  when 
as  yet  there  was  no  suspicion  that  Napoleon  had  abandoned 
the  invasion,  Cornwallis  was  told  that  so  soon  as  he  was 
strong  enough  he  would  have  to  detach  a  division  of  four 
or  five  of  the  line  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of 
Scilly  in  order  to  receive  the  threatened  Trade.  Calder 
had  already  been  directed  to  cover  its  arrival,  if  he  found 
Villeneuve  and  Allemand  seemed  to  be  making  it  their 
objective  ;  and  Cornwallis's  new  instructions  provided  that 
if  the  detachment  found  Calder  operating  to  this  end  it 
was  to  consider  itself  under  his  orders.'^ 


^  Rainier  left  Madras  with  Wellesley  on  March  10th,  and  reached  St. 
Helena,  the  great  Southern  convoy  rendezvous,  on  June  21st.  Here  they 
were  joined  by  the  China  ships  and  some  whalers,  making  twenty -nine  sail, 
which  were  valued  at  £15,000,000.  Varying  at  his  own  discretion  the  Ad- 
miralty instructions,  he  sailed  again  on  July  12th  after  forcing  certain 
neutrals  to  remain  behind  anchored  under  the  fort  guns  for  fear  of  their 
betraying  his  route. — Kainier  to  Marsden.  "  Off  the  Start,  Sept.  8  "  :  In-letterSy 
176  ;  and  Log  of  the  Trident.     For  the  secret  route  see  post,  p.  303,  note  i. 

^  Secret  Orders,  August  27th. 


2  8o     THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE     aug.  19-23 

It  was  on  this  burning  question — the  real  objective  and 
the  whereabouts  of  the  Combined  Fleet — that  Nelson  was 
most  eagerly  consulted  by  the  Ministers  when  he  reached 
London.  He  had  struck  his  flag  on  the  evening  of 
August  19th  in  grave  anxiety  as  to  what  his  reception 
would  be.  In  his  own  eyes  he  had  failed  and  been  out- 
witted. He  was  soon  reassured.  His  heroic  dash  to  save 
the  West  Indies  had  reawakened  all  the  old  enthusiasm  for 
the  hero  of  the  Nile  and  Copenhagen.  At  Portsmouth  he 
had  met  an  ovation,  and  by  the  time  he  reached  London 
it  was  unrestrained  adulation.  So  extravagant  did  it  grow 
that  the  more  sober  spirits  felt  called  upon  to  protest. 
"  Should  the  mad  project  of  invasion,"  wrote  the  editor  of 
the  Naval  Chronicle,  "  ever  be  attempted,  the  public  would 
feel  additional  security  from  having  the  hero  of  the  Nile 
on  our  coast.  But  we  greatly  lament  that  ill-judged  and 
overweening  popularity,  which  tends  to  make  another 
'  demi-god '  of  Lord  Nelson  at  the  expense  of  all  other 
officers  in  the  service,  many  of  whom  possess  equal  merit, 
and  equal  abilities,  and  equal  gallantry  with  the  noble 
Admiral." ' 

But  nothing  could  stem  the  tide.  People,  city,  and 
Ministers  were  all  at  one,  and  Nelson  to  his  no  small  dis- 
comfort found  himself  regarded  as  a  magician,  as  though 
he  were  in  possession  of  Drake's  fabled  mirror  in  which  he 
could  see  "  all  the  movements  of  the  enemy's  ships,  all  that 
passed  in  them,  and  count  their  crews."  On  August  23rd, 
his  first  day  in  London,  he  saw  both  Castlereagh  and  Pitt, 
and  found  them  "  full  of  the  enemy's  fleet,"  and  expecting 
him  to  say  where  it  was.  "  I  am  now  set  up  for  a  con- 
jurer," he  wrote  next  day  to  Keats  of  the  Superb,  his  most 
trusted  counsellor,  who  had  come  ashore  with  him ;  "  and 
God  knows  they  will  very  soon  find  I  am  far  from  being 
one.  I  was  asked  my  opinion  against  my  inclination,  for  if 
I  make  one  wrong  guess  the  charm  will  be  broken." 

Barham  alone  held  aloof.  The  two  great  seamen 
hardly  knew  one  another,  and  to  the  First  Lord's  cold, 
hard-headed    intellect    there    must    have    been    something 

1  Vol.  xiv.  157. 


AUG.20-24  BARHAM   AND    NELSON  281 

antagonistic  in  Nelson's  full-coloured  genius.  It  is  probable 
that,  in  common  with  many  others,  he  regarded  him  as  a 
poseur,  whose  vanity  was  wont  to  make  the  most  of  his 
achievements,  and  whose  impulsive  nature — for  so  it  seemed 
on  the  surface — was  not  to  be  relied  on  in  a  vital  crisis. 
The  crucial  question  was,  of  course,  whom  should  he  entrust 
with  the  Mediterranean  command.  There  the  naval  in- 
terest now  centred  with  acute  emphasis.  Nelson  with 
his  rich  experience  was,  of  course,  the  natural  choice ;  but 
Barham  clearly  shared  Nelson's  own  doubts  as  to  whether 
his  recent  conduct  had  been  as  well  considered  as  it  might 
have  been,  and  the  national  hero  was  met  on  landing  with 
a  cold  request  to  send  up  his  Journal.  Nelson  in  reply 
submitted  that  he  did  not  know  such  a  thing  was  expected 
of  a  Commander-in-chief.  But  he  had  kept  one  for  the 
two  periods  of  his  chase,  and  this  he  sent  up — and  with 
quick  effect.  "  Lord  Barham,"  we  are  told  on  the  best 
authority,  "  on  receiving  .  .  .  Lord  Nelson's  Journals,  per- 
used the  whole  narrative  with  an  attention  which  enabled 
that  Minister  to  form  a  more  complete  idea  of  the  Admiral's 
character;  and  Lord  Barham  afterwards  liberally  declared 
he  had  not  before  sufficiently  appreciated  such  extraordinary 
talents.  This  opinion  of  the  noble  Admiral's  late  proceed- 
ings was  immediately  communicated  to  the  Cabinet  with 
an  assurance  from  Lord  Barham  that  an  unbounded  con- 
fidence ought  to  be  placed  in  Nelson,  who  was,  above  all 
others,  the  officer  to  be  employed  on  the  station  he  had 
so  ably  watched,  and  whose  political  relations  he  had  so 
thoroughly  understood."  ^ 

From  this  moment  he  was  treated  frankly  as  the  man 


^  Clarke  and  M'Arthur,  ii.  116.  This  copy  of  the  Journal  is  in  the  Kecord 
Office  with  its  covering  letter  to  Marsden,  which  appears  never  to  have  been 
printed.  It  is  as  follows :  "  Merton,  August  (sic)  1805.  In  answer  to  your 
letter  of  the  19th  requesting,  by  direction  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the 
Admiralty,  that  I  will  transmit  you  a  journal  of  my  proceedings  for  their 
information,  I  beg  leave  to  acquaint  you  that  never  having  been  called  upon 
(or  understanding  it  to  be  customary)  as  Commander-in-chief  to  furnish  their 
Lordships  with  a  journal  of  my  proceedings,  none  has  been  kept  for  that 
purpose,  except  for  the  different  periods  the  fleet  under  my  command  was  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy,  from  the  19th  of  January  1805  till  the  12th  of  March 
following,  and  from  the  4th  of  April  till  the  20th  instant,  which  I  herewith 
transmit  for  the  information  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty," 


282       THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     aug.  12 

of  the  hour — the  embodiraent  of  the  policy  of  a  bold 
counter-attack  in  the  Mediterranean  into  which  Pitt's  war 
direction  had  ripened.  Barham  consulted  him  freely  on  the 
naval  requirements,  and  this  occupied  the  greater  part  of 
his  time,  and  was  fruitful,  as  we  shall  see,  in  new  develop- 
ments. But  to  the  Ministers  his  political  knowledge  was 
of  equal  value.  Our  relations  on  the  Continent  were  still 
in  the  greatest  uncertainty.  A  week  before  Nelson  landed, 
a  King's  Messenger  had  arrived  from  St.  Petersburg.  In 
his  last  despatch  Gower  had  led  Pitt  to  expect  an  an- 
nouncement that  the  Russian  treaty  had  been  ratified.  But 
now  he  could  only  tell  that  the  Czar  was  still  hanging  back. 
At  St.  Petersburg  they  had  been  pressing  him  further  on 
the  question  of  Malta  and  the  Maritime  Code,  but  he  had 
firmly  refused  even  to  discuss  the  points.  The  Minister 
had  then  hinted  at  the  prospect  of  mediation  being  re- 
sumed. Gower,  however,  was  unmoved,  and  assured  his 
Government  that  the  treaty  would  probably  be  ratified  in 
a  few  days  without  the  mediation  article.  His  hopes  of 
Austria  were  still  more  sanguine.  The  Czar  had  been 
assured  she  had  definitely  decided  to  take  action  at  once, 
so  as  not  to  leave  the  choice  of  time  to  Napoleon,  and  it 
was  said  she  had  already  concerted  a  plan  of  campaign 
with  Russia.  Under  this  arrangement,  as  communicated 
to  Gower,  55,000  Russians  were  to  enter  Galicia  in  the 
middle  of  August,  and  in  two  months  they  would  be  in 
line  with  an  Austrian  army  on  the  frontier  of  Bavaria.  It 
was  calculated — and  most  unhappily  calculated — that  this 
would  enable  them  to  anticipate  Napoleon  by  twenty  days. 
The  Archduke  Charles  was  to  command  the  allied  army 
without  interference  from  Vienna.^ 

All  this  was  well  so  far  as  it  went,  but  there  was  no- 
thing yet  on  which  Pitt  could  build  securely.  By  the 
time,  however,  that  Nelson  reached  London  the  posi- 
tion had  become  more  stable.  Gower,  as  he  expected,  had 
been  able  to  announce  the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  and 
that  concerted  action  was  opening.     The  Russians  were  to 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  July  21st  and   22nd,  received  Aug    12th  ;    F.   0. 
Hussia,  58.     Printed  by  Holland  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  pp.  188-93. 


Aug.  22-29     UNCERTAINTY   ABOUT   NAPLES  283 

commence  their  march  through  Austria  on  August  20th, 
and  a  force  of  16,000  men  for  Stralsund  was  only  awaiting 
transport.  For  its  support  they  begged  that  the  Hanoverian 
troops  in  England  should  be  sent  to  join  it,  and  that  the 
British  Government  would  hasten  to  come  to  terms  with 
Sweden  as  to  the  amount  of  her  subsidy.^ 

Clearly,  then,  the  time  for  drastic  action  on  the  other 
flank  of  the  French  had  come.  But  unfortunately  the 
situation  in  Southern  Italy  was  in  the  last  degree  precarious, 
and  here  Nelson's  intimate  knowledge  was  a  godsend.  The 
difficulty  was  that  nothing  was  as  yet  known  as  to  the 
arrangements  Elliot  had  been  able  to  make  with  the 
Russian  Generals  for  co-operation  with  Craig.  It  was  not 
even  known  whether  Craig  had  reached  Malta.^  The  last 
information  from  Elliot  was  that  an  envoy  had  arrived 
from  Paris  who,  with  ruthless  brutality,  was  trying  to  brow- 
beat the  Neapolitan  court  into  a  recognition  of  Napoleon's 
new  title.  At  any  moment  they  might  give  way,  and  Lacy, 
the  Russian  General,  wanted  to  have  his  troops  brought 
over  from  Corfu  immediately.  He  was  urgently  pressing 
for  Craig's  co-operation,  but  not  a  word  had  been  heard 
from  him.^ 

It  was  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  under  Napoleon's 
violent  pressure  the  feeble  resistance  of  Naples  might 
break  down,  and  Craig,  even  if  he  arrived  in  time,  might 
find  the  moment  had  come  for  a  forcible  and  adverse 
occupation  of  Messina  to  save  Sicily  from  the  wreck  of 
the  Neapolitan  kingdom.  Seeing  how  long  Nelson  had  been 
pressing  for  troops  to  meet  this  very  situation,  he  natur- 
ally became  anxious  to  know  how  Craig's  force  was  to  be 
used,  but  Castlereagh  could  not  yet  give  him  a  definite 
answer.     "  As  the  man  said  of  the  Parson,"  Nelson  wrote  to 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  July  31st  (two  despatches),  received  August  23rd: 
Ihid. 

^  It  was  not  till  Sept.  3rd  that  the  Admiralty  informed  Ministers  that 
Bickerton  had  seen  him  as  far  as  Cape  Bona  with  a  fair  wind. —  War  Office,  i, 
712.  On  Aug.  1st,  Elliot  had  written  fully  of  his  arrival  and  the  co-operation 
of  the  Russians,  but  though  he  specially  sent  the  letter  to  Rome  to  be 
forwarded  by  post  overland  it  did  not  come  to  hand  till  "  Sept.  17th  at  night." 
— Foreign  Office,  Sicily,  25. 

^  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  July  9th  and  16th,  received  August  14th  and  22nd : 
F.  0.  Sicily,  25. 


2  84      THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept.  i 

Ball,  "  he  preached  about  doing  good,  and  so  Ministers 
talked  of  our  troops  doing  good  to  the  Common  Cause." 
In  the  turbid  mist  that  shrouded  the  situation  Nelson 
clung  to  his  old  idea  of  securing  Sardinia  as  the  key  of  the 
difficulty.  So  long  as  he  had  that  island  for  a  base,  he 
was  sure  he  could  place  Sicily  beyond  Napoleon's  roach/ 

He  was  listened  to  with  respect,  and  indeed  was  even- 
tually furnished  with  means  to  the  amount  of  £40,000  for 
the  organisation  of  the  Sardinian  forces  in  case  of  need. 
The  point  just  then  received  new  emphasis.  On  September 
1st  came  another  despatch  from  Gower,  saying  that  Austria 
had  authorised  a  plenipotentiary  to  sign  her  adhesion  to  the 
Coalition,  but  she  was  making  all  kinds  of  difficulties  over 
details.  With  her  appetite  for  Northern  Italy  unassuaged, 
she  made  special  objection  to  the  restoration  of  the  King 
of  Sardinia  as  a  term  of  the  ultimate  settlement  of  Europe. 
She  also  wished,  in  spite  of  the  recent  Russian  experience, 
to  try  mediation  as  a  means  to  her  end  before  committing 
herself  to  actual  hostilities ;  but  nevertheless  she  expected 
Pitt  to  commence  paying  her  subsidy  at  once.  Naturally 
Gower  had  refused,  and  he  now  warned  Mulgrave  that  the 
character  of  the  Austrian  Court  was  so  weak  and  vacillating 
that,  unless  she  could  be  forced  to  commit  herself  during 
a  momentary  fit  of  vigour,  she  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
The  military  arrangements  she  proposed  were  equally  un- 
satisfactory. She  intended,  of  course,  to  use  her  main  army 
in  Northern  Italy,  and  she  was  demanding  that  Craig's  force 
should  march  with  Lacy's  Russians  to  join  it.  The  proposal 
was  out  of  the  question.  It  would  destroy  the  value  which 
the  expedition  derived  from  its  amphibious  nature — the 
only  real  value  it  had — and  would  jeopardise  Sicily.  Gower 
again  had  refused.'- 

In  the  same  bag  with  this  despatch  was  a  second  giving 
details  of  the  intended  movements  of  the  Russians  for  the 
coercion   of    Prussia  and   their   requirements   in  Northern 

^  Nelson  to  Pitt,  6  a.m.,  Aug.  29th,  and  same  to  Lord  Minto,  Aug.  31st : 
Nicolas,  vii.  20,  25.  Castlereagh  to  Nelson,  Sept.  —  :  Caatlcrcayh'n  Letters  and 
Despatches,  2nd  series,  i.  88.     Nelson  to  Ball,  Sept.  30th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  55. 

-  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  Aug.  l4tb,  received  Sept.  1st:  F.  0.  Foreiyn,  58. 
Holland  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  197. 


Sept.  1-3      CALLS    ON    THE    BRITISH    ARMY  285 

Europe.  "  I  am  to  press,"  wrote  Gower,  "  the  advantage  to 
the  cause  which  would  be  derived  by  a  demonstration  on 
the  English  coast,  and  that  a  collection  of  transports  in  the 
Downs  and  the  movement  of  troops  upon  the  shore  would 
not  fail  to  add  considerably  to  the  embarrassments  of 
Bonaparte."  They  further  hoped  that  when  operations 
began  a  British  force  would  appear  in  the  Elbe  and  land.^ 

These  measures  did  not  appeal  to  Pitt.  The  hour  for 
them  had  not  yet  struck,  and  he  was  not  to  be  drawn  into 
ventures  beyond  the  force  at  his  disposal  or  beyond  what 
the  precarious  situation  warranted — and  the  situation  was 
obviously  precarious.  Indeed,  the  whole  plan  of  action  had 
a  half-hearted  ring  about  it  that  was  not  to  his  mind.  It 
was  the  work  of  a  joint  council  of  war  upon  which  the 
Austrian  representative  was  General  Mack.  High  as  was 
his  reputation  as  an  administrative  soldier,  he  was  not  a 
man  to  inspire  confidence,  and  the  suggested  dispositions 
savoured  strongly  of  his  hand.  Pitt,  therefore,  had  no 
hesitation  in  supporting  the  attitude  Gower  had  taken  up. 
"  The  proposals  and  plan  of  operations,"  wrote  Mulgrave  in 
his  reply,  "  present  rather  the  laboured  details  of  obstacles 
to  any  attempt  at  opening  a  campaign  against  the  French 
than  a  system  of  active  and  vigorous  operations."  As  to 
the  special  Russian  demands,  he  was  to  say  that  England 
was  ready  to  subsidise  everybody,  but  that  it  was  useless  to 
send  any  force  to  the  Elbe  and  Weser  to  co-operate  with 
the  Swedes  and  Russians  until  the  main  operations  had 
developed.  This,  of  course,  was  strictly  in  accordance  with 
the  principles  on  which  alone  such  expeditions  could 
materially  affect  a  Continental  campaign.^ 

To  what  extent  Nelson  was  consulted  on  the  main 
scheme  of  the  great  Coalition  is  uncertain.  But  one  con- 
tribution he  made  to  it  is  very  noteworthy.  He  had  known 
Mack  when  in  1798  that  admired  officer  had  been  sent 
down  to  command  the  Neapolitan  army,  and  he  was  con- 
vinced nothing  good  could  come  of  operations  committed 
to  his  charge.     Though  not  consulted  by  the  Government 

^  Same  to  same,  August  14th:  F.  0.  Russia,  58.     Received  September  1st. 
^  Mulgrave  to  Gower,  September  3rd  :  F.  0.  Foreign,  58. 


2  86        THE    RETURN   TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept. 

in  the  matter,  he  did  his  best  to  warn  thcin  through  his 
old  friend  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  and  that  in  no  measured 
terms.  "  If  your  Royal  Highness,"  he  is  recorded  to  have 
said,  "  has  any  communication  with  Government,  let  not 
General  Mack  be  employed,  for  I  know  him  to  be  a  rascal, 
a  scoundrel,  and  a  coward."  ^  It  is  probable  that  his  deep 
interest  in  foreign  politics  led  him  to  make  other  sug- 
gestions. "  No  Minister,"  wrote  his  devoted  chaplain,  "  ever 
better  understood  the  tone  of  the  times  he  lived  in."  True, 
he  himself  says  he  was  so  short  a  time  in  England,  and  not 
more  than  four  times  in  London,  that  he  could  hardly  talk 
of  anything  seriously  but  naval  aftairs.^  Still,  his  con- 
temporary biographers  assert  that  "  he  visited  various  depart- 
ments and  showed  Ministers  the  dangers  to  which  they 
w^ere  particularly  exposed  in  the  Mediterranean,  the  errors 
that  had  too  long  been  persisted  in,  and  the  events  and 
changes  that  might  be  expected  to  take  place  in  Europe 
from  the  prevailing  aspect  of  its  political  horizon."  ^  The 
statement  is  confirmed  by  Wellington's  well-known  account 
of  their  dramatic  meetinsc  in  Castlereaofh's  ante -room,  when 
the  "  Sepoy  General "  came  to  report  himself  on  his  safe 
return,  and  Nelson  was  waiting  to  take  his  leave.  At  first 
impressed  adversely,  like  Barham,  with  his  egotistic  conversa- 
tion, "  so  vain  and  so  silly  as  to  surprise  and  almost  disgust 
me,"  he  changed  his  opinion  when  Nelson  found  out  who  he 
Avas.  "  Then,"  said  the  Duke,  ''  he  talked  of  the  state  of  the 
country  and  of  the  aspect  and  probabilities  of  affairs  on  the 
Continent  with  a  good  sense  and  a  knowledge  of  subjects 
both  at  home  and  abroad,  that  surprised  me  equally.  .  .  . 
In  fact,  he  talked  like  an  officer  and  a  statesman."  ^ 

It  would  be  Avorth  much  to  know  what  were  the  ideas  of 
Nelson's  that  so  deeply  impressed  the  great  soldier — to  know 
whether  perchance  they  discussed  the  policy  Pitt  even  then 

^  Clarke  and  M'Arthnr,  ii.  117.  Nelson's  opinion  must  not,  of  course,  be 
taken  too  seriously.  Mack  was  a  man  who  had  risen  from  the  ranks,  but 
whether  by  his  ability  or,  like  Kales^h,  by  "his  bold  and  plausible  tongue," 
opinions  differed.  The  British  War  Office  inclined  to  believe  in  him. 
Napoleon  regarded  him  as  a  charlatan. 

2  To  Sir  A.  Ball,  Sept.  30th.     Nicolas,  vii.  55. 

^  Clarke  and  M'Arthur,  ii.  117. 

*  Croker,  Diary,  ii.  233. 


Sept.  II  NELSON   AND   DUMOURIEZ  287 

had  in  mind  and  Avhicli  Wellington  brought  to  so  full  a 
fruition.  The  idea  of  pressing  Napoleon  from  the  sea  at 
his  weakest  point  was  at  least  an  old  and  favourite  one  with 
the  Admiral.  Years  before  he  had  discussed  it  with  another 
famous  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  Dumouriez  was  then  in 
exile  at  Acton,  finding  relief  for  the  disappointment  of  his 
marred  career  in  advising  the  British  Government  on  the 
defence  of  England.  He  had  just  presented  them  with  the 
last  of  his  elaborate  appreciations,  and  now  seeing  in  Nelson 
the  embodiment  of  his  own  and  Pitt's  policy  of  counter- 
attack in  the  Mediterranean,  the  neglected  General  found 
new  hope  of  measuring  swords  at  last  with  the  man  who 
had  supplanted  him.  "  My  constant  desires  are  to  co- 
operate with  you  in  Italy,"  he  wrote.  "  All  my  hopes  at 
the  very  point  of  the  Continental  Avar  are  in  your  counsels 
to  your  Ministry  to  provide  me  with  a  foreign  army  of 
Italians  or  Austrians  to  attack  the  upstart  Corsican  through 
the  centre  of  Italy."  He  had  already  submitted  a  plan  to 
Vienna.  "  And  if,"  he  continued,  "  I  receive  the  command 
of  the  diversion,  we  will  realise  together  the  projects  we 
formed  at  our  first  meeting  in  Hamburg,  against  the  bar- 
barian usurpator  whom  we  equally  abhor."  ^ 

It  was  with  his  mind  filled  with  these  preoccupations 
that  Nelson  had  been  trying  to  enjoy  his  rest  down  at 
Merton.  From  his  first  interview  with  Pitt  he  seems  to 
have  understood  that  he  might  be  called  on  at  any  moment 
to  resume  his  command.^  But  till  Villeneuve's  fleet  was 
located  and  the  situation  cleared  he  could  only  wait, 
holding  himself  ready  for  the  summons  at  any  moment. 
Both  he  and  his  friends  knew  it  must  come.  Lord  Hood 
told  him  on  August  26  th  he  felt  sure  Villeneuve  had  gone 
to  the  Mediterranean  or  Cadiz,  and  that  he  would  certainly 

1  Rose  and  Broadley  :  Dumouriez  and  the  Defence  of  England,  p.  453,  Sept. 
11th,  citing  Add.  MSS.,  34931,  f.  160  ;  and  see  Ibid.,  p.  207,  for  his  letter  to 
Nelson  of  April  20,  1801:  "If  you  have  charge  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea 
we  can  together  deliver  Italy  and  France  of  the  democratic  tyranny."  Two 
other  letters  are  Ibid.,  pp.  208-210.  For  his  appreciation,  written  after  he 
knew  Villeneuve  was  at  Coruna  and  on  the  false  supposition  that  Oalder 
would  blockade  him  there,  see  Ibid.,  ch.  xiii. 

^  Nelson  to  Keats,  August  24th :  Postscript,  "  You  see  by  my  writing  tackle 
that  I  am  not  yet  mounted  as  Commander-in-chief"  :  Nicolas,  vii.  16. 


288     THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept. 2-3 

have  to  go  to  sea  again.^  The  naval  tension  of  that  last 
week  in  August  was  as  high  as  the  political.  Alert  for  the 
great  summons,  Nelson  would  accept  no  invitations.  In 
refusing  one  on  the  29th  he  says,  "Every  ship,  even  the 
Victory,  is  ordered  out,  for  there  is  an  entire  igncjrance 
whether  the  Ferrol  fleet  is  coming  to  the  northward,  gone 
to  the  Mediterranean,  or  cruising  for  our  valuable  homeward- 
bound  fleet " ;  and  again  the  same  day,  expressing  the  same 
doubts,  he  says,  "  My  time  and  movements  must  depend 
upon  Buonaparte.  We  are  at  present  ignorant  of  his 
intentions." '" 

It  was  four  days  later  that  Blackwood  in  the  grey  dawn 
broke  in  upon  him  with  the  glorious  news.  Nelson  im- 
mediately followed  him  to  London,  and  found  all  excite- 
ment at  the  release  of  the  strain.  "  Thank  God  !  Thank 
God  ! "  wrote  the  veteran  Lord  Radstock,  "  a  thousand  thou- 
sand times  that  these  Jack  o'  Lanterns  are  once  more  safely 
housed  without  having  done  that  mischief  which  was 
justly  dreaded.  The  papers  tell  us  you  will  shortly  be 
after  them."  ^ 

That  his  hour  had  come  he  took  as  a  matter  of  course. 
It  was  the  call  for  which  he  had  been  waiting.  The  first 
order  that  left  the  Admiralty  after  Blackwood's  chaise  had 
rattled  down  Whitehall  was  one  to  stop  the  Victory — pro- 
bably it  was  Nelson's  first  request.'*  The  next  was  to 
Cornwallis  cancelling  the  directions  he  had  received  to  send 
Cotton  to  replace  Calder  in  command  of  the  southern  half 
of  his  fleet.  Then  a  day  passed  in  which  there  is  nothing 
but  one  of  the  cruel  orders  that  tell  so  harshly  the  strain 
of  the  crisis.  Men  were  lacking  for  the  ships  that  were  to 
reinforce  Nelson,  and  all  station  commanders  received 
directions  to  press  seamen  from  the  homeward-bound  con- 
voys. The  next  day  is  silence,  and  well  it  might  be ;  for 
it  so  happened  that  the  day  on  which  Blackwood  reached 

^  Add.  MSS.,  34930. 

-  On  August  29th  there  is  a  Minute  ordering  the  Victory  to  join  Cornwallis 
the  moment  she  is  ready  to  sail,  and  to  tell  Nelson  she  is  no  longer  under 
his  command  :  Admiralty  Minutes,  154. 

^  Admiral  Lord  Radstock  to  ^'elson,  September  3rd  :  Add.  MSS.,  34931. 

*  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept  2nd. 


Sept.  3-5  A    NEW    DEPARTURE  289 

the  Admiralty  with  the  longed-for  news,  was  also  the  day 
on  which  came  in  the  first  reports  that  the  Boulogne 
camp  was  breaking  up.  The  revolution  in  the  campaign 
had  come  about — an  entirely  new  phase  had  begun,  and 
all  day  Barham  was  at  work  upon  a  remarkable  series  of 
orders  to  meet  it.  On  the  morrow  they  were  complete.^ 
Their  purport  must  be  dealt  with  later.  Suffice  it  now 
to  say  that  when  Nelson's  were  put  into  his  hands  he 
found  them  of  a  nature  which  fully  confirms  what  we  are 
told  of  Barham's  conversion.  "  In  confidence  in  his  zeal 
and  ability,"  the  old  Mediterranean  station  was  to  be 
restored  as  far  west  as  St.  Vincent,  and  it  was  to  be  placed 
in  his  hands  with  full  liberty  to  distribute  his  squadron 
as  he  pleased.  He  was  given  in  fact  a  free  hand,  subject 
only  to  two  provisoes.  He  was  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
putting  to  sea,  and  he  was  to  protect  the  Mediterranean 
convoys."^ 

Of  the  military  operations  it  was  still  impossible  to  say 
anything  definitely.  But  the  prospect  was  brighter.  The 
Admiralty's  news  that  Bickerton  had  seen  Craig's  expedition 
safely  as  far  as  Cape  Bona  had  come  opportunely  to  hand 
the  day  after  Blackwood's  arrival.  On  September  5th  were 
received  two  despatches  from  Sir  Arthur  Paget,  our 
ambassador  at  Vienna.  The  first  was  filled  with  despair 
at  Austria's  insisting  on  a  preliminary  attempt  at  media- 
tion, but  the  second  announced  that  the  Austrian  Foreign 
Minister,  Cobenzl,  had  just  informed  him  that  he  had 
couched  his  demands  to  Napoleon  in  such  a  way  that  war 
Avas  inevitable.^    In  the  same  hour,  too,  there  was  a  despatch 

^  This  day,  Sept.  4th,  must  have  been  one  of  the  heaviest  known  to  the 
Admiralty.  There  were  then  seven  "Senior  Clerks"  (£800-£350)and  seventeen 
"  Junior  Clerks  "  (£250-£90)  to  deal  with  the  routine  of  the  enormous  number 
of  ships  in  commission  ;  and  only  four  days  before  they  had  memorialised  for 
an  increase  of  salary  {Minutefi,  154,  Aug.  29th).  In  July  Barham  had  made  an 
attempt  to  reduce  this  paper  work  by  issuing  printed  forms  for  returning 
"  Dispositions  "  and  for  acknowledging  orders  and  letters.  The  latter  had 
three  columns:  (1)  The  date,  (2)  Subject  of  the  letter,  (3)  Result,  i.e.  the 
action  that  had  been  or  would  be  taken  on  it.  For  examples,  see  In-letters, 
552,  August  2nd  and  4th. 

■^  Admiralty  In-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  Sept.  3rd.  It  was  on  the  6th 
that  Marsden  the  Secretary  informed  him  they  were  ready  and  requested  him 
to  call  for  them  at  the  Admiralty. — Add.  MSS.,  34931. 

^  Paget  to  Mulgrave,  August  10  and  17,  received  September  5th  (at 
night)  F.O.  Austria,  74. 


290     THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE    Sept.  4-6 

from  Elliot.  The  Queen,  be  said,  was  prostrate  at  the 
insolence  with  which  the  French  envoy  had  delivered 
Napoleon's  harsh  ultimatum.  The  end  seemed  at  hand,  and 
the  Russians,  impatient  for  action,  were  growing  suspicious 
at  hearing  nothing  from  Craig.  Still  there  was  hope.  The 
attitude  of  Austria  had  prevented  any  reinforcement  of  St. 
Cyr,  and  Elliot  himself  had  been  doing  his  best  to  allay  the 
impatience  of  the  Russians  by  putting  them  in  communica- 
tion with  Captain  Sotheron  of  the  Excellent,  the  sienior 
British  naval  officer  on  the  station.^ 

Immediate  action  was  now  taken.  The  crisis  was 
clearly  acute.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  Craig  had 
reached  Malta,  and  by  this  time  would  be  in  communi- 
cation with  Lacy ;  and  on  the  morrow  the  Admiralty  was 
requested  to  order  all  transports  at  Gibraltar  to  proceed  to 
Malta  forthwith.- 

On  the  same  day,  moreover,  full  confirmation  was 
received  of  the  reported  abandonment  of  the  invasion. 
The  cutter,  Courier,  had  just  cut  out  of  Tr^port  a  French 
schooner  which  had  left  Boulogne  on  the  2nd.  Her 
skipper  asserted  that  the  flotilla  there  was  being  dismantled, 
and  that  the  troops  had  marched  off  into  the  country  six 
days  before,  "  because  of  a  new  war  with  Russia."  Napoleon, 
he  said,  was  still  at  Boulogne  when  he  sailed,  but  was 
expected  to  leave  in  a  day  or  two.  The  Tr^port  division  of 
the  flotilla  was  also  found  to  be  landing  its  stores  and 
ammunition.^ 

By  this  time,  therefore,  it  was  obvious  that  henceforth 
the  head  and  front  of  British  action  was  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean area,  and  that  Nelson  was  the  central  figure.  Flat- 
tering as  was  the  position,  he  regarded  it  without  enthusiasm. 
''  I  hope,"  he  wrote  to  his  friend  Davidson  on  the  6th,  *^my 
absence  will  not  be  long,  and  that  I  shall  soon  meet  the 
combined  fleets  with  a  force  sufficient  to  do  the  job  well ; 

^  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  July  23rd,  received  September  5th  (at  night)  :  F.  0. 
Sicily.     Printed  in  Auriol,  ii.  308. 

'^  Admiralty  Jn-lctters  {Secretary  of  State),  4199,  September  6th. 

^  Admiralty  Jn-letters,  552,  September  5th.  Sent  to  the  War  Office  next 
day. —  W.O.  (i.),  712.  It  is  worth  noting  that  at  this  time  every  scrap  of  naval 
intelligence  was  forwarded  daily  to  the  War  Office  as  soon  as  it  came  in. 


Sept.  6-12  THE    NAVAL   PROBLEM  291 

for  half  a  victory  would  but  half  content  me.  But  I  do  not 
believe  the  Admiralty  can  give  mo  a  force  within  fifteen  or 
sixteen  sail  of  the  line  of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  But  I  will  do  my 
best,  and  I  hope  God  Almighty  will  go  with  me.  I  have 
much  to  lose, 'but  little  to  gain :  and  I  go  because  it  is  right, 
and  I  will  serve  the  country  faithfully."  He  had  had 
scarcely  more  than  a  week's  real  rest  to  restore  the  long 
strain  upon  his  shattered  constitution,  and  the  situation 
before  him  was  one  of  the  utmost  difficulty.  It  was  not 
so  much  a  question  of  how  to  defeat  the  enemy — of  that  he 
had  little  doubt — it  was  how  to  entice  or  force  them  to  a 
decisive  action.  Unless  this  could  be  done,  the  only 
prospect  before  him  was  another  long  winter  blockade. 

This  problem  was  now  his  main  pre-occupation.  In  his 
last  interview  with  Castlereagh,  after  his  meeting  with 
Wellesley,  the  advisability  of  using  a  military  force  for 
the  purpose  of  forcing  Villeneuve's  hand  had  been  dis- 
cussed. Whether  the  suggestion  came  from  Nelson,  or 
the  War  Minister,  or  possibly  from  Wellesley,  is  not  clear. 
Castlereagh  implies  that  Nelson  was  in  favour  of  it,  and  says 
distinctly  that  the  Admiral  only  refrained  from  pressing  for 
military  assistance  because  he  regarded  the  season  as  too 
far  advanced  for  the  operation  to  be  undertaken  that  year.^ 

The  fairest  promise  of  bringing  the  enemy  to  action  by 
naval  means  alone  lay  in  the  inferiority  of  the  force  which 
would  be  at  his  disposal  at  least  for  some  time.  But  here 
lay  also  his  chief  trouble ;  for  an  action  with  inferior  force 
could  hardly  prove  decisive,  and  it  was  a  decisive  action 
that  would  be  expected.  To  this  alternative,  however,  he 
reconciled  himself.  His  general  plan  was  to  conceal  as  far 
as  possible  the  amount  of  his  force  in  hopes  of  tempting 
Villeneuve  to  commit  himself  to  an  attack.  All  day  on 
September  11th  he  was  at  the  Admiralty  issuing  orders  as 
Commander-in-chief.  On  the  12th  he  took  leave  of  Pitt 
and  Castlereagh,  and  on  the  morrow,  after  a  day  at  Merton, 
he  set  out  at  night  for  Spithead.     The  enthusiasm  of  his 

^  Castlereagh  to  Nelson  :  Letters  and  Despatches,  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  124. 
This  letter  was  written  the  day  before  the  news  of  Nelson's  death  reached 
London. 


292       THE   RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  14 

reception  at  Portsmouth  next  morning  did  something  to  lift 
the  weight  of  anxiety  that  oppressed  him.  Early  in  the 
morning  ho  went  oft'  to  the  Victory  and  rehoisted  his  flag. 
Two  of  the  Ministers,  Canning  and  Rose,  accompanied  him 
to  see  him  oft'/  They  dined  on  board,  and  then  Nelson 
made  the  signal  to  weigh,  little  dreaming  that,  as  he  began 
to  face  his  almost  hopeless  task,  Napoleon  in  the  self-same 
hour  was  issuing,  in  untaught  disregard  of  his  enemy,  the 
very  order  he  prayed  for — the  order  which  would  solve 
the  insoluble  and  deliver  Villeneuve  into  his  hands. 

Yet  so  it  was — as  though  Fate  had  willed  that  no  touch 
should  be  wanting  to  the  dramatic  intensity  of  the  campaign 
as  it  pressed  to  its  catastrophe.  It  was  on  August  30th, 
amidst  the  littered  wastes  where  the  Ocean  camp  had  been, 
that  the  Emperor  signed  the  decree  demobilising  the 
Flotilla.  The  following  day,  with  his  eye  on  the  British 
army,  he  was  busy  arranging  for  its  defence  against  a 
descent  from  the  sea.  It  was  at  this  time  he  must  have 
received  from  Villeneuve  the  despatches  which  told  of  his 
return  to  Cadiz;  for  on  September  IstDecres,  on  Napoleon's 
instructions,  was  sending  him  fresh  orders  to  meet  the 
changed  aspect  of  the  campaign.  "  With  those  thirty-six 
of  the  line,"  the  Minister  wrote,  ''  his  Majesty's  will  is  that 
his  flag  and  that  of  his  allies  command  the  whole  of  the 
Andalusian  coasts  and  the  Straits,  because  he  regards  it  as 
impossible  that  the  enemy  can  confront  you  there  with  an 
equal  force.  It  is  said  at  this  moment  that  England  is 
preparing  a  convoy  and  some  sort  of  expedition  which  is 
presumed  to  be  destined  for  the  Mediterranean.  His 
Majesty's  will  is  that  you  should  take  all  fitting  pre- 
cautions to  get  warning  of  the  approach  of  this  expedition 
and  to  destroy  it." " 

It  would  seem  that  fresh  news  must  just  have  come 
in  about  Baird's  expedition  at  Cork  and  that  it  increased 
Napoleon's  annoyance.  Still  he  did  not  anticipate  that 
it  would  lead  to  any  serious  naval  developments,  nor  was 

1  Canning  was  at  this  time  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  and  Rose  Vice-President 
of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  Joint  Paymaster  General, 

2  Desbri^re,  v.  823,  and  see  ante,  p.  278. 


Sept.  13  THE    INVASION    LEGEND  293 

ii  fleet  action  any  longer  in  his  mind.  While  Decres 
was  penning  the  new  orders  for  Villeneuve,  Napoleon 
himself  was  sketching  out  a  fresh  plan  of  operation  for 
his  naval  force,  by  which  it  Avas  to  be  broken  up  into  a 
number  of  cruising  squadrons  and  devoted  to  commerce 
destruction.  Besides  three  cruiser  squadrons  it  was  his 
intention  to  establish  no  less  than  seven  others  from 
his  battle  force — three  from  the  Brest  fleet,  and  four  from 
Cadiz,  employing  thirty  of  the  line  and  eleven  frigates.^ 

With  this  unsatisfactory  project  in  his  mind  he  set  out 
next  day  for  Paris,  brooding  over  the  blow  his  prestige  had 
suffered  from  his  ignominious  failure  to  invade,  and  over 
the  tremendous  campaign  he  had  to  face  in  order  to  recover 
it — and  as  he  brooded  his  anger  burned  hotter  and  hotter 
against  Villeneuve.  It  was  in  these  days  that  he  finally 
persuaded  himself  that  the  whole  fiasco  was  due  to  Ville- 
neuve and  to  Villeneuve  alone;  and  on  the  13th,  as  Nelson 
was  passing  his  last  quiet  hours  at  Merton,  he  sat  down  to 
concoct  his  famous  Legend  of  the  Invasion — a  legend  which 
to  this  day  has  lost  little  of  its  vitality. 

"  I  meant,"  he  wrote,  "  to  concentrate  forty  or  fifty  ships 
of  the  line  in  the  port  of  Martinique  by  combined  operations 
from  Toulon,  Cadiz,  Ferrol,  and  Brest  [yet  it  had  never 
been  his  idea  that  the  Ferrol  squadron  should  go  there] ; 
to  bring  them  back  suddenly  on  Boulogne ;  to  make  myself 
master  of  the  sea  for  a  fortnight  [it  had  always  varied  before 
from  a  few  hours  to  four  days];  to  have  150,000  men  and 
10,000  horses  encamped  on  this  coast  [yet  he  had  never 
had  two-thirds  of  that  strength] ;  and  immediately  on  the 
signal  of  my  fleet's  approach  to  land  in  England  and  seize 
London  and  the  Thames.  This  project  failed  to  succeed. 
If  Admiral  Villeneuve  instead  of  entering  Ferrol  [which  he 
never  did]  had  merely  called  out  the  Spanish  squadron 
[it  was  Franco-Spanish  and  could  not  have  got  out  sooner 
for  the  wind]  and  had  sailed  for  Brest  to  join  with  Admiral 
Ganteaume,  my  army  would  have  landed  and  it  would  have 
been  all  over  with  England."  And  yet  he  knew  full  well, 
if  Villeneuve's  stores  had  permitted  him  to  do  so,  he  would 

^  Napoleon  to  Decres,  September  1st :  Correspondance,  xi.  170. 


294       THE   RETURN   TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  13 

have  fallen  into  the  midst  of  the  overpowering  concentration 
that  awaited  him  off  Brest.  So  he  goes  on  to  try  to  explain 
away  his  original  mistake  in  believing  the  operation  feasible 
with  the  armed  flotilla  alone.  It  was  absolutely  useless,  he 
says,  but  if  he  had  collected  ordinary  unarmed  transports 
the  English  Avould  at  once  have  penetrated  his  design  of 
bringing  his  massed  fleets  into  the  Channel.  The  costly 
creation  and  armament  of  the  flotilla  was  solely  intended  to 
deceive  them  as  to  the  direction  from  which  the  real  danger 
was  coming  and  it  was  successful.  "  The  enemy  were 
duped,"  he  says  with  heroic  effrontery.  "  They  thought 
I  meant  to  pass  by  main  force  with  the  pure  military 
strength  of  the  flotilla.  The  idea  of  my  real  project 
never  dawned  on  them."  The  unblushing  misrepresenta- 
tion of  what  he  knew  to  be  the  facts  almost  takes  away 
the  breath.  But  that  a  man  of  Napoleon's  imagination 
should  have  penned  such  a  document  is  less  astounding 
than  that  it  should  ever  have  been  taken  seriously.  It 
obviously  reflects  nothing  but  anxiety  for  his  shattered 
prestige,  and  was  simply  a  political  manifesto  designed 
to  save  his  face,  in  which  his  freedom  with  the  facts  of 
the  case  was  only  bounded  by  his  genius  for  gauging  the 
limits  of  popular  credulity.^ 

The  anxiety  under  Avhich  he  invented  his  great  fable  is 
clear  to  see  in  the  next  document  which  came  from  his  pen. 
To  add  to  his  trouble  it  would  seem  that  further  informa- 
tion had  just  reached  him  from  Italy  of  the  danger  that 
threatened  the  right  flank  of  his  vast  movement.  His 
scheme  for  a  world-wide  campaign  against  British  com- 
merce was  suddenly  laid  aside,  and  the  following  day  fresh 
orders   went  off  to   Villeneuve,  which  gave  the  Combined 

^  For  the  vitality  of  the  legend,  see  Captain  Gabriel  Darrieu's  Li  Guerre 
.vir  Mer,  1007,  pp.  63  d  scq.  Writing  seven  years  after  the  publication  of  the 
French  Staff  History,  the  Professor  of  Strategy  can  still  quote  the  paper  and 
say,  "  It  is  a  specimen  of  magnificent  strategy ;  its  principles  are  impeccable 
and  the  plan  in  its  grandiose  proportions  could  and  should  have  succeeded." 
He  accepts  in  their  entirety  Napoleon's  travesty  of  the  facts  and  his  elimina- 
tion of  the  enemy  ;  treats  Barbara's  dispositions  as  matters  of  pure  chance  ; 
and  then,  as  his  better  judgment  and  conspicuous  knowledge  of  his  profession 
reassert  themselves,  he  proceeds  to  show  that  the  whole  plan  was  based  on 
the  Emperor's  profound  ignorance  of  the  elements  of  naval  warfare,  and  had 
no  chance  of  success. 


Sept.  14     VILLENEUVE  ORDERED  TO  NAPLES      295 

Fleet  a  new  and  pressing  function.  So  immediate  was  the 
necessity  for  bold  and  prompt  action  that  he  would  not 
even  permit  Decres  to  tell  the  unhappy  Admiral  what 
he  thought  of  him.  With  one  more  appeal  to  his  courage 
and  audacity,  he  told  him  not  to  w^ait  for  six  months' 
stores,  as  he  had  been  enjoined  in  the  last  orders,  but 
to  be  content  with  tw^o,  and  get  to  sea  at  once  to  save 
the  situation.  "  Having  resolved,"  he  said,  still  holding 
back  from  admitting  he  was  on  his  defence — "  having  re- 
solved to  make  a  powerful  diversion  by  directing  into  the 
Mediterranean  our  naval  forces  concentrated  at  the  port  of 
Cadiz,  combined  with  those  of  his  Catholic  Majesty,  we 
Avould  have  you  know  that  our  intention  is  that,  imme- 
diately on  receipt  of  these  presents,  you  will  seize  the  first 
favourable  opportunity  of  sailing  with  the  Combined  Fleet 
and  proceeding  into  that  sea.  .  .  .  You  will  first  make  for 
Cartagena  to  join  the  Spanish  squadron  which  is  in  that 
port ;  you  will  then  proceed  to  Naples  and  disembark  on 
some  point  of  the  coast  the  troops  you  carry  on  board  to 
join  the  army  under  the  orders  of  General  St.  Cyr.  If  you 
find  at  Naples  any  English  or  Russian  ships  of  war,  you  will 
seize  them.  The  fleet  under  your  command  will  remain  off 
the  Neapolitan  shores  so  long  as  you  may  judge  necessary 
to  do  the  utmost  harm  to  the  enemy,  and  to  intercept 
an  expedition  w^hich  they  intend  to  send  from  Malta.  Our 
intention  is  that  wherever  you  meet  the  enemy  in  inferior 
force  you  will  attack  them  without  hesitation  and  obtain 
a  decision  against  them.  It  will  not  escape  you  that  the 
success  of  these  operations  depends  essentially  on  the 
promptness  of  your  leaving  Cadiz."  ^ 

It  is  in  this  apprehension  for  St.  Cyr  and  particularly 
in  the  threat  from  Malta,  that  we  get  the  key  of  the  rest  of 
the  campaign,  and  how  it  was  that  Pitt,  by  his  little  expedi- 
tion, forced  Napoleon  to  sacrifice  his  fleet  to  Nelson.  On 
the  following  day  the  Emperor  wrote  again  to  Decres  ex- 
plaining, without  disguise,  that  the  primary  object  of  the 
new  orders  was  to  deal  with  Craig's  expedition  and  prevent 
any  further  action  of  the  same  kind  in  the  Mediterranean. 

^  Napoleon  to  Villeneuve,  Sfc.  Cloud,  Sept.  14th  :  Correspondance,  xi.  195. 


296       THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  15 

So  absolutely  essential  did  he  regard  the  movement  that  a 
day's  reflection  had  convinced  him  that  he  could  not  risk  leav- 
ing its  execution  to  Villeneuve's  nerveless  hands.  He  must 
be  superseded  by  a  more  vigorous  officer.  Admiral  Rosily, 
Avho  had  been  originally  intended  to  replace  Missiessy,  was 
the  man  he  chose,  and  Decr^s  was  told  he  was  to  order  him 
to  set  out  for  Cadiz  forthwith  and  take  over  the  command 
if  the  fleet  had  not  put  to  sea.^ 

So  the  old  device  which  Pitt  had  inherited  from  his 
father  worked  the  miracle — by  sheer  force  of  strategical  law 
and  by  no  clearly  expressed  intention.  Nelson  at  least  never 
alludes  to  the  possibility  of  its  proving  a  solution  of  his 
difficulty,  and  as  Rosily 's  orders  were  being  written — and 
it  was  these  that  eventually  did  the  work — he  was  clearing 
the  Channel  with  Blackwood  and  two  of  the  line  that  had 
joined  from  Plymouth,  all  unconscious  that  his  arch-enemy 
was  stretching  out  to  him  the  crown  of  his  career. 

^  To  Decres,  September  15th,  and  Kosily's  Instructions,  September  17th: 
Cor  respond  ance,  xi.  20  i  and  217. 


CHAPTER    XX 

SECURING   THE   COMMUNICATIONS 

All's  well  that  ends  well;  but  the  strain  which  had  pre- 
vailed at  the  British  Admiralty  until  Villeneuve  had  been 
located  and  safely  housed  had  driven  home  certain  lessons. 
It  was  clear  that  the  existing  cruiser  system  was  far  too 
loose  and  unscientific  to  ensure  such  an  effective  command 
of  European  waters  as  Pitt's  intended  operations  demanded. 
Barham  at  all  events  set  himself,  in  concert  with  Nelson,  to 
organise  his  cruiser  control  on  sounder  lines  for  the  rest  of 
the  campaign.  Drury,  who  at  Cork  had  been  directing  the 
most  important  squadron  both  for  intelligence  and  com- 
merce protection,  had  shown  little  grasp  of  his  functions, 
and  was  constantly  being  found  fault  with  by  the  Admiralty. 
And  as  for  the  captains,  the  leading  idea  with  many  of  them 
was  that  when  sent  oft'  on  detached  service  they  were  to 
enjoy  the  luxury  of  "  a  cruise  "  with  a  chance  of  distinction 
and  prize  money.  The  freedom  in  which  they  sometimes 
indulged  themselves  was  outrageous,  and  the  whole  system 
cried  out  for  severe  restraint  and  organisation.^ 

Circumstances  were  favourable  for  an  improvement. 
The  release  of  the  strain  on  Keith's  squadron  caused  by  the 
abandonment  of  the  invasion  set  a  good  many  cruisers  at 
liberty,  while  at  the  same  time  a  new  means  of  increasing 
the  power  of  communication  was  available.  With  the  latter 
there  can  be  no  doubt  Nelson  had  a  good  deal  to  do.  Barrow 
relates  that  in  the  morning  of  the  Admiral's  last  day  in 

^  See  especially  the  case  of  the  Cerberus.  After  Missiessy's  escape  from 
Eochefort  she  was  sent  from  Saumarez's  squadron,  on  March  27th,  to  cruise 
about  Madeira  for  a  month  and  to  return  immediately.  She  did  not  come 
back  till  July  15th,  and  Saumaurez  was  directed  to  express  to  her  captain  "  the 
high  disapprobation  of  the  Admiralty." — In-IcUcm,  223 ;  Secret  Orders,  1363. 

297 


298       SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS     Sept.  12 

London,  he  was  at  the  Admiralty  inquiring  earnestly  about  a 
code  of  signals  just  then  improved  and  enlarged.  "  I  assured 
him,"  he  writes,  "  they  were  all  but  ready :  that  he  should 
not  be  disappointed,  and  that  I  would  take  care  they  were 
at  Portsmouth  the  following  morning."  But  even  so,  Nelson 
could  not  rest.  He  looked  in  again  in  the  evening,  the  last 
thing  before  leaving  for  Merton.  Barrow  was  staying  late 
on  purpose  to  see  them  off.  "  I  pledged  myself,"  he  says, 
"  not  to  leave  the  office  till  a  messenger  was  despatched 
with  the  signals,  should  the  post  have  departed,  and  that 
he  might  rely  on  their  being  at  Portsmouth  the  following 
morning.  On  this  he  shook  hands  with  me  .  .  .  and  he 
departed  apparently  more  than  usually  cheerful." 

What  Nelson  was  so  anxious  to  have  was  the  famous 
code  which  he  was  soon  to  immortalise,  entitled  Telegraphic 
Signals  or  Mcti%nc  Vocabulary,  the  recent  invention  of  Sir 
Home  Popham.  As  yet  it  had  not  been  fully  adopted 
into  the  service,  but  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  in  1803, 
it  had  been  so  far  recognised  as  to  be  issued  to  ships  of 
the  line.^  Apparently  it  had  been  issued  to  Keith's  cruiser 
squadron,  where  the  inventor  had  been  using  it  with  great 
success.  Under  Popham's  direction  indeed  it  proved  so 
great  a  convenience,  especially  in  bad  weather  when  per- 
sonal communication  was  impossible,  that  its  value  could 
no  longer  be  doubted.  Accordingly,  during  the  time  Nelson 
was  being  consulted  by  Barham,  it  was  decided,  apparently 
in  some  haste,  that  every  ship  should  have  a  copy,  and 
the  decision  seems  closely  related  to  the  new  system  of 
cruising. 

This  system  was  based  on  the  modern  idea  of  cruiser 

'  Nelson  had  certainly  used  it  to  communicate  with  his  battleship  captains 
(see  e.g.  his  letter  to  Hargood,  Aug.  5th  :  Nicolas,  viii.  3).  In  saying  the  code 
had  just  been  improved  and  enlarged  Barrow's  memory  must  have  deceived 
him.  According  to  the  Introduction  and  successive  Prefaces  to  the  work,  the 
first  edition  was  privately  printed  in  1800,  and  was  used  by  Popham  in  the 
Baltic  principally  for  communicating  between  his  ship,  the  Romncy  50,  off 
Copenhagen,  and  Admiral  Dickson  at  Elsinore.  Later  on  he  used  it  in  the 
Red  Sea,  and  by  the  encouragement  of  Lord  Spencer,  then  First  Lord,  he 
prepared  a  new  edition  when  he  came  home,  adding  two  new  parts.  Part  I. 
(the  old  edition)  had  about  1000  words  ;  Part  II.  added  1000  more,  and  Part 
ill.  a  number  of  sentences  and  phrases.  This  edition  was  in  quarto,  and 
issued  in  180:^.  Up  till  1S09  there  were  several  reprints  in  a  cheaper  octavo 
form,  but  no  additions  or  changes  were  made. 


Sept.  6  THE    NEW    CRUISER   LINES  299 

lines.  The  most  important  one  was  to  be  established  by 
the  Irish  Admiral,  to  extend  from  Cape  Clear  to  Finis- 
terre.  The  order  was  one  of  those  forwarded  in  those 
famous  days  of  hard  work  that  followed  Blackwood's  arrival 
and  brought  Nelson  in  hot  haste  up  to  London.  Lord 
Gardner,  whose  sick-leave  had  expired,  and  who  was  about 
to  relieve  Drury  at  Cork,  was  informed  that  his  frigates  were 
to  cruise  in  a  line  between  Cape  Clear  and  Finisterre,  in 
order  to  keep  up  as  direct  a  communication  as  pos- 
sible with  the  other  stations,  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
trade  and  the  annoyance  of  the  enemy.  And  in  case  of 
falling  in  with  any  squadrons  of  the  enemy  they  were  not 
to  quit  them  for  the  purpose  of  giving  information  until 
they  should  have  followed  them  so  far  on  their  course  as  to 
be  certain  of  their  destination.  Then  they  were  to  make 
the  best  of  their  way  to  the  Admiral  to  whom  in  their 
judgment  the  intelligence  was  most  material.^ 

Three  frigates  were  all  that  could  be  spared  for  the 
purpose  at  the  moment,  but  Cornwallis  was  directed  to 
keep  one  of  his  own  cruisers  permanently  off  Finisterre 
to  complete  the  line.  His  other  cruisers,  which  he  kept 
normally  to  the  westward,  further  reinforced  it,  but  at  no 
time  do  more  than  six  frigates  appear  to  have  been  em- 
ployed in  the  service."  It  was  not  strictly,  therefore,  a 
cruiser  line  in  the  modern  sense,  but  rather  a  means  of 
securing  a  proper  distribution  of  cruisers  to  cover  the 
ground  as  effectively  as  possible. 

Beyond  Finisterre  the  line  was  to  be  continued  down 
to  St.  Vincent,  so  as  to  connect  Cornwallis's  command 
with  Nelson's,  and  this  extension  was  undoubtedly  the 
suggestion  of  Nelson  himself.  He  had  been  consulted  on 
the  question  by  Barham  soon  after  his  arrival  in  London, 

^  Gardner  to  Admiralty,  Sept.  9th :  In-lcttcrs,  620.  He  says  the  orders 
were  dated  Sept.  6th.     In  the  Barham  Papers  is  a  draft  of  them  undated. 

'^  Cornwallis,  it  should  be  said,  did  not  recognise  anything  peculiarly  new 
in  the  arrangement,  and  perhaps  a  little  resented  the  reflection  on  his  usual 
methods.  In  owning  a  copy  of  the  Irish  Station  order,  together  with  his 
quota  of  Popham's  Signal  Books,  he  says :  "  The  instructions  contained  in 
the  order  are  nearly  the  same  as  have  generally  been  given.  I  can  therefore 
only  guess  why  the  copy  of  the  order  was  sent  to  me." — To  the  Admiralty, 
Sept.  28th:  In-letters,  129. 


300       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      Sept.  3 

and  had  reduced  his  opiuion  to  writing  in  the  following 
letter : — 

•"  Albkmarle,'  Au(/t.  2dth,  1805. 

"My  dear  Lord, — With  great  deference  I  venture  by 
Your  Lordship's  desire  to  state  my  opinion  of  the  neces- 
sity of  a  constant  succession  of  frigates  and  fast  sailing 
sloops  being  employed  for  the^  protection  of  our  Com- 
merce and  the  destruction  of  the  Enemy's  numerous 
privateers  on  the  Coast  of  Portugal,  from  off  Cape 
Ortugal  to  St.  Ubes,  many  of  them  small,  lurking  under 
the  Bayonne  Islands  and  the  Burlings.  Ships  on  this 
service  would  not  only  prevent  the  depredations  of  the 
Privateers  but  be  in  the  way  to  watch  any  Squadron  of  the 
Enemy  should  they  pass  on  their  track.  A  frigate  belonging 
to  the  Mediterranean  Fleet  must  always  be  off  Cape  St. 
Vincent.  Therefore  intelligence  will  be  quickly  conveyed  and 
the  Enemy  I  think  never  again  lost  sight  of.  I  was  happy 
to  hear  from  good  Mr.  Thompson  that  Your  Lordship  had 
thought  of  extending  frigates  as  much  as  possible  from 
Cape  Finisterre  to  Ireland.  This  will  effectually  protect  our 
Commerce  and  in  every  way  greatly  annoy  the  Enemy. — I 
am  ever,  my  dear  Lord,  your  most  faithful  Servant, 

"Nelson  &  Bronte."^ 


Nelson's  views  were  adopted,  and  a  special  squadron 
was  devoted  to  the  service.  It  was  to  consist  of  four  sail, 
and  was  entrusted  to  Captain  Lobb,  who  had  been  Popham's 
right-hand  man  off  Boulogne — Popham  himself  being  in 
command  of  Baird's  escort  with  a  broad  pennant.  This  was 
the  first  squadron  to  be  got  off.  An  order  for  Lobb  to 
receive  the  necessary  number  of  Popham's  signal  books  was 
made  on  Sept.  3rd  and  his  instructions  were  signed  the  next 
day.  They  directed  him  to  keep  frequent  communication 
between  St.  Vincent  and  Finisterre,  with  a  view  to  making 
known  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  fleets  immediately  to  the 

^  This  important  letter  has  hitherto  been  unpublished.  It  was  presented 
to  the  Britannia  R.N.  College,  Dartmouth,  on  Trafalgar  Day,  1907,  by  Mrs. 
Scarth  (of  Bearsted,  Kent).     Thompson  was  the  First  Lord's  Private  Secretary. 


Sept.  4-9  ISSUE    OF    POPHAM'S    CODE  301 

Admirals  at  Ushant,  Ferrol,  or  Cadiz,  "  or  to  any  other  line 
of  cruisers  which  from  time  to  time  you  may  be  acquainted 
with."  If  he  failed  to  get  touch  with  any  such  line  the  ship 
entrusted  with  the  intelligence  was  to  make  as  directly  as 
possible  for  one  of  the  Admirals,  and  Lobb  was  to  be  careful 
to  keep  in  constant  communication  with  Lisbon.^ 

With  these  orders  he  received  a  letter  covering  his 
copies  of  the  Signal  Book.  It  explained  that  their  lord- 
ships were  of  opinion  that  it  might  be  used  to  advantage  in 
communicating  between  ships  at  sea.  He  was  to  keep  one 
copy  himself  and  give  the  rest  to  his  captains.  On  the  9th 
fifty  copies  were  ordered  to  be  put  on  board  the  Victory  with 
a  similar  letter  to  Nelson.  The  same  day  Drury  received 
twenty-five  copies,  and  two  days  later  fifty  were  ordered  for 
Cornwallis.^ 

Coming  as  it  did  together  with  the  establishment  of 
cruiser  lines,  the  issue  of  the  telegraph  code  to  cruisers 
reveals  a  distinct  advance  towards  more  scientific  systems 
of  intelligence  and  commerce  protection ;  and  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  Allemand  was  still  at  large,  both  were  certainly 
needed.  Such  a  squadron  operating  boldly  about  the  ter- 
minal area  of  the  great  trade  routes  and  on  the  vital  line 
of  communication  with  the  Mediterranean  fleet  Avas  a 
serious  danger.  Until  it  could  be  met  with  and  disposed 
of,  the  whole  situation  must  be  in  a  constant  state  of 
unrest,  and  it  becomes  therefore  a  matter  essential  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  campaign  to  trace  the  motions  of  the 
disturbing  factor  and  the  eflbrts  that  were  made  to  deal 
with  it. 

With  his  formidable  squadron,  consisting,  as  we  have 
seen,  of  the  Majeshteitx  120,  four  seventy-fours,  three 
frigates,  and  a  couple  of  sloops,  Allemand,  after  finding 
nothing  in  Ferrol,  had  proceeded  to  the  rendezvous  off  the 
Penmarcks  which  Villeneuve  had  sent  to  him  at  Vig^o.  He 
reached  it  by  daybreak  on  August   30  th.     Cornwallis  was 

^  Out-letters  [Secret  Orders),  1184.  For  his  working  of  the  line  see  Captains* 
Letters,  2075, 

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept.  3rd,  9th,  11th.  Drury  to  Admiralty:  In- 
letters,  640,  Sept.  9th.  A  minute  of  Oct.  5th  {Ibid.,  p.  155)  shows  copies  sent 
to  the  West  Indies  and  North  America,  and  twenty  more  copies  for  Nelson. 


302       SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS      aug.  30 

of  course  watching"  this  important  Landfall,  and  had  cruis- 
ing there  the  M  daw  pus  frigate  and  two  sloops.  Allcmand 
chased  them  all  that  day  without  success,  the  Melampus 
making  away  for  Cornwallis  and  the  two  sloops  standing 
by.  They  were  chased  again  next  day  and  this  time  only 
escaped  by  sacrificing  guns  and  gear.  The  Melamjms  re- 
ported to  Cornwallis  the  following  day  and  the  action  he 
took  was  enth-ely  in  the  spirit  of  the  tradition  as  to  the 
functions  of  the  Western  Squadron.  That  function,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  to  secure  the  approaches  to  the  Channel  for 
all  purposes  ;  the  blockade  of  Brest  being  only  part  of  the 
means  to  effect  that  object.  As  has  been  already  explained, 
this  principle  had  been  recognised  in  the  normal  distribu- 
tion of  the  Home  Fleet;  that  is,  a  small  battle  squadron 
was  usually  maintained  on  the  south  coast  of  Ireland,  either 
under  the  Cork  Admiral  or  as  a  division  of  the  Western 
Squadron.  Owing  to  the  strain  on  the  British  naval 
resources  caused  by  the  three-power  coalition,  this  squadron, 
it  will  be  remembered;  had  been  absorbed  into  the  Western 
Squadron  and  Cornwallis  had  devoted  it  to  the  great  Biscay 
blockade.  Hitherto  this  arrangement  had  sufficed  to  pre- 
vent any  battle-ship  interference  with  cruiser  control  of  the 
Channel  approaches ;  but  with  the  appearance  of  Alle- 
mand's  squadron  on  the  scene  that  control  was  threatened, 
and  threatened  at  a  most  critical  time. 

It  so  happened  that  Popham  was  in  the  act  of  sailing 
from  Cork  with  Baird's  expedition  and  a  vast  mass  of  the 
East  and  West  India  trade.  He  had  nothing  but  a  couple 
of  sixty-fours,  a  fifty,  and  a  few  cruisers,  and  an  encounter 
with  such  a  squadron  as  Allemand's  would  have  meant  a 
serious  disaster.^  Whether  Cornwallis  knew  the  acuteness 
of  this  particular  danger  is  not  recorded,  but  there  were 
others  of  which  he  had  certainly  been  informed.  Only  a 
week  before  he  had  received  from  the  Admiralty  the  very 
secret  despatch  already  mentioned,  informing  him  that 
Rainier's  priceless  convoy  was  about  due,  and  bidding 
him  have  a  special  regard  for  its  safety  if  there  was  any 

^  Lofj  of  the  Diadem  (Sir  Home  Popham),  Captains  Logs,  1743.  He  weighed 
ou  Aug.  28th,  but  did  not  get  clear  out  of  Queenstown  harbour  till  the  31st. 


AUG.20-30  THE    HOME    TERMINALS  303 

indication  that  the  enemy  were  making  it  their  objective.^ 
Nor  was  this  all.  The  first  convoy  from  the  Leeward 
Islands  was  also  due,  and  owing  to  the  suspension  of 
the  normal  sailings  by  the  irruption  of  Villeneuve  and 
Missiessy  it  was  unusually  large.  It  consisted  of  no  less 
than  two  hundred  sail,  and  so  rich  was  it  that  it  will 
be  remembered  Cochrane,  anticipating  the  orders  of  the 
Admiralty,  had  taken  upon  himself  to  assign  for  its 
escort  the  Illustrious,  one  of  the  two  fast  seventy-fours 
that  Collingwood  had  detached  after  Nelson.^  Finally  the 
Lisbon-Oporto  convoy  outward-bound  was  also  on  the  point 
of  sailing. 

It  was  a  situation  that  was  causing  Barham  considerable 
anxiety.  He  believed  that  the  next  move  of  the  enemy 
would  be  to  break  up  their  main  fleets  and  "  to  employ 
squadrons  at  sea"  for  preying  on  commerce,  and  this,  as 
we  have  seen,  had  actually  been  Napoleon's  intention  until 
the  news  of  Craig's  expedition  forced  his  hand.'*^  Barham 
accordingly  informed  Gardner  that  he  was  going  to  place 
under  his  orders  a  heavy  cruiser  squadron  as  strong  as 
circumstances  would  permit,  not  only  for  the  annoyance  of 
the  enemy's  cruisers,  but  for  the  protection  of  the  home- 
ward-bound convoys,  and  also  of  the  western  coasts  when 
necessary.  "  By  these  means,"  he  added,  on  the  old 
principle  of  terminal  commerce  protection,  "  much  strength 
will  be  added  to  the  convoys,  when  they  stand  most  in 
need  of  it."  "^ 

But  if  the  enemy  were  likely  to  send  out  heavy 
squadrons  this  was  not  enough.  Without  battle-ship 
support  frigates  could  not  be  effective.  In  the  circum- 
stances   it    was    clear    the    old     Irish    squadron    must    be 

^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  Aug.  20th  :  In-letters,  129.  The  route  Rainier 
sailed  was  about  two  hundred  miles  west  of  the  Azores  and  then  for  the 
Lizard. 

^  Cochrane  to  the  Admiralty,  July  17th  :  In-lctters,  326.  Admirnlty  Min- 
utes, July  11th,  ordering  him  to  send  home  the  Illustrious  and  Eaniillies  with 
any  convoy  that  was  ready.  He  detained  the  Ramillies  for  the  second 
convoy. 

'^  See  ante,  p.  293. 

*  Barham  to  Gardner :  Barham  Papers,  written  between  August  17th  and 
23rd.  More  than  a  month  before,  July  11th,  he  had  ordered  Dacres  at  Jamaica 
to  send  home  four  of  his  heaviest  frigates  for  this  purpose. — Secret  Orders, 
1363. 


304       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      aug.  31 

restored  in  some  form  or  other  from  the  Western  Squadron 
into  which  it  had  been  absorbed.  So  long  as  the  Home 
division  of  that  squadron  was  kept  massed  before  Brest 
it  could  not  support  effectively  the  cruiser  control  of  the 
Soundings.  At  all  reasonable  risk  it  must  be  divided,  and 
we  have  seen  how,  as  early  as  August  27  th,  Barham  had 
directed  Cornwallis  to  detach  four  or  five  of  the  line  to 
receive  the  convoys  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of 
Scilly,  so  soon  as  he  was  reinforced  sufficiently  to  be  able 
to  retain  eighteen  with  his  flag.^  Owing  to  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  manning  the  necessary  ships  until  the  Trade 
came  home  these  reinforcements  had  been  seriously  de- 
layed. Yet  as  soon  as  Cornwallis  had  got  the  report  of 
Allemand's  presence  from  the  Melampus  he  did  not  hesitate 
a  moment.  To  his  broad  view  of  the  meaning  of  his  fleet 
the  danger  to  the  trade  route  overrode  the  letter  of 
Barham's  order.  His  fleet,  as  Barham  had  recently  told 
him,  was  the  mainspring  from  which  all  offensive  operations 
must  proceed,  and  in  this  spirit  he  decided  to  make  the 
detachment  at  once,  having  little  doubt  he  could  contain 
the  Brest  fleet  with  less  than  eighteen  of  the  line  until  his 
reinforcements  arrived. 

Stirling,  Avho  had  remained  with  his  flag,  was  chosen 
for  the  command,  and  the  force  entrusted  to  him  was  just 
equal  to  that  of  Allemand  and  no  more — on  the  principle 
perhaps  that  no  squadron  can  do  serious  injury  to  trade 
with  an  equal  squadron  operating  against  it.'"^  His  in- 
structions were  unfortunate,  though  in  the  circumstances, 
correct.  Allemand's  presence  off  the  Penmarcks  deter- 
mined Cornwallis  not  to  send  the  detachment  direct  to 
the  station  Barham  had  ordered,  for  it  indicated  something 
different  from  a  direct  stroke  at  the  convoys. 

Allemand's  position,  however,  was,  as  we  know,  a  mis- 
take. Napoleon  at  this  time  had  almost  given  him  up 
for  lost  and  Avas  raging  at  Villeneuve  for  his  blunder. 
"  Admiral   Villeneuve,"   he   wrote,  "  has   filled  the   cup   at 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363. 

2  Stirling  bad  Glory  98  (flag),  four  sevent)'-fours  {Repulse,  Triumph,  Dragon, 
Warrior),  and  the  Creaccnt  'MS.  The  Melampus  and  other  cruisers  were 
already  out  trying  to  locate  the  enemy. 


( 


Sept.  1-7      STIRLING'S    CAST    FOR   ALLEMAND      305 

last.  On  his  sailing  from  Vigo  he  gives  Captain  Allemand 
the  order  to  go  to  Brest  and  writes  you  that  his  intention 
is  to  go  to  Cadiz.  That  is  absolute  treason.  Here  is 
Allemand's  squadron  seriously  compromised  and  he  must 
roam  the  seas  for  months.  .  .  .  Villeneuve  is  a  wretch 
we  must  break  ignominiously."  ^  But  ignorant  of  these 
cross  purposes  Cornwallis  could  only  interpret  Allemand's 
inexplicable  position  as  indicating  an  intention  to  seek 
supplies  in  L'Orient  or  Rochefort,  and  he  decided  to  fling 
the  division  at  him  at  once.  Stirling  was  therefore  directed 
first  to  look  into  both  those  ports,  and  if  he  found  the 
enemy  in  either  to  blockade  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
ascertained  they  had  not  gone  in,  he  was  "  immediately  to 
proceed  to  the  northward  to  protect  the  homeward-bound 
convoys  and  see  them  into  the  Channel."^ 

With  these  instructions  Stirling  parted  company  on 
August  31st,  and  proceeding  along  the  Breton  coast  looked 
into  L'Orient  on  September  1st.  No  attempt  was  made  to 
spread  and  for  this  perhaps  Stirling  is  not  to  be  blamed, 
for  it  was  incredible  Allemand  would  be  cruising  so  close 
to  Cornwallis.  So  without  any  suspicion  of  the  enemy's 
being  so  near,  Stirling  had  passed  inshore  of  him,  and  find- 
ing nothing  in  L'Orient  he  worked  down  with  light  and 
baffling  airs  past  Belleisle  and  the  Morbihan  to  look  into 
Rochefort.  But  in  vain ;  gales  succeeded  the  calm  weather 
and  baffled  his  purpose.  For  a  week  he  was  hovering  on 
the  coast  within  fifty  miles  of  Allemand,  and  yet  neither 
got  wind  of  the  other.'^ 

All  this  time  the  adventurous  French  commodore  had 
been  cruising  about  fifteen  leagues  from  the  Penmarcks, 
trying   to   pick   up   news   of  Villeneuve.     On  the   5th   he 

1  To  Decres,  September  4tli :  Correspondance,  xi.  176. 

2  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  September  2nd:  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  352.  His 
actual  orders  to  Stirling  have  not  been  found.  Ifc  is  uncertain,  therefore, 
whether  he  instructed  him  to  take  Barbara's  position — 100  leagues  W.S.W. 
of  Scilly. 

^  The  failure  to  locate  Allemand  seems  to  have  been  partly  due  to  bad 
cruising.  On  September  tJth  the  Melampus  came  back  to  say  she  had  been 
chased  by  four  of  the  line  off  the  Saints  the  day  before  in  thick  weather. 
But  subsequently  it  proved  that  the  ships  from  which  she  had  run  were 
two  of  Cornwallis's  own  frigates  and  two  sloops. — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  358, 
361. 

U 


3o6     SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS    Sept.  7-18 

spoke  a  Portuguese  who  had  recently  sighted  the  Combined 
Squadron  at  sea  to  the  north-westward  of  Ferrol,  and  had 
also  seen  Calder  off  Finisterre.  The  natural  inference  was 
that  Villeneuve  had  found  it  impossible  to  proceed  to  the 
northward  and  was  being  forced  to  retire  to  Cadiz.  In  the 
circumstances  it  was  worse  than  useless  for  Allemand  to 
hold  the  rendezvous  longer.  On  the  morrow,  moreover,  he 
found  that  one  of  the  sloops  which  he  had  chased  off  had 
picked  him  up  again,  and  there  and  then  he  decided  to  get 
away  to  the  southward  immediately.  He  was  only  just  in 
time.  Two  days  later  Stirling  ascertained  from  neutrals 
that  the  evasive  squadron  was  not  in  Rochefort,  and  he 
held  away  under  a  press  of  sail  for  his  station  off  Scilly, 
passing  on  his  way  over  the  very  ground  which  Allemand 
had  just  vacated.' 

Narrow  as  w^as  the  escape  it  was  complete.  Stirling 
with  all  the  speed  he  could  make  was  going  as  wide  as 
possible  from  his  chase.  It  was  nearly  a  week  before  he 
reached  the  entrance  to  the  Channel,  and  here  he  found 
Parker  in  the  Amazon,  whom  Cornwallis  had  sent  away  the 
day  before  Allemand  was  reported,  to  cruise  to  the  west- 
ward.- He  had  been  a  fortnight  on  the  station  doing  his 
best  to  protect  the  stragglers  of  the  Jamaica  convoy  which 
had  just  passed  in,  and  two  days  before  meeting  Stirling 
had  been  rewarded  by  capturing  the  Frinciiie  de  la  Paz,  a 
fine  new  Vigo  privateer  of  twenty-four  guns,  commanded 
by  a  famous  French  skipper  ;  but  of  Allemand  he  had 
found  no  trace.'^  Stirling,  however,  continued  to  hold  the 
position.  He  had  heard  the  Jamaica  convoy  was  safe,  but 
nothing  of  Rainier's  East  Indiamen,  although  in  fact  they 
had  all  anchored  safely  in  the  Downs,  as  Stirling  was  leav- 
ing   the   French    coast    to   cover   their   entrance    into   the 

1  Stirling  to  Cornwallis,  September  IGth.  "  Scilly  bearing  N.E.  by  E.  20 
leagues,"  enclosed  in  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  September  27th. — In-htters, 
129. 

2  Parker  to  his  mother,  August  30th. — "  Since  writing  the  above  I  joined 
Admiral  Cornwallis,  who  with  the  best  intentions  and  in  the  kindest  manner 
has  ordered  me  to  cruise  three  weeks  to  the  westward  for  the  protection  of 
the  homeward-bound  trade." — Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  W.  Parker,  i.  305. 

^  Parker  to  Cornwallis :  Blochide  of  Brest,  ii.  3.'39.  Her  commander  was 
Fran9ois  Beck.  She  had  taken  our  Lisbon  packet  and  a  letter  of  Marque. 
The  crew  of  the  latter  and  a  considerable  sum  of  specie  were  on  board. 


Sept.  19-22  STIRLING    FAILS  307 

Channel.  On  September  19tli,  as  he  was  thus  engaged, 
he  was  gladdened  with  the  sight  of  a  strange  squadron. 
It  closely  resembled  the  one  he  sought,  and  clearing  for 
action  he  gave  chase.  But  the  strangers  proved  to  be 
Nelson  with  his  four  consorts,  struggling  against  south- 
westerly winds  on  his  way  to  Cadiz.  He  of  course 
could  report  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  Allemand 
Channelwards,  and  that  Rainier  was  in  safety.  More- 
over, while  they  were  still  together,  the  Decade  appeared 
from  the  southward  bringing  home  Admiral  Bickerton  on 
sick  leave.  She  also  had  nothing  to  report.  Nelson  accord- 
ingly proceeded  on  his  way,  and  Stirling,  instead  of  continuing 
to  hold  the  position,  turned  back  to  rejoin  Cornwallis.^ 

No  decision  could  have  been  more  unfortunate ;  for  it 
so  happened,  as  we  shall  see  directly,  that  on  that  very  day 
Allemand  by  a  remarkably  bold  stroke  was  taking  up  a 
cruising  station  not  forty-five  leagues  to  the  west  of  him. 
With  all  the  facts  before  us  it  is  easy  to  condemn  the 
movement — not  so  much  as  a  stroke  of  ill-luck  as  an  error 
of  judgment — the  only  one  that  can  be  laid  at  Cornwallis's 
door  during  his  admirable  conduct  of  the  station.  Seeing 
that  all  the  convoys  were  not  yet  in  and  Allemand  was 
still  unlocated,  it  will  probably  be  thought  that  he  should 
at  least  have  sent  Stirling  back  the  moment  he  rejoined. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  the  situation  w^as  by  no  means 
easy.  The  probability  was  that  Ganteaume,  now  if  ever, 
would  make  a  desperate  attempt  to  break  out  and  join 
Villeneuve  at  Cadiz,  and  any  weakening  of  the  Brest 
blockade  except  for  high  cause  was  to  be  avoided.  In  the 
view  of  the  Admiralty,  Allemand  must  have  returned  to 
port,  and  even  before  Rainier  had  been  heard  of,  they  had 
actually  informed  Cornwallis  he  was  at  liberty  to  reconsider 
the  necessity  of  making  the  detachment  they  had  ordered.^ 
It  was  on  these  amended  instructions  he  decided  to  keep 
his  squadron  massed  for  the  present. 

1  Log  of  the  Glory  (Stirling's  flag),  Captains'  Logs,  1544.  Cornwallis  to 
Admiralty  with  Stirling's  Eeport,  August  22-27.  See  also  "Proceedings 
of  the  meet y— Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.,  34973,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  p.  4(j. 
Stirling  rejoined  on  Sept.  22nd. 

-  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept.  3rd. 


3o8        SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS     Sept.  u 

And  how,  in  fact,  did  Allcmand  come  to  be  where  he 
was  ?  If  ever  squadron  bore  a  charmed  life  it  was  his. 
After  miraculously  escaping  Stirling  off  the  Penmarcks,  as 
above  related,  he  had  made  for  Cadiz  fair  into  the  lap  of 
Calder.  There  seemed  no  possibility  of  his  return,  yet  again 
a  happy  accident  was  to  keep  him  out  of  harm's  way.  This 
time,  however,  it  was  his  characteristic  mixture  of  daring 
and  caution  that  earned  its  reward.  On  his  way  down  the 
coast  of  Portugal  he  heard  for  certain  that  Villeneuve  was 
in  Cadiz,  and  he  pushed  on  under  every  stitch  he  could 
carry,  but  not  direct  for  the  port.  After  passing  St.  Vincent 
on  September  11th  he  warily  held  on  to  the  southward  till 
he  reached  the  latitude  of  the  Straits.  Here  he  would  be 
certain  to  fall  in  with  something  that  could  tell  him  how 
things  stood,  and  sure  enough  the  same  day  a  British  brig 
came  gaily  into  his  squadron  thinking  he  was  Nelson,  who 
was  daily  expected.^  She,  of  course,  had  to  strike,  and 
from  her  crew  Allemand  learnt  that  Cadiz  was  blockaded 
by  twenty-six  of  the  line  and  Cartagena  by  five.  His  posi- 
tion was  now  of  extreme  difficulty.  To  break  the  blockade 
by  force  was  impossible.  A  lucky  flaw  of  weather  might 
enable  him  to  run  it,  but  then  if  he  failed,  so  he  argued, 
his  retreat  would  almost  certainly  be  cut  off  by  Nelson  as 
he  came  down  the  coast.  He  had,  therefore,  to  recognise 
that  his  courageous  attempt  to  join  Villeneuve  had  failed, 
and  he  ran  out  into  the  ocean  to  consider  what  he  was 
to  do. 

The  result  was  worthy  of  him  and  of  the  best  traditions 
of  the  French  service.  Calling  his  captains  to  council,  he 
read  them  the  passages  in  his  instructions  which  seemed 
to  meet  the  case.  "  You  will  consum.e  your  provisions  in 
cruising  wherever  you  can  do  the  enemy  most  harm,  and  you 
will  not  return  to  port  till  six  months  after  sailing."  The 
place  where  he  could  do  most  harm  was  the  mouth  of  the 
Channel,  but  he  did  not  disguise  from  himself  not  only  that 
the  West  Indian  and  American  convoys  then  due  came 
home   under  strong   escort,  but   that   in   all  probability  a 

^  Allemand  says  she  was  the  Fhcehus,  from  Gibraltar  to  Grenada.     She 
does  not  appear  in  any  navy  list,  and  must  have  been  a  simple  trader. 


Sept.  12-13        BAIRD'S    NARROW    ESCAPE  309 

battle  squadron  would  be  sent  out  to  meet  them.  Now,  as 
we  have  seen,  Stirling  at  the  moment  was  hurrying  with  all 
speed  to  take  up  the  station,  as  Allemand  feared.  Still  he 
read  on :  "  Your  instructions  will  clearly  inform  you  of  the 
spirit  of  your  mission  and  its  object.  .  .  .  Use  all  your 
audacity  to  do  harm  to  the  enemy — that  is  the  pith  of 
what  the  Emperor  commands."  "  Then,"  says  the  intrepid 
commodore,  "  I  hesitated  no  longer,  and  I  lay  my  course  to 
take  up  a  station  to  the  westward  of  the  Lizard."  ^ 

It  was  a  bold  resolution,  and  it  came  within  an  ace  at 
the  outset  of  winning  him  a  resounding  success.  To  the 
northward  Popham  was  passing  down  with  his  vast  convoy 
and  Baird's  expedition,  and  the  course,  which  Allemand 
was  steering  to  make  his  westing  in  the  usual  way,  would 
take  him  right  athwart  Popham's  track.  As  things  stood, 
it  was  almost  inevitable  they  should  clash,  Popham's 
noon  position  on  the  9th  was  about  200  miles  N.N.W.  of 
Finisterre,  and  on  the  11th  Allemand  started  from  the 
Straits'  mouth  to  the  north-west.  Had  Popham  held  on 
there  is  no  saying  what  might  have  happened,  but  by  good 
luck  it  so  happened  that  he  met  baffling  winds,  and  in  three 
days  made  little  more  than  thirty  miles  on  his  true  course. 
Thus  it  happened  that  Allemand  must  have  crossed  his 
track  certainly  not  more  than  three  days  ahead  of  him,  and 
probably  much  less.^  Recent  writers  have  commented  on 
the  ease  with  which  we  passed  military  expeditions  to  their 
destinations  in  the  height  of  the  Trafalgar  campaign,  but 
it  is  submitted  such  complacency  is  wholly  unwarranted. 
Both  Craig  and  Baird  had  run  the  gravest  risk  of  destruc- 
tion.    In  Craig's  case  the  danger  arose  by  no  fault  of  the 

1  Allemand's  Journal:  Desbriere,  v.  794. 

^  See  Chart,  p.  302.  The  facts  of  this  episode  are  taken  from  the  Log  of 
the  Diadem,  Popham's  ship  {Captains'  Logs,  1743),  and  Allemand's  Journal  : 
Desbriere,  v.  793.  When  Allemand  captured  the  brig  he  was  in  'do"  50'  N. 
and  ir  38'  W.  (^9°  18'  Greenwich).  This  was  at  6  p.m.  on  the  11th.  He 
then  took  "  la  bordee  du  nord-ouest  en  attendant  une  plus  mure  reflexion." 
This  course,  if  he  continued  it,  would  take  him  almost  direct  to  Popham's 
noon  position  on  the  17th  {i.e.  39°  32'  N.  and  14°  12'  W.),  and  on  an  average 
rate  of  sailing  he  cannot  have  crossed  the  British  track  much  before  the  13th, 
and  it  may  have  been  later.  His  Journal,  however,  gives  no  entries  for  these 
days.  Popham  at  this  time  had  only  the  Diadem  64,  Bclliqucux  64,  Diomcdc  50, 
Narcissus  32,  and  the  Leda  36.  The  latter  he  sent  forward  to  Madeira  on 
the  15th. 


3IO     SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS    Sept.  20-4 

Admiralty,  for  the  most  scientific  arrangement  had  been 
made  to  cover  his  passage.  But  Baird's  saihng  was  based 
on  a  supposition — a  supposition  for  which  there  was  no 
direct  cvidencc^ — that  Allcmand  had  returned  to  port,  and 
the  best  opinion  will  hardly  regard  the  movement  as  a  fair 
risk  of  war.     Luck,  and  luck  alone,  saved  him. 

But  now  Fortune,  having  dealt  so  kindly  with  Baird, 
had  a  smile  for  Allcmand.  After  so  narrowly  missing  the 
glorious  chance,  Avhich  his  audacity  and  enterprise  had 
earned  him,  he  was  making  almost  exactly  for  the  position 
which  Barham  had  told  Cornwallis  to  occupy — that  is, 
about  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of  Scilly.  It  was 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  the  westward  of  the 
position  Stirling  had  taken,  and  we  have  seen  how  Allcmand 
reached  it  the  day  Stirling  and  Nelson  met.  By  what 
reasoning  or  intuition  Barham  divined  that  this  position 
would  not  be  far  enough  to  the  westward  we  cannot  tell, 
nor  why  it  was  Stirling  did  not  carry  out  Barbara's  in- 
structions. It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  Cornwallis  com- 
promised with  a  nearer  position,  since  he  was  going  beyond 
the  letter  of  his  instructions  in  detaching  Stirling  at  all 
before  his  reinforcements  arrived.  All  that  we  can  say 
is  that,  had  Barbara's  strategy  been  followed  to  the  full, 
Allemand's  squadron  almost  certainly  must  have  been 
rendered  incapable  of  further  cruising.  But,  as  it  was, 
while  Stirling  moved  away  to  rejoin  Cornwallis,  Allemand 
sat  down  undisturbed  in  the  midst  of  the  great  trade  fair- 
way, coolly  shifting  spars  and  refitting  his  worst  ships  with 
such  means  as  he  had  at  his  disposal.  There  he  lay  for 
four  days  with  his  cruisers  and  fastest  seventy-fours  spread, 
and  on  the  24th  he  found  about  a  dozen  sail  in  sight  all 
round  him  making  for  the  Channel.  He  gave  chase,  but 
next  day  his  leading  ship  came  back  to  report  a  squadron 
of  eight  of  the  line,  and  it  was  not  till  the  following  morn- 
ingf  that  he  discovered  the  real  nature  of  the  chase. 

It  was,  in  fact,  a  small  convoy  from  St.  Helena,  con- 
sisting of  a  single  Indiaman,  three  South  Sea  whalers,  two 
other  merchantmen,  and  a  damaged  straggler  from  the 
West  Indian  convoy  that  had  sought  its  protection.     The 


Sept.  24      ALLEMAND    OFF   THE   CHANNEL  3 1 1 

escort  was  the  Calcutta,  an  old  East  Indiaman  that  had 
been  converted  into  a  fifty-four,  and  she  was  then  in 
command  of  Captain  Woodriff,  whose  conduct  richly  de- 
serves recording.  Finding  his  pursuers  were  gaining,  he 
ordered  his  convoy  to  disperse  to  the  north  and  east, 
while  he  held  back  to  engage  the  leading  frigate.  As 
the  action  began  Woodriff  held  to  the  southward  to  try 
to  draw  the  enemy  away  from  his  convoy.  In  this  he 
was  entirely  successful.  The  frigate  held  off  at  long 
range  to  let  a  seventy-four  come  up,  and  Allemand, 
enraged  to  see  how  things  were  going,  impetuously  chased 
with  his  whole  squadron.  About  sunset  the  seventy-four 
got  in  range  and  Woodriff  furiously  engaged  her,  but  as 
she  fired  entirely  at  his  rigging  he  was  quickly  disabled, 
though  it  was  not  till  ten  o'clock  that  he  hauled  down 
his  flag,  surrounded  by  the  whole  of  Allemand's 
squadron.^ 

By  this  brilliant  conduct  Woodriff  had  led  his  pursuers 
into  the  area  Stirling  had  just  left.  Had  Stirling  only  re- 
mained where  he  was  Allemand's  daring  cruise  must  still 
have  been  cut  short,  but  as  it  was  Woodriff  had  done 
enough.  Not  only  had  he  saved  all  his  convoy  except  the 
uninvited  guest,  but  he  had  also  saved  the  West  Indian 
convoy  which  the  Illustrious  was  bringing  home.  On  the 
previous  day  Allemand's  cruisers  had  fallen  in  with  some 
of  its  stragglers,  and  brought  in  four  of  them  richly  laden 
the  morning  of  the  action.  But  Allemand,  in  his  eager- 
ness to  capture  the  Calcutta,  had  chased  far  out  of  the 
convoy's  real  track.  On  the  three  following  days  four 
more  stragglers  were  brought  in,  but  the  mass  of  the 
convoy,  thanks  to  Woodriff"s  cunning,  got  safely  home. 
Allemand's  chief  reward  was  the  Calcutta,  which  he  added 
to  his  squadron.  Woodriff  was,  of  course,  court-martialled 
for  his  loss,  but  his  trial  was  a  mere  excuse  to  give  him 
and  his  company  a  kind  of  triumph. 

Meanwhile  Allemand,  without  perceiving  it,  had  been 
watched.  The  Moucheron,  one  of  the  cruisers  Cornwallis 
had  sent  to  the  westward,  heard  the  firing.     It  was  dead 

^  James,  iv.  47.    Allemand's  Journal :  Desbriere,  v.  795. 


312     SECURING    THE    COMMUNK^ATIONS    Sept.  25-9 

calm,  but  she  made  for  the  sound  of  the  guns  with  her 
sweeps.  During  the  night  she  got  close  to  the  squadron, 
and  in  the  morning  stood  by  and  quietly  counted  them 
while  Allemand  was  refitting  the  Calcutta.  The  Moticheron 
was  apparently  flying  American  colours.  At  all  events 
Allemand  took  no  notice  of  her,  and  having  completed  her 
reconnaissance  she  made  off  to  Cornwallis.^ 

But  this  was  not  all.  One  of  Woodrilfs  whalers  in 
escaping  had  fallen  in  with  the  Portugal  convoy  of  thirty- 
three  sail  outward-bound,  under  escort  of  Commander  Hawes 
in  the  AimaUe.  He  immediately  hauled  off  his  natural 
course  to  give  the  enemy  a  wide  berth,  and  pass  nearer  to 
Cornwallis.  The  admiral  must  be  w^arned,  but  he  had 
nothing  to  send  him  but  the  Dilifjent,  a  valuable  storeship 
for  the  Gibraltar  garrison.  Yet  he  determined  to  take  the 
responsibility  of  detaching  her,  and  so  it  was  Cornwallis  got 
the  first  news  of  what  was  going  on." 

At  the  moment  she  arrived,  Cornwallis,  finding  every- 
thing quiet  in  Brest,  and  some  of  the  ships  refitting, 
Avas  preparing  to  take  his  fleet  into  Falmouth  to  refresh, 
and  he  had  just  formed  an  inshore  squadron  of  four  of  the 
line  to  remain  on  guard  in  his  absence  under  Sir  Richard 
Strachan.^  Like  Barham,  he  w^as  still  under  the  belief  that 
Allemand  must  have  made  for  some  port  to  replenish.  If 
so  there  would  be  plenty  of  time  to  blockade  him,  when  he 
was  located ;  and  he  had  contented  himself  with  detaching 
frigates  to  watch  Rochefort,  L'Orient,  and  Ferrol,  besides 
those  he  had  looking  out  to  the  westward. 

It  was  early  on  September  29  th  that  the  storeship  came 
in.  Cornwallis  immediately  sent  her  on  to  Strachan  to  tell 
him  to  go  in  search  of  the  enemy's  squadron  to  the  south- 
ward and  escort  the  storeship  across  the  Bay.  No  sooner, 
however,  had  he  done  so,  than  the  Moucheron  appeared 
to  report  that  she  had  located  the  enemy,  had  fixed  the 
squadron  beyond  doubt  as  Allemand's,  and  that  she  had 

^  Moucheron  s    Report,    enclosed   in   Cornwallis  to    the    Admiralty:   In- 
letters,   129. 

2  Hawes's  Report,  ibid.     He  took  the  precaution  of  sending  in  a  copy  of 


the  whaler's  log,  for  the  Admiral's  inforn 
^'^  Cwsar  80,  Hero  74,  Namur  74,  Coura^ 


formation. 


geiix  74,  and  two  frigates. 


Sept.  29      CORNWALLIS   AFTER    ALLEMAND         313 

left  him  lying  quietly  in  the  fairway,  repairing  rigging,  and 
picking  up  everything  that  came  by. 

To  be  flouted  in  so  impudent  a  manner  in  the  heart  of 
his  own  station  was  more  than  old  "  Billy-go-tight "  could 
endure.  So  strongly  did  his  paramount  function  now 
assert  itself,  that  he  boldly  determined  once  more  to  leave 
Brest  open  and  do  himself  what  his  detachment  had  failed 
to  achieve.  Ganteaume,  or  no  Ganteaume,  the  control  of 
the  Channel  approach  must  be  secured.  Strachan's  orders 
were  allowed  to  stand,  and  away  he  went  for  Finis terre, 
while  the  Admiral,  leaving  a  single  frigate  to  keep  an  eye 
on  Ganteaume,  made  a  dash  for  the  phantom  squadron  with 
all  the  rest  of  his  fleet. 

Heading  straight  for  the  point  where  the  Moucheron 
had  located  it,  he  hunted  up  and  down  upon  the  scene  of 
Allemand's  depredations,  but  not  a  trace  of  him  was  to  be 
had.  After  three  days'  work  Cornwallis  was  convinced  the 
wary  French  commodore  must  have  got  wind  of  him,  and 
on  the  fourth  day,  having  fallen  in  with  the  homeward- 
bound  Portugal  convoy,  he  decided  to  escort  it  into 
the  Channel  out  of  harm's  way.  This  he  did,  and  by 
October  8th  was  back  again  on  his  station  off"  Ushant,  and 
next  day  was  reinforced  up  to  his  full  strength.^ 

The  truth  was  that,  by  the  time  the  MoK^heron  reached 
Ushant,  Allemand  had  recognised  that  he  had  made  the 
ground  too  hot  to  hold  him.  It  was  then  four  days  since 
Woodriff's  convoy  had  got  away.  Two  days,  he  calculated, 
would  see  the  news  in  England — two  more  Avould  bring  a 
squadron  down  upon  him.  He  dared  not  linger  another 
hour,  and  so  with  just  judgment  the  very  day  Cornwallis 
began  his  dash  at  him,  he  was  flying  away  to  the  southward 
for  Vigo.  Again  he  had  struck  his  blow  and  was  gone, 
with  nine  prizes  for  his  reward.-^ 

The  whole  episode  is  worthy  of  note  as  representing 
probably  the  utmost  effect  that  can  be  hoped  from  raiding 
squadrons  operating  against  trade.  The  only  theatres  in 
which  such  operations    can  count  on  making  a  real  im- 

^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  October  5th,  8tb,  and  9th :  In-lctters,  129, 
^  Allemand's  Journal :  Desbriere,  v.  795. 


314        SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS        Sept. 

pression  on  the  course  of  the  war  are  the  home  termmals, 
and  in  a  lesser  degree,  the  oversea  terminals  and  focal 
points.  Allemand  with  a  squadron,  with  which  no  amount 
of  cruisers  could  hope  to  deal,  had  boldly  chosen  the  home 
terminal  and  with  every  advantage  in  his  favour.  Our 
cruising  system  was  still  so  imperfect,  that  it  was  a  full 
week  before  he  was  located,  and  our  home  battle  squadrons 
were  fully  occupied.  And  yet  their  mere  presence  in  home 
waters  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  hold  his  ground  long 
enough  to  do  vital  damage.  It  was  on  this  immutable 
principle  that  our  trade  protection  had  always  been  founded. 
It  sprang  from  our  geographical  position,  and  must  endure 
so  long  as  that  position  endures.  It  goes  to  the  root  of 
our  whole  system  of  naval  defence,  and  exposes  the  fallacy 
that  any  strength  of  military  defence  would  alter  it.  If  a 
battle  fleet  were  not  required  in  home  waters  to  control  the 
passage  of  a  foreign  army,  it  must  still  be  there  to  control 
the  home  trade-terminals.  No  other  sure  system  of  trade 
protection  has  ever  been  devised — no  patrolling  of  the  seas 
can  ever  supply  its  place.  The  seas  are  wide — the  trade 
routes  are  many,  and  so  long  as  the  point  of  convergence  is 
safe,  nowhere  upon  the  high  seas  can  an  enemy  hope  in 
war  time  to  encounter  enough  trade  to  make  commerce 
destruction  an  adequate  object  for  her  battle  squadrons. 

The  audacity  and  judgment  with  which  Allemand  had 
acted  left  nothing  to  be  desired,  and  yet  as  a  strategical 
operation  his  cruise  had  wholly  failed  in  its  object. 
Napoleon  had  designed  it  with  confidence  as  a  means  of 
disturbing  the  British  dispositions  and  forcing  them  to 
break  their  concentration ;  but  so  sure  was  the  grasp  of 
the  essentials  under  Barham  and  his  admirals  that  it  had 
not  availed  for  one  moment  even  to  loosen  their  grip.  The 
raiding  squadron  had  been  ignored  until  the  conditions 
permitted  operations  against  it  without  prejudicing  the 
security  of  the  main  positions.  The  whole  affair,  indeed, 
will  serve  to  demonstrate  the  futility  of  seeking  to  entice 
our  fleets  away,  so  long  as  a  sound  strategical  tradition 
remains  green  in  the  service. 

Let  us  follow  the  intrepid  and  resourceful  Allemand  a 


Oct.  4-9         STRACHAN   AND    ALLEMAND  315 

little  further,  and  see  how  his  extraordinary  luck  pursued 
him.  He  was  now  making  for  Vigo  to  renew  his  water 
and  secure  his  prizes,  and  at  the  same  time  Strachan  was 
racing  across  the  Bay  to  cut  him  off  at  Finistcrre.  Strachan 
was  there  first.  On  October  4th  he  was  some  sixty  miles 
north-west  of  the  Cape,  and  thence  he  cast  to  and  fro, 
always  nearmg  the  land.  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
scientific  than  the  means  which  Cornwallis  had  adopted  to 
catch  the  elusive  squadron,  and  yet  again  it  escaped.  How 
it  happened  we  cannot  tell,  but  it  would  seem  that  Allemand 
must  have  passed  Strachan  to  seaward.  At  any  rate,  on 
the  morning  of  October  9th  Allemand  sighted  the  Agcc- 
meimion  64.  She  was  following  Nelson  down  and  was  then 
about  sixty  miles  due  west  of  Finisterre,  while  Strachan  at 
the  same  time  was  hovering  about  twenty-five  miles  to  the 
north-north-west.^  Allemand  at  once  gave  chase  and 
pressed  her  so  vehemently  with  his  flagship  that  it  was 
only  by  starting  her  water  she  escaped.  So  desperately, 
indeed,  did  Allemand  push  her  that  he  was  carried  to  lee- 
ward of  his  port.'  Still  nothing  would  hold  him.  Just  as 
he  abandoned  the  Agamemno7i  he  saw  to  the  southward  the 
Aimahle  with  the  Portugal  convoy  which  had  eluded  him  in 
the  mouth  of  the  Channel.  Regardless  of  consequences,  he 
chased  again  still  further  to  leeward  of  Vigo.  The  Aimahle 
was  within  an  ace  of  being  captured.  She  too  had  to  start 
her  water,  cut  away  her  boats,  and  heave  overboard  a  quan- 
tity of  shot.  Once  she  was  on  her  beam  ends  with  the 
press  of  sail  she  tried  to  carry,  but  at  last  she  got  away. 
The  bulk  of  the  convoy  also  escaped,  and  Allemand  had 
nothing  for  his  pains  except  three  stragglers  and  a  small 
letter  of  mark.^ 

^  The  situation  is  by  no  means  certain.  Captain  Sir  Edward  Berrj',  who 
commanded  the  Agamemnon,  says  at  3*30  A.M.  Finisterre  bore  S.70.W.,  meaning 
probably  magnetic.  Allemand  says  he  sighted  her  at  4*0  A.M.  "  ahead  and 
pretty  close,"  but  he  also  says  on  the  7th  he  was  12  leagues  from  Vigo,  that 
is,  much  further  to  the  southward.  The  "  12  "  must  be  an  error  of  transcrip- 
tion. If  he  was  so  close  to  Vigo  on  the  8th  he  could  not  have  seen  the 
Agamemnon  on  the  next  day,  and  moreover  he  must  have  passed  through 
Strachan's  squadron  the  previous  day. 

2  For  Captain  Sir  E.  Berry's  despatch  see  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar, 
p.  40,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  117  note.  Allemand  thought  he  recognised  the  Aga- 
memnon as  the  Dragon,  "  England's  fastest  ship." 

3  For  an  amusing  account  of  the  Aimahle' s  escape  by  a  newly-joined 
midshipman,  see  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar,^.  40. 


3i6       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      Oct.  n 

While  the  Rochefort  squadron  was  thus  brilliantly  raid- 
ing Nelson's  line  of  communications,  Strachan  was  still 
hovering  off  Finisterre  in  ignorance  that  his  chase  had 
passed.  AUcmand  was  in  fact  lying-to  nearly  two  hundred 
miles  to  the  southward — trying  to  rally  his  scattered 
squadron  and  wondering  what  to  do  next.  Scurvy  had 
possession  of  his  crews,  and  speedy  relief  was  essential.  To 
beat  back  to  Vigo  would  take  ten  days  at  least,  even  if  it  - 
were  still  open.  An  exaggerated  report  of  Strachan's  '^ 
squadron  had  reached  him.  It  was  said  to  be  ten  of  the 
line,  and  to  be  waiting  for  him  off  Ferrol.  He  suspected 
the  Agamemnon  when  she  escaped  him  had  made  for  this 
squadron,  and  that  he  would  find  it  had  come  down  to  bar 
his  way  to  Vigo.  Here  again  he  showed  his  usual  sagacity. 
Strachan  had  indeed  got  wind  of  him,  though  not  from  the 
Agamemnon,  and  that  very  day,  October  10th,  was  moving 
down  to  Vigo,  confident  of  bringing  him  to  action  as  he 
returned.  But  Allemand  was  not  so  easily  handled.  There 
was  still  one  more  chance  for  him,  and  that  was  to  run  to 
the  Canaries.  This  course  he  boldly  took  next  day,  leaving 
Strachan  in  hopeful  patience  covering  the  approaches  to 
Vigo,  while  he  himself  sped  southward  without  knowing  he 
was  on  the  heels  of  Popham  and  Baird. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

THE   DEADLOCK   AT   CADIZ 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  September  28  th  that  Nelson 
reached  the  fleet  off  Cadiz,  and  on  the  morrow — his  birth- 
day— he  took  over  the  command.  On  his  way  down  the 
Portuofuese  coast  he  had  communicated  with  Lobb's  cruiser 
Hne,  and  off  Lisbon  had  issued  directions  that  his  arrival 
was  to  be  kept  secret.  His  mind,  as  usual,  was  occupied 
with  making  good  the  ground  behind  him,  and  guarding 
himself  against  the  interruption  of  his  line  of  communica- 
tion by  an  escape  of  the  Brest  squadron.  The  possibility 
of  such  an  escape  during  the  equinoctial  weather  was  a  long- 
established  strategical  factor,  and  in  view  of  the  import- 
ance of  securing  the  flow  of  his  promised  reinforcements, 
Nelson  could  not  ignore  the  danger.  Off  St.  Vincent  he 
stopped  a  cruiser  that  was  going  home  with  Collingwood's 
despatches,  and  in  accordance  with  the  system  he  had 
recommended  he  ordered  her  to  remain  there  to  continue 
Lobb's  line.  Her  instructions  were  to  direct  new  arrivals 
to  look  for  him  "  between  Cape  St.  Mary  and  Cadiz,"  the 
rendezvous  he  had  chosen.  If  they  should  find  him  gone 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  new  orders  would  be  found  off' 
Cape  Spartel.  "  Should  the  enemy's  fleet  from  Brest  make 
its  appearance,"  so  the  instructions  concluded,  "  I  desire  you 
will  join  me  with  an  account  thereof  with  the  utmost 
despatch."  In  this  significant  remark  we  probably  have  a 
reflection  of  the  prevailing  anxiety  which  had  crippled  Corn- 
wallis's  freedom  of  action,  and  by  holding  him  to  Ushant 
had  given  Allemand  his  opportunity. 

From  this  point,  moreover,  Nelson  sent  forward  an 
order  by  Blackwood  that  no  notice  was  to  be  taken  of 
him  when  he  joined   by  salute   or  otherwise.     His  main 


3i8  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Sept. 

preoccupation  was  still  the  difficulty  of  forcing  Villeneuve 
to  action,  and  his  lirst  precaution  was,  if  possible,  to  con- 
ceal his  arrival.  He  even  begged  General  Fox  at  Gibraltar 
to  forbid  the  publication  of  the* news  in  the  local  press. 
"  For  I  much  fear,"  he  wrote,  "  that  if  the  enemy  know  of 
our  increased  numbers,  wc  shall  never  see  them  out  of 
Cadiz."  On  seeing  how  the  Combined  Fleet  lay  not  in 
the  bay,  but  crowded  up  in  the  harbour,  he  had  hopes  that 
possibly  Colonel  Congreve  and  his  rockets  might  prove 
effective,  if  other  means  failed.  "  Even  should  no  ships 
be  burnt,"  he  wrote  to  Castlereagh,  "  yet  it  should  make 
Cadiz  so  very  disagreeable  that  they  would  rather  risk  an 
action  than  remain  in  port." 

But  the  pressure  on  which  he  had  most  faith  was 
famine.  This,  however,  could  only  be  effected  by  a 
rigorous  blockade  of  all  the  Andalusian  ports  into  which 
Danish  vessels  had  been  pouring  supplies  from  France. 
Now  the  Government  for  political  reasons  had  a  strong 
antipathy  to  these  blockades.  They  never  failed  to  have 
the  effect  of  exasperating  neutrals,  and  so  strongly  was 
this  objection  felt  that  only  a  short  time  since  Lord  Keith 
had  been  absolutely  forbidden  to  close  the  North  Sea  ports 
through  which  Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch  squadron 
and  flotilla  were  being  supplied.^  Collingwood,  however, 
had  boldly  taken  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  and 
established  a  blockade  of  the  whole  coast.  Nelson  resolved 
to  continue  it,  and  begged  Castlereagh  to  support  him  and 
see  that  naval  officers  did  not  suff"er  for  the  execution  of 
his  order.  Neutrals,  he  made  free  to  hint,  would  take  it 
quietly  enough  if  Ministers  at  home  would  only  stop  the 
abuse  of  granting  licences  for  British  vessels  to  enter  the 
blockaded  ports. 

On  starvation,  then,  and  on  concealing  his  force  he 
relied  principally  for  bringing  Villeneuve  to  a  decision. 
From  the  pressure  of  Craig's  expedition  he  had  no  hope 
at  all.     He  even  yet  did  not  know  its  object.     When  he 

1  Keith  to  Admiralty,  July  12tb  :  In-httcrs,  557.  Barham  minuted  the 
letter  that  such  a  blockade  as  Keith  suggested  was  a  question  for  the  Foreign 
Office,  and  the  Minute  was  sent  there  accordingly  and  disallowed. 


Sept.  17  NEWS    OF    CRAIG  319 

sailed  the  situation  at  Naples  was  still  too  obscure  for 
Ministers  to  say  anything  definite ;  but  his  ignorance  of 
what  it  really  portended  was  about  to  be  enlightened.  On 
September  17th,  as  Nelson  was  leaving  the  Channel,  a 
courier  arrived  late  at  night  at  the  Foreign  Office  with 
despatches  that  at  last  cleared  the  uncertainty.  In  his  bag 
was  Elliot's  despatch  from  Naples  announcing  that  Craig 
had  reached  Malta  in  safety,  and  that  conferences  for 
co-operation  between  him  and  the  Russians  Avere  in  full 
swing.  Despatches  from  Craig  were  enclosed  to  say  he 
would  have  at  least  6000  men  ready  for  action  without 
denuding  the  Malta  garrison.  There  was  also  a  despatch 
from  Vienna  in  which  the  ambassador  said  that  as  Cobenzl 
expected,  Napoleon  had  refused  the  offer  of  mediation,  his 
counter  demands  had  been  firmly  rejected,  the  whole 
Austrian  army  had  been  placed  on  a  war  footing,  and  at 
any  moment  the  Archduke  Charles  might  strike  a  blow  in 
Italy.  For  the  Austrians  were  still  persuaded  the  initiative 
would  be  theirs,  and  to  the  Archduke  had  been  committed 
their  main  offensive  movement  against  Napoleon's  new 
kingdom.^ 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  opportune  for  Pitt. 
Exhausted  by  the  strain  of  the  recently-closed  session,  in 
which  the  opposition  of  Fox  and  his  friends  had  been  more 
implacable  than  ever,  he  felt  unable  to  face  Parliament 
again  on  the  same  terms,  and  conduct  the  war  as  well. 
The  only  chance  he  saw  was  to  form  such  a  coalition  with 
Fox,  as  his  father  had  done  so  triumphantly  with  Newcastle 
in  the  crisis  of  the  Seven  Years'  War.  Party  must  cease 
for  a  time  and  a  true  national  government  take  its  place. 
Full  of  this  idea,  he  had  gone  down  to  Weymouth,  where 
the  King  was  taking  his  accustomed  spell  of  sea  air  guarded 
by  two  or  three  precious  cruisers.  But  the  stubborn  old 
monarch  proved  as  obdurate  as  ever.  Nelson's  friend  Rose 
came  down  to  help.  "  I  told  his  Majesty,"  he  wrote  in  his 
Diary,   "  that   considering    our  situation  in   the   House   of 

^  Foreign  Office  [Sicily),  25.  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  August  1st  {via  Eome), 
endorsed,  "  Received  Sept.  7th  at  night."  Paget  to  same,  August  29th  and 
30th,  "most  secret,"  received  the  same  day:  Foreign  Office  {Austria),  74. 
Craig's  despatches  are  in  War  Office  (1)  280,  July  20-1. 


3  20  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Sept.  21 

Commons,  I  was  perfectly  persuaded,  if  Mr.  Pitt  should  be 
confined  by  the  gout  or  any  other  complaint  for  two  or 
three  weeks  there  would  be  an  end  of  us."  But  it  was 
no  good.  The  King  was  so  much  upset  by  the  bare  idea 
of  Fox  in  the  Cabinet,  that  another  attack  of  insanity  was 
feared.  They  had  to  desist,  and  Pitt  was  left  to  face  the 
prospect  of  yet  another  session,  in  which  he  would  have 
to  fight  Fox  all  day  and  Napoleon  all  night. 

In  these  circumstances  news  that  held  out  a  hope  of 
striking  a  brilliant  blow  before  the  new  session  opened  was 
in  the  highest  degree  inspiriting,  and  in  ten  days  the 
necessary  action  was  decided  on.  On  September  21st 
Castlereagh  informed  the  Admiralty  that  in  the  event  of 
hostilities  on  the  Continent  (which  were  now  certain), 
Craig's  force  might  be  employed  on  the  coast  of  Italy.  He 
desired  them,  therefore,  to  call  Nelson's  attention  to  what 
was  in  the  Avind,  and  to  direct  him,  "  after  providing 
effectually  for  the  blockade  of  Cadiz,  to  keep  in  view  the 
object  of  covering  such  operations  as  Sir  James  Craig  may 
undertake  from  any  interruption  by  the  enemy's  naval  force 
in  the  Mediterranean,"  and  to  keep  in  constant  communica- 
tion with  him.^  Accordingly  on  the  same  day,  secret 
instructions  to  that  effect  went  forward  for  Nelson  with  a 
copy  of  Craig's  orders  enclosed." 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  ideas  of  the  Government  did 
not  quite  coincide  with  those  of  Nelson.  In  Pitt's  eyes  the 
function  of  the  fleet  was  fulfilled  if  it  succeeded  in  sealing 
up  Villeneuve's  fleet  so  that  it  could  not  interfere  with  his 
combined  flank  attack  on  Italy,  and  Nelson's  orders  had 
been  drawn  in  this  sense.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
they  gave  him  practically  a  free  hand,  but  with  the  express 
proviso  that  he  was  to  blockade  Cadiz  so  as  to  prevent  the 
Combined  Fleet  putting  to  sea.  Nelson's  preoccupation,  on 
the  other  hand,  was  to  force  it  to  sea  and  destroy  it,  know- 
ing full  well  the  precariousness  of  a  long  winter  blockade 
on  the  capricious  Andalusian  coast. 

1  Castlereagh  to  the  Admiralty,  September  21st :  la-letters  {Sec.  of  State), 
4200. 

2  Secret  Orders.  13G3,  September  21st. 


Sept.-Oct.         the   BOULOGNE    PROJECT  321 

Barham  must  have  shared  the  Nelsonian  view.  As 
soon  as  it  was  known  that  Napoleon  had  abandoned  the 
invasion,  the  Government  had  set  their  hearts  on  destrojdng 
the  demobiHsed  flotilla  by  a  combined  attack  on  Boulogne. 
The  moral  effects  of  the  operation,  if  successful,  would  be 
invaluable  for  securing  the  position  of  the  Government  and 
for  reconciling  the  country  to  the  sight  of  their  army  being 
sent  oversea  to  act  offensively  on  the  Continent.  From 
this  point  of  view  it  may  be  taken  as  justifiable  for  ministers 
to  press  the  operation  whatever  its  purely  strategical  defects. 
These  defects,  however,  the  Admiralty  had  regarded  as 
prohibitive,  ever  since  Nelson's  failure  in  1801.  But 
Colonel  Congreve's  invention  was  thought  by  Castlereagh 
to  have  made  a  difference.  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  with 
characteristic  self-confidence,  was  sure  it  could  be  done, 
and  had  been  charged  to  make  the  attempt.  A  closer 
view  quickly  brought  him  round  to  the  Admiralty  view, 
that  it  was  impossible  without  the  support  of  a  military 
force.  This  Pitt  was  wise  enough  not  to  sanction  without 
a  special  report  from  Sir  John  Moore,  and  that  great  master 
of  war  was  now  ordered  to  make  the  necessary  reconnais- 
sance. Barham,  who  believed  as  little  in  the  rockets  as  he 
did  in  Sidney  Smith,  threw  cold  water  on  the  scheme.  If  a 
military  force  was  available  he  saw  a  far  better  objective 
against  which  it  could  be  employed,  and  that  was  Ville- 
neuve's  fleet.  He  therefore  submitted  that  if  troops  went 
at  all  they  should  go  to  Cadiz.  Moore,  however,  reported 
privately  to  Pitt  that  the  Boulogne  enterprise  was  not  a 
feasible  military  operation,  and  there  it  ended. ^ 

In  the  meantime,  as  we  know,  the  problem  of  getting  a 

^  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir  John  Moore,  ii.  109.  Castlereagh  to  Moore, 
September  23rd.  Barham  to  Castlereagh,  September  25th.  Pitt  to  same, 
October  6th.  Castlereagh  Corres2Joiidence,  2nd  Series,  i.  86-117  ;  and  Stanhope, 
Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  337  :  "  Walmer  Castle,  October  6th,  1805.— Dear  Castlereagh,— 
You  will  have  learned  from  General  Moore  the  substance  of  what  passed 
between  him  and  me,  which  left  me  convinced  that  any  attempt  at  landing  is 
attended  with  too  much  risk  to  justify  the  experiment.  I  still  entertain  con- 
siderable hopes  of  something  effectual  being  done,  and  I  trust  you  will  not 
have  had  much  further  difficulty  in  overcoming  the  objections  both  of  Lord 
Keith  and  the  Admiralty.  Your  answer  to  Lord  Barham  places  the  subject 
exactly  in  the  true  light.  .  .  .  With  this  wind  I  am  much  disappointed  not 
to  have  heard  of  anything  fresh  from  the  Continent, — Ever  sincerely  yours, 
W.  Pitt."  '         ^  ^  ^ 


322  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Oct.  2 

decisive  blow  at  Villeneuve,  in  which  Barham  and  Nelson 
were  absorbed,  had  been  solved  for  them  by  Napoleon 
himself.  As  Nelson  appeared  at  Cape  St.  Vincent  the 
order  directing  the  Combined  Fleet  to  sail  forthwith  for 
Naples  reached  Cadiz.  On  hearing  of  it  Gravina  went  on 
board  Yilleneuve's  flagship,  the  BiLcentaure,  and  announced 
that  his  fourteen  ships  were  ready  for  sea.  At  Yilleneuve's 
request  he  gave  instructions  that  the  Spanish  dockyard  was 
to  render  the  French  every  possible  assistance  in  com- 
pleting their  stores,  while  Villeneuve  issued  a  stirring  order. 
By  the  following  Monday  all  troops  necessary  to  fill  up  the 
ships'  companies  were  to  be  on  board,  for  on  that  day  he 
meant  to  go  forth  and  "  to  strike  down  England's  tyran- 
nical domination  of  the  seas."  The  same  evening,  however, 
the  signal  stations  reported  that  a  three-decker  and  two 
seventy-fours  were  joining  Collingwood  from  the  westward. 
"  That  makes  thirty-one,"  wrote  Villeneuve,  in  a  lower  tone, 
"  well  known  to  be  in  the  offing."  Still  it  was  not  yet 
ascertained  that  it  was  Nelson  who  had  come,  and  the 
embarkation  of  the  troops  proceeded.  By  October  2nd  it 
was  complete,  but  towards  evening  Gravina  received  two 
expresses  from  Lisbon  by  Avhich  the  tone  of  confidence  was 
severely  shaken.  They  told  that  Nelson  had  arrived 
"  with  four  of  the  line  and  great  projects  for  attacking, 
bombarding,  and  burning  the  Combined  Squadron."  The 
effect  was  startling.  At  the  cost  of  interrupting  the  pre- 
parations for  sea  a  defence  flotilla  of  gunboats,  bomb- 
vessels,  and  anything  that  could  be  handled  in  bad  weather 
was  hastily  organised  and  manned  with  officers  and  men 
from  the  fleet.^  Moreover,  instead  of  being  able  to  get  the 
ships  out  into  the  bay  as  they  were  ready,  the  fear  of 
Nelson's  doing  something  desperate  made  it  advisable  to 
keep  them  still  croAvded  up  in  the  harbour  out  of  harm's 
way.  Still  Villeneuve  proclaimed  his  intention  of  sailing 
the  moment  he  had  a  fair  breeze. 

At  Cadiz  in  fine  autumn  weather  there  is  a  land  wind 


^  Escano  (Gravina's  Chief  of  the  Staff)  to  Don  Enrique  MacDonnell. 
Captain  of  the  R(iyo :  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.  98.  There  was  another 
MacDonnell,  a  brioradier,  in  the  fleet,  who  sat  on  the  Council  of  War. 


Oct.  6-7  THE    COUNCIL    OF    WAR  323 

at  night  from  the  east,  fair  for  coming  out,  while  outside  in 
the  morning  is  found  a  westerly  breeze  fair  for  entering  the  * 
Mediterranean.  On  the  evening  of  the  7  th  an  easterly 
breeze  sprang  up,  and  signal  was  made  to  prepare  to  weigh, 
but  it  was  almost  immediately  annulled,  for  the  wind 
increased  so  rapidly  as  to  threaten  a  real  Levanter  "  dia- 
metrically contrary  to  the  course  they  had  to  make." 
Such  is  the  story  Yilleneuve  told  officially.^  But  the 
truth  would  seem  to  be  that  Nelson's  arrival  had  once 
more  dominated  the  spirits  of  the  French  Admiral  and 
most  of  his  colleagues.  Ever  since  he  had  joined  nothing 
had  been  seen  of  the  fleet  from  the  signal  stations  except 
an  inshore  squadron  of  five  cruisers,  with  an  occasional 
glimpse  of  communicating  ships  of  the  line.  Nelson  must 
be  there,  but  what  he  was  doing  and  what  his  strength  no 
one  could  tell.  "  I  could  not  close  my  ears,"  wrote  Villeneuve 
in  reporting  to  Decres  his  arrested  attempt  to  sail,  "  to  the 
observations  which  came  to  me  from  all  sides  on  the  in- 
feriority of  our  force  compared  with  that  of  the  enemy, 
who  have  now  certainly  from  thirty-one  to  thirty-three  of 
the  line,  of  which  eight  are  of  three  decks,  and  a  large 
number  of  frigates.  To  go  out  in  such  circumstances  is 
stigmatised  as  an  act  of  desperation  beyond  the  power  of 
the  two  Courts."  Accordingly  he  says  he  decided  to  call 
a  Council  of  War.  Escafio,  who  was  still  Gravina  s  Chief 
of  the  Staff',  gives,  however,  another  version  of  the  calling 
of  the  Council  which  rings  more  true.  According  to  him, 
on  October  6  th  Villeneuve  informed  Gravina  that  by 
superior  orders  he  must  put  to  sea  the  moment  supplies 
were  complete,  and  requested  him  to  have  his  squadron 
ready.  "  The  Spanish  Admiral,"  says  Escauo,  "  confined 
himself  to  replying  that  he  considered  it  necessary  before 
weighing  to  hold  a  Council  to  hear  the  opinion  of  all  the 
Staff  officers  of  both  nations,  but  without  further  discus- 
sion he  gave  orders  to  demobilise  the  flotilla  and  for  its 
officers  to  return  to  their  ships." 

On  the  following  morning,  therefore,  a  Council  was  held 
on    board    the    Bucentaure.      Villeneuve    opened    the    pro- 

1  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Oct.  8th:   Ibid.,  p.  96. 


324  THE    DEADLOCK   AT    CADIZ  Oct.  8 

ceedings  by  communicating  the  Emperor's  secret  orders, 
"  that  the  Combined  Fleet  was  to  sail  at  the  first  favour- 
able opportunity,  and  that  wherever  it  found  the  enemy 
in  inferior  strength  it  was  to  attack  him  without  hesitation 
in  order  to  force  him  to  a  decisive  action."  On  these 
instructions,  so  Escafio  says,  Villeneuve  put  it  to  the  Council 
whether  they  should  go  to  sea  or  remain  at  anchor  in  hopes 
the  enemy  would  attack  them,  in  which  case  they  would 
probably  bo  able  to  destroy  them  and  obtain  a  free  passage 
out.  The  Spanish  oflScers  had  been  careful  to  discuss 
the  question  previously,  and  they  unanimously  supported 
Gravina's  opinion  that  in  view  of  the  superiority  of  the 
British  fleet  Napoleon's  orders  did  not  bind  them  to  seek 
an  action  at  the  moment,  and  that  they  ought  to  abide 
an  attack  at  anchor.  The  Frenchmen,  however,  had  not 
taken  the  same  precaution,  and  a  violent  debate  was  the 
result,  some  of  them  hotly  insisting  that  there  could  be  no 
doubt  they  should  go  out  and  fight  immediately.  Captain 
Prigny,  however,  Villeneuve's  Chief  of  the  Staff,  pointed  out 
that  even  if  there  were  no  more  than  twenty-five  of  the 
enemy  outside,  still  the  Combined  Fleet  was  not  superior  to 
them.  "  They,"  he  said,  ''have  kept  the  seas  without  inter- 
mission since  1793,  while  most  of  their  own  fleet  have 
scarcely  Aveighed  anchor  for  eight  years."  He  therefore 
urged  the  success  that  might  be  obtained  with  a  well- 
organised  defence  flotilla,  and  concluded  with  the  maxim 
that  no  superior  order  could  bind  them  to  attempt  the 
impossible.  Admiral  Magon  at  once  sprang  up  to  refute 
the  Chief  of  the  Staff  and  the  opinion  of  the  Spanish 
officers,  and  expressed  himself  so  hotly  and  in  language 
so  violent  that  a  scene  ensued.  General  Galiano,  one 
of  the  brigadiers  of  the  Spanish  troops,  got  up  to  protest. 
The  behaviour  of  the  Frenchman  was  more,  says  Escafio, 
than  his  nice  and  lofty  sense  of  honour  could  endure,  and 
he  demanded  that  Magon  should  be  called  upon  to  with- 
draw his  oflensive  expressions.  The  Council  was  at  once  in 
a  storm.  Higher  and  higher  it  raged,  till  Gravina  quelled 
it  by  moving  suddenly  that  the  question  be  put  without 
further  discussion.      Thus  it  was  he  stated  it :  "  Ought  or 


Oct.  8  WHAT    NELSON    KNEW  325 

ought  not  the  Combined  Squadron  to  put  to  sea,  seeing 
that  it  was  not  in  such  superiority  of  force  as  to  balance 
its  inherent  inferiority  ?  "  A  vote  was  taken,  and  the  result 
was  a  decision  to  remain  at  anchor.  It  was  further  agreed 
to  re-establish  the  defence  flotilla  with  contingents  from 
the  fleet  till  a  favourable  opportunity  for  going  out  should 
occur.^ 

Thus  it  was  the  Admirals  tried  to  save  Napoleon  from 
his  reckless  determination  to  hurl  his  fleet  upon  Craig  and 
the  Russians ;  and  it  so  happened  that  while  the  resolution 
of  inability  was  being  taken  Nelson  received  from  home  the 
communication  which  for  the  first  time  explained  to  him 
the  meaning  of  the  expedition  at  Malta.  The  effect  of  the 
despatch  was  finally  to  clear  his  mind  and  to  enable  him 
at  last  to  form  a  definite  idea  of  the  shape  the  campaign 
would  thenceforth  assume.  It  is  certain  at  least  that  on 
receiving  the  news  he  changed  his  view  of  the  enemy's 
probable  action  and  fixed  a  plan  of  operations  from  which 
he  never  again  swerved.  To  appreciate  the  point,  it  is 
necessary  to  grasp  clearly  the  information  he  had  previously 
and  the  dispositions  he  had  made. 

Newspapers  of  September  20th  had  already  reached 
the  fleet  announcing  that  the  Continental  war  was  certain. 
There  were  also  local  rumours  that  Napoleon  had  ordered 
the  Cadiz  fleet  to  sea,  and  that  in  Council  of  War  they  had 
decided  to  disobey.  Villeneuve,  it  was  said,  was  to  be 
superseded  in  consequence  by  Decres.-^  Though  the  news 
could  only  strengthen  the  expectation  that  the  Combined 
Fleet  would  soon  put  to  sea,  it  gave  little  light  on  its 
objective.  It  was  quite  as  likely  it  would  be  used  for  a 
diversion  to  the  north  or  west  as  that  it  would  act  directly 
in  the  Mediterranean.  Nelson,  indeed,  had  been  absorbed 
in  arranging  for  the  cruiser  command  of  that  sea,  while  his 
battle  fleet  was  held  to  Cadiz,  and  had  just  sent  home  a 
memorandum  of  the  minimum  cruiser  force  that  was  required 


^  "  Proces-verbal  du  Conseil  du  guerre,  &c.,"  and  Escailo's  letter  to  Captain 
MacDonnell :  Ibid.,  pp.  97-9. 

2  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrinyton,  i.  53.  Codrington  wrote  Duplex  instead 
of  Decres. 


326  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Oct.  i 

for  the  whole  of  his  station.'  Bctwueii  writing  this  de- 
spatch, liowever,  and  the  receipt  of  the  new  instructions 
concerning  Craig,  he  made  a  significant  change  in  his 
arrangements. 

His  first  step  on  taking  over  the  command  had  been  to 
send  Bhickwood  to  recall  Admiral  Louis  from  before  Cadiz. 
CoUingwood  had  stationed  him  close  in  with  an  inshore 
squadron  consisting  of  the  Qvccn  1)8,  the  Canopus  80,  and 
three  seventy- fours.  It  was  a  normal  feature  of  blockade, 
as  it  was  then  practised,  of  which  Nelson  did  not  approve, 
unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  it ; 
and  in  this  case  the  danger  of  a  sudden  v/esterly  squall  to 
an  inshore  squadron  Avas  a  special  reason  for  not  employing 
one.  The  inherent  advantage  of  the  blockader  is  his  power 
of  concealing  from  the  enemy  his  actual  strength,  position, 
and  movements,  and  in  Nelson's  eyes  full  use  should  be 
made  of  this  advantage.  He  had  therefore  decided  to 
remove  the  whole  of  his  battle  fleet  out  of  sight  and  to 
watch  the  port  with  a  cruiser  squadron  only,  which  Black- 
Avood  was  to  command.  The  new  disposition  is  significant. 
For  it  emphasises  the  growing  expectation  that  the  exigencies 
of  the  situation  would  force  the  enemy  to  sea  if  only  they 
were  given  an  apparent  chance  of  escape.  There  was  reason 
enough  to  believe  they  might  make  the  attempt  any  day, 
for  Blackwood  from  his  inshore  position  had  already  re- 
ported that  the  troops  were  being  embarked.  Yet  at  the 
same  time  Nelson  set  about  preparing  for  a  long  and  ex- 
hausting watch.  It  was  mainly  a  question  of  supply.  A 
certain  amount  of  the  work  could  be  done  in  fine  weather 
on  the  spot  from  transports,  but  it  was  only  by  sending  his 
ships  away  in  batches  to  Gibraltar  and  Tctuan  that  he 
could  rely  on  keeping  his  stores  and  water  up  to  the  mark. 


^  Nicolas,  vii.  85-6,  107.  For  the  service  of  the  battle  fleet  his  requisi- 
tion was  for  8  frigates  and  2  sloops,  of  which  2  frigates  and  4  sloops  were  to 
keep  open  communication  with  Gibraltar  and  Lisbon.  For  observation  and 
commercial  blockade  service  he  required  3  frigates  at  Cape  Spartel,  Cape 
St,  Mary  and  the  Salvages,  and  2  sloops  for  Cape  St.  Vincent,  as  well  as  a 
frigate  and  a  sloop  off  Cartagena.  Besides  these  the  officer  in  command  at 
Gibraltar  required  2  frigates  and  3  sloops  for  the  protection  of  the  Straits, 
while  for  the  rest  of  the  Mediterranean  were  required  3  frigates  and  G  sloops, 
besides  the  3  frigates  which  formed  Craig's  escort. 


Oct.  2-5  NELSON'S   DISPOSITIONS  32; 

To  this  embarrassing  necessity  he  was  no  doubt  reconciled 
and  even  bound  by  his  instructions.  For  so  long  as  there 
was  an  active  squadron  in  Cartagena  he  must  have  sonje- 
thing  to  watch  it.  He  must  guard  against  its  interference 
up  the  Mediterranean  or  on  the  trade  route  through  the 
Straits,  to  say  nothing  of  the  possibility  of  its  slipping  into 
Cadiz  while  the  main  British  fleet  was  kept  wide  of  the 
port.  Accordingly  on  October  2nd,  Louis,  much  against  his 
will,  was  ordered  to  the  Straits  with  his  squadron  and  a 
small  convoy  which  had  arrived  for  Malta. 

The  position  which  Nelson  himself  decided  to  occupy 
was  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  leagues  west  from  Cadiz.  In 
order  to  keep  touch  with  the  enemy  he  gave  Captain  Duff 
of  the  Defence  an  advanced  squadron  of  four  seventy-fours 
with  which  he  was  to  maintain  signal  communication  with 
Blackwood's  cruiser  squadron  without  getting  in  sight  of 
the  Spanish  signal  stations.  "  In  fresh  easterly  breezes," 
he  wrote  to  Blackwood,  '  I  shall  work  up  for  Cadiz,  never 
getting  to  the  northward  of  it,  and  in  the  event  of  hearing 
they  are  standing  out  of  Cadiz,  I  shall  carry  a  press  of 
sail  to  the  southward  towards  Cape  Spartel  and  Arrache."  ^ 

Such  were  his  ideas  and  intentions  before  he  received 
the  information  about  Craig,  that  is,  he  expected  the  enemy 
to  sail  with  the  first  easterly  wind.  On  the  5th  the  wind 
did  come  easterly,  and  in  view  of  Louis's  detachment 
Nelson  began  to  be  seriously  anxious  for  his  promised  rein- 
forcements from  home,  and  in  writing  to  Barham  to  explain 
what  he  had  done  he  urged  the  importance  of  annihilating 
the  enemy  and  not  merely  "  spoiling  their  voyage."  To  Rose 
he  wrote  next  day  more  strongly.  "  I  am  very  venj  very 
anxious,"  he  said,  "  for  its  arrival,  for  the  thing  will  be  done 
if  a  few  more  days  elapse.  ...  It  is,  as  Pitt  knows,  anni- 
hilation that  the  country  wants.  .  .  .  Numbers    can  only 

^  According  to  Lieutenant  (afterwards  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey)  Senhouse 
the  general  idea  in  the  fleet  was  that  Nelson  chose  his  position  with  the  fol- 
lowing objects  :  "In  the  first  place  to  give  the  enemy  a  chance  of  escape  ; 
next  to  prevent  our  fleet  being  driven  through  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  in  the 
winter  westerly  gales  .  .  .  and  lastly  to  be  ready  to  intercept  the  Brest  fleet, 
should  they  have  endeavoured  to  form  a  junction  with  the  fleet  at  Cadiz  before 
the  latter  could  arrive  to  the  assistance  of  the  former." — MacmiUans  Mafja- 
zinc,  vol.  81,  p.  415. 


3  28  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Ocr.  5-8 

annihilate  {sic).  Tlierefore  I  ho])o  the  Admiralty  will  send 
the  fixed  force  as  soon  as  possible."  ' 

Blackwood's  information  that  the  troops  were  embark- 
ing was  at  the  bottom  of  Nelson's  anxiety,  and  he  sent  it  on 
to  Collingwood  together  with  his  own  doubts  as  to  what  the 
enemy  meant  to  do.  Collingwood,  with  his  fresh  experience 
of  the  station,  seized  the  opportunity  to  hint  to  his  chief 
that  his  appreciation  was  incorrect  and  his  anxiety  pre- 
mature. "  Now,  my  lord,"  he  wrote,  with  a  striking  pene- 
tration of  Villeneuve's  mind,  "  I  will  give  your  lordship  my 
ideas  on  the  subject.  ...  If  they  are  to  sail  with  an  easterly 
wind,  they  are  not  bound  for  the  Mediterranean,  and  your 
lordship  may  depend  upon  it  the  Cartagena  squadron  is 
intended  to  join  them.  If  they  effect  that — and  with  a 
strongly  easterly  wind  they  may — they  will  present  them- 
selves to  us  with  forty  sail.  If  by  any  good  fortune  Louis 
was  to  fall  in  wdth  that  squadron  I  am  sure  he  would  turn 
them  to  leeward  .  .  .  and  a  French  ensign  might  bring 
them  to  us.  Whenever  the  Cartagena  people  were  expected 
they  lit  the  light-house.  Captain  Blackwood  should  look 
to  that  as  a  signal." "" 

Now  it  was  on  the  following  day  that  Nelson  received 
the  news  of  Craig's  intended  operations  in  Italy.  The 
despatch  came  out  in  the  Roj/al  Sovcrci/jn,  She  joined  on 
October  8th,  spick  and  span  after  her  relit  for  Collingwood's 
Hag,  and  though  the  easterly  wind  continued  to  blow.  Nelson's 
immediate  anxiety  passed  away.  With  Craig's  instructions 
in  his  hand  it  is  clear  he  had  no  longer  any  doubt  that 
Villeneuvc  was  destined  for  the  Mediterranean,  and  Colling- 
wood's appreciation  had  convinced  him  the  enemy  would 


^  To  the  Right.  Hon.  Sh'  George  Rose,  Oct.  6.  In  view  of  the  fact  tliat  this 
letter  is  often  cited  as  evidence  of  Nelson's  preference  for  a  number  of  units 
as  against  individual  force,  it  should  be  noted  that  what  he  is  pressing  Rose 
for,  is  "  the  fixed  force."  Now  besides  the  Victory  and  Jioijfd  tSovcrcign  and 
the  two  seventy-fours  which  he  had  brought  out,  the  fixed  force  which  he  was 
expecting  included  the  Loudon  and  Barjlcur  98's,  the  A(j<ininnnon  64,  and 
Bcllcifilc  74.  Thus  of  eight  units  half  were  three-deckers.  (To  Blackwood, 
Oct.  8  and  1),  Nicolas  vii.  <S8  and  90.)  In  his  official  letter  to  Barham,  he 
says  nothing  about  "  numbers,"  but  only  "  the  ships  from  England  "  (Oct. 
5,  Jbid.,  p.  75).  The  expression  used  to  Rose  clearly  proves  nothing  either 
way,  if  read  with  its  context. 

2  Nicolas,  vii.  81  note. 


OCT.3-IO  LOUIS   AND    BLACKWOOD  329 

not  sail  with  the  wind  at  east.  This  view  he  now  adopted, 
and  the  characteristic  tenacity  and  singleness  of  mind  with 
which  he  clung  to  it  was  evinced  at  once.  It  so  happened 
that  the  day  after  Louis  parted  company,  Blackwood  in- 
formed him  by  signal  that  the  enemy's  troops  were  embarked, 
and  that  they  intended  to  sail  on  the  first  easterly  wind. 
As  the  wind  had  then  come  east  Louis  decided  to  send  on 
his  convoy  with  two  of  his  squadron  and  to  return  to  Nelson 
with  the  rest.  "  But  Lord  Nelson,"  so  James  tells  us,  ''  con- 
ceiving the  whole  to  be  a  stratagem  to  draw  him  nearer  to 
Cadiz  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  more  accurate  know- 
ledge of  his  force,  ordered  the  Rear-Admiral  to  proceed  in 
the  execution  of  his  orders."^ 

Louis,  therefore,  much  to  his  own  and  his  captain's 
disgust,  had  again  to  part  company,  and  in  accordance  with 
Nelson  s  new  view  of  the  situation  fresh  instructions  were 
sent  to  Blackwood.  His  squadron  had  just  been  made  up 
with  new  arrivals  to  its  full  strength  of  five  frigates  and  two 
sloops.  "  Those,"  Nelson  wrote  to  him,  "  who  know  more  of 
Cadiz  than  either  you  or  I  do,  say  that  after  these  Levanters 
come  several  days  of  fine  weather — sea  breezes  westerly, 
land  wind  at  night — and  if  the  enemy  are  bound  for  the 
Mediterranean  they  will  come  out  at  night  .  .  .  run  to  the 
southward  and  catch  the  sea  breezes  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Gut  and  push  through  while  we  have  little  wind  in  the 
oflfing."  He  was  therefore  to  take  measures  to  ensure 
detecting  any  such  movement,  and  was  furnished  with 
special  long-distance  night-signals  to  give  warning. 

As  for  the  battle  squadron.  Nelson  was  now  quite  clear 
what  to  do  with  it.  ''  At  present,"  he  wrote  to  CoUing- 
wood,  "  I  am  sure  the  Mediterranean  is  their  destination. 
.  .  .  Should  the  enemy  move  ...  it  is  then  probable  that 
I  shall  make  the  signal  to  bear  up  and  steer  for  the  entrance 
of  the  Straits." "  At  the  same  time  all  arrangements  were 
completed  for  the  expected  action.  It  was  now^  he  issued 
his  order  of  battle   and  the   famous   plan  of  attack — the 

^  Hubback,  Jane  Austcn^s  Sailor  Brothcra,  p.  149  ;  James,  Naval  Histonj, 
iv.  380  ;  Log  of  the  Canopus.     Blackwood  had  the  information  from  a  Swede. 
2  Nicolas,  vii.  110,  October  10th. 


330  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ        Oct.  10-17 

"  Nelson  touch  "  as  lie  called  it — which  hitherto  he  had 
only  explained  verbally  to  his  captains  when  they  assembled 
to  greet  him  on  his  taking  over  the  command.' 

Then  for  a  week  all  was  quiet,  save  for  the  painful  duty 
of  sending  Calder  home  for  his  trial  and  the  passing  dis- 
turbance which  Allemand  created.  On  the  13th  Sir  Edward 
Berry  joined  in  the  Agamemnon,  bringing  news  of  his  narrow 
escape,  and  the  same  evening  Calder  parted  company.  The 
belief  was  that  Allemand  was  still  to  the  northward  about 
Vigo,  and  Nelson  was  in  some  anxiety  lest  Calder  should 
fall  into  his  hands.  To  have  such  a  squadron  on  his  com- 
munications Avith  home  was  far  from  pleasant.  He  had  full 
particulars  of  AUemand's  force  and  its  proceedings  from 
a  French  officer  who  had  been  taken  in  a  recapture  by  one 
of  the  ubiquitous  Guernsey  privateers.  Further  intelligence 
was  brought  in  by  the  Diligent,  the  store  ship  which  had 
informed  Cornwallis  of  AUemand's  presence  in  the  Sound- 
ings. Strachan  had  escorted  her  well  to  the  southw^ard  till 
she  was  safe  in  Lobb's  hands,  and  he  was  now  quietly  cruis- 
ing off  Vigo  for  AUemand's  superior  squadron,  under  the 
belief  it  was  somewhere  close  to  him  and  about  to  make 
the  port."  Nelson  was  naturally  far  from  easy  about  him. 
"  I  wish  he  were  stronger,"  he  wrote  to  Blackwood  on  the 
14th,  "but  I  am  sure  he  will  spoil  their  cruising;"  and 
again  to  Collingwood  on  the  l7th,  "  I  wish  he  had  a  good 
three-decker  with  him."  ^ 

For  the  rest  he  was  busy  with  the  problem  of  con- 
trolling Italian  waters,  difficult  enough  in  itself  without  the 
disturbance  on  his  communications.  The  Agamemnon  had 
brought  out  a  repetition  of  his  instructions  for  co-operating 
with  Craig,  and  the  expedition  was  much  in  his  mind.  He 
had  already  informed  the  Admiralty  he  must  have  three 


1  For  both  these  documents,  see  post,  p.  353,  and  Appendix  D.  It  is  worth 
noting  that  had  Villeneuve  coiue  out  when  Nelson  lirst  expected  him  the 
Memorandum  would  not  have  been  ready. 

-  Log  of  the  Cccsd}'. 

3  Nicolas,  vii.  121  and  12()-7-9.  On  the  same  day,  the  18th,  we  have 
another  ray  of  light  on  Nelson's  regard  for  three-decked  ships.  Collingwood, 
in  discussing  what  ships  should  receive  water  from  the  water-ships,  says, 
"  I  suppose  your  lordship  would  wish  the  three-deckers  to  be  filled  up  well." 
— Ibid.,  note.     This  seems  to  put  force  before  numbers. 


Oct.  i6-i8  THE    DEADLOCK    BROKEN  331 

cruisers  besides  those  he  originally  asked  for,  if  he  was  to  keep 
up  coinrQunication  with  the  expeditionary  force.  He  was 
now  very  anxious  to  send  a  squadron  of  ten  of  the  line  to 
his  own  old  station,  but  till  Yilleneuve  was  dealt  with  this 
was  impossible,  and  all  he  could  hope  for — and  that  not 
immediately — was  a  strong  cruiser  squadron  which  he  in- 
tended to  place  under  Keats  of  the  Siiiicrh.  Still,  so  deeply 
was  he  concerned  with  the  importance  of  supporting  Craig 
that  he  did  take  the  extreme  step  of  sending  Louis  an  order 
to  escort  the  Malta  convoy  past  Cartagena  before  he  rejoined.^ 
At  this  time  he  seems  to  have  had  little  expectation  of  the 
enemy's  putting  to  sea.  He  was  preparing  bomb- vessels  and 
looking  for  the  arrival  of  fire-ships,  as  well  as  Congreve  and 
Francis  with  their  rockets  and  torpedoes  to  force  things  to  an 
issue.'^  But  his  hope  of  a  decision  rested  mainly  as  before 
on  the  slow  pressure  of  famine  and  little  on  the  stimulus 
of  the  Anglo-Russian  threat  in  South  Italy.  There  is 
no  reference  to  it  in  Nelson's  correspondence,  though  he 
must  have  discussed  it  with  Collingwood.  We  know  at 
least  that  on  this  ground  Collingwood  regarded  Villeneuve's 
continued  inaction  as  inexplicable.  "  It  is  very  extra- 
ordinary," he  wrote  to  Nelson  on  the  18th,  "the  people  in 
Cadiz  do  not  make  some  movement.  If  they  allow  the  war 
to  begin  in  Italy,  they  cannot  hereafter  make  up  for  the 
want  of  assistance  they  might  give  in  the  first  instance."  ^ 

Once  more  Collingwood  showed  his  power  of  penetration. 
His  vision  of  what  was  stirring  inside  Cadiz  could  not  have 
been  more  just.     As  he  wrote  the  hour  had  come. 

The  resolution  which  the  Council  of  War  had  first 
taken  was  just  the  kind  of  thing  that  Napoleon  expected, 
and  the  precautions  he  adopted  to  meet  it,  acted  even  more 
promptly  than  he  planned.  On  October  12th,  four  days 
after  the  Council  of  War,  Admiral  Rosily  reached  Madrid 

^  Hubback,  Jane  Aastcns  Sailor  Brothers^  p.  152.  Louis  received  the  order 
by  a  frigate  at  Tetuan  on  the  17th.  He  also  at  this  time  sent  the  Donegal  74 
into  Gibraltar  "  for  a  ground-tier  of  casks." 

^  "  Mr.  Francis  "  was  the  famous  American,  Robert  Fulton.  He  had  in- 
vented a  torpedo,  designed  to  be  fixed  to  the  cable  of  a  ship  in  a  tideway, 
when  it  would  swing  under  her  and  be  exploded  by  clockwork.  It  had  lately 
been  tried  with  success  experimentally. 

=»  Ndson  Papers,  Add.  3ISS.  34968.' 


3  32  THE    DEADLOCK   AT    CADIZ  oci.is 

on  his  way  to  supersede  Villcneuve.  The  posting  system 
had  broken  down,  the  roads  beyond  Cordova  were  infested 
with  brigands,  and  the  French  Ambassador  warned  him  not 
to  i)rocccd  till  arrangen:ients  could  be  made  for  his  travel- 
ling in  safety.  It  was  ten  days'  journey  on  to  Cadiz,  but  in 
half  that  time  word  came  to  Villeneuve  that  Rosily  had 
reached  the  capital.  Guessing  in  a  moment  what  it  meant, 
and  without  saying  a  word  to  any  one,  on  the  18th,  as 
Colling  wood  was  writing  the  letter  just  quoted,  he  suddenly 
ordered  Magon  with  seven  of  the  line  and  a  frigate  to  pro- 
ceed to  sea  at  dark  and  endeavour  to  capture  Blackwood's 
squadron  and  lind  out  what  was  behind  it.  Before,  how- 
ever, the  order  was  executed,  word  came  in  by  telegraph  of 
Louis's  detachment  at  Gibraltar.  The  news  was  that  the 
convoy  which  had  been  waiting  there  for  escort,  had  sailed 
eastward  in  charge  of  four  of  the  line,  and  that  two  others 
were  said  to  be  in  the  port.^  Villeneuve's  inference  was  that 
Nelson  must  be  six  of  the  line  short.  Now  if  ever  was  his 
time.  There  was  no  wind  and  little  sign  of  it,  but  he  was 
desperate,  and  without  consulting  any  one  he  made  the 
general  signal  to  prepare  to  weigh.-^ 

^  One  of  these  was  tlie  Donegal  74,  which  Nelson  had  just  sent  in  there, 
"  beinp  obliged  to  e^o  into  the  Mole  for  two  days."  Nelson  to  Collingwood, 
Oct.  19th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  127.  The  other  may  have  been  the  Zadons  74,  which, 
with  the  Endymion  40  ("both  being  crippled  ships"),  Louis  had  originally 
sent  on  with  the  Malta  convoy. 

-  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Oct.  18th  (two  letters)  :  Desbriere,  Trufalgar,  ^Ipp. 
101-2. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

THE  MAIN   FLEETS  IN   CONTACT 

"  Enemy  have  their  topsail  yards  hoisted."  At  six  o'clock 
in  the  morning  of  October  19th  the  signal  fluttered  from  the 
SiHus,  the  nearest  frigate  inshore ;  and  then  at  seven  the 
long-awaited  No.  370.  It  meant  "The  enemy's  ships  are 
coming  out  of  port  or  getting  under  sail."  In  ten  minutes 
Blackwood  passed  it  on  to  the  Pte&c, which  he  kept  to  the 
westward.  As  the  light  grew,  they  got  it  through  to  the 
Mars,  Duff's  easternmost  ship,  and  by  half-past  nine  Nelson 
had  it.  He  was  then  nearly  fifty  miles  to  the  westward  of 
Cadiz.  Without  a  moment's  hesitation  or  waiting  to  form 
order  of  sailing  he  gave  the  word  for  ''  General  chase,  south- 
east," and  shortly  afterwards  made  the  signal  to  prepare  for 
battle.^ 

Meanwhile  Blackwood  had  despatched  one  of  his  tAVO 
sloops  to  the  Victory  and  the  other  to  warn  Louis,  while  he 
himself  watched  the  enemy  struggling  to  get  out  of  the 
harbour  on  the  faint  land  breeze.  By  three  o'clock  a  signal 
came  through  from  him  that  the  enemy's  fleet  was  at  sea, 

1  There  has  been  sorae  confusion  about  Nelson's  exact  position  when  he 
got  the  signal.  He  says  in  his  Diary  :  "  Wind  at  South,  Cadiz  bearing  E.N.E. 
by  compass  {i.c,  magnetic)  16  leagues."  The  variation  as  recorded  in  the 
log  of  the  Montancs  was  20°  West  ^Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  Ajrp.  374).  E.N.E. 
magnetic  was  therefore  about  N.E.  true.  On  a  south  wind  he  could  not  sail 
south-east  true,  nor  from  a  position  16  leagues  true  S.W,  of  Cadiz  could  he 
make  the  Straits  on  that  course.  The  signal  he  used  was  the  single  flag  with 
two  guns  and  the  S.E.  compass  flag,  and  it  meant  "  The  whole  fleet  to  chase 
in  the  S.E.  quarter."  The  course  required  was  a  little  south  of  east,  i.e.  in 
the  south-east  quarter.  Probably,  however,  Nelson's  position  is  wrong,  for 
the  noon  position  in  the  Victory's  log  is  36°  36'  N.  7°  30' W.,  which  makes 
Cadiz  bear  about  19  leagues  E.S.E.  magnetic  and  about  E.  true,  that  is,  his 
regular  position.  From  this  point  a  south-east  course  led  into  the  Straits' 
mouth.  There  is  nothing  to  show  Nelson  had  changed  the  position  of  the 
fleet,  and  probably  therefore  he  wrote  "E.N.E."  for  "E.S.E."  by  mistake. 
According  to  the  TCmcraire^s  log  the  course  was  first  E.  by  S.  and  wind  S.  by 
E.,  and  afterwards  S.E.  by  E.  on  a  W.S.W.  wind. 

333 


3  34  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  19 

though  ill  truth  it  was  only  Magon's  division  that  as  yet  was 
outside.  Nelson  held  on  his  way.  The  movement  to  cut 
off  Villeneuve  from  the  Straits  was  that  which  he  had 
settled  from  the  time  he  had  learnt  from  the  Government 
how  much  rested  upon  Craig's  operations,  but  he  had  also 
in  view  an  immediate  object  of  his  own.  The  recent  easterly 
wind  let  him  hope  that  he  might  find  Louis  coming  out  of 
the  Straits  to  give  him  his  whole  fleet  in  hand  for  the  final 
decision.^  As  evening  closed  down,  in  order  to  ensure  his 
purpose  as  far  as  possible  he  formed  the  "Advance  Squadron," 
for  which  in  accordance  with  Mediterranean  practice  his 
tactical  Memorandum  provided.  A  division  of  eight  two- 
deckers  was  placed  under  Captain  Duft'  of  the  Mars,  five  of 
them  to  look  out  ahead  and  the  rest  to  continue  to  keep 
signal  touch  with  Blackwood's  cruisers."  The  rest  of  his 
fleet,  according  to  the  regular  practice,  were  to  observe  the 
Admiral's  motions  closely  during  the  night,  as  he  would 
probably  manoeuvre  without  signals.  At  the  same  time  he 
superseded  "  General  chase  "  by  signalling  for  the  order  of 
sailing ;  but  as  during  recent  exercises  three  of  his  seven 
three-deckers,  Britannia,  Prince,  and  Dreadnought,  had 
proved  very  bad  sailers,  he  directed  tliem  to  take  station 
as  convenient.'^     The  point  should  be  noticed  as  the  first 

1  Nelson  to  Collingwood,  October  18tb  and  19th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  127,  129.  No 
instructions  to  Louis  have  been  found,  but  Nelson  says  he  told  him  "an 
easterly  wind  must  not  be  lost,"  even  if  the  convoy  had  to  wait  for  the  next 
detachment. 

2  An  Advance  Squadron  was  established  in  the  Mediterranean  fleet  as 
early  as  1790.  It  was  not  Nelson's  idea,  and  was  borrowed  probably  from 
the  French.  See  Sir/nah  and  Instructions  {Navt/  Record  iSociety),  pp.  72-3.  The 
composition  of  the  Division  in  this  case  is  uncertain.  Codriiigton  in  a  letter 
to  his  wife  {Lift',  i.  57)  says:  "  The  above  four  (A(/amemnon,  Defence,  CoIossuh, 
and  Mars)  and  as  many  more  of  us  are  now  to  form  an  advanced  squadron, 
and  I  trust  by  morning  we  shall  all  be  united  [i.e.  with  Louis]  and  in  sight  of 
the  enemy."  He  also  says  his  own  ship,  Orion,  and  the  Belleisle,  were  amongst 
those  that  went  ahead.  Defence  and  Af/amemri'tn  were  nearest  Cadiz,  with 
Mars  and  Co/o.s.su.s  as  connecting  ships.  Temeraire  records  a  signal  (No.  155) 
to  Belleisle,  Orion,  Leviathan,  Polyphemus,  and  Bellerophon,  ''to  keep  a  look-out 
ahead  during  the  night  at  a  convenient  distance  for  intercourse  by  night 
signals,  carrying  a  light  in  the  stern." — Masters'  Logs,  870G.  Colonel  Owen, 
who  then  commanded  the  Marines  in  the  Belleisle,  also  says  live  were  sent 
forward. — Allen,  Memoirs  of  Sir  W.  Harcjood,  p.  137.  There  must  therefore 
have  been  nine  pennants  in  the  squadron — that  is,  one-third  of  the  force  with 
Nelson's  flag — an  unusually  large  proportion. 

3  Private  Diary,  Nicolas,  vii.  133,  and  Teiaeraire's^\^r\a\  Log,  Masters'  Logs, 
370(i.  A  curious  effect  of  this  order  was  that  the  French  believed  these  three 
ships  had  been  formed  into  an  Escadre  d' observation. 


Oct.  20  WHY    LOUIS    DID    NOT    REJOIN  335 

step  in  the  process  of  disintegration  Avhich  his  "  Order  of 
battle  "  and  "  Plan  of  attack  "  were  to  suffer,  as  the  actual 
tactical  conditions  of  the  occasion  developed  themselves  to 
his  elastic  mind. 

At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  having  attained  his 
desired  position,  he  hove-to,  and  at  dawn  found  himself  in 
sight  of  Gibraltar  between  Capes  Trafalgar  and  Spartel, 
that  is,  in  the  entrance  to  the  Straits.  In  the  growing  light 
every  eye  was  strained  for  a  sight  of  Louis's  squadron,  but 
not  a  sign  of  it  was  to  be  seen.  The  truth  was  that  his 
return  to  Nelson  after  he  had  first  started  and  the  prevail- 
ing easterly  winds  had  prevented  his  reaching  Gibraltar 
for  five  days  after  he  received  his  orders,  and  it  was  not  till 
the  15th  that  he  was  able  to  complete  his  water  and  victuals 
at  Tetuan.  This  done  he  hurried  away  to  rejoin  Nelson,  but 
meeting  a  Avesterly  wind,  was  forced  back  to  Tetuan,  and 
there  on  the  1 7th,  before  he  could  sail  again,  the  order  reached 
him  to  see  the  Malta  convoy  forward.  The  result  was  that 
he  missed  Blackwood's  sloop,  and  when  Nelson  was  looking 
for  him  between  Spartel  and  Trafalgar  he  was  two  hundred 
miles  away  and  still  going  to  the  eastward.  Nor  was  it  till 
the  21st  of  famous  memory  that  in  accordance  with  the 
usual  practice  he  dismissed  the  convoy  off  Cape  Tenez  and 
stood  back  towards  Cartagena  to  cover  its  further  progress.^ 
Thus  after  all  the  practically  inert  Cartagena  squadron, 
though  it  failed  to  make  any  movement  which  Napoleon 
had  designed  for  it,  did  avail  in  the  hour  of  crisis  to  break 
the  vital  British  concentration.  A  more  significant  instance 
could  not  be  found  of  how  much  more  difficult  to  deal  with 
is  a  purely  expectant  attitude  at  sea  than  on  land.  It 
is  a  radical  and  far-reaching  difference  between  naval  and 
military  strategy,  due  mainly  to  the  exigencies  of  commerce 
protection. 

Disappointing  as  it  was  to  Nelson's  men  that  Louis  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen,  there  was  a  worse  trouble  to  disturb 
them.  An  action  had  been  expected  confidently  at  dawn, 
but  Villeneuve  v/as  nowhere  to  be  seen.  The  sun  rose 
stormily  ;  the  fine  weather  had  passed  ;  it  was  thick  and  wet, 

^  Log  of  the  Queen.     Hubback,  Jane  Austen's JiCiilor  Brothers,  p.  152. 


336  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  20 

with  a  very  short  range  of  visibiHty.  In  breathless  impa- 
tience they  scoured  the  mist,  but  look  as  they  would  there 
was  not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  anywhere.  What  had  become 
of  them  ?  "  All  our  gay  hopes  are  fled,"  wrote  Codrington 
to  his  wife  that  morning,  "  and  instead  of  being  under  all 
sail  in  a  veiy  light  breeze  and  fine  weather,  expecting  to 
bring  the  enemy  to  battle,  wc  are  under  close-reefed  topsails 
in  a  very  stormy  wind  with  thick  rainy  weather  and  the 
dastardly  French  we  find  returned  to  Cadiz."  This  belief 
must  have  been  a  mere  inference  from  their  not  beingr  in 
sight.  "  Had  they  persevered,"  he  added,  "  we  should  cer- 
tainly have  come  up  with  them  from  the  decisive  dash  we 
made  for  the  Gut  of  Gibraltar."  ^  Where  could  they  be  if 
not  in  Cadiz  ?  One  thing  at  least  was  clear.  In  such  foul 
weather  as  was  blowing  up,  the  fleet  could  not  stay  where 
it  was.  "  I  must  guard,"  Nelson  had  written  to  Barham, 
"  against  being  caught  with  a  westerly  wind  near  Cadiz,  {is 
a  fleet  of  ships  with  so  many  three-deckers  would  inevitably 
be  forced  into  the  Straits."  -  Accordingly,  so  soon  as  it  was 
light  enough  to  be  sure  how  things  stood,  he  decided  to 
make  use  of  the  stiff  south-south-west  wind  to  get  back 
towards  his  old  station. 

Scarcely  had  he  made  the  decision  when  one  of  Black- 
wood's frigates  hove  in  sight  flying  the  welcome  signal  that 
the  enemy  bore  to  the  north.  Nelson  immediately  signalled 
for  the  order  of  sailing,  and  about  an  hour  later  hove  the 
Victory  to  and  summoned  Collingwood  on  board  to  consult 
him.  Collingwood,  it  is  said,  was  for  making  an  immediate 
attack,  but  this  was  not  to  Nelson's  mind.  We  can  only 
guess  his  reason.  It  may  have  been  that  he  felt  Colling- 
wood's  plan  would  mean  engaging  too  late  in  the  day  and 
too  near  Cadiz  to  ensure  a  decisive  battle,  and  yet  the  wind 
was  fair  to  carry  him  rapidly  into  action.  What  he  did  was 
to  reform  order  of  sailing  and  to  stand  on  again  north-west 
under  easy  sail  as  though  to  entice  Villeneuve  to  attempt  to 
pass  him  inshore."^ 

^  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  58.  ^  Nicolas,  vii.  75. 

^  Dr  Beatty  says :  "  At  8  o'clock  the  Victory  hove-to,  and  Admiral 
Collingwood  .  .  .  came  on  board  to  receive  instructions."  Codrington  related 
the  incident  thus:  "On  the  tSunday  morning  Lord  Nelson,  as  a  compliment 


0CT.20      THE    RETURN    FROM    THE    STRAITS      zZ7 

At  the  same  time  he  summoned  Dutt'  and  two  of  his 
captains,  and  instructed  them  to  keep  contact  with  Black- 
wood and  the  enemy.  Then  without  recalHng  the  rest  of 
the  Advance  Squadron  into  the  line,  he  held  on  the  course 
he  had  chosen,  presumably  to  avoid  premature  contact  or  a 
premature  disclosure  of  his  force.  By  noon  it  had  brought 
him  some  twenty  miles  south-west  of  Cadiz.  Blackwood's 
second  sloop  by  this  time  had  communicated,  and  informed 
him  that  she  had  seen  forty  sail  coming  out  the  previous 
evening,  but  this  still  left  the  enemy's  conduct  a  mystery. 
In  the  afternoon,  however,  Blackwood  telegraphed  a  message 
which  put  a  clearer  aspect  on  the  situation,  and  seemed  to 
account  for  the  enemy's  not  having  been  caught  at  the 
Strait's  mouth.  It  was  that  they  appeared  determined  to 
ofo  to  the  westward.  "  And  that,"  wrote  the  Admiral  in  his 
diary,  "  they  shall  not  do,  if  in  the  power  of  Nelson  and 
Bronte  to  prevent  them."  The  course  he  was  steering, 
whether  by  intention  or  not,  was  exactly  what  was  wanted. 
He  therefore  held  on  as  he  was  till  two  o'clock,  when  the 
fleet  was  taken  aback  by  a  sudden  shift  of  wind  into  the 
west-north-west.  The  sailing  order  was  thrown  into  confu- 
sion, and  all  movement  was  checked  till  he  could  restore 
his  formation. 

If  the  mystery  of  Villeneuve's  intention  was  hard  to 
fathom,  it  was  no  wonder,  for  the  true  explanation  of  his 
not  having  been  found  in  the  Strait's  mouth  lay  in  circum- 
stances beyond  his  control.  Blackwood  was  understood  to 
have  reported  that  the  whole  allied  fleet  had  got  to  sea  on 
the  evening  of  the  19th,  but  in  fact  its  seamanship  had 
proved  unequal  to  the  task  in  the  light  airs  that  prevailed. 
It  was  not  till  nearly  noon  on  the  20tli  that  Villeneuve  had  the 
whole  of  his  force  well  under  way.  His  intention,  as  Nelson 
divined,  had  actually  been  to  make  direct  for  the  Mediter- 

to  Collingwood,  called  him  on  board  by  signal  to  consult  with  him,  saying  to 
Hardy  jocosely  that  lie  should  noc  be  guided  Vjy  his  opinion  unless  it  agreed 
with  his  own  ;  and  upon  asking  him,  Collingwood  gave  his  opinion  in  favour 
of  attacking  the  lleet  immediately.  Lord  Nelson,  however,  kept  to  his  plan 
of  waiting  till  he  could  get  them  further  off,  fis  they  did  not  seem  determined 
to  return  to  Cadiz  but  to  persevere  in  their  original  intentions,'  &c.  This 
was  one  of  the  passages  which  Codrington  dictated  to  his  daughter  I^ady 
Bourchier  many  years  later." — Life  of  Codrinyton,  i.  59. 

Y 


338  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN   CONTACT      oct.  20 

ranean,  but  outside  he  had  met  the  southerly  wind  shifting 
to  the  south-west  on  which  Nelson  under  easy  sail  was 
reaching  back  from  the  Straits,  and  he  had  been  compelled, 
as  Blackwood  had  reported,  to  stand  to  the  westward.  On 
this  course  he  began  laboriously  to  form  his  order  of  sailing. 
His  organisation  was  based  on  the  old  tactical  idea  of 
"  equalising  the  line,"  and  using  the  surplus  units  as  a  corps 
cle  reserve.  Believing  that  after  Louis's  departure  Nelson 
would  have  only  twenty  of  the  line  with  his  Hag,  he  formed 
a  corjjs  de  hataille  of  that  number,  in  three  divisions  under 
his  immediate  command.  With  the  remaining  twelve  he 
constituted  an  esaulre  d! observation  in  two  divisions,  which, 
like  Nelson's  Advance  Squadron,  was  to  be  employed  as  a 
reserve.  Graviua  was  in  command  of  it,  and  his  instructions 
on  the  time-honoured  plan  were  to  keep  somewhat  ahead 
and  to  windward,  so  as  to  be  able  to  succour  any  part  of  the 
fleet  upon  which  the  enemy  should  concentrate.  Seeing 
that  Villeneuve  was  convinced  that  Nelson  would  adopt 
the  principle  of  concentration,  the  organisation  was  well 
conceived  for  dealing  with  it,  had  only  the  power  of  execu- 
tion been  equal  to  the  design.  But  in  the  shifting  squalls 
that  prevailed,  the  lack  of  cohesion  in  the  allied  fleet  and 
its  defects  in  seamanship  became  more  and  more  apparent. 
So  unhandy  was  the  manoeuvring  that  for  three  hours  the 
cumbrous  fleet  laboured  in  vain  to  attain  its  formation. 
About  four  o'clock  the  wind  came  westerly.  The  sailing 
order  was  still  far  from  being  formed,  but  regardless  of 
consequences  Villeneuve  felt  compelled  to  seize  the  oppor- 
tunity of  getting  to  the  southward,  and  he  signalled  to  wear 
together.  The  confusion  that  ensued  was  almost  hopeless, 
and  after  wearing  the  efibrt  to  form  the  order  of  sailing 
continued  more  laboriously  than  ever.  The  evolution  was 
only  possible  by  forming  on  the  ships  furthest  to  leeward, 
so  that  although  Villeneuve  tried  to  keep  close-hauled  on 
the  starboard  tack  and  steer  to  the  west-south-west  as 
though  to  weather  Nelson  or  get  a  good  offing  for  entering 
the  Straits,  his  mean  course  must  have  been  about  south, 
and  he  was  reported  thus  by  the  British  frigates  about 
nightfall. 


0CT.2O  NELSON   RECOVERS   TOUCH  339 

If  Villeneuve  was  in  trouble  with  his  fleet,  it  was  little 
wonder,  for  after  the  shift  of  wind  Nelson  himself  took  two 
hours  to  restore  his  order  of  sailing/  He  did  it  by  coming- 
to  the  wind  on  the  starboard  tack,  so  that  the  fleet  was 
now  heading  about  south-west.  But  towards  four  o'clock — 
that  is,  when  Villeneuve  was  wearing  his  fleet— Nelson  was 
doing  the  same,  but  on  the  opposite  or  port  tack.  Whether 
he  knew  the  enemy  had  gone  about  is  doubtful.  There  is 
no  trace  of  the  movement  having  been  reported  to  him. 
The  Uuryalus  had  run  down  to  the  battle  squadron  and 
w\as  signalling  direct  to  the  Victory,  but  was  not  in  sight 
of  the  enemy ;  and  the  last  signal  she  had  made  was  that 
their  leading  ship  bore  to  the  north  of  him.^  The  effect 
of  the  British  movement  was  to  give  the  fleet  a  course 
very  little  west  of  north,  so  that  Nelson  must  have  known 
he  was  steering  direct  to  meet  his  enemy.  Indeed,  the 
weather  had  cleared  so  much  with  the  westerly  wind  that 
before  sundown  several  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  from 
the  mast-head  close  in  to  Cadiz.^ 

Is  it  possible  after  all  that  he  was  thinking  of  engaging 
that  evening  ?  It  is  not  probable.  An  oflicer  present  tells 
us,  that  the  general  impression  in  the  fleet  was  that  the 
enemy  did  not  mean  to  go  back  into  Cadiz,  but  that,  seeing 
they  had  remained  at  sea  in  face  of  the  blustery  weather,  it 
was  evident  they  were  going  to  attempt  to  escape  at  the 
risk  of  an  action.  True,  it  was  at  this  time  that  Nelson 
finally  concentrated  his  fleet.  At  sunset  the  whole  of  the 
Advance  Squadron,  except  the  two  or  three  connecting 
ships,  were  reabsorbed  into  the  order  of  sailing.*  He  was 
also  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  delivering  the  attack 

^  Hardy's  Journal :  Captains'  Logs,  414. 

2  Log  of  Euriialus  :  Great  ^Sea  Fights,  ii  1G7.  "  At  4.10  to  Victory,  No.  413, 
north,  two  guns."  This  was  an  MS.  addition  in  the  Signal  Book.  It  appears 
in  a  copy  belonging  to  Captain  Hope,  R.N.,  with  this  signification:  "The 
leading  ship  of  the  enemy's  line  bears  on  the  point  of  the  compass  shown 
herewith."  Enryalus'  time  was  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ahead  of 
Victory^ s.  By  Victory's  time  the  signal  would  have  been  made  about  3  30. 
Euryalus'  log  gives  it  as  4.10.     Temerairc  says  Naiad  made  it  at  3.34. 

^  Lieutenant  Senhouse  to  his  mother:  Alacmillan's  Magazine,  vol.  81, 
p  416  The  writer  was  afterwards  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey  Senhouse.  For 
his  authority  as  a  critic  of  the  action,  see  'post,  p   344. 

*  See  Colonel  Owen's  letters.     Allen  :  Memoirs  of  Hargood,  p    138. 


340  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  21 

which  the  Alemoranduin  laid  down,  and  we  know  it  was  a 
favourite  idea  of  his  to  approach  directly  end-on,  so  that 
the  enemy  could  not  tell  whether  he  meant  to  engage  to 
windward  or  leeward/  If  he  did  contemplate  engaging,  it 
must  have  been  in  a  night  action,  and  this  was  what 
Villeneuve  was  expecting.  But  he  cannot  in  fact  have  had 
any  such  intention.  For  when  he  absorbed  the  Advance 
Squadron  into  the  fleet,  he  telegraphed  to  Blackwood  that 
he  relied  on  hiui  and  his  cruiser  squadron  to  keep  touch 
during  the  night,  and  at  eight  o'clock,  just  as  Villeneuve 
in  fear  of  an  immediate  attack  was  signalling  for  the  line 
of  battle  as  convenient,  he  wore  away  again  seawards — that 
is,  to  the  south-west."  He  must  therefore  have  been  bent 
on  encouraging  the  enemy  to  make  their  expected  attempt 
to  escape,  and  by  keeping  to  windward  of  them  to  ensure  it 
should  not  succeed. 

This  movement  was  accurately  followed  by  all  the  fleet 
except  one  vessel,  a  chance  that  was  to  have  a  curious  effect 
for  good  on  the  coming  battle.  The  Africa  G4  apparently 
did  not  take  in  the  signal,  and  held  on  to  the  northward 
till  she  lost  touch.^  For  eight  hours  Nelson  held  this 
course  under  easy  sail,  Blackwood  keeping  him  hourly 
informed  of  the  enemy's  position  through  the  connecting 
ships  of  the  line.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  the 
wind  at  west-north-west,  he  wore  again  "  to  the  north-east," 
he  himself  sa3^s,  but  the  Victory  s  Log  gives  the  course  more 
accurately  as  north  by  east,  and  this  was  maintained  through 
the  night. 

The  effect  of  these  movements  had  been  to  annul  the 
Order  of  Sailing.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  that  in  those 
days  when  fleets  were  not  accustomed  to  cruise  in  regular 
formation,   the   sailing   order   was    seldom    preserved   after 

^  See  his  earlier  Memorandum,  i^i5'/ifi'n,7 /ns<r«r^/ons,  p.  315.  "  The  other 
mode  would  be  to  stand  under  an  easy  but  commanding  sail  directly  for  their 
headmost  ship,  so  as  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  knowing  whether  I  should 
pass  to  windward  or  to  leeward  of  him." 

2  It  was  already  dark,  and  he  used  No.  31  of  the  Night  Signals,  and  began, 
after  his  custom,  to  burn  blue  lights  to  indicate  his  position  :  Temerairc's 
Signal  Log, 

^  See  Lieutenant  Senhouse  to  his  mother,  October  27th  :  "  The  Africa,  who 
had  parted  in  the  night  "  {post,  p.  344,  note).  She  was  not  sent  to  scout  ahead, 
as  is  sometimes  stated. 


Oct.  2  1  FACE    TO    FACE  341 

dark,  and  especially  as  in  this  case  when  there  had  been 
any  manceuvring  during  the  night.  At  daybreak  accord- 
ingly the  fleet  was  in  no  regular  formation.  Collingwood 
was  apparently  about  the  van  of  his  division,  but  Nelson 
was  not.  Most  of  his  ships  had  stretched  ahead  of  him, 
and  what  the  French  saw  when  it  was  light  enough  was 
a  confused  mass  of  vessels  "  in  no  particular  order  "  stretch- 
ing about  south-east  and  north-west,  with  the  two  flagships 
near  each  other  about  the  centre.^ 

The  fleets  were  now  bearing  from  one  another  about 
south-west  and  north-east,  and  some  eight  or  nine  miles 
apart.  Shortly  after  six  it  was  light  enough  for  each  to 
see  the  other,  and  what  Nelson  made  out  was  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  in  no  distinguishable  formation  steering  for  the 
Straits.  The  moment  of  his  life  and  of  the  campaign  had 
come.  What  should  he  do  ?  Should  he  carry  out  the 
attack,  as  he  had  laid  it  down,  or  should  he  not  ?  What 
in  these  first  minutes  of  the  waxing  light  was  the  thought 
that  held  uppermost  in  his  mind  ?  Death  has  robbed  us 
of  the  answer.  We  can  only  glean  the  fragments  that  lie 
scattered  upon  those  hallowed  waters  and  bid  them  tell  us, 
if  they  will,  the  golden  secret. 

^  See  Reports  of  the  various  commanders  in  Desbriere's  Trafalgar,  and 
particularly  the  plan  attached  to  that  of  Prigny,  Chief  of  the  Staif  {post,  p.  360). 
The  confusion  of  the  British  fleet  is  shown  by  the  entries  in  the  logs  of  how 
the  enemy  bore.  Victory  has  E.  to  E.SE,  ;  Royal  Sovereign  has  E.S  E.  to  E. 
by  N.,  and  must  therefore  have  been  little  south  of  Victory ;  Britannia  E.S.E., 
ahead  of  Nelson;  Tcnurairc  S.E.,  still  further  ahead  ;  Neptune  E.  by  S.,  close 
to  Victory.  Drcadnovght  of  Collingwood' s  division  saw  them  E.N.E.,  and  was 
S.  W.  of  Victory — that  is,  to  windward  instead  of  leeward.  Spartiatc  of  Nelson's 
division  saw  them  N.N.E. ;  Conqueror  N.E. — both  therefore  correctly  astern 
of  him,  as  were  also  Minotaur  and  Agamemnon ;  but  Ajax  and  Africa  were 
ahead. 


CHAPTER   XXIII 

NELSON'S   PLAN   OF   ATTACK 

The  old  and  much-dispuled  question,  whether  Nelson  did 
or  did  not  attack  in  accordance  with  the  Memorandum, 
dates  from  the  morrow  of  the  action.  Some  officers,  in 
every  way  equipped  for  a  right  judgment,  held  that  he 
did ;  others  equally  well  equipped  assumed  the  contrary  as 
a  fact  beyond  dispute.^ 

Collingwood  passes  shyly  over  the  question,  and  leaves 
it  practically  untouched.  All  he  says  in  his  official  despatch 
is  that — "  as  the  mode  of  attack  had  been  previously  deter- 
mined on  and  communicated  to  the  flag-officers  and  captains, 
few  signals  were  necessary,"  and  yet  it  is  certain  many  were 
made.  Two  months  afterwards,  in  a  private  letter  to  Sir 
Thomas  Pasley,  he  wrote  that  the  plan  which  Nelson  had 
determined  to  adopt  was  executed  Avell  and  succeeded 
admirably.  But  what  did  he  mean  by  the  plan  ?  Earlier 
in  the  letter  he  explains  it  thus :  "  Lord  Nelson  determined 
to  substitute  for  exact  order  an  impetuous  attack  in  two 
distinct  bodies.  The  weather  line  he  commanded,  and  left 
the  lee  line  totally  to  my  direction.  He  had  assigned  the 
points  to  be  attacked."  But  no  one  will  assert  that  this  is 
an  adequate  summary  of  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum. 
It  conveys  little  more  than  the  impression  of  an  attack  by 
divisions  in  "  General  Chase."  The  distinctive  idea  is 
barely  indicated,  and  it  entirely  ignores  the  subtle  method 
of  engaging  by  which  Nelson  intended  to  realise  that  idea. 
Collingwood  therefore  was  saying  at  most  that  the  general 
intention  of  an  attack  in  two  independent  divisions  was 
carried  out.  It  need  not,  however,  be  assumed  from  this 
that  Collingwood   did   not   appreciate   the   niceties  of  the 

^  For  the  text  of  the  Memorandum,  &ee  jjost,  Appeyidix  D. 
342 


VIEW   THAT    IT   WAS   EXECUTED  343 

Memorandum.  The  chivalrous  loyalty  of  his  nature  would 
not  in  any  case  permit  him  to  say  more,  and  in  everything 
he  wrote  of  the  action  Ave  can  read  between  the  lines  a 
lofty  determination  to  ignore  any  detail  which  might  be 
turned  even  remotely  to  detract  from  the  glory  of  his  dead 
friend  or  to  suggest  in  any  degree  that  the  victory  was  not 
entirely  Nelson's. 

Captain  Harvey  of  the  Temeraire,  who  was  Nelson's 
second  in  the  line,  is  equally  general,  and  yet  the  Log  of 
the  ship  shows  that  he  was  by  far  the  most  detailed  and 
methodical  observer  of  the  action.  "  It  was  noon,"  he  wrote, 
"  before  the  action  commenced,  which  was  done  according 
to  the  instructions  given  us  by  Lord  Nelson."  Whether  by 
"  the  instructions  "  he  meant  the  written  "  Plan  of  Attack," 
or  the  verbal  instructions  passed  down  the  line  during  the 
approach,  every  one  must  judge  for  himself.  It  is  certainly 
impossible  to  assert  beyond  the  possibility  of  contradiction 
that  he  meant  the  "  Plan  of  Attack."  The  other  two  wit- 
nesses tor  the  affirmative  are  equally  vague.  Thirty  years 
after  the  event,  Codrington  said  he  could  remember  calling 
the  attention  of  his  first  lieutenant  to  Nelson's  movements 
as  he  came  into  action,  remarking,  "  How  beautifully  the 
Admiral  is  carrying  his  design  into  effect ;  "  but  a  week 
after  the  action  he  wTote  to  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  "  We 
all  scrambled  into  battle  as  soon  as  we  could."  ^  Lastly, 
there  is  the  fact  that  Captain  Hope  of  the  Defence  endorsed 
on  his  copy  of  the  Memorandum :  "  It  was  agreeable  to 
these  instructions  that  Lord  Nelson  attacked  the  combined 
fleets  of  France  and  Spain."  This  appears  to  exhaust  the 
affirmative  evidence  such  as  it  is,  and  so  far  as  it  is  known 
at  present. 

The  negative  testimony  is  richer  and  far  more  explicit. 
Captain  Moorsom  of  the  Revenge,  in  Collingw^ood's  division, 
said :  *'  A  regular  plan  was  laid  down  by  Lord  Nelson  before 
the  action,  but  not  acted  on  ;  "  and  again,  "  Admiral  Colling- 
wood  dashed  directly  down,  supported  by  such  ships  as 
could  get  up,  and  Avent  directly  through  their  line.  Lord 
Nelson  did  the  same,  and  the  rest  as  fast  as  they  could." 

^  To  Lord  Garlies,  Oct.  28th :  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  60  and  77, 


344  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

Li  his  opinion,  then,  there  was  no  dif'terenco  in  the  way  the 
two  divisions  engaged.  Both  made  an  almost  perpendicular 
attack — that  is,  the  two  lines  went  "  directly  down  "  instead 
of  getting  into  the  designed  position  parallel  to  the  enemy's 
line  and  then  hauling  to  the  wind.'  His  son,  Admiral  Con- 
stantine  Moorsom,  who  earned  hiiiiself  a  rare  reputation  as  a 
scientific  student  of  tactics,  went  farther.  In  his  rrinciples 
of  Naval  Tactics,  the  only  original  treatise  on  the  subject 
which  the  service  had  produced,  he  wrote,  that  "  there  was 
an  entire  alteration  both  of  the  scientific  principle  and  of 
the  tactical  movements."  ^ 

The  only  fully  reasoned  criticism  which  we  have  from 
the  pen  of  an  officer  who  was  present  is  to  the  same  effect. 
It  was  written  about  1820  by  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey 
Senhouse,  who  served  in  the  battle  as  a  lieutenant  in  Israel 
Pellew's  ship,  the  Colossus,  an  officer  who  highly  distin- 
guished himself  in  the  later  years  of  the  war  and  was 
afterwards  fiag-captain,  both  in  the  Channel  and  the 
Mediterranean.^  His  criticism  was  based  on  the  then 
undisputed  fact  that  the  British  Fleet  bore  up  in  suc- 
cession and  attacked  in  two  lines  ahead,  and  his  argument 
is  that  it  would  have  been  better  "  if  the  regulated  plan 
had   been   adhered    to."     "  The   attack   of  this   almost   in- 

^  Captain  Moorsom  to  his  father,  November  1st,  1805  :  Great  Sea  Fujhts, 
ii.  242.  In  this  letter  he  says,  *'  We  kept  going  down  in  two  columns,  point- 
ing to  their  centre  nearly  in  this  manner,"  and  then  in  the  original  he  gives 
a  rough  diagiam  showing  the  two  British  columns  parallel  with  one  another, 
and  nearly  vertical  to  the  enemy's  line.     See  post,  Appendix  E,  p.  453. 

-  The  Principles  of  Naval  2\ictics,  exemplified  with  Ted)les  for  farHitating  the 
several  evolutions.     By  Captain  C.  R.  Moorsom,  R.N.     London,  1843. 

•^  This  remarkable  i^aper  was  communicated  to  Macviillemh  Magazine  in 
1900  by  the  Admiral's  daughter.  Miss  Senhouse  believed  it  was  written  be- 
tween 1827  and  1830,  but  as  it  was  communicated  to  Sir  Charles  Ekins,  and 
printed  in  part  by  him  in  1824  (see  Nav<d  Battles,  p.  271),  it  must  have  been 
originally  written  earlier,  and  possibly  at  Ekins'  request.  Miss  Senhouse's 
manuscript,  however,  is  a  somewhat  amplified  form,  more  careful  to  repudiate 
any  suspicion  of  belittling  of  Nelson,  and  it  may  have  been  written  later, 
possibly  even  when  he  was  Hotham's  liag-captain  in  the  Mediterranean.  It 
contains  at  least  this  curious  addition  :  "  There  is  a  rising  naval  power  which 
possesses  the  germs  of  a  growing  equality  with  the  naval  power  of  this  coun- 
try, and  which  may  one  day  rise  nearly  to  the  colossal  height  its  great  proto- 
type has  obtained."  This  power  he  contrasts  favourably  with  that  of  France 
and  Spain,  and  regards  with  such  serious  apprehension  as  to  deprecate  the 
use  of  Nelson's  tactics  against  it.  He  of  course  is  referring  to  the  rising 
power  of  Turkey  and  Egypt,  which  was  broken  by  Codrington  at  Navarino 
in  1827.  The  manuscript,  therefore,  was  probably  produced  before  that  time, 
but  the  menace  continued  to  exist  for  some  years  after.     It  was,  in  any  case, 


THE    CONTRARY    VIEW  345 

fallible  Admiral,"  he  says,  "  was  different  from  that  laid 
down  in  his  instructions,  substituting  a  line-ahead  for  a 
line-abreast  in  his  division  "  ;  and  he  holds  that  the  change 
sacrificed  both  simultaneous  impact  and  superior  concen- 
tration of  attack.  He  assumes  the  form  of  engaging  in 
two  lines  ahead  end-on  as  a  fact  that  no  one  present  at 
the  action  would  dispute,  and  indeed  no  one  did.  "  You 
are  to  understand,"  wrote  Captain  Harvey  of  the  TSmeraire, 
"  that  we  bore  down  on  the  enemy  in  two  columns,"  and 
every  one  who  touched  the  point  said  the  same  thing. 

Sir  Charles  Ekins,  who  had  every  opportunity  of  know- 
ing, proceeds  on  the  same  assumption  without  a  shadow 
of  doubt.  "  It  is  known,"  he  wrote,  "  to  all  the  captains  of 
the  fleet  that  the  plan  of  attack  from  to  windward  was, 
by  previous  concert,  to  have  been  of  a  different  and  still 
more  formidable  nature."  ^  Indeed,  it  is  believed  that 
every  categorical  statement  on  the  point  by  officers  who 
were  present  or  directly  concerned — that  is,  setting  aside 
rough  generalisations,  and  what  is  only  inferential  or  an 
obiter  dictum — asserts  that  the  attack  as  delivered  differed 
in  important  particulars  from  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum. 

For  those  accustomed  to  weigh  historical  evidence 
there  cannot  be  serious  doubt  of  what  the  departure  was, 
in  the  deliberate  judgment  of  the  Naval  Staff'  of  the  time. 
On  this  we  have  evidence  that  no  inferential  argument 
can  shake  :  for  it  lies  in  the  next  edition  of  the  Signal 
Book.  There,  beyond  all  dispute,  is  a  new  Signal  for  a 
form  of  attack  purporting,  as  the  "  Signification  "  explains, 
to  embody  the  experiences  of  Trafalgar  and  the  principles 
of  the  Memorandum.  It  is  to  "  cut  the  enemy's  line  in 
order  of  sailing  in  two  columns."  It  is  accompanied  by  a 
diagram   showing   an   almost   vertical   attack   in   two  lines 

the  result  of  mature  reflection  by  an  experienced  staff  officer.  At  the  battle 
he  was  a  lieutenant  of  only  three  years'  standing,  and  knew  nothing  of  Nelson's 
"Plan"  or  intentions.  (See  his  letter  of  October  27th,  1805.  Ibid.,  p.  41o.) 
He  says  there  that  the  plan  of  attack  had  been  so  well  arranged  .  .  .  that 
nothing  was  requisite  but  the  signal  to  alter  course,  but  he  then  believed  the 
plan  was  for  Collingwood  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line  or  pass  ahead  or 
astern  of  it  as  convenient  and  engage  them  from  to  leeward,  while  Nelson 
doubled  on  the  part  engaged  from  to  windward. 
1  Naval  Battles,  268.     Ekins  wrote  in  1824. 


346  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

ahead  without  previous  deployment,  and  a  long  instruction 
explaining  the  method  of  engaging  in  succession  and  its 
tactical  advantages,  such  as  they  were,  over  simultaneous 
impact/ 

The  best  foreign  criticism  took  precisely  the  same  view. 
Here,  for  instance,  is  the  appreciation  sent  to  the  Spanish 
Government  some  six  weeks  after  the  action  by  Escafio, 
Gravina's  accomplished  Chief  of  the  Staff.  "  Nothing,"  lie 
concludes,  "  is  more  seamanlike,  or  better  tactics,  than  for  a 
Heet  which  is  well  to  windward  of  another  to  bear  down 
upon  it  in  two  separate  columns,  and  deploy  into  line  at 
gunshot  from  the  enemy.  But  Admiral  Nelson  did  not 
deploy  his  columns  at  gunshot  from  our  line,  but  ran 
up  within  pistol-shot  and  broke  through  it.  .  .  .  It 
was  a  manner  in  which  I  do  not  think  he  will  find  many 
imitators." " 

How,  then,  in  the  face  of  these  uncompromising  and 
authoritative  statements,  can  we  reconcile  the  view — and  it 
undoubtedly  prevailed — that  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum 
was  carried  out  ?     The  explanation  is  not  far  to  seek. 

On  analysis  the  famous  document,  like  others  of  its 
class,  will  be  found  to  be  composed  of  two  groups  of 
ideas — the  first  relating  to  major  tactics,  and  the  second  to 
minor.  The  origin  of  the  first  group  may  be  traced  back 
to  a  conversation  which  Nelson  had  with  his  faithful 
counsellor  Keats  at  Merton,  while  he  was  waiting  for  his 
call.  ''•  No  day,"  said  Nelson,  "  can  be  long  enough  to 
arrange  a  couple  of  fleets  and  fight  a  decisive  battle  accord- 
ing to  the  old  system.  ...  I  shall  form  the  fleet  into  three 
divisions  in  three  lines.  One  division  shall  be  composed  of 
twelve  or  fourteen  of  the  fastest  two-decked  ships,  which 
I  shall  keep  always  to  windward,  or  in  a  situation  of 
advantage.  ...  I  consider  it  will  always  be  in  my  power 
to  throw  it  into  the  battle  in  any  part  I  may  choose.  .  .  . 
With  the  remaining  part  of  the  fleet  formed  in  two  lines 
I  shall  go  at  them  at  once,  if  I  can,  about  one-third  of  their 

1  Signals  and  Instructions  for  the  use  of  II.  M.  Fleet,  181G.     Sigual  I.  7,  p.  28. 
Post,  Appendix,  C. 

2  Fernandez  Duro :  Arumda  Espuuola,  viii.  353. 


ITS    MAIN    IDEAS  347 

line  from  their  leading  ship.  ...  I  think  it  will  surprise 
and  confound  the  enemy.  They  won't  know  what  I  am 
about.  It  will  bring  on  a  pell-mell  battle,  and  that  is  what 
I  want."  Setting  aside  the  third  division — a  point  to  be 
dealt  with  later — this  scheme  coincides  with  the  action 
much  more  closely  than  it  does  with  the  Memorandum. 
Indeed,  the  expressions  "  go  at  them  at  once,"  and  ''  pell- 
mell  battle,"  suggest  that  Keats's  memory,  by  a  familiar 
psychological  process,  was  coloured  by  what  actually 
occurred.  Still  here  we  have  three  of  the  four  major 
ideas — attack  in  separate  divisions  instead  of  one  line — 
concentration  on  the  rear — and  concealing  the  nature  and 
point  of  the  attack  till  the  last  moment.  The  Memorandum 
itself  is  much  more  subtle.  It  contained  a  fourth  idea  that 
was  entirely  Nelson's  own.  Calder's  main  conception  had 
also  been  concentration  on  the  rear,  and  he  too  had  not 
formed  his  battle  order  or  disclosed  his  attack  till  he  was 
very  close.  But  Calder's  attack  had  been  parried  by  the 
enemy's  van  coming  down  to  the  assistance  of  the  rear. 
It  is  in  the  craft  with  which  the  Memorandum  provides 
against  such  a  move  that  lies  its  most  brilliant  and  original 
feature.  Nothing  else  is  entirely  Nelson's.  Duncan  at 
Camperdown  had  attacked  in  two  divisions ;  Clerk  of  Eldin 
had  suggested  the  principle  of  approach  in  echelon  on 
which  Nelson's  intended  formation  was  based,  while  from 
Calder's  action  he  got  the  warning  of  what  he  had  to  expect 
from  the  enemy. 

Nelson's  Memorandum  opens  with  a  recital  of  the  delay 
inseparable  from  forming  a  large  fleet  in  one  line,  and  his 
consequent  determination  to  organise  his  fleet  in  such  a 
way  that  the  order  of  sailing  will  be  the  order  of  battle, 
but  with  this  proviso.  The  order  of  sailing  was  to  be  the 
order  of  battle,  "  with  the  exception  of  the  first  and  second 
in  command."  This  neglected  point  is  important.  It 
meant  that  in  order  of  sailing  the  two  admirals  would  as 
usual  lead  their  respective  divisions,  but  in  order  of  battle 
they  would  not.  Some  other  station  would  be  assigned  to 
them.  Assuming  a  fleet  of  forty  sail,  the  organisation 
would   be  in  two  lines  of  sixteen  ships,  with  an  advance 


348  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

squadron  of  eight  (or  one-fifth)  composed  of  the  fastest 
two-deckers — but  as  this  last  factor  eventually  disappeared 
it  can  be  discarded  for  the  present. 

The  next  point  is  new — the  second  in  command  is  to 
have  entire  direction  of  his  line  after  the  Admiral's  in- 
tentions are  made  known  to  him.  The  wording  of  the 
paragraph  docs  not  make  it  quite  clear  at  what  time  this 
independent  direction  was  to  begin.  What  did  Nelson 
mean  by  "  after  the  Admiral's  intentions  are  made  known  to 
him  "  ?  A  later  paragraph  defines  it,  at  least  for  the  attack 
from  to  windward,  which  was  the  attack  actually  delivered. 
In  this  case  Nelson  himself  will  conduct  the  approach  until 
the  whole  licet  is  "  nearly  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy's 
centre."  He  will  then  signal  to  Collingwood  the  manner 
in  which  he  is  to  attack.  The  signal  that  will  probably  be 
made  is  specified,  and  he  is  also  warned  what  he  may  be 
wanted  to  do  in  case  certain  counter-movements  are  made 
by  the  enemy.  Then  Nelson  repeats  that  the  entire 
management  of  the  lee  line  will  be  left  to  the  second  in 
command  "  after  the  intention  of  the  Commander-in-chief 
is  signified."  This  could  only  mean  that  the  independent 
direction  was  to  begin  directly  Nelson  had  given  his  col- 
league the  signal  to  engage,  and  not  before.  In  other 
words,  his  obvious  and  natural  intention  was  to  conduct 
the  approach  himself  and  then  to  leave  his  colleague  a  free 
hand  to  do  his  special  part  of  the  work.^ 

Having  got  thus  far  with  his  major  tactics  he  breaks  off 
into  the  minor,  dealing  successively  with  the  two  conditions 
of  finding  the  enemy  to  windward  or  to  leeward.  In 
engaging  from  to  leeward — he  will  attack  in  three  lines, 
in  line-ahead.  Collingwood  will  lead  through  as  near  as  he 
can  at  the  twelfth  ship  from  the  rear,  so  as  to  concentrate 
on  about  three-fourths  of  his  own  number.-     Nelson's  line 


^  This  was  certainly  the  view  taken  by  the  author  of  the  Signal  Book  of 
1816.  The  instruction  in  the  "  Trafalgar  Signal "  reads  :  "  It  is  to  be  considered 
that  the  conduct  of  the  Lee  Division,  after  breaking  the  line,  is  left  to  its 
commander,"  i.e.  in  the  absence  of  special  instructions.    See  post,  Appendix  C. 

2  In  a  marginal  note  he  explains  that  if  the  enemy  are  less  than  forty,  only  a 
proportionate  number  of  the  rear  are  to  be  cut  off.  "  British  to  be  -^  superior 
to  the  enemy  cut  off." 


CONTAINING   THE    VAN  349 

will  lead  through  about  the  centre ;  and  the  advance 
squadron,  a  few  ships  ahead  of  it,  "  so  as  to  ensure  getting 
at  their  Commander-in-chief,  whom  every  effort  must  be 
made  to  capture."  This  idea  of  enveloping  the  enemy's 
Commander-in-chief  was  a  return  to  the  central  idea  of 
medioeval  tactics.  Indeed,  nothing  is  so  remarkable  in  this 
immortal  Memorandum  than  the  way  in  which  it  seems  to 
gather  up  and  co-ordinate  every  tactical  principle  that  had 
ever  proved  effective. 

He  then  falls  back  again  into  major  exposition.  The 
principle  of  the  attack  is  concentration  of  the  entire  fleet 
upon  the  enemy's  rear  as  far  forward  as  their  Commander- 
in-chief  and  the  units  immediately  ahead  of  him.  This 
would  leave  some  twenty  sail  untouched  and  free  to  act  as 
Gravina  had  done  in  Calder's  action,  but  he  considers  his 
form  of  attack  provides  sufficiently  against  any  section  of  his 
fleet  being  doubled  on  by  the  unengaged  ships  of  the 
enemy.  "  It  must  be  some  time,"  he  sa3^s,  "  before  they 
could  perform  a  manoeuvre  to  bring  their  force  compact 
to  attack  any  part  of  the  British  fleet  engaged  or  to  succour 
their  own  ships,  which  indeed  would  be  impossible  without 
mixing  with  the  ships  engaged."  His  meaning  clearly  is, 
that  if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  there  will  be  a 
melee,  which  must  result  in  a  decisive  action.  "  I  look 
with  confidence,"  he  adds,  "  to  a  victory  before  the 
van  of  the  enemy  can  succour  their  rear,  and  then  the 
British  fleet  would  most  of  them  be  ready  to  receive  their 
twenty-sail."  He  concludes  this  part  of  the  Memorandum 
by  a  return  to  minor  tactics,  in  which  he  explains  exactly 
what  is  to  be  done  if  the  van  does  tack,  but  as  the  attack 
was  not  made  from  to  leeward  these  details  may  be  dis- 
carded. 

From,  this  point  onwards  the  document  is  concerned 
entirely  with  the  minor  tactics  of  an  attack  from  to  wind- 
ward— the  form  which  he  hoped  to  and  did  adopt.  The 
section  is  headed,  "  Of  the  intended  attack  from  to  wind- 
ward. The  enemy  in  line  of  battle  ready  to  attack."  In  this 
case  he  says  "  the  divisions  of  the  British  fleet  will  be 
brought  nearly  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy's  centre,"  and  a 


3 so  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

diagram  is  given  to  illustrate  the  intended  position.^  The 
signal  would  then  most  probably  bo  made  for  the  lee  line 
to  bear  np  together  upon  the  twelve  rearmost  ships  of  the 
enemy — that  is,  as  before,  upon  three-fourths  of  its  own 
n  umber. - 

From  the  position  in  which  Nelson  intended  to  place 
him,  the  second  in  command  would  be  able  to  deliver 
Howe's  attack  through  the  intervals  of  the  enemy's  line, 
going  down  with  every  stitch  of  canvas  set  in  the  regular 
line  of  bearing,  obliquely,  as  Byng  tried  to  do  at  Minorca, 
with  his  broadsides  bearing.^  "  Some  ships,"  wrote  Nelson, 
"  may  not  get  through  their  exact  place,  but  they  will 
always  be  at  hand  to  assist  their  friends,  and  if  any  are 
thrown  round  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  they  will  eftectually 
complete  the  business  of  twelve  sail  of  the  enemy." 

Such  an  attack  made  from  to  windward  was  open  to  two 
well-known  parries,  with  Avhich  Nelson  proceeds  to  deal.  The 
enemy  might  wear  together  so  as  to  make  the  rear  their 
van,  or  they  might  execute  the  manoeuvre  of  the  old  French 
text-books,  by  bearing  up  together  and  running  to  leeward, 
so  as  to  get  the  attacking  force  between  two  fires  and  avoid 
being  raked.  In  either  case  CollingAvood  was  to  persist  in 
his  attack  on  the  twelve  ships  assigned  to  him  and  press  it 
home,  "  unless  otherwise  directed  by  the  Commander-in- 
chief,  which  is  scarcely  to  be  expected."  The  remainder  of 
the  enemy's  fleet  was  to  be  left  to  Nelson,  but  of  what  he 

^  For  the  original  as  drawn  by  Nelson,  see  past,  p.  448.     The  diagrams 
differ  slightly   in  the  various  copies.     In   one  in  the  British   Museum,  for 


instance,  it  stands  thus  :  — 

Sail    S          ( 

Advanced  Squadron 

[  British. 

.     10    40^ 

Weather  line 

1''         f 

TiP-e  lin^ 

Enemy 

4G  sail. 

-  The  signal  provided  was  a  "  Single  Flag,"  not  in  the  printed  book.  He 
chose  the  eighth  flag,  on  p.  17,  "Yellow  with  blue  fly,"  which  had  not  been 
appropriated  as  a  tactical  signal,  and  gave  it  this  signification  in  MS.  : — "  Cut 
through  the  enemy's  line,  and  engage  close  on  the  other  side.  N.B. — This 
signal  to  be  repeated  by  all  ships."  It  stands  thus  in  Hardy's  copy  of  the 
Signal  Book  now  in  the  possession  of  Commander  Sir  Malcolm  Macgregor, 
R.N.      The  signal  was  not  made  at  the  action. 

^  For  the  technical  meaning  of  the  line  of  bearing,  see  post,  p.  370. 


MINIMISING    THE    RISK  351 

intended  to  do  he  says  no  more  than  "  that  he  will  endea- 
vour to  take  care  that  the  movements  of  the  second-in- 
command  are  interrupted  as  little  as  possible."  In  short, 
his  major  function  was  to  contain  the  van,  and  the  minor 
tactics  would  depend  on  circumstances. 

From  the  approach  which  he  contemplated  it  would  be 
open  to  him  either  to  cut  the  line  at  one  point  in  line-ahead, 
or,  like  Collingwood,  to  cut  it  at  all  intervals;  while  the 
Advance  Squadron,  to  which  in  the  weather  attack  no 
special  function  was  assigned,  would  be  always  in  reserve  to 
support  either  Admiral  as  circumstances  required.  But 
there  are  clear  indications  that  he  relied  mainly  on  the 
former  manoeuvre,  risky  as  it  was.  The  danger  which  had 
caused  it  to  fall  into  disuse  since  the  old  Dutch  Wars  was, 
firstly,  that  the  leading  ship  was  likely  to  be  overpowered 
by  a  concentrated  fire  as  she  approached;  and  the  second 
was,  that  if  any  ships  did  succeed  in  getting  through  they 
were  liable  to  be  cut  off  and  surrounded.  Nelson,  we  are 
often  told,  never  measured  risks.  Nothing  is  really  further 
from  his  character  than  such  folly.  In  this  case  he  faced 
the  risks,  measured  them  with  consummate  tactical  insight, 
and  provided  a  means  of  discounting  them  that  was  with- 
out precedent.  His  highly  original  and  scientific  idea  was 
a  couibination  of  two  principles — high  speed,  and  massing 
guns  to  the  utmost  at  the  point  of  shock.  For  the  first 
time  on  record  the  attack  was  to  be  made  not  under 
''  fighting  sails  "  as  usual,  but  under  every  stitch  the  spars 
would  carry.  He  would  gather  the  highest  attainable 
speed  and  so  bring  his  momentum  to  the  maximum,  and 
the  danger  period  to  the  minimum. 

The  second  expedient  was  still  more  remarkable.  It 
was  obtained,  as  will  be  shown  directly,  by  massing  his 
three-deckers  in  the  van  of  his  line.  This  was  a  method  of 
concentration  which  had  been  suggested  originally  by  Bigot 
de  Morogues  in  his  Tactiqite  Navcdc  in  17G3,  as  the  only  one 
that  was  really  effective.  Rodney  had  introduced  a  signal 
for  it,  but  it  had  never  been  used  till  Nelson  now  set  his 
seal  upon  it,  to  overcome  the  almost  insuperable  difficulties 
of  the  manoeuvre  for  which  his  tactical  scheme  called  most 
loudly.     There  was  no  case  in  which  a  well-formed  line  of 


3  52  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

battle  had  been  broken  successfully  by  the  old  method  in 
line-ahead,  but  Nelson  must  have  thought  that  in  the 
French  theory  he  saw  his  way  where  no  one  before  him  had 
dared  to  tread.  Ho  would  arm  the  head  of  his  line  for  the 
fatal  shock  with  a  mass  of  fire  that  nothing  could  resist, 
and  would  overpower  the  time-honoured  defensive  foi-mation 
by  sheer  weight  of  metal  and  momentum.  He  would  form 
his  van  of  a  group  so  powerful  that  even  if  it  were  cut  off 
and  surrounded  it  could  hold  its  own  against  any  concen- 
tration that  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  Thus  it  was 
that  at  the  supreme  crisis  he  called  to  his  aid  the  theory  of 
the  great  French  tactician — the  theory  of  concentration  of 
gun  power  in  the  fewest  possible  units  and  in  the  shortest 
possible  length' of  line.  And  so  in  the  culminating  hour  of 
sailing  warfare  the  theorist  and  the  man  of  action  were  at  one. 
Morogues'  solution  of  the  problem  of  concentration 
may  have  been  in  Nelson's  mind  for  some  time.  We  have 
seen  how  the  idea  of  massing  heavy  ships  in  the  van  is 
to  bo  detected  in  the  two  orders  of  battle  which  he  had 
issued  during  his  chase  of  Villeneuve.^  In  both  cases, 
however,  the  arrangement  may  have  been  accidental  or 
due  to  other  considerations.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the 
Trafalgar  order  places  it  beyond  doubt  that  Morogues' 
suo'iJfestion  was  the  fundamental  idea  on  which  he  dis- 
posed  his  ships.  By  a  curious  chance  no  copy  of  the 
order  actually  used  in  the  action  has  come  down  to  us. 
Indeed,  it  is  most  probable  he  never  prepared  one  for  the 
reduced  fleet  with  which  he  eventually  had  to  engage,  since 
he  did  not  anticipate  fighting  without  Louis's  division.  The 
latest  and  only  one  he  is  known  to  have  drawn  up  was 
issued  with  the  Memorandum  on  October  10th.  Calder 
was  still  with  him  at  the  time,  and  it  includes  his  ship  as 
well  as  those  of  Louis's  division  and  one  or  two  that  were 
daily  expected,  leaving  blanks  for  the  rest.  The  original 
signed  and  dated  copy,  issued  "Off  Cadiz,  Oct.  10,  1805," 
is  in  the  museum  of  the  United  Service  Institution,  with 
the  fleet  pennant-board  attached.  It  is  on  a  form  designed 
for  the  forty  sail  that  had   been  promised  him,  as  given 

^  At  Sardinia  and  Barbadoes;  nntc,  p.  163. 


THE    ORDER   OF    SAILING 


353 


below,  the  ships  not  present  at  the  battle  being  printed 
in  italics  with  the  causes  of  their  absence  appended  in 
brackets. 


ORDER   OF   SAILING. 


Van  Squadron. 

Rear  Squadron. 

d 

f  1- 

T^meraire  98. 

t 

f     1- 

Prince  98. 

*cS 

2. 

Superb  74  {not  arrived). 

1     . 

2. 

Mars  74. 

»§ 

3. 

Victory  (flag)  100. 

S   o 

3. 

R.  Sovereign  (flag)  100 

4. 

Neptune  98. 

-:2 

4. 

Tonnant  80. 

^Q' 

O. 

G. 

Tigrc  74  {with  Loxds). 

!s- 

6. 

Bellerophon  74. 

g  1 

7. 

Canopus  80  {Louis's  flag). 

7. 

Colossus  74. 

^t 

8. 

Conqueror  74. 

8. 

Achille  74. 

>  "^ 

9. 

Agamemnon  64. 

9. 

Polyphemus  64. 

a 

tio. 

Leviathan  74. 

o 

Uo. 

Revenge  74. 

o 

11. 

Pr.  of  Wales  (flag)  98  {home 

3 
*> 

flL 

Britannia  (flag)  100. 

> 

with  Calder). 

P   d 

12. 

Swiftsure  74. 

«  § 

12. 

Ajax  74. 

'CJ  .2 

13. 

Defence  74. 

'H  3 

13. 

Orion  74. 

>-l      c« 

14. 

c3   'fc» 

14. 

Minotaur  74. 

1  p. 

15. 

Kent  74  {not  arrived). 

.S  p. 

15. 

16. 

Zealous  74  {with  Louis). 

-S'^ 

16. 

Queen  {with  Louis)  98. 

^  § 

17. 

02    § 

17. 

Donegal  {at  Gibraltar)  74. 

O     O 

18. 

Thunderer  74. 

> 

18. 

Spencer  {with  Louis)  74. 

rt   ^ 

19. 

Defiance  74. 

19. 

« 

[20. 

Dreadnought  98. 

>■ 

,20. 

Spartiate  74. 

Apart  from  the  striking  concentration  of  powerful  units 
in  the  van  of  each  line  the  document  presents  other  re- 
markable features.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  organisa- 
tion is  quadruple  in  two  squadrons  and  four  divisions,  each 
with  its  flag-oflScer.  This  was  an  innovation,  but  whether 
Nelson's  or  not  cannot  yet  be  said  with  certainty.  The 
normal  organisation  since  the  reforms  of  Howe  and  Kem- 
penfelt  had  been  threefold,  that  is,  in  three  squadrons,  and 
for  a  fleet  of  this  size  each  squadron  would  be  in  two  divi- 
sions. It  had  become  usual  also  to  provide  for  a  dual 
formation  in  two  "  Grand  Divisions  "  by  splitting  the  centre 
squadron,  and  attaching  its  two  divisions  to  the  van  and 
rear  squadrons  respectively.  It  will  further  be  noted  that 
no  provision  is  made  for  the  Advance  Squadron  which 
the  Memorandum  contemplated,  as  had  been  done  in 
earlier  Mediterranean  orders/ 

1  Signals  and  Instructions  (N.R.S.),  p.  73.  An  "  Order  of  Battle  and  Sail- 
ing "  similar  to,  but  not  identical  with,  the  above  was  printed  by  Nicolas, 
(vii.  94).  It  is  not  signed  or  dated  though  assigned  to  October  9th,  and  may  be 
a  discarded  draft  of  earlier  date.  It  shows  only  a  van  and  a  rear  squadron 
with  no  divisional  organisation.     The  fifth  station  in  each  squadron  is  filled 

Z 


354 


NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 


It  is  incredible  that  if  Nelson  issued  an  order  of  battle 
subsequent  to  this,  no  copy  of  it  should  have  survived.  We 
may  assume,  therefore,  with  some  certainty  that  the  order 
used  in  the  action  was  that  issued  with  the  Memorandum, 
modified  only  by  the  exigencies  of  the  case.  Judging  by 
the  various  extant  lists  purporting  to  show  how  the  ships 
Avent  into  action  the  actual  battle  order  must  have  been 
formed  by  simply  closing  up  the  intervals  left  by  missing 
units,  but  with  one  important  alteration.  Britannia  was 
certainly  in  Nelson  s  squadron,  and  in  her  own  list  and  two 
others  she  is  shown  sixth.  We  may  assume  then,  as  was 
only  natural,  that  when  Calder  went  home,  Lord  Northesk 
was  brought  over  to  take  his  place  at  the  head  of  Nelson's 
second  division.  His  place  would  naturally  have  been 
taken  by  Louis,  who  was  now  the  fourth  flag-officer,  but  as 
he  was  away,  the  head  of  Collingwood's  second  division  seems 
to  have  been  assigned  temporarily  to  the  Dreadnought,  from 
which  ship  Collingwood  had  just  shifted  his  flag  to  the 
Royal  Sovereign} 

On  these  indications  we  get  the  actual  battle  order  of 
the  reduced  fleet  as  follows  : — 


PROBABLE  ORDER  OF  BATTLE  AT  TRAFALGAR. 

As  modified  from  that  of  October  10  for  the  ships  actually  present. 

Rear  or  Lee  Squadron. 

1.  Prince  98  (Grindall). 

2.  Mars  74  (DuiT). 


Van  or  Weather  Squadron. 

1.  T(^m<5raire  98  (Harvey). 

2.  Victory  100  (Hardy). 

3.  Neptune  98  (Fremantle). 

4.  Conqueror  74  (J.  Pellew). 

5.  Leviathan  74  (Bayntun). 
G.  Africa  (?)  04  (Digby)- 


3.  R. Sovereign  100  (Rotherham). 

4.  Tonnant  80  (Tyler). 

5.  Belleisle  74  (Hargood). 

6.  Bellerophon  74  (Cooke). 

7.  Colossus  74  (Morris). 

8.  Achille  74  (King). 


i  7.  Britannia  100  (Bullen). 

8.  Ajax  74  (Brown). 

9.  Orion  74  (Codrington) 

10.  Agamemnon  G4  (Berry). 

11.  Minotaur  74  (Mansfield). 

12.  Spartiate  74  (Laforey). 


9.  Dreadnought  98  (Conn). 

10.  Polyphemus  04  (Redmilj). 

11.  Revenge  74  (Moorsom). 

12.  Swiftsure  74  (Rutherford). 

13.  Defence  74  (Hope). 

14.  Thunderer  74  (Lechemere). 
^15.  Defiance  74  (Durham). 


up  and  not  left  blank  as  in  the  Northesk  copy.  The  Kent  is  not  mentioned, 
her  place  being  fiiUed  by  Orion  (Codrington),  who  was  finally  stationed  next 
astern  of  Ajax  in  Nelson's  squadron. 

1  The  Dreadnought  appears  in  this  station  in  the  Nicolas  plan  (vol.  vii. 
301).  She  certainly  cannot  have  remained  the  rearmost  ship,  for  she  was 
one  of  the  three  three-deckers  specially  ordered  to  take  station  as  her  speed 
would  allow.     See  Ibid.,  p.  115,  and  ante,  p.  334. 


ORDER   OF   BATTLE,    OCTOBER    21  355 

This  order,  it  is  true,  does  not  coincide  exactly  with 
any  of  the  extant  lists  of  how  the  ships  came  into  action. 
But  no  two  of  them  agree,  none  have  any  certain  authority, 
and  all  are  demonstrably  incorrect  in  detail/  But  taken 
with  the  official  order  of  October  10th,  it  affords  the  best 
indication  of  the  organisation  that  was  in  Nelson's  mind. 
In  that  order  we  have  a  concentration  in  the  van  of  the 
weather  line  of  three  three-deckers  broken  only  by  the 
Sicjjerh,  a  powerful  seventy-four  under  his  special  favourite 
Keats,  whom  he  had  promised  to  be  his  second  if  he  arrived 
in  time.^  Possibly  a  fourth  three-decker  was  intended,  as 
he  was  expecting  two  more,  and  the  fifth  place  was  left 
vacant.  Similarly  in  Collingwood's  line  we  have  in  the  lead- 
ing four  units,  two  three-deckers,  an  eighty,  and  another 
powerful  seventy -four,  with  the  fifth  place  again  left  vacant. 
It  was  given  to  Bellcisle,  an  exceptionally  heavy  two-decker, 
when  she  arrived.^ 

A  further  important  feature  to  note  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  two  vans  is  that  neither  Nelson  nor  Collingwood 
were  to  lead  their  lines  in  order  of  battle,  but  only  in  the 
normal  order  of  sailing.  In  the  Memorandum,  Nelson 
wrote,  "  My  line  would  lead  through,"  not  "  I  should  lead 
through,"  and  Captain  Harvey  says  that  in  consequence  of 
a  signal  made  at  the  last  moment  he  went  into  action  astern 
instead  of  ahead  of  the  Victory,  implying  that  Nelson's 
station  was  second  in  order  of  battle,  as  we  should  expect 
in  the  absence  of  the  Sujocrh.  As  to  Collingwood's  place, 
w^e  have  a  distinct  statement  that  it  was  third,  as  in  the 
official  order  of  battle.* 

There  is  one  more  point  in  the  order  that  was  actually 
used,  and  w^hich  must  be  noticed  as  a  departure  from  the 
Memorandum.  The  various  lists  agree  that  in  the  action 
the  two  squadrons  were  not  equal.    In  all  of  them  Nelson  is 

^  See  post,  Appendix  E. 

2  Nelson  to  Ball,  Oct.  15th :  Nicolas,   vii,  123. 

3  She  was  taken  in  1795,  and  when  first  placed  on  the  Navy  List  was  rated 
as  an  80-gun  ship.  Her  armament  was  30  32-pounders  ;  30  24-pounders  ;  18 
9-pounders  ;  14  32-pounder  carronades,  and  4  24-pounders.  Her  complement 
was  700  men,  only  50  less  than  the  98's. 

*  Harvey  to  his  Wife:  Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  225,  and  Senhouse  to  his 
Mother:  Macmillans  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  417. 


3  56  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

shown  with  twelve  units,  and  Colhngwood  with  fifteen. 
The  numerical  inferiority  of  Nelson's  column  was  no  doubt 
partly  due  to  the  absence  of  Louis's  squadron,  since  all 
but  one  of  his  ships  belonged  to  the  weather  line  in  the 
official  order.  But  the  inferiority  is  more  apparent  than 
real,  for  if  three-deckers  are  counted  as  two  units,  Nelson 
has  sixteen  against  Collingwood's  eighteen.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  containing  by  breaking  the  line  in  line-ahead 
Nelson's  numerical  inferiority  was  of  small  moment,  while 
if  Collingwood  was  to  attack  twelve  of  the  enemy,  it  was 
essential  to  keep  his  division  as  nearly  as  possible  one- 
fourth  superior  in  number. 

Such  an  allocation  of  force  was  all  the  more  necessary 
owing  to  the  absorption  of  the  Advance  Squadron  into  the 
two  main  divisions,  and  the  consequent  change  from  a 
triple  to  a  dual  organisation.  This  fundamental  alteration 
has  never  been  clearly  explained,  and  is  worth  considera- 
tion. By  recent  Mediterranean  practice  the  Advance 
Squadron  had  been  nothing  but  an  Observation  Squadron, 
but  it  is  clear  that  Nelson  had  in  his  mind  a  step  forward 
which  Avould  give  it  a  real  tactical  function.  In  the 
Memorandum  he  treats  it  not  merely  as  an  Observation 
Squadron,  but  as  a  kind  of  reserve.  On  the  assumption 
that  his  fleet  would  reach  the  promised  number  of  forty 
sail  of  the  line,  he  gives  it  in  the  Memorandum,  though 
not  in  the  Order  of  Sailing,  an  organisation  in  two  grand 
divisions  of  sixteen  ships  each,  with  an  Advance  Squadron 
of  eight  of  his  fastest  two-deckers,  that  is,  one-fifth  of  his 
battle  squadron  and  not  the  one-third  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  he  had  been  using  on  the  eve  of  the  engagement.  Its 
purpose  he  explains  by  saying  that,  "  It  will  always  make, 
if  wanted,  a  line  of  twenty-four  sail  on  whichever  line  the 
commander-in-chief  may  direct."  Now,  so  far  as  we  know, 
no  such  organisation  was  ever  carried  out,  but  owing  to  the 
circumstance  that  we  have  no  ''  Organisation  "  of  the  fleet 
later  than  the  10th,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  Avhat 
was  done. 

An  Observation  Squadron  had  existed  from  the  first. 
On  taking  over  the  command  and  before  the  Memorandum 


THE  ADVANCE  SQUADRON       357 

was  issued,  Nelson  gave  Duff  four  ships,  namely,  the  Mars 
(his  own),  Colossus,  Defence,  and  Ajax,  two  being  from  each 
squadron  according  to  the  original  Order  of  Sailing.  After 
the  issue  of  the  Memorandum,  Bdleisle  and  Agamemnon 
arrived  and  were  added  to  the  connecting  line,  being  again 
one  from  each  squadron.  This  detachment  Nelson  called 
his  Advanced  Squadron.  "  I  have,"  he  writes  to  Ball  ten 
days  before  the  battle,  "  an  Advanced  Squadron  of  fast- 
sailing  ships  between  me  and  the  frigates."  ^  If  Codrington 
is  correct  it  must  by  this  time  have  received  its  full 
organisation.  Eight  units,  he  says,  were  detached  for  this 
service  after  the  Memorandum  was  issued,  of  which  his  own 
ship  Orion  was  one.  But  he  was  obviously  in  some  con- 
fusion as  to  what  Nelson  said  he  was  going  to  do  with 
them.  He  understood  generally  that  the  attack  was  to  be 
made  upon  the  enemy's  rear  in  two  lines,  Collingwood 
making  the  main  attack,  while  Nelson  prevented  the  van 
from  interfering,  as  it  had  done  in  Calder's  action.  He 
would  effect  this  by  cutting  the  line  in  rear  of  the  allied 
Commander-in-chief,  while  the  Advance  Squadron  cut  it 
ahead  of  him  so  as  to  isolate  and  surround  the  enemy's 
flagship  and  her  seconds.  But  Codrington  was  by  no 
means  clear,  and  naturally  enough  ;  for  this  form  of  engage- 
ment was  enjoined  by  the  Memorandum  for  the  special 
case  of  an  attack  from  to  leeward  only.  In  the  other 
part  of  the  document,  which  explains  the  intended  attack 
from  to  windward,  no  independent  attack  is  assigned  to  the 
Advance  Squadron,  though  its  existence  is  clearly  shown  in 
the  diagram.  We  can  only  assume  that  in  this  case  the 
general  reserve  clause  relating  to  it  would  operate,  and  that 
it  would  be  used  to  reinforce  either  line  as  necessary. 

Brilliant  as  the  Memorandum  is  as  a  tactical  concep- 
tion, a  certain  obscurity  in  its  exposition  must  be  admitted. 
It  bears  throughout  marks  of  the  haste  with  which  it  was 
drawn  up  when  Nelson  believed  that  the  shift  of  wind 
into  the  east  Avould  bring  Villeneuve  ovit  in  a  few  hours. 
Its  arrangement,  as  we  have  seen,  is  without  logical  order 
or  system ;  it  is  full  of  repetitions ;  the  diction  in  places 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  Ill,  October  11th. 


3  58  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

ignores  grammar ;  and  the  order  of  battle  which  it  predi- 
cates dilVers  radically  from  that  which  was  issued.  The 
meaning  consequently  is  often  far  from  clear  without  care- 
ful interpretive  study,  and  the  actual  conditions  on  the 
eve  of  the  battle  can  only  have  increased  the  captains' 
uncertainty. 

As  the  situation  stood,  it  was  obvious  the  attack  must 
be  made  from  to  windward.  The  diagram  in  the  Memo- 
randum clearly  showed  the  existence  and  position  of  the 
Advance  Squadron  for  such  an  attack,  and  yet  the 
Advance  Squadron  had  been  absorbed  the  night  before 
and  had  ceased  to  exist  as  a  separate  organisation.  Up 
till  the  last  moment  there  was  nothing  to  tell  Nelson's 
captains  that  he  had  departed  from  the  organisation  he 
had  laid  down  in  the  Memorandum.  Li  the  voluminous 
evidence  that  is  extant  there  is  no  hint  that  he  explained 
to  the  officers  concerned  that  this  tactical  alteration  had 
been  made.  If  he  had  issued  any  fresh  instructions, 
Codrington  certainly  could  not  have  forgotten  the  circum- 
stance or  omitted  to  mention  it.  Long  afterwards  he  dealt 
with  the  point,  but  the  only  impression  left  in  his  mind 
was  that  the  arrangement  had  not  been  cancelled,  and  that 
Nelson  had  said  that  the  eight  ships  were  to  draw  out  of 
the  line  if  the  enemy's  van  should  threaten  to  come  down 
to  the  assistance  of  the  rear.  But  this  is  hardly  possible. 
The  Advance  Squadron,  as  constituted  on  the  night  before 
the  battle,  consisted,  as  we  have  seen,  of  the  five  ships  sent 
ahead,  and  four  connecting  with  the  cruisers.  But  of  these 
no  less  than  six  belonged  to  the  division  which  Collingwood 
led  into  battle,  and  they  could  not  possibly  have  been  called 
out  of  the  line  without  paralysing  the  main  attack. 

Two  conclusions,  then,  seem  to  be  inevitable.  The  first 
is,  that  so  long  as  Nelson  had  hope  of  recovering  Louis's 
squadron,  the  idea  of  an  Advance  Squadron  was  still  in  his 
mind ;  but  when  that  hope  failed  he  abandoned  the  triple 
organisation  altogether.  The  second  is  that  no  fresh 
tactical  instructions  were  given  to  the  fleet  after  his 
decision  was  made. 

Such,  as  nearly  as  they  can  be  ascertained,  are  the  facts 


THE    TRIPLE    ORDER   ABANDONED         359 

which  are  relevant  to  the  problem  of  Nelson's  real  mten- 
tions.  By  the  light  of  them  we  must  seek  to  penetrate  the 
meaning  of  his  changing  movements.  They  are  all  we 
have  to  reveal  what  was  working  in  his  mind,  and  by  their 
aid  alone  can  we  reach  any  right  appreciation  of  the  tactics 
he  actually  employed. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

THE   BATTLE   OF   TRAFALGAR 

As  the  morning  of  October  21st  broke  in  soft  serenity, 
Nelson,  as  we  have  seen,  found  himself  with  his  fleet  in 
disorder  and  a  section  of  it  absent,  in  presence  of  a  superior 
enemy  to  leeward — not  as  he  had  pictured  them  "  in  the 
line  of  battle  ready  to  attack,"  but  apparently  in  no  regular 
formation.  The  body  of  them  bore  from  the  flagship  a 
little  south  of  east,  some  nine  miles  away  as  estimated  in 
the  Victory  s  Log ;  and  with  Gravina's  squadron  to  wind- 
ward of  the  van  they  appeared  to  stretch  north-north-east 
and  south-south-west,  with  their  heads  to  the  southward  as 
though  making  for  the  Straits. 

The  apparent  lack  of  formation  was  due  to  the  fact 
that  Villeneuve  was  trying  to  change  from  the  "  order  of 
battle  as  convenient "  which  he  had  hastily  ordered  at 
night-fall,  to  the  regular  order  (ordre  naturel).  His  organisa- 
tion had  been  further  disturbed  by  the  discovery  that  the 
British  fleet  was  stronger  by  five  ships  than  he  expected. 
Instead  of  being,  as  he  had  calculated,  just  equal  to  his 
corjys  dc  hataille,  it  outnumbered  it,  and  thus  at  the  last 
hour  he  found  his  whole  tactical  design  Avas  upset.  To 
meet  the  case  there  was  only  one  thing  to  do.  The  corjjs 
de  hataille  must  be  strengthened ;  his  well-designed  dual 
organisation  must  be  sacrificed,  and  instead  of  having 
Gravina's  advanced  squadron  as  an  independent  unit,  he 
was  forced  to  order  him  to  take  station  ahead  of  the  corps 
de  hataille.  Thus  after  all  his  care  and  forethought,  there 
was  fixed  upon  him  a  single  unwieldy  line,  the  very  forma- 
tion which  he  knew  to  be  the  worst  for  meeting  English 
tactics. 

To  be  compelled  on  the  eve  of  engaging  to  abandon 

360 


I 


PLAN   OF 

1 

(7 
C^                                                f  ■ 

TRAFALGAR 

attached  to  the  Report 

c^"^                      • 

of 

^-"""cs               •*; » 

Captain  Prigny, 

Villeneuve's    Chief   of   the     Staff 

^..                 " 

(Archives  de  la  Marine  BB'^  232) 

b              ^     V 

from 

<?                                   1 

Desbriere's  Trafalgar. 

Note.— r/j/s  Plar\  was  also  adopted 

a           _ 

L 

by  Dumanoir. 

U'.,. 

"      0 

?.^ 

»•    French  and  Spanish  Fleet 

o   English  Fleet 

Ahout  6:30  after  Nelson^  first 

two  signals.  British,  lines  hegiiming 
to  form.. 

2 

3 

\        . 

\          v^             ft 

^ 

V  k 

»       1 

A 

<^<>                                        -4 

■=-s.«s,:,^ 

'-, 

y 

4 
4 

<7                                                    i 
^  <f  <7                                                li 

"r*/ 

^C        1 

'         i!.' 

V 

4*« 

-. 

» 

About  11-30.  Nelson,  steering  to 

^fcouA  12-30.    Slie-wing  the  sliips 

1          pass  ahead,  of  S.  Trmidad-  ajui  Ms 

j         suJbseqvLent  tarn,  to  starboard. 

wahe  after  his  turn,  to  starboard.. 

4 

5 

V\    • 

'■■:*:•■ 

V  .-^' 

\  \a-                      '* 

d 

-f  :^     ,  . 

^^^ 

V 

.1-  ,    . 

o     J^ .   4   4        * 

\          4Q'(l' 

^      1 

.■■— 

—    ^  d 

<^^ 

^'  "    Qt 

&      t      4 

^    <J4^ 

4a       4 

4     ^^    4 

Ahovdt   2  SO.     ActLoTvaenjeral, 
and.  Dvmiaxwir  wearing.  "Uiis  note 

^  About  30.    This  note  is  attached.: 

is  attached.:  "(\)  Coxa-se.  which,  the, 
coTTunanxler  of  the.  Vbroshovbid,  Ua.ve 

"( 1 )  These  ships  did,  not  run,  for  Cadiz. 

They  came  into  acHon.:  for  instance 

taken.  V 

th&  Intrepid£,  amongst  others'' 

6 

7 

1  ( 

.-•- 

*  A 

""■\-..                •  0 

v..                                *                        4a  •/ 

a  ^                              4 

/                                  *     '• 

\?        'J                                  i 

\   r/" 

0                                              4     4 

V    '^ 

■\      .-^                                           %^ 

oA                      <» 

•       a 

p/  \                         a   a 

■     ft                                    ^ 

i-*     ^ 

/    i                             a 

1    *i     «    V                          ^                4 

\        U        '      ' 

a  ^ 

1             • 

/  i  '  '  ' 

/            .         '         • 

^        •             « 

^       ■ 

b 

a 

<.<»     .     a 

~       50   ^      J 

t 

About  3-30.  Burrtanoir'a  attempt 

on.  the  rear.  Thenew British  line. 

•^6out  4  0.   Retreat  of  Gravina, 

is  not  shown,. 

ScDnmanoir.  The Neptuno  isolated,. 

r<p  face  pa^e  560. 


Oct.  21  SITUATION    AT    DAYBREAK  361 

the  only  arrangement  which  could  have  availed  to  bafEe 
Nelson's  intended  attack  was  bad  enough,  but  it  was  by  no 
means  the  end  of  the  trouble.  The  squally  weather  had 
passed  in  the  night,  and  had  been  succeeded  by  light  airs 
very  variable  in  the  north-west  quarter.  The  British  had 
it  at  first  fairly  fresh  about  north-west,  but  the  Combined 
Fleet  had  it  lighter,  and  shifting  between  west-south-west 
and  west-north-west.  There  was  also  a  heavy  swell  rolling 
in  from  the  same  quarter  which  made  manoeuvring  still 
more  difficult,  and  the  result  was  that,  as  the  allies  began  to 
execute  the  new  movement,  the  confusion  increased  and  all 
semblance  of  order  disappeared.^ 

In  these  conditions  it  has  been  assumed  that  the  proper 
and  natural  thing  for  Nelson  to  do  was  to  restore  his  order 
of  sailing  and  bear  up  together,  or  at  least  to  form  the  line 
of  bearing  so  as  to  get  the  fleet  into  the  position  the 
Memorandum  depicted."  He  did  neither.  It  would  have 
been  contrary  to  the  established  practice.  Fleets  in  those 
days  rapidly  lost  order  and  cohesion  if  they  tried  to  move 
any  distance  in  line-abreast  or  line  of  bearing,  and  it 
had  been  one  of  the  most  useful  reforms  of  Howe  and 
Kempenfelt  to  abolish  the  clumsy  method  of  the  old  order 
of  sailing.  On  their  improved  system,  adapted  from  the 
French,  a  fleet  in  sailing  order  always  moved  in  two  or 
more  lines  ahead,  and  nothing  was  held  to  have  increased 

^  The  varying  directions  of  the  wind  are  very  important,  particularly  as  a 
recent  and  very  ingenious  attempt,  based  on  the  wind,  has  been  made  to  show 
that  Nelson's  attack  was  not  perpendicular  (Thursfield,  Nelson  and  Other 
Naval  Studies).  It  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  the  wind  was  steady  at 
north-west  as  given  in  the  Victory''s  Log  up  to  noon,  though  this  is  contra- 
dicted by  Collingwood  himself,  who  said  in  his  despatch  that  the  wind  was 
about  west.  He  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  the  French  reports,  which  are 
unanimous  that  the  wind  was  as  above  stated,  and  by  most  of  the  British 
Logs.  Prince  (Master's  Log)  has  west  to  south-west..  Neptune  (Captain's  Log) 
gives  5.0  to  8.0  west ;  8.0  to  12.0  west  by  south  ;  12.0  to  6.0  west.  Thunderer 
gives  it  at  noon,  south-west  by  south.  The  general  testimony  is  that  it 
shifted  from  somewhere  north  of  west  to  west,  and  was  even  sometimes  south 
of  west.  Bellerophon  enters  successively  "west  by  north,"  "north-east  by 
north,"  "north-north-west,"  and  "westerly."  Dreadnought  \ia,s '' noxth.-M^es,t 
to  west."     Jievenge  gives  it  "  variable,  calm,  variable." 

2  The  line  of  bearing  (larboard  or  starboard)  was  a  highly  technical  ex- 
pression meaning  a  bow-and-quarter  line  formed  seven  points  from  the  wind, 
so  that  when  the  ships  hauled  to  the  wind  together  they  would  be  on  the 
(larboard  or  starboard)  tack  in  close-hauled  line  of  battle.  A  line  of  bearing 
meant  any  bow-and-quarter  line  formed  on  the  point  of  the  compass  in- 
dicated.   See  post,  p.  370. 


362  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

tactical  mobility  so  much  as  this  happy  iimovation.'  No 
Admiral  would  have  thought  of  reverting  to  the  discredited 
system  at  such  an  hour,  and  least  of  all  Nelson,  whose  plan 
depended  on  holding  the  fleet  in  his  hand  in  the  highest 
attainable  state  of  ticxibility  and  cohesion  till  the  moment 
came  to  fluig  it  upon  the  enemy  in  the  manner  that  the 
moment  should  require. 

What  he  did  was  to  signal  at  once  for  the  Order  of 
Sailing,  and  a  few  minutes  afterwards — that  is,  probably  as 
soon  as  the  first  signal  was  answered — "  to  bear-up  and  sail 
large  "  with  the  compass  signal  east-north-east.  Now  this 
was  a  signal  not  intended  for  a  formed  fleet,  that  is,  a  fleet 
in  sailing  or  battle  order.  It  was  used  only  to  an  unformed 
fleet,  and  the  effect,  therefore,  of  the  two  hoists  was  an 
order  to  bear-up  one  after  the  other  in  turn  as  they 
happened  to  be  sailing  and  take  their  regular  stations  in 
the  wake  of  their  respective  flagships  as  they  steered  east- 
north-east.'-^  The  plain  evidence  of  the  Signal  Book  is  en- 
dorsed by  the  Master  of  the  NepAtne,  who  expressly  records 

1  See  "  Instructions  respecting  the  Order  of  Sailing  "  :  Signal  Booh,  1799, 
article  ii.  p.  127.  "  The  columns  are  to  be  parallel  to  each  other,  every  ship 
steering  in  the  wake  of  the  leading  ship  of  her  column."  Cf.  Signals  and 
Instructiovs  {Navy  Records  Society),  pp.  75-77. 

"  No.  72.  "  Form  the  order  of  sailing  in  two  columns."  The  corresponding 
instruction  in  the  Signal  Book,  No.  4,  p.  101,  provides  that  "  when  a  signal  is 
made  for  any  line  or  order  of  sailing  "  with  a  compass  signal,  that  signal 
indicates  "the  direction  in  which  the  line  is  to  be  formed,"  If  a  compass 
signal  is  hoisted  after  the  main  signal  has  been  answered  "it  is  to  show  the 
course  the  fleet  is  to  steer."  In  this  case  no  compass  signal  was  hoisted  with 
the  one  for  the  order  of  sailing.  What  followed  was  a  separate  signal,  No. 
76  =  "When  lying-to  or  sailing  by  the  wind  to  bear-up  and  sail  large  on  the 
course  steered  by  the  Admiral  or  that  pointed  out  by  signal."  In  this  case 
east-north-east  was  "the  course  pointed  out."  It  has  been  assumed  some- 
times that  this  meant  "  bear-up  together,"  but  the  corresponding  instruction 
(No  14,  p.  132)  begins,  "When  the  fleet  is  to  bear-up  in  succession  and  sail 
large,"  and  it  proceeds  to  say  how  each  ship  is  to  behave  with  regard  to  her 
seconds  ahead  and  astern.  It  was  a  signal  Nelson  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
to  an  unformed  fleet,  e.g.,  "  Proceedings  of  the  Fleet,  September  30th  "  {Add. 
MSS.,  84973) :  "  At  l.Ohove-to  ;  at  G.O  made  general  signal  to  make  sail  after 
lying-to  {i.e.  No.  76)  ;  at  6.35,  to  tack  in  succession  ;  at  6.35  to  bear-up  and 
sail  large  (No.  76  again)  ;  at  0.42  general,  to  form  the  established  order  of 
sailing."  The  corresponding  signals  for  a  formed  fleet  "  in  hne  of  battle  or 
order  of  sailing"  were  Nos.  79  to  82.  Nos.  79  and  80  to  alter  course  in  suc- 
cession to  port  or  starboard  one  point  or  as  directed  by  compass  signal  ;  Nos. 
81  and  82  to  alter  course  together.  There  was  no  signal  for  an  unformed 
fleet  to  bear-up  together.  Until  it  was  in  order  of  battle  or  sailing  .such  an 
order  could  not  be  given  to  it,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  would  have 
thrown  the  fleet  out  of  cruising  order,  that  is,  the  loose  order  that  was 
specially  maintained  to  facilitate  a  rapid  formation  of  the  order  of  sailing. 


THE    OPENING   SIGNALS  363 

that  they  bore  uj)  in  succession.^  Moreover,  under  Nelson's 
own  hand  we  have  exactly  what  he  intended.  In  the  last 
entry  in  his  Private  Diary  he  wrote,  "  At  daylight  saw 
the  enemy's  Combined  Fleet  from  east  to  east-south-east ; 
bore  away ;  made  signal  for  order  of  sailing."  There  can 
therefore  be  no  shadow  of  doubt  that  he  regarded  "  bearing 
away  "  as  a  preliminary  to  forming  the  order  of  sailing,  and 
that  he  meant  the  fleet  to  form  upon  him  as  he  bore  away 
east-north-east.^ 

Now  this  is  precisely  what  the  enemy  saw.  The  first 
impression  as  the  British  fleet  bore  up  in  the  distance 
was  that  it  was  forming  line-abreast  or  line  of  bearing 
or  groups  disposed  abreast.^  As  the  movement  went 
on,  however,  it  was  seen  to  be  dividing  into  two  groups 
or  "  pelotons,"  which  would  be  the  natural  effect  of  the 
various  ships  cutting  their  corners  to  get  into  the  Admirals' 
wake.  Finally  in  about  two  hours  it  was  evident  that 
these  two  groups  were  developing  into  two  columns  with 
the  heavy  ships  leading.* 

1  Masters'  Logs,  P.R.O.  This  Log  unfortunatel}^  was  not  printed  either  by 
Nicolas  or  in  the  Great  Sea  Fights.  Otherwise  so  careful  an  historian  as 
Admiral  Colomb  would  never  have  hazarded  his  unlucky  conjecture  that  the 
fleet  bore  up  together  {The  Battle  of  Trafalgar,  1905,  reprinted  from  the 
United  Service  Magazine).  Senhouse  also  is  perfectly  clear  on  the  point. 
"  The  British  fleet,"  he  says,  "  bore  up  in  succession  .  .  .  and  continued  in 
the  order  of  sailing  of  two  divisions  in  line-ahead  until  the  attack  "  [Mac- 
millan^s  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  422).  The  terra  "  in  succession  "  at  that  time  was 
used  not  only  for  movements  in  line-ahead,  but  also  for  movements  in  cruis- 
ing order — meaning  that  no  ship  was  to  tack  or  haul  upon  the  new  course  till 
the  ship  ahead  of  her  had  done  so.  It  was  a  device  to  prevent  confusion  and 
accident.     For  Nelson's  use  of  the  term,  &ee  ^lost,  p.  36.5. 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  137.  Collingwood  in  his  Journal  clearly  states  that  this 
is  what  happened.  "  6.30,  Oi'der  of  Sailing  in  two  columns.  .  .  .  Bore  up  .  .  . 
the  British  fleet  in  two  columns  bearing  down  on  them  "  {Great  Sea  Fights,  ii. 
201).  At  first  he  bore  up  south  80  east  presumably  to  open  out  the  correct 
distance  from  the  Victory  {Royal  Sovereign,  Captain's  Log).  See  also  Cap- 
tain Moorsom's  and  Captain  Harvey's  descriptions  and  the  hogspassim,  as  sum- 
marised by  Mr.  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar,  pp.  88-4.  "  Column  "  in  the  Signal 
Book  was  a  technical  equivalent  borrowed  from  the  French  for  "line-ahead." 
"  Line-ahead"  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  signals  relating  to  order  of  sailing. 

^  Some  ships  seem  to  have  anticipated  Nelson's  general  signal  in  order  as 
was  usual  to  get  nearer  their  place.  See  Logs  of  Conqueror  and  Ajax  :  Great 
Sea  Fights,  ii.  257  and  285. 

*  See  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  pp.  184-5  and  in  his  Appendix,  Report  of 
Villeneuve,  p.  129  ;  Dumanoir,  p.  150;  Magendie,  p.^  178  ;  Lucas  (^edowtoWe), 
p.  197;  Philibert  (Magon's  chief -of-staff),  p.  233  ;  Epron  {Argonaute),  p.  249; 
L'Achille,  p.  263.  Two  French  vessels,  Neptune  (p.  192)  and  Fougueux  (p.  214) 
report  the  enemy  forming  en  6chiquier  {i.e.  line  of  bearing)  and  then  in 
column. 


364  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Villcnouve's  iirsl  idea  was  that  Nelson  was  coming  down 
upon  his  roar  in  a  mass  of  groups  with  the  double  intention 
of  securing  a  superior  concentration  and  cutting  hirn  off  from 
Cadiz. ^  To  meet  such  an  attack  there  was  a  special  signal 
in  the  French  book.  It  ran,  "  The  fleet  of  the  Republic  being 
in  order  of  battle  and  in  any  line  whatever  to  leeward,  the 
enemy  in  group  formation  (en  pdoton)  or  in  any  line  Avhatever 
or  even  in  several  lines,  endeavouring  to  engage  the  rear  of 
the  fleet — order  to  all  the  vessels  to  wear  together."  -  Ville- 
neuve's  fleet  being  in  the  process  of  carrying  out  his  last 
signal  for  ordrc  natiird  was  in  no  condition  to  manoeuvre. 
It  was  indeed  in  so  much  disorder  that  in  many  places  it 
was  en  j)dotons  instead  of  in  line.  Nevertheless  he  deter- 
mined to  make  the  signal,  and  thus  for  the  second  time 
tried  to  wear  his  unformed  fleet  together,  regardless  of  the 
consequences. 

Did  Nelson  expect  this  when  he  made  his  undisguised 
threat  upon  Villeneuve's  rear  ?  Blackwood,  who  had  been 
called  on  board  the  Victory  about  this  time,  says  "  he 
appeared  very  much  to  regret  it."  ^  Yet  the  Memorandum 
anticipated  such  a  movement.  Should  the  enemy  wear 
together.  Nelson  had  w^ritten,  the  original  rear  was  still 
to  be  Collingwood's  "  object  of  attack."  It  is  clear,  how- 
ever, that  he  had  not  looked  for  the  movement  so  soon. 
He  was  providing  for  its  being  made  when  the  attack  was 
fully  developed.  Still  that  Villeneuve  wore  sooner  than 
he  expected  is  hardly  enough  of  itself  to  account  for  his 
annoyance.  There  is,  moreover,  a  further  difficulty  about 
what  was  in  Nelson's  mind  at  this  time.  How  could  he 
possibly  have  attacked  as  he  intended,  on  the  course  he 
was  steering  for  the  rear,  if  Villeneuve  had  held  on  to  the 
southward  ?  The  only  way,  without  interchanging  the 
positions  of  the  two  squadrons,  would  have  been  to  stand 
for  the  enemy's  van  as  it  then  was,  and  then  haul  to  the 
wind  in  succession  on  the  opposite  tack  and  so  bring  his 
fleet  in  echelon  abreast  their  centre.  But  even  this  would 
have  been  very  awkward,  and  in  the  light  wind  would  have 

^  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  p.  129. 

2  Ibid. ,  p.  192,  Neptune's  report.    See  also  p.  166,  Report  of  the  ^cVos,  where 
the  text  has  "  cTicmi  en  pelotons." 

3  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur,  ii.  146,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  138. 


NELSON'S    FIRST   IDEA  365 

taken  too  much  time.  When  Villeneuve  reversed  the 
order  of  his  fleet  the  situation  was  much  more  favourable, 
since  the  position  of  the  Memorandum  could  have  been 
obtained,  when  Nelson  thought  fit,  by  simply  throwing  the 
two  divisions  into  the  larboard  line  of  bearing.  Why  then 
did  Nelson  regret  it  ?  The  answer  is  that  he  did  not  yet 
realise  that  Villeneuve  was  in  order  of  battle.  To  him  the 
allied  fleet  in  the  distance  appeared  to  be  like  his  own  in 
cruising  order — the  route  lihre  of  the  French.  "  At  seven," 
he  Avrote  in  the  last  entry  in  his  Private  Diary, "  the  enemy 
wearing  in  succession.  May  the  Great  God  whom  I  wor- 
ship grant  to  my  country  and  for  the  benefit  of  Europe 
in  general  a  great  and  glorious  Victory."  He  must  have 
thought,  like  Cromwell,  that  the  Lord  had  delivered  them 
into  his  hand.  As  we  know  they  were  not  "  wearing  in 
succession  "  but  "  together,"  and  if  Nelson  had  realised  they 
were  in  order  of  battle  he  could  not  have  mistaken  the 
manoeuvre.  It  must  have  seemed  to  him  that  they  were 
performing  another  manoeuvre — in  fact  the  one  he  himself 
had  just  executed.  In  his  eyes  it  was  not  a  line  of  battle 
being  inverted,  but  an  unformed  fleet  in  which  the  ships 
were  wearing  in  turn  one  after  the  other  in  the  now 
obsolete  sense  of  "  in  succession."  ^  It  could  only  mean 
that  he  had  caught  them  unawares,  and  that  to  save  them- 
selves from  an  attack  in  chase  they  were  hurrying  en  route 
lihre  for  Cadiz. 

At  that  time,  indeed,  the  British  fleet  had  all  the 
appearance  of  threatening  the  old  vehement  attack  of 
Hawke  and  Boscawen — attack  in  general  chase  with  the 
leading  ships  forming  line  as  they  chased.  In  some  of 
the  British  ships  the  impression  seems  to  have  been  that 
this  was  actually  Nelson's  intention.  ''  The  signal  was 
made  to  chase,"  wrote  a  lieutenant  of  the  Eoyal  Sovereign 
in  his  Journal.  "  Bore  up  and  made  all  sail  in  chase,"  says 
the  Master  of  the  Conqueror,^     It  is  then  quite  possible  and 


1  Gravina's  Staff  report  makes  this  quite  clear:  "A  las  8,"  it  says,  "la 
senal  de  virar  en  redondo  a  un  tempo  (to  wear  together)  arrivando  succesiva- 
mente  (bearing  up  in  succession)  para  quedar  alineados  en  la  mura  de  babor 
(in  order  to  get  into  line  on  the  port  tack)." 

^  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  of  the  seventeen  ships  which  record  the  pre- 
liminary signals  onlj'  seven  mention  that  for  the  order  of  sailing. 


366  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

indeed  the  best  explanation  of  all  the  circumstances  that 
this  idea  was  at  first  uppermost  in  Nelson's  mind — to  fling 
his  fleet  upon  the  unformed  enemy  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment,  or  as  Collingwood  told  Pasley,  to  deliver  "  an 
impetuous  attack  in  two  distinct  bodies."  ^ 

Whether  or  not  this  was  actually  his  first  impulse,  it  is 
certain  it  did  not  last  long.  However  much  the  inversion 
of  the  enemy's  line  annoyed  him,  it  quickly  became  apparent 
he  was  adhering  to  the  principle  of  his  plan  of  attack.  So 
soon  as  he  realised  their  intention  to  head  to  the  northward 
he  again  made  the  signal  to  bear  up,  this  time  with  the 
compass  flag  "  East."  He  did  not,  however,  steer  that 
course,  but  as  the  Logs  of  the  leading  ships  show,  from  half 
a  point  to  a  point  north  of  east,  direct  for  the  enemy's 
centre.  It  was  just  what  the  Memorandum  provided,  and 
would  bring  the  whole  weight  of  his  attack  upon  their  new 
rear." 

But  before  proceeding  further,  it  is  necessary  to  clear 
the  expressions  "  centre  "  and  "  rear "  from  the  ambiguity 
which  has  been  so  fertile  in  error.  Owing  to  the  change  in 
the  allied  formation  much  confusion  arose  both  in  their 
own  and  the  British  reports  in  specifying  the  various  parts 
of  the  fleet.  When  Villeneuve  decided  to  invert  the  line, 
he  ordered  Gravina  to  form  the  squadron  of  observation  in 
the  rear  of  the  corps  de  hataille.  This,  the  main  body  of 
the  fleet  which  was  Villeneuve's  immediate  command,  con- 
sisted of  three  squadrons,  which  were  designated  "  Van," 
"  Centre,"  and  "  Rear."  The  new  disposition,  however,  upset 
the  old  designations.  Some  officers  in  their  reports  kept  to 
the  original  nomenclature,  and  used  "  Rear  "  as  meaning  the 
rear  of  the  corps  de  hataille ;  while  others  gave  it  up  and 
used  "  Rear "  to  designate  Gravina's  observation  squadron, 
which  was  now  the  true  rear  of  the  fleet.     So  also  with  the 

^  To  Pasley,  December  lOth  :  Nicolas,  vii.  241. 

^  Victory  records  the  change  of  course  thus  :  "  At  7.0  course  east-north- 
east. At  8.0  (till  noon),  east  by  north."  Neptune  has:  "At  7.0,  north-east 
by  east.  At  8.0  (till  noon),  cast  half-north."  Collingwood's  Journal  has  the 
signal:  "At  7.40  to  bear  up  east."  Jioyal  Sovereign's  Log  gives  her  course 
generally  as  '*  south  80  east."  Tonnant  (her  second)  "  east  by  south."  Con- 
queror (astern  of  Nepttine)  has  "east  half-south."  Confusion  has  arisen  as  to 
the  actual  course  of  the  approacli,  since  some  vessels  record  only  the  first 
compass  signal  and  some  only  the  second.  Ajax  is  the  only  ship  that  records 
both  correctly. — See  Jhst.  Appendix  F,  "Abstract  of  Signals." 


ALLIED    ORGANISATION 


367 


*  Centre."  In  some  reports  it  means  the  old  "  Centre  " ; 
that  is,  the  centre  of  the  cor'ps  de  hataille.  In  others  it 
means  the  centre  of  the  complete  line ;  that  is,  the  new 
"  Centre  "  comprising  the  original  '*  Rear  "  and  part  of  the 
original  "  Centre,"  while  the  rest  of  the  original  "  Centre  " 
became  part  of  the  actual  van.  As  a  consequence  of  this 
ambiguity  it  happens  that  in  some  reports  both  Nelson  and 
Collingwood  are  said  to  attack  the  centre,  while  in  others 
Nelson  is  said  to  attack  the  van  and  Collingwood  the  rear. 
To  clear  up  the  confusion  the  French  Staff  prepared  for 
Napoleon  the  following  lucid  table,  which  it  is  well  to  grasp 
at  the  outset :  ^ — 


Line  op  Battle. 

As  issued  to  all  the  ships  of  the  fleet 

on  Oct.  6. 

Inverted  Order. 


a 


O  Ti 

9.  <^ 

02 


Neptuno 

Scipion   . 

Rayo 

Formidable  (flag) 

Duguay  Trouin 

San  Francisco  de  Assisi 

Mont  Blanc 

San  Augustin 
Heros 

Sma.  Trinidad  (flag) 
Bucentaure  (flag) 
Neptune 
Leandro 
■'^Redoutable 

Intrepide 

San  Justo 

Indomptable 

Santa  Anna  (flag) 

Fougueux 

Monarca 

Pluton    . 


o  <^ 

9,  <^ 

02 


■"^     TO 

cr 


I  Bahama 

i  Aigle 

Montaues 
iAlge9iras  (flag) 

Argonauta 
'  Swiftsure 

Argonaute 
San  Ildefonso 
Achilla 

e  Asturias  (flag)  112 

ick  (flag)  .         .     74 

epomuceno     .         .     74 


84 
74 

74 
80 
74 

74 
74 

74 
74 
130 
80 
80 
64 
74 

74 
74 
80 
120 
74 
74 
74 

74 
74 
74 
74 
84 
74 

74 

74 
74 


^Pr.  de 
IBerwic 
\Nepou 


Line  of  Battle. 

With  the  changes  indicated  in 

M.  Prigny's  report  and 

in  the  Journals. 


a  § 


5h    c3 

-    O 


CD    O 

>  a 


'^M  o 
>  20 


Neptuno. 

Scipion. 

Intrepide. 

Rayo. 

Formidable. 

Duguay  Trouin. 
Mont  Blanc. 

San  Francisco. 

San  Augustin. 

'H^ros. 

Sma.  Trinidad. 
Bucentaure. 

Neptune. 
R^doutable. 

Leandro. 

San  Justo. 

Indomptable. 

Santa  Anna. 

Fougueux, 

Monarca. 

Pluton. 

Algeciras. 

Bahama. 

Aigle. 

Swiftsure. 

Argonaute. 

Montanes. 

Argonauta. 
Berwick. 
Nepomuceno. 

Achille. 
San  Ildefonso. 
Principe  de  Asturias. 


Note. — "  The  positions  in  the  Squadron  of  Observation  are  uncertain. 
^  Desbri^re,  Trafalgar,  App.,  p.  124. 


368  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

It  must  be  taken,  then,  for  all  tactical  purposes  that  as 
soon  as  it  was  seen  that  Villeneuve  was  inverting  his  order, 
both  the  British  columns  steered  for  the  centre,  or  if  we 
regard  the  Combined  Fleet  as  having  fallen  into  two  grand 
divisions,  as  in  effect  it  actually  did,  then  Nelson  steered 
for  the  rear  of  the  van  and  Collingwood  for  the  van  of  the 
rear. 

By  Nelson  s  signals,  as  we  have  seen,  the  approach  was 
being  made  on  the  true  centre  in  sailing  order,  that  is 
in  two  columns  line- ahead,  but  it  was  almost  immediately 
modified  in  a  remarkable  manner  by  the  independent  action 
of  Collingwood.  By  the  text  of  the  Memorandum,  it  will  be 
remembered,  the  Second-in-command  was  to  have  entire 
control  of  his  division  "  after  the  intention  of  the  Com- 
mander-in-chief had  been  signified,"  but  no  such  intimation 
was  to  be  expected  till  Nelson  had  brought  both  divisions 
"  nearly  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy's  centre."  They  were 
nowhere  near  such  a  position,  yet  as  Collingwood  read  the 
Memorandum  he  must  have  thought  that  the  time  for  the 
free  hand  which  Nelson  had  promised  him  had  already 
come,  and  within  half-an-hour  of  Villeneuve's  making  the 
signal  to  invert  the  order  of  battle,  Collingwood  signalled 
the  lee  division  "  to  form  the  larboard  line  of  bearing," 
thereby  actually  overriding  Nelson's  signal  for  the  Order 
of  Sailing.^ 

This  startling  fact  has  escaped  notice  apparently  because 
it  has  always  been  assumed  that  Collingwood  made  his 
signal  at  the  last  hour.  It  has  further  been  taken,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  that  he  made  it  in  consequence  of  the  fact 

^  This,  the  most  important  tactical  order  in  the  battle,  has  always  been 
placed  about  11  o'clock,  owing  to  the  careless  way  the  Log  of  the  Jioy(tl 
Sovereign  was  kept.  TlmniUrer  also  has  it  entered,  so  that  it  appears  in  the 
afternoon.  But  there  are  two  signal  Logs — Temerairc  and  Defence — which  fix 
it  exactly,  though  by  a  miracle  they  seem  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the 
numerous  writers  who  have  dealt  with  the  battle.  Tevuraire  (Master's  Log) 
has  "8.47,  Royal  Sovereign  to  Larboard  Division  Nos.  42  and  88."  Defence 
(both  Captain's  and  Master's  Logs)  has  ''  8.45  Sig.  50  divisional  from  Koyal 
Sovereign  ;  8.46,  ditto  42  and  88."  No.  50  is  "  to  keep  larboard  line  of  bearing 
though  on  starboard  tack."  Agamemnon,  in  Nelson's  division,  answered  it, 
thinking  it  was  general.  It  was  probably  a  mi.-^take  of  the  signal  officer,  and 
was  at  once  annulled  by  No.  42  :  "  Form  the  larboard  line  of  bearing,  steering 
the  course  indicated."  No.  88  was  :  "  Make  more  sail,  the  leading  ship  first  if 
in  line  of  battle  or  order  of  sailing." 


J 


COLLINGWOOD'S    FIRST    SIGNAL 


369 


that  a  concavity  which  developed  in  the  allied  line  had 
brought  Gravina's  division  almost  parallel  with  Colling- 
wood's  approach.  But  if  this  were  so  the  larboard  line  of 
bearing  is  not  the  formation  he  would  have  required.  The 
truth  is,  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  concavity.     Colling- 


AB.  Nelson's  division  in  larboard  line  of  bearing. 

A'B'.  Collingwood's  division  in  larboard  line  of  bearing. 

CD  and  CD'.  The  two  divisions  hauled  into  line  of  battle. 

EF.  Combined  fleet  en  ligne  de  plus  prks. 

Note. — The  line  of  the  British  approach  is  taken  as  E.N.E. 
as  directed  by  Nelson's  first  signal. 


^l 


uV 


Coarsf,€ 


c 

/o 
'^  0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
a 


E 

I 

« 

I 

I 

I 

d 


DIAGEAM   TO   ILLUSTRATE   THE   INTENTION   OF   COLLINGWOOD  S 
SIGNAL  FOR   THE  LARBOARD  LINE  OF  BEARING 


wood  gave  the  order  nearly  two  hours  before  Villeneuve 
made  the  signal  which,  as  we  shall  see,  produced  the  mal- 
formation. 

Why,  then,  did  Collingwood  make  the  signal  ?  Its 
tactical  purpose,  as  laid  down  in  the  Signal  Book,  leaves 
little  room  for  doubt.     A  note  to  the  signification  explains 

*  2  A 


370  THE   BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

it  somewhat  obscurely  as  meaning  that  the  ships  were  "  to 
bear  from  each  other  on  the  point  of  the  compass  on  which 
they  would  sail,  keeping  a  point  from  the  wind,  if  formed  in 
a  line-ahead  on  the  larboard  tack."  This  survival  of  Howe's 
crabbed  style  is  unintelligible  until  we  know  that  by  "  keep- 
ing one  point  from  the  wind "  Avas  meant  one  point  from 
the  true  close-hauled  line,  that  is,  seven  points  from  the 
w^ind  instead  of  six,  which  was  the  true  close-hauled  line  or 
lig7ie  cle  plus  prds  of  the  French.  The  phrase  therefore  merely 
embodies  the  British  practice  of  keeping  a  point  in  hand  for 
contingencies.^  The  instruction  then  may  be  translated 
thus :  "  The  line  of  bearing  is  to  be  formed  in  such  a  way 
that  when  the  ships  haul  together  into  line  of  battle  their 
line  will  be  seven  points  from  the  wind  or  one  from  the 
true  close-hauled  line."  In  short,  it  was  the  ordinary  evolu- 
tion to  bring  a  column  from  the  approach  into  a  line  of 
battle  parallel  to  and  on  the  same  tack  with  the  ligne  de  plus 
pres  which  the  French  were  trying  to  form.^  The  explana- 
tion of  Collingwood's  conduct  is  that  he  believed  he  was 
doing  what  Nelson  would  naturally  expect  him  to  do,  in 
order  to  get  the  fleet  into  the  position  of  the  diagram,  and 
that  as  soon  as  his  own  manoeuvre  was  fairly  advanced, 
Nelson  would  commence  it  in  his  turn.  It  was  in  fact  the 
obvious  evolution  to  bring  the  two  divisions  into  echelon 
nearly  abreast  the  enemy's  centre,  as  the  Memorandum  dis- 
tinctly laid  down  for  the  windward  attack. 

Nelson,  however,  had  a  subtler  idea,  and  made  no  cor- 
responding move.  Still,  although,  as  we  shall  see,  he  did 
not  yet  consider  Collingwood  in  full  control  of  his  division, 
he  must  have  seen  no  harm  in  what  his  second  was  doing. 
At  any  rate  he  raised  no  objection,  and  permitted  the  evolu- 

^  See  Signals  and  Instructions  {Navy  Records  Society),  p.  77,  and  Signal 
Bool,  1799,  Instruction  xv.  p.  120. 

2  The  instruction  attached  to  the  signal  [Signal  Booh,  1799,  p.  149, 
Instruction  vii.)  provides  that  "the  ships  are  to  place  themselves  in  such 
a  manner  that  if  thej  haul  to  the  wind  together  on  the  tack  for  which  the 
line  of  bearing  is  formed,  they  would  immediately  form  line  on  that  tack. 
To  do  this  every  ship  must  bring  the  ship  which  would  be  her  second  ahead, 
if  the  line  of  battle  were  formed,  to  bear  on  that  point  of  the  compass  on 
which  the  fleet  would  sail,  viz.  on  that  point  of  the  compass  which  is  seven 
points  from  the  direction  of  the  wind,  or  six  points,  if  the  signal  is  made  to 
keep  close  to  the  wind. 


COLLINGWOOD'S    LATER    SIGNAL  371 

tion  to  continue  as  best  it  could.  But  it  is  to  bo  observed 
that  by  his  conduct  ho  made  it  practically  impossible  for  it 
to  be  carried  out.  It  is  obvious  that  when  a  fleet  is  going 
large  in  line-ahead,  the  close-hauled  line  of  bearing  cannot 
be  formed  unless  the  leading  ships  shorten  sail.  Nelson 
did  not  shorten  sail  and  Collingwood,  Avho  was  to  com- 
mence the  attack,  had  to  conform  and  keep  his  speed.  But, 
although  the  line  of  bearing  was  thus  put  beyond  his  reach, 
a  line  of  bearing  was  still  possible.  Collingwood's  division 
had  not  had  time  to  get  into  line-ahead  astern  of  him,  and 
most  of  the  rear  ships  were  to  starboard  of  his  wake  and 
already  partly  in  position  for  a  bow-and-quarter  line. 
After  about  half-an-hour  Collingwood  seems  to  have  recog- 
nised the  situation.  His  chief  continued  to  hold  on  without 
any  sign  of  deploying  or  shortening  sail,  and  either  because 
Nelson  did  not  conform  or  because  he  saw  the  line  of  bear- 
ing parallel  to  the  enemy  was  impossible,  he  abandoned 
it  for  a  bow-and-quarter  line  such  as  he  could  hope  to 
achieve. 

Accordingly  he  signalled  to  Belleisle,  whom  he  had  just 
ordered  to  take  station  astern  of  him,  since  his  true  second 
Tonnant  could  not  keep  up,  to  take  station  to  the  south- 
Avest  of  him,  as  though  he  intended  to  substitute  a  south- 
west bow-and-quarter  line  for  the  larboard  line  of  bearing. 
Five  minutes  later  he  signalled  to  the  Revenge,  the  fastest 
ship  about  his  centre,  to  keep  a  line  of  bearing  from  him ; 
but  the  point  on  which  she  was  to  bear  is  not  stated.  We 
might  assume  it  was  south-west  also,  were  it  not  that  im- 
mediately afterwards  he  made  a  signal  to  the  Belleisle  and 
also  to  the  Achille,  a  ship  midway  between  her  and  the 
Revenge,  to  alter  course  one  point  to  starboard  together. 
The  signification  of  the  signal  was,  "Alter  course  together 
one  point  to  starboard  or  to  the  course  pointed  out  by 
compass  signal,  the  ships  preserving  their  relative  bearing 
from  each  other ; "  and  the  instruction  attached  provides 
that  "  when  a  line  of  bearing  has  been  formed  the  ships  are 
to  preserve  that  relative  bearing  from  each  other  whenever 
they  are  directed  to  alter  course  together."  ^     Now,  no  com- 

^  Signal  81,  and  Instruction  viii.  p.  150. 


372  THE    BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

pass  signal  was  made,  nor  was  it  possible  the  line  of  bearing 
had  been  formed  in  the  seven  minutes  that  had  elapsed 
since  the  previous  signal.  On  the  evidence  of  the  signals, 
therefore,  the  only  conclusion  is  that  CoUingwood  had  seen 
that  even  a  south-west  line  of  bearing  was  impossible  without 
his  shortening  sail,  that  he  had  consequently  overridden  his 
south-west  signal  by  that  for  one  point  to  starboard,  and 
had  found  himself  forced  to  be  content  with  a  line  of  bear- 
ing only  one  point  from  the  line-ahead. 

This  conclusion  has  all  the  more  weight  since  it  is  the 
only  way  of  reconciling  his  various  signals  for  line  of 
bearing  with  the  fact  that  he  himself,  in  his  official  de- 
spatch and  in  his  tactical  explanation  to  his  friend  Pasley, 
says  he  attacked  in  column.  Of  a  Hne  of  bearing  he  says 
not  a  word  in  either  place.  An  irregular  ill-formed  bow- 
and-quarter  line  one  point  from  the  line-ahead  was  of 
course  in  the  circumstances  tactically  indistinguishable 
from  a  column,  and  this  is  why  Collingwood's  own  official 
statement  that  the  fleet  attacked  in  two  columns  is  en- 
dorsed by  Harvey  and  Senhouse,  as  well  as  by  Moorsom 
himself,  who  was  captain  of  the  Revenge,  and  indeed  by 
every  eye-witness  and  contemporary  writer  who  touched 
the  question. 

It  is  of  course  possible,  by  selecting  fragmentary  passages 
from  the  ill-kept  Logs  and  Journals  and  by  calculations 
based  on  the  various  times  at  which  ships  alleged  they 
engaged,  to  infer  that  possibly  a  real  line  of  bearing  was 
formed ;  but  the  rigour  of  historical  science  absolutely 
forbids  such  fragile  web-spinning  to  obscure  a  question 
which  is  illumined  by  direct  and  unimpeachable  evidence 
to  the  contrary.  Not  only  have  we  the  categorical  positive 
of  the  signals  and  of  the  very  best  authorities  present,  but 
there  is  the  irrefutable  negative  that  in  all  the  mass  of 
contemporary  description  there  is  absolute  silence  as  to  the 
lee  line  having  approached  in  the  manner  suggested.  For 
historical  scholars  such  silence  on  a  matter  of  the  highest 
importance,  even  if  it  stood  alone,  would  be  conclusive. 
But  it  does  not  stand  alone,  and  the  weight  of  direct 
evidence  behind  it  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that,  however 


ENEMY   AWAIT   THE    ATTACK  373 

anxious  Collingwood  may  have  been  to  form  a  line  of  bear- 
ing, he  found  that,  as  Nelson  held  on  as  he  was,  it  was 
perhaps  contrary  to  his  wish  and  certainly  impossible  to 
achieve. 

What  Nelson  thought  of  it  all  is  difficult  to  fathom. 
His  mind  at  this  time  is  impenetrable.  He  was  still 
steering  for  just  ahead  of  the  centre  under  a  press  of  sail 
with  his  division  forming  in  his  wake  as  best  it  could,  as 
though  he  was  still  bent  on  delivering  Hawke's  attack  in 
chase  to  prevent  the  enemy  escaping.^  "  His  great  anxiety," 
wrote  Moorsom,  "  seemed  to  be  to  get  to  leeward  of  them, 
lest  they  should  make  off  into  Cadiz  before  he  could  get 
near."  But  as  he  advanced  it  became  evident  that  Ville- 
neuve  did  not  mean  to  avoid  him.  To  his  surprise  the 
Combined  Fleet,  after  wearing,  had  boldly  hove-to  to  form 
their  line  of  battle  and  await  his  attack.-^  For  such  a 
condition  of  affairs  Hawke's  attack  was  singularly  ill- 
adapted,  unless  he  could  get  up  before  their  battle  order 
was  complete.  The  bold  attitude  of  the  enemy  certainly 
upset  Nelson  s  calculations.  "  About  ten  o'clock,"  says 
Captain  Blackwood,  "  Lord  Nelson's  anxiety  to  close  with 


^  Victory's  Log  says  :  "  Still  standing  for  the  enemy's  van,"  but  as  he  is 
recorded  to  have  headed  for  the  .14th  ship,  and  he  never  altered  his  course 
from  E.  Vjy  N.,  it  is  clear  "  van  "  here  means  "  the  van  half  of  the  fleet." 

2  In  view  of  the  attempts  to  show  Nelson's  approach  could  not  have  been 
vertical  owing  to  the  supposed  movement  of  the  enemy  to  the  northward, 
the  point  that  they  were  motionless  is  very  important.  The  evidence  is  con- 
clusive from  both  sides.  From  the  Logs  in  the  Great  Sea  Fights  we  have : 
"A.M.  The  enemy  forming  the  line  and  waiting  our  attack"  [Britannia, 
p.  211).  "A.M.  Enemy's  fleet  lying-to  and  forming  the  line"  [Sjiartiate, 
p.  2t)2,  two  entries).  "At  12.10  the  enemy's  fleet  then  ahead,  lying-to" 
[Colossus,  p.  265).  "At  noon  .  .  .  the  combined  fleet  lying-to"  [Entre- 
p7-enant,  p.  320).  Walker  of  the  Bellerophon  says  :  "  While  we  were  bearing 
down  on  them  they  formed  line  and  waited  for  us  with  great  intrepidity  " 
[Ibid.,  p.  323).  Senhouse  says  they  were  "  lying  with  their  main-top  sails  to 
the  mast  and  consequently  could  not  keep  accurate  station"  [MacvLiUan's 
Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  p.  421).  From  the  French  accounts  it  is  clear  the  only 
motion  was  what  was  necessary  for  forming  the  line.  "  Les  vaisseaux  de 
I'arriere-garde  ont  ete  obliges  de  se  tenir  en  panne  pendant  tres  longtemps  " 
[Vrigny's  Abstract,  Desbriere,  p.  285).  In  the  Corps  de  Batailie  he  says  it  was 
the  same,  "  d'autres  etaient  en  panne  au  moment  oti  le  combat  a  commence  " 
[Ibid.,  p.  186,  and  see  the  Reports  he  quotes).  The  Bucentaurc  herself  was 
hove-to  [Ibid.,  p.  187).  We  have  also  the  fact  that  the  Victory  steered  all 
through  the  approach  for  the  14th  ship  from  the  van  and  records  no  change 
in  her  course  till  the  last  moment.  As  other  ships  do  record  their  changes 
of  course  from  hour  to  hour,  the  presumption  is  that  the  Victory  did  not 
change. 


374  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

the  cnciny  became  very  iipparent."  He  must  have  been 
in  a  high  state  of  nervous  tension,  for  he  kept  saying  to 
Blackwood  that  they  put  a  good  face  on  it,  but  always 
added  quickly,  "  I'll  give  them  such  a  dressing  as  they 
never  had  before."  Still  he  made  no  sign  of  deploying  in 
conformity  with  Collingwood's  signal,  but  he  did  begin 
interfering  with  his  colleague's  line,  as  though  he  did  not 
yet  regard  him  as  in  charge  of  it,  and  a  passage  of  some 
humour  took  place  between  the  two  old  friends. 

Both  of  them,  in  breach  of  the  established  order  of 
battle,  were  still  leading  their  divisions.  Neither  showed 
any  inclination  to  get  back  into  his  proper  station,  and 
Nelson's  officers,  in  extreme  anxiety  for  his  Hfe,  were  worry- 
ing about  it.  Blackwood  at  last  undertook  to  approach 
him,  and  after  trying  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to  direct  the 
battle  from  the  Uuryalus,  he  begged  him  to  let  the  three 
ships  astern — Temeraire,  Neptune,  and  Leviathan — go  ahead 
of  the  Vidorij.  With  difficulty  Blackwood  got  permission 
to  carry  the  order  to  the  Temeraire  to  pass  if  she  could,  and 
the  necessary  signals  were  made.-^  But  if  Nelson  consented 
to  get  into  his  proper  station,  "  Coll  "  must  do  the  same. 
The  Prince,  which  should  have  been  leading  the  lee  line,  was 
falling  far  astern.  There  was  no  chance  of  her  ever  getting 
into  her  station,  and  Collingwood  was  seen  coolly  pushing 
on  right  ahead  of  his  division,  regardless  of  support.  Such 
a  challenge  was  more  than  Nelson's  fighting  instinct  could 
endure.  But  even  so  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  use  his 
authority  by  a  direct  order.  So  like  any  schoolboy  he 
began  to  try  to  jockey  him  out  of  the  lead.  Collingwood 
had  just  made  the  signal  for  Belleisle  to  take  Tonnant's  place, 
but  without  regarding  it  Nelson  signalled  the  Mars,  Avhich 
had  been  one  of  the  connecting  ships  and  was  now  coming 
up  fast,  to  take  station  astern  of  the  Royal  Sovereign,  with 
what  intention  soon  appeared.  Collingwood  paid  no  regard. 
On  the  contrary  it  was  now  he  made  his  final  signal  for  a 
point  to  starboard  together,  and  it  is  possible  that  Nelson's 

1  Clarke  and  M' Arthur,  ii.  cb.  xii.  p.  148.  Dr.  Beatty  says  Victory  signalled 
Tcmiraire  and  Leviathan  to  go  ahead. — Nicolas,  vii.  146.  Temeraire  (Master's 
Log)  records  at  0.36  a  signal,  No.  269,  for  Leviathan  to  take  station  astern  of 
Temeraire.     Ncxitune  was  evidently  lagging. 


THE    OLD    FRIENDS'   RIVALRY  375 

obvious  anxiety  to  keep  him  back  had  not  a  little  to  do 
with  his  determination  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  form 
even  a  south-west  line  of  bearing.  Without  his  shortening 
sail  it  could  not  be  done,  and  shorten  sail  he  would  not 
unless  Nelson  set  him  the  example,  or  gave  a  direct  order. 
Still  Nelson  would  not  do  either,  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
later  he  tried  again.  This  time  he  went  a  step  further  and 
actually  signalled  Mars  to  lead  the  lee  division.  In  the 
absence  of  the  Prince  it  was  her  proper  station  by  the  order 
of  battle,  and  no  hint  could  have  been  broader  for  Colling- 
wood  to  fall  back  astern  of  her.  But  this  attempt  was  even 
less  effective  than  the  last.  Collingwood,  it  is  clear,  had 
no  intention  of  getting  back  into  his  station  short  of  a 
direct  order,  which  hie  must  have  known  his  old  friend 
would  not  have  the  heart  to  give.  He  at  least  had  the 
justification  that  there  was  now  no  three-decker  but  his 
own  to  lead  his  line,  and  his  defiant  reply  was  to  set  all 
his  studding-sails.^  Then  Nelson  gave  it  up,  and  thence- 
forth there  was  little  chance  of  Temerairc  being  allowed  to 
obey  his  last  order. 

The  story  goes  that  at  this  time  Nelson  caught  sight  of 
some  one  resetting  one  of  his  studding-sails,  and  thinking  it 
was  being  taken  in  without  his  orders,  he  delivered  himself 
with  a  heat  that  seemed  beyond  the  occasion.  Away  to 
leeward  Collingwood,  with  his  division  in  an  irregular  bow- 
and-quarter  line  disposed  steeply  on  his  starboard  quarter, 
was  still  pressing  on  in  his  newly  coppered  ship  and  drawing 
gradually  more  and  more  ahead  of  his  second  astern.  It 
was  no  wonder,  then,  that  when  Blackwood  got  back  to  the 
Victory  he  found  Nelson  in  a  peppery  humour  doing  all  he 
could  to  increase  his  speed  and  prevent  T6meraire  carrying 
out  the  order  that  had  been  wrung  from  him.  But  for  his 
colleague's  disobedience  he  had  nothing  but  admiration. 
"  See,"  he  exclaimed  half-an-hour  later,  "  how  that  noble 
fellow  Collingwood  carries  his  ship  into  action ! " 

Meanwhile  the  situation  had  been  crystallizing.  It  was 
now  perfectly  evident  that,  far  from  running  away,  the 
enemy   were    defiantly   abiding   his   attack.      Welcome    as 

^  Lo(j  of  Royal  Sovcrcujn  :  "  At  11.0,  Set  studding  sails." 


^7^  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Villeneuve's  attitude  was,  it  had  its  drawbacks.  It  brought 
the  shoals  of  Trafalgar  under  his  lee,  so  that  it  would  be 
difficult  to  push  home  the  attack,  and  it  opened  Cadiz  as  a 
point  of  retreat.  On  the  other  hand  it  greatly  facilitated 
the  plan  of  attack  which  Nelson  had  in  mind.  The  need 
to  hurry  was  obviously  not  so  great  as  he  had  supposed, 
and  it  might  have  been  thought  that  now  if  ever  he  would 
attempt  to  deploy  and  bring  about  the  situation  which  the 
diagram  in  the  Memorandum  had  prescribed.  There  was, 
however,  a  difficulty  about  it  which  did  not  exist  in 
Collingwood's  case.  Most  of  Nelson's  division  were  coming 
into  line  from  his  larboard  quarter,^  so  that  they  were 
very  badly  placed  for  forming  a  line  of  bearing  such  as 
CoUingwood  had  been  attempting.  It  would  take  much 
longer,  and  moreover,  Nelson  had  conceived  a  subtler  and 
more  effective  way  of  performing  the  function  that  he  had 
set  himself  in  the  Memorandum.  He  was  to  contain  the 
van,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  his  infallible  eye  for  a  situation 
told  him  that  by  far  the  best  way  of  concealing  his  intention 
from  the  enemy  and  holding  them  in  uncertainty  was  to 
keep  on  as  he  was  in  line-ahead.  This  at  least  is  what  he 
did,  and  accordingly,  about  this  time,  Villeneuve  began 
to  see  that  the  two  British  pelotons  were  developing  into 
two  lines  ahead,  directed,  the  one  about  his  own  flagship, 
the  other  at  his  own  rear  squadron,  which,  since  Gravina 
was  forming  the  true  rear,  was  now  in  fact  part  of  the 
centre."^ 

The  relative  alignment  of  the  two  fleets  was  now 
becoming  what  it  remained  till  the  moment  of  impact. 
The  two  British  lines,  owing  to  the  manner  in  which  they 
were  being  formed,  had  the  appearance  of  converging  slightly 
upon  the  enemy's  centre,  their  mean  direction  being  now 
about  east.  The  extremities  of  the  allied  fleet  bore  from 
each  other  roughly  about  north-north-east  and  south-south- 
west, with  an  increasing  sag  to  leeward.     The  wind  had 

^  All  the  French  plans  show  this,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  such  ships  of 
Nelson's  division  as  give  their  courses,  c.7.  Orion  ait  7.0,  E.  by  N.  ;  8.0,  E.  ;  9.0, 
E.  by  S.  ;  10-11,  E.  by  S.|  S. ;  12.0  E.S.E.     See  also  p.  379  note. 

-  Villeneuve  himself  says  at  9.0.  The  official  abstract  puts  it  as  late 
as  11.0. 


ENEMY'S   SAG   TO    LEEWARD 


377 


settled  at  about  west,  varying  sometimes  a  little  north  of 
it,  and  sometimes  south,^  and  as  the  van  ship  hauled  up  to 
it,  and  her  successors  edged  into  her  wake,  the  general 
alignment  of  the  van  half  of  the  line  was  about  north  and 
south,  but  a  little  west  of  north  in  the  extreme  van  as  it  is 
shown  in  all  the  French  official  plans.  The  rest  of  the  fleet 
would  have  had  an  alignment  curving  gradually  from  the 
centre  to  almost  south-west  in  the  extreme  rear.     As  the 


AB.  Ligne  de  plus  pres  (6  points 

from  the  wind)  with  the  wind 
at  W.N.  W. 

AC.  The  same  with  wind  at  W. 

DD.  Gravina's  squadron  trying  to 
form  in  Villeneuve's  wake. 

EE'.  Lines  of  Nelson's  and  Colling- 
wood's  approach. 

Note.— The  ligne  de  jjhis  pres  AB  had 
not  been  correctly  formed  after 
the  fleet  wore.  The  mean 
alignment  was  about  N.N.E. 
and  S.S.W. 


:^55«^ 


:j^ 


DIAGRAM   TO   SHOW  HOW   THE  ALLIED   LINE   BECAME  CONVEX 
IN   TRYING   TO   RE-FORM   FOR   THE  SHIFT   OP   WIND 

British  lines  were  approaching  on  a  mean  course  about 
east,  their  general  direction  to  all  tactical  intent  was 
perpendicular  to  the  central  portion  of  the  enemy  at  which 
they  were  aiming. 

For  Nelson  this  fortuitous  malformation  of  the  enemy's 
line  was  very  opportune.  It  went  far  to  remove  the  main 
difficulties  of  carrying  out    the  fundamental  ideas   of  the 


1  Neptune  gives  it  W.  by  S.,  Thunderer  (at  12.15)  S.W.  by  S. 


378  THE   BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

intended  attack.  But  he  cannot  have  foreseen  it,  for  it 
arose  from  a  chance  shift  of  wind.  Nor  can  it  have 
influenced  him  in  the  first  hours  of  his  approach.  The 
signal  which  produced  it  was  not  made  by  Villeneuve  till 
ten  o'clock,  and  even  when  the  dislocation  commenced 
Nelson  was  too  far  away  to  be  able  to  realise  its  effect  at 
once.  By  eleven  o'clock,  however,  after  the  movement  had 
been  in  progress  an  hour,  it  must  have  become  pronounced, 
and  by  that  time  Nelson  was  not  more  than  three  miles 
from  the  enemy's  centre.^  We  cannot  therefore  place  his 
recognition  of  the  crescent  formation  later  than  that  hour 
nor  much  before.  In  any  case  it  is  impossible  to  trace  any 
influence  it  had  on  the  British  attack.  There  were  no 
fresh  signals  and  no  alteration  of  course.  Both  Nelson 
and  ColUngwood  held  on  as  they  were  with  every  stitch  of 
canvas  set,  and  making  with  their  utmost  efl'ort  between 
two  and  three  knots.^ 

Collingwood's  division  continued  to  struggle  for  the 
formation  he  had  last  signalled,  but  certainly  without 
undue  attention  to  accurate  stations.  Indeed,  in  the  un- 
formed rear  at  least  his  captains  interpreted  their  chiefs 
succession  of  signals  with  characteristic  freedom  as  an  inti- 
mation that  he  wished  them  to  get  into  action  as  quickly 
and  simultaneously  as  possible.  It  was  the  true  spirit  of 
the  British  service  in  its  later  manifestations,  and  as 
Codrington  frankly  says,  "  We  all  scrambled  into  battle  as 
soon  as  we  could."  ^     As  for  Nelson's  division,  it  continued 

^  Lieutenant  G.  L.  Browne  of  the  Victory  wrote  :  "  At  11.0  we  were  about 
three  miles  from  the  enemy. — Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  197, 

2  The  fastest  ships  were  doing  a  little  over  three  knots,  the  slower  ones 
about  two.  Prince,  a  very  slow  ship,  gives  her  speed  at  two  knots  excejjt 
between  9.0  and  10.0,  when  it  was  only  one.  Neptune,  who  at  first  had  been 
doing  over  three,  dropped  to  1*4  after  9.0,  and  so  continued.  Minotaur,  who 
had  been  doing  1*4,  increased  to  2  at  9.0.  Spartiate,  her  second,  did  2 
throughout.  Dreadnought,  another  slow  three-decker,  did  only  one  knot  till 
10.0,  when  she  increased  up  to  2  at  noon.  Tonnant  did  2  and  a  little  over,  and 
2 "4  as  she  came  into  action.  Revenge,  a  fast  ship,  increased  from  about  1^  to 
2*4  and  3*4  as  she  came  into  action.  Defence,  a  connecting  ship,  who  had  to 
run  down  from  the  northward  on  a  wind,  only  did  one.  Conqueror  did  2 
throughout.  Swiftsure  at  11.0  increased  from  2  to  3.  Victory  and  Royal 
Sovereign  apparently  were  doing  3  at  the  finish. 

^  Life  of  Codrington,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.  Similarly  Defiance  enters  in  her  Log 
simply  "  Standing  for  the  enemy's  fleet,"  without  the  usual  specification  of 
the  actual  course. 


END    OF   THE    APPROACH  379 

to  trail  after  him,  swarming  roughly  into  line  as  best  it 
could. ^  No  check  was  made.  As  they  approached  the 
fire  zone,  where  the  utmost  impetus  was  vital,  the  speed 
was  even  increased.  CoUingwood  signalled  for  more  sail, 
and  Nelson  promptly  responded  still  more  emphatically 
with  "  Make  all  sail  possible  with  safety  to  the  masts." 
Laggards  were  left  far  behind,  and  the  two  old  friends  in 
exultant  rivalry  seemed  bent  on  nothing  but  to  see  who 
could  be  first  into  the  furnace  that  awaited  them. 

Nelson  apparently  had  not  yet  made  up  his  mind 
exactly  what  he  was  going  to  do,  and  probably,  as  the 
Memorandum  suggests,  did  not  intend  to  decide  till  he  saw 
what  the  situation  called  for  at  the  last  moment.  He  was 
still  steering  steadily  for  the  centre  just  ahead  of  the  San- 
tisima  Trinidad,  the  largest  ship  in  the  allied  fleet."  The 
functions  he  had  assigned  himself,  it  will  be  remembered, 
were  not  only  to  contain  the  van  but  also  to  envelop  the 
Commander-in-chief.  But  as  yet  the  Commander-in-chief 
could    not    be    found.     He    had    not   shown    his   flag  and 

^  Some  of  the  ships  give  their  courses  in  detail.  Of  the  lee  division, 
Tonnani's  was  E.  by  S.  all  the  time.  Revenge,  after  her  signal  was  made, 
shifted  from  E.  by  N.  to  E.,  and  did  not  change  again.  Swiftsurcs  course 
was  at  7.0  N.E. ;  at  8,  N.E.  by  E.  ;  at  10.0,  E.N.E.,  and  at  11.0,  after  Colling- 
wood's  last  signal,  E.S.E.  Defence  came  down  from  the  northward  S.S.W., 
S.  by  W.,  and  at  lO.O  was  going  S.S.E.  again.  Pruwc  did,  E.,  E,  byN.,  E.N.E., 
and  at  10.0  turned  E.  Dreadnow/ht  did,  at  7.0  E.NE. ;  at  8.0  E.  by  N.,  and 
at  10.0  shifted  to  E.  by  S.;^  S.,  and  kept  it  till  she  came  into  action.  The 
ill-kept  Log  of  the  Royal  Sovereign  gives  her  course  as  S.  80  E.  throughout.  In 
Nelson's  division  Temeraire  only  gives  N.  34  E.  Neptune,  at  7.0  N.E.  by  E., 
and,  after  8.0,  E.  |  N. ;  Conqueror,  E.|  S.  till  noon  ;  Orion,  at  7.0  E.  by  N. ;  at  8.0, 
E.;  at  9.0,  E.  by  S".,  then  for  two  hours  E.  by  S.|  S.,  and  at  noon  E.S.E.  Spartiatc 
did,  N.E.  by  E.  till  noon,  and  Minotaur  must  have  done  the  same.  Britannia 
went  E.  till  noon,  and  then  turned  E.S.E. 

^  All  the  reports  of  the  Alhed  Centre,  as  well  as  the  French  official 
"Abstract,"  agree  in  this.  Colonel  Desbriere,  however  {Trafalgar,  p.  208), 
thought  the  evidence  on  the  whole  shows  that  Nelson's  division  made  as  high 
as  the  vessel  at  the  head  of  the  allied  line,  and  then  filed  off  under  the  fire  of 
the  van  on  the  opposite  tack  and  at  half  gun-shot,  till  the  moment  he  at- 
tacked the  stern  of  the  Bucentaurc.  But  he  only  cites  the  reports  of  Intrepide 
and  SrApion,  and  neither  of  these,  if  read  in  the  light  of  Prigny's  warning  as 
to  squadronal  designations,  appears  to  support  his  view.  Scipion  says  Nelson's 
column  "  se  portait  sur  le  centre  de  I'avant-garde,"  by  which  may  well  be 
meant  the  centre  of  the  van  half  of  the  line,  that  is,  just  ahead  of  the 
.S'.  Trinidad.  Intrepide  says  no  more  than  that  Nelson  "  manoeuvrait  pour 
couper  en  arriere  du  Bucentaurc.'"  Dumanoir,  like  the  Scipion,  says  he  made 
"sur  le  centre  de  notre  avant-garde,"  and  refers  to  a  plan  which  shows  the 
Victory  steering  to  cut  the  line  ahead  of  S.  Trinidad.  Of  Nelson's  alleged  feint 
on  the  van  of  the  line  there  is  really  no  evidence  whatever  except  that  of 
Codrington.     S>eepost,  p.  381. 


38o  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Nelson's  main  anxiety  at  this  time  seems  to  have  been  to 
ascertain  his  position.  "  Although,"  says  James,  "  every 
glass  on  board  the  Victorij  was  put  in  requisition  to  discover 
the  flag  of  the  French  Commander-in-chief,  all  the  answers 
to  Nelson's  repeated  questions  on  the  subject  ended  in  dis- 
appointment." ^  James  must  have  had  this  from  an  eye- 
witness, and  it  affords  a  perfectly  simple  explanation  of  why 
Nelson  made  for  the  Scmtisima  Trinidad.  He  was  then 
under  the  belief  that  Decres  had  come  to  take  the  chief 
command  over  Villeneuve's  head,  and  it  was  natural  to  seek 
him  in  the  largest  ship  in  the  fleet  which  was  also  a  new 
comer." 

A  different  explanation,  however,  related  to  his  function 
of  containing  the  van,  has  come  of  late  years  to  confuse  our 
appreciation  of  Nelson's  tactics.  Because  he  made  for  a 
point  higher  up  the  line  than  the  one  he  eventually 
attacked,  it  is  said  he  was  making  a  feint  on  the  van  in 
order  to  hold  it  inactive.  The  sole  contemporary  evidence 
of  this  is  an  entry  in  the  Master's  Log  of  Codrington's  ship 
the  Orion.  "  The  Victory,  after  making  a  feint  of  attacking 
the  van,  hauled  to  starboard  to  reach  the  centre."  This  in 
itself  contains  no  actual  assertion  that  Nelson  altered  his 
course  to  port  before  turning  to  starboard.  But  when 
questioned  on  the  point  by  Nicolas  in  his  old  age  Cod- 
rington  said,  "  He  was  under  the  impression  that  he  was 
expressly  instructed  by  Nelson  that  he  himself  would  pro- 

1  Vol.  iii.  397. 

-  ISec  Blackwood  to  his  wife :  Nicolas,  vii.  226.  "  Would  to  God  he  had 
lived  to  see  his  prizes  and  the  Admirals  he  had  taken — three  in  all — amongst 
them  the  French  Commander-in-chief,  who,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  Villeneuve 
and  not  Decres."  An  unpublished  letter  of  Nelson's  chaplain,  Scott,  confirms 
his  preoccupation  with  the  capture  of  the  Commander-in-chief.  ' '  It  was  what 
he  particularly  aimed  at,"  he  says  ;  but  adds,  "  As,  however,  the  Frenchman 
never  hoisted  his  flag  it  was  not  yet  known  [i.e.  when  Nelson  died]  that  the 
Admiral  was  taken."  In  this  Scott  was  certainly  mistaken.  "  I  never  went," 
he  says,  "  higher  than  the  middle  deck.  ...  I  was  quartered  below  with  the 
Surgeon."  He  must,  then,  have  gone  to  his  station  before  Villeneuve  showed 
his  flag.  There  can  be  no  doubt  it  was  shown,  as  the  French  and  Spanish  re- 
ports agree,  or  that  it  was  seen  by  Nelson  ;  for  Spartiatc,  the  last  ship  in  the 
line,  records :  "  12.59,  F/'ctory  bearing  down  between  a  Spanish  four-decker 
and  a  French  two-decker  with  an  Admiral's  flag  at  the  main  "  {Captains'  Logs, 
P.R.O.).  In  her  Master's  Journal  is  the  note:  "  The  watch,  the  minutes  of 
the  action  was  taken  by,  appears  to  have  been  34  minutes  too  fast."  It  was 
half-an-hour  faster  still  by  Victory's  time,  which  makes  Spartiatc' s  12.59  equal 
Victory's  1 1.55. 


\ 


ALLEGED    FEINT    ON   THE   VAN  381 

bably  make  a  feint  of  attacking  the  van  "  (instead  of  using 
the  Advance  Squadron  for  that  purpose,  as  he  had  intended 
originally).  "  I  have  no  doubt,"  he  added,  "  of  the  Victory 
having  hauled  out  to  port  for  a  short  space."  He  also  said 
he  remembered  calling  his  First  Lieutenant's  attention  to  it 
at  the  time,  which  would  account  for  the  isolated  entry  in 
Orion's  Log.  Then,  after  giving  some  corroborative  details 
about  Nelson's  studding-sails,  he  went  on  to  say  that  it 
was  this  movement  to  port  which  occasioned  the  Victory  to 
suffer  so  severely  from  the  raking  fire  of  several  ships  ahead 
of  the  centre.  Evidently  then  his  memory  was  failing  him, 
for  the  ships  that  raked  Nelson  were  those  for  which  he 
had  been  steering  all  along  and  which  he  eventually 
attacked.^  No  one  who  was  at  Nelson's  side  knew  anything 
of  such  a  manoeuvre.  Besides  his  own  staff,  he  had  three 
frigate  captains  on  his  quarterdeck,  and  not  one  of  them 
says  a  word  about  it.  Nor  does  it  appear  from  any  of  the 
enemy's  reports.  Like  the  original  entry  in  the  Orion's  Log 
they  duly  record  the  turn  to  starboard,  but  not  the  alleged 
one  to  port.  It  is  impossible  indeed  to  believe  it  ever  took 
place,  and  till  better  evidence  is  forthcoming  it  must  be 
dismissed  as  a  by-product  of  Codrington's  enthusiastic 
admiration  of  his  chief. 

Nor  does  this  conclusion  rest  on  negative  evidence 
alone.  We  have  the  direct  testimony  of  Blackwood  that 
what  Nelson  had  in  his  mind  at  this  time  was  not  a  feint 
on  the  van  but  a  real  attack,  and  that  this  attack  involved 
if  anything  a  preliminary  turn  to  starboard  and  not  to 
port.  In  fact  it  was  well  before  the  time  of  Codrington's 
alleged  feint  that  Nelson  made  up  his  mind  what  he  was 
going  to  do,  and  it  was  one  of  the  curiosities  of  the  oft- 
told  story  that  this  remarkable  decision  has  been  almost 
ignored.  Yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it.  The  Eiiry- 
alus  records  that  at  11.40  she  repeated  a  telegraph  message 
from  Nelson  to  this  effect :  "  I  intend  to  push  or  go 
through  the  end  of  the  enemy's  line  to  prevent  them  from 

^  See  Nicolas,  vii.  154,  note.  The  only  other  mention  of  Nelson's  altering^ 
his  course  is  when  he  altered  it  to  starboard,  e.g.  Thunderer's  Log :  "  Observed 
the  Victory  alter  her  course  and  lead  .  .  .  towards  the  enemy's  centre." — Ihid., 
202,  note. 


382  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

getting  into  Cadiz."  '  It  is  obviously  not  entered  verbatim. 
James,  who  also  knew  of  it,  and  was  told  it  was  made  to 
Collingwood,  gives  it  thus :  ''  I  intend  to  pass  through  the 
van  of  the  enemy's  line  to  prevent  him  from  getting  into 
Cadiz."  ^  Such  a  signal  is  certainly  startling.  No  other 
ship  records  it,  and  yet  it  is  impossible  to  believe  it  was 
not  made  when  it  appears  in  the  Log  of  the  senior  repeating 
frigate.  Whatever  its  actual  words,  it  can  only  have  meant 
that  Nelson  had  abandoned  his  plan  of  attack  on  the  rear 
half  of  the  enemy  in  favour  of  that  recommended  by  Howe 
and  Kempenfelt  for  engaging  a  numerically  superior  fleet.'^ 
It  is  possible  that  the  signal  which  Villeneuve  had  just 
made  to  his  van  to  make  more  sail  had  renewed  Nelson's 
abiding  apprehension  that  his  enemy  meant  to  avoid  a 
decisive  action  by  slipping  back  into  Cadiz.  To  thwart  the 
movement  he  would  attack  the  van,  as  he  had  told  Colling- 
wood to  attack  the  rear,  and  would  leave  the  centre — on 
Torrington's  plan — unengaged. 

Such  a  sudden  and  complete  variation  of  his  plan — 
though  characteristic  enough  of  Nelson's  genius  and  ex- 
pressly foreshadowed  by  the  Memorandum — is  difficult 
enough  to  believe  of  itself.  But  there  is  the  further 
objection  that  it  involved  the  abandonment  of  another 
cardinal  point  of  his  plan.  The  new  attack  sacrificed 
entirely  the  idea  of  enveloping  the  Commander-in-chief. 
This  consideration,  however,  so  far  from  throwing  doubt 
on  the  signal  which  Euryahis  records,  goes  far  to  corro- 
borate it.  For  it  so  happens  that  Nelson  had  at  the 
moment  orood  reason  for  not  seeking:  the  Commander-in- 
chief  in  the  centre.  Collingwood  had  just  telegraphed  to 
him    "  that    the    enemy's    chief   appears    to    command    in 

^  The  time  here  seems  to  be  much  the  same  as  Victory's.  Euryalus 
repeated,  "England  expects,  &c."  at  11.50.  Pascoe  says  it  was  made 
about  11.45. 

-  Vol.  iii.  p.  392. 

•■'  The  best  contemporary  French  historian,  a  veteran  of  the  older  wars, 
had  no  doubt,  after  his  careful  and  sagacious  study  of  the  battle,  that  this 
was  wliat  Nelson  meant,  though  he  naturally  regarded  it  as  a  feint.  "  Nelson 
first  made  a  feint  of  attacking  the  van  and  rear  of  the  fleet.  Then  he  re- 
assembled his  force  on  the  centre  and  abandoned  the  fate  of  the  action  to 
the  intelligence  of  his  captains." — Mathieu  Dumas,  Precis  des  Eviuernents 
Milltaires,  xiv.  408. 


i 


ORDER  TO  ATTACK  THE  VAN     383 

a  frigate."  ^  Collingwood  tlicn  must  have  read  in  Nelson's 
message  a  natural  answer  to  bis  own.  If  Villeneuve  was 
not  in  the  centre  it  was  not  there  a  decision  was  to  be 
sought,  but  in  the  van,  and  for  this  reason.  The  most 
serious  change  which  Nelson's  new  idea  made  in  the  plan 
of  attack  was  the  apparent  abandonment  of  his  own  con- 
taining function  on  which  the  success  of  Collingwood's 
attack  depended.  But,  in  truth,  it  involved  no  real 
abandonment.  The  natural  consequence  of  his  altered 
form  of  attack  w^as  that  the  enemy's  centre  would  stand 
on  at  once  to  relieve  the  van.  Indeed  this  was  the 
inherent  weakness  of  all  attempts  to  concentrate  on  the 
van.  Nelson  would  probably  be  doubled  on,  but  that 
would  bring  on  a  meUe  and  Collingwood  would  be  left 
free  to  "  complete  the  business  of  the  rear." 

There  seems,  then,  to  be  no  sufficient  reason  to  reject 
the  explicit  statement  of  Euryaluss  Log.  It  was  just 
at  this  time  that  Nelson  revoked  his  permission  to 
Tim^raire  to  pass  ahead  of  him  and  ordered  her  to  take 
station  astern.^  In  other  words,  at  the  last  moment  he 
strictly  re-formed  his  column  as  though  he  intended  to 
break  the  line  in  line-ahead,  and  this  we  know  from  an 
unimpeachable  source  was  actually  his  intention.  The 
enemy's  van  was  just  opening  fire  on  him  at  long  range, 
and  he  dismissed  his  three  frigate  captains  to  inform  the 
ships  in  his  rear  exactly  what  his  intentions  were.  Black- 
Avood  went  straight  alongside  the  Neptune  in  his  boat  and 
informed  Captain  Fremantle  that  Nelson's  intention  was 
"  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line  about  the  thirteenth 
or  fourteenth  ship,  and  then  to  make  sail  on  the  larboard 
tack  for  their  van."  ^     Now,  about  the  thirteenth  ship  we 

^  Lieutenant  G.  L.  Browne  of  the  Victory.  Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  196. 
He  records  it  as  made  at  10.40.  James  says  it  was  "a  few  minutes  before 
the  action  commenced,"  but  Browne  says  distinctly  it  was  at  10.40,  and  he 
was  assistant  flag-lieutenant. 

2  Neptune  (Master's  Log-).  "11.50,  Timtrairc  took  station  astern  of 
Victory,  Neptune  next."  Temcraire  (Captain's  Log).  "  Noon,  Victory  to 
Temeraire,  269,  with  Victory's  pennants,"  Temcraire' s  clock  was  20  minutes 
ahead  of  Victory^ s.  Captain  Harvey  says  he  had  the  signal  about  15 
minutes  before  the  Victory  opened  fire.     That  would  make  it  about  11.45. 

^  Neptune's  log  puts  it  at  11,50  :  Nicolas,  vii.  186.  It  was  7  minutes  before 
Royal  Sovereign  opened  fire,  which  Victory  says  was  at  11.40. 


384  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

know  a  wide  gap  had  opened  in  the  enemy's  Hne  owing 
to  ships  to  leeward  not  being  able  to  get  into  station/ 
Nelson  clearly  intended  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  this 
break  in  the  line  to  pass  through  it  and  then  to  run 
up  the  van  and  engage  it  from  to  leeward,  crippling  each 
unit  as  he  passed  with  his  massed  three-deckers,  and  leaving 
them  a  prey  to  his  w^eaker  following. 

It  was  a  conception  entirely  worthy  of  him  and  entirely 
in  accord  with  the  fundamental  principle  of  his  plan.  It 
fully  and  worthily  explains  his  neglect  to  deploy — his  per- 
sistent clinging  to  his  line-ahead,  which  so  much  effort  has 
been  made  to  explain  away.  For  the  purpose  of  containing 
the  van  it  served  admirably.  Till  the  last  moment  it  was 
impossible  for  the  enemy  to  tell  whether  or  not  the  van 
was  his  objective,  for  to  the  last  he  himself  had  not  decided. 
Both  van  and  centre  were  equally  threatened.  For  a  regular 
feint  there  was  no  need,  and  certainly  none  was  made.  If, 
as  several  witnesses  clearly  record,  he  was  steering  for  the 
Santisima  Trinidad,  his  intended  movement  for  the  gap  a 
ship  or  two  astern  of  her  would  mean  a  short  turn  to 
starboard  before  hauling  to  the  wind  on  the  opposite  tack ; 
and  so  far  from  being  a  feint  on  the  van,  it  would  if  any- 
thing amount  to  a  feint  on  the  centre.  But  the  whole 
meaning  of  the  decision  is  this.  At  the  last  moment  his 
unmatched  eye  for  a  battle  had  seized  a  weakness  in  the 
enemy's  position  and  with  perfect  mastery  he  meant  to 
deliver  his  attack  accordingly.  It  was  only  by  keeping 
his  division  in  line-ahead  that  such  a  sudden  stroke  was 
possible.  Surely  it  needs  no  excuse.  Leadership  could 
not  well  rise  higher. 

This  then  was  undoubtedly  the  last  order  which  Nelson 
conveyed  to  his  fleet  before  engaging.  But  no  sooner  were 
the  frigate  captains  away  with  it  than  he  saw  reason  to 
change  his  resolution.  As  the  fleets  drew  together  Ville- 
neuve  had  signalled  to  engage  as  soon  as  they  were  in 
effective  range,  and  then,  as  tlie  rear  opened  fire  on  Colling- 
wood,  he  and  all  the  other  Admirals  displayed  their  flags. 

1  Rapport    du    Capitaine    de   vaisseau    Lucas   {Redoultahle) :    Desbriere, 
Trafalgar,  App.,  196  ;  and  ante,  p.  3G7. 


HXfnj.a  dii 


POSITIOI^^'of  the'COM^^        FORCES 'of  FRaJ?^^  &  

atthtc(?7nm£nz^menti>ftA^Jctw7t22^0drimwiffiIjORI^    N^Ij S  ON^  Gip(^TfXiralgar.  bearing  E,S:E.4Leaffu^^ 

Spartiate      M 

/        -    ■ 


Reference 


(  Frencli 

^  .Spaniards  -<$fe 


Escadre-   j        /^ 
d  ObservaUcTt  \      '^ 


^Ae  a/'f 


Defiance  m 
Ptttnderer    ^ 
Defmw\  0 

Revaig^  % 
Toypfiemus  \ 

Bci/dlSovera^rv  \ 
'  Aflmy  Collingwx>od 


Minotaur  m 
Orion    f 


Col^fi 


fsU^ 


Ajax  0 

^oamemnon  §    a^„  .  Ffujifc.^^ 
w     m^Bntannjui 

^  XardNortliBsk 
Conqueror  J 

W  Waiad 

Leviathan      ^ 
Ntptww  % 

Taneraire  J  _       ,       _ 

Victory       A 
LordNebon  |L 


Etttrtprcnant  ^ 
outer  ^ 


Sifius 


Jfrica 


%^Si 


.1 1 


d/m/i^. 


'^U^M/^^- 


la-UfAeM*^.  ana>.EijyaZ  FamS^  JfiBcrtd  Street,  Zemdtm, 


Ij  i'<u>t.  pajjc  384 


NELSON   RESUMES   HIS   PLAN  385 

The  commander-in- chief  was  confessed.  He  was  for  Nelson 
and  Bronte,  and  no  one  else.  His  station  Avas  tenth  in  the 
actual  line,  and  in  an  instant  Nelson,  instead  of  making 
for  the  gap  astern  of  her,  was  heading  to  pass  between  the 
Bucentaure  and  Trinidad,  her  second  ahead. 

For  the  moment  at  least  it  would  seem  he  had  aban- 
doned his  project  of  attacking  the  van,  for  the  original  plan 
of  the  Memorandum.  The  little  Africa  was  coming  in  from 
the  northward  and  he  signalled  her  to  engage  the  leading 
ship  of  the  enemy,  as  though  he  felt  he  must  sacrifice  her 
to  keeping  the  van  quiet  till  he  had  settled  the  business 
of  the  enemy's  two  flagships.  But  this  was  not  so  easy. 
His  sudden  reversion  to  his  original  idea  of  enveloping  the 
commander-in-chief  was  as  suddenly  foiled.  Villeneuve 
seeing  his  purpose,  hauled  to  the  wind,  and  drawing  ahead 
into  a  line  of  bearing  on  the  Trinidad,  closed  the  interval 
which  Nelson  had  chosen.  He  had  to  stand  on  down  the 
line  for  the  next  opening  exposed  to  a  terrific  concentration 
of  fire  from  the  group  round  the  Bucentaure.  It  was  too 
warm  work  to  last  long,  as  Nelson  said.  The  enemy  were 
looking  every  moment  to  see  both  him  and  Collingwood 
crushed  by  the  mass  of  fire.  The  wind  had  nearly  dropped. 
Astern  of  the  Bucentaure  was  the  gap  through  which  he  had 
originally  intended  to  lead  the  line  for  his  attack  on  the 
van,  but  now  there  was  no  more  than  a  regular  interval 
as  difficult  as  the  other.  The  RedoutaUe,  to  avert  the 
threatened  attack  on  the  flagship,  had  devotedly  forced  her 
way  close  to  Villeneuve's  quarter.  There  was  no  possibility 
of  passing  clear  between  the  two  ships,  but  if  Nelson  was 
to  have  the  commander-in-chief  it  must  be  this  or  nothing, 
and  in  desperation  he  put  up  his  helm  and  crashed  in 
under  the  Bucentaure  s  stern. 

That  was  the  end  of  his  tactics.  If  he  still  retained 
his  purpose  of  engaging  the  van  from  to  leeward,  the  bold 
move  of  the  RedoutaUe  had  completely  foiled  him.  Though 
magnificently  supported  by  Tem&aire,  who  almost  touched 
his  stern,  he  failed — in  the  tactical  sense  at  least — to  break 
the  line.  Running  hard  aboard  the  RedoutaUe  he  simply 
stuck  in  the  enemy's  formation,  incapable  of  leading  the 

2  B 


3  86  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

movement  if  be  had  had  a  mind,  or  indeed  of  any  further 
manceuvre.  Neptune,  it  is  true,  followed  T^nUraire  through 
the  line  astern  of  Bticentaure,  raking  her  as  she  passed ; 
then  hauled  her  wind  to  the  northward  in  accordance  with 
Nelsons  last  directions  by  Blackwood  and  settled  down 
with  the  Santisima  Trinidad.  But  the  movement  went 
little  further,  and  the  weather  column,  as  it  surged  up 
against  the  enemy's  clubbed  formation,  simply  flattened 
itself  out  with  the  impact. 

In  intention,  risk,  and  daring,  it  was  in  the  end  an  un- 
precedented vertical  attack  in  line-ahead  upon  a  closely 
formed  and  even  reduplicated  line  of  battle.  To  some 
slight  extent,  it  is  true,  its  perpendicular  character  was  at 
the  last  moment  modified.  So  closely  did  Tenieraire  and 
Neptune  follow  their  chief  that  his  sudden  movements 
forced  them  upon  his  port  and  starboard  quarters  to  avoid 
running  foul  of  him.^  In  the  rear,  moreover,  the  line  had 
never  been  formed  accurately,  and  his  captains  hurried  up 
to  port  and  starboard  of  him  more  like  a  pack  of  wolves 
than  a  formed  fleet.  Still  in  tactical  principle  no  attack 
could  have  been  weaker — none  could  have  offended  more 
seriously  against  the  principle  of  simultaneous  impact.  To 
all  tactical  intent  it  ended  as  it  had  begun,  by  both  columns 
making  the  onslaught  which  Hawke  had  devised  for  a 
flying  enemy. 

Hazardous,  even  desperate,  as  seemed  Nelsons  use  of 
it,  it  was  in  truth  the  outcome  of  heroic  judgment  and 
insight.  Both  risk  and  advantage  had  been  accuratel}^ 
weighed.  The  enormous  mass  of  gun  power  at  the  head  of 
Nelson's  line  dominated  the  counter-convergence  of  fire, 
and  brought  on  the  melee  round  the  French  Admiral  which 
Nelson  required,  while  the  rear  of  his  division  as  it  stretched 

^  The  Santisima  Trinidad's  report  (Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.  305)  gives 
the  situation  thus:  The  Victory  steered  for  the  combined  centre  "formando 
con  el  Ttvurairc  y  el  Neptune  de  tres  pontes  una  linea  casi  paralela  de  la  que 
formaban  en  acquella  parte  el  Bucentaurc  por  su  proa  el  Trinidad  y  por  la  de 
este  el  Heros."  As  these  three  ships  had  got  into  line  of  bearing  the  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  Nelson  and  his  two  consorts  were  also  in  a  line  of  bearing  or 
irregular  line  abreast,  roughly  parallel  to  that  formed  by  Trinidad  and  her 
two  seconds.  Cf.  Codrington  :  "Our  line  pressed  so  much  upon  each  other  as 
to  be  obliged  to  go  bow  and  quarter  line  instead  of  ahead." — Life,  i.  64. 


COLLINGWOOD'S   ATTACK  387 

on  into  action  made  it  impossible  for  Dumanoir  to  come 
down  directly  without  submitting  himself  to  a  crossing  of 
the  T. 

In  Collingwood's  case  the  risk  and  daring  of  the  attack 
Avas  even  greater  than  with  Nelson.  He  had  no  mass  of 
three-deckers  in  his  van,  and  the  speed  of  his  ship  and  the 
steepness  of  his  line  of  bearing  left  him  to  suffer  the  first 
shock  with  even  less  support  than  his  chief  received.  Not 
content,  moreover,  with  the  dozen  ships  which  Nelson  had 
allotted  to  his  division,  he  took  more  than  half  the  original 
allied  rear  as  well  as  Gravina's  advanced  squadron — sixteen 
ships  in  all.  Three  of  them  were  so  far  to  leeward  as  to  be 
out  of  the  line,  and  all  were  so  much  crowded  that  the 
twelfth  ship  was  not  easy  to  distinguish.  Somewhere  about 
the  right  place  was  a  Spanish  three-decker,  flying  a  Vice- 
Admiral's  flag,  and  under  such  temptation  a  man  of  Colling- 
wood's spirit  could  scarcely  be  expected  to  count  with 
scrupulous  exactness.  The  result  was  that  he  too  struck 
the  actual  centre  where  the  enemy's  formation  was  practi- 
cally at  right  angles  to  his  line  of  advance.  "  About  noon," 
he  says,  ''the  Royal  Sovereign  opened  a  fire  on  the  12th, 
13  th,  14th,  and  15  th  ships  from  the  enemy's  rear  and 
stood  on  with  all  sail  to  break  the  enemy's  line.  A  quarter 
past  twelve  altered  course  to  port ; "  that  is,  at  the  last 
moment  he  changed  his  direction  higher  up  the  line  and 
ran  through  under  the  stern  of  the  Spanish  Vice-flagship 
Santa  Anna} 

For  all  his  prompt  attempt  to  deploy  he  was  unsup- 
ported for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  So  far  from  establishing  a 
concentration  on  the  enemy's  rear,  he  himself  was  exposed 
to  the  concentrated  lire  of  four  powerful  ships,  but  in  the 
exhilaration  of  having  beaten  his  chief  in  the  wild  race  he 
could  only  cry  to  his  flag  captain,  "  What  would  Nelson 
give  to  be  here  ! "  He  was  first  into  action  and  the  rest 
mattered  not.  Belleisle,  with  Mars  close  at  hand,  was  first 
to  bring  him  relief.     Then  he  was  left  alone  with  the  Santa 

^  She  was  first-rate  of  112  guns,  bearing;  the  flag  of  Vice- Admiral  de  Alava, 
and  according  to  Colonel  Desbriere  was  thirteenth  from  the  rear  in  actual 
line  :  Trafalgar,  p.  207. 


388  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Anna,  while  his  consort  was  cut  to  pieces  and  dismasted  by 
a  powerful  concentration  in  her  turn. 

Apart  from  Colling  wood's  refusal  to  check  his  onset, 
the  advance  had  been  too  nearly  vertical  for  the  line  of 
bearing  to  produce  anything  like  unity  of  impact  behind 
him.  Almost  every  ship  in  the  first  half  of  his  division  met 
with  a  similar  reception.  "  Instead  of  doubling  on  the 
enemy,"  says  Senhousc,  who  was  in  the  Colossvs,  the  sixth 
ship  of  Collingwood's  line,  "  the  British  were  on  that  day 
themselves  doubled  and  trebled  on;  and  the  advantage  of 
applying  an  overwhelming  force  collectively  it  would  seem 
was  totally  lost.  The  Victory,  Temdraire,  Sovereign,  Belleisle, 
Mars,  Colossus,  and  Bellrrophon  were  placed  in  such  a  situa- 
tion at  the  onset,  that  nothing  but  the  most  heroic 
gallantry  and  practical  skill  with  the  guns  could  have 
extricated  them.  .  .  .  The  position  of  the  Combined  Fleet 
at  one  time  was  precisely  that  in  which  the  British  were 
desirous  of  being  placed ;  that  is,  to  have  part  of  an 
opposing  fleet  doubled  on  and  separated  from  the  main 
body."  ^  The  same  could  bo  said  of  other  ships  astern  of 
the  Colossus,  such  as  the  B-cvenge.  What  Codrington  saw 
from  Nelson's  line — and  he  says  he  was  placed  so  as  to 
have  a  specially  clear  view — was  the  ships  of  the  lee 
division  coming  up  one  by  one  and  attacking  the  remainder 
of  the  enemy's  rear  in  succession.^  Owing  to  differences 
of  speed  and  the  fact  that  Collingwood's  squadron  was  still 
unformed  when  he  ordered  the  line  of  bearing,  the  ships 
came  into  action  not  only  one  after  the  other,  but  at 
irregular  intervals — so  irregularly  indeed  that  the  enemy 
thought  they  were  being  attacked  by  distinct  groups.  One 
was  Collingwood's  own,  another  seemed  to  follow  the 
Revenge,  while  a  third  was  headed  by  the  Dreadnought  and 
Polyphemus.  So  closely  clubbed  was  the  allied  formation 
by  Gravina's  pressing  on  to  support  the  centre,  that  though 
the  line  was  penetrated  in  all  parts  there  still  remained 
yet  another  group  to  double  on  the  extreme  rear. 

1  MacmiUan  s  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  424. 

2  Orion  H  Journal:  Nicolas,  vii.  1^2,  note.  What  Codrington  wrote  at  the 
time  is  of  course  good  evidence,  to  be  distinguished  frpm  the  memories  of  his 
old  age. 


THE    ACTION   GENERAL  389 

It  was  nearly  an  hour  before  the  action  became  general, 
and  things  were  reduced  to  a  more  equal  footing.  By  that 
time  some  twenty-two  British  vessels  must  have  been  in 
action  with  the  twenty-two  French  and  Spanish  that  had 
been  cut  off.  It  was  a  melee  at  pistol-shot  all  along  the 
line,  in  which  the  captains  on  both  sides  supported  and 
relieved  one  another  with  brilliance  and  devotion,  and  with 
as  much  skill  of  manoeuvre  as  mangled  rigging,  the  clouds 
of  hanging  smoke,  and  that  almost  breathless  afternoon 
permitted.  Each  side  extorted  bursts  of  admiration  from 
the  other.  It  was  a  fair  fight  against  foes  worth  fightiog, 
and  with  no  advantage  on  either  side,  except  in  the  superior 
sea  training  and  gunnery  of  the  British.  It  was  only 
gradually  by  sheer  hard  fighting  that  Nelson's  and  Colling- 
wood's  men  redressed  the  disadvantage  of  the  impetuous 
attack.  In  an  hour  or  so  they  began  to  reap  its  fruits,  and 
to  establish  a  domination  over  the  raging  fire  into  which 
they  had  flung  themselves  one  by  one. 

All  this  time  the  enemy's  van  had  made  no  movement 
to  intervene.  There  some  ten  or  eleven  ships,  practically 
untouched  save  for  the  little  Africa  as  she  ran  down  from 
the  northward  to  get  into  her  station,  were  held  inactive 
by  Rear- Admiral  Dumanoir,  in  spite  of  what  every  one  re- 
garded as  his  plain  duty.  The  censures  that  he  earned 
may  rest  in  the  grave  of  acquittal  which  his  court-martial 
awarded  him.  We  are  only  concerned  with  what  he  did — 
and  deeply  concerned,  for  here  is  the  measure  by  which  we 
must  gauge  the  value  and  effectiveness  of  the  "  containing  " 
element  in  Nelson's  plan. 

It  was  not  for  more  than  two  hours  after  the  action 
had  begun — one  hour  after  it  had  become  general — that, 
in  response  to  Villeneuve's  repeated  signals,  Dumanoir 
began  to  tack.  Till  then  Nelson's  bewildering  method  of 
engaging  held  him  in  uncertainty  of  what  the  weather 
division  was  going  to  do.  But  when  it  was  clear  that  the 
strange  tactics  meant  an  attack  on  the  centre  in  column, 
he  saw,  so  he  says,  the  possibility  of  cutting  off  Nelson's 
rearmost  ships — a  danger  to  which  the  line-ahead  attack 
obviously  exposed  them.    It  was  a  risk  Nelson  had  calculated 


390  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

and  taken  willi  a  light  heart.  "  It  must  be  some  time,"  he 
wrote  in  the  ]\[emoramlum,  "  before  they  could  perform  a 
manoeuvre  to  bring  their  force  compact  to  attack  any  part 
of  the  British  fleet,"  and  so  it  proved. 

The  wind  was  so  light  that  it  was  only  by  using  boats 
that  Dumanoir's  ships  could  get  round  at  all,  and  it  was 
nearly  three  o'clock  before  they  were   standing  down.      By 
that  time  the   back  of  the  Allies'  splendid  resistance  was 
broken.      Not  a  mast  was  left  in  the  flagships  which  Nelson 
and  Collingwood  had  attacked,  and  all  three  of  them  had 
struck.      Still   there  was   a  chance;  for    the   British  ships 
which  had  borne  the  brunt  of  the  struggle  were   for   the 
most  part  dismasted  hulks,  and  Nelson  was  lying  mortally 
wounded.      In  the  extreme  rear  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  the 
centre^    there   were    possibilities    of   efifective    interference. 
Here  the  action  was  comparatively  fresh,  and  Gravina  was 
desperately  holding  his  own  against  a  concentration  that 
was  steadily  increasing.     He  himself,  like  Nelson,  had  been 
laid  low  witli  a  wound  that  was  to   prove  mortal,  but  the 
chief  of  his  staff  was  maintaining  the  struggle  Avith  obsti- 
nate courage,  and  there  was  nothing  to  tell  that  Villeneuve's 
right  hand  was  not  still  strong  to  save  the  situation.     The 
promise   of   this   hope,    and   the  danger   of  the  honoured 
Spanish   Admiral  were  so  great,  that  when   Dumanoir  led 
down    to   windward   only  four  units   followed  him — three 
French  and  the  Spanish  JVeptimo,  the  headmost  ship.     Nearly 
all  the  rest  made  for  Gravina  to  leeward,  and  one,  the  In- 
trSpide,  went  straight  into  the  melee  that  was  dying  round 
the  Bucentaurc.     This,  in  the  opinion  of  Villeneuve's  staff, 
was  the  course  all  should  have  taken.^     It  was  the  most 
direct  and    the    surest   way   to   renew   close    action   while 
there  was  yet  a  ray  of  hope.     But  as  it  was,  the  daring 
Intrepiclc  was  checked  by  the  little  Africa,  which  had  run 
the    gauntlet    of   the    enem3^'s   van   successfully,  and   had, 
now  reached  the  centre.     The  gallant  Frenchman  was  thus 
held  unsupported,  and  was  quickly  captured  by  some  fresh 
ships — Ajax  and  Orion  being  tAvo  of  them — which  Nelson's 

*  See  the  plan  attached  to  Prigny's  report,  No.  4,  Dcsbricrc,   Trafalgar, 
App   142,  and  ante,  p.  360. 


DUMANOIR    COMES   DOWN  391 

Rear-Admiral  Lord  Northesk  seems  to  have  led  up  in  the 
Britannia} 

By  the  time  Dumanoir  was  well  set  on  his  course  there 
were  only  the  last  two  shi|)s  of  Nelson's  column,  Spartiate 
and  Minotaur,  not  in  action,  and  it  was  these  vessels  the 
French  Rear- Admiral  thought  he  could  cut  olf.  They  saw 
the  danger,  but  it  was  not  their  own  they  saw.  It  was  the 
critical  position  of  the  flagships  and  the  T^m^raire,  as  they 
lay  almost  helpless  wrecks  and  cumbered  with  their  prizes. 
Captain  Mansfield  in  the  Minotaur,  the  slower  ship  of  the 
two,  was  leading,  for  the  principle  of  the  line-ahead  had 
been  preserved  to  the  end.  Seeing  there  was  not  a 
moment  to  lose,  Sir  Francis  Laforey,  in  the  Spartiate,  begged 
leave  to  pass  her,  and  so  the  two  devoted  men  held  straight 
on  across  Dumanoir's  bows,  raking  him  at  pistol-shot  as 
they  passed,  and  then  hove-to  to  leeward  between  him  and 
the  British  Admirals.  And  there  they  held  their  ground, 
engaging  the  four  French  ships  as  they  passed  and  forcing 
them  to  keep  their  wind.  It  was  a  splendid  bit  of  work, 
two  seventy-fours  standing  up  to  three  seventy-fours  and 
two  eighty s,  and  it  was  done  on  their  own  initiative  in  the 
true  spirit  of  the  Memorandum. 

No  moment  in  the  action,  except  the  first,  was  more 
critical.  The  Victory  and  Royal  Sovereign  had  each  but  a 
single  mast  standing,  and  were  both  unmanageable.  The 
Temeraire  was  a  hulk  absolutely  helpless.  The  Britcmnia 
had  passed  through  to  engage  the  ships  to  leeward  and 
could  not  have  returned,  and  only  the  Neptune  and  a  couple 
of  crippled  two-deckers  remained  in  a  case  to  resist 
Dumanoir's  attack.  But  this  was  far  from  the  worst. 
Collingwood  had  already  been  warned  that  Nelson  was 
dangerously  wounded,  and  now  in  the  strain  of  the  crisis, 

^  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  61.  Lord  Northesk's  part  in  battle  is  very  obscure. 
He  claims  to  have  engaged  ten  minutes  after  Nelson,  "  three  of  the  enemy's 
ships  having  opened  their  fire  on  us  while  edging  (sic)  down." — Log  of 
Britannia:  "At  8.0,"  it  says,  "passed  through  the  line."  This  suggests 
he  engaged  for  two  hours  at  considerable  range.  Collingwood  placed 
him  last  in  his  official  list,  but  Spartiate  and  Minotaur  were  certainly  astern 
of  him.  Magendie  in  the  plan  attached  to  his  report  places  him  fourth 
— possibly  his  real  place  in  the  order  of  battle.  But  the  most  authoritative 
lists  and  plans  put  him  sixth,  with  AJax  and  Orion  following.  See 
Appendix  F. 


392  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

when  no  one  could  sec  liow  it  would  end,  Blackwood  came 
on  board  the  Royal  Sovereign  to  break  the  terrible  news  that 
he  was  dead.  The  soul  of  the  battle  had  sped,  but,  acute 
as  was  the  shock  to  Collingwood,  not  for  one  moment  did 
he  lose  head  or  heart.  He  was  now  in  command.  In  his 
hand  it  rested  to  save  his  friend's  imperilled  victory. 

The  TImndcrcr,  one  of  the  last  of  his  own  squadron,  was 
looming  up  out  of  the  smoke  with  all  standing.  Her  part 
in  the  action  serves  well  to  illustrate  the  kind  of  concen- 
tration which  the  attack  in  succession  was  now  producing. 
She  began  firing  her  starboard  guns  at  the  extreme  rear  at 
1.15  ;  at  two  she  was  alongside  a  two-decker  that  had  been 
already  engaged  ;  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  she  had 
brought  down  all  her  masts  and  forced  her  to  strike.  In 
another  quarter  of  an  hour  she  had  served  a  second  crippled 
two-decker  in  the  same  way.  Next  was  Gravina's  shattered 
llagship,  that  after  getting  rid  of  the  Dreadnought  was  hotly 
defending  herself  against  the  Revenge.  Bearing  up  she 
passed  under  her  stern,  and  raked  her  so  severely  as  to 
force  her  finally  to  run  to  leeward  out  of  action.  She  then 
hauled  her  wind  and  passed  up  the  line  as  she  saw  the 
enemy's  van  about  to  come  down.^  At  the  same  moment 
Minotaur  and  Spartiatc  were  coming  up  into  action,  and 
Collingwood's  first  signal  as  commander-in-chief  was  to 
these  three  ships  to  tack  and  engage  Dnmanoir's  five  that 
were  coming  down  to  windward  upon  the  centre  and  were 
then  barely  three-quarters  of  a  mile  away.  "  Set  every  sail 
we  were  able,"  says  the  Thunderer,  who  naturally  had  not 
come  oti'  unscathed.  "  In  passing  cheered  the  Victory T 
Minotaur  and  SjKtrtiate,  as  we  know,  were  anticipating  the 
order,  and  were  already  engaged  with  Commodore  Valdez 
in  the  Ncptuno^'  By  a  desperate  eftbrt  both  Victory  -and 
Royal  Sovereign  got  some  guns  to  bear,  and  so  did  some 
of   the   two-deckers.     Neptune,  too,    was    soon   ready,   and 

1   Thunderer,  Captain's  Loj?,  P.R.O. 

-  Collingwood's  Journal :  Grcut  Sea  Fiyht^,  ii.  20i>.  He  says  ho  signalled 
after  3.30.  See  also  Logs  of  Minotaur  and  Spaiii'tte,  Ihid.,  250  and  270. 
Thunderer  says  she  got  a  verbal  order  after  3.30  (Nicolas,  vii.  202).  For 
Dumanoir's  account,  sec  Desbriere  :  Trafahjar,  A  pp.  152.  The  signals  at 
this  iiitcve.sting  time  unfortunately  are  missing  from  Euryalus's  Log,  and 
I'evierairc  ceased  to  record  anything  after  12.30. 


RETREAT    OF    THE    ALLIES  393 

Diimanoir,  finding  how  much  bite  was  left  in  the  appar- 
ently helpless  centre  and  that  Bucentaure  had  struck,  held 
on  as  he  was  to  see  what  could  be  done  in  the  rear, 
abandoning  the  Ne;pttono  to  the  mercies  of  Minotaur  and 
Spartiate. 

But  in  the  rear,  too,  Collingwood  was  ready  for  him. 
His  hand  was  as  steady  on  the  action  as  ever.  Seeing 
what  Dumanoir  was  threatening,  he  made  the  general  signal 
to  come  to  the  wind  in  succession  on  the  larboard  tack/ 
The  consequence  was  that  by  the  time  Dumanoir  was 
in  a  position  to  attack  the  rear  he  saw  half-a-dozen  ships 
hauling  out  to  form  a  new  line  to  windward.  To  sink  his 
spirit  still  further,  he  coidd  see  Gravina's  flagship  clearly 
bearing  away  out  of  action  and  flying  the  signal  for  the 
fleet  to  rally  round  her.  Here  at  least  was  a  good  reason 
for  Dumanoir  to  hold  on  and  try  to  join  her  to  leeward 
round  the  British  rear.  But  again  his  heart  failed  him. 
The  response  to  Collingwood's  signal  had  assumed  so 
threatening  an  aspect,  and  Gravina  and  the  ships  rallying 
round  him  were  soon  so  far  on  their  way  to  Cadiz,  that  he 
dared  not  make  the  attempt,  and  giving  up  the  action  for 
lost,  he  held  on  to  the  southward  for  the  Straits.  As  for 
the  rest  of  his  squadron  that  had  tried  to  get  down  to  leeward, 
they  were  quickly  headed  off  by  the  Britannia  and  her 
consorts,  who  pursued  them  towards  Cadiz,  capturing  one 
and  crippling  others.  Then  came  Collingwood's  signal  to 
haul  to  the  wind,  and  it  amounted  to  a  recall.'^ 

But  for  this  more  might  undoubtedly  have  been  done. 
Gravina's  flagship  would  certainly  have  been  taken,  for  she 
was  now  unmanageable  and  in  tow.  But  to  say  nothing  of 
the  grand  prizes,  the  situation  of  the  dismantled  British 
ships  on  a  leeshore  and  with  signs  of  a  coming  gale,  was 


^  Log  of  the  Dreadnought.  "At  4.5  made  and  repeated  101  geiierjil  " 
(=aboiit3, 35  Victory'' a  tirae).  7-V(fr6e  (frigate)  says  she  repeated  it  from  the 
Victory  at  3.20  (  =  3.40  Victory's  time).  Victory  still  had  her  mizzen  standing 
at  that  time,  and  probabl}^  repeated  the  signal.  The  signification  was: 
"  Come  to  the  wind  in  succession  on  the  larboard  tack  after  the  leading  ship, 
when  arrived  in  the  wake  thereof."  Kead  with  the  accompanying  instruc- 
tion, it  was  in  effect  an  order  for  each  division  to  re-form  line  by  tacking  or 
wearing  as  the  circumstances  required. 

'^  Britannia  says  she  obeyed  the  signal  at  4.30  (  =  3.40  Victory's  time). 


394  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

far  too  critical  for  anything  more  to  be  attempted.  Every 
ship  that  could  steer  or  make  sail  was  required  to  assist 
them,  and  in  Collingwood's  judgment  the  limit  of  risk  had 
been  reached.  He  did  not  even  deem  it  ])ossible  to  anchor, 
though  Nelson  had  made  the  ])roparatory  signal  before  the 
action  began,  and  it  was  his  last  wish  that  it  should  be 
executed.  Firing  had  now  everywhere  ceased  except  where 
the  Ncptuno  was  making  her  last  ei'i'ort.  Shortly  after  four 
she  struck,  and  the  most  decisive  naval  action  in  our  history 
had  come  to  an  end. 

The  enemy's  commander-in-chief  and  two  of  his  flag 
officers  were  prisoners  in  the  British  fleet.  Of  the  thirty- 
three  of  the  line  which  had  left  Cadiz  the  day  before,  only 
nine  got  back  that  night  to  safety ;  four  were  flying  for  the 
Straits ;  leaving  no  less  than  twenty  on  the  field  of  battle, 
of  which  seventeen  were  totally  dismantled,  thirteen 
actually  in  possession  of  prize  crews,  and  one  in  flames, 
while  every  British  flag  was  still  flying. 

Thus  whether  the  Plan  of  Attack  was  acted  on  or  not, 
elson's  tactics  were  justified.  His  forecast  of  their  con- 
taining capacity  was  fully  realised.  The  van  had  not  been 
able  to  move  till  too  late,  and  when  it  did  it  had  failed,  as 
the  Memorandum  foretold,  to  bring  its  force  compact  upon 
any  part  of  the  British  fleet.  For  the  rest  we  cannot  do 
better  than  take  the  deliberate  summary  of  the  Spanish 
Staff,  drawn  up  when  all  the  circumstances  were  known 
and  after  making  all  allowances  for  inaccuracy  of  detail. 
"  The  attack,"  they  say,  ''  was  upon  the  centre  and  rear 
of  our  line,  and  by  concentrating  their  force  upon  it,  they 
involved  the  riearguard  in  a  regular  action,  line  to  line, 
doubling  our  extreme  rear  and  leaving  the  van  out  of 
action."  ^  The  words  give  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  action 
as  it  eventually  developed.  They  are  also  a  correct  summary 
of  the  main  idea  of  the  Memorandum.  In  the  eyes  of  the 
Spanish  Staff  that  idea  was  carried  out  entirely.  On 
the  other  hand  their  reports,  as  well  as  those  of  the  French, 
are  full  of  bewildered  astonishment  that  an  attack  made  so 

1  Diario  del  navio  Principe  dc   Asturias    (Gravina's  flagship):  Desbriere, 
Trafalrjar,  Apj^.  387.     The  pas.sagc  is  a  note  added  t;ubsequently. 


,1 


THE    PLAN    AND    THE    ACTION  395 

recklessly  and  so  regardless  of  cstablislicd  principle — made 
in  column  without  any  regular  deployment — was  not  crushed 
in  the  bud.  No  ingenuity  of  deduction  can  answer  this 
criticism.  The  approach  up  to  the  moment  of  impact  was 
in  tactical  efiect  an  end-on  approach  in  line-ahead.  Neither 
the  irregularity  of  Nelson's  line  nor  the  accidental  broaden- 
ing of  his  front  at  the  last  moment  will  alter  the  fact,  nor 
will  Collingwood's  well-meant  but  unexecuted  signal  for  the 
line  of  bearing  remove  it  even  in  his  case.  In  neither  line 
was  there  any  developed  deployment  before  the  leading  ships 
were  in  contact,  nor,  taking  the  fleet  as  a  whole,  was  there 
any  such  unity  of  impact  as  Nelson  had  designed  in  his 
diagram. 

If,  then,  these  Avere  the  facts,  as  all  the  contemporary 
evidence  agrees,  was  the  battle  fought  in  accordance  with 
the  plan  of  attack  or  was  it  not  ?  The  answer  surely  is 
plain  and  simple  enough,  for  all  the  casuistry  with  which 
it  has  been  inwiebbed.  In  major  tactics  it  was :  in  its 
minor  tactics  it  Avas  not.  The  main  ideas,  as  the  Spanish 
Staff  saw,  were  fully  and  triumphantly  realised,  but  the 
actual  method  of  realising  them  was  not  the  one  Nelson 
had  indicated.  Possibly  he  had  discussed  the  method  he 
used  verbally,  but  of  this  we  know  nothing.  All  we  can 
say  is  that  in  the  culminating  hour  of  his  unmatched 
experience  he  flung  away  the  security  of  scientific  deploy- 
ment, and  in  its  place  he  staked  all  on  the  moral  and 
material  advantage  of  speed  and  momentum  against  an 
enemy  apparently  unformed  and  seeking  to  escape  him. 
The  risk  he  took  of  having  the  heads  of  his  two  columns 
isolated  by  a  loss  of  wind  or  crushed  prematurely  by  the 
concentration  to  which  he  exposed  them  naked,  almost 
passed  the  limits  of  sober  leading.  Its  justification  was 
its  success  and  the  known  defects  of  his  opponents.  Yet 
it  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether,  if  he  had  realised 
how  much  higher  was  the  spirit  of  his  enemy  than  he 
expected,  he  would  have  dared  so  greatly.  Blackwood 
lets  us  see  how  acutely  nervous  he  was  when  he  recognised 
how  good  a  face  they  put  upon  it,  but  it  was  then  too  late 
to  alter.     To  check  the  impetuous  attack  at  the  last  moment 


39^ 


THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 


in  order  to  substitute  one  of  lower  risk  would  have  been  an 
error  of  the  gravest  kind. 

Then  surely  ho  was  right.  The  lack  of  training  and 
sea  experience  in  his  enemy  on  Avhich  he  relied  saved  him 
and  justified  the  heroic  risk  he  had  taken.  Some  capable 
officers,  reviewing  the  tactics  afterwards  in  cold  blood, 
believed,  it  is  true,  the  luizard  was  unnecessary,  that  an 
hour  or  so  of  delay  in  attaining  the  position  he  had  designed 
Avould  have  left  time  enough  "to  complete  the  business " 
and  have  given  even  more  decisive  results.  It  is  a  point 
on  which  no  one  can  now  pass  judgment,  seeing  that  it 
depends  on  the  niceties  of  a  dead  art.  All  we  can  say 
is  thai  the  risk  he  took  was  great — that  it  was  not  one 
he  intended  to  take  when  he  made  his  plan,  nor  one  that 
his  captains  expected.  And  yet  when  all  is  said  and  done, 
that  final  resolution  remains  as  the  stroke  that  above  all 
others  touches  his  leadership  with  divinity.  Such  flashes 
of  genius  will  not  submit  to  reasoned  criticism,  they  are 
beyond  rule  or  principle,  and  every  efibrt  to  measure  them 
by  scientific  standards  can  only  be  lost  in  the  final  comment 
— "  It  was  a  glorious  victory." 


CHAPTER   XXV 

END   OF  THE   NAVAL  CAMPAIGN 

The  decision  which  Pitt's  policy  required  had  been  obtained. 
Napoleon's  attempt  to  use  his  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean 
had  been  crushed,  but  not  without  cost.  Small  as  it  was 
compared  with  the  results  obtained,  it  was  heavy  enough  to 
prevent  Collingwood  from  following  up  at  once  the  instruc- 
tions which  he  had  inherited  from  Nelson  to  support  the 
military  operations  of  the  Coalition  in  Italy. 

In  the  night  after  the  battle  the  threatening  gale  came 
up,  and  in  the  two  following  days  increased  to  such  violence 
that  had  it  not  shifted  a  little  to  the  southward  not  a 
single  prize  nor  one  of  the  dismasted  victors  could  have 
escaped  wreck.  Three  of  the  vessels  which  had  engaged 
Nelson  and  T4m&airc  most  hotly  went  down — BedoutaUe, 
Fougiieux,  and  Bucentaurc  herself.  Prisoners  had  to  be 
released,  and  with  friend  and  foe  working  resolutely  hand 
in  hand  it  was  only  by  the  most  desperate  exertions  that 
many  of  the  others  could  be  kept  afloat  and  off  the  rocks. 
To  increase  the  difficulty,  on  the  second  day  Cosmao,  one 
of  the  finest  captains  in  the  French  service  and  the  senior 
ofiicer  left  unwound ed  in  Cadiz,  boldly  put  out  with  five  of 
the  line  and  seven  cruisers  to  rescue  such  of  the  prizes  as 
were  drifting  towards  the  bay.  Believing  that  Dumanoir 
as  well  as  Gravina  had  got  into  Cadiz  with  ten  of  the  line, 
Collingwood  ordered  an  equal  number  to  cast  off  their  prizes 
and  form  battle  order.^  The  French  frigates  managed  to 
rescue  the  Santa  Anna  and  Ncptuiw,  both  of  which  were 
little  better  than  wrecks,  but  it  was  only  at  a  cost  which 
made  Nelson's  victory  more  decisive.     For  in  returning  to 

1  Collingwood  to  Cornwallis,  Oct.  26th:  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collec- 
tions, vi.  412. 

397 


398      END    OF    THE    NAVAL    CAMPAIGN     Oct.  22-24 

port  the  Ilayo,  a  three-decker,  together  with  one  eighty  and 
a  seventy-four  of  Cosmao's  squadron,  went  ashore.  Next 
day  the  Doaef/al,  which  just  before  the  battle  Nelson  had 
been  forced  to  send  into  Gibraltar  for  her  needs,  rejoined, 
and  together  with  some  of  CoUingwood's  least  injured  ships 
began  a  wholesale  destruction  of  the  prizes.  There  was 
nothing  else  to  be  done.  Several  that  had  gone  ashore 
were  burnt ;  even  the  splendid  Santisima  Trinidad  had  to 
be  sacrificed.  Of  the  nineteen  vessels  captured  four  were 
recaptured  and  eleven  wrecked  or  destroyed,  and  in  the 
end  only  four  were  brought  into  Gibraltar. 

By  the  24th  the  gale  had  abated  and  Collingwood  was 
able  to  re-establish  the  blockade  of  Cadiz — more  for  the  moral 
effect  than  anything  else,  for  he  now  knew  that  Dumanoir 
was  not  there  and  that  there  was  almost  nothing  seaworthy 
left  in  the  port  to  blockade.  Having  got  things  in  hand, 
one  of  his  first  cares  was  to  send  away  a  sloop  with  the 
new^s  to  Elliot  at  Naples.  His  despatch  admirably  presents 
the  situation  and  his  intentions.  "  As  it  is  of  great  import- 
ance," he  wrote,  "  to  the  affairs  of  Italy  and  Europe  in 
general  that  the  events  which  have  lately  taken  place  on 
this  coast  should  be  known  as  soon  as  possible  at  the  Court 
at  which  you  reside,  I  lose  no  time  in  informing  you,  Sir, 
that  on  the  19  th  instant  the  Combined  Fleet  sailed  from 
Cadiz,  their  destination  certainly  for  Italy.  On  the  21st 
.  .  .  the  action  began  at  noon  and  after  a  most  severe 
conflict  for  three  hours  the  enemy  gave  way  and  Admiral 
Gravina  retired  with  nine  ships  towards  Cadiz;  four  others 
(French  ships)  escaped  under  Kear-Admiral  Dumanoir  to 
the  southward  and  are  supposed  to  have  got  into  the 
Mediterranean  ;  leaving  to  his  Majesty's  squadron  twenty 
sail  of  the  line  captured.  .  .  .  The  most  decisive  and  com- 
plete victory  that  ever  was  gained  over  a  powerful  enemy. 
Eighteen  of  the  enemy's  ships  were  left  without  a  mast  in 
them,  and  I  will  venture  to  say  had  the  battle  been  fought 
in  the  Ocean  far  from  land  and  unembarrassed  by  the  rocks 
and  shoals  of  Trafalgar,  there  probably  would  not  one  of 
the  enemy's  ships  have  escaped.  On  the  22nd  a  gale  of 
wind  arose  which  continued  for  three  days,  sometimes  blow- 


Oct.  26  CADIZ    BLOCKADE    RESUMED  399 

ing  with  extreme  fury,  dispersed  the  fleet  in  all  directions, 
driving  most  of  the  captured  hulks  ashore  and  two  or  three 
were  driven  into  the  port  of  Cadiz.  The  rest  so  entirely 
disabled  that  I  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  burning 
and  sinking  them.  .  .  .  The  Combined  Fleet  is  annihilated. 
I  believe  there  are  not  more  than  four  or  five  ships  in 
Cadiz  which  can  be  made  ready  for  sea.  ...  I  understand 
there  are  neither  masts,  sails,  nor  cordage  to  refit  them — a 
shattered  fleet  and  empty  magazines.  But  what  has  raised 
their  admiration  and  excited  their  dread  too  of  the  British 
Flag  beyond  anything,  is  the  keeping  our  station  before 
their  port  after  so  severe  an  action,  which  I  have  done  to 
convince  them  that  we  are  not  to  be  removed  by  their 
utmost  efforts  from  a  station  that  is  necessary  to  be  kept. 
As  soon  as  I  can  make  the  necessary  arrangements,  I  pro- 
pose coming  into  the  Mediterranean,  and  if  the  Spanish 
squadron  of  Cartagena  is  in  motion  and  at  sea,  to  use  my 
utmost  endeavours  to  destroy  them  also  and  send  to  the 
Italian  coast  such  a  force  as  will  check  any  operations  the 
enemy  may  have  in  contemplation  there."  ^ 

There  were  some  who  believed  he  would  have  been 
better  employed  in  making  his  demonstration  at  Naples 
without  the  loss  of  a  day  instead  of  off  Cadiz,  but  after  the 
terrible  strain  of  that  exhausting  week  he  probably  did  all 
that  was  humanly  possible.  "  In  short,"  he  wrote  to  Corn- 
wallis,  "  my  strength  is  exhausted."  ^  From  the  Cartagena 
squadron  or  Dumanoir's,  wherever  it  might  have  gone,  there 
was  really  little  to  fear  as  Louis  was  still  somewhere  about 
the  Straits,  and  even  if  Dumanoir  entered  the  Mediterranean 
and  eluded  him,  he  would  certainly  have  to  make  for 
Toulon  to  refit  before  he  could  do  anything  at  Naples. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  he  had  not  entered  the  Straits. 
On  the  22nd  the  southerly  gale  had  struck  his  crippled 
squadron,  and  it  was  found  impossible  to  stand  up  to  it. 
Towards  evening,  moreover,  he  saw  sails  in  the  Gut  which 
he  believed  to  be  Louis's  squadron,  and  he  decided  to  reach 
to   the   westward  in  hopes   of    falling   in   with   Allemand. 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  231 :  Euryalus  off  Cadiz,  Oct.  24th. 

2  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  412,  Oct.  26th. 


400    END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  2 

For  two  days  lie  hunted  for  bim,  doing  the  best  he  could 
to  refit  and  stop  his  leaks,  and  then  on  the  25th  decided 
to  go  northward.  On  the  29th,  as  Louis  was  coming  out 
of  the  Straits  to  rejoin  Colling  wood,  he  doubled  Cape  St. 
Vincent.  Neutrals  were  questioned,  but  not  a  word  of 
Allemand  could  be  had,  and  he  stood  on  for  Rochefort 
in  ignorance  that  Strachan  was  ahead  of  him  still  wait- 
ing patiently  in  eager  hope  of  intercepting  the  squadron 
Dumanoir  was  seeking. 

Strachan  had  remained  as  we  left  him  in  constant  touch 
Avith  Lobb's  cruiser  line  about  Vigo  till  the  day  of  the 
battle.  Then  hearing  that  the  ships  which  Villeneuve  had 
left  in  Vigo  w'cre  ready  for  sea,  he  had  moved  away  to  let 
them  out,  and  on  the  24th  had  taken  station  off  Finisterre 
convinced  that  with  Nelson  oW  Cadiz  they  would  try  to  get 
north.^  He  was  thus  excellently  placed.  Dumanoir 's 
flagship  and  some  others  were  making  so  much  water  that 
he  felt  forced  to  keep  near  the  coast.  After  passing  the 
latitude  of  Finisterre  early  on  November  2nd,  he  was  actu- 
ally in  sight  of  Cape  Villano,  and  though  he  had  stolen  past 
Strachan  inshore  without  being  seen,  he  was  at  the  point 
of  junction  of  the  two  British  cruiser  lines,  and  as  a  matter 
of  course  quickly  found  he  was  being  observed. 

Two  frigates,  the  Boadicea  38  and  Dryad  36,  which 
seem  to  have  formed  part  of  the  Ushant-Finisterre  line  and 
must  have  been  on  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  were  to  the 
westward,  while  a  third  had  just  passed  inshore  of  him, 
and  was  a  little  to  the  southward.  It  was  Baker  again  in 
the  Phcenix,  with  his  genius  for  being  in  the  right  place,  and 
another  highly  interesting  piece  of  cruiser  work  ensued. 
After  his  hairbreadth  escape  with  the  Didon  from  Allemand 
he  had  nearly  been  caught  by  the  Combined  Fleet  as  he 
was  trying  to  get  his  prize  to  Gibraltar.  Eventually  he 
had  stood  north  again  and  taken  her  safely  home,  to  be 

1  Covnwallis  to  Marsden,  October  29th,  with  report  of  Captain  Rodd  of 
the  Indefatujahh,  44  :  la-letters,  129.  lie  had  been  sent  to  the  westward  of  the 
Channel  to  cover  the  home-coming  convoys,  and  on  September  20th  had 
sighted  Allemand  in  latitude  48°  57'  and  longitude  18"  19'.  Having  lost  touch 
he  ran  back  to  inform  Cornwallis,  and  meeting  Strachan  just  as  he  was 
starling  in  search  of  Allemand,  was  detained  by  him  and  taken  down 
to  Vigo. 


Nov.  2  PHCENIX  LOCATES    DUMANOIR  401 

rewarded  for  his  feat,  as  the  custom  was,  with  a  cruise.     On 
October   29th  he  had  left  Falmouth  for  a  station  to  the 
westward   of   Scilly,  where  he  was  to  open  sealed  orders. 
On  the  second  day  he  fell  in  with  a  Dane  who  said  he  had 
been  detained  by  Allemand  from  the   13th  to   the   15th. 
He  had  been  released  in  latitude  3  7°   51'  and  longitude 
14°    3',   that  is,   about   250   miles  west-north-west  of  St. 
Vincent,  and  his  captors  then  steered  north-west.^     As  we 
know  that  Allemand  was  then  on  his  way  to  the  Canaries, 
this  was  a  false  course  to  drown  his  scent.     Baker,  of  course, 
could  not  know  this.      It  was  the  ordinary  track  to  reach 
the   French   Atlantic   ports,   and   the    inference    was    that 
Allemand  was  somewhere  down  the  Bay  making  for  Roche- 
fort.     Baker  had  not  yet  reached  his  allotted  station,  but 
so  eager   was  he  to  let  Strachan  know  his  news  that  he 
decided  to  break  the  seal.     He  found  nothing  but  a  hand- 
some order  to  proceed  to  a  very  profitable  cruising  ground. 
Then  he  did  not  hesitate  a  moment.     Prize  money  was  flung 
to  the  winds  and  away  he  went  for  Ferrol,  where  he  ex- 
pected to  meet  with  Strachan.     Not  finding  him  there  he 
made  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  with  the  result  that  at 
daylight  on  November  2nd  he  found  himself,  as  we  have 
seen,  passing  inshore  of  what  he  believed  to  be  Allemand's 
squadron. 

Dumanoir,  who  was  then  sailing  east-north-east, 
promptly  detached  the  Duguaij-Trouin  to  chase  him;  but 
Baker,  instead  of  trying  to  escape,  held  on  south-west  for 
the  regular  rendezvous,  where  he  was  sure  to  hear  of 
Strachan.  In  vain  the  Frenchman  tried  to  cut  him  off. 
By  five  o'clock  he  had  passed  across  her  bows  to  windward, 
and  Dumanoir  signalled  the  recall.  During  the  last  two 
hours  of  the  chase  Baker  had  been  firing  signal  guns,  as 
Dumanoir  naturally  believed,  to  the  other  two  frigates,  but 
in  fact  he  had  not  seen  them.  What  he  had  sighted  was 
part  of  Strachan's  squadron  to  the  southward.  Dumanoir, 
with  all  Allemand's  luck,  must  have  passed  close  by  him 
the  night  before,  unseen,  for  all  that  Strachan  had  his 
squadron  widely  spread,  and  but  for  Baker's  activity  the 

^  Captain  Baker's  Journal  enclosed  in  strachan's  despatch  :  7izcZ ,  Nov.  5th. 

2  C 


402    EXD  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  2 

fugitives  might  well  have  got  awa}'.  The  other  two  frigates 
by  a  strange  chance  did  nothing.  It  was  nearly  nine  and 
quite  dark  before  they  made  out  the  Phoeni.r,  and  as  they  were 
between  her  and  the  enemv,  she  mistook  their  recogfnition 
signals  as  coming  from  Dumanoir's  squadron.  A  little  later 
they  saw  the  squadron  for  which  the  Fhcenb:  was  standing,  but 
again  their  signals  were  mistaken,  and  making  sure  they 
were  alone  between  two  divisions  of  AUemand's  squadron 
they  stood  clear  away  and  were  seen  no  more.'^ 

Even  the  Phcenic  was  fired  upon  before  she  could  make 
Strachan  understand.  Luckily  it  was  his  flagship,  the 
Ccvsar  80,  that  was  nearest  to  her,  the  rest  being  scattered 
far  astern.  Baker  reported  he  had  just  been  chased  by 
AUemand's  squadron,  and  that  they  were  close  by  to 
leeward.  '^  I  was  delighted,"  wrote  Strachan,  "and  told 
him  to  tell  the  captains  astern  I  meant  to  engage  at  once." 
So  away  went  the  Phoenix  again  to  rally  the  squadron,  while 
Strachan  held  on  after  the  chase.  He  could  see  them  in 
the  moonlight  standing  away  m  Ime  abreast,  but  when  the 
moon  set  he  lost  them.  Dumanoir,  m  fact,  m  order  to 
throw  him  off,  altered  course  to  the  south-east  so  .soon  as 
it  was  dark,  but  Strachan  was  not  deceived.  He  merely 
shortened  sail  till  he  was  joined  by  two  of  his  seventy-fours. 
Hero  and  Courageux,  and  one  of  his  frigates,  uEolus  32, 
with  Lord  William  Fitzroy  still  in  command.  Of  the  rest 
of  his  squadron  the  Namur  74,  and  Santa  Margarita.  36, 
were  still  astern,  and  his  fifth  ship  of  the  line,  Bellona 
74,  as  well  as  the  IndefatigaUe  had  unfortunately  just 
parted  company. 

But  weakened  as  he  was  and  though  he  had  lost  sight 
of  the  chase,  he  had  no  doubt  what  to  do.  As  though  he 
saw  clearly  into  Dumanoir's  mind  he  made  straight  east- 
north-east  for  Cape  Ortegal.  It  was  for  that  point  also 
that  Dumanoir  was  steering  to  get  a  departure,  and  possibly 
with  the  hope  of  slipping  into  Ferrol.  But  Strachan  had 
cleverly  cut  him  off.     At  daybreak  on  the   3rd,  with  his 

1  Strachan  took  these  two  vessels  for  part  of  the  enemy's  squadron.  "  We 
saw  six  sail,"  he  wrote  to  Cornwallis.  "and  cannot  conceive  which  way  the 
other  two  went  " — Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Var.  Coll.,  vi.  413. 


Order  of  Battle                                                                                         ^ 

Prendi  (Black)                                                                           ^ 
DuguxiyTroiuxv                N°  1                                                     (^       ^^ 
Farmidable                        N°2                                                       1/^ 

MontBUuLC                        N?3 

Sdpion,                              .Nf4 

Britisli  (WTiite)                                                         ^ 

Ojesar                                 N?  1                                         0 

Eero                                   N?Z 

4 

2 

3 

4        ^ 

12        3                                     4 

4 

12            3                                        4 

<^  <::3  <::d                   ^ 

'o:^Gi 

6 

7 

8 

9 

*9 

3           i.       -- 

10 

c::^     3      ' 

CtORGE.   PHILIPS   SON. I 


SIR  RICHARD  STRACHAN'S  ACTION. 

From  a  plan  attached  to  the  Report  of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir  le  Pelley 
(Archives  de  la  Marine  BB*  237).     Desbriere's  Trafalgar. 

To  fouoe.  page  402. 


Nov.  3-4      STRACHAN    CHASES   DUMANOIR  403 

other  frigate  SanUi  MaTyarita  added  to  the  units  iu  com- 
pany, he  had  Ortegal  in  sight,  and  by  nine  o'clock  the  chase 
appeared  again  in  the  north-east.  A  couple  of  hours  later 
the  Phoenix  and  Namuv  were  seen  coming  up,  and  behind 
them  a  stray  frigate  they  had  picked  up.  She  proved  to 
be  the  ESvolutionnaire  38,  a  heavily  armed  cruiser,  that 
went  some  way  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  Bellona. 
The  force  at  his  disposal  thus  amounted  to  four  of  the  line 
and  an  equal  number  of  what  we  should  now  call  first-class 
cruisers,  and  here  lies  the  main  interest  of  the  encounter. 
For  the  first  time  in  anything  that  could  be  classed  as  a 
fleet  action  the  fighting  power  of  cruisers  was  about  to  be 
used  directly  to  influence  the  issue,  and  that  not  in  line 
with  the  battleships  in  the  primitive  style,  but  as  a  detach- 
ment with  separate  functions  in  accordance  with  the  most 
recent  ideas  of  our  own  time. 

All  day  on  the  3rd  the  weary  chase  went  on  towards 
Rochefort  with  the  British  slowly  gaining,  but  when  dark- 
ness fell  the  two  fleets  were  still  far  apart.  So  fine  was  the 
night,  however,  that  the  chase  was  easily  kept  in  sight,  as 
it  stood  on  in  line  of  bearing,  and  when  morning  broke  the 
Cccsar  was  barely  six  miles  from  the  Scipmi,  the  last  of 
Dumanoir's  four  ships.  Ahead  of  the  British  squadron  and 
just  within  gunshot  were  the  frigates  that  had  been  leading, 
and  before  six  they  had  taken  hold  of  the  French  rear. 
The  power  of  heavy  cruisers  to  stop  a  flying  battle  fleet 
was  never  better  shown.  In  an  hour  or  two  the  Margarita 
and  Phoenix  got  near  enough  to  keep  yawing  and  giving 
the  Scipion  their  broadsides.  Dumanoir  was  still  hoping  to 
avoid  an  action.  He  had  had  to  jettison  a  score  of  his 
eighty  guns  to  keep  his  flagship  afloat,  and  was  in  no  con- 
dition to  fight  even  an  inferior  force.  But  by  eleven  o'clock, 
finding  it  impossible  to  shake  ofl'  the  frigates  with  his  stern- 
chasers,  he  was  forced  to  haul  to  the  wind  in  line  of  battle, 
and  an  action  became  inevitable. 

Strachan  still  had  but  three  of  his  squadron  up,  and  in 
accordance  with  the  then  favourite  plan  he  hailed  his 
captains  to  say  he  meant  to  attack  the  rear.  He  himself 
led  into  action  with  his  flagship,  she  being  the  most  power- 


404    END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  4 

ful  vessel  in  the  squadron.  The  most  approved  method  of 
engaging  for  a  fieet  coming  up  from  astern  of  an  enemy  in 
line  of  battle  and  from  to  windward  was  by  inverting  the 
line,  that  is,  for  the  leading  ship  to  engage  the  enemy's 
rearmost  and  her  second  astern  to  pass  on  under  cover  of 
her  fh^e  and  take  the  next  ahead,  and  so  on.  But  this 
Strachan  did  not  do,  probably  because  Dumanoir  was 
second  in  the  French  line,  and  he  wanted  to  bring  the  two 
flagships  together.  In  any  case  he  himself,  like  Nelson,  led 
the  line,  engaging  the  two  sternmost  ships  as  he  passed 
and  hauling  up  abreast  the  French  flagship.  No  attempt 
was  made  to  break  the  line  and  engage  from  to  leeward, 
as  Nelson  had  laid  down  in  his  Memorandum  of  1803,  and 
this  perhaps  is  explained  by  the  interesting  action  of  the 
cruisers.  Instead  of  taking  the  orthodox  position  to  wind- 
ward of  their  own  line  and  away  from  the  enemy,  they  got 
into  position  on  the  lee  and  weather  quarters  of  the  rear- 
most ship  and  continued  to  engage  her. 

Strachan  thus  secured  a  concentration  on  the  rear, 
and  left  the  van  ship,  the  BiujiLay'Trouin,  out  of  action. 
Dumanoir  promptly  signalled  to  tack  in  succession,  with  the 
intention  of  covering  his  two  rear  ships  and  cutting  off  the 
NamuT,  which  was  now  seen  to  be  coming  up.  It  Avas  a 
bold  move,  for  it  had  to  be  done  under  a  destructive  fire 
from  the  Ca:sar  and  her  second  the  Hero,  and  it  brought  the 
French  down  within  pistol  shot  of  the  British  line.  And 
not  only  this.  The  other  two  heavy  frigates  had  come  up, 
and  it  brought  them  all  four  in  line  to  leeward.  Dumanoir 
was  thus  doubled  on  and  deprived  of  the  possibility  of 
bearing  up  to  get  out  of  action.  It  was,  therefore,  un- 
necessary for  Strachan  to  attempt  the  hazardous  manoeuvre 
of  breaking  the  line  in  order  to  secure  a  decisive  action,  and 
indeed  Dumanoir  evinced  no  desire  to  avoid  one. 

The  effect  of  the  French  move  was  that  the  two  lines 
passed  on  opposite  tacks.  Then,  instead  of  tacking  again, 
Dumanoir  held  on  to  isolate  the  Naninr,  who  was  keeping  her 
wind  to  Aveather  them,  and  for  more  than  half-an-hour  the 
action  ceased.  Strachan  was,  of  course,  trying  to  get  round. 
The  obvious  move  w^as  to  tack,  but  his  rigging  was  so  badly 


Nov.  4  STRACHAN'S    VICTORY  405 

injured  that  he  was  forced  to  wear.  The  result  was  con- 
fusion, and  seeing  the  French  were  getting  away  and  threat- 
ening to  weather  him  he  signalled  to  the  Namnr,  as  Nelson 
had  done  to  the  Africa,  to  bear  up  and  engage  the  van.  To 
save  time,  as  the  Rcro  had  got  round  first,  he  ordered  her 
to  lead,  and  formed  a  new  line  on  her.  In  this  formation 
the  action  was  renewed  Avith  a  fresh  attack  on  the  French 
rear,  the  frigates  retaining  their  position  astern  and  to  lee- 
ward. At  the  same  time  the  Namur  came  into  line  astern 
of  the  Hero,  and  the  Diujuay-Trouin  being  out  of  action, 
Strachan's  four  ships  could  concentrate  on  Dumanoir's 
other  three.  "  The  French  squadron  fought  to  admiration," 
wrote  Strachan  in  his  despatch,  "  and  did  not  surrender  till 
their  ships  were  unmanageable,"  but  by  four  o'clock  the 
business  was  done  and  all  had  struck. 

It  was  not  till  Strachan  had  the  French  Admiral  on 
board  that  he  discovered  what  he  had  done.  "Judge  of 
my  surprise,"  he  wrote,  "when  I  found  the  ships  we  had 
taken  were  not  the  Rochefort  squadron,  but  four  from 
Cadiz."  He  had  not  been  fighting  Allemand  after  all,  but 
a  mere  remnant  that  had  escaped  Nelson's  hands.  The 
elusive  Allemand  was,  of  course,  far  away,  and  to  the  end  he 
maintained  his  reputation.  The  day  before  the  battle  of 
Trafalgar,  finding  no  European  port  open  to  him,  he  had 
resolved  to  run  for  the  Canaries.  In  a  fortnight  he  was 
close  to  Teneriffe,  where  he  learned  from  a  Portuguese 
schooner  fresh  from  Madeira  that  a  British  expedition,  con- 
sisting of  eight  of  the  line,  as  many  frigates,  and  130 
transports,  had  recently  demanded  shelter  there  and  had 
been  refused.  It  was,  of  course,  Popham  and  Baird,  whom 
he  had  so  narrowly  missed  a  few  weeks  before.  They  were 
said  to  be  destined  for  a  distant  expedition,  and  were  to 
take  the  Canaries  on  the  way.  If  it  were  true,  Allemand 
was  in  a  terrible  plight :  but  he  decided  to  hold  on  in  hopes 
the  British  squadron  had  passed  forward,  and  that  he  would 
be  able  to  retake  the  islands  if  he  found  a  hostile  garrison 
in  occupation.  On  the  morrow,  the  day  Strachan  and 
Dumanoir  met,  he  made  Teneriffe  and  cleared  for  action. 
But  it  was  a  false  alarm.    Baird  and  Popham  had  passed  on 


4o6   END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN  nov.-Dec. 

to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  without  touching  the  Canaries, 
and  Allemand  was  received  with  open  arms  by  the  Spanish 
Governor.  Hero  ho  stayed  for  a  fortnight  to  Lmd  his  sick, 
revictual,  and  sell  his  prizes,  which  realised  not  fiir  short  of 
£20,000,  and  this,  of  course,  was  all  over  and  above  the 
value  of  the  numerous  less  valuable  captures  lie  had  sunk. 
But,  as  usual,  the  damage  he  had  done  to  British  trade 
cannot  nearly  have  covered  the  cost  of  his  expedition. 

Still  this  indefatigable  officer  was  far  from  regarding  his 
campaign  as  finished.  As  yet  he  had  not  had  a  word  of 
the  Combined  Fleet.  He  believed  it  was  still  blockaded  in 
Cadiz,  and  he  laid  his  plans  accordingly.  Having  obtained 
three  months'  victuals  and  recruited  his  companies,  he 
would  cruise  for  a  while  about  Madeira  for  the  British 
colonial  trade  and  reinforcements,  and  then  would  proceed 
off  the  coast  of  Portugal  to  sit  on  the  communications  of 
the  squadron  that  was  blockading  Villeneuve.  With  this 
intention  he  sailed  on  November  19th.  The  very  next  day 
he  sighted  seven  sail,  which  he  believed  to  be  one  of  the 
British  squadrons  in  search  of  him.  It  was  reported  to  be 
inferior,  and  he  formed  battle  order  and  gave  chase.  In  the 
night,  however,  the  strangers  eluded  him.  There  was,  in 
fact,  no  British  squadron  near  him.  The  strangers  were 
probably  a  convoy,  and  they  must  have  had  a  narrow  escape. 
Three  days  later,  about  Madeira,  he  captured  a  British  West 
Coast  vessel  outward  bound,  and  learned  from  her  skipper 
that  before  leaving  Portsmouth  he  had  heard  a  great  battle 
had  been  fought,  in  which  Nelson  had  been  killed,  but  he 
did  not  know^  the  particulars.  With  no  further  captures 
Allemand  passed  on  from  his  Madeira  station,  but  it  was 
not  till  the  middle  of  December  that  he  reached  the  coast 
of  Portugal.  Here  on  the  18  th  and  19  th  he  took  and  sunk 
three  British  vessels,  and  from  them  he  learned  that  there 
was  a  squadron  about  on  the  look-out  for  him,  and  that 
the  Combined  Fleet  had  been  annihilated  by  Nelson  and 
Strachan.  ''  The  indiscretion,"  he  says,  ''  of  those  who 
brought  me  the  news  struck  consternation  aboard  and 
aroused  keen  anxiety  to  get  into  port."  At  last  the  heart 
was  beaten  out  of  him  and  his  squadron,  and  he  resolved  to 


Dec.  24         END    OF   ALLEMAND'S    CRUISE  407 

seek  shelter  in  Rochefort.  One  last  stroke  of  luck  still 
awaited  him.  It  came  with  a  westerly  gale  and  thick 
weather  that  drove  up  at  the  right  moment  and  carried 
him  on  at  ten  knots  to  the  latitude  of  Rochefort,  and 
there  unseen  he  ran  in  in  safety  on  Christmas  Eve.  So  his 
brilHant  Odyssey  had  ended.  ''On  the  3rd  (Nivose) "  he 
concluded  his  report,  "  I  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Aix 
Island  after  161  days'  absence,  of  which  148  were  under 
sail,  bringing  back,  with  the  squadron  His  Majesty  entrusted 
to  me,  the  enemy's  ship  of  the  line  Calcutta.  If,  my  lord, 
His  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  and  your  Excellency  con- 
descend to  approve  the  dispositions  I  made  in  the  various 
difficult  and  embarrassing  circumstances  I  met  with,  I  shall 
feel  highly  recompensed  for  the  pains  I  have  taken  to 
this  end."^ 

Oh  si  sic  omnes !  If  Craig's  expedition  had  not  forced 
Napoleon's  hand,  if,  as  he  first  intended,  he  had  been  able 
to  wait  till  winter  loosened  the  blockades  and  had  been 
able  to  split  up  his  fleet  into  cruising  squadrons  under 
young  officers  of  Allemand's  stamp,  what  infinite  trouble 
they  might  have  caused  to  our  colonial  and  commercial 
interests !  But  that  at  least  Nelson's  crushing  victory  had 
prevented.  Pitt's  offensive  policy  had  undesignedly  forced 
Napoleon  to  expose  his  fleet  to  annihilation,  and  all  hope  of 
effective  action  at  sea  was  gone. 

1  Desbriere,  Projets  et  Tentatives,  v.  798-800. 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

CONCLUSION 

By  universal  assent  Trafalgar  is  ranked  as  one  of  the 
decisive  battles  of  the  world,  and  yet  of  all  the  great 
victories  there  i&  not  one  which  to  all  appearance  was 
so  barren  of  immediate  result.  It  had  brought  to  a 
triumphant  conckision  one  of  the  most  masterly  and  com- 
plex sea  campaigns  in  history,  but  in  so  far  as  it  was  an 
integral  part  of  the  combined  campaign  its  results  are 
scarcely  to  be  discerned.  It  gave  to  England  finally  the 
dominion  of  the  seas,  but  it  left  Napoleon  dicfcato3?-ef  the 
Continent.  So' incomprehensible  was  its  apparent  sterility 
that  to  fill  the  void  a  legend  grew  up  that  it  saved  England 
from  invasion.  That  legend  grew  green  till  the  present 
generation,  unsupported  as  it  was  by  the  plain  succession 
of  events.  Under  the  dry  glare  of  modern  historical 
methods  the  legend  has  withered,  and  in  its  place  springs 
up  the  question,  why  was  it  that  the  consequences  of 
Nelson's  last  achievement  fell  so  far  below  his  confident 
expectation,  and  why  did  Pitt  die  believing  himself  de- 
feated ? 

The  fault,  it  is  certain,  cannot  be  laid  to  his  door.  Not 
a  moment  had  been  lost  in  following  up  the  blow.  So 
soon  as  Napoleon's  change  of  front  was  known,  the  War 
Office  threw  itself  into  bringing  forward  the  disposable 
force  for  immediate  action,  and  by  the  first  week  of  October 
Castlereagh  had  settled  the  first  step  of  the  continental 
campaign.  Bernadotte,  in  conformity  with  Napoleon's  vast 
movement,  had  withdrawn  his  corps  from  Hanover,  and 
was  en  route  to  join  the  Grand  Army  for  the  invasion  of 
Austria,  leaving  nothing  behind  him  but  a  small  garrison  in 

Hameln,  on  the  Weser,  to  secure  a  re-entry  from  West- 

408 


I 


Sept.  THE    NORTHERN    EXPEDITION  409 

phalia.  The  opportunity  of  driving  the  French  from 
Northern  Europe  in  Napoleon's  absence  was  too  promising 
to  be  resisted.  A  Russian  force  was  on  its  way  to  join  the 
Swedes  at  Stralsund,  and  Pitt  decided  that  without  waiting 
till  the  whole  disposable  British  force  could  be  mobilised, 
the  king's  German  legion  should  sail  at  once  to  co-operate 
with  the  allies.^  In  view  of  the  approach  of  winter  and  the 
closing  of  the  northern  seas  with  ice,  the  operation  was 
extremely  hazardous,  but  the  risks  were  faced.  To  minimise 
them  it  was  decided  to  send  the  expedition  not  to  the 
Baltic,  but  to  the  Elbe,  where  from  Cuxhaven  and  Stade  it 
could  rapidly  join  hands  with  the  Swedes  and  Russians 
Irom  Stralsund,  at  Lauenberg  on  the  Weser.  Accordingly 
Lord  Keith  was  placed  in  direct  communication  with  the 
War  Office  and  ordered  to  get  the  troops  across  as  quickly 
as  possible,  while  CornwalHs  covered  the  operation  before 
Brest. 

The  Legion,  with  two  British  brigades  which  formed 
the  advanced  force  under  General  Don,  numbered  about 
11,000  men,  and  they  were  to  be  followed  as  soon  as  trans- 
port was  ready  by  the  rest  of  the  disposable  force,  which 
Castlereagh  hoped  would  eventually  bring  the  whole  up  to 
sixty  or  seventy  thousand. 

It  was  not,  of  course,  on  this  force  alone  that  Pitt  relied 
for  success.  The  British  expedition  was  only  one  element 
m  a  grand  combined  movement  on  Napoleon's  left  flank, 
and  the  backbone  of  the  combination  must  be  Prussia! 
Her  attitude  to  the  Coalition  was  still  uncertain.  At 
Berlm  the  War  and  the  Peace  parties  were  still  at  grips, 
and  It  was  to  stiffen  and  embolden  her  that  Pitt  had 
hastened  the  despatch  of  his  first  contingent.  If  Prussia 
could  only  be  enheartened  to  take  a  hand  it  was  calculated 
that  m  the  spring,  with  the  Swedes  and  Russians  from 
Stralsund  and  various  contingents  from  the  minor  German 
States,  the  combined  army  would  reach  a  hundred  thousand 

'  This  famous  corps,  which  served  under  the  British  fla- with  so  much 
distinction  all  over  Europe  till  the  end  of  the  war,  consisted  mainly  of  Hano 
verian  troops  who  rather  than  submit  to  the  French  under  the  Co/vention  of 

service,     bee  Beamish,  History  of  the  King's  German  Legion.  ^ 


4IO  CONCLUSION  oct.  21 

men.  Such  a  force  threatening  Holland  and  the  northern 
French  frontier  could  not  be  neglected.  It  must  at  least 
act  as  a  powerful  diversion  and  cover  an  advance  of  the 
main  Prussian  army  which  it  was  proposed  should  move  at 
once  through  Moravia  against  Napoleon's  left.  Such  was  the 
stroke  which  Pitt  endeavoured  to  play — so  it  was  he  meant 
to  use  his  command  of  the  sea — on  the  well-tried  lines  his 
father  had  folloAvcd  with  so  much  success  to  save  Frederick 
the  Great.  It  is  a  bypath  of  the  Austerlitz  campaign  that 
is  now  long  forgotten.  Yet  it  was  nothing  but  the  incal- 
culable rapidity  of  Napoleon's  heroic  change  of  front  that 
condemned  it  to  failure  and  oblivion. 

The  incapacity  and  blindness  with  which  the  great 
soldier  directed  his  naval  campaign  was  only  equalled  by 
the  astounding  brilliance  and  certainty  of  touch  with  which 
ashore  he  snatched  himself  free  from  Pitt's  toils.  It  was 
one  of  the  many  dramatic  strokes  of  the  campaign  that  on 
the  day  that  Trafalgar  was  fought,  as  Nelson  and  CoUing- 
wood  were  contending  in  their  snail's  race  to  be  first  in  the 
hour  of  reckoning,  Napoleon  was  issuing  from  the  camp  of 
the  Grand  Army  at  Elchingen  in  Bavaria  his  famous  Ninth 
Bulletin.  It  told  how,  two  days  before,  General  Mack,  in 
accordance  with  Nelson's  prophecy,  had  surrendered  at  Ulm 
with  30,000  men.  The  effect,  taken  together  with  that  of 
the  actions  which  led  to  it,  was  that  the  Austrian  home 
army  had  almost  ceased  to  exist.  By  a  last  stroke  of  irony 
it  had  happened  just  as  Villeneuve  was  being  driven  out  of 
Cadiz  by  his  master's  ruthless  treatment  and  there  was  no 
longer  need  for  the  fleet  to  be  hazarded  to  almost  certain 
destruction. 

Staggering  as  was  the  blow  which  Napoleon  had  delivered, 
it  by  no  means  involved  the  end  of  the  Coalition.  It  had 
been  obtained  only  at  the  cost  of  sinning  against  a  high 
strategical  canon  which  condemns  operations  calculated  to 
raise  up  fresh  enemies.  In  order  to  outmanoeuvre  Mack 
Napoleon  had  violated  Prussian  territory,  and  the  insult 
gave  the  War  party  at  Berlin  the  upper  hand  of  the 
vacillating  king.  Advances  were  made  to  the  other 
Powers  engaged,  the  nebulous  threat   on  Napoleon's  left 


Nov.  THE    NORTHERN    EXPEDITION  411 

flank  began  to  materialise  rapidly,  and  on  November  3rd, 
as  Strachan  was  in  the  heat  of  his  chase  after  Dumanoir, 
the  Treaty  of  Potsdam  was  signed.  By  its  terms  Prussia 
accepted  the  British  proposals,  and  agreed  that  if  within 
four  weeks  Napoleon  did  not  accept  her  mediation  she 
would  join  the  Coalition  with   180,000   men. 

At  last  Pitt's  great  idea  seemed  to  be  realised,  and 
Lord  Harrovvby,  a  member  of  the  Cabinet,  was  hurried  off 
to  Berlin  on  a  special  mission  to  push  things  forward  into 
action.  There  he  arrived  in  the  middle  of  November,  just 
as  the  news  of  Trafalgar  was  flashing  over  Europe  and 
as  Don  was  landing  in  the  Weser.^  Harrowby  carried  full 
powers  to  arrange  for  a  complete  alliance,  to  define  the 
common  objects  and  to  concert  a  plan  of  campaign.  The 
main  object  was  to  secure  prompt  action,  and  Prussia,  like 
Austria  before  her,  was  timidly  bent  on  wasting  time  with 
an  armed  mediation.  Harrowby  was  authorised  to  go  even 
beyond  what  England  had  already  offered.  He  was  to 
promise  a  magnificent  subsidy  for  all  her  troops  and  the 
command  of  the  auxiliary  army  on  the  Weser  if  she 
would  begin  operations  in  Moravia  at  once.  He  was  also 
empowered  to  deal  with  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  certain  of 
the  Westphalian  States,  and  to  undertake  that  by  the 
spring  England  would  provide  70,000  men  for  use  on  the 
Continent  or  in  maritime  expeditions  as  the  Allies  desired. 
To  mark  England's  disinterestedness  he  was  to  say  that  if 
the  Coalition  forced  Napoleon  to  a  general  peace  she  was 
willing  to  give  up  without  compensation  all  her  conquests 
excepting  only  Malta  and  the  Cape.  Amongst  the  military 
experts  consulted  was  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  who  had  a 
brigade  in  the  expeditionary  force.  He  threw  cold  water 
on  the  whole  plan — not  for  any  inherent  strategical 
defects — but  because,  with  the  same  sure  military  insight 
that  had  prompted  Nelson  to  protest  against  Mack,  he  was 
certain  the  Prussian  army  could  not  be  mobilised  in  time 
to  do  any  good. 

^  Harrowby 's  first  despatch  from  Berlin,  and  Don's  first  from  Cuxhaven,  are 
dated  November  17th.  See  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  222,  and  War  Office  (1) 
In-letters,  186. 


4 1 2  CONCLUSION  Oct.-Nov. 

The  situation  indeed  was  gone  too  far  to  leave  much 
hope  of  saving  it.  If  Napoleon's  first  blow  had  stirred  up 
a  hornet's  nest  on  his  left  flank,  on  his  right  its  effect  had 
been  all  he  could  wish.  In  view  of  the  threatening  aspect 
of  affairs  in  Italy  he  had  been  compelled  to  withdraw 
St.  Cyr  from  the  south  and  to  use  his  corps  to  reinforce 
Massena  on  the  Adige.  To  Massena  had  been  committed 
the  task  of  holding  back  the  superior  army  of  the  Archduke 
Charles,  whose  mission  was  to  drive  the  French  out  of 
Italy  and  put  an  end  to  Napoleon's  new  kingdom.  Massena's 
function  was,  in  fact,  defensive,  but  the  moment  he  knew  of 
Ulm  he  sprang  forward  and  made  a  rough  attack  on 
the  Austrian  camp.  The  Archduke  hurled  him  back,  but 
seeing  how  desperate  was  the  condition  of  Austria,  it  was 
impossible  to  follow  up  his  success.  All  that  it  secured 
him  was  a  safe  retreat,  and  he  rapidly  fell  back  out  of  Italy 
to  try  to  save  the  situation  at  home. 

With  that  retreat  all  hope  of  effective  action  by  Craig 
and  the  Russians  was  gone.  It  was  on  October  30  th,  the 
day  of  Massena's  unsuccessful  attack  on  the  Archduke's 
camp,  that  Craig  finally  received  his  summons  to  meet  the 
Russian  expedition.  Syracuse  was  to  be  the  point  of  con- 
centration. But  so  perverse  was  the  weather  that  it  was 
ten  days  before  he  even  lost  sight  of  Malta.  Tired  of 
waiting,  the  Russians  passed  on,  and  eventually  the  two 
expeditions  concentrated  off  Cape  Passaro,  where  a  cen- 
tury and  a  half  before  the  elder  Byng  had  struck  one 
of  the  many  blows  which  England  had  delivered  to  save 
Sicily  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  first-class  naval 
power. 

Craig  had  brought  his  force  up  to  8000  men,  but  the 
promised  Russian  reinforcement  from  the  Black  Sea  had 
not  arrived,  and  all  told  the  combined  force  numbered  not 
more  than  20,000.  As  the  King  of  Naples  had  just  broken 
down  under  Napoleon's  pressure,  and  had  signed  in  despair 
a  treaty  of  neutrality,  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  what  to 
do.  The  Russian  envoy,  however,  had  little  difficulty  in 
persuading  the  high-spirited  Queen  to  denounce  the  treaty, 
and  to  join  the  Coalition,  promising  that  the  kingdom  would 


Nov.  CRAIG   AT   NAPLES  413 

be  defended.  Elliot  always  said  he  opposed  so  liagrant  a 
breach  of  faith,  and  believed  no  good  could  come  of  it.  He 
was  certainly  no  party  to  the  arrangement,  but  under  it 
both  the  Russian  and  British  troops  were  invited  to  land. 
It  was  not  till  November  20th  they  anchored  in  Naples 
Bay,  and  then  it  Avas  only  to  hear  the  staggering  news  of 
Mack's  capitulation  and  the  Archduke's  retreat.^ 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  To  Craig  at  least  it  was  obvious 
that  the  French  could  return  whenever  they  liked,  and 
invade  the  Neapolitan  dominions  in  such  strength  as  it 
would  be  impossible  for  the  local  forces  and  their  allies  to 
resist.  Elliot  was  of  Craig's  opinion  that  any  further  at- 
tempt to  defend  Naples  could  only  end  in  disaster.  His 
diplomacy,  he  knew,  was  powerless  in  face  of  the  Russian  as- 
cendancy, but  he  trusted  that  the  British  General's  influence 
over  General  Lacy  was  such  that  the  British  view  would 
prevail.2  But  even  if  it  did,  the  difficulties  of  the  situation 
were  far  from  solved.  Simply  to  re-embark  the  troops 
was  to  leave  the  unhappy  Queen  to  the  extremity  of 
Napoleon's  vengeance  which  their  reception  would  have 
earned  her.  True,  there  was  a  valid  and  urgent  excuse  for 
a  re-embarkation.  A  message  had  come  from  the  Arch- 
duke begging  that  the  expeditionary  force  should  be  brought 
to  Venice  to  act  on  Masscna's  rear  and  stop  his  pursuit ; 
but  this  was  equally  out  of  the  question.  Not  only  was 
the  operation  beyond  the  strength  available,  it  was  also  too 
late,  and  was  certainly  beyond  Craig's  instructions.  The 
two  Generals  agreed,  therefore,  to  go  into  cantonments  and 
collect  transport  and  horses  for  their  cavalry  and  guns,  and 
to  watch  developments  till  further  orders. 

They  had  not  long  to  wait.  The  situation  indeed  had 
been  developing  with  rapidity.  On  November  3rd,  the 
same  day  that  the  Treaty  of  Potsdam  brought  Prussia  into 
the  Coalition,  Castlereagh  issued  final  orders  for  the  whole 
disposable  force  of  the  kingdom  to  prepare  for  foreign 
service.     By  the  end  of  the  four  weeks  on  which  Prussia 

1  Craig  to  Castlereagh,  November  2nd  and  December  9th  :    War  Office  (1) 
280.  •'       ^  '' 

2  Elliot  to  Mulgvave,   Dec.   10th  :  Auriol,   ii.  693.      Napoleon  to  Prince 
Eugene,  and  Berthier  to  St.  Cyr  :  Ibid.,  pp.  704-5. 


414  CONCLUSION  Nov. 

insisted  for  hor  armed  mediation  all  would  be  ready, 
but  things  were  not  going  quite  smoothly.  Prussia  was 
showing  herself  difficult  about  the  ultimate  settlement 
to  be  achieved.  Hanover  was  her  Naboth's  vineyard,  and 
amongst  other  things  she  wanted  England  to  agree  to  its 
cession  in  exchange  for  Frisia  and  part  of  Westphalia. 
This  proposal,  however,  the  Cabinet  refused  even  to  com- 
municate to  the  king.  As  for  the  mediation  it  mattered 
little.  It  was  now  understood  to  be  nothing  but  a  dilatory 
device  to  gain  time  for  mobilisation.  Before  the  end  of 
November,  Pitt  had  not  only  seen  the  full  terms  of  the  treaty, 
but  Harrowby  had  also  received  a  comprehensive  plan  of 
campaign  from  the  German  Staff  which  was  all  that  could 
be  desired,  and  fitted  nicely  with  the  ideas  of  the  British 
Cabinet.  England  was  specially  to  charge  herself  with 
securing  the  mouths  of  the  Elbe,  Weser,  and  Emms,  which 
would  be  the  lines  of  supply  for  the  Combined  Army  of 
the  North,  and  to  further  as  much  as  possible  the  flow  of 
stores  from  Russia  to  the  King  of  Prussia's  magazines. 
Since  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon's  fleet  it  was  a  duty  which 
presented  no  difficulties.  As  for  the  operations  of  the  Allies 
ashore  the  general  plan  of  campaign  was  based  in  full 
accordance  with  the  traditions  of  the  elder  Pitt's  time  on 
defensive  action  upon  the  Emms  and  Weser  to  cover  the 
main  operations  till  events  justified  something  more  drastic. 
All  was  going  well  except  for  the  Swedes,  who  refused  to 
advance  till  Prussia  had  committed  herself  by  an  act  of 
war.  Operations  w^ere  amicably  concerted  between  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick,  who  was  commanding  in  chief,  Tolstoi, 
who  commanded  the  Russian  contingent,  and  Bliicher,  who 
was  Chief  of  the  Staff  in  a  Prussian  corps  commanded  by 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Hesse.  Hameln  was  already  invested 
by  Tolstoi  and  Don ;  and  Lord  Cathcart,  with  the  main 
body  of  the  British  expeditionary  force,  was  at  Yarmouth 
only  waiting  for  a  wind.^ 

^  Details  of  the  whole  episode  are  to  be  found  in  the  despatches  of  Don, 
of  Brioadier  Deoken  (chief  inielliirence  officer  with  Don),  and  of  Lord  Cath- 
cart, the  British  Commander-in-chief,  all  in  War  Office  (1)  la-letters,  18G. 
Castlereagh's  are  in  Ibid.  (0),  Out-letters  {Secretary  of  State),  13,  and  in  his 
Correspoiidence,  Second  Series,  vol.  ii.     Harrowby's  are  in  Rose,  Third  Coalition. 


Dec.  2-15  EFFECTS    OF   AUSTERLITZ  415 

Clearly,  then,  Napoleon's  position  was  one  that  could  not 
be  maintained  for  long,  and  certainly  not  over  the  winter. 
Some  of  the  remnants  of  Mack's  army  had  succeeded  in 
joining  the  Prussians,  while  others  had  escaped  through  the 
Tyrol  and  come  down  in  rear  of  Massena.  At  all  costs, 
then,  another  blow  must  be  dealt,  and  Napoleon,  in  spite  of 
the  danger  that  was  brewing  on  his  left  rear,  staked  every- 
thing on  a  rapid  forward  movement  to  meet  the  advancing 
Russians  still  further  from  his  base.  His  rapidity  and 
daring  were  triumphant.  At  Austerlitz,  on  December  2nd, 
the  fatal  blow  was  delivered,  and  Pitt's  grand  fabric  was  in 
ruins.  Though  at  first  the  truth  was  not  realised,  the  Third 
Coalition  had  ceased  to  exist. 

The  respite  on  which  Prussia  insisted  had  just  expired, 
but  instead  of  keeping  her  word  and  immediately  taking 
advantage  of  the  desperate  position  into  which  Napoleon  had 
pushed  himself,  she  began  to  weaken  at  once.  Harrowby, 
fearing  the  worst,  had  to  warn  Don  not  to  commit  himself 
too  far.  He  was  then  at  Verden  on  the  Weser,  and  so  sure 
had  seemed  the  position  that  he  had  recently  ordered  the 
empty  transports  to  return  for  further  duty.  Now  he  had 
to  recall  them  in  view  of  a  retreat,  and  he  himself  had  to 
stand  fast  as  he  was.  This  was  the  situation  which  greeted 
Cathcart,  when  on  December  15th  he  reached  Cuxhaven, 
and  which  staggered  the  anxious  Generals  in  their  canton- 
ments at  Naples. 

Elliot  was  in  despair.  The  day  after  the  news  of 
Austerlitz  reached  the  Neapolitan  Court,  he  sent  home  a 
hopeless  despatch  reviewing  the  situation.  The  mis- 
fortunes and  blunders  of  the  Austrian  Generals,  he  said, 
had  in  their  fatal  consequences  passed  all  calculation.  In 
the  interval  between  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at 
Corfu  and  Malta  and  their  arrival  at  Naples,  the  formid- 
able power  of  the  Austrian  monarchy  had  melted  aw^y. 
"  I  am  tempted,"  he  wrote,  "  to  say  with  Shakspeare,  '  It 
has  vanished  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream.' " 
Vienna,  the  Tyrol,  and  Venetia  were  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  the  Archduke  Charles,  who  had  the  only 
Austrian   array  still  in  existence,  was   said  to  be  retiring 


4 1 6  CONCLUSION  Dec. 

into  Hungary.  There  were  even  rumours  that  a  French 
army  was  already  in  movement  for  Naples/ 

It  was  not  quite  true,  but  true  enough.  The  day 
before  Elliot  wrote  Napoleon  had  informed  Prince  Eugene, 
his  viceroy  in  Italy,  who  was  getting  nervous,  that  he 
was  about  to  send  back  St.  Cyr  with  5000  men.  But  it 
was  not  so  easy  to  find  the  troops.  An  armistice  with  the 
Austrians  had  been  signed  and  negotiations  for  peace  were 
commencing,  but  Vienna  was  showing  an  unexpectedly  stiff 
front.  Talleyrand  had  strict  orders  to  keep  Naples  out  of 
the  treaty,  but  Napoleon  was  doubtful  whether  he  Avould 
be  able  to  insist  on  its  annexation.  The  Archduke  was 
in  Hungary,  drawing  near  to  Vienna,  and  it  was  found 
necessary  to  absorb  Massena's  corps  into  the  Grand  Army. 
Clearly  Austerlitz  had  not  finished  the  business  unless 
Prussia  could  be  frightened  out  of  the  path  on  which  she 
had  set  her  timid  foot.  To  this  end  Napoleon  was  exerting 
the  whole  force  of  his  personality,  and  by  the  middle  of 
the  month  it  was  done.  Haugwitz,  the  Prussian  envoy, 
suddenly  collapsed,  and  on  December  15  th  set  his  hand 
to  an  abject  desertion  of  the  allies.  Still  the  end  was  not 
yet.  The  king  refused  to  ratify  what  Haugwitz  had  done, 
and  Austria  was  still  holding  out. 

Meanwhile  British  troops  were  still  pouring  across  the 
North  Sea.  Including  the  recruits  that  had  flocked  to 
the  German  Legion,  Cathcart  had  some  25,000  men  and 
was  already  stretching  forward  to  the  Emms  with  intent 
to  seize  Holland  while  it  was  still  denuded  of  French 
troops.'-  But  a  despatch  from  Harrowby  announcing  that 
the  armistice  which  followed  Austerlitz  had  been  signed, 
brought  all  to  a  standstill.  Kussia,  it  is  true,  had  been 
no  party  to  it,  but  the  Czar  was  on  his  way  back  to  St. 
Petersburg,  and  Prussia  was  begging  that  no  offensive 
movement  should  be  made.  Our  arrangement  with  her 
had   provided  for   Cathcart's  retreat  in   case  of  need  into 

1  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  December  10th:  Printed  by  Anriol,  ii.  r.93, 

2  A  retiivD,  dated  January  180G,  gives  the  whole  force  as  27,000,  of  which 
the  German  Leo;ion  were  1 1,000.  There  were  five  British  brigades  under 
Dundas,  Fraser,  Wellesley.  Shirbrook,  and  Hill.—  W.  0.  (\),  ISG,  January  2nd 
and  14th. 


Dec.  PRUSSIA   DESERTS  417 

Prussian  territory.  No  promise  had  yet  been  given,  and 
clearly  she  was  no  longer  to  be  trusted  without  one. 
Leaving  his  troops  where  they  were,  Cathcart  at  once 
went  up  the  AVeser  to  Nienberg  to  hold  a  conference  with 
Tolstoi. 

The  Russian  General  had  been  given  to  understand 
that  his  master  had  hope  of  continuing  the  war  in  concert 
with  Prussia  in  the  spring ;  but  for  the  present  it  was 
agreed  there  must  be  a  general  falling  back  to  a  defensive 
position.  The  investment  of  Hameln  Avas  raised,  Cathcart 
stopped  all  the  last  arrived  transports,  recalled  his  advanced 
posts  from  the  Emms,  and  began  to  concentrate  on  the 
lower  Weser  round  Bremen.  Still  he  had  no  thought  of 
abandoning  his  loyal  Russian  allies  without  express  orders 
from  home.  To  complete  his  position  he  prepared  to  seize 
Bremen,  as  the  best  means  of  securing  his  retreat  and 
of  defending  himself  if  the  ice  should  shut  him  in.^ 
There  was  indeed  little  hope  of  a  successful  issue,  and 
he  warned  the  Government  not  to  send  on  the  third 
division  of  his  force,  which,  after  sailing,  had  been  driven 
back  by  a  gale  with  some  loss.  It  was  inexpedient,  he 
thought,  in  the  circumstances,  to  lock  up  more  of  the 
disposable  force  in  North  Germany.  But  the  transports 
were  already  at  sea,  and  things  were  going  from  bad  to 
worse.  They  had  sailed  again  on  December  22nd,  and  next 
day  all  was  over.  Prussia  had  given  in ;  Austria  had 
agreed  to  terms  of  peace ;  and  the  main  Russian  army 
was  sullenly  retiring. 

It  was  at  Naples  that  the  reaction  was  first  felt.  On 
the  morrow  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace  being  agreed, 
St.  Cyr  received  orders  to  march.  On  the  25  th  the  Peace 
of  Presburg  was  signed  between  France  and  Austria,  and 
without  waiting  a  day  Napoleon  issued  a  bulletin  to  his 
army  announcing  that  the  Bourbon  dynasty  at  Naples, 
for  its  crimes  and  treason,  had  ceased  to  exist.  By  the 
end     of   the    month    the    Emperor's    brother    Joseph    had 

1  Cathcart  to  Castlereagb,  December  25th  (enclosing  Harrowby  to  Cath- 
cart, December  20th),  and  Cathcart  to  Castlereagb,  January  1st :  W.  0. 
(1)  176. 

2   D 


4 1 8  CONCLUSION  jan. 

received  orders  to  reign  in  his  stead,  and  Mass^na  had 
been  sent  down  to  command  the  army  that  was  to  put 
him  on  the  throne. 

At  the  urgent  entreaty  of  the  doomed  Queen,  Lacy 
and  his  staff  were  engaged  in  a  reconnaissance  of  the 
Neapolitan  frontier  to  sec  if  resistance  were  in  any  way 
possible  before  giving  in  to  Craig's  views.  On  January 
ord  he  was  back,  and  a  full  council  of  war  was  held 
for  a  final  decision.  Lacy  was  there  with  three  of  his 
staff,  and  Craig  with  Stuart  his  second  in  command,  and 
Campbell  his  second  brigadier,  as  well  as  the  Russian 
Commodore  Greig  and  Captain  Sotheron  of  the  Excellent, 
whose  year-long  vigil  was  still  unended.  The  unanimous 
decision  was  that  with  the  force  available  the  frontier 
was  indefensible.  As  to  the  alternative,  there  was  a 
difference  of  opinion.  The  question  was  whether  any 
part  of  the  kingdom  could  be  held  or  whether  the  allied 
forces  should  re-embark.  The  Russians  were  decidedly 
in  favour  of  abandoning  the  capital  and  retiring  the  whole 
of  the  troops — Russians,  British,  and  Neapolitan,  into 
Calabria,  which  they  were  convinced  could  be  retained. 
They  were  supported  by  Stuart  and  Bunbury  against  the 
British  commander-in-chief.  Craig  took  a  different  view. 
His  instructions  enjoined  that  whatever  he  could  or 
could  not  do,  he  was  to  make  sure  of  Sicily.  So  soon 
as  it  was  in  danger  he  was  to  occupy  Messina,  if  possible 
by  consent  of  the  King ;  if  not,  then  without  it.  Since 
neither  he  nor  Elliot  had  been  any  party  to  the  recent 
convention  by  which  Russia  had  undertaken  the  defence 
of  Naples,  they  did  not  regard  the  British  honour  pledged 
like  that  of  the  Russians.  Nevertheless  Craig,  as  a  soldier, 
did  feel  bound  to  Lacy,  just  as  Cathcart  did  to  Tolstoi. 
His  position  was  extremely  difiScult.  He  was  firmly  of 
opinion  that,  under  his  instructions,  the  hour  had  come 
to  secure  Sicily,  that  he  ought  at  once  to  place  Messina 
beyond  Napoleon's  reach,  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  could 
not  permit  his  view  to  carry  him  so  far  as  to  decline  to 
be  bound  by  the  decision  of  the  majority,  Accordingly  he 
entered  a  separate  written  opinion,  in  which  he  pronounced 


Jan.  CRAIG    LEAVES   NAPLES  419 

strongly  against  the  idea  of  holding  Calabria,  as  a  measure 
that  could  do  no  good  either  to  Naples  or  the  common 
cause.  Nevertheless,  he  said  he  considered  himself  bound 
in  honour  not  to  desert  his  Russian  colleague,  and  solely 
on  that  consideration  he  consented  to  share  the  risks 
and  dangers  which,  in  his  eyes,  the  proposed  operation 
promised.^ 

The  decision  was  immediately  conveyed  to  the  Court. 
They  were  in  despair,  but  worse  was  yet  to  come.  Into  the 
midst  of  their  distracted  protests  broke  an  aide-de-camp  of 
the  Czar.  He  had  come  in  hot  haste  from  Austerlitz,  and 
he  handed  Lacy  a  peremptory  order  to  evacuate  Italy. - 
On  a  smaller  scale  it  was  a  betrayal  as  barefaced  as  that 
of  Avhich  Prussia  had  been  guilty.  Its  sole  and  sufficient 
excuse  was  hard  necessity.  Craig's  conscience  at  least  was 
clear,  his  hands  were  free,  and  he  hesitated  no  longer  to 
carry  out  his  plain  instructions.  His  troops  were  marched 
down  again  to  their  landing-place  at  Castellamare,  while 
the  Russians  returned  to  Baia.  In  vain  the  Court  entreated 
for  a  delay  while  they  attempted  to  avert  Napoleon's 
vengeance  through  the  Pope.  It  was  a  hopeless  expedient. 
Mercy  was  as  much  out  of  the  question  as  resistance,  and 
after  a  few  days'  hesitation  the  Russians  returned  to  Corfu, 
and  Craig  on  January  20th  anchored  his  force  before 
Messina. 

On  the  North  Sea  the  same  unhappy  scene  was  being 
enacted.  As  Craig  marched  down  to  Castellamare  news 
reached  London  that  Prussia  was  certainly  intending  to 
desert  the  Coalition,  and  to  make  the  best  terms  she  could 
for  herself.  To  complete  the  general  perplexity,  Pitt  was 
on  his  death-bed,  stricken  down  by  the  shock  of  Austerlitz. 
He  had  just  come  back  from  Bath,  worse  rather  than  better 
for  the  change,  and  was  in  no  condition  to  transact  business. 

^  Aiiriol,  ii.  745  :  Protocol  of  the  Council  of  War. 

2  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  January  l.'^th  (Auriol,  ii.  778).  The  reason  for  this 
order  does  not  seem  to  be  known,  but  it  may  be  not  unconnected  with  the 
armistice  and  the  fact  that  the  remnants  of  the  Russian  army  were  permitted 
to  retire  without  further  molestation.  Tolstoi  appears  to  have  told  Cathcart 
the  idea  of  Lacy's  recall  was  to  concentrate  in  Poland  for  an  expected 
campaign  in  concert  with  Prussia.  Cathcart  to  Castlereagh,  December  25th  : 
W.O.  (1),  186. 


420.  CONCLUSION  jan 

But  the  crisis  was  acute.  The  troops  had  been  sent  in  the 
first  instance  mainly  in  the  hope  of  stiffening  Prussia's 
attitude  to  Napoleon,  and  she  Avas  obviously  becoming  again 
like  wax  in  his  hands.  The  Ministers  had  to  face  the 
])ossibility  that  at  any  moment  she  might  accept  the  bribe 
of  Hanover  and  declare  for  Napoleon.  In  that  case  half 
of  our  whole  disposal  force,  which  was  now  with  Cathcart, 
would  be  in  serious  jeopardy.  On  January  3rd  he  had 
occupied  Bremen,  and  had  concentrated  everything  in  its 
immediate  neighbourhood.  But  with  Prussia  hostile  the 
position  was  scarcely  tenable,  even  with  the  rivers  open. 
It  was  obvious  that  Cathcart  must  be  either  reinforced  or 
withdrawn  at  once  before  winter  locked  him  in. 

Still  to  reverse  Pitt's  policy,  as  he  lay  helpless,  was 
more  than  the  Ministers  had  the  heart  to  do  without  his 
consent.  Castlereagh  and  Hawkesbury  therefore  took  the 
responsibility  of  going  to  his  bedside.  The  interview  was 
the  last  blow.  Till  then  there  had  been  fair  hope  of 
recovery,  but  on  the  morrow  it  was  obvious  he  was  dying. 
It  was  the  last  piece  of  business  he  did  for  his  country,  and 
to  the  end  he  strove  against  the  wreck  of  his  heroic  policy. 
The  last  shred  of  hope  must  be  clung  to.  Orders  went  out 
to  General  Cathcart  not  to  withdraw  at  once,  but  that  he 
was  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  re-embark  the  whole 
force  the  moment  he  got  the  word  from  Berlin.  He  had 
not  long  to  wait.  A  despatch  from  Lord  Harrowby  almost 
immediately  quenched  even  the  last  spark  of  hope ;  and  as 
Craig  was  anchoring  at  Messina  definite  and  urgent  orders 
Avent  off  to  Cathcart  to  re-embark  forthwith,  and  to  Keith 
to  cover  the  retirement. 

So  fell  the  last  fragment  of  all  the  dying  Minister  had 
hoped  of  his  great  Coalition.  If  the  British  position  were 
to  be  secured  it  must  be  done  single-handed.  Pitt's  wisdom 
had  foreseen  it,  and  provided  the  means  in  the  two  little 
forces  of  Craig  and  Baird.  They  still  remained  to  close  the 
chapter  with  a  welcome  gleam  of  success. 

With  Craig's  transports  before  Messina,  Sicily  was  safe. 
He  could  secure  his  point  at  any  moment,  and  was  content 
to  hold  his  hand  till  the  consent  of  the  Neapolitan  Court 


Feb.  CRAIG    OCCUPIES    MESSINA  421 

to  an  occupation  was  obtained,  or  till  need  arose  to  act 
without  it.  His  action  was  not  stayed  for  long.  Three 
days  after  he  arrived,  as  London  was  hushed  in  its  waking 
with  the  news  that  Pitt  was  dead,  the  Excellent  was  weighing 
anchor ;  St.  Cyr  was  in  motion ;  the  hour  for  which  Nelson 
more  than  a  year  before  had  bidden  her  stand-by  had  come, 
and  the  King  was  on  board.  He  landed  at  Palermo,  where 
Acton  was  waiting  for  him,  and  with  his  old  adviser  at  his 
side  there  was  little  doubt  how  things  would  go  for  Craig. 
The  Execlleiit  went  back  for  the  Queen,  and  she  too  sought 
the  refuge  Nelson  had  provided.  A  day  or  two  later  she 
was  with  the  King  again,  and  all  was  settled.  An  invitation 
came  at  once  for  Craig  to  land,  and  on  February  16th 
Messina  was  occupied. 

It  was  the  last  stroke  of  the  Trafalgar  campaign — and 
fitly  so ;  for  it  was  the  central  point  around  which  it  had 
turned.  Little  as  seemed  the  gain  in  the  midst  of  the  vast 
continental  struggle,  it  was  enough ;  and  Napoleon  knew  it, 
as  was  quickly  confessed,  although  for  a  while  he  believed 
that  the  removal  of  Pitt's  firm  hand  from  the  helm  would 
enable  him  to  do  with  England  what  he  would. 

The  tragic  death  of  the  great  War  Minister  forced  on 
the  King  a  change  of  Government.  Amidst  the  ruins  of 
the  Coalition  he  had  no  choice  but  to  place  himself  in  the 
hands  of  the  Opposition.  With  the  rest  of  the  old  servants 
who  had  shaped  the  campaign  went  Barham.  Without 
honour  or  recognition  the  great  sailor,  who  had  handled 
the  fleet  with  a  mastery  never  equalled  since  Anson's  days, 
retired  into  the  obscurity  from  which  Pitt  had  called  him 
in  the  hour  of  need.  Not  a  word  can  be  found  to  show 
that  the  country  recognised  in  the  least  the  perfection  of 
his  work.  His  rigid  determination  to  permit  none  of  the 
old  evil  influences  to  prejudice  the  efficiency  of  the  machine 
with  which  Pitt  had  entrusted  him  ;  his  ruthless  attitude  to 
family  influence  and  his  sparing  reward  for  plain  duty  done 
had  set  against  him  those  who  make  reputations — the  self- 
seekers  in  society  and  the  service.  ''  The  present  Ad- 
miralty, I  hear,"  wrote  the  wife  of  Cornwallis's  Captain  of 
the  Fleet,  "  are  making  their  arrangements  of  cong6.  .   .   . 


42  2  CONCLUSION  May 

In  no  case  do  I  believe  they  would  have  remained  in, 
for  the  cry  is  violent  among  the  Navy  against  them,  and 
they  have  really  treated  Baker,  Sir  Richard  Strachan,  and 
others  like  delinquents,  Lord  Barham,  as  I  hear,  holding 
the  language  '  that  it  was  his  duty  to  make  other  people 
do  theirs,  because  it  was  their  duty.'  This  sounds  very 
fine,  iiicujnificoit,  and  let  us  add  nonsensical.  .  .  .  Lord 
Townshend  wrote  to  Lord  Barham  to  ask  him  to  make 
him  (Lord  James  Townshend)  a  lieutenant.  What  would 
you  say  if  I  assert  that  this  was  refused  ?  When  you  con- 
sider Lord  Townshend's  services,  his  respectability,  is  it  not 
incredible  ?  Lady  Townshend  is  very  indignant,  but  like- 
wise hurt  to  death  about  it ! "  ^  Trivial  as  is  the  letter,  it 
goes  far  to  explain  how  the  reputation  of  one  of  the  greatest 
of  our  strategists  and  administrators  suffered  so  complete 
an  eclipse.  Such  an  attitude  as  he  assumed  in  such  an 
age,  however  high  the  motive  or  the  occasion,  was  not  to 
be  forgiven ;  and  his  solitude  and  silence  did  the  rest.  No 
one  perhaps  except  Pitt  really  knew  what  he  had  done." 

At  the  Foreign  Office  the  change  was  as  complete  as 
at  the  Admiralty,  and  here  lay  Napoleon's  chance.  In  the 
desperate  condition  of  affairs  the  King  had  at  last  to  accept 
the  services  of  Fox.  The  office  he  selected  was  that  of 
Foreign  Secretary,  and,  as  was  only  to  be  expected,  no  sooner 
was  he  fairly  seated  than  he  tried  to  snatch  a  peace. 
Napoleon  seemed  equally  willing.  Within  a  fortnight  of 
Pitt's  death  Fox  was  in  direct  communication  with  Talley- 
rand. By  May  regular  negotiations  were  established  on  the 
basis  of  uti  possidetis.  But  the  rock  they  split  upon  was 
Sicily.  Fox,  it  is  true,  in  his  fanaticism  for  peace,  did 
his  best  to  throw  it  aAvay.  There  was  a  period  when 
Napoleon  might  have  had  it  on  excellent  terms,  but  he  let 
the  chance  go  by  in  the  intoxication  of  his  success,  and 

^  Mrs.  Nugent  to  Cornwallis,  Jan.  23,  1806  :  Hist.  MSS.  Co7n.,Various  Collcc- 
tions,  vi.  417. 

2  Barham  lived  in  retirement  nearly  till  the  end  of  the  war,  dying  on 
June  17,  1813,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-seven.  There  was  a  rumour 
that  he  was  to  be  succeeded  by  Lord  St.  Vincent  "as  Lord  High  Admiral  at 
sea,  to  command  from  Cape  Finistcrre  to  John  o'  Groat's  House  in  Scotland," 
but  this  was  entirely  contrary  to  the  British  tradition,  and  his  place  was 
given  to  a  civilian,  Charles  Grey,  the  Earl  Grey  of  the  Reform  Bill. 


June  MAIDA  423 

then  it  was  too  late.^  It  was  a  piece  of  mad  perversity. 
But  for  Napoleon,  at  the  zenith  of  his  power,  the  one  frag- 
ment of  success  that  was  left  to  England  in  Europe  was 
unendurable  to  the  pride  which  had  been  so  completely 
humbled  at  sea.  His  first  orders  to  Joseph  on  his  accept- 
ing the  crown  of  Naples  had  been  that  he  was  immediately 
to  seize  Sicily.  He  had  merely  to  throw  troops  across  in 
the  confusion  that  reigned,  and  the  thing  would  be  done. 
Apparently  Napoleon's  own  failure  had  taught  him  nothing. 
So  far  from  being  able  to  carry  out  his  brother's  order, 
Joseph  had  not  yet  succeeded  in  possessing  himself  of 
Calabria.  Supported  by  a  squadron  under  Sir  Sidney 
Smith,  Gaeta  was  still  Hying  the  Bourbon  flag,  and  the 
"  brigands  "  were  holding  out  in  the  hills.  Napoleon  kept 
urging  more  energetic  measures,  but  though  General  Rejnier 
was  operating  in  the  mountains  with  7000  men,  little  solid 
progress  was  made. 

In  view  of  the  secret  negotiations  with  Fox,  the  delay 
was  exasperating,  and  the  pressure  on  easy-going  Joseph 
grew  stronger.  "  The  English,"  wrote  the  Emperor  in  the 
middle  of  June,  "  are  willing  to  recognise  you  as  King  of 
Naples,  but  without  Sicily  they  will  refuse  to  recognise  you. 
Peace  could  be  made  if  you  were  master  of  Sicily."  Joseph's 
answer  must  have  been  galling  in  the  extreme.  Craig  had 
gone  home  on  sick  leave,  and  Stuart,  left  in  command, 
suddenly  threw  some  5000  of  his  men  across  the  straits, 
and  assisted  by  a  naval  brigade  from  Sidney  Smith's 
Squadron,  inflicted  a  severe  defeat  upon  Reynier  at 
Maida.  It  was  the  first  time  Napoleon's  troops  had 
crossed  bayonets  with  the  British  army,  and  they  had 
been  beaten  by  an  inferior  force.  To  add  to  the  vexation 
of  it  and  the  loss  of  prestige,  the  whole  of  Calabria  was 
immediately  in  flames.  A  strong  counter-movement  set  in 
against  Joseph,  and  so  far  from  his  being  able  to  seize 
Sicily,  it  looked  for  a  while  as  though  he  were  to  lose  his 
crown  as  suddenly  as  it  had  been  gained. 

From  that  day  till  the  end  of  the  war  in  1814,  every 

^  For    these    negotiations    see  the  excellent  monograph    by    Coquelle, 
Napoleon  et  Aivjleterrc,  partii.     Translation  by  G.  D.  Knox. 


424  CONCLUSION  jan. 

effort  of  Napoleon's  to  win  the  heart  of  the  Mediterranean 
was  fruitless.  It  remained  in  British  RandsTin"llie~TasrT6 
rnark  the  justness  with  which  Pitt's  great  campaign^  had 
been  conceived.  He  had  failed  to  save  Europe,  but  he  had 
secured  the  British  Empire.  Beside  the  vital  outpost  in 
Sicily  he  had  won  another  as  valuable  in  the  south.  By 
the  middle  of  January  Baird  was  in  full  possession  of  the 
Cape.  These  two  positions  were  the  solid  return  of  the 
unmatched  work  which  Pitt's  Admirals  had  performed  at 
sea,  and  together  they  rendered  the  Empire  impregnable. 

That  and  no  less  was  what  the  campaign  of  Trafalgar 
achieved.  It  was  not  merely  that  it  secured  the  British 
Isles  from  invasion.  The  ramparts  it  built  stretched  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  It  was  not  merely  that  it  destroyed  the 
French  naval  power.  By  securing  bases  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  towards  the  East,  it  made  it  impossible  for  any 
partial  revival  of  Napoleon's  navy  to  place  any  part  of  our 
oversea  possessions  in  serious  jeopardy.  Against  any  other 
man  than  Napoleon,  with  any  other  ally  than  Prussia  as  she 
then  was,  it  might  well  have  done  much  more.  As  it  was, 
the  sea  had  done  all  that  the  sea  could  do,  and  for  Europe 
the  end  was  failure. 


APPENDICES 


APPENDIX   A 


PITT'S   INSTRUCTIONS   TO   LORD   G.    LEVESON-GOWER 

[Foreign  Office.     Russia.     58.] 

Downing  Street,  June  7,  1805. 

My  Lord, — In  addition  to  the  contents  of  my  Dispatch  No.  15 
of  this  date,  in  which  I  treat  of  the  proposal  that  His  Majesty 
should  consent  without  reserve  to  an  offer  to  be  made,  in  the  last 
resort,  to  Bonaparte  by  Monsieur  de  Novossilzoff  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  Malta,  as  a  condition  of  the  immediate  adoption  of  the 
arrangements  proposed  in  the  Treaty  signed  on  the  11th  of  April 
at  St.  Petersburg!!,  it  appears  expedient,  at  this  crisis,  that,  in 
order  to  place  in  their  true  light  the  great  and  extensive  sacrifices 
already  consented  to  by  the  King,  I  should  declare  more  at  large 
to  your  Excellency  the  sense  which  His  Majesty  entertains  of  the 
comparative  situation  of  Great  Britain  and  of  the  nations  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  with  respect  to  the  power  and  views  of 
France,  lest  those  liberal  sacrifices  which  are  the  result  of  a  great 
and  comprehensive  view  of  general  Policy,  should  be  misconceived 
as  the  effect  of  impending  danger  or  of  anxious  apprehension.  It 
cannot,  however,  have  escaped  the  observation  of  the  Cabinet  of  St. 
Petersburgh  that,  whilst  the  energies  of  the  Continental  Powers 
are  held  in  suspense  between  the  danger  of  submission  and  the 
apprehended  consequences  of  opposing  resistance  to  the  un- 
interrupted course  of  insults  or  encroachment  on  the  part  of 
France,  Great  Britain  has  disproved  the  vainglorious  boast  of  the 
French  Government  by  a  contest  maintained,  with  advantage, 
single-handed. 

The  immense  and  expensive  preparations  for  the  invasion  of 
this  country  have  been  blocked  up  and  confined  by  the  British 
Navy  within  the  range  of  the  protecting  batteries  which  line  the 
enemy's  coast,  and  valuable  Colonies  have  been  conquered  from 
France  and  her  Dependent  Allies.  During  this  period  of  success- 
ful events,  the  Naval  and  Military  force   of  Great  Britain  have 

427 


428  APPENDIX    A 

progressively  increased,  and  the  financial  resources  of  the  country 
have  continued  unimpaired. 

But  notwithstanding  the  means  which  His  Majesty  has  proved 
that  he  possessed  of  providing  for  the  immediate  security  of  his 
own  Dominions,  he  has  never  lost  sight  of  the  policy  by  which 
their  permanent  interests  are  connected  with  those  of  the  Con- 
tinent. On  this  principle  His  Majesty  has  declined  entering  into 
any  negotiation  with  France  except  in  concert  with  other  Powers, 
and  especially  with  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  On  the  same  prin- 
ciple he  has  offered  great  and  extensive  sacrifices  for  the  purpose 
of  obtaining,  if  possible  by  Treaty,  a  general  arrangement  for  the 
security  of  Europe,  and,  in  the  other  alternative,  the  most  liberal 
co-operation  towards  the  vigorous  prosecution  of  a  Continental 
war.  His  Majesty  in  proposing  these  extensive  sacrifices  for 
stipulated  conditions  of  general  security,  in  undertaking  to  provide 
such  ample  contributions  for  the  support  of  war,  if  that  alternative 
should  be  resorted  to  for  the  general  advantage,  stated  at  the 
same  time  the  degree  of  security  which  he  deemed  essential,  and 
the  outline  of  the  provisions  by  which  alone  it  appeared  to  His 
Majesty  such  security  could  be  ensured  to  the  different  States  of 
Europe.  The  King  observes,  with  the  highest  satisfaction,  that, 
in  the  event  of  war  being  found  to  be  the  only  course  by  which  a 
state  of  security  to  Europe  can  be  established  and  preserved,  the 
views  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  are  in  perfect  conformity  to  those 
of  His  Majesty.  But,  in  estimating  the  conditions  proper  to  be 
offered  to  Bonaparte  with  the  intent  to  avert  the  calamities  of 
War  by  proposing  the  most  moderate  provisions  for  the  future 
Safety  and  Independence  of  the  Powers  of  the  Continent,  His 
Majesty  observes,  with  regret,  that  the  modifications  introduced 
into  the  Treaty,  as  signed  by  your  Excellency,  fall,  in  many 
essential  points,  far  short  of  the  stipulations  stated  as  necessary  in 
His  Majesty's  original  proposal. 

In  Italy  the  intended  arrangement  by  no  means  gives  effect  to 
the  principle,  the  importance  of  which  is  recognized  in  the  10th 
Separate  Article  of  the  Treaty,  that  the  frontiers  of  France 
should,  on  one  side,  be  confined  within  the  Alps ;  for  it  cannot  be 
contended  that,  in  effect  (whatever  may  be  expressed  in  terms) 
France  will  be  confined  within  the  Alps,  if  a  sovereign  of  the 
family  of  Bonaparte  should  be  established  in  Piedmont.  The 
uninterrupted  influence  of  France  over  the  councils  and  conduct 
of  Spain  from  the  period  of  the  accession  of  the  Duke  of  Anjou  to 
the  throne  of  the  latter  kingdom,  affords  a  suflicient  example  of 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    LEVESON-GOWER      429 

the  consequences  which  must  inevitably  follow  from  the  proposed 
distribution  of  the  North  of  Italy,  connecting,  as  it  will,  France 
and  Lombardy  under  the  Government  of  the  family  of  Bonaparte. 
The  sovereignty  in  that  case  provided  for  the  King  of  Sardinia 
would  not,  either  in  strength  of  frontier,  in  extent  of  territory, 
or  in  the  amount  of  its  revenue  or  population,  be  capable  of 
maintaining  a  state  of  independence  against  France,  even  with 
every  support  which  might  reasonably  be  hoped  for  from  Austria, 
though  the  latter  Power  should  be  put  in  possession  of  Mantua, 
which  however  is  not  made  an  absolute  condition  under  the  terms 
of  the  Treaty. 

On  the  side  of  Holland  and  the  North  of  Germany  the  pro- 
visions for  security  and  independence  are  not  more  solid. 
Although  the  establishment  of  a  powerful  state  in  that  quarter  is 
specified  as  the  surest  mode  of  providing  for  the  security  of  the 
United  Provinces,  such  an  arrangement  is  relinquished  as  hopeless. 
In  the  present  instance,  the  additional  Barrier  proposed  for 
Holland,  inadequate  as  it  is,  is  not  to  be  insisted  upon,  and  even 
the  ancient  line  of  their  territory  is  not  positively  stipulated.  It 
is  evident  upon  this  cursory  statement  of  the  inadequacy  of  the 
modified  terms  which  compose  the  conditions  of  the  Treaty  as 
signed  by  your  Excellency,  that  the  view  with  which  His  Majesty 
proffered  the  sacrifice  of  all  his  conquests  made  during  the  present 
War  has  not  been  adhered  to.  Yet  His  Majesty  is  fully  sensible  of 
the  benefits  which  may  be  derived  from  any  improvement  of  the 
present  state  of  Europe,  and  from  any  arrangement  of  territory 
which  may  afford  some  additional  means  of  resistance,  especially 
if  this  improvement  is  accompanied  by  that  confidence  which  is  the 
result  of  successful  opposition  to  encroaching  ambition,  and  which 
may  lead  to  future  exertion,  if  increased  means  of  such  future 
exertion  are  held  forth  ;  and  above  all  by  a  system  of  co-operation 
and  concert  among  the  leading  Powers.  His  Majesty  therefore, 
however  disappointed  in  the  expectation  of  a  more  adequate  pro- 
vision for  the  immediate  and  effectual  security  of  Europe,  is  ready, 
on  his  part,  to  agree  to  the  modifications  proposed  by  His  Imperial 
Majesty.  The  Treaty  has  accordingly  been  ratified  with  the  ex- 
ception of  that  part  of  the  10th  Separate  Article  which  relates  to 
the  evacuation  of  Malta  by  His  Majesty's  troops  ;  and  with  certain 
verbal  alterations  in  the  same  Article,  where  the  expression  of 
sentiments  attributed  to  the  King,  is  carried  somewhat  beyond  the 
real  opinion  and  feelings  of  His  Majesty.  These  alterations  how- 
ever in  no  degree  affect  either  the  principles  or  the  object  of  the 


430  APPENDIX    A 

Concert.  There  is  also  an  alteration  in  the  7th  Separate  Article 
which  becomes  necessary  in  consequence  of  the  terms  on  which 
His  Majesty  has  expressed  his  readiness  to  admit  of  a  substitute 
for  Malta  in  the  Mediterranean. 

Having  stated  to  your  Excellency  the  view  which  His  Majesty 
has  of  the  probable  degree  of  efficacy  of  the  conditions  provided  by 
the  Treaty,  if  they  should  be  accepted  by  Bonaparte,  I  trust  your 
Excellency  will  be  able  to  convince  the  Russian  Cabinet  that  the 
evacuation  of  Malta  by  Great  Britain  under  such  a  state  of  things, 
would  not  be  consistent  with  the  future  security  and  permanent 
tranquillity  of  Europe.  If  the  continent  should  be  left  (as  stated 
above)  open  to  the  future  aggressions  of  Bonaparte,  and  that  the 
restraint  on  the  naval  operations  of  France  in  the  iMediterranean 
should  be  removed  by  the  surrender  of  the  British  Establishment 
in  that  sea ;  the  coasts  of  Italy,  Turkey,  Greece,  and  Egypt 
would  be  exposed  to  the  unrestricted  enterprizes  of  the  common 
enemy ;  and  would  soon  be  subject  to  his  absolute  control. 

It  would  exceed  the  limits  of  a  dispatch  to  state  (and  would 
indeed  be  superfluous  and  unnecessary  to  your  Excellency,  who  are 
so  well  informed  of  them)  the  long  course  of  historical  events,  in 
which  the  protecting  influence  of  the  British  Navy  in  the 
Mediterranean  has  been  exerted  for  the  advantage  of  Europe. 
It  is  however  essential  to  draw  your  Excellency's  attention  to  the 
particular  circumstances  which,  at  the  present  time,  render  a 
British  station  in  that  quarter  of  peculiar  importance.  To  prove 
this  position  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  the  earnest  and  unremitting 
exertions  of  the  French  Government  to  secure  to  itself  the 
command  of  every  port  in  the  Mediterranean.  Already  in 
possession  of  Toulon,  of  Corsica,  and  of  many  of  the  ports  of 
Italy,  and  with  an  entire  influence  over  the  ports  of  Spain, 
Bonaparte  has  arbitrarily  annexed  to  France  the  Island  of  Elba, 
and,  if  he  had  succeeded  in  the  attempt  which  he  made  subsequent 
to  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  to  place  Malta  in  the  hands  of  the 
Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  deprived  as  they  were  even  of 
the  benefits  of  the  provisions  of  that  Treaty,  and  of  all  means  of 
maintaining  their  independence,  he  might  again,  at  pleasure,  have 
either  purchased  or  seized  that  Island,  and  have  thereby  secured 
the  absolute  control  of  Sicily  and  Naples,  and  the  means  of 
effecting  his  designs  against  the  Ottoman  territories.  In  the 
absence  of  a  British  fleet,  what  power  could  check  the  progress  of 
French  ambition  to  these  ends?  Would  JNIalta,  in  the  hands  of 
Russia,  operate  that  check,  without  a  British  fleet  ?     No ;  but  it 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    LEVESON-GOWER       431 

may  be  said  that  Malta,  with  the  flag  of  Russia  flying  on  its 
ramparts,  would  still  afford  that  salutary  station  to  the  British 
fleet.  That  question  certainly  forms  a  part  of  the  discussion  of 
this  great  subject,  and  merits  consideration. 

The  just  and  enlightened  views  of  the  present  Sovereign  of 
Russia  neither  are  nor  can  be  doubted,  and  create  a  perfect 
reliance  on  the  present  system  of  Russia ;  but,  in  forming  a  final 
arrangement,  it  is  necessary  to  secure  permanence  to  the  system 
on  which  that  arrangement  depends — past  experience  gives  no 
assurance  of  that  security.  I  am  unwilling  to  recall  the  painful 
recollection  of  the  moment  at  which  Russia  was  on  the  point  of 
exerting,  in  conjunction  with  France,  all  the  powerful  means  of 
that  great  Empire.  Had  such  a  Confederacy  been  actually  estab- 
lished and  brought  into  action,  and  the  fleets  of  Great  Britain  at 
the  same  time  excluded  from  the  Mediterranean,  all  the  calamities 
which  still  threaten  to  overwhelm  Europe,  unless  prevented  by 
resistance,  would,  in  that  case,  have  been  at  once  effected  and 
irretrievabl}'  confirmed.  The  danger  which  then  existed  may,  by 
possibility,  again  recur,  if  the  same  disposition  should,  in  any 
future  reign,  misguide  the  policy,  and  misapply  the  powerful 
influence  of  the  Russian  Empire.  But  without  looking  forward  to 
possible  contingencies,  which  it  is  painful  to  contemplate,  your 
Excellency  will  perceive  that,  even  under  the  present  system,  so 
congenial  to  the  character  and  disposition  of  the  reigning  Emperor, 
the  continuance  or  renewal  of  the  weakness  and  apathy  of  the 
other  Powers  of  Europe,  might  again  necessarily  prevent  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  from  taking  an  active  part  in  any  future  war 
between  England  and  France ;  in  which  case  Malta  would  become 
a  neutral  port,  open  indeed  to  the  commerce  of  both  belligerents, 
but  receiving  only  a  limited  number  of  the  ships  of  war  of  either 
nation;  a  circumstance  indifferent  to  France,  with  the  possession 
of  ample  and  convenient  ports,  but  capable  of  operating,  under 
certain  situations  of  Italy  and  the  other  maritime  stations  within 
the  Mediterranean,  as  an  absolute  prohibition  on  any  naval  opera- 
tions by  Great  Britain  in  those  seas. 

The  wise  and  generous  policy  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  has 
led  him  to  feel,  in  common  with  the  King,  the  importance  of 
supporting  the  Ottoman  Empire.  With  this  general  object  equally 
in  view.  Great  Britain  and  Russia  have  obviously  a  more  near  and 
pressing  interest  in  distinct  and  different  parts  of  the  posses- 
sions of  the  Porte,  and  they  are  respectively,  at  this  time,  in 
possession  of  the  stations,  which  can  aff'ord  the  most  immediate 


432  APPENDIX    A 

and  effectual  support  to  the  quarter  most  essentially  interesting 
to  each.  Corfu  is  at  once  the  bulwark  and  key  of  Greece,  as 
Malta  is  of  Egypt;  but  as  the  latter  would  not  be  equally 
effectual  to  that  object  in  the  hands  of  Russia,  neither  could  it 
be  expected,  if  the  Ottoman  Dominions  should  be  threatened 
and  endangered  by  France,  that  Russia  would  divert  her  attention 
from  tlie  object  more  immediately  interesting  to  itself,  to 
provide  for  the  security  of  that  which  is  more  particularly  and 
pointedly  connected  with  the  interests  of  Great  Britain.  It  will 
also  be  remembered  that,  by  the  Treaties  which  have  been  con- 
cluded with  the  Porte,  the  assistance  of  a  British  fleet  has  been 
deemed  indispensably  necessary  for  the  security  of  the  Turkish 
Dominions.  This  aid  His  Majesty  cannot  effectually  afford 
without  the  possession  of  Malta,  and  the  command  which  it 
gives  in  those  Seas.  Russia  cannot  keep  up  a  garrison  in  Malta 
and  supply  the  place  without  infinite  difficulty  and  expense, 
especially  if  there  be  not  a  superior  Russian  fleet  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, for,  without  that  protection,  the  supply  from  Sicily 
might,  at  the  pleasure  of  France,  be  cut  ofl*,  and  even  the  Island 
itself  might  consequently  be  reduced  by  famine ;  or  perhaps  the 
vicinity  of  France  might  even  afford  the  opportunity  of  besieging 
its  extensive  fortifications  with  so  superior  a  force  as  to  preclude 
an  effectual  resistance  during  the  long  period  which  must  elapse 
before  the  arrival  of  reinforcements. 

It  must  also  be  recollected  that  the  active  intrigues  of  France 
might  prevail  upon  the  Porte  suddenly  to  prohibit  the  passage  of 
the  Dardanelles,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  either  naval  or 
military  reinforcement,  or,  if  intrigue  sliould  prove  ineffectual, 
the  fleets  of  France,  triumphant  in  those  seas,  might  shut  the 
passage  by  force.  If  such  would  be  the  ineffectual  and  precarious 
possession  of  Malta  by  Russia,  it  seems  to  be  for  the  general 
interest  of  all  the  Powers  of  Europe,  but  more  especially  of 
Russia,  that  the  Island  should  not  be  separated  from  His  Majesty's 
Dominions,  by  exchanging  it  for  any  other  naval  station  in  the 
Mediterranean.  Before  I  quit  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  is 
necessary  that  I  should  observe  upon  an  argument  which  has  been 
dwelt  upon  as  being  of  considerable  weight  in  discussing  the 
question  of  the  evacuation  of  that  Island.  It  has  been  said  that 
Great  Britain  having  once  consented  to  evacuate  Malta  on  the 
condition  of  being  secured  against  the  repossession  of  it  by  France, 
His  Majesty  cannot,  at  this  time,  be  justified  in  insisting  upon  the 
retention  of  that  place.     In  this  mode  of  reasoning  a  variety  of 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    LEVESON-GOWER      433 

answers  immediately  present  themselves.  It  is  a  received  and 
undisputed  principle  that  a  state  of  war  not  only  puts  an  end  to 
the  absolute  provisions  of  all  existing  treaties,  but,  of  course,  also 
to  all  conditional  concessions,  which,  under  particular  circum- 
stances previous  to  the  existence  of  war,  might  have  been  deemed 
expedient  or  admissible.  In  the  present  case  it  is  further  to  be 
observed  that  the  unconditional  and  unrequited  evacuation  of 
Malta  is  now  proposed  ;  whereas,  at  the  period  alluded  to,  other 
stipulations  favourable  to  Great  Britain  attended  the  condition 
annexed  to  Malta — important  Colonies  were  retained  and  con- 
firmed to  her  by  treaty  as  the  price  of  peace,  and  engagements 
entered  into  by  France  for  the  independence  of  different  States 
in  Europe.  Subsequent  to  the  conclusion  of  peace,  great  en- 
croachments had  been  made  by  the  French  Government,  and 
some  of  the  very  countries  which,  according  to  the  terms  to  be 
now  proposed  under  the  10th  separate  Article  of  the  Treaty 
would  remain  in  possession  of  France,  were  annexed  to  that 
Republic,  subsequent  to  the  provisions  made  with  respect  to 
Malta  at  the  Treaty  of  Amiens.  Piedmont  has  since  that  period 
been  incorporated  into  France ;  Elba  has  been  seized  and  appro- 
priated to  the  French  Republic ;  the  stipulated  independence  of 
Holland  has  been  violated  by  arbitrary  changes  of  its  form  of 
Government,  and  by  the  despotic  control  exercised  over  the 
commerce  and  resources  of  that  country ;  Switzerland,  instead  of 
enjoying  the  covenanted  choice  of  its  own  form  of  Government 
and  the  independence  of  its  national  existence,  has  been  con- 
trolled, degraded,  and  oppressed.  The  Kingdom  of  Naples  has 
been  menaced  and  invaded ;  and  in  one  word,  every  condition  has 
been  violated,  which  appeared  at  that  time  to  afford  a  semblance 
of  security  to  Europe.  It  is  obvious,  upon  these  grounds,  that 
His  Majesty  cannot  be  called  upon,  in  point  of  consistency  or 
justice,  to  recur  to  stipulations  which  were  provided  under  a 
state  of  things  in  every  respect  distinct  and  different  from  the 
present,  and  which  have  been  rendered  impracticable  by  the 
subseq,uent  conduct  of  the  French  Government. 

Impressed  as  His  Majesty  is  with  all  these  powerful  con- 
siderations, nothing  could  now  induce  him  to  entertain  in  any 
shape,  or  on  any  conditions,  the  idea  of  relinquishing  this  posses- 
sion, but  an  extreme  desire  to  meet,  if  possible,  the  wishes  of  the 
Emperor  of  Russia,  and  to  show  his  anxiety  to  facilitate,  as  much 
as  possible,  any  general  and  solid  arrangement  for  the  security 
and  interests  of  Europe. 

2  E 


434  APPENDIX    A 

lUit  in  no  case,  can  it  be  consistent  with  those  very  interests 
(independent  of  those  of  Great  Britain),  even  if  any  circumstances 
should  render  the  evacuation  of  Malt<i  admissible,  that  His 
Majesty  should  be  left  without  some  secure  and  adequate  station 
in  the  Mediterranean. 

The  result,  therefore,  of  what  I  am  to  state  to  your  Excellency 
by  His  Majesty's  command  is,  First,  That  it  is  impossible  for  His 
Majesty  to  consent  to  relinquish  the  possession  of  Malta  in  return 
for  such  inadequate  provisions  for  the  security  of  the  Continent 
as  those  arising  out  of  the  modifications  proposed  to  be  admitted 
by  the  10th  Article;  and.  Secondly,  that  however  favourable 
might  be  the  conditions  obtained  for  the  Continent,  he  could 
in  no  case  listen  to  such  an  arrangement  without  obtaining  in 
exchange  for  Malta  some  Naval  Station  in  the  Mediterranean, 
which,  though  in  many  respects  inferior,  might  afford  a  competent 
security  against  the  attack  of  an  enemy,  and  be  in  its  nature  and 
position  effectual  to  some  of  the  principal  naval  objects  of  Great 
Britain  in  that  quarter. 

The  condition  on  which  His  Majesty  would  be  induced  to 
consent  to  such  an  arrangement  can  only  be  that  of  more  effectual 
provisions  being  concluded  for  the  general  security  of  Europe — 
and  more  particularly  for  that  part  of  it  in  which  the  interests  of 
Great  Britain  are  most  immediately  involved — by  the  establish- 
ment of  a  firm  and  solid  Barrier  for  the  protection  of  The  United 
Provinces. 

The  following  conditions,  in  His  Majesty's  view  of  the  necessary 
measures  to  be  pursued,  ought  to  be  insisted  upon  : — 

l^'irst :  The  absolute  re-establishment  of  the  King  of  Sardinia 
in  Piedmont,  with  such  a  line  of  defence  in  the  Alps  as  may  be 
deemed  sufiicient  for  the  security  of  his  dominions. 

Second  :  The  present  and  permanent  independence  of  Switzer- 
land, secured  by  the  uninfluenced  choice  of  its  own  form  of 
Government,  and  by  the  undisturbed  construction  of  the  foiti'esses 
necessary  for  the  perfect  security  of  its  territory,  as  stated  in 
the  10  th  separate  Article. 

Third  :  A  substantial  Barrier  to  Holland,  and  further  effectual 
means  for  the  future  preservation  of  that  country  against  the 
attempts  of  France,  by  the  interposition  and  co-operation  of  some 
great  Military  Power  interested  in  its  defence.  His  Majesty,  on 
the  fullest  consideration,  is  confirmed  in  the  opinion  that,  in  the 
present  state  of  Europe,  that  essential  object  can  be  assigned  to 
Prussia  alone.     But  to  induce  and   enable  that  Power  to  make 


INSTRUCTIONS   TO    LEVESON-GOWER      435 

effectual  exertions  for  that  important  purpose,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  give  to  Prussia  such  a  military  line  of  frontier  as  shall  connect 
advantageously  with  that  of  Holland,  together  with  such  an 
acquisition  of  territory  as  shall  amply  supply  the  means  of 
supporting  the  necessary  charges  of  maintaining  and  defending 
that  frontier. 

The  King  entertains  an  earnest  desire  to  conform  his  proposals 
for  effecting  this  purpose,  to  the  views  entertained  by  the  Emperor 
of  Russia,  in  as  much  as  may  be  consistent  with  the  objects  for 
which  alone  His  Majesty  would  feel  himself  justified  in  admitting 
any  exchange  for  Malta.  His  Majesty  is  disposed,  therefore,  to 
state  the  acquisitions  to  be  assigned  to  Prussia  considerably  short 
of  the  extent  of  those  originally  suggested  in  the  dispatch  to 
Count  Woronzow  of  the  19th  of  January,  as  expedient  to  be  given 
in  the  event  of  Prussia  becoming  a  party  to  the  concert. 

Although  at  that  time  the  evacuation  of  Malta  was  not  in  dis- 

o 

cussion,  and  certainly  not  in  the  contemplation  of  His  Majesty, 
Your  Excellency  will  observe  that  the  territory  proposed  as  an 
inducement  to  Prussia  to  join  in  the  concert  consisted  of  the  whole  of 
the  Netherlands  (not  within  the  line  to  be  drawn  from  Antwerp  to 
Maestricht)  together  with  the  whole  of  the  Duchies  of  Luxem- 
bourg and  Juliers,  and  the  other  territories  between  the  Mouse 
and  the  Moselle ;  and  further  (if  no  insuperable  objection  should 
be  stated)  the  whole  of  the  country  acquired  by  France  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  eastward  of  the  Moselle ;  but  in  con- 
sideration of  that  arrangement  having  been  in  contemplation,  as 
the  result  of  successful  war,  and  that  the  present  proposals  are  to 
be  made  with  a  view  to  prevent  that  extremity,  the  King  is 
disposed  to  assent  to  the  offer  of  lower  terms,  even  for  the 
evacuation  of  Malta,  which  His  Majesty  cannot,  however,  but 
consider  as,  on  his  part,  giving  an  advantage ;  which  could  not 
otherwise  be  obtained  by  the  enemy,  except  as  the  consequence  of 
the  most  successful  war.  His  Majesty,  under  the  circumstances 
of  the  present  moment,  will  be  contented  that  the  proposal  to  be 
made  to  France  shall  not  exceed  what,  to  His  Majesty,  appears 
the  least  which  can  afford  either  sufficient  means,  or  sufficient 
temptation  to  induce  Prussia  to  undertake,  and  effectually  provide 
for,  the  safety  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  which  was  stated  in 
the  dispatch  of  the  19th  of  January,  as  the  least  that  could  afford 
security. 

For  this  object,  therefore.  His  Majesty  would  deem  it  an 
adequate  arrangement  if  Prussia  should  be  put  in  possession  of  the 


436  APPENDIX    A 

fortress  of  Luxembourg,  together  with  sucli  proportion  of  that 
Duchy  as  will  form  an  effectual  military  line  from  thence  to 
Maestricht,  with  the  fortress  necessary  to  be  constructed,  and  the 
whole  of  the  country  included  within  that  line,  the  Meuse,  the 
Moselle,  and  the  Rhine  ;  trusting,  however,  that  any  necessary 
increase  for  the  sole  and  obvious  purpose  of  rendering  more 
effectual  the  military  line  of  defence  will  not  be  objected  to  by 
His  Imperial  Majesty. 

His  Majesty  is  the  more  disposed  to  flatter  himself  that  the 
Emperor  will  be  inclined  to  acquiesce  in  this  propofc'al  as  he 
perceives  with  pleasure,  not  only  that  the  principle  of  securing  the 
Barrier  of  Holland  by  the  interposition  of  a  Great  Power  is 
recognised  by  His  Imperial  Majesty  ;  but  that  after  stating  in  the 
first  instance,  the  restoration  of  the  former  Prussian  territories  on 
the  left  of  the  lihine,  as  a  fit  offer  to  be  made  to  Prussia,  it  is 
proposed  to  make  in  certain  cases  an  addition  (the  extent  of  which 
is  not  defined)  to  those  territories,  and  to  carry  their  limits  to 
whatever  frontier  may  ultimately  be  assigned  to  France  in  that 
quarter.  His  Majesty  is  indeed  aware  that  this  extension  of 
territory  is  suggested  only  in  the  supposed  event  of  successful 
war.  But  the  same  degree  of  security  in  this  most  essential 
quarter,  which  is  meant  in  that  case,  to  be  obtained  by  war.  His 
Majesty  thinks  himself  reasonably  and  justly  entitled  to  insist 
upon  in  the  first  instance  as  a  condition  of  negotiation,  in  return 
for  such  an  additional  sacrifice  of  strength  and  security  as  he  is 
now  called  upon  to  make  with  a  view  to  pacific  arrangement. 

The  King,  however,  on  his  part,  is  not  disposed  tenaciously  to 
adhere  to  any  precise  view  of  this  question  which  he  may  have 
adopted,  though  it  has  by  no  means  changed  since  the  original 
exposition  of  the  subject  in  the  dispatch  above  alluded  to;  but  His 
Majesty  will  be  well  satisfied  to  give  his  consent  to  any  diff'erent 
or  more  limited  arrangement  to  which  the  King  of  Prussia  would 
consent  as  sufficient  to  induce  and  enable  him  to  undertake  the 
protection  and  co-operate  in  the  future  defence  of  the  United 
Provinces. 

The  security  of  Holland,  the  ancient  and  important  ally  of 
Great  Britain,  being  so  far  provided  for,  and  the  different  States 
of  Italy  being  placed  in  a  situation  to  repel  the  hostile  attacks  of 
France,  the  King  will  be  satisfied  to  place  after  a  time  to  be 
limited,  the  harbour  of  Malta  under  the  protection  of  a  liussian 
garrison,  due  provision  being  at  the  same  time  made  for  the  civil 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    LEVESON-GOWER      437 

government  of  the  Island,  iu  a  way  satisfactory  to  the  inhabitants, 
provided  an  arrangement  can  be  made  by  which  His  Majesty  shall 
be  put  in  possession  of  the  Island  of  Minorca  as  the  substituted 
Naval  Station  for  the  fleets  of  Great  Britain,  although  the  relative 
security  of  that  Island  against  invasion  and  capture,  can  bear  no 
comparison  with  that  of  Malta.  But  His  Majesty  considering  the 
advantages  to  Europe  of  the  improved  stipulations  under  which 
he  engages  to  make  such  exchange,  is  satisfied  in  this,  as  in  other 
instances,  to  relinquish  considerations  peculiar  to  himself,  for  the 
solid  advantages  to  be  procured  for  his  allies ;  and  for  the  better 
and  more  certain  establishment  of  general  and  permanent  tran- 
quillity. With  a  view  to  compensate  Spain  for  the  transfer  of 
Minorca  His  Majesty  would  be  ready  to  concur  in  any  reasonable 
arrangement  which  might  be  made  in  Italy  for  the  benefit  of  the 
King  of  Etruria,  and  he  trusts  that,  by  the  interposition  of  His 
Impl.  Majesty  the  Court  of  Spain  might  without  much  difficulty  be 
reconciled  to  this  proposal.  The  period  to  be  limited  at  the 
expiration  of  which  this  arrangement  can  take  place,  must  not  be  less 
than  three  years  ;  in  order  to  afford  His  M-ajesty  a  reasonable  time 
for  completing  such  works  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  defence  of 
Minorca ;  and  also  to  afford  an  opportunity  of  making  a  con- 
siderable progress  in  the  essential  work  of  strengthening  the 
Barriers  of  Holland,  Germany  and  Switzerland. 

His  Majesty  thinks  it  necessary  also  expressly  to  declare,  that, 
in  agreeing  to  make  this  last  sacrifice  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
security  for  the  Continent  by  negotiation  rather  than  war,  he 
can  consider  this  offer  as  binding  only  in  the  event  of  a  pacific 
arrangement,  and  that  if  the  negotiation  should  not  take  place,  or 
should  not  prove  successful,  it  shall  at  no  future  time  be  made  a 
claim,  that  this  important  possession  shall  again  become  matter 
of  negotiation.  Although  the  King  has  every  reason  to  be  con- 
vinced, that  this' disposition  on  his  part  to  concur  in  the  views  of 
His  Imperial  Majesty,  will  be  met  in  every  respect  with  a  corre- 
sponding sentiment  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia, — His 
Majesty  has  nevertheless  especially  commanded  me  to  repeat  to 
Your  Excellency  in  this  confidential  dispatch,  his  firm  deter- 
mination not  to  concur  in  any  proposal  that  can  countenance  the 
slightest  expectation  of  a  revision  of  the  Maritime  Code, — and  to 
e;xpress  His  Majesty's  confident  hope,  that  His  Imperial  Majesty 
will  not  persevere  in  the  idea  of  a  measure,  which  however 
contrary  to  the  intention  of  His  Imperial  Majesty,  will  neverthe- 


43  8  APPENDIX    A 


less   bear    the   appearance   of  a  disposition  unfavourable    to    the 
rights  and  intei 
practical  result. 


rights  and  interests  of  Great  J>ritain,  and  which  can  lead  to  no 


[Endorsed.]  DRAFT 

To  Loud  G.  L.  Gower, 

Ju?ie  7thj  1805. 

Ko.  16. 

By  the  Messenger  Elsworth. 


I 

i 


APPENDIX   B 


FURTHER   INSTRUCTIONS   TO  LORD   G. 
LEVESON-GOWER 

[Foreign  Offi.ce.     Russia.     58.] 

Downing  Street,  July  1805. 

My  Lord, — The  information  received  by  a  courier  just  arrived 
from  Berlin  is  in  some  respects  so  decisive,  and  in  every  point  of 
view  so  important,  that  I  lose  no  time  in  addressing  some  observa- 
tions to  Your  Excellency  on  the  present  state  of  affairs,  and  on 
the  course  which  it  may  in  consequence  become  expedient  to  adopt 
in  conjunction  with  Russia.  At  the  same  time  that  His  Majesty's 
Government  learned  that  the  arrogant  usurpation  by  Buonaparte 
of  the  obvious  objects  of  the  proposed  negotiation,  had  determined 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  put  an  end  to  the  mission  of  Monsr. 
Novossilzoff,  and  that  His  Imperial  Majesty  had  ordered  the 
French  passports  to  be  returned  into  the  hands  of  the  Prussian 
Minister,  information  was  also  received  that  Prussia  is  decidedly 
averse  to  any  exertion  for  its  own  independence,  or  for  the 
deliverance  of  Europe,  and  that  Austria,  though  more  directly 
threatened,  and  more  immediately  in  danger,  has  not  manifested 
any  disposition  to  accede  to  the  proposed  concert,  or  to  enter  into 
any  more  active  alliance  with  Great  Britain  and  Russia  than  that 
which  she  had  contracted  with  the  latter  Power  in  the  defensive 
Treaty  concluded  in  November  1804. 

This  disposition  of  the  two  powers  renders  the  stipulated 
force  of  400,000  unattainable,  and  the  general  deliverance  of 
Europe  at  the  present  period  impracticable.  The  object  and  the 
means  proposed  by  the  concert  concluded  between  His  Majesty 
and  the  Emperor  of  Russia  being  thus,  for  the  time  at  least, 
frustrated,  it  becomes  a  subject  of  important  deliberation  to 
determine  how  far  it  may  be  practicable  for  Great  Britain  and 
Russia,  without  the  assistance  of  Prussia  or  Austria,  to  check  the 
progress  of  France  in  any  particular  quarter,  or  to  afford  security 

439 


440  APPENDIX    B 

against  her  meditated  attacks  to  any  of  those  powers,  which, 
having  manifested  a  just  sense  of  the  conduct  and  views  of  the 
French  Government,  are  thereby  become  the  more  immediate  and 
particular  objects  of  its  enmity.  Sweden  and  Naples  are  the 
States  which  obviously  come  under  the  above  description,  they  are 
also  respectively  more  or  less  open  to  the  aggressions  of  France ; 
Naples  indeed  is  not  merely  threatened  but  already  in  part 
occupied  by  the  troops  of  the  French  Republic.  On  the  other 
hand  also  the  line  of  Prussian  guarantee  has  been  so  uniformly 
contracted  as  the  councils  of  French  encroachment  have  been 
extended,  that  no  reasonable  expectation  of  security  for  Swedish 
Pomerania  can  be  founded  on  the  professed  protection  of  the  North 
of  Germany  by  Prussia. 

In  considering  therefore  the  expediency  and  probable  effect  of 
the  employment  of  Russian  troops,  unsupported  by  Austria  and 
Prussia,  the  points  which  first  present  themselves  as  important 
and  as,  upon  the  whole,  most  likely  to  be  occupied  with  security 
and  effect,  are  1st  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  and  2nd  the  tract 
of  country  in  the  North  of  Germany  lying  between  the  Elbe  and 
the  Baltic.  The  importance  of  security  to  those  points,  if  attain- 
able, will  be  immediately  obvious  to  Your  Excellency.  The 
occupation  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  (especially  if  a  sufficient 
army  should  be  collected  to  clear  it  of  St.  Cyr's  army,  and  to 
establish  the  line  of  defence  in  the  Province  of  Abruzzo)  must  be 
productive  of  considerable  advantage  to  the  common  cause.  A 
force  so  stationed  would  in  the  first  place  afford  the  most  effectual 
check  to  any  projects  which  Buonaparte  may  entertain  on  the  side 
of  Greece ;  the  deliverance  of  Naples  would  manifest  to  the 
Ottoman  Porte,  and  to  all  the  powers  of  the  second  order,  that 
a  steady  adherence  to  the  good  cause  will  be  followed  by  powerful 
exertions  and  efficient  measures  of  protection  and  defence  on  the 
part  of  Great  Britain  and  Russia.  The  entire  security  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Naples  by  the  vigorous  defence  of  an  extensive 
frontier,  might  also  (it  is  to  be  hoped)  operate  as  an  encouragement 
to  Austria,  to  act  with  energy  on  the  side  of  Venice  and  the  Tyrol 
for  the  recovery  of  a  security  against  France  in  that  quarter,  of 
which  she  has  been  entirely  deprived  by  the  stipulations  of  the 
Treaty  of  Luneville.  Should  Austria,  by  the  example  of  the 
Russian  operations  in  Naples,  be  brought  into  action,  not  only 
would  the  South  of  Italy  at  least  to  the  Arno,  be  immediately 
delivered,  but  the  great  objects  of  the  concert  would  thereby  at 
once  be  revived,  and  the  estimated  number  of  400,000  men  might 


\ 


FURTHER    INSTRUCTIONS  441 

be  collected  and  employed  for  the  general  deliverance  of  Europe. 
The  occupation  of  the  district  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Baltic 
would  not  indeed  hold  out  so  early  or  such  extensive  prospects  of 
any  general  influence  on  the  course  of  events.  The  occupation 
however  of  that  district  would,  in  the  first  instance,  have  the 
effect  of  checking  the  progress  of  French  ambition,  and  of  counter- 
acting any  secret  negociation  which  may  be  on  foot  for  the 
occupation  and  partition  of  those  countries.  Further  advantages 
might  by  contingent  events  be  derived  from  such  a  position,  if 
securely  maintained,  a  force  might  ultimately  be  collected  from 
Hanover,  Denmark,  and  Sweden,  which,  reinforced  by  a  powerful 
army  of  Russians,  and  assisted  by  demonstrations  and  co-operation 
on  the  side  of  Flushing,  might,  if  the  Dutch  nation  should  mani- 
fest a  disposition  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  slavery  with  which  they 
are  oppressed,  effect  the  deliverance  of  the  United  Provinces, 
especially  if  the  collection  of  such  a  force  and  the  temptation  of  the 
acquisitions  to  be  offered  to  Prussia  should  at  length  induce  that 
Government  to  consult  its  true  interest  and  adopt  a  firm,  wise,  and 
dignified  line  of  policy. 

Such  being  the  immediate  and  possible  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  the  secure  occupation  of  the  two  points  in  question, 
there  arise  three  other  heads  of  consideration  necessary  to  be 
discussed  before  those  measures  can  be  determined. 

1st.  Upon  what  grounds  the  occupation  of  those  countries  is 
to  be  assumed. 

2nd.  How  great  a  force,  and  at  what  expense,  it  will 
necessarily  be  employed,  how  long  and  with  what  expectation  of  a 
favourable  result  this  defensive  system  can  be  continued  ;  and, 
lastly,  how  far  it  has  been  ascertained  that  either  or  both  the 
lines  of  frontier  above  alluded  to,  are  capable  of  such  a  defence 
as  may  defy  the  undivided  exertions  of  the  French  power. 

Upon  the  first  head  perhaps  no  great  difficulty  may  exist : 
there  is  little  doubt  that  with  respect  to  Swedish  Pomerania, 
Mecklenburgh,  Lubeck,  &c.,  the  respective  Sovereigns  of  those 
districts  would  readily  invite  or  receive  the  security  offered  by 
Great  Britain  and  Russia.  At  Naples  there  probably  exists  an 
equal  disposition  to  invite  the  assistance  of  a  united  British  and 
Russian  army,  if  such  a  force  should  present  itself  within  reach 
of  affording  immediate  protection  to  those  Kingdoms ;  indeed  the 
recent  threat  of  Buonaparte  that  he  would  consider  Naples  as  in 
a  state  of  war  with  France  if  his  title  of  King  of  Italy  should  not 
be  acknowledged  on  a  given  day,  would  be  sufficient,  in  any  con- 


442  APPENDIX    B 

sequence  of  that  threat,  to  justify  the  occupation  of  Naples  by  the 
allies  of  his  Sicilian  Majesty.  If  the  threat  should  be  followed 
by  war,  the  assistance  will  of  course  be  invited  and  accepted,  if  it 
be  followed  by  a  compelled  acknowledgment  of  a  title,  which 
implies  in  terms  the  annihilation  of  the  Sicilian  Monarchy,  the 
King  of  Naples  can  no  longer  be  considered  in  a  situation  to  give 
the  consent  or  refusal  of  an  independent  Sovereign,  and  his 
deliverance  may  be  lawfully  undertaken  without  requiring  his 
assent. 

With  respect  to  the  second  consideration,  it  has  undoubtedly 
been  a  question  frequently  agitated,  whether  an  absolute  defensive 
in  war  were  admissible  in  principle  ;  or  possible  in  practice,  with 
a  general  conclusion  against  the  adoption  of  such  a  state  of  war ; 
in  the  present  instance,  however,  it  is  worthy  of  consideration 
how  far  such  a  system  may  operate  to  the  effectual  injury 
of  the  particular  enemy  against  whom  it  shall  be  employed. 
There  is  every  reason  to  expect  that  the  command  of  the  sea  and 
the  resources  of  the  countries  within  the  reach  of  the  two  proposed 
points  of  operation,  would  enable  the  Allies  to  supply  their 
armies  at  a  much  cheaper  rate,  and  in  greater  abundance,  than 
could  the  enemy  acting  against  those  lines  of  frontier,  and 
drawing  his  supplies  from  the  country  immediately  behind  him. 
The  consideration  of  relative  numbers  may  also  make  an  important 
difference  in  the  expense  of  the  warfare,  if,  from  the  nature  of  the 
country,  a  comparatively  small  army  should  be  found  siifficient  to 
occupy  the  exertions  of  a  very  considerable  force  of  the  enemy. 
A  long  and  unsuccessful  series  of  efforts  would  tend,  more  than  any 
thing,  to  lower  the  military  estimation  of  Buonaparte,  and  thereby 
to  overturn  his  usurped  dominion.  This  however  must  depend 
upon  the  answer  to  the  second  head  of  consideration,  which  I  have 
not  materials  to  ascertain,  and  which  must  depend  upon  the 
numbers  proposed  to  be  employed.  This  also  depends  upon  the 
solution  of  the  question  in  the  3rd  and  last  head  :  "  How  far  it 
has  been  ascertained  that  either  or  both  of  the  lines  of  frontier 
alluded  to,  are  capable  of  such  a  defence  as  may  defy  the  undivided 
exertions  of  the  French  power."  This  question  requires  an  earnest 
and  attentive  consideration.  It  is  in  all  cases  difficult  to  decide 
upon  the  expediency  and  practicability  of  military  operations, 
without  having  first  received  very  detailed  information  from 
intelligent  officers  well  acquainted  with  the  local  circumstances 
and  military  resources  of  the  countries  in  which  a  campaign  is  to 
be  conducted.     This  difficulty  must  be  felt  even  on  an  enlarged 


FURTHER    INSTRUCTIONS  443 

scale  of  active  operations,  where  much  may  be  trusted  to  con- 
tingent circumstances,  and  to  the  skilful  conduct  of  combined  and 
active  military  movements.  But,  in  the  occupation  of  a  limited 
frontier,  upon  a  system  merely  defensive,  it  is  of  indispensable 
necessity  to  be  minutely  informed  of  the  grounds  upon  which  a 
rational  expectation  of  success,  little  short  of  absolute  security, 
may  be  rested.  Impressed  with  this  view  of  the  subject,  His 
Majesty's  Ministers  are  desirous  of  learning  fiom  the  Russian 
Government  the  nature  of  the  information  it  has  received  with 
respect  to  the  most  effectual  mode  of  employing  its  forces  without 
any  assistance  from  the  other  great  military  Powers  of  the  Con- 
tinent, either  on  the  points  of  which  I  have  been  treating,  or  in 
any  other  quarter  which  may  have  occurred  to  the  Cabinet  of 
St.  Petersburgh. 

An  extensive  diversion  of  the  French  force  to  operations  on 
the  Continent,  even  independent  of  the  great  and  decisive  results 
which  are  in  contemplation  of  the  concert  concluded  between  His 
Majesty  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  must  evidently  be  an  object 
of  interest  and  advantage  to  this  country ;  but  His  Majesty  has 
too  just  a  feeling  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  cordial  union 
which  so  happily  subsists  between  His  Majesty  and  the  Emperor 
of  Russia  to  be  desirous  of  such  a  diversion,  at  the  hazard  of  any 
important  failure  which  might  either  be  injurious  to  the  interests 
and  influence  of  Russia,  or  which  might  in  any  degree  affect  the 
high  military  reputation  of  that  Empire.  It  is  therefore  the 
wish  of  His  Majesty's  Government  to  learn  from  the  details 
collected  by  Russian  officers  how  far  the  defence  of  the  frontiers 
of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  or  of  any  given  line  in  the  north  of 
Germany  could  be  undertaken  with  a  prospect  of  baffling  the 
utmost  efforts  of  France  by  the  opposition  which  Russia,  un- 
supported by  Prussian  or  Austrian  co-operation,  could  present  in 
both  or  either  of  those  quarters  respectively. 

The  desire  expressed  by  the  Russian  Court  of  the  re- 
establishment  of  peace  between  this  country  and  Spain  induces 
me  to  mention  to  Your  Excellency  the  possibility  of  another 
course  of  operations,  more  distant  indeed  in  prospect,  and  cer- 
tainly less  likely  to  be  adopted  with  effect,  than  that  which  I  have 
already  opened. 

The  Kingdom  of  Portugal  is  at  this  moment  in  an  uneasy  and 
precarious  state  of  purchased  neutrality,  and  there  is  great  reason 
to  apprehend  that  both  the  military  and  pecuniary  resources  of 
that  country  are  in  a  worse  state  than  the  Government  is  willing 


444  APPENDIX    B 

to  avow.  I  have  hitherto  in  vain  represented  to  the  Portuguese 
Minister  the  necessity  for  procuring  from  his  Court  an  accurate 
statement  of  the  means  which  it  possesses,  and  of  the  assistance 
it  would  require  to  enable  Portugal  to  hold  the  language  of 
independence,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  provide  such  means  of 
defence  as  would  secure  that  character  to  the  country. 

The  Chevalier  de  Souza  has  indeed  stated  in  conversation  that 
15,000  auxiliary  troops  for  a  twelvemonth  would  give  such  pro- 
tection to  the  country,  and  so  much  energy  to  the  Government, 
that  they  would  be  enabled  to  place  the  native  force  on  such  a 
footing  as  should  render  it  after  that  period  sufficient  for  its  own 
defence.  I  doubt,  however,  whether  any  energy  could  be  created 
in  the  Portuguese  Government  unless  the  Prince  Regent  could 
be  induced  to  commit  the  administration  of  affairs  to  different 
Ministers,  who  should  not  either  from  the  operation  of  their  fears 
or  their  prejudices  appear  so  entirely  devoted  to  France.  The 
recall  of  Messrs.  de  Souza  and  d'Ameida,  or  the  appointment  of 
any  other  persons  of  energy  and  decision  of  character,  might 
possibly  restore  Portugal  to  such  a  state  of  exertion  as  might 
place  that  country  out  of  the  reach  of  French  aggression.  That 
point  being  established,  it  might  be  worth  consideration  whether 
the  present  disposition  of  the  Spanish  nation,  of  a  great  proportion 
of  its  ancient  nobility,  and  of  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  assisted  by 
Portugal  and  the  auxiliary  forces  employed  in  that  country, 
might  not  at  once  deliver  the  King  of  Spain  from  the  control 
of  France  and  the  domineering  influence  of  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
and  once  again  firmly  establish  the  barrier  of  the  Pyrenees 
between  Spain  and  France.  I  am  aware  that  such  an  event 
might  more  reasonably  be  expected  as  the  consequence  of  a 
general  confederacy  of  the  great  military  Powers  of  the  Continent, 
than  as  the  partial  operation  of  a  more  limited  concert,  but  in 
suggesting  even  less  probable  subjects  of  discussion,  I  am  fulfilling 
the  disposition  of  His  Majesty's  Government  to  comply  with  the 
desire  of  the  Russian  Cabinet  that  the  means  of  acting  against 
France  without  the  assistance  of  Austria  and  Prussia  should  be 
amply  discussed  and  fully  considered. 

[Endorsed.]  DRAFT 

To  Lord  G.  L.  Gower, 

July,  1805. 


APPENDIX   C 

THE   TRAFALGAR   SIGNAL,   1816 

Signal  No.  I.  7.     Cut  through  the  Enemy's  Line  in  the  Order  of 
Sailing  in  Two  Columns 

The  Admiral  will  make  known  what  number  of  ships  from  the 
Van  Ship  of  the  enemy  the  Weather  Division  is  to  break  through 
the  enemy's  line,  and  the  same  from  the  rear  at  which  the  Lee 
Division  is  to  break  through  their  line. 

To  execute  this  signal  the  fleet  is  to  form  in  the  Order  of 
Sailing  in  two  columns,  should  it  not  be  so  formed  already  ;  the 


*% 


7^ 


'2% 


9 


10  II 


12 


13 


^  I  -O  1  ^  i   ^  i  '^\^» 


3 


DIAGRAM   OF   THE   TRAFALGAR  SIGNAL 
From  the  Signal  Book  of  1816 

leader  of  each  column  steering  down  for  the  position  pointed  out, 
where  he  is  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line. 

If  the  Admiral  wishes  any  particular  conduct  to  be  pursued  by 
the  leader  of  the  Division  in  which  he  happens  not  to  be,  after  the 
line  is  broken,  he  will  of  course  point  it  out.  If  he  does  not,  it  is 
to  be  considered  that  the  conduct  of  the  Lee  Division,  after  break- 
ing the  line,  is  left  to  its  commander. 

In  performing  this  evolution,  the  second  astern  of  the  leader  is 
to  pass  through  the  line  astern  of  the  ship  next  ahead  of  where  her 
leader  broke  through,  and  so  on  in  succession,  breaking  through 
all  parts  of  the  enemy's  line  ahead  of  their  leaders^  as  described  in 
the  Plate. 

445 


446  APPENDIX    C 

By  this  arrangement  no  sliip  will  have  to  pass  the  whole  of  the 
enemy's  line.  If,  however,  in  consequence  of  any  circumstance, 
the  rear  ships  should  not  be  able  to  cut  through  in  their  assigned 
places,  the  captains  of  these  ships,  as  well  as  the  ships  which  are 
deprived  of  opponents  in  the  enemy's  line  by  this  mode  of  attack, 
are  to  act  to  the  best  of  their  judgment  for  the  destruction  of  the 
enemy,  unless  a  disposition  to  the  contrary  has  been  previously 
made. 

It  will  also  be  seen  that  by  breaking  the  line  in  this  order  the 
enemy's  van  ships  will  not  be  able  to  assist  either  the  Centre  or 
the  Rear  without  tacking  or  wearing  for  that  purpose. 

Note. — Owing  to  the  diagram  in  the  plate  being  apparently 
incomplete,  the  significance  of  the  signal  and  its  instruction  is 
somewhat  obscured.  The  diagram  shows  an  attack  end-on  in  two 
divisions  upon  an  equal  number  of  ships,  all  of  which  are  engaged. 
But  the  first  and  last  paragraphs  of  the  instructions  make  it  clear 
that  a  concentration  on  the  rear  and  centre  of  a  superior  fleet  is 
intended  as  at  Trafalgar,  and  we  must  assume  that  the  unengaged 
van  of  the  enemy  is  not  shown.  The  intention  then  becomes 
clear.  It  is  a  device  to  reduce  the  risk  which  was  so  widely 
recognised  in  Nelson's  attack.  So  far  as  the  weather  column  is 
concerned,  the  exposure  of  the  leading  ship  to  a  dangerous  con- 
centration remains.  But  in  the  lee  column  it  is  avoided.  Instead 
of  leading  for  the  van  ships  of  the  section  which  she  is  to  cut  off, 
she  leads  for  the  rearmost,  and  is  thus  less  exposed  to  a  con- 
centrated fire.  The  rest  of  her  division  then  engage  in  succession 
and  in  reverse  order  till  the  assigned  interval  is  reached. 

Another  advantage  of  this  modification  of  the  attack  is  that  every 
enemy's  ship  is  doubled  on  by  the  British  ships  as  they  pass  to 
their  proper  stations.  Thus  in  the  lee  line  No.  8  fires  her  star- 
board guns  on  the  ship  which  No.  9  is  engaging  to  leeward,  and 
reserves  her  larboard  guns  to  rake  her  proper  opponent  as  she 
passes  through  the  line  under  her  stern.  Similarly  the  British 
No.  10  would  double  on  the  two  ships  engaged  by  Nos.  8  and  9 
in  succession,  and  so  on.  If  the  leading  ship  in  each  division 
survived  the  first  shock,  as  they  did  at  Trafalgar,  the  attack  is 
obviously  very  formidable,  but  in  a  commanding  breeze  it  could 
easily  be  parried  or  avoided  by  the  irregular  French  methods. 

Its  interest,  however,  remains,  viz.,  that  being  clearly  founded 
on  Nelson's  Memorandum,  it  represents  an  end-on  attack  in  line- 
ahead,  and  seeks  by  an  ingenious  modification  to  minimise  its 
obvious  tactical  defects. 


APPENDIX   D 


LORD    NELSON'S    MEMORANDUM 

\Ho1ograj)h  draft  in  Nelson's  hand,  unsigned ;  amended  in  that  of  Ms 
diajjlain,  Dr.  Scott.  Tico  sheets  {eight  jiages  4^o),  British 
Museum].'^ 

Menf.^  Memorandum 

Victory,  off  Cadiz,  9th  Oct.  1805.^ 
Thinking  it  almost  impossible  to  bring  a  fleet  of  forty  sail  of  the 
line  into  line  of  battle  in  variable  winds  thick  weather  and  other 
circumstances  which  must  occur,  without  such  a  loss  of  time  that 
the  opportunity  would  probably  be  lost  of  bringing  the  enemy  to 
battle  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  the  business  decisive — 

I  have  therefore  made  up  my  mind  to  keep  the  fleet  in  that 
position  of  sailing  (with  the  exception  of  the  first  and  second  in 
command)  that  the  order  of  sailing  is  to  be  the  order  of  battle, 
placing  the  fleet  in  two  lines  of  sixteen  ships  each  with  an  advanced 
squadron  of  eight  of  the  fastest  sailing  two-decked  ships  ivhich^ 
will  always  make  if  wanted  a  line  of  twenty-four  sail,  on  whichever 
line  the  commander-in-chief  may  direct. 

The  second  in  command  will  ^  after  my  intentions  are  made 
known  to  him  have  the  entire  direction  of  his  line  to  make  the 
attack  upon  the  enemy  and  to  follow  up  the  blow  until  they  are 
captured  or  destroyed. 

If  the  enemy's  fleet  should  be  seen  to  windward  in  line  of  battle, 
and  that  the  two  lines  ^  and  the  advanced  squadron  can  fetch  them  ^ 

^  Paragraphing  and  punctuation  are  given  as  in  the  original.  From  the 
nature  of  Scott's  amendments  (printed  in  italics)  it  would  seem  as  though  he 
read  the  draft  over  to  Nelson  and  suggested  improvements  in  grammar,  &c., 
as  he  went  on. 

2  Inserted  by  Scott. 

2  Nelson  first  wrote  here  "  in  fact  command  his  line  and,"  but  the  words 
are  deleted,  presumably  to  make  it  clear  he  was  not  to  have  the  direction  of 
his  line  at  first, 

■*  For  the  words  "  to  windward  in  line  of  battle,  and  that  the  two  lines," 
Nelson  first  wrote,  "to  windward,  but  in  that  position  that  the  two  lines." 

^  Here  are  deleted  the  words,  "  I  shall  suppose  them  forty-six  sail  in  the 
line  of  battle."  The  marginal  note  (see  below,  note  6  on  next  page)  was 
substituted. 


448  APPENDIX    D 

they  will  probably  be  so  extended  that  their  van  could  not  succour 
their  rear. 

I  should  therefore  probably  make  the  second  in  command's^ 
signal,  to  lead  through  about  the  twelfth  ship  from  the  rear  (or 
wherever  he  ^  could  fetch,  if  not  able  to  get  as  far  advanced).  My 
line  would  lead  through  about  their  centre  and  the  advanced 
squadron  to  cut  two  three  or  four  ships  ahead  of  their  centre  so 
far  as  to  ensure  getting  at  their  commander-in-chief  on  whom 
every  effort  must  be  made  to  capture  [him].^ 

The  whole  impression  of  the  British  fleet  ^  must  be  to  overpower 
from  two  to  three  ships  ahead  ^of  their  commander-in-chief 
supposed  to  be  in  the  centre  to  the  rear  of  their  fleet.  I  will 
suppose^  twenty  sail  of  the  enemy's^  line  to  be  untouched,  it  must 
be  some  time  before  they  could  perform  a  manoeuvre  to  bring  their 
force  compact  to  attack  any  part  of  the  British  fleet  engaged  or 
to  succour  their  own  ships,  which  indeed  would  be  impossible, 
without  mixing  with  the  ships  engaged.^  Something  must  be  left 
to  chance  ;  nothing  is  sure  in  a  sea  fight  beyond  all  others.  Shot 
will  carry  away  the  masts  and  yards  of  friends  as  well  as  foes 
but  I  look  with  confidence  to  a  victory  before  the  van  of  the 
enemy  could  succour  their  rear  '^  and  then  that  the  British  fleet 
would  most  of  them  be  ready  to  receive  their  twenty-sail 
of  the  line,  or  to  pursue  them,  should  they  endeavour  to 
make  off. 

If  the  van  of  the  enemy  tacks  the  captured  ships  must  run  to 
leeward  of  the  British  fleet,  if  the  enemy  wears  the  British  must 
place  themselves  between  the  enemy  and  the  captured  and 
disabled  British  ships  and  should  the  enemy  close  I  have  no 
fears  as  to  the  result. 

The  second  in  command  will  in  all  possible  things  direct  the 
movements  of  his  line  by  keeping  them  as  compact  as  the  nature 
of  the  circumstances  will  admit.  Captains  are  to  look  to  their 
particular  line  as  their  rallying  point.     But  in  case  signals  can 

^  "  Your"  deleted. 

■-■  Deleted  by  Nelson. 

^  "  Fleet"  inserted. 

*  For  "I  will  suppose"  he  first  wrote  **  supposing." 

''  "  Enemy's  "  inserted. 

^  Here  Scott  inserted  an  asterisk  referring  to  a  note  which  Nelson  wrote 
in  the  upper  margin,  reversing  the  paper.  It  is  as  follows:  "The  enemy's 
fleet  is  supposed  to  consist  of  4(5  sail  of  the  line,  British  fleet  40.  If  either 
be  less,  only  a  proportionate  number  of  enemy's  ships  are  to  be  cut  off. 
B.  to  be  ^  superior  to  the  E.  cut  off." 

'  •'  Friends  "  deleted  and  "  rear  '  substituted. 


NELSON'S    MEMORANDUM  449 

neither  be  seen  or  perfectly  understood  no  captain   can  do   very 
wrong  if  he  phices  his  ship  alongside  that  of  an  enemy. 

1  Of  the  intended  attack  from  to  windward.     The  enemy  in  the 
line  of  battle  ready  to  attack. 


The  divisions  of  the  British  fleet  will  be  brought  nearly  within 
gunshot  of  the  enemy's  centre.  The  signal  will  most  probably  then  - 
be  made  for  the  lee  line  to  bear  up  together  to  set  all  their  sails, 
even  steering-sails  ^  in  order  to  get  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the 
enemy's  line  and  to  cut  through,  beginning  from  the  12  ship 
from  the  enemy's  rear.  Some  ships  may  not  get  through  their  exact 
place  but  they  will  always  be  at  hand  to  assist  their  friends  and 
if  any  are  thrown  round  the  rear  of  the  enemy  they  will  effectually 
complete  the  business  of  twelve  sail  of  the  enemy. 

Should  the  enemy  wear  together  or  bear  up  and  sail  large  still 
the  twelve  ships  composing  in  the  first  position  the  enemy's  rear 
are  to  be  the'^  object  of  attack  of  the  lee  line,  unless  otherwise 
directed  from  the  commander-in-chief  which  is  scarcely  to  be 
expected  as  the  entire  management  of  the  lee  line  after  the 
intentions  of  the  commander-in-chief  is  ^  signified  is  intended  to  be 
left  to  the  judgment  of  the  admiral  commanding  that  line. 

The  remainder  of  the  enemy's  fleet  34  sail  are  to  be  left  to 
the  management  of  the  commander-in-chief,  who  will  endeavour 
to  take  care  that  the  movements  of  the  second  in  command  are  as 
little  interrupted  as  possible.^ 

^  The  draft  breaks  off  before  this  clause  with  a  space.  "Of  the  intended 
attack  from  to  windward,"  occupies  just  one  line,  so  that  it  may  or  may  not 
have  been  intended  as  a  heading  to  all  that  follows.  The  diagram  is  very 
roughly  drawn.  The  lines  are  not  straight  or  parallel,  as  in  the  diagram 
above,  but  their  relative  proportions  and  distances  (half  scale)  are  preserved. 

2  "  Then  "  inserted  by  Nelson. 

^  In  the  upper  margin  is  this  note:  "Vide  instructions  for  signal, 
Yellow  with  blue  fly.  Page  17.  Eighth  flag,  with  reference  to  appendix." 
The  "Appendix"  was  a  small  pamphlet  of  additional  signals  issued  by  the 
Admiralty  in  1804.  This  signal,  however,  is  not  in  it.  The  presumption  is 
that  Nelson  himself  added  it  to  the  Appendix. 

*  Inserted  by  Scott.  ^  Scott  suggested  "are." 

^  Here  Nelson  came  to  the  extreme  end  of  the  second  sheet  of  paper. 

2   F 


APPENDIX   E 

LISTS   AND    PLANS   SHOWING   THE    MANNER   OF 
ENGAGING   AT  TUAFALGAK 

1.  A  list  attached  to  Collingwood's  official  despatch.  Nicolas, 
vii.  215. 

2.  The  Britannia  list. — From  the  Journal  of  Lieutenant  John 
Barclay  of  that  ship.     Great  Sea  Fvjlits  (N.R.S.),  ii.  215. 

3.  The  ''Naval  Chronicle''  piarz.— Published  in  the  Naval 
Chronicle^  December  31,  1805  (vol.  xiv.  p.  495),  and  reproduced  in 
Mr.  Newbolt's  Year  of  Trafalgar,  p.  98.  This  was  the  earliest 
plan  printed.  It  represents  three  stages  of  the  approach  as  in  the 
official  French  plan  {antey  p.  360),  namely,  the  first  "  At  daylight," 
and  the  second  "  At  9  o'clock,"  showing  the  British  fleet  in  process 
of  forming  sailing  order  as  it  bore  up  ;  and  the  third  "  At  12  o'clock 
at  noon,"  showing  the  actual  moment  of  contact  with  the  columns 
almost  vertical  to  the  enemy's  line,  but  slightly  converging.  In 
the  accompanying  note  we  are  told  it  was  engraved  from  a  drawing 
furnished  *'  by  a  gentleman  who  copied  it  from  the  original  in  the 
possession  of  the  Admiralty."  ...  It  further  states  that  "  The 
situation,  as  here  represented,  has  been  vouched  to  be  correct 
by  Admiral  Villeneuve  in  the  original  sent  to  the  Admiralty." 
Several  errors,  and  particularly  in  the  order  of  the  allied  ships, 
suggest  that  the  work  was  hurriedly  and  carelessly  done  by  the 
anonymous  gentleman. 

4.  The  Craig  Plan. — This  little-known  plan  is  a  hand- 
coloured  copperplate  engraving  from  the  design  of  the  famous 
William  Marshall  Craig,  drawing-master  to  the  Princess  Charlotte, 
and  miniature  painter  to  the  Duke  of  York  {Dictionary  of  National 
Biography),  who  was  the  most  fashionable  designer  of  his  time. 
It  was  published  on  January  9,  1806,  by  Edward  Orme,  "Print- 
seller  to  the  King,"  a  well-known  naval  and  military  publisher. 
It  contains  the  noon  position  only ;  that  is,  the  actual  attack,  and 
bears  the  inscription  :  "  Position  of  the  combined  forces  of  France 
and  Spain  at  the  commencement  of  the  action,"  &c.  At  the  foot 
is  this  note,  "  The  above  plan  has  been  certified  as  to  its  correctness 


PLANS    OF   TRAFALGAR  451 

by  the  Flag-officers  of  the  Euryalui^  and  Admiral  Villeneuve." 
From  this  it  would  appear  that  it  was  taken  from  the  same 
original  as  the  Naval  Chronicle  plan,  though  it  is  more  carefully 
done.  That  this  was  its  origin  is  certain,  for  at  the  top  half  of  the 
plate  is  a  picture  purporting  to  represent  Nelson  explaining  his 
plan  of  attack  to  his  officers,  and  on  the  table  before  him  is  a  plan 
showing  the  attack  as  it  was  delivered,  with  all  three  positions  as 
in  the  Naval  Chronicle.  The  inference,  then,  from  what  we  learn 
from  these  two  sources,  is  that  shortly  after  the  battle,  while 
Collingwood  and  Villeneuve  were  on  board  the  Euryalua  with  their 
staffs,  a  plan  was  prepared  in  concert  between  them,  and  that  it 
was  forwarded  to  the  Admiralty  in  the  Euryalus  when  she  went 
home  with  despatches  and  Villeneuve.  It  must  be  doubted,  how- 
ever, whether  the  plan  was  regarded  as  authentic  for  anything  but 
the  disposition  of  the  Combined  Fleet,  which,  indeed,  is  all  the 
inscription  claims.  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur  state,  on  what  they 
regarded  as  very  high  authority,  that  "the  British  fleet  was 
certainly  not  in  the  position  stated  in  the  plan  sent  to  the 
Admiralty,  and  signed  Magendie,  captain  of  the  Burentaurey 
{Life  of  Nelson,  vol.  ii.,  Continuation,  p.  167.)  Clearly,  then,  "the 
plan  sent  to  the  Admiralty  "  must  have  been  the  original  of  that 
signed  by  Magendie,  which  is  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere  in  his 
Trafalgar,  Appendix,  p.  186.  By  "  Flag-officers  of  the  Euryalus, ^^ 
therefore,  the  Craig  print  may  mean  not  Collingwood  and  his  staff, 
but  the  French  "  flag-officers"  only ;  but  as  Villeneuve  is  specially 
mentioned  as  the  French  authority,  it  is  equally  likely  that  the 
British  "  flag-officers"  are  meant. 

In  any  case  it  must  have  been  considered  that  the  delineation 
of  the  British  fleet  was  not  quite  correct  in  detail.  Nothing 
seriously  wrong  is  suggested.  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur  imply  only 
that  Magendie's  plan  made  the  lines  too  regular,  not  that  the 
general  disposition  or  manner  of  approach  was  wrong. ^  It  is 
evident,  then,  that  it  was  the  order  and  position  of  the  British 
ships  which  left  room  for  improvement  and  not  the  general  line 
of  the  attack.  This  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  comparing  the 
plans  of  Craig  and  the  Naval  Chronicle.  It  will  be  seen  that  in 
Craig's  design  a  number  of  alterations  had  been  made  in  the  British 
fleet,  but  the  general  plan  of  attack,  in  two  lines  ahead  almost 
vertical,  remains  the  same  in  both.  The  alterations  given  to 
Craig   were   in   details  of  the  order  and   positions  of  individual 

1  Their  words  are,   "  Our  ships  could  not  be  exactly  in  the  same  track 
astern  of  each  other." 


45  2  APPENDIX    E 

units  only.  Britannia,  for  instance,  instead  of  being  fourth  in 
Nelson's  line,  as  she  is  in  the  Naval  Chronicle  and  Magendie's  plan, 
is  shown  hauled  out  to  windward,  with  the  seventh  ship,  Agamemnon, 
passing  her,  approximately  as  in  the  Harbin  plan  {Frontispiece). 
Moreover,  the  Neptune  and  Lemathan,  instead  of  being  in  accurate 
line  (as  Clarke  and  M'Arthur  complained),  are  represented  also 
hauling  out  to  windward  as  though  to  pass  ahead  of  the  Victory  in 
accordance  with  the  signals  that  had  been  made,  certainly  to  the 
Leviatlian,  and  probably  to  the  Ne})fune  as  her  next  ahead. 

On  the  whole,  then,  from  the  above  hints  and  the  standing  of 
the  designer  and  publisher,  we  may  take  it  that  the  Craig  engraving 
is  the  most  authentic  plan  we  have.  True,  it  does  not  show  the 
line  of  bearing  in  the  lee  division,  but  this  was  only  natural,  since 
Collingwood  did  not  regard  it  as  of  sufficient  importance  for 
mention  in  his  dispatch,  and  neither  A'^illeneuve  nor  Magendie 
could  have  seen  it. 

5.  The  Magendie  Plan. — From  Colonel  Desbriere's  version  of 
the  original  in  the  Archives  de  la  Marine  (Paris).  It  may  be 
doubted  if  this  is  identical  with  the  plan  sent  to  the  Admiralty, 
for  the  British  lines  are  not  shown  accurately  formed  as 
Clarke  and  M'Arthur  imply  they  were  originally.  It  is  possible 
that  Magendie  altered  this  on  the  representations  of  British 
officers.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  foundation  of  Prigny's 
final  plan  (see  ante,  p.  360),  and  also  of  the  one  Dumanoir 
exhibited  at  his  court-martial,  both  of  which  are  given  by 
Desbriere.^ 

6.  The  Harhin  Plan  {Frontispiece). — This  hitherto  unpublished 
plan  is  in  MS.,  coloured.  It  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  a  petty 
officer  called  Harbin,  who  was  present  at  the  battle,  and  to  have 
been  handed  down  in  his  family,  till  it  recently  came  into  the 
author's  possession.  Its  value  is  that  it  is  clearly  independent, 
and  not  founded  on  any  other  known  plan,  and  especially  that 
it  alone  shows  Collingwood's  line  of  bearing,  and  shows  it  exactly 
as  would  be  expected  from  the  signals  that  were  made.  For 
Nelson's  line  it  is  of  no  value,  except  for  the  position  of  Britannia, 
since  it  does  not  give  the  irregularity  which  Nelson's  sudden 
changes  of  intention  created  in  his  van. 

1  There  are  two  other  plans  given  by  Desbri^re  which  make  Collingwood's 
attack  practically  parallel.  One  is  that  prepared  by  Captain  Epron  of  the 
Ar()onaute.  The  other  is  from  the  archives  of  the  Captain-General  of  Cadiz, 
but  both  are  so  fanciful  in  other  particulars  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as 
of  suflScient  authority  to  contradict  the  weight  of  higher  testimony  that  is 
against  them. 


PLANS    OF    TRAFALGAR  453 

7.  The  Nicolas  Plan. — Published  by  him  in  the  Nelsoiis  Despatches 
(vol.  vii.  p.  301),  1846,  without  any  indication  of  its  origin.  This 
also  is  clearly  not  based  on  the  Admiralty  plan,  for  Gravina's 
squadron  is  shown  prolonging  the  rear,  and  not  passing  up  to 
leeward,  as  in  Magendie's  ;  while  in  the  British  fleet  Britannia  is 
fourth  in  Nelson's  line,  and  Dreadnought  is  leading  Collingwood's 
second  division.  Moreover,  it  shows  the  irregularity  in  Nelson's 
van,  but  not  quite  in  the  same  way  as  the  Craig  plan. 

In  endeavouring  to  prove  that  Nelson's  attack  was  not 
practically  vertical,  some  writers  would  discard  the  testimony  of 
the  existing  plans.  A  letter  of  Captain  Moorsom's  is  quoted,  in 
which  he  says  :  "  I  have  seen  several  plans  of  the  action,  but  none 
to  answer  my  ideas  of  it.  Indeed,  scarce  any  plans  can  be  given. 
It  was  irregular,  and  the  ships  got  down  as  fast  as  they  could  and 
into  any  space  when  they  found  the  enemy,  without  attending  to 
their  place  in  the  line."  On  this  three  remarks  arise.  1.  The 
letter  was  written  from  Spithead  on  December  4th,  before  the 
Craig  plan  was  published.  2.  He  is  clearly  referring  not  to  the 
general  plan  of  attack,  but  to  the  positions  of  individual  units 
in  action.  3.  In  a  previous  letter  from  Gibraltar,  November  1st, 
he  himself  gave  a  rough  diagram  showing  the  British  fleet  ^' going 
down  in  two  columns  pointing  towards  the  centre,"  and  only 
slightly  inclined  from  the  perpendicular.  (See  Great  Sea  Fights, 
ii.  p.  242,  where  the  diagram  is  omitted.  The  original  is  in  the 
possession  of  Lady  Longmore.) 


APPENDIX   F 


SCHEDULE    OF   SIGNALS    MADE    AT   TRAFALGAR 

Foil  tlie  tactics  of  any  battle  the  primary  autliority  must  always 
be  the  signals  actually  recorded.  An  attempt,  therefore,  has  been 
made  below  to  tabulate  the  whole  of  the  signals  entered  in  the 
logs  and  journals  of  the  ships,  with  their  signification,  number, 
ship  by  whom  made,  and  ship  or  ships  to  whom  made.  To  each  is 
appended  the  particular  log  or  logs  in  which  it  is  found,  with  the 
time  of  making  as  recorded  by  the  different  ships. 

With  regard  to  these  "  logs,"  it  should  be  remembered  that 
the  official  record  of  a  ship's  movements  and  of  the  events  that 
transpire  on  board  is  the  log  hook.  At  the  time  of  Trafalgar  the 
ship's  log  hook  was  kept  by  the  master,  who  was  the  navigating 
officer.  It  is  therefore  known  as  the  masters  log.  The  master,  in 
common  with  the  other  officers,  was  also  required  to  keep  '*  an 
exact  and  perfect  journal."  When  the  ship  was  paid  olf  he  had  to 
deliver  a  copy  of  the  log  and  of  the  journal  to  the  Navy  Office.  As 
a  rule  the  masters'  journals  were  simply  copies  of  the  log,  made 
solely  to  comply  with  the  regulations.  In  certain  cases,  of  which 
the  Temeraire  is  the  most  striking  instance,  the  log  contains  many 
important  signals  omitted  from  the  journal.  Both  have  been 
denoted  by  the  letter  ''  M." 

The  captain  and  lieutenants  were  also  bound  to  keep  journals, 
and  deliver  signed  copies  at  stated  intervals.  The  lieutenants' 
journals  have  not  as  a  rule  been  preserved.  The  captains^journalsy 
which,  together  with  the  logs,  are  now  in  the  Public  Record  Office, 
are  denoted  by  the  letter  "■  C."  The  letter  "  N,"  which  will  be 
found  in  two  cases,  signifies  that  the  entry  is  taken  from  logs 
given  by  Nicolas  in  his  Nelsons  Despatches  (vol.  vii.),  the  originals 
of  which  have  not  been  found  in  the  Record  Office. 

The  schedule  only  extends  to  mid-day,  when  the  action  became 
general. 


o 


o 

H 
O 
O 


Gvl 


H  O 

O     r^ 

>< 

O 

I— I 
in 


^3 


i^kS 


pq 


^.  o  p  q  Ci 

CC  O  O  'O 


o  ■^  >o  o 
<=>  C-.  --1  ^.  '-t  ■-! 

CO  CO  O  ^  CO 


iLi    til        r■^    r,  1 1  J^    '-^, I 


^  i^  >^  2  O  c^ 
pqfq<lgOC 


ai 


be 

o    . 


o  O  O  iw  o 
p  <M_  (N  CO  c>o  •<*;  p  p 

CO  CO  CO  to  CO  o  t^  t^ 


^  a  ^  "^  c^ 

d  2    O  4^  re! 

•2.9  b^  o 


455 


^  20 


=^S 
S  - 


:z^^  ^tc  f3-2  fi^v. 
pq  pq  <!  Q  O  ;zi  ;z;  pq 


a 

o 

o 

a 

o 

a 

O    bD 

a,S 

a 

Pi 

-  'fi 

^  ^ 

o    &, 

O 

- 

^3 


bfj 


o 
o 

c 


<M  lO  O  O  CO  lO 

■^TTIOIOOO         <M<M 

o  to  ?o  CO  h-I  i>^       r-  t^ 


O         »0        CO 

T^H  q  TjK      Tti 
r-'  00  t-^       i-^ 


^H      jW    ^    .rH    t|_,       t-i 

<u  -r^  o  a  a>  a 


*= 

r^ 

% 

o 

2 

rt 

d 

iz; 

S 

w 

-a; 

C53 

rr 

r— ' 

o 

'     a 

-0) 

a 

(^  2 

a 

_C3 

ij 

HH 

rn 

>^ 

cq 

^"^ 

^  "■     — ■ 

-C 

^ 

^ 

o 

to 

^r. 

T. 

be 

"-! 

cc 

^T. 

Britann] 

Prince 

Dreadnc 

.5  <^ 

b 

3 

8.S 

(^ 

£<S 

CCM 

o 
o 


o 
o 


fcfi 


OS 

be 


o^ 


.a  c 


CD 
b/D  C 


^  ::^  '^  .a 

■=!  C  rt  O 
W    O    bf;  '^ 

aj  >  (D  c^ 

rt  o  ^  *; 
-^^  o  3  o 
P-.-ji  o  "t: 

^  ar'^ 

'^^  w  .S  w 
H 


£3      . 

rt  bo 
O  ^ 

o  ^ 


«    O 

if  §6 

-  ri.a 

H 


456 


o  "-'-. 
'^^^  ^ 

^    CD 

05  a3  !^ 
•9  1^  ^' 


«3   rt 

o  - 

S3  - 

0  M   cS 

1  ^.^ 
bio  w  (c 


Is  2- 

cl  to        o:- 
C   1:3  c«  -^f 


o  ^   ^  ^   bi),±? 

-^       ?3  -^  o  ri 

o 


m 


;zj.2  fl 


c/i    rt 


2     .    C3  ^-'ft-g 
ri   o3   tfi   Oj   p3  o 


CO  00 


3-1 


OS 


0)  a 


a> 

hn 

Q< 

o 

'H 

.22 

cri 

> 

O 

Q 

rt 

uj 

o 

^^ 

^  a 

<U  'CD 


e3    > 


OQ 

111  > 


O 

<D 

"a> 


35 


> 
o 
m 

d 

-r!    bC 


OJ 


o   ^ 


eg  o 

o  o<^ 
d  ^:S 


•— '    4-J     TO 


0)  r^ 


ftd  bet: 

O    d)    O)    ^ 
^  ri4  ^    g 


O    (« 

c^  bo 

/2.r 


I, 

o 

r   <^  1 


^ 


S    5-    o 


g   ^   « 


^    bD^ 

•r:  o 


.s^5 


br)05 


d  B 


O    (-1    cu 

7.  .B^o 


la 

go 


457 


U2 

< 

O 

I— I 

U2 


..'^ 

u   f, 

O  CO 

o  w 

CM  (M 

w  CO 

Ci  Oi 

OS  CI 

O 

o 

=«,3! 

^•^ 

bo 

St 

st 

vJ 

'to    g 

3  s 

<u  -o 

S^D 

:=3  a 

^  a 

cu  va) 

0)    vg 

PQH 

«H 

CO  00 
c;  cJ 


o 

2s 

3 

£ 

.-^  s 

g 

»S 

^  a 

g 

i^~^^ 

WH 

&H 

a 

o 

j3 

-d 

O   -u; 

o 

cS 

^ 

:2g 

t« 

"ui 

^ 

o 

:r3  S3 
O  o 

O) 

.52 

> 

CQir^ 

CQ 

cq 

^ 

a 

> 

p 

p 

o     • 

o 

o 

rt    Q^' 

m 

GO 

cc 

^1 

d 

fl 

fl 

>^ 

^   bD 

,_, 

^rl 

f— 1   be 

.^■^ 

c3 

o' 

0) 

&•§ 

o 

« 

K 

a^ 

fc^ 

"« "i. 


o 


CO  CO  "^ 


-  ^^^ : 

rt    c^    C    S 
cu  «-.  ^  .^ 

q_i     O    eo 

a  S3  ^  ^  .S 
-a  ^:  .^^^  ^ 

c3  ■-  r  «  i 

^   5; 


fcH    rj    X    aj 

O    §    «S    c« 
.1-1 ,  ro 

§ii.§a 
:2"a8 

>   03^3 
Cud  M 

«i    O    P    pj 
t.  ^  P  o 

•^  en  ^    Ph  M 


^      „. 

^  "l^ 

with 
rair 
nan 

eship 
signal 
this 
ed. 
rcum- 

-^^ 

8   ■" 

?qiiire  to  m 
hip  to  take 
out  for  her. 

on  astern  of  tb 
stinguishing 
shown    after 
s  been  answer 
re  to  act  as  ci 

may  r 
or  the  s 
pointed 

stati 
se  di 

be 
al  ha 
ips  a 

2  =.-2 

rt  0  --  c  <; 

0)  ^  .-;::   be  =^ 

5  S  « 

^  ^  ^-s^ 

CO     ;>     OJ 

H                 ^ 

458 


Iso     recorded     by 
Captain    Moorsom 
of  the  Revenge  (see 
Zor/s  of  Great   Sea 
Fights,  ii.   p.   244). 
In  neither  place  is 

1 

4  oS 

cue 

a. 2 

o  c 

<! 

-' 

o 

o 

I— 1 

O  <N 

'^ 

'*'=^. 

■<ti 

^    Tt* 

^  a,  lo  2  - 

gis  c^  §  .. 

-tJ  Q    13     f^    G 


lO  lO   i-H 

oi  o  O 


g 

(U 

O 

rt 

hn 

MJ 

fl 

s:3 

"■© 

fl> 

HK 

o 

«« 

g 

s 

m 

H 

(D 

~(11 

MH 

F^     O 

a  ^  c 


m-ii 


> 
o 
m 

a 

r-i  be 


<L> 


o 


CO      CD  g 

rt    O    O) 


o 
d 


P5 


o 
o 


(M    o  d  ^ 


o  a  § 


rd       1^ 

o  -^    ^ 


c3  d 

d  f^ 

o  Ph 

rt  :: 
o 

«d 

.-(  o 

d  ^ 

CO  ^         i_, 

2^  d :; 

§     *  d     '^ 

Ord  c3  TS 

H 


4^0:=; 

w   ^    f^ 

=«   ^   S 
Ci,  d 

<u  "d   be 

■^     M     CO 


'I'    OJ    ^    Sh" 


72  (i5 


bx)  a 


bo 


O    c« 


^   -^     '-^  O) 

S  o  "S  > 


c^  o 
^^ 

.  d 

(V)  O 

O  Pw 

o)  d 

:S  a 


:$  s^ 


^  -^  s^ 


bc^   2r   e  ' 


459 


a 


bC**:^   boo   ^   ^    _ 

O   O   £-.  -M   cs   c3  X> 


<o 


ro  a  o 


::i  ?nrt  S; 


^d 


o 


^        d  a  <i^  ':t  C 


•-  .,  2 


■tJ    *-"    Qj 


rf    O 


'■'^  rP  ii 


U.H 


■^  ^  7^  -i       h<       "C   «  S7^  K    o  fli  15  -^  ^  °P 
^        *-:«^        S  a  "^  ^'^^  ^  rt  *"  «  " 


w  13 


i^ u rt03S5^ 


o  o  -^ 


ca  c: 


.s'^ 

s& 

^ 

^2 

O 
I— 1 

o      o 

i-H            1— ( 

>, 

o 

o 

^   § 

^    s 

^ 

<^ 

< 

^^ 

^ 

s  ^ 

h4 

o 

o       ;;;;^ 

o 
o 

c 
bo 


o         ^^ 


^   g   «  ~  -p 

"^  XJ  'c  S  2 

a;  (D  ^  S  "5 

o  -^  -<  "^  ■" 


-II 


4 


|s 

n3 

o 
13 

g 

i 

d 

O 
■♦J 

^ 

l1 

^ 

2 

s 

a> 

W 

C4 

-1-3 

;-4 

:^i 

00 

(U  ew 

o 

o   ^ 

00 

1 

73 

o 

1 « 

pq 

m 

« 

-» 

CO 

lO  »o  »o 

(M 

d 

o 

o 

»o 

N 

lO  lO 

rH 

'>i  iq 

0? 

--H  " 

riH 

W3 

lO 

rH 

o    ■ 

,— 1 

rH 

r— i  1— H 

^ 

»H  =" 

^ 

<-i 

^ 

""* 

*"• 

■"* 

»H 

I— 1  rH 

'"' 

•"• 

I— ( 

iH 

rH 

Q 

O 

o 

1^ 

^ 
s 

1^ 

*s 

a 

.2  a 

.2 

02 

P 

0 

a 

H 

-3l 

^OOH 

o 

^CP 

W 

W 

H 

CD 

GO 

r^ 

O 

1 

a 

2 

P 

1 

_o 

^£ 

'o 

d 

Q 

^ 

O 

o 

cq 

o 

o 

o 

> 

> 

o 

o 

CO 

m 

h 

h 

4) 

a 

b 

d 

>-. 

o 

o 
o 

0) 

IS 

1 

r-H      tlD 

I'S 

o 
o 

> 

> 

p 

p^ 

t^ 

P3 

> 

a> 

r- 

(M 

oo 

^a 

o 

t-~. 

i 

o 

CO 

00 

00 

lO 

o 

CO 

% 

H 

^ 

^ 

,G  iJ  bo 

^ 

4-2 

- 

'% 

<D 

o 

-i^    f>>  U) 

<I> 

3  M 

§ 

oia 

5  =« 

if 

5- 

?§£ 

f-^ 

il 

ph  a 

p.a 

„ 

rg 

S^a 

a; 

'ake    all    sail 
safety  to  the 
ippc7idix.) 

:: 

i 

6 

a 

1 
a 

0) 

03 

■ggg 
1-5 

2 

o 

o 
o 

.a 

O 

S 

^ 

< 

^ 

HH 

w 

!^ 

46 


a 

CO 

S 

o 

o 

9i  a>     ;      i.o  KO  O  oc  -o       o       ci  :i>                                          o  O  o       O       o 

a     be                CI   CO   -^   Tf<   »0  O   r-H            CO    -^   O  O   O  O  O   O  O    O   r-l   r-(   r-t            O  O   -^ 

^  gj         ^  ,_;  r-J  ^'  r-H*  c<i  oi      .-i  .-H  ci  ci  ci  ci  c-i  oi  ci  ci  c-i  oi  ci      -^  oi  ci 

th 

o 
h-5 

Orion  C 
Naiad  M 
Neptune  'SL 
Defence  :\I  &  C 
Euryalus 
Defiance  M  &  C 
Revenge  M 

Africa  C 
Neptune  M 
Bellerophon  M 
Naiad  M 
Orion  M  &  C 
Euryalus  M 
Dreadnoujxht  M 
Ajax  C 
Defence  M 
Ajax  M 
Temcraire  M 
Conqueror  M  ^ 
Defiance  M 

Neptune 
Temcraire  M  L 
Conqueror  M 

To  Whom. 

0) 

11                                                      1 
a                             a                                                   B 

B 

il 

Signal. 

a 

Telegraph 
message 

Preparative 
with  63 

269 
Victory's  pen- 
nants 

Signification  in  Signal  Book. 

1 

1  England    expects    that    every 
man  will  do  his  duty. 

1 

1 

I  Prepare  to   anchor    after  the 
close  of  day. 

i 

Take  a  station  astern  of  the 
ship    whose    distinguishing 
signal  will  be  shown  .  .   . 

462 


10?DOOCO»0»0000000 
lOlOi-HrHi-lrHrHr-JrH<NC<ICO 

,-H  i-i  c4  c<i  <m'  c<i  (m'  c<i  oi  M  c4  csj 


lO  CD  O  O 
<N  IM  00  CO 

c<i  (N  c<i  oi 


^ 


<L> 


fp  ;zi  H  -<  W  0.<!  <i3  <3  ^  w  o 


»  5  ^ 


-05 


1-^ 


O)    Cj     QJ 


c3 

h^ 

O 

(P 

f-( 

fl 

< 

o 

Cl> 

o 

O 

a 

a 

S>i 

>^, 

a 

a 

0) 

o 

^ 

r^ 

-t-3 

+J 

k. 

t^. 

o  "3 

be  M 

^o 

^O 

f^ 

w 

a 


463 


i 


INDEX 


AchiUe  (74),  371 

Acton,  Gen.  Sir  John,  155 

Addington,    Henry,    Viscount     iSid- 

mouth,  2-5,  71-2 
Admiralty,  methods  of  war  direction, 

14,    184    n.  ;    civil    staff   of,    289 ; 

Barham's  organisation  of,  82,  85-8 
Adriatic,  command  of,  176 
Advanced    Squadrons,   334,    338-40, 

346,  351,  356-8 
J^Jolus  (32),  216.  218-9,  221,  402 
uEtna.  bomb,  93  n 
Affleck,  V.-Ad.  Philip,  71 
Africa  (64),  300,  385,  389-^)0 
Agamemnon  (64),  197  n.,   315-6,  330, 

334  n.,  357 
Air/le  (Fr.  74),  68 
AimaUe{^2),  312,  315 
Ajax  (74),  195-202,  357,  390 
Alexander    I.,   Czar  of  Russia,  6,  7, 

116,232-3.     See  also  "Russia 
Alge^iras,  flotilla  at,  57,  62,  147-53 
Allemand.Commodore  Zacharie  I.  T., 

Comte,  175;  his  cruise,  188,  213-9, 

247,  263,  267-9  ;  leaves  Vigo,  301- 

2  ;      further     operations,    304-10, 

399-401,    405-7  ;      treatment      of 

neutrals,  214 
Amazon   (38),   91,    93,  96,    99,   103-6, 

108,  155,  265-6,  306 
Ambleteuse,  11.     See  also  Flotilla 
Amiens,  Peace  of,  1,  3,  5,  6,  58 
Amphion  (32),  G6,  105,  108 
Anrep,  General  (C.-in-C,  Corfu),  273 
Anson,  Adra.  Lord,  12 
Antigua,  131,  159,  160,  165-8 
Apulia,  Fr.  occupation  of,  58.  See  aho 

St.  Cyr 
Armament  of  ships,  one-calibre,  47-8. 

See  also  Carronades 
Armlde  (Fr.  40),  217 
Army,  British,  4,  7,  9-10  ;  "  disposal 

force"    of,  274,  277  n.,  409,  4! 3, 

416-7  ;  co-operation  with  fleet,  4, 

25,    113,    161,    291;    assisting-   in 

dockyards,  76 
Attack  (12),  267 


Austerlitz,  battle  of,  415  ;  campaign 

of,  see  Napoleon 
Austria,  policy  of,   10,  16,  18-20,  25, 

35,  118,  127,  129,  232,  241-4,  273, 

284,  289-90,  319,  416-7,  Appendix 

A  and  B 


B 


Baird,  Gen.  Sir  David,  his  expedition, 
235,  274,  292;  sails,  302;  his 
narrow  escape,  309  ;  316,  405,  420  ; 
occupies  the  Cape,  424 

Baker,  Capt.  Thomas  {Phanix),  201-n, 
400-3,  422 

Ball,  Capt.  Sir  Alex.,  Gov.  of  Malta, 
32,  58,  176 

Barbadoes,  island  of,  29.  75,  77,  131 

Barhadoes  (28),  166  n.,  169  n. 

Barbe-Marbois,  Francois,  Marquis  de 
(Fr.  Finance  Minister),  136 

Barbuda,  159,  160,  165 

Barjieur  (98),  197  n. 

Barham,  Adm.  Sir  Charles  Middleton, 
Lord  (First  Lord  of  Admiralty),  15  ; 
his  service,  69-71 ;  appointment, 
71-2,  81  ;  resignation,  421-2  ;  his 
orders,  74,  81-4,  112-4,  118-23, 
144-7,  182-4,  215,  227-31,  246, 
249-52,  279,  304,  310  ;  his  appre- 
ciations, 173-181,  303,  321 ;  organi- 
sation of  Admiralty,  82-8 ;  of 
cruiser  system,  297-300;  opinion 
of  Nelson,  280-2 

Bayntun,  Capt.  William  Henry 
[Leviathan),  208 

Beaqle  (18),  66,  101,  111-3,  152-3 

Belicisle  (74),  104,  163,  334  n.,  355, 
357,  371,  374,  388 

Bellerophon  (74),  152  n.,  334  n.,  388 

Belliqueux  (74),  309  a. 

Bellona  (74),  402-3 

Bernadotte,  Marshal,  408 

Berry,  Capt.  Sir  Edw.  {A(/amem7ion), 
31*5  7t.,  330 

Bertheaume  Road,  53  ;  action  in,  260 

Berthier,  Marshal,  136,  276-7 
j   Bettesworth,      Capt.      Edm.     Byron 
I        {Curicux),  162,  168,  181,  184 

4^5  2  G 


466 


INDEX 


Beurnonville,  General  (Fr.   Amb.   at 

Madrid),  25(5 
Bicker!  on,  II.- Ad,  Sir  Richard,  Acting 

C.-in-C,   Mediterranean,    99,    107, 

114,   147-52,  176,   209-10,    270-1, 

289,  307 
Bigot   de   Morogues,   Capt.,  45,   1G2, 

:J51 
Blackwood,  Cajit.   Jlenry  {Kitri/(duH), 

2G5-C),  270,  278,  288,  29G,  ;il7,  320, 

328-9,  333,  337,  373,  383 
Block-ships,  11,  12(i 
Blockade,   conditions  of,  133-4,  140. 

320;  commercial,  27,  210,  218 
Blvicher,  General,  414 
Boadiceu  (38),  400 
Boards,  under  Adniiralt)',  86 
Bordeaux,  27 
Boulogne,  H.-Q.  of  Army  of  England, 

11,   30,  129,  190,  219  ;  defence  of, 

277,  321 
Boyles,Capt.  Charles ( Winchor  disth), 

197  n. 
Brace,  Capt.  Edvv.  {Iris),  250  n. 
Bremen,  British  occupation  of,  417, 

420 
Brereton,  Brig.-Gen,  Robert,  C.-in-C, 

St.  Lucia,  161-2 
Brest,  blockade  of,  12,  14,  52,  120-1, 

302.     See  Cornwallis,  Cotton,  and 

Gardner 
Britannia  (100),  334,  354,  303 
Brown,  Capt.  William  {Ajax),  195-202 
Bucnitaure     (80),   55,    322-4,    385-6, 

390,  393,  397 
Buckinghamshire,     Robert      Hobart, 

4th  Earl  of,  72 
Buller,  Capt.  Edm.  (Malta),  197  n. 
Bunbur^,  Col    Sir   Henry,  Q.-M.-G., 

51,  4i8 
Burn,  Capt.  John  {Beagle),  111-3 
Byng,  Adm.  John,  75,  350 


Cabril,  Fort  (Dominica),  125 

Cadiz,  blockade  of,  17,  29,  39,  40, 
49,  62,  231 ;  arsenal,  135.  See  also 
Oi-de,  Collingwood,  Nelson 

Ca'sar  (80),  185,  312  n.,  402-5 

Calabria,  6,  7,  9,  418-9,  423 

Calcutta  (54),  119  n.  ;  capture  of, 
311-2,  407 

Calder,  V.-Ad.  Sir  Robert,  29,  30,  52, 
54,  67,  74,  83,  112.  114-5,  146-8, 
175-6,  181-4,  186,  211-2;  his  cast 
for  Missiessy,  121-2 ;  his  action 
with  Villeneuve,  44,  193-204  ; 
its  sequel,  205-7,  215-7  ;  his  cast 


for  Allemand,  218-9 ;  closes  on 
Ushant,  219  ;  detached  in  search 
of  Villeneuve,  247-9,  267-71  ; 
blockades  him  in  Cadiz,  278  ;  sent 
home,  330 

Cambact'Tos,  J.  J.  Regis  de,  Arch- 
Chancellor  of  France,  80,  136 

Camden,  Earl,  Sec.  for  War,  49,  l.';4 

Campbell,  R.-Ad.  Donald,  101,  104-5, 
112,  152 

Campbell,  Capt.  Patrick  {Doris),  27-8 

Canning,  Right  Hon.  George,  292 

Canopns  (80),  163,  247,  32u 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  as  outpost  of 
India,  36,  235-7  ;  captured,  424 

Cape  Verde  Islands,  as  intelligence 
centre,  29 

Capel,  Capt.  Hon.  T.  Bladen  (Phcehe), 
94,  176 

Carr,  Commander  Wm.  (Netlcy), 
166,  169 

Carronades,  47-8,  224  n. 

Cartagena,  effect  of  squadron  at,  52, 
56,  61,  76, 133-4, 147-153,  176,  270, 
327  8 

Castlereagh,  Rob.  Stewart,  Viscount, 
71,  236,  274,  283,  318,  320,  409,  413, 
420 

Cathcart,  General  Chas.  Murra)^  2nd 
Earl  of,  414-7,  420 

Crntaur  (74),  126 

CWbcrus  (32),  247  ri. 

Channel  Islands  Cruiser  Squadron,  11 

Channel  Fleet.  .S'ee  Western  Squadron 

Charles,  Archduke,  282,  412,  415-6 

Coalition,  the  Third,  origin  of,  6,  7, 
16;  its  progress  and  intention, 
232-4,  282,  410-2,  415.  See  also 
Appendix  A  and  B. 

Cobeuzl,  Philip  Graf  von,  209,  319 

Godrington,  Capt.  Edw.  {Orion),  251, 
336,  343,  357-8,  380-1 

Cochrane,  R.-Ad.  Sir  Alexander,  17, 
30,  75,  77,  113,  132,  139,  155-7, 
160,  162,  167,  170-1,  303 

Combined  expeditions,  method  of 
pi'otecting  over  uncoramanded 
seas,  51-2,  83-4,  89-92,  107-8, 
152-3,  176,  309  ;  strategical  use 
of,  79-81,  128,  134,  138,  142, 
173-4,  187,  227,  274,  283-4,  291-3, 
295-6 

Commerce,  protection  and  destruction 
of,  3,  51, 119,  252,  279,293,  303-16. 
See  also  Convoys 

Collingwood,  V.-Ad.  Cuthbert,  43, 
76-8.  110,  113-5,  117-23;  off 
Cadiz.  142,  149-53,  176  7,  269-71, 
318;  at  Trafalgar,  348-51,  354-6, 
361-96;     C.-in-C,  Mediterranean, 


I 


INDEX 


467 


397-400;  his  strategy  and  appre- 
ciations, 151-2,  178,  209-10,  328, 
331,338,  342,  398-9 

Colossus  (74),  334  w.,  357,  388 

CoDgreve,  CoL,  his  rockets,  318,  321 

Conqiceror{74:),  l(i3 

Constantinople,  17(5,  234-5 

Convoys,  as  strategical  factors,  57, 
62,  93, 165-6,  278-9, 302-4  ;  attacks 
on,  57,  166,  311,  315.  See  also 
Commerce 

Coote,  Gen.  Sir  Eyre,  79,  119,  144, 
178,  235 

Corfu,  Kussians  at,  5,  6,  10,  58,  232, 
432  ;  their  squadron  at,  176 

Cork,  H.-Q.  Irish  station,  79,  265, 
299,  302 

Cornwallis,  Charles,  1st  Marquis, 
Gov. -Gen.  of  India,  81 ;  his  instruc- 
tions, 236-7,  312-3 

Cornwalhs,  Ad.  William,  11-15,  29, 
43,  52,172,  181-4,  230,  279,  301-2  ; 
his  movement  to  meet  Villeneuve, 
185-7,  191-2;  divides  his  fleet, 
246-59,  277  ;  attacks  Ganteaume, 
260-1 ;  operations  against  AUe- 
mand,  302-4,  307,  312-3 

Corsica,  136 

Coruna,  171 

Cosmao-Kerjulien,  Capt.  J.  M. 
Baron  de,  158,  397 

Cotton,  Ad.  Sir  Charles,  12,  52-4, 
249   288 

Courngcux  (74),  312  n.,  402-5 

Courier,  cutter,  290 

Craig,  Lieut. -Gen.  Sir  James,  10, 
23-4,  148-9,  154,  210,  232,  234, 
413,  418-9,  423  ;  his  expedition, 
42,  49-52,  58,  73-5, 78-9,  83,  89-92, 
97  ;  at  Lisbon,  101-3,  107,  116  ; 
meets  Nelson,  107-8,111,  137;  at 
Gibraltar,  134,  142,  147-9,  152-3  ; 
Spanish  fear  of,  134,  138  ;  progress 
of,  176,  273,  283-4,  289,  290,  295, 
318-9,  320,  325-8,  330-1  ;  at 
Naples,  412-3,  418-9  ;  at  Messina, 
419-21 ;  Napoleon  on,  135-8,  274-5 
Cruisers,  stripped  to  man  battleships, 

77  ;  as  battle  units,  403-4 
Cruiser-lines,  299-301,  317,  330 
Cruiser  squadrons,  11,  94,  161,    172, 
210,  228,  252,  265,  293,  303,  325-6, 
329  331 
Cruiser  work,  27-8,  31-2,  56,  59-60, 
77-8,    90-1,    111-3,    119-121,    166, 
216-9,    221-5,    229,    249    n.,    256, 
258-9,    262-70,    311-3,    333,    340, 
400-2 
Cuming,    Capt.    William    {Prince  of 
Wales),  197  n. 


Curieux  (18),  162,  168,  181,  183,  211. 
217.  228 


D 


Dacres,      R.-Ad.     James      Richard, 

C.-in-C,  Jamaica,  30,  75,  77,  157 
Daru,  Count,  244 

Dcmdc  (36),  91,  97,  108,  195,  208,  307 
Decrcs,  V.-Adm.,  French  Minister  of 

Marine,  35,  47,  1.38,  145,  177,221, 

275-6,  292,  325,  380  ;  his  warnings 

to  Napoleon,  139-41,  275-6 
Defence  (74),  180,  231  n.,  334  n.,  357 
Defiance  (74),  195-7 
Diadem  (64),  309  n. 
Diamond   Rock  (Martinique),  125-6, 

157-8,  159-60,  104,  174 
Didon{m,  132, 158  ;  captured,  221-5, 

157-8,  159-60,  164,  174 
Diligent,  storeship,  312,  330 
Diomede  (50),  307  n. 
Discretion  of  Admirals,  114-5, 122-3, 

144,  146 
Disguising  ships,  223 
Dominica,  80,  124-5,  128,  131,  157 
Don,  Maj.-Gen.  George,  411,  414-5 
Donegal  (74),  163,  232  n.,  398 
Doris  (36),  27-8 
Douglas,     R.-Ad.     William     Henry 

("Billy"),  229 
Dragon  (74),  49,  97,  146,  194,   196-7, 

2i2,  219,  225,  240,  247,  249,  261-3, 

304  71. 
Dreadnought  (98),  43,  45  ?i.,  77,  334, 

354,  388,  392 
Drury,R.-Adm.,  144,  228,265,  266  7i., 

296,  299 
Dryad  (36),  400 
Duff,  Capt.  George  [Mars),  327,  333-4, 

337 
Duguay-Trouin  (Fr.  74),  401-4 
Dumanoir,  Le  Pelley,  R.-Ad.,  389-93  ; 

his  action  with  Strachan,  400-5 
Dumouriez,  General,  25-6,  287,389-93 
Dundas,  Capt.  Thomas  {Naiad),  259, 

265  n. 
Dunkirk  flotilla  depot,  229 
Durham,  Capt.  Philip  C.   (Defiance), 

197  n. 
Duroc,  Michel,  Grand  Master  of  the 

Palace,  277 
Dutch  West  Indies,  17 


E 


Egypt,  its  deflection  of  British 
'strategy,  33,  51,  54-5,  57-8,  76,  78, 
89,  111,  117,  130,  132,  158 


468 


INDEX 


Ekins,  Sir  Charles,  345 

Elba,  25,  43P. 

Elbe,   operations  on,  285,   400,  411, 

414-7 
Elliot,  Mr.   Hugh,   Brit.   Minister  at 

Naples,  50,   58,    91,  283,  290,  31!', 

398,  412-3,  415-(i 
Emms  river,  operations  on.    Sec  Elbe 
Efecaiio,    Capt.    Antonio   de,    199   7t., 
,  258,  2(i4,  323-4,  346 
Etaples,  11 
Eurji<dus  (38),  2G5-G,   270,   278,  339, 

374 


Felix  (12),  27-8 

Ferdinand  IV.,  King  of  Naples,  50, 

58,  412,  421 
Eerrol,  blockade  of,  IJ,  14,  30,  34,  39, 

40,  54,  83-4,  97,  132, 146,  175,  187, 

212,  215-6,  218;  raised,  219,225; 
its  squadron,  129 

Finisterre,  rendezvous,   116,    211    n., 

213,  219,  221,  299 
Fisyard  (38),  73-4,  97 
Fitzgerald,  Lord  Kobert,  Brit.  Minister 

at  Lisbon,  100-31,  115 
Fitzroy,  Capt.  Lord  William  {JHolus), 

221-3 
Flotillas,   British   defence,    11,  229  ; 

Napoleon's,  11,  15  n.,  16,  38;  final 

state  of,  190-1,  229  ;   demobilised, 

277-8,    292;    at   Cadiz,    322.     See 

aho  Cartagena  and  Alge9iras 
Flying  Squadron,  43,  76-9, 110, 113-5, 

117-23,  128.     See  aho  CoUingwood 
Formentara,  90-1 
Fort  de  France.     Sec  Martinique 
Fouchc,      Joseph,     Due     d'Otrante, 

Minister  of  Police,  136-7 
Foudroyiint  (80),  123  n. 
Fouguiux  (Fr.  74),  397 
Fox,  Charles  James,  81,  319-20;  in 

office,  421-3 
Fox,'Lt.-Gen.  Hon.  Edward,  C.-in-C, 

Gibraltar,  152,  318 
"Francis,"  Mr.,  331 
Fremantle,      Capt.     Thos.      Francis 

[Neptune),  383 
Fulton,  Robert.     See  '*  Francis  " 


Gaeta,  423 

Galiano,  Brig. -General,  324 

Galita,  59 

Galleons,  seizure  of  Spanish,  17 

Gambler,  V.-Adm.,  71,  85,  184,  269       | 


Gambler,  Mr.,  Consul  at  Lisbon,  101-2, 
269-70 

Ganteaume,  V.-Adm.  Honore,  Comte, 
J 8,  34,  36,  39-41,  43-4.  46,  49, 
52-4,  120,  129,  130,  134,  177-8, 
186  ;  tries  to  get  to  sea,  260 ;  ap- 
preciation by,  188 

Gardner,  Adni.  Alan,  Lord,  54,  63, 
76-8,  83-4,  99,  106.  113-6,  120, 
144-6,  172,  299,  303 

Gardner,  Capt.  Hon.  Alan  Hyde 
[Hero),  197  n.,  199 

Genoa,  naval  base  at,  172 

George  III.,  72,  319,  421 

Gibraltar,  7,  8,  21,  49,  93-4,  210 

Glory  (98),  65  n.,  175,  197  n.,  204, 
304  n. 

Godoy,  Manuel,  Principe  de  la  Pnz 
131,  134 

(ioliath  (74),  180,  231  n.,  240,  247,  249 

Gourdon,  R.-Adm.,  39,  129,  175,  212 

Grandallana,  General  (Adm.),  Do- 
mingo de,  129,  175 

Graves,  R.-Adm.  Sir  Thomas,  27-8, 
53,  122,  144-5,  175  ;  Sea  Lord,  71 

Gravina,  Lt.-Gen.  Frederico,  C.-in-C, 
Cadiz  squadron,  62,  67-8,  167;  in 
Calder's  action,  197-202,  205;  at 
Coruua,  220;  at  Cadiz,  271,  338; 
at  Trafalgar,  360,  369,  390-3  ;  ap- 
preciations by,  219-20,  266,  322-4 
Greece,  Turkish  Province,  5,  54 

Greig,  Commodore  (Russian),  418 
Grenville,  William,  70 
Grey,  Charles,  Earl,  422  n. 
Griffith,  Capt.  Edw.  {Dragon),  197  «., 

262 
Guadaloupe,  125,  168 


H 


Hallowell,  Capt,  Benjamin  (Thjre),  89 
Hamcln,  277.  408,  414,  417 
Hanover,  10,  20,  273,  277,  408  ;  troops 

from,  283,  409,  414 
Hargood,    Capt.    William    (Bdlcisle), 

104 
Harrowby,   Dudley  Ryder,  2nd  P^arl 

of,  Sec.  of  State,  8,  23,  411,  414-5, 

420 
Harvey,  Capt.  John  [Teniirairc),  197  n., 

343" 
Havana,  169 
Hawes,  Commander  James  {Aimable), 

312 
Plawke's  attack,  373 
Ba^^rrd  (18),  259 

Jlero  (74),  197  n.,  199,  312  n.,  402-5 
Ilibcrnia  (120),  40  n. 


INDEX 


469 


Holloway,     E.-Adra.     John     (Nore), 

229  n. 
Home  defence,  10,  229  n.,  239,  203. 

See  also  Flotilla 
Hood,  Adm.   Samuel,   Viscount,  71, 

287 
Hood,  Commodore  Samuel,  C.-in-C, 

Leeward  Islands,  29,  150 
Hope,  Capt.  George  {Defence),  343 
Howe,  Adm.  Earl,  70,  193 
Hythe  Canal,  10  n. 


Illustrious  (74),  170,  130,  311 
Indefatigahh  (44),  42,  400  n.,  402 
India,  its  influence  on  the  campaign, 

5,  36,  79,  81,  117,  114,  279 
Inman,  Capt.  'Kenxy  {Triumpli),  197  n. 
Intelligence,  54,  56,  73-4,  77,  82,  101, 
105-(3,  110.  13G,  175,  178,  195,  211, 
227 ;    Napoleon's    department   for, 
242  «.,  277 
Invasion,  Napoleon's  threat  of,  1,  11, 
13,    15 ;    abandoned,    IG,    19  ;    re- 
sumed,   20,    25-G,    35-42;     again 
abandoned,   275-7 ;    news  thereof 
in  England,  289,  290;    legend  of, 
293.     See  also  Home  Defence 
Ionian  Islands.     Sec  Corfu 
Ireland,  as  possible  objective,  14,  18, 
9G,   107,   139,   173,    177,    213,   227, 
259  ;  signal  stations  in,  228  n. 
Iris  (32),  258-9,  261,  265-7,  270 
Irish  Squadron,  302-4.    See  also  Cork 
Italy,    Napoleon's    kingdom   of,   37, 
118,  132,  136-8,  233 


Jamaica,  30,  75,  113,  119,  156-7,  170 

Jerome  Bonaparte,  137 

Joseph     Bonaparte,     80 ;     King     of 

Naples,  423 
Joubert,  General,  234,  237 
Junot,  General  Andoche,  at  Lisbon, 

100-4 


Keats,  Capt.  Richard  Gardiner 
(Superb),  280,  331,  346 

Keith,  Adm.  Sir  Geo.  Keith  Elphin- 
stone,  K.B.,  Lord,  C.-in-C,  North 
Sea,  11,  192,  227-30,  318,  321  7i., 
420  ;  appreciations  V)y,  217-9 

Kempenfelt's  system,  193 


Kerr,    Capt.    Lord    Mark    {Fisgard), 

73-4,  96,  110 
Knight,  R.-Adm.  John,  49,  51-2,  73, 

75,  79,  83,  97,  101-3,  105,  107-8, 

114,  146-7,  210 


Lacy  (Lasci  or  Lascy),  General,  24, 

51,  232,  273,  283,  413,  418-9 
Laforey,    Capt,    Sir    Francis,    Bart. 

[Spar'tiate),  16 
Lagos,  63,  105 
"  L'Ami,"  a  spy,  75 
Lauriston,  General  Alexandre,  33,  35, 

256-7,  263-5 
Legge,    Capt.    Hon.     Arthur     Kaye 

[Repulse),  197  n. 
Letchmere,    Capt.    W.     {Thunderer), 

197  7^. 
Leveson-Gower,  Lord  Granville,  Am- 
bassador to   Russia,    7,   8,   9,  116, 

232-3,  255  n,  282-5 
Leviathan  (74),  163,  208,  374 
Line  of  bearing,  370-2 
Linzee,  Capt.  8.  H.  ( Warrior),  197  n. 
Lisbon,  as   intelligence    centre,    29, 

96,  99,  107,  195,  208,  211,  218,  322  ; 

as  objective   and  naval  base,  79, 

100-3,  166-7,  209 
Lively  (38),  106 

Liverpool,  as  intelligence  centre,  178 
Lobb,  Capt.  Wm.  Granville  (Z'o/no/if), 

300-1,  317,  330 
Loire  (38),  121 
L'Orient,  24,  192 
Louis,  R.-Adm.  Thomas,  247,  326-9, 

333-5,  354,  356,  358,  399-400 


M 


M'Arthur,  Dr.  John,  98 

Mack  von  Leiberich,  General  Charles, 

Baron,  284-5,  410 
Maddalena  (Sardinia),  31,  90 
Madeira,   as  intelligence  centre,  29, 

G6,  77,  113;  as  focal  trade  point, 

119 
Marjnanimc  (74),  175 
Magon  de  Clos-Dore,   Adm.    Charles 

Rene,   127,    129,    132,    157-8,   160, 

324,  332,  334 
Maida,  battle  of,  423 
Maitland,  Capt.  Fred.  Lewis  [Loire), 

121 
Majestueux  (120),  301 
Malta,  question  of,   3-10,    21-4,   49, 

116, 233,  282,  429-33,  App.  A  and  B 

2  G   2 


470 


INDEX 


M.iJta  (80,  lato  GuiUnume   Tdl),  194, 

197,  201-2,  212 
Maria  Caroline,  Queen  of  Naples,  290, 

418,  421 
Maritime  Code,  question  of,  24,  233, 

282 
Marittimo,  91 
Marniont,  Marshal  Viese  de,  18,  142, 

173-4,  187,  227,  243,  277.     S(r  aUo 

Texel 
Mars  (74),  353-4,  357,  374-5,  387-8 
Martin  (IG),  195 
Martinique,  30,  38-41 ;  battle  feared 

at,  139 
Massena,  Marshal,  412,  410 
Maurice,  Lieut.  James  Wilkes  (Z^.  J/, ^S". 

Diamond    Hock),    12(;,    157-8,    IGO, 

164 
Mauritius,  34 
Mediterranean,  Russian  and  British 

interests  in,  G,  7,  22,  llG-7,  250-2 
Mediterranean  station,  3G,  75,  289 
Mclampm  (3G),    G7,    73-4,    302,   304, 

305  n. 
Melville,    Henry   Dundas,   Viscount, 

First    Lord    of    Admiralty,    12-3, 

31  ;  his  fall,  G9-71,  81,  92 
Messina,    9 ;     occupied     by     Craig, 

419-21 
Milan,  Napoleon  crowned  at,  13G-8 
Milius,    Capt.    P.    Bernard    {Didon), 

221-5 
Minorca,  24,  437 
Minotaur  (74),  152  n.,  391-3 
Missiessy,  R.-Adm.    E.   T.    Burgues, 

Comte    de,    18-9,   27-30,    38,    43, 

80  ;    his   return,    121   2,    127,  131, 

134, 144,  208  ;  his  raid  on  W.  Indies, 

124-7,  156   7  ;  retires,  174   5 
Montserrat,  125 
Moore,  Lt.-Gen.  Sir  John,  321 
Moore,    Coiiunodore    Graham    {Jnd(- 

fatli/ablc],  17,  112 
Moorsom,  Adm.  Constantino,  344 
Moorsom,  Capt.  Robert  (AVt'tn//*),  343 
Morea.     See  Greece 
iMouchcron  (IG),  311-3 
Mulgrave,  Henry  Phipps,  Earl  of,  Sec. 

of  State,  23,  91,  117,  2:34 
Murat,  Joachim,  Prince,  137 
Myers, Lt.-Gen   Sir  William,  118, 161 
Myers,  Major,  161  n. 


N 


Naiad  (38),  217,  258-9,  205,  267 
Naiaur  (74),  312  n.,  404-5 
Naples,  kingdom  of,  5-7,  24,  56,  283, 
417,  423 


Napoleon,  his  policy,  1  d  scrj.,  32. 
34-8,  49,  58,  100,  241,  290,  422-3  ; 
goes  to  Italy,  73,  128  ;  returns,  183, 
187;  at  Boulogne,  219,  240,  246. 
290  ;  abandons  (he  invasion,  275-8  ; 
starts  for  Vienna,  293  ;  his  Auster- 
litz    campaign,  410,  415-7 

,  liis   naval  strategy,   12,  34-42, 

53,  57,  89-99,  124,  127-145,  159, 
167,  172  5,  177-8,  187-190,219-20, 
226-7,  242-5,  248,  264,  272  6, 
292  6,  304,  322,  307 

,  his  views    on    invasion,   15-6, 

19,  80  ;  on  battleships,  44-8  ;  ou 
combined  expeditions,  79-81,  128, 
13.")  8,  227;  his  use  of  them,  142, 
173  4,  242;  estimate  of  Nelson, 
130-2,  177  ;  use  of  the  Press,  130, 
145 

,  characteristics  as  war-director, 

54,  80,  127,  131-3,  142,  209,  2] 3, 
216,  245 

Narci.^sus  (32),  309  n. 

Naval  Staff,  85-8,  276 

Navy,  inquiry  into  state  of,  09,  70,  81 

Neapolitan  Squadron,  94 

Nelson,  V.-Adm.  Horatio  Lord, 
C.-in-C,  Mediterranean,  29;  misses 
Villeneuve,  29-31  ;  cliases  him, 
109,  154-5,  213;  in  W.  Indies, 
lGO-8;  returns,  169,  195,  208-10; 
closes  on  Channel,  211,  238-40; 
at  home,  278-83  ;  ordered  to  Cadiz, 
289-92  ;  sails,  296,  307  ;  off  Cadiz, 
317-  332  ;  getting  contact  with  Vil- 
leneuve, 338-41  ;  at  Trafalgar, 
36U-92,  397 

,  his  relations  with  Orde,   30  1  ; 

62,  (A,  84,  98,  105  6 

,  his  strategy  and  appreciations, 

8-9,  17,  25,  32,  54-5,  57-61,  78, 
118,  154-5,  169,  207,  320-1,  329-31 

,  orders  to,  17,  50,  52,  73,  75-6, 

78,  114-1.5,  119,  230,  289,  320,  330 

,  ideas  on  large  ships,  44-6,  328  n. , 

330/i.,  351-4;  on  tactics,  169,  248-9; 
on  cruisers  and  signals,  298-300 

,  his   tactical   memoranda,   155, 

193,  330,  340,  343-59,  394-6,  and 
App.  D 

Neptune  (98),  45  ri.,  374,  383,  386, 
391-3 

Neptuno  (Sp.  80),  390,  394,  397 

Netley  (12),  166,  168 

Neutrals,  interference  by,  50,  59,  93, 
106  7,  112,  121,  95,  195,  208,  214, 
216,  222-3,  262,  318,  329,  401 

Nevis.  125 

Newspapers,  information  from,  136, 
139,  211 


INDEX 


471 


Nile,  battle  of,  its  influence,  53,  199, 

285 
Nimble  (10),  255,  268 
Niohe  (38),  222  n.,  240 
Nore,  The,  11 
Norris,  Adm.  Sir  John,  12 
Northesk,  R.-Adm.  AViliiam  Carnegie, 

Earl  of,  354.     See  eiho  Ih'iUiaiWL 
Nurlhuviberhciid  {SO).  157,  l<J3 
Nourse,    Capt.    Josepli    {linrhndoe^), 

IGt;,  1(59  a. 
Novosilzow,    Co\int,    Russian   Envoy 

Extraordinary,  232-3,  427 
Nugent,  V.-Adin.,  197  n. 


Orde,  V.-Adm.  Sir  John,  "Coast  of 
Spain"  station,  17,  29,  30-1,  49; 
his  retreat  from  Cadiz,  G2-8 ;  73, 
75,  78,  83,  95,  98,  111-2,  114,  159, 
221,  271 

Organisation  of  fleets,  338,  353-5, 
Sec  also  Advanced  Squadrons 

Orion  (74).  334  7;..,  357,  391 

OrpheaH  (32),  102-4 

Otranto,  G,  58 

Otway,  Capt.  Wm.  Henry,  Comr.  at 
Gibraltar,  98 


Packets.  101-2,  113,  195,  306  n. 
Paget,  Sir  Arthur,   Amb.   at  Vienna, 

289 
Palermo,  89 

Palmas,  Gulf  of  (Sardinia),  54-7 
Parker,  Capt.  William  {Amazon),  91, 

93,  96,  106,  155,  265-6,  306 
Passaro,  Cape,  412 
Pellew,  R.-Adm.  Sir  Edward,  C.-in-C, 

East  Indies,  144 
Penmarcks,  rendezvous,  268,  301 
Phoehc  (36),  94,  333 
Phoenix  (36),  217,  221-5,  262-3,  270, 

400-3 
Piclle  (10),  267 

Piedmont.     See  Sardinia,  Kingdom  of 
Pino,  General,  Fr.  War  Minister  in 

Italy,  81 
Pitt,  John,  second  Earl  of  Chatham, 

70  :  First  Lord  of  Admiralty,  71 
Pitt,  William,  first  Earl  of  Chatham, 

1,  50,  274 
Pitt,  William,  the  Younger,  69,  71-2, 

116-8,     178,    319-20;    his   death, 

419-21  ;  his  policy,  App.  A  and  B 
,   as   a   War  Minister,  1  et    scg., 

16-7,    20-6,     35,  50-1,  61,    81-2, 


135,  144,  233-8,  251,  272-4,  282-5, 

295-6,  407,  414-5 
Plutun  (Fr.  74),  158 
Polf/phemus   (64),   65,   230  n.,  334  n., 

388 
Popham,  Commodore  Sir  Home,  235, 

302,   309,  316,   405  ;  his  telegraph 

code  adopted,  298-301 
Portugal  as  a  neutral,  100-3 
Potsdam,  Treaty  of,  411,  413 
Poulette,  cruiser,  269 
Poyntz,  Capt.  Stephen  {MelampuH),  67 
Prevost,  Lt.-Gen.  Sir  George,  124-5 
Prigny,  Capt.,  Fr.  Chief-of-Staif,  324 
Prinee  (98),  334,  354,  374-5 
Prince  Georqe  (98),  84 
Prince  of  W<des  (98),  146,  197  vi.,  202 
Princess  of  Oranf/c  (74),  230  n. 
Princi/je  de  Asturuis  (112),  239.     See 

also  Gravina 
Principe  de  la  Pa"  (24),  privateer,  306 
Prussia,   policy  of,   10,  20,  25,  189, 

129,  223,  273,  277,  409-11,  414-6  ; 

deserts  tlie  Coalition,  4 17,  424.     See 

also  App.  A  and  B 
Pula  Roads  (Sardinia),  54,  59 


Qveen  (98),  49,  97,  14G,  152  n.,  326 
Qiiiberon  Pay,  27-8 


R 


Rainier,  R.-Adm.  Peter,  260,  279, 
302,  306-7 

Raisonnahle  (64),  123  n.,  197  n. 

Ramilies  (74),  170 

Ranger  (14),  214 

Ransoms,  125 

liayo  (Sp.  100),  398 

Redmitable  (Fr.  74),  385,  397 

Rendezvous,  54  n.,  67,  74  n.,  90,  211  n. 

Renotvn  (74),  57,  62 

Repidse  (74),  123  n.,  197  n.,  304  n. 

Revenue  (74),  371-2,  388,  392 

Reynier,  Gen.  Jean  L.  E.,  Comte,  423 

Rochefort,  blockade  of,  12,  14,  27, 
34, 124,  1-31 ;  raised,  182-3  ;  squad- 
ron of,  131,  133-4,  138-9,  144, 
174-5.  See  (d^o  Missiessy  and 
Allemand 

Rockets.     See  Congreve 

Rodd,  Capt.  J.  Tremayne  {Indefati- 
gable),  400  n. 

Rodney,  Adm.  Sir  G.  Brydges,  193, 
351  * 

Rooke,  Adm.  Sir  Geo.,  75 


472 


INDEX 


Kose,  Rt.  Hon.  George,  292,  :Ui) 
Koseiiu  (Dominica),  124-5 
Kowlev,  Adm.,  84 
RoJiiil  'Soxrrelrja  (100),  91),  107,  108  vi., 

170.  328,  354,  370,  387-8,  391.     -Sfr 

Collingwood 
R%iby  (G4),  230  a. 
Riigen,  island  of,  20,  25 
Kussell,  K.-Adra.  Thomas  Macnamara 

("  Faddy"),  229,  231  n. 
Russia,   liritish   relations  with,   5    <t 

sni.,  20  ct  se(/.,  37,  49,  llG-7,  232-3, 

282-5.     Sec  also  Alexander  I. 


St.  Christopher's,  125,  1G5 

St.Cyr,  General  Gouvion,  Fr.  C.-in-C, 

Apulia,  58,  290,  295,  412,  41G,  421 
St.  Domingo,  30,  127,  15(1 
St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Naval  Knights 

of,  117,  430 
St.  Lucia,  2,  80,  124,  128-9,  131,  157 
St.  Vincent,   Adm.  Sir  John  Jervis, 

Earl,  12  n.,  422  n.;  his  school,  193 
St.  Vincent  (W.  Indies),  131 
Salcedo,  R.-Adm.  Jose  Justo  (C.-in-C, 

Cartagena),  61,  135,  142,  153 
Santa  Anna  (Sp.  120),  387,  397 
Santa  Margarita  (44),  402-4 
Santisima  Trinidad  (Sp.  120),  379-80, 

384-6, 398 
Sardinia,  Kingdom  of,  7,  9,  35 
Sardinia,  island  of,  its  naval  import- 
ance, 8,  9,  54-5,  59-60,  283 
Saumarez,  R.-Atlm.  Sir  James,  11,  77 
Scilly,  rendezvous,  120,  240 
Sci^lon  (Fr.  74),  403-4 
Scott,  Rev.  A.  T.,  44-5 
Senhouse,   Adm.   Sir   Humphrey,   at 

Trafalgar,  327  n.,  339  n.,  344-5,  388 
Seville,  blockade  of,  210 
Sicily,  G,  7,  283-4,  422-3  ;  naval  im- 
portance of,  8,  9,  32,  50,  55,  59-61 
Sidmouth,  Lord.     See  Addington 
Signals,  121  n.,  164,  201-2,  296-301 
Signal   stations,  Spanish,  194,   327 ; 

Irish,  228  n. 
Smith,  Lt.-Col.,  91 
Smith,  Capt.  Sir  Sidney,  ?/21,  423 
Sophie  (18),  63 
Sotheron,    Capt.    Frank    {Exrdlcnt), 

290,  4 1 8 
Spain,  attitude  of,  16  ;  war  with,  17, 

38,  100 
"  Spanish  Squadron  "  (Coast  of  Spain 

station),  30,  33.     See  Orde 
Spartiate   (74),    156,     161,    163,    160, 

391-3 


Spies,  18,  76,  82,  116,  119,  227-8,  2G6. 

See  Intelligence 
Stirling,  R.-Adm.  Charles,   175,  182, 

184;   joins  Calder,   194-5,  213;  at 

Ushant,     239 ;     detached     against 

AUemand,  304-7,  311 
Strachan,     Capt.    Sir    Richard,    57, 

62-3,    89,  93,  118,  185  ;  operations 

against     Allemand,     312-3,     330; 

action  with  Duinanoir,  400-5 
Stralsund,  20,  25,  409 
Strangford,    Lord,     Chart/ ('-d'affaires, 

Lisbon,  228,  266 
Stuart,  Gen.  Sir  John,  41S 
Superb  (74),  163,  355 
Sutton,   Capt.  Samuel  {Amphion),  66, 

101,  105 
Sweden,  policy  of,  10,  20,  118,  285, 

409 
Sxoiftmre  (74),  30,  163 


Talleyrand-Perigord,  Ch.  Maurice  de, 

79-81,  243-5,  416,  422 
Tangier,  as  intelligence  centre,  HI. 
Taranto,  6,  7,  58,  132 
Termaqant  (20),  210 
Temeraire   (98),  45   n.,  334   n.,    343, 

374-5,  383,  385-6,  397 
Terrible  (74),  185 
Tetuan  as  victualling  depot,  98,  104, 

210,  326 
Texel   squadron   and   corps,    11,    18, 

133,  142,  172-3,  227,  249-50,  274, 
318  {see  also  Marmont) ;  blockade 
of,  231  n. 

Three-deckers,  tactical  value  of,  43-9, 
108,  118,  120,  146,  167,  240  n., 
253  n.,  256  ;  Nelson  on,  328  n., 
330,  336,  351-4 

Thunderer  (74),  197  n.,  202-3,  392 

Tif/re  (74),  163 

Tobago,  2,  131 

Tolstoi,  General,  414 

Tonnant  (80),  374 

Toro  (Sardinia),  59 

Torpedoes.     Sec  Francis 

Toulon  Sqxiadron,  39.  See  Ville- 
neuve.     New    one  projected,   131, 

134,  138 

Trafalgar,    battle   of,   361-96  ;    ships 

at,  353-4,  367,  379  n. 
Treport,  290 
Trident  (64),  279 
Trieste,  196 

Trinidad,  131 ;  Nelson  at,  164 
Triumph  (74),  197  n.,  304  n. 


INDEX 


473 


Turkev,  Russian  and  British  interest 
in,  5,  9,  10,  'i-i,  234-5,  237 


U 


Uulocated  fleets,  61,  07,  109, 
134,  142,  154,  lfi7,  170,  238, 
255-7,  263-4,  270,  27i»,  287 

Ushant  position,  118,  128,  182, 
Sec  Western  Squadron 

Ustica,  LO,  89 


130, 


11. 


Variation  of  compass,  333  n. 

Vashon,  R.-Adm.  James  (Leith),  228-9 

Ver  Huell,  Adm.  Graf  von  Sevenaer, 
229 

Victory  (100),  1(38,  208,  240,  288,  292, 
380,388,391.     .Sec  Nelson 

Vigo,  Villeneuve  at,  205,  212 

Vi/lc  dc  Paris  (llU),  185.  Scr  Corn- 
wall is 

Villeneuve,  V.-Adm,  18,  19,  23, 
30-5;  his  escape,  54-68,  73,  75-8; 
false  ref)ort  of  his  return,  101,  107, 
115-6,  122  ;  in  the  W.  Indies,  157- 
67;  returns,  167-71,  195;  new 
orders  for,  187  ;  his  action  with 
Calder,  195-207  ;  enters  Vigo,  205, 
212  ;  at  Coruha,  218,  225  ;  puts  to 
sea,  238,  256-63 ;  retreats  to 
Cadiz,  2C4,  270-1;  ordered  to 
Naples,  295,  322-5  ;  purs  to  sea, 
332  ;  formation  of  his  fleet,  338, 
860-1,  366-9.  Sec  aho  Trafalgar 
and  Buccntaurc ;  orders  to,  ch.  ix. 
pasdm ;  appreciations  bv,  159,  167, 
220-1 


W 


Warren,  V.-Adm,  Sir  John  Borlase, 

A  tub.  to  Russia,  7 
Warren,  Capt.  Samuel  {Glory),  197  n. 
Warrior  (74),  123  n.,  197  n.,'304  v. 
m/.s/)  (16),  66,  101 
Wellesley,     Sir     Arlhur     (Dnke    of 

Wellington),    119,   279,   286,    411, 

416  n. 
Weser,  operations  on.     See  Elbe 
West  Indies,  defence  of,  77,  113-5, 

119;  as  possible  objective,   14,  17, 

18,  29,  74,  94  9,  131 
Western  Squadron,  11-2,  30,  60,  83, 

133,    179,   208,   229-31,    24l>,    802. 

See  Cornwallis  and  Gardner 
Whitbv,  Capt.  John  (  Villc  dc  Paris), 

247  n. 
Wilberforce,  Mr.  William,  71 
Wimereux,  11.     Sec  Flotilla 
Windsor    Castle   (98),   123   n.,    119  n. 

201-4 
Woodriff,     Capt.     Daniel    [Calcutta), 

119  n,,  311-2 
Woronzow,   Count,  Russian  Amb.  in 

London,  6,  8,  20,  22,  71,  116-7,  283, 

235  H.,  A[)],).  A  and  B 


Yarmouth,  11,  173. 


Russell 


Yeu,  Isle  d',  27 

Young,   V.-Adm.    W.,    C.-in-C,   Ply- 


mouth, 185 


Z 


Zealous  (74),  180,  331  n. 


Printed  by  Ballan'tViNE,  Hanson  err'  Co. 
Edinburi'h  or"  London 


I 


MILITARY  AND  NAVAL  HISTORY 

AND    SCIENCE 

[For  Works  on  A'aval  Construction  by  E.  L,  Attwood,  A.  Campbell  Holms,  W.  J. 
LovETT,  and  T.  H,  Watson,  see  Messrs.  Longmans  ^  Co.'s  Catalogue  of 
Scientijjc  Works.) 

WORKS   BY   JULIAN   S.    CORBETT 
DRAKE  AND  THE  TUDOR  NAVY.     With  a  History  of  the 

Rise  of  England  as  a  Maritime  Power.     With  Portraits,  Illustrations,  and 
Maps.     2  vols.     Crown  8vo,  i6s. 

THE  SUCCESSORS  OF  DRAKE.  With  4  Portraits  (2  Photo- 
gravures) and  12  Maps  and  Plans.     8vo,  21s. 

ENGLAND    IN   THE    MEDITERRANEAN:    a   Study   of  the 

Rise  and  Influence  of  British  Power  within  the  Straits,  1603-1713.     2  vols. 
8vo,  24s.  net. 

ENGLAND  IN  THE  SEVEN  YEARS'  WAR.  A  Study  in 
Combined  Strategy.     With  14  Maps  and  Plans,     Svo,  21s.  net. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ROYAL 
ARTILLERY  FROM  WATERLOO 
TO  THE  CRIMEAN  WAR.  Bv 
Lieut. -Colonel  H.  W.  L.  Hime.  Svo, 
6s.  net. 

GUNPOWDER  AND  AMMUNI- 
TION :  their  Origin  and  Progress. 
By  Lieut.-Colonel  Henry  W.  L. 
Hime,  (late)  Royal  Artillery.  Svo, 
9s.  net. 

THE  CRISIS  OF  THE  CON- 
FEDER.\CY:  A  History  of  Gettys- 
burg and  the  Wilderness,  By  Cecil 
Battine,  Capiain,  15th  King's  Hus- 
sars. With  Coloured  l^'rontispiece 
(Battle  Flags  of  the  Confederacy)  and 
6  Maps,     Svo,  i6s.  net. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  INDIAN 
MUTINY,  18S7-1S58.  By  Sir  John 
W.  Kaye  and  Colonel  G.  B.  Malle- 
SON.  With  Analytical  Index  and 
Maps  and  Plans.  6  vols.  Crown  Svo, 
3s.  6cl.  each. 

RECOLLECTIONS  OF  A  LUCK- 
NOW  VETERAN,  1S45-1876.  By 
Major-General  J,  Ruggles,  Colonel, 
19th  Punjabees.     Svo,  5s,  net. 


!   By  the  Right  Hon.  Winston  Spenceii 
j  Churchill,  M.P. 

I   THE    RIVER   WAR:    an   Historical 

i        Account    of    the    Reconquest    of    the 

Soudan.        Edited     by     Colonel      F. 

Rhodes,  D.S.O,     With  22  Maps  and 

plans.     Medium  Svo,  los,  6d.  net, 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  MALA- 
KAND  FIELD  FORCE,  1897.  With 
Map  and  Plans,     Crown  Svo,  3s.  6d, 

LONDON  TO  LADYSMITH  VIA 
PRETORIA.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF 
THE  AMERICAN  REVOLU- 
TIONARY ARMY.  By  Louis 
Clinton  Hatch,  Ph.D.  Svo, 
7s.  6d. 

A  SUBALTERN'S  LETTERS  TO 
HIS  WIFE.  (The  Boer  War.)  By 
Reginald  Rankin,  Crown  Svo, 
3s.  6d, 

IN  MOROCCO  WITH  GENERAL 
D'AMADE.  By  Reginald  Rankin. 
With  35  Illustiations  from  Photo- 
graphs and  a  Map,     Svo,  9s.  net. 


LONGMANS,  GREEN  AND  CO.,  39  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C. 
New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta 


MILITARY    AND   NAVAL   HISTORY 

AND    SCIENCE— ^^«//;7//<f^ 

By  the  late  Colonfi.  G.  F.  R.  HENDERSON,  C.B. 

THE  SCIENCE  OK  WAF^  :  a  Collection  of  Essays  and  Lectures, 
1892-1903.  With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author  by  KicUi-Marshal  Earl  Roberts, 
V.C.  ;  a  Photogravure  Portrait  of  Colonel  IIf.NDKRSon  and  4  Maps.  8vo, 
14s.  net. 

STONEWALL    JACKSON    AND    THE    AMERICAN    CIVIL 

WAR.     With  2  Portraits  and  33  Maps  and  Plans.     2  vols.     Crown   Svo, 
i6s.  net. 


INQUIRIES  CONCERNINCx  THE 
TACTICS  OP^  THE  FUTURE.  By 
Fritz  Hoknig.  With  i  Sketch  in 
the  Text  and  5  Maps.  Translated 
by  Captain  II.  M.  Bowkk.  Svo, 
15s.  net. 

HERESIES  OF  SEA  POWER.  By 
Frku.  T.  Jank.  With  8  Maps  and 
14  Illustrations.     Svo,  12s  6d.  net. 

TACTICS     APPLIED     TO 

SCHEMES,  with  Numerous  Solutions 
to  Tactical  Schemes,  and  14  Maps. 
By  Major  J.  Sherston,  D.S.O.  ,  the 
Rifle  Brigade,  late  D.A.A.G.  for  In- 
struction, and  Major  L.  J.  Siiauwkll, 
Lancashire  Fusiliers,  late  D.A.A.Ci, 
for  Instruction.  2  vols.  Svo.  (Vol.  I. 
Text.     Vol.  II.  Maps.)     153,  net. 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  LAND 
DEFENCE,  AND  THEIR  AP- 
PLICATION TO  THE  CONDI- 
TIONS OF  TO-DAY.  By  Captain 
H.  F.  Thuili.irh,  R.E.  Witii  21 
Illustrations  and  Diagrams.  Svo, 
I2S.  6d.  net. 

MARSHAL  TURENNE.  By  the 
Author  of  "  A  Life  of  Sir  Kenelm 
Digby,"  tSrc.  With  an  Introduction 
by  Brigadier-General  Francis  Li.oyd, 
C.B. ,  D.S.O. ,  and  numerous  Illustra- 
tions.    Svo,  I2S.  6(1.  net. 

LIFE  OF  THE  DUKE  OF  WEL- 
LINGTON. By  the  Rev.  G.  R. 
Gleig,  M.A.     Crown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

WATERLOO  LECTURES  :  a  Study 
of  the  Campaign  of  18x5.  By  Colonel 
Charles  C.  ChesneV,  R.  E.,  late 
Professor  of  Military  Art  and  History 
in  the  Staff  College.     Svo,  6s.  net. 


By  Sir  Ralph  Payne-Gallwey, 
Bart. 

THE  CROSSBOW,  MEDLEVAL 
AND  MODERN,  MILITARY  AND 
SPORTING:  its  Construction,  His- 
tory, and  Management,  With  a 
Treatise  on  the  Balista  and  Catapult 
('f  the  AnciiMUs.  With  220  Illustra- 
tions.    Medium  4to,  63s.  net. 

A  SUMMARY  OF  THE  HISTORY, 

CONSTRUCTION,  AND  EFFECTS 
IN  WARFARE  OF  THE  PRO- 
JECTILE-THROWING ENGINES 
OF  THE  ANCIENTS.  With  a 
Treatise  on  the  Structure,  Power,  and 
Manag(Miient  of  Turkish  and  other 
Oriental  Bows  of  Mediaeval  and  later 
times.  With  ao  Illustrations.  4to, 
ss.  net. 


THE  ADMIRALTY  OF  THE 
ATLANTIC.  An  Inquiry  into  the 
Development  of  German  Sea  Power — 
Past,  l^resent,  and  Prospective.  By 
Percival  a.  Hislam.  With  21  Illus- 
trations and  a  Map  of  the  North  Sea. 
Svo,  6s.  6d.  net. 

MALTZAHN  S  NAVAL  WAR- 
FARE:  its  Historical  Development 
from  the  Age  of  the  Great  Geographi- 
cal Discoveries  to  the  Present  Time. 
By  Baron  Curt  von  Malt/.ahn, 
\'ice -Admiral  (retired).  Translated 
from  the  (ierman  by  John  Combe 
Milli:k,     Crown  Svo,  2s.  net. 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  RIFLE.     By 

the  Hon.  T.  F.  Fremantle,  Major, 
Tst  Bucks  V.R.C.  With  54  Plates  and 
no  Diajjrams.     Svo,  12s.  6d.  net. 


LONGMANS,  GREEN  AND  CO.,  39  Paternoster  Row,  London,  E.C. 
New  York,  Bombay,  and  Calcutta 


^    />  /> 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


'^mi^^mm^- 


mm 


