Acknow ledgements

This thesis is one product of a three-man project investigating the victualling of the Royal
Navy during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic War. I would like to thank the
Leverhulme Trust whose grant funded three years of this thesis, in conjunction with the
National Maritime Museum. Although it will not be needed in full, I am grateful to the
NMM for their award of a Caird Fellowship.


Researching this project has taken me around Britain and on one occasion across the
Atlantic. I would like to thank the staff of the National Archives, the Caird Library, the
Suffolk Record Office, the Dreadnought Library in Greenwich, the British Library, New
York Public Library, the Bodleian Library and the National Library of Wales for their
help and never-ending patience with my requests. King's College London allowed a
grateful alumnus to make use of their excellent facilities. Joy Moorhead was especially
kind when I visited the Mulgrave Archive in Whitby and I am grateful to the Marquis of
Normanby for allowing to me to consult and quote from those papers.


Working in the GMI has been made almost too enjoyable by the friendly banter of
Suzanne Bowles, while Sarah Palmer and Chris Ware have always been on hand with
helpful advice. Doug Hamilton was kind enough to comment on parts of my thesis,
particularly sections that have been published as articles. Fellow scholars of naval
administration have assisted: Bob Sutcliffe has shared his knowledge of the Transport
Board, while frequent lunches and conversations with Cori Convertito-Farrar have made
visits to various archives more agreeable than perhaps they should have been. Special
mention must go to Tim Voelcker, whose knowledge and scholarship on Sir James
Saumarez and the Baltic fleet has proved invaluable. He was also generous enough to
lend me his translations of the von Rosen papers from the original Swedish, while his
hospitality on my frequent visits to Ipswich will not be forgotten. Janet MacDonald
generously lent me a copy of her completed thesis as I was finishing mine, and has been a
constant source of helpful tips over the last three years. Lindsey Roberts and Amanda




                                                                                         111
