Introduction

       On arri\ing in the Belt. with a convoy of no less than a thousand sail homeward bound, it was
       intimated that the French Prince of Ponte Corvo, the newly elected successor to the throne, was at
       Ny hurg. and permission to cross the Belt was demanded and obtained from the Admiral for his yacht
       to pass unmolested. which he did on the 14 Octoher at the time this immense fleet was at anchor of
       Sproe. A scene so novel to a French General, and so interesting to his Royal Highness under the
       present circumstances. could not hut make a deep impression, while it conveyed some idea of the
       wealth and power of the British nation. l
                                                                              - Sir John Ross



History has all too easily forgotten the naval war following Trafalgar. Napoleon's
inyasion and defeat in Russia, and the successes of the British army in the Peninsula,
ha\'e detracted attention from the Royal Navy's actions following that seemingly decisive
engagement. Julian Corbett recognised this early in the 20 th century and spoke of the
temptation amongst historians to 'ring down the curtain there and then,.2 Mackesy in
1957 complained of a similar mentality, arguing that fifty years later 'the struggle at sea
has generally been written as though it ended at Trafalgar, before the war had run a
quarter of its course,.3 For all of these promptings, this is still the case nearly ninety years
after Corbett's article. The Royal Navy's role moved increasingly away from decisive
battle from 1805; sea power continued to be the keystone of British strategy, as ever the
nation's major offensive and defensive force. It continued to dominate the seas around
the globe, resisting Napoleon's Continental System, harassing enemy trade, supporting
British forces and those of their allies from the Peninsula to the West Indies, and
protecting the crucial maritime trade on which Britain depended. In doing so it made a
crucial contribution to the fall of Napoleon. This period lacks the glamour so attractive to
battle-focused historians, as the Royal Navy's role became more subtle though no less
important.


Nowhere was this more the case than in the Baltic theatre between 1808 and 1812.
Barring the ice-ridden winter months, there was a constant British naval presence under


1 John Ross, Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord de Saumarez,       From Original Papers on
Possession of the Family (Richard Bentley, London, 1838), pp. 214-5.
2 J. S. Corbett, 'Napoleon and the British Navy After Trafalgar', Quarterly Review, No. 237 (1922), p. 241.
3 Piers Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean /803-/8/0 (Harvard University Press, 1957) p. vii.




                                                                                                          1
