Britain's military power that came from this region, and secondly as an area of huge
e\.port yalue for British goods.


To turn to the former. it could even be argued that the Baltic was more crucial to Britain
than any other theatre. so essential to British naval power were the supplies of naval
stores that allowed the Royal Navy and merchant fleets to function and maintain itself. In
 1801 the Secretary of War Dundas had recognised the importance of the region, noting
that 'as to Baltick operations the game is lost, which alone can make success certain, if
\\"e are not able to haye a powerful fleet there the moment it is accessible,.5 In his book
Forests and SeapOl,rer Albion has pointed to the pressures produced by the reliance on
foreign produce for its shipbuilding needs. 'From the days when Cromwell ruled England
till the battle of Hampton Roads sounded the knell of wooden ships of war', he wrote,
 'the heads of the English Navy worried over its timber shortage'. The Napoleonic War
came towards the end of 'two centuries of anxiety over this problem'. 6 Kaplan sums it up
\\"ell: 'Great Britain's importation of Russian flax, hemp and linen goods was essential to
the British way of life, industry and economy,.7


It was a problem that continued unabated throughout the Napoleonic wars, During the
   th
18 century, and in spite of Parliamentary encouragements and pressure from the Board
of Trade, Britain repeatedly bought Baltic produce in preference to colonial goods and
often did so at higher prices, since it cost less to transport and suffered less in shipment;
the Baltic market supplied virtually all the important naval supplies except canvas, large

 5 Dundas to Evan Nepean, Admiralty Secretary, 9 January 1801, quoted in Andrew Lambert, Nelson:
 Britannia's God of War (Faber and Faber, London, 2005) p. 192.
 6 Robert Greenhalgh Albion, Forests and Seapower: The Timber Problem of the Royal Navy 1652-1862
 (Archon Books, Hamden, Connecticut, 1965), p. 1. Albion's work is still seen as important in stressing the
importance of timber as a basis of sea power. In an article revising Albion's work, R.J.B. Knight argued
that Albion's wider point, that timber shortage led to failure in war, was a fragile one at best. There
remained a perception and deep concern about timber shortages, especially in the early 1800' s; as Knight
comments, 'this is not to say that the procurement of naval stores should not have been perceived as a
central problem, or that, in the Baltic region, it was never less than a cornerstone of British foreign policy'.
See R.1.B. Knight, 'New England Forests and British Seapower: Albion Revised', The American Neptune,
                                                                                      th
Vol. XLVI, No.4, (1986), pp. 221-9. For the timber supply to Britain during the 18 century, see also,
Joseph J. Malone, 'England and the Baltic Naval Stores Trade in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth
Centuries', MM, Vo1.58, No.4, (November 1972) and P.K. Crimmin, 'The Supply of Timber For the Royal
Navy, c.l803-1830', The Naval Miscellany Vol. VII (NRS, 2008) pp. 191-234.
7 Herbert Kaplan, Russian Overseas Commerce with Great Britain During the Reign of Catherine II
(American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1995) p. 63.


                                                                                                               3
