the Baltic fleet. command of the sea was not 'incidental' to its political aims; it was a
means to ultimate political goals, the protection of its Baltic trade, in particular the naval
stores so essential to the Navy itself, and the wearing down of Napoleon's Continental
System.




The Baltic Sea: A Forgotten Theatre
GiYen the importance of the Baltic theatre to British interests, it is remarkable that it has
been ignored by historians. In the post-Trafalgar period, with isolated exceptions such as
the action at Copenhagen in 1807, the attention of historians has turned landwards,
concerning itself with the more glorious actions in the Iberian Peninsula, the campaigns
in 1813--+ and the Waterloo campaign. 32 Indeed, the Baltic region has been overlooked
throughout Britain's span as a great power. For instance, Andrew D. Lambert noted that
the Baltic region had been treated as a 'sideshow' by the majority of scholars writing on
the Crimean War. 33 Jan Glete too pointed out that syntheses of naval history and
~apoleonic     Wars have concentrated on the Atlantic hemisphere; 'why there were
considerable regional navies in the Baltic and Levant is not discussed and sometimes
hardly mentioned'. 34


The absence of the Baltic region from the historical mainstream is unfortunate. Historians
haye often ignored or downplayed the theatre in calculations of French defeat. Rory Muir
underplays the importance of the theatre; he comments that 'the war shifted away from
the Baltic' after 1808, somehow ignoring five years of conflict, economic warfare, and on
at least one occasion the near possibility of a battle-fleet action to rival any other in the
French Revolutionary or Napoleonic Wars. Though he allows that the Baltic was 'the
principal theatre for British activity in the first six months of the Portland ministry', its



32 Christopher Hall's Wellington's Navy; Sea Power and the Peninsular War 1807-1814 (Chatham,
London, 2004) is a notable exception.
33 Andrew D. Lambert, The Crimean War: British Grand Strategy 1853-6 (Manchester University Press,

1990) p. xvii.
34 Jan Glete, 'Navies and Power Struggle in Northern and eastern Europe, 1721-1814', in Hobson and
Kristansen, ed. Navies in Northern Waters 1721-2000 (Frank Cass, London, 2004) p. 66.


                                                                                                     10
