authoritati\'t~ sun'ey for example has attempted to redress the academic ignorance of the

post-Trafalgar period but in its wider scope can afford it only a cursory glance. 58


Otherwise. the war in the Baltic between 1808 and 1812 has eluded historical
scholarship. Despite a well-founded appreciation of the success with which Saumarez and
the Royal Navy kept the Baltic open to British trade and impacted upon Napoleon's
Continental System, the mechanics of the operations have never been examined. Only a
fleet well-supplied, well-maintained, and well-supported would be able to bring British
naval po\\'er fully to bear. It is in the area of logistics that the Baltic fleet's most
remarkable achievements were made. The Royal Navy in the Baltic was able to supply
over 16,000 men for months at a time with food three hundred miles from a friendly port.
It \\'as this operation that allowed the Royal Navy to do its crucial work in the Baltic and
yet this has never been studied. Rodger notes that the most crucial developments in the
period covered by his volume, 'were not naval but financial and administrative' .59 Yet
how this was borne out in particular theatres has yet to be assessed. Britain in the
:\apoleonic wars pursued her objectives through naval power, coalition diplomacy and
                                              60
the exploitation of her economic muscle.           All were present in the Baltic.



The Historiography of Naval Administration and the
Significance of Victualling
From the 1960s onwards there has been a fundamental change in the way both naval and
military history has been studied. Narrow, battle-centric studies of generals and
commanders have been superseded by cross-disciplinary studies. There has been a
realisation that v;ar and military and naval institutions cannot be studied in isolation and
must take account of their economic, social and political surroundings. A leading
exponent of this, Daniel Baugh, hoped, 'to make a contribution to naval history by
assisting those who may be prepared to study the whole range of factors that determine



5x N.A.M. Rodger, The Command of the Ocean: a Naval History of Britain, 1649-1815    (Allen Lane, 2005)
pp.557-561.
59 Rodger, The Command of the Ocean. p. 583,
60 Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (Longman, 1995) p. 148.




                                                                                                     15
