finance. Raising money was one thing, how it was used another: the spending of the
British state has been overlooked. How effectively were resources used?


In particular and most relevant to this thesis, the success of the Royal Navy during the
Napoleonic wars is increasingly seen to depend on the area of government and
administration as ITIuch as the fighting capabilities of its fleets or armies. Michael Hayden
pointed to the efforts of Graham, and in particular Baugh, when he commented in 1980
that 'the recent trend in British naval history is away from narrative and analysis of
tactics and strategy and towards the study of naval administration' .67 No longer can naval
history be studied solely in the form of battles and operations; no longer can it be studied
in isolation from its administrative, economic and political moorings. As important as
battles such as Trafalgar were, there is an increased awareness that administrative efforts
in finance and logistics were crucial to Britain's ultimate success.


The pioneer of 'the New Naval History', or at least naval history that aimed to look
beyond the battle-fleet and consider the administrative backbone of the Royal Navy, was
Daniel Baugh. Two works, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole and a
complementary volume of documents supplementing the original monograph of 1965
Naval Administration 1715-1750 set the benchmark for this field, both in originality of
his approach and the quality of the scholarship.68 In both he traced the evolution of
                                               th
British naval administration in the 18              century, highlighting firstly its complexity and
then its effectiveness. Baugh found that the British naval administration in the first half of
the eighteenth century was 'basically sound and capable of reform' .69 Given the obstacles
facing the 18 th century administrator, not least the problems of size (the Royal Navy
swallowed half of public revenue) and overbearing commercial interests, British naval
                                            7o
administration actually did sterling work.      Gradish considered British naval
administration in the period of the Seven Years War. The records demonstrate that 'most


67 See foreword to Stephen F. Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy during the Seven Years War

(Royal Historical Society, London, 1980) p. xii.
68 Daniel A. Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole (Princeton University Press, 1965),
Daniel A. Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, (Navy Records Society, 1977).
69 Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, p. xii.
70 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 6.




                                                                                                       17
