answer of course is that it could not. The raising and managing of exceptional amounts of
revenue required an overhaul of the British state's administrative machinery.


                                      th
Judging the efficiency of the 18 century British state is not an easy task. The functioning
of the entire British state is too large a subject for this chapter; instead it will focus on the
reforming instincts of the naval branches of government, particularly those involved in
the production and movement of provisions. The Victualling and Transport Boards are
interesting windows into the nature of the British state, at war and under pressure to
reform. Pool has noted that even after Britain's greatest victories at sea the civil
administration of the Navy suffered from 'almost continuous criticism because of its
alleged corruption and inefficiency,.5 These are but two government departments. There
is however good reason to focus solely on these institutions. In 1800 the total naval
expenditure was £14,809"+44, of which the victualling component came to £5,209,248
                                6
and transports £1,499,007. Between them they accounted for 45.3% of the entire naval
budget. Given that the naval budget itself took up half of all government expenditure, the
two Boards were responsible for a significant proportion of public spending. 7 This
chapter will argue that the British state, even before the wars of 1793-1815, was not the
corrupt inefficient organisation portrayed by contemporary reformers and subsequent
historians. In this it will not take too much issue with Philip Harling's excellent work on
                                                                      th
the subject. Indeed, Harling acknowledges that the late 18 century state was reforming
itself, although there still remained many injustices and much corruption across
government departments.


Where this thesis differs from other work on this subject is in the emphasis on the
reforming tendencies of the naval departments during the Napoleonic War. The
succeSSIve     administrations      of Portland,      Perceval     and     Liverpool    increased      the
effectiveness of the British war machine. The Napoleonic War was a conflict
unprecedented in its scope and challenges. As such, it required a monumental effort to

5 Bernard Pool, 'Navy contracts in the Last Years of the Navy Board, 1780-1832', MM, Vo1.50, No.3 p.

161.
6 NMM, ADM BP121 a, Navy Board to Admiralty, 18 February 1801.
                th
7 That in the 18 century the Navy swallowed half of all public revenue is noted by Daniel A. Baugh,
British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. vii.


                                                                                                       28
