It is no\\' vital to link administrative and political history to the operational, to analyse
how administrative change was effected out at sea. The interaction of administrative and
operational naval history has only been examined once, with Christian Buchet's study of
the Seven Years War. S5 Superior supply gave Britain the opportunity to keep fleets at sea
for longer, multiplying strategic and operational capabilities. Much depended on the
solidity and strength of each navy's infrastructure, and its flexibility to respond to
unprecedented stresses. S6 It was in this that the Royal Navy was to have a critical
advantage.
         '-




Methodology

This thesis is one part of a Leverhulme funded project investigating the victualling of the
Royal Xavy during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. Roger Knight and
~Iartin Wilcox, colleagues on the project, have focussed on the contracting side s7 , while
this thesis will focus on how provisions were distributed. The first question to consider is,
why the Baltic? Firstly, as has been shown above, the Baltic region was perhaps more
important to Britain (and certainly its navy) than any other. A discrete period was chosen
to examine victualling operations in detail, where success and failure could be measured.
Therefore this thesis will focus on the period the Baltic fleet was in existence, with
lengthy comparisons with the Mediterranean fleet during the same wars. Again, as
highlighted above, the post-Trafalgar period has been worryingly under-studied. The
Baltic was a new challenge for victualling officials; consequently it is a good opportunity
to judge the speed with which naval administrators learnt. The Baltic fleet's period of
action, 1808-12 came just after the Commission of Naval Revision, and thus is an
excellent chance to judge the reforming instincts of the British state, and its success in
doing so. Victuals were the only supply needed by the Baltic fleet when on station;



R5 Christian Buchet, Marine, economie et societe: un exemple d'interaction: f'avitaillement de la Royal
Nav.y durant la guerre de sept ans (Paris, 1999).
R6 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 378.
R7 To be published as Roger Knight and Martin Wilcox, Sustaining the Fleet 1793-1815: War, the British
Navy and the Contractor State (forthcoming, Boydell and Brewer, 2010).


                                                                                                      21
