rubbish on its surface' ,77 tells us more about his opinions of contemporary government
                      th
than that of the 18 century. This opinion has been since demolished, as scholars such as
Baugh, Gradish, Condon and Syrett have analysed and rehabilitated attitudes to 18 th
century nayul administration. Clear from their work is the idea that naval administration
was effectiye and often forward thinking. There is a consensus now that the first half of
       th
the 18 Century "marked the epoch in which the navy's institutional arrangements, under
the auspice of practical experience, matured,.78 One aspect of the naval administration
that has been left alone is the victualling of seamen during the French Revolutionary and
Napoleonic Wars.


The American War of 1776-1783 highlighted the deficiencies that remained in the
victualling service. And yet during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, one
finds a naval infrastructure capable of provisioning 140,000 men, many of whom were
stationed across the globe. This thesis will focus on the transformation of the British
victualling service during the Napoleonic War. There has never been an investigation into
how the victualling services worked on an operational level during the French
Reyolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. It has never been assessed how effective the
Victualling Board was in ensuring supply to its fleets across the globe. Are there
examples of operations ever being harmed by victualling failures, as there had been
during the Seven Years War, or War of American Independence? Can we talk of the
\'ictualling service making a telling contribution to the Royal Navy's, indeed Britain's,
ultimate success?


It is remarkable that the victualling system and Victualling Board during the French
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars have yet to be studied with any real conviction. This
is especially surprising given that in the mid-eighteenth century, victualling accounted for
one quarter of the navy's expenditure. Considering that one half of all national tax




77 David Hannay, A Short History of the Royal Navy, 1217-1815 (London, 1909).
78 Daniel A. Baugh, 'Naval Power: what gave the British navy superiority?' in Leandro Prados de la
Escorura (ed.) Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and its European Rivals, 1688-1815
(Cambridge, 2004) pp. 235-260.


                                                                                                     19
