contracting arrangements from Caribbean merchants to the British state. The key aim of
this thesis is to measure the effectiveness of the naval administration, and therefore the
British state, in a time of war. The focus will be the state's mobilisation and management
of private resources rather than the merchants and ship-owners themselves. It should be
stated that researching through the Henley and Constable archives has merely confirmed
rather than undermined initial understanding of the power and importance of the state in
       th               th
late 18 and early 19 century Britain.


The focus of this thesis is on the contracting of transport vessels rather than contracting
for provisions. This thesis focuses on the operational and strategic side of victualling: it is
fair to say that no operation was ever hampered to due to a lack of provisions in the naval
Victualling yards. However bad corn shortages were during the wars against
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France, the Victualling Board always had adequate
stocks. 93 Howeyer, the supply of transports did have (at times crippling) effects on the
movement of victuals out to fleets: the focus on this side of the state's dealings with the
private sector makes more sense.


Wilkinson has noted the limitation based on a survey of government records.


        In the past wntmg on the civil affairs of the Navy has concentrated on what
        administrators and politicians actually said in their official and private correspondence.
        This highlights the problems they were facing and the decisions taken, but, just as
        minutes of board meetings merely record the decisions taken rather than the decision
        making process. this correspondence is often inadequate for an understanding of a course
        of action.


This thesis will, like Wilkinson's, look beyond the content of archival evidence. The text
of departmental correspondence is useful, so too is the considerable body of statistical
data it contains, much of which was never analysed; from this 'we can better analyse
much of the statistical material upon which administrators would have made their




93 MacDonald, 'Management Competence, p. 287.




                                                                                                     23
