decisions ... to not only make us aware of what was written in the conventional way but
also to look beyond and exalnine the logic behind decisions' .94


The problenls that remain are twofold: there is the problem of historical enquiry and the
historian's trust. Cabinet decisions were made without minutes, and so researching
British 'strategy' as we might call it today, is difficult. As Mackesy has noted, 'It is no
easy task to discover what passed through their minds, or how they reached the decisions
embodied in their despatches: often it can only be inferred from the dispatches
themselves. for no record of cabinet discussions was kept, and the minutes and
memoranda which survive reveal little' .95 The second is one of historical trust. This thesis
focuses more on the administrative rather than the political sphere. The majority of
accounts were kept by clerks and civil servants, whose positions were not dependent on
\\'hichever party was in power. Some permanent officials were appointed by political
parties. but the majority of clerks were not. 96 Their duties were to administer and
organise, maintaining traditional records which were kept solely for the benefit of their
organisation. As such. they had no reason to fabricate information.



Supplying the Baltic Fleet

This thesis analyses the logistical support of the Baltic fleet between 1808 and 1812,
placing it rightly in its administrative and political context. Indeed, the Baltic fleet's
existence dovetails nicely with Spencer Perceval's government of 1809-12, one that
brought a clear sighted determination to support the war against Napoleonic hegemony.
Under Perceval, the country's capacity to raise and spend revenue grew extensively. As
Christie points out, expenditure began to 'soar into a new dimension ... although there was
nothing very novel about Perceval's fiscal policy, he found it possible to raise hitherto
unexampled proportions of war expenditure by taxation without damaging credit to the




9.. Clive Wilkinson, The British Navy and the State In The Eighteenth Century (Boydell Press, Woodbridge,

2004) p. 8.
95 Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean, p. viii.
96 Chapter 1 will cover this issue in more detail.




                                                                                                      24
