Chapter 1: Victualling the Navy and the British State,
1780-1812
        It is said our constitution is not well calculated for war. I know of no reason why, but because men
        cannot be found to attend to business.
                                               - Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782.1



Historians writing on government and administration in the 18 th century are confronted
with the idea of 'Old Corruption'. The term's source, the contemporary reformer William
Cobbett, defined it as a parasitic system that taxed the wealth of the nation and diverted it
into the pockets of a narrow political clique, whose control of patronage, government
contracts and rotten boroughs all hit the common man hard. Historians have taken this
notion and expanded it, seeing it as something more than simply social inequality. Philip
Harling has commented in his work on the subject of 'Old Corruption', that the French
Reyolutionary and Napoleonic Wars led to an enormous growth in taxes, public debt,
central government agencies and 'bureaucratic sclerosis'; in consequence the government
'inspired serious attacks on the ostensible "extravagance" of the state & insatiable greed
of its ministers'. 2 In other words, the efficiency of the state was called into question, in
particular how it allocated resources. As Harling comments, 'while the state had turned
into a yery efficient tax engine, Committee members [the 1797 Finance Committee]
concluded, it was still lamentably wasteful in the manner in which it allocated public
money·. 3 From the 1780s there were persistent if irregular calls for 'economic reform'.
Criticism was directed against the management of public finance, with repeated
parliamentary committees of accounts to examine expenditure and methods of
accounting.-+ Herein lies a paradox: how could a state where patronage, favouritism,
privilege were rife, order itself to fight and win a global war in which unprecedented
revenues were collected and government expenditure exceeded all previous records? The




1 Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782, Barham Papers, Vol. II, p. 66.
2 Philip Harling, The Waning of 'Old Corruption ': The Politics of Economic Reform in Britain, 1779-1846

(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) p. 2.
3 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 75.
4 MJ Daunton, Progress and Poverty: An Economic and Social History of Britain 1700-1850 (Oxford

University Press, 1995) p. 516.


                                                                                                          27
