ordnance and naval stores were provided during the winter months when the fleet
                          88
wintered in British ports. Victualling remained a steady and unceasing demand.


One factor assisting this thesis has been the large amount of archival resources available.
The Adn1iralty records in the National Archives are extensive, many of which have never
been consulted. Each government board kept rigorous accounts and daily minutes and
gathered all letters sent and received. MacDonald is dismissive of the Victualling Board
minutes as a source. describing them as 'cumbersome' and 'little more than abstracts' .89
On the contrary. they provide significant amounts of data, which if collected and
manipulated, tell us much about the performance of naval administrators. The British
Library and the Caird Library in the National Maritime Museum are similarly mines of
archival information. The papers of Sir James Saumarez are housed in their entirety in the
Suffolk Record Office, while the papers of the First Lord of the Admiralty between 1807
and 1809. Lord Mulgrave, are privately held but well-catalogued and accessible. 9o


That said there are understandable limits. Firstly, there are small gaps in the archives due
to accident. For example, the Bill of Exchange Books in the National Archives were
destroyed in a fire in 1923. 91 While the papers emanating from the British state are
generally well kept. merchants' accounts are less so: it has proven very difficult to locate
private-sector papers. Few firms or companies operating in the 1800s are still doing so
today. with the exception of Lloyd's insurers and a few of the older banks. This explains
the ease with which merchant accounts have disappeared from the historical record.
Williams noted the difficulty in discovering the owners of victualling transports, as
frequently only the master's were named, and those changed fairly regularly.92
Fortunately, one crucial private-sector archive - that of Henley and Sons, from whom the
Transport Board hired transports for much of the war - has been exceptionally useful. The
John Constable papers in the New York Public Library have also shed light on the

gg See for example, TNA, ADM 1/8,25 March 1809.
X9 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', pp. 37-38.
90 The Mulgrave Archive (MA) in Mulgrave Castle, Whitby, UK.
91 StiIllisted as TNA PMG1331, these records would have detailed the specific amounts paid in the Baltic

for locally sourced beef. In their place, the author has had to use ships logs and occasional Victualling
Board minutes, which are not as routine.
92 M.1. Williams, 'Sandwich', p. 534




                                                                                                        22
