point at which he could not also float the loans he required' .97 The victualling service was
slowly reforming after the Commission of Naval Revision reports of 1809, and indeed the
Baltic fleet itself would be one of the first beneficiaries of this. Consequently, this thesis
\\'ill consider the naval administration from the Admiralty, down through the subordinate
Transport and Victualling Boards, tracing the supply of provisions out to the Baltic
theatre itself. It will consider relative responsibilities, the chain of command, the
efficiency of logistical arrangements, the degree to which they improved over time, and
how their efficiency influenced strategic, operational and diplomatic decisions.


The oyerall efforts of the Victualling Board are remarkable; for example, the Navy's
yictualling tonnage between 1803 and 1807 quadrupled, and did so again by 1812,
                                             98
numbering 109 vessels of 31,827 tons.             These are numbers unparalleled before in British
naval     history;    provisioning the      Napoleonic      War was       an   unprecedented     task.
Commentaries on the worth of the Victualling Board itself are valuable, but less useful
without studies of how the fleets were supplied at lower levels, down the chain of
command. Questions of the efficiency of British naval victualling during the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars go unanswered.


At a time when government spending is continually challenged and contested, the desire
of eighteenth and nineteenth century administrators to improve the effectiveness of the
state becomes all the more relevant. Indeed, in an environment in which the utility of the
Royal Navy and the political uses of seapower are discussed ever more frequently, the
need for logistical excellence, alongside technological change to support fighting
capacity, continues to be essential. 99 There is still little known about the administrators
who worked on the war effort, on whom policy and management decisions fell. Theatres
distant from Wellington and Waterloo are also neglected; it is impossible to disagree with
Esdaile on this point. 100 From the First Lord of the Admiralty down to agent victuallers
afloat, the supply of the Baltic fleet is an area requiring further investigation. The

97 Ian R. Christie, Wars and Revolutions (Edward Arnold, London, 1982) pp. 290, 296.
98 Hall, British Strategy, p. 39
99 For instance Jeff McKnaughton, 'Searching High and Low for Innovative Solutions to Improve Naval
Logistics Efforts' (Military Logistics Forum, Vol. 2, Issue 4 (July 2008).
100 Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (Longman, Pearson Education, 1995) pp. ix-x.




                                                                                                      25
