century. the efforts of Harley and Godolphin had begun the process whereby men of
business and talent were brought in to government, ahead of political appointees. The
new departInents created after 1680 allowed 1 13 commissioners at the head of 18
different Boards; 'most of these commissioners, outside the Admiralty, the Board of
Trade and the Board of Ordnance, were essentially non-political', argued Holmes. And
indeed, a 1709 investigation ascertained that there had been only two instances in the
Board of Ordnance since 1683 of clerks dismissed at the whim of an incoming principal
officer. In the Admiralty and Navy Board "the overriding pattern was one of survival,
either until death or until retirement, for almost everyone except temporary clerks', rather
than political appointments. 17 A permanent, professional state civil service was the result,
with increased departmentalism and specialisation, The departmental nature of naval
administration \\Oi II be examined in Chapter 4.


'Ability' rather than 'contacts' decided appointments to a much higher degree than has
often been thought. For example, the English Revenue Commissioners represented the
                                                                            th
'hard core' of experience in the revenue departments of the late 18 century. As Ward
argues, 'despite all the claims of the aristocratic and political world ... a considerable
number of commissioners were in effect professional civil servants to whom
administration provided the career of a lifetime', It was possible for men with few
advantages to rise to the top of a Government department. 18


This was particularly true of naval departments. As Baugh points out, venality and
neglect had been so extensive in the eighteenth century navy 'that an administrative
historian, if he did not know in advance that the British navy was by far the strongest and
most consistently victorious navy of the period, could easily end with a catalogue of
                                                                                   th
reasons for British naval collapse' .19 The Victualling Board in the mid 18 century was
certainly not built on foundations of professionalism; in Middleton's words it 'provides
one of the worst examples of the 18 th century patronage system', with all of its members


17 Holmes, Augustan England, pp. 246-7.
IX WR Ward, 'Some Eighteenth Century Civil Servants: The English Revenue Commissioners 1754-98',

(English Historical Review, 70, 1955) p. 41-44.
19 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 2.




                                                                                                   31
