opinion that 'nothing short of an entire new system [is] likely to be effectual' .37 New
procedures and systems were brought in after the Commission of Naval Revision had
lnade its recommendations. As will be shown later, the Transport and Victualling Boards
were homes to constant improvement and refining of administrative procedures. These
went hand-in-hand with a reformation of the entire make-up of naval administration,
dissolYing patronage, replacing hereditary positions with a meritocracy and replacing fees
with salaries. The implementation of the reforms to the victualling system depended upon
these wider ranging changes. The reforms of 1809, in particular, demonstrated that
competence and merit had come to rule the respective offices.


The fundamental change was the replacement of the system of patronage with one that
\\'as more meritocratic. The Commission of Naval Revision saw the advent of
professionalism in naval administration. In January 1808, JC Searle, Commissioner of the
Victualling Board. wrote to the Lord of the Admiralty enquiring about a position on the
~ ayy Board. Searle was a man of convention, very much at home in the 18 th century
belief in traditional progression through the ranks of the naval departments. He was to
receive a shock. 'I have been informed that Commissioner Inglefield has declined the
acceptance of the situation intended for him at Somerset House' he wrote, and

              as the seat I know fill at this Board, has hitherto been considered as a preparatory step
              to the Navy Board, I should be wanting to myself, if I neglected this opportunity of
              soliciting your Lordship for that appointment. .. few Captains of any reputation in the
              Navy would accept the situation I now hold but for the prospect of succeeding to a
              better.


In 1808, he was dealing with a new world. Mulgrave's reply was terse and cutting:


              I have never understood that a seat at the Victualling Board has been considered as a
              preparatory step to the Navy Board by my predecessors, it certainly is not my
              intention so to consider it, nor could I indeed in that case have proposed the
              appointments to the Navy Board to Commissioner Inglefield.


Merit rather than seniority was the order of the day: 'If I may judge from the numerous
applications which I have already delivered, I can feel no apprehension of finding highly



37 Ibid p.   141.



                                                                                                          35
