respecti\'t~ly.27 However, 'as important as fees still were (and continued to be until the
practice came under systematic attack in the 1780's) in determining the records of office
in old-established departments, those who profited from them represented, well before
1730. very much the exception to the general rule of a salaried profession' .28
Surprisingly 'modern' terms of service were the norm in departments created after the
Reformation, most notably the payment of decent salaries with almost no supplementary
perquisites attached to them. 29


Naval Administration and the French Wars: The State
Reforms Itself
That being said. there can be no doubt that government departments, including the naval
departments were far from any definition of 'good government' at the start of the French
Reyolutionary War in 1793. The Victualling Board had been much criticised for
corruption before the Wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. In 1782, there
had been a lengthy scandal involving the chief clerk to the Secretary of the Victualling
Board, a man named Wilkins, who had divulged confidential information to a naval
agent. Lacking support from the Admiralty, George Philip Towry, at this time Secretary
to the Board, was forced to reinstate him. An outraged Burgoyne resigned from the Board
and wrote to Towry, 'My good friend, I fear you are likely to have a troublesome life of
it, & will I fear soon experience how impossible it is to stem the tide of jobbs &
dishonesty' .30 Towry, tasked with restoring the good name of the Board saw it as
'absolutely necessary to restore the Victualling Office to the good opinion of the Public',
under no illusions as to 'how low it had fallen' .31 Calls for reform of the Victualling
Board in 1788 following the Commission on Fees were not heeded. Patronage was still
rampant. As Wilkinson points out, 'the Admiralty Board members were often hostage to
political fortune, whereas the more minor officials within the Admiralty and the members



27 Ibid p.16-7.
2X Holmes, Augustan England, p. 257.
29 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 23.
30 Roger Knight, 'Politics and Trust in Victualling the Navy, 1793-1815', MM, Vol. 94, No.2, May 2008, p.

134.
31 Knight, 'Politics and Trust', p. 134.




                                                                                                      33
