reputable officers to fill any vacancIes which might arIse at the Victualling Board,
\\'ithout any pledge on my part for their removal to better situations which must & always
be distant & precarious', wrote Mulgrave. 38 Political influence was generally removed
fron1 the Victualling Board. Indeed, one of the consequences of the Victualling Board's
lower status was that the Board had no serving MPs. One of the few political placemen
who sen'ed on the Victualling Board, the Hon. Edward Stewart, fifth son of the Earl of
Galloway, ga\'e up his parliamentary seat in Scotland on the day in 1809 that he was
appointed to the Board. 39


A combination of the Commission of Naval Revision's reports and the discovery of
misdeeds by the Victualling office led to the replacement of three commissioners,
creating embarrassment in Parliament. A motion was proposed by Admiral Sir Charles
Pole (chairman of the earlier Commmission of Naval Enquiry) on the necessity to appoint
'professional' and 'indefatigable' commissioners. 4o In 1809 the Victualling Board
'purged' itself. Elderly. ineffectual commissioners were removed in favour of younger,
more dynamic - and most importantly - officials who were appointed on merit.
Commissioners Marsh, Budge and Moody were all removed from service in the Board.
They were fired not because of their political loyalty, but because they were deemed not
to be up to the job. Robert Sadley Moody complained avidly to Mulgrave. After listing
his 49 years of service, he stated with some degree of snobbery that


          I found myself placed by Order of the Board of Admiralty, the Junior Member of the
          Junior committee in the new arrangement of the Victualling Board; a situation, which
          I could not possibly occupy without being degraded not only in my own Eyes, but in
          the opinion of the Public, particularly as two of the Gentlemen who had served as
          Pursers in the Navy were new Members, and, two other Gentlemen had not been three
          years at the Board.




3X MA 20/652, JC Searle to Lord Mulgrave, 8 January 1808. It would be small comfort to Searle that in fact
only five commissioners did receive a 'promotion' to the more senior Navy Board, four them being Navy
officers. Searle would get a promotion, becoming Chairman of the Victualling Office 11 months later, in
December 1808. See Knight, 'Politics and Trust', pp. 135, 145.
39 Hon Edward Richard Stewart, M.P. Wigtown Burghs 1806-20 Jan 1809, Commissioner of the
Victualling Board 20 January 1809-14 June 1813. See Roger Knight, The Spending and Accounting
Performance of the British Victualling Board, 1793-1815', WEHC Conference Utrecht 2009.
40 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', p. 161.




                                                                                                       36
