The mo\'e to bring in able and talented men (in this case pursers) put him 'under the
painful necessity of soliciting leave to retire on a Pension'. The rest of his letter went on
to ask for a full salary pension, rather than three-quarters, since he has served more than
the 35 years stipulated in the Order of Council respecting Superannuation of Officers and
Clerks, which he argued was applicable to him. Mulgrave's reply was typically brusque
and dismissi\'e .41


The advent of professionalism can perhaps best be seen in a letter of February 1810.
James Archibald Wortley wrote to Lord Mulgrave, wishing for George Watson to
succeed his uncle (Mf. Wilkie) as Agent Victualler at Malta where he had been employed
oyer the preyious six months. Mulgrave was adamant that no such privileges could be
tolerated:


           It is \ery unusual to allow officers to resign their situation in favour of their Relations,
           & were this the Practise with respect to Good and permanent situations, Government
           would find it difficult to prevail on competent Persons to undertake temporary
           Service. or accept appointments to small Establishments, which they are now
           encouraged to do in hopes of advancement, & it would be improper in the event of Mr
           \Vilkie being ... otherwise obliged to quit his station to appoint his nephew provided he
           were qualified, over the heads of many who have been, & now are acting in situation
           not pennanent or so good as that of Agent Victualler at Malta. 42


Appointments were no longer favours, but were made on merit. Before the wars against
Revolutionary and Napoleonic France, patronage dominated naval administration. It
could provoke anger in certain quarters. In the years 1779 to 1781, the Comptroller of the
Navy Board, Charles Middleton, wrote a series of letters to the then First Lord of the
Admiralty, Lord Sandwich, arguing that experience and merit should replace political
favour as the basis of civil naval appointments: 'for want of proper men to conduct the
                                                                                                          43
business at the ports, no expedition is used in fitting the ships', he complained.
Increasingly frustrated at the abuses of patronage, Middleton demanded the chance to
report on the 'character' of potential dockyards employees: as he said, 'the spirit of
faction, which has gained strength by your political system of management, would have


41 MA 221216, Commissioner Robert Sadleir Moody to Lord Mulgrave, 1 January 1810.
42 MA 22/359a, James Archibald Stuart Wortley to Lord Mulgrave, 17 February 1810.
-13 Middleton to Sandwich, (no date) 1779, Letters of Lord Barham, p. 7.




                                                                                                          37
