manage the means to victory. Military departments were (and indeed are) different to
other goyernmental departments. This chapter will focus on the Victualling and Transport
Boards as case studies of government competence under the pressure of war. It will argue
that in these particular government bodies, changes had been made that put them ahead of
their peers in other departments. Secondly, the impulse for these reforms did not, as
Harling argues. derive from political fear instilled by the events of the French Revolution,
or at least, not entirely. It was the escalation of the war against Napoleon that brought
hon1e to British governments that something approaching a 'total' effort would be needed
to defeat Napoleon. Given a choice between reform or defeat, British governments
unsurprisingly chose the latter.



The 18th Century State
How can we judge an efficient state? Aylmer puts forward six principal features of 'the
old administrative system', including entry to office through purchase or patronage,
lifetime tenure, the concept of offices as personal property, remuneration of these offices
                                                                            8
coming from fees and perquisites rather than fixed salaries. In a similar vein, Harling
focuses on two key factors differentiating the mid-Victorian state from the fiscal military-
state of 1780. 9 Firstly, whilst the former was characterised by 'cheap government' and
low expenditure compared to other European states, the latter was summed up by very
high levels of public expenditure. 1o The first judgement is clearly accurate: wartime
spending gave rise to very high levels of public expenditure. Spending was £4.9 per
                                                                                                        11
capita in 1801 and £4.5 per capita in 1811, compared to £2.0 per capita in 1851.                             The
second difference was one of 'good government'. By the mid-nineteenth century, and
possibly not until the 1870s with the Northcote-Trevelyan Report, there was an


K Gerald Aylmer, 'From Office-Holding to Civil Service: The Genesis of Modern Bureaucracy' in TRHS,

5th Series, part 30 (1980) pp. 91-108.
9 The 'fiscal-military state' is a concept conceived by John Brewer in his book The Sinews of Power that
                                                     th
has generally been accepted by historians of the 18 century. The rising cost of war meant military
endeavours required increasing higher public spending, itself requiring higher tax revenues. A state's
ability to wage war depended increasingly on its ability to raise revenue, hence the fiscal-military state. It
has much in common with Geoffrey Parker's concept of the 'Military Revolution' and indeed can be seen
as the logical conclusion to it.
10 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 9.
11 Ibid p. 12.




                                                                                                              29
