acceptance and adoption of 'rational' standards of administrative efficiency and of 'lofty'
standards of public conduct by civil servants and minsters alike. This contrasted
markedly with the British state seventy years earlier. Quoting Gerald Aylmer, Harling
argues that the British state c.1780 was manifested in 'an extraordinary patch-work of
administrative efficiency and waste, of probity and abuse', rather than fairly uniform
standards of rational 'good government' .12 The second characteristic however is more
debateable. The state was larger, but was it inefficient? This study provides an
opportunity to assess this at a mid-way point, during the Napoleonic Wars of 1803-15.


Ho\\' did Harling define 'good government'? Echoing Aylmer's description of 'the old
administrative system', he argued that government and administration would not be
deeply influenced by political considerations (by which he meant party-political
considerations), with the appointment of state servants insulated from politics. Secondly,
political office would be a position of public trust, rather than one of private property.
Appointments were not sold but earned. Lastly, 'good government' was characterised by
strict salaries, formal superannuation arrangements, and transactions of official business
by the appointee in person, instead of irregular emoluments and fees. 13


The degree to which the pre-1793 government was corrupt and inefficient has been
overstated. Certainly patronage did dominate the political scene. Holmes is right to
comment that 'no government, even in wartime, was entirely innocent of patronage
considerations' .1-+ Harling himself noted, it is easy to exaggerate the extent of government
patronage. IS There was a growing tendency to appoint men on the grounds of ability,
merit and experience, in other words a professionalisation of the naval departments. After
1688 professionalism and expertise began to pervade the upper ranks of departments, as
Harling notes, 'for the growing volume and complexity of public business called forth the
energies of a good many talented and hard-working men' .16 In the early eighteenth


12 Aylmer, 'Genesis of Modern Bureaucracy', p. 106. Harling, Old Corruption, p. 10.
13 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 14.
14 Geoffrey Holmes, Augustan England: Professions, State and Society 1680-1730 (George Allen and

Unwin, 1982) p. 244.
15 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 15.
16 Ibid p. 23.




                                                                                                   30
