revenue and private Income should be completely separated: gratuities and fees for
perforn1ing official duties should cease, as should sinecures (to be replaced by pensions).
Fees and other perquisites compensated for the low level of the salaries established in the
seventeenth century and not altered since: they were regarded as an 'inflationary
influence' on the costs of the navy.48 Abuses in the transport service were common
before the institution of the Transport Board. Transports were hired not according to the
tonnage of the ship. but according to the quantity of stores put on board, which method
'opened a door to a variety of abuses' noted the Commission on Fees in 1788. As the
Commission of Naval Revision wrote years after, 'a door was opened for very great
temptations to the persons entrusted with the execution of this service' .49


The eighth report of the Commission on Fees detailed many instances of salaries being
boosted by fees, gratuities and perquisites from various sources. The accountant for cash
and his chief clerk received 2s 6d per bill for despatching bills of freight and demurrage,
and from 2s 6d to £2 2s for bills to tradesmen and artificers. His first and second extra
clerks receive respectively 2s 6d per search for checking that masters of victuallers had
accounted properly for returned casks, and 2s 6d to 5s for entering each bill of exchange.
In 1798, the accountant for cash reported an average income over the previous three years
of £3169 13s, of which only £120 was salary, while his chief clerk reported an average
income over the same period of £1722 2s 2d of which only £60 was salary. The
Commission on Fees commissioners recommended that the system of fees as part of
salaries should be replaced by a salary-only system, although it was not until 1800 that
their salary recommendations for the Victualling Board and its staff were put into
effect. 5o


Nine years later, a further commission began to report on naval administration, the tenth
report covering the working of the Victualling Board. Any form of corrupt behaviour was
rooted out. It stated that:


4R Roger Morriss, Naval Power and British Culture,   1760-1850 (Ashgate, London, 2004) p. 31.
49 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 5 .
.'if) Commission on Fees, Eighth Report, pp.695-706, quoted in MacDonald, 'Management Competence', pp.

 175,177.


                                                                                                   39
