            No Commissioner. Officer, Clerk, or other person belonging to the Victualling
            Department shall receivc for his own advantage any fee, gratuity, perquisite, or
            emolument whatevcr, from nay person having, or had, any transactions with the
            Victualling Department', and ordered that all Victualling Office employees take an
            oath, supported hy a bond worth three times their respective salaries. 51


Eyery person entrusted with making purchases, 'or other expenditure of public money
abroad' was to 'attest on oath ... that he neither has received, nor expects to receive,
directly or indirectly, any benefit whatever from such expenses', again under penalty. 52


In April 1808 for example, ten Victualling Board employees, including the accountant for
cash, were sacked for the simple crime of receiving presents from contractors. The Lords
of the Admiralty could only 'express their surprize, that the system of corruption which
appears in the minutes of the Evidence ... all persons against whom the receiving presents
or being concerned as Agents, Brokers, or otherwise, for Contractors ... in violation of
their Oaths and their duty has been proved, should be immediately dismissed from their
respective employments' .53 This was not the practice of an inefficient government
institution. Indeed, the Admiralty's anger was amplified by the fact that the offences
'should have been carried to so great an extent and for such a considerable length of time
in direct violation of the regulations of this Office ... without the Board having discovered
it' .5'+ This was an unusual event: the Commission of Naval Revision stated that 'we
belie\e that the same highly commendable disinterestedness in the Commissioners still
continues'. 55 Soon after its establishment in 1794 the Transport Board had made similar
efforts to eliminate some of the abuses that still existed. One of the first resolutions
passed by the Transport Board stated that no person belonging to, or under the direction
of the Board, should have any property vested in transports, or share or shares of any
ships or vessels employed as a transport, directly or indirectly, under pain of dismissal
from office. 56



51 Commission of Naval Revision, Tenth Report, p. 21.
52 Ibid p. 22.
53 TNA, ADM 111/187, 23 April 1808.
54 Ibid.
55 Commission of Naval Revision, Tenth Report, p. 16.
56 TNA, ADM 108/31, 26 August 1794, quoted in M.E. Condon, 'The Establishment of the Transport
Board - A Subdivision of the Admiralty - 4 July 1794' (MM, Vol. 58, 1972) p. 82.


                                                                                                 40
