state's ser\'ice. was the twenty years of warfare which ensued during the quarter century
between 1689 and 1713'. Between 1706 and 1711, there was a constant army size of over
 120,000. and in December 1688 there were 100 ships of the line. As Holmes comments,
'nothing to compare with such a force had been mustered by any previous generation'. In
other words. war had forced British government to extend itself: 'to organise, equip and
direct such armed forces, and to raise and administer the revenue for a military and naval
budget that was eventually five times as large as James II's, called not only for a much
larger and more complex executive than that of 1688 but for a new attitude towards the
officials who composed it".71




Just as in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century, the state during the
Napoleonic Wars responded to unprecedented challenges with reforms that changed
aspects of the British state. Esdaile has commented that Britain 'brought down Napoleon
\\·ithout any fundamental reformation in either Britain's way of making war or her system
of government". 72 While this is true in a general structural sense, it neglects the wide-
ranging reforms brought in to win the war by the naval administration. There was no
 'British Revolution', nor a change from parliamentary control. The British State was not
an inert institution, obsessed with notions of privilege and patronage. In a war that placed
unprecedented strains on Britain, the naval departments of British government, especially
in the last years of the war, were able to reform itself to fight a conflict of some
magnitude.


Ascribing the changes of 1809 to Benthamite influence is at best doubtful. Like all naval
departments, the Victualling Board operated on the principle of collective responsibility,
rather than the individual responsibility urged by Samuel Bentham, with all
                                                                             73
correspondence being signed by a minimum quorum of commissioners.                 As Morriss
points out, after 1805, 'Benthamite thinking went underground'. As he comments, 'there

71 Holmes, Augustan England, p. 242.
72 Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (Longman, 1995) p. 143.
73 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', p. 168.




                                                                                         45
