lS   no eddence that Barham either sympathised with Bentham's ideas for reform or
understood the system he hoped to promote' .74 It seems clear that the impulse came not
from fear of re\'olution, but fear of defeat. It was the challenge of war that implemented
reform.


Daunton argues that 'the Whigs in the 1830' s were in many ways completing the work of
Burke and Pitt rather than embarking on a new radical attack to destroy 'Old
Corruption" .75 It was the reforming tendencies of the Portland, Perceval and Liverpool
administrations, faced with perhaps the first 'total' war in British history that should take
the credit for reforming the naval departments. Improved efficiency of the Victualling
Board did not happen for its own sake, but was part of a wider investigation into
improving the machinery of government so that it could fight the war against Napoleon.
In 1782 Middleton complained that men could not be found for business. This was no
longer the case by the 1800s.




74 Morriss, Naval Power and British Culture, pp.175, 185. Roger Morriss has traced the reform of naval
administration to the influence of Samuel Bentham, the son of Jeremy Bentham, who was made Inspector
General of the Naval Works in 1796. Previous historians such as A.V. Dicey identified 'the period of
Benthamism or individualism' as 1825-70, though Henry Parris believed such thinking was 'highly
misleading' noting the contrasts between nineteenth century laissez-faire with Benthamist utilitarianism.
Morriss attempts to 'relocate the beginnings of that "revolution in government" to the late 1790's' and to
attach it to Samuel rather than Jeremy Bentham. By Benthamism, he meant individual responsibility, the
centralisation of financial control, moti vation of the workforce by the desire to rise in class, and the
optimism of performance by education. Such changes would generate a meritocracy. Morriss, Naval Power
and British Culture, pp. 3-4.
75 Daunton, Progress and Poverty, p. 517.




                                                                                                         46
