Competence more than political loyalty was the deciding factor in appointments and this
seeped through into the Board's business. The Victualling Board had long been behind
with its accounts during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. The reforming
Victualling Board after the Commission began targeting their backlog of accounts, partly
the result of cmnbersome accounting procedures, and partly the result of insufficient
staff. By 1810, the Victualling Board was making quarterly reports on the progress which
had been made:


           r~~L1l\'ing the arrears of accuunts in this Office by employing a part of our Officers and
           Clerk~ out of the stated hours of employment of the Clerks during extra hours, and to
           report to their Lordships, at the expiration of every three months, the progress made in
           reducing the arrears of Victualling Accounts ... during the last three months the
           employment of our Officers and Clerks out of the established hours of Office, has
           principally been devoted to the Cash and Store accounts, in arrear of Pursers of His
           ~laj~sty's Ships and Vessels, and that the progress made in passing them, compared
           with former operations in a similar period, has been in the increased proportion of
           more than one half beyond what we were formerly able to accomplish. 57


The Board was not only improving, but catching up on previous backdated accounts.


What of victualling contracts? The 'financial revolution', as M.J. Daunton has termed it
that occurred in London, created a wealthy elite of loan contractors and merchants who
were allied to the state and its pursuit of war and empire. 58 'It was inevitable', argues
Harling, 'that the provisioning requirements of such a far flung and protracted war effort
would furnish contractors and government officers with irresistible opportunities to
commit frauds on the public' .59 Perhaps it was likely, but not inevitable. It is certainly
true that some contractors did well out of the war. John Constable, part of a network of
merchants supplying British forces in the West Indies, was certainly making serious
profits, though not scandalous ones. His balance sheet between August and December
                                                                                                        6o
1796 showed a profit of £9520 14s 1d, from an account balance of £61054 ISs 6d.                              The
next year his profit or 'commission' can be seen in the table below.


57 ADM 110/63/37-8, Victualling Board to Admiralty, 4 December 1810.
58 Daunton, Progress and Povert)', p. 478.
59 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 76.
60 NYPL, Constable Pierrepont Papers, Box 7




                                                                                                              41
