Chapter 2: Evolution in the Navy: the Strategic
Consequences of an Improving Victualling Service

The \\ant of timely supplies ... at se\'eral times ... greatly obstructed those Designs, which otherwise might
ha\'e been carried on with greater Advantage to the Publick. 1
                                                                                  - Josiah Burchett, 1703



Various scholars, notably Aldridge, Baugh, Buchet, Gradish, N.A.M. Rodger, and MJ.
 \Villiams ha\'e written positively of the victualling achievements of the Royal Navy
during the 18 century. ~ These works concentrate on specific periods or individual wars:
                 th


 \\'hat is missing is a consideration of the linear improvements in the victualling service
from the 17-l-0s to the Napoleonic War. At various junctures the ability of the naval
administration of Great Britain to provision fleets in foreign waters improved
incrementally, culminating in the efficient and timely service provided in the last years of
the :'\apoleonic War. This improvement was not reliant on technology. The ships,
transports, preservation materials available to the Victualling Board in the 1800s were for
all intents and purposes the same as those used in the 1740s. The evolution of the
\'ictualing service was the consequence of systemic and administrative change: this
chapter will trace these developments through the 18 th century through to 1808. The rest
of the thesis will judge how far the Napoleonic War witnessed the culmination of these
developments.


Throughout the 18 th Century there were very rarely shortages of victuals in British
Victualling storehouses. The victualling service's ability to provision its fleets and
squadrons around the globe rested on its distribution of foodstuffs. MJ. Williams noticed
two major problems of 18 th century victualling that were 'almost insoluble'. Firstly, there


I Burchett participated in the naval administration of William III (reigning from 1650-1702). Baugh, British
Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole p. 373. As Baugh comments, Burchett's comments were
undeniably accurate.
2 D.D. Aldridge, 'British Naval Expeditions', Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole.
Baugh, Naval Administration. Buchet, Marine, economie et societe. Gradish, Manning of the British Navy.
N.A.M. Rodger, 'The Victualling of the British Navy during the Seven Years' War', Bulletin du Centre
d'Histoire des Espaces Atlantique, Bordeaux, 1985, pp. 37-54. M.1. Williams, 'Sandwich'. Rodger stated
that 'British naval victualling is a remarkable story of rising standards, making ever extended operations
possible', Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 366.


                                                                                                            47
