                     68
was defeated.             Accordingly, it required unprecedented means to win. Given a choice
between efficiency and defeat. the British government naturally chose the latter. From
this arose the movenlent towards efficiency in its military departments that was for the
 most part completed by 1809. More than any other factor, it was war that forced the
 goyernment and administration to reform. The state was scrutinised, resulting in radical
 bureaucratic change in nayal administration, as demonstrated above. As the threat to the
 country eyolyed, so did the measures to deal with it. The state was looking for efficiency
 and stepped in where it did not exist.


 Lastly. efficiency was also needed to maintain the credit-worthiness of the fiscal-military
          69
 state.        At a tilne when the collapse of public credit would spell ruin for the British state
 (and it nearly did in 1797 when fears of foreign invasion caused a collapse in confidence
and a run on the banks), the British government was always keen to demonstrate its
efficiency. as can be seen in its responses to the various enquiries into naval and military
administration. The Commission for Naval Revision should also be seen in this light.
\Var forcing administrative change was nothing new. In the 1680s and 1690s there was a
drive for greater administrative efficiency, especially in revenue raising and collection,
 'its mainsprings arising from a rejuvenated Treasury. A strengthening of central
authority, the impact of war, and a fundamental change in attitudes towards public
service in England came together to bring this about' .70 It was from this that the 'fiscal-
military state' as described by John Brewer arose. The military and naval administration
was quick to reform.


As Holmes has argued of the 1680s, 'the second development in point of time, and one
which far more spectacular effects on career opportunity in all three branches of the


                                                                                                th
fiX The issue of whether the Napoleonic Wars were 'total' or merely the largest of all the 18   century
limited wars is hotly debated. Recent scholarship such as David A. Bell's The First Total War
(Bloomsbury, London, 2007) tends towards the former. It is not the place here to discuss it in detail, since it
                                                                                                  th
is an argument that depends as much on definition and semantics as on historical argument. 20 century
                                                                          th
maxims of total war such as confiscation of property were alien to the 18 century mind. However,
conscription, and seemingly unlimited political objectives were first seen in these wars. Let it simply be
said that the Napoleonic Wars were more 'total' than anything seen before, but less total than the later wars
of the 19 th century in 1861-5 and 1870-1.
69 Daunton, Progress and Poverty, p. 517.
70 Holmes, Augustan England, pp. 241-2.




                                                                                                            44
