condemned large quantities of provisions delivered by contractors as being unfit for
hmnan consumption. On one occasion in 1780, Cherry reported that one contractor had
failed to deliver 54,920 pounds of beef and 229,767 pounds of butter for the last convoy
                  2
of the year.-+ By and large though, the production of foodstuffs was never an issue
operationally.-+3 The main challenge was in distributing provisions around the globe.


Victualling success clearly depended on an adequate transport system. Where transports
were ayailable, or where inadequacies could be offset by local provisioning, fleets could
be supplied, operations could be maintained. However, the regularity with which
complaints \\'ere made demonstrates that victualling from a discrete, centralised location
had yet to be mastered. M.1. Williams wrote that 'it is clear that there were shortcomings
in the yictualling system under Sandwich. There were delays and supplies fell short from
time to time. Yet the great difficulties of supplying foreign stations in the days of sail
must be remembered. Vital factors were the provisions of adequate transport and convoy
escort to say nothing of favourable winds. Delays through failure to meet any of these
requirements might result in great loss through provisions becoming rotten' .44 That these
problems remained throughout much of the war is an indictment of the naval
administration's performance. Delays caused by convoy and transport provision could be
overcome.


Transport procurement was a slow and laborious task. As Syrett put it: 'ordinary business
concerning the transport service moved through the hierarchy of British government in a
sluggish and inefficient manner ... weeks and in some cases months might be required to
resolve simple problems relating to the transport service' .45 He details many examples of
delays in transport and victuals. In 1779 a convoy requested by the Navy Board on the 5
June 1779, was only loaded and ready by 4 September 1779. The speed with which a
convoy was secured was even slower. That same example of 1779 did not receive its


42 Ibid p. 150.
43 The contracting side of victualling during the American War is covered admirably in Norman Baker,
Government and Contractors: British Treasury and War supplies, J 775-83 (University of London
Historical Society, 1971).
44 MJ. Williams, 'Sandwich', p. 567.
45 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, pp. 12-15.




                                                                                                       57
