complimentary of the provisioning service. As he argued, the Victualling Board were
'dedicated and conscientious nlen who were remarkably successful in raising the
standards of naval victualling in a day and age when the technology of preparing and
preserving victuals in their original state for prolonged periods was virtually non-
existent'. Gradish is ultimately positive about the Victualling Board: 'on the whole, the
picture that emerges of the Victualling Board is favourable', he argues, though follows
this with the slightly more circumspect, 'certainly they were not totally incompetent and
         • 11
corrupt.


Victualling efficiency was improved. The proportion of victuals condemned shrank
drastically: for Bread only one pound in every 294, and for beef only one pound in every
                              12
1,691 was condemned.               Calculations of supply became more exact. Ships were given
four months of rations: enough to sustain a fleet for that period but not too much that
provisions would go off and thus be wasted. In 1756, Admiral Boscawen wrote that 'This
ship has know been at sea twelve weeks, which is longer than I ever knew any first-rate
ever at sea ... at the beginning of the Spanish War our cruisers would not keep the sea
above a fortnight, till one or two of them were broken for it, now three months is but a
                  .    . 13
common cruIse .


During the Seven Years War, the key aim of naval strategy was to keep a strong battle-
fleet off the French Atlantic coast for as long as possible. British strategy centered around
the Western Squadron which could cover the English Channel and Atlantic ports: the
naval ports of Brest and Rochefort in particular, but also the commercial ports of Le
Havre, St Malo, Nantes and Bordeaux. 14 This blockade required constant vigilance, to
imprison the French fleet and attack French mercantile commerce; it had to be continuous




11 Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, p.   146.
12 Ibid pp.   144-5.
13 Kemp, 'Boscawen's Letters to his Wife, 1755-56' in Lloyd, Naval ~iscellany IV, p. 248.
14 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 264. Michael Duffy, 'The EstablIshment of t.h~ Western Squadron as
the linchpin of British Naval Strategy' in Michael Duffy ed. The Parameters of Brztlsh Naval Power, 1650-
1850 (Exeter, 1992) pp. 66-81.


                                                                                                      51
