Deptford. Not only would this enable the Royal Navy to distribute higher volumes of
provisions, the location of both south-coast ports enabled them to playa significant role
in supplying fleets blockading French northern and western ports. The proximity of
closer \,ictualling out-ports meant re-provisioning could be completed much more
quickly. Baugh comments that "it is striking how seldom, during the war of 1739-1748,
they altered plans or postponed their moves because of inadequate victuals,.8


Problems of \,ictualling were magnified when distributing victuals to squadrons and bases
o\'erseas. Fleets cruising in foreign waters were victualled through local contracts. This
was limited by politics and geography. The increasing number of ships in service added
to \'ictualling difficulties, as the war escalated. As Baugh commented, 'with the
expansion of overseas operations the challenges of distance and climate grew more
formidable,.9 The problem of communication over wide distances, and problems securing
transport tonnage impacted upon the victualling system. At times there was a dearth of
shipping a\'ailable for government hire, without which supplies could not be transported.
victualling commissioners complained that shipping was hard to get. This was not
because potential shipping was not available: government was slow in adjusting its rates
and terms of hire to meet wartime market conditions. 1o As we will see, this was not a
problem limited to the 1740s. Despite some improvements in the victualling service, the
naval administration could not yet guarantee timely arrivals of foodstuffs at ships, and
admirals and captains continued to complain of bad provisions and to worry about future
supplies. Ships or fleets could not act independently of their supplies.




Victualling During the Seven Years War
During the Seven Years War victualling standards continued to rIse, as the naval
administration of Britain grappled with the problems of distributing provisions. Stephen
Gradish re-emphasised the insoluble problems Williams spoke of, but was otherwise


8   Ibid, p. 374.
9 Ibid, p. 406.
10 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, pp. 441-2.




                                                                                       50
