to be effective. The onset of disease was the nlain determinant of the length of a cruise. IS
For the fleet to remain on station they would require provisions greater than the four
months worth of provisions they left port with. Early in the war, the navy had yet to
organise a system whereby fleets outside victualling ports could be regularly supplied
without simply returning to port. As a result a force of at least one and a half times that of
the squadron at sea was required so piecemeal detachments could be made for repairs and
refreshment. 16 This meant that a significant proportion of ships of war available would be
engaged in re-victualling at any given time, rather than serving operational or strategic
functions. It was an inefficient use of naval force.


During the Seven Years War, occasions when fleets were forced to abandon operations
due to poor logistics were common. Two of Hawkes's cruises in 1755-6 barely lasted two
          17
months.        Anson, although aware of the risk involved in raising the blockade, was forced
to leave his station in 1758. Given the perilous shortage of provisions for his fleet he had
to grasp any expedient to preserve the health of the crew. He sent a large minority of his
fleet back to port due to scurvy, with the intention of allowing them to restore their
strength. otherwise, they 'will be destroyed and the ships in the end will become useless'.
They were not home long enough: in August the fleet had almost one thousand sick on
board, half of these ill with scurvy and fever, and the worst affected ships had to be sent
                                                                                       I8
home again, reducing the strength of his squadron by three vessels.                         Operations
continued to be seriously affected by victualling shortfalls, with the result that the
blockade was periodically broken.


The victualling service improved from 1759. There were developments in packing and
processing of victuals, with production of naval victuals centralised in the major ports in




15 Michael Duffy, 'Devon and the Naval Strategy of the French Wars 1689-1815' in Michael Duff, Stephen
Fisher, Basil Greenhill, David J. Starkey, Joyce Youngs, ed. The New Maritime History of Devon: Volume
1 From Early Times to the Late Eighteenth Century (Conway Maritime Press, London, 1992) p. 188.
16 Baugh, 'Naval Power', p. 250.
17 Duffy, 'Devon and the Naval Strategy of the French Wars 1689-1815', p. 188.                      .
                          th
18 Anson to Shelburne, 16 July 1758, William L. Clements Library, Shelburne MSS, Vol. 137 p. 91, cIted
in Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, pp. 137-8.


                                                                                                    52
