months, to enjoy a better state of health upon the watery element, than it can well be
imagined so great a number of people would enjoy, on the most healthful spot of ground
in the world' .25 Logistical breakthroughs brought strategic dividends. The Victualling
Board's "greatest achievement' during the Seven Years War was the resupplying ships of
the Royal Navy in the Bay of Biscay, enabling Hawke to fight the battle of Quiberon
Bay, and to closely blockade Brest for six months, an 'unprecedented strategy', one not
repeated until the French Revolutionary Wars.26


It is important to put this in context; these were still very primitive moves. There were
still huge problems in shipping and distributing the victuals. A Victualling Commissioner
reported that the master's inability to navigate, a want of manning and damages sustained
loading and unloading (threatening the master's profits) meant that 'almost all the
masters of the victualling vessels ... had come to him in a body and requested their
discharge,.27 Syrett comments that during the Seven Years War, the Victualling Board
'was able to procure shipping required to transport all the provisions required by the
crews of the ships of the Royal Navy' .28 Yet, supplies shipped could only be a small
proportion of the necessary total. Proximity to the ports of Plymouth and Portsmouth
meant provisions could be sent to the Channel fleet, but to stations further away this
became a much more imposing challenge. In the mid eighteenth century, transporting
victuals was limited to fleets in home waters, and also to the summer months. Bad
weather and insufficient shipping forced seamen to rely on a standard diet during the
winter months. 29 In the Americas and West Indies, supply remained the sum of what
could be carried on board ship, and what could be bought locally. Here the Victualling
Board continued to organise local merchants to supply provisions to ships stationed
overseas.



                                                                                          fd
25 James Lind, An Essa)' on the most Effectual Means of Preserving the Health of Seamen (3 edn 1779), in
Christopher Lloyd, ed. The Health of Seamen (NRS Vol. 107, 1965) p. 121.
26 Syrett, Shipping and Military Power in the Seven Years War: The Sails of Victory (University of Exeter

Press, 2008) p. 55.
27 Admiralty to Victualling Commissioners, 2 August 1759, British Naval Documents 1204-1960, p. 442 ..
28 Syrett, Shipping and Military Power in the Seven Years War, p.55. See also Andrew Lambert, Warfare In
the Age of Sail 1650-1850 (Cassell, London, 2000) p. 122.
29 Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, pp. 167-169.




                                                                                                      54
