Stores however were never the maIn problem. An even larger problem was the
operational issue: once a fleet was on station, there was no certainty that, assuming ships
were initially victualled for between four and six months, re-victualling could be carried
out at that period. After this period there was no administrative infrastructure to keep
ships at sea supplied. A ships time at sea could be measured by the food they took with
them. After this had been consumed, the vessels returned to port, often limiting, or in the
worst cases se\'erely harming a fleet's operational viability. On one occasion in August
1717 for instance all but ten ships were sent back from the Baltic to enable the remaining
ships to maintain a 'whole allowance' of victuals. s


As Britain entered the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-1748) the naval
administration would be confronted by a further problem: administrative inefficiency.
Logistical distribution was a systemic problem and the movement of supplies and stores
across the globe would be a challenging and occasionally impossible task. This was
further weakened by problems of management: even assuming resources could be
distributed there was no guarantee that what was sent would be a well judged or accurate
amount. Clerks worked from reports that were out of date; consequently calculations of
spoilage and supply were inaccurate and unreliable. As a result, administrators learnt to
provide more than enough and to accept waste as an unavoidable consequence of
preparedness. 6 Wastage of provisions, administrative inefficiencies and faults in the
provisioning system would therefore connive against naval operations.


Daniel Baugh has outlined the improvements the victualling services made during the
war of 1740-48. The Victualling Board took great initiative in anticipating the needs of
various squadrons. The government office did remarkably well in answering sudden
demands (helped by a dynamic London food market, and Irish beef and butter), and stood
                                                                         7
ready to fill gaps in the army's victualling arrangements. Facilities at Portsmouth and
Plymouth were expanded, which made them the two most important out-ports after


5 Ibid. Victualling difficulties were sunnounted by a degree of local provisioning, though as the Baltic fleet
of 1808-12 found later, this was limited to a few foodstuffs, all of which were extortionately expensive.
6 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, pp. 444,449.
7 Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, p. 406.




                                                                                                            49
