French Re\,olutionary and Napoleonic Wars. This was a move towards a more efficient
use of na\'al strength. By using fleets of transports to supply fleets in foreign waters, no
warships would be wasted transporting provisions, or returning to port to re-victual.
Centralised, remote supply was not a universal policy: fleets in the East Indies and West
Indies would continue to be supplied using local contractors. 65 The majority of fleets
would be supplied from British out-ports. Remote supply removed fleet dependence on
local politics and climates that could not be guaranteed, and allowed victualling decision
making to be centralised in London. As we have seen, remote supply was nothing new:
during the Seven Years War, the Channel fleet had been supplied by in this method. In
the 1750s, it was beyond the administrative and managerial capacity of naval
administration to continue this remote system of provisioning at larger distances from
British out-ports. By 1795, fleets in the North Sea, the Channel, the Mediterranean, the
Cape, the Brazils. North America and periodically in the Baltic (in 1801, 1807 and 1808-
 12) were pro\'isioned in this manner, with fleets of transports travelling from Deptford,
Portsmouth and Plymouth. Fleets would not be reliant on local provisioning, not always
possible in politically unstable or geographically unsuited regions. Fleets would no longer
need to return to port.


Torbay took on an important role in the provisioning of the Channel Fleet with vessels
completing there on their way to blockading stations. In 1805 plans were announced that
Falmouth would become the base for ships coming from Ushant to complete (it was
closer to Brest). It was evident that a more efficient system would be required. As in 1755
when Hawke's squadron had received convoys of victuallers, once again fleets of
                       .
                                                                                            66
transports were arranged from Plymouth to sustain the blockading squadron.                       From 1805
and the institution of the 'close blockade' ships were only to come into port when
weather forced them to. The 'close blockade' differed from the previous form, entailing
the placement of warships within sight of the respective coast or port to ensure the
immediate interception of any ship entering or leaving. It was both the most effective and


65 There were economic as well as logistical reasons for this. With an abundance of local supplies it made
both economic and operational sense to cut out the delays that accompanied victual distribution and obtain
supplies locally. An abundance of local supplies could not always be guaranteed though.
66 Steer, 'Victualling of the Western Squadron', pp. 309-314.




                                                                                                         62
