transport sen'ice for the army, navy and ordnance. It was created at the prompting of
~1iddleton. by now Lord of the Admiralty. Not having a Transport Board 'operated so
much on the mind [of Middleton] that it induced him to submit to Mr Pitt, the absolute
necessity there was for its existence'; and Pitt 'was so convinced of it as immediately to
                                       6o
put it into execution', wrote Dundas. Its appearance allowed that Board to concentrate
on its own area of expertise: procuring tonnage from the merchant sector. It is interesting
that the naval departn1ents were felt the best to manage these crucial logistical
developments. a sign that the naval administration was ahead of its civil and military
counterparts. With the creation of a Transport Board many of the abuses revealed by the
Commission on Fees were eliminated, the most important being the competition among
the different boards for tonnage. Instead, the Victualling, Ordnance and Navy Board
would apply to the Transport Board, whose sole duty was the hiring of transports from
the merchant community.61 As Morriss has commented, 'rationalization was true of all
victualling and transportation undertaken by the Treasury, secretary of state, Admiralty,
Ordnance, and other government departments after 1794' .62 In a further rationalisation,
the Victualling Board took on the duty of supplying the army. As the Admiralty
explained, 'it was considered that the service would be 'performed with greater
advantage to the public ... than in any other war' .63 It promised new economies since the
Victualling commissioners could engage for army supplies with contractors who supplied
the navy. 64 From this point on the provisioning of military forces abroad would be the
responsibility of the Victualling Board.


The second major development in the provisioning service during the French Wars was
the institution of provisions distributed by regular transports to fleets at sea. The policy of
provisioning from a centralised location was replicated across the globe during the


60 Melville MSS 1044, f.l 07, National Library of Scotland, quoted in M.E. Condon, 'The Establishment of
the Transport Board - A Subdivision of the Admiralty - 4 July 1794', MM, Vol. 58, 1972, p. 79.
61 In 1806, with the demise of the Sick and Hurt Board, the Transport Board would be given responsibility

for Prisoners of War and naval hospitals. Mary Ellen Condon, 'The administration of the Transport service
during the war against Revolutionary France, 1793-1802', (Unpublished Ph.D., London, 1968). Condon,
'The Establishment of the Transport Board', p. 82.
62 Roger Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport: The Reorganization of
Logistics Management, 1780-1795, War in History, No.14 (2007), p. 322.
63 TNA, ADM 1091102,24.
64 Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport', p. 321.




                                                                                                       61
