the most difficult form of blockade to implement. Difficulties arose because the
blockading ships needed to remain continuously at sea, exposed to storms and hardship.
No longer would ships be forced back to port to re-victual. Significantly, this meant that
squadrons would no longer have to allow for up to a third of their strength to be absent
from their station as they picked up provisions. Such an advance in the victualling service
was instrumental in allowing the 'close blockade' to be executed.


The success or failure of victualling operations would therefore depend on the success
with which these convoys of victuallers could be organised. This would not be a given
during the following years. There continued to be instances where victualling delays did
obstruct strategic designs, such as at the Cape in 1796. The Royal Naval administration
did not immediately comprehend or deal with the challenges posed by the unprecedented
scale or extremity of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. During the Peace
of Amiens provisions failed to reach Malta and scurvy and debility resulted in seamen's
            67
deaths.          Delays in provisioning and water contributed to the disastrous Wa1cheren
expedition of 1809. 68 In 1804, the Channel fleet was forced into Torbay, providing as it
did the best chance of resupply.69 The battle of Trafalgar was prompted by Nelson being
forced to send six ships of his squadron away for provisions and water, leaving him an
inferior number of ships, and inadvertently drew out the combined French and Spanish
fleet. 70


Fortunately for Nelson, this gave him the opportunity to fight a decisive battle;
victualling shortfalls rarely had such positive results. In 1807, in the most politically
damaging example of victualling arrangements influencing operations, Sir Richard
Strachan was forced off his blockading station off Rochefort because of a lack of
victuals: such was the fall-out from this that the incident was presented to Parliament.
The first concerns for the fleet came on 11 December as Admiral Lord Gardner warned
that 'at this time the Line-of Battle Ships have not more than Eight Weeks Provisions on

67 Knight, The Pursuit of Victory (Allen Lane, London, 2005) p. 443.
68 Gordon C. Bond, The Grand expedition: the British invasion of Holland in 1809 (Athens, Georgia, 1979)

Pi- 145-6.
6  Duffy, 'Devon and the Naval Strategy of the French Wars 1689-1815', p. 188.
70 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 537.




                                                                                                     63
