 There had not been a British fleet in the Baltic since 1727 (Nelson's brief voyage in 1801
 aside) and Saumarez was faced with a considerable challenge to ensure the provisioning
 of his fleet: with inadequate charts, in unknown waters, all the while surrounded by
 hostile states and with a supply line open to attack from Danish gunboats. At the same
 time Saumarez was aware of the vulnerability of his opponent's supply lines. In 1809, he
 deliberately set out to attack the Russian enemy's logistics, 'having stationed the Defence
 and Bellephroll in Makiloto Bay for the purpose of interrupting the supplies of Provisions
 passing along the coast of Finland for the use of the Russian Troops in Aland,.2



 Concerns for the Fleet: Economics and Administration

There were senous concerns for the Baltic fleet's ability to prOVISIon itself. One
 anonymous officer, calling himself 'Observator', wrote to Mulgrave, then the Lord of the
 Admiralty. at the outset of the Baltic operation to express his fears for the fleet. He was
clearly a man who had spent much of his career with the Victualling Board and is
therefore someone whose views were taken seriously, as Mulgrave's acknowledgement
indicates. As he wrote,


        No man can be more attached to His Majesty's Service with more respect than myself the
        veneration I hold every measure in which has proceeded to from the Board you have the
        Honor to preside at. It is animated with the welfare of my country, and that no cause of
        importation might appear from a want of foresight to the various necessities of the Ships
        and Vessels employed in the Baltic, that I now very respectfully address your Lordship,
        and as I profess to have some knowledge of the Victualling of Ships from having spent
        many years in that service I trust I may be allowed to presume on that point. 3


This illustrates the prevailing opinion; that the victualling of the Baltic fleet was to be a
feat more challenging than any other station. Speaking of the recent logistical problems
suffered by Sir Richard Strachan's Squadron when off Rochfort, he mentioned that this
was 'a collected force', which despite its concentration in one place 'from a source of
information I cannot make known was much in want of Provisions and Water, which it is


2 TNA, ADM 11917, Saumarez to Admiralty, 16 August 1809.
3 MA 20/30, 'Obervator' Anonymous writer) to Lord Mulgrave, 13 July 1808.




                                                                                                    67
