board'. Sir Richard Strachan wrote on the 1 December that 'we failed with the hope of
falling in with the Victuallers, which I concluded would have sometime past left
 Plymouth'. The Superb, Spencer and Cumberland were sent to Rochefort to replace the
 ships forced off station as a relief force, but it arrived too late to prevent the French fleet
escaping from port. The' State and Condition' of the squadron of 21 December noted that
 the Impeteux and Donegal had only fifteen and nineteen days bread left, while the
 Emerald and Raleigh had only nineteen and twenty two tons of water remaining. The
 Colosslls and Mediator were delayed in setting off from Deptford, as reported on the 31
December, not to sail until the 6 January. The supplies would not arrive until the 16
January, by which time it was too late. As Strachan reported, 'since the Mediator left the
 Squadron, I have used my utmost exertion to regain our station of Chasseron, but Strong
 North east winds have prevented our getting to windward. This morning the Attack gun-
vessel joined us, making the signal that the Enemy had put to sea. She had a Transport
with Provisions under convoy, and has seen us to leeward this two days past' .71 In other
words, the fleet having to leave station to find the Mediator, had allowed the French fleet
to escape. Four months after these problems, and two months after it was presented to
Parliament, the Baltic fleet set sail for the Baltic.




Naval administration proved very successful at overcoll11ng so called 'insoluble'
problems. There is a clear correlation between advances in the victualling system and
increasing operational and strategic capabilities. As the logistical support for fleets
improved, they were able to remain at sea for longer periods, at distances further from
Britain than had been attempted before. As Baugh argues, 'all in all, the rise of the
Victualling department may have had more impact on the success of British arms than
any other administrative development since the time of Pepys'. An evolution of the
means available transformed the operational and strategic ends that could be attained. At
times it was a slow development. Baugh comments that 'in the early years of the



71 House of Commons Parliamentary Papers Online, 1808 (103) Papers Presented to the House of
Commons Relating to the State and Condition of the Squadron Employed off Rochefort under the command
of Sir Richard 1. Strachan, printed J5 March J808 No.9-59, 16, 18, 35,28,44,46, 56, 59.


                                                                                                 64
