Between the years 1808 to 1812 British shipping, victuallers and transports struggled to
pass through the Sound. Privateer craft based at Copenhagen constantly harassed any
passing shipping. Even ships of the line vulnerable in a calm. Captain John Harvey
Boteler recounted how the 'the Africa, 64, got a terrible mauling at the hands of the
Danish gunboats, who caught her in a calm. There was a whole fleet of boats, she unable
to get shot at them ... and in this condition the fleet was fired at for two or three hours, the
ensign shot away more than once; in fact it was down so long the Danes declared she had
stuck, and claimed her as a prize. The breeze fortunately sprung up, and the ship got her
anchor up, and the fight soon ended, and the Danes rowed away well satisfied with their
        "
work'. -'- Just as a convoy in January 1809 was lost in the Malmo Channel, the following
year in July 1810 Danish gunboats captured 47 merchant vessels off the Skaw. Saumarez'
supply lines were thus at worst precarious, at best unreliable.


This was a frustration for Saumarez, 'particularly when the Intricacy of the passages of
the Belts and Sound are considered and the various obstacles thrown in the way by the
numerous Aotillas of the enemy' .33 Strongly supported convoys could make the passage
through the Sound, especially once the threat of Danish gun boats and privateers had
been neutralised. Saumarez wrote in 1809 that 'in consequence of the great Risque, and
Danger. attending Convoys passing thro' the Belt, I have judged it most advisable to send
directions to Wingo Sound to the Captains and Commanders of any of His Majesty's
Ships or Vessels charged with convoys, to proceed thro' the Sound or Great Belt
according as the state of the wind and weather may render it most advisable' .34


Ships passing into or from the Baltic therefore passed through the Great Belt instead
which, although less dangerous, meant a slower passage. The Belt was unknown waters
for most of the fleet's captains. A fleet in the Mediterranean could benefit from decades
of Royal Navy action within its coastline; the waters were well known to those who
navigated it. In the Baltic however the hydrography of the area was still being surveyed.
Rear Admiral Keats, a veteran of the 1801 and 1807 campaigns and a man chosen

32 Bonner-Smith, Captain John Harvey Boteler, pp. 13-14.
33 TNA, ADM 1/7/398-405, Saumarez to Admiralty, 21 November 1808.
34 TNA, ADM 1/8/431, Saumarez to Admiralty, 31 May 1809, [italics added].




                                                                                             78
