of as a nuisance, by the orders of the Stores contiguous to that in which they were lodged,
which obliged him to dispose of them, for one third of what they would have fetched, had
they been returned in good condition; and that the Cattle, from unforeseen and
unavoidable causes, owing to the weather, and their having, with a scarcity of hay, been
kept on board ship longer than was at first imagined, naturally experienced a diminution
in their Weight' .IS This was about ship-board management rather than problems with the
victualling system. In addition however, problems procuring good quality provisions
e\.isted as Saumarez' fleet entered the Baltic. The Consul in Elsinore, Charles Fenwick,
confirmed this in April 1808: 'provisions do not appear plenty in the last mentioned
Provinces [Holstein, Schleswick, Jutland, Funen]. I even think I remarked a scarcity of
Bread which is proved by this circumstance'. On the subject of beef he complained that
 'the Danish Government had collected much, and forbid the exportation' .19 Procuring
supplies locally would be difficult, and for the majority of foodstuffs, Saumarez's fleet
would have to rely on supplies from Britain. 2o


The 'Observator' reminded Mulgrave of the victualling problems that existed in 1807.
'The fleet under Admiral Gambier at Copenhagen altho' victualled a sailing from
England with 5 months provisions were from unforeseen circumstances put at 2/3
allowance of Bread about 2 Months after their arrival and shortly after that the
Capitulation of the City, this is an evident proof that resource should be sent early to
guard against every necessity and the stigmas of opposition', he wrote. With this in mind,
he urged Mulgrave to arrange for supplies to be sent out immediately, especially given
the huge number of men to be fed. 'From the enquiries I have made and information
received', he wrote, 'the number of Men employed in the Baltic on board ships amount to
at least 11 thousand, this is an alarming number to take care of, and on whom a careful
eye should be directed. Your Lordship may not be aware of the quantity of Provisions
necessary to revictual the ships for 4 weeks, at the rate of 11,000 Men Daily'. True to


18 NMM, ADM DP121, 20 October 180l.
19 TNA, FO 22/58/98-99, Charles Fenwick to George Canning, 28 April 1808.
20 Sea provisions contracts could not be brokered; however Saumarez did manage to secure the supply of
some individual species from Sweden, namely fresh meat. Local procurement, even if on a limited level,
helped supplement the deliveries from Deptford. Indeed, the supply continued even after Sweden had
declared war on Britain after 1810. This episode will be covered fully in chapter 7.


                                                                                                         73
