Partly his responses were down to frustration, but his refusal to go along with many of his
contemporaries' fears for the victualling of the Baltic fleet derived from his awareness
that such operations would be possible. The Admiralty was confident in the knowledge
that sin1ilarly scaled operations had been done before, albeit in different circumstances.
Periodically, throughout the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, a fleet of up to
~O,OOO seamen had been provisioned in the Mediterranean Sea. The Mediterranean was

similar to the Baltic in many ways: both were insular seas, in which British naval forces
found themselves surrounded by hostile shores. In both, the provisioning of British
seamen would not only be an administrative challenge but also a task involving
diplomatic skill and economic awareness. British naval activity in both was concerned
primarily with the protection of British trade which was of paramount importance. In
both theatres, the naval war would cease to be defensive: it was in Portugal, through the
Mediterranean. and in the Baltic especially that the Continental System would first be
attacked and ultimately defeated. 25


The Mediterranean fleet commanded by Lord Keith between 1800 and 1802 faced
Britain's sternest challenge to naval superiority during the Napoleonic Wars, and was
beset \\'ith challenges of isolation and insecure supply lines. Keith and his squadron were
responsible for maintaining the blockade, transporting and supplying amphibious
operations under General Abercromby in the Levant and also co-operating with the
Austrian army under General Melas in northern Italy. Keith would proclaim early in his
Mediterranean tenure, that 'they declare that they cannot take Genoa without me, nor
feed their army on the coast'. 26 Keith's ability to victual his forces, as well as the
Austrian army for much of the campaign, was of vital importance to its success.


The Mediterranean was therefore a useful precedent for those planning the provisioning
of the Baltic fleet. As in the Baltic a small proportion of supplies would be sourced
locally; flour and wheat from Egypt, fresh beef from Naples and Leghorn (now Livorno),
and water from the Beys· (governors) of northern Africa. Keith wrote to Hibil Sarlasty,

25 James Davey, 'Within Hostile Shores: Victualling the Royal Navy in European Waters during the
Napoleonic Wars', The International Journal of Maritime History, Vol. 21 No.2 (December 2009).
:y, NMM, ELL/139, Keith to Minto, 10 May 1800.



                                                                                                   75
