stationed in the eastern Mediterranean, could draw upon decades of seafaring and
provisioning knowledge of the area. In May the Agent Victualler in Port Mahon, James
Yeo, wrote to Keith that, 'it has always been a practise to put three or four Galleons [sic]
of Brandy into the Syracuse Wine to make it keep in summer, whereas the Masala wine
will keep in any climate and any length of time' .16


Knowledge of local conditions, merchants, and victualling practices were invaluable in
the Mediterranean: they were absent in the Baltic. As Nelson himself found in his brief
yoyage through the Baltic in 1801, the last British fleet to enter the Baltic had been in
1727, since when ships of the line had become larger, with greater draught of water and
had more numerous crews. Knight points to the consequent inconveniences for Nelson;
when Admiral Totty arrived to reinforce Nelson, he found vessels 'in want of fuel and
cannot purchase any. as their bills are non-negotiable', whilst the governor of Bornholm
refused to supply the British ships moored off the coast with vegetables. Cattle were
eventually supplied from Danzig, though there were difficulties and delays. Nelson, an
astute organizer as well as a celebrated tactician, kept a firm financial hand on victualling
matters: 'it must be noted that the lowest price & best provisions must both combine', he
urged when in the Baltic. Aware of the problems he had encountered, and in a letter that
can be read as a warning for the Baltic fleet that would arrive seven years later, he
commented on Baltic provisioning, 'such iniquity, I fear, has been going on in Denmark
that the victualling must look out before they pay the horrid bills,.17 The inclusion of an
Agent Victualler with the fleet in 1808 suggests that the Victualling Board had paid
attention to Nelson's experiences.


The limited provisions that had in 1801 been procured locally proved to be of inferior
quality. 'It was afterwards found' it reported in 1801, 'that the Hides and Tallow from
being too long kept on board (notwithstanding all possible means were adopted and
ordered by the Commander in Chief and Rear Admiral Totty) were generally, when
returned to Mr Booth, stinking, full of maggots and so very offensive as to be complained


16 NMM, KEIIL/2/68-9, James Yeo to Keith, 10 May 1800.
17 Knight, Pursuit of Victory pp. 395-6.




                                                                                          72
