Chapter 4: Naval Administration and the Provisioning of
Fleets Abroad

       E\\:ry neglect of sen'ice sincc I havc been in office has originated in London. If the public officers
       ~)~ \\ho~e orders every preparation and movement depends, are not diligent, regular and punctual,
       it IS of httle consequence what your admirals and generals are.
                                            - Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 178i



The importance of a well-functioning naval administration to ships at sea was not lost on
Charles Nliddleton. a man who spent much of his career reforming the civilian branch of
the Royal Navy. As he witnessed during the American war of 1776-83, there was little
advantage having ships and fleets on active service if the infrastructure to support them
was inadequate. The victualling of the Baltic fleet, as indeed of any fleet, rested on the
naval administration that supported it. This chapter will examine the system that executed
victualling operations putting them in the context of British government.



British Politics and Strategy

At the head of government was the Cabinet, the executive branch comprised of members
of the legislature, the House of Commons and House of Lords. It was here that 'strategy'
(as we would today term it) was determined. It was a cabinet decision to send a fleet to
the Baltic. Once there it would be maintained by the naval administration. 1808, the year
in which the Baltic fleet came into existence, also marked a much broader movement to
ratchet up the British war effort. The Duke of Portland was at the head of this new
ministry, though as Dixon has noted, 'he did not regard personal parliamentary activity as
one of his obligations,.2 An increasingly ill man, Portland's lack of force enabled his
ambitious ministers to take on more responsibility, bringing increased organisation and
drive to British war planning. In particular, George Canning the Foreign Secretary and
Lord Castlereagh at the War Office took control of the war against France.


1 Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782,     Barham Papers, (London, Navy Records
Society, 2009), Vol. II, pp. 66-67.
2 Peter Dixon, Canning: politician and Statesmen (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1976), p. 107.



                                                                                                           86
