delay \'ictuallers and putting at risk the whole fleet. Saumarez wrote in 1808 that 'the
contrary Winds have prevented these last five weeks the arrival of the Victuallers I
expected from England with the Provisions for the Squadron under my command. It was
not until four days since that they have been enabled to join Rear Admiral Sir Samuel
Hood off Moen Island, and I waited here for those supplies in order to proceed off Hango
Add and join the Squadron of His Swedish Majesty' .46


Both the Sound and Belt were treacherous routes, for different reasons, and to different
extents. Mistakes made in 1808 were not repeated in 1809. In late 1809, Saumarez
contemplated the relative merits of sending merchant ships under only a light convoy, to
ensure their arri\'al in Britain. As he commented to the Admiralty, he wondered:

         whether under the present circumstances of the Season I am of opinion His Majesty's
         Ships may with safety be sent upon this service .. .1 do not consider it in the safety of His
         ~ lajesty' s Ships appointed for the protection of the Trade and those stationed in the Belt
         to defend them against the Attack of the Danish Gun Boats, that they should be ordered
         to remain in the Baltic to a later Period, particularly after the disastrous events that
         occurred last season, when so many of His Majesty's Ships were lost, and others exposed
         to imminent Danger, besides the number of valuable Vessels which were wrecked and
         fell into the hands of the enemy.47

It was always to be a difficult choice between the threat of the enemy and the threat from
the climate. The Baltic Sea, not known for its serenity, made victims of many ships. In
1808, a convoy was lost in the Sound when trying to force its way through the ice. In
1810, the Minotaur was wrecked returning from the Baltic. In 1811 the last convoy to
leave the Baltic was hit by a storm, with the loss St George, Defence and Hero. This
'Melancholy Fate', as termed by A.N. Ryan, shocked the nation: 'the deaths of 2,000
men of the Baltic fleet were a loss heavier by far than those suffered in any of the great
                          .
sea-battles of the RevolutIonary or N apo I eOIllc
                                                . W ars.,48



Depending on the weather, the last convoys would leave the eastern Baltic by early
October to avoid winter storms and the sea freezing over. Every winter the Baltic would
freeze over for between two to three months bringing further problems, as the majority of


46 SRO, HA 93/6/1/237, Saumarez to Baron de Rajalin, 5 August 1808.
47 TNA, ADM 1/9/306-7, Saumarez to Admiralty, 7 December 1809.
48 A.N. Ryan, 'The Melancholy Fate of the Baltic Ships in 1811 " MM, Vo1.50, No.2, (May 1964), p. 131.


                                                                                                         81
