By 1811 the war policy of the Perceval government (which had replaced the Portland
administration in 1809) had become even firmer. While they 'groaned at the cost of
keeping the British and Portuguese forces on this basis of perpetual war, but they had
resol\'ed to bear it. They had at last put away from the mirage, which had beckoned on all
their predecessors. that the French might be beaten by one great and sudden
masterstroke' .S Perceval refused to give in to those arguing for economic reform. 'We
cannot without absolute reduction of army, or navy, make any such saving as would
justify   this   expression'.     and       absolute   reductions    were        impossible   under   the
                  9
circumstances.


A go\,ernment determined to wage war at a new level depended on the success of its
departmental administrative system. David Syrett commented that anyone studying
British administration is 'immediately struck by inordinate delays that attended the
implementation of military decisions reached by cabinet'. Secretaries of state put the
Cabinet's plans into execution and kept government administration working: they alone
                                                                            1o
had the power to coordinate the actions of various departments.                  The Cabinet determined
strategy. while it fell to the Foreign Office, the War Office, the Board of Ordnance and
the Admiralty to execute it. The Secretary of State for War had also to try to work with
several authorities who enjoyed great independence, and 'most of which were of doubtful
efficiency: namely the Board of Ordnance, the Transport Board, and the Commissary
General' .11 The Admiralty oversaw subordinate boards with differing responsibilities: the
Victualling Board, the Transport Board, the Navy Board, and the Ordnance Board.


As Hilton has noted, 'the co-operation achieved between such fiercely independent
bodies as the Foreign, War and Home Offices, and the undertaking of operations keeping
them secret, and if necessary shredding files, all required sophisticated planning' .12 That
this was sometimes lacking should not be surprising, Bartlett for one emphasising that 'it

x Watson, Reign of George 1/1, pp. 488-9.
9 Perceval to Wellesley, Jan  1810, BL Add. Ms. 37295, quoted in Philip Harling, The Waning of 'Old
Corruption ': The Politics of Economic Reform in Britain, 1779- 1846 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) p.
133.
10 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 5.
11 CJ Bartlett, Castlereagh (Macmillan, London, 1966) p. 52.
12 Hilton, England 1783-1846, pp. 85-6.




                                                                                                          88
