 the fleet sailed back to English Ports, leaving a number of smaller ships to be victualled
 in dock in the Baltic. "The proportion must be calculated for the time it will be necessary
 for the large Ships to remain in the Country', wrote George Hope, anticipating the winter
 months ahead in the Baltic, "and for the number of smaller vessels that may be kept out
 during the winter months' .49 On the one hand, this meant that the fleet returning to
 Britain could rest, and re-victual, before heading back to the Baltic the following spring.
 On the other, it left a considerable challenge of timing to the Commander in Chief.
 Should he return early, ensuring his fleet's safety from storms and ice, or should he risk
 the latter, in the hope of ensuring every last merchant ship could be convoyed home?
 Such decisions weighed heavily with Saumarez and his written conversations with Baltic
 merchants would often take an exasperated tone as the year neared its end.


 Dealing with the ice during those winter months lead to further victualling problems.
 Keats spoke of 'the impediments arising from the Season', in particular 'the difficulties I
 experience in providing the Ships with Provisions and water especially'. 50 Talking of a
 convoy. Captain Bathurst reported that HMS Magnet had run aground, and that he was
 'sorry to say that the whole got so entangled in the ice as not to be able to get through' .51
 The process of removing a ship from the ice is recounted well by Boteler:


        It was getting rather late in the year when we returned to Wingoe Sound, and I well
        remember thrashing through the ice, occasionally brought up by it, and our having
        capstan bars over the bows to save the copper: all the fore part of the ship was covered
        with ice. the ropes so frozen as with difficulty to run through the blocks. However, we
        got into Wingoe. in perfect smooth water, and one morning there was a sort of film over
        it, and by the evening thick ice had formed, and next morning the ship was hard and fast
        in ice five or six inches thick .. .1 don't know how long we were frozen up, but I recollect
        the fun of clearing a transport of provisions with our boats on skids. In the end we were
        relieved by ice-saws, sent I believe from England. We set to work, and by cutting ~ur
        squares of ice, which with the capstan bars, handspik.es, and hooks we sh?ve~2 under Ice
        on either side, till we made a canal, and warped the ShIp to open water outsIde.




49 TNA, ADM 1/6/382, Captain George Hope, Memo, 1 August 1808.
50 SRO, HA 93/6/1/458, Keats to Saumarez 28 December 1808.
51 SRO, HA 93/6/1/477, Captain Walter Bathurst to Bertie, 7 January 1809.
52 Bonner-Smith, Captain John Harvey Boteler, pp. 39-40.




                                                                                                       82
