Victuallers too would be vulnerable, such as when the President victualler was lost in
                   53
December 1809.          The loss of a victualler could cause serious problems for isolated
fleets. Dixon wrote that 'I am seriously concerned to acquaint you that the President Vict.
One of t\\'o under the escort of the Osprey & considerably the largest was wrecked on the
night of the 11 th during a very heavy Gale of wind ... she sailed upon the Rocks & in a
very short time was dashed to pieces'. The Thea victualler arrived with the Osprey and
entered port also in great peril. Dixon sent information detailing the quantities of
provisions left in the Baltic, leaving it to the Admiralty to judge whether or not a further
                                54
supply should be sent OUt.           The following year, Captain Honeyman of the Ardent
reported 'the loss of the Jean Transport', and asked for another to replace it 'without
delay, in order that the Island of Anholt may not suffer from this accident. .. we have to
request you will forthwith provide us with another Vessel, capable of conveying to
Anholt a supply of Provisions to the extent of about 180 tons' .55 These problems with
victualling were compounded by the fact that there was no naval base in the Baltic. The
Mediterranean benefited from a number of British bases in particular Gibraltar on its
western edge. and Port Mahon in Minorca, where victualling operations were centred.
Alongside their lack of precedents to guide them, Saumarez' Baltic fleet did not have the
luxury of British naval ports. Moreover, the Victualling Board had been able to transport
fleets of victuallers through the Bay of Biscay to Lisbon, but had never attempted the
same through passages as dangerous as the Great Belt. As Ryan argued, 'the want of a
base in the Baltic was not as serious as had been the want of a base within the
Mediterranean; but it had its inconveniences and perils' .56


There would also be problems securing tonnage to transport provisions to the Baltic fleet.
As we will see in Chapter 5, the victualling system was dependent on hiring tonnage to
transport provisions. James Thornton, the agent in South Shields for Henley and Sons,
ship-owners who chartered their ships out to the British government agent, wrote of the
difficulty he had had in securing tonnage to go to the Baltic in September, particularly


53 TNA, ADM 1/9/349, Dixon to Saumarez, 16 December 1809.
54 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1227, Dixon to Saumarez, 14 December 1809.
55 TNA, ADM 110/62/390, VB to the TB, 24 September 1810.
56 Ryan, 'Melancholy Fate', p. 131.



                                                                                         83
