It is true that there was no stated coherent government strategy. J. Steven Watson was
correct to argue that the Portland government 'had no cabinet policy but staggered along
like a motor firing intermittently on different cylinders as first one then the other of its
members took the initiative,.3 However, Portland's ministers did inject a new fervour and
driYe into the handling of the war. Castlereagh well understood the demands of a war
unprecedented in scale and importance. The war, he noted in 1807, was 'no longer a
struggle for territory or for point of honour, but whether the existence of Great Britain as
a nayal power is compatible with that of France'.4


The goyernment's first initiative, the attack on Copenhagen and seizure of the Danish
fleet, was both ambitious and ruthless. As Hilton has written, 'what was breathtaking
about the measures of 1806-7 was not the mutually assured destruction but the extent to
which both countries [Britain and France] were prepared to trample on the sovereign
rights of other countries'. The blockade of Europe was heightened. Britain, in Hilton's
words. 'hugely raised the stakes in the economic war', as proposals to interdict every
European port from which British ships were excluded were planned and executed. s
Castlereagh brought new vision to the War Office. On finding only 12,000 troops
available as he took office, he began to increase the size of the army. 30,000 men were
taken from the militia and trained as first-rank troops. The system of transports was
improved, so that what force existed could be made available for rapid service wherever
it might be needed. 6 Portland's government determined to follow up the attack on
Copenhagen by landing an expeditionary force in Europe. Canning briefly considered
opening up an offensive front in Denmark, but became less enthusiastic following Sir
John Moore's failure in Sweden.7 It eventually went to Spain, beginning Britain's
involvement in the Peninsular War.




3 J. Steven Watson, The Reign of George III 1760-1815, (Oxford University Press, 1960), p. 444.
4 Boyd Hilton, A Mad,   Bad & Dangerous People? England 1783-1846 (Oxford University Press, 2006), p.
212.
5 Hilton, England 1783-1846, pp. 212-3.
6 Watson. Reign of George III, p. 454.
7 Sir John Moore, sent with his army to Sweden to assist their war against Russia, managed to offend the
Swedish king so much he was arrested, and forced to return to Britain. Watson, Reign of George III, p. 457.


                                                                                                        87
