 respond by ordering the Victualling Board to arrange the necessary amounts. While this
 order to the Victualling Board could be done by letter, it was sometimes done verbally,
 for example on one occasion in 1809, 'The Chairman having represented that he has been
 \'erbally directed by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, to cause a further supply
 of Provisions to be forthwith sent out for the use of His Majesty's Ships in the Baltic' .30


 The Admiralty informed the Victualling Board of a fleet's needs. To give an example, in
 ~1ay 1809. they wrote to the Board that:


         Vice Admiral Sir Js. Saumarez. Commander in Chief of the Baltic hath in his letter to our
         Secretary of the loth Instant submitted the expectation of sending out to him in the Great
         Belt. .. a proportion of Provisions of all species, for two months, for twelve thousand
         l\len: \Y c do hereby require and direct you to give the necessary orders accordingly:
         letting us know when the Vessels which you may employ on this service, may be ready.3!

 Occasionally, when discussing specific supplies of individual foodstuffs, some
 commanders would write directly to the Victualling Board, leaving it to that board to gain
 Admiralty acquiescence. 'Having taken into consideration your letter to our Secretary',
 the Admiralty wrote in August 1809, 'the Copy of one which you had received from Rear
 Admiral Dixon, requesting supplies of Live Oxen, and Vegetables for the use of His
Majesty" s Ships under his orders in the Great Belt; We do hereby require & direct you, to
 send out to the said Rear Admiral, with as little delay as possible a supply of Potatoes &
Onion for the use of the ships under his command, for two Months' .32


It was crucial to have either Admiralty or Treasury authorization to arrange a shipment of
provisions: the hierarchy of naval administration was clear. On one occasion in August
1809, the Transport Board wrote to the Victualling Board, requesting that the latter would
'immediately supply Provisions for 20,000 Men for one month, for the use of the Infantry
and Cavalry Transports in the ScheIdt; and stating that they will provide conveyance
thereof whenever this Board shall report to them the quantity required'. The Victualling
Board was adamant that Admiralty authorisation must be secured first. They wrote to the
Transport Board in reply that 'there is not any instance of Provisions being furnished by

30 TNA, ADM 1111192, 16 August 1809.
31 TNA, ADM 2/156/185-6, Admiralty to VB, 19 May 1809.
32 TNA, ADM 2/156/441-2, Admiralty to VB, 19 August 1809.




                                                                                                      95
