work. As such, in wartime, 'the machinery began to get clogged' .21 Although the
Admiralty constituted the political arm of the navy, departmentalism in the naval
adnlinistration meant that different boards had different responsibilities unaffected by
political changes in the Admiralty. A sudden change in the membership of the Board did
not disturb the nayy's business.


The Inain departments subsidiary to the Admiralty were the Navy Board, the Victualling
Board. alongside the Transport Board, and the Ordnance Board. The Admiralty had
seniority oyer the subordinate boards, appointing commissioners for each. Each was
subordinate to the Admiralty, and although the boards were similarly ranked, the relative
longeyity of each department influenced its status. For example, the newest, the
Transport Board. which had been re-established in 1794 after a half century's absence,
lacked the standing of its neighbours. The oldest, the Navy Board, was largely left to its
own deYices. Although the senior body, the Admiralty's control over the Navy Board was
 'often meaningless'. since the Navy Board was left to its own expertise: 'to avoid a
situation \\'here the amateurs of the Admiralty were directing the experts in the Navy
Board' .22 The Navy Board administered the dockyards, contracted for and administered
all naval stores and equipment except for ordnance, food and medicines and, before 1794,
transport. It was also responsible for ship design, compiling the estimates that the
Admiralty would submit, the payment of wages and appointing dockyard personnel. The
Navy Board was made up of professional men, frequently naval officers or shipwrights. 23
Like the colleagues in the Admiralty, the Navy Board had not always been considered the
most effective branch of government. Middleton complained in July 1779 that 'as it now
stands I cannot be one hour absent while the [Navy] Board sits' .24 Studies, such as that by
M.l Williams, have shown that in providing the Navy with naval stores, it was actually
largely successfu1. 25 In this, the Navy Board and Victualling Board communicated with


21 Williams, 'Sandwich'. p. 18.
22 Wilkinson, The British Nav)' and the State, p. 23.
23 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 20.
24 Middleton to Sandwich, 9 July 1779, Sandwich Papers, Vol. 3.
25 MJ Williams stated that 'from the point of view that their primary task was to supply the Navy, the could
scarcely have done more'. As the Navy Board themselves wrote in 1782, 'our magazines are so fully
supplied that we shall have difficulty I finding room for what is already ordered'. Williams, 'Sandwich'.
pp. 325, 328.


                                                                                                            91
