this Departlnent, and sent out of the Kingdom without the immediate directions of the
Lord ConlInissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, His Majesty's Secretaries of State or the
Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty'. The Victualling Board were not simply sticklers
for procedure. They did propose a compromise, 'in order that no time may be lost in the'
execution of the service mentioned in their letter', they acquainted the Transport Board
that 'the Tonnage required for the Provisions in question will be equal to 1,200 Tons, and
that the necessary orders will be given to our officers to have the Provisions in readiness
to be shipped on board the vessels that may be appropriated to receive them, the moment
we receive the requisite authority for supplying the same'. Higher authority had to be
received first. The Treasury order for the same came through on the 31 August. 33


The Victualling Board officials could be very deferential to the Admiralty, even when
they had better access to victualling information than their overseers. A letter from Rear
Admiral Dixon in 1809, representing that the Squadron under his command had only
three months' provisions remaining and requesting that a further supply of two months
provisions of all species would be sent out soon, prompted diffidence rather than an
assured response. The Victualling Board wrote to the Admiralty and requested 'such
directions thereon as to their Lordships may appear expedient; stating however at the
same time that two months Provisions for the whole of the squadron under the command
of Sir James Saumarez, the Commander in Chief in the Baltic have recently been
forwarded in Victuallers from Deptford ... with which Shipments it is probable Rear
Admiral Dixon was unacquainted at the time he made his application' .34 Again, it was
felt necessary to gain Admiralty authorisation when sending out deliveries. It should be
remembered that the Admiralty's power over the Victualling Board was not merely
bureaucratic. Since Victualling Board commissioners were appointed by the Admiralty,
deference on the part of Victualling Board officials should not strike us as surprising.
Certainly the Victualling Board was an obedient servant to the Admiralty: in 1811 they
wrote that 'the arrangement formed for sending out supplies to the Baltic Fleet at periods
fixed upon by the commander in Chief, has been grounded upon an order from the Lord's

33 TNA, ADM 111/192,26 August 1809.                                                       .
34 TNA, ADM 111/192, 13 October 1809. The Admiralty's reply arrived three days later, statmg that no
further supply was needed, see TNA, ADM 111/192, 16 October 1809.


                                                                                                       96
