On recei\'ing an order from the Admiralty to provide provisions for a fleet in foreign
 waters. it was the Victualling Board's responsibility to work out the amount needed to
 pro\'ide for a fleet for a given period of time. There were two things the Board looked at
 when calculating the amount to send out. Firstly, there was the number of men on the
 station, with supplies sent out accordingly.39 For example in 1808, Saumarez transmitted
 a request for pro\'isions to complete the fleet under his command 'beyond the time for
 which they are at present victualled, and requesting that the same may be sent out as soon
 as can be made con\'enient'. Aside from the request, it was left to the Victualling Board
 to work out the specific amounts needed by the fleet. Victualling decisions were
 therefore. for the most part, centralised in London.


 There was an assumption that the Victualling Board had better access to information and
 could judge the wider picture better than commanders at sea. In this case, the Board
 replied to Saumarez, 'advising him of the quantities of Provisions &c. which we had
caused to be shipped on Board the twelve victuallers therein named .. .in addition to the
 supply previously forwarded for the like service, as stated in our letters to him of the 21 st
June last and -+ th ultimo, which we apprehend will be sufficient to carryon the
Victualling, calculated at 11,000 men ... to about the middle of December next'. 40 The
Victualling Board made careful calculations as to what was needed, aware of the perils
that could come from either over-supply or under-supply. The former was considered
wastage, and to a naval administration obsessed with avoiding wastage was very much
frowned upon. The latter would result in the starvation of a fleet, with consequent
ramifications for operational (and therefore strategic) viability.41


Secondly, there was the examination of reports of the state of provisions in each fleet
which could override all other calculations if it appeared that a fleet was in desperate
want. A letter of September 1809 highlights this. The chairman of the Victualling Board,
'having reported to the Board that on examination of the last state of the Provisions on

39 There were quarterly lists made up by the Admiralty, detailing the number of ships and men on each
station around the world. These lists now make up TNA, ADM 8 in the National Archives, UK.
40 TNA, ADM 111/188, 22 August 1808.
41 The efficiency of the Victualling Board, and how successfully the Board judged this dilemma, will be

discussed in detail in Chapter 9.


                                                                                                          98
