COl1unissioners of the Admiralty' and, 'we cannot presume to deviate from it, nor is it for
us to question its propriety' .35



 Authorisation aside, the Admiralty was happy to leave the Victualling Board to its
 expertise in the area of provisioning. Its orders appear less dictatorial, delegating
 authority to officials who knew their business. By 1810, it was common practice for
 commanders to write directly to the Victualling Board; the absence of virtually any
 Victualling Board correspondence in the Admiralty 'in-letters' is testament to this. 36 In
 1809, a request by Saumarez for four weeks' provisions for his fleet, was given a simple
                                              37
 'refer to Viet. Bd.' Admiralty notation.          Writing directly to the Victualling Board saved
 time, and enabled the Victualling Board to demonstrate its specialist knowledge and
expertise with minimal Admiralty interference or friction.


The maIn tasks in administering the provlslOmng system were 111 the hands of the
subordinate Boards, in particular the Victualling Board and Transport Board. The
responsibility for organising the victualling of the Baltic fleet would be shared by the two
boards. The Victualling Board was responsible for the production of foodstuffs, either
through its victualling yards, for example at Deptford, or by securing contracts with
merchants to supply the necessary amounts of provisions. They obtained year long
estimates for the provisioning requirements up to a year at a time and were responsible
for producing and contracting for these amounts. In August 1808 the Victualling Board
requested the Admiralty to estimate the number of men 'intended to be provided for' the
following year, so that they could have sufficient warning to direct such supplies of beef
and pork to be procured. 38 The organising of shipments of victuals to fleets in home and
foreign waters was therefore just one of many important tasks (albeit a crucial one). Also
important was the constant management of contracts for all varieties of foodstuffs. The
Victualling Board could not produce the huge quantities of provisions needed to supply
the 140,000 seamen in service and turned to the private sector to furnish them.

35 TNA, ADM 1111199,13 June 1811.
36 Correspondence between Saumarez and the Admiralty is conspicuous in its absence from Admiralty in-
letters from the Baltic, for example TNA, ADM 1112.
37 TNA, ADM 1/9/215-6, Saumarez to Admiralty, 7 November 1809.
3K TNA, ADM 11154/506, Admiralty to the VB, 4 August 1808.




                                                                                                    97
