\\'as no easy matter to keep the cumbrous machinery for the conduct of the war in motion,
and to synchronise its working for the speedy equipment and despatch of British
expeditions to the Continent or overseas. It was not surprising that delays and
deficiencies in equipment frequently occurred, though he did note that on the whole
expeditions were assen1bled and despatched relatively quickly, especially while
Castlereagh was in office, 'once the cabinet had made up its mind to act' .13 Indeed, the
Duke of Portland's government was particularly adept at enforcing the departmentalism.
 As Perceyal wrote, 'it is not because the Duke of Portland is at our head that the
 Go\,emment is a Government of Departments, but it is because the Government is and
must be essentially a Government of Departments that the Duke of Portland is at our
head · . 14-



The Admiralty and the Naval Administration

Once a strategic decision had been made, its implementation fell upon naval
administration. The decision to arrange a victualling shipment to a fleet was the
Admiralty" s. The Admiralty was the highest level of naval administration. Headed by the
First Lord of Admiralty, and made up of commissioners, the Admiralty was the political
arm of the navy, the sole representative of the navy in Cabinet. If the navy had a role in
forming national strategy it was in this capacity. Aside from Cabinet decisions, it
governed the naval branch of government, issuing orders on operational and tactical
matters. Most of its work was routine: as Wilkinson argues, 'the Admiralty was not
necessarily a weak body but. .. its powers and responsibilities were quite limited and its
capabilities for effecting change or directing policy were very restricted' .15 Decisions of
strategy came from Cabinet, with orders emanating from the Secretary of State for War.
The Admiralty's role was the operational arm: assigning ships and captains in line with
the orders of Cabinet, issuing orders for ship movements, assigning convoys, recruiting




13 Bartlett, Castlereagh, p. 53.
14 Watson, The Reign of George III, p. 444.
15 Wilkinson, The British Navy and the State, p. 21.




                                                                                         89
