these four years past, but nobody will understand it' .51 Twenty years later the importance
of the nayal administration to British power was feeding through. Pitt's steady investment
in the naval establishment throughout the 1780s, and the various commissions into the
efficiency of all of Britain's military departments highlighted a growing understanding of
the importance of the governmental boards to the British state. Williams wrote of the
administratiye system in the 1780s thus: 'Sandwich then was at the head of an
Administratiye System. the customs and rules of which were already deep rooted in
tradition. It was a system which was formidably thorough, conscientious and
conserYatiYe. imbued with the notion that the utmost care and economy must be
preseryed in the expenditure of public money. Inflexibility was characteristic of all parts
of the system. Fear of departing from precedent, of acting without due authority governed
nearly all officers and officials'. 52 As we have seen the naval administration that was
responsible for proYisioning foreign fleets during the Napoleonic Wars were instinctive
reformers. The transfer of authority to the Victualling Board and Transport Board was a
rationalisation of the victualling service. Each could concentrate in their areas of
expertise.


It would be the failures of the Transport Board that placed the greater strain on the
victualling system. It is wrong therefore to say, as Morriss does, that 'hire, dispatch,
return and reuse became a regular, generally trouble-free routine until 1816 when the
Board was dissolved' .53 This is inaccurate given the huge transport shortages faced in the
Napoleonic War. The trials of the Transport Board will the analysed in the next chapter.




51 Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782, Barham Papers, Vol. II, p. 66.

52 Williams,'Sandwich'. p. 40.
53 Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport', p. 318.




                                                                                            103
