having requested the necessary tonnage from the Transport Board, was free to complain
to the :-\dnliralty if it showed any negligence in the duty of procuring tonnage. Indeed, the
Victualling Board appears to have taken some relish in doing so, so often were their
complaints. A letter to the Admiralty in September 1808 was written


     for the information of their Lordships. that upon the receipt on the 6 th inst. of their Lordships
     abon:mentioned directions. we, on that day, applied to the Transport Board requesting they
     would cause liS to be furnished with all possible expedition, with proper Vessels for the
     conveyance of the Provisions we were directed to send out for the aforesaid service; to which
     application not any reply has hitherto been given to us by the Transport Board. 50


This was the first of many letters of complaint, throughout the period 1808-12. It should
be stated that in hiring tonnage from a mercantile sector reluctant to hand shipping over
to the government (and forgo the lucrative trades in the Indies) the Transport Board had
one of the most challenging jobs in naval administration.


The Admiralty would again be involved when transports were ready to sail; on being told
by the Victualling Board that the 'delivery' was ready, it was the Admiralty'S
responsibility to organise a convoy. Victualling transports were generally added to trade
convoys heading to the Baltic. Important deliveries could be assigned their own convoy
howe\'er.




The supply of provisions would therefore require no little coordination between the two
boards; indeed, all victualling arrangements were conducted between the Victualling and
Transport Boards. Only in dire circumstances would the Admiralty be forced to
intervene. During the first two years of the Baltic fleet's existence, imperfect cooperation
between the two would lead to severe problems in the victualling system and intervention
from above. The problems that Middleton complained of in the 1780s were not yet fully
solved by 1808. In the same letter to Shelburne with which this chapter began, Middleton
complained he had endeavoured to enforce reform 'by every means in my power, for



50 TNA, ADM 110/58/239/41, VB to Admiralty, 16 September 1808.




                                                                                                          102
