Admiralty that transports were ready for a convoy, rather than ordering a convoy, hints at
their respecti\'e authority.


 It is certainly true that the Transport Board tried to emphasise its independence from
 other na\'al departments. In 1811, it wrote to the Admiralty stating that only over naval
 concerns were they to be considered to be in the naval hierarchy: 'the services relating to
 the Transport Department are placed, by Patent, under the authority of the Lords
 Commissioners of the Treasury. and those which have reference to sick and wounded
 seamen and Prisoners of W~u', under the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty' .48 The
 distinction was important for the Transport Board always emphasised its link to the
 Treasury rather than with the Admiralty (this explains the direct line on the diagram
 above between the Transport Board and the Treasury). When asked if there were any
 reforms that could be implemented 'with advantage to the public service ... and whether
 any, and which of them, would require, previous to their adoption, the Sanction of
 Parliament. .. · the Boards only recommendation was bitter swipe at the Admiralty:

            The only alteration upon which it appears to us necessary to obtain the sanction of the
            Legislature. is the following. According to the Act. .. 25 George III, Cap.31, the Navy
            Board only are authorised to pass the Accounts of the Victualling Board with the
            treasurer of the Navy. The accounts of this office with the treasurer of the Navy have
            hitherto been passed in the same manner, by order of the Lords of the Treasury, but as
            there seems an Impropriety in the Commissioners of the Navy passing accounts of an
            office with which they have in fact nothing to do, we deem it proper to submit to their
            Lordships the Fitness of this Board being authorised to pass their own Accounts with the
            Treasurer of the Navy, the propriety of which measure we have indeed been given to
            understand, the Commissioners of the Navy are likewise about to submit to the Lords
                                                                    4LJ
            Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury for adoption.


The Transport Board's desire to remove itself from its subordinate position in the naval
hierarchy indicates more clearly than anything else that it was very much part of it. While
it certainly attempted to distance itself from the Admiralty, helped by the direct link to
the Treasury and its other duties hiring for the Ordnance Board and the army, when it
came to the organisation of victualling shipments to the navy, the Transport Board was
very much one of the subordinate boards to the Admiralty. The Admiralty issued the
formal orders for victualling the fleet, the other boards complied. The Victualling Board,

4!! TNA, ADM 1/3763/515-537, 7 February 1811.
4'J Ibid.




                                                                                                       101
