                                             th
Board the Baltic Fleet, dated the 28              ult. it appears expedient that a further supply of
Flour. Raisins and suet, should be forthwith sent out, for the use of the said squadron'.
The Board was continually assessing the state of provisions in their distant fleets and
covering any potential oversights. In this case, it was ordered that the quantities of those
articles mentioned were to be forwarded to the Baltic: 72,000 lbs of flour, 12,000lbs of
raisins and 6,000 lbs of suet, each calculated with regard to the fleet's needs. 42


Once an order to provision a foreign fleet was received, the Victualling Board would then
request the necessary tonnage for its delivery from the Transport Board. The Transport
Board was located in Dorset Square:n As such, it was a thirty minute walk from the
Victualling Board offices in Somerset House on the Strand to the Transport Board
offices; close enough to ensure letters could be exchanged daily, but crucially just far
enough to preclude much in the way of verbal communication and decision-making. All
Victualling Board correspondence with the Transport Board was therefore written. So
while this was in no small part to ensure official business could be substantiated and
minuted in case a board's activities came into question, it was also a geographical
necessity.


The Transport Board's domain was the delivery of all stores worldwide, not just food
provisions. In 1809 the Transport Board's duties were listed as 'the hiring and
appropriating of ships and vessels for the conveyance of troops and baggage, victualling,
ordnance, barrack, commissariate, naval and military stores of all kinds, convicts and
stores to New South Wales', with many other smaller services' .44 This would take place
on government owned ships, but much more commonly on hired vessels or 'freight',
which were paid relative to their tonnage to transport victuals to the fleet. Just as the
Navy Board had done before the hand-over of control of transports, the Transport Board
controlled the owners and the masters of ships through the 'power of the purse', to use



42 TNA, ADM 1111192, 11 September 1809.                                                   .
43 This is now Cockspur Street, running into eastern Pall MalL and is not to be confused WIt~ the Do~set
Square near Paddington. See John Tallis' London Street Views J838-40 (London TopographIcal SOCIety
reprint, 2002) p. 85.
44 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report     p. 9.


                                                                                                           99
