is ... detained damages at the rate of three pound sterling per day, the days to be taken
from alongside at the expense of the government'.9


Ho\\' much this suggests preferential treatment for certain ship-owners is hard to judge. It
is unlikely to say the least that their meeting was related to anything other than the
prospectiYe tender. Certainly the Henleys were well known to the Transport Board and
had a lengthy history of supplying the Board with shipping. It was logical for the Board
to patronise merchants it knew to be reliable and had a proven history of delivering what
was needed. As such, the Transport Board's courting of the Henleys amounts to
intelligent management of the mercantile sector for their own ends. Some ship-owners
were powerful men. with contacts in government. On one occasion, several of Isaac
Solly's ships were detained in Swedish ports, prompting much fury in London. It testifies
to Solly's influence. and to Britain's need for hemp that Canning instructed his consul in
Sweden 'relative to the detention in the Ports of Sweden, of several ships & their
property' to 'desire that you will make the necessary Representations to the Swedish
Government on this subject, and use every exertion in your power to procure the Release
of the ships in question' .10 That Solly's influence went as high as the Foreign Secretary
should not be surprising. The next day, Canning attached a list of the ships employed by
Mr Solly bringing Hemp from Russia to this Country for the use of His Majesty's Navy,
desiring that Merry, the Minister at Stockholm, would 'use your utmost Endeavours with
the Swedish Government to procure the immediate Release of such of these ships as may
have been detained in the Swedish Ports, and that you will do everything in your power
to protect the whole of them from any molestation in the prosecution of their voyage to
England' .11


Once tenders had been received and accepted, the ship in question was examined. The
Transport Board wrote a report in 1811 outlining the procedure. 'When a ship that has
been tendered to the Board for a Transport, has passed the Regular Surveys, jointly made
by the Inspecting and Surveying Officers, as to her fitness and has been reported by them


9 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.4,   12 September 1809.
10 TNA, FO 73/50, Canning to Merry, 10 November 1810.
11 TNA, FO 73/50, Canning to Merry, 11 November 1810.



                                                                                         107
