                   45
Syrett's phrase.        The Board would withhold a major part of a vessel's freight until its
charter had been completed. If it was breached, a fine would be placed on the freight of
the offending ships. Irregular or negligent acts were reported, while the Transport Board
would be informed when a ship separated from its convoy; compensation could then be
awarded. Just like their colleagues in the Victualling Board, the Transport Board relied
on mobilising resources from the private sector to organise the vast amounts of transport
shipping needed to fulfil the British state's needs. The Board's trials and tribuations in
doing so will be the focus of the next chapter.


The Transport Board tried to maintain a spirit of fierce independence from the Admiralty
and its subordinate nayal boards. This has since confused historians. Morriss for example
argues for the Transport Board's relative independence: 'although nominally subject to
the Admiralty, the Transport Board possessed an authority that was independent of the
existing nayal boards and derived directly from the king through his secretary of state. So
far as the management of transports were concerned, the Admiralty took a secondary, if
not subordinate role' .46 Cabinet orders could devolve directly on to the Transport Board,
as in 1794 in which Transport Board reminders are deemed to be orders to the Admiralty.
However, it is wrong to read too much into the Transport Board's tone. That the
Transport Board felt it necessary to 'remind' the Admiralty of these particular orders
                                                                                                         th
when applying for a convoy was not an example of independence, more a function of 18
century naval administration letter format than bureaucratic superiority. That the
Transport Board 'had already directed the masters of transports where to embark [and]
ordered its own local agents to manage these embarkations', was again the Transport
Board fulfilling its designated duties rather than undermining the Admiralty. The
'dependence' of other government departments on the Transport Board did not give that
Board 'an authority that seems to have exceeded its apparent subordination to the
Admiralty'. 47 If there was a dependence it was a mutual dependence, as one cog in a
machine depends on another. Indeed, the fact that the Transport Board informed the


45 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 37.                                            .   .
46 Roger Morriss, 'Colonization, Conquest, and the Supply of Food and Transport: The ReorganIzation of
Logistics Management, 1780-1795' War in History, No.14, p. 317.
47 Ibid, pp. 317, 322.



                                                                                                    100
