than to haye such Provisions sent out on Freight, by reason we purpose having the vessels
loaded back with Rice' ..5


The process by which transports were procured was similar, whether for short-term or
long-term hire. The Ninth Report of the Commission of Naval Revision, reporting in
1809. stated that when transports were wanted, the demand was usually signified by
sending notice to Lloyds Coffee House, 'where Ship Owners and Brokers continually
resort'. Current rate of hire were already established. 6 The Board then awaited tenders.
An un sent tender lies in the Henley records and provides an example of how this was
organised:


        \\'e beg leaYe to offer to your Honble Board our ship Alina 226 Tons, Register
        ~kasurement. lying at Union Stairs Wapping for a Regular Coppered Transport at six
        months certain at the rate of Twenty Five Shillings per ton per Kalendar Month and to be
        subject to all the rules and conditions of the usual printed Charterparty. We beg leave to
        obsene that this \ esse! is adapted for the service of your Honble. Board, having Heights
        in her Hold and 'tween decks, and also that she is in complete readiness for any voyage
        she may be ordered upon (saving the extra stores requisite in the Transport Service. 7


Both the Victualling Board and Transport Board had links with the merchant community.
On the 9 September 1809 for example, the Transport Board wrote to James Henley,
asking that 'I am commanded by the Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy,
to request your attendance at the Board on Monday morning at 11 o'Clock,.8 The
following day, after the meeting, the Henleys submitted a tender to supply the island of
Anholt in the Baltic: 'we beg leave to tender to send a vessel to the Island of Anholt with
a cargo of Coals fit for the lighthouse there, quantity not less then 60 Chaldrons and no
more than one hundred Chal.' . No doubt the Board had hinted at a price that was likely to
be found acceptable. The Henleys tendered for 'freight over sea, Duty at Six pound ten
shilling per Chal. Five days to be allowed for the quantity .. .In case the vessel




5 TNA, ADM 111/191, VB to TB, 24 April   1811.
6 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 10.
7 NMM, HNL 14/5 f.l0 (no date).
H NMM, HNL 13/17 f.3, 9 September 1809.




                                                                                                     106
