Anholt. \vhen he received orders from him to stop in Hawke Roads, Gothenburg to
supply the Royal Navy ships on that station, 'the quantity of twenty-four Tons, sixteen
hundred weight one quarter and twenty pounds of coals by weight and also the further
quantity of Forty six. Chaldrons and Thirty Bushels of Coals by measure as appears by the
receipts hereunto annexed'. Later under the orders of Captain Reynolds of His Majesty's
ship the Tribune. 'and also by verbal orders from Admiral Dixon's captain', he applied to
Captain Barclay of His Majesty's ship Minotaur for instructions, 'which he received and
in conformity thereto sailed from Gottenburgh on the ninth day of January last for the
port of Leith \vith the remainder of the coals on board' .28 Once signed, a merchant vessel
was for all intents and purposes a government vessel.




The Transport Board's relationship with Contractors

What were the incentives for contracting with the Transport Board? Wartime shipping
profits outside government service could be large. Hall states that it was 'hard to stop
civilian owners taking advantage of the nation's needs to make inflated profits' .29 In a
time of unprecedented commercial prosperity, it was more advantageous for a merchant
to put his ship to a trade than let it to government. 30 This being true, the question should
be asked, why did any enter government service? In practice, the fear of capture played a
part in a ship-owner's decision and could encourage him to enter into government
service. For the Transport service to procure shipping, they were forced to enter the open
                                                                                               31
market and offer freight rates which could compete with those in civilian carrying trade.
Given the risk of capture, particularly prevalent in the Baltic with Danish gunboats a
constant risk through the Sound, the safe, steady profits available with the Transport
Board were attractive. This did not necessarily mean however that the sole incentive was
financial. Added to this was the small amount of effort that went into managing a ship in
the pay of the Transport Board. As Simon Ville has noted, 'the Henleys saw advantages


2X NMM, HNL 13/17 f.22, 14 April 1810.
29 Hall, British Strategy, p. 41 .
30 Mary Ellen Condon, 'The Administration of the Transport Service During the War Against
Revolutionary France, 1793-1802' (Unpublished PhD thesis, University of London, 1968) p. 3.
31 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 78.



                                                                                              111
