Specific costs were built into the contract. For example, Michael Henley purchased 150
chaldrons at the rate of fifty one shillings per chaldron, with specific allowances for
miteage. lighterage and porterage, which was accepted by the Victualling Board, to be
                               24
paid in ninety day bills.           Once the contracts were signed, the ships entered the
go\,ernOlent service.


Once in the pay of the Transport Board, the ship was under that board's control, and
could be used for a \,ariety of purposes required by the British State. One typical contract
stated that
        the said Master shall and will receive and take on Board the said Ship or Vessel, from
        Time to Time. such a Number of Soldiers, Horses, Provisions, Powder, Provender, or any
        Kind or Sort of Naval Victualling Stores. Recruits. and whatever else there shall be
        Occasion for. for the Service of His Majesty, as he shall be directed and required, and as
        he can reasonably stow and carry ... under Convoy, as the said Commissioners, or the
        Officer in Chief whose command he shall be under, shall order and direct, landing and
        delivering the same accordingly.25


Essential was the practice of giving, signing, and keeping Bills of Lading (specific
receipts for ships) and other indents for supplies received on Board and the acceptance
that they were accountable for the same. A log-book of the wind and weather was kept.
At the end of the service, this would be delivered to the Transport Office, 'upon Oath, if
                                                                                26
required'. together with all orders and instructions that he received.               The Freedom was a
transport in the Baltic between April and December 1808. Its records and receipts remain,
listing many receipts for supplies bought during 1808. Also kept for the ship's and
owner's records were wage accounts, portage bills and receipts for dues.27


When under contract, and when sent to a fleet, the transports came under the orders of the
Commander in Chief. As such, they could be ordered wherever they were needed. John
Stables, Master of the Ann of Leith, reported that he left the port of Leith laden with
ninety-six tons one hundred-weight of coals for the Island of Anholt. On arriving at
Gothenburg he applied to the Commander in Chief, Sir James Saumarez, for a convoy to



24 TNA ,ADM 111/187,11 June 1808.
25 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810.
26 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810.
27 NMM, HNL 59/81 f.2-31    April-December 1808.


                                                                                                     110
