III   di\'ersifying by employing some vessels in the transport Service and some on
con1mercial \'entures. One of the chief advantages of the service was a guaranteed income
in return for \'ery little day-to-day management by the owner' .32


Being insured for any loss was an added benefit. Ships in the Transport service would sail
at the risk of the government. with the Transport Board compensating the owners for any
damage sustained by hostile action. Ship-owners were happy to let ships to the
Victualling Board, since they could make money and protect their investment. 33 Though
there was an inquiry into any given claim, with potential negligence on the part of the
master in\'estigated. compensation was regularly awarded. At the time a ship was
engaged as a transport, her value was estimated jointly by the surveying officer,
shipwright officer. and storekeeper. It was a condition of the contract that if she was
captured by the enemy during her time of service, her value would be paid by
Government. If a capture took place, the master would detail all the circumstances of the
case. A certificate was also required from the commander of the convoy under whose
protection she may have been, stating his opinion of the master's conduct. If the fault was
the master's, determined 'sea-risk', then the Board could withhold compensation. By sea-
risk, they meant 'all accidents which may rise on that head are at the charge of the
Owners, who either injure their ships or take the risk upon themselves' .34 If upon
investigation it appeared that the ship was unavoidably captured, and that no blame could
be attached, a Bill of Sale was made out and the ship passed into the property of the
crown. 35 In both June and July 1809 the treasury ledgers note that occasions on which
payments listed at 'the value of ship were made' .36 Payment such were paid on average of
about once a month.




32 Simon Ville, 'The deployment of English merchant shipping: Michael and Jo.seph Henle~ of Wapping,
ship owners, 1775-1830', Journal of Transport History Vol. V, (1984) p. 22. VIlle emphaSIses the .
considerable flexibility of the Henley's deployment. Although Ville's analysis ~ocused?n an economIC
history of the shipowners themselves, his figures are also very useful once applIed to thIS study.
33 Syrett, Shipping and Military Power, p. 55.
34 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 10.
35 A deduction was made for wear and tear, at a rate of eight shillings per ton per annum. TNA,
1/3763/515-537,7 February 1811.
36 TNA, ADM 20/324, June and July 1809.



                                                                                                   112
