       Twn Months. at the end of Ten Months; and a Payment of Two Months whenever Eight
       Months shall be ~ue. ka\ing always at least Six Months Pay in Arrear for the Security of
       the Government.'I1


The Transport Board thus deferred payment, allowing them to run the transport service
on credit. While the ship was in service, it was the Transport Board that held the power.
If a ship on short term service was delayed because of a naval order, for example from a
Comnlander in Chief. the Transport Board allowed for 'Interest on Transport-Office Bills
added thereto for the Number of Tons abovementioned, for so long a time as the said
Ship or Vessel shall be continued in His Majesty's Service'. In September 1809 the
Board agreed to pay the owner of the Ann, 'if detained more than ten days after arrival in
discharging the Cargo to be paid four guineas per day demurrage'. 52


Howeyer. this could work the other way, and with much stronger penalties. Negligence
on the part of ~lasters or ship-owners meant ships could be mulcted. It was agreed in the
contract between the respective parties, 'that upon the Loss of Time, Breach of Orders, or
Neglect of Duty. by the said Master being made appear, the said Commissioners shall
haye free Liberty, and be permitted to mulct (fine), or make such Abatement out of the
Freight and Pay. as shall be adjudged fit and reasonable' .53 The Ann was ordered that 'the
Master does engage to proceed immediately with the Provisions under-mentioned, Wind
and Weather permitting, and to make the best of his Way thither, on the Penalty of having
Four-pence per Tun a Day abated from his Freight Bill, in Case of any Neglect or Delay
          . 'i"+
    · Part.-
on hIS


This was a serious issue. By March 1811, the Harry Morris reported to the notary public
in Portsmouth. It had served its Baltic portion of service as contracted: the vessel Harry
Morris of London had passed all of the Transport Board's criteria, and had laden at
Shields with a cargo of coals and bound to Anholt. It arrived at Yarmouth and received
orders from the Resident Agent there to proceed to this part to join the convoy for



51 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810.
52 NMM, HNL 13/17 f.ll, 9 October 1809.
53 NMM, HNL 13/20, f.8, 4 September 1810.
54 NMM, HNL 34/30, f.3, 5 May 1800.



                                                                                                  120
