In 1800 Keith instructed Lieutenant Lamb, by now the resident' Agent for Transports and
Victuallers'. that he would soon 'have occasion in a very few weeks to embark at
Leghorn for Minorca. about four thousand five hundred men and three thousand horses
with the necessary baggage and stores'. He desired that he would go about 'refraining
thither. as many Transports and Victuallers as will be fit for this purpose ... or, if these
should not be a sufficient number, all that can possibly be cleared and fitted for this
                                                 th
sen'ice·. Need overcame maxims of early 19 century property rights. Keith made it clear
that 'it is not my intention that any are to be hired,.73 The Victualling Board condoned
this practice. stating in July 1800 stating that that 'the Victuallers hired for the purpose of
transporting Provisions to the Mediterranean, are invariably taken up on monthly pay'
after their terms. 'for the purpose of their being removed to such Ports, and at such times
as the Commander in Chief may direct' .74 This was not commandeering by name:
ho\\'ever it was certainly a blurring of the line between state and private property.




The Transport Board thus proved adept at managing the resources of the private sector
for its own ends. Using higher freight-rates and ensuring that the ship's procurement
could be extended after the length of the contract, the Board took an increasingly large
number of vessels into the transport service in the years 1807-12. It should be
remembered that loaning a ship to the Transport Board was a more secure option than
pursuing the more lucrative and more dangerous mercantile trades. To continue to
procure freight, the Transport Board found it necessary to raise the freight rate to
unprecedented levels for this essential service.


The procurement of transports was a crucial part of the provIsIomng chain. Naval
administration had two levels of concern during the Napoleonic Wars. Firstly, could they
get it done, and supply what was needed? Secondly, could they provide it at the cheapest
possible price? For the Victualling Board, the first was never an issue: they would spend
the war attempting to achieve the best possible price for their efforts. For the Transport

73 NMM, KEIIL1241207-8, Keith to Lamb, 17 April 1800.

74 TNA, ADM 111/156, 11 July 1800.




                                                                                           125
