accidents ... occasioned by the desertion, indiscipline, and want of Seamanship - both of
Masters and Men in the Transports .. .1 believe this is the constant complaint on every
occasion when a large body of Transports is employed'. 60 The neglect of a master could
absolve the board of any responsibility to buy the vessel. In early 1810, the news of the
loss of the President victualler in the Baltic broke in London. Rear Admiral Dixon wrote
to the Transport Board, complaining of the misconduct of the master of the President
victualler. "in consequence if his having gone to England without waiting upon him to
give an account of the disaster ... Let a copy thereof be delivered to the Accountant for
Stores. in order that the impropriety of the Master's conduct may be strictly investigated
before any Certificates be granted to enable the Owners to receive payment of the
Freight.       And    acquaint   the   Rear     Admiral    therewith,        thanking   him   for   the
           .    .    . 61
commUnICatIon.


The transference of risk onto the merchant was made clear by the Commission of Naval
Revision. The storekeeper signed a bill of lading, and provided blank receipts to the
master of the vessel, for respective pursers to sign as provisions were handed over to
Royal ~a\'y ships. These receipts were transmitted immediately on the transport's return,
accounting for the whole cargo, and were answerable financially for any discrepancy.62
The Transport Board could be forgiving: it was in the Board's interest, after all, not to
anger potential future lenders of freight. When the Ceres, another Henley ship, reported
problems unloading its carriage on the Island of Anholt, the Transport Board was more
understanding. 'The Ceres delivered one Boat's load as three Chaldrons of Coals, after
which the whole of the Boats belonging to the Island were employed in delivering Bricks
and Tiles from the Philesia Transport that no Boats came to the Ceres till after the
                                                                h       th
Philesia had delivered her cargo, which was about the i             or 8 day of September'. There
were clear time limits in the charterparty (contract) that the ships were following. The
Ceres was required to lay at the Island of Anholt for the purpose of discharging its cargo




60 MA, 19129.
61 TNA, ADM 111/194,12 January 1810.
62 Commission of Naval Revision, Eleventh Report, p. 74.



                                                                                                    122
