statement of the order in which the various Expenditure of this office ... are authorised', it
explained that a bill was issued for two months hire, payable 90 days after the initial date
by the Treasurer of the Navy. After the ship has been in service for six months, a further
payment of two months' hire was Inade, provided a certificate under the hand of an Agent
for Transports could be produced, stating that she was still employed, complete in men
and stores and fit for the service in which she is engaged. An additional bill for two
months freight was issued at the end of ten months. Payments for two month's hire were
repeated. This meant that after a transport had been in service for fourteen months, a
 'reserye of six months' Pay' was kept up, a deposit to cover any stores belonging to the
Government being lost or damaged during the course of the service. This ensured that
Government had the means of indemnification for any time lost, whether through neglect
of the master or crew. or from inability of the ship for performing the services on which
she may haye been employed.-+9


When a ship was discharged from serVIce the owners were required to produce
certificates from the necessary departments, as evidence of their having accounted for all
goyernment stores and cargoes supplied to them by the Victualling, Ordnance or Navy
Boards, before the balance of freight remaining due was allowed to be paid. Only when
these certificates had been handed in, considered by the sub-Accountant and the General
Accountant. and then laid before the Board for approval and allowance, was a Bill made
out for the balance due. 5o The Transport Board ensured this was written into every
contract. For example, the contract for a Henley ship in 1810 stated clearly that


        After the said Ship or Vessel shall have been in the Service Three Months, and the sa~d
        Michael Henley and Son, or the Owners or Master shall have produced to the SaId
        Commissioners a Certificate, to the Effect contained in the Margin hereof, from the
        Commanding or Senior Officer of His Majesty's Ships, or Agents for Transports, under
        whose Orders and Directions such Ship or Vessel shall happen to be ... Ship or Vessel,
        shall have and receive a Bill of Imprest, made out and registered for One months Freight
        More and after the said ship or Vessel shall have been in the service for Six months, and
        the S~id Michael Henley and Son or the Owners, or the Master of the said Ship or Vessel,
        in behalf of the Owners shall have produced to the said Commissioners, a like Certificate
        thereof, as before the said Michael Henley and Son shall have and receive and Bill of
        Imprest, made out and registered for Two Months Freight more; and a further Payment of


49 TNA, 1/3763/515-537, 7 February 1811.
50 Ibid.




                                                                                                    119
