Chapter 6: Victualling the Baltic Fleet, 1808-1809


In October 1808 Vice-Adtniral Sir James Saumarez visited the Swedish squadron and
witnessed first hand the devastating consequences of an ineffective victualling system.
'On board their ships'. he informed the Admiralty, 'I found 1500 Sick all much affected
with scury)'. accompanied with dysentery, low fever, and a few Catarrhal complaints ... all
apparently sinking under general debility and despondency; in many instances amounting
to insanity. which too frequently terminated in the unhappy sufferer committing
suicide ... ·. The situation was worse on land: 'in their hospitals I found 3864 suffering
under similar disease', he continued.!


The poor health of the Swedish forces is a measure against which the efforts of the Royal
Navy to supply itself through the Napoleonic Wars can be judged. Employed in the same
Baltic region as the Swedish Navy, how was it that the British seamen stationed there did
not come to suffer from such problems? A monthly return of sick and wounded on board
the Baltic squadron at the end of 1808 found only four cases of scurvy amongst over
11,000 seamen, compared to forty five cases of rheumatism and thirty two cases of
Venereal Disease. 2 This is made all the more impressive when one considers the
challenges of distance, geography and politics Chapter 3 outlined.




The Victualling System in practice: 1808-1809
In 1808 there were four deliveries of victuals to the Baltic fleet. The Victualling Board
was always faced with a dilemma: the more deliveries it made, the fresher the food would
be, while spreading the risk of transport loss at sea. They could not very well send out
victuallers every few weeks, however, as such an arrangement would be both expensive
and an administrative nightmare. They settled for economies of scale: though that term is



J TNA, ADM 1171278-80, Saumarez to the Admiralty, 16 October 1808.
2 TNA, ADM 1/8/38. Of the four cases of scurvy, three were on board the Prometheus, which had spent the
second half of the campaign in the eastern Baltic, the furthest from supply.


                                                                                                   127
