Victualler in the Baltic and Gothenburg, wrote on 20 August, observing that the invoice
for the beef. pork and suet in the Fa1'ourite victualler was not sent, and that the Betsey's
Bill of Lading specified an incorrect amount. While the invoice specified nineteen
hogsheads of sugar for Lemon Juice, being 10,640 pounds, only ten hogsheads, 5,600
pounds, were on board. In the Fal'lmrite's Invoice 3141 pounds of tobacco was inserted,
whereas there was none in the bill of lading. The board ordered that the superintendent
signify to the Officers concerned 'the Board's disapprobation of their conduct in the
instance alluded to'. and called to the attention of those officers 'to this most unfortunate
part of their duty, any future neglect of which will oblige the Board to adopt efficient
measures to remedy the same' .16 It demonstrates the board's ruthlessness with any
disparity or mistake. \vhen a receipt for a small amount of provisions, which in the grand
scheme of the Victualling Board's duties was fairly small, could incur such
disapprobation. Furthermore, it also shows Smithson Waller in a good light, since it was
he that spotted the error.


Delays in the victualling process were generally the result not of Victualling Board
mistakes, but problems in securing tonnage. With regard to the delivery ordered on 6
September, the Victualling Board questioned the delay. 'The vessels with which you have
furnished us in consequence of our letter to you of the 6 th Inst. for the conveyance of
Provisions to His Majesty's Ships in the Baltic', wrote the Secretary of the Victualling
Board three days after first inquiring, 'being insufficient to take the whole of the said
Provisions, we have to request you will provide us with another Vessel for that Service of
about 200 tons Register,.17 The shipment from the order on 22 September also had
problems securing the necessary tonnage. 'Not any vessels having yet been appropriated
for the reception of the Provisions intended to be sent out for the supply of His Majesty's
                                                                         rd
Ships in the Baltic, as mentioned in our letter to you of the 23              ult.', wrote the
Victualling Board with increasing frustration, 'and the orders we are under for the
shipment of the said Provisions being of a very pressing nature, we have to request you




11) INA, ADM 111/l88, IO September 1808.
17 INA, ADM 110/58/263, VB to IB, 26 September 1808.




                                                                                          138
