Keats' words placed 'us quite at ease on the subject of Provisions', and enabled him to
                      n
end the rationing.-       They were cutting it close, but it again demonstrates how the
Admiralty and its subordinate boards were capable of responding to immediate events,
and nlore than adequately providing for them.


Certainly there were still victualling problems, particularly at the end of the year, as the
majority of the tleet began its migration back to British ports for the winter. Rear-
Admiral Dixon complained to Keats in December 1808 that 'the River [the Gata Alv] is
Frozen and we can get no more Water'. Further to this, a supply of provisions had
arrived, enabling Dixon "to complete all the ships to 25 January, and I have gone to Two
thirds allo\\'ance of Bread from this day ... I am getting very low in Spirits and other
Provisions' .38 Keats himself repeated victualling problems; 'If the weather which we
have had for this week past is the usual for the Season, it is time to quit the Belt .. .1 am
also under some embarrassment on the score of Provisions, the ships, notwithstanding I
took what I could from the Mars on her passage down [back to Britain] and ... tho' it is
now a fortnight since I sent to Gothenburg, no Victualler or Sloop with a temporary
supply has yet made its appearance' .39


This apparent shortage is something of a mystery. We can certainly be sure it was
perceived rather than real. Saumarez wrote of how he would:

        direct Rear Admiral Keats to remain at Marstrand during the Winter, for the purpose of
        protecting the Trade of His Majesty's subjects, and of His Ally the King of Sweden;
        holding himself, and the ships, and vessels under his orders, in constant readiness to
        cooperate with the Swedish fleet. .. causing him to be supplied with such stores of all
        species as can be spared from the Ships which are ordered to England; leaving all
        provisions ordered for the supply of the Ships under my command, at the disposal of the
        Rear Admiral. ,to

The Royal Navy fleet stationed in the Baltic, having been on active serVIce for six
months, surrounded by hostile shores, and with a precarious supply train through the
Sound and Belt, was as well supplied with provisions as if it had been in a home port. An


37 TNA, ADM 1/7/56-7, Keats to Admiralty, 22 August 1808.
38 TNA. ADM 1/7/461-2, Dixon to Keats, Wingo Sound, 1 December 1808.
39 TNA, ADM 1/7/476-7, Keats to Admiralty, 12 December 1808.
40 TNA, ADM 1/7/343-4, Saumarez to Admiralty, 29 October 1808.




                                                                                                  146
