 Early Challenges: 1808-9
 At the end of 1808, both the Admiralty and Saumarez had good reason to consider the
 \'ictualling operations of that year a success. Certainly in August a delay in a transport
 shipment had wonied Saumarez, demonstrating the concern all commanders had for their
 supplies. 'I ha\'e the honor to inform your Excellency', he wrote to a Swedish notary,
 'that the contrary Winds have prevented these last five weeks the ani val of the
 Victuallers I expected from England with the Provisions for the Squadron under my
 command. It was not until four days since that they have been enabled to join Rear
 Admiral Sir Samuel Hood off Moen Island, and I waited here for those supplies in order
 to proceed off Hano' . 23



 The lack of pro\'isions did effect operations, albeit in a small way, notable the brief
 detention of the 1Hars and Africa, having to travel out off their station to collect
 provisions. 'I send Captain Hope the account of the distribution of provisions made, of
 which the Centaur is full' wrote Hood to Saumarez. 'The Mars and Africa return to their
 stations immediately. The detention of the Brunswick and Edgar 1 hope you will ... write
 Admiral Keats by the Eralus of my intentions that such other victuallers may follow as
 may be necessary for the Implacable & Goliath thought the Centaur's supply will I hope
 be all that may be necessary until your orders arrive'. 24


Hood too complained to Saumarez of shortages, as supplies took longer to reach the
eastern Baltic. 'You will be informed that the Two Victuallers that have joined me. I had
hopes that the Freedom would have been one of them as there is a material deficiency in
the supply, particularly bread. Neither the Edgar nor Brunswick having anived, it is my
intention to take such Provisions as possible in the Centaur. The cause of the delay of
those ships I imagine from Admiral Keats' detour. . .I shall be ready for anything and this




22 For a more detailed analysis of victualling timeliness throughout the period 1808-1812 see Chapter 9, pp.
230-240.
23 Hano is on the southern tip of Sweden near Karlskrona. SRO, HA 93/6/1/237, Saumarez to Baron de
Rajalin, 5 August 1808.
24 SRO, HA 93/6/1/235, Hood to Saumarez 6 August 1808.




                                                                                                        142
