       ~upplies of fresh n:getables during the winter, to suppress the growing and dangerous
       I~t111~ncc of scun'y. Under these circumstances I cannot delay making known to you my
       kars. that should the crews of any of the Ships before mentioned be necessitated to suffer
       the sc\erity of the winter here, there are strong reasons to dread that we must lose a
       num~er o~' yaluable liyes ... From this statement I must beg leave to submit to your
       consIderatIOn the expediency of either requiring occasional supplies of vegetables from
       England. or recommending the ships I have particularly to be delivered as soon as
       possible by healthy fresh ships, which would prove the most happy means to preserve
       health.-t6



Jamison was paranoid after seeIng the state of the Swedish fleet. He need not have
worried, as the superior supply system continued to support the Baltic fleet. Neither was
the Admiralty concerned, despite having meetings with Saumarez over the winter of
1808-9. In the Admiralty's reply a few months later, his request was refused. 'I have
receiyed and laid before my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, your letter of
Yesterdays date. inclosing one from Dr Jamison, Physician to the Fleet under your
command' they wrote. and must 'acquaint you that they do not think it necessary to put
any yegetables on Board the Gorgon, as the fleet must in a short time be supplied on their
station, with what may be necessary' .47




The naval administrators and Saumarez began to plan for the future. The winter months
when Saumarez was back in London provided an opportunity to meet and discuss where
improvements for the next year could be made. It provided an opportunity to correct
mistakes and failures and refine the victualling system. This happened every winter. In
1809 for instance, the Victualling Board reported that the Admiralty were attempting to
reduce the number of ships carrying provisions to the Baltic. Fewer, larger ships would
be used. It was recorded in the minutes that 'it is the desire of the Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty that the said Provisions be conveyed in as few Vessels as possible; and
that Vice Admiral Saumarez has verbally expressed a wish to the same effect to the
Chairman; and request they will let us know whether it is in their power to appropriate to




46 SRO, HA 93/6/1/460, Dr Jamison to Keats, 28 December 1808.
47 SRO, HA 93/6/1/628, Admiralty to Saumarez, 27 April 1809.



                                                                                                    150
