them. The Victualling Board noted that since the first four had already arrived at the
Nore, they ordered that the said Victuallers proceed to Deptford and deliver their cargoes
into Store.-+:' Clearly, there had been no shortage of provisions over the winter.


That a fleet could have access to such a large amount of victuals, having already been at
sea for six months. demonstrates the remarkable contribution an effective victualling
system could make to a fleet, in pursuance of its objectives, both operational and
strategic. Perhaps most importantly, as important for operational effectiveness, was the
huge amounts of lemon juice transported to the Baltic; 76,464 lbs of it, a further 58,520
lbs mixed with sugar, and a further 19,110 bottles of the anti-scorbutic. The Royal
Nayy' s ability to moye such remarkable quantities - particular one that prevented scurvy -
to support their forces was crucial to the fleet's continuing operational capability.




A Move to Self Sufficiency: 1808-1809

As the fleet re-entered the Baltic in April 1809, victualling officials could look back on
 1808 as a relative success. There had been minor delays and some problems with
provisioning. but nothing to hamper operational effectiveness. The victualling system that
had been chosen had done its job. Indeed, the system had shown impressive flexibility,
particularly with the unforeseen demands of a 10,000 strong Spanish army foisted upon

it.


Keats was happy, as was the Admiralty. At the end of 1808, the physician to the fleet, Dr
Jamison, suggested sending out a further supply of vegetables to combat the onset of

scurvy. As he wrote,


        From the length of harassing, and detached service the Crews of His Majesty's Ships
        Superb, Brunswick, Dictator, Sa/sette, Lynx, Prometheus and Tartarus have endured;
        which has deprived them of necessary vegetable refreshment to ess~ntial to remedy and
        check the peculiar disposition this climate and its bad water has .to ~nduce Scurvy ....a?d
        understanding that this country cannot afford our squadron mdIspensably reqUISIte


45 INA, ADM 111/191,3 April 1809.



                                                                                                      149
