                                                  66
barrels a day could be easily supplied.                The Island of Gothska Sanod near Gotland was
found to 'afford an abundant supply of water to His Majesty's Ships under my command
when it cannot be more conveniently obtained from the Swedish Ports', by Captain
          67
Forest.        Saumarez also discovered water on Nargen Island and was delighted to discover
that 'by having persevered in digging Wells in different parts, the island was 'likely to
afford sufficient for all the squadron' .68 The Baltic fleet would not have to worry about
water supplies from 1809 onwards.



Fears Dispelled
By the end of the first year of Baltic operations, initial fears had been allayed. The fleet
had become self-sufficient in water. Problems of political hostility and geographic factors
had been overcome by a supply system that left a ship in the eastern Baltic as well
supplied as one in a British port. At no point had operations been drastically affected by
victualling shortages. There had been temporary shortages, on occasion lasting as much
as t\\"O \\"eeks. The victualling service to the Baltic fleet at this point was by no means
perfect. The occasional unavailability of transports for example had brought delays.
However. it had reacted well to sudden demands, such as the sudden need to feed a
Spanish force. In 1809 there were improvements, as the fleet moved towards self-
sufficiency in water.


The victualling of the fleet was a key factor in determining operations; the route used for
convoying trade across the Baltic was arranged so that convoys would assemble at Hano
                                                                        69
Bay where masters could obtain supplies of fresh water.                      Gothenburg, too, became
another pivot for the organisation of much of the Baltic commerce. The Admiralty used
the port as the administrative centre to which consular reports could be sent from Elsinore




66 TNA, ADM 1/8/435-6, Captain Martin, Implacable, to Saumarez, 31 May 1809.
67 TNA. ADM 1/8/499-500, Saumarez to Admiralty, 29 June 1809.
68 TNA. ADM 1/8/548, Saumarez to Admiralty, 13 July 1809.
69 Crowhurst,    Defence of British Trade p.74.


                                                                                                 157
