and other Baltic ports, commanders being informed of the movements of enemy or
hostile shipping.7o



The relatiye ease with which the Royal Navy had set up a logistical chain contrasted
greatly with the neighbouring Swedish fleets' ill-health, made clear by Saumarez's visit
to the Swedish fleet in late 1808 when he witnessed the terrible deprivations and disease.
Such was the difference between the supply of the Swedish and British fleets that Rear-
Admiral Keats worried, . I apprehend some difficulties, on the part of the Swedish
Government, to admit our men to associate with, or live near, the Swedish Seamen,
fearing jealousies and discontents might arise from the superior pay and nourishment of
the English Seamen' .71


British commanders by 1808 were well informed of the causes and prevention of scurvy.
'1 haye daily. since my arrival here devoted my best attention to promote the recovery of
the numerous Swedish Sick Seamen on Board their Ships, and in their hospitals on
shore', Saumarez wrote to the Admiralty. The Swedes, he informed them:

         having no antiscorbutic remedies on board their fleet at sea, except vinegar, that they had
         stopped the allowance of spirits ... Scurvy is itself the most debilitating disease, the human
         body or mind is subject to, and vinegar when the disease is present can never cure it, and
         if used largely will always increase the evil, in these instances, it diseased the bowels, and
         scun) is always ready to fix on any port in a state of irritation, and its aggravating
         influence. and great tendency to ... prove fatal in two or three days .. .I strongly
         recommended a nourishing diet with a free use of vegetables and fruit and Port wine as
         far as the nature of their complaints would admit of'. Fortunately, "the Swedish Admirals
         and Captains of the Fleet have paid the most marked attention to all my suggestions for
         the re-establishment of the health of their Fleet, and the means I have recommended to
                               · 72
         prevent f uture caI amIty.

The difference between the health of the British and Swedish forces cannot be explained
solely by a knowledge or ignorance of the causes of scurvy.73 Indeed, a comparison


70 This intelligence network will be covered in detail in chapter 8, pp. 201-207.
71 TNA, ADM 1/7/447-52, Keats to Admiralty, 27 November 1808.
72 TNA, ADM 1/7/278-80, Saumarez to Admiralty, 16 October 1808.
73 Jamison, the physician to the fleet was awarded the Swedish Royal Order of Was a in the Spring o~ ~809,
as he wrote due to the distinguished approbation they have received from the Royal College of PhysIcIans
of Stockholm, 'His Highness the Duke of Sudenmenia Regent of Sweden, has requested Mr Merry our
Minister late at His Court, to procure my most gracious sovereign permission to allow me to accept some
distinguishing mark of His favour, in the service I had rendered the Swed~sh Nation in th~ line of my
profession ... occasioned by the spontaneous but unanimous recommendatIOn of the AdmIrals and officers


                                                                                                          158
