Problenls within the Swedish fleet were not solely an issue of diet however. The Swedish
nay)' did not have the infrastructure or logistical systems to support fleets at sea. As a
short distance fleet. Sweden had little experience of long voyages and were consequently
ill-prepared for the blockade of Russian ports. They had not made the same logistical
                                                  th
improvements Britain had during the 18                 century. The superior supply system of the
British \\'as the difference: "after a careful examination I am decidedly of opinion that
Scurvy. of the most obstinate and dangerous nature threatens the safety of the whole
fleer wrote Saumarez' surgeon.


        In order to account for the introduction of this unfortunate complaint it will be necessary
        to mention that in the months of January and February last their ships were fitted out, and
        ha\e since that period. continued at sea without having received any regular supplies of
        Fresh Provisions. and the greater part. consisting of Country farmers in general
        accustomed to liw on wgetable diet, fully explain the origin and cause of their present
        state,


In other words. it was not simply the medical issues but the logistical deficiency that had
left the Swedish fleet stricken in port. As the surgeon continued, 'the rapid progress
which this disease is making cannot fail to cite the greatest alarm, as already twelve
hundred men have been sent to the hospital. .. all those means which our service points
out - both for the cure and prevention of this formidable evil (consistent with the
situation of both fleets) have been suggested and first put into practice with the utmost
alacrity, by the Physician and Surgeons, many of the latter I am sorry to say are
exhausted from fatigue ... The present proportion of lime juice with which they are
supplied is insufficient to affect a radical change' .76 There would be devastating results
for Swedish operational viability, as Saumarez described it, 'a melancholy proof of the
inefficiency of those ships and their inability to have kept the sea,.77


While the Swedish fleet, sailing just outside its own ports was devastated due to its
inferior supply system, the Royal Navy fleet under the command of Sir James Saumarez
was never faced with such problems. A poor victualling system left Sweden prey to the
Russian military advance: in 1809 it signed a peace treaty from a position of great


76 SRO, HA 93/6/1/333, Valentine Duke, Surgeon RN, to Saumarez, 12 September.
77 Saumarez to Pole, 21 November 1808, Ryan, Saumarez Papers, p. 55.



                                                                                                      160
