 hetween Britain and Sweden is instructive; the disparity in the respective health of the
 two sets of seamen was also to do with the supply systems. Glete, the leading proponent
                                              th
 of national comparisons between 18 century navies argued that 'the experiences of the
 18[h century show that the naval bureaucracies which had been established as part of the
 fabric of new strong states were not smooth instruments in the hands of political leaders
 of these states ... this inability of bureaucracies meant the political leaders - parliament
 and king - had to try and solve the problems together with innovative officers and
 technicians more or less in conflict with the institutions' .74


 Swedish victualling administration certainly suffered from this. The Swedish naval diet
 was full and hearty. Lieutenant Ross wrote to Saumarez about the types of provisions
 with \\'hich Swedish seamen were supplied: 'all the Ships companies are allowed a Gall
 of Com Brandy, at 7 Bread & Butter or Bread & Herrings alternately for breakfast, at
 noon peasesoup with Beef & Pork ... which appears a very wholesome meal, there bread
 is black but good ... they are allowed vinegar with their full meat, and as much as they can
 eat of everything. the water is indifferent but they have as much as they can use'. Anti-
 scorbutics however were conspicuous by their absence, with the result that' 12000 sick
 ha\"e already been sent home in 3 ships and those still remain, 858 part of which are about
 to go home in Gustaf 3. 3/4 of those are afflicted with Scurvy the progress of which
 seems to have been considerably checked by the effect of Lime Juice and Sugar supplied
 by the British Squadron. It must be difficult to say what would most effectively remedy
their present distress as the officers say that the people live as they have always been
accustomed to do, but I think that allowing less salt provision might have a good
effect'.75 Whereas the British had gained an understanding of how scurvy could be
prevented, the Swedish navy had not.




 of their fleet and the united memorials of the Royal Uni versities of Lund and Upsel in my favour, placing
 the highest ;alue on the truth and correctness of all my professional opinions & advic~ relative to their
sick ... During my anxious exertions in favour of the distressed sickly stat~ of the publ.I~ ser~ants of the
Swedish nation, in instructing their Medical Men into the nature of the DIsease prevaIlIng, Its treatment,
which proved so successful when had recourse to, and the means which proved able to avert the progress of
contagion'. MA 21/399, Jamison to Mulgrave, 29 May 1809.
74 Glete, Navies and Nations, p. 415.
75 SRO, HA 93/6/1/330. Lieutenant Ross to Saumarez, 11 September 1808.




                                                                                                       159
