the Baltic. had been easily countered, coming as they did from misplaced victuallers
outside Gothenburg. rather than any systemic problems. The system for provisioning the
Baltic fleet had worked well and there were no reasons to think things would be different
in 1809. The concern of Keats and Dickson in late 1808 hinted at the fine line that existed
between victualling competence, and a provisioning disaster. 1809 however, would
witness a greater strain on the victualling system, one that stretched it almost to breaking
point.


The increased demand for victuals manifested itself in other ways. More supplies were
procured locally in 1809 than in 1808. The system of local procurement centered around
the purchase of provisions with Bills of Exchange, charged against the Agent Victualler
at that port. Bills of Exchange drawn upon the victualling Board from the Baltic
                                                               11
increased from £ 19.144 in 1808 to £40,863 in 1809.                 This alone would not be sufficient
to deal with the greatly increased demand and strain placed upon the Baltic victualling
system in 1809. This chapter will initially outline the fundamental changes that impacted
so heavily on the victualling system. It will then analyse the temporary failures of the
provisioning service, explaining how and why they occurred, before describing what
measures Saumarez and the Victualling Board took to remedy them. Saumarez and the
Victualling Board were therefore to face the most daunting challenge to the safe
victualling of their fleet, without an Agent Victualler; it is impossible to avoid the
question of how much an Agent Victualler could have assisted the victualling effort in
1809. Certainly it did not make provisioning any easier.



Victualling Problems, 1809
In late 1808, Keats began to call for a more aggreSSIve approach in the Baltic, and
subsequently for more ships. 'As our plans of defence must be formed on those of attack,
and proportioned to the efforts of the enemy', he wrote,

         but on the supposition that his efforts will be doubled next year: and th~t that whi~h we
         have employed here this year has not been adequate to the SerVIce; beSIdes the ShIPS of


11 TNA, ADM 110/61.




                                                                                                     164
