       in t~e course of the ensuing Spring, shall, previously to their proceeding upon that
       Se~\'!ce, he compl~ted to six months, of all species of Provisions, including Wine and
       Spmts: and that Fngates and Sloops shall have an equal supply of Provisions or as much
       thereof as they can l'ol1\'eniently stow: We signify the same for your information, and that
       upon your receiving: our orders hereafter, respecting the said squadron you are to
       understand that when ships are directed to he completed for Baltic Service, they are to be
       Victualled agreeahly to the Proceeding Regulation. 57


Notice was given to the officers and agents at Deptford, Chatham, Portsmouth, Plymouth
and Dover, and on board the Lancaster and Harmony Depots at Sheerness and the
Downs, where Mr Grant, the Contractor at Yarmouth. 58 Never again would ships leave
port lacking in provisions.


Secondly, nayal administrators attempted to remove future problems with the hiring of
transport tonnage. In April 1810, as the Baltic fleet left for its third year on station, the
Admiralty allowed the Transport Board to raise its tonnage rates for the hire of freight.
'Whereas you have transmitted to us in your letter to our secretary of the Ith Inst. the
copy of a letter you had received from the Victualling Board', they wrote,

        upon the subject of the Tonnage that will be required for conveying Provisions to the
        fleet in the Baltic, under the orders of Vice Admiral Sir James Saumarez ... it will be
        necessary to increase the rate of hire, to twenty five shillings per Ton, per month, for
        three months certain, which is the rate of hire you have given for some time past, in cases
        of emergency: we have taken the same into consideration, & do hereby require and direct
        you. to procure the Tonnage which may be required for the service in question, on the
        most reasonable terms in your power, in sufficient time to load the vessels of the period
        specified in your letter for the Transport of Provisions for the Baltic Fleet accordingly.59


The rate of hire was increased: the Transport Board had paid for more transports to solve
the problem. Difficulties securing tonnage in the future had been comprehensively
reduced. By 1810, any crisis that might have existed concerning the procurement of
transport tonnage was over. Indeed, one can see increasingly detailed demands by the
Transport Board over what to hire. Whereas in 1809 they were hiring almost desperately,
by 1810 they could be choosier. In 1810, three tenders by Henley and Son were offered:
the Mary, Freedom and Noifolk vessels were all rejected, the Transport Board writing to



57 TNA, ADM 2/157/464-5, Admiralty to TB, 30 January 1810.
5!! TNA, ADM 111/194,31 January 1810.
59 TNA, ADM 2/158/115-6, Admiralty to TB, 19 April 1810.


                                                                                                       178
