The "ictualling system in 1809 found itself under a great strain, yet it was a strain they
were able to withstand. Unclear organisation in the Victualling Board, communication
problems emanating from the supply of such a remote fleet, the loss of a transport, the
sudden increase in the size of the Baltic fleet and the difficulty in procuring tonnage
worried commanders and a concerned Admiralty. The victualling system had proved
adept at reacting quickly to avoid disastrous food shortages in the Baltic fleet. It had
proved less able to organise regular, timely shipments in advance. The victualling
systems still had room for improvement: this would change in 1809-10. Following a
damaging year in which the victualling of the Baltic fleet had been called into doubt,
changes needed to be made.




Reforming the Baltic Victualling System, 1809-1810
Early in the winter of 1808-1809, and particularly in the winter 1809-10, widespread
systemic changes were brought to the victualling system. As Chapter 1 has shown, the
Victualling Board and Admiralty could be very proactive at instituting personnel
changes. Similarly, it was also astute when making systemic changes to the victualling
service. There was a degree of performance measurement. Admirals' and captains'
correspondence informed those in London. Inter-departmental letters were passed
between naval boards, highlighting inefficiencies and inaccuracies. Large amounts of
infonnation were collected, for instance the 'state and condition' of fleets, were returned
from foreign stations. Occasionally this was recorded in the Victualling Board minutes,
but often it was not. Every winter, with Saumarez back in London, changes to systems
and procedures could be recommended and executed. On 12 April 1810 for instance he
wrote to the Victualling Board proposing changes to supply system, advocating fewer,
                                                          56
larger shipments planned precisely months in advance.          Ships would no longer leave
ports under-supplied. The Admiralty made it clear that in the Baltic, fleets were to be
provisioned initially with six months' provisions. 'Whereas we think it proper that the
Ships of the Line which may form a part of the Squadron intended to be employed in the

Baltic, and the Neighbouring Seas', they wrote:


56 TNA, ADM 2/158/115-6.



                                                                                       177
