receive and deal with a victualling order from a commander was in this case less than a
        1l)
month.-



There were two occasions when provisioning problems arose. In June the cumulative
effect of increased seamen numbers upon a victualling system not yet flexible enough to
support it contrived to bring about massive delays in distributing provision. Again
towards the end of the year, delays in sending transports would cause concerns for the
Baltic fleet. Convoys of victualling deliveries continued to make impressive time from
Deptford to the western Baltic. Saumarez described the arrival of a convoy of victuallers
in July 1809: "His Majesty's ship Defence with the Four Victuallers named in the Margin
[Commerce. Tucker. Symmetry, Brunton], joined me on the 18 th Instant and the Tribune
on the following Day ... The supply of Provisions brought by the Victuallers will compleat
His Majesty's Ships within the Baltic till the latter end of September' .30 These victuallers
had sailed from the Nore on 13 June, arrived in the Belt on 1 July 1809, reaching
Saumarez in the eastern Baltic (Nargen Island) on the 21 July.31 The time taken from the
Nore to the western Baltic was a mere 18 days, and only 39 days to reach Nargen Island
further east.


Instead, and for the first time in the Baltic, major victualling problems were the result of
faults in the victualling service, rather than occasional accidents, or unexpected demands.
The Transport Board's difficulties in securing tonnage, and fundamental problems in the
Victualling Board system for remote supply combined to bring severe problems to the
Baltic fleet. Saumarez was deeply concerned, and was certainly greatly inconvenienced.
'Not having received any accounts of any Victuallers being on their way from England
for the Squadron, make me most particularly anxious for their arrival', he wrote to the
Admiralty in June. 32 A major victualling shortfall, as he well knew, could have
devastating effects for his operational viability.



29 As Chapter 5 has demonstrated, the Victualling Board in 1809 was beset with problems securing tonnage

for the distribution of victuals.
30 INA, Saumarez to Admiralty, 21 July 1809.
31 See convoy of Curlew, INA, ADM 717911118.
32 INA, ADM 1/8/499-500, Saumarez to Admiralty, 29 June 1809.




                                                                                                    169
