As the \,ictualling systetTI began to break down, the subordinate Boards began to report to
the Admiralty. distancing thenlselves from blame. 'Having been pleased by their Order of
         th
the 19        inst. to direct us to send out. with as little delay as possible', wrote the
Victualling Board to the Admiralty,


          a supply of Potatncs and Onions, for the use of His Majesty's ships under the command
          of Rear Admiral Dixon in the Great Belt, and finding it impracticable at this time to
          prlx'ure Freight. on any terms for the conveyance of the said Vegetables, we have to
          request you will mo\e their Lordships to signify to us whether there is a probability of
          our being enabled to fnrward about eighteen or twenty Tons of the aforementioned
             . I es J....l'y any 0 t' H'IS M'
          artIe                                      SIpS:·~~
                                            a.1esty 'Sh'


The problems securing tonnage are all the more remarkable when one considers that this
was for only a small amount of foodstuffs that needed transporting. In 1809 the strain on
the \'ictualling systenl began to worry the commanders in the Baltic. In July the Captain
of the Rllby mo\'ed his squadron off station in search of a victualling convoy; 'being
given to understand that the Victuallers for the Fleet were in the Convoy', he wrote,

          I lost no time in joining it. and having this morning ordered the Victuallers each
          alongside their respective Ships, have completed the Ruby, Majestic, Vanguard and
          Ardent, to Six Months Provisions, except Butter and Cheese, Flour and Suet, of the
          former. to two months, the latter to Four, and have to inform you that I shall return
          immediately with the Ruby and Vanguard to Sproe, leaving the Majestic to accompany
                                                          34
          the convoy on, the moment the wind will permit.

That he was willing to go out of his way in search of victuallers demonstrates the worries
commanders had over provisioning~ It was a rare example of victualling problems
directly acting to the detriment of operations. The shortage of victuals in the Baltic
became even more apparent towards the end of the year. Saumarez was worried about his
supply line, and the consequent effect. 'As the Ships to be left upon this station for the
Protection of the Trade to the 1st December are very short of Provisions', he wrote in
November, 'I request their Lordships will be pleased to give Directions that a supply of
the articles mentioned in the enclosed may be sent as speedy as possible to Hawke Roads,
no Victuallers having arrived since the supply sent out in the vessels named in the margin




33 TNA, ADM 110/60/285-6, VB to Admiralty, 22 August 1809.
34 TNA, ADM 1/8/506-7, Captain of the Ruby to Saumarez, July 1 1809.




                                                                                                     170
