think proper,.·n This was con1pleted a mere eleven days after the actual incident. Taking
into account the tin1e delay for the news to travel to London, this was a remarkably fast.
Once again the yictualling system had proved attempt at reacting quickly to potentially
disastrous circumstances.


The \"ictualling problems of 1809 were not limited solely to transport shortage. A
retrospectiye letter written in 1811 from the Victualling Board described this well and is
worth quoting in full:


        \Ye haVe to acquaint you that as the arrangement formed for sending out supplies to the
        Baltic Fleet at periods ti-,ed upon by the Commander in Chief, has been grounded upon
        an order from the Right Honourable the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty we
        cannot presume to deviate from it. nor is it for us to question its propriety; the more
        especially when we consider the great inconvenience to which the Baltic Fleet was
        subjected in the year 1809 from the want of the arrival of supplies in due time,
        occasioned not only by delays which probably were unavoidable, but also by many of the
        King's Ships having sailed very short of the quantities of Provisions they were expected
        to take out. a circumstance against the recurrence of which it is not in our power to
        pro\"!°d eo .q

The problem was not simply one of a shortage of transport tonnage therefore, as the
above letter makes clear. The Victualling Board, for all its attempts to place the blame on
the Transport Board' s head, was also at fault. That many Royal Navy ships were leaving
port short of the quantities of provisions expected was particularly worrying for the
Victualling Board. It had always been the way that ships assigned to Channel Service
were usually victualled for four months, East Indies eight, whilst ships heading to
medium-distance stations, such as in Africa, West Indies and North America, were
provisioned for six. -+5 The Baltic was perhaps in a curious position; certainly it was for
victualling planners. Saumarez was used to six months provisions. In April 1808 he wrote
to his wife that 'I am well equipped for a six months cruise' .46 On the other hand, the
Victualling Board was less clear on the standard amount of victuals a Baltic fleet should
possess on leaving port. On one occasion in August 1808 the commissioners wrote to the

Admiralty that:


43 TNA, ADM 113759, TB to Admiralty, 25 December 1809.

44 TNA, ADM 110/64111-2, VB to TB, 13 June 1811.
45 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 431.
46 SRO, HA 93, Saumarez to Martha Saumarez, 18 April     1808.


                                                                                                   174
