Indeed, into the winter of 1809-10, problems at the Victualling Board continued, as ships
in the Baltic waited impatiently for their supplies. 'We have received', wrote the
Victualling Board to the Admiralty, 'your letter of the 26 th inclosing a copy of one which
the Right Honorable the Lords Comlnissioners of the Admiralty had received from Vice
Admiral Wells representing that for the reasons therein mentioned the Edgar, Cerberus,
and Grampus. cannot be brought forward with dispatch, for want of a supply of
Provisions and water'. 53



Clearly. the yictualling system was struggling to function as well as it had done the year
before. It should be emphasised that 1809 was not a story of continuous provisioning
disasters. Shipments did get through to Saumarez, if occasionally the margin was cut fine.
In neither June or December, when victualling deliveries were seriously delayed, was
Saumarez forced to abandon any of his key objectives; he continued to blockade the
Russian fleet. he continued to protect British trade and he continued to assist the Swedish
navy against the Russian forces. There were instances of the Victualling Board operating
more than competently. In November, the Victualling Board was acting as it had the year
before. anticipating demands and doing its best to respond to them. 'We received your
letter of the loth instant, transmitting copies of a Letter ... from Vice Admiral Sir James
Saumarez'. they wrote to the Transport Board in November 1809:

         requesting that a supply of the articles therein mentioned may be sent as speedily as
         possible to Hawke Road ... we beg to acquaint you ... that having received a letter from the
         Vice Admiral to the same effect, we had previously the receipt of your letter taken the
         necessary measures for having the Provisions required by him shipped and forwarded
         with every possible expedition; and we have the satisfaction to state that two Victuallers
         named the President and Flora, are now lading therewith, and in such a state of
         forwardness as to afford reasonable ground to expect that they will be completely laden,
                                                                               54
         and in readiness to proceed on their Voyage by tomorrow afternoon.

Earlier that year, the Admiralty could answer that, after a request of 25 August for two
months provisions, 'directions accordingly to the Victualling Board, where a supply has

already been sent to answer that demand'. 55


53 INA, ADM 110/61/291-3, VB to Admiralty, 30 January 1810.
54 TNA   ADM 110/61/67-8, VB toTB, 23 November 1809.
55 INA: ADM 1/9176, Admiralty note II September 1809, see Saumarez to Admiralty, 25 August 1809.




                                                                                                        176
