Saumarez was of course still in correspondence with the Victualling Board, and was of
great assistance in advising or correcting the Victualling Board's knowledge of the
number of sean1en in the Baltic. The Victualling Board wrote to the Transport Board that
same month. acknowledging his advice:


       In reference to our letter of the J 1 March last informing you that we should have occasion
       for Vessels to load with the remaining ... provisions for the Baltic by the 1 July next, we
       han:? to acquaint ~ ou that by a letter we have received from Sir James Saumarez it
       appears that the force under his command has been increased, and that it will in
       consequence be expedient that a supply of Provisions to the extent of Two thousand nine
       hundred tons instead of two thousand should be forwarded. From the early notice thus
       gi\en we trust that not any difficulty or delay will occur in respect to your furnishing us
       with the requisite Vessels by the time specified. 65


~loreover. this demonstrates the remarkable flexibility available to the Baltic victualling

system in 1810. The supply was increased from 2,000 to 2,900 tons in a matter of weeks
\\"ithout any complications or delays. Such an arrangement could avoid the issue of
procuring transports which was the huge delaying factor of the previous year. 'In order to
afford the Transport Board timely notice of the Tonnage required for this service', wrote
the Victualling Board, they would be informed in advance, 'stating that the Tonnage
necessary for the first moiety, consisting of 2000 Tons, will require to be at Deptford, in
perfect readiness to load by the first week in May next; and that the second Moiety
consisting of the like number of Tons, will be required to be in readiness, at the same
place, by the first week in July' .66


It was also decided that the 'respective Cargoes of the different Ships should be
comprised of equal proportions of each particular Species of Provisions'. Why this
should be the case is unclear but it seems likely that this was new policy following on
from the loss of the President victualler the year before. If the contents of the two Flora
victuallers are examined (see p. 173), it can be seen that they did not carry equal
proportions of all species, but carried more of particular types. In neither of those ships
for example was there wine, spirits, sugar or butter. It is highly likely that the President,
when lost, carried larger amounts of these species, which were then greatly missed. The


65 TNA, ADM 110/62/131, VB to TB, 5 June 1810.
66 TNA, ADM 111/194, 31 March 1810.



                                                                                                     180
