Further changes were made. Permanent victuallers were sent to aid fleets heading to the
Baltic. again at the bidding of the Admiralty rather than the Commander in Chief.
'Whereas we think fair that you shall without loss of time provide a Vessel for the
purpose of supplying water to such of the Squadron under the orders of Vice Admiral Sir
James Saumarez'. they wrote, 'as may occasionally put into Hoseley Bay, continuing the
said Vessel upon that sen'ice until the final departure of the Vice Admiral's Squadron for
the Baltic: We do hereby require and direct you, to give the necessary orders for this
purpose. accordingly·.77 A similar victualler was sent there to furnish other provisions
there. The Admiralty instructed the Victualling Board that 'you shall immediately
provide an assorted cargo of Provisions to the extent of about 250 Tons, to be put on
board a Transport intended to lie in Hosely Bay, at a depot for supplying such of HM
Ships as may occasionally anchor there, keeping such Provisions, together with Stores,
from time to time complete; & that a clerk be sent out on board the said Transport
belonging to your department, for the purpose of keeping an account of the receipt &
issue of the Provisions'. 78 Captain Boteler remembered later that 'every fortnight four
ships of the line were sent away to Hosely Bay, on the Norfolk coast, to complete water
and get about twenty bullocks for the fleet, then go off the Texel, to be in sight of the
large Dutch and French fleets at anchor in the Zuyder Zee, and there remain four or five
days. Spring tides were the only time those ships could get out' .79


Another development was the increased use made of other British out-ports. In 1808 and
1809 supplies had nearly always come from Deptford. Closer to the Baltic in sailing time
as well as distance was the port of Yarmouth. In decline as a naval base since the Dutch
Wars, in 1810 it began to be used to supply certain victuals to the fleet. This was initially
suggested by Admiral Dixon in 1809, and passed on by the Victualling Board to the
Admiralty, which would see the benefits of a port more accessible to the Baltic. 'We beg
leave to transmit to you for the information of the Right Honorable Lords Commissioners
of the Admiralty, a copy of a letter we have this day received from Rear Admiral Dixon',


77 TNA, ADM 21160/259-60, Admiralty to VB, 5 April 1811.
7X INA, ADM 21160/466, Admiralty to VB, 28 June 1811.
79 Bonner-Smith, Captain John Harvey Boteler, p. 30.



                                                                                         184
