      they reported, 'requesting that supplies of Live Oxen and Vegetables, may occasionally
      sent from Yannouth for the use of the Companies of His Majesty's Ships under his
      command in the Great Belt'. So unprecedented was it that initially the idea was
      questioned. · As there are no instance of Live Cattle ever having been sent by the
      Department to that place', the Victualling Board commented, 'and as we apprehend that
      it would be yery difficult if not impracticable, to preserve Vegetables on such a Voyage,
      \\'e haye to request you will submit to their Lordships consideration how far it may be
      expedient to comply with the Rear Admiral's request'. 80


  The Admiralty was less keen than Dixon. However, the following year, Yarmouth began
  to be used to cater for the increasing victualling needs of the Baltic fleet. The Admiralty
  requested that "in consequence of His Majesty's Ships and Vessels stationed in the Belt
  under the Command of Rear Admiral Dixon, being unable to obtain any Vegetables, a
  supply thereof may be sent from Yarmouth by such of His Majesty's Ships as may be on
  their way to the station: We do hereby require and direct you to provide and send out a
  supply of such Vegetables, as will bear the voyage from Yarmouth for the use of the said
  ships and Vessels, accordingly' .81 Fairly large amounts were sent, 'as opportunities occur
  in his Majesty's Ships'. The majority of the supplies came to Yarmouth from Deptford
  itself: victuals were redirected from Deptford, rather than Deptford taking a reduced role.
 In this instance, the following amounts were taken from the contractor for vegetables at
 Yarmouth.


 Table 24: Provisions from Yarmouth, 1809

                                    Pounds                        Cwt

 Potatoes                           33,600                  or    300
 Onions                             8,400                   or    75




R!J   INA, ADM, VB to Admiralty, 18 August 1809.
Rl INA, ADM 2/159/58-9, Admiralty to VB, 30 August 1810.




                                                                                          185
