The contractor was instructed 'to enjoin the Contractor to select such Potatoes and
Onions for the service in question, as will best bear the voyage and be likely to keep.82
The Baltic tleet therefore ceased to be reliant on the supply from Deptford.



The Victualling System Refined 1810-12
Throughout the rest of the Baltic tleet's time in the Baltic, the victualling system
conducted itself along these lines. With victualling matters centralised in the Victualling
Board, Saumarez and the Admiralty could concentrate on their own areas of expertise.
AdY~lI1ced planning. unheard of in 1808-9, added to the changes in the way tonnage was

secured and in the amount of money available to hire it which meant the victualling
system once again could claim to have mastered the organisational and administrative
problems that surrounded the victualling of the Baltic tleet.


The Victualling Board was orgamsIng the distribution of victualling resources even
before anyone requested it; from 1810 they were consistently demonstrating competence
and efficiency. One rare inquiry from the Admiralty in 1811 brought a confident and
assured response. 'We received ... a letter from Vice Admiral Sir James Saumarez in
which he requests that the Spirits and Bread for Wingo Sound may be hastened as much
possible', wrote the Victualling Board. 'In return to which ... we, on the same day directed
our agent atloat at Sheerness to put as much Bread and Spirits on board His Majesty's
Ship Fisgard destined for Wingo Sound, as she could possibly stow, and that it appears
by a report we received from our said agent dated the 2ih past that one hundred Bags of
Bread and three Tons of Spirits were, on the preceding day ... that sixty four hundred
weight of Bread in Casks, were then in readiness ... and that it was stated in the Demand
that no more of either Species could be received'. 83


Such questioning letters were a rarity; by 1811, the Admiralty had all but ceased writing
to the Victualling Board. There was one occasion when the Victualling Board became



X2 TNA, ADM 111/192,23 August 1809.
83 rNA, ADM 110/64/425-6, VB to Admiralty, 2 December 1811.




                                                                                        186
