agent at Deptford was directed to take special care that such regular assortment of the
different species be 'duly apportioned and punctually attended to'. 67


:-\.gain. the commanders in the Baltic could still have an impact on decision making about
\'ictualling. For instance, the Victualling Board reported that, 'our Chairmen having laid
before us a letter he has recei\'ed from Captain George Hope first Captain to the Baltic
Fleet [in modern parlance the Chief of Staff, and the man responsible for such planning]
upon the subject of hastening the second moiety of the Provisions required to be
forwarded for the use of the said Fleet; we have to request you will furnish us with all
possible dispatch with the Tonnage necessary to complete the shipment of what remains
due on warrant and with Four hundred and fifty Tons in addition, to enable us to comply
with a further demand for the same service' .68 The planning was still the Victualling
Board's responsibility. The following year in another letter to the Transport Board, it
advised that:

        in reference to our letters to you of the 1t h and 13 th ult. and to a communication made to
        our Chairman by the First Captain to the Baltic Fleet, we deem it necessary that the
        second supply of Provisions for the fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Sir James
        Saumarez should arrive in the Baltic early in the month of September, and we therefore
        earnestly request that you will provide us with the Tonnage requisite for this service by
        the first week of the next month at furthest, which, according to the usual method of
        calculating the Tonnage in this Department amounts to One Thousand three hundred and
          .              69
        nmety two tons.

As this letter also points out, the consequence of the centralisation of victualling decision-
making in the Victualling Board, rather than the commander, was that planning could
now occur up to six months in advance. In March 1810, the Victualling Board could state
to the Transport Board

        the Right Honorable Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having been pleased to
        direct us to send out to the Baltic such quantities of Provisions as may from time to time
        be necessary for the supply of the Squadron of His Majesty's Ships and Vessels intended
        to be employed upon that station under the command of Sir James Saumarez, we have to
        acquaint you that the supplies which we shall have to forw~rd for this ~erv~c~ will am?unt
        in the whole to about Four Thousand Tons, the first vanety of WhICh It IS essentIally
        requisite should be so timely shipped as to be forwarded from De.ptford by the 1st day of
        June next, and the other variety by the first day of August followmg, we have to request


67 TNA, ADM 1/9/306-7, TNA, ADM 111/194,31 March 1810.
68 TNA , ADM 110/62/199-200, VB to TB, 14 July 1810.
69 TNA, ADM 110/64/90-1, VB to TB, 20 July 1811.



                                                                                                       181
