It is easy to impart blame on naval administrators. Janet MacDonald paints a negative
picture of the Victualling Board, stating that the victualling commissioners were 'reactive
rather than proactive'. capable of responding to 'acute' problems, but unable to address
longer-standing systemic problems. A major fault was their failure 'to instigate changes
to their internal systems and office procedures' .98 On the contrary, as this chapter has
shown. the Victualling Board commissioners oversaw frequent changes to systems and
the institution of reforms. The Commission for Naval Revision prompted its own
reforms; it should be remembered that separate to this, the Victualling Board were
comfortable changing procedures at their own bidding, when the need arose.


The mistakes of 1809 would not be made again; the story of victualling from 1810-1812
was one of unremitting success. The system devised for the provisioning of a fleet of over
16,000 men, surrounded by hostile states, with a vulnerable supply line, could not have
been carried out a few decades before. The improvements in the victualling system
brought a strategic flexibility no other nation could match; no other nation in the world
would have been able to supply a fleet in such dangerous waters, for so long, and with
such success. Herein lay the contribution of the victualling service to Britain's victory in
the Napoleonic Wars. By 1811, both the Victualling Board and Saumarez were clear that
the proyisioning system was more than adequately doing its job, enabling the
Commander in Chief to concentrate on his operational and strategic objectives. In a
'Report of the State and Condition of His Majesty's Ships named in the margin [the
Hannibal, Ardent, Vanguard, Orion, Mars, Dreadnought]" Saumarez commented in
1811 that he had' great pleasure in stating the Crews are in general very healthy to which
the occasional supplies of Fresh Provisions have greatly contributed' .99 It is to fresh
provisions, and the procurement of supplies locally, that this thesis will now turn.




9X MacDonald, 'Management Competence', p. 291.
99 TNA, ADM 1112/139, Saumarez to Admiralty, 7 July 1811.




                                                                                        191
