Smithson Waller was appointed Agent Victualler to the Baltic fleet in 1808. This was
Waller's first appointment as Agent Victualler, having no experience in that particular
role. He had been a purser on the Prince of Wales up until March 1808, most recently
serYing in the Baltic in Lord Gambier's fleet. Clearly, he was a talented purser. The
Victualling Board minutes record an imprest standing out against him in March 1809 on
'account of Provisions purchased by him at sundry places and times for the use of His
Majesty" s Ships under the command of Admiral Gambier off Copenhagen, amounting to
the SUIn of £7851..16 ..4'. With the report of Mr. Prime, the chief clerk of the Imprest
Office obviously clearing him, the Board gave Waller 'a Commission of two and a half
per cent. upon the amount of his disbersements, exclusively of the purchases made for the
supply of His Majesty's Ship Prince of Wales' and ordered the imprest of £7451 16s 4d
standing out against Admiral Lord Gambier and Mr. Waller to be cleared, and that the
Bill of Exchange for £600, was nonetheless to be accepted when presented and 'a perfect
Bill be made out in discharge thereof'. A 'Ready Money Bill' was to be made out to Mr.
Waller. for the sum of One hundred and eighty six Pounds, ten shillings, 'being the
amount of the balance which appears to be due to him: as submitted' .12 He was a man to
be taken on trust.


No doubt it was this reputation as a competent and reliable purser that encouraged the
Victualling Board to believe he could make the step up to Agent Victualler, and take on
the organisation of the supplies for the whole fleet that left for the Baltic in 1808. In April
the Board moved to 'appoint Mr. Smithson Waller to be this Boards Agent in procuring
and sending of supplies of Cattle, Fresh Beef, Vegetables ... for the squadron intended to
be employed in the Baltic, and to allow him a salary of Four Hundred Pounds per
Annum'. In addition to this he was given an allowance for table money at a rate of 15
                                                                               I3
shillings per day, and was furnished with instructions for his guidance.            He also had
previous precedents to guide him, both in the Mediterranean and the Baltic. During
Nelson's time in the Baltic after Copenhagen (June-October), the Admiral purchased live



12 TNA, ADM 111/187,2 May 1808.
13 TNA, ADM 111/187, 1 April 1808.



                                                                                            197
