into the Continental System in 1809. In 1810 it became a French ally. Its trade and grain
con\'oys, dependent on Britain, were at risk. As Martha Saumarez wrote succinctly of the
Swedes to her husband, 'They stand between two fires either of which is likely to
consume thenl,.9 The curious and unprecedented situation arose whereby the Swedish
nation fought a 'phoney war' against Britain. While officially at war with Britain,
Sweden continued to happily supply the Baltic fleet, on the condition that Britain would
not undertake aggressive operations against them. The need to secure local provisions
goes a long way to explain the friendly British attitudes towards Sweden throughout
 1808-12. Con\'ersely. Sweden's willingness to provide these provisions is also a
reflection of its underlying goodwill, but also of economic necessity.



The local procurement system: 1808
The system for procuring supplies locally in the Baltic was the same as that used in the
Mediterranean. The \'alue of local provisioning was clear: it was quicker, provided better
quality \'ictuals, and removed the month long period of storage as the provisions were
transported. Abo\'e all it was cheaper, always a concern for the Victualling Board. Io With
no cost for transports and freight, procuring supplies locally was advantageous. The
system used in the Mediterranean between 1800 and 1802 would be replicated in the
Baltic six years later. Firstly a bill of exchange would be drawn upon the Victualling
Board in favour of one or more merchants for the necessary amount. This would then be
charged against the agent victualler at that port, or where none was present, against the
Consul or Admiral who organised it. As a memo of July 1808 made clear, 'the Captains
and Commanders of the Ships and Vessels of the Squadron are to apply to the person
appointed at the different Ports they arrive at for Fresh Beef or Live Bullocks, taking care
to give proper receipt to the same' .11 The said official would then request the bill of
exchange to be charged as an imprest against him and would request payment from the
Victualling Board, which according to the relative currency values would then (if all was

correct with the receipts and invoices) approve the payment.


9 Voelcker, Saumarez vs. Napoleon,   p. 137.
10 Davey, 'Within Hostile Shores'.
11 NMM, MKH 112, General Memo, 24 July 1808.




                                                                                        196
