agriculture. Between 1801 and 1803, an average of 40-50 per cent of Sweden's iron and
steel, by far her most important export, went to England. Andersson commented that 'the
maintenance of good relations with this country was therefore essential to Swedish
economic life,.6 The Swedes were dependent on British goodwill so that cargoes of grain
\\'ithout which much of the Swedish population would starve, could cross over to Sweden
from the Gern1an provinces, as mentioned in Chapter 3. 7 Engestrom, the Swedish
Chancellor from 1809 stated that, 'we cannot break off all trade with England ... indeed,
article IV of the treaty of Paris authorises us to receive from England the salt required for
the needs of our population and, consequently, to sell Swedish produce to the English'. 8


This self-interest was reciprocated: Britain gained much from a friendly and
accommodating S\\'eden. Although Baltic supplies of· naval stores came largely from
Russia and northern Germany rather than Sweden, the latter was a destination for the
large British export-trade to northern Europe, in particular the ports of Gothenburg and
Stockholm. Howeyer. the main importance of Sweden was strategic. Swedish ports
provided shelter for the Baltic fleet, particularly in the winter as the Baltic froze over.
More importantly. they provided supplies to Saumarez' fleet, especially fresh beef and
water. There was therefore a clear link between British diplomacy and victualling. A
worsening diplomatic situation from 1809 led to increasing concern about these supplies:
at times of Anglo-Swedish conflict, remarkable efforts were made by the Swedes to
ensure that supplies would continue.


This chapter will outline the system in place for procuring victuals locally. It will
consider the precedents for this, particularly the provisioning of the Baltic fleet in 1801
and the Mediterranean fleet. It will then trace how the local procurement of provisions
changed between 1808 and 1812 as the diplomatic situation changed. Sweden found itself
in a difficult position. Military defeat by Russia and a Francophile court brought Sweden

6 Ingvar Andersson, A History of Sweden, Translatedfrom the Swedish by Carolyn Hannay (Wiedenfeld

and Nicholson, Londom, 1955) p. 302.
7
  See p. 71                                                                    .    . I   ..         ff
~ 'Nous ne pouvons pas interrompre tout co~merce. avec I' Angleterre, contmu.aIt e mImst~e; en e et,
I'article IV du traite de Paris nous autorise a receVOlr de ce pays Ie sel neceSSaIre aux besoms de no~re.
population et, comme consequence, a vendre. aux A~glais les produits suedois'. P. Coquelle, 'La MISSIon
d'Alquier a Stockholm', Revue d'Histoire Diplomatique, Vol. 23,1909, p. 203.


                                                                                                        195
