and water locally.3 That in 1808-9 the Mediterranean fleet was somewhat larger than that
of the Baltic explains the difference in amounts. Also noticeable from the graph is that in
the Baltic local provisioning increased from £29,144 in 1808 to £40,863 in 1809. It was
an increasing dependence.


The ability to obtain supplies locally rested upon the diplomatic situation in the Baltic.
The procurement of food would be facilitated by friendly and hospitable nations from
whom provisions could be obtained. Conversely, the victualling needs of the fleet became
a key component in the diplomatic decisions made by Saumarez. Such was the distance
from London. as Commander in Chief of the Baltic fleet Admiral Saumarez had much
leeway to dictate policy. He could be frustrated by the lack of orders. On May 24 1809
Saumarez \\Tote to his wife complaining 'I wish I could speak as favourably of my public
correspondents - but they pursue their former plan of leaving me without instructions'.
Two months later. he was still in the dark as to orders from London: 'Sir Richard
B[ickerton] preserves his accustom'd silence, altho' I have written to him repeatedly,.4
While it is possible that the Admiralty were happy to leave Saumarez to his own devices
they certainly did not inform Saumarez that that was their intention and he was left to
make his own decisions. Whether by delegation or negligence (and this author agrees
with Voelcker that it was probably the latter) Saumarez was able to adopt his own
strategy, occasionally diverging from his superiors and subordinates, based on his
convictions and his own interpretation of British interests.


On Saumarez' arrival in the Baltic Sweden was happy to supply the fleet, increasingly
dependent upon a subsidy from Britain. In February 1808 a subsidy treaty was agreed,
                                                          5
Sweden being promised £ 1.2 million per annum. In any case, the Swedish economy was
reliant on British trade. This became increasingly evident in the following years, as
French pressure for Sweden to join the Continental System grew. The Swedish
government was well aware that British naval action could decimate their trade and

3 For a fuller comparison of the differences between Baltic and Mediterranean victu~J1ing, see James.
Davey, 'Within Hostile Shores: Victualling the Royal Navy in European Waters dunng the NapoleOnIC
Wars', in The International Journal of Maritime History, Vol. 21 No.2 (December 2009).
-+ Bickerton was appointed as a Lord of the Admiralty in 1807. Voelcker, Saumarez vs Napoleon, pp. 85-6.

5 Hall, British Strategy, p. 163.



                                                                                                        194
