Victualling Board provided extra manpower. 'It being of the utmost importance that the
Victuallers loading for the Baltic should be all completed by the end of the next week'
they \\Tote. 'write to the Agent at Deptford and direct him to cause every exertion to be
used for that purpose, and if it shall be deemed necessary, to employ a part of the men
during Extra hours upon the said service·. 96




In 1809. the Baltic fleet had twice come close to a victualling disaster: in June, when
Saumarez had been so worried, and again towards the end of the year, as the fleet
prepared for an ice-ridden winter in the Baltic. Potential disasters had been avoided;
delayed deliveries of victualling transports had finally arrived. The, 'great inconvenience
to which the Baltic Fleet was subjected in the year 1809 from the want of the arrival of
supplies in due time'. did not happen again. 97 The Victualling Board made a series of
changes and minor reforms to ensure this was the case: victualling deliveries were
planned up to six months in advance, the timings of which were made by the Board itself.
The Transport Board was able to raise the rates of hire to secure whatever transport
tonnage was necessary. The port of Great Yarmouth as well as permanent victuallers
were used to spread the supply of victuals to the Baltic fleet. In these cases, the
Victualling Board was improving existing procedures rather than over-hauling the
system, through a combination of hard won experience and close winter interaction
between commander and administrator. That was not to say they were incapable of wider,
more extensive reforms when necessary, as will be discussed in Chapter 9. In actuality,
the Baltic fleet did not need its agent victualler, who had been removed at the start of
1809. Even after the near-disasters of 1809, there was no move to appoint anyone to this
position, and the competent running of the victualling system from 1810-1812 suggests
that the Admiralty was right when it decided an agent victualler was unnecessary.




96 TNA, ADM 1111204,1 August 1812.
97 TNA , ADM 110/64111-2, VB to the TB, 13 June 1811.



                                                                                       190
