  also provided infonnation on the Baltic Sea, so Britain would know when convoys could
  start up again. 'Ice has been loosening and is now driving about the Sound at the impulse
  of the \\'ind and currents' .40 Again on 14 March 1811, Fenwick wrote that 'the Belt and
  Sound are no\\' quite clear of ice' .-+ 1 This was not only to help naval commanders but was
  also part of their economic role as organisers of the vast Baltic trade.


  Consuls had specific economic roles. Firstly, they collected information on prices, market
  situations and business opportunities and forwarded it to the necessary state authorities.
  They assisted the subjects of the sending state in handling contracts with local authorities
  and informed the sending state's subjects of risks. Muller gives the example of consuls
  frequently representing absentee ship-owners at court when a ship or cargo was declared
  a prize. Their 'semi-diplomatic' status might directly affect the security of commerce and
  shipping. ~luller goes as far as to argue that the consular service was a 'mercantilist
                                                 42
  institution' rather than a diplomatic one.          British consuls tend to be removed from most
  diplomatic histories, overshadowed by the movements of foreign secretaries and
  ambassadors. In keeping abreast of local information and intelligence, which involved
  military movements, food prices, diplomatic and political sympathies, consuls played an
 essential role in obtaining local provisions. They advised on prices and quantities.
 Charles Fenwick. consul in Halsingborg, wrote in June 1810 of


         The temporary difficulty that exists in procuring oxen for the use of the squadron and of
         their extravagantly high price, both of which circumstances I am very sorry to learn. I.am
        aware from experience that a large number of oxen cannot be procured at a short notIce,
        although \\ hen a sufficient time is given a regular and efficient. sup~ly. may be depended
        on. I however believe that Mr. Sodergren (with whom Mr. Berndge IS m treaty for cattle)
        has overrated his price, as I do not believe that those which I am procuring ~ere will cost
        any thing like the sum of 200 Krona per pair which Mr Sod~rgren says. IS the current
        price at Christianstad. As however I am quite unacquainted WIth that neIghbourhood, I
        cannot form a competent opinion on the subject. You may however rest assured that as
        far as my exertions will go, they shall be applied to procuring them a~ the lowe~t rate
        possible and that I will bona fide adhere t~ w.hat l~had the honour of statmg to you m my
        last respects in what regard my own commISSIOn ..




4()TNA, FO 22/6117. Fenwick to Hamilton, 23 February 1810.
41 TNA, FO 22/62/18-20, Fenwick to Smith, 14 March 1811.

42 Muller, Consuls, Corsairs, and Commerce, pp. 20-1.
43 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1389, Fenwick to Saumarez, 14 June 1810.




                                                                                                      204
