of that fortress (under Blucher). He was also able to give a detailed list of weaponry and
armaments ayailable to the garrison and the number of Prussian troops.34


The intelligence network was particularly useful for gauging the opinion of Sweden, both
                                        35
its state officials and its people.          Informants made the position of each clear. Saumarez
confirmed to Yorke in 1810 that "I am from opinion from the last reports I have received,
the Government will studiously avoid a rupture with England, and they are in great dread
of an attack from Russia'. 36 Of particular use to the intelligence network was Count
Rosen. Goyernor of Gothenburg, who confirmed to Saumarez, that, even if Sweden were
forced into a \\'~u- with Britain, no hostile measures would be taken. As Saumarez
reported:

           I ha\ c this moment received the private communication from Count Rosen Governor of
           Gothenburg that he has been informed by His Government that Bonaparte has
           peremptorily demanded that Sweden will adopt the same system against the commerce of
           England as the other Powers upon the Continent in Alliance with France and that all
           British and Colonial Produce shall be forthwith confiscated, also that measures of
           hostility shall be immediately pursued towards England. )7


Information from John Smith, the consul at Gothenburg, confirmed 'the very considerate
manner in which Sweden appears to put in force the Decrees against Colonial Produce
and other Merchandize' prompting him to forgo responding with hostile measures against
the Swedes. 38 Merchants regularly reported intelligence to Saumarez; one named Johnson
confirmed that, ·the relations between England & Sweden will continue nearly the same
as they have been for the last six months, as the New Declaration appears to me to have
principally in view the enforcing of municipal Regulations ... 1t is understood that the
communication with England by Packet Boats is to continue, but as it is necessary that
this should be done with caution, it is recommended by the Governor of Gothenburg that
only one Packet should be dispatched weekly from Harwich to Gothenburg' .39 Consuls


3.. NMM    YOR 16/55 Saumarez to Yorke, 2 September 1810.
35 IntelIi~ence matter~ appear only in private papers, in this case the Yorke's. Matters of intelligence would

be kept out of the public Admiralty files.
36 NMM, YOR 16/1 0, Saumarez to Yorke, 27 August 1810.
37 NMM, YOR 16/26, Saumarez to Yorke, 20 November 1810.
3R NMM, YOR 16126, Saumarez to Yorke, 26 November 18.10.                .   .
39 NMM, YOR 16127, Copy of a communication made to VIce AdmIral SIr James Saumarez by Mr

Johnson.


                                                                                                          203
