       It is the Commander in Chiefs direction that the Captains and Commanders of such of
       Hl\ 1 Ships as may receive Fresh Beef from Gothenburg also water, do cause receipts
       agr~cabl,Y to t.he ~nnexcd fo~ms to b~ given for the same to the Agent for Victualling His
       MaJcsty s Shlps.m the Baltic. and m the event of receiving Stores or Provision at any
       other port, (are IS to bc taken that the receipts are given for the same before the ships
       proceeds to Sea. Should the ship be ordered out in a hurry they are to be sent to the
       Senior Ofticer.


The receipt would list the place of supply, the date, the agent or consul involved, the
name of the ship, and the specific amount of various foodstuffs supplied, all signed by the
purser. 2-:- Waller's reputation as a trustworthy employee meant that the absence of receipts
could be oyercome if necessary. Waller wrote in July 1808 that he supplied His Majesty's
sloops Ranger, Sea Gull and Nightingale with the fresh beef for which he was unable to
procure receipts. He requested that the pursers of the ships be charged. The Victualling
Board ordered that "an extract of Mr Waller's letter to be delivered to the Accountant for
Stores for his charging the Pursers, as desired'. The bills of exchange mentioned in Mr
Waller's letter amounting to the sums of £ 1500 and £337 lOs 9d were accepted, and were
                                            28
charged as imprest against Mr Waller.



Consuls, Intelligence and Victualling
At Karlskrona on the other side of the Sound and Belt to Gothenburg, the British Vice-
Consul John Lindegren managed the local procurement of beef. Smaller amounts were
obtained but it was important to have a variety of places from which beef could be
procured. The log of the Centaur shows many deliveries of fresh beef while the ship was
stationed in Karlskrona after returning from the eastern Baltic, on 6 July, 7 October and 9
October 1808. 29 Where the agent victualler was absent, consuls would replace the agent
victualler as the official in charge of local foodstuff procurement.


A consul's role was both political and economIc. Indeed, Sweden's active economic
expansion of the 1720s and 1730s can be traced by the expansion of the Swedish consular
service. Until the 1780s, southern Europe was the major area of appointment in

27 NMM, MKH 112, General Memo, 12 May 1808.
2R TNA, ADM 111/188, 23 July 1808.
29 INA, ADM 51/1824, Log of the Centaur, July-October 1808.



                                                                                                    201
