payments were made. In consequence of 'subsequent information respecting the rate of
E\.change between England and Sweden', Martin thought it his duty to write to Mr
Lindegren stating that the sum of £7 3s 6d be repaid to M Field, the Purser, which the
Board confirmed. -lSl




In Stockholm, the Minister Foster was asked to leave Sweden as French pressure forced
Sweden to take official hostile measures against Britain in June 1810. However, George
Foy. an English businessman resident in Sweden, remained as an unofficial link. Two
further consuls were also present in the Baltic. Charles Fenwick had been a consul in
Denmark: at the outset of war with the Danes in 1807 he had crossed the Sound and taken
up residence at Elsinore in Denmark, and then Halsingborg, where he stayed on in his
priyate capacity. As the above quotes concerning the gathering of intelligence testify,
Fen\\"ick \\"as an able consul. In 1812, Saumarez wrote in warm tones about Fenwick's
sen"ice. "His Majesty's Service having derived considerable benefit from the zeal and
e\.ertion of ~1r Fenwick late Consul at Elsinore, in the intelligence he has from time to
time communicated to me during my command in the Baltic, and who in facilitating thro'
Sweden the conyeyance of persons employed in the service of Government, I beg leave
to recommend him to your Lordship for any remunerative as his Services may be found
deserving of .-l9


John Smith, consul in Gothenburg, became more important in the victualling process
after Waller's removal in 1809. After the Swedish declaration of war in November 1810,
he too stayed on in his private role. 5o He was less competent, however. He was often
criticised by the Victualling Board for having irregular accounts. Smith spent much of
1810 concocting excuses proclaiming his innocence, or alternatively simply ignoring the
Board altogether. In June the Board wrote to Smith refusing to admit the Bill of
Exchange for £ 1,300 which he had drawn on them 'in payment of supplies of Fresh Beef
and Live Oxen to His Majesty's Fleet. .. until the necessary Vouchers respecting the




48 TNA, ADM 111/188, 30 September 1808.
49 TNA, FO 22/63/42, Saumarez to Wellesley, 29 January 1812.

50 Voelcker, Saumarez vs Napoleon, p. 106.



                                                                                     206
