that of the Rhine, each to furnish a contingent of Ships, or Men, by which means he will
obtain Sean1en for his purposes'. Sweden he stated, 'is lost to us' .65 On 13 March 1809,
King Gustav IV was overthrown in a bloodless COUp.66 Gustav's hatred for Napoleon had
made him Britain's strongest ally in Europe, and his removal from power increased the
ambiguity surrounding relations with Sweden. Swedish stock was not high in Britain: the
month before, Gustav had attempted to blackmail the British government, by threatening
to close his ports to British shipping unless the his subsidy was doubled. The British
refusal - based on the knowledge that, as Canning pointed out, the Commons would reject
                                      67
it - left Sweden friendless in Europe. The new king (although initially regent) was the
elderly Duke of Sodermania, who later became Charles XIII was merely a figurehead for
more ambitious ministers.


These developments left Saumarez concerned for the supply of his fleet, as he wrote,
'supposing Sweden to become an enemy, or a neutral power & shutting her ports against
our ships of \\'ar' .68 British ships were temporarily forced to leave Swedish harbours and
British Admirals began to expect war. The lack of friendly harbours would make British
objecti yes that much harder to secure. A hostile Sweden would mean no more local
procurement of provisions. Later that year on 17 September 1809 the Treaty of
Frederiksha\en was signed between Sweden and Russia, ending the war between them
very much on Russia's terms. Sweden did join the Continental System and ordered
British ships out of Swedish ports albeit in a non-confrontational manner. The British
Consul at Gothenburg however, made it clear to Saumarez that this would not affect
supplies heading towards the Royal Navy. 'I am further desired by the Governor' (von
Rosen), he wrote 'to request that you will not permit any of the Boats of the Fleet to
come up to the Town or above the Fortress, except a Flag of Truce, nor officers to appear
in their uniforms ... with regard to supplying the Ships with Fresh Beef &c I have not had
an opportunity to arrange but as far as I can see it will go on, though not ostensibly for


liS MA 211283 John Gooch to Lord Mulgrave, 15 August 1809.                             .            .
66 Th'      d'            f th   overthrow    was the ever  volatile Gustav's  accusatIOns of cowardIce towards
    e Imme late cause 0        e                                                        .
          · ans
many Iead 109  . tocrat'IC famI'II'es , and a new tax five times the rate it had been 10 1800. See Voelcker,
Saumarez vs Napoleon, p. 77.
67 Ibid, pp. 80-1.                                       . .      . . h B It" '
6& SRO, HA 93/6/1/1248, 'Saumarez' (see p. 149), 'StrategIc SItuatIon 10 t e a IC .




                                                                                                            210
