        He was instructed to communicate to me in the most confidential manner, that it was the
        earnest wish of the Swedish Government to keep on the most amicable terms with Great
        Brit~i~ and that is was not intended under any circumstances to commit any acts of
        hostIhty whatc\er: that the supplies of water and fresh provisions for the use of the
        s~uadron should he facilitated hoth at Hano Bay and Gothenhurg; for which purpose the
        PIL'quets should he withdrawn from the points the most convenient for the articles to be
        received' .

He added that 'the appearance of any hostile measures was only intended for
Demonstration, and in order to elude the Vigilance of French Spies, who might be
dispersed in the Country.89 Saumarez replied that it was 'far from my Intention to commit
any act of Hostility against Sweden, and that I was confident it was the Wish of my
Goyernment to keep upon an amicable Footing as long as Circumstances would possibly
admit'. He gaye orders to allow the coasting trade of Sweden to pass unmolested, and
aimed at extending it to the ports in Swedish Pomerania. 9o So, despite such
inconyeniences as declarations of war, the conflict between Sweden and Britain remained
one of pretence. Saumarez' promise not to undertake hostile measures against Swedish
commerce was taken as a given. His conduct towards the Swedes had always been
respectful, kind and honourable, despite provocation. Saumarez was aware that British
prevention of Swedish coasting trade 'would have been a subject of the greatest distress
to Sweden. but \\'hen added to other disastrous events, must involve them in the deepest
ruin', and as such had always been avoided. 91 Saumarez wrote with relief that 'with the
exception of the Affair at Carlshamn which took place previous to my arrival, nothing
has occurred to cause any interruption to the same intercourse as was held last year, the
usual supplies are continued and places pointed out where they can be most readily
recei ved' .92


The Swedish authorities allowed the British to set up a victualling base on the tip of
Sweden's south coast, on the Island of Hano. The idea for this had come from one of
Fenwick's contacts back in June 1810. Anticipating the Swedish declaration of war, he
passed on the suggestion from a Mr. Berridge, who had suggested to him 'the advantage

89 TNA, ADM 1/12/13-15, Saumarez to Admiralty, 23 May 1811.
90 TNA, ADM 1112/13-15, Saumarez to Admiralty, 23 May 1811.
91 Voelcker, 'From Post Captain to Diplomat', p. 143.                       . ,
92 NMM, YOR 16/43, Saumarez to Yorke, 28 May 1811. The 'Carlshan:n Affatr     referred to ~ame w~e~
   · I ad
sh IpS  en B
           on '  . h accoun t were detained at Karlshamn by the SwedIsh government, arousmg anXIetIes
              ntIS
in London, Ryan, Saumarez Papers, p. 169.


                                                                                                   216
