the use of His Majesty's Fleet'. 69 So began the secret provisioning of the Baltic fleet by
Swedish officials.


The Swedes ensured that supplies to the British fleet would not be stopped. Aware of the
importance Saumarez placed on them, Baron von Platen, a retired Swedish Naval Officer,
then a councillor of state, was deputed to explain that discreet provisioning would
continue. He wrote to Saumarez in 1809 detailing the good-feeling and gratitude of the
Swedes. and their plans for future provisioning:


        at the conclusion of the peace, hard as it is, we can not yet deny, that a high degree we are
        indebted to you, for our existing as a state ... As for the Continental System, it is easily to
        be seen by the Treaty that the Russian interest is not alike with the French and that it is
        mentioned only because it ought to be so. For the first moment I am authorised to say that
        no alteration \\ill take place in what was before mentioned to Mr. Foster and he probably
        \\ill have advertised of our ports and oxen to so brave an ally to so successful a protector
        for so many sails as your Esq. judges it fit to send in into them for the remaining of the
        harvest. .. If your Excellence should wish for any refreshments at Gotland such as may be
        had there of sheeps and greens proper steps are taken by the Governor. The best way
        might be to send a small vessel with an advertisement, and then a little after let the fleet
        proceed to Ostergarn .. .1 am confident the Governor will make his utmost for to by all
        POSS]'bl e means. 70



Local provIsIomng that had occurred in 1808 continued as normal throughout 1809.
Writing the following year, Saumarez wrote that 'this summer is likely to prove more
inactiye than any former one - every account from Russia states their fleet to be
dismantled, and the Swedes are not disposed to give us any employment. They testify
upon eyer)' occasion their sense of gratitude at the moderation by which I uniformly acted
towards them, and they continue to allow the usual supplies of fresh provisions to be sent
to the squadron, although not with the approval of the Government' .71 Captain Thomas
Harvey of the Majestic described being provisioned at Karlskrona as usual. 'After having
compleated the Majestiec water during which time I embarked cattle and vegetables for
the Belt Squadron' he wrote; 'while at Carlscrona I had provisions at different times
taken out of Majestic which will account to you for the difference you must procure in




69 TNA. ADM 1/9/248, John Smith, Consul at Gothenburg to Saumarez, 16 November 1809.

70 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1129, Platen to Saumarez, 22 September 1809.
71 SRO, SA 3/1/2/1, Saumarez to Martha Saumarez, 24 June 1809.



                                                                                                          211
