British knew that these provIsIons would not be affected. To all intents and purposes,
nothing would change. Here we can see the benefits of Saumarez' conduct throughout the
period as Conunander in Chief in the Baltic. Ever courteous, his relaxed and
understanding conduct towards Sweden earned dividends between 1809 and 1812.
Swedish resentment of the French was becoming more pronounced. The Swedish
Admiral Krusenstjerna highlighted Swedish disillusionment with their French allies:


        Our friends the French and Danes express their friendship to us with unremitted zeal in
        capturing and robbing from our merchant vessels, whilst our enemies the English let them
        pass unmolested from one port to another. We did not suffer by one hundred times as
        much from the two nations, the time we were at war against them, as we do now when
        they call themselves our friends and allies. 77


Conyersely, as yon Rosen commented, 'Admiral Saumarez' ways of thinking and attitude
regarding Sweden are quite the same as they so far have been. He protects our trade, lets
our ships sail with or without convoys and licenses, allows exports of colonial
merchandise·. 78 This was a deliberate gamble on the part of Saumarez, hoping that his
policy of appeasement and compassion would lead Sweden to reciprocate. So although
Sweden made official noises banning the British from their ports and ending the supply to
the fleet, confidentially it was made clear that


        these measures are perfectly contrary to the sentiments of the Swedish Government and
        particularly to those of the Crown Prince, and as they are to be acted upon in the most
        modified manner, and only confined to the sequestration of British Produce, that I shall
        abstain from any offensive measures against Sweden .. .It is added that in consequence of
        the early communication made by the Swedish Governor in Gothenburg, it is expected
        that very little loss will be incurred to the British Merchants, having had time to make the
                                   79
        necessary arrangements.


Saumarez' conduct had been instrumental. Von Platen wrote in 1811, 'you have been the
guardian angel of my country. By your wise temperament and loyal conduct you have
been the first cause of the plans which have formed against the Demon of the Continent.
Had you fired one shot when we declared war against England, all had been ended, and




77 Ross, Memoirs and Correspondence, Vol. II, p. 245.
7x Von Rosen, Ep.E.1O:11, fo1.109, 8 June 1811.
79 NMM, YOR 16/26, Saumarez to Yorke, 20 November 1810.



                                                                                                       213
