Europe would ha\'e been enslaved'. 80 Von Rosen commented in 1813, 'you were the first
cause that Russia had dared to make war against France: had you fired one shot when we
declared war against England, all had been ended, and Europe' .81 For instance, had
Saun1arez carried out Wellesley's instructions to treat the Swedish coastal trade as
'enemy' at the start of the 1811 season or had retaliated for the 'Carlsham cargoes' by
using his firepower to retake the sequestered merchant ships, 'Sweden would almost
certainly ha\'e felt bound to respond to Alquier's [the French minister in Sweden]
pressure with action rather than deception, to enforce the Continental System to which he
was tied by treaty with France. and to cease providing supplies and shelter to Saumarez's
Baltic fleet; above all water'. 82 In emphasising that Swedish and British interests were not
mutually exclusi\'e, he ensured that 'phoney war' remained just that.


In February 1811, Fenwick wrote to Saumarez, stating that despite the war, 'matters
appear to continue pretty nearly what they were, and it is the opinion that no alteration
will take place with regard to us, or at least not for the worse'. The reasons for this were
clear: 'it is said that the newcomer has entirely devoted himself to his adopted country,
and the treatment which he has received in that which he has left, makes it likely that he
will still more firmly attach himself to whom he now is. It is said that he is very popular
there, owing to his having embraced the beforementioned line of conduct' .83 Fenwick,
Smith and Saumarez kept in close contact with the Swedish court, in particular the
Swedish Foreign Minister, the Baron d'Engestrom. Sweden's entry into the war had
always been hesitant, forced reluctantly into the Continental System by a domineering
Napoleon. What followed was the peculiar situation of two states at war freely and
happily trading provisions. Five months after the declaration of war, Engestrom informed


80
  Ross. Vol. II, p. 293.
81 SRO    HA 93/6/1/2447, Von Rosen to Saumarez, 22 August 1813. There are some doubts as to whether it
was vo~ Rosen who wrote the letter. There are four copies in the archive, none of which are signed. Sir
John Ross believed it to be from Baron von Platen aide de camp to the Crown Prince, while the archivist
believed the letter from von Rosen. Tim Voelcker, whose knowledge of von Rosen is exceptional, backs
the latter, and indeed the friendly yet grateful phrasing suggests his authorship. See Voelcker, Saumarez vs
Napoleon, p. 3.                                                      .          .'                       .
82 Tim Voelcker, 'From Post Captain to Diplomat: The Transformation of Admiral Sir James Saumarez In

the Napoleonic Wars', PhD thesis, University of Exeter, 2007, p. 2 5 6 . . ,          .'
83 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1664, Fenwick to Saumarez, 22 February 1811, unsigned for fear of aCCidents In

crossing the sea', but in Fenwick's hand.


                                                                                                        214
