a British agent, that orders had been sent to Swedish governors instructing them to grant
'en~ry facility to the English that circumstances may afford' to the British fleet stationed
of the ('oast of Sweden. 'The British Admiral or those under his command will send a
Flag of Truce with the boats sent for water or fresh provisions and under protection of a
parley. opportunity will be given to them to procure the supplies they require' .84 As Foy
wrote, 'it is desired that for [provisioning] the admiral may fix on Carlscrona, to the
Goyernor of which place orders are already issued to grant every facility to the English
that circumstances may allow' .85 Consul Smith was relieved to hear of these
deyelopments: 'I am very happy to learn that Possible Intentions of our Government
towards this Country and as far as my Information leads, Sweden is equally well inclined,
notwithstanding the demonstrations it has been obliged to adopt'. 86


Sweden was well inclined to do so. Bernadotte would certainly have known of the
importance of Britain to the Swedish economy. Krusenstjerna wrote that 'I am most
perfectly persuaded. that my Royal Sovereign will enjoy the greatest satisfaction in
accepting the assurance Your Excellency has been pleased to communicate of His
Britannic ~'Iajesty' s intentions to preserve the harmony and good understanding, that
exist between both Nations - intentions, which for the benefit and prosperity of both
Nations it has been an object for His Swedish Majesty' earnest wishes and most studious
endeavours to injure in the British Government' .87 There were considerable loopholes of
which British fleets could take advantage, despite Sweden's theoretical hostility. Count
Rosen wrote that 'Ships flying the English flag are not allowed, unless suffering from
substantial damage at sea and needing assistance, to enter a major port'. 88 This was an
exception taken advantage of many times, with Royal Navy ships entering Swedish ports,
particularly Gothenburg. After a discussion on board the Victory between Saumarez and
Tawast, the military Commander in Chief at Gothenburg, Saumarez reported that




84 TNA, FO 47174.
R5 TNA, FO 73/65, George Foy to Smith, 9 May 181!.
86 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1719, Smith to Reynolds, 2 May 181!.        ,....                         .
R7 Kristina Sandberg, 'England, Sverige och Hanobukten 1810-12 , Hlstona 01, Hogskolan I VaxJo Docent

Larsonns uppsatsseminarium den 5 juni 1978, Karlsharnn Kommun, p. 20.
RR Voelcker, 'From Post Captain to Diplomat', p. 142.




                                                                                                 215
