Needless to say, Krok was left out of pocket. There is no record of whether the
Victualling Board did cover Krok's losses. Other evidence though, namely the Board's
willingness to pay compensation to Lindegren in 1810 and also Krok's tender in 1811 to
supply the Baltic fleet once more, suggests his fingers had not been burned too much by
the experience. 61



This incident could be an explanation of the Victualling Board's decision to remove
Waller as agent yictualler in early 1809. Such large quantities of fresh beef were clearly
not needed and Waller was at least partly responsible. No record remains detailing why
Waller was suddenly deemed unnecessary, but in April 1809 he was removed as Agent
Victualler. That he was not replaced suggests that this was nothing personal: only that his
duties could be carried out as easily by consuls. 62 Rear-Admiral Bertie, who had replaced
Keats as squadron commander in the western Baltic, wrote to Hood later that year, stating
that "as I understand Mr Waller the agent Victualler is returned to England, and there
being no person here deputed by him to supply the squadron with Fresh Beef, I have
given ~lr Fenwick [Consul in Elsinore] directions to provide it at the contract price' .63
Waller continued to process his accounts, in April the Victualling Board minutes record
further Bills of Exchange from him. The Board ordered that 'the three Bills of Exchange
therein advised of drawn upon this Office for Victualling services, amounting to the sum
of £1315 .. 9 .. 0 be accepted and be charged as Imprest Against Mr Waller' .64 Waller would
return to his old position as purser on the Prince of Wales.


In 1809, the responsibility for procuring supplies locally would fall on the British consuls
in the Baltic. They would face the first diplomatic strains between Britain and Sweden.
The armistice between Sweden and Russia in early 1809 began the process by which
Sweden was slowly reeled into the Continental System. John Gooch wrote to Lord
Mulgrave in August 1809 'Seeing that the Ruler of France is grasping all the shores of
Europe, and without doubt intends by them to form a Maritime Confederice similar to

61
     See pp. 226-7.                                                                 .       II        h·
62 As suggested above, Waller actually appears to have been a very competent Agent V1ctua        er, t e Issue
with Mr Krok notwithstanding.
63 NMM, MKH I 14, Bertie to Hood, 15 April 1809.
64 TNA, ADM II III 91, 19 April 1809.



                                                                                                            209
