the supply of live oxen and Vegetables to the Ships of his Squadron as he may deem most
e~pedient, and acquaint Mr Krok therewith' . 131



There were risks inherent in contracting. Lindegren, the Consul at Karlskrona, suffered
from some loss. when operations beyond his control took the fleet away from provisions
he had hastily arranged, leaving him severely out of pocket. In early 1810, he wrote
complaining of "the suffering I have been subjected to by the failure of an undertaking I
engaged in by your request and for account of HM Ships under your command then in
these roads'. In order to supply the needs of the Ships under Captain Barrett's command
with bullocks, spirits and rice, Lindegren begged Barret to 'consider that great expense,
trouble and exertion could not possibly be avoided'. The livestock was purchased at
numerous and distant places and was consequently very dear. The spirits and wine, 'not
being within the line of my business, I was obliged to contract for with several persons
\J,:hich naturally occasioned loss of time and left no profit to me'. The collection of these
different items at Karlskrona 'attended a great trouble and still greater expense,
particularly bringing down the goods, and the loading of the crafts'. Unfortunately, the
vessels were about to be loaded and sent on their way to the British ships, about twelve
miles from the town, 'when most unfortunately a thick fog came in over land, which
rendered the further progress of the vessels utterly impossible'. The convoy which the
Royal .:\avy was covering had in the mean time made sail, and it became necessary for
the Minotaur to proceed after it. The vessels transporting the provisions out to the fleet
'had no other alternative to return ... with the whole of their cargoes which are now laying
very heavily on my hands'. Lindegren calculated his loss 'to the fairest calculations' at
£400, and he asked Barrett to plead to the Victualling Board for restitution. 132


The Victualling Board demanded a full statement of account, which was then sent. The
account specified the exact amount of loss sustained by Mr Lindegren at £689 2s and
2Y2d. 133 Six months later, Lindegren was awarded compensation for his losses:



131 TNA, ADM 1111198,26 March 1811.
132 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1444, Lindegren to Barrett, 18 January 1810.
133 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1444/5, Lindegren to Barrett, 18 January 1810.




                                                                                         227
