but Saumarez attempted to obtain as much as he could. Secondly there was also the issue
of security. The overthrow of King Gustav IV, in early 1809 created political and
diplomatic turmoil. The Victualling Board was not to know in 1809 that Swedish co-
operation could be relied upon.


Mr Krok' s difficulties aside, obtaining local supplies was cheap, quick and efficient. The
Baltic commanders did not have the opportunity to play the market to secure the best
price. Lord Keith had that luxury during his time in the Mediterranean in 1800. Aware of
the benefit that derived from competition, he claimed 'on the subject of Fresh Beef and
LiYe Cattle, I agree with you that anyone individual, intrusted exclusively with the
supply. may impose upon the Government; an I am well assured that the first article can
be obtained at a lower price at Leghorn than the price that it at present costs .. .it is
therefore my determination to resort to a fair and open competition, in order that the
Public may be supplied on just and reasonable terms' .126 In April 1800 he worried that
the price of beef 'that it at present costs ... exceeds Eightpence sterling per pound' was too
dear. 127 That the Baltic fleet secured a price of six pence per pound in a less agriculturally
productiye region, outside a competitive market, makes the achievement all the more
remarkable.


Long-term contracts, organised in advance, were cheap and reliable. However, supplies
bought at short notice could be prohibitively expensive. On the rare occasions when the
Baltic fleet became needy, it was the merchant's turn to manipulate a desperate navy. We
saw in Chapter 6 the problems the Baltic fleet faced in 1809, with two deliveries of




126 NMM. KEAIL/23/264-6, Lord Keith to James Yeo, agent victualler in the Mediterranean, 27 April
1800. Keith was an assiduous player of the market. Earlier in 1800 he commented that 'at present I am far
from thinking that the Beef is supplied on as low terms as it could be procure~ ... but I sha~l hereafter
endeavour, when opportunity will admit, to obtain full information on th~ subJe~t, an? gUl~e m~self
accordingly'. NMM KEAIL/23/260- I, Keith to the Commissioners for Vlctua~h~g HIS ~aJesty s Na:y, 25
January 1800. In April he wrote to the British Vice-Consul at Savona, .comp~ammg that the beef whIch you
have found on board the Audacious appears to me to be charged at a hIgh pnce, and even exceed~ that at
which you told me you could provide it' . He ordered that no more be purchased for any of the .shlps under
his orders. NMM KEAIL/23/192, Keith to Mr Alebrte, British Vice-Consul at Savo?a, 11 Apnl 1800 ..
127 NMM, KEAIL/23/264-6, Lord Keith to James Yeo, Agent Victualler in the MedIterranean, 27 Apnl

1800.


                                                                                                      225
