board officially for a cartel. He said that the English consul had been present at the
meeting and had signed a contract to provision the English fleet. Alquier complained that
Tawast 'promised him from five to six hundred oxen, of which fifty are already
deliyered. Therefore the Sweden is feeding the enemies of France ... The Swedish were
also supplying the Island of Anholt where the English fleet were anchored' .113 He went
on to complain of the convoys that came and went between England and Sweden, and of
the supplies deliyered from Sweden to the English base on Anholt. Von Rosen denied the
Consul Smith was on the Victory, which in Voelcker's words, 'enabled him to avoid
answering all the other points, which were indeed true' .114 He added that Saumarez had
started to get supplies from Jutland and prayed that this would develop so that 'we could
be spared from being the suppliers' and therefore avoid French criticism. Sweden
remained officially at war with Britain, and made token gestures to their French allies.
Von Rosen confiscated 10 oxen which were bound for the fleet and asked that this might
appear in the papers, 'so that I, poor sinner, may for once shine with continental fervour
in the annals of Europe'. Saumarez had been warned in advance so as 'not to be cross' .115
Given the benefits to the Baltic fleet the provisioning provided, it is certain that he was
not too upset. Saumarez too made token captures of Swedish coastal vessels to reinforce
                                                                                             116
the show of hostility, notably in May 1811 when two vessels were taken.


Years after the Napoleonic War had finished, those most concerned in this shadowy
business felt more comfortable disclosing the activities around Hano. Sir John Ross,
lieutenant on the Victory, wrote a memorandum to His Majesty's government, asking for
a pension for Count von Rosen, who had been involved in much of the provisioning. 'In
the year 1810', he wrote, 'when Sweden was obliged to obey the mandate of Buonaparte,
and shut her ports against Great Britain; it became necessary to open a secret
communication with some individual who had power to supply the fleet with fresh
provisions, vegetables &c. I was employed by Sir J. Saumarez Confidentially on this

113 'II lui   apromis six cents boeufs, dont cent cinquante ont deja ete livres. Don la Sue~e nourrit les
ennemis de la France .. .les Suedois approvisionment egalement l'lle d' Anholt, au mOUlll~ la flotte
anglaise'. P. Coquelle, 'La Mission d' Alquier a Stockholm', Revue d'Histoire Diplomatique, Vol. 23, 1909,
~. 226.
 14 Voelcker, Saumarez vs. Napoleon, p. 153.
115 Von Rosen Letters, Ep.E.I0.ll, f.120 26 July 1811, Ep.E.10.11. f.123, 7 August 1811.

116 Voelcker, Saumarez vs. Napoleon, p. 153.



                                                                                                            221
