sen'ice and in a private interview with Count Rosen, then, (and ever since) Governor of
Gothenburg this desirable arrangement with him' .117 He had witnessed a conversation
between Mr Smith the English Consul and Count Rosen, the former promising von Rosen
that when the peace was concluded he would be given a pension of 'a thousand pounds or
more if necessary: Mr Smith then promised that he would make it £2,000 if he could'.
Unfortunately. Smith had left for England before any money was paid, and died soon
after. while his nephew. W. Morris, 'who had a personal dislike to Count Rosen,
destroyed the letter. both to hurt the Count, and get himself into favor being a candidate
for the Consulship, and Count Rosen ultimately received only £400, which may justly be
considered a breach of faith'. Ross encloses a copy of a letter from Sir James Saumarez
to Count Rosen, demonstrating 'his Lordship's opinions of the services rendered to Great
Britain': all of which were favourable. Ross asked whether 'it would be politic to give to
Count Rosen 5 or 600£ which would no doubt bring him sound, by relieving him from
his pecuniary embarrassments under which he is now labouring ever since that period at
which he was promised the money and on which he actually depended' .118


Ross' statement that the provlslomng arrangements, built around a mutually agreed
interest in peaceful and friendly relations, 'ultimately led to the treaty of alliance, or to
the Swedes joining the allies of Great Britain against France', was correct. I 19 The Swedes
became more and more well disposed to Britain. By the end of 1811, the British could be
forgiven for thinking the Swedes were not their enemy at all. In November 1811,
Saumarez was concerned by the condition of HMS St George, and suggested that the ship
winter at Gothenburg. As Ryan commented, 'the state of Anglo-Swedish relations was
now such that there was no political objection to this suggestion' .120


Towards the end of 1811, further long-term provisioning arrangements began to be drawn
up. A British merchant by the name of Anthony Scheck residing on the Island of Anholt
offered to enter into a contract to supply the island of Anholt. Mr J Boyle, the purser


117 TNA, HD 3/6, John Ross, Memorandum for His Majesty, September 1834.

llX Ibid.
119
      1b 'd
12() A IN'  R    'The Melancholy Fate of the Baltic Ships in 1811', MM, Vo1.50, No.2, (May 1964) pp. 126 .
        . . yan,

                                                                                                      222
