There were French spies around: no doubt they did hear of the provisioning operations
going on in Hano. Foy wrote to Saumarez in August 1811 stating that spies were present:
'It would seen1 that some French Spies have latterly come by the Packets from England',
he wrote 'purposely to expose this Government in the Eyes of the French by proving the
communications preserved by the Packets between the Countries', and also to delve into
the proYisioning operations. They were not helped by the late Swedish Consul in London
\\'ho was 'partly to be blamed, as it is on his passports or certificates that the passenger,
on getting the Packets, are admitted into Gothenburg ... Baron d'Engestrom would be
extremely thankful if Your Excellency would intimate to His Majesty's Government the
necessity of the alien office at Harwich being more circumspect in regard to the persons
they admit on board the Packets for Sweden' .110


There then followed games of half-truths and deceptions. Royal Navy ships continued to
be supplied at Hano. Throughout 1811, the log of the St George notes bullocks being
receiYed, hands building houses on shore and butchers being sent on shore to slaughter
bullocks. III Surreptitious means were taken up to disguise it. In May 1811, Sweden made
a token gesture to confiscate some British shipping. Saumarez wrote to the Admiralty,
pointing out that


        The Swedish Government intends by no means to give offence to the British ... If any
        other Vessels are detained ... it is only a measure of Necessity and Demonstration at the
        Present critical moment, when Russia seems wavering and suspending her operations
        against France, for Sweden seems to stand alone under the Displeasure of Napoleon for
        what she has not done, and for what she did in the winter. .. it is merely a demonstration to
        appear as having adopted the Continental System, but on no account to confiscate the
        Property which lies equally safe in our possession as on board the Ships, and which most
                                                      112
        likely will be restored in a very short time.


Alquier was under no illusion as to Swedish loyalty, and complained to the Swedish
authorities about their failures as allies. His main complaint was about General Tawast
(the Commander of the Swedish West Coast Army) visiting HMS Victory in May, on



110 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1866, Foy to Saumarez, 30 August 1811.
111 TNA, ADM 5112345, Log of the Sf George, June 1811.
112 TNA, ADM 1/1217-8, Saumarez to Admiralty, 15 May 181l.




                                                                                                        220
