Chapter 9: The Effectiveness of Baltic Victualling:
Operations and Strategy


Assessing the effectiveness of the state, of governmental Boards, and of individuals poses
problems for the historian. This is certainly true of assessing victualling effectiveness
during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. This thesis so far has used
correspondence to and from admirals' and captains' for remarks concerning victualling.
Commander's comments on supply mostly consisted of complaints: looking only at crises
would give a skewed perspective on provisioning operations. When victualling
operations were running smoothly, they were never remarked upon. We have seen the
problems in 1809 and the critical improvements in 1810 and 1811. Only at crisis point
did victualling as a subject explicitly enter the correspondence of Admirals. The remarks
of contemporaries tell us much about the success of provisioning: this chapter will
provide statistical data that will assess the effectiveness of the victualling system

empirically.


The effectiveness of the Victualling Board can be measured on two levels. We have seen
in Chapters 6 and 7 that the victualling system was effective, especially after 1809 in
getting the basic task done: keeping men at sea fed adequately. In wartime, it is this level
of effectiveness that is striven for. Secondly however, effectiveness can be measured
using particular performance indicators. It can be judged on an operational level; in terms
                                                                                                   1
of speed, or as importantly, 'timeliness'. It can also be judged on 'efficiency'. Efficiency
is a part of effectiveness; efficiency is only attempted when the system is working and the
basic aims are being met. For instance, the basic aim of the victualling system was to
ensure men were fed, regardless of cost or wastage. However, once this achievement was
 guaranteed, wastage became in issue. Judging efficiency is therefore a means of testing

 the improvement of the victualling service.



 1 A further measurement of victualling effectiveness is cost, but this thesis has   a~ready cove~ed the cost of
 transports (Chapter 5) and the cost of procuring supplies locally (Chapter 8). ThIS chapter WIll therefore
begin by focusing on timeliness and efficiency.
                                                                                                              229
