         \\'herL'as the. Right Honourahle. the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty have been
         pleased
          '     h to direct . that,
                                  Lemon JUice and Sugar shall be furnished to His MaJ·esty's Sh·IpS
         f or. t e p~eSL'r\'atlOn of the health of their several companies; and Whereas the said
         articles will he charged to, and must he accounted for by, the respective Pursers, into
         whose charge the same are to be delivL'red ... The sugar and Lemon Juice are to be issued
         to the crews of H~s Majesty'.s Ships and Vessels in the proportion of One ounce of Sugar,
         and ?ne ounce of Lem~n,JUlce per ~an per day, .and are to be either mixed with the Grog
         or \\ me ~lI?,w~d to. Sh~p s c?mpanIL's. ~r t~ he Issued unmix~d as sherbet, according to
         the CaptaIn s. 10 their discretion, shall thmk It proper to direct.- I


With lemon juice issued to all fleets, the appearance of scurvy was an issue of supply
rather than scientific medical knowledge, its outbreak confined to occasions when the
distribution of lemon juice failed. It was a disease that pointed to deficiency. Did the
Baltic fleet ha\"e to deal with scurvy?


The answer is an emphatic 'no'. We have already seen that Britain's Swedish allies
suffered greatly in 1808. The more nervous officers of Saumarez' fleet were concerned
that scury)' might be an issue. Dr Jamison warned Keats that 'as the fatal ravages of that
formidable disease have totally unmanned the Swedish Navy, and having manifested its
way at different times on board several of our ships,.22 A close inspection of Royal Navy
musters paints a different picture. At the end of 1808 there were only four cases of scurvy
amongst over 11,000 seamen. 23 Given that the fleet had been at sea for eight months this
was remarkably low. These incredibly low rates of scurvy were replicated throughout the
fleet's time in the Baltic. On the 27 December 1809, Jamison wrote to the Admiralty,
listing the numbers sick on the Gorgon Hospital ship between the 5 and 27 December
1809. Of the twenty men listed, none had scurvy. Fever and debility were present, as was
rheumatism, but not scurvy. 24 Jamison was a very competent p h YSlclan
                                                                     ..     to th e fl eet,
sending back monthly returns listing the respective numbers of sick. Below the number of
seamen suffering from scurvy, as compared to the overall sick list in the Baltic fleet can

be seen.




21 INA, ADM 1111158.
22 SRO   HA 93/6/1/460 Dr Jamison to Keats, 28 December 1808.
23 INA', ADM 1/8/38. Of the four cases, three were on board the Prometheus, which had spent the second
half of the campaign in the eastern outskirts of the Baltic, the furthest from supply.
24 INA, ADM 97/88, Jamison to Transport Board, 27 December 1809.

                                                                                                      238
