Distribution was not the sole preserve of the Victualling Board. Although charged with
assigning provisions. the responsibility for securing and organising tonnage, in a timely
fashion. was that of the Transport Board. The effective management of provisions
required cooperation and co-ordination across more than one government body. The
speed with which provisions were distributed can be separated into four categories.
Firstly, there is the time taken, on receiving orders from the Admiralty, for the necessary
tonnage to be ordered from the Transport Board and for the necessary victuals to be
ordered from the victualling stores. Then there was the speed in which tonnage was
secured. Thirdly. there is the period taken to load provisions, and arrange a convoy.
Fourthly there is the time taken to deliver the provisions to where they were needed. As
an indicator of timeliness a fifth and final consideration will be the occurrence of scurvy.


1. Admiralt~· to Victualling Board Orders
On receiving orders from the Admiralty, or a request from a fleet commander, the
Victualling Board would order the necessary tonnage and provisions there and then. This
research has not come across any delay of more than twenty four hours in this part of the
chain of command. Syrett commented that in the 1780s, 'for the Admiralty to transmit an
order within 2-+ hours of receipt was rather exceptional', with delays of 3-4 days common
place. 3 This was certainly not true by the 1800' s. In 1805, Charles Middleton had planned
a detailed distribution of duties among the commissioners of the Admiralty to promote
'economy of time' and the 'punctual discharge of duty', ever the objective of that
distinguished administrator. 4 By the end of the Napoleonic Wars and certainly by 1808,
the processing of letters was speedy and efficient. William Marsden, second secretary at
the Admiralty observed that 'no public letter was ever omitted (unless under very
peculiar circumstances) to be read at the Board, minuted, answered and despatched, if

practicable, on the day of its receipt'.5



3 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, p. 7.

4 Barham Papers, Vol.3, pp. 76-78.                                    . .               .
5 William Marsden, A Brief Memoir of the Life and Writings of the Late Wdha~.Marsden, Wntten by
Himselj(London, 1838), p. 97. Quoted in Roger Morriss, Naval Power and Bntlsh Culture, 1760-1850
(Ashgate, London, 2004) p. 19.
                                                                                                   231
