 This chapter wi II also look at other indicators; for instance the incidence and occurrence
 of scur\'y. This disease had causes not solely limited to the distribution of provisions: by
  1808 there was sufficient knowledge of the prevention of scurvy. The occurrence of
 scurvy would be due to supply problems rather than medical ignorance. The widespread
 distribution of lemon juice was only achieved when supply problems were overcome.2
 The occurrence of mutiny and the amount of wastage will also be considered. Operations
 sen'e a strategic end however: the second part will consider whether the victualling of the
 Baltic fleet allowed it to serve its strategic ends. Incidents where provisioning problems
 impacted on strategy will be analysed. The relationship between victualling and the
 defence of British trade, the blockade of the Russian fleet, and the attack on the
 Continental SYstem will be discussed.


 A final indicator of effectiveness is 'cost'. Strenuous efforts were made to ensure the
 Board paid the cheapest price. Where it worked out cheaper to procure provisions locally,
 such as beef from Sweden, it was advocated by the Victualling Board, as we have seen in
 Chapter 8. The trade in victualling contracts was clearly lucrative; there was never a
 shortage of merchants coming forward to supply the Navy. And yet the high number of
 bankruptcies among contractors towards the end of the Napoleonic War (for example
 Thomas Pinkerton in 1810), suggests that the Victualling Board was never beaten into
 paying too much over the odds.



 Victualling Operations: Speed
It was vital to ensure that provisions arrived in the Baltic quickly. How fast could the
Victualling Board distribute provisions and, more importantly, was it done in time? A
better term might be 'timeliness': provisions needed to arrive quickly but not before they
were needed. Because administrators were dealing with perishable supplies, foodstuffs
arriving too early would be rotten by the time they were needed. As we saw in Chapters 6
and 7 the decision as to when to send provisions was the Commander in Chief's in 1808-
9 and the Victualling Board's from 1810 onwards.


2 Vale, 'The Conquest of Scurvy' , pp. 160-75.


                                                                                       230
