Errors at the Store Office were not limited to quality concerns. Later in 1809, the purser
of the "anguard in the Baltic reported short measures of certain species sent out.
Inclosing a 'Report of Survey' on a quantity of cheese received by him from the Brunton
Victualler. he requested information 'with regard to the shortness of weight &c, with the
Report thereon of the Accountant of Stores'. The response from the Victualling Board
demonstrates a deep knowledge and command of the issue. As it ordered:

       \Yrite the Purser in reply that the Cheese in question, appears to have been laden on board
       the Brunton Victualler at Deptford on the 7th June last, and the circumstance therefore
       alluded ll) hy him of the W<lITanty of it having been so nearly expired when received on
       board the Vanguard was unavoidable: and state to him that the deficiency in the Weight
       of the said Cheese, heing according to his statement about one pound in sixteen or twenty
       one pounds. \\as not greater than what is usual, and might be expected, and that the
       allowance of the eights is intended to cover such losses.'~9


It is notable that errors came in 1809, without doubt a low point for the Victualling
Board. ~listakes were made in calculating the necessary amounts; further errors were
made in loading the victuallers, as both quality and quantities of provisions sent out could
be condemned by pursers and Victualling Board officials. It should be pointed that the
quantities complained about were small, especially if compared to the large amounts of
victuals being supplied to the Baltic fleet. 626 pounds of bread lost among deliveries of
hundreds of thousands of pounds of bread was not enough to impact seriously upon a
fleet's operational viability. As notable as these fairly insignificant errors is the complete
absence of any such problems in 1810 and 1811. A comprehensive search through the
archives of the Victualling Board, the Admiralty and those of Saumarez himself has
found no mention of similar problems from 1810 onwards.


There were errors out in the Baltic: these were mistakes of receipting, or even
carelessness. Mr John Ross, the purser of the Tartar stationed in the Great Belt, wrote in
September 1809 that 'he received from the Transport Brig Providence, Cornelius Ryan
Master , Five Boxes of Candles containing 360 pounds, but that as the service was
performed in great haste, he made a mistake in reckoning them, and gave a receipt for
460 pounds; and requesting that he may be charged accordingly'. Such receipting



39 TNA, ADM 111/192, 17 October 1809.

                                                                                                     247
