Victualling Operations: Efficiency
So what of efficiency'? It was the Victualling Board's duty to plan each individual fleet's
requirements. Informed by the Admiralty of a fleet's size, the Victualling Board would
also haye access to the' Admiralty Lists', recorded bi-annually, giving the complement of
men for each ship and fleet. As such they knew the number of men on each station and
the daily ration required by each individual. From this they would calculate the amount of
each proyision that was needed per day by the fleet, and could then distribute provisions
designed to last for a set period of time.


~luch rested upon these calculations. Sending too little would lead to shortages. To send

too much would be a \\'ilste of resources. The estimates were generally very accurate,
\\'ith specific quantities sent out to supply exact forces. For example, in September 1801
the Victualling Board sent out 80,000 4lb pieces of pork with one shipment to the
~lediterranean, 'being a proportion for twenty thousand men for two months,.28 This

amounted to 320,000 individual rations. This amount of pork, divided by the 20,000
seamen meant the shipment contained 16 rations per man serving in the Mediterranean.
And. since each man was given two rations of pork per week, this allowed enough pork
for eight weeks, almost exactly the two months planned for by the Victualling Board. Far
from being a leaden institution responding to demand at short notice the Victualling
Board practised a highly sophisticated level of planning and organization.


Judging efficiency is a matter of judging wastage against shortage. We know the number
of men stationed in each theatre and can therefore calculate the number of rations needed
over a year. From the Victualling Board minutes, we can also calculate the number of
rations sent out, and compare the two. If there were significantly higher amounts of
rations being sent out than were needed, then we can talk of wastage. If there is
significantly less being sent out, then it is clear there was a shortage. The Baltic theatre
particularly lends itself to this mode of analysis due to its annual status. Since the




28 TNA, ADM 1111160, 16 September 1801.

                                                                                        241
