                                          4o
 mistakes could be easily rectified.           Later that month John Barrow, at the Admiralty,
 reported a copy of a letter which the Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty had received
 from Lieutenant Stokes commanding the Gun Brig Constant, requesting to be allowed the
 expense of some casks which were lost in ascertaining soundings. The Lieutenant was
 allowed credit for the two hogsheads, two barrels and twenty eight iron hoops issued by
 him. 'in the e\'ent of his appearing in debt the articles on his next account' .41


 The Victualling Board managed an efficient provisioning system as borne out by the data
 presented in this chapter. Mistakes in 1808 are understandable given Britain's
 unpreparedness for lengthy Baltic service. In 1809 the naval administration failed the
 Baltic fleet. Supplies were insufficient and occasionally condemned. A key tenet of the
 British state was its ability to reform itself. Though not linked to the Baltic fleet in 1809
 the commission of Naval Revision, which had been investigating the naval departments
 since 1804, published its reports and recommendations for the Transport and Victualling
 Boards. These reforms would be too late to help the Baltic fleet in 1809: the improved
 performance in 1810 and 1811 is evidence of the Report's impact.




 The Commission of Naval Revision
                     th
In April 1809 the 9 , loth 11 th and 1i h the Reports of the Commission for Revising and
Digesting the Civil Affairs of His Majesty's Navy or more simply the 'Commission of
~aval Revision' were published. While the Commission was charged with investigating

the whole of naval administration, it spent much of its time recommending changes to the
Victualling Board. Throughout 1809 the results of these reports were implemented. There
were direct ramifications, with specific changes executed. The report brought in
wholesale changes to the way in which victualling services were conducted. Efficient
control of ships from shore required accurate reports and timely returns of information to
the Admiralty and Victualling Board: this whole process was completely overhauled.
There were also more subtle transformations. The report, advocating as it did a more


40 TNA, ADM 111/192, II September 1809.
41 TNA, ADM 111/192, 18 September 1809.


                                                                                         248
