Great care was taken to ensure the most efficient service. As the Commission wrote, 'the
Storekeeper is to issue first the provisions that are the oldest, or in the worst condition for
keeping, and to this end he is to regulate the conveyance of them to the respective ships,
that the Provisions which it may be proper to expend first may be the last received into
the Ships, and thereby stowed uppermost, and most readily got at for being first
expended'. Those dealing with public money were to be carefully regulated. The Chief
Clerk of the Imprest Office would examine rates of exchange on which Bills of Exchange
               46
were drawn.         Problems that had occurred in 1809 with fleets being sent out under-
supplied would not happen again.


The Commission found little wrong with the Transport Board. On the contrary, the 9 th
Report \\'hich focused on the workings of the Transport Board, complimented them on
the success of the Board since its inception in 1794. The Ninth Report of Naval Revision
stated in early 1809 that 'much Money and Time have also been saved by transferring
Ships from one Service to another, according to the demands of each, instead of suffering
them to remain unemployed, as was before the practise' .47 Published in April 1809, the
transport tonnage crisis that would impact on the Baltic fleet later in 1809 did not enter
their inYestigation. The Commission's most important legacy was not simply the
suggestion of specific changes. From 1810 there were continual improvements in both
the Victualling Board and Transport Board.


To assess the effectiveness of the Victualling system, we have looked at two criteria:
speed and efficiency. In terms of distributing the provisions, even in its worse years, the
victualling system provided a fairly timely and efficient service. Delays, while not
common, did occur. It is perhaps understandable that the Victualling Board would claim
that delays were 'probably unavoidable' .48 Eighteenth century communication and ships
prey to adverse weather did conspire on occasion to draw complaints from commanders.
For example, in 1800 adverse weather delayed a victualling convoy heading to the
Mediterranean. It is to the credit of the naval administration that it did not let such


46 Commission of Naval Revision, Eleventh Report, p. 74.
47 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 14.
48 TNA, ADM 110/64111-2, VB to TB, 13 June 1811.

                                                                                           252
