excuses predominate. James Yeo, the agent victualler at Minorca would no doubt have
agreed: as he pointed out. 'in great and multiplied concerns it's possible for an oversight
to happen.' .t.9



The Baltic fleet did not experience a perfect victualling system in its first two years of
existence. The Comnlission of Naval Revision reported from 1807 onwards, though the
chief reforms concerning victualling came in 1809 as the Baltic fleet faced its greatest
problems. The Commission's legacy for the victualling of fleets in foreign waters was a
widespread tightening and streamlining of the provisioning process. While calculations of
foodstuffs needed abroad had always been accurate, from 1810 the Victualling Board
squeezed the difference between amounts needed and the amounts sent, as the respective
figures for 1810 and 1811 demonstrate. These improvements took effect immediately.
~lore than this they concentrated on improving the timeliness of victualling operations.

The Commission's long term effect was an improvement in the culture of naval
administration. The key improvement in logistics during the Napoleonic War was the
gradual - yet crucial - improvement in speed with which deliveries of foodstuffs were
ordered, arranged and loaded. Delays might not have always been the fault of naval
administration: this did not stop it improving its performance. Keith in 1800 and
Saumarez in 1809 did complain of waiting for victuals but these occasions are
conspicuous by their rarity. From 1809 transports were procured more quickly than ever
before and exact quantities of provisions were distributed. The timely arrival of
provisions would have telling consequences for British sea-power and, consequently,
British operational viability.




Victualling, Operations and Strategy

The true test of victualling effectiveness was the concern of every serving admiral and
captain: did a shortfall in victualling effectiveness impact on operations? Was the Baltic
fleet ever compromised by a lack of victuals? The answer has to be a resounding 'no'.

49 NMM, KEIIL!2!212, Yeo to Keith, 29 May 1800.

                                                                                       253
