so (and checking that what was coming in was similar to what was going out) they aimed
at placing the entire victualling establishment on a much more efficient footing, and
targeting wastage. There would be a quarterly examination of these accounts. Weekly
accounts 'of the progress made in shipping off provisions' were ordered, so ensuring that
they 'at all times know the progress made in shipping Provisions and Victualling
Stores ... on distant sen'ice' .44 The centralisation of victualling decision-making we saw in
Chapter 7 was a by-product of the Commission of Naval Revision.


The delivery of foodstuffs to fleets stationed abroad was now regulated, preCIse and
accountable. As the Victualling Board explained, 'it being essentially requisite in the
shipment of Provisions from this Department at Deptford to the Foreign Stations that the
Commander in Chief. Agent Victuallers and other persons, to whom the said Provisions
&c may be consigned, should be made acquainted, as early as possible, with the
respective quantities laden on board each vessels'. At the other end of the system, under
the new regulations issued to the 'Agents for the Victualling Establishments at the Home
Stations', as soon as the masters of the vessels had signed the receipts for the quantities
of provisions and victualling stores shipped on board them, the receipts and invoices were
to be forwarded immediately to the Accountant for Stores of this Office, 'to the end that
an abstract of the articles shipped may be forthwith laid before the Board by him'. The
Board wanted to oversee all levels of the victualling system. It gave warning of the

penalties:


           in the event of its at any time occurring that the Masters of the Vessels omit to timely
           sign the receipt, which the Agent at Deptford is by every means in his P?wer to
           prevent, Ordered further that an abstract and Invoice of such shipment be In those
           instances forwarded without delay to the Store Accountant for the purpose
           beforementioned, and that the Masters' receipt be transmitted as speedily after as may
           be. 45


Quantities shipped and delivered were noted, so as to inform future decisions.




44 Ibid, pp. 74-6, 81, 82, 86, 90.
45 TNA, ADM 111/193, 27 October 1809 .

                                                                                                      251
