station, and intend taking the Plantagenet to Anholt to compleat her water and afterwards
send her to \\'ingo Sound for her Provisions, which I hope will meet your appropriation. I
haye completed the Dictator in her Water & Provisions from the Ardent, which latter
Ship \\'ill rejoin you the moment her Water is completed at Anholt' .52 The two other ships
previously nlentioned, although smaller, would also remain on station: Eyles mentioned
that 'the \roodlark & Fly [would remain] to Cruize here until my return which movement
I trust you will approye' .53 Firstly it should be stated that this was an isolated occasion.
Secondly, it should also be mentioned that the operational effects were not a particular
concern for Dixon. Relatiye to the entire geography of the Baltic, the ship's station off
Rostock was not especially far from British victualling bases. Both Hano and Anholt
were 200km a\\'ay. Ships from stations away from Hano, Gothenburg, Karlskrona and
Anholt in the eastern and lower Baltic (for example off Rostock) were most at risk from
running out of victuals. However, as Eyles commented, transports would still reach them.
Although the Plantagenet left its station, the Woodlark and Fly remained, and the
Dictator would soon join them to continue to escort trade to and from northern Germany:
 operational effectiveness was not compromised. This is also true when we consider the
 victualling of the whole Baltic fleet. It is an interesting fact that 59 days' worth of
 victuals proyoked such concern: the bar of provisioning standards had been set very high.
 That this constituted the only major occasion when operations were influenced by
 victualling speaks volumes about the effectiveness of Baltic provisioning.


 1. The Protection of Trade: British Exports
 Ultimately, the success of victualling must be judged at the strategic level. Supply is a
 means to an end. Was the Baltic fleet able to carry out its strategic function? One of its
 most important duties was the protection of British and neutral trade in that region. This
 was complicated by many factors. Merchant fleets could still fall prey to French and
 Danish privateers. A further consideration was that British merchants did not wish the
 ships laden with their property to appear off the Baltic ports in convoy with the Royal
 Navy, as this would have defeated the precautions taken to disguise the origin of the



 52 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1810, Dixon to Saumarez, 4 August 1811.
 53 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1810/1, Captain Eyles to Dixon, 25 July 1811.

                                                                                          255
