There were occasions when. as we have seen, supplies were late getting out to the Baltic.
These delays and shortfalls could be overcome by the temporary introduction of two-
thirds rationing. This was never a popular measure and could not be sustained
indefinitely. It could however fill a temporary shortfall and in 1809 was used to great
effect. Despite the various and slight shortages in 1809, the fleet continued to pursue its
major objectives with no loss to its strategic objectives. Indeed, as can be seen during
1809. the fleet continued to protect trade and blockade the Russian fleet.


There are very few examples where operational capability was undercut by provisioning
problems. We saw in Chapter 6 that in 1808 the Mars and Africa were forced off station
to receive a supply of provisions, while the Ardent lost 83 men while watering on the
              5u
Danish shore. The first was a relatively temporary and innocuous mistake. The second
was more concerning for the fleet. However, the self-sufficiency achieved by the Baltic
fleet by 1809 with regards to water removed the threat of similar losses. These examples
aside. only one example has been found of operational viability coming close to being
threatened by severe problems with the victualling service. In 1811, HMS Plantagenet
was stationed off Rostock protecting trade on its way to and from the Baltic. Its captain,
Eyles. wrote on 28 July speaking of 'the expense of Provisions as stated in the weekly
account. having now not more than fifty nine days Bread & Spirits at two thirds
allowance'. He added that the 'victualling also of the Woodlark and Fly', two ships also
in his squadron 'will reduce me more'. He stated that he could 'not rely upon any supply
from the Transports gone up, for what are the Contents of two amongst so many and
Admiral Reynolds very naturally told the Brigs when asked for Provisions they were to
be supplied from the ship whose orders they were under, as he had so many who looked
up to him to have their wants supplied' .51


The lack of supplies meant he was forced off his station. As Dixon explained to
Saumarez, 'In consequence of the very reduced state of the Water and Provisions of that
ship. I have directed Captain Williams of the Dictator to succeed Captain Eyles on that



50 See pp. 154-5.
51 SRO, HA 93/6/1/181012. Captain Eyles to Dixon, 28 July 1811.

                                                                                       254
