cargoes.:'4 Above all the Admiralty urged that merchant ships 'should not be delayed
beyond the time necessary to collect the Trade at either of the abovementioned
 1       ' 5'i-
paces ....



There were certainly fears British trade would suffer. Thornton wrote to Canning in June
1808, stating that he was
                  '-




         Strongly. inclined to believe. that the Exportation from England through this country to
         ~he RussI.an and other ports of the Baltic will be much less than it is hoped for in England,
         If I may Judge from the number of licenses obtained from His Majesty in Council: and it
         would be wry right, that the merchants of England should prepare themselves for much
         disappointment and much loss upon this point'. Thornton went on to say that 'Buonaparte
         is perfectly indifferent to the suffering and Privations of his Northern Allies, if he does
         not even take pleasure in augmenting them. and his agents pursue his system with a zeal
         and rigour. which I should not have expected from so corrupt and greedy of gain as all of
         them are whom I have seen. 56


Fortunately for Britain, neither opinion turned out to be accurate. Most obvious was the
official hostility of much of the Baltic region. This could be countered however. An
entrep6t was created at Gothenburg for 'the Admission of all British Productions,
colonial or manufactured, on certain conditions, and with certain regulations, until they
can be re-exported .. .in other vessels to Ports in the Possession, or under the Influence of
France, from which the British Navigation and Commerce are excluded' .57


In the first two years of the war, the British fleet proved very successful in allowing trade
into the Baltic. As N .A.M. Rodger put it, 'soldiers and officials even at the highest levels
of the Napoleonic system were eminently corruptible, and many honest men, not
otherwise disloyal, had no patience with measures openly designed to support Napoleon's
ambitions by beggaring his subjects, and particularly his non-French subjects' .58 French
Custom officials were paid 500 francs a year, barely more than an unskilled worker. The
Chief of police in Leghorn commented on their tendency towards corrupt behaviour:
'How can you prevent a custom officer earning 40 francs a month ... from returning an

54 TNA, ADM 1/6/28 July 1808. Ryan, 'The Defence of British Trade', pp. 449-50.

55 SRO, HA 93/6/1/43, Admiralty Orders, 16 April 1808.
56 TNA, FO 73/48, Thornton to Canning, 11 June 1808.
57 TNA, FO 73/47, Thornton to Canning, 24 March 1808.
5X Rodger, The Command of the Ocean, p. 558.

                                                                                                         256
