accounts and returns were 'unnecessarily multiplied', full of defective information, often
'fonned fron1 probable calculation, but not from fact'. There were others that were
entirely fictitious. Vouchers and returns of information were therefore often useless. They
'omitted to describe the numerous useless Forms and Accounts kept relating to the supply
of proyisions to Your Majesty's ships in ordinary - a branch of duty which we found in
much unnecessary perplexity'. It is not hard to see why the Victualling Board had
occasionally miscalculated when sending supplies to the Baltic fleet in 1808 and 1809.
These criticisms aside, the Commission's report was not one of blame: instead it targeted
'the consequences of defects, which have gradually and imperceptibly arisen in the
course of the last century'. They took advantage of the opportunity to bring in an entirely
new system, replacing the piecemeal reforms of the 18 th century. 43


The recommendations of the Commission were lengthy and wide-ranging. The main
objectiye was a significant improvement in the Board's distribution of provisions. All
forms of wastage were discouraged: the improvement in victualling efficiency in 1810
was a logical consequence of these reforms. A clerk from the Victualling Office was to
attend the issue of provisions to ensure supplies were correct: each clerk was to be given
a daily issue book in which all issues would be written, including the species and the
quantity. Precise amounts of provisions were to be sent to fulfill the needs of exact
numbers of men. They were also to ensure all casks were sent off perfectly full. These
daily issue books were to be regularly compared to purser's receipts by the resident
agent. The system whereby receipts, vouchers and bills of lading were regulated was
improved, with one 'Clerk of the Check' placed in charge. 'In shipping Provisions and
Stores for [foreign] Service, the two clerks shall attend and take an exact Account of the
quantity of each species of Stores laden in any Transport, in their respective Daily Issue
Books'. These would be forwarded to the Clerk of the Check, and then the agent, who
would compare them quarterly. Great care was taken to document and take account of
stores lost by leakage and waste: again it would be recorded in various accounts and
ledgers, to be double-checked at regular intervals by the storekeeper. Most importantly
complete accounts were to be kept of all stores received, issued and expended. By doing


43 Commission of Naval Revision, Eleventh Report, pp. 4, 6-7, 24.

                                                                                       250
