accountable and streamlined civil serVIce, began to reform the entire culture of naval
administration.



How did the report impact on the victualling system? The main focus of the Tenth Report
was "the numerous instances of mismanagement' , and the huge backlog of accounts. The
Commission estimated that there was a total of £ 10,985, 100 worth of cash accounts yet to
be paid off and remaining "unliquidated'. 'We cannot avoid remarking, that when it
becomes notorious that the Accounts delivered into any Office generally lay there for a
considerable time. and sometimes years before they are finally settled' they wrote. This
was put down to "a lack of sufficient space to employ more clerks' and 'the pressure of
the current business', by which they meant the pressure of war. The Report stated that
"nothing short of an entire new system [is] likely to be effectual'. The members of the
Board were diYided into committees of correspondence, accounts and stores. 42
Operational issues also caused contemporary concern. 1808 to 1809 was a particularly
sensitiye time for the Victualling Board. Richard Strachan's squadron stationed off
Rochefort had been forced to abandon its station due to lack of victuals: it prompted a
public debate in the House of Commons. The failure of the Walcheren expedition, also
deriying from logistical issues would advance this further. Though neither was in reality
the fault of the Victualling Board, it was the fault of the victualling system, which
incorporates the whole of naval administration involved in provisioning. There was
severe pressure to improve its operational performance.


The Eleventh Report considered the victualling system abroad, at British out-ports and
for foreign fleets. As it observed, the business of victualling 'is conducted in a loose and
confused manner without system, clearness, regularity or method'. The accounts for
stores, which were involved in loading supplies for foreign fleets, were 'unnecessarily
intricate and voluminous, without providing any sufficient check'. The Baltic fleet that
had been over-supplied in 1808, and would suffer in 1809 from the opposite problem,
bore witness to his. With so many of the Board's staff involved in rendering accounts,
there was some doubt 'who is to be considered really responsible for the Stores'. Books,


42 Commission of Naval Revision, Tenth Report, pp. 3-5, 8, 13-14, 36.

                                                                                        249
