The decline in exports to northern Europe is evident in this graph. The release of
economic pressure by 1814- is also obvious, as exemplified by the huge increase in British
e:\ports. It is true that exports fell below their pre-war level, particular in 1811: that they
continued at all \vas due to the work of Saumarez and the British consuls. As Saumarez
himself commented in 1808 with some justification, 'when it is considered that above
three hundred sail of vessels have gone under convoy to the Baltic in the face of the
immense flotilla which the enemy have collected in Zealand, it cannot be a matter of
surprise that 16 of that number should have fallen in their hands,.71 In the years 1808-10
a significant proportion of British trade continued to enter the Baltic, particularly to
Sweden and northern Germany. Indeed, the remarkable amount of trade passing through
the Baltic was a source of much complaint to those charged with directing it. Charles
Fenwick. the British Consul General in Denmark wrote of 'the immense British Trade
and ~avigation thro' the Sound, have been truly arduous. Forty to fifty, and latterly
nearly double that number of British Convoys, with 4,000 Sail of our Merchant ships,
arriving annually in the Sound; have engaged more than half of my time,.72 Complaints
from merchants were rare: individual merchant fleet losses, such as in 1808 and 1810
 were exceptional and constituted a small fraction of the overall trade. The withholding of
trade from Russia, if anything, was to prove beneficial as we will see.


 2. The Protection of Trade: British Imports (particularly Naval Stores)
 The continental blockade was not merely about reducing British exports. This is partly a
 question of French intentions and British perceptions: the British were always far more
 concerned about their ability to obtain crucial naval stores from the Baltic. After all, only
 two fifths of British overseas trade was with Europe: as Christie has argued, the
 Continental System was unable to cripple Britain. New markets, particularly in South
                                                                            73
 America were able (in the long run) to replace their Baltic markets.            We saw in the
 introduction how essential naval stores from the Baltic were to Britain. The war in the
 Baltic had severe implications for the prices of these most valuable of commodities.



 71 SRO, HA 93/6/1/192, Saumarez to Mulgrave, 14 July 1~08.
 72 TNA, FO 22/58/20-1, Charles Fenwick to George Cannmg, 8 January 1808.

 73 Christie, Wars and Revolutions, p. 312.
                                                                                            260
