Russian exports. Britain's monopoly of Russian raw produce did much to influence
Russia's diplOlnacy. As Oddy, who drew up the table above, stated of the Baltic states:
'these powers flourished only by their Exportation to Great Britain, that of the whole of
Sweden was 7/8ths. Prussia two thirds, and that of Russia, dividing her exportations into
100 parts to all nations'. His table demonstrates that Britain received most of the crucial
comn10dities. ~-+


There is little doubt that the Russian aristocracy was seriously affected by the loss of
income from their trade in timber. hemp and other products that they had supplied to the
British Nay)' for many years. During the second half of the eighteenth century Great
Britain becan1e Russia' s most lucrative trading partner. 85 British contractors also had
giYen long-term credits to both merchants and gentry in Russia which made them largely
dependent on trading with Britain. Savoy, the French minister in St Petersburg, had
reported it most unlikely that France could take England's place for imports to Russia,
and 'what is more, I fear that if measures are taken against England, the Emperor
Alexander will have to take severe measures to silence the dissafected' .86 Saumarez was
well aware of this. In 1810 he wrote to the First Lord of the Admiralty, 'If it were
possible for us to go on without any trade to the Baltic, I am convinced it would soon
reduce Russia to the necessity of making peace' .87


Equally effective was the withholding of British trade to Russia. By the later stages of the
Napoleonic Wars, Britain had achieved a further monopoly of the supply of many
important colonial products. Fluctuations in British-Russian trade came to mean large
price fluctuations in Russia. 88 The graph above on page 253 demonstrates that British
exports to northern Europe were always higher than imports from northern Europe. In
essence, Europe needed British trade more than Britain needed European exports. This
was to be a powerful tool of policy. J Oddy spoke of 'the consummate wisdom & policy

R-l J Oddy, extract from Oddy's Treatise on European Commerce, FO 22/63/7-11,11 March 181l.

85 Kaplan Russian Overseas Commerce, p. 51.
86 Niven, Napoleon and Alexander I, pp. 59-61. As a Frenchman, Savoy would have been unaware of the

difference between 'England' and 'Britain'.
87 SRO, HA 93/6/1/1625, Saumarez to Yorke, 5 November 1810.              .               .,
88 M.S. Anderson, 'The Continental System and Russo-British Relations dunng the NapoleOnIC Wars, p.

75.
                                                                                                 264
