 .... The Blockade of the Russian Fleet

 The final objective of the Baltic fleet was the blockade of the Russian fleet. In late 1808
 Saumarez was presented with an opportunity to attack it. On leaving Cronstadt the
 Russian fleet entered a brief action with a squadron in the eastern Baltic. On meeting
 Captain Byam Martin. the fleet was chased into Rogerswick. The Russian fleet would not
 leave port for the rest of the war. Like the aftermath of Jutland in 1916, battle was
 unnecessary. The Russian fleet was not to leave its port moorings until 1812, when it
 went to sea as a friend of Britain. In 1810 a merchant commented to Saumarez that 'The
 Russian fleet is still laid up in Cronstadt, and there are no apparent preparations for its
                95
 fitting-ouf.        This was to be the natural state of the Russian fleet: Martin's brief chase
 had been all that was necessary to convince them of British naval superiority. Charles
 Yorke agreed: 'the apparently intended inactivity of the Russian Fleet (which it would
 seem is not likely to make its appearance in any Force this season) as well as the kindly
 disposition of the Swedes (to be encouraged by all proper means) offers results highly
 ad\-antageous to HM at this conjecture' .96




The operational viability of the Baltic fleet relied upon an effective victualling system.
Without regular and timely supplies the British fleet could not have remained at sea for
up to ten months at a time without returning to a victualling base in the Baltic, let alone
one in Britain. Such effectiveness was a direct result of the British state's ability to
reform and improve itself, improving timeliness and efficiency. As a consequence, the
Baltic fleet was able to fulfill its strategic obligations. Although trade was affected,
significant amounts continued to be conducted to and from the Baltic. The Russian fleet
was blockaded in port: one incident in 1808 notwithstanding, it was to remain there for
the entire war. Added to this, the British fleet was able to execute a tight economic
blockade that forced Russia to leave the Continental System. In the final instance
logistics are a means to a strategic end, and in this the supply to the Baltic fleet was
ultimately effective and successful.


95 SRO, HA 93/61111407, St Aubin to Saumarez, 25 June 1810.
96 NMM, YORlI6, 9, Saumarez to Yorke, 11 August 1810.

                                                                                           267
