Conclusion

This thesis has made a significant contribution to our understanding of naval
administration, nayal logistics and the operational and strategic consequences that
follo\\' from these. Furthermore, it has much to offer British political and economic
history. This research has focused on the Royal Navy's involvement in one region
oyer fiYe years. thereby allowing a detailed examination to be made of the relative
success of the provIsIonIng operations, and whether this improved over time.
Fundamentally,     this   thesis   has   been concerned with       measuring victualling
effectiyeness. In a time of war - particularly one which at times stretched Britain's
capacity to conduct war - making systems work, regardless of cost, was the crucial
consideration. This study has shown that this was the most important concern for
politicians. nayal administrators and admirals concerned with supplying the Baltic
fleet bet\\"een 1808 and 1812. Once this had been assured, governments could focus
on improving efficiency: reducing costs and wastage, and improving speed. These in
tum would only make systems more effective.


Victualling is a neglected topic, and what has been written has never considered how
provisioning was carried out at ground level, or how logistics impacted upon naval
                                                                    th
operations. It has been well documented that during the 18               century there were
continual improvements in victualling standards. However, the incremental evolution
 in the effectiveness of the British victualling service that distributed provisions to
fleets on foreign stations has never been traced through the century, as outlined in this
 thesis. There was a clear correlation between an improving victualling service and
 widening operational capabilities. That being said, even by the 1800s, a reliable
 seryice had yet to be implemented. There were fears for the viability of the Baltic fleet
 as it was prepared in early 1808, due solely to concerns over its ability to sustain itself

 with victuals once there.


 The Victualling Board was rarely short of provisions in its stores: the huge London
 food market meant the main issue for the board was not whether they were able to
 procure foodstuffs, but how much they would pay for them. Keeping the Baltic fleet
 supplied depended on how successfully victuals could be distributed to it. In other



                                                                                        268
