any potential . strategic revolution' could be made. However, if other stations also
witnessed the significant improvement in victualling effectiveness seen in the Baltic,
it would certainly be possible to point to a strategic watershed in the history of the
Royal Nay)'. In the same way that Napoleon's decision to live off the land
reyolutionised land warfare, the Royal Navy's ability to reliably provision fleets
across the globe. using remote transports to continually re-victual fleets, gave it a
                                                5
strategic flexibility none could Inatch. After 1809, the navy's ability to do this was
assured ..-\ ship sitting in the eastern Baltic would be as well provisioned as one lying
off Deptford: therein lay the new-found strategic flexibility.


This thesis has demonstrated that an effective logistical system was the key to
supporting strategic objectiYes. The Royal Navy fleet could be maintained in the
Baltic from April until December each year; the victualling service allowed the Royal
~ avy to command the Baltic Sea to an unprecedented degree. Consequently, British

and neutral trade was protected and the Russian fleet was blockaded, as was
continental trade. The economic blockade of the continent would ultimately force
Russia into leaving the Continental System and tempt Napoleon into his greatest
mistake: the attack on Russia in 1812. This is something often missed by historians:
the Baltic region has been seriously overlooked in analyses of war and national
interests, something this study has repUdiated. Indeed, the success of the Baltic
blockade foreshadowed a strategy Britain again resort to in the Baltic against Russia.
During the Crimean War the British would again blockade Russia in the Baltic; 'as a


 5 Napoleon's decision to live off the land, though never wholly relied on, enabled his corps to be
dispersed over much wider areas, converging when necessary at the 'decisive point'. As Howard
argues, the French armies 'had to a large extent live off the country ... Napoleon expected his troops to
 fend for themselves, which indeed they did, though they did make the French cause very unpopular in
the process'. This policy did however work less well as Napoleon began to penetrate the less fertile
areas of Europe into, Poland and Spain. See Michael Howard, War in European History, (Oxford
University Press, 1976) pp. 84-5. As Rothenburg has argued, although Napoleon 'did not entirely rely
on "living of the land", and frequently, such as in 1800, 1807, and again in 1812, laid down g~eat
magazine for the supply of the army ... Napoleonic strategy was based on rapid movement forcmg the
enemy into decisive battle. Large wagon trains, even if they had existed, could not. have kep.t pace'.
One notable example was the Austerlitz campaign in December 1805, where, lackmg effectIve
logistical support from the suppl~ train, he dro.ve ahead anyway, livir~g of t?~ land ~nd stores captured
from intact Austrian arsenals, ultImately secunng the defeat of the 3 CoalItIOn. ThIS army carned a
mere eight days worth of rations with it, spread over a wide frontage, able t? subsis~ of t~e country. See
Gunther Erich Rothenburg, The Art of Waifare in the Age of Napoleon (IndIana Um~ersIty Press, 1981)
pp. 129-130. See also Martin van Creveld, Supplying War: Logistics from Wallenstem to Patton
(Cambridge University Press, 1977) pp. 40-61, and John Morgan, 'War Fe~~ing W~r? The Impact of
Logistics on the Napoleonic Occupation of Catalonia', in the Journal of Mllttary Hlstory, No.73,
(January 2009), pp. 83-116.


                                                                                                     272
