But as Daunton hints, it was not just the raising of capital. How that capital was spent
was as just important: in the victualling service, the British had spent their money
well. Indeed, the financial power Britain enjoyed enabled it to pay for an expensive
supply systen1 without worrying about cost.


British policy-makers had no doubt as to the potency of naval power: it was the
central arm of any national strategy. In battle, blockade, or in the movement of troops,
the navy had the technical expertise, experience and leadership to execute such
operations. The challenge in regions such as the Baltic where the Royal Navy had
little experience, was being able to sustain them once there. All possible avenues were
explored. Exceptional diplomatic manoeuvres for instance secured important local
foodstuffs, \\'hile every effort was made to find and exploit local water sources. The
assimilation of knowledge and experience, and its consequent application was the
mainstay of the improving victualling service in the 18 th century. This study has
shown that this continued between 1808 and 1812. The process whereby naval
administration learnt from the previous years experience was not unique, to the time
or indeed the place. Similarly, the Russian army displayed a similar learning curve in
its campaigns against Napoleonic France from 1812 onwards. 8 The last five years of
the ~ apoleonic War sawall European states improving their military means to secure
the defeat of Napoleon. For Britain this meant unleashing the full force of British
naval power. For this it required a victualling service that could sustain a naval force,
enabling it to act wherever, and for as long as, it wanted. After 1809, the Baltic fleet
could count on such a service.




8 See Dominic Lievan, Russia Against Napoleon: The Battlefor Europe   180~-1~14 (A,ll~n Lane, 2009),
pp. 7-8, passim. The Russian army became more professional, while improvmg Its logIstIcal systems,
greatly contributing to its advance on Paris.


                                                                                                274
