words, it was the logistical dimension that determined operational success. If the
prr1\'isioning failed, the Royal Navy could not hope to execute its strategic and
operational designs. It \vas the responsibility of naval administration, in particular the
Victualling Board and Transport Board to organise and execute provisioning
operations. This study has shown how the administrative structure was arranged, and
how it n1anaged the process of delivering foodstuffs to foreign fleets.


The provISIonIng serVIce to the Baltic fleet was effective. In 1808 victualling
deliveries arrived on time, \vith little delays. The victualling service showed itself to
be flexible and capable of responding to unforeseen events. In 1809 an increase in the
size of the Baltic fleet, widespread national shipping shortages, and faulty
administration combined to cause a series of delays of victualling deliveries. These
were isolated incidents and for the most part provisioning matters did not impact on
the operational effectiveness of naval forces. However, the victualling service could
still not guarantee effectiveness.


The fundamental finding of this thesis is in outlining how the victualling serVIce
improved after 1810. In this, the thesis has made a significant contribution not just to
                                                                                        th
 our knowledge of naval logistics and their strategic consequences but also the 18
 century British state. Historians writing on the British state during this period have
 emphasised the role of patronage, the absence of a meritocracy, and its leaning
 towards convention to the exclusion of innovation. The naval departments, under
 pressure of war, were capable and indeed willing to conduct reform. This took two
 forms. Firstly there were smaller changes to procedures that were the common
 currency of naval administration. Secondly however were the grander broadly-
 conceived reforms emanating from governmental commissions into the state of the
 naval departments. The Commission of Naval Revision, reporting from 1809
 instituted a new dynamic; a professional workforce, where 'men of business' - men
 appointed because of their expertise and merit rather than affiliation - managed the
 issues of state. Hand-in-hand with this, the Commission also oversaw widespread
 changes that improved the victualling service. Indeed, the one could not happen
 without the other. Anew, streamlined, accountable and efficient victualling service

 required men of ability to run it.



                                                                                       269
