gradual, clunulative strategic instrument the blockade could degrade Russian military
perfonnance, weaken the resource base of the state, and assist the move towards
peace'. The Russian dependence on the regular exports of bulky primary produce was
exposed, resulting in a rapid decrease in wartime spending linked to the collapse of
in1port-based customs revenues. At the end of the war, revenue met only one quarter
of wartime expenditure, leading to a sizable deficit and serious inflation. 6 As in 1808-
1812. economic warfare had concrete political results.


The victualling system that supported naval forces in the Baltic and indeed around the
world therefore played a vital role in the final British victory in 1815. It certainly gave
Britain a crucial advantage over its rivals. The effective victualling service executed
in the Baltic \\'as in direct contrast to the Swedish fleet, which in 1808 was paralysed
by scurvy, thus removing its ability to conduct operations in the Baltic. Conversely,
the British fleet continued to patrol the Baltic, hundred of miles from the nearest out-
port.


The victualling service was only one element of the British war machinery, albeit a
significant one. Ultimately British success in the Napoleonic War rested on its
financial advantage. British national debt enabled it to borrow much larger amounts
than its enemy, and at much lower rates. This was particularly true of the last eight
years of the war. The 'fiscal-military state' proved itself to be an unrivalled form of
organization for the waging of 18 th century warfare. Investors were only willing to
subscribe to large loans because they were backed by a highly efficient tax regime
which guaranteed the payment of interest. Daunton summed up the financial
achievement well:

        The Navy was the largest business of the eighteenth century. A first-~la~s naval
        vessel with a crew of 900 exceeded the work-force of the largest factory; It Involved
        large fixed capital in dockyards; and demanded a mass~ve provisi.oning system to
        supply food, munitions, ropes, sails, and myriad pIece~ of Iron, ~rass and
        copper ... the outcome was an efficient system of tax collectIOn and publIc .finance
        which allowed Britain to bear a heavier financial burden than France, yet wIthout a
        political crisis threatening the state. 7




6 Andrew D. Lambert. 'The Crimean War Blockade 1854-6' in Bruce A. Elleman and S.C.M. Paine
Naval Blockades and Seapower: Strategies and Counter-strategies 1805-2005 (Routledge, London,
2006) pp. 46, 56.
7 Daunton, Progress and Poverty, p. 511.



                                                                                                273
