This study goes against the prevailing historical orthodoxy and also the most recent
scholarship on the subject. Janet MacDonald's study of the Victualling Board
commISSIoners during the wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France
deplores the absence of a meritocracy, stating that, 'the failures of the Victualling
Board are attributable to the lack of management competence of the victualling
conlmissioners, which are attributable to the way they were appointed, with more
emphasis being given to considerations of political patronage than professional
            1
ability'. This thesis has found this to be untrue; from 1808 it was men of talent that
ran the Victualling Board.


While, in MacDonald's view, the Victualling Board proved very resourceful dealing
with 'acute' denlands, they were less competent dealing with long-standing, 'chronic'
issues, particularly the backlog of accounts. As a result,

           It seems. therefore. that certainly before, and probably after, the changes to the
           system in 1809 brought about by the Board of Revision, the board of victualling
           commissioners. as the managers of an important and high-spending government
           department. were the only competent when dealing with routine matters which had
           clearly laid-down parameters, or which arose in a manner which prompted an
           immediate response ... whether the Victualling Board's performance improved on a
           grand scale after 1809 is difficult to ascertain, mainly because it coincided with an
                                         2
           escalation in the war effort.


On the contrary, this study has shown both that it is possible to assess the Board's
performance after 1809 and that, when measured, its performance is impressive.
Where the business of the Victualling Board and Transport Board mattered,
distributing provisions to fleets              across the globe, there were considerable
improvements in the victualling service after 1809. A more efficient, smoother, and
above all quicker victualling system was implemented. We saw in Chapter 2 that
earlier in the 18 th century procuring transport tonnage for a victualling convoy took
months to arrange. 3 By 1810, transport tonnage could be procured in a week. From
1810 the timely arrival of victuals, carefully calculated to fit precise numbers of

seamen, became commonplace.


I MacDonald     'Management Competence' , p. 2.
2 MacDonald:     'Management Competence', pp. 293-4. In an earlier ~ork, Macdonald argues that there
was little difference between victualling methods of the NapoleonIc Wars, and those same method.s
over the previous seventy years. As she comments, it is 'hard to see how they could hav~ changed :t
more, given the available technology and administrative systems'. Janet MacDonald, Feedmg Nelson s
Navy (Chatham Publishing, London, 2004) p. 172.
3
    See p. 57.


                                                                                                   270
