Important though the Commission of Naval Revision was this research has shown that
nayal administration was both capable and willing to institute procedural change at its
own bidding. The centralisation of victualling decision making, the removal of the
Nayy Board from the provisioning chain of command and the alteration of procedures
for proYisioning Baltic fleets, all came about before the Commission of Naval
Reyision reported. Scholars' understanding of the British state, or at least the naval
departments that accounted for the majority of the state's spending, must be re-
configured.


What must also be re-considered is the 18 th century state's relationship with the
priyate sector. Increasingly evident in recent historical inquiries is the inter-
dependence of the state and the market. The state depended on the market; unable to
produce the vast quantities of victuals, shipping, ordnance, medicines and naval stores
needed by the navy itself, it transferred to responsibility, and consequently also the
risk onto contractors. who were happy to supply the most reliable purchaser of all: the
state. 4 Britain's success in war required it to use these markets; firstly to ensure
adequate supplies, and with these secured, to achieve the best possible price. The state
did play these markets successfully, and as this thesis has shown, this was equally the
case when procuring transports from the large market for shipping in London.


The reforms of the years 1809-10, both procedural changes related to organIC
administrative change and widespread reforms instituted by the Commission for
Naval Revision,         instituted a new          victualling service that could guarantee
effectiveness. This had crucial strategic implications. Operations conducted in the
Baltic between 1808 and 1812 could not have been carried out even twenty years
earlier. The fleet could be sustained the year round without the need to return to port.


It is important to note that this study has looked only at one theatre. There would need
to be corresponding studies of other stations after 1809 before final conclusions on


4 Such is the importance of this interdependence that the term 'Contractor-St~te' is n~w being
presented as a viable alternative to John Brewer.'s 'fisca\~military' state: The InternatlOn~l conference
looking at the spending of states across Europe In the 18 cent~ry was In 2.009 rename? . The Europe~n
Contractor State, 1659-1815, and its implications'. See also Kmght and WIlcox, Sustam111g the Fleet.
War, the Navy and the Contractor State.


                                                                                                     271
