

Coping with Poverty in Rural Brandenburg

The Role of Lords and State in the Late Eighteenth Century Takashi Iida to provide peasants with firewood, litter, and fodder from their forests, as will be detailed in chapter 13 of this volume. Otherwise, they were generally obligated to support their subjects in case of need.

In his study from 1887 of the "peasant emancipation" from the demesne lordship in Prussia, Georg Friedrich Knapp wrote a pioneering description of the East Elbian demesne lordship and gave a picture of the subject peasants as generally impoverished, unmotivated, and incapable of development under oppressive feudal lordship, despite being on the verge of emancipation. He illustrated their deep dependence on their lords for a wide range of life's necessities, suggesting that there was a region where "many subjects openly say that they do not regard it as an injustice to steal their lords' goods, and do not call it theft, but nourishing by the lords. " 2 Thereafter, for a century, the image of the patriarchal care of East Elbian lords for their subjects became a tradition in the scholarship, 3 although counterevidence was cited as well. 4 However, the traditional image was fundamentally challenged by new research beginning in the mid-1980s, which offered a more dynamic and diverse view of the peasants' economy and society under the demesne lordship. 5 Since then, the image of generally impoverished and dependent East Elbian peasants can no longer be upheld. Nevertheless, it is still worth focusing on the lords' obligations and practices to support their subjects' lives, which varied according to the conditions. 6 owever, the lords were not solely responsible for supporting impoverished people. During the eighteenth century, the Prussian state sought to provide relief to the impoverished people through village or town communities. 7 This was all the more necessary because of the emergence of a new type of rural populace. After the resettlement of peasant farms that had been deserted because of the Thirty Years' War, the Prussian state's population growth policy meant to ensure a large army (table 5 ) led to an increase in the number of cottage residents. Among them, the lodgers (Einlieger) especially were free persons who, in contrast to subject peasants of feudal estates, could leave an estate freely but were more likely to fall into poverty. These landless people were beyond the control of each feudal estate and were to be supported publicly by the state authorities or each village and town community.

This chapter illustrates how this dual system of poor relief functioned in rural Brandenburg in the late eighteenth century, focusing on the case of the royal domain of Alt-Ruppin, one of the fifty-four royal domains in the Kurmark (the greater part of Brandenburg comprising the Altmark west of the Elbe River and East Elbian areas down to the Oder River surrounding Berlin). Around 1800, the Alt-Ruppin domain comprised two towns and twenty-seven villages. In the royal domain of Alt-Ruppin, the number of large peasants (Bauern) and small peasants (Kossäten) was almost unchanged at around 420 and 110 between 1764 and 1800. While farms passed undivided to a single child, noninheriting heirs were compensated with a portion with which they married into a peasant farm, set up a cottage, or rented it. Consequently, the cottage-resident class repeated their self-reproduction and became denser, because there was almost no chance of upward social mobility to the farm-holding class. 9 Between 1764 and 1800, the number of cottagers (Büdner), who owned a cottage, remained also constant at 124 after the rapid increase in the 1750s. However, lodgers (Einlieger) who rented a cottage that was built mostly on a peasant farm increased rapidly from 135 in 1764 to 322 in 1800 (see table 8 in chapter 13 ). Cottagers and lodgers usually earned their living as laborers, handicraftsmen, or soldiers. In this social differentiation, poverty became concentrated among the cottage-resident class, especially among lodgers.