16 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. Bi

LKIN

Bernstein cautions us about the dangers of adopting a condescending “back-
shadowing” attitude toward participants in past events—such as the victims
of the Holocaust—that were neither inevitable nor perhaps even predictable.

Of our contributors, Weber (Chapter 12) is most concerned with the po-
tentially liberating effects of allowing our counterfactual imaginations freer
rein than they arc usually given. He suggests that a partial explanation of
why international relations theorists are so often surprised by events is a
failure of divergent thinking—a failure to give due weight to the variety of
possible pasts that could have occurred as well as to the variety of possible
futures that might yet occur. Confronted by a complex probabilistic world in
which the tape of history only runs once, prudent decision makers should
entertain multiple plausible scenarios of how events might have unfolded
and might yet unfold, hedging their policy bets accordingly (Schoemaker
1991). Weber also criticizes methodologists and epistemologists, including
us, who try to constrain our counterfactual imaginations by invoking the
sorts of plausibility tests advanced in the next section. We agree with Weber
that deterministic tunnel vision is a serious problem but worry about the
viability of the proposed solution. Weber may be right that lack of creative
divergent thinking is a more serious deficiency in world politics than prolif-
eration of false hypotheses, but if the field took Weber's advice to heart, the
opposite might well soon be the case. Any self-respecting academic commu-
nity must offer the attentive public criteria for distinguishing scenario snake
oil from serious scholarship,

Six Criteria for Judging Counterfactual Arguments

‘There should now be no doubt that scholars use counterfactual arguments for
1a variety of distinct, albeit interrelated, purposes. It should also come as no
surprise that there is no single answer to the question of what counts as a good
counterfactual argument, The obvious rejoinder is, “Good for what?” A coun-
terfactual that is idiographically incisive (advances our understanding of a par-
ticular case) might be nomothetically banal (devoid of interesting theoretical
implications) and vice versa. A counterfactual grounded in an elegant computer
simulation might blow a gaping logical hole in an influential theoretical argu-
‘ment but tell us precious little about the actual world it supposedly simulates. A
counterfactual that stimulates us to think of new hypotheses might run afoul of
the received wisdom on what counts as a trivial or influential cause.

Given the diverse goals that people have in mind when they advance
counterfactual arguments—from hypothesis generation to hypothesis testing,
from historical understanding to theory extension—our contributors con-
vinced us that the quest for a one-size-fits-all epistemology is quixotic. Dif-
ferent investigators will inevitably emphasize somewhat different criteria in

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS a

judging the legitimacy, plausibility, and insightfulness of specific counter-
factuals. It would be a big mistake, however, to confuse epistemic pluralism
(which we accept up to a point) with an anything-goes subjectivism (which
wwe reject and which would treat all counterfactual claims as equally valid in
their own way). The study of world politics has suffered from a lack of self-
consciousness about the counterfactual underpinnings of causal claims
(Fearon 1991). Indeed, different schools of thought sometimes seem precar-
iously close to establishing their own implicit norms for deciding what is
and is not a “trivial” argument (Chapter 12, Weber)—an outcome that would
be disastrous because it would permit rival schools to disengage altogether
from constructive arguments with each other. A science or, more modestly,
‘quasi science of world politics is possible if and only if advocates of con-
flicting hypotheses embrace at least some common standards for judging the
plausibility of each other’s counterfactual claims. Otherwise, we are fated to
talk past each other.

‘To avoid this fate, we advance six normative criteria for judging counter-
factual arguments that appear to command substantial cross-disciplinary sup-
port. To be sure, we do not expect universal consent; we do seek, however,
to initiate a sustained conversation within the research community on what
should count as a compelling counterfactual argument—a conversation that
will allow us to explore the strengths and weaknesses of specific standards in
the abstract, in isolation from the dominant debates of the moment (when
the temptation to play favorites is often irresistible). There should, more-
over, be plenty to talk about. Each standard we propose is open to some
interpretation. Certain standards will provoke resistance from those who de-
nounce it as impossible (Chapter 3, Breslauer) or undesirable (Chapter 12,
Weber) or irrelevant (Chapter 5, Lebow and Stein). And some standards will
clash with each other. For example, consistency with well-established his-
torical fact sometimes conflicts with consistency with well-established statis-
tical or theoretical generalizations. There are at present no generally ac-
cepted principles for adjudicating such disputes and we do not claim to offer
a well-defined “method of counterfactual argument” that researchers can
deploy in an off-the-shelf fashion to solve any and all problems.

With these disclaimers, we list six attributes of the ideal counterfactual
thought exercise (where “ideal” means most likely to contribute to the ulti-
mate social-science goals of logically consistent, reasonably comprehensive
and parsimonious, and rigorously testable explanations that integrate the idi-
graphic and the nomothetic):!

" Readers may wonder how these six criteria for good counterfactual reasoning map onto the
five ideal-type pattems of counterfactual reasoning sketched earlier. Although the answer is
‘complex and the subject of some disagreement among contributors, we can offer the following
‘observations:

(1) The first two criteria—logical clarity and cotenability—have widespread acceptance
