Napoleon’s Integration of Europe
Napoleon’s Integration
of Europe




Stuart Woolf




London and New York
First published 1991
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2003.

Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
a division of Routledge, Chapman and Hall, Inc.
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001

© 1991 Stuart Woolf

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publishers.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

Woolf, S.J. (Stuart Joseph)
 Napoleon’s integration of Europe.
 1. Europe, 1715–1815
 I. Title
 940.253

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Woolf, S.J. (Stuart Joseph)
  Napoleon’s integration of Europe/Stuart Woolf.
     p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  1. Europe—History—1789–1815. 2. Napoleon I, Emperor of the
French, 1769–1821—Influence. 3. Europe—Relations—France.
4. France—Relations—Europe. I. Title.
D308.W66 1991
940.2´7–dc        90–24135

ISBN 0-203-40856-X Master e-book ISBN



ISBN 0-203-71680-9 (Adobe eReader Format)
ISBN 0-415-04961-X (Print Edition)
Contents
  List of maps                                              vi
  Preface                                                  vii
1 The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest          1
  The French and Europe                                    1
  The political model of the Revolution                    8
  The Revolutionary experiences of expansion              13
  Napoleon and Europe                                     20
2 The tools of conquest                                   33
  The role of Paris                                       37
  The mechanics of occupation                             45
  The generals                                            53
  The diplomats                                           63
  The professionals of annexation                         69
  The prefects                                            74
3 The practices of conquest: administrative integration    83
  The restoration of order                                 85
  Modernisation of the state                               96
  Administration and society                              107
  The constraints of physical and social space            116
  The contradictions of integration                       124
4 The practices of conquest: exploitation                 133
  Economic policy                                         134
  The Continental blockade                                144
  Conscription                                            156
  Armies                                                  165
  Social privilege                                        174
5 Responses to conquest                                   185
  Collaboration                                           187
  Economic opportunities                                  196
  Religion                                                206
  Social practices                                        215
  Resistance                                              226
6 Epilogue: the heritage                                  238

  Appendix: chronology 1789–1821                          247
  Notes                                                   270
  Bibliography                                            287
  Name index                                              301
  Subject index                                           313
List of maps




1 Major Napoleonic battles 1792–1815                            21
2 Europe in the period 1789–99                                  34
3 Europe in the period 1800–6                                   35
4 Europe in the period 1807–12                                  36
5 Principal postal and commercial routes in the Empire by 1812 135




                                vi
Preface




Napoleon as man and military leader has always attracted writers and
readers. Such has been the fascination of his meteoric career that
historians have been hard put to defend their hegemony against the
incursions of more creative novelists, artists and film-makers. The
fascination is easy to understand, the closer one approaches this most
private of public personages. There is an unknown Napoleon (perhaps
many unknown Napoleons) of whom glimpses are caught
unexpectedly in the vast literature. Who would expect the Emperor to
be a discerning connoisseur of Paisiello’s music (as Berlioz recalled)?
Or that this eternal military hero’s ‘keen sense of smell ill tolerated the
stench that accompanied a pillage’, in the words of his aide-de-camp,
Ségur? The personal sobriety of this corrupter of men is well
established; but where did the reality blur into a consciously
constructed myth? As Denon, his official fine arts adviser, instructed
Gérard: Take care to emphasise the full splendour of the uniforms of
the officers surrounding the Emperor, as this contrasts with the
simplicity he displays and so immediately marks him out in their
midst.’ To quote the great poet Giovanni Pascoli, writing three
quarters of a century later: ‘my silent room is filled with the echo of
Napoleon dictating’.1
   But history does not just consist of great men, nor are the years of
Napoleonic domination explicable in terms of his battlefields.
   My concern has been to understand what I believe to be the central
problem of the Napoleonic period: the attempt by the political class
that had emerged from the Revolution to extend their ideals of
progress and civilisation to every region of Europe touched by French
armies. The military victories were the necessary premiss and
condition of the French presence; but it is simplistic to regard the wars
as either the causal factor or indeed an adequate explanation of the
Napoleonic years. For contemporaries, the political changes and
imposition of a new and uniform model of administrative

                                    vii
viii   Preface


modernisation constituted a continuous and uninterrupted experience
of a dramatically radical nature. It is necessary to follow this
experience as it evolved, from the years of the Directory to the
collapse of the Empire, in terms of the interaction between the attempt
of the French conquerors to create a new and integrated Europe in
their own image and the responses of the conquered to this
unprecedented experiment. Without French arms, the experiment
could never even have been initiated. But in all other respects, to write
of conquerors and conquered risks misunderstanding. The aim of the
Napoleonic administrators was to convince the peoples who came
under their control of the benefits of integration or imitative
association by demonstration of the superiority and applicability of
the French model of government; it was essentially peaceful and
dependent on active collaboration rather than enforced submission.
The fundamental problem was the resistance posed by the
heterogeneity of the societies over whom the French established
control, the multiplicity of cultural identities that have always
characterised Europe.
    To study this remarkable experience, which was to influence the
course of European history through the nineteenth century, has meant
reversing the conventional historiographical approach in which what
happened outside the frontiers of present-day France is regarded
almost as an appendage to the internal history of Napoleonic France
or—seen from the other side—as (a usually undesirable) interruption
in a teleologically oriented history of individual nation-states. I have
attempted to bring together in an explicitly comparative manner the
experiences of French rule across the entire Continent. This has
meant, on the one hand, a constant attention to the relationship
between internal developments in France during the Directory,
Consulate and Empire and the evolution of the French administrative
presence outside her frontiers; and, on the other hand, a concern to
highlight the similarities and dissimilarities between different
European societies, as they responded to the French presence. Hence,
geographically, I have not limited myself to the regions progressively
annexed by France, but have sought to bring into my discussion states
which were directly controlled by France, whether they were satellites
(like Westphalia or Naples) or formally more independent allies (like
Bavaria).
    Inevitably there are limitations to so vast and challenging an
enterprise. The first is linguistic. My inability to read the
historiography in Dutch, Flemish, Polish or Russian has necessarily
impeded me from acquiring that depth of knowledge that provides the
                                                              Preface   ix


historian with confidence; I hope my discussions of the relevant
regions are not too superficial. In one case—the Russian response to
Napoleon’s invasion—I have preferred, out of ignorance, not even to
attempt any remarks.
   The second limitation is that a work of synthesis and interpretation
of this sort cannot be based on original research on all aspects. I began
my research in the archives many years ago on Italy under French rule
and then extended this, in the Archives Nationales of Paris, to
prolonged study of the mechanisms and social implications of the
administration of the Empire, and in particular of the significance
attributed to statistics and of the problems of poverty. But necessarily
I have been dependent on the research of generations of scholars
across Europe in order to understand the overall dimensions of the
task I had set myself. The hypotheses which lay at the origins of this
book emerged out of a combination of my own research and the
cumulative results of such historiography. My knowledge remains
deeper of some parts of Europe than of others, although I hope this
has not affected my overall interpretation.
   I owe a debt of gratitude to more people than I can name here. I
would like to thank Louis Audibert for offering me the challenge of
writing this book. It could not have been written without the
exhilarating experience of my years in the Department of History and
Civilization of the European University Institute, where the
juxtaposition of national intellectual approaches and academic
traditions necessitates an unending reflection on the meaning of
Europe and its cultural identities; I am deeply grateful to my
colleagues and research students from whom I have learnt so much in
formal seminars, innovative theses and informal discussions. I wish to
thank Paola Querci, Anna Debenedetti and Bonnie Bonis for their
eagle eyes in spotting obscurities of expression. Daniel Roche and
Heinz-Gerhard Haupt have been patient and understanding friends,
as well as professional colleagues, always ready to read and suggest
improvements. Naturally the responsibility for the opinions and
conclusions expressed in this book remains wholly mine.

                                                             May 1990
1 The Revolutionary-Napoleonic
  ideals of conquest




    Not everything that the wisdom of the legislator decrees for the
    good of one of the various nations under his dominion can be
    applied equally to all the others, as the natural differences among
    peoples in terms of climate, character, genius and customs play
    too great a role.
       (Kaunitz to the Empress Maria Theresa, 14 December 1769)1

    A political State is a very difficult machine to direct, as general
    laws must often yield to circumstantial needs; if everything is to be
    subjected to a single regulation, it is impossible to maintain the
    form of policing and protection appropriate to the inhabitants of
    each part of an empire.
                 (Jacques Peuchet, Statistique générale et particulière
     de la France et de ses colonies…, Paris, an XII (1803–4), vol. 1,
                                                                   p. vi)


THE FRENCH AND EUROPE
What did French men and women know about Europe at the end of
the ancien regime? The question offers a convenient starting-point for
a discussion of the quarter of a century in which French arms and
Napoleon’s political ingenuity constructed and imposed on the greater
part of the Continent their particular model of the modern nation-
state.
   A wealth of indications can provide us with at least an
impressionistic response to so apparently simple a query. For the
overwhelming majority of this profoundly rural society the ‘foreigner’
was any ‘stranger’ from distant parts. Frequently he was the product
of the massive, ubiquitous machine of military conscription, which

                                   1
2   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


recruited some 2.5 million men (both French and others) between
1700 and 1789 and itself stimulated the flow of emigration. He was
not necessarily unknown—for pedlars and migratory rural artisans
regularly followed the same routes—but unattached to the standard
networks of identification, kin and village, and frequently speaking a
different native tongue. Few of the 1 million French men and women
who took to the roads every spring and summer of the later eighteenth
century ventured as far as Italy, Spain, Germany or the Low
Countries; nor indeed were ‘national’ frontier posts so different in
kind from the multiplicity of customs and toll barriers within France.
For the other 20-odd million peasants, whose daily life was firmly
rooted within the physical limits of walking distances, the elements of
information about other peoples and states, on which they
constructed their mental world, must have come essentially through
the channels of such migrants, the lurid fireside fantasies of the
soldiers, or the tales of pedlars’ chapbooks.
   A mere generation later, as a result of Napoleonic conscription,
every French peasant family must have acquired knowledge of one or
more of the countries of Europe directly or indirectly, through the
military experiences of relatives or neighbours. One can hypothesise
that, in the early years, this immediate contact with other peoples and
places must have juxtaposed uneasily with the traditional knowledge
and practices, based on maps, memoirs and hearsay, of the pre-
Revolutionary professional soldiers. How such experiences filtered
into and modified the popular representation of the outside world is
an interesting but ultimately probably unanswerable question.
   Not only the peasantry, but also (as Daniel Roche has shown) the
great majority of the local elites who provided the public of the
enlightenment had rarely travelled afar, and then usually only to
Paris. Their knowledge of foreign parts was based on the written
‘voyages’ of travellers and that more or less intense correspondence
so characteristic of the ‘republic of letters’, occasionally enriched by
meetings at their local academy or masonic lodge with the wealthy,
cultured foreigner on his grand tour or the officer returning from
foreign parts. Undoubtedly the numbers of educated and curious
travellers increased continuously and rapidly in the latter decades of
the century, possibly even more than the printed voyages and
descriptions. Within this corpus of publications, Europe—and finally
France as well—occupied an increasing space. The geographer
Langlet-Dufresnoy could assert in 1742, following the publication of
the great Jesuit Geographical, historical, chronological, political and
physical description of the Empire of China and of Chinese Tartary
                        The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   3


(1735), that China—a recurrent ideal of western political thought—
was known ‘with as much detail and precision as France or the states
of Europe’.2 The attraction of these distant lands remained strong—
as can be seen in the chinoiseries and Turkish motifs of the
decorative arts—and was accompanied by the newer scientific and
anthropological explorations and descriptions of the Australasian
Pacific and extra-European worlds. But with the prolonged peace
following the end of the Seven Years’ War (1763), this traditional
cult of the unusual and the exotic, an extension of the ‘cabinet of
marvels’, ceded prime of place to nearer and more easily accessible
regions. In Boucher de la Richarderie’s vast listing of travel-books
published as the Bibliothèque universelle des voyages in 1808,
accounts of European countries constituted 35 per cent of the total
of seventeenth-century publications, but 53 per cent of eighteenth-
century ones.3 Europe was ‘discovered’ by travellers and readers
alike, assisted in their voyages by increasingly stereotyped
descriptions and practical guides: no travellers of today, nurtured on
their Blue Guides, would be surprised (except by the length of title)
at L.Dutens’ Itinerary of the most popular routes, or Journal of a
tour of the main cities of Europe, including…the time needed to go
from one place to another, the distances in English miles…the most
remarkable things to see…To which is added the exchange rate of
moneys and a table of travel and linear distances.4
   Europe was visited in its remotest parts, from Iceland and
Scandinavia to Russia and Turkey. Geography and history went hand
in hand, for—as Voltaire preached and practised—it was essential to
describe to the reader the unfamiliar. Voltaire was well placed to do
so, with 137 volumes of voyages as well as geographical dictionaries
in his library of nearly 4,000 works. But, in general, the remoteness of
the country was in inverse proportion to the informative detail
authors of voyages provided about it. The countries of the grand tour
continued to attract most attention. For the French reader and
traveller, cultural and historical traditions ensured the continuing
primacy of Italy, while Britain attracted ever greater attention, based
on that intimacy resulting from a secular rivalry that now related to
political structures as well as to economic activities. By the 1780s the
major novelty was the massive increase in publications, travel and
contacts with the German states, where commercial opportunities,
administrative models and reforming princes aroused growing
interest.
   The dimensions of this fashionable boom in travel and travelogues
of the late eighteenth century can be gauged by comparing Voltaire’s
4   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


collection of voyages to the 700 books of geography and history in the
2,000-volume library of Adrien Duquesnoy, a little-known but
influential administrator of the Consular years.5 But if travel was
fashionable, its purposes had changed: it was pedagogic and
utilitarian, philosophic and scientific. Rousseau had exalted the
benefits that would result for mankind from a voyage round the world
by philosophes; Duquesnoy, more mundanely, argued that through
knowledge of foreign examples, ‘one can compare facts and theories,
establish a body of principles and adopt a plan which will be
practicable at home’.6
   It was this particular interest for the classification of useful
information that explains the rapid development of statistical
topographies. Of German origin, a direct offshoot of the
Kameralwissenschaft, these numerical descriptions of the physical
environment, history, political structure, economic activities and
social organisation of administratively delimited areas encapsulated at
one and the same time the educated public’s thirst for easily acquired
knowledge, the trader’s need for practical information and the
scientifically oriented administrator’s search for classified and hence
comparable empirical data. The statistical topography, the favoured
mode of diffusing information about the departments in Directorial-
Consular France, can be regarded as the logical culmination of the
vast growth of interest in travel, in the double sense that it selected
and moulded the information to meet the requirements of ‘social
utility’, and turned attention from foreign parts to the ‘discovery’ of
the homeland itself. In so doing, it combined the acquisition of useful
knowledge as the basis for policy with the illustration of the progress
of the different regions of France since the Revolution.7
   It is obvious that Frenchmen’s knowledge of Europe was not
limited to travel and travel books. The very propaganda of the
philosophes, like the international expansion of economic activity in
the later decades of the eighteenth century, thickened the intimate,
complex, never interrupted web of personal contacts and interchange
on which the European economy and culture had always depended.
Observation of practices and methods employed in other societies and
states stimulated a widely shared search for improvement, whether in
the private or the public domain. It was precisely with this intent, for
example, that Duquesnoy translated into French the major treatises
on institutional means to deal with poverty published in Britain, the
United Provinces, Philadelphia, Switzerland, Germany, Scandinavia
and Italy.8 What to do with the poor was an issue to which late-
eighteenth-century elites were particularly sensitive. But it formed part
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   5


of a far larger problem of effective government, or ‘social utility’,
which was in the forefront of the attention of French, as of other
European savants and administrators, following on the wide-ranging
and contradictory criticisms and preaching of the philosophes. The
interest among the leading French intellectuals, both before and after
1789, in Scottish political economists and the late aufklärische
Göttingen school of public administration derived directly from the
apparent success of the analytical methods, and (at least in part) the
solutions they proposed. What was needed, wrote Volney, was ‘a
sufficiently large number of facts that can be compared with due
reflection in order to extract from them other new truths or the
confirmation of established ones, or even the disproof of accepted
errors’.9
   Direct observation and experience abroad was a precious asset
(possibly because it remained so unusual), which came to be
particularly valued by the Revolutionary political class and assisted
administrative careers. Highly illustrative is the early career of C.E.
Coquebert de Montbret, future head of the Napoleonic bureau of
statistics and secretary-general of the ministry of manufactures and
commerce: before the Revolution he had spent nine years at Hamburg
as French commissioner of the merchant marine and consul, then to be
employed by the Directory and Consulate as commercial and shipping
representative at Dublin, Amsterdam and, after the peace of Amiens,
at London.10 As significant was the request made by the thermidorian
ministry of foreign affairs to the geographer and idéologue, C.-
F.Volney, to prepare a list of Statistical questions for the use of
travellers, so that the ministry’s diplomatic agents abroad could
collect useful facts in a systematic manner.
   It is evident that knowledge of Europe was acquired through
many channels and functioned at different levels. In terms of private
contacts, unquestionably the most diffuse and continuous level,
networks of correspondents and relationships ignoring national
frontiers had always existed, deriving from kin and patterns of
sociability. The cosmopolitan veneer of aristocratic pretensions was
based on the reality of a model of marriage in which status counted
for far more than nation and encouraged matrimonial alliances that
ignored national frontiers. Social modes (in which the French Court
played the leading role) transcended the boundaries of the individual
state and circulated across Europe in the persons of preceptors (such
as Gilbert Romme), chefs, clothes designers or Casanova’s actresses.
At the less mundane level of the ‘republic of letters’, authors—of
whom Voltaire and Rousseau were only the most publicised and best
6   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


known—and learned societies, especially the medical profession,
transmitted cultural knowledge and models of comportment. At yet
another level, economic exchange explained the wide-ranging
information about Europe possessed by French commercial families.
   The group of Frenchmen probably best informed about, and most
sensitive to changes in European affairs, alongside, or even more than,
official representatives, were the manufacturers and traders. Despite
the loss of much of her empire in 1763, France had participated
actively in the expansion of the international economy in the latter
half of the century. The rapid growth in colonial trade, in which
France divided the lion’s share with Britain, not only benefited the
great ports of Bordeaux, Nantes and Marseille, but also had a
multiplier effect on the general level of economic activity and urban
demand. By the eve of the Revolution, re-exports to other European
countries of colonial goods—sugar, coffee, tea, spices, rum, tobacco—
amounted to about one-third of total French exports, while colonial
demand in the Antilles and Spanish colonies—for silks and other
luxury products, as well as slaves—absorbed perhaps a quarter of
French industrial production. By the eve of the Revolution, British
technological superiority in textile production and ironworks was
impinging on traditional French export markets in the Levant and
Mediterranean. But if the entrepôt trade was unquestionably the most
rapidly growing sector of the French economy, some manufactures—
especially silk and fashionable goods—and agricultural products such
as wine benefited from the growth of both domestic and European
markets. In a world of poor and seasonably impossible
communications, the development of a national market in France was
facilitated by an inland transport system admired by foreign travellers,
even the British. The great centres were developing their trade
contemporaneously within France and across Europe. Marseille was
expanding its activities from its traditional Levant woollen exports to
re-export of North American colonial goods; Bordeaux developed
contacts with Hamburg, at the expense of Amsterdam; Paris and Lyon
imposed their needs on the ports and sold their silks and fashion
products throughout the interior. The Rhineland areas, Alsace, the
Bishoprics and Lorraine, were drawn into the national network;
exchanges with the Italian states and Spain developed primarily with
Lyons and the Midi; above all, northern and eastern Europe—the
German states, Poland and Russia—provided important markets via
the Baltic and the fairs at Frankfurt and Leipzig, for French wines,
silks and luxury goods.
   Much attention has been paid, understandably, to the activities and
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   7


merchants of the maritime ports. But the traders, merchants and
merchant-manufacturers throughout the kingdom formed the infantry
(or at best the non-commissioned officers) of this army of
international trade. In an economy which remained overwhelmingly
agricultural, the numbers and geographical range of activities of these
manufacturers and traders should not be exaggerated. The market, for
most producers and merchants, was an extremely local one, although
indirectly through the exchange of goods, the links with the great
ports and metropolises of Paris and Lyons, via river traffic and inland
trading towns, were increasing rapidly. In the absence of a banking
system, credit was in short supply at all levels, from the pedlars who
stocked up at Lyons to the Alsatian calico print manufacturers reliant
on the sleeping partnership of Basel bankers. Throughout France,
along the frontiers and coasts, elaborate and sophisticated systems of
smuggling involved entire villages and towns, from carters and
bargees to respectable businessmen and Customs officers. Smuggling
(except of domestic salt, a state monopoly) implied a considerable
knowledge and network of supply routes and markets, at least across
the neighbouring frontiers. Far more general were the regular and
routine exchanges of manufacturers and merchants at their
warehouses, or with clients on their order-books, either directly or on
commission.
   The eighteenth century witnessed a growing concern in the
technical education of manufacturers and merchants, in France as
elsewhere, with proposals of professional courses and publication of
technical instructions and guides. The Encyclopédie had already
popularised the technology of production, with articles by educated
skilled artisans. Jacques Peuchet, former secretary of Morellet, saw
the market for a Universal dictionary of trading geography, published
in six volumes in the Years VII–VIII. But most manufacturers and
merchants undoubtedly learnt their trade on the job. A small minority
acquired their apprenticeship (and languages) abroad. The political
vagaries of the Revolution increased their number, through the forced
apprenticeship in foreign trading houses of many children of the
wealthy bourgeoisie, such as the future prefect H.C.F. Barthélemy at
Mainz, or the idéologue and civil servant J.M.de Gérando at Naples.
The larger merchant houses, such as Briansiaux of Lille, were engaged
in intense commercial correspondence with expeditioners and
commissioners across all western Europe. Whether through direct
experience or business correspondence, these manufacturers and
merchants were acutely conscious of their reliance on the established
trading routes around which they had so carefully cultivated their
8   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


networks. Natural or man-made interruptions, such as through a poor
olive crop in Apulia or threat of war in Poland, were registered
immediately with the sensitivity of a thermometer. Whatever the
geographical range—from the pre-Revolutionary small tobacco
processor of Strasbourg trading across the Rhine to the Restoration
Swiss merchant and liberal G.P.Vieusseux, who wrote accounts of the
European-wide commerce in Scandinavian salted cod and Black Sea
grain—knowledge of Europe was an essential pre-requisite for the
businessman.


THE POLITICAL MODEL OF THE REVOLUTION
By 1789 the leading role of France in the forward march of civilisation
was accepted by educated elites throughout Europe—even by the
British. Although the reforms advocated by the philosophes seemed to
have made far greater progress in other states, such as Tuscany,
Austria, even the Russia of Catherine II, and although the economic
success of Britain was undeniable, France—which usually meant
Paris—remained the intellectual powerhouse of enlightenment ideas
about how to improve the present and construct the future. Such a
role was based on France’s remarkably high and intense level of
philosophic and scientific enquiry. But it was also a consciously
constructed reputation, based on a self-confidence in the superiority
and leadership of French civilisation, that dated back to the cultural
affirmations of the Court of Louis XIV and appeared continuously
confirmed by the generalised acceptance of French as the language of
international discourse. The cosmopolitan diffusion of the French
model of aristocratic sociability, which imbued the practices and
comportment of the European nobilities, underpinned such self-
confidence and paradoxically was reinforced by the abrupt and
massive emigration of nobles with the Revolution.
   Civilisation, a new word that entered the French language only in
the mid-eighteenth century to describe the level of perfection of a
society, was identified with the progress of reason. In the hands of so
influential a writer as Voltaire, it was demonstrable through the
evidence of history, from the millennial ‘barbarism’ and ‘superstitions’
that followed the fall of ancient Rome to the early manifestations of
the new spirit of reason of the Renaissance, culminating in the current
age of enlightenment. Each progressive age was characterised by the
achievements of a particular people: in classical times the Greeks and
Romans, in recent centuries the Italians, then the British and now the
French.
                        The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   9


   This identification of the most advanced stage of civilisation with
the French nation was consolidated by the Revolution, not only
among the French themselves, but also initially among all who
believed in progress. It was an identification based on optimism, faith
in the possibility and reality of peaceful change, to which the first
euphoric year of radical reforms seemed to bear witness. It is a
truism—and misleading, at least in the short term—to explain the
fundamental influence of the Revolution in the future development of
western civilisation in terms of the universality of its political values.
For some of its key ideas—such as ‘fraternity’—rapidly degenerated,
at best into slogans, at worst into mockery, whether on the French
political scene or in the territories ‘liberated’ by French armies; while
others—such as liberty, equality or popular sovereignty—were to
undergo deep and anguished redefinitions through the often fratricidal
political struggle up to and beyond Brumaire, from which they
emerged almost unrecognisably transformed.
   Nevertheless, there are few indications that the French political and
military class ever doubted its mission as vector of the most advanced
form of civilisation, to be carried to, or imposed upon, less fortunate
peoples. Already in October 1789 Mirabeau argued that:

    The example of the French Revolution will only produce a greater
    respect for the law, a greater rigidity in discipline and social
    hierarchy in England. But there will be incalculable tremors in the
    Batavian provinces, where the revolutionary fever was cut short;
    in the Belgian provinces, where habits and opinions are restless
    and seditious; in the Helvetic cantons, unless the aristocrats
    double up in good sense and firmness…in the splendid provinces
    of Germany along the Rhine, unless their federal ties are rapidly
    strengthened.11

By August 1797, Bonaparte’s Italian army broadsheet could proclaim,
with that irritating self-congratulatory complacency that never
abandoned the French military presence: ‘Every step of the Great
Nation is marked by blessings! Happy is the citizen who is part of it!
Happy is he who can say about our great men: these are my friends,
my brothers!’12 In May 1799, as the Austro-Russian armies seemed on
the point of victory, General Masséna announced publicly that: ‘Only
the efforts of France impede Europe from falling into the barbarism
into which her enemies are hurling her’.13 In later years, in ever more
cynical tone, Napoleon would justify French actions, however self-
serving, in terms of the benefits resulting from French arms. As he
10   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


wrote to his stepson Eugene de Beauharnais on 23 August 1810 about
the kingdom of Italy (but the same sentiment applied to every country
where French armies had passed): ‘It would be shortsighted not to
recognise that Italy is independent only because of France; that this
independence is the price of France’s blood and victories, and that
Italy must not misuse it’.14
    Rhetoric, the stock-in-trade of political figures of all times, too
easily rings false in later ages, because (like style of clothing) it is so
integrally disciplined by the conventions of its period. But, when the
rhetoric is put aside, the evidence remains that the French political
model, in its successive Revolutionary and Napoleonic incarnations,
was perceived by its representatives as not only superior to, but also to
be emulated by, existing states and societies. There is no doubt that
French elites of both the Revolutionary and the Napoleonic years felt
themselves to be participants in an experience of unique historical
significance. And precisely because France was Europe’s mentor, it
seemed appropriate to many that Paris, the new Rome, the capital and
heart of civilisation, should be enriched with the most significant
artefacts of the arts and sciences to be found elsewhere in Europe. The
time has come when the kingdom [of fine arts] must pass over to
France as confirmation and embellishment of that of liberty’, asserted
the Directors in May 1796, authorising the pillaging of Italian
museums.15 At the height of the Empire, Montalivet, minister of the
interior, proposed transferring from Italian, Dutch, Belgian, German
and other conquered repositories to the new national archives at Paris
all documentation relating to the earlier political history of their
states.16
    A missionary zeal, as vectors of civilisation, resulted from this sense
of historic novelty, of personal embodiment of the values of a new age.
Robespierre, virtually alone, had warned at the outset that liberty was
not bestowed at bayonet-point; but his message was ignored, long
after liberty had ceased to be a popular word. His compatriots
remained persuaded that the values of the Revolution were universal
and hence exportable. Precisely because French elites were convinced
that they had created a new political model, it is important to identify
what they understood by such a model, as it changed in content. For
it incorporated the underlying ideals which the French and their most
dedicated followers strove to apply, amidst the ever harsher buffeting
of economic and military demands, in the countries over which they
assumed responsibility.
    In the first instance, the Revolution offered a model of a new
relationship between the state and society, or more precisely a rapidly
                        The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   11


changing succession of constitutional devices which endeavoured to
regulate the degree of political participation of the new citizens. The
intense debates and bitter political struggle over equality and liberty
that characterised the early years of the Revolution were never
directly experienced in the neighbouring countries: at most, they
echoed in the discussions, debates and propaganda of the Italian and
Dutch democratic patriots, or in the shadowy conspiratorial
aspirations of a handful of ‘neo-Jacobins’ or ‘anarchists’ (to use the
contemporary terms) associated in some form with the Babeuf
conspiracy (1796). Of the thirteen constitutions promulgated in the
‘sister republics’, eleven were modelled on the thermidorian
constitution of the Year III, with its elaborate, rigid and ultimately
unworkable separation of powers and graduated system of election.
Hence in the countries subject to the control of the Directorial armies,
and even more in those invaded after Brumaire, the terms of the
political debate had shifted decisively away from the sovereignty of
the people, in the direction of a definition of representation restricted
to the appropriately qualified (whatever the criteria employed to
define them).
   Secondly, a new concept of political nation had provided the early
revolutionaries with their political strength and had become
increasingly sharply defined with the patriotism engendered by the
wars. It was a concept initially based on the Revolutionary unity of
the patriots, aspiring towards the Utopian vision of a unified fraternal
society which, particularly in the sections and among the sansculotte
volunteers of the armies of 1792–3, was expressed in the form of
direct popular sovereignty. There was growing uneasy awareness of
the fragility of this new construct, evidenced internally by popular
reluctance or resistance to so many of the Revolutionary practices and
beyond the frontiers by incomprehension among the conquered
peoples of the appeal to fraternise. This did not destroy the belief itself
in the identification of ‘people’ and ‘nation’, only in the optimism of
Revolutionary spontaneity as an adequate method to achieve it.
Alternative but complementary means were elaborated. On the one
hand, it was seen as necessary to eliminate, albeit carefully and
gradually, the historical, traditional and customary legacies of a
superstitious past, whose survival in popular practices was regarded
as a fundamental obstacle to the existence of an ultimately uniform
nation. On the other hand, the suppression of elective procedures
within the army already in 1794–5 and the return to traditional
methods of advancement heralded a different form of combative
12   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


patriotism, embodied in the superiority of the Grande Nation and
expressed in the disciplined élan of the Grande Armée.
   Thirdly, the new social and economic order was defined most
clearly in negative form, by contrast to the highly elaborate juridical
and institutional orders and ties identified with the society and
economy of the ancien regime. At the simplest level, the abolition of
‘intermediary bodies’, the feudal regime and internal customs tolls
exemplified the initial optimistic expectation that the new
individualism and economic liberalism would generate social
harmony and economic productivity. Once again, the painful
experiences of the Revolutionary decade did not modify the basic faith
in either individualism or the ‘hidden hand’ of the free market, but
focused attention on those best equipped, by resources, education and
capacity, to turn the opportunities to good use, and to provide the
social homogeneity and solidity on which the social fabric was
believed to depend.
   Finally, the prerequisite for the achievement of all other aims was
the provision of appropriate institutional, administrative, financial
and juridical structures, based on the application of enlightened
reason to the body politic. In a sense, it is hardly surprising—given the
lengthy preparation of an enlightenment increasingly oriented
towards the end of ‘social utility’—that, to accomplish these ends,
reliance should have been placed on the state, almost uninterruptedly
even in the Revolutionary years. Particularly after the failure of the
Directory to fulfil this role, the state acquired the right to intervene,
protect and direct civil society in order to ‘liberate’ both individual
and productive forces. What was novel in this relationship was the
increasing centrality and legitimising of the executive bureaucracy, the
extension of whose role was indirectly stimulated by the idéologues’
utilitarian conviction that systematic classification of empirical facts
provided the basis for the identification and demonstration of the
social interest to potentially irrational individuals.
   It was on this bureaucracy that the direct responsibility was to fall
for the extension of the French political model to the rest of Europe.
For reasons of climate, levels of civilisation, forms of social
organisation and human egoism, in so vast a geographical area as the
Empire and its satellite states, genuine (and ultimately desirable)
uniformity could not be expected. But there was an increasingly
explicit belief in the Napoleonic years that the new nation-states could
and were to be remoulded from above, through the application of an
administrative blueprint. The evidence of progress and benefits that
would result from such institutional remodelling of state structures
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   13


and social relations would attract the support of educated and hence
rational elites and local notables. But the anonymous mass of the
people were slow to reject the prejudices and practices of the past.
Precisely because the greater number of individuals who constituted
society were lethargic in their acceptance of the advantages of
modernity, an administrative grid, elaborated according to rational
and enlightened criteria, was expected to force the pace and orient
society in the appropriate direction.


THE REVOLUTIONARY EXPERIENCES OF EXPANSION
The administrative project for modernity was to be developed only
after Brumaire and to reach its fullest elaboration at the height of the
Empire, in the very years when its fulfilment was rendered ever less
plausible by the competing military and economic ambitions of
Napoleon. But already before Brumaire, the experience of territorial
expansion had revealed contradictions and conflict, particularly in the
years of the Directory, when the diffusion of power permitted, indeed
encouraged, the contemporaneous pursuit of incompatible policies.
   As is well known, at the outset of the Revolution the members of
the Constituent Assembly, wholly engaged in the regeneration of
France and imbued with the pacific ideals of the enlightenment, had
formally renounced any aggressive intent: The French nation
renounces any intention of engaging in a war of conquest and will
never employ its forces against the liberty of any people’ (22 May
1790). Within two years, on 20 April 1792, the Legislative Assembly,
almost unanimously, had declared war on the ‘king of Bohemia and
Hungary’, and within ten months found itself at war with Prussia,
Sardinia, Britain, the Low Countries and Spain. (See Appendix for a
chronology.) How the revolutionaries reached this position has been
recounted innumerable times and requires little recapitulation. The
right of peoples to determine their nationality and allegiance, initially
formulated by the populations of Avignon and Alsace (subject
respectively to papal sovereignty and the feudal lordship of German
princes) raised an issue of far wider import than the specific cases, as
it challenged the validity of international law and encouraged the
populations of other states to follow suit, particularly in francophone
regions economically or socially close to France, such as Savoy, Nice,
areas of romand Switzerland or Belgium. As fears of counter-
revolution and international conspiracy grew, cause and consequence
of the deepening divisions between Court and Assembly and among
the revolutionaries, the appeals of foreign exiles, especially the Dutch
14   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and Liégeois, who acted as organised pressure groups, fell on
increasingly responsive ears. War was urged and finally declared by
Brissot and the Girondins, with almost casual nonchalance (to our
contemporary ears), in rhetoric redolent with references to the ancient
Greek city-states and the recent victory of the Americans, to the
tempering effects of war on the character of peoples and the innate
strength of free peoples against despots. How this came about can
most easily be understood in the context of what was then
unprecedented and has become too sadly familiar in the twentieth
century—the search for a solution to domestic problems by an appeal
to the ideology of patriotism.
   The experience of war (as historically is usually the case) assumed
forms and dimensions wholly unforeseen by its initiators. As all
historians agree, it conditioned the internal development of the
Revolution, from the overthrow of the monarchy and the Jacobin
dictatorship to the anti-Jacobin reaction of Thermidor and Directory
until the coup of Brumaire. In terms of France’s relations with Europe,
it requires discussion from three different perspectives—political,
military and economic—as in each case they contained important
elements of Napoleon’s future policies.
   There can be no doubt about the deliberately subversive ideological
fervour of the revolutionaries in the earliest stages of the war, a
response in kind to the counter-revolutionary declaration of
Brunswick (25 July 1792) and immediate consequence of the victories
of Valmy (20 September) and Jemappes (6 November). Between 19
November 1792 and 8 January 1793 the republican Convention
declared its will to accord ‘fraternity and aid to all peoples who want
to recover their liberty’ and instructed its generals, on occupation of
enemy territory, to encourage the local populations to ‘enfranchise
themselves…to give themselves a free government, through the
exercise of their legitimate sovereignty…to regenerate themselves by a
universal change in accordance with the principles of equality and
liberty’.17 Words were followed by actions, with the Convention’s
confirmation of a vote by the peoples of Savoy and Nice to become
part of the French republic (27 November 1792, 31 January 1793).
   The Convention accepted the will of the people in this instance. But
the conflict between a disinterested policy of liberation and one of
national power emerged at once over the explicit request of the
democrats in occupied Belgium that their independence be recognised by
France, and the obvious hostility of the populations of other occupied
areas to annexation. By the end of March 1793, inebriated by success, the
Convention had decreed that the French and Flemish-speaking Belgians,
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   15


the French and German-speaking populations of substantial areas of the
left bank of the Rhine, form part of the ‘Great Nation’. In the following
years (1793–9), at successive upturns of the wars, ‘liberation’, ‘reunion’
and ‘sister republics’ became the code words to describe the occupation,
annexation or restructuring as satellite states of the entire left bank of
the Rhine, the Low Countries, Switzerland, and all mainland Italy.
Even the Muslims of Egypt were ‘liberated’ by Napoleon (1798–
1801).
    Certain aspects of the political expansionism initiated by the
Girondins merit comment. In the first instance, throughout these
years, the form and direction taken by the expansionist policy
remained unclear, because they were internally contested. The basic
conflict was between France’s ‘natural frontiers’—by which the
Alsatian Director Reubell meant the Rhine—and expansion
elsewhere. There seem to have been few hesitations about the
annexation of Belgium, only about how to ensure that Austria (its
legitimate sovereign) and Britain would accept this in a future peace
treaty. The main bone of contention was the deployment of French
victories in other areas—primarily the Dutch Low Countries, western
Germany, Switzerland and northern Italy—and the character of the
institutional arrangements to be established in these areas, in the light
of a future settlement. ‘Natural frontiers’ conflicted fundamentally
with the policy of ‘sister republics’, in that it implied a territorial
expansion of France, even at the expense of like-minded
revolutionaries from such areas. The ‘sister republics’—for their
supporters—served at one and the same time ideological, political and
military purposes: to hold faith to the ideals of the Revolution by
creating states in the image of republican France; to requite the
expectations of the native patriots, the most loyal supporters of the
French; and to strengthen French defences through a semi-circle of
cushion states. But even the supporters of sister republics were careful
not to allow them to become political or economic threats to France.
If, after much hesitation, the Dutch patriots were allowed to create a
state with a far more unified political structure than the previous
federation of jealously independent provinces, Dutch merchants were
crippled economically and financially by loss of territory, a heavy
indemnity and a costly alliance with France. The Italian Jacobins’
aspirations for a large Unitarian republic were consistently rejected by
the Directors, as by Bonaparte.
    In theory, total victory could have reconciled the two policies. But
even in 1795, when French successes induced Tuscany, Prussia, the
new Batavian (Dutch) republic and Spain to sign peace treaties
16   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


(February-July), a general European settlement remained implausible,
given the irreducible hostility of Britain and Austria.
    In subsequent years, the pursuit of such a peace became ever more
a mirage, essentially for two reasons. On the one hand, the Directory
proved increasingly incapable of controlling its generals and army
commissaires. Kléber rejected a policy of conquest, Hoche urged the
creation of a ‘Cisrhenian’ republic, the commissaires Saliceti and
Garrau encouraged the Italian patriots in their hopes of an
independent republic, Championnet set up the Parthenopean republic
against the explicit orders of the Directory. Above all, Bonaparte
pursued his private policy, creating the Cisalpine republic, negotiating
its recognition by Austria at Leoben and Campoformio (1797), and
obtaining the expedition to Egypt. This lack of authority of the
Directors derived not only from their need to make the war pay for
itself, but also increasingly from their dependence on successful war to
enable them to overcome their financial and political problems at
home. But the consequence of the very multiplicity of initiatives, at
different levels and locations, was to negate the capacity and
credibility of the Directors to follow a coherent policy, and frustrated
Reubell’s efforts—even after he had gained a majority within the
Directory—to obtain the Rhine frontier by concessions in Italy and
elsewhere. On the other hand, by pursuing simultaneously different
and contradictory policies, the wars of the Directors spread to an ever
wider geographic area, hence confirming the mistrust of existing
enemies and inciting new ones. The extension of military activities and
political changes from the Low Countries and Rhineland to
Switzerland and Italy, with the annexation of the Rhineland and
Geneva and the creation of the Roman and Helvetic republics (1798),
effectively nullified the Campoformio agreement. The further
extension of strategy to the entire Mediterranean, with the annexation
of the Ionian islands and Malta and the invasion of Egypt and Syria,
added Russia and Turkey to France’s enemies.
    At the same time, the very policies of occupation and creation of
new states destroyed the sympathy enjoyed earlier by the French
revolutionaries, even among the patriots. Wherever French armies
passed, pillaging, billeting, requisitions and war contributions
followed. After the victory of Fleurus (26 June 1794), official policy
was to consider all occupied countries initially as enemy territory, in
which the army was expected to live off the land. Local proposals for
a change in status—‘reunion’ with France or the creation of a
republic—dressed up with the fiction of popular support, owed not a
little to hopes that the army presence would be removed or at least
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   17


regulated. The inadequacy of logistic arrangements for mass armies
before the state of emergency declared by the Jacobins, and the
subsequent inflation and chronic financial collapse of the
thermidorian and early Directorial government, offered justification
and opportunity for private initiatives. Generals, like Masséna and
Macdonald, and army suppliers, like Flachat and Haller, engaged in
looting and exactions, which were protected by the corruption of
politicians and Directors, such as Barras and Talleyrand. The ‘sister
republics’, like the other occupied territories, were forced to pay
extraordinary taxes as well as maintain their ‘protector’ armies.
Whatever the overall amount of such exactions (estimated by
Godechot as at least 360 million francs between 1792 and 1799), they
constituted an essential part of the Directory’s revenues, perhaps a
quarter by the Years VI and VII.
    The undisciplined behaviour of French troops and heavy
exploitation of the occupied territories aroused popular peasant
resistance in Belgium, Switzerland, Spain and—most spectacularly—
in Italy during the retreat of 1799. Unquestionably, the novelty and
scale of the military problem of creating a national army was partly
responsible. The restructured army, following the breakdown of
authority, mass desertions and the withdrawal from service of 60 per
cent of the officer corps (1791–3), was dependent initially on a major
influx of volunteers, which must have presented problems of
discipline, in times of victory as much as of defeat. At the peak of Year
II, when the ‘nation in arms’ had developed a formidable instrument
of war, there were 750,000 soldiers (compared to an army of about
165,000 in 1789), creating logistic problems on an unprecedented
scale.
    The continuing war on multiple fronts required many sizeable
armies, which the Directory proved incapable of paying and
equipping. The consequences were dramatic and of importance in two
particular respects, which were to mark Napoleonic policies in
subsequent years. On the one hand, desertion began again on a
massive scale: by the beginning of Year VII, the armies had dropped to
325,000. The introduction of conscription in 1798 marked the
Directory’s recognition that Revolutionary patriotism was no longer
able to arouse a voluntary response. On the other hand, the very
ambiguities of the policies of expansion confused and ultimately
submerged the patriotism of the early Revolutionary years: the quality
of altruistic idealism was lost, the rhetoric of France’s mission
remained. Despite the official powers of the civil representatives, the
army commissaires, the Directory’s delegation to the generals was in
18   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


reality unlimited, since the latter had to provide for the needs of their
armies. Effectively this forged a bond between each army unit and its
general, in which military success and the daily problems of pay and
food explained the degree of identification between soldier and
commanding officer. This fundamental shift in mentality is
demonstrated by the sharp contrast between the fiasco of General
Dumouriez’s attempted coup of March 1793, when his troops turned
against him, and the constant suspicion and occasional employment of
generals by the Directors to bolster their own authority. The much-
quoted promise of Bonaparte to his ragged penniless troops in April
1796 that they would find ‘happiness, glory and riches’ in the
mythically wealthy Italian plain was perhaps less important in gaining
the loyalty of the Army of Italy than the triumph of actual victory and
the part-payment of their wages in hard cash.
   If military comportment and the internal logic of maintaining large
armies explained popular resentment, the economic policies of the
successive revolutionary governments in the occupied territories
disillusioned and alienated the urban elites. To write of economic
policies in this decade of revolution is probably excessive, as it
consisted of economic hopes and ambitions, constantly overtaken and
confused with immediate contingencies. The realities of economic
policy in the short term, in relation to the occupied territories, fell into
two, overlapping phases, the first characterised by the ‘extraction
agencies’, set up in the Belgian and German lands in 1794, the second
by the return to private initiative in the supply of the armies. The
ransacking of the occupied territories by the extraction agency and
related requisitioning agencies in Belgium was so uncontrolled and
inefficient that it was a major cause of the annexation and
reorganisation of the country in departments, on the French model
(1795). The power and abuses of the speculators and bankers who
formed companies to supply the armies was legendary, as they tried to
protect themselves against paper money and a defaulting state by
requisitions and contributions in the occupied lands: the neutral
Tuscan port of Leghorn was occupied by Bonaparte in 1796 under
pressure from the Flachat-Laporte company, who demanded
compensation for its credits in the form of the English merchandise
stocked in this entrepôt.
   But if day-to-day problems dominated and effectively created the
economic policy of the Directory, projects and plans about the future
of the Great Nation were not lacking and are of interest because of
their similarity to aspects of later policies introduced under Napoleon.
The main author of these proposals was Charles Delacroix, one of the
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   19


foreign ministers of the Directory, but he expressed ideas that were
circulating in the thermidorian Year III among such leaders as Sieyès,
Merlin de Douai and Pelet de la Lozère. The continuity with pre-
Revolutionary preoccupations is as marked as the total abandonment
of the initial Revolutionary respect for the rights and interests of other
peoples. By 1789 there was considerable worry among textile
producers—documented in the cahiers de doléances—about the
moderate liberalisation of trade with Britain resulting from the Eden
treaty (1786), and a more generalised concern for technological
modernisation. The outbreak of war rapidly led to confirmation of
British naval superiority, not least through the haemorrhage of officers
from the French navy. Colonial trade, the most dynamic sector of the
French economy, was wholly disrupted, despite attempts to substitute
supply routes through Spanish and Dutch ports.
   Economic nationalism was the French response. The extraction
agencies in Belgium and the Rhineland in 1794, the commissaires and
generals who crossed the Rhine in 1796, were instructed to send back
to Paris potentially useful mechanised machinery, and even to destroy
machinery in direct rivalry to national textile production. With the
conquest of Belgium, the river Scheldt (closed in the sixteenth century
by the Dutch during their war of independence) was reopened to
international traffic, possibly to please the Belgian patriots, certainly
in order to embarrass the British and Dutch, while developing French
trade routes to northern and eastern Europe. Plans were drawn up to
negotiate trade treaties with other continental states which would
favour French exports and prohibit imports of British goods. The
Cisalpine republic was forced to grant France exclusive navigation
rights and customs reductions for trade between the two states.
Although Delacroix’s project for negotiating favoured market outlets
for French products in the neighbouring states was never realised, it
continued to circulate in government milieux after Brumaire.
   Before Bonaparte’s coup of 18 Brumaire Year VIII (9 November
1799), revolutionary France’s relationships with Europe had already
been set. Political frontiers had been drastically modified to France’s
benefit and, primarily, Austria’s loss. If France proved unable to
achieve peace because of her continuously expanding ambitions, her
enemies were equally incapable of defeating her decisively. Masséna’s
victory over the Russians at Zürich (25–7 September 1799) was the
latest example of France’s apparently unlimited military resources and
superior fighting skills. With the extension of her frontiers to include
Belgium, the Rhineland, Savoy, Geneva and Nice and the creation of
dependent republics, the Great Nation could claim to have
20   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


counterbalanced, if not compensated, the loss of colonies and freedom
of the seas. For the policy of passing on the costs of such uninterrupted
warfare to defeated or dependent states had paid healthy cash
dividends. And if the crises of the Atlantic ports and their great
trading families were to appear irreversible (American ships at
Bordeaux fell from fifty-one in 1797 to zero in 1799), the prospects of
expanding land markets for French producers looked promising.
   In his relations with Europe, as in his reordering of France,
Napoleon was to develop many of the policies already initiated under
the Directory. Many, but not all. In two particular respects, Brumaire
marked a rupture with the past. First, the generals were brought under
control, as a unity of direction was imposed on France’s external
policies that had been lacking since the Jacobin Year II. In the second
place, since the credibility of the liberation of peoples and popular
sovereignty had been irrevocably compromised, new methods and
policies of ensuring collaboration had to be elaborated to provide
political and social stability for the new order Napoleon’s France was
imposing on Europe. The price paid for this was the definitive
discrediting of pro-French local patriots and unequivocal popular
hostility to the arbitrary, unregulated exactions and behaviour of
French occupying forces.


NAPOLEON AND EUROPE
The conquest of Europe has always constituted the centre-piece of the
historiography of the Napoleonic years. Nor could it be otherwise,
given the prolonged sequence of military victories, the profound and
often irreversible changes imposed on the political geography of the
Continent, and the imagery of the triumphant hero so crucial to the
fabrication of the Napoleonic myth. But within a historiography that
has overwhelmingly privileged military-political events,
interpretations of the motivations underlying Napoleon’s actions and
policies have differed radically, conditioned (like all historical
interpretations) by the political beliefs and moral values of the periods
and societies in which successive generations of Napoleonic experts
have written.
   Today few historians would claim that, from the outset, Bonaparte
had a single plan in mind, whether for the rule of France or the
settlement of Europe. Unequivocally influenced by the reforming
ideals of the enlightenment, he remained hostile to the dogmatic
systems of its more theoretical exponents, whose abstract coherence
                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   21




Map 1 Major Napoleonic battles 1792–1815



he regarded as inapplicable to the practical demands of government.
‘You idéologues’, he remarked in 1806 to Karl von Dalberg, prince
primate of the newly created Confederation of the Rhine, ‘act
according to systems worked out in advance. As for myself, I’m a
practical man, I seize events and push them as far as they will go’.18
Such aphorisms, glittering like false gold in Napoleon’s vast
correspondence and the subsequent memoirs of contemporaries, have
inevitably caught the eye of historians, often anxious to bolster a
thesis; they need to be employed with critical caution, precisely
because they were delivered by such a past master of audience and
occasion as Napoleon. Nevertheless, the repetition over the years of
certain themes, with innumerable minor variations according to the
circumstances, offers a valuable indicator of some underlying tenets,
prejudices and beliefs of this complex, secretive man who chose to
spend so much of his life exposed to public view. ‘Idéologue’, for
instance, was a favourite term of disparagement, extended from the
original group of intellectual supporters of Brumaire whom he purged
from public office in 1802, to all collaborators of philosophical bent
suspected of insisting on their ideals. Napoleon remained firmly
22   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


grounded in a practical, realistic, utilitarian approach to politics,
eager and rapid to exploit every opportunity, in diplomatic matters as
much as on the battlefield. There can be little doubt that he was
describing a genuine conviction when he remarked, with unusual self-
irony, that ‘high policy is nothing more than good sense applied to
great matters’.19
   Such pragmatism permeated Napoleon’s attitude to Europe, a
continuous adaptation to changing circumstances, in which real or
apparent successes laid the ground for a successive, ever more
ambitious stage. Whatever contemporary English suspicions about the
unlimited aims of the Corsican upstart, Bonaparte’s policies and wars
are best understood not as the unveiling over the years of a blueprint
already in existence, nor as the obsessive pursuit of a single aim (such
as the total defeat of Britain), but rather as successive phases rendered
possible or (in Napoleon’s eyes) necessary by the presence and
behaviour of hostile forces. Nor can any one phase be described as the
pursuit of a single dominant objective, for within each one different
and often conflicting policies were inextricably enmeshed, while every
successive phase inevitably included the increasingly contradictory
load of the innovations and consequences of the previous stages. At
most it is possible to note—as did contemporaries—that the
continuation of the wars became ever more inevitable in direct
relationship to Napoleon’s expanding ambitions and self-confidence.
   A convenient (albeit simplified) approach to Napoleon’s policies in
Europe is to separate his political from his economic aims. The former,
elaborated in two phases, separated by the peace of Amiens, were
concerned with the establishment of a political and then a dynastic
hegemony, until 1806–7. The latter then played an increasingly
dominant role, with the Continental blockade—at least in part a
response to the British Orders in Council—becoming the centre-piece
of the economic struggle with Britain.
   The first phase, until 1802, marked no change from the Directory’s
policies. Nor was this surprising, given the prime role played by
Bonaparte in forcing and extending the ambitions of the Directors,
from the occupation of northern Italy and the treaty of Campoformio
(October 1797) to the Egyptian expedition (July 1798). The latter
episode, launched with as much insouciance as the initial Girondin
war of liberation, combined a traditional anti-British policy—with its
immediate threat to trade routes and its vague intimations of an
invasion of India—with Bonaparte’s romantic vision of an Oriental
civilisation that merited modernisation. Such hopes had foundered
with Nelson’s destruction of the French fleet at the battle of the Nile
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   23


(Aboukir: 2 August 1798). The basic contradiction of the
irreconcilability of French imperialist ambitions with the achievement
of peace not only remained, but also had worsened by Brumaire, with
the advance of the forces of the second coalition across Italy and
Switzerland. Initially, even the independence of initiative of the
generals remained, as Bonaparte was unable to make Moreau accept
his strategy of a rapid dual-pronged attack across the Rhine and Alps.
   Military victories at Marengo and Hohenlinden (14 June, 2
December 1800) brought a general peace nearer—as in 1795—with
Habsburg Austria’s enforced acceptance of French annexation of the
left bank of the Rhine and Napoleon’s settlement of Italy by the treaty
of Lunéville (9 February 1801). Exploitation of a favourable
international conjuncture by a now vigorous and unified French
diplomacy momentarily promised a Continental coalition against
Britain, with the Russian-led league of neutral states. Finally economic
and political difficulties in Britain turned the mirage of peace into
reality, with the treaty of Amiens, signed by a mutually suspicious
Britain and France (25 March 1802).
   It would be difficult to underestimate the importance of Amiens, as
for the first and only time between 1792 and 1814 it ended the state
of war between France and one or (usually) more European powers.
General Bonaparte had displayed his capacities to make peace, the
prerequisite for stability; grateful citizens voted overwhelmingly to
transform the first consul’s constitutional position into that of consul
for life (2 August 1802). If British control of the seas was confirmed,
with recognition of her conquest of Dutch Ceylon and Spanish
Trinidad, France had achieved not only her natural frontiers (Belgium,
the Rhineland left bank, Geneva, Savoy), but also a hegemony that
extended far beyond them: the military occupation of Piedmont and
the Batavian republic, the recognition of the Batavian, Helvetic,
Ligurian and Cisalpine republics and territorial enlargement of the
Cisalpine, the expulsion of the Habsburgs of Tuscany and Modena in
favour of the Spanish Bourbons, for whom a new kingdom of Etruria
was established (treaty of Aranjuez between France and Spain, 21
March 1801), tacit acceptance of France’s right to interfere in German
and Spanish affairs. Papal recognition, in the form of a Concordat (18
April 1801), consecrated France’s new role in Europe.
   But if Lunéville and Amiens testified to Napoleon’s capacity to
enforce a pacification on the European states, the very expansion of
direct French control beyond her natural frontiers threatened the
durability of the peace. Napoleon’s actions increased the diffidence of
his rivals and ultimately provoked the renewal of war. British
24   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


commercial and manufacturing interests felt frustrated and threatened
by the refusal to open the French market and by the colonial interest
again displayed by Paris, with the cession of Louisiana to France by
Spain (1 October 1800), Bonaparte’s despatch of an expedition to
reconquer San Domingo and Guadaloupe (February 1802), and
renewed diplomatic activities in the direction of India. In Italy,
Napoleon had assumed the presidency of the Cisalpine republic and
provocatively changed its name into the ‘Italian republic’ (24–6
December 1801); Piedmont was annexed by France (11 September
1802), as well as Elba and Piombino, while Parma was occupied
(October 1802). In Switzerland Napoleon imposed a constitutional
settlement by military threat, which created a new republic of the
Valais, controlling the Simplon pass, rectified the Geneva frontier in
France’s favour, and forced the federal cantons into an alliance with
France (29 May 1802; act of mediation, 19 February 1803). In
Germany, Napoleon incited Tsar Alexander’s ambitions to play a
leading role in Europe and exploited the territorial greed of German
princes to weaken the Austrian emperor’s authority as overlord. The
infinitely complicated tangle of demands for compensation resulting
from France’s annexation of the Rhineland left bank was transformed,
through able diplomacy, into a political opportunity to create, at the
expense of the Catholic Church and the imperial free cities and
knights, a limited number of southern German states and a Protestant
majority of imperial electors, jealous of their independence and hence
attracted, through hostility to Austria, into the French orbit (Rezes of
Regensburg, 25 February 1803).
   The renewal of war with Britain (May 1803) and Austria and
Russia (August 1805) marked a new phase, in which the implications
of the control of sea and land respectively by the opposing forces of
Britain and France became reality. Whatever the reciprocal
provocations, the underlying reason for the revival of hostilities
between Britain and France, after so brief a pause, was the clash of
conflicting imperialisms. Bonaparte sold Louisiana to the United
States, partly to finance the invasion of Britain (3 May 1803). British
naval superiority prevented Napoleon’s army from crossing the
Channel and definitively ended the threat with Nelson’s destruction of
the French and Spanish fleets at Trafalgar (21 October 1805). Control
of the seas meant not only the development of British trade,
particularly in Spanish America, but also harassment of neutral ships
to the Continent, and the ability to supply forces hostile to the French,
as in Sicily or Portugal. But Britain remained impotent to challenge
Napoleon’s control of the land-mass of Europe, her major market.
                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   25


   The extension of the maritime economic struggle with Britain into
the war on land against the third coalition was the direct consequence
of Napoleon’s continued affirmation of his power. Prussia was
worried by the French occupation of George III’s duchy of Hanover,
bordering on its frontiers. With the kidnapping and execution of the
duke of Enghien (March 1804), the unstable Tsar Alexander turned
against Napoleon, whom he saw as a dangerous rival in Germany and
the Ottoman empire. But above all Austria, in serious economic
difficulties, was provoked into war by Napoleon’s deliberate
challenge to Habsburg imperial authority. By taking the title of
emperor rather than that of king (18 May 1804), Napoleon asserted
his European pretensions, with deliberate evocation of Charlemagne,
whose authority had extended over Germany and Italy. If Francis II’s
immediate riposte was to proclaim himself hereditary emperor of
Austria (11 August 1804), within a year he felt goaded into war by
Napoleon’s assumption of the title of king of Italy (19 March 1805),
his annexation of the Ligurian republic, his direct administration of
Parma, and his creation of petty principates at Piombino and Lucca
for Elisa Bonaparte and her husband Felix Baciocchi (March-July
1805). Italy had been Napoleon’s chosen ground to expand his
territories and humiliate the Austrian emperor. With the outbreak of
war against Austria and Russia, Napoleon’s intention to extend and
shift his influence and activities to Germany was confirmed by the
alliance with the southern German states of Bavaria and
Württemberg.
   The spectacular victories over the Austrian-Russian armies at Ulm
(15 October 1805) and Austerlitz (2 December 1805) and then—after
Frederick William III’s wholly unexpected declaration of war—over
the Prussian armies at Jena and Auerstädt (14 October 1806)
transformed Napoleon’s vision of his role in Europe. The Carolingian
empire of the west, oriented primarily towards Italy—to which
Napoleon made deliberate rhetorical allusions—began to assume even
more ambitious dimensions, with echoes of Charles V’s realm
extending across Europe. At the same time, Napoleon’s very mastery
of Europe convinced him of the possibility of compensating loss of
control of the seas by imposing a land blockade against Britain. Both
developments implied indefinite French presence across the Continent,
until such time as the states and societies of Europe would recognise
their debt to France by accepting its political and economic hegemony,
and Britain would be forced to capitulate.
   Austria’s defeat meant her expulsion from Italy (treaty of Presburg,
26 December 1805): Venetia (given by Napoleon to Austria only eight
26   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


years earlier at Campoformio), was annexed by the kingdom of Italy,
Tyrol and the Trentino (hereditary Austrian lands) by Bavaria. The
Bourbon dynasty of Naples, protégé of the Tsar, ‘has ceased to reign’,
declared Napoleon (27 December 1805), who assigned the kingdom
to his brother Joseph (30 March 1806). Of the former rulers of Italy,
only the Pope survived and his protests were ignored with the
occupation of the Papal ports of Ancona and Civitavecchia.
   The policy in Germany represented a greater innovation, in the
sense that Italy was firmly within the French sphere of influence, and
for almost a decade Napoleon had manipulated the peninsula’s
political geography. In Germany, France traditionally had looked to
Prussia as a counterweight to Habsburg Austria and Russia. The idea
of encouraging a third, francophile force in Germany among the
central and southern states had originated with Sieyès and Talleyrand
under the Directory and had assumed material form with the Rezès of
1803. Until Austerlitz Napoleon was hesitant, frequently changing his
ideas about Germany’s future. Now he enlarged the territories of his
allies, Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden. But the real novelty was his
insistence, against the reluctance of the German princes, on the
creation of the Confederation of the Rhine, of which sixteen princes
formed part (12 July 1806), in place of the Holy Roman Empire
(declared defunct by Napoleon on 1 August 1806). A central-southern
bloc had been set up, with a population of over 7 million and
Napoleon as its Protector; the initial intention of creating a new
constitutional structure faded away, but the military commitment to
provide France with 69,000 soldiers remained. The new sovereign
rulers, various of whom proclaimed themselves king, constituted an
effective counterbalance to Austria. Until Jena Prussia was left as the
dominant state in the rest of Germany.
   Prussia’s defeat inevitably expanded Napoleon’s ambitions.
Russia’s support for Prussia determined him not only to truncate the
Hohenzollerns of their western territories, but also to use the kingdom
indefinitely as a military base in order to pursue the war eastwards.
Although the battle of Eylau (8 February 1807) was indecisive, the
French victory at Friedland (14 June 1807) convinced Alexander to
come to terms with Napoleon. The treaty of Tilsit (7 July 1807)
marked the end of this renewed phase of war, with Napoleon at the
peak of his power. In agreement with his new ally Alexander of
Russia, Prussia was dismembered: its lands west of the Elbe were
assigned primarily to create a new kingdom of Westphalia, under
Jerome Bonaparte, while its Polish provinces were turned into an
independent grand-duchy of Warsaw, under the king of Saxony.
                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   27


Westphalia, Saxony and hence Warsaw entered the Confederation of
the Rhine and were to function as military frontier posts against any
future threat from Prussia or Russia; French armies remained
garrisoned at Warsaw and in what remained of Prussia, which was
subjected to payment of a massive indemnity. In exchange for
promises of expansion into Swedish Finland and the Turkish empire,
Alexander also ceded the Adriatic port of Cattaro and the Ionian
islands to Napoleon. As important was the decision to exclude British
trade, with the agreement of the two allies to force the neutral states
of Denmark, Sweden and Portugal into this Continental federation.
   All the elements of the Napoleonic imperial system were already in
place before Prussia’s unfortunate sortie of October 1806, and they
were consolidated by Tilsit. Europe was to be reconstructed around a
system ‘of federated states, or a true French empire’, in Napoleon’s
words. Within this federation, states could be made and unmade,
sovereigns appointed or transferred, frontier lines shifted to extend
French territory or to make adjustments between vassal states—all by
the Emperor’s decision, sometimes without even advising the rulers
concerned. The Emperor’s family was the prime beneficiary: his
brother Joseph was appointed king of Naples (30 March 1806), his
brother-in-law Joachim Murat grand-duke of Berg (15 March 1806),
his brothers Louis king of Holland (3 May 1806) and Jerome king of
Westphalia (18 August 1807). But allied rulers, such as Max Joseph of
Bavaria or Dalberg, former elector of Mainz, were richly rewarded, as
were meritorious generals, like Berthier, for whom the Swiss
principality of Neuchâtel was created (30 March 1806). Arguably,
Napoleon’s desire to legitimise his dynasty by marriage ties with old
ruling houses played a role in his intense involvement in Germany (in
contrast to Italy, where he had chased out the only surviving dynasties
of Savoy and Bourbon to the islands of Sardinia and Sicily): his wife
Josephine de Beauharnais’ family was married into the Bavarian and
Baden ruling families, Jerome to that of Württemberg, and even the
faithful Berthier to a Bavarian princess. Napoleon himself was to set
aside Josephine in order to marry Marie Louise, daughter of the
Habsburg emperor, in 1810. Although formally the allied states
remained independent, their rulers were forced to collaborate in the
Emperor’s wars and to submit to his economic policies. This imperial
system was a political, military, dynastic and economic federation of
very unequal states.
   The Continental blockade was a logical complement to the imperial
system, which became possible precisely as a consequence of the new
dimensions of Napoleon’s military successes. The French attempt to
28   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


exclude British manufactures dated back to the outbreak of the
Revolutionary wars and had marked a high point of Directorial
economic ambitions. British mastery of the seas implied not only a
defence against invasion, but also a naval blockade of Continental
ports and the ability to disrupt the crucial two-way trade with the
colonies and Americas. Napoleon’s progressive extension of land
control paradoxically accentuated this sharp division of influence
between the two rivals, as Britain attacked or seized the warships of
allied or neutral states (Spain, Holland, Denmark, Naples, Portugal)
and destroyed France’s merchant marine. Through the campaigns of
1805–7 Napoleon achieved land-mastery over all northern and
western Europe, except Sweden and Portugal, which provided him
with the necessary conditions to reverse the relative relationship of
power between the two countries by declaring Britain to be ‘in a state
of blockade’ (Berlin decree, 21 November 1806). The assumption
underlying the blockade, argued with increasing success by
Montgaillard, was that, by closing all Continental markets to British
exports, British tax revenues would fall drastically, its government
would be unable to finance hostile coalitions or service its national
debt and so ultimately would be forced to sue for peace.
   In a spiral of reciprocity the measures were exacerbated on both
sides: in response to the British Orders in Council (1807), the decrees
of Fontainebleau and Milan (13 October, 23 November, 17 December
1807) extended the prohibition of imports to neutral carriers and to
entire categories of colonial and manufactured goods regarded by
definition as British, irrespective of their real place of origin. With the
manifest failure of the blockade to bring Britain to her knees and the
ubiquitous evidence of massive smuggling of British goods to the
Continent, the system was tightened further by the introduction of
prohibitive import dues at France’s borders (decrees of Trianon and
Saint-Cloud, 5 July, 12 September 1810).
   Three aspects of the blockade need to be noted, because of their
profound implications for the territories under French control. First,
the blockade was not only a negative weapon of France’s economic
warfare against Britain, but also the basis of a positive project to open
up Continental outlets for French products, as substitute—or indeed
definitively alternative—markets for the lost colonies. Hence an
underlying tension persisted in relations with allied or vassal states
with competitive manufactures or other products. Secondly, the very
mechanics of the blockade required the imposition of a customs line
along not only the coasts, but also the inland frontiers. The manifest
incapacity of the Customs service (despite the steady increase in
                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   29


personnel) to police such prolonged lines meant the deployment of
regular troops, frequent disregard for legal procedures, and arbitrary
modification of territorial frontiers. Inevitably this application of a
tariff policy geared to French interests in the most narrow sense
conflicted with the efforts to win over local populations to the model
of French rule. Finally, if the blockade developed as a natural
complement to the enlargement of the imperial system, in turn it
became a propulsive element for the pursuit of ever more extensive
control by military means.
   It was the application of the blockade, in fact, that underlay the
progressive transformation of the imperial system into the mirage of a
universal empire. This is not to say that Napoleon’s military
expansionism was simply a response to the impossibility of sealing off
the Continent to British products. Political elements were undoubtedly
important in the decision to take over Spain; fear that Alexander was
about to change sides explains the invasion of Russia. Nevertheless,
success of the blockade, both to defeat Britain and to ensure France’s
economic markets, was ever more inextricably linked to political
calculations, not least because such success was dependent on Russia’s
collaboration in controlling eastern Europe.
   The invasion of Portugal (October 1807) was the counterpart to
Alexander’s invasion of Swedish Finland and Ottoman Turkey, agreed
at Tilsit. The annexation of Tuscany and Parma to France (December
1807, May 1808), and of the Papal Marches to the kingdom of Italy
(April 1808) met the requirements of both Empire and blockade,
through direct administration. But precisely because military control
of the Continent was believed to be the means to arrive at an effective
stranglehold of Britain, the very dimensions of the land-mass to be
controlled made the objective unobtainable. Thus the insurrections in
Spain, following Napoleon’s brusque replacement of the Bourbons by
his brother Joseph (May-July 1808), initially seemed no more
problematic than earlier popular resistance—as in Calabria—even
after Dupont’s defeat at Baylen (22 July 1808). The armies that
Napoleon sent into Spain were relatively limited in size and contained
a high proportion of foreign troops (Germans, Italians, Swiss and
Poles), because the Grande Armée was required to keep control of
eastern Europe. The terms imposed on Prussia (French occupation of
key fortresses and limitation of its army to 42,000) and the apparent
confirmation at Erfurt of the alliance with Alexander (September
1808) appeared to ensure the control of eastern Europe. Nevertheless
the displacement of the Grande Armée to Spain (November 1808) was
30   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


the immediate cause of Austria’s decision to renew war against France
(1809).
   The remarkable mobilisation of an army of 300,000 in Germany
and, after the bloody check at Essling (21 May 1809), the victory of
Wagram (6 July 1809) seemed to re-establish Napoleon’s dominance.
Control of Italy was completed with the deportation of the Pope and
the annexation of the Papal States (May-July 1809). With the treaty of
Schönbrunn (14 October 1809), Austria was forced to cede territory
to Bavaria, Warsaw and Russia and was cut off from the sea with
France’s annexation of Trieste, Croatia, Carinthia, Istria and
Dalmatia. These territories were reorganised as the Illyrian provinces
(December 1809) in order to ensure cotton imports by protection of
the caravans from Constantinople and to close the Adriatic coasts to
Britain. It is possible that by 1810 Napoleon began to doubt his earlier
dynastic policy, given the reluctance of his brothers to enforce the
blockade.20 His sudden marriage to the Austrian emperor’s daughter,
Marie Louise (2 April 1810) abruptly reversed his anti-Habsburg
policy in Germany, but appeared to consolidate French control of
central Europe. Empire and blockade again reinforced each other,
with the annexation of Louis Bonaparte’s kingdom of Holland (9 July
1810), and of territories belonging to both Jerome’s kingdom of
Westphalia and the grand-duchy of Berg, followed by that of the
hinterland of the north German coast, including the Hanseatic ports
(22 January 1811), and the Valais and Ticino canton (July 1810,
January 1811). The greater part of Spain was removed from Joseph’s
control and placed under military governors (8 February 1810). By
1812 the Grand Empire had reached its maximum extension, over
750,000 square kilometres, divided into 130 departments, with 44
million inhabitants, besides the four Catalan departments, six Illyrian
intendancies and twenty-four departments of the kingdom of Italy.
   But the survival and consolidation of the imperial system depended
ever more urgently on military victory. Wellington’s ability to hold out
and increasingly to circumscribe French control of Spain had the effect
of a running sore, pinning down substantial French forces. Alexander
of Russia’s frustration with Napoleon grew, as he felt that the French
were failing to give him appropriate support in Finland, the Ottoman
empire and Persia. The denunciation of the alliance (31 December
1810) tore a rent in the Baltic end of the blockade. Once more only a
decisive victory could permit Napoleon to reaffirm his hegemony. The
invasion of Russia (May 1812 to March 1813), with yet another
Grande Armée of nearly 700,000 men from twenty nations, proved
the intimate dependence of the Empire on military success. Napoleon
                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   31


was unable to destroy his enemy, despite the victory of Borodino (7
September 1812), and his army disintegrated as it withdrew in the
Russian winter. Alexander’s decision to invade Germany was the
direct cause of the renewed coalition of 1813, the abandonment of
France not only by its traditional antagonists, but also by many of its
allies and rulers created by Napoleon. The defeat of Leipzig (16–19
October 1813) led to the collapse of the Empire and Napoleon’s
abdication (6 April 1814).
    The dramatic events of these intense years tend to mask the close
correspondence between the internal evolution of France and that
outside her frontiers. The ties between domestic and external
developments were not only close but also reciprocally influential. At
the political level, for example, the north Italian (Cisalpine) and Dutch
(Batavian) republics adapted their constitutions to Brumaire and, at a
second stage following Napoleon’s assumption of an imperial title,
were transformed into kingdoms. But, equally, the assumption of the
title of emperor—an essentially domestic development—played a not
insignificant role in the creation of the third coalition and the renewal
of war. At the economic level, a similar correspondence can be
identified. The struggle between France and Britain, which dominated
the history of the Napoleonic years, dated back to long before the
Revolution. Its imposition on the entire Continent, with the blockade,
was a direct extension of France’s domestic concerns; the
determination to exploit France’s military hegemony to open up
markets for French manufactures provided a further example. In both
instances, the attempt to resolve French economic domestic problems
by turning to the territories under French control contradicted the
ambitious efforts to implant by administrative fiat, outside her
frontiers, a French model of modernity, which would sink roots and
attract a broad and long-term consensus.
    For however dependent ultimately on the army, Napoleon’s
hegemony of Europe was not (and could not be) dependent on
military rule. The territories incorporated within French Europe were
conceived of (with only marginal exceptions) as the constitutive
elements of a new form of state and society that would characterise
the new era. The new model was not born in the dawn of Brumaire,
but developed over the years, in direct dependence on the evolution of
Napoleon’s concept of his own role. Hence the policies imposed on
the conquered lands corresponded, according to their date of
incorporation, to the phase of administrative restructuring within
France herself, and changes in policies towards the external territories
paralleled domestic changes. Contemporaneously, the very existence
32   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of this vaster terrain opened up new perspectives for Napoleon and his
close advisers which influenced their choice of policies. In particular,
they pointed towards a more intimate identification of France and
Europe, most concretely identified in the ambition to create new
ruling elites of service, which would cut across former national
loyalties.
   The profound belief in the possibility of creating a Europe in the
image of France underlay Napoleon’s reconstruction of Europe. How
this Utopian ideal was to be achieved and the contradictory tensions
and forces that resulted from the attempts to realise it constitute the
main theme of the following chapters.
2 The tools of conquest




    I need bulwarks, because my confidence is more solidly built on
    the strictness of the rule than on the character of men. I employ
    many men, I hardly know any of them. Hence I must place my
    trust in them. The safest way for me, but for them too, is to ensure
    that they cannot abuse my trust.
        (Napoleon, 1811: Mémoires du comte Beugnot, Paris, 1866,
                                                        vol. 1, p. 387)

As Napoleon’s policies developed over the years, embracing ever
wider areas of Europe, so the tools of conquest—in terms of
administrative mechanisms and personnel—were modified, adapted
and rendered more professional to meet the demands of an expanding
Empire. Much stress is placed in the historiography of Napoleon,
quite correctly, on his growing social conservatism, his shift away
from the egalitarian ideals of the Revolution towards inherited status
distinctions, a quasi-revivalist display of the aristocratic trappings of
the ancien regime or of the monarchical societies of his peers in
Austria, Russia or Britain. But often in-built into this explanation of
the social trajectory of the Napoleonic experience is the assumption
that such conservatism can be equated with a decline in quality. At the
deeper and longer-term level of the negative cultural effects of
constraints of conformity and excessive centralisation on initiative,
intellectual expression and possibly innovation, such an equation is
tenable—and was indeed affirmed at the time in the language of
liberty by Mme de Staël and Benjamin Constant. But at the more
immediate, practical, day-to-day level of creating and running the
Empire, the evidence that emerges from the immense documentation
and experiences of the small army of administrators argues against
such an assumption. For the most part, the cumulative experiences of


                                   33
Map 2 Europe in the period 1789–99
Map 3 Europe in the period 1800–6
Map 4 Europe in the period 1807–12
                                                The tools of conquest   37


these years led to a progressive refining of the wheels of
administration and of the selection of their human cogs. It is this that
explains the contrast between the political-military crisis of the final
years and the unprecedented and sophisticated administrative self-
confidence that produced the great statistical enquiries of 1812–14,
the minister of the interior Montalivet’s Exposition of the state of the
Empire, presented to the Legislative Body of 1813, or the minister of
war Clarke’s Administrative atlas of the French Empire of 1812.1
   Since Tocqueville, the political rupture represented by the
Revolution has been redimensioned by the insistence of observers and
historians on the administrative continuity between the ancien regime,
the Revolution and the Napoleonic experience. What tends to be
ignored in these considerations of the long-term trend of the French
state is the radical change of scale imposed by the expansion of France
in the Revolutionary-Napoleonic period: the problems of organising
an Empire of 130 departments with 44 million inhabitants were of a
different order from those faced by the Constituent legislators in a
France of 83 departments inhabited by a population of 27–8 million.
Space, time and language assumed other dimensions in this new
context.
   The bureaucratic developments should be seen as a response to the
rapid political changes imposed on Europe by Napoleon. Their most
novel feature was the forging of an administrative corps and practices
in the field, for there were few precedents to build on or react against,
as had been the case in the early Consulate in relation to the
Revolutionary decade. The composition of so far-flung a corps
constitutes the main theme of this chapter. But some preliminary
remarks are required about the allocation of responsibilities at Paris.


THE ROLE OF PARIS
After the initial, fertile period immediately following Brumaire, it is
unclear how often Napoleon himself provided the initiative for
administrative modifications. But it is certain that he always
maintained a direct and close control over all proposals, and that he
would intervene, even in the details of minor affairs, displaying that
remarkable memory and knowledge of men, matters and milieux that
so impressed his entourage and visitors. Prince Metternich, a hostile
but attentive observer of the French emperor from the time of his
nomination as ambassador at Paris in 1805, contested the reality of
Napoleon’s knowledge of his domain: ‘A truth that is not sufficiently
well known…is the shallowness of Napoleon’s knowledge about a
38   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


great part of the internal administration of his immense state. Above
all, he understands nothing about trading relations’. 2 There is
considerable evidence to support Metternich’s judgement about the
superficiality, indeed the simplicity, of Napoleon’s economic ideas. But
the very centralisation of the system, from its creation in the Year VIII
until the abdication, with its insistence on hierarchical control of
individual decision-making and nomination of officials, ensured that
Napoleon was informed about personalities and administrative
problems in all corners of his Empire to a degree inconceivable to
bureaucrats or ministers of our times.
   The price paid for such personalised centralisation was delay.
Major progress had been achieved in modernising the land and water
routes within France already before the Revolution. The difficulty was
the absence of anything comparable beyond France’s old frontiers
(except in Britain). Napoleon’s almost obsessive insistence on
constructing roads, even across the Alpine passes, is proverbial and—
like his extension of the Revolutionary telegraph lines—corresponded
to military strategy and political needs. Every new route, as he
observed in 1811, ‘ensures and consolidates the reunion of these
countries to the Empire and is hence a matter of prime importance’.3
But with the extension of the frontiers, the heavy use to which the
roads were subjected by increasingly frequent troop movements and
the deployment of the Grande Armée ever further east, the problem
worsened of how to force the pace of road construction in order to
meet the ever more urgent pressures of administration and war. In
fact, Napoleon tended to use special couriers, not just to coordinate
military movements or announce a victory during his campaigns, but
for all important matters. And such couriers, as Marbot recalled in his
memoirs, might carry not just secret despatches, but silks for the
empress imported illegally despite the Continental blockade.4
   There was a fundamental incompatibility between Napoleon’s
constant mobility and the requirement of his authorisation for an
infinity of minor administrative acts. It took fourteen months, for
instance, for the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova at Florence to be
granted permission by Napoleon to sell some houses it owned in order
to pay its creditors.5 Major decisions could be transmitted with
remarkable speed, such as the decree to confiscate all colonial goods
in the grand-duchy of Berg, signed by Napoleon at Nossen (between
Dresden and Leipzig) on 8 May 1813, received by special courier at
Paris on 14 May and by Beugnot, the minister responsible at
Düsseldorf on 16 May.6 But delay became ever more the norm as
Napoleon was increasingly absent: between 1805 and 1814 the
                                                The tools of conquest   39


Emperor spent only 900 of 3,500 days at Paris;7 and it was not
accidental that so many major political and administrative decisions
were taken in 1810, the only year he spent in or near France. With the
Russian campaign the delays worsened. Authorisation for expenditure
in Berg was granted by Roederer, the minister responsible at Paris,
only for expenditure from January to April 1813 on 19 March, for
May and August expenditure on 14 August, for June and July on 8
September, for September on 1 October, and never thereafter.8
   It is this insistence on personal control irrespective of geographical
displacements that gives an impression of fluidity to the channels of
administrative communication along which the Empire was run.
Napoleon’s official visitations to one or another part of the lands he
ruled directly or controlled (as distinct from, though sometimes
connected to, his sudden, frightening appearances at the head of the
Grande Armée) were like sharply accelerated versions of the stately
progress of medieval monarchs or of the Emperor Charles V. He was
at Bruges, Ghent, Antwerp, Brussels and Maestricht in July 1803, at
Aix-la-Chapelle, The Hague, Cologne, Coblenz, Mainz, Trier and
Luxemburg in September-October 1804, in Piedmont, the kingdom of
Italy, Parma and Genoa in spring 1805, in northern Italy again in
November-December 1807, at Erfurt in autumn 1808, in Belgium in
spring 1810, in Antwerp, Holland and Berg in October-November
1811. Such occasions were marked by a sudden flurry of
administrative activity, including the resolution of long delayed
matters. For besides the continuous round of receptions, these visits
regularly comprised intense sessions between Napoleon, the ministers
and councillors of state he had brought with him and local
administrators, in which individuals were praised or blamed, and
decrees passed to relieve or develop the local economy and embellish
the privileged city with new roads or promenades.

It is not always easy to understand why a particular issue should have
left its documentary traces in one rather than another ministry or
council. But the broad lines of responsibility at Paris relating to the
territories outside France’s pre-Revolutionary frontiers can be
attributed within the twin parameters of functional specialisation and
territorial status.
    Functional specialisation—diplomatic, military or fiscal affairs, for
example—was the least precise. For however direct and personal a
control Napoleon exercised over political, diplomatic and generally
all major decisions, he was meticulous in his demand for information,
and often ready (particularly in his earlier years) to listen to the
40   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


opinions of one or more ministers, state councillors or mere
functionaries, a practice that was formalised in Year X by the creation
of a privy council of changing composition. Diplomatic matters were
channelled exclusively through the ministry of foreign affairs (except
for major negotiations, which Napoleon dealt with personally or for
which he often nominated his own representatives). But their
repercussions, for example relating to the economic blockade, could
find their way to the council of state, the privy council, the Customs
general directorate, the ministry of finances, the consultative general
councils on manufacturing and trade, the ministerial board of trade,
and elsewhere. Fiscal matters would primarily be processed and
prepared within the ministry of finances and the treasury, but—
depending on the object—could be the responsibility of the
Extraordinary demesne or the Customs. Military affairs belonged to
the domain of the ministries of war and war administration, but
involved the interior ministry over conscription and civil-military
relations. Most matters relating to legislation and public
administration would be discussed within the council of state. In
short, as one would expect, a primary degree of specialisation oriented
the regular bureaucratic channels of communication between Paris
and the world beyond France’s frontiers, although overlapping (and
sometimes conflictual) spheres of competence and the creation of
consultative and interministerial councils, as well as Napoleon’s
specific instructions and the repercussions of earlier decisions, could
easily generate a wider diffusion of paper and discussion. Above all,
the expanding use of the council of state by ministers cuts across any
clear-cut image of functional specialisation. Increasingly, as is evident
from an infinity of sources like Stendhal’s Journal, the councillors of
state were transformed into all-purpose experts.
   Territorial status provides clearer distinctions, as the areas can be
grouped in apparently distinct categories. Thus the territories
progressively ‘reunited’ to France—from Savoy and the Belgian Low
Countries to Italy, Holland and the Hanseatic seaboard—were
administratively treated in uniform manner as part of France, divided
in departments with prefects, and hence the responsibility of the
ministry of the interior. Only if these territories were subjected to a
special transitional regime, like the Tuscan junta, Parma or the Illyrian
intendancy, was responsibility provisionally assigned to Gaudin,
minister of finances. Holland was treated analogously on its
annexation in 1810, with the creation of a Council for Dutch Affairs
under Gaudin. At the other extreme, established states which survived
France’s military onslaught (primarily Russia, Britain and Austria,
                                                 The tools of conquest   41


and Prussia until 1806) remained within the exclusive domain of the
ministry of foreign affairs.
   In between these extremes, at least two further classifications can
be made. In the first group can be placed the states assigned to
members of Napoleon’s family. Such states, whether already in
existence like Naples or Holland or newly created like Westphalia,
were formally independent, and hence merited a diplomatic
representative and correspondence through the foreign affairs
ministry. But Napoleon’s exactions of troops and his reservation to his
crown of substantial incomes in these states, as much as the Bonaparte
family relationship, led to parallel channels of communication with
the ministry of war, the Extraordinary demesne, and via Napoleon’s
copious personal correspondence with his brothers and brother-in-
law.
   The second group contained the states over which Napoleon
claimed direct authority, either permanently or for a long period: the
republic-kingdom of Italy and the grand-duchy of Berg. As absentee
head of the Italian state, with a vice-president-viceroy at Milan, he
maintained the formal distinction between his two domains by
employing the foreign affairs ministry but, after the creation of the
kingdom, insisted on the permanent presence at Paris of a minister
(Aldini). Responsibility for relations with Berg had initially been
placed in the hands of Gaudin, minister of finances, possibly because
of the reserved crown incomes. With Murat’s departure (1808) and
the choice of Louis of Holland’s 5-year-old son as grand-duke,
Napoleon shifted responsibility for control of the administration of
Berg to the minister-secretary of state Maret, and then (because of
Maret’s passivity) to Roederer, who was given the same status.
   It is evident from these examples that even territorial status does
not provide clear-cut distinctions about responsibilities at Paris for
non-French territories. Military demands and the increasingly
arbitrary attempts to enforce the Continental blockade involved the
war ministries and Customs, who on occasion bypassed foreign affairs
in their relations even with established allied states, such as Bavaria or
Baden. The alliances imposed on these states, particularly within the
Rhine and Helvetic (Swiss) Confederations of which Napoleon was
Protector, and the reservation to the French crown of properties and
incomes within conquered states multiplied the channels of
communication with Paris. The allocation to favoured ministers of
mini-states—Benevento to Talleyrand, Neuchâtel to Berthier—led to
the utilisation of official channels (foreign affairs, war) for what was
virtually patrimonial administration.
42   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


   The facade of a rationally organised central administration with
functional or territorial allocation of responsibilities at Paris for the
effective maintenance of France’s domination of Europe, masked a
complexity that, far from disappearing, probably increased over the
period, because of the conflicting expectations and demands made
by the different branches of the administration. The result was not
the confusion that might have been expected, but effective control,
which can be attributed to Napoleon’s personal role, the implacable
demands of the military and the professionalism of the bureaucratic
corps. It is difficult to impose a neat interpretative grid on such
complexity, although it is easy to illustrate it, for example through
the occasional irritation of a prefect in responding to the demands of
different ministers about the same object, such as statistics on cereal
production or public order. Far less tangible is the problem of how
information was filtered, and at what levels, before it reached the
Emperor. Indeed, in a deeper sense, one is forced to ask to what
extent a socio-cultural filter operated throughout the system,
constructing those very realities that Napoleon and his servants
expected to find, whether about the nature of the territories under
French control, the functioning of the economy, social behaviour or
any other aspect of the organisation of society. It is a problem of
considerable significance (and not only for the Napoleonic regime),
as such information contributed in the process of decision-making.
What is certain is that, following the retreat from Russia and the
renewed formation of the anti-Napoleonic coalition, as French
armies were pushed back across central Europe and Spain in 1813,
control rapidly gave way to evidence of opposition and disorder.
Worried local elites hastened to prepare for a pacific transfer of
power on Napoleon’s defeat.

The Parisian civil service remained almost exclusively French. The
only ministry which contained a small proportion of foreigners or
natives of newly annexed regions was foreign affairs, where the
tradition of a specialised training at Strasbourg and linguistic skills
encouraged the recruitment of Alsatians and Germans, such as
Reinhardt and Bacher. In other ministries the enlargement of France’s
frontiers does not appear to have had any effect on recruitment. Nor
is this surprising, given the small size of the ministries (the interior
numbered only 220 employees in the late Empire), the strong influence
of patronage and presence at Paris on chances of recruitment, and the
opportunities and needs of employment in the new local
administrations.
                                                   The tools of conquest   43


   Nevertheless ‘new’ Frenchmen formed part of the constituted
organs of government in the capital. Their presence was a deliberate
political gesture, a consecration of the reality of the expanding
Empire, for which Napoleon was directly responsible. A very general
indicator of evolution of attitudes towards the incorporation of these
new compatriots is provided by their presence in the legislative
assemblies. Lambrechts, the sole Belgian senator in 1800, was
sceptical about getting a compatriot appointed to the Tribunate:
There is little hope, as they do not seem to be very generous in offering
places to men from the annexed departments’.9 There seem to have
been none among the 120 members of the Tribunate appointed in
1800 or 1802, despite the annexation of Belgium, Geneva and the left
bank of the Rhine (fourteen departments). In the Legislative body,
membership became automatic in that all departments were
represented (constitution of Year X). Although the departments of the
annexed territories constituted one-third of the total number, the 22
per cent ‘new French’ members of the Legislative body between 1800
and 1813 represented a fair proportion, given that over half their
departments became part of France only in the later years. A similar
conclusion can be drawn for the Senate. Of the initial sixty-three
senators only Lambrechts was born outside France (in Belgium) and
he had served as minister of justice during the Directory; in sharp
contrast, of senators nominated between the Year IX and 1813 over a
quarter of the new members came from Italy, Belgium, Holland and
Germany. Some of the French members of the Legislative body were
prefects of annexed departments, like Frémin de Beaumont, who
represented the Manche for ten years until he was appointed prefect of
the Bouches du Rhin in 1810, or Sauzey, who was the first prefect of
the Mont Blanc until his election to the Legislative body as
representative of the same department in Year X. Successful French
prefects were more often rewarded by their appointment as senators,
like Viry, prefect of the Lys, Cochon de Lapparent, prefect successively
of Vienne and Deux-Nèthes. The ‘new Frenchmen’ appointed to the
legislative assemblies were overwhelmingly influential figures,
politically or socially, in their countries of origin, like Durazzo, the last
doge of Genoa, the Piedmontese noble Falletti di Barolo, the Tuscan
minister and engineer Fossombroni or Schimmelpenninck, former
grand pensionary of the Batavian republic.10
   When Holland was annexed in 1810, guarantees were given of
posts within the Empire: six senators, six councillors of state, two
judges in the supreme court, twenty-six deputies of the Legislative
body. Holland was unique among the incorporated territories,
44   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


because of concern about the political reaction against annexation
among a population with a proud tradition of independence, so soon
after its previous remodelling into a Bonapartist kingdom. But there
can be little doubt that in general Napoleon saw the presence of these
new compatriots in the legislative assemblies as symbolising the unity
and indivisibility of the French Empire. At the same time, their landed
wealth and in most cases noble origins served to consolidate the
conservatism of these bodies.
   Membership of the Legislative body and Senate was a mark of
honour and source of privilege, but hardly an onerous burden.
Appointment to the council of state was a different matter, as it was
the very core of the central administrative system, on which rested
Bonaparte’s affirmation of advancement through merit. Here too only
Frenchmen seemed to have been appointed in the earliest years as
councillors of state (or maîtres des requêtes), but from 1802 Napoleon
included natives of the annexed departments: of 112 councillors, six
were Italians, two Germans (including Dalberg) and four Dutch. The
council of state was conceived as the seedbed of the future
administrative class for the entire Empire, the civilian equivalent of
the military academy. Nowhere is its importance demonstrated more
clearly than in Napoleon’s insistence on the presence of young nobles
from the annexed departments among the auditors. From the creation
of this category of trainees in 1803, Belgians and then Italians
requested appointments; in 1811, of thirty-three nominations,
fourteen were from the newly annexed Rome. As striking as the
competition to enter the ranks of the auditors was Napoleon’s
overriding of the hostility to their appointment of the scions of leading
Roman and Piedmontese aristocratic families, like Cesare Balbo. For
a rigorous experience as auditor, initially at Paris, was regarded as
ideal preparation for service in the field, not just in terms of
professional training, but as a form of acculturation. The auditors
were seen as crucial tools in the transmission of the values and hence
the durability of the French Empire.
   Paris was to play the role of imperial Rome, not just as the brain of
an administrative body, but as its heart, drawing in and pumping out
the life-blood of a culture which was assumed to have attained new
levels. The boundless ambition and underlying ambiguity of this
intimate mesh of political-administrative responsibilities and socio-
cultural aspirations was reflected in the assiduous presence of the
leading functionaries in the fashionable salons. From Pompadour to
Mme Roland, Récamier and Josephine de Beauharnais, political
sociability had characterised the Parisian salons. Whether official in
                                                The tools of conquest   45


tone (like Caroline Murat’s), scientific (like Madame d’Helvétius at
Autueil) or in opposition (like Juliette Récamier or Germaine de
Staël), the Parisian salons were now frequented by a new imperial and
European elite. The cultural legacy, beyond France’s borders after
1815, was to be no less marked than the directly political experience.


THE MECHANICS OF OCCUPATION
How to occupy a country and what to do with it was a process that
the French learnt by trial and error during the Revolutionary decade.
In later years Napoleon built on these experiences, but continued to
improve on the mechanics of the operation, introducing major
variations.
   The Convention, in a decree of 15 December 1792, proclaimed the
abolition of feudalism in all the occupied territories, and despatched
commissaires to prepare elections as the manifest proof of liberation.
But already in these earliest years of hostilities, the logistic problems
of warfare and the manifest reluctance of the populations to be
liberated rapidly led French generals, like their superiors at Paris and
the civilian commissaires accompanying the armies, to regard
occupied territory as enemy territory. Two immediate consequences
followed. First, the military commander felt free to requisition and
exact what (at the least) he judged necessary to supply his army, and
(at the worst) he believed could be extorted for his soldiers, his
suppliers, his government and, last but not least, himself. Secondly, the
commander, while asserting control over all state institutions, was
reliant on civilian collaboration to facilitate his exactions, and hence
normally reluctant to encourage the proposals of local patriots to
purge the existing administrators or (worse) to set up new
Revolutionary administrative structures. In addition, lack of
experience, authority or concern often meant that a general in charge
of an army was unable to control his subordinates, so that local
pillaging and illegal exactions accompanied the official efforts to meet
the demands for supplies and indemnities of the occupying forces.
This was certainly the experience of the Belgian Low Countries and
Rhineland in 1793–4. The creation of ‘extraction agencies’
(euphemistically called ‘commercial agencies’) in the Belgian and
German territories in 1794, as of a ‘military agency’ in Lombardy in
1796, was essentially an attempt to cut out private initiative, since it
weakened the ability of the constituted authorities to make the local
populations pay their share of the military-imposed ransom. The
46   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


problem worsened in the Directory years because of the inability of
the government at Paris to control its generals.
   Treatment as enemy territory was dependent on the formal status
assigned to each country by the French authorities. For, in theory at
least, the French troops would be evacuated once a new friendly
government (such as a sister republic) had been set up, or the
population had voted for reunion to France. Hence the pressures on
local populations to change their status were compelling. But local
voices, whether patriotic or desperate, were rarely heard, as they fell
foul of the conflicting ambitions or policies of French commissaires,
generals and Parisian politicians. Even where the patriots were able
momentarily to seize the initiative—as in Liège, the Low Countries or
Lombardy—they were soon constrained by the French occupying
forces. The very early experience of the patriots in the principality of
Liège can be regarded as paradigmatic of this process. Here the
popular societies had played a central role, with the French
occupation in 1792–3, in setting up a provisional administration and
preparing a vote in favour of reunion to France, despite the ferocious
attacks on their commitment by a Convention commissaire, Publicola
Chaussard. In 1794, although both the municipal and the provisional
central administrations were re-established, the French commissaire
Frécine radically reduced their powers, and then, ignoring local
opinion, carved up the former principality into two parts, assigned
respectively to the nearby (and hence resented) authority of Brussels
and Aix-la-Chapelle.
   In general, the change from simple military occupation to some
form of provisional civilian administration was usually the result of
the diminishing returns of military exactions. Thus in the Rhineland,
where there was an army of occupation of 100,000, a central
administration was set up in 1794, consisting of equal numbers of
French and Germans. The administrative problem was complicated in
the Rhineland (on both sides of the river), because previously
sovereignty had been divided between 101 petty states. In Lombardy,
after only a few months of occupation, Bonaparte accepted a central
administration of patriots as it facilitated the monthly payments for
his army.
   The underlying problem was the uncertainty about the future in
each territory, about which local patriots, occupying generals, civilian
commissaires and the authorities at Paris could have different and
conflicting views. Thus the Belgian (and hence Liège) experience of
provisional administrations and ‘extraction agencies’ rapidly led to
annexation (1795), which meant not only the removal of military
                                                The tools of conquest   47


exactions, but also a total rupture with the administrative practices of
the past through the division of the territory into departments. In the
Rhineland, on the other hand, the successive military administrators
(Generals Custine, Hoche and Augereau) only tampered with the
administrative structures, replacing the central administration with
French-staffed general directorates (May 1796) to improve the flow of
payments. Only after the peace of Campoformio (October 1797),
when the Directory was convinced that the left bank would remain
French, was military authority replaced by the appointment of a
general commissaire, F.J.Rudler, to restructure the administrative,
financial and judicial system in preparation for annexation. In yet
another variant, the Directory accepted the Dutch patriots’ creation of
the Batavian republic (May 1795), but only at the price of annexing
territory to improve the French frontier, payment of a huge indemnity
and the maintenance of an army of 25,000 French soldiers. In Italy,
provisional administrations were set up in Genoa and Venice, as
subsequently at Lucca and Rome (1797–8). Only at a second stage
was General Bonaparte prepared to transform the Lombard
provisional general administration into a sister-republic, the Cisalpine
(July 1797), which remained responsible for the maintenance of the
French army; and it was similarly the initiative of a French general,
Championnet, that allowed the creation of the Neapolitan republic
(January 1799). The reluctance of the Directory to change the existing
administrative structures in Italy was shown in the refusal to allow the
Piedmontese patriots to overthrow their government, and then
(December 1798) in its acceptance only of a provisional
administration. In Tuscany, despite the sympathy of the French
commanders Gaulthier and Schérer towards a change of regime, the
Directory insisted on a purely military occupation (1799).
   In the eyes of the local patriots, the proclamation of a republic
signified the creation of an autonomous sovereign state. From the
point of view of the Directory, the republics (apart from their possible
diplomatic implications at a future peace treaty) merely constituted
another experiment in the mechanics of occupation. Ultimate
authority remained firmly in the hands of the military commanders.
Some, like Masséna and Augereau, were legendary for their systematic
pillaging. Irrespective of their personal greed, these military leaders,
like the French civilian commissaires, intervened at will in the
activities of the local republican authorities, writing and rewriting
their constitutions, purging their assemblies, appointing new executive
commissions, according to their political inclinations and the
fluctuations in the life of the Directory. Whatever the political and
48   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


personal antagonisms between military and civilian agents, Jacobins
and moderates, in 1797–9 there was little difference in the operational
techniques deployed by Generals Bonaparte and Brune and
ambassador Trouvé in the Cisalpine, the agents Mengaud, Lecarlier
and Rapinat in the Helvetic republic, the delegates Noel and
Delacroix in the Batavian republic, commissaire Abrial at Naples, or
General Masséna at Genoa. Only in Piedmont, where commissaire
Eymar supervised the actions of the provisional government on a daily
basis, can any variation be noted, when Eymar’s successor Musset
dissolved the government and (like Rudler in the Rhineland) began to
reorganise Piedmont on a departmental basis in apparent preparation
of annexation (1799).
    By Brumaire, successive French governments had experimented
with the mechanics of occupation and elaborated certain techniques.
Purely military occupation, treating the country as enemy territory,
was limited to the short term or to emergencies (such as Masséna’s
seven requisitions in Switzerland in five months of 1799). If
occupation was prolonged, the standard practice was to replace the
local administrators (many of whom had fled) by a provisional
administration of patriots or less willing collaborators. The precise
physiognomy of such provisional administrations varied, as did their
titles, but the primary concern of the French representatives was to
ensure collaboration, not demonstrations of independence. Up to this
point these territories were certainly regarded as potential bargaining
counters in a future peace. Wherever the extension of France’s
frontiers was seen as both desirable and feasible, the territory was
restructured on French departmental lines, whether after annexation
(Savoy, Belgium) or in preparation (Rhineland, Piedmont). Elsewhere
the very plurality of sources of power under the Directory, at Paris and
in the occupied territories, sometimes offered the possibility to local
patriots to transform provisional administrations into new republics,
under the sympathetic eye of the French general in command. The
Directory adapted to this situation, sending out members of the
legislature as commissaires with extensive powers to control both
generals and republican administrations. Their success was normally
greater with the latter than the former. But the very conflict of power
continued to offer a political space for the local patriots, without
providing any stable prospects for the future of the republics.
    Napoleon, after Marengo, could exploit two advantages in the
reoccupied territories lacking to his predecessors: unity of command
(in contrast to the previous diffusion of power) and a degree of
support from the local elites (because of the discreditable behaviour of
                                                 The tools of conquest   49


the old regimes during their brief restoration in 1799–1800). His
immediate solution to the administration of these territories was to
employ as model the constitution of the Year VIII, just as the
Directory had turned to the constitution of the Year III. In Piedmont,
the Cisalpine and Liguria executive government commissions and
legislative councils were set up (June-July 1800). But the real power
was placed more firmly than ever in the hands of French
representatives—Generals Jourdan and Dejean in Piedmont and
Liguria, army inspector Petiet in the Cisalpine—who acted as virtual
proconsuls, combining military and civil authority, receiving orders
directly from the First Consul, presiding over the meetings of the
executive commissions. Within a year (April 1801) the military
control was formalised in Piedmont and Liguria by transforming them
into the 27th and 28th military divisions of France, even though
neither of them had yet been annexed.
   Three alternative methods were employed during the Consulate in
the search for stable solutions to the control of foreign territories.
Piedmont was ‘prepared’ for annexation by the nomination of a
general administration under General Jourdan, responsible for
introducing the entire French machinery of government (April 1801).
Within a month, prefects had been appointed to the six departments.
To assist Jourdan and his council of six, experts were imported for the
more specialised branches of administration: A.J.Hennet, a financial
bureaucrat who had served under Necker, G.A.Jourde to set up the
new judicial system, General Wirion to establish a gendarmerie, the
bishop of Amiens to sort out the ecclesiastical hierarchy. For political
reasons annexation was delayed until 11 September 1802, the local
population being informed two weeks later. Jourdan, too republican
for Napoleon’s taste, was replaced by the conservative General
Menou. As in the Rhineland, where the extraordinary authority of a
general commissaire continued until Year X, although prefects had
been appointed already in Year VIII, a two-tier system was continued
until 1805, with both Menou as administrator-general and regular
prefects, creating ambiguities over the respective responsibilities of the
minister of the interior and the administrator-general. Piedmont
provided the model for future annexations.11
   The second method, apparently as definitive, was the creation of
republics under direct French rule. Here too northern Italy provided
the experimental field. Consultation of local notables, with the
summoning to Lyon of carefully selected figures of the Cisalpine
republic, was the consular version of proclaiming consensus. The
creation of the Italian republic (January 1802) with Napoleon as
50   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


president, a Constitution and entirely native administration under
Melzi d’Eril based on the French prototype, and the maintenance of a
French army at the new republic’s expense, seemed to offer a viable
solution in the form of a vassal state that could be restructured in the
French image. The refusal of the Ligurians to go to Lyon, through
their fear of being swallowed up in the new Lombard state, perhaps
explains why Napoleon gave them a separate constitution, with a
legislative council, electoral colleges and senate, but under the firm
control of the French representative Saliceti (June 1802). The
uncertainties and disadvantages of their status (trade with Piedmont
was hit by a new tariff barrier, obligations were imposed to provide
soldiers and sailors for France) encouraged enthusiasm for
annexation, as had been the Piedmontese experience.
   The third method was less direct—an attempt to ensure control of
foreign territories without the difficulties of occupation. In the case
of Holland, the Batavian republic was replaced by a more traditional
collegial regency, which restored power to the former urban
oligarchies and Orange aristocrats (September 1801), while
imposing the obligation on the Dutch to maintain an army of 18,000
men. In Switzerland, Napoleon proposed a more original formula,
carefully avoiding further annexations or commitments by ensuring
the return to power of the former cantonal oligarchies in a
‘mediation’ which he guaranteed as Protector. In return the Swiss
were committed to supply France with a regular military contingent
(1803). The Swiss precedent was to be repeated on a far grander
scale in Germany, where the invention of the Confederation of the
Rhine among (initially) sixteen states, with Napoleon as Protector,
confirmed and indeed extended the territorial sovereignty of the
participant members, while committing them to recruit 63,000
soldiers for France (1806). In both instances, the shadow of
Napoleon’s protection acted as an effective substitute for direct
intervention, the Grande Armée was ensured of substantial
contingents, and the example of state modernity provided by France
encouraged emulation among the dependent rulers.
   The creation of the Empire and Napoleon’s military triumphs of
1805–7 raised the techniques of occupation to a new level.
Annexation became a skilled art, as repeated recourse was made to it.
With the annexation of Venetia in 1806, local notables were
appointed as special commissaires, a temporary measure until the
nomination of experienced prefects from the kingdom of Italy.
Already in 1802, on the death of the duke of Parma (whose state had
been ceded to France by the treaty of Aranjuez, March 1801), the
                                                The tools of conquest   51


French resident, Moreau de Saint-Méry, was appointed administrator-
general for the unusually lengthy transitional period of four years
(October 1802 to January 1806). It was presumably the revolt at
Piacenza (December 1805) that decided Napoleon to ‘prepare’ the
territory for annexation, with the appointment of a special
‘administrative prefect’, Nardon (1806–8). The diplomat Champagny
was first sent to prepare the annexation of the Ligurian republic. But
he was immediately followed by the former consul Lebrun and a team
of experts to create three new departments (June-September 1805).
On the Piedmontese model of a two-tier structure, Lebrun was to
remain governor-general of Liguria for two years, alongside the three
prefects. With the annexation of Tuscany (December 1807), Dauchy
was first appointed as administrator-general with specialised staff
transferred from the Piedmontese departments, then Menou was sent
as military commander and head of a provisional junta of experts to
establish the French system. The members of the Roman consulta
charged with an identical task following the annexation of the Papal
States (May 1809) were partly the same as those of the Tuscan junta
(Gérando, Janet, Balbo). With the annexation of Holland (1810), the
aged Lebrun was once more employed as lieutenant-general to set up
the prefectoral system, then staying on—as previously in Liguria—as
governor-general (1811–13). Special intendants were despatched to
absorb the three Hanseatic departments on the North Sea (1812), and
French commissaires were sent to set up four departments in
Catalonia in 1812, in the widespread expectation that the region was
to be annexed.
   In many ways, the most interesting example of the mechanism of
annexation is that of the Illyrian provinces, created out of territories
seized from Austria in 1809. Ruled by a governor-general (Marmont,
then Bertrand), an intendant-general of finances (Dauchy, then
Chabrol) and six intendants, despite a decision in April 1811 to
assimilate the area to the French system of government, Napoleon was
forced to accept its practical impossibility. Culturally and ethnically
remote from the French experience, at the very frontiers of
civilisation, the Illyrian provinces were assigned a special status,
neither a simple military occupation nor rapid annexation, but
necessitating adaptation at a much slower pace than the three months
prescribed to Rudler in the Rhineland or the seven months given to
Gérando in Tuscany.
   Besides annexation, the Empire innovated in terms of techniques of
occupation through the elevation of Napoleon’s family to new and old
thrones. These Bonaparte states resembled the republic-kingdom of
52   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Italy more than the allied states of the Rhine Confederation. For,
although formally independent, Berg, Naples, Holland and
Westphalia, like Elisa’s petty state of Lucca and Berthier’s principality
of Neuchâtel, had French advisers and ministers, were subjected to
military contingents, and above all were obliged to adopt the French
machinery of government. Indeed Berg under Murat and even more
Jerome’s new kingdom of Westphalia were expected to become model
states whose example would be followed by their neighbours.
Precisely because he regarded these family states as an extension of the
Empire, Napoleon saw no reasons for formalities (even consultation)
before interfering in their affairs, as Louis of Holland discovered when
he lost his throne, and Joseph of Spain when Napoleon created
military administrations in Catalonia, Aragon, Navarre and the
Basque country. Spain was a special case, since the unending war
inevitably subordinated civilian administration to the military. But it
is evident from Napoleon’s ample correspondence with his kin
sovereigns that he would brook no discussion of the subordination
of their states to France, not only in terms of political hegemony, but
also as a cultural model demanding close imitation. If Joachim
Murat, alone among Napoleon’s family, was able to affirm
expressions of independence, this was primarily because by these
years the emperor was distracted by other, more pressing problems
in distant parts.
   Continuous warfare, as well as the economic blockade, explains the
renewed importance of military occupation in the later years.
Increasingly Napoleon sent in his generals to impose a military
administration. Sometimes, when an extended though temporary
occupation was anticipated, civilian administrators might be
appointed—like the prefects Thiébault and Tournon at Erfurt and
Bayreuth in 1810, who were instructed not to make any
administrative changes. Elsewhere military occupation could lead to
subsequent institutional changes, although without removing the
presence of French troops, like the creation of the grand-duchy of
Warsaw (1807) or the annexation of the Hanseatic cities (1812).
Mostly, military occupation was seen as a deliberately heavy-handed
method of ensuring payment of indemnities by a defeated enemy. This
necessitated the presence of civilian administrators, like Bignon,
imperial commissaire in charge of the conquered Prussian provinces in
1806 and of occupied Austria in 1809. Nowhere was this policy
clearer than in Prussia, where French forces remained after Jena until
1810, then returning in February 1812 to use the humiliated state as
supply base for the Russian campaign. The distinction in the handling
                                                 The tools of conquest   53


of Austria and Prussia is significant. Napoleon never proposed
depriving the Habsburgs of their core territories, nor even apparently
tried to subordinate this traditional enemy within France’s direct
sphere of influence. Prussia, on the other hand, was treated brutally
and deprived of its most ‘Europeanised’ territories (Poland), as a
punishment for the irresponsible behaviour of the Hohenzollerns in
1806. It seems likely that Napoleon never wanted to absorb eastern
Europe. By these final years, his involvement in Germany and eastern
Europe was so predominantly geared to warfare, that military
occupation, rather than other techniques of administering territories,
had inevitably returned to the fore.
   The range of methods adopted to administer French-dominated
territories provides the clearest evidence of the continuing uncertainty
and ultimate inability to find a definitive solution to the mechanics of
occupation. This failure to identify and refine a single model of
occupation rendered inevitable the personal intervention of the
Emperor and his direct agents. In a sense, the return to military
occupation—in which Spain acted as a precocious standard-bearer—
can be seen as cutting the Gordian knot, a simplified, exasperated and
appropriately belligerent means of resolving the issue. Each variant in
the mechanics of occupation carried with it immediate and longer-
term implications in the relations between occupiers and occupied.
For the establishment and consolidation of an expanded Empire,
indeed of a Europe modelled on France, depended on the possibility or
impossibility of a prolonged dialogue. Military occupation negated
dialogue.


THE GENERALS
If Napoleon was the most civilian of military rulers, who owed his
undeniable popularity in the Consulate years to his qualities as
administrator and peace-maker, he was a general and under no
illusions that the durability of his regime and its ability to sink roots
was ultimately dependent on military strength. The army remained
the essential tool of the spread of French control and influence. Hence,
given that the upkeep, administration and logistics of the army
constituted the military counterpart to the mechanics of occupation,
one could expect to find a broadly similar pattern of evolution,
growing professionalisation and centralisation. In fact, the parallelism
does not hold good, essentially for two reasons. The first relates to the
very essence of Napoleonic warfare, which rendered ultimately
impossible the centralisation of military logistics above the level of the
54   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


individual army corps. The second was the relative indifference of the
Emperor to major aspects of military administration. The latter point
may appear somewhat paradoxical, given the significance of military
attributes in the Napoleonic myth. There is little reason to doubt
contemporary descriptions of the general’s capacity to arouse
boundless enthusiasm and loyalty as he moved among his soldiers at
the Boulogne camp or on the battlefield. And he was intensely
interested (and interfering) in every detail of military uniforms, which
symbolised so well his values of hierarchy and glory. But his
enthusiasms were selective and rarely extended to the humdrum
details of army administration, as can be illustrated by a rapid survey
of the main sectors.
   Recruitment of armies was always a matter of crucial importance,
which (as will be discussed later) demanded central control in terms of
its volume, regularity and methods of enforcement. But, although
subject to the war ministries and involving army officers, it was
essentially a responsibility of civilian administrators—the prefects.
   The strategy of campaigns was even more centralised, in the
person of Napoleon, whose orders were transmitted to the army
commanders by his minister of war and faithful and efficient chief of
general staff Berthier. But this very strategy, which lay at the core of
Napoleon’s military genius, denied the possibility of an effectively
centralised administration of the armies. For the Napoleonic
campaigns were structured around sudden, rapid movements of
armies, often over very long distances, whose unexpected
convergence took the enemy by surprise, so facilitating the decisive
mass attack. For this reason it made no sense to set up an overall,
central intendancy for the military forces, but only intendancies at
the level of the individual army corps. The 1805 campaign in
Germany involved seven army corps, Murat’s cavalry corps and the
Imperial Guard (180,000 men), the 1806 campaign in Prussia six
army corps and the Guard (160,000 men), the 1807 campaign in
Poland seven army corps, two cavalry corps and the Guard (150,000
men), the 1809 Austrian campaign ten army and one cavalry corps,
besides the Guard (200,000 men), the 1812 invasion of Russia
twelve army and four cavalry corps (530,000 men).
   If strategic and tactical reasons underlay this unexpected but real
lack of centralisation, Napoleon’s notorious disinterest in the practical
details of the logistics of his armies helps explain the tardiness and
relative paucity of development of appropriate structures for their
supply and administration. A ministry for war administration had
been created in 1802, under Generals Dejean (until 1810), Lacuée
                                                The tools of conquest   55


(until 1813) and Daru, but its responsibilities remained essentially
limited to the coordination of the activities of the individual army
intendancies, the general state services (régies) (for the provision of
bread, meat, forage and hospital services), transport and clothing.12
The intendants-general, successors to the Jacobin representatives on
mission and Directorial army commissaires, were meant to act as the
counterbalance to the army commanders, but already under the
Directory had failed to contain the pillaging of such generals as
Masséna and Augereau. In the Napoleonic years, their performance
was better but certainly failed to keep up with the needs of the troops,
who continued to be inadequately equipped, ill-clothed and often
underfed, with their wages overdue. Napoleon was far from unaware
of these inadequacies, but never got beyond the denunciation of
civilian suppliers he expressed to Dejean in 1807: ‘Our armies will
never be organised until there is a single administrator, until
everything is military…. Until then we shall continue to be at the
mercy of rogues like those we know too well’.13 But it is questionable
whether even militarisation would have been successful, given that
appointment to posts within these intendancies was heavily dependent
on recommendations, particularly by generals, more so than in most
other fields. Stendhal owed his position as war commissaire in 1806 to
his cousin Pierre Daru, then intendant-general of the Grande Armée.
   Compared to the intendants-general and their staff of intendants
and commissaires aux guerres, three other services responsible for the
regular administration of the armies enjoyed a better reputation, not
least because of Napoleon’s interest in their effectiveness. First, a
carefully chosen inspectorate of officers was responsible for the
development of artillery. With the exception of Marmont, their
names—Songis, Lariboisière, Eblé, Sorbier, Drouot—do not figure on
the roll-call of military glory recognisable by later generations through
the literature of the Napoleonic legend and the street names of Paris.
But Napoleon never forgot his origins as an artillery second
lieutenant, indeed he recalled it proudly at a banquet in honour of
Tsar Alexander at Erfurt. Secondly, a distinctive and well-paid corps
of inspectors (‘inspecteurs aux revues’) was created in 1800 in order to
carry out regular reviews that the numbers of soldiers actually present
corresponded to the numbers declared by their officers. Finally, a
special body of military paymasters was set up, appointed by and
exclusively responsible to the ministry of the treasury (not the war
ministries), and subjected to detailed and rigorously applied
regulations (1805) to keep them independent of the army staffs.
Napoleon’s close supervision of this corps was such that in 1808,
56   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


while engaged at Bayonne in forcing the Bourbon dynasty to cede him
the kingdom of Spain, he took time off to dismiss the paymaster of the
army of Dalmatia, Duliège, and confiscate his deposit and possessions
for irregularly granting funds to Marmont.14
   It is not surprising that these highly specialised services should have
attracted more administrative attention than the army intendancies,
as they dealt with matters about which Napoleon was particularly
sensitive—artillery power, the strength and smartness of his regiments,
and honest accounting. Mindful of his initial training, Napoleon was
increasingly concerned to develop the firing power of his armies,
particularly to compensate for the decline in the proportion of
experienced veterans in the army. He took a personal interest in
reviewing the turnout of the regiments. Marbot recalled how he
would ridicule commanders for their inadequate knowledge of their
troops.

     Besides the standard questions about numbers of men and horses,
     armaments, etc., he threw a host of unexpected question at them,
     for which they were not always prepared. For example: ‘How
     many men have you taken from a given department over the past
     two years? How many carbines produced at Tulle or Charleville?
     What’s the average age of your soldiers? of your officers? of your
     horses?’ Such question, always delivered in the most peremptory,
     abrupt manner, accompanied by a penetrating expression,
     disconcerted many a colonel. But a hesitating reply was ill
     advised, as Napoleon mentally put a black mark against the
     officer’.15

As warlord and head of state with an almost kitchen economy concern
to balance the budget, for Napoleon the review inspectors performed
an inestimably valuable task in not making him pay for non-existent
troops—even if he seemed resigned to a decline in their efficacy after
the initial Consulate years (They make me pay for all the dead
soldiers’, he complained to Mollien, minister of the treasury in
1808). 16 The army paymasters, sticking to the letter of their
instructions, retained his confidence, in contrast to the intendants.
Hence it was not surprising, when the administration of conquered
territory was changed from military government (under a general) to
civilian, that the responsibility should have been given to review
inspectors or military paymasters rather than intendants-general, or
alternatively to councillors of state. Daru, in charge of exacting war
indemnities from Austria in 1805 and Prussia in 1806, was councillor
                                                The tools of conquest   57


of state and review inspector before being appointed intendant-
general of the Grande Armée for the Russian campaign; his immediate
subordinates during the Prussian occupation were the paymasters-
general Estève and La Bouillerie and the chief review inspector
Villemanzy.

If army administration failed to develop the bureaucratic complexity,
sophistication and pride of place of that of civil society, army leaders
retained the primacy in Napoleon’s hierarchy of values. Given his
career, his obligations towards a number of them with the coup of
Brumaire, and his permanent reliance on military victory, this is
hardly surprising.
   There can be no doubt that military valour, in its most classical
sense of a highly individual quality, was regarded as a praiseworthy
attribute. Of the 2,248 generals of the Revolutionary-Napoleonic
wars, 230 were killed, while 1,235 accumulated a total of 4,055
wounds; six army commanders were killed in battle.17 Oudinot (who
died aged 80) fought in all the major campaigns except the Peninsular
wars between 1800 and 1814 and was wounded twenty-three times.
He can be regarded as representative of the professional soldier, a
loyal man of action not well suited for other functions: when ordered
by Napoleon to occupy Neuchâtel as a new French territory in 1806,
he gave a brief speech, reported by a local bourgeois as ‘well prepared
in the French manner and delivered in the style of an authentic
grenadier leader’.18 Unlike many of his peers, Oudinot was honest and
punctilious in his behaviour towards the populations of the territories
he occupied, maintaining strict control over his soldiers, even paying
for his board and lodging. Napoleon always remembered bravery in
battle, particularly when it tilted the balance, and was generous in his
largesse on the field and after. He retained a sneaking respect for the
swaggering comportment that sometimes accompanied such courage,
even for those whom he disliked, like Augereau (as he recalled at St
Helena):

    His height, his manners and his language, all made him seem a
    braggart. But he was far from being one, after he found himself
    gorged on honours and riches—which, to boot, he grabbed for
    himself in every possible way.19

Even if advancement was no longer so open as in the early years of the
Revolution, when most generals achieved their rank before they were
30, the army continued to offer great possibilities, not only through
58   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


the continuous state of warfare, but also because of the patronage of
senior officers. Kinship and marriage alliances grew stronger within
this military caste, perhaps the defensive mechanism of parvenus or
political trimmers, as Georges Six has argued. 20 Berthier’s two
younger brothers became generals; Davout, who married the sister of
Pauline Bonaparte’s husband General Leclerc, helped a brother and
uncle to become generals, while a cousin’s husband became a colonel;
two Clary sisters married Joseph Bonaparte and Bernadotte, while the
son of the third sister became a general and the two daughters married
the future Marshal Suchet and General Saligny. Bessières, Beurmann,
Beylié, Damas, Dumas, Lanusse, Wimpffen and many others were
families with two brothers as generals. Six has estimated that at least
240 generals were fathers, sons, brothers, uncles, nephews, cousins,
fathers-in-law, sons-in-law, brothers-in-law or husbands of widows of
other generals.
   While nepotism assisted a military career, personal contact with
Bonaparte and alignment with his meteoric political career were
even more important. The crucial moments were those of his early
years—the Army of Italy, the Egyptian campaign and Brumaire.
Careers were made or broken in those years, dependent more on
attitudes adopted than on strictly military achievement. For
example, Berthier, Bessières, Lannes, Andréossy, Bertrand,
Marmont, Murat and Duroc were close to Bonaparte in all three
episodes and were appropriately rewarded. Masséna, Suchet,
Clarke, Brune, Sébastiani and Bernadotte established or
consolidated their careers in Italy. The Egyptian expedition forged
particularly close ties, which were to last through the Empire. The
future paymaster-general Estève’s career began there; Davout, who
was presented to Bonaparte by Desaix and immediately despatched
to Toulon to prepare the Egyptian expedition, owed his spectacular
career to this. Junot and Menou were repeatedly offered career
opportunities by Napoleon, despite the excesses of the former and
mediocrity of the latter. It would be tedious to prolong the list.
   As revealing are the instances of officers whose careers were
broken by attitudes judged unacceptable by Bonaparte’s close
entourage. General Damas, Kléber’s protégé in Egypt, was accused
by Menou, after his patron’s murder, of the defeat at Canope (21
March 1801) and was disgraced, along with his brother, also a
general. Reynier, Damas’ superior at Canope, was placed under
arrest by Menou and subsequently exiled to Italy. Napoleon himself
oscillated in his willingness to distinguish military capacities from
personal or political prejudices. He persecuted Moreau and
                                                The tools of conquest   59


distanced Jourdan from a political role, because of their
consolidated reputations as republican generals; Macdonald was
removed from his post in command of Versailles four days after
Brumaire, then kept at a distance and disgraced after defending
Moreau in 1804; Miollis was removed from active service after
voting against Bonaparte’s nomination as consul for life. Gouvion
Saint-Cyr, on the other hand, who refused to make his soldiers swear
the oath of loyalty to the consuls after Brumaire or to allow them to
join in the highly organised appeals to Napoleon to become Emperor
in 1804, had an important, albeit bumpy, career, and was finally
appointed marshal in 1812. Grouchy, who protested against the
consulate, was deployed actively throughout the period, even if he
was appointed marshal only during the Hundred Days. Even
Augereau, who initially opposed Brumaire, enjoyed a successful
career with ample material rewards, once he rallied to Napoleon.
   For officers who had fallen foul of Napoleon or his closest
followers, or disagreed with his trajectory, service in the vassal states
offered the major outlet, at least until the later years, when the
military demands of Spain, Germany and finally Russia led to their
recall. Some had chosen to move voluntarily into this outer circle, like
Martel, aide-de-camp to General Fiorella in the Army of Italy in the
1790s, who followed his general to serve the Italian republic and
kingdom; or the younger General Damas, who entered Louis of
Holland’s service in 1806, resigned over Holland’s annexation,
moving on to Jerome of Westphalia, in whose army he was killed at
the battle of Moscow (Borodino) in 1812; or the former mercenary
General van Hogendorp, who became minister of war in the kingdom
of Holland, before returning to Napoleon’s service with its
annexation. Others requested permission to serve in these vassal states
in the hope of returning to favour. Thus Macdonald, after his disgrace
over the Moreau affair, was allowed to enter Joseph of Naples’ service
in 1807, and then that of Eugene de Beauharnais in 1809, before his
role at Wagram got him a marshal’s baton; Reynier became minister
of war at Naples before his recall to the Grande Armée in 1809;
Miollis served in the army of the kingdom of Italy and in this capacity
was ordered by Napoleon to occupy Rome, in 1808, where he
remained until 1814; Michaud entered Louis of Holland’s service in
1806, was recalled by Napoleon as governor of the Hanseatic cities,
but because of his excessive rectitude was soon removed, and ended
his career in Jerome of Westphalia’s army.
   The great majority of this multitude of generals enjoyed a regular
and undistinguished career, which (appropriately) has left little trace
60   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


in the historical record. Among the more able—or more powerfully
sponsored—Napoleon chose to use some in three roles which
demanded different capacities than the purely military: as
commanders of occupied territories, as administrators, or as
diplomats. These roles were not mutually exclusive, for some generals
in the course of their careers fulfilled two or, like Brune, even all three
of such functions. Their employment by Napoleon responded to the
accelerating demands imposed by the dynamism of the Empire, as well
as reflecting the importance assigned to the military.
   Little need be said about military occupation, as its very repetition
must have accustomed commanders to its techniques, which became
increasingly regulated. The underlying principles—maintenance of
public order and exaction of taxes—implied strict control over the
comportment of the soldiers and continuity of administrative
operations. Typical were Napoleon’s orders to Oudinot for the
occupation of Neuchâtel:

     You must go to Neuchâtel and take possession of this principality
     in my name. You will order that all taxes continue to be raised as
     normal. You will take care not to change the customs barriers that
     separate Neuchâtel from France…. You will confirm all the
     authorities in office…. You will ensure the maintenance of good
     discipline. You will settle your troops so that they can rest. You
     will speak well of Prussia. You will print and display the following
     proclamation: ‘In the name of H.M. the Emperor and King, my
     sovereign, I have taken possession of the principality of
     Neuchâtel, which the king of Prussia has ceded him. The troops
     under my command will maintain strict discipline. On the other
     hand, they must be welcomed by the inhabitants with appropriate
     sentiments.’ You will change nothing in the administration until I
     give you new orders.21

The clear concern to obtain at least passive acceptance by the
population—a tenet first applied explicitly and effectively by Brune in
his pacification of the chouan departments of western France in
1800—reflected the negative experiences of the revolutionary
occupations and the permanent worry over undisciplined soldiery.
   If the generals appointed to act as governors of cities or larger
territories regarded their post as temporary and transitional,
particular conditions of warfare offered possibilities to commanders
to transform military occupations into more prolonged and complex
structures of administration. This was the case of Calabria, where the
                                                 The tools of conquest   61


difficulties of repressing the revolt led to the delegation of civilian
authority by Joseph to a special commissaire, combining military and
civilian powers, with the authority to report judicial abuses (such as
the acquittal of captured ‘brigands’) and make appointments to local
offices. Above all, it was characteristic of Spain, where the inability of
the French armies to inflict a decisive defeat on Wellington and the
guerrilla forces led to a dual system of administration, divided
between Joseph and the more successful generals, with Napoleon’s
connivance.
   The Emperor’s unilateral decision of 8 February 1810 to place
Catalonia, Aragon, Navarre and the Basque country under military
rule in effect subordinated his brother’s authority to that of the
generals. General Barthélemy, for example, ignored the protests of the
civilian intendant at Santander, Aldamar, in exacting 300,000 francs
to cover the costs of his troops, and then imprisoned the unfortunate
administrator of the rentes for trying to carry out his duty. The two
most successful military leaders, Marshals Soult and Suchet, acted as
virtual viceroys for nearly three years in Andalusia and Aragon. In an
attempt to reaffirm his authority, Joseph sent a commissaire with
special powers and the rank of minister to Andalusia, but this royal
representative, count de Montarco, rapidly identified himself with
Soult. Suchet disciplined his troops, ensured honest public accounts
and regular justice and reopened the academy of Zaragoza; but he
refused to accept the nomination by Joseph’s government of a
councillor of state and three prefects to administer Valencia. Such
were the possibilities open to ambitious generals in special
circumstances at the periphery of the Empire. The consequences could
be disastrous, as the military and personal rivalries of these proconsuls
effectively destroyed the unity of action required to defeat the
exceptionally tenacious enemies in the Peninsula. Marbot, aide-de-
camp to Masséna in 1810, recalled disconsolately Suchet’s failure to
assist Saint-Cyr, Victor’s lethargy in supporting Soult’s invasion of
Portugal, the refusal of Ney, Reynier, Soult and Bessières to accept
Masséna’s authority.22
   Employment as administrators would seem to have been more
appropriate to the talents of military officers. Inevitably, some of the
generals closest to Bonaparte were appointed to the council of state in
the early Consulate: Caffarelli, Admiral Bruix, Dejean, Mathieu
Dumas, Gouvion Saint-Cyr, Bernadotte (replacing the uncomfortable
Brune), the former deputies Lacuée and Jourdan. As France’s
territories expanded, the skills of officers in specialised branches were
put to good use. Bertrand was sent to Bavaria in 1805 to train its
62   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


army. General Wirion, commander of the gendarmerie in the Sambre-
et-Meuse army in 1794, was responsible for setting up the
gendarmerie in the nine departments of newly annexed Belgium
(1795–7), then in the Rhineland departments (1798), Piedmont and
the Cisalpine (1801). His colleague General Radet, who had
reorganised the gendarmerie in the Midi in 1798 and then throughout
France in 1804, carried out inspections of the gendarmerie in
Piedmont and Genoa, descended on Naples in 1806 to set up its
gendarmerie, repeated the exercise in Tuscany in 1809 and then Rome
(where he was personally responsible for arresting the Pope), before
moving on to the Hamburg gendarmerie in 1811. Chasseloup-Laubat,
commander of the engineer corps in the Army of Italy (1796, 1799)
was responsible for the fortifications in northern Italy (1801–5, 1808–
9) and Holland (1811).
   But irrespective of specialised skills, with the Consulate the
responsibilities of commanders of military occupations began to be
extended officially to include the installation of the new civilian
structures of administration that characterised absorption within the
Empire. Napoleon’s brother-in-law, General Leclerc, was sent as
governor-general, combining military and civil authority, to St
Domingo, where he died (1802); Jourdan was appointed
administrator-general in Piedmont (1801); Menou, Jourdan’s
successor in Piedmont (1802), was subsequently appointed
commander of the Italian departments (1805), governor-general of
Tuscany (1808) and then of Venice (1809); Marmont was both army
commander and governor-general of Dalmatia (1806–8) and then of
the Illyrian provinces (1809–11), as was his successor Bertrand (1811–
12); Davout was governor-general of the grand-duchy of Warsaw
(1807) and then of the Hanseatic cities (1810). In contrast to the later
1790s, when generals had set up and intervened in civilian
administrations often against the orders of the Directory, the
conjunction of military and civilian authority in the person of a
general was congruent with the techniques of expansion of the
Empire. Between the authority of these governors-general and that of
the viceroys in Spain, the distinction was not one of effective power,
but of a legitimation conferred by the confines of the Empire. Outside
these confines, France was represented officially by its diplomats,
who—in extreme cases of areas of prolonged warfare like Spain—
were replaced by military viceroys; inside the constantly redrawn lines
of annexation, military governors-general were nominated to meet the
same needs. Increasingly, these military representatives of Napoleon
required civilian experts.
                                                The tools of conquest   63


THE DIPLOMATS
The diplomats constituted a substantial and distinctive group, like the
generals, although their numbers were always far smaller: career
personnel at the ministry at Paris never rose to more than 55 (or 75
including translators and temporary employees), diplomats in the field
averaged around 130, with a further 250 in the consular service.23 The
cost of the diplomatic service was little more than 1 per cent of the
French budget throughout the Napoleonic period. In some respects
these figures provide an accurate reflection of the subordination of the
normal channels of international relations during these years. But they
are misleading as an indicator of the importance of the functions
assigned to diplomats in the Napoleonic vision of the world.
   The ministry of foreign affairs had been badly disrupted during the
Revolutionary years because of its identification with the ancien
regime in terms of functions and aristocratic personnel. By the end of
the Jacobin Year II, France had only four accredited diplomatic
representatives, all in neutral states. Under the Directory, Delacroix,
Talleyrand and Reinhardt reconstructed the professionality of the
ministry, but by Brumaire there were still only eight posts abroad.
France’s diplomatic representation fluctuated along with Napoleon’s
manipulation of Europe’s political geography, expanding or
contracting according to the state of peace and extension of the
Empire’s frontiers. But the relationship was fairly loose, since the
extinction of sovereign states consequential upon the expansion of the
Empire was partly compensated by the creation of vassal states, and
because Napoleon and Talleyrand tended to maintain the traditional
ancien regime pattern of representation, despite the political changes.
Thus, out of a total of twenty-nine diplomatic posts in 1802, there
were nine in Germany, besides Berlin and Vienna; later, eleven posts
were accredited to Rhine Confederation states; in Italy, where
Napoleon progressively swallowed up the former states, he
maintained a diplomatic mission at Lucca, his sister Elisa’s mini-
duchy, as late as 1809. The number of consulates (responsibility for
which had been transferred from the ministry of marine to foreign
affairs in 1793) remained stable at ninety to ninety-five until 1810,
despite annexations and the interruptions of war, as posts were
maintained or newly opened to monitor the economic blockade.
   Appointment to the ministry or to posts abroad, among diplomats
as with generals, was strongly influenced by family patronage and
recommendation. Roederer’s son was one of Talleyrand’s three
personal secretaries; consul Lebrun, minister Chaptal, even Lafayette
64   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


gave a helping hand to protégés or kin; diplomatic bureaucrats in
service, like Caillard, assisted their relatives. Professional continuity
had survived through the Revolutionary years, particularly in the
persons of Alsatians and Germans, often trained at Strasbourg
University, like Reinhardt, Otto and Bacher. Their presence certainly
assisted the professional and linguistic competence of the diplomatic
representation in Germany throughout the period, just as the earlier
experiences as consul of Hauterive and Dhermand facilitated the
commitment to reconstitute an ample consular network.
   The concern to provide specialist training certainly existed. A
school of oriental languages to train interpreters or drogmans (1795)
was maintained at Paris and Constantinople. Hauterive was
responsible for a school for aspiring diplomats (April 1797): the pupils
needed to know French, Latin, one or two modern languages and the
geography of universal history; they were to be taught public law,
modern political history, the constitutions and ‘statistics of states’, and
above all analysis of reports in order to form judgement and acquire
method and style; they were to serve in both the ministerial bureaux
and abroad. But in practice, less than one-third of these ‘aspirants’
made a career in the service, as advancement (a note from the ministry
observed in 1805) ‘depends entirely on the connections their relatives
have with the persons responsible for nominations or with the
political agents themselves, who normally obtain satisfaction if they
ask that their protégés accompany them on their political missions’.24
An attempt to extend to the diplomatic service the use of the council
of state as a training ground for a future professional class by
reserving posts of legation secretaries to auditors (1806) was
effectively reversed by the ministerial éminence grise, Hauterive, who
utilised it to obtain nomination as auditors for some young diplomats
already in service. In practice, there was no bureaucratic development
of professionalism—except for linguistic requirements—but a
professionalism acquired in the field by a core of long-serving
diplomats, like Reinhardt, Bacher, Helflinger, Jacob or Siméon. In the
consular service, especially in the earlier period of reconstruction, the
stress on experience, continuity and local knowledge—and hence on
family ties—was even greater; only in the later years of the Empire did
military events prise consuls out of their favoured posts in Spain and
Portugal to the cold north German coasts.
   Personal appointment by Napoleon, in so small a corps, inevitably
played a disproportionate influence on career prospects, as he chose
men without previous diplomatic or consular experience. The results
could be disastrous, as in the case of Chateaubriand, nominated
                                               The tools of conquest   65


secretary of the legation at Rome on the recommendation of Fontanes
and Napoleon’s sister Elisa. Chateaubriand later complained that his
duties were as insignificant as those of an office-boy in a prefecture.
But this was hardly surprising, given his disregard for diplomatic
protocol, his predilection for royalist exiles, his romantic
identification with the myth of Rome, and his conviction that he was
predestined personally to reconcile Christianity and politics. As the
ambassador, Cardinal Fesch, wrote in irritation to his nephew, the
First Consul Bonaparte, Chateaubriand was ‘a man launched by a
faction, a Doctor who wants to dogmatise, a writer incapable of
satisfaction just from producing books’.25
   Initially the major beneficiaries of Napoleon’s personal choice of
diplomats were the generals. To represent France diplomatically with
military men was a logical sequence to the coup of Brumaire—and in
some cases compensation for aid received. In twenty-nine diplomatic
postings, seventeen generals were named under the Consulate as head
of mission, and eleven during the Empire. Between diplomatic and
consular posts, seventy-one officers were named as heads over the
entire period. During the brief spell of general peace in 1801–2,
virtually all the ambassadors or plenipotentiaries were generals—
Beurnonville in Berlin and then Madrid, Brune at Constantinople,
Andréossy at London, Clarke in Florence, Mathieu Dumas at Naples,
Jourdan at Milan, Gouvion Saint-Cyr at Madrid, Hédouville at St
Petersburg, Lannes at Lisbon, Macdonald at Copenhagen, Ney at
Berne, Turreau at Washington. Many of them insisted on bringing a
full military ‘household’ with them, causing some friction with the
ministry of foreign affairs about responsibility for the costs. Other
generals, particularly close to Napoleon, were sent on special
missions: Duroc to Berlin, Basel, Vienna, St Petersburg and
Copenhagen; Savary in 1805 to Alexander I as a cover to spy on the
Austro-Russian forces.
   Many of these generals were ill-suited for their diplomatic duties,
and some clearly preferred the battlefield. Gouvion Saint-Cyr
floundered amidst the diplomatic intrigues of Madrid of 1801–2; Ney
found himself a diplomat malgré lui as military commander in
Switzerland, through the failure of his civilian predecessors to work
out a viable constitutional settlement. Brune, like Lannes, tried to
shorten his term of office. Junot at Lisbon, like Gardane at Teheran,
simply abandoned their posts when they heard that the fighting had
started again.
   On occasions these military diplomats were used to impress the
Court to which they were sent: almost all the ambassadors to
66   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Constantinople were generals, starting with Brune. Some, under the
Consulate, acted as virtual proconsuls, like Dejean at Genoa or
Jourdan in Piedmont. In other cases, their military qualifications fitted
them particularly to report on potential enemy forces, like Andréossy
at Vienna in 1806, who was accompanied by the future General
Mériage as secretary; both of them were to return in 1809 in military
command of Vienna. Very few were used repeatedly as diplomats, to
the extent of abandoning their vocation: Beurnonville, ambassador at
Berlin (1799) and Madrid (1802), was then retired to the Senate;
Andréossy, a military engineer, served as ambassador in London
(1802–3), Vienna (1806) and Constantinople (1812–14);
Caulaincourt, Talleyrand’s protégé, was regarded as particularly
suited as an ancien regime noble to be ambassador at St Petersburg
(1807–11), subsequently becoming Napoleon’s foreign minister
(1813–14). All in all, Napoleon’s initial experiences of using generals
as diplomatic representatives would seem to have made him gradually
more wary of their suitability.
   Increasingly, with the return of émigré families, especially from
1810, aristocrats resumed their traditional role in the diplomatic
service: between 1800–8 and 1812–13 the proportion of aristocratic
heads of missions rose from one-third to 60 per cent, and at all levels
noble diplomats tended to be younger than non-nobles. The
expansion of the Empire marginally increased the aristocratic element,
as Napoleon appointed the Piedmontese San Marzano to the embassy
at Berlin and the Belgian Mercy-Argenteau to Munich. Turnover
tended to be limited, advancement prospects uncertain, particularly
given these exogenous influences. One consequence was that many
able men, in both the diplomatic and consular services, preferred to
turn elsewhere. Fauvel, vice-consul at Athens, was unperturbed, given
his passion for archaeology. For the young Roederer, foreign affairs
was only a staging post, before his appointment as auditor and then
prefect; Marivault and Jordan followed a similar path. The young
Siméon, after postings to Florence and Rome, took service (like his
father) under Jerome of Westphalia; Jacob moved his career to the
kingdom of Italy; Chateaubriand and the young Portalis, both
promoted rapidly to Rome and Ratisbon, abandoned the service. The
most senior of the consuls, Coquebert, after serving in Hamburg,
Amsterdam, London and Dublin, made his career in the ministries of
the interior and commerce.
   Napoleon never underestimated the importance of the diplomatic
service in France’s international relations. Stipends of foreign affairs
bureaucrats were higher than for corresponding grades in other
                                                The tools of conquest   67


ministries; bonuses were given for successful negotiations, as well as
honours and titles. Outward display was of importance to uphold
France’s prestige and justified expense: Andréossy, as ambassador at
London, received 240,000 francs a year, Caulaincourt at St
Petersburg 480,000 in order to maintain an appropriate style.
Napoleon granted Talleyrand’s successor as foreign minister,
Champagny, additional funds, as ‘my intention is that my minister
for foreign affairs should have more livery, ostentation, servants and
ceremony than the minister of the interior’.26 Great stress was placed
on the quality of the highly visible social activities at the embassies,
with fêtes and receptions: Madame Lannes’ balls at Lisbon were
renowned.
    The diplomats served the customary two functions of their
trade—as sources of information and as agents of their country’s
policies—but in a more specific and integrated manner than was the
norm. Despite Napoleon’s correspondence with his generals in the
field and his family sovereigns and his use of experts and spies on
special missions, diplomatic reports remained his main and most
regular source of information about the external world. Napoleon
insisted on daily reports from the minister, as well as the texts of all
important despatches; at one moment he even demanded to see all
the diplomatic correspondence, although he soon accepted the need
to filter the mass of paper within the ministry. As the demands for
information steadily increased, the department reminded its
representatives ‘that they should neglect no detail, however small, if
it can shed light on the state of the country, the spirit of the Court,
the character and attitudes of influential persons’.27 The demands on
the consuls were even greater: no doubt bowing to the statistical
fashion of those years, in 1802 Talleyrand sent a circular to all
consuls, asking for periodic commercial statistics, with a model
questionnaire specifying the information required, sometimes dating
back to 1792. Following the blockade decrees of 1806 ever more
frequent reports were demanded on the state of commerce, shipping
movements, trading practices, food supplies, grain prices, monetary
exchange rates and smuggling.
    High priority was obviously placed on military information. The
Cadix consul-general sent detailed reports on the movements of
British squadrons in 1805; Ornano, consul-general at Cagliari,
reported on the Sardinian army and the island’s fortifications, should
Napoleon decide on an invasion. In 1805 Otto at Munich and Bacher
at Ratisbon sent precise information about the position of the Austrian
armies that enabled Napoleon to trap them at Ulm. In 1811–12,
68   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Bignon, resident at Warsaw, made up for the inability of the
ambassadors at St Petersburg, Caulaincourt and Lauriston, to send
reliable information on the Russian forces by setting up a network of
Polish spies in Russia’s western provinces.
   The most continuous function of the diplomats, besides reporting
information, was to act as instruments of propaganda. As Hauterive
stated in 1812:

     One of the responsibilities of the ministry of foreign affairs,
     whenever hostilities commence again, is to prove that France has
     always faithfully fulfilled her commitments to peace and that the
     crime of aggression must be imputed to the governments against
     whom she is at war.28

Regular circulars were sent to all legations outlining the French
viewpoint. Military victories, the solidity of the imperial regime,
Napoleon’s personal popularity, the lies of allied propaganda about
the impact of the Spanish war on French opinion, were main themes
of the diplomats’ united front.
   In allied or satellite states, diplomats were expected, sometimes
even encouraged, to play a more leading role. At Danzig, Massias,
jointly with the military governor Rapp, employed the Danziger
Zeitung as a means to rally opinion. At Warsaw, Bignon was officially
responsible for recruiting and equipping Polish troops, besides his
indefatigable involvement in guiding the creation of the new state’s
administrative structures and persuading the faction-ridden nobility
to work together. In general, the diplomats’ responsibilities in
dependent states were to ensure respect of the blockade and regularity
in payment of subsidies and recruitment of troops. In neutral states,
besides the traditional role of winning a favourable attitude towards
their country, on occasions they reverted to earlier expertise: when
British fleets attacked Copenhagen (1801) and Constantinople (1807)
the French ambassadors, Generals Victor and Sébastiani, hastened to
organise their defences.
   Napoleon’s ambitions necessitated an active diplomatic and
consular corps, not just in Europe, but in the Levant, the United States
and even further afield. The recurrent mirage of the Orient, as much
as the need to neutralise Russia, explains not only his consistent
concern for representation at Constantinople (where generals were
thought more likely to impress the divan), but also the despatch of
Sébastiani on a secret mission to Egypt and Palestine already in 1802,
missions and a legation at Teheran (from 1805), even the nomination
                                               The tools of conquest   69


of consuls to the Cape and Macao (1802). Given Napoleon’s highly
personal direction of foreign affairs, his diplomatic representatives
enjoyed virtually no autonomy. At most, like Sébastiani in Turkey or
Alquier in Sweden, they were pawns in a vast game of chess whose
credibility could be burnt by sudden changes of diplomatic alliances.
In his relations with states that remained at least formally
independent, Napoleon’s diplomats, like his generals and senior
bureaucrats, were expendable tools of conquest.


THE PROFESSIONALS OF ANNEXATION
Repeated seizures of territory on the scale of Directorial-Napoleonic
France required personnel with particular political and administrative
skills to absorb them. A rapid glance at the careers of some
representative figures involved in the mechanics of occupation offers
some insight into the gradual emergence of a class of civilian
professionals, convinced of the potential of modern administration
and expert in its application. As always, neat classifications break
down before the realities of the overlap of functions and the highly
personalised careers of individuals under Napoleon. But a study of the
men responsible for the civil administration of occupied territories
merits attention.
   Many of the officials involved in the multiple forms of occupation
of the consular and imperial years gained their initial experience as
members of the Revolutionary assemblies sent into the field as
commissaires.29 François-Joseph Rudler had served in the Legislative
assembly before transforming the left bank of the Rhine into four
departments of France; A.-F.Miot de Mélito, a feuillant in 1792, was
commissaire at Florence, Rome and in Corsica in 1795, minister-
plenipotentiary in Piedmont in 1796 and despatched to Holland in
1798; Ange-Marie d’Eymar was a deputy to the Estates-General
before serving as commissaire to the Cisalpine republic in the Year VI
and to the provisional administration in Piedmont in 1798–9; the
notorious Antoine-Christophe Saliceti, fellow Corsican and patron of
Bonaparte, was also a deputy to the Estates-General, as well as a
member of the 1792 Convention, who acted as commissaire in
Corsica, Oneglia and Genoa between 1793 and 1797, and intrigued
unofficially at Genoa, Florence and Rome in 1798–9. With the
exception of Saliceti, almost all these politicians had opposed the
Jacobins and some had had to flee or hide during Year II.
   Besides the assemblies, alternative paths of experience were service
in a ministry or an army, or previous experience abroad. Claude
70   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Petiet, whom Napoleon nominated to govern Lombardy in 1800–1,
had started his career as an ordnance officer in the army in 1790 and
had served in both the Directory Legislative assemblies and as minister
of war. Charles-Etienne Coquebert de Montbret, who was to have a
brilliant career as head of the statistical bureau in the ministry of the
interior and then secretary-general of the ministry of manufactures,
had started as consul at Hamburg for nearly ten years before the
Revolution and was to be employed by Napoleon in the delicate posts
of consul at London during the peace of Amiens and then as general
commissioner to establish the excise system on shipping on the Rhine
in 1805.
   By Brumaire, most of these men were aged about 40 (the oldest,
Eymar and Petiet, were born in 1747 and 1749; all the others
between 1755 and 1762). They owed their appointments after
Brumaire to their previous experience, or because of the patronage
of the inner circle close to Napoleon. Thus L.A.Fauvelet de
Bourrienne, whose reputation rests on his suspect memoirs and his
corrupt practices as charge d’affaires at Hamburg from 1805 until
his clamorous dismissal in 1813, had started his career in the
embassy in Vienna in 1788, continuing to serve in Leipzig and
Warsaw until 1792, but owed his progress to his position close to
Napoleon as personal secretary at Leoben in 1797, then at
Campoformio, on the Egyptian expedition, and in Italy in 1800.
J.A.M.Agar, count Mosburg, owed his entire career to his fellow
citizen from Cahors, Murat: commissaire with the provisional
administration in Tuscany in 1801, member of the Legislative body
for the Lot department in Year XII, he accompanied Murat on the
1805 campaign, became chief minister in his duchy of Berg, followed
Murat to Naples in 1808 where he was minister of finances, and got
imperial recognition of his Berg title as comte Mosburg through the
direct intervention of Caroline and Murat in 1812. F.V.J.Lespérut, a
friend of the idéologue Volney, was secretary to General Berthier
during the Consulate, briefly secretary-general of Berthier’s ministry
of war and appointed to the Legislative body in 1802, before moving
into the entourage of Elisa Bonaparte Baciocchi as administrator of
her new duchy of Piombino in 1805; recalled by Berthier to act as
governor of his principality of Neuchâtel (1806), he reported to
Berthier at the general headquarters at Warsaw, but was snatched by
Napoleon to act as administrator-general of finances in occupied
Silesia (1807), returning to Neuchâtel only in 1810.
   Lespérut’s experience is revealing of the career mobility of those
able to hold the favour of powerful patrons. He moved essentially in
                                                The tools of conquest   71


what could be described as the outer circle of service, in the new states
created by Napoleon. To be employed in the outer circle was not an
unambiguous proof of success, nor was it without its dangers. Jean-
Claude Beugnot had been recommended by General Beurnonville to
Lucien Bonaparte after Brumaire and had played a major role in the
creation of the prefectoral system, then serving ably as prefect of the
Seine-Inférieure department (1800–6) before being called to the
council of state. As minister of finances in the new kingdom of
Westphalia he felt particularly exposed because of the conflicting
orders of Jerome and Napoleon and returned to Paris within a year; as
commissaire and minister of finances at Berg, he felt cheated when
Roederer was appointed as his superior and secretary of state in 1810
and requested (in vain) to be transferred to Holland. Joseph
Bonaparte’s entourage at Naples was heavily marked by Frenchmen
who had fallen into disgrace: the former Jacobin P.J. Briot (a protégé
of Lucien Bonaparte) was intendant in the Abruzzi, Saliceti (whom
Napoleon mistrusted, but who had once acted as Joseph’s secretary)
was minister of police. Roederer himself, who had rewritten the
Cisalpine constitution, but had then fallen out of favour in 1802 and
been retired to the Senate, was appointed as minister of finances at
Naples only through Joseph’s insistence. Faipoult de Maisoncelles,
who had a chequered career in the Revolutionary years, culminating
as Directory commissaire contesting General Championnet’s creation
of the Neapolitan republic, had been dismissed from his post as
prefect of the Belgian department of Escaut (1808) and was only saved
by Joseph, who appointed him councillor of state in Spain. Gérando
found himself removed from the list of councillors of state, while
serving as commissaire in Catalonia in 1812, like Siméon in the duchy
of Berg.
   For the military, despatch to these outlying vassal states could also
be a sign of disfavour and risky in its consequences. Marshal Masséna,
temporarily out of favour with Napoleon through his financial
malpractices, constantly demanded his recall from Naples. General
Reynier, who had killed in a duel his former superior officer in Egypt,
was exiled to Naples. General Damas had been retired in 1803,
arrested with Moreau in 1804 and managed to remake his career only
through Murat’s insistence that he was the ideal man to create an
army in Berg. General Lamarque refused to follow Joseph from
Naples to Spain as it meant resigning from the Grande Armée: ‘I wish
to remain French’.30 Whether or not Napoleon refused to grant the
Bavarian chief minister Montgelas’ request for the services of General
Bertrand,31 it seems probable that such service in a vassal state would
72   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


have harmed his subsequent rapid career, which was to end with his
personal accompaniment of the Emperor to St Helena.
    Service in the new vassal states was ambiguous: it could signify
equally a sign of promotion in a promising career, recall from the
oblivion of previous disgrace, temporary banishment, or permanent
exile into the outer circle. Despatch to territories where Napoleon
intended to maintain direct control, by contrast, became an
increasingly professional affair. Sometimes continuity had been
ensured by the appointment of the transitional administrators as the
first prefects, like Shée, Jolivet and Jeanbon-Saint-André in the
Rhineland in 1800; the same method was to be employed with the
transformation of Parma into the department of the Taro by Nardon
(1806–8), and the creation of the Valais into the Simplon department
(1810), where the diplomatic resident Derville-Maléchard became
prefect. Expertise became a requirement, with teams being sent in to
adapt the existing systems to French structures at successive
annexations. In Piedmont in 1801–2, French technicians of finances,
the judicial system, the gendarmerie and ecclesiastical matters were
joined by Prina, the future minister of finances in the kingdom of Italy.
When Liguria was annexed in 1805, not only was the former consul
Lebrun sent to head the team, but so too was the minister of finances
Gaudin, who was subsequently to be despatched to Holland in 1811
with the same task of reorganising the financial system. Daru,
intendant-general of the civil list, was made responsible for the
administration and exaction of the huge indemnity imposed on
conquered Prussia in 1806. Coquebert de Montbret, who had served
in Amsterdam and was an acknowledged expert on Customs and
Excise, was detached from the ministry of the interior on a special
mission to Holland after its annexation to organise the new Customs
line.
    By the middle years of the Empire, service in the newly occupied or
annexed territories became a step in the career of young auditors,
often in place of a sub-prefecture. Bruguière de Barante’s vocal dislike
of his posting as intendant to Danzig, Warsaw and Silesia (1806–7) led
to his downgrading as sub-prefect, before promotion to prefect.
Rouen des Mallets was intendant of Ragusa and Carniole in the
Illyrian provinces for two years (1811–13) before appointment as
prefect; Stassart was intendant of the Tyrol, Elbing, Königsberg, east
Prussia and Berlin (1806–7), before becoming sub-prefect and then
prefect; Cesare Balbo was secretary to the junta absorbing Tuscany
and the consulta annexing the rump of the Papal states (1808–10);
                                               The tools of conquest   73


Nicolai was intendant at Vilna (1811–12) before becoming prefect of
the Piedmontese Doire department.
   The growing professionalism was reflected in linguistic
expectations. If some of the older French ministers serving in the
vassal states—like Agar and Beugnot in Berg and Siméon in
Westphalia—did not know German, by the later years language
became one of the necessary qualifications. Italian, still the language
of culture, seemed to have presented no problems. But in Germany,
the need for personnel in the new Hanseatic departments and the
continuous occupations led to a major shake-up of French diplomatic
representatives in 1811–12.
   There had emerged a category of senior bureaucrats of territorial
occupations, skilled in the art of inducting newly annexed regions into
the French methods of administration, and able to pass on their
expertise to the young auditors who accompanied them. A few
examples are sufficient to illustrate the point. L.J. E.Dauchy, a
moderate of the Estates-General and Directory assemblies, who had
served as prefect in the Aisne and Piedmontese Marengo departments,
and as councillor of state since 1802, was proposed by Eugene de
Beauharnais as prefect of the newly annexed department of the
Adriatico (Venice). He was then appointed administrator-general of
finances and domains in Dalmatia in 1806, intendant for the treasury
in the junta responsible for assimilating Tuscany in 1808, and then
intendant-general in the Illyrian provinces (1809). F.L.R.Mouchard de
Chaban, whose competence as a prefect successively in the Rhineland
Rhin-et-Moselle and Belgian Dyle departments led to his nomination
as maître des requêtes in 1802, was appointed to the Tuscan junta
(1808), then as intendant of the interior and finances in the Hanseatic
departments in 1810 and intendant-general of finances of the 32nd
military division (north Germany) in 1813. J.M.de Gérando, who had
fled from the Terror to Naples and then from the Fructidor purge to
Germany, was seconded from the ministry of the interior to assist in
the annexation of Genoa in 1805, the Tuscan junta in 1808 and the
Roman consulta in 1809, returning as councillor of state until he was
once more sent into the field as intendant for upper Catalonia.
C.F.Lebrun was sent successively to Liguria (1805–7) and Holland
(1810–13) to supervise their absorption into the Empire. The
reluctance of the young auditor Balbo to serve in the Tuscan and
Roman special commissions of annexation was anomalous. H.C.F.
Barthélemy enthusiastically seized the opportunity offered by his
knowledge of German to serve in a newly absorbed Hanseatic
department; A.Petit de Beauverger specialised in the North Sea area,
74   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


as secretary-general of the commission responsible for the
organisation of the Hanseatic departments (1810–12), before his
appointment as prefect of Ems-Occidental (1813).
   The pace of annexation had produced its professional specialists,
senior bureaucrats of the absorption of conquered territories. Few if
any were appointed specifically with this purpose in mind. Most had
acquired experience in the council of state, where it was not
uncommon for its members to be employed in specialised services or
ministries.32 Nevertheless, if initially their deployment in occupied
territories was the outcome of their duties and skills within the normal
course of administration, they developed into a specialist group. With
exemplary rapidity, they rendered the areas under their control
administratively similar to France, before handing over responsibility
to the prefects. It seems likely that their physical presence in the
territory was as important as their professional training in order to
achieve such radical restructuring. The counterproof is offered by the
principality of Neuchâtel where virtually nothing was changed in
eight years: its ruler, Marshal Berthier, never set foot in it, while his
representative Lespérut spent only a few months there intermittently.
The accumulated experience of these senior bureaucrats presumably
would have been passed on to the generation of auditors. Time was
lacking and was abruptly brought to a halt by military defeat.

THE PREFECTS
Assimilation to the cultural model of France, and even more
absorption within its frontiers, was recognised as a lengthy process. If
military means were necessary to impose French hegemony, only
civilian rule could achieve the broad social consensus on which the
solidity of the regime necessarily rested. Like their Revolutionary
predecessors (or most imperialist ideologists), the most convinced of
the Napoleonic elite do not seem to have regarded the ultimate
achievement of a new Europe fashioned in the image of France as a
chimera, but to have accepted that it would require a new generation
to overcome the deep-rooted superstitions and prejudices inherited
from the past. In the meantime it was the task of the administration to
create the conditions which would facilitate and accelerate the process
of acculturation.
   The prefects personified this responsibility. Obviously they could
not act alone, nor were they judged omnicompetent. Local
collaboration was essential for the functioning of the administration,
from sub-prefects to judges, from financial agents to mayors. In the
                                                The tools of conquest   75


satellite states—like Bavaria, Holland or Warsaw—French presence
(apart from the military) was normally limited to diplomatic
representation and temporary missions by experts; even in the
Bonaparte family kingdoms (except for Naples), French advisers were
not more than a handful. The role of these local elites, whether in the
annexed territories or the formally independent states, will be
considered later. For the present, in this discussion of the tools of
conquest, it is necessary to look at the composition of the prefectoral
corps responsible for administering the annexed territories.
   Between 1800 and 1814 306 prefects were nominated; we have
details of the careers of 281.33 Political patronage inevitably played a
major role in the initial appointments, given the rapidity with which
ninety-seven prefects were chosen: about twenty prefects had studied
or served with Napoleon in his youth, seven had belonged to the
scientific commission of the Egyptian campaign, two had been
diplomats in Italy. The Beauharnais clan, Lucien Bonaparte as
minister of the interior (aided by Beugnot), Talleyrand, General
Clarke and the two Consuls Cambacérès and Lebrun exercised
considerable patronage, while family and personal relationships
played, as always, an important role. In later years, patronage and kin
remained important, but their effects were more diffused.
   Politically, the prefects were men of the Revolution, few of whom
had administrative experience before 1789. Over 40 per cent of all
prefects had belonged to a Revolutionary assembly, but inevitably as
the years passed the proportion dropped; by 1807 it was 38 per cent,
by 1813 only 23 per cent. Socially, although bourgeois prefects always
remained a majority (61 per cent over the whole period), the
proportion of nobles grew already under the Consulate and early
Empire with the return of the émigrés and the substantial increase in
the number of posts (23 per cent in 1800, 31 per cent in 1804, 39 per
cent in 1808, 41 per cent in 1813). It seems likely that, as in the
diplomatic service, these nobles made careers more rapidly than their
bourgeois peers; it is certain that they were given preference in
nominations to the more important departments.
   But whether noble or bourgeois, administrative capacity was
always of prime importance. About sixty prefects of the initial list had
been members or presidents of departmental administrations, or
commissaires of the Directory supervising these local administrations,
or mayors of large cities. Over the entire period, 32 per cent of the
prefects were recruited from the administration, having previously
served as sub-prefects, secretaries-general, intendants of occupied
territories, bureaucrats, diplomats or consuls; 20 per cent came from
76   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


a legal background; the military provided 12 per cent of the prefects.
As Whitcomb has shown, there was an increasing professionalisation
of the prefectoral corps, with the proportion recruited from the
administration rising from 15 per cent in 1802 to 41 per cent by 1811
and 47 per cent by 1814. A substantial number of initially nominated
prefects were dismissed in the first three years, and major turnovers
occurred again in 1810 and 1813, in the latter cases specifically to
make way for younger qualified men. Over the entire period the
average years of administrative experience of the prefects rose
steadily—from 2.4 years in 1800 to 6.5 by 1805 and 10 years in
1812—whereas their average age fell from 48 years (1808–10) to 45
following the turnovers of 1810 and 1813. As in other fields, it was
the auditors who emerged as an increasingly important group: forty-
two auditors in all were promoted to prefect, by 1813 one in four of
the prefects came from their ranks.
   Given these overall traits of the prefectoral body, it is useful to
enquire whether the annexed departments were in any way distinctive.
The language of ‘reunion’ preached uniformity, the transformation of
the annexed territories into departments similar in all respects to those
of ‘ancienne’ France. Later historiography, particularly of these
annexed regions, often lamented that equal career opportunities were
not available. In fact, only 32 prefects, or 12 per cent, came from
outside France’s pre-1789 frontiers, although the 43 annexed
departments constituted one-third of the total 130 in the Empire.
Among these thirty-two, the largest contingent came from Italy—
thirteen or 5 per cent of all prefects (although the Italian departments
numbered 11 per cent of the total)—followed by nine Belgians (3 per
cent, with 7 per cent of the departments), seven Dutchmen (with the
same number of departments), one German (eight departments) and
two Swiss (one department, but with Geneva in another). The
comparison worsens if the length of period of departmentalisation is
taken into account, for the Belgians had become French since 1795,
the Rhineland Germans in 1800, the Piedmontese since 1802, whereas
the Dutch only in 1810. It is evident on these figures that the Germans
in particular were discriminated against.
   More significant is an analysis of the policy over appointment to
prefectures within the annexed departments themselves. Of the total
281 prefects, 98 or 35 per cent were responsible at some stage for one
of the 44 annexed departments.34 The proportion who originated in
these territories was remarkably high—of the total thirty-two ‘new
French’ appointed as prefects throughout the Empire, twenty-five
served in these new departments, equivalent to one of every four
                                                The tools of conquest   77


prefects. There was evidently a deliberate policy of favouring such
appointments, whose evolution can be traced through successive
phases. Initially only Frenchmen were appointed. All the seven
prefects who served in the two departments of former Savoy and
Geneva were French, as were fifteen of the sixteen who served in the
four departments of the Rhineland left bank. The twenty-eight
prefects who administered the nine Belgian departments included only
two Italians and one Belgian. With the annexation of Piedmont, the
policy seemed to change: of twenty-two prefects, nine were Italian, all
except one from the former Sardinian state; two of the nine prefects of
the three Genoese departments came from Genoa. But with the later
annexations in central Italy, such consideration for local appointments
vanished, with only one Italian (and then from a different state) out of
nine prefects. In Holland, because of the particular circumstances,
policy changed again, with seven Dutch and four Belgian
appointments, compared to only three French. In the Hanseatic
departments, evidently for linguistic reasons as well, three Belgians
were appointed, alongside two French.35
   A closer look at the twenty-four ‘new French’ prefects throws
further light on the underlying policies. In Piedmont, the initial
appointments to all six departments were of Italians, all except one
from Piedmont or the ex-Sardinian county of Nice; in three
departments the second nomination was also of a Piedmontese. Two
of these prefects, Angelo Gandolfo and Carlo Giulio, were professors
at the University of Turin; Giulio had been a member of the so-called
‘Jacobin’ triumvirate that collaborated with Jourdan. Giulio Robert,
who died in office as prefect of the Tanaro department in 1803, had
been a member of the Italian deputation to Paris during the 1798–9
retreat of the French armies, in the provisional administration in
1800, and Piedmontese minister to the Cisalpine government. Others
came from noble families, often leading ones—like Giovanni
Francesco San Martino della Motta or P.A.Biamino Arborio—but
always with some previous political or intellectual qualification that
brought them to the attention of the French authorities and explained
their willingness to serve. Thus San Martino, a botanist, was a
member of the Academy of Sciences, who had formed part of the
provisional government in 1800 and of the municipal administration
of Turin in 1801. Vittorio Federico Ercole della Villa di Villastellone,
who had been chamberlain to the king of Sardinia, was nominated by
Berthier to the Piedmontese Legislative assembly in 1800 before his
appointment as prefect to the most important department, that of the
Po, where he served for four years. Giovanni Lorenzo Degregory di
78   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Marcorengo had taken a law degree, travelled widely in France,
England and Germany before the Revolution, and been among the
first in Italy to experiment with balloon air flights; he had already
collaborated with the French in Year VII as commissaire in the Sesia
tribunal, and became sub-prefect of Biella after Marengo, before his
appointment as prefect of the Stura department, where he also served
for four years, before his elevation to the Senate (1803) and as
imperial count (1808).
   With the annexation of the Ligurian republic, Napoleon nominated
the most distinguished aristocrat, Gerolamo Durazzo, to act as prefect
of Genoa as guarantee of a smooth transition; Durazzo had been a
member of the executive committee and took constitutional
responsibility with the return of the French in 1800, and had been
appointed as the last doge of Genoa in 1802. The same stress on
continuity is visible in Holland, where the initial Dutch prefects had
all served Louis of Holland’s administration as landdrost, usually for
at least two years. Some, like P.Hofstede, had a more varied
experience, as provisional secretary-general (1805) and landdrost
successively of two provinces, Drenthe (1807) and Overijssel (1809);
or C.G.Hultman, landdrost of Maasland in 1808, nominated prefect
of the Vaucluse in 1810 before his appointment as prefect of the
Bouches de Meuse.
   Other ‘new French’ prefects had already entered French service
before they were employed in their country of origin or neighbouring
areas. Thus Biamino Arborio, who was initially appointed as a
councillor of the prefecture in his home department of Sesia, was
nominated sub-prefect at Lille and then Douai two years later, before
his rapid promotion as prefect of the Stura department in 1803.
P.C.G.de Coninck-Outrive had started his career in similar fashion as
councillor of the prefecture in the department of the Lys, before his
appointment as prefect of the Ain in 1802 and then of the Belgian
department of Jemappes in 1805. To stress the distinction of national
origin in these instances is somewhat arbitrary, for there is little to
distinguish the career patterns of these ‘new French’ administrators
from the ‘old’ French, except in linguistic capacities; even in this
respect the Alsatians were as well qualified. Thus de Coninck, on the
basis of his initial experience in the Ain, was evidently regarded as an
able administrator whose origins and linguistic skills could be put to
best use in the northern seaboard: from Jemappes, he was appointed
successively to the Dutch department of Bouches de l’Escaut (1810)
and then to Hamburg, capital of the Bouches de l’Elbe department
(1811). But there was little to distinguish his career from that of
                                               The tools of conquest   79


S.L.J.Jannesson, an Alsatian (nine years de Coninck’s junior), who
started as councillor of the prefecture of the Haut-Rhin department,
was appointed sub-prefect of Deux-Ponts in the Rhineland
department of Mont-Tonnerre (1807) and then promoted as prefect of
the northern Dutch department of Ems-Oriental (1810); Jannesson’s
family relationship (brother-in-law) with the Belgian auditor, count
d’Arberg, may well have helped the latter’s appointment as prefect of
the Bremen department of the Bouches du Weser (1811) and then of
Jannesson’s original department of Mont-Tonnerre (December 1813).
But if de Coninck and Arberg provide examples of ‘new French’ who
continued to be deployed in regions with which they could be
presumed to have a special affinity, this was hardly the case of
Biamino Arborio, who was transferred from the Stura to the Belgian
Lys department (1811), perhaps on the assumption that he had
acquired knowledge of this northern French region during his early
service as sub-prefect in the neighbouring department of the Nord.
Arborio’s career was paralleled by that of the Belgian B.-J.Holvoet,
who started as a councillor in the prefecture of his native Lys
department in Year XI, was appointed maître des requêtes in 1810
and director of the tobacco monopoly in 1811, before his
appointment as prefect to the ‘old’ French department of the Loire
(1812). The careers of Arborio and Holvoet were essentially similar to
those of Frenchmen, who were transferred between ‘old’ and ‘new’
French departments, like C.Cochon de Lapparent, prefect of Vienne
after Brumaire, who was transferred, to his despair, to the department
of Deux-Nèthes; or A.Jubé de la Perelle, a member of the Tribunate in
the Year VIII, prefect of the Doire (1808), and then of the Gers
department (1813); or P.A.F.de Lezay-Marnésia, prefect of the
Rhineland department of Rhin-et-Moselle (1806) and then of the
Alsatian Bas-Rhin (1810).
   A few of these ‘old’ French prefects were born in nearby regions.
This was particularly marked among the Rhineland departments.
Thus Lezay-Marnésia was born in the Jura; N.S.Simon, prefect of
Roer (1800), was born at Colmar; J.C.F.de Ladoucette, born at Nancy,
was transferred as prefect from the Hautes-Alpes to Roer (1809);
J.Bexon d’Ormschwiller, prefect of the Sarre, was born in the Moselle
area; and his successor, M.X.Keppler, in the Bas-Rhin. Such a choice
of prefects of local origin is comparable to that of Flamands in the
Hanseatic departments, based on linguistic and possibly cultural
reasons, whereas the Italians and Dutch nominated as prefects in their
home areas were appointed as a manifestation of continuity.
Elsewhere, relative vicinity of birthplace to location of service would
80   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


seem to be coincidental, and in any case far less significant than other
factors, such as previous experience: Ange-Marie d’Eymar was not
appointed as first prefect of the Genevan department of Léman
because he was born at Forcalquier in the Basses-Alpes, but because as
representative of the Directory in the Cisalpine republic and at Turin
he had acquired considerable knowledge and contacts within the
region.
   The common denominator to the prefects in the new departments
was experience, particularly in the administrative field. It was not
unusual, particularly in the early annexations (Savoy, Belgium,
Rhineland), for men to be appointed in their fifties, like Ange-Marie
Eymar (b. 1747), prefect of Léman 1800–3, whose experience dated
back to the Estates General.36 Indeed in the earlier years young
appointments were the exception, where administrative experience
and often political contacts explained the rapid promotion. Thus
P.J.M.Boucqueau de la Villeraie (b. 1773), a Belgian lawyer, had been
actively pro-French since the Year II and had demonstrated his
qualities as commissaire of the Directory with the central
administration of the Sarre (Years VI–VIII), until his appointment as
prefect of Rhin-et-Moselle at the age of 27 (1800). Even in these early
appointments, under the Consulate, a majority of the prefects had
already served at least two to three years in an administrative
capacity, and some had a prolonged political-administrative past.
Thus, Alexandre de Lameth, a deputy to the Estates-General and
émigré from 1795, had already served as prefect of Basses-Alpes since
1800 before his appointment to Rhin-et-Moselle in 1805; Pierre
Loysel, a deputy of the Legislative assembly, the Convention and the
Council of the Elders, was employed in the registration and demesne
department from the eve of Brumaire until his appointment as prefect
of Meuse-Inférieure in 1802 and then of the Po department in 1805;
the Ligurian G.B.Roggieri, who had first met Bonaparte at
Campoformio, had been the Genoese representative at the Cisalpine,
member of the Ligurian Legislative assembly in 1800, minister of
foreign affairs of the Ligurian republic from 1803 until annexation,
when he became prefect of Meuse-Inférieure.
   Some prefects were obviously regarded as particularly suited or
skilled in the administration of the new departments, as they were
transferred from one to another, like Loysel and Coninck, or Lameth
who moved from Rhin-et-Moselle to Roer (1806) and then to the Po
department (1809). B.V.de Chauvelin, who had served for six years as
prefect of Lys (1804–10), before his appointment as councillor of
state, was then despatched to Catalonia as intendant-general in 1812.
                                                 The tools of conquest   81


Of the ninety-eight prefects who served in the new departments, ten
were appointed successively to two departments and two (Lameth,
Coninck) to three.
   During the imperial years, the period of administrative experience
before appointment tended to lengthen for prefects of the annexed
departments, as elsewhere. Increasingly use was made of auditors,
which tended to reduce the age of prefects. Of the 112 appointments
of prefects in the 44 departments, one-third (37) were of men who had
already served as prefect elsewhere, and a notably higher proportion
who had served as sub-prefects or in equivalent positions. Of these
prefects, twenty had begun their careers as auditors, of whom
seventeen were nominated from 1808 (six in 1813). By these later
years, the experiences of the annexed departments did not differ
significantly from the overall pattern of the Empire, where (as
Whitcomb has shown) the period of previous administrative
experience increased, contemporaneously to a slight fall in average
age, through the steady increase in the number of auditor-trained
prefects.
   It is in the earlier years that the policy towards the new
departments shows its specificity in the care displayed from the outset
in the choice of prefects. Unlike many departments of ‘ancienne’
France, very few of the initially appointed prefects were changed
rapidly. In the twenty-eight departments annexed before 1808, three
of the first prefects died in office within three years, three others were
promoted, and only two were moved out of administrative
responsibility; in all other cases, including the immediate successors of
the defunct prefects, the prefects served from between three and
thirteen years. Stability was characteristic of prefectoral rule within
the annexed departments, already firmly established by the end of the
Consulate and consolidated during the Empire. The only major
changes that can be observed are clearly related to overall policy.
Thus, in preparation for the annexation of the Ligurian republic
(spring 1805), policy towards the entire bloc of Piedmontese
departments was reconsidered: the three surviving Italian prefects
were removed, and the department of the Tanaro was suppressed,
with its prefect transferred to the new neighbouring department of the
Apennins. The replacement of the two prefects of the departments in
former Savoy in 1810 formed part of the far larger turnover of that
year that affected the entire Empire.
   The prefects were not the sole agents responsible for absorbing the
new departments into the French system. Napoleon regarded his
generals in the thirty-two military divisions that incorporated groups
82   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of departments as an important check, and sometimes counter-
balance, to the civil authority of the prefects. He and his ministers
regularly sent out specialists into these new departments for a range of
purposes. Thus, engineers, mining experts and trade specialists were
despatched to regions of the expanding Empire in order to assess
economic potential.37 With the blockade, agents were sent out to
explore how smuggling could be checked, like the Customs inspector
Catineau La Roche in the Illyrian provinces in 1810 and in Italy,
Germany and Switzerland in the following years. At one point or
another, almost everywhere, spies, like Pellenc in Illyria, were sent to
report on both the administered and the administrators. As the Empire
grew, the complexities of its administration and the contradictions
resulting from the attempt to impose an essentially single and static
model became ever more evident. The prefects, as the central cogs of
this wide-flung machine, were the most exposed to the pressures.

The tools of conquest had been forged over the years as an inevitable
response to the repeated experiences of conquest and occupation. At
Paris the cultural benefits of the French model were never placed in
doubt, but constituted a shared assumption which explains the
unusually corporate unity of vision and which was translated into a
remarkable esprit de corps. But unity of vision and of administrative
action regularly ran up against the bedrock of regional diversity,
whether historical, cultural, economic or social. The experiments of
different mechanisms of control were conceived as means to create
and consolidate acceptance or support, but provoked expressions of
independence. As the frontiers of the Empire expanded, the pressing
insistence on centralisation was contradicted by autonomous
comportments at the periphery. It is to these contrasts between unity
of vision and diversity of practices, between the language of
centralisation and the realities of the periphery, between control and
independence, that we need to turn in order to understand the
Napoleonic conquest of Europe.
3 The practices of conquest:
  administrative integration




    To organise is a word of the Empire.
                                 (Balzac)

Even before the French armies moved in, the states they subverted
were in a condition of crisis that rendered them vulnerable. From the
Austrian empire to the Dutch United Provinces, from Bourbon Naples
and Spain to the Swiss Confederation, the rulers of the ancien regime
states were confronted by social tensions which only too easily
coagulated around the ossified political and administrative structures
they upheld or tried to reform. Revolt had already been repressed in
the Austrian Low Countries and Dutch republic, before it turned into
revolution in France, and flickered, threatening to catch fire, over the
following decade in a multitude of localities, often unaffected directly
by French arms (although not by the menace—or promise—of the
French example). The plots and risings in southern Piedmont, Arezzo
and Pistoia, Schaffhausen, Valais or Zurich, as in the cities of Mainz
or Naples, were supremely local in their origins and expression, even
if they were symptomatic of a far broader and diffuse social malaise
and discontent. The disasters of occupation, or pressures of war on
states such as Spain, Portugal or Venice which bought their peace or
neutrality, absorbed the particularity of such tensions into generalised
resentment against rising and ever more arbitrary fiscal exactions. In
territories occupied by the Directory armies, wherever peasant risings
exploded—above all during the retreat of 1799—they were
interpreted by the French without reference to the underlying
economic and social causes specific to each context. At most the
risings were acknowledged as expressions of resentment at the
unregulated conduct of the soldiery; more commonly, they were

                                  83
84   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


attributed to the influence of priests and reactionary local notables,
manipulating religious superstition and traditional ties of respect and
dependence.
   To what extent were the French authorities aware of the social and
economic crises of the territories they occupied, particularly in the
specificity of their local contexts? In the earlier years of the
Revolution, wherever tensions had climaxed in political revolt, there is
ample documentation that information and rumours about such
episodes circulated widely at Paris, where they were transmuted into
elements of the domestic political struggle. Nor could this be
otherwise, given the presence of political exiles and enthusiasts. Many
of the 40,000 Dutch who had fled their country to escape the
repression that followed the failure of their revolution in 1787 went to
Paris. On the other hand, riots, demonstrations and risings against
bread prices, urban speculators or feudal exactions during the
Revolutionary decade—as in Guipúzcoa, Piedmont or Calabria—
were interpreted in purely political terms. The inevitable lack of
detailed local knowledge combined with the high level of
politicisation to obscure perception of deeper social or economic
processes, be they the decline of the Dutch economy or the antifeudal
struggle of Catalan peasants.
   After Brumaire, characteristic of the Napoleonic years was the
determined effort to collect information about the territories and
peoples under French rule as an instrument of government. There was
a need, in the words of Adrien Duquesnoy, who bore much of the
responsibility for formalizing statistical enquiries in the Consulate
years, not only for a regular flow of information about economic
matters and administrative arrangements but, even more, ‘adequately
precise details about the habits, prejudices, opinions, customs and
energy of the inhabitants, so that the Government can determine the
appropriate measures of surveillance, repression, encouragement and
protection to obtain the best results in each different locality’.1 The
correspondence of the administrators at all levels—from the sub-
prefects as much as from the governors-general and senior officials—
are replete with descriptions and explanations of the areas and
societies for which they were responsible. But here too, now that
politics had become administration, the information was structured in
categories that fixed knowledge into administrative modules. The
formal mould into which the information was ordered and presented,
by its very insistence on a uniform matrix, distanced and inhibited the
possibility of analysis of social and economic relations in localised
contexts. At the same time, it encouraged an indulgence in platitudes
                                              The practices of conquest   85


about social characteristics, an anthology of commonplaces culled
from the philosophes and economists of the enlightenment, sometimes
updated by the more recent writings on the science of man and
progress of civilisation. In lieu of explanation, social groups and entire
peoples were allocated to an appropriately labelled and preformulated
box, as ‘idle’ or ‘industrious’, ‘superstitious’ or ‘enlightened’, ‘feudal’
or ‘civilised’, and so forth.
   Such indifference towards an analysis of the social reality was not
accidental. The concerns of the Napoleonic administrators were not
those of the scholar (even if the more exceptional among them, like
Chabrol or de Gérando, displayed marked scientific interests). They
were of an eminently practical nature, often sustained by a genuine,
albeit Utopian faith in the possibility of arriving at a well-ordered
society. To achieve this end, two complementary routes were
indicated. On the one hand, the experiences of the Revolutionary
decade, including those in occupied territories, imposed an obligatory
and negative reading: they provided clear signposts of what was to be
avoided, especially divided authority, uncontrolled political
expression and social conflict. On the other hand, the French system
of administration, progressively elaborated over the years, constituted
a standard and increasingly mandatory model, whose application was
expected to produce a stable and modern society, freed of the dross of
the past.


THE RESTORATION OF ORDER
Virtually every state brought within the French sphere of influence
carried with it a legacy of recent disruption. Perhaps the only
exceptions were the electorate (from 1806 kingdom) of Bavaria and
the tiny Swiss principality of Neuchâtel. In the former, from the
accession of the young pro-French elector Max-Joseph in 1799, the
leading minister Montgelas accelerated a reforming tradition, then
applying the new system to the territories periodically granted to
Bavaria by grace of Napoleon. In the latter, ceded to Napoleon by the
king of Prussia in exchange for Hanover (1806), Lespérut,
representative of the newly enfeoffed Prince Berthier, warned against
precipitous change precisely because of the stability of the society:
‘One must be cautious about changes with a people which is happy
with its laws and tends to believe that this is because of these laws’.2
   War, invasions, occupations, dismemberment of territory, punitive
indemnities, economic upheaval, sometimes change of regime, were
the causes of the disruption. They were experiences not only of the
86   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


‘sister republics’ of the Directorial years, from the Batavian to the
Parthenopeian, but also common to defeated states like Spain and
Naples, to regions annexed by France, such as Belgium, the Rhenish
left bank, or Holland, as much as to politically remodelled states, like
the Rhine and Swiss confederations or the grand-duchy of Warsaw.
They were experiences that spanned the entire Napoleonic period,
from the termination of the Batavian (1801) and creation of the
Italian republic (1802) to the occupation of Spain (1808) and the
annexation of the Hanseatic ports and Swiss Valais (1810).
    Whether in territories annexed by France or heavily subject as
satellite states, the administrators called to mark a break with the past
were confronted with two major consequences of the previous years.
First, the deliberate dismantling of political and administrative
institutions within each state, or their progressive decomposition
under external pressures, had created a political vacuum, in which
power effectively devolved from the centre to the periphery, where the
local patriciates and landowners, traditionally incorporating
authority, wealth and reasonably continuous presence, reaffirmed the
authority of municipal and provincial institutions. Secondly, the
political experiences of these years had created deep divisions among
the elites, often as profound as those resulting from the Revolutionary
struggle in France. Where there had been a change of regime followed
by a repressive restoration—as in Belgium, Piedmont, Lombardy or
Naples—the bloodshed and persecutions had added a new dimension
of vendetta to the political enmities between patriots and
conservatives, enmities which already too easily coincided with long-
standing feuds between local factions and families. Even where there
was no restoration, hostility and divisions ran deep among the elites,
whether through the direct experience of revolution—as in the
Batavian republic—or its indirect consequences, in the form of
economic crisis and political humiliation, as in the pro- and anti-
Godoy factions in Spain or the resentment of the smaller bourgeoisie
of Bremen against the city patricians. Perhaps only in the states newly
created by rapid military victory out of formerly separate
sovereignties—like the grand-duchy of Berg, the kingdom of
Westphalia or the grand-duchy of Warsaw—was there no time for
such divisions to sink root; although here, more than elsewhere, local
authority and power was entrenched.
    Confronted with these legacies, the immediate tasks confronting
the new administrators were the restoration of order, the affirmation
of political authority and the acquisition of local collaboration. All
three tasks required knowledge of the area.
                                             The practices of conquest   87


   The systematic collection of information was regarded as forming
an essential prerequisite to effective administration by Brumaire. The
great statistical topography of the departments of France, initiated by
the Directorial minister of the interior, François de Neufchâteau, and
actively pushed forward by his consular successor, Chaptal, gave
official consecration to the widespread optimism of intellectual and
political circles in the possibility and desirability of collecting and
ordering information on every aspect of the human environment. This
massive enterprise, which at its peak (1802–3) involved the activities
of 20 per cent of the personnel of the economics division of the
ministry of the interior and represented an attempt to engage the
collaboration of the local intelligentsia, was to flag in the increasingly
pragmatic and secretive environment of the Empire. The preparation
and publication of a statistical topography for each department had
proved too slow, whether as political propaganda (to demonstrate the
progress since 1789) or as information that could be of immediate
practical utility.3
   If a failure as a Utopian intellectual project, the experience of the
statistical topography not only remained, but also acquired a more all-
embracing status as the central discipline in the elaboration of a
science of administration. The collection of data about the resources,
economy and society of the department provided the administration
not only with factual knowledge as a preliminary to policy decisions,
but also a regular check on the correspondence of administrative
norms to social evolution. For C.J.Bonnin, ‘through the knowledge of
facts, governments will search for remedies appropriate to the needs
of nations’.4 For de Gérando, statistics provided a method and
procedure of observation, analysis, comparison and synthesis, which
was essential to ensure that the administration avoided arbitrary
actions and exercised its functions in the public interest. Statistics
provided the legitimising of the new role of the administration in its
relationship with society. Administrative action, as de Gérando put it,
signified

    the rights of society as much as the principle of power exercised
    by the authority that represents it. The law regulates
    administrative action; the interests of society are its rule and its
    aim. Private interests are like a deposit held on trust by Authority,
    marking its limit.5

It would be difficult to overestimate the pervasive influence of this
intimate, at moments almost symbiotic relationship between statistics
88   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and administration. If Napoleon had little patience for the more
metaphysical aspirations of the statistical exponents, nobody ever
doubted his devouring thirst for facts. Beugnot, sent with other
experts to examine how to organise the newly created kingdom of
Westphalia, began his report:

     Sire, When those of us who lived at Paris received Your Majesty’s
     orders, you insisted that we provide you with details, an
     abundance of details. It was your way of informing us that the
     simplest features of Westphalia were a matter of great interest to
     you; and that it would never be importunate to speak to you
     frequently about your peoples.6

Napoleon’s avidity for factual information, with which he importuned
one and all, formed part of his public image. But it was consistent with
his insistence, out of public view, that his administrators acquire first-
hand knowledge.
   The obligation on prefects to carry out an annual tour of their
departments—which Napoleon extended to the kingdom of Italy with
his reorganisation of the administration in 1805—was merely one
aspect of what by then had become standard practice. As occasion
demanded, special agents were despatched across the Empire and
beyond its frontiers to draw up statistical assessments of the potential
of resources (including those in territories not yet under French
control) or to investigate the malfunctioning of branches of the
administration. Where specialised knowledge was required, such
enquiries were entrusted to men with appropriate skills, such as Héron
de Villefosse, who was appointed ‘general inspector of mines in the
conquered territories’ in Germany, or the engineers Baillet and Gallois
in Piedmont and Liguria.7 More generally, the ability to collect and
present information in statistical form, according to requirement, was
regarded as normal procedure, part of the standard training of
aspirant prefects, like the auditor Plancy, who was sent to the Belgian
departments in Year XII (1805) to assess the likely shortage in the
cereal harvest.8

Given this widespread faith in the statistical collection of information
within the administrative mind at Paris, it is hardly surprising that
French prefects should have insisted in such an exercise of style even
when it was apparent that it could be of little practical value, nor that
similar beliefs should have prevailed outside France’s frontiers.
Chaptal’s grandiose project had embraced all the departments of
                                               The practices of conquest   89


France. By 1805, of the total 111, 25 constituted new territories
incorporated by France: statistical memoirs were compiled by at least
47 prefects, including a remarkable one on Montenotte by Chabrol de
Volvic, future prefect of Paris. The annexed regions were particularly
well served, with memoirs on Savoy, eight of the nine Belgian
departments and three of the four Rhenish ones.9 Years later, when the
fashion and method of compiling statistics had changed
fundamentally, from the large-scale description to the regular
collection of data on individual sectors of the economy, the intendant-
general of the interior of the newly annexed Dutch provinces, F.J.B.
d’Alphonse—who as prefect of the Indre had already produced one
such memoir—still felt the urge to draw up a vast statistical ‘General
survey of Holland’ in 1,364 pages.10 Nor was he alone: the prefect of
a Catalan department, Alban de Villeneuve, prepared a ‘Statistical,
historical and administrative memoir providing a description of the
administration of the department of the Bouches de l’Ebre before the
war, the changes it has experienced since the war and its state on 1
January 1813’. In form and content a replica of the Chaptal statistical
memoirs, it rests as a monument to the power of established modes of
thought, even when rendered anachronistic, unrealistic and impossible
to complete by the conditions of war:

    The destruction of the archives, the flight of the most enlightened
    persons, the ignorance, mistrust or ill faith of those who have
    stayed, and last but not least the difficulties of communications
    have and for a long time will continue to impede the completion
    of a work of this sort.11

The Netherlands offered repeated examples of the collection of
statistics as a necessary part of the administrative process. The major
effort made by the last Batavian government (1798–1801) to
centralise the administration was inevitably complemented by wide-
ranging statistical enquiries, previously inconceivable in the context of
provincial independence; under Louis Bonaparte, the French pattern
was adopted of regular reports on economic activities. In the kingdom
of Italy, the passion for statistics was so great that public officials, like
Scopoli, minister of education, and private scholars, like Vincenzo
Cuoco, launched projects as ambitious as Chaptal’s departmental
topography. In Naples, Murat tried to replace the assumptions about
the country’s wealth (which at best relied on old investigations of
enlightenment reformers like G.M.Galanti, at worst on prejudiced
guesses) by the solid facts of statistical enquiries. The frontiers of
90   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


French influence were signposted by the outward march of statistics,
like those ordered by Marshal Suchet in 1810 as military governor of
Aragon, as he settled in for a lengthy stay. Perhaps the most intriguing
example of the success of the French model of ‘state statistics’ was the
1806 short-lived decision by Prussia (which possessed its own
distinguished and autonomous statistical tradition) to set up a bureau
of statistics in imitation of the Parisian one; Jena truncated the
experiment.

The restoration of order required both less and more than the
statistical collection of information could provide. In the immediate
instance, the solution to disorder was armed repression; over the
longer term, the destruction of banditry necessitated a knowledge of
kin and communal networks that escaped official administrative
sources, and usually the police.
   The wars and upheavals of the Directorial years were inevitably
accompanied by the breakdown of order in the countryside. Bandits
and bands were no new phenomenon, and their repression had been
utilised by late-eighteenth-century governments as a means to extend
central authority by the creation of militarised patrols. Wherever there
were frontiers—and hence smuggling—unlicensed carrying of arms
was common and the presence of bands hardly less so. But banditry or
brigandage was not confined to frontier areas. It was traditional in the
mountainous areas of the Mediterranean, where it was normally
contained within the local structures of power. In times of major crisis
of state authority, factionalism destroyed the consent underlying the
exercise of local authority and banditry increased, as in Calabria, the
Pyrenees and the western Alps. Where large armies existed, military
defeat encouraged the rapid diffusion of banditry through
disbandment and desertion, as in Piedmont, Lombardy, Naples and
Spain, or later, during the Napoleonic debacle, across northern
Europe.
   The restoration of order was given high priority during the
Consulate as, in practice and symbolically, it constituted a necessary
condition to win the support of landowners and peasants. Where
whole regions defied authority—as in the Vendée and Calabria—
military force was used. Hoche’s tactics of isolating and destroying the
bases of the counter-revolutionaries in the Vendée were deployed with
some success by Masséna against the brigands in Calabria; at first
Napoleon assumed that a similar response would be adequate in
Spain. Elsewhere—initially in the departments of the French Midi,
Piedmont and the Italian republic, then in every new territory
                                              The practices of conquest   91


conquered by the French—the most obtrusive manifestations of
banditry were rapidly suppressed by the creation of a corps of military
police, the gendarmerie, recruited locally and stiffened by a leavening
of seasoned French soldiers. General Wirion organised the
gendarmerie in the Belgian departments, the Vendée (following
Hoche’s military campaign) and Piedmont, where he insisted with the
Parisian ministry of war on a large enough force of veterans of the
Italian campaigns. Protection of the main roads and patrols in most
turbulent areas were normally adequate to restore order relatively
rapidly—as in Belgium, Piedmont, the Italian republic or Tuscany.
   The effectiveness of the repression of bandits and brigands was
dependent on the scale of the phenomenon and the attitude of the
local population. In Calabria, the difficulties of penetrating the
inaccessible Sila mountains, the vicinity of British-controlled Sicily
and the collusion of large numbers of landed proprietors encouraged
a vigorous brigandage: long after Masséna’s military repression, the
gendarmerie General Manhès was deploying three mobile columns to
fight pitched battles with bandits. In Catalonia, the distinction
between brigands and guerrillas was often a fine one, and rendered the
restoration of order permanently fragile: for patriotic resistance
enveloped and cloaked episodes of simple banditry, while hostility to
the French was so widespread that it proved impossible to create a
gendarmerie. By contrast, in Piedmont even tightly organised bands
near the Ligurian border, like Scarzello’s at Narzole, were ultimately
destroyed when local support was withdrawn. If salt smuggling could
never be eliminated, as Napoleon himself acknowledged,12 the active
cooperation of local landowners, organised as national guards, had
restored a tranquillity to Piedmont by 1808 which remained
undisturbed even when French power collapsed in 1814. Presumably
the apparent absence of banditry of a serious nature further north in
Europe—from the Rhineland to Berg, Westphalia, Holland and the
Hanseatic departments—can be explained in terms of the rapid
handover or seizure of power, the established authority of local elites,
and the presence of substantial military forces. In these regions, the
main concern of the gendarmerie (as also in Piedmont or the kingdom
of Italy) was to enforce conscription and search for smugglers.
   The safety of citizens in their persons and property lay at the very
core of the Napoleonic settlement. It constituted the complement to
the Revolutionary affirmation of the monopoly of public power by the
state. It implied respect for the due processes of law. In the light of the
gross infractions of respect for legality of Napoleonic rule—from the
kidnapping and execution of the duke of Enghien to the practices of
92   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


conscription—such a statement may seem to ring hollow. Extreme
situations were regarded as justifying extreme solutions. Thus military
tribunals were employed in the repression of revolt or what was
defined as brigandage (an elastic term, which made the accused liable
to the additional, serious offence of association). But even such an
exceptional procedure could backfire—as in the failure to convict
those accused of responsibility for the Bologna revolt of 1802 or the
judicially debatable suppression of the Scarzello band in 1808—
because of inadequate knowledge of criminal law.
   There can be no doubt about the constant concern of the civilian
administrators to protect the citizens from arbitrary actions. At a
general level, respect for the private sphere of citizens acted as an
ultimate but effective constraint on the expansive aspirations of the
administration. In the day-to-day handling of affairs, the tendencies of
those directly responsible for the maintenance of order to ignore or
infringe the legal rights of citizens was a continuous source of friction.
Whether inside or outside imperial frontiers, there was a litany of
protests from prefects and rulers against the abuses of the military or
corps like the gendarmerie, Customs officials and officers of the
alcohol and tobacco monopolies (droits réunis), with quasi-military
functions and comportment. In Piedmont, the readiness of the
governor-general Menou to impose collective fines or quarter
gendarme mobile units on villages suspected of collaborating with
bandits was opposed by the prefect and overruled by the minister of
the interior in 1807, because this punished the innocent with the
guilty. D’Auzers, head of the police in Piedmont, condemned the
comportment of the tax officials in 1809:

     I am inundated by complaints against the droits réunis…some of
     their petty agents are gallows birds, recruited from the dregs of
     society…. They entangle the peasants in a maze of laws or
     regulations that these poor wretches cannot hope to know or
     understand; they threaten them with legal proceedings, they
     frighten them too, even over the most simple matters and…by the
     use of such odious means, exact a sort of tax on ignorance and
     weakness.13

In Lombardy, the viceroy Eugene ordered the chief judge to respect the
rights of individuals accused of involvement in the 1809 risings: ‘I
shall say no more than tell the Minister that the circumstances do not
justify the violation of due forms and hence I recommend he ensure
that respect for procedure and prosecution of the guilty march
                                            The practices of conquest   93


together’.14 The Dutch were shocked by the behaviour of tax officials
and gendarmes following the annexation of their country. As Gogel
complained, ‘The Dutch public has always been accustomed to being
treated according to the letter of the law’.15 The reconciliation of the
maintenance of order with respect for legality was essential for the
civilian administrators as an affirmation of political authority. It
represented a precondition of the search for a social base of
acceptance, if not of collaboration.

From the outset, the new administrators of the territories annexed by
France or set up as sovereign states were dependent on local
collaboration. There was rarely, if ever, any lack of administrative
personnel at the middling or lower levels. On the contrary, the
immediate and pressing problem was how to reduce the exuberant
number of public employees, which was a common feature to the
former regimes, whether or not affected by revolutionary upheavals.
In France, after Brumaire, Lucien Bonaparte had slimmed down the
ministry of the interior from 345 to 66.16 Melzi, vice-president of the
Italian republic, found the administrative offices of the Cisalpine
swollen with politicians persecuted or deported during the Austrian
restoration. Beugnot observed of Westphalia that ‘administrative
posts are the old perquisite of a class of poor nobles. Such posts have
multiplied far beyond the need’.17 Joseph of Naples, reporting to his
brother, immediately noted that ‘the great scourge of this country is
the wholly excessive number of employees; I shall be obliged to
discharge many of them’. 18 In fact, his administrative reforms
threatened half the civil class with unemployment.
   The difficulties confronting the new administrators were of a
different nature: how to choose collaborators who would be at one
and the same time politically impartial, administratively capable and
willing to serve.
   The political divisions of the previous years made social
reconciliation a prime necessity for future stability, as Bonaparte had
demonstrated in consular France. The same conditions prevailed in
virtually all the regions annexed by France, as well as the newly
conquered states, with the exception of Germany, where only the
Rhineland had been seriously affected by the Revolution. The patriots
and politicians of these countries, disillusioned by the Revolutionary
fragmentation of authority or adapting adroitly to new times, were
ready to support an administration with extensive executive powers,
even at the expense of political representation. Isaac Gogel, the
94   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


idealist of 1794 and determined but frustrated minister of finances of
the Batavian republic of 1798–1801, by 1804 was calling for

     an energetic government which…does not have to be in conflict
     with subaltern bodies and which is not obstructed by every kind
     of provincial claim, but is limited only by some rules and may
     proceed freely so long as it does not infringe them.19

The problem was that various of the new leaders appointed by
Bonaparte—Melzi as vice-president of the Italian republic, Menou as
governor-general of Piedmont, Schimmelpenninck as grand
pensionary of the Netherlands—were hostile to the patriots and
maintained that the employment of men too openly identified with the
previous governments would frighten off the moderate and
conservative land-owners and notables. Melzi was obsessed with the
need to make a break with the past, vetoing candidates who had
served in the Cisalpine assemblies or (even worse) been deported by
the Austrians in 1799. The experience of the Batavian republic was
still recent enough in 1805 for Schimmelpenninck to agitate the
spectre of ‘anarchists’. In reality, at least in the states where the
restoration governments of 1799 had displayed their persecutory zeal
for vendetta, a more likely reason for the reluctance to serve of the
hitherto politically neutral was prudence—at least until Bonapartist
rule proved its durability. As the years passed and the Napoleonic star
continued to rise, the problem seemed to disappear. Fear of so-called
‘Jacobins’ was of major importance in Belgium, Piedmont, the Italian
republic and Switzerland; by 1806 Joseph was appointing some
genuine Jacobins to posts in Naples (including Bonaparte’s early
patron Saliceti as minister of police). In Spain, where the patriot
experience of the 1790s had never occurred, it was fear of popular
vengeance that effectively discouraged collaboration with the French.
But the suspicion and resentments that resulted from the attitude of
leading families and individuals towards collaboration were to mark
the years of the Restoration, as evoked so tellingly in ‘The Chartreuse
of Parma’.
   Where patriots were excluded, it became even more difficult to
appoint capable and willing men, particularly at the higher levels.
Melzi’s correspondence with his foreign minister Marescalchi at Paris
is replete with complaints about the reluctance of wealthy, noble
landowners or urban patricians to accept appointment as prefects.
Some were so wealthy that the not insubstantial stipend of 20,000–
24,000 lire was only a relative attraction. Most refused because of the
                                            The practices of conquest   95


obligation to move to a different department, giving priority to their
family and administration of their patrimony. In the end, a substantial
proportion of Melzi’s aristocratic prefects soon resigned or were
removed through incompetence, as were the Venetian nobles
appointed by Melzi’s successor Eugene de Beauharnais.20
   Melzi’s experiences were reasonably typical, even if he complicated
them by his hatred of Jacobins. Reluctance to serve if this required
physical displacement was general, as it had been initially in France
too. Nor was such reluctance restricted to prefectures. Appointments
to posts as judges were declined for identical reasons, as a judge at
Alessandria (Piedmont) explained his refusal of nomination to the
appeal court at Genoa: ‘Given my personal situation, under no
circumstances could I distance myself from my country and leave my
properties and family…. This promotion would be nothing but a
misfortune for me and would bring me to destitution’.21 Moreover,
administrative capacity was not easily detectable from the personal
friendships, family loyalties or exercise of patronage that lay behind
perhaps the majority of early appointments; which explains the
unusually high proportion of replacements in all states, including
Brumairean France. The result was that in departments and states
with previous revolutionary experiences, like Piedmont, the Italian
republic and Holland, posts in the police and civil judiciary tended to
be thronged with patriots. In countries without such experiences, like
Venetia, Naples, Berg or Spain, it often proved difficult or impossible
to recruit the respectable (and respected), particularly to the more
onerous or less prestigious offices. In Berg, the nobles were unwilling
to serve as judges, as this required legal training and hard work,
according to Beugnot. In the city of Naples the police were accused of
being agents of one noble clan, the Cassano.22
   The situation was aggravated, particularly in the first round of
appointments in each newly administered region, by the preference
given to Frenchmen. In Belgium there was resentment at the exclusion
of locals; perhaps this was the reason for the initial appointment of
Italians (including locals) in Piedmont—many of whom were soon
replaced. Only in the Dutch departments annexed in 1810 was there
a notable continuity of personnel from Louis’ reign, as a sop to the
strong tradition of national independence. Throughout the annexed
departments, preference was given to Frenchmen for the senior posts
in the financial administration and criminal judiciary. Outside the
Empire, the situation was if anything worse, given the contempt for
locals of many of the senior French in charge of the territories and the
expectations of their compatriots of jumping on the bandwagon of the
96   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


new administrations. In Italy, Holland, Berg, Naples and Westphalia,
the protest was unanimous against Parisian pressure (backed by
French generals stationed in the territories) for appointments of
Frenchmen. Only in Spain was their presence necessary, given the
unwillingness of local elites to serve. Eugene in Italy and Louis in
Holland resisted most effectively; Murat threw fits of fury at the 2,000
requests for posts he had received at Paris in 1811.23
   These difficult relations between occupiers and occupied were
never satisfactorily resolved, not just because of the relative brevity of
French rule, but perhaps even more because of an increasing
reluctance of Napoleon and his followers to reconcile Parisian
certainties with local expectations, despite the protests of his relatives
and administrators in the occupied territories. There was an
impatience with local inadequacies, expressed revealingly by the
young Stendhal in his private journal, after two years spent in
Brunswick attached to the French war commissiares (1806–8):

     My attitude towards the people of this country has been typical of
     that of a young man, of a true Frenchman, criticising to their face
     what seemed to me criticisable, as if they were philosophers
     without prejudices, and even letting them glimpse my contempt
     for their heavy dullness.24


MODERNISATION OF THE STATE
Brumaire had occurred as a response to the demand for effective
authority. The propaganda of its victors attacked elected assemblies
and eulogised undivided authority. The inevitable consequence was a
deep shift in the concept of representation. Demonstration of popular
sovereignty through the right to vote, already battered and
manipulated under the Directory, was reduced to the symbolism of the
Napoleonic plebiscites and the infrequent exercise of indirect elections
by a suffrage limited to the wealthy and educated. Elected
representatives were deprived of legislative authority, and summoned
to meet for restricted periods in a consultative capacity. At the
departmental level, however, at least in the early years, they retained
an important function—that of expressing public opinion. For Adrien
Duquesnoy, who was responsible for coordinating the activities of the
departmental general councils, such an institution

     had the precious advantage of providing the government with the
     pure expression of public wishes and of making it know the
                                             The practices of conquest   97


    thoughts of the departments. Such an institution constantly
    enlightens the government about the results of all the acts which
    emanate from its authority and reports the opinion of the
    administered, about both the men who have been invested with
    some power and the different public services. It is an institution
    that cannot but perfect the administration in all its parts.25

Duquesnoy’s vision of the complementarity of the roles of a central
directive administration, incorporated in the ministry of the interior,
and a multitude of local elites, each the expression of public opinion
in a single department, soon faded before Bonaparte’s increasingly
authoritarian self-confidence. The departmental general councils
ceased to present cahiers de doléances and were confined, under the
prefect’s direction, to limited fiscal responsibilities of tax allocation.
At most, as Molé, Napoleon’s minister of justice, later reflected, their
representative function was performed (in an even more discreet
manner) by the Legislative body: ‘it consisted, generally speaking, of
men less independent than worthy, and above all less servile than
peaceable, and so could serve Bonaparte as a monitor, since there was
no brake’.26
   With the disappearance of any institutional expression of public
opinion, increasingly the administration claimed to represent the
nation. The entire philosophy of Napoleonic rule was based on the
assumption that a modern and efficient administration was implicitly
identified with the most responsible and progressive opinion in
society, and that—precisely because it possessed the power of the
state—such an administration could create a framework that would
accelerate the development of a stable and productive society more
effectively than any elected representative body. Napoleon, in his
customary expeditious manner of settling matters which in his opinion
had already generated too much theoretical hot air, informed the
newly created Italian state legislature (1805) why conventional
representation was outdated:

    Political liberty, which is so necessary to the State, does not
    consist of this sort of multiplication of authority, but in a visibly
    stable and secure system of good administration. Once the royal
    treasury has been separated from that of the nation, so that the
    King cannot use the Nation’s coffers for himself; once a
    Legislative body receives annual accounts of the expenditure of
    the funds it had assigned, once it has decreed the necessary new
    funds, political liberty is guaranteed.27
98   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


The context of Napoleon’s utterance was the resistance of the leading
councillors in his kingdom of Italy to the abolition of the departmental
assemblies. The episode is symptomatic of the difficulties experienced
in exporting the French model of administration. For if the model was
single, the multiplicity of societies to which it was applied meant that
the fit was rarely perfect. ‘The knowledge of facts’ was the
bureaucratic answer. But for reasons of history, administrative
practices, tradition or simply prejudice, even the most enlightened
subjects somehow did not always seem to accept the reasonableness of
the proposals. Behind the impatience of the French and the often
frustrated evasiveness of their local correspondents was the objective
difficulty in each of the territories of the entrenched presence of
juridical categories and institutions that were ill adapted to the new
French laws.

The demarcation of space presented a delicate problem in all the areas
where French authority was established or its influence accepted,
precisely because it incorporated the difficulties and often the
impossibility of reconciling the new and the old concepts. To redesign
the territory of a state in new administrative units conformed to the
French experience not only in practical terms, but also as a symbolic
gesture of rupture with the past. But space has always constituted an
object of jealous attachments and material prerogatives, capable of
opening new wounds or reviving slumbering rivalries. Hence it is not
surprising that the determination to rationalise boundaries should
have aroused opposition, nor that, at the lower level of the communes
where territory, interests and identity were most intimately linked,
such rationalisation should often have been rejected.
   In the areas annexed by France the redrawing of internal frontiers
constituted a deliberate attempt to break with previous political
identity. In the case of former provinces, like the Austrian Low
Countries, Savoy or the fragmented territories of the left bank of the
Rhine, the transformation into departments was straightforward:
Savoy became the department of Mont-Blanc, the nine Belgian
departments were easily drawn up as they corresponded to the main
cities of a highly urbanised region. Where entire states or capitals were
swallowed by France—Liège, Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, Holland,
Rome, the Hanseatic ports—the division into single military divisions
and multiple departments became the exclusive terms of reference in
official and public documents. The pride of the former capitals was
assuaged by tacit recognition of their pre-eminence as the first among
equals. But this was little recompense for the patriots of Liège, capital
                                            The practices of conquest   99


of the Ourthe department, whose former principality was truncated,
despite their protests, to the advantage of Dyle. Geneva, formally
reduced to capital of Léman, was allowed to conserve privileges
unknown elsewhere in the Empire, more because of its unique prestige
in late-eighteenth-century Europe than for its economic importance.
Rome was given the title of second capital of the Empire, which not
surprisingly was regarded as insulting by the nobility of the former
capital of Christianity. But Catalonia, whose latent sense of national
identity was stimulated by the French occupation, was divided into
four departments, with its administrative capital even displaced from
Barcelona to Gerona.
   Political overtones thus coloured the division into departments,
which constituted the essential unit for all purposes of administration.
Less desirable, because of its negative consequences on social
reconciliation, was the major discontent generated among the smaller
cities by the new administrative divisions. Attempts to soothe
provincial feelings were made by proposing the formation of
numerous sub-prefectures. But for reasons of administrative costs
their numbers were rapidly reduced: in Piedmont from thirty-one to
twenty-one (1801). The choice of Hamburg, Bremen and Osnabrück
as capitals of the Hanseatic departments on the Baltic offended
Lübeck, Oldenburg and Lüneburg (1810).
   Outside France a distinction needs to be made between newly
created states and those which continued to exist but where the regime
was changed. In the former, carved out of the territories of various
states with radically different institutions and administrative
practices, departments and sub-prefectures were created. In Berg and
Westphalia, their boundaries were marked—as in France eighteen
years earlier—by attempts to achieve a rational balance between space
and population, where administrative centres would be within
reasonable access of all inhabitants. In the republic-kingdom of Italy,
where historical traditions remained strong, the same pattern and
problems emerged as in the annexed departments of France: on the
one hand, official ostracism of all references to earlier ‘national’
identities, with the division into departments of the former territories
of Lombardy, the Papal States and Venetia; on the other, discontent of
urban oligarchies at Bologna and Venice, offended at their relegation
to the level of other departments.
   The experience of the states whose political identity was
maintained without rupture is revealing of the sensitivity of the
administrators towards the rhetorical and emotive appeal of local
identity. In Naples, Joseph stressed the continuity with the previous
100   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


regime, accepting the provinces created by Zurlo in 1801 and
employing the traditional terms of districts, compartments and
universities for the sub-divisions, with intendants in place of prefects.
In the Netherlands, the attempt of the centralising Batavian republic
of 1798–1801 to eliminate the historical identity of the provinces by
the creation of new departments barely lasted two years; and when
King Louis reintroduced departments, he paid attention not to change
the boundaries of the provinces. In Frankfurt, the ruler of the new
grand-duchy, Dalberg, took care to create departments whose
boundaries respected the historical prerogatives of the cities (1810). In
Bavaria (where there was no change of regime), Montgelas,
enthusiastic and active reformer in the Bonapartist mould, waited
until the apparent security of the peace of Tilsit to consolidate the
enlarged kingdom by the abolition of all the old names except Bavaria
and the creation of new administrative units, on the basis of statistical
enquiry into their geography and population.

The French model of administration was hierarchical and centralised.
It assumed, as Roederer expressed it with that penchant of politicians
for recent scientific terminology, that ‘the executive chain descends
without interruption from the minister to the administered and
transmits the law and the government’s orders to the furthest
ramifications of the social order, with the rapidity of an electric
current’.28
    At the centre, the council of state combined legislative and
judicial functions with political advice; the ministry of the interior
was responsible for all administrative matters except in those sectors
for which a specific ministry existed. Alongside the interior, war (for
which Napoleon created three ministries) and foreign affairs,
finances represented the most important ministry, which under
Gaudin’s uninterrupted direction retained total autonomy from all
other branches of the administration. The central administration
grew in size and complexity over the years, in consequence of the
wars and the growth of the Empire. Auditors and maîtres de requêtes
were added to the council of state, the number of ministries
increased to twelve; under Montalivet, the ministry of the interior
rose to about 220 staff.
    In the departments, prefects and sub-prefects represented the
administration. Directly responsible to the ministry of the interior,
their very role as sole representatives of central authority inevitably
involved them in functions relating to other ministries, over
conscription (war), public opinion (police), religion (cults), the
                                            The practices of conquest   101


economy (manufactures and commerce), or matters affecting the
judiciary (justice) or revenue (treasury). In fact, since appointments to
posts or honours were based on the names proposed by the prefects,
all ministries (except foreign affairs) were to a degree reliant upon
them. However comprehensive the prefects’ responsibilities, their
jurisdiction did not extend over all the representatives of the state. The
generals in charge of the thirty-two military divisions of the Empire
acted not only independently, but also on occasion in rivalry with the
prefects. The judiciary, from the tribunals and assize courts in all
departments to the thirty-seven appeal courts and the supreme court
at Paris, responded to the minister of justice, in homage to the
Revolutionary principle of the separation of powers. The numerous
financial employees responded to their hierarchical superiors and
turned to the prefects only for support in carrying out their duties. The
police, including the directors-general at Rome and Amsterdam and
the directors responsible respectively for the Piedmontese and Tuscan
departments, were subject to the minister of general police, whose
authority also extended over the thirty gendarmerie legions. In theory
separated by the precise nature of their responsibilities, in practice the
presence of these officials in the departments easily generated friction
or conflict with the prefect, because of overlapping spheres of
competence and the impossibility, to a greater or lesser degree, of any
of them acting without his knowledge and involvement.
   It was the duty of this army of functionaries to ensure the rapid
execution of those general laws and specific measures by which the
government intended, on the one hand, to complete the Revolutionary
task of liberating the economy and society from obstacles to free
initiative, and on the other hand, to force the pace—within the legal
limits of a respect for property and persons—in the direction of its
own model of modernity. To the student of the Napoleonic civil
administration, there can be no doubt about the care and seriousness
with which the laws and decrees were discussed and prepared, any
more than about their lack of novelty in terms of the juridical and
economic ideas circulating since the later eighteenth century.
   The most publicly spectacular measures had already been passed in
the earliest phase of the Revolution. Napoleonic legislation was
elaborated in the more discreet environment of the council of state
and the ministries. But, like the Revolutionary reforms, it derived
directly from the pre-Revolutionary discussions, both within and
outside France. This can be illustrated by the two most radical
initiatives of the Napoleonic period—the reordering of finances and
the legal codes. The separation of finances from the administration
102   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


was not merely the consequence of the bankruptcy of the French
monarchy and Revolutionary governments, nor of Bonaparte’s
obsession with kitchen accountancy; it reflected the well-established
Habsburg late cameralist distinction between policing (in the
eighteenth-century sense of legislation and administration) and public
finance. Similarly, the civil code took so long to elaborate and was
relatively so ill-balanced because of the differences and opposition of
juridical ideas, which were finally resolved by Bonaparte’s imposition
of a compromise, ‘a transaction, a badly estimated quotation’, in
Molé’s words.29 The civil code consolidated the social changes that
had already been achieved in France, consecrating absolute property
rights (to which the code dedicated 1,776 articles, compared to 515
articles regulating persons). The criminal code was more regressive,
not just because of the greater difficulty in revising criminal law in the
absence of any equivalent to Roman law, but because Napoleon
(unlike his eighteenth-century predecessors) was more concerned with
affirming the state’s monopoly of the administration of criminal law
(expressed in the code of criminal procedure) than with the content of
the law itself.
   There is no need to repeat the litany of Napoleonic legislative and
administrative reforms which have left so profound an impression
on the subsequent evolution of France. What is of concern here is the
determination to export the entire corpus of these reforms and the
reactions they aroused. Given the differences in intellectual
traditions (as well as languages) that characterized the numerous
states and societies where such an attempt was made, the cultural
shock was necessarily profound. There was also a fundamental
difference in the recent political experiences of France, with its
unreneged decade of Revolutionary change, and other European
countries. Elimination of intermediary corps and privileges that
impeded a direct relationship between the state and individual
citizen and the free circulation of goods, confiscation of
ecclesiastical property and achievement of a balanced budget
through rationalisation of the fiscal system and land cadasters,
abolition of the guilds and economic individualism, codification of
the sources and procedures of law to achieve legal equality—to name
only the most important aspects of the reforms—appeared so new in
the areas of French expansion only because they were introduced or
imposed on states and societies that to varying degrees were still
functioning with the norms of the ancien regime.
   Within the annexed territories, French administration and laws
were introduced with ever briefer periods of adaptation: nearly
                                            The practices of conquest   103


eighteen months passed between Piedmont’s ‘preparation’ for the
French system under General Jourdan (April 1801) and its annexation
(September 1802); Lebrun was given six months to adapt Liguria
(1805), as was the consulta responsible for Rome (1809); within six
weeks of the decision to introduce French legislation into the
Hanseatic departments, the imperial printing office produced copies
of complete collections of French laws and decrees in French and
German that amounted to 32,000 volumes.30 More interesting as
illustrating the attractions and difficulties of exporting the French
model of administrative centralisation are the experiences of the states
within the Napoleonic sphere of influence. Three themes provide
illuminating examples: centralisation, fiscal reform and the civil code.
    A centralised structure of administration was the aspiration of all
eighteenth-century regimes. Hence it is not surprising that councils of
state, prefects and sub-prefects should have been adopted (with
minimal variants in form and terminology) with alacrity by the rulers
of these states. The problems of translating these structures into the
exercise of power can be located on the one hand in the effective
authority of the prefects and, on the other, in the degree of autonomy
of the lowest level of the new organisation, municipal administration.
    In the Italian republic, where Melzi enjoyed a notable degree of
autonomy, the prefects’ authority was potentially restricted by the
presence of two lieutenants, chosen among the local notables, and
effectively counterbalanced by a departmental administration with
vaguely defined powers and real financial control. There can be no
doubt about Melzi’s tendency to identify with his peers of the urban
patriciates. However, he saw an objective need to reconcile the new
French institution of the prefect with the traditions of local self-
government by oligarchies whose powers had been reinforced by the
Habsburg reforms.31
    In states with federalist structures, like the Low Countries or Swiss
confederation, the same problem presented itself even more acutely.
The unitarian patriots of the Helvetic republic (1798) had invented
prefects even before Brumaire. But they lacked the strength to break
the hostility of the merchant and professional bourgeoisie of the cities,
who returned to power with Bonaparte’s restoration of cantonal
autonomy in the Mediation of 1803.
    The Dutch experience initially seemed to follow a similar
trajectory: in a country whose national independence was equated
with provincial and municipal autonomy, the energetic patriots of
1798–1801 managed to set up only the embryo of a French-style
structure, with national agencies at the centre and local
104   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


commissioners who proved incapable of exacting the obedience of the
town regents. The following years of the Regency of State (1801–5)
witnessed the full restoration of the urban patriciates. As Gogel
complained:

      The present government succeeds in combining the worst…by
      having an infinity of governments all endowed with constitutional
      laws and separate powers, so that the departmental councils
      dispute with the government and the towns and communes with
      those first councils. All power is disposed to self-extension.

It needed the bankruptcy of the cities, through falling revenues and a
rising wave of pauperism, for the Dutch burghers to accept the
dependence of local administrations on central government.32
   Fiscal reform was the touchstone of Napoleonic modernisation of
the state. It signified the emancipation of the state from the throttle-
hold of spiralling public debt that characterised the ancien regime
governments and consecration of its role as sole tutor of legal equality
through the fair distribution of taxes. Precisely because it touched so
many interests, of individuals and categories, its implementation was
massively difficult. Roederer, former member of the Constituent
assembly’s taxation committee, as Joseph’s minister of finances in
Naples, was fully aware of the immensity of the issues, which he
described as ‘not so much a question of the administration of finances
but rather the creation of an administration’. The only method was to
utilise the existing fiscal mechanisms through which to introduce the
new system: ‘I departed as little as possible from the practices of the
Revenue office and its agents…. The basis for every projected tax
already existed at Naples, the form I proposed to adopt came from
France.’33
   Not surprisingly, given the common enlightened matrix, there were
many points of similarity between the French model of public finances
and taxation and those of reforming states such as Lombardy,
Tuscany, some Swiss cantons, and even Naples (as Roederer
observed). The comprehensive reform of the fiscal system in the
Netherlands, which the great finance minister Gogel finally managed
to impose in 1806, and which spread the burden of taxation more
uniformly between provinces and among social groupings within each
province, owed more to Gogel’s earlier abortive reform of 1801 than
to the French. The existence of such earlier or contemporaneous
reforms rendered assimilation to the French system easier, particularly
in the Consulate years, when the pressure of taxation was still
                                            The practices of conquest   105


contained. Elsewhere, as in Germany, the impact of the French
reforms was immediate and radical, in that it implied the separation of
public from domain or Crown revenues, the destruction of feudal
privileges and the compilation of land cadasters. For Roederer, always
an optimist, the land tax destroyed feudalism and encouraged
smallholdings in Naples. In Poland, Illyria and parts of Germany,
however, feudalism remained so strong that it prevented the effective
functioning of the French reforms.
   In the end, the French model of public finances was adopted, albeit
with variations, in virtually all Continental states except Russia and
the Ottoman Balkans. Public finances were legally regulated, fiscal
administration was restructured, budgeting was introduced, unified
and rationalised and simplified systems of public expenditure, revenue
and debt were adopted. Over the longer term, these reforms laid the
bases for modern systems of public finance. But at the time, their
impact and success was far from uniform. A general reason for this
was the rapidly rising increase of demand on revenue to meet the
military requirements of Napoleonic hegemony. In all the states public
debt—the cause of the breakdown of ancien regime finances—
increased vertiginously, particularly from 1806–7. In the kingdom of
Italy, revenues increased by 50 per cent between 1805 and 1811, while
the deficit rose from 1 million to 5 million lire. In the German states,
the increase of the public debt was on an even greater scale. If direct
taxation remained structured around the land and moveable property
taxes and trading licence (foncière, mobilière and patente), the
number, pressure and proportion of indirect taxes relative to overall
revenue rose steeply. Some of these taxes, like that on salt or customs
duties, were common to all states; others, like the French tobacco
monopoly, were applied only in some states, such as Berg. But
everywhere their collection incited official abuse and popular hostility.
It was not coincidental that Customs and droits réunis officials,
alongside gendarmes, were the object of popular assaults at the
moment of collapse of Napoleonic rule in 1813–14; nor that the only
minister to be murdered by a mob was Prina, Gaudin’s counter-part in
the kingdom of Italy responsible for public finances.
   It seems likely (although it is still virtually impossible to
demonstrate, in the absence of detailed studies of its impact on the
distribution of wealth) that in their adoption of the French fiscal
system, these states replicated its structural inequalities, possibly on a
greater scale. Land cadasters were compiled with great haste, once
Napoleon urged their completion in 1807, sometimes with the
assistance of French technicians, and almost certainly far less
106    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


thoroughly than in France. Once again, the effectiveness of reform—
in this instance the distribution of the land-tax—was closely tied to
the collaboration or obstructive capacities of the landowners and local
administrators. In regions where feudalism was strong (even in
Naples, let alone in Bavaria or much of Germany), fiscal reforms were
impaired and distorted, at the expense of the socially weak.
   For Napoleon, the civil code possessed universal value. He brooked
no delays in its introduction in the territories he annexed and exerted
notable pressure on family and friends in favour of its adoption. He
ordered its introduction into the grand-duchy of Warsaw, Hamburg
and Danzig. On 31 October 1807 he instructed Joseph and Louis that
‘from 1 January the Napoleonic code becomes the law of their
peoples’. Champagny, his foreign minister, explained to the rulers of
Bavaria, Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden that the code

      is an object of study and admiration throughout Europe by
      everyone concerned with the science of laws…. It is not just a
      great empire that feels the need for a uniform legislation. There
      are few states, even small ones, where the differences in customs
      do not create difficulties for transactions and damage the
      execution of justice in civil matters. This is even truer for
      Germany than for other countries. Many states and provinces
      formerly ruled according to their own laws and those of the Holy
      Roman Empire are now under a new rule and united to other
      states with an entirely different legislation. Hence the adoption of
      the Napoleonic code will be a blessing for the peoples of these
      states as it will eliminate the variety of customs that rule them.34

Napoleon, in his more imperious moments, aspired to iron out and
render uniform laws, customs and practices. After all, as he explained
to Louis, the Romans had imposed their law on their subject peoples,
why should not the French do the same with the Dutch?35
   Precisely for the same reasons his brothers and allies resisted his
urgings. In Westphalia, his writ ran free. In Holland and Naples, Louis
and Joseph finally submitted, but modified sections of the code which
conflicted with local juridical principles and practices. Beugnot
proposed to introduce it gradually into Berg; when he was overruled
and the code took effect with less than two months’ advance notice,
the local mayors resigned in mass against the obligation personally to
view all corpses and newborn babes.36 Baden accepted the code, with
modifications. Bavaria and others within the Confederation of the
Rhine resisted, pointing to the example of the Prussian code of 1794
                                             The practices of conquest   107


as an alternative model. A jurist, von Allmedingen, expressed the
general reluctance in a highly Germanic form: ‘Perfect laws are the
beautiful and free forms of the interior life of a nation: they come out
of life itself. The Civil code has not come out of the life of the German
nation.’ 37 Introduction of the code was impossible without
reorganisation of the judicial system. The one and the other touched
so close to the orderly functioning of civil society that even reforming
Bavaria took care not to adopt them.


ADMINISTRATION AND SOCIETY
Administration could yield its positive effects only through a detailed
knowledge of society and its leaders. Statistical enquiry was the
instrument to provide the factual information about society—the
resources, economy and institutional organisation of an
administratively delimited area. The range of such enquiry could be
extended, given the ethnographic curiosity about the science of man
and earlier stages of civilisation, to descriptions of social practices and
even physical appearance. But the observations remained extremely
general, as they were predominantly confined to the behaviour of the
common folk, by definition anonymous. The conduct of elites was
normally too familiar to require comment, except in so far as it related
to the public sphere. Their attitude towards the French, their level of
education or religious prejudice might merit a prefectoral note, but
not their forms of sociability except in so far as these contained
implications for the conduct of the administration.
   On the other hand, effective administration also demanded the
identification of those individual members of the local elites who were
judged to possess particular qualities. Napoleonic rule displayed an
unquenchable thirst for lists of persons deemed worthy of attention
because of their wealth, family, reputation, talents or other merits.
Such lists were essential for a multiplicity of purposes—to appoint to
administrative posts, to classify the richest and most respectable, to
gauge attitudes towards the regime, to identify economic
entrepreneurs or philanthropists, or (most common of all) to present
the names of those from whose ranks would be chosen the members
of representative or consultative councils at all levels. The
departmental lists of the thirty or the six hundred paying the highest
taxes, of the sixty ‘citizens distinguished by their civil and private
virtues’, or ‘the most outstanding’ or ‘remarkable persons’, of the
candidates for appointment to the judiciary, the communal, sub-
prefecture and department councils, to the local consultative
108   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


chambers of arts and commerce and bureaux of philanthropy, to the
imperial guards of honour, were compiled to meet the demands of
central government.38 An expanding and ambitious administration
knew no bounds to its search for personal information about the
elites. By the later years of the Empire the ministers of police, Fouché
and Savary, asked the prefects for ‘personal and moral statistics’: For
reasons of social order, the government needs to know who are the
most influential persons. Since, in general, wealth is the basis of the
greatest influence, it is of interest to the government to identify all the
rich families, without exception’, including information about
unmarried daughters and their likely dowry, their physical
appearance, qualities and religious principles.39 In this case at least,
such police files remained incomplete, partly through the reticence of
the prefects to violate the privacy of respectable citizens beyond the
immediately practical needs of administration.
    While these lists were ordered by the central government, they also
acted as a means of acquiring knowledge of local notables essential to
a prefect for the smooth discharge of his responsibilities. The annual
tour of the department which formed part of the prefect’s duties
served the same purpose. It enabled the functionary to assess the
public spirit through his personal contact with those regarded as
opinion-makers in an essentially static society. Who these leaders were
and how they were to be approached was specified with unusual
precision by Di Breme, minister of the interior in the kingdom of Italy,
in his instructions of 1807:

      Furthermore, they shall ensure that they get to know those
      persons whose capacity, morality and attachment to the
      government indicate that they will be best able to discharge the
      duties of podesta, mayor or registrar…. Prefects will pay
      particular attention to find out about public opinion…. They will
      ensure that they get into conversation with various persons and
      lead them to explain their attitude frankly and in confidence…. In
      each commune, they will note those persons who have most
      influence over the common-right peasants; and will take care to
      find out whether they are attached to the government, through
      sentiment, principles or other reasons, or if their conduct makes
      them suspect of contrary opinions. Above all they will obtain the
      most exact information about the behaviour and opinions of the
      parish priests and other ministers of religion, whose ministry puts
      them into a position to be useful, if good, or harmful, if bad.40
                                            The practices of conquest   109


Knowledge of the reputation and comportment of local opinion
leaders was the prerequisite for gaining their acquiescence and, if
possible, their active involvement in the administration. For wherever
a new regime was set up, it required the consent and collaboration of
leading personalities. The Cisalpine notables were summoned to
Lyons in 1801, like the Genoese senators to Milan in 1805, the
Spanish grandees to Bayonne in 1808 and the Dutch ministers to Paris
in 1810, to provide a fig-leaf of responsible opinion to decisions that
had already been taken; they were the Bonapartist sequel to the faked
plebiscites of the Directorial years. Such grand notables constituted a
handful of personalities known to Bonaparte and his advisers for
reasons of political career or social prestige. Their future attitudes
could not easily be judged from their behaviour during such artificial
and browbeating meetings.
   More substantial and necessary was the commitment of leading
local figures to act within their own countries as catalysts for
acceptance and support of the new regime. Melzi in the Italian
republic, Schimmelpenninck in the Netherlands, Bülow in Westphalia,
Nesselrode in Berg, even Rougemont in tiny Neuchâtel, performed
such a function. In Naples faction ran so deep that Joseph’s
appointment of great nobles like the Cassano clan alienated other
leading figures. In Spain, the fragmentation of the elites in the years
before Bayonne meant that the pro-French, like Azanza and O’Farrill,
were few and isolated. To obtain the visible participation of
personalities with a widely accepted reputation, usually from a
leading aristocratic or patriciate family, was of major importance. The
collaboration of reforming ministers of earlier political experiences,
such as Zurlo and Ricciardi in Naples, Gianni in Tuscany, Cabarrús in
Spain, was an inadequate substitute as, whatever their commitment,
they were politically isolated and usually socially insignificant through
lack of appropriate kin and influence. Murat in Naples was forced
into increasing reliance on the military. The failure of the French
administrators in Spain, whether serving Joseph or in Catalonia
(albeit under the particular conditions of war), was highlighted by the
absence of collaboration of local notables.
   In France, from Brumaire, the operational words in the search for
stability were ‘amalgamation’ (amalgame) and ‘rallying round’
(ralliement). ‘Amalgamation’, or its synonym ‘fusion’, was an
ambiguous term, as it implied not only reconciliation of the political
opponents of the recent Revolutionary years, but also an end to the
social divides of the ancien regime. The ideal way to achieve
amalgamation was through a military or civilian career, where Jacobin
110   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and servative, noble and non-noble, would work together in the service
of the state. But the ideal was not always realisable, and the Napoleonic
administrators were satisfied with less committed attitudes which could
be interpreted as evidence of ‘rallying round’. It is evident that the
transformation of the French republic into an Empire, soon followed by
the creation of a host of courts outside and within the imperial frontiers,
offered new and attractive possibilities of ralliement to the old
aristocratic families, with the relatively few exceptions of those
obstinately faithful to the former dynasties. But reputation requires time
to sink roots. Much effort was expended by Napoleon and his
propagandists to counter the recurrent sense of instability engendered
by his international adventures. ‘Announce my imminent arrival at
Naples’, Napoleon wrote to Joseph two weeks after the latter’s
occupation of the southern Italian capital, ‘Naples is so distant that I
cannot promise you that I shall get there; but for both the army and the
peoples of the country, there is no harm in announcing that I’m
coming’.41 Every victory appeared to reinforce ralliement, with the most
distinguished nobles and patricians, even those of staunchly dynastic
loyalties—in Piedmont and Belgium, Naples and Holland, as much as in
France—accepting court office or appointment as mayor of their local
city. But every renewal of war as regularly revived suspicions and
potential withdrawal: ‘The moment that a campaign starts is always
marked by plots’, were the resigned, cynical words of the police
commissaire of Cuneo to the prefect of the Stura in July 1809.42

It is useful to distinguish between career and non-career posts. The
establishment of administrations on the French model meant not only
the dismantling of the old offices, but also new career opportunities.
Prina in the kingdom of Italy employed nearly 250 within his ministry
of finances in 1805, the ministry of the interior over 100;43 by 1810
the central administration had expanded to some thousands. In
Holland, Bavaria, Westphalia or any other of the states where
administration was modernised, there was a corresponding creation of
career posts. Ministry of finances officials operating in the
departments of the kingdom of Italy numbered over 5,000 already in
1805. In the absence of detailed research in local archives, it is
impossible to calculate precise figures for posts in the departments.
But on the basis of the incomplete listings of the published almanachs
of four annexed departments—Mont-Tonnerre for 1808, Léman and
Escaut for 1811 and Arno for 1813—it is clear that, taken all together,
administrative, financial and judicial posts were numerous and
increasing in number. The prefectures and sub-prefectures were the
                                            The practices of conquest   111


most contained, with 20 to 45 employees; the judiciary (including
justices of the peace) normally recruited between 80 and 120; while
the total of employees responsible for revenues ranged from 120 to
over 300; public works, civil engineering, the postal service and
various other responsibilities easily added on a further 30 to 60 posts,
education 25 (Escaut) to 40 (Geneva); besides the police and
numerous low-level jobs.44
   Despite individual hesitations, the patriots of the republics continued
to offer their services, even with the change to monarchy. There is a
continuity of personnel, for example, at the higher levels of ministers
and prefects, from the Dutch patriots of 1787 through the Batavian
republics of 1798–1801 and 1805–6, to Louis’ kingdom of 1806–10
and the annexed departments of 1810. At the intermediate and lower
levels of career posts, there would also seem to have been no shortage
of candidates. Italy or Germany had experienced a major expansion of
higher education in the previous decades: Pavia university had about
150 students in the 1760s and a thousand in 1788; in Germany there
were some 2,000 to 3,000 ‘writers’ in 1766 and about 11,000 in 1806.45
In Poland, where the educational level was markedly lower, a school of
law and administration was founded in order to train functionaries,
chosen primarily from the poor nobility.
   The problem was one of access, particularly in states like Naples
where previously the educated class had depended on a plethora of
underpaid but official sinecures. Patronage was all important,
especially in the newly annexed departments and the satellite states in
Italy, where there was forceful competition from Frenchmen. Perhaps
linguistic difficulties, as much as deliberate policy, ensured the
reservation of most career posts to locals in the German states and
Holland. Even so, the growing professionalism of the
administration—and presumably the age structure of those in office—
made access increasingly difficult. Giuseppe Tornielli, prefect at
Novara, warned his younger brother Gaudenzio that there was no
possibility of employment without a long, unpaid apprenticeship:

    Prefect Caccia di Romentino’s brother is a good example: after
    nearly two years of apprenticeship in this prefecture, he was
    unable to get paid employment, as the first to be placed are those
    left out with the introduction of the new system. He has
    abandoned the career he had embarked on.46

The problems for the new rulers above all related to the non-career
posts that constituted the base of the administrative pyramid. It was at
112   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


this level that the prefect’s lists should have served to identify the
appropriate candidates. The matter was of crucial importance for the
effective introduction of French practices in newly annexed regions, as
it was often difficult to recruit with adequate rapidity the professional
technicians of local government. Two years after Venetia was annexed
to the kingdom of Italy, the new prefect of the department of the
Tagliamento, Giovanni Scopoli, reported that:

      The communes are all in the greatest administrative disorder,
      because few have a revenue office, and no land registrars or other
      administrative directors were set up in the cantons, so that
      everything is entrusted to the mayors in a new country, with a
      multitude of completely new laws.47

The complaints of the prefects and sub-prefects were universal about
the impossibility of finding candidates with appropriate qualifications
for the rural communes and small towns. There is little doubt that, at
least within the Empire, the demands made on local administrators
were on a different level from those of previous governments, whether
in terms of responsibility for taxation, maintenance of communal
roads, registry of births, marriages and deaths, or sanitary measures.
Lack of adequate private means, education or reputation were the
explanations the prefects put forward, often to justify the continuing
dependence on the local parish priest. The attitude of the new
authorities towards these parish priests was ambivalent, inevitably so
given the suspicion and respect attributed contemporaneously to the
Church. The local clergy was mistrusted as potential catalysts for
reactionary opposition to the new order—and often fulfilled this
function where religious conservatism was the norm, as in the ex-
Papal Marches in Italy, or in regions of the remodelled German states
where Protestantism or Catholicism had formerly excluded toleration.
However, the parish priests were also needed by the new
administrators who utilised them as public officials for the civil
registry and were often dependent on their role and prestige as
intermediaries between the state and the local community.
    In reality, the comments of the prefects revealed the limits of the
lists of the good and the worthy that were compiled so assiduously.
They often masked an uneasy sense of their ignorance of the hidden
complexity and moral assumptions of kin, neighbourhood, property
and working relations that characterised life at the local level, whether
in an Emilian village, a Westphalian seigneurial village, the Zeeland
dykelands or a Catalan peasant community. For willingness or
                                            The practices of conquest   113


reluctance to assume responsibility often depended on attitudes that
were extraneous to the new order, and the new issues that now
appeared were only gradually mediated into terms and interests of
relevance to the local leading families. In the small town of Werden in
Berg, the local notables forced the resignation as mayor of the local
innkeeper, who was judged to have stepped out of place.48 In southern
Piedmont, the refusal of royalists to serve alongside patriots was not
simply political, but covered longer-standing local family rivalries;
after years of French rule, the same men would unite as natives of
Mondovì to attack an outsider, ‘who has little consideration for local
men’.49
   In the newly annexed departments, the French authorities were
aware of the dangers of being sucked into such introspective local
affairs. Two examples can be given—the redrawing of communal
boundaries and measures of administrative policing (haute police).
Abstract rationality and the practical needs of cadastral measurements
for fiscal purposes argued in favour of rectifying the illogical confines
of communes. In Piedmont, the prefects applied themselves with
dedication and tact to negotiate between communes for exchanges of
territory or settle age-old disputes. Such was the wasps’ nest that their
endeavours provoked that finally the council of state itself decreed the
boundaries should be left untouched.50
   A similar caution was displayed in the use of measures of haute
police, punishment imposed by the administration without trial, in
response to requests from local officials or even individuals. Haute
police was used by the French in Piedmont or Tuscany as an
instrument to achieve calm or reconciliation where unrest or divisions
existed between or even within families. Acceptance of the
impartiality of the French as an outside authority was an essential
condition of ralliement. The evidence of success was to be found in the
slow acceptance—first in Belgium and the Rhenish departments, from
1806–7 in Savoy and Piedmont—by leading noble families of
appointments as mayor of a city or president of the departmental
electoral college.
   It would be inaccurate to conclude that reluctance or resistance was
universal at the local level. There were always some who were
convinced of the advantages and opportunities offered by French rule,
particularly among purchasers of national properties or the free
professions. But the particularity of the problem of imposing the new
administrative system at the level of commune and sub-prefecture was
the traditional impermeability of local notables to abstract calls to
114   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


rationality or duty, the relatively greater importance of private over
public concerns.
   The consequences for the model of modernising administration
were significant. The application of general measures intrinsic to the
new system could nullify all the efforts at impartiality and careful
cultivation of local personalities: religious equality and Jewish
emancipation were resented by the landowning nobles of Westphalia,
subordination of the Church was resisted by Catholics in Belgium or
the former Papal States. The abolition of feudalism was a direct
challenge to the dominant class of landowners in Naples and Berg, as
in Poland and Valencia: Calabrian landowners might be prepared to
serve in the provincial guards out of fear of peasant risings, but this
usually marked the limit of their collaboration. The greater the shock
of the measures introduced by the new administrations in terms of the
socio-economic conditions to which they were applied, the lesser the
willingness of the local notables to accept formal responsibilities. It is
hardly surprising that there should have been a reluctant but wide-
spread readiness to serve in local government in Holland under Louis
Bonaparte but not in the grand-duchy of Warsaw under Frederick
Augustus of Saxony.
   Readiness to collaborate, however, often implied, on the one hand,
negotiation of the conditions of service and, on the other, tacit
acceptance by the authorities of exceptions to the uniformity of their
rules. Bonaparte always insisted that ‘men change in relation to their
position, especially those with talent and foresight who best calculate
the future’, observed Melzi regretfully.51 But if men adapted to the
responsibilities of their post, some managed to adapt the post to their
own advantage: ex-Count Ippolito Lovatelli of Ravenna refused
appointment as prefect since it meant leaving his home base, but
accepted employment as prefectoral lieutenant at nearby Forlì, where
his position strengthened his and his cronies’ hand in cornering the
market in the purchase of national properties.52 In the Rhineland,
there was far greater collaboration by nobles in the Bas-Rhin
department, whose income depended on their properties, than in the
adjacent Mont-Tonnerre and Sarre departments with a wealthier ex-
court and service nobility.53 In Valencia, the price Marshal Suchet paid
for the collaboration of the local noble land-owners was the
maintenance of feudal dues, which they exacted with the support of
French troops.54
   The alternative to compromise was recognition of the practical
impossibility of making the administrative system function effectively
at the local level and hence acceptance that, in some respects, it would
                                            The practices of conquest   115


be subject to unavoidable limitations. How could this be otherwise
when a Baron Kettler regarded his nomination as mayor of Münster
as a joke and continued to act as in the good old days before the
arrival of the French?55 Whereas complaints of lack of qualified
candidates in rural areas would seem to be common to all areas,
whether in or outside imperial frontiers, compromise or resignation at
the impossibility of adapting local notables to the expectations of the
new administrative spirit would seem to be characteristic primarily of
the satellite states. In contrast to Baron Kettler, Barthélemy, a young
and ambitious sub-prefect in the newly annexed German department
of Bouches de l’Elbe, when confronted by the insolence of the mayor
of Lüneburg (who had held the office for the twenty-five years of
Barthélemy’s life), firmly put him in his place, with the virtuous self-
confidence of an auditor fresh from Paris.56
   Multiple examples could be cited of the inability of the reformers
outside the Empire to impose their standards at this most intimate
level of village and town, each instance specific to the local context
and mentality. In the kingdom of Italy, prefects failed to control the
expenditure of smaller communes: the village of San Salvatore, the
minister Di Breme discovered, was exacting a local land tax at the
level of 178 denari per scudo, where the legal limit was 3 centimes (or
about 8 denari).57 In Holland the abolition of the guilds—which Gogel
regarded as a decisive struggle of the forces of light against those of
darkness—did not prevent Amsterdam from denying a Jew the right to
trade in glass, porcelain and mineral water.58 Outside the Empire, even
the French administrators most sure of their mission recognised the
difficulties of convincing opinion. The price of collaboration was
acceptance of limits. In foreign territories even convinced local
reformers, appointed as ministers or prefects, might identify with the
interests of the notables, like Carlo Verri, prefect of the department of
Mella, who sided with the patriciate of Brescia in opposing a new
cadastral measurement of their urban properties.59 As Beugnot
recalled, he had no choice in Berg but to abandon municipal
government to Nesselrode as

    a means of softening the foreign yoke in the eyes of the Germans
    was to propose for that part of the administration that required
    daily activity a man of repute who spoke their language, shared
    their tastes and even their weaknesses, and whose comportment
    corresponded to all their prejudices.60
116    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


THE CONSTRAINTS OF PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL SPACE
The administrative model of France—initially including the major
reforms of the Revolutionary decade incorporated by the Consul
Bonaparte, and then in its successive amplifications—provided the
obligatory reference point throughout continental Europe. Even hostile
powers like Prussia followed the Napoleonic experiments in state-
building with close attention. The Prussian ambassador in Westphalia,
Küster, reported to Frederick William III with admiration at the early
and rapid progress of the creation of this new state (October 1808): The
main feature is the felicitous unity of the administration in place of the
previous heterogeneous elements of states; its simplicity, rapidity and
energy cannot fail to achieve full success’.61
   In the earlier years, there was recognition of the need for prudence
in the introduction of reforms derived from the French archetype.
Even in the annexed departments, there was a process of trial and
error in the imposition of the French system: in his instructions
appointing Lebrun as governor-general of the former Ligurian
republic (10 prairial Year XIII/29 May 1805), Napoleon stressed ‘the
experience I had in Piedmont of the false operations that were carried
out there’.62
   Outside French frontiers, there was cautious recognition of the
difficulties. Melzi enjoyed an unrivalled degree of autonomy, partly
because Bonaparte’s preoccupations with sorting out France in this
most fruitful period of the Consulate subordinated his attention for
the Italian republic. As Marescalchi reported to Melzi on 17
December 1802:

      I don’t always succeed, even in the two days…when I’m allowed
      to visit him,…in discussing calmly with the consul…without some
      urgent matter interrupting us. So an affair can be delayed from
      audience to audience and sometimes, because it’s clear that he gets
      irritated if I remind him, I put the matter to him yet again, but this
      time in writing; but he only replies when he wants to.63

But lack of time was not the only reason. Napoleon intervened in the
Netherlands in 1805 to impose Schimmelpenninck at the head of a
French-style centralising administration, which brought together
moderate Batavian republicans and Orangists in a recognisable
amalgame. But the Emperor then kept in the background, lending his
support only for major issues like Gogel’s tax reform. When he
created the grand-duchy of Berg for Murat (1806), he followed
                                             The practices of conquest   117


developments closely, but advised caution against the wholesale
application of the French administrative machinery.
   However, increasingly the French system was imposed or urged on
prefects and allies as a model that brooked little modification or delay,
except in the light of political (which normally meant military)
exigencies. As always, the change was neither abrupt nor definitive; it
was not the clear-cut application of a blueprint, but a progressive
exercise of pressure. Thus, outside imperial frontiers, the insistence on
close conformation to French practices was most visible initially in the
region where Napoleon exercised direct sovereignty—north-central
Italy—with the creation in 1805 of the kingdom of Italy (often called
the Italic kingdom), whose administrative structures were
immediately revised to reduce the anomalies of Melzi’s republic. The
kingdom of Holland (1806–10) provides a transition case, where in
the earlier years Napoleon’s constant recommendations to his brother
Louis that he should take over the French system were accompanied
by a practical acceptance of the often substantial differences of the
Dutch reforms. By contrast, Napoleon was more insistent with his
brother Joseph, possibly because of the widespread prejudice that the
Neapolitans were less civilised: the ‘semi-barbarians’ of Calabria,
‘savages of Europe’, the lazzaroni, the rabble of the capital city, were
not to be won over by conciliating their feelings, but only by
threatening them immediately with cannon, as he himself had done at
Cairo, and then imposing firm French rule.64
   The change in style and insistence was marked by 1808 and became
absolute by 1810. The time allowed administrators and prefects to
impose French laws and procedures in the new departments in
Tuscany, Rome, Holland and the Hanseatic coast shrank to a few
months. From 1808 the Emperor was constantly urging Murat in
Naples, Louis in Holland, Roederer and Beugnot in Berg, to hasten the
adoption of the French system. Eugene de Beauharnais in Italy was
informed by his stepfather that he would brook no disobedience;
Jerome in Westphalia was presented with the fait accompli of a
constitution and administrative package.
   Napoleon’s representatives and close collaborators expressed his
belief that France was offering other states the possibility of enjoying
the benefits of her success in creating the pattern for the future,
without suffering the pains of its revolutionary parturition. The
experienced diplomat Otto reported from Munich in May 1808:

    The entire Bavarian administration is convinced that this kingdom,
    which is so closely united to France by the most sacred political ties,
118   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      must assimilate all its institutions with ours;…all the cogs of
      government, which have already produced such marvellous effects
      in France, will be introduced step by step into this country, which
      will profit from our experience without undergoing the shocks that
      preceded the glorious reign of H.M. the Emperor.65

In fact, allied states alone, like Bavaria and Baden, were able
effectively to resist the pressure and filter the French model, selecting
and adopting those elements that seemed most appropriate to local
needs, despite Napoleon’s attempts to convince the member states of
the Rhine Confederation into accepting his civil code and a French-
style constitution.
   The crucial year was 1810, during which Napoleon attempted to
tighten and centralise control domestically by statistical enquiries in
the economy, the creation of the Imperial University and the new
decrees of the Continental system. It is hardly surprising that the
counterpart should have been intolerance of deviations from the
French example. By 1812, even in war-bound Catalonia, the solution
to old ills was new administration, as the prefect Alban de Villeneuve
observed in his otherwise banal explanation of Spanish decadence:

      The principal causes of the depopulation of Spain are war,
      famines,…the incursions of pirates, the vast landholdings of lords
      and church, the expulsion of the Jews and Moriscos, ecclesiastical
      mortmain, the great number of individuals who embrace the
      religious life, forced labour, begging, the natural sloth of the
      inhabitants, and at bottom an internal and inveterate ill that
      derives from bad government.66

By 1812 Napoleon’s conviction that he possessed the administrative
formula for stable rule was so profound that, as his Grande Armée
advanced into Russian Poland, he immediately tried to organise the
territory into departments.67

Napoleon’s growing insistence on the uniform application of the
French model was inevitably matched by increasing resistance. Space
and the vitality of the European past worked against its feasibility.
The immoderate presence of the French aroused resentment. Military
and economic exploitation ultimately contradicted administrative
integration.
   All the administrators responsible for introducing the French system
were agreed about the need for a gradual approach in the new
                                            The practices of conquest   119


territories. Physical space and social organisation worked against the
practicality of the immediate adoption of the entire French system. An
underlying sense of the backwardness that resulted from the irregular
process of civilisation surfaced in platitudes about the character of the
different peoples—the docility of the Tuscans, the feudal mentality of
German seigneurs, the idleness of Spaniards and Neapolitans, the
stolidity of the Dutch. Time was needed to provide the necessary
material conditions and to counter the prejudices of the local
populations. The tyranny of physical geography could be overcome
through knowledge of the terrain, construction of new roads and
bridges and state monopoly of the postal system. In the mean-time,
military repression of brigands and personal administrative inspections
served as preparatory measures: ‘I believe that the true system to follow
in a country where there is need to ensure uniformity in the methods
and where there is little change in posts is few directorates and many
inspections’, Roederer advised Joseph in his kingdom of Naples.68
Napoleon agreed with Joseph that immediate suppression of the
mendicant orders was dangerous and accepted that the introduction of
the metric system required time. For Beugnot, in his report to Napoleon
on what was needed to structure Westphalia, the social organisation of
feudalism imposed the gradual introduction of reforms:

    for the feudalism that exists in your state of Westphalia is not the
    weak and almost extinct feudalism that existed in France in 1789,
    where one could only observe privileges and honorific rights.
    Here feudalism is part of the social order, it is at its roots…. All
    reforms must be slow and measured: this is one of those matters
    where time is required for success.69

Murat’s councillors in Berg, Agar and Nesselrode, were cautious
about reform of municipal administration, first experimenting in the
capital Düsseldorf, with the appointment of an executive Stadt-
Direktor and only slowly extending the solution to other cities.
   Even more than graduality, adaptation of the French model to the
historical, social and institutional particularities of each state became
the central issue in dispute. Napoleon did not deny the existence of
such particularities, only the method of dealing with them. Ever more
forcefully, he reprimanded his relatives and representatives for their
desire to conciliate the local populations. Lebrun was castigated for
suspending the conscription of sailors at Genoa, Joseph mocked for
trying to win the sympathy of the lazzaroni. From the height of his
power, Napoleon drew on his experiences to conclude that, as the key
120    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


to conquest was the application of an established sequence of military
operations, so standard procedures existed for the consolidation of
new regimes, including harsh repression of the inevitable
insurrection.70 ‘Peoples are not governed with weakness, which only
draws misfortunes on them’, he told Lebrun.

      Did you hope to govern the people without discontenting them
      first? …You know well that in matters of government, justice
      signifies force as a virtue. As for those who say that this will make
      the Genoese discontented and push them to behave badly, for me
      this is unacceptable language. I know their weight and worth.71

It was this indifference to popular reaction that led him initially to
underestimate the strength of Spanish hostility.
   His respondents, for their part, did not deny that the French path
to modernity was the best and indeed the only (or at least the
inevitable) one. Like the Emperor, they were convinced of the benefits
of a council of state and prefects, of statistical enquiries and free
circulation of goods, of industrial exhibitions and urban
embellishments. They shared his conviction that the mechanisms
through which society operated could be understood and controlled:
it was a question of identifying the leaders and ensuring their
acquiescence. Even in Spain, Joseph’s ministers thought it would be
possible to negotiate an end to opposition, as it was led by local
notables who were their relatives and friends.72 Where they differed
from him—even before conscription and the Continental system of the
later years rendered administrative modernisation irrelevant as a
means of integration—was in their assessment of the dangers of
discontent, and their conviction that concessions to national
susceptibilities would prove more effective in consolidating their rule.
   Causes of friction were multiple, inevitably so given the infinity of
local situations; the final ruptures between Napoleon and the relatives
he had raised to thrones resulted from the untenable strains of war
and blockade. But the impossible dream of a uniform administrative
system probably forced the satellite rulers into stronger affirmations
of identification with their peoples than might have been expected.
Joseph and Louis Bonaparte, Murat and even young Jerome were
genuinely concerned, like Melzi before them, to revive or create
national pride: To uplift a humiliated nation, one has to imagine it
today as it will be tomorrow’, reflected Joseph in 1806.73 Nothing
could have been further from Napoleon’s thoughts: for him, the
morrow belonged to states modelled on and in the service of France.
                                             The practices of conquest   121


   The faithful reproduction of the French administrative system
touched on sensitive nerves. It is significant that the aspect which
aroused greatest hesitation and resistance was that of the new legal
codes. For the adoption of a new legal system was not limited to
retraining practitioners of the law; it affected profoundly day-to-day
practices, established conventions and ingrained prejudices. In Naples,
the civil code was modified to avoid too sharp a break over
inheritance and dowry practices. In Westphalia, Siméon wanted to
adjust the penal code to local usages. In Holland, Reuvens insisted
that the codes be adapted to fit ‘our institutions, our physical and
moral situation, our manners and customs’.74
   Only the allied states, like Bavaria, were able to adopt a more
gradualist and controlled approach, experimenting with reforms by
their application in specific localities, modifying articles of faith of the
French system (such as the regulation rather than the abolition of the
guilds), quietly abandoning what was regarded as unrealisable, such
as the French legal and judicial system.
   Resistance to adoption of the French administrative model was
undoubtedly heightened by its association with the intrusive presence
of Frenchmen. The military commanders and officers, stationed in the
eleven military divisions covering the annexed departments, in the five
divisions in the kingdom of Italy, or in the satellite states, were a
constant source of friction with the civilian authorities. Their
suspicion or contempt for the local inhabitants (including their elites)
hardly encouraged good relations. Whether pro-patriot (like Masséna
in Naples) or conservative (like Menou in Piedmont), they tried to
exert pressure in favour of appointment of French civilians. The
prejudices of some of the leading French administrators pushed in the
same direction. According to Roederer, French functionaries worked
even without pay, Neapolitans expected pay without work: ‘it’s the
division of leisure’.75 Beugnot expostulated that the Germans were
‘convinced that the French constitutions are worthless and that they
serve their country well by opposing when possible, hampering when
they cannot oppose, and delaying when they cannot hamper’. For the
young Stendhal, the only lively personality in Brunswick was a Jewish
banker.76 A minor figure like Pierre Legarde, director-general of police
in the Venetian departments, argued that:

    A people destined to be dependent on France for a long time
    cannot be governed by its own men, as they have an interest in
    paying as little as possible and hence are always inclined to hide
    the country’s resources and protest that the taxes are too high.77
122   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Far from encouraging such self-interested propositions, the
administrators and rulers of the new regimes resisted the
recommendations and urgings from Paris and locally to appoint
Frenchmen. Naples was exceptional, regarded as potentially wealthy
and legitimate booty; but even here Joseph and Murat argued strongly
in favour of employing locals; the constitution of 1808 specified that
all offices be reserved to Neapolitan subjects. Melzi had already
refused to give in to French pressure, whether from Paris or military
commanders. In Germany and Holland, Beugnot, Siméon and Lebrun
insisted on the need to reserve the posts to the local elite in order not
to create unemployment and discontent. Napoleon accepted that only
Poles could hold office in the grand-duchy of Warsaw. The hostility
against French office-seekers was often out of proportion to the
numbers actually employed. But resentment at their possible
employment hardly assisted administrative integration.

Roederer, one of the most experienced administrators of foreign
territories, was a convinced exponent of French administration, which
he regarded as the solution to the problem of maintaining equality and
stability without oppression. In 1810 (the year of the tightening of
control), he wrote to Napoleon:
      A characteristic of your government is to conduct affairs through
      institutions and not to rely on men endowed with arbitrary power.
      You have thus given the lie in your immense Empire to the grand
      theory that asserts that great empires are incompatible with
      moderate government, since it was thought impossible to govern
      distant provinces without sending and being an oppressor.
      Because you cannot answer to your peoples for so many agents,
      you have institutions that answer for them, and they answer to
      you for the institutions.78

Despite Roederer’s optimism, the problem remained, that the
excellence of the institutions was in practice dependent on the men
who made them function. Inevitably not all lived up to expectations,
even among the French. In Calabria, the local commanders sold
exemptions from service in the civic guards. The prefect Barthélemy
recalled that his first superior Reiset (in whose office he had been
placed at the age of 14 by a friend of his stepmother’s family) laid the
basis of his fortune by using his position as general tax collector at
Colmar to speculate against French currency: he used to cross the
Rhine, carrying bags of 2,000 louis d’or—symbol of Napoleonic
monetary stabilisation in 1803, officially quoted at 20 francs—which
                                          The practices of conquest   123


he exchanged at Frankfurt at a profit of 50 to 60 centimes per coin.
Thiébault recorded that in Spain the paymasters-general of the armies
in like manner profited from the funds under their control, which they
used to lend at high interest rates.79 Corruption was rife among
Customs officials at every frontier, particularly where smuggling
became a full-time business, as at Strasbourg or Hamburg. Nor were
such weaknesses limited to lower-level officials. Military leaders
continued to abuse their positions for private profit: Brune demanded
half a million guilders and got 80,000 as a ‘gift’ when he left the
Netherlands in 1799; Napoleon was furious with Masséna for
extracting 3 million francs illegally from the local administrations
with the occupation of Venetia in 1806 and insisted that he disgorge
them.80 Bonaparte’s artillery school comrade Bourrienne, as consul at
Hamburg, turned the Continental system to his private advantage,
accumulating at least 1 million francs from illegal licences, before
Napoleon ordered an official investigation in 1810. Talleyrand’s
penchant for bribes was notorious throughout Europe.
   It would be inaccurate to conclude that the Napoleonic
administration was vitiated by corruption. It is difficult to imagine a
regime holding power over an extended period without scandals or
individual examples of corruption, which naturally figure prominently
in contemporary memoirs. The Napoleonic administration upheld
high standards, partly in reaction to the lax permissiveness of the
Directorial years, far more out of a genuinely collective sense of
professionalism and duty (besides the importance attributed to
administrative controls). Such isolated cases of private profit from
public service essentially only dirtied minor cogs in the vast machine—
except for the administrative machinery of the Continental system,
which was seriously clogged up.
   More serious a constraint on the smooth running of this massive,
sophisticated complex was the scarcity of local men imbued with the
skills and convictions of the French functionaries. As Beugnot
commented gloomily: ‘It’s already a great deal to take our institutions
to neighbouring peoples, but it always remains a difficult matter to
form men for these institutions, until the time arrives when they will
be born from the institutions themselves’.81 This was particularly
evidenced in the refusal (or inability) to accept the new bureaucratic
lines of communication, which (it was believed) could be short-
circuited by personal contacts. Where new administrations were still
in their infancy, outside the Empire, such practices were not
uncommon. Precisely because of the accentuated centralisation, access
to decision-makers was crucial. Without such access, causes could
124   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


easily be lost or in any case drag on forever. On occasion, Napoleon
could act the medieval monarch as embodiment of justice: a peasant
deputation from the Dortmund countryside in Berg (advised by a
liberal lawyer) waited outside the gates of St Cloud and finally
managed to present a petition against their feudal lord to the Emperor
in person.82 More generally, citizens and officials sought for the means
to sidestep the functionary directly in charge by appeal one or more
steps above: a mayor appealed to the prefect, ignoring the sub-prefect
(as at Lüneburg), a prefect to the head of state, ignoring the ministry
of the interior (as at Brescia).83 Everywhere local notables sought for
means of access to Paris and especially to Napoleon: Berthier, as
prince of Neuchâtel, received regular requests for intervention with
the Emperor; the nobles of Valencia appealed directly to Joseph
against Napoleon’s abolition of seigneurial rights (though in fact they
then continued to be exacted).84 Dutch democrats, like Gogel and
Verhuell, denied access to the French government during the collapse
of the Regency in 1804, turned to Marshal Marmont.85 Marshals had
a special line to Napoleon.
   Such initiatives were not without their dangers, at least for
functionaries: Chateaubriand’s ostentatious ignoring of protocol at
Rome was used as an excuse for relegating him in punishment for his
protest at the execution of the duke of Enghien; Francesco Angiolini
was dismissed because of his critical comments about his superior in
Dalmatia, Vincenzo Dandolo; the mayor of Brussels, Rouppe, was not
only dismissed but also exiled for his resistance to orders from Paris
and appealing to public opinion by printing his version of the issues at
dispute.86 For private citizens, little was to be lost by such attempts to
bypass the normal channels of the new administrative system.
Patronage and contacts already played so important a role in access to
the bureaucracy that they continued to be considered as normal
practice for the favourable resolution of issues at dispute.
Nevertheless, such initiatives are revealing of an issue of more general
significance: the problematic relationship between administrators—
who asserted the novelty and institutional impersonality of the new
machinery of government—and the administered, whose persistence
in attempting to exercise traditional methods of personal influence on
decisions was indicative of a cultural attitude of diffidence.


THE CONTRADICTIONS OF INTEGRATION
It would be hazardous to maintain that Napoleon’s concept of the
state remained unchanged. The identification of the administration
                                             The practices of conquest   125


with the state, by the very fact of the continuous extension of the
former, implied changes in the concept of the latter and expansion of
its role. It is only too easy to point to the radical shifts in the
institutional arrangements Napoleon imposed on France and the
satellite states or to the contrast between some of the constitutional
norms and the practices of government to conclude that there was no
consistency, merely the political contingencies and propagandistic
benefits of the moment. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that
Napoleon always regarded the institutional organisation of the state
as the only sure means of laying foundations (in the Machiavellian
sense of ‘gittar fondamenti’). It is equally clear that in the organisation
of the state he held firmly to a few fundamental ideas, mostly derived
from the pre-Revolutionary critique of the ancien regime: equality of
citizens before the law, control and accountability of public finances,
absolute property rights, legal protection of individual initiative,
secularisation of the state, participation in public affairs open to all
elites, who were defined by wealth, education and comportment. The
science of administration, through which these concepts were to be
translated into practice, was probably the most recent and certainly
the most novel of Napoleon’s ideas about the state.
    Until the marked tightening of control in 1810, Napoleon’s vision
of the relationship between society and the state contained elements of
the ancien regime concept of representation, however reduced and
controlled in reaction to the Revolutionary experiences. In the late
ancien regime, the political ideas of sovereignty of the people had
conflicted with the social practices of organic representation by status
and group. Now the concept of popular sovereignty had been totally
abandoned, whereas organic representation was revived under
different names. From the first constitution (the Brumairean model of
Year VIII) to the last one (grand-duchy of Frankfurt, 1810),
representation was restricted to specific categories of the populations,
whose selection procedures were kept as distinctly separate as those of
the former Estates-General. Political representation of groups was an
old idea among French political theorists, elaborated, for example, by
the Huguenot Hotman in the sixteenth century. The Bonapartist
categories constituted what were regarded as the elites or opinion
leaders of each particular society; they represented both the
description of its social composition and Napoleonic assumptions
about specific groups whose influence or contribution merited
recognition. Landed proprietors were always present and were often
given a greater share of representation; in terms of wealth, the
category was defined broadly, so as to include relatively modest
126   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


proprietors. Manufacturers and merchants equally constituted a
general category. In the republic of Italy, an additional electoral
college was created of dotti, presumably because of the reputation of
the intellectuals in the Lombard reforming tradition and universities;
savants and artists were similarly recognised with an electoral college
in the constitutions of Bayonne, Naples and Berg, where jurists in
particular enjoyed considerable prestige. In the Spanish, Neapolitan
and Polish constitutions, the traditional power of nobility and clergy
was recognised by the creation of colleges reserved for them.
   In terms of parliamentary democracy, the limited powers and
restricted and contorted electoral procedures—which in some cases
(Spain, Bavaria, Berg) were never even put into practice—reduced
Napoleonic representation to a mere simulacre. Only in Warsaw,
highly conscious of its recent parliamentary tradition, did the diet
express animated and on occasions effective criticism of the executive.
But it would be a mistake to dismiss the constitutions as mere
window-dressing. They were drawn up either as the basis for the
creation of a wholly new state (Italian republic, Westphalia), where
representation of the new ‘national’ entity complemented
administrative efforts to overcome regionalist and particularist
tendencies; or as a means of legitimising the new political power
through the participation of powerful and potentially dangerous
social groups (Warsaw, Spain, Naples).
   The constitutions (with the exception of the republic of Italy,
created immediately in the image of France) belonged to a particular
moment of the Napoleonic trajectory—1807 to 1808—when military
and diplomatic successes brought nearer the mirage of French
hegemony over Europe. It was the moment when Napoleon signed his
decrees emperor, king and protector ‘by the grace of God and the
constitutions’. 87 Napoleon personally dictated the draft of the
constitution of the grand-duchy of Warsaw, before assigning the new
state to the king of Saxony. The Polish constitution of 1807 was the
model for the new kingdom of Westphalia, was closely imitated by
Bavaria and was the basis of discussions for representation in Berg.
The Spanish constitution of 1808 (copied by Joseph as his parting gift
from Naples) was again personally supervised by Napoleon at
Bayonne, in a manner closely resembling his patronage of the Italian
constitution of 1801 at Lyons: in both instances, his concern was to
render the leading notables coresponsible, and hence to legitimise the
reordering of the state. From 1810 more authoritarian methods of
administrative centralisation were judged the most effective path to
the future. But in the earlier years, above all at the peak of his success,
                                           The practices of conquest   127


constitutions were an integral part of Napoleon’s perception of how
to lay foundations, the counterpart to the modern administration, the
bridge between state and society through their expression of what
Napoleon defined as liberal government.
   Nowhere was this expressed more clearly than in the creation of the
kingdom of Westphalia (1807). More confident than ever that his
genius enabled him to empathise with the wishes of the peoples of
Europe, Napoleon explained to Jerome, with a dose of rhetoric, how
good government would win the affection of his new subjects:

    What the peoples of Germany impatiently desire is that
    individuals who are not noble and have talent should have an
    equal right to your consideration and employment; that all forms
    of serfdom and intermediary ties between the sovereign and the
    last class of the people should be wholly abolished. The benefits of
    the Napoleonic code, the publicity of procedures, the creation of
    juries will all be distinctive characteristics of your monarchy. Let
    me spell out my thoughts to you completely: I count more on the
    effects [of such reforms] than on the greatest of victories in
    extending and affirming your monarchy…. The peoples of
    Germany, of France, Italy and Spain want equality and liberal
    ideas. I have been leading the affairs of Europe for some years
    now and I have become convinced that general opinion is against
    the buzzing of the privileged. Be a constitutional king…. This way
    you will find that you have the strength of opinion and a natural
    ascendancy over the absolute kings, your neighbours.88

Given Napoleon’s ambition to demonstrate, through the kingdom of
Westphalia, the possibility of creating a model state, his insistence on
the appropriate ways to attract social support is not surprising.
Perhaps more interesting in this son of the Revolution is his
identification of such means with the attack on privilege of 1789,
albeit now tempered by more recent liberal constitutional ideas.

In a peaceful world (and Napoleon’s administrators, even in Spain,
envisaged such a world, almost till the end), it might have been
possible to judge how far this massive experiment in modernisation
was feasible and what changes it induced at the social level. But it was
never a ‘pure’ experiment, as it was increasingly vitiated by
contradictory exigencies.
   The fundamental social conquests of the Revolution, whole-
heartedly incorporated in the Napoleonic model—abolition of
128   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


feudalism, free exercise of individual activities and circulation of
goods, full property rights—were introduced most effectively in
territories subject directly and for an extended period to French rule.
Within these territories, the local avant-garde often shared a common
cultural tradition, sometimes an earlier reforming experience, which
rendered less radical the imposition of the new French system on
societies where feudal and corporative structures had vanished or lost
their force. When French administrators negatively described a society
they came into contact with as displaying the characteristics of an
earlier stage of civilisation, they expressed the differences, in their
eyes, between societies which, however imperfectly, functioned like
their own and those that seemed to equate to an earlier phase of the
evolution of France: ‘One would have to go back four or five centuries
to find such examples in France’, exclaimed Beugnot about feudal
rights in Westphalia.89 Not only Piedmont, Lombardy, Tuscany or
Holland, but even Savoy, areas of Belgium and parts of the Rhine left
bank where seigneurial rights still survived, were societies which the
French felt they could ‘read’ without excessive difficulties. They also
happened to be geographically close to France, which explained more
widespread knowledge (from cultural and commercial contacts and
the Directorial wars) and permitted more direct and continuous
pressure.
   Southern Italy, Germany, Spain and then Poland and Illyria were
more distant and less known. At times the reports of the French
administrators read as if they were explorers. They identified
feudalism as the dominant social system of regions or even the entire
area of these countries and recognised with shock that it could not be
destroyed at the stroke of a pen. Hence their insistence on the
graduality of reform. At the same time, juridical respect for property
was strong among ex-Constituent deputies, like Beugnot and
Roederer, or members of the civil code commission, like Siméon:
serfdom was unacceptable, as a personal obligation; but distinctions
needed to be made (as in France, in the days following the abolition of
feudalism on 4 August 1789) between feudal and property rights. In
Naples, where ex-Bourbon reformers like Zurlo welcomed strong
French government as the means to destroy feudal power, a feudal
commission was created—unique in Europe—to sort out the division
of feudal lands between their former owners and the communes.
   Elsewhere, particularly in Germany, the new or reforming rulers
preferred compromise. In Berg and Westphalia, as in Bavaria,
Frankfurt and Hesse, only personal serf obligations were abolished,
while seigneurial dues required redemption by the peasants. The
                                             The practices of conquest   129


distinctions were often vague and local tribunals supported the lords.
The peasants in these states, most surely aware of the successful
abolition of all seigneurial rights in France and then in the (formerly
German) Rhine left bank, continued their legal battle for years,
sometimes with the support of French administrators, like Siméon.
The result was to discontent the seigneurs, without winning the
support of the peasantry. Bacher, the experienced chargé d’affaires at
Frankfurt, reflected that, since the nobility and regular clergy would
never support ‘the new order of things’, the governments ‘in the end
would be forced to admit that they were politically obliged to favour
the redemption of rights in order to gain popularity and win the
support of the rural population’.90 In Spain, war conditions and the
need to raise revenue persuaded Suchet to ignore the Emperor’s decree
abolishing feudalism. In Poland, Napoleon did not even propose to
abolish noble privileges.
   The contrast between the decisive determination of the French
within the annexed departments of the Empire and the cautious
pragmatism with which they approached the abolition of feudalism in
Germany and Poland cannot be explained simply in terms of
awareness of the greater social dimensions of the issue. It also resulted
from practical exigencies of the wars and the political situation. Since
Napoleon’s initial invasion of 1796, Italy had entered definitively into
the French sphere of influence: hence the Neapolitan feudatories could
be attacked with vigour as the kingdom formed part of the future
configuration of Europe. Napoleon’s control of Germany was both
more recent and less sure, particularly as he moved further east. Its
future lay with the model states of Westphalia and Berg, perhaps in
due course of Warsaw. But time was too short to risk the immediate
opposition of the local nobility. Given the example of French
procrastination, it was not surprising that even reforming states in the
Confederation of the Rhine, like Bavaria, should also have progressed
slowly. The strategic demands of international politics and war
worked against the effective abolition of feudalism, thus under-mining
a central social pillar of the Bonapartist construction of the new state
and society.
   This was not the only contradiction of the civil project of
integration. It is a commonplace of historiography that the end of the
republic marked a conservative shift in Napoleon’s evolution. The
implications of the proclamation of the Empire went far beyond
questions of style or of international politics. It led directly, on the one
hand, to the abandonment of the concept of equality, with the creation
of the new imperial nobility and, on the other, to an erosion of the
130   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


financial independence of some of the satellite states, with the
reservation of revenues for the benefit of the new dignitaries. Both
nobility and endowments will be discussed in more detail on pp. 174–
84. For the moment, it is enough to note that the new titles and
entailed revenues fell almost exclusively outside the frontiers of the
Empire. The principalities and duchies created by Napoleon from
1806, first in the annexed Venetian territories and throughout the
Italian peninsula, then ever more heavily in Germany, as well as in
Switzerland and Poland, created exceptions to the administrative
unification of the satellite states and even left political enclaves within
their territorial sovereignty, like the former Papal possessions of
Benevento and Pontecorvo in the kingdom of Naples, transformed
into duchies for Talleyrand and Bernadotte.
   Napoleon’s purposes in creating a nobility did not signify the
abandonment of his ambitions to construct a new society. On the
contrary, as he stated in his message to the Senate setting up the first
duchies: ‘He had been guided principally by the great idea of
consolidating the social order and his throne, which was its
foundation and base, and creating corresponding centres of support
for the great empire’.91 But the existence of an ever more numerous
class with material and honorific privileges (30,000 had been
admitted to the Legion of Honour by 1814) could not but work
against the principles of legal equality central to the administrative
concept of the state and reinforce the resistance of the landed
aristocracies to the abolition of their seigneurial dues in the dependent
states.
   The practical consequences were directly contradictory to the aim
of integration. Nowhere was this seen more clearly than in the
kingdom of Westphalia, which had been created explicitly as a model
state, the excellence of whose administration would win the support
of the population and invite imitation throughout Germany.
Napoleon’s reservation as military entails of half the Crown allodial
domains destroyed all possibilities of balancing the state budget and
funding the necessary reforms and new administrative structure
without exercising inequitable pressure on the population. The right
of military conquest was deliberately deployed by Napoleon as
adequate justification for ignoring the principles and practices which
Jerome’s functionaries had been appointed to administer: These
domains belong to my generals who conquered your kingdom; that is
a commitment I took towards them and which nothing can make me
abandon’. 92 A principle systematically applied by Napoleon as
essential to reconcile the local elites was the acceptance of at least a
                                           The practices of conquest   131


substantial portion of the public debt of their predecessors by the new
regimes. But in Westphalia it was rejected in favour of the holders of
endowments: ‘I know that there are donees whom one would like to
make responsible for the debts of their predecessors, whereas I gave
them their properties free of all expenses’.93 A convention was
imposed (10 May 1811) which exempted the entailed lands from all
taxes and charges, requisitions or billeting, and set special conditions
for the redemption of feudal tithes.94 To all effects and purposes, the
943 beneficiaries of Napoleon’s generosity in Westphalia enjoyed
extra-territorial status that frustrated the uniformity and equality of
every administrative measure. Westphalia and the former British
Crown state of Hanover were the most heavily burdened with
Imperial endowments. But the total 30 million francs’ revenue
received by nearly 5,000 beneficiaries was drawn almost exclusively
from the territories under French control outside the Empire.
   Military and political priorities were always in conflict with the
necessarily long-term and patient efforts at consolidating support
through administrative action. The boundaries imposed on some of
the new states, usually for strategic reasons, denied the necessary
continuity of territory and hindered economic activity. In the republic
of Italy, the traditional frontier area of the Lunigiana, between
Tuscany and Liguria, was almost cut off from the rest of the state in
the interests of a military corridor. Beugnot strove continuously but
ineffectively to bring together the northern and southern parts of Berg,
which were connected only by a narrow strip of land, and to obtain an
uninterrupted stretch of territory along the Rhine as a major trade
route between Holland and southern Germany. Napoleon was
impervious to arguments of the rationalisation of territories of states
outside the Empire: with the annexation of Holland in 1810, he also
absorbed the neighbouring areas of Berg, with a quarter of its
population, in order to rectify the French customs line.
   As imperial ambitions expanded, so the military and fiscal
pressures on the satellite states increased, contradicting and
jeopardising the regularity and normality of civil administration. In
1808 Mosca, prefect of the Reno department in the kingdom of Italy,
commented on the positive effects of the new system,

    as the new political and administrative institutions gain in
    solidity, so the tranquillity and confidence of the populations seem
    to grow proportionately, as they understand the advantages of
    this progressive settlement of things which is now happening so
    eventfully, after many years of muddled opinions.95
132   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


The success of the Napoleonic project could emerge only through the
peaceful application and progression of the new administrative
structures and training of a professional bureaucracy. Conscription
and fiscal exactions distracted and disrupted the efforts of the ever
more skilled functionaries throughout French-controlled Europe. By
1810, faced with the reluctance of his brothers to enforce his crippling
demands, Napoleon attempted to reconcile the contradictions of his
policies by insisting ever more on centralisation and uniformity. Spain
provided the paradox of this final phase, with the unending insistence
on the possibility of creating the modern state by civil reforms negated
by the demands of war, but still partly implemented, at least in
Aragon, under the military administration of Suchet.96 The dogmatic
insistence on a theory of civil administration which in practice was
applicable only under military rule highlights the contradiction of
integration by the later years of the Empire.

Administrative integration was seen as the sequel to military
occupation and the means to create a new relationship between state
and society. Through the restoration of order and modernisation of
the state, the Napoleonic functionaries expected to win the support of
the elites—the opinion-makers of society—and acceptance by the
mass of the people. The possibilities of success of such a project were
contradicted by the military demands of the wars and Napoleon’s
insistence on an increasingly rigid centralisation. At the same time, the
responses of the populations to the imposition of administrative
integration inevitably modified its practices. These are the main
themes of the following chapters.
4 The practices of conquest:
  exploitation




    The Romans gave their laws to their allies. Why should not
    France insist on the adoption of her own?
                 (Napoleon to Louis Bonaparte, 13 November 1807)

The French administrative project, as theory and practice, reached its
high point in the very years of the political-military crisis of the
Empire. Social psychologists and some historians of war have argued
that the greater the pressure, the higher the capacity to respond of
individuals and social organizations. It is a hypothesis that tends to
concentrate on the short term, ignoring the prolonged after-effects on
individuals and groups. In the case of Napoleonic Europe, the smooth
oiling of the French administrative machine effectively enabled
Napoleon to wage ever more bloody battles and continuous military
campaigns, and to conceive of the feasibility of forcing the European
land-mass into the corset of the Continental blockade. Compared to
the world wars of the twentieth century, Napoleon’s struggle against
Britain and the coalitions never reached the level of total war.
Absolute exclusion of British goods from the Continent did not also
mean a policy of starving the British into submission; the immense
waste of human life in battles was never accompanied by the
destruction or, even worse, extermination of enemy civilian
populations. Technology did not provide the means, and mentalities
had not yet transferred to the ‘enemy’ the fanatical conviction of evil.
   Nevertheless, if the professionalism of the bureaucracy ensured the
more or less efficient application of France’s economic policy and
conscription for her armies, both blockade and wars destroyed the
very bases of the administrative project. For the bureaucrats, the
presence and influence of France in Europe derived from its
identification with a particular form of progress—the modernisation

                                  133
134   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of more backward societies through administrative guidance. It was a
project intimately linked to the universalist values of the Revolution,
corrected of their excesses. It depended on the force of example that
could be expressed only in peaceful conditions over an unspecified but
certainly not brief period of time. It was this that justified integration
within an expanding empire and the export of French theories and
practices of good administration to neighbouring states. The very
premisses on which the administrative project was based were denied
by French economic and military policies. For the one and the other
inevitably signified the exploitation of the material and human
resources of the territories within the French sphere of influence. At
every turn, the economic and military practices of conquest negated
the advantages of administrative modernity, to the frustration of the
prefects in the annexed departments and councillors in the satellite
states.
   War and the blockade, it could be hoped, would be of limited
duration. But the same years when their impact was felt most heavily
were also those in which the most central values of the administrative
project were challenged by the steady diffusion of social privileges.
These were the years when the military offered an alternative model to
that of the civilian administration, when the introduction of an
imperial nobility denied the equality of citizens, when Napoleon’s
practices of distributing state revenues as largesse to his relatives and
favourites destroyed the viability of such model states as Westphalia.
From 1810, as the blockade tightened, the wars accelerated and social
privileges increased, the impossibility of reconciling the practices of
integration and exploitation came to the surface.


ECONOMIC POLICY
The Revolutionary legislators possessed a body of theories about how
economies functioned unprecedented in quantity, range and level of
sophistication. They were of the essence of the philosophes’ debate
and some propositions had inspired radical changes in policies under
reforming ministers and princes like Turgot and Peter Leopold of
Tuscany. In the initial dismantling of the ancien regime by the
revolutionaries it would be difficult to overestimate the importance of
the ideas central to French and Scottish economists like Quesnay and
Adam Smith and the multitude of other theorists. The study of
economic theories during the Revolutionary-Napoleonic period has
attracted far less attention than enlightenment theorists or the
utilitarians and political economists of the Restoration. But without
Map 5 Principal postal and commercial routes in the Empire by 1812
136   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


doubt the fundamental concepts inherited from the late eighteenth
century—from individualism to the natural order or invisible hand of
the market, from utility to the role of exchange, from rapidity of
circulation to economic interdependence—were influential, not only
in the theorising of the idéologues, but as part of the mental baggage
of the French administrative class. Nor could this be otherwise, given
the extensive overlap in personnel between the worlds of the scientists
and French officialdom.
   Nevertheless, in the Napoleonic years theoretical debate about the
workings of an economy appears to have lost its pride of place. In
part, this may have reflected Bonaparte’s impatience and growing
intolerance of abstract reasoning; in part, it was doubtless an aspect of
the compression of autonomous discussion that resulted from the
dilatation of an ever more conventional official wisdom. But as
important was the divergence between the concerns of economic
theorising and the objectives of economic policy. For the axis of the
theoretical debate had always been the analysis of the national
economy, whereas the unprecedented conditions of continuous
warfare distorted the established framework of policy decision-
making within the national economy by enhancing, on the one hand,
the role of the state and, on the other, the relationship between the
national and the international economy.
   Private initiative and property remained articles of faith for official
representatives, which were seen as marking clear limits to state
action. Even at the peak of the administrative drive for economic
statistics, in 1812, a prefect could explain his failure to provide
detailed figures on forges in that they ‘have to be obtained from
private individuals over whom I have no power, who are free to reply
or not without any possibility of my compelling them’.1 In theory, the
role of the state was primarily to remove the obstacles and create the
conditions for a self-regulating internal market based on initiative and
competition. This was the purpose of the early Revolutionary
prohibition of corporations and workers’ coalitions (1791), as of the
later Napoleonic attempts to regulate out of existence collective rights
in the countryside through a rural code (1811–14). It explained the
creation of institutions for the diffusion of technological knowledge,
like the Conservatory of arts and crafts (1794). It underpinned the
great statistical effort of the ministers of the interior François de
Neufchâteau and Chaptal (1797–1804), for whom the public
availability of regional data was to serve as a stimulus to economic
activity and entrepreneurship.
   In practice, however, the state was forced into an ever more active
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   137


role through the consequences of both Revolutionary legislation and
war, and in response to the demands of manufacturers and traders.
During the Revolutionary decade, the state found itself responsible for
manufactories abandoned by émigrés; at the same time, it was forced
to extend its control over whole sectors of the economy, like
metallurgy, in order to supply the armies. For their part,
manufacturers and traders gave few signs of appreciating the value of
statistical data, whereas they never ceased to appeal for state aid.
Ministers and bureaucrats were under continuous pressure to impose
protective tariffs, provide subsidies, guarantee large-scale orders or
constrain foreign competition. In this sense, the Continental blockade,
at least initially, constituted a logical extension of the function
attributed to the state, rather than a turning-point in economic policy.
At the same time, it represented the economic counterpart to the role
the administration assigned itself in modernising society: with the
blockade, the state claimed the right to force the pace and direction of
the new European economy, although (as in other fields) it remained
ultimately dependent on the willingness of its collaborators—the
entrepreneurs—to seize their opportunities.
   The leading importance of the relationship between the national
and international economy derived directly from the wars. Economic
theories before (and after) the Revolution were premised on a
condition of peace, necessary for the analysis of the domestic factors
of production, distribution and consumption. The realities of the
Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience denied such an assumption.
The immediate implication of war with Britain and the coalition
powers was the sharp diminution and rapid loss of commerce with the
colonies, previously the fastest growing sector of the French economy.
The wars and naval defeats throttled trade with the British, Spanish
and soon the Dutch empires. Initially neutral, especially American,
ships ensured some continuity of traffic with the colonies, albeit at a
lower level. By 1798 the English fleet had effectively interrupted
Atlantic exchanges; the revival following the peace of Amiens proved
ephemeral. The consequences for the French economy were multiple.
The collapse of colonial trading repercussed on the general level of
economic activity throughout the country, affecting agricultural
exports, manufactures and processing and re-export of colonial
goods. France’s external balance of payments deficit deepened, thus
rendering French currency vulnerable to enemy rumours and bankers’
speculations in financial centres like Amsterdam and Hamburg. The
wars affected the economy ambivalently, on the one hand disrupting
138   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


normal economic activities and generating inflation, on the other,
opening up new opportunities and the possibilities of new markets.
   The immediacy and persistence of the crisis of colonial trading and
the recurrence of wars led to a profound reorientation of the structure
of the French economy. The south-west, whose prosperity had been
developed around the Atlantic trade, was affected most deeply, with
the deindustrialisation that resulted from the dislocation of its
activities. Elsewhere the new conditions produced extremely varied
responses within the different sectors, industries and regions. Some
traditional industries, like linen and hemp, declined with the closure of
the colonies and subsequently the fall in naval demand for ropes and
canvas; others, above all cotton, expanded and modernised in the
absence of British competition. Paris asserted its primacy as the
banking centre and cotton capital of the country. River and land
transport and inland entrepôts gained in importance. In contrast to
the uncertainties of the 1790s, the agricultural sector ceased to be a
source of concern for most of the Napoleonic years, until 1812.
Against this reassuring background, trading and manufactures
assumed and were to retain a new level of importance for policy-
makers, because of the structural shift of direction of the economy
towards the Continental land markets, away from the Atlantic
seaboard.
   The Revolutionary decade had been marked by inflation and state
bankruptcy, as well as the crisis of foreign trade. Napoleon, whose
ideas about economics were traditional and at times primitive,
responded by a rigid monetarist policy, alongside measures to boost
exports and production. Such policies were basically contradictory, as
the monetary and budget measures had deflationary effects on the
economy. Fearful of the inflationary dangers of paper currency (after
the only too recent experience of the assignats and the Directory’s
bankruptcy), Bonaparte restricted circulation to the metallic monetary
mass; he inhibited the level of loans and hence the potential
contribution of the new Bank of France as a source of credit. State
finances were considered in terms of their political implications and
regarded as entirely separate from the needs of the economy. The
budget was to be balanced from year to year, as deficits (which were
only officially recognised in 1811) were seen as putting at risk public
confidence. The correspondence between Mollien, minister of the
treasury, and Napoleon shows clearly the Emperor’s unawareness of
the negative consequences on the general level of economic activities
of such rigid accountancy, or of how fiscal requirements could affect
the capital market. When the tobacco monopoly was established in
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   139


1811 to boost revenues, the minister of the treasury Mollien
commented bitterly at how it drained liquidity: ‘all available capital at
the moment is utilised in the securities demanded by the tobacco
monopoly administration…. One should first of all decide whether
fiscal needs or trade are more fundamental to an empire.’2
   Nevertheless, if Napoleon was less sophisticated than many of his
advisers in his understanding of economic mechanisms, he was
vigorously decisive in his support of French manufactures against the
British. His policy developed that advocated by Delacroix during the
Directory, in the imposition of favoured market outlets for national
products outside France’s frontiers, as much as in the exclusion of
British manufactures. Whatever the opinion of the theorists about
leaving the national market unfettered so that it could achieve its
natural harmony, in the international economy such liberal ideas were
rejected out of hand. The economic world view of Napoleon and
influential publicists like Montgaillard remained essentially
mercantilist—a static concept of a fixed stock of wealth, in which the
increase of France’s share implied a diminution of that of her eternal
enemy, Britain. Not all Napoleon’s advisers were in agreement. Some,
like Chaptal or Coquebert de Montbret (both significantly with
scientific leanings), were opposed to highly protective measures.
Chaptal, before his appointment as minister of the interior, affirmed:

    It is not true, despite general belief, that prohibiting the entry of
    foreign goods will benefit our national factories. Such a ban
    results in three major inconveniences: firstly, it deprives the State
    of customs revenue; secondly, it encourages smuggling; thirdly, it
    deprives our manufacturers of the stimulus of competition.3

Such liberal views, still respectable during the Directory, were soon to
sound as rarefied as voices in the desert. Economic competition
became part of a larger struggle, expressed in military metaphors and
equipped with weapons of war. Already during the Directory, war by
corsairs had become a major industry. American consular sources
estimated (no doubt with gross exaggeration) that French and Barbary
corsairs had seized 3,000 British vessels in the Mediterranean between
1793 and 1800.4 In 1798 Schimmelpenninck privately confessed his
conviction that the French government lay behind the systematic
attack on ships reaching Dutch ports:

    I am more and more convinced in these unhappy circumstances
    that the system of French privateering is so organised and in such
140   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      a formidable and extended state that an announcement of the
      arrival and landing of a neutral ship…is now synonymous with a
      confiscation.5

Nothing came more naturally to Bonaparte than the active
encouragement of such a policy. For, as Metternich perceptively
observed to Stadion in 1808,

      he has supreme contempt for the status of the merchant and
      confuses industry with usury, trading with monopoly and profit
      with theft. I’m sure that he thinks he is trading by means of his
      corsairs. He protects them because he regards them as military
      merchants and their ships as nobler shops than those of peaceful
      citizens.6

After Trafalgar and the definitive loss of any hopes of naval victory,
the corsairs represented the sole means of challenging British control
of the seas and an effective weapon against neutral ships smuggling
illegal British manufactures to the Continent. As late as 1811 a
Corsican privateer, Pollan, was able to defy British naval surveillance
of the Catalan coast.7
    Napoleon’s methods in boosting national manufactures and trade
were characteristically brusque and authoritarian. Political pressure
and legislative intervention were regarded as appropriate weapons
through which French trade would replace the lost colonies with the
territorial markets of Continental Europe. Trade could be disciplined
like armies, as Chaptal later recalled: ‘he presumed to manoeuvre it
like a battalion and demanded that trade submit as passively’.8 States
within the French sphere of influence were to be persuaded to offer
preferential treatment to French goods, while Customs barriers were
erected to protect French manufacturers against English competition.
Such a policy was not new, but dated back to the war with Britain and
the anti-French coalition. Nine Customs laws to exclude British goods
had been decreed between 1793 and Brumaire, seventeen more before
the 1806 imposition of the blockade, compared to six subsequent
measures. If the immediate purpose was to extend the military and
naval war against Britain into the industrial and commercial spheres,
the longer-term aim was to enable France to replace Britain as the
workshop of the Continent. Even before the blockade, there was an
awareness of the need to gain time behind protective barriers in order
to catch up with Britain’s technological superiority. As the preamble
to publication of the official Customs tariff of 1804 stated: ‘Foreign
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   141


industry will be driven back from our territory for as long as is needed
for French factories to make good their losses and consolidate their
establishments’.9
   Within this project of a grand Continental market, Germany
necessarily played a central role, not only because of the potential
promised by its population and pre-1789 commercial relations, but
also as a crossroad between north and south, west and east, Europe as
far as Russia, which was reflected in the importance of the great fairs
of Leipzig and Frankfurt. In Geoffrey Ellis’ words, the Rhineland
became the hub of this new pattern of international trade, which
explains the importance of the Rhine’s navigation convention of 1804
negotiated by Coquebert de Montbret among the rival cities along its
banks. Italy was initially of importance as a supplier of foodstuffs and
primary materials for industry (hides, oil for soap, wool, cotton and
above all raw silk); but increasingly it was seen as an additional, even
a substitute market to compensate for the failure of French
manufactures to replace British goods against local competition. Spain
and Portugal, like Holland, were considered essential for access to
their colonies; their importance declined sharply with the British
blockade of their ports and the military struggle. It is misleading to
compare the relative importance of the different regions of Europe as
trading partners of France in terms of the official figures, because of
the continuously shifting frontiers and scale of smuggling. But French
agricultural exports to northern Europe, according to Champagny in
1806, were three to four times greater than to the south; all French
exports to Italy (excluding the annexed departments) were only about
half those to the German Rhenish Confederation between 1806 and
1810, but rose to 65–75 per cent in 1811–12.10 There can be little
doubt that the Mediterranean declined in importance relative to
central-northern Europe, albeit never so disastrously as the Atlantic
seaboard.
   The economic consequences of this policy of tariff discrimination
against British goods, combined with political-military pressure on the
European states, were extremely varied, both within France’s frontiers
and in the other states. The frontier distinction, in economic terms as
in so many other ways, is a crucial one, as Customs barriers were
applied in a single direction—in favour of French manufactures—long
before the Continental blockade. Thus the Italic republic had been
browbeaten into a Customs treaty with France that privileged some
French imports already in 1803. The duchy of Berg, whose
manufactures were often similar to English products (textiles,
haberdashery, ironmongery), was forced to negotiate with the
142   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Directory tariff reductions on its exports to France, which were
progressively lost, until they ceased by 1806–7. On the other hand,
inclusion within France’s frontiers offered access to the largest unified
market in Europe for Belgian, Luxembourg and Alsatian cotton and
iron producers. The major exception to such possibilities (at least
before the annexations resulting from the blockade) were the
Piedmontese silk weavers, whose production and outlets were
deliberately sabotaged in order to protect Lyons’ monopoly.
   The political imposition of frontiers and their continuous
modification had immediate and profound consequences on regional
economies. The absorption of Belgian Brabant within the French
republic deprived the pipe-makers of Gouda of Ardennes clay and
Dutch brewers and distillers of Flemish hops, grain and coal. The
complementarity of economic exchange on the two sides of the Rhine
was abruptly broken. Augsburg commission agents suffered from the
new barriers on the traditional trade routes between Italy, northern
Germany and eastern Europe. Piedmontese wine producers lost access
to their traditional Lombard markets in the kingdom of Italy. Woollen
cloth production in the Italian Marches, incorporated in the kingdom
of Italy, fell with its severance from the good quality wool supplies of
Lazio. Zinc and lead mines in Carinthia lost their markets in Austria
with the creation of the Illyrian provinces. The examples could easily
be multiplied. But if well-established regional patterns of production
and trading were thus dismembered by political means, new economic
areas were created by precisely the same artificial measures. The new
state of Berg created in 1806 brought together for the first time the
coal-mines and metal forges of Mark and Berg. Within France’s
frontiers, a new industrial region was created, stretching from Liège
and Verviers to Aix-la-Chapelle and Cologne. The annexation of the
southern Black Forest by Baden gave its manufacturers an elastic
labour supply.
   The repercussions of the French-imposed reorientation of European
manufacturing and trade were multiple and in many ways unforeseen.
For even where the frontiers introduced discriminatory policies, they
could not prevent the transfer of entrepreneurs, capital and techniques
from south Alsace and north Switzerland; German and Swiss
entrepreneurs introduced advanced cotton technology in Lombardy,
Piedmont and Naples.
   Napoleonic efforts to force the pace of French manufacturing and
trade were probably effective until 1806 and in the early period of the
blockade. In aggregate terms, French foreign trade increased
significantly from the disastrous years of the 1790s wars: total trade,
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   143


estimated officially at about 1,000 million francs in 1787–9, had
fallen to under 500 million in 1797–9 and rose to over 900 million in
1804–6.11 Woollen and cotton cloth, iron and steel increased in
volume of production and in some cases modernised technologically.
But the very protection from British competition that encouraged
French manufacturers played an analogous role in the development of
rival industries outside France. For many of the same factors operated
in like manner inside and without France’s frontiers.
   As with France, there was a direct relationship between
entrepreneurial activity and size of internal market: the Munich beer
industry benefited from the enlargement of the kingdom of Bavaria to
3.5 million inhabitants; Lombard woollen cloth production increased
in the republic (then kingdom) of Italy, whose population rose from 3
million to 7 million; the Rhenish Confederation led to Customs
agreements between some of its states, to the benefit of Baden cotton
production; Saxon cotton manufacturers gained access to a market of
3 million with the creation of the grand-duchy of Warsaw under the
king of Saxony.
   As in France, many of the entrepreneurs in these other states
remained closely tied to the state. There were few who relied on
traditional export markets, like the great cotton entrepreneur
Oberkampf or the Prato woollen fez manufacturer Mazzoni. Mining
and metallurgy, whether in the Ruhr, Bas-Rhin, the Aosta or Brescia
valleys, gained from the constant military demand for armaments.
The demand for woollen cloth and tanned skins was related directly to
the provision of uniforms and shoes for soldiers. The sharp
contraction of navies and merchant marines was immediately
reflected in the crisis of rope and canvas producers, in Holland and
Genoa, as in lower Normandy.
   The blockade encouraged the development of industries capable of
taking advantage of the protection provided by the new measures and
competing effectively with French producers outside the Empire’s
frontiers. For price differentials and transport costs now worked against
the competitivity of French products. Mechanization of cotton spinning
spread rapidly in Berg, Baden, north Switzerland and Saxony. The
productivity level of Mulhouse printed cottons was far lower than that
of Belgian producers within the Empire; Berg and Saxon cottons,
according to the prefect Chaban, cost 20 per cent less than those of
Brussels. A French manufacturer like Oberkampf actively tried to open
up new export markets, but he was unable to compete against Swiss and
south German printed cottons.12 Woollen cloths from Bohemia, Saxony,
Hesse and especially Berg under-cut the cheapest French cloth from
144    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Verviers, Montjoie and Aix-la-Chapelle: ‘the abundance of raw
materials and the low cost of labour prevent other factories from
competing against the factories of these countries’.13 The failure of the
economic project to create a vast land market for French manufactures
in place of the lost colonies was to become ever more apparent with the
development of the Continental blockade.


THE CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE
The decrees of Berlin (21 November 1806) and Milan (23 November,
17 December 1807) raised the economic war with Britain to a new
level. Since Brumaire, Bonaparte had insisted that his allies exclude
British goods. He had negotiated preferential trade treaties with
Naples (1800), Spain (1801, 1803), Portugal (1801), Russia (1801),
Turkey (1802) and the Italic republic (1803, 1806). These
complementary policies of impeding British trade and encouraging
French exports had been pursued by clearly delimited measures, which
still left ample scope—within the limits of repeated bouts of warfare—
for the continuation of existing patterns of international commerce,
and for trade with the colonies, carried in particular by neutral ships.
Following the peace of Amiens, the merchants and shipbuilders of the
Atlantic ports, financed by Parisian bankers, had invested in a
restoration of the pre-Revolutionary colonial oriented economy; even
as late as summer 1806, with the renewal of diplomatic contacts with
Britain, many turned their hopes overseas. But on each occasion the
outbreak of war led to a sharp commercial crisis, as in 1803 and 1805,
with loss of ships, interruption of colonial trading and bankruptcies.
    French manufacturers and merchants were insistent on the need to
find alternative markets. From 1805 Oberkampf took active steps to
find new outlets in Italy, the Belgian departments and Holland. The
Marseilles chamber of commerce stressed that the Italian and Spanish
markets were needed to replace Santo Domingo:

      The loss of our main colony must attribute an ever higher value to
      the outlets that our factories and manufactures still hold in
      Europe…. It is in the interest of France to supply, if not the
      totality, at least the greater part of all the manufactured articles
      that Spain consumes and supplies to her colonies.14

The Berlin and Milan decrees appeared to offer the means to meet the
demands of the business community. First, they extended the
prohibition and seizure of goods from Britain or her colonies to all
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   145


French-dominated Europe, even to Russia after Tilsit; then, in
retaliation to the British Orders in Council, the same principle of
confiscation as prizes was extended to all neutral ships with British
licences or products. Initially the measures aroused considerable
expectations, as they followed the defeat of Austria and, most
recently, of Prussia. Whether or not the British economy would
collapse through the glut of over-production caused by closure of her
major markets, the French-controlled Continent was protected from
competition. Political pressure or military force (it was assumed)
could enforce obedience, as with the invasion of Portugal (1807). The
markets of Europe lay open. In the words of an advertisement of the
wholesale metal dealer Deloche in 1807: ‘What prospects cannot be
imagined for our trade today, now that political and friendly relations
have turned Germany, Holland, Spain and Italy into vast fairs where
France will always find a certain sale for her surplus industrial
products?’15
   No economic policy could satisfy all interests. The blockade
accelerated cotton mechanisation and production. But cotton printers
like Oberkampf experienced constant difficulties in substituting
Indian cottons with ‘national’ fabrics of equivalent quality, and even
more in ensuring adequate and regular raw cotton supplies from
Brazil (through Portugal), the United States, southern Italy and the
Levant. In fact, while raw cotton consumption in France doubled
between 1785 and 1809 from 4,000 to 8,000 metric tons, it
quintupled in Britain from 8,000 to 42,000 tons. With the re-
establishment of peace on the Continent in 1807 many inland areas of
the Empire—Paris, the Lyons area, Belgium, the left bank—enjoyed
economic expansion until 1810. French export of cotton products
increased tenfold in these years, and silkstuffs, woollens, mixed
textiles, metal and luxury goods all benefited. By contrast, the Atlantic
ports definitively lost their lifeline of neutral shipping: American ships
entering Bordeaux dropped from 121 in 1807 to 6 in 1808; and
traditional outputting industries, like linen, persisted in their
irrevocable decline.16
   The success of the blockade depended on Napoleon’s capacity both
to keep out British goods, and to ensure adequate alternative supplies
of foodstuffs, raw materials and manufactures. In the event, neither of
these conditions was met. According to Camille Perier, sent to
Germany by the interior minister Champagny in 1807–8, British
cotton yarn and sewing cotton was still 16 per cent cheaper than
French yarn nine months after the introduction of the blockade.17 His
explanation was stockpiling by importers. But sealing off the coastal
146   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


areas proved an arduous and impossible task, which stimulated the
ingenuity of traders to circumvent the law. Smuggling became a highly
organised commercial activity of major proportions. A major reason
for this was the inability of the French to substitute British supplies of
raw or semi-finished materials.
   At the same time, as we have already noted, the very conditions of
protection encouraged the rapid expansion of textile firms in
Germany, Prussia and Austria which competed successfully against
the French. Many of the German states, according to the military
expert Jomini in November 1806, were hostile to Britain and ready to
respond to some form of joint Customs agreement. But the blockade,
for Napoleon and his advisers, was conceived of only as a very
unequal partnership, with no serious consideration of reciprocity.
France’s allies, even the satellites, were formally independent and
hence able to set up their own Customs policies. In a world of
protection, liberal ideas were impractical, as the free-trader Bavarian
minister of finances, Hampesch, reluctantly recognised.18 Champagny
recognised the problem as early as August 1807, when he urged
Napoleon to insist on free passage or extremely preferential transit
and import duties for French goods in the Confederate states.
Germany was not only a market, but also the obligatory route for
exports of wines and spirits, silkstuffs and luxury goods, fashion ware
and quality woollens to Poland and Russia. It is hardly surprising that
the German princes refused to accept French propositions and only in
individual cases submitted under pressure, reluctantly and partially, to
lower tariffs on French exports to their states. The effect of this first
phase of the blockade on trading relations with Germany and eastern
Europe can be illustrated by the examples of the two major western
German states, Berg and Bavaria, and of Poland.
   Berg was of major importance in pre-Revolutionary Franco-
German economic relations, both as a manufacturing centre of textile
and metal products, and as the export route for German manufactures
to France. Hence it was particularly vulnerable to French protective
tariffs, the more so as many of its manufactures were similar to those
produced in Britain. The effect of the blockade was to impose duties
on Berg goods of up to nearly three times their value. Murat supported
his manufacturers’ appeal for special treatment (as under the
Directory), but to no effect. Berg entrepreneurs searched desperately
for alternative markets. They sent a deputation to Napoleon (which
finally caught up with him at Warsaw), asking for preferential
treatment for textile exports to Italy; momentarily he agreed, but
within months, on his return to France and Italy, had revoked his
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   147


decision. Northern German trading relations became more important
and Berg textile manufacturers resisted, despite rising wage levels, till
1809. But then the crisis came. Appeals for transit concessions across
France to Spain and Portugal were rejected. The result was an attempt
to compensate the manufacturing crisis by a huge increase of trade in
smuggled British goods which transited across the country towards
France, Switzerland and Italy.
   When Napoleon absorbed Holland within the Empire in 1810, he
also annexed northern Berg to the south of the Dutch border, with
nearly a quarter of its 1 million inhabitants. The 4,000 industrialists of
this small state of Berg, now land-locked, its exports blocked not only
by France but also by its German neighbours, were induced by the
blockade measures of 1810 to appeal for reunion with France as the
sole solution. The episode revealed the real interests at stake. The Berg
manufacturers argued, somewhat disingenuously, that the absorption
within France of Belgian textile manufactures at Verviers and Aix-la-
Chapelle had not lessened production at Louviers, Sedan or Elbeuf,
nor had Crefeld silk and cotton ruined Lyon’s monopoly: The struggle
against England’s mercantile tyranny can be sustained only if the
industrial states are themselves privileged’. For the Cologne chamber
of commerce, across the Rhine in the department of the Roer, despite
ten years of tariff discrimination, Berg competition remained too
keen. In a remarkable admission of inferiority, the manufacturers
successfully urged the prefect to keep their Berg rivals out of their
protected French and Italian markets, as

    We conclude that: (1) our labour costs must be higher than on the
    right bank of the Rhine, as our labourers work less and spend
    more than those of Berg; (2) our goods are of a lower quality than
    those manufactured in the grand-duchy because, since our
    workers no longer find subsistence in the convents, they only
    work out of necessity, whereas Berg workers strive to make their
    products as perfect as possible; (3) as a result, our factories could
    not withstand the competition of those of the grand-duchy of
    Berg, if it were annexed to the French empire.19

Berg, like the kingdom of Italy, was directly dependent on French
authority. Bavaria, by contrast, was France’s major and most loyal
ally, not just in Germany. So long as Napoleon’s preoccupation was
the coastal blockade of British goods, Bavaria benefited: sugar-beet
and tobacco production increased, optical glass was manufactured at
Munich, textiles at Augsburg, calico printing, pins and needles and
148   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


ceramics at Schwabach. The 1806 measures, because they applied to
the kingdom of Italy, were a direct threat to Bavaria’s traditional
exports and transit trade to Italy. Max Joseph was surprised at
Napoleon’s rigidity, since Bavaria had continuously given way to
demands for tariff concessions on French wines and manufactures.
The Italian and Bavarian ministers, Marescalchi and Montgelas,
negotiated a trade treaty, which confirmed the French prohibition of
British goods, but reciprocally reduced Customs duties by 50 per cent
(2 January 1808). Champagny convinced Napoleon to annul the
treaty, not only because Bavarian woollens were too competitive for
the French, given ‘the proximity [to Italy] of Bavarian factories, their
cheap labour, their perfect knowledge of consumer tastes’, but also
because Bohemian, Moravian and other German cheap cloths would
be exported to Italy under cover of the treaty.20 The consequences for
Bavaria were dramatic but not disastrous. Economically, Bavaria
responded in kind: she introduced her own protective tariff in 1809,
mechanised and expanded production for her large internal market,
and exploited her geographical location to obtain advantages in the
new transit route of raw cotton from the Ottoman empire imposed by
Napoleon on Austria after Wagram (1809). Nuremburg experienced a
new age of prosperity as the centre of Bavarian manufacturing exports
and even colonial imports. But politically the breakdown of trade with
Italy was a major cause of the revolt of her recently acquired territory
of Tyrol in 1809.
   The vitality of the Polish economy depended on its exports of
cereals from Danzig to western Europe, overwhelmingly to Britain.
The decrees of 1806 and occupation of Danzig by Marshal Lefebvre
(1807) led to a sharp inversion of the formerly favourable terms of
trade, as wheat exports collapsed. The result was disastrous for the
already indebted Polish landowners and catastrophic for the peasants,
who fled the land. As elsewhere in the Continent, the protection
provided by the blockade opened up opportunities, especially for
textile entrepreneurs: Saxon cottons and Silesian woollens expanded
into the Polish market. The protectionist tariffs introduced by the
government of the new grand-duchy of Warsaw encouraged
investment and expansion of national production of woollens, mines
and distilleries. French manufacturers were unable to compete with
such cheap textiles, while their traditional luxury exports—such as
wines and silks—presumably suffered with the rapid decline in income
of Polish noble households.
   As evidence mounted of the inability of French entrepreneurs to
take over the central role of British manufactures in Germany and
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   149


eastern Europe, the Mediterranean assumed increasing importance as
a reserved market. The initial hopes of the Iberian market rapidly
vanished with the difficulty of access to the Portuguese and Spanish
empires and popular resistance in Spain. The major objects of trading,
constantly endangered by guerrillas and bandits, were food supplies
for the French armies and import of colonial goods to France. It is
hardly surprising that such trade should have been monopolised by a
well-established Perpignan merchant, François Durand, who gained
immunity for his mule trains across the Pyrenees by supplying both
French troops and their enemies: ‘his profits are so enormous that they
touch on the indecent’, commented the Spanish authorities.21
   Italy inevitably became the focus of interest. Italy supplied between
50 per cent and 75 per cent of French raw silk and organzines. With
annexation, Piedmontese silk production was colonised, as Lyons
insisted on a monopoly, not only for its own manufactures, but also—
since it never utilised more than half Piedmontese production—as an
entrepôt for re-export of the surplus to central Europe. As a
precautionary measure, the head of the Parisian bureau responsible
for manufactures, C.A.Costaz, vetoed the transfer to Prato (in the
annexed department of the Arno) of models of textile machinery, lest
Prato entrepreneurs emerged to challenge established French
manufacturers. 22 The kingdom of Italy was subjected to similar
pressure, particularly with the imposition of the preferential trade
treaty of 1808, which gave the monopoly of cotton imports to French
producers and confirmed the high tariffs on Lombard and Venetian
exports to their traditional trading partners—Switzerland, Austria,
Bavaria and the German states. It was precisely this policy of turning
the Italian peninsula into a subordinate market for French
manufactures that precipitated relations between Napoleon and
Murat at Naples. For Murat, like the princes of the Rhenish
Confederation, reacted against France’s ever more peremptory
imperialistic economic policy by imposing his own highly protective
tariff barrier in 1809. Cotton, woollen and silk factories were set up
in Naples by foreign entrepreneurs with government support and
orders; raw cotton production rose in three to four years (according to
the American consul in 1815) from 5,000 to 20,000 bales.23
   The ability of the French government to enforce the blockade
depended on a range of only partly controllable factors: absence of
military campaigns, British hostility towards neutral shipping,
relations between different corps of the administration, the level of
commitment or corruption of individual bureaucrats, the degree of
resistance of France’s allies and local populations to the dislocation
150    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and deprivation caused by the blockade. When the positive factors
tended to converge—as in the first half of 1808, when active warfare
was confined to Spain, President Jefferson prohibited American
trading, and the coasts were closely guarded—the result was a
downturn in British foreign trade. At other times, laxity of
surveillance led to the immediate revival and increase of smuggling,
with the support of the British navy.
   Smuggling, by definition, is impossible to quantify, as confiscations
are not necessarily proportionate to the quantity of goods illegally
transferred. But its structure, topography and intensity in these years
are well documented. Alongside supply of armies and speculation in
national properties, smuggling offered the major possibility of making
large fortunes. A graphic description is offered by Winn, an American
merchant in Malta, in a letter to his partners of 1 August 1808:

      The Rebecca arrived here 23 ult.° and sails again tomorrow with
      your humble servant on board for Trieste. I take $10,000 on
      board myself in Sugar and Coffee, and the Brig is filled up on
      freight…. As I am to be convoyed to and from…I consider the risk
      but very trifling. The principal danger, I fear, is in port…. I don’t
      fear the Austrians, but the French may make a sudden move and
      take Trieste, or they may march an army and frighten the
      Austrians into these measures, and then farewell to the little
      Rebecca and $10,000…the temptation is so great I can’t resist it.
      …Should I be fortunate, and find the markets in the state they
      were in at the date of the last advices, I shall make from 100 to
      150 per cent.24

Malta was one of a series of islands in the Mediterranean—like Sicily,
Corfu and Vis in the Adriatic—occupied and deployed by the British
as depots for colonial goods and manufactures to be smuggled on to
the mainland. Portuguese ports served the same purpose on the
Atlantic coast. But Holland and the northern European coasts were
inevitably the most attractive for British producers. Coquebert de
Montbret, who had a broader experience of European trading than
anyone in the imperial administration, had argued that the only
effective means to win over Holland was a genuine customs
confederation linking France, Holland and Italy: ‘Holland will never
be brought to reject English merchandise; it is a trading country, not
an industrial one, so that it is wholly in its interest to handle England
considerately’.25 The open collusion between the Dutch government,
bankers and traders was insufficient to restore Dutch prosperity and
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   151


cost Louis his throne in 1810. But French pressure, before and after
1810, merely shifted the epicentre of British activities further east, to
Danish Tönning in 1807 and then to Oldenburg and then Altona, just
outside Hamburg. Heligoland became the North Sea depot for British
goods, with Frankfurt as the distribution centre. Bourrienne, the
French representative at Hamburg, sold over 150,000 authorisations
for the export of illegally imported goods between August 1807 and
December 1810, at fixed rates of 0.25 per cent to 0.50 per cent the
value of the merchandise; he was estimated to have made 1 million
francs out of this private initiative, which implied the export of goods
worth 200 million to 400 million francs, or 60 million to 120 million
annually.26 It is hardly surprising that colonial cotton, sugar and coffee
continued to circulate in Germany, Switzerland and Austria at prices
often lower than at Paris, even after the 1810 decrees. As the North
Sea coast became more difficult for smuggled goods between 1810
and 1812, British ships increased their activities in the Balkans and
Adriatic, even clearing the Illyrian coast of corsairs in order to win the
goodwill of the local merchants. Bacher, the minister at Frankfurt,
noted the immediate effect of the Trianon decree (5 August 1810)
imposing prohibitive entry duties into France:

    Since the coasts of Holland and the Hanseatic cities as far as the
    Oder are no longer as accessible as in the past to colonial goods
    and merchandise, it is claimed that such traffic now takes a new
    direction. All the routes that lead from different points of Russia,
    on the one hand towards Prussia, on the other towards Poland
    and Moravia as far as Vienna, and from the Ottoman provinces
    into the Austrian empire, have been successively activated for
    English goods unloaded in the Levant ports. It is said that the
    Danube will replace the Rhine as the canal through which the
    states of the Rhenish Confederation will be able to obtain supplies
    in the future.27

In many regions smuggling offered the possibility of relatively high
earnings, whether for the trader or the worker. Gaudoit of Caen,
officially a lace merchant, imported illegal British goods worth
probably 750,000 francs between 1801 and 1808, from London via
Amsterdam or Rotterdam to Düsseldorf or Frankfurt, on to Paris,
whence they were redistributed to Bordeaux and Strasbourg. The
Rothschilds emerged as leading bankers at Frankfurt, London and
Paris by financing illegal trading and working both the British and
French licensing systems contemporaneously. Along the Rhine, a
152   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


smuggler could earn 12 to 24 francs for one night’s transport, when an
agricultural labourer’s daily wage was 1 to 21- francs. In Roussillon,
each trip across the Pyrenees was worth 10 francs, compared to the 3
francs of a day-labourer. In Hamburg, where a pound of coffee sold at
12 sous more than at Altona, the insurers offered 4 sous per pound to
each carrier; the distance was so short that they could make ten to
twelve trips a day; the authorities estimated that some 6,000–10,000
persons smuggled coffee, sugar or other goods every day, of which not
more than 3–5 per cent was confiscated.28
   Nevertheless, it would be erroneous to conclude that the measures
to enforce the blockade were mere window-dressing. They were never
wholly effective, nor could they be. They were sabotaged within the
very ranks of the French administration for reasons of corruption or
rivalry: the denunciation by Eudel, the Customs director at Hamburg,
of the lack of commitment of the military commander, General
Morand, hardly differed from the hostility of the military and civil
authorities in Roussillon towards his colleague Boulouvard,
responsible for Customs on the Catalan frontier.29 But that the decrees
had a sharp effect, where French power could police them, is reflected
in the differences in insurance rates paid for illegal British goods: only
6–8 per cent of value in Hamburg in 1808–9, along the Rhine they
had risen from 6 per cent in 1800 to 10 per cent in 1801–2, 26 per cent
in 1807–8, 30 per cent by July 1809, and up to 50 per cent by 1811;
the rates for American ships to Naples rose from 15 per cent in 1809
to 25–30 per cent by 1811.30
   The 1810 decrees of Saint-Cloud, Trianon and Fontainebleau (3
July, 1 August, 10 and 18 October) aimed at tightening the pressure
on British exports by a wholesale onslaught on illegal British goods,
strengthening the privileged position of French manufactures by
raising imperial and Italian Customs tariffs still higher, and turning
smuggling to the advantage of the French treasury by issuing licences
for agricultural (and then silk cloth) exports and imports of necessary
raw materials. Such propositions were contradictory. For example, the
decision to authorise (in return for payment of a 40–50 per cent tax)
the sale of prizes seized by corsairs and of the stockpile of colonial
goods confiscated in Holland weakened the market for French
manufactures over the short term. The licensing system, which it was
hoped would deepen American discontent with the arbitrary action of
the Royal Navy, effectively provisioned Britain with desperately
needed wheat, while failing to provoke the United States into a
rupture of relations with Britain until too late, in mid-1812. The
major crisis in France of 1810–11 was directly related to the new level
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   153


of economic warfare launched by the decrees and annexations. But in
broader geographical terms, the authoritarian application of the
blockade, so blatantly in favour of France, distorted the normal flows
of trade, diminished the level of economic activities throughout
Europe, diverted capital from industrial investment into trading and
smuggling, and worsened relations at all levels between France and
the states and peoples within her sphere of influence.
   The consequences of the new measures for trade flows and
economic activities were immediately visible in all regions. The axis of
traffic on what had been Europe’s main waterway, the Rhine, which
had moved north-south with the import of colonial goods from
Holland, was reversed as colonial imports dried up and were replaced
by wood for construction and heating sent north from Baden and
Württemberg. Far more widespread were the negative effects of
Napoleon’s decision (12 November 1810) to establish a French-
controlled cotton route from the Ottoman empire in order to replace
overseas cotton supplies and thus damage both Britain and France’s
Continental competitors. From 1 January 1811 the established Levant
route—from Salonika via Austria, Germany and Switzerland to
Cologne, Mainz, Coblenz and Strasburg—was replaced by caravans
that crossed Macedonia and Bosnia and the Illyrian provinces to
Trieste, then bypassing Austria via Bavarian territory and the
kingdom of Italy to Piedmont. Sismondi, secretary to the Geneva
chamber of commerce, protested at the losses caused by so abrupt a
change, and in general at the impossibility of trading under
continuously changing regulations:

    It is a question of trading with a country with whom
    correspondence is slow and unsure, where there is a minute
    number of men with the appropriate knowledge and where all
    information is difficult to obtain. Hence trade has a basic need of
    time in order to change its former direction; it needs time above
    all because it has suffered from so many ruinous shocks which
    have terrified all speculators…. For some time now the financial
    laws of France and all the countries subjected to it have lacked all
    stability…. Commercial speculations are based on the existing
    order, whatsoever it is, and on the belief in its duration, so that
    every shock produces a disruption of private wealth, the ruin of
    mercantile enterprises and universal discouragement.31

The industrial crisis of 1810–11 was caused by the immediate slump
in trading outlets. As stocks built up, bankers and merchants tightened
154    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


credit terms and raised interest rates, leading to bankruptcies of small
firms and speculators in all major cities, from Paris and Lyons to
Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Hamburg and Basel. Some industries within
the Empire recovered, holding or even increasing production in 1812–
13, like the cotton firms of Mulhouse and the Belgian Bauwens at
Passy, or the coal-mines of Jemappes. The Italian market undoubtedly
gave a respite to French manufacturers, like the cotton printers of the
Parisian region and the Haut-Rhin. But by these years French
protectionism had become increasingly inward-looking. Holland and
the Hanseatic cities, although annexed by France, continued to be
excluded from her markets by the new Customs barriers until October
1812. The results were disastrous: the closure of the ports to colonial
goods meant the collapse of Dutch processing industries. Hamburg,
which had replaced Amsterdam as the financial centre of the
Continent since the years of the Consulate, used its wealth to redeem
confiscated British goods and relieve the poverty of its citizens by a
sophisticated charitable system.
   Outside France’s frontiers, the effects were everywhere negative
and in some cases disastrous. Within the Rhenish Confederation,
many of the states sought protection and above all public revenue, on
the model of France, through tariff barriers. Others, like Austria, in
practice failed to apply the 1810 decrees, thus further disadvantaging
states like Berg, whose textile workers migrated to Austrian Moravia
and Bohemia. In the kingdom of Italy, the crisis of over-production
that resulted from the blockage of market outlets was so widespread
that by August 1811 Montalivet was paradoxically suggesting to
Napoleon that contraband exports of silk to Britain be encouraged. It
would be advantageous, he wrote,

      to authorise the smugglers at Dunkirk to carry organzines to
      England. Their operations will be extremely active again in a
      month or six weeks’ time as the nights grow longer. This sort of
      trading is a normal activity, practised at all times, the outlets it
      procures are important.32

It is always difficult to assess the responsibility of political measures in
economic conjunctures. The blockade, even after 1810, cannot be
compared with the total economic warfare of 1939–45. Nor can the
crises of specific industries or regions be ascribed necessarily to the
blockade: Dutch industry and trade was already in decline before the
1790s; labour costs in Berg textile firms were already making
production uncompetitive before 1810. Movement of entrepreneurs,
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   155


capital and workers and the spread of mechanisation in textiles and
mining, in Lombardy and Piedmont as in Berg and Saxony, was
facilitated by the blockade and survived the short-run crisis of the
final years of French domination. The Napoleonic-style Customs
union, because it was so one-sided, diverted trade rather than creating
it. But it led to a heightened awareness of the advantages of
protection, as a form of defence against unequal industrial
competition, as a source of public revenue, as a means of reducing the
administrative costs of government. Administrative rather than
economic reasons explain the initial creation of the Zollverein in
Restoration Germany.
    If the economic consequences of the blockade thus need to be
nuanced, there can be no doubt about the negative social consequences.
The blockade sowed doubts, aroused resentment and even led to revolt.
Within France, manufacturers as loyal as Oberkampf protested at ‘the
tyranny or, more exactly, the piracy’ of the French generals in Spain.33
The public burning of confiscated British manufactures in 1812—worth
2 million francs in Amsterdam, 500,000 francs in Hamburg, 200,000
francs in Frankfurt—outraged the bourgeois sense of property. Above
all, the behaviour of the corps of Customs officers, whose numbers had
increased from 12,000 in the Year V (1796–7) to over 35,000 by 1810,
aroused hostility at every level. In July 1809, 300 French Customs
officers crossed the Rhine and cut off all communications between
Holland and Berg without consulting the rulers and administrators of
these two formally independent states; Jerome of Westphalia
experienced similar contempt for his sovereignty. The Danish
representative at Hamburg, Rist, noted the indignities to which the
Customs officers subjected the ordinary folk:

    The Customs was no longer satisfied with stopping the carriages
    and searching them at their convenience…; pedestrians were also
    subjected rigorously to body searches, and those less well dressed
    were touched all over; even women of a better class were
    subjected to this.34

In Berg, economic crisis and unemployment led to open revolt by
industrial workers in January 1813. The hostility of the local
population was compounded by the behaviour of the Customs
officials, as they attempted to perform the impossible task of sealing
off the imperial frontiers between Holland and the grand-duchy, and
searched houses in the inland cities to rout out deposits of illegal
goods. It was hardly surprising that Customs and droits réunis
156   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


officials, together with gendarmes, should have been the chosen object
of popular attacks when French authority collapsed. Their
comportment negated the bureaucrats’ dream of winning support
through the superior quality of their administration.


CONSCRIPTION
Conscription, wherever it occurred, touched the most sensitive nerve
of individuals, families and communities. It was an intrusion in private
and social life, it could destroy the equilibrium of the family economy,
it threatened delicate balances of interests within small communities
based on trust by the arbitrary choice of who should depart. Above all
it was novel in its annual regularity.
    The pre-Revolutionary armies and navies of Europe—with the
partial exception of Prussia—were composed of more or less willing
volunteers, mercenaries who had chosen a career to which entry was
incomparably easier than to the guilds. Popular fear of enrolment and
diffidence towards soldiers was reinforced by a climate of opinion
which, by the later eighteenth century, was hostile to the deep-rooted
exaltation of military prowess that had accompanied and
characterised European societies since feudal times. The
enlightenment insistence on values of rationality, order,
humanitarianism, tolerance and peace argued against military service.
The noble officer, in his ignorance, superficiality and arrogance,
symbolised the negative attributes of a privileged caste, chosen butt of
the philosophes’ scorn. Economic criticism of the wasteful cost of
armies, of their distraction of useful hands from gainful employment,
combined with Rousseau’s ideal of the citizen in arms. Contempt for
the common soldier or sailor, recruited from the dregs of society,
combined with horror at the brutality of his treatment.
    The Revolutionary army marked a rupture with this past in terms
of scale and social composition. Previously cost had acted as a decisive
constraint on size: in the 1760s, Prussia and France, the states with the
largest armies, maintained 160,000–170,000 troops; in 1789, the
French line army amounted to about 165,000 men. Although
mercenary, the armies had become increasingly ‘national’, to avoid the
expenses of distant recruitment, so that even the foreign regiments of
the French army (with the exception of the eleven Swiss ones)
consisted for over 90 per cent of Frenchmen. Peasant resentment
against the obligatory militia system that supplemented the
professional regiments perhaps explains why the volunteers were
drawn primarily from the urban poor. The French army in 1789 was
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   157


thus markedly out of line with the overall distribution of the
population, including 60 per cent urban artisans and shopkeepers and
only 20–25 per cent peasants.35
   The National Assembly had abolished the militia system and had
rejected conscription in favour of a small professional army. But
between 1789 and 1791 the army was in danger of disintegrating, as
soldiers deserted and, after the king’s flight to Varennes, officers
emigrated or retired. By January 1791, the line army was 20,000 short
of its authorised strength of 150,000. By the end of 1791, about 6,000
officers, or 60 per cent of the officer corps, had emigrated; by April
1794, 87 per cent of officers on active duty in mid-1789 had left the
service.36 With an increasing sense of urgency, the Revolutionary
assemblies were forced to rebuild the army. The entire organisation
was restructured: the number of units and officers was reduced, a far
more humane system of military justice was introduced, new
regulations about battle training and tactics were issued. The officer
corps was overwhelmingly restocked, with the promotion of non-
commissioned officers, initially by examination, but increasingly on
the basis of their years of service. The nation was called to arms, with
repeated appeals for volunteers between 1791 and 1793, serving as
separate units alongside the line army, until they were merged in
February 1793.
   The new army was young—60 per cent were aged 18 to 25—and
with little experience of service: one-third of the soldiers had served
less than one year in February 1793, and two-thirds under four years.
But it was an army that now increasingly reflected the social
composition of the nation, with two-thirds of the line soldiers, rising
to 80 per cent in the 1793 mass levy, from the countryside. If the
soldiers were inexperienced, their officers, including the non-
commissioned, were overwhelmingly veterans. The fact that the new
officers were closer to their men than any ancien regime corps, with a
deep and shared patriotic motivation, goes as far towards explaining
how a fighting army was forged so rapidly as the readiness of the
officers to adapt their tactics to their new combat experiences.
   Increasingly, the appeal to patriotism failed to produce the required
numbers, while volunteers withdrew after a campaign. Quotas were
imposed on departments, culminating in the August 1793 mass levy
which made all unmarried able-bodied males aged 18 to 25 liable to
service for a limited period. In this Jacobin year of emergency, the army
reached a peak of 750,000 men, which was to be surpassed only in the
later Napoleonic years. Under the Directory, numbers were falling fast
through desertions, death and disease, and it was this sharp decline that
158    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


explains the Jourdan-Delbrel law of September 1798 which made
military service obligatory. The law stated: ‘Every Frenchman is a
soldier and has the duty to defend his country’. The minimum age of the
five ‘classes’ was now raised to 20, and service was to be for five years.
The municipalities were ordered to draw up the lists by year of birth or
class, while a review committee was to examine or reject the unfit and
those smaller than 4 foot 9 inches (1.57 metres).
   There can be no doubt that the authorities were aware of the
difficulties of enforcing the new system. Pierre Daru, secretary-general
of the ministry of war in the early Consulate, recommended in 1802
that the choice of those actually enrolled be left with the local
communal authorities as a means of softening what was recognised as
a hated measure:

      The distribution is entrusted to the magistrates most immediately
      charged with the interests of the people. Such magistrates are
      necessarily domiciled in the place where they exercise their
      current functions and have a greater need than anyone to retain
      the respect of their fellow citizens; the disinterest of these
      municipal magistrates is a sort of guarantee of their honesty and
      independence.

      …The author of this draft law thought that to decide the method
      of choice would render the law more rigorous; that the only way
      to soften it was to take local circumstances into account; that it
      was impossible to solve the problem of justice and uniformity;
      that it was necessary to provide the people’s magistrates with a
      clear sign of confidence; that surveillance of the interested parties
      was sufficient guarantee of the equitable distribution that is hoped
      for; and, finally, that wise regulations were sufficient to prevent
      the abuses that are rightly feared.37

However, control was increasingly taken over by the direct
representatives of the central government: communes were grouped
into cantons under the sub-prefect’s control in order to weaken
personal favouritism in the identification of the unfit in each new
class; the prefect and military officers formed ambulant recruiting
commissions; the prefect and sub-prefect replaced the local councils in
the repartition of the levy between the arrondissements and
communes.
   Initially no substitution had been allowed, but with the failure of
Jourdan’s first levy, drawing by lot was accepted. At first, those
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   159


registered as poor had been discharged without obligation to find a
replacement, but this was apparently ignored or dropped. Substitution
became a matter of money, with marked variations between
departments, but rising everywhere to between 3,000 and 7,000
francs. Because of abuses, a series of modifications were introduced, in
order to avoid the use as substitutes of men liable for future service or
for conscription in other administrative areas: by 1806 substitutes
could be drawn only from those who had not been chosen from the
five preceding classes within the department. With the characteristic
thoroughness of the Napoleonic administration, all the modifications
were finally incorporated into a lengthy single regulation in 1812.
   This immensely complicated and difficult process of raising mass
armies was a constant and growing concern of administrators in both
France and the allied states. Overall numbers remain uncertain, partly
because they refer to different definitions of the armed forces, and
partly because the base years employed to calculate overall aggregate
numbers are not always the same. In 1807 Napoleon decided to
calculate for himself the size of the French armies under Louis XIV as
a comparison with his own forces. He arrived at a figure of 546,000
in 1692, considerably higher (after the Jacobin effort) than the
Revolutionary and Consulate figures, which were mostly under
400,000; only in 1808 did such a general estimate for the French army
rise to 500,000; and it was then to increase sharply from 1809, with
the intervention in Spain and then the Russian campaign, rising to a
maximum of 1,100,000 under arms in May 1813.38 The levies in
France, between the Year VIII and 1813, officially demanded
2,835,000 men, with the pressure increasing from 1808, rising by
1812 and 1813 to nearly 50 per cent of the registered classes liable for
service.
   The overwhelming superiority of France’s population relative to
that of other nations and its youthful age structure (with three-
quarters of the 28 million under the age of 40 in 1789) help explain
why Napoleon boasted that there were no limits to the numbers of
men he could raise. Historians have compared conscription in
imperial France to that of the First World War of 1914–18, concluding
that the weight of the former was far less, removing under 7 per cent
of the population (36 per cent of the cohorts liable to conscription).
But the vast documentary evidence in the administrative records,
especially the prefects’ reports, leaves no doubt that contemporaries
regarded conscription as an unmitigated evil, to be resisted by all
means. The rules of the game about physical disabilities, marriage,
clerical status and above all purchase of substitutes, which offered
160   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


considerable scope for evasion, were compounded by passive
resistance and open collusion by local authorities, who covered up for
those who failed to turn up to the examination or conscription lottery.
   With due statistical zeal and closer correspondence to reality than
in fields where private collaboration was essential, the head of the
conscription bureau of the ministry of war, A.A.Hargenvilliers, drew
up tables specifying the size of levy in each department, the number
rejected as physically handicapped or too small, and the differences
between the numbers of those called up, despatched and actually
enrolled into the army, attributable to desertions at the various
stages.39 An average of one in three of the recruitable classes was
rejected as unfit between 1798 and 1809. Of those chosen, to 1804–
5, 8.7 per cent were judged draft evaders (réfractaires) as they failed
to turn up, and a further 33.5 per cent subsequently deserted. In the
nine Belgian departments, the proportion of evaders rose from 10.7
per cent (till 1804–5) to 42.4 per cent in 1805–9, while that of
deserters fell from 49.3 per cent to 14.8 per cent.
   Local studies uniformly document the general hostility to
conscription under the Directory, extending well into the Napoleonic
years. As Alan Forrest argues,40 the opposition from the peasantry—
which exploded at its most spectacular in the Vendée rising—reflected
the sharp shift in the composition of the French army from an urban
to a heavily peasant one, a shift accentuated by the practice of
substitution, which tended to diminish the presence of reasonably
wealthy (and hence primarily) urban families. The experience of such
wide-spread hostility made the authorities hesitant about imposing
conscription in some regions, both in France and the satellite states.
Thus the Vendée was initially exempted from the Jourdan law; its
attempted imposition in the Flemish departments led to a peasant
revolt (1798). In the kingdom of Naples, Joseph Bonaparte never
imposed conscription, while Murat, when introducing it in 1809, kept
it initially at the very low proportion of one in 1,500 inhabitants
(compared to one in 500 in the early years in the Belgian
departments). The more recalcitrant among the newly annexed
departments (in Belgium, the left bank of the Rhine and elsewhere)
tended to be given lighter quotas in the initial conscription levies,
though this was then adjusted in subsequent years within each region.
Similar difficulties were experienced in the coastal areas: Lebrun
hesitated immediately to introduce conscription of sailors in Liguria,
although by 1810 rougher methods were being used in the Hanseatic
ports. In mountainous frontier areas, like the Pyrenees, the
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   161


Piedmontese Alps or Neuchâtel, battalions of chasseurs were allowed;
but they tended to desert across the frontiers.
   Analysis of resistance to conscription shows definite regional
variations. As one would expect, the evaders were most numerous in
areas where the physical terrain facilitated evasion, in mountainous,
heavily forested or frontier areas. Religious or ethnic differences
sometimes counted, which explains the greater opposition in the
Flemish departments like Escaut, compared to French-speaking
Belgium. By contrast, in areas where there were strong pre-
Revolutionary traditions of military service—as in the northern and
eastern frontier regions of France, the Swiss cantons, Sarre on the left
bank of the Rhine, or the Monferrato in Piedmont—conscription
proved far easier, even in the early years. It is probably such discipline
that explains the positive response to conscription in a poor, wooded
and mountainous department like the Sarre. Desertion after
enrolment, usually on the march to the military depots, would not
seem to display any particular pattern of regional differentiation,
presumably because the conscripts had finally accepted their lot.
   ‘Insubordination’, the official description for evasion of
conscription, steadily diminished over the years. The turning point can
be dated in 1805–6, coinciding with the end of the period of
Napoleon’s reorganisation of his army. In the Rhine left bank
departments, desertion accounted for about 10 per cent of the annual
levies between 1800 and 1805, falling sharply to under 2 per cent in
1806–10, with 1809 as a crisis year for the authorities, because of the
imposition of a supplementary levy; from 1811 such pre-conscription
resistance virtually disappeared, even though these were the years
with the heaviest levies. Only in the final debacle in 1813 was there a
sharp rise in the number of deserters among serving soldiers. The
Belgian departments followed a similar trajectory.
   Such a development is paradoxical, as the enforced removal of men
for an indefinite duration, if not permanently through death, touched
the most sensitive nerve of the familial and communal organisation of
daily life. There can be no doubt about the massive hostility of the
populations in the early years both in France and the allied states: in
the kingdom of Italy, conscription was enforced only by virtual press-
gangs. It seems likely that the increasing efficiency of the
administrative machine accustomed the people to obedience. The
passive resistance of entire communities was certainly broken by
transferring their administrative responsibilities to the sub-prefects
and prefects. The resentment against substitution as a discriminatory
measure of wealth would appear to have diminished as the annual
162   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


levies enrolled ever larger numbers, as brothers, friends and entire
classes of age were marched away. There are instances of self-
regulation, where the conscripted justified or denounced their peers
who had failed to turn up. At least in the heyday of the Empire the
Church gave its support to the authorities, with parish priests
preaching obedience. Amnesties had some effect. But ultimately it was
the use of force against recalcitrant conscripts that ensured obedience:
spies, billeting and above all mobile columns broke the back of
insubordination, arresting 63,000 in 92 departments between 1810
and 1812. To this can be added great care in obeying the letter of the
law, not least through fear of sparking off mass popular revolts, such
as occurred in the Tyrol in 1809. The recaptured deserters were then
despatched to safe locations, like the isle of Elba, where they were
trained with notable professionalism.
    Within France’s frontiers, conscription had been forced into
acceptance by the civilian population—whether French, Flemish,
German, Swiss or Italian—as an unpleasant but inevitable fact of life.
A bureaucratic machinery had been developed, whose methods could
be applied to newly annexed regions like Holland and the Hanseatic
cities, whose populations were still recalcitrant: Napoleon despatched
Real, a councillor of state, to Holland and his military aides-de-camp
to Germany in 1811 to enforce obedience to conscription and round
up evaders.41 Outside the frontiers, it proved more difficult to develop
similarly effective techniques.
    Napoleon introduced conscription wherever he assumed direct
control—in the Italian republic in 1802, Berg in 1807, Holland and
the Hanseatic departments in 1810. The only exception was at the
extreme periphery of the Empire, the south-eastern frontier of the
Illyrian provinces, where French civilisation met the once threatening
Muslim Ottoman empire. Here, in military Croatia (as it was
described), the Austrian system of permanent military collective
settlements (zadruga) was left in place. Elsewhere the Emperor
insisted that his dependants and allies raise armies for his wars. A
prime reason for the creation of the Rhenish Confederation was to
obtain an abundant supply of German troops. For, as he advised
Murat, newly nominated duke of Berg: ‘According to French practice,
troops cost too much; Bavarian style, they are much cheaper’.42
    The rulers of the satellite states were also anxious to create their
own armies, some—like Eugene de Beauharnais and Murat—because
of their military vocation, others—like the Polish nobles—as a pledge
of their independence, all because it would reduce the crippling cost of
maintaining French troops on their soil. Everywhere they ran into the
                              The practices of conquest: exploitation   163


difficulties already experienced by the French, but with variations
which are revealing of the different traditions and social structures.
   A problem common to many of these countries was how to raise
troops rapidly without an appropriate administrative structure, at a
time when neighbouring states were in the same predicament. Two
long-established solutions were tried: enrolment of convicts and
sometimes orphans, and recruitment of prisoners and deserters from
other armies. The Neapolitan contingent to Spain in 1807 consisted of
convicts and captured brigands; when Napoleon demanded a further
contingent of 3,000 for Germany in August 1812, they were taken
from the Vicaria prison and were of such poor quality that 1,000 were
sent back.43 The Dutch, a people of naval bellicosity with a horror of
landed warfare, traditionally bought mercenaries, German by
preference. The size of army Napoleon demanded from his brother
Louis (30,000 to 40,000 men) created multiple repercussions, because
of the Dutch refusal to introduce conscription (except for orphans);
instead, they offered high pay and bonuses to encourage Dutch
volunteers, while enlisting Germans and Swiss and Prussian prisoners
held at Mainz and elsewhere on the left bank. The result was that
when the Berg administrators tried to meet their commitment of 5,000
soldiers in 1807, they found that Dutch recruiting officers had
preceded them. General Damas, appointed by Murat to create the new
Berg army, sent his recruiters to the military prisons in Nancy and
Dijon to enlist prisoners; but because the Spanish, Swiss, Dutch and
Poles had already been taken, they managed to raise only 800 and
were forced to turn their attention to neighbouring Hesse. Berthier,
newly created prince of Neuchâtel, decided there was no need to
introduce conscription, given the tradition of military service, and in
this same year (1807) forbade recruitment of his subjects by other
states. When the kingdom of Westphalia was created, also in 1807,
van Hogendorp (until recently Dutch minister of war) arranged for
the soldiers originating from the ex-Prussian territories of Westphalia
and recruited by Holland to be transferred to Jerome’s service.44 The
same pattern of fishing in neighbours’ pools could be observed in
Italy: evaders and deserters who fled across the border from the
neighbouring French departments found themselves conscripted in the
Italian republic; Neapolitan recruiters for Joseph tried to persuade
soldiers to desert from Beauharnais’ army. Murat’s prolonged
hesitation in introducing conscription in Naples (1809), and the
practice of convict supplementation derived from the resistance of the
landed barons and worry about the reaction of the lazzaroni of the
capital. But the danger of recruiting convicts or captured prisoners
164   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


was that they deserted so rapidly. Colonel Noguès created a
Westphalian regiment mostly of Prussian, Austrian and Russian
prisoners; when he took them to Hamburg in 1808, he lost thirty a
day, bribed by the British and Russian ambassadors.45
   Conscription created massive resistance and evasion everywhere,
except where there were earlier traditions of military service, as in
Switzerland or at Mainz where the Elector had already introduced it.
Resistance was particularly marked in regions which previously had
been specifically exempted from conscription, as in Mark, formerly
Prussian, now part of Berg. But where the social structure remained
heavily seigneurial, conscription could never succeed, because of the
dependence on the landed owners. In Bavaria entire social categories
were exempted when conscription was introduced in 1804–5, and
only with the invasion of 1809, and then with the heavy demands of
1812, was the system tightened.
   Elsewhere, as in the Italic republic from 1803, Venetia from 1806
or Holland from 1810, the familiar pattern of flight, self-mutilation,
local collusion and heavy-handed bureaucratic measures was the
order of the day. In regions where banditry had been common, as in
southern Piedmont or Calabria, evaders and deserters were seen as
reinforcing their numbers and structures, and certainly did so with the
collapse of French power in 1813. Elsewhere, particularly where the
priests preached obedience and resignation, as in Venetia, evaders
tended to give up, at the most after two to three years, through the
material difficulties of living in hiding, dependent on kin and friends.
Those who could afford them bought substitutes for their sons; but
besides the rising cost, there was the danger of desertion by
substitutes: one unfortunate citizen of Padua paid four times, as the
first two deserted and the third was then drawn by lot for the reserves.
In 1813 Napoleon illegally conscripted those who had bought
substitutes.
   As in France, violent methods were deployed to overcome
resistance. Villages, towns, even a city like Milan, were surrounded by
troops and subjected to house-by-house searches, with the arrest of all
males of conscript age. Once captured, they were rapidly marched
away from their local areas, to diminish the chances of desertion.
Jacquin, a veteran in service since 1798, recalled how he marched
from Brittany to Turin in 1806 in order to be close at hand to receive
recruits from Provence: ‘there was no way of getting any of them to
Brittany, as they deserted en route through fear of being embarked on
ships. The recruiting non-commissioned officers responsible for
accompanying the detachments arrived at Vannes, as it were, alone’.46
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   165


Jacquin’s experiences within France were applicable throughout
Europe, wherever there was conscription. In Catalonia desertion was
as continuous a drain on recruitment to the Spanish armies as ever it
was to the French. Even patriotism had its limits, particularly in a
region whose population had previously been exempt from
conscription. The French prefect at Lerida could not be accused of
wishful thinking when he wrote: They detest military service and it’s
only by force that they can be torn from their families to serve in the
rebel bands’.47


ARMIES
Mathieu-Louis Molé, descendant of a dynasty of magistrates and the
most civilian of Napoleon’s ministers, had no doubts that Napoleon
was happiest when he was with his soldiers:

    The Army above all was the object of the First Consul’s care and
    his warmest concern. The fortnightly reviews that he held at the
    Carrousel and in the courtyard of the Tuileries were famous
    throughout Europe. The beauty of the troops and the precision of
    the manoeuvres were not what attracted most attention. One
    came to see Bonaparte in his element, amidst such rich and elegant
    uniforms he was recognisable in his single-toned dress, his small
    hat without braids and, if it was raining, his grey overcoat. When
    the troops were assembled, he dismounted and walked among the
    ranks. He stopped in front of each soldier, examined his uniform,
    called those he recognised by their name—and there were always
    a large number—recalled the occasion on which they had
    distinguished themselves, accepted their requests with good grace
    but without committing himself to any of them. In my opinion, in
    no other role did he reveal himself so directly, nor display more
    ably and profoundly the art of leading men.48

Napoleon upheld and magnified the tribute rendered by the
Revolution to its defenders. Indifferent to the tiresome details of
military logistics and administration, to the point of often leaving his
soldiers without pay, food or adequate clothing and shoes, he never
wavered in his conviction that armies were only as good as the quality
of their men. If a marshal’s baton was no longer carried in any
private’s sack, soldiers and non-commissioned officers could still
make careers, so long as they possessed a minimal education. Veterans
continued to be lodged and honoured at the Invalides, as before and
166   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


during the Revolution. The widows and orphans of soldiers killed in
battle could expect assistance, the wounded received pensions. The
recognition of obligations by civil society towards the military once
they had ceased to fight was without parallel in Europe.
   Officers received particular attention, to the point that Napoleon
personally followed their promotions, even at the level of lieutenant
and captain. But the favours lavished upon the officer corps did not
derive purely from the Emperor’s passionate interest in the ceremonies
and ritual of the parade-ground. In the hierarchical philosophy of the
regime, officers were crucially important for at least three reasons.
First, because in the confusion of the battlefield, victory depended,
even more than on the officers’ bravery, on their ‘talent’—and by
talent was understood technical instruction in the art of war. Secondly,
the role of officers in the world of the military was seen as
corresponding to that of the elites in civil society: the example of the
few was necessary, if not sufficient (for good order and discipline were
also required), to ensure the proper comportment of the many.
Thirdly, service within the officer corps was seen as the means of
overcoming the divisions inherited from the past, whether between the
aristocracy and the bourgeoisie, or between the old and new citizens
and subjects of France.
   Instruction became increasingly important as the key to promotion,
alongside number of years in rank and bravery. Indeed, officers
sometimes got together to pay ‘military teachers’ for lessons in
mathematics, map-reading and foreign languages.49 Promotion in the
artillery and engineering corps was virtually dependent on
examinations. The stress on technical expertise, so characteristic of
the Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience, was not confined to
France, but remained strong in Italy: the military academy at Modena
had long-established traditions; at Naples an engineering school was
set up; if the outstanding Piedmontese artillery school was suppressed
on annexation, its personnel continued to collaborate in French
military schools and the école polytechnique, as well as the University
of Turin.
   Military schools and academies were of importance not only to
provide appropriate instruction and discipline to the future officers,
but also to ‘amalgamate’ the elites in the service of the state. They
were to act as the military equivalent of the auditors in the council of
state, training grounds for the most able young, where talent
supported by wealth replaced birth. It was not surprising that Saint-
Cyr and La Flèche were imitated in the allied states. The University of
Pavia in the kingdom of Italy was transformed into a military
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   167


academy. Max Joseph of Bavaria and Louis of Holland both set up
military schools; given the military reluctance of the Dutch, it was not
surprising that in their school discipline was attenuated and education
accentuated. For Lacuée, the military schools would unite the future
elite of the Empire more effectively than the state schools organised by
the Imperial University; the list of prize-winners at Saint-Cyr in the
Year XI included boys from annexed Italian and German
departments.50 The creation of elite corps in the armies served the
same function. The guards of honour and velites restricted to the
nobility and wealthy, whose social exclusiveness attracted volunteers,
were introduced into the kingdoms of Italy and Naples, on the model
of France.
    The entire ethos of society shifted dramatically away from the
critical attitudes towards the army of the enlightenment. Honour
became the key concept, in the fullness of its military connotations.
‘Even for a Frenchman it is difficult to explain with precision what
honour is’, Pierre Crouzet exhorted the pupils at Saint-Cyr soon after
Austerlitz, citing the examples of Bayard, Duguesclin, Turenne, Jeanne
d’Arc and—curiously—the Dutch Barneveldt.

    Facts, far better than words, can define and prove its existence.
    Honour, gentlemen, is the second religion of the French warrior.
    …Sons of our heroes, consider your august Emperor as your
    father: overwhelmed by his benevolence, you owe him your
    blood. …For him you must live, for him you must die: to sacrifice
    your life for him is to sacrifice it for honour itself, which has never
    had a more noble image on earth.51

The cult of individual glory and a romantic image of the military life
were again leading values, as can be seen in Stendhal’s Journal of his
military campaigns in these years, as much as in his later novels.
   There is considerable evidence that the families of the notables, not
only in France, but also in the annexed regions, responded to the
appeal of a military career. In Paris, the sons of merchants, land-
owners and rentiers volunteered alongside students, merchants’
assistants, notaries’ clerks. In the Belgian departments, there were
initially over 2,600 volunteers and velites, or nearly 4 per cent of the
conscripted in the Years VII to XIII, although the numbers fell
dramatically in the following years (523 in 1805–9). In Neuchâtel, the
leading families sent their children to Berthier with the advice: In the
career you are about to enter, he is the most powerful protector that
you could possibly meet. It is essential that you be one of the first to
168   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


volunteer’.52 Despite the hostility to conscription, a military career—
which remained genuinely open to all the talents, given the
unrelenting demand—had become a symbol of prestige, a channel for
social promotion, even a pledge for the national aspirations of Poles
and Italians. Only the Spaniards rejected the intimate association of
honour with the Napoleonic armies, attributing it rather to their own
independence.
   This remarkable identification between Napoleon and his military
exploits was fundamental to the creation and success of the
Napoleonic myth. The iconography of this myth was quintessentially
military, from the paintings of Gros and David of the military hero at
Arcole, crossing the St Bernard Pass, at Austerlitz, Wagram or Eylau,
to such monuments as the Colonne Vendôme or the Arc de Triomphe;
while the great French (and non-French) literature of subsequent years
was imprinted with a predominantly military image of the hero. The
myth was deliberately and assiduously cultivated by Bonaparte
through the publication of propaganda, from his earliest command—
with the Courier of the Army of Italy (1797)—to the Bulletins of the
Grande Armée, which circulated everywhere, from salons to schools.
As Alfred de Vigny recalled:

      Our teachers never stopped reading us the bulletins of the Grande
      Armée and our cries of ‘Long live the Emperor’ interrupted
      Tacitus and Plato. Our tutors resembled heralds, our classrooms
      barracks, our recreations manoeuvres and our exams military
      reviews.53

Of the three constitutive images of the Napoleonic myth identified by
Jean Tulard—the young hero, the master of the world, and the
proscribed exile—two were military. It is this disproportionate weight
of military success in the Napoleonic myth that helps explain why the
image of the Grande Armée remained so deeply rooted in nineteenth-
century French literature: Hugo, Dumas and Nerval were all sons of
Napoleonic officers, who—like Vigny—had avidly read the Bulletins
of the Grande Armée in their youth.
   How far the actual experience of soldiers and officers corresponded
to the romantic image of military life would merit a longer discussion
than is possible here. F.-J.Jacquin, the son of a Franche Comtois
peasant, who was conscripted in 1798 and fought repeatedly from
Zurich to Ulm, Essling and Wagram, jotted down a travel notebook of
his movements.54 He received his first uniform only after thirteen
months, and his company refused to march from Bayonne to Spain in
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   169


1801 until they received their backlog of eleven months’ pay and new
shoes. His notebook reveals what was undoubtedly the most common
experience of soldiers in Napoleon’s armies—marches across huge
distances, alternating with periods in the barracks. He marched an
average 6 leagues a day (or 24 kilometres), but when necessary would
cover 10–11 leagues. He marched across Switzerland, Germany,
Prussia and Austria in 1799–1800, across France in 1801 to
Salamanca, where he stayed only twenty-eight days before hastening
up to Brest. In October 1805, from Vannes in Brittany he crossed
northern France and Belgium by forced marches to Nijmegen in
Holland in ten weeks, resting for two weeks before retracing his steps
(presumably lighter on equipment) in five weeks. Within months, he
marched from Vannes to Chambéry in six weeks and then slowly
across the Alps to Turin with his recruits. Late in November 1806 he
hastened by forced marches across the Po plain to Bergamo and
Brescia, and then via the Trentino across Germany, marching 9–14
leagues a day, to Saxony and Pomerania on the Baltic (July 1807).
After a leisurely walk back to France, he was given sixteen days’ leave
in the December snows to visit his family for the first time in eleven
years. By 1809 he was marching through Austria and in 1811 was
stationed in Holland.
   Officers rarely marched (unless their horses were shot). Their
abundant memoirs, on which the Napoleonic myth was fed, mostly
recall battles, great men and the quality of their lodgings. For many,
like A.Noguès, one of three martial brothers, military activity appears
as the sole purpose of life: ‘When offered…employment at Court, I
replied that I preferred battlefields in Germany to standing around
like a crane in antechambers’.55 The ferocity of the war in Spain and
the debacle of the Russian campaign made at least some officers
confess to less bellicose feelings. Nevertheless, alongside the bravado,
a constant theme of these memoirs, is the nagging sense of rivalry, of
petty injustices in the attribution of awards or promotion. Jacquin’s
disgust at being passed over for the Legion of Honour is at one with
the acid criticisms of Thiébault, Marbot and innumerable other
officers that acknowledgement of true valour should have been
subordinated by marshals like Davout and Masséna and lesser
generals to personal favouritisms and clientelistic considerations. For
the price of honour—a consequence of its renewed centrality in the
values of the time—was how to obtain its public recognition.
   Personal experience of participation in the Napoleonic wars
remains opaque, but was undoubtedly profound. The armies acted as
a melting pot for both officers and soldiers, forcing the recruits
170   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


through the artificial conditions of military life into a prolonged
socialisation that cut across linguistic and geographical boundaries.
The linguistic problems should not be underestimated. Noguès, who
served Louis in Holland, explained somewhat complacently the
failure of the French General Gracin to put some Dutch regiments
through their paces in a review ordered by Bernadotte: ‘In fact he did
not know how to issue his orders in Dutch and instead of saying
gueswinde pas (quicken pace), he pronounced chuinte pas, which
means pig pace’. But Jacquin, who spoke only French, when he found
himself alone in an Austrian village, managed to persuade the hostile
peasants that he was not really their enemy.56 The numbers and
nationalities of the men who fought in or against Napoleon’s armies
ensured that the campaigns would enter the collective memory of vast
numbers of families, in a manner subsequently paralleled only by the
First World War. It would appear that for many, particularly the
officers, the sense of making history more than compensated for the
disappointments and discomforts. Even so unusual and sensitive an
officer as Stendhal—who not only read all the time and was bored by
the company of his peers, but also witnessed the bloodshed of the
1809 Austrian war and the burning of Moscow—retained his
admiration for this military epic.

Napoleon had concentrated on the reorganisation of his armies
between the peace of Amiens and Austerlitz. The aim of such a
reorganisation was to strengthen their strategic flexibility, by
increasing the autonomy of the individual armies under a single
supreme command, which could always summon them at short notice
to march rapidly across Europe during campaigns. All the armies
depended on the core of Revolutionary or Consulate veterans, who
disciplined the recruits as they marched them to their bases and
tempered their performance on the battlefield. But as the demands on
the troops grew heavier, their quality declined. From about 1806 the
proportion of troops with experience of the Revolutionary wars
dropped rapidly. In consequence the manoeuvres under fire, which
were central to Revolutionary and Napoleonic tactics, proved less
possible and the later battles became ever bloodier: 8,000 were killed
at Austerlitz (1805), 30,000 at Wagram (1809) and Borodino (1812),
25,000 of a total army of 72,000 at Waterloo (1815). Napoleon tried
to compensate for the inexperience of his infantry by strengthening
the role of the artillery, but his arsenals were never able to produce
enough guns. Even worse, despite the major improvements in field
surgery introduced by Larrey and Percy, the inadequacy of the medical
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   171


services meant a far greater toll of death through disease and
hospitalisation than on the actual battlefield. Napoleon’s contempt
for human life, masked by his charismatic presence among his
soldiers, was ultimately responsible for the debacle of the Grande
Armée.
   A consequence of Napoleon’s need for ever larger military forces,
combined with the decline in the numbers of veterans, was an increase
in the numbers of soldiers provided by the satellite states. The
Napoleonic armies had always contained many ‘foreigners’, just as the
forces of the satellite states included French officers, and all armies
utilised captured troops. Service in Napoleon’s armies offered prestige
and greater career prospects, particularly in the Grande Armée, the
army directly commanded by the emperor. ‘French’ generals included
seventy Italians, thirty-two Poles, fifteen Swiss, eighteen Dutch, ten
Belgians, twenty Germans and nineteen Irish and English. French
armies of course included conscripts from the annexed departments.
In the absence of detailed studies (except for Belgium), it is impossible
to know with any precision what proportion of the total forces these
represented. The nine Belgian departments provided 90,000 to
100,000 soldiers by between 1798 and 1809, the six Piedmontese
departments about 95,000 between 1802 and 1814.57 Napoleon
deliberately and systematically incorporated such new Frenchmen
within the existing regiments and battalions, in order to prevent the
development of significant ‘national’ armies. Piedmontese proposals
for a national guard were blocked and only volunteers were allowed
to remain in Piedmontese regiments. Given the legendary reputation
of Swiss soldiers, the refusal to allow the formation of a federal army,
and even a Swiss military school, was perhaps inevitable. Instead, the
autonomy of the cantons was stressed by allowing each its own
militia; the contribution of the cantons to French armies may have
amounted to 20,000 men.
   The policy towards armed forces in the satellite and allied states
was more ambivalent. On the one hand, such armies might be used as
the basis to create or reinforce a national identity. After all, this was
one of the functions of the imperial armies, as Napoleon angrily
reminded Lebrun when he failed to conscript 15,000 Genoese sailors:
‘I repeat, only when I shall have sailors aboard my ships will this
country have become wholly French’.58 On the other hand, allied
armies were essential for the wars. A condition of the creation of the
Confederation of the Rhine was that its states supply 63,000 men. Of
these, Bavaria was responsible for 30,000. To forge an effective
Bavarian army, Montgelas had asked Napoleon for a French general
172   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


‘sufficiently firm to command the Bavarian officers and sufficiently
moderate not to humiliate them’:59 under H.G.Bertrand, Napoleon’s
faithful companion from Egypt to St Helena, Bavarian forces
increased from 16,000 in 1804–5 to a peak of over 62,000.
Westphalia was committed to an army of 25,000. In Germany,
Napoleon seemed to have had few worries about the possible hostility
of such allied armies, even (after their defeats) of the Austrians and
Prussians, who were committed to provide 30,000 troops each for the
Russian campaign. In Holland, he must have realised that his
demands were unlikely to be met, as the initial figure of 40,000 (1806)
was dropped to 30,000 or 35,000. In Italy, instead, Napoleon
consistently frustrated the ambitions of Melzi and Murat to utilise
their armies in order to achieve a more independent status. Only in
Poland was he prepared to exploit the explicit identification of army
with patriotic independence: such was the conviction of the Poles that
their future depended on Napoleon’s victory that they were even
ready to fight in Spain; the 30,000 Polish troops of 1807 had become
60,000 by 1809 and 100,000 on the eve of the invasion of Russia. The
proportion of foreign troops steadily increased by the later years: they
constituted over half of the Grande Armée that invaded Russia
(500,000 to 600,000 men). Overall, the contribution of soldiers from
outside France’s frontiers to the Napoleonic armies amounted to
perhaps 1 million men.60
   The cost of these armies was crippling. Napoleon was always
confident that he could make war pay, not only by encouraging his
armies to live off the land during campaigns, but also by exacting huge
indemnities from his defeated enemies and making his allies pay the
heavy maintenance costs of the French armies on their territory.
Gaudin, his minister of finances, claimed that the campaigns of 1806
and 1807 covered one-third of France’s budgeted expenditure, in
addition to the maintenance costs of her troops abroad. Austria’s two
defeats led to indemnities of 350 million francs, a large part of which
was spent on the victorious occupying forces, but which yielded the
French treasury 120 million francs; the indemnities imposed on
Prussia amounted to 515 million francs, of which 220 million francs
were paid to the war treasury and a similar amount spent on the
occupation forces. But not all such impositions were exacted—
Portugal paid only 7 million of the 100 million francs demanded in
1807—nor were all campaigns profitable. The Spanish war was a
constant drain, and the Russian campaign was catastrophic. The
deficit in the French budgets from 1811 was due overwhelmingly to
war: military expenditure rose from 40 per cent of the budget total in
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   173


1806 to 58 per cent in 1813. Even more, as Jean Gabillard has shown,
in an economy where state borrowing was refused on principle and a
rigid metallic currency system imposed, the military campaigns had
serious deflationary repercussions on the French economy and bore
much of the responsibility for the crises of 1805–7 and 1811–14.61
   In the satellite states, the cost of the armies was even more
crippling, as they related to both French forces and their own troops.
The French army occupying the kingdom of Naples in 1806 numbered
40,000 (of whom a substantial proportion came from the kingdom of
Italy), whereas Joseph estimated an army of 24,000 as the maximum
the country could support. Murat was committed to provide 16,000
infantry and 2,500 cavalry by the treaty of Bayonne. Between 1808
and 1811 the revenues of the kingdom of Naples rose by 50 per cent,
but army and navy expenditure increased from 60 per cent to 80 per
cent of the total budget. Westphalia was committed to make a
substantial financial contribution to Napoleon’s war campaigns, as
well as to pay for a French contingent of at least 11,000 to 12,000
men, until it raised its own army of 25,000. Beugnot estimated that
Westphalia’s state revenues could not rise above 34 million francs,
while the war contributions would cost 31 million francs and the
maintenance of an army of 25,000 a further 11.5 million francs. The
Dutch national debt rose from 1,163 million florins to 1,475 million
florins between 1806 and 1810, almost wholly through military
costs.62 It would be otiose to insist further. One of the great successes
of Napoleonic administration, in all states under French influence,
had been the rationalisation of public finances, resulting in substantial
increase of revenues. The benefits were lost, as all states experienced
a spiralling of expenditure directly caused by military requirements,
from 1811 at the latest. The demands of the armies created public
poverty, at the same time as they offered unparalleled opportunities
for private wealth to suppliers and speculators.

Political scientists today point to the Revolutionary-Napoleonic years
as marking (in some though by no means all respects) the beginnings
of the professionalisation of the military: they point in particular to
the creation of mass armies through conscription, the centralisation of
supreme command with delegation to autonomous units, and the end
of the caste system of officer recruitment.63 It is easy to identify such
elements in Napoleon’s aims and practices. What are not normally
discussed are the methods of imposition of such practices or their
compatibility with the civilian ideal of administration. Conscription
has already been discussed. It is worth noting that, at the officer level,
174   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


if the army continued to offer a career open to talent, this was truer
for the French than for the others, as too many French officers viewed
the satellite armies as providing alternative opportunities for quick
advancement. This may have been worse in Italy than elsewhere, but
certainly the presence of French officers in the kingdoms of Italy and
particularly of Naples was a source of constant friction. More in
general, the behaviour of military commanders, not only outside
France, but also within the new territories—of which Davout in the
Hanseatic departments offers a prime example—outraged impotent
civilian administrators.64
    Gaetano Mosca considered that the subordination of the armed
forces to civilian authority was among the most distinctive and crucial
features of European civilisation. He attributed this to the integration
of the officer corps within the ruling elites, contemporaneous to the
rigid class divisions within the armies. Military intervention in the
political life of post-Napoleonic Spain offers the most obvious
exception to this generalisation about the history of Europe since
1815. But the pre-eminent role assigned to the army and the privileges
given to the officer corps in Napoleonic society itself must raise
questions about the nature of their subordination.


SOCIAL PRIVILEGE
Aspirations to social equality had flickered and died like fireflies in the
summer’s night of the Revolution. Long before Brumaire, equality had
been restored—but in restrictive manner—to the sphere initially
assigned it by the deputies of the National Assembly—a political
weapon against privilege, defined juridically as equality before the law.
The Consulate succeeded not only because it imposed political stability,
but also because it ensured continuity with the social identity of the
Directory: ownership of property marked an ever sharper divide from
the labouring classes. The very insistence in identifying those regarded
as notables at every level, the listings drawn up repeatedly by the
administrators for this purpose, the terminology employed to describe
their qualities, are all revealing of the strictly hierarchical representation
of society under Napoleon. In the heyday of the Empire, in 1810, over
100,000 notables were classified by the prefects in tables of candidates
judged suitable for membership of the departmental and sub-prefectural
electoral colleges.65 The revenues attributed to them ranged widely,
from over 50,000 francs to under 500 francs, reflecting the low level of
wealth in many departments. Landed property was the common
denominator of all professional categories, whether these notables were
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   175


defined as ‘proprietors’, ‘farmers’, or ‘functionaries’, ‘merchants’ or
members of the liberal professions. One-third was described as
proprietors, but since a large proportion of those listed as belonging to
local administrations (18 per cent) were also dependent on their landed
incomes, the category of landowner covered probably half the total
number of notables; the functionaries were the next largest group (16
per cent), more than the liberal professions (14 per cent) or traders and
manufacturers (11 per cent). These were Napoleon’s ‘masses of granite’,
who were to hold together ‘the grains of sand-dust’ of the ordinary
people by their example, connections, wealth and influence; from their
ranks were chosen the men of ‘talent’ to serve the state in civilian or
military capacity.
   There was a strong continuity in professions between the notability
of ancien regime France and that of the Empire: if the most senior
officials of Louis XVI’s administration and army had vanished, the
middle ranks retained their natural place among the ruling elites. But
this continuity extended beyond occupations to social positions and
wealth: most of the wealthiest landlords were nobles. In France, their
strong presence in the departmental listings of the top twelve land tax
payers (1802) reflected the remarkable resilience of the old noble
families in the face of the persecutions and confiscations of the
previous decade. In the annexed territories and satellite states, the very
absence of the intense Revolutionary experience ensured the
continuing influence of the great aristocratic families, whose wealth
was based on land. Naturally this was not the case in regions where
great estates had never been characteristic, such as Savoy, Haut- and
Bas-Rhin or Léman, nor did it apply (except in the Orangist northern
provinces) to mercantile societies like the Dutch. But in the
Piedmontese departments in 1810, for example, 114 of the 150 names
in the lists of the 30 ‘most heavily taxed’ were ex-nobles, while in the
Italic kingdom three-quarters of the electoral college of the
‘proprietors’ were the old nobility. Further east in Europe, supremely
in Poland, there was never even any pretence at challenging the
continuity of aristocratic political and social power.66
   To conclude from this that little had changed from the ancien
regime would be erroneous. If great landed families had survived the
vicissitudes of political upheaval, they had still lost their fiscal
privileges. The weight of the land tax remained highly
disproportionate between departments, and even the radical decision
to introduce the theoretically impartial cadaster (1808) was weakened
by local opposition. But equality before the law meant equal liability
176   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


to taxation, as well as access to landownership and to careers
unhampered by legal restrictions.
   Nevertheless, already under the Consulate, one sector of society
was regarded as more equal than others—the military. Recognition of
individual acts of military valour by the award of arms of honour
dated back to the Directory. The Legion of Honour (19 May 1802),
forced through the council of state by Napoleon despite the
reservations of some councillors, was justified precisely in terms of
recompense of honour. For Roederer, it was a means of shifting power
away from the Brumairean notability of the electoral colleges to
Bonaparte, on whom nominations to the Legion depended. The
Legion was given a military and hierarchical structure (organised in
fifteen cohorts, with grand officers, commandants, officers and
legionaries) and was presented as a means of strengthening cohesion
in a society atomised by the Revolution. It was expected, Lucien
Bonaparte told the Tribunate, that ‘this happy system of union
established among the legionaries will hopefully spread through
society’.67 To facilitate the effectiveness of this collective military
injection into civil society, the knightly Order was entailed with
national properties worth 76 million francs. From the outset (as in the
creation of ‘sénatoreries’ for particularly meritorious senators in
1803), an income was assigned with each title. The purpose was to
ensure that the beneficiaries enjoyed adequate financial means to
uphold publicly attributed status, while avoiding the danger of
creating a hereditary class. In practice, the rapid and continuous
inflation of nominations reduced appointments to a sign of
distinction, with an income guaranteed to keep the legionaries,
irrespective of their social origin, above the labouring classes. From
the initial 5,000 awards, the Legion grew to over 11,000 in 1805 and
38,000 by 1814. But, from its outset, the Legion remained an almost
exclusive reserve for the military. In 1814 only 1,500, or under 4 per
cent, were civilians, mostly leading dignitaries of the regime.68 Lucien
Bonaparte’s sibylline phrase at the moment of the creation of the
Legion of Honour perhaps masked an unconfessed hope that the
corporate ownership and military organisation of the Order’s estates
would act as an embryonic model for a future French society.
Napoleon, at his most self-confident, attracted by the example of the
Roman empire, even tried to imitate the deployment of legionaries as
a means contemporaneously to defend and stiffen society, particularly
in the border or new territories. Initially (1802) he proposed to
establish ten landed settlements, each with 400 veterans, retired
because of their wounds; two experimental camps were opened at
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   177


Alessandria in Piedmont and Juliers in the Rhineland. Confirmation of
the military settlements of Croatia, the zadrugas, may well have been
encouraged by similar sentiments. In the same vein, 6,000 respectable
dowries were offered in 1810 to induce veterans to marry and
reproduce.69
   There can be no doubt that, as Napoleon became more
conservative over the years, his preference for the military became
more marked. Victorious war offered officers and soldiers multiple
opportunities for income supplementation, hierarchically structured
according to grade. The enormous fortunes of favourite marshals—
some of whom, like Berthier, Masséna and Ney, accumulated official
incomes of 700,000 to over 1,200,000 francs annually—were the
result of Napoleon’s generosity, not to speak of his normal willingness
to turn a blind eye to the ‘voluntary donations’ they extracted in
occupied territories. But apart from military campaigns, the military
were granted solid material benefits and growing social prestige. The
officers received stipends that, particularly at the higher grades,
compared very favourably to those of the civilian administrators.
Over 4,500 wounded soldiers and officers were given incomes ranging
from 500 francs to over 4,000 francs. Despite the civil code, officers’
property was given protection against seizure, free education was
enjoyed by their daughters, scholarships to military schools were
given to their sons (and from 1812, exclusively to them). Retired
officers were employed in the civil administration, especially at the
lower levels, as head clerks in the police, Customs and financial
administrations, where presumably the requirements of discipline and
force particularly suited their military qualifications.70
   The duke of Wellington recalled an imperial France that, in his old
age, had already acquired the blurred and inaccurate contours of a
mythical past:

    That country was constituted upon a military basis. All its
    institutions were framed for the purpose of forming and
    maintaining its armies with a view to conquest. All the offices and
    rewards of the State were reserved in the first instance exclusively
    for the army. An officer, even a private soldier, might look to the
    sovereignty of a kingdom as a reward for his services.71

Wellington’s memories were coloured by his experiences in Portugal
where, to someone of his aristocratic and military background, his
French opponents—Junot, Soult, Masséna—may well have seemed
upstarts who had risen from the ranks. Nevertheless, his comment,
178   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


however exaggerated, confirmed a contemporary impression difficult
to refute. Under the Empire the military had acquired the visible
characteristics of a privileged caste. In official ceremonies, the officers
insisted on and ultimately won precedence over their civilian
counterparts. Their uniforms set the tone for civilian administrators.
Their marriages were controlled by the minister of war to ensure they
did not demean their standing.
   From France, the privileged position attributed to the military
spread outwards across Europe. This was hardly surprising, given the
high proportion of generals who ruled or governed territories—from
Murat and Eugene de Beauharnais to the marshals in Spain and
Germany—not to speak of the plethora of French officers seeking to
make careers in the satellite states. Nor could it be otherwise in a
country like Poland, where the aristocratic officers of the vastly
expanded army could legitimately assert that the nation’s newly
recovered independence was primarily dependent on military valour.
Perhaps more unexpected, and certainly misplaced, was Louis’
decision to affirm Holland’s autonomy in the military sphere by the
sudden nomination of Dutch marshals. As General van Hogendorp,
minister of war, recalled: ‘It was absurd and pointless to create six
marshals for a small state like Holland’; the only effect was to irritate
Napoleon by the implicit challenge to his exclusive monopoly of such
promotions.72 The social origins of the officer corps in the different
satellite states would merit study. One can confidently surmise that,
while the local nobilities lost their monopoly (except in Poland),
outside France the officers lacked the genuinely popular component
that had characterised the French revolutionary armies. Whether in
Holland or Italy, Bavaria or Poland, the military set the tone for
society, through their parades and uniforms as much as through their
exorbitant demands on public resources. Indeed, within states like
Naples and Spain the endemic threat of war in regions such as
Calabria or Valencia led to a virtual militarisation of society, where
the senior civilian administrators were often former officers, taxes
were collected by the army, and the donning of uniforms throughout
the civil administration symbolised the presence of the state.

If the military was encouraged to affirm itself as a caste, the nobility was
deliberately created as an accompaniment to the Empire. The
assumption of the imperial title required a Court and the assignation of
appropriate titles to the sovereign’s family. In the one and the other case
the protocol of the ancien regime was assiduously copied. Even more
symptomatic of the blatant desire to affirm the hierarchical order of an
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   179


imaginary past was the juridical language employed to decree the grant
of principates and duchies as grand fiefs of the Empire to Napoleon’s
relatives and a few favoured generals and ministers (1806). The concept
of primogeniture through the male line adopted for these fiefs, with
reversion to the Crown in the absence of legitimate heirs, incorporated
the ideal of what was seen as the original model of feudalism, as it was
imagined to have existed in Carolingian times, purified of the accretions
and corruptions of later ages. The same neo-gothic imagery can
subsequently be found in the oath of fealty sworn by the new nobles,
who vowed as true knights ‘to march to the defence of the patrie on
every occasion that its territory is threatened or that His Majesty goes
forth at the head of his army’.73 An excellent example, if ever there was,
of a terminology replete with meanings shifting in significance from
contemporary to imagined past in its references to ‘patrie’, ‘territory’
and the king ‘at the head of his army’.
   The creation of a nobility (March 1808) was more than either a
logical development from the initial principates or a means to reward
the great and favoured. Titles consecrated the hierarchy of function,
with level of honour corresponding to administrative grade: ministers,
senators, councillors of state, presidents of the Legislative body and
archbishops were counts; presidents of electoral colleges and of the
highest tribunals, bishops and the mayors of the thirty-seven ‘good
towns’ were barons. Progress in the service of the state could be publicly
acknowledged by elevation from chevalier to baron. Prefects and
generals could be rewarded by nomination at different points in the
hierarchy of titles, according to Napoleon’s estimation of their service.
   At the same time, a title could be made hereditary on condition that
the holder entailed his estate to guarantee an appropriate level of
income, as well as demonstrate his reputation and standing. The aim
was to create a new nobility that would replace and absorb the old
aristocracies. The discretionary power of concession of heritable titles
functioned as a weapon both to protect the social exclusiveness of the
imperial nobility, and to divide the ranks of the old families of great
name who remained aloof from the regime.
   Napoleon’s concern to rally the old nobility to himself was one
more aspect of his growing conservatism. As consul, his policy had
been clear: on the one hand, to offer legal guarantees of person and
property to those who were prepared to accept the new France, on the
other, to reduce to impotence impenitent royalists by terrorism (the
kidnapping and execution of the duke of Enghien) and confiscation of
émigré properties. With the consolidation of his power, the prestige of
service to the state attracted the younger generation of nobles. The old
180    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


aristocracy had almost vanished from the 1802 list of notables, where
it represented only 3 per cent; but 58 per cent of the prefects in 1806
were ancien regime nobles, as were one-third of the sub-prefects and
mayors.74 The creation of new noble titles, while the old remained
abolished, was both a deliberate challenge and a veiled suggestion to
the old families that it was time to rally openly to the regime. Pasquier,
who came from their ranks and was the leading figure in the new
Council for seals of nobility, warned them:75

      Those who are called by their wealth, name or condition to play
      a useful role in public life too often deceive themselves into
      believing that their abstention attracts attention to them and gives
      them a real importance. Should a reaction arrive, of any sort, it is
      not to them that the government would ever appeal. It would turn
      to the men of action, to those whose acts or words could carry the
      strength or means to be truly useful, to those who have followed
      the current and are not some twenty years behind the times.

From 1810 discretion gave way to open pressure as Napoleon, now
married to Louis XVI’s niece, Marie Louise, demanded open
obeisance from all the nobles, even the most nostalgic. The brusque
change in approach can be detected in all directions. In a long note
dictated on 14 June 1810, the Emperor recognised that without the
participation of the old families, the imperial nobility ‘would never
convince those who formerly enjoyed the prerogatives of nobility to
forget’. He proposed a hierarchy of privileges and titles to attract
them. ‘Give support to the present dynasty, get people to forget the old
nobility, that’s the end to reach’.76 The insistence on entails and
adequate income to live in a manner appropriate to status was carried
to the point of granting regular subsidies to the poor nobles of
Tuscany and Genoa (1810). An independent charity for poor pregnant
mothers, taken over in the Empress’s name, became the occasion to
attempt to rally the grand old families via their philanthropically
minded wives (1810). The nobles of the newly annexed departments
were given the opportunity to request titles in place of those they had
enjoyed before annexation (1811). Most sinister, the minister of
police, Savary, asked prefects for a listing of the unmarried daughters
of the leading families, with comments on their qualities and dowries
(1810–11). As Savary explained:

      Such information is all the more necessary as most of the old
      families only seek to ally among themselves because they are
                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   181


    persuaded that they can revive and give greater brilliance to titles
    that the government does not recognise and which today are no
    more than the recompense granted to those who gave
    considerable service in the civil career…. They believe they would
    lower themselves if they united with families whose fathers have
    shed their blood so gloriously for their country.77

The imperial nobility numbered about 3,350, the greater part of
whose titles were granted between 1808 and 1810. The lion’s share
went to the military, 59 per cent of the total, rising to 80 per cent of
the chevaliers; 22 per cent were leading functionaries (councillors of
state, prefects, bishops, magistrates) and 17 per cent notables
(senators, members of electoral colleges, mayors); there were few
scientists, artists, manufacturers or merchants. If the ‘grand old world’
successfully resisted the conscription of its daughters (only about ten
of whom married into the new nobility), it rallied increasingly to the
regime: 950 (or one-third) of the new titles went to ancien regime
families, of whom 680 came from within France’s pre-Revolutionary
frontiers. In a satellite state like the Italic kingdom, where 227 titles
were created, the proportion of military among its new nobles fell to
10 per cent; although old families constituted 70 per cent, this was
more the automatic result of the posts they held than clear evidence of
‘rallying round’.78
   The creation of this new nobility, whether to reward the military
and civilian servants of the state or to absorb the old aristocracy, was
oriented primarily towards ‘old’ France. This is not to ignore the fact
that non-French generals and aristocrats from the annexed
departments were ennobled, nor that nostalgic nobles persisted in
their passive resistance to rally in territories like Piedmont, Lombardy
or the former Papal States. It is not accidental that of the 285 titles
given to the leading families of the annexed departments or satellite
states, 170 should have been given to Italians, compared to 70 granted
to the highly committed Poles and a mere handful to the other
nationalities. Indeed, of the five members of the council created to
examine applications for titles and entails, San Martino was a
Piedmontese of ancient lineage.
   Nevertheless, Napoleon’s concern was quintessentially with the
France divided by the Revolution. In his visions of grandeur, the
ralliement of the ancien regime great families assumed a central role of
legitimising his dynasty. Hence his readiness to allow Murat and
Joseph to recognise the old nobility in the monarchical states of
Naples and Spain, as the grand-duke of Warsaw recognised the Polish
182   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


magnate families and Jerome the old families of his Westphalian
territories. Begrudgingly, Napoleon allowed them to create their own
nobilities, but took care that their titles remained inferior to those of
France. ‘Kings shall not have the right to name princes; such a right is
inherent to the imperial crown’, he reprimanded Louis, whose
proposals to create a Dutch nobility seemed to him inopportune in a
country with such strong republican traditions: ‘My institutions do
not exist to be turned to ridicule’.79 Joseph’s elevation of General
Salligny as duke of San Germano in Naples and then grandee of Spain
was placed in proper perspective by the Emperor’s appointment of the
same general as a French baron. Napoleon was happy to exchange
nominations to chivalric orders with an established dynasty like that
of Bavaria, but was reluctant to recognise the orders instituted by
Louis or Murat. In the federative system he had created, as
contemporaries from its outer provinces, like van Hogendorp,
observed:

      secondary states attached to France (governed by Napoleon’s
      brothers or others) were not allowed to take any measures, to
      create any institution, above all military, which was not in
      keeping with the principles of government of the grand empire,
      head of the confederation.80

Yet the possibilities of success of Napoleon’s policy of a ‘fusion’ of old
and new nobility in France depended directly on the existence and
integration of the Empire and federative system. This was illustrated
unequivocally by the imperial policy of entails and donations that
underpinned the heredity of titles. From the outset, in 1806, the titles
assigned by Napoleon were located in the satellite or annexed
territories. The principates and duchies were located initially in
Venetia and central Italy, then in the kingdom of Naples and Germany.
The Emperor of the French, heir to the Revolution, carefully avoided
employing the toponymy of France for his new dukes. Equally, the
incomes that went with the titles were no longer available in France,
since the greater part and the most worthwhile national properties
had already been alienated. Newly conquered territories offered the
obvious solution. A condition of the cession of Venetia to the kingdom
of Italy was that one-fifth of its revenues, as well as national
properties to the value of 30 million francs, were attached to the new
fiefs; a further annual income of 1.2 million francs was set aside for
distribution to generals, officers and soldiers designated by Napoleon.
After Tilsit, the same policy was employed on an ever larger scale.
                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   183


State revenues and national properties were reserved, above all in the
German states, in order to guarantee entailed incomes and donations
to select members of the new nobility and others (for donations were
also given without titles).
   The distribution of such personal largesse was guarded jealously by
Napoleon. The two large volumes in which the names and amounts
were listed ‘he always kept on the corner of his table’, recalled his
cabinet secretary Baron Fain;

    when the Emperor wanted to distribute some endowed incomes,
    he himself calculated them, keeping his eye on what he had
    already donated…. After turning a number of pages of the great
    book, he stopped and looked at me: ‘Aha, old chap’, he said, ‘I’ve
    found you one! Here you are! Ten thousand francs’ income in
    Pomerania! Let it not be said that I’ve forgotten my secretaries.’81

By 1814 Napoleon had made grants to 4,994 persons, at a cost of
nearly 30 million francs a year. The greatest part went, inevitably, to
the military: 824 generals received 1,261 grants, worth over 16
million francs, while the smallest gifts (nearly 3,000, of 500 francs)
went to soldiers and officers wounded in the wars. At the top of the
league, Napoleon’s relatives and favourite marshals, such as Paolina
Borghese, Berthier, Ney and Davout, in all 486 recipients, or 10 per
cent of the total, shared 28 million francs’ revenue, or 80 per cent of
the total.
   No relationship existed between the geographical location of the
properties from which the endowments were derived and the titles to
which they were tied. Ney, duke of Elchingen, for example, was given
revenues in Westphalia, Hanover, Trasimeno, on the consolidated debt
of the Italic kingdom and the Rhine octroi.82 It is possible that such
wide, apparently haphazard distribution reflected Napoleon’s
intention of tying the material interests of his generals to the future of
the Empire. It is certain that all territories were regarded as equal
sources of revenue for entails and gifts—so long as they lay outside the
frontiers of pre-Revolutionary France. For the beneficiaries, this
created problems (and protests) in obtaining the money promised
them. For the countries from which the revenues were exacted,
Napoleon’s policy of reserved donations was at the least onerous, at
the worst—as in Westphalia—catastrophic. Nearly a thousand
beneficiaries were guaranteed 7 million francs, or nearly 20 per cent of
Westphalia’s public revenues. Friction and unending lawsuits resulted
from the demands of these absentee owners of entailed national
184   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


properties that they be allowed to retain the privileges and seigneurial
rights abolished by the civil code and laws that Westphalia had
adopted in imitation of France. No better example could be given of
the unresolvable contradictions between the modernising ideals of
integration of the French administrative class and the practices of
exploitation that accompanied the expansion of the Empire.
5 Responses to conquest




    The peoples we are dealing with are too ignorant, too distant
    from civilisation and above all too poor for us to hope to succeed
    all at once.
             (Lareintz, intendant of Ragusa, 1 March 1813, Archives
                                            Nationales, Paris, F 1e62)

    If they are of a different lineage…
                           (Goya, Los desastres de la Guerra, no. 61)

The premiss of the French vision of the new state and society,
administratively modern and socially integrated, was the legitimacy of
the exercise of governmental authority. Napoleon and his
collaborators never doubted their freedom to act on behalf of the
rights and interests of those they governed, to apply rational decisions
and procedures on the basis of carefully collected information. Their
exercise of power was rarely arbitrary, for they genuinely respected
rights of property and persons and observance of due processes of law.
The self-confidence of the Napoleonic functionaries in the possibility of
applying uniform norms to the diversity of territories and peoples where
they established rule or control was great. Nevertheless they never
denied the complexity of the societies for whom they assumed
responsibility, nor the reality of a multiplicity of pre-existing sources of
power. They recognised that acceptance of their procedures and values
required trust and collaboration on the part of those they regarded as
men of influence in society. They acknowledged that the imposition of
so comprehensive a new set of rules would inevitably clash with many
established practices, which had emerged from and expressed often
long-accepted values. Perhaps only the most experienced of the senior
functionaries of this imperial enterprise—a former idéologue like de
Gérando or a sceptic like Lebrun—appreciated that the very extension

                                   185
186   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of the arena of action opened up by the continuous outgrowth of
political frontiers generated an equivalent, indeed a disproportionate
difficulty in translating norms into practices.
   What is certain is that the French civilian administrators sought
actively to involve the local elites in their experience as the necessary
condition of success, ultimately the only sure means of sinking roots
and ensuring the viability of the new model. They recognised the
interdependence between their actions and the comportment of
those they identified as the opinion leaders in each society. They
sought to coopt such elites, they exploited and manipulated shared
values as a means of building up confidence and ultimately trust,
they accepted the need to transact, according to the demands of each
locality, person or group. We have discussed the limits to such efforts
imposed by the very heterogeneity of space and history, as well as the
contradictions created by military and economic exploitation. But
the Napoleonic analysis of society, precisely because of its static
quality, constrained the capacity of the administrators to understand
how the changes they were introducing modified existing attitudes,
preferences and values, at the same time as introducing new
elements, in an unending dynamic of changing social relations that
questioned the very bases of their efforts, blocked or distorted the
penetration of their ideas, and in some instances aroused armed
resistance.
   For the historian, the Napoleonic experiment in administrative
integration offers a unique possibility in modern history to explore the
moment of exercise of political and social power, because the state
identified itself to an unusual degree with a single, unifying model. For
exactly the opposite reasons, it is difficult to offer as complete or
satisfactory an interpretation of the responses to the introduction of
this model. For such responses were quintessentially local, the old and
new expressions of different levels of cultural identity, social relations
and constellations of power. The interaction between a state power
that imposed itself with unprecedented thoroughness, and the thick
structures of numerous societies of varying dimensions can be fully
apprehended only by a worm’s eye view, an approach that holds
firmly to the local context and examines the relationships and
interdependence between a plurality of powers at different levels and
from different perspectives. A multitude of such studies are needed,
not a single chapter in a study concerned to draw out the overall
structures and mechanisms of the Napoleonic conquest of Europe.
Nevertheless, it remains possible to sketch at least some of the range
of responses. Such responses inevitably varied, not only because of the
                                                 Responses to conquest   187


relative liberty of individual choice, but also in terms of their
significance for the differing structures and forms of organisation of
family, communal and social life. The responses are most visible not
only at the political level of collaboration, withdrawal or resistance,
but also where the utilisation of the new economic opportunities
offered by the Napoleonic regime have left ample traces in the
documentation. Less immediately apparent, but no less important for
an assessment of the capacity of the new model to penetrate the inner
structures of communities and societies, are the responses expressed in
the forms of religious and lay sociability and patterns of social
relations. A discussion of these themes, however brief, offers another
dimension to our understanding of this experiment in imposed
integration, as well as a means of gauging its success.


COLLABORATION
The Napoleonic analysis of society only partially adhered to the
conventional image of the pyramid. In reality, all societies—for the
Napoleonic administrators—were dichotomous, consisting of elites
and ‘people’. The ‘people’ was always ignorant, normally passive and
rationally unknowable. Its ignorance was not only proof of its inferior
status, but also surviving evidence of an earlier stage of civilisation. Its
passivity resulted from the bonds of obedience and deference inbuilt
into family and social relations, and was likely to be upset only
through prolonged hunger or subversive incitement. It was
unknowable precisely because its comportment corresponded to the
irrationality of earlier ages, described and dismissed in (usually
dichotomous) platitudes about unchanging social characteristics: thus
the ‘people’, always regarded as an anonymous mass, was
‘industrious’ or ‘idle’, ‘superstitious’ or ‘enlightened’, ‘feudal’ or
‘civilised’. 1 At most, the ties of influence and dependence that
explained the functioning of all societies (and their pyramidal form)
were deployed to explain the behaviour of even the most primitive and
ignorant. As Napoleon instructed Joseph after his occupation of
Naples in 1806: ‘The lazzaroni must have leaders; these must be made
responsible for all of them.’2
   Such judgements could claim a distinguished lineage, from
Montesquieu back to Montaigne and earlier. But the functionaries’
sense of remoteness from the people was accentuated by two aspects
of the Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience. On the one hand, the
perennial gulf between the labouring poor and the propertied classes
was deepened by the very stress on property of the new regime. On the
188   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


other hand, the destruction of conventional institutional intermediary
bodies, such as guilds or confraternities, had the unexpected
consequence of removing traditional channels of communication—
and hence of mediation—with the people.
    Dependence on the elites was accentuated by this difficulty in
reading the codes of the people. The only alternative—to which the
administrators were forced to resort more often than they wished—
was the parish priest. The insistence in drawing up lists of notables
and the very criteria employed in selecting those judged worthy of
public recognition confirmed the centrality of the role of the elites as
opinion leaders and mediators of opaque societies. Property, now
reaching down into the social structure to incorporate artisans and
wealthy peasants, often beneficiaries of the sales of national
properties, was regarded as the most effective tie to the social order.
Reputation, even more than wealth, was essential as it signified family
and local roots, essential elements in ensuring the esteem and proper
comportment of the peasantry and respectable poor. Public service
was the seal of commitment to the common good, irrespective of
political regime. If ‘talent’—professional competence—had acquired a
novel weight in the choice of administrators and magistrates, its
definition at the local level was negotiable, because of the importance
of obtaining the collaboration of the provincial elites. The notables
were crucial mediators at all levels, as exclusive source of information
for the statistical enquiries, as representatives of local opinion, and as
leaders whose political opinion would influence the lesser ranks of
society. The dependence of the administration on their collaboration
was the greater in the newly annexed territories, where the stock of
intimate knowledge that derived from long familiarity was inevitably
lacking.
    Given this analysis of society and recognition of the role of the
elites, what was the response of the latter? Outside the Empire, at the
very top of the social hierarchy, Napoleon had made a special appeal
to personalities distinguished by reason of family, wealth or political
position. Why did a Melzi, a Schimmelpenninck, a Bülow or a
Cassano agree to assume leading roles? We do not often have their
direct testimonies, which in any case need to be read critically as they
were written after the debacle, usually in self-defence. But a brief
glance at some of their careers suggests replies.
    Francesco Melzi d’Eril, a wealthy and educated Lombard
aristocrat, brother-in-law of the Milanese reformer Pietro Verri, had
met Bonaparte in 1796 and was untainted by association with the
Cisalpine republics. Vice-president of the Italian republic, with greater
                                               Responses to conquest   189


authority than his successor Eugene or any other head of state
nominated by Napoleon (except Murat), this whiggish patrician was
convinced of the need to forge a modern and stable state socially
based on enlightened, moderate, wealthy landed proprietors. At the
same time, he translated into secret diplomatic negotiations his
Utopian hopes of restoring independence to a Lombard-dominated
north Italian state. Although removed from effective power with the
transformation of the republic into a kingdom, he willingly accepted
the honours that were showered upon him, was personally responsible
for the selection of the new Italian nobility and reaffirmed his belief in
an independent state at the moment of Napoleon’s abdication.
   The Dutch grand pensionary, Schimmelpenninck, a lawyer
involved in politics since the troubles of 1784, representative of
Amsterdam in the 1795 revolution and envoy of the Batavian republic
at Paris and London, saw his role as saviour of his country. A
committed patriot and moderate, he believed he could retain what
was best in the Dutch republican tradition by reversing the
centralising drive of the radical patriots and negotiating the
independence of his country directly with Napoleon. His failure in the
one and the other proposition led to his opposition to the creation of
the kingdom of Holland, but not to his nomination to the French
Senate after the annexation of 1810.
   These two contrasting examples point to the principled belief in the
possibility of retaining, if not independence, at least some form of
identity, alongside the conviction—shared by Melzi and
Schimmelpenninck with the French administrative class—of the need
to modernise the state. Once involved in the affairs of state, whatever
their disappointment and disillusion, they were irretrievably identified
with the Napoleonic regime and ready to accept its rewards. Similar
motivations of a personal sense of capacity and public duty in a
moment of national crisis, inextricably enmeshed in the temptations of
playing a primary role in the administrative modernisation of a new
and potentially more powerful state, no doubt explain the role of
other leading landed aristocrats such as Bülow in Westphalia or
Nesselrode in Berg—just as in the case of Stein and Hardenberg in the
enemy kingdom of Prussia.
   It would be simplistic to pretend that these motivations were shared
by all. In the tiny principality of Neuchâtel, the driving concern of the
chief magistrate Georges de Rougemont was to neutralise rather than
to encourage rapid and radical administrative change. In the kingdom
of Naples the acceptance of the interior ministry by the duke of
Cassano was correctly viewed as the appropriation of political power
190   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


by a factious clan within the aristocracy. Nevertheless it is reasonable
to conclude that acceptance of office by leading personalities at the
moment of the loss of independence was based on a genuine belief in
public duty combined with a (usually excessive) sense of self-
importance. In many ways the counterproof of this was the decision of
the Spanish afrancesados to join Joseph’s government. Against all the
evidence of their impotence and isolation, they collaborated with this
new French king because of their fear of revolution and social
anarchy, their faith in monarchy and constituted authority, and their
belief in the need for political and social reforms: ‘An extraordinary
revolution will improve the existence of the monarchy, establishing it
on the solid foundations of reason, justice and power’, wrote
Moratín. 3 These were sentiments shared by their constitutional
opponents at Cadiz. It was their misfortune that the realisation of
their expectations, which had been demonstrated in the administrative
practices of so many other states, was destroyed almost before it could
take shape in the fire of popular resistance.
   The sense of participating in a most successful and important
experience of reformism was not of course restricted to these leading
personalities. It was shared by many of the old reformers, discredited
or frightened by the revolutionary upheavals of the previous decade,
who now returned, some in their old age, to governmental
responsibility: Zurlo in Naples, Gianni in Tuscany, like Cabarrús in
Spain, were symbols of the continuity that these reformers saw
between the work of the enlightened despots and Napoleon. They
were few, because age and disillusionment had taken their toll. Far
more numerous and active were the intellectuals and ‘technicians’,
mostly of recent decades.
   It was hardly surprising that civil and military engineers,
cartographers, scientists and educationalists should have collaborated
freely and often enthusiastically with the French administration.
‘Useful’ science enjoyed a privileged relationship with the political
class from the outset of the Revolution, and many of the leading
scientists—from Chaptal and Laplace to Berthollet and Cuvier—
continued to play a central role throughout the years of the regime.
The Egyptian expedition, with its 167 scientists and artists, gave
Bonaparte an aureole of intellectual sensibility that he was never to
lose. Administrative modernisation included a vast programme of
infra-structural works and scientific research, from the great roads
and bridges that were among Napoleon’s most lasting legacies, to
mechanical, chemical or medical investigations for the improvement
of manufactures and the art of warfare. The very size of the
                                               Responses to conquest   191


administrative class, within and outside France’s frontiers, offered
possibilities of career and sometimes, within limits, of
experimentation, with far greater assurance of support than under
even the most favourably disposed of the former enlightenment
governments.
   Many examples could be given. In Piedmont, when Charles
Emanuel IV abdicated, the entire corps of 106 artillery officers opted
to continue their careers in the French army. In the kingdom of
Naples, the military academy of the Nunziatella, which had been
reformed in 1786 but closed in the reaction of 1799, was immediately
revived under its founder, General Giuseppe Parisi, who successfully
urged the creation of a Scuola Politecnica to rationalise the teaching of
mathematics and engineering in both their military and civilian
applications. The Tuscan scientist Giovanni Fabbroni, whose career
had suffered during the obscurantist years of the kingdom of Etruria,
pleaded and intrigued incessantly after Tuscany’s annexation until he
was finally appointed inspector of civil engineering for the Italian
departments. The careers of the Saluzzo di Monesiglio in Piedmont
were exemplary of the adaptability of even aristocratic families of old
lineage but a scientific mentality to seize the opportunities offered by
the new regime to further their own struggle to introduce modern
values against the provincial conservativism of their peers. The four
sons of Giuseppe Angelo Saluzzo, artillery general, scientist and co-
founder of the Academy of Sciences, chose different career paths, both
military and civilian, which enabled the family not only to collect
honours, but also to play a guiding role in the restructuring of the
educational system.4
   Such examples, all related to the field of engineering, come from
Italy. It may be that there was greater collaboration among Italian
scientists and ‘technicians’ than, for example, among Germans; if so,
this was less through national differences than for reasons of the
different dimensions and cultural traditions of the states that fell
under French control within the two areas. But collaboration among
the most technically prepared was far from restricted to Italy. In
Holland, the financial expert Isaac Gogel swallowed his republican
principles in order to force through his fiscal reforms under Louis
Bonaparte and Napoleon; and Adriaan van den Ende utilised Louis’
support to set up a nation-wide system of primary education that
aroused the admiration even of the French Cuvier in 1811.5 If the
Napoleonic embrace stifled private and individual initiatives, in
compensation it offered unprecedented opportunities to preach and
192   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


practice cherished theories and principles to those who were willing to
reciprocate by official involvement.

Collaboration, however, was not a matter primarily of leading
personalities or scientists, but of elites. The sources, so lavish in their
information about the identity of the elites, are more ambiguous in
their evidence about the nature of collaboration. Refusal to
collaborate could appear to be dangerous in some instances, such as
when Napoleon ordered his brother-in-law Prince Borghese, governor-
general of Piedmont and Liguria, that he should take

      measures to ensure that the pupils chosen for Saint-Cyr go there
      promptly, of their own free will or under threat of being
      disinherited and their properties confiscated. The prince should
      adopt the same measures to ensure that those nominated auditors
      go to Paris forthwith…. These wealthy Piedmontese families try
      to keep out of the way, but I want to force them to come to Paris.6

Nomination to a post might have no practical consequences, as in
failure to turn up to vote in electoral colleges. Acceptance of
appointment could mean many things, from barely veiled disapproval
to energetic commitment, or indeed a changing experience, from the
former towards the latter. The very ambivalence about motivation has
offered fertile terrain for one of those less helpful historical debates,
replete with references to mental reservations, based more on
nationalist susceptibilities and facile psychologisms than on reliable
evidence. For while there can be no doubt that at certain moments,
among some groups and in specific areas there was a generalised
reluctance to collaborate—as for instance at Hamburg after its
annexation, among the clergy in some Belgian departments or the
former Papal States, or probably in most annexed territories in
1813—the weight of recent research points to the conclusion that
after initial difficulties, the policy of ralliement was successful.
Whatever the resistance to Napoleon’s later policy of forcing the pace
of social fusion by the creation of an imperial nobility and attempted
marriage alliances, at the administrative and honorific level the French
regime had won acceptance—at least as long as its presence seemed
solid and permanent.
   Military service as officers, with its connotations of glory and
prospects of rapid career, attracted the younger generation, to the
point of creating tensions and ruptures within noble families who had
retained their distance from the new regime. From the outset the
                                             Responses to conquest   193


French had worked actively to reintegrate the officers of former
enemy armies who wished to continue service, or to ensure them
pensions, overriding the opposition of the democratic patriots. It was
important, in regions like Savoy where military service characterised
the nobility, to avoid the opposition of suddenly unemployed and
usually poor nobles. We do not know how many accepted in Savoy,
but it is reasonable to assume that this old aristocracy remained
hostile. However, gradually, examples appear of young sons who
threatened to run away from home unless they were allowed to
volunteer. Three of the four Verger brothers from the Tarentaise
(Savoy), whose father had been killed in 1794 fighting in the
Piedmontese army, were to die in Russia in 1812. The provost of
Breslau Cathedral, Ch.-Th.-Frédéric de Regnauld de Bissy, saw the
death of his 21-year-old nephew Bon de Regnauld in Spain almost as
inevitable retribution for his lack of filial respect: ‘He insisted on
joining the military against his father’s wishes, threatening to run
away if he was not allowed to volunteer: and now here we have the
result.’7
    To fight under Napoleon could mean the search for glory at more
than the individual level. It could signify the transformation into
action of that broader aspiration towards a national identity which—
like the concept of glory itself—formed constitutive elements of the
new romanticism. If there is little evidence that Belgians, Dutch or
even Swiss saw military service as a path towards the forging of
national identity, such a sentiment was certainly present among some
of the more literary-minded Italians and Germans who fought in
Napoleon’s armies—as it explained the commitment of many of the
young Spaniards who resisted the French so bitterly in defence of their
independence. In such contradictory instances, there was an intimate
link between military valour and national independence.
    Even without such longer-term ideals, the evidence is overwhelming
that the image of Napoleon as military hero functioned as an effective
catalyst for the young elites. Even during the Emperor’s final, brutal
reconstitution of his armies in 1812 and 1813, it would seem to have
been the families rather than the elite recruits who voiced their
resentment at the abrupt end to the private negotiation of exemptions.
‘It is not so much those leaving as their families and mistresses who
scream in protest’, observed the Tuscan director of police, Lagarde, on
8 August 1812; a year later (12 July 1813), he noted that The best
society, from whose ranks the guards of honour have generally been
chosen, is deeply discontented, and many of the guards have still not
left’.8
194    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


   For many, service—whether military or civilian—offered the
prospect of a good stipend. Officers were in general better paid than
their civilian counterparts, although those of modest origins rarely
made fortunes. For reasons of prestige, once retired, their presence
among the notables was virtually guaranteed; and they then had
privileged access to civilian employment. Indeed, from 1811 some
posts were reserved for them, arousing an enthusiastic response
among the military:
      To have the right to share almost half the posts in civil employment
      is an act of such generosity that what soldier, what officer would
      not give his last drop of blood for the most magnanimous sovereign
      there has ever been? My brother Amédée has asked for a tobacco
      warehouse in the Mont-Blanc or Léman department,
wrote V.-A.de Lannoy, a former officer of the Sardinian army.9
   The evidence is equally clear that collaboration came early and was
widespread at the middling ranks of the civilian administration, if not
initially at the highest level. There was never any problem in recruiting
the democrats of the 1790s, whose offer of services not only exceeded
the supply of posts, but also frightened the moderate leaders. Indeed,
where the post-Brumairean settlement was imposed on previous
revolutionary agitations—as in the southern Rhineland (Sarre, Mont-
Tonnerre), Belgium, the Italian republic, or southern Piedmont—the
consistent presence of former democrats in the lower echelons of the
administrations and magistracies constituted a powerful lobby against
the recruitment of nobles, counteracting the efforts of the prefects.
Soon, even in these regions and from the outset in areas without a
revolutionary past, competition for posts was brisk, not least because
stipends were high (at least for the heads of administrative, financial
and judicial services) or offered lucrative possibilities, such as for
justices of the peace. Increasingly the main obstacle to service was the
practical implications of transfer to another area, costly in terms of
income and influence.
   It is probable that collaboration was encouraged by the principle—
applied with greater or lesser conviction—that all except the top posts
should be generally reserved for the local population of annexed or
satellite territories. Competition for posts underlay the sometimes
vitriolic exchanges about character and talent between native and
French administrators. In practice, it was inevitable that the vast
majority of positions should have gone to residents rather than
newcomers, particularly at the middling and local administrative and
fiscal levels and in the magistracy, for reasons of language, local
                                              Responses to conquest   195


knowledge and connections. There was a marked continuity between
former office-holders and the newly appointed, in Naples as much as
in Holland or the Hanseatic departments. Stipend, interest and the
fresh prestige associated with the post of functionary, all contributed
to attract local notables to take office, especially in regions where
private fortunes were relatively small and few. It was hardly surprising
that the elections to sub-prefectoral and departmental councils should
have favoured public officials, lawyers and notaries, as well as
increasingly nobles, as these were the persons best known to their
peers and clients, even more in the countryside than in the towns.
Office thus played a crucial role in the interdependence between
public and private interests, which probably grew closer, as networks
of relationships closed the means of access to the inner circles.
   Ralliement needs to be set in the context of this increasingly
favourable climate of collaboration. There were always grand families
who ostentatiously refused support or silently withdrew. This was true
of the overwhelming majority of Spanish elites. It characterised the
hostility of many among the oligarchs of formerly capital cities, like
Modena, Venice or Lübeck, or the intransigently Catholic aristocrats
of Belgium or Rome. There were noble landowners whose initial tepid
collaboration turned to open hostility, like the baron de Gudenau,
who accepted nomination as mayor of Villip (Rhin-et-Moselle), but
then refused to be renewed or to be presented to Napoleon in 1811,
sold his properties and emigrated to Austria.10
   Nevertheless the Napoleonic wooing of the old nobility was
undoubtedly successful. The threat of confiscation of their properties
determined many of the aristocratic émigrés to return. The conviction
that the example of the few influences the many was not without
basis, as slowly the readiness of a Balbo, a Saluzzo or a Cavour in
Piedmont, a Boos-Waldeck or a Belderbusch in the Rhineland, to
accept nomination or election to office resolved doubts and isolated
those who remained intransigent. By 1806 Joseph de Maistre, the
ideologist of the Restoration, appealed in despair for assistance to his
exiled monarch in Sardinia:

    Sire, I am the head of one of the most numerous families of your
    former duchy of Savoy, the only family in the country, I think, that
    has remained wholly in the service of Your Majesty until the last
    moment, without exceptions or changes.11

In the following years, throughout the Empire and in all the satellite
states except Spain, the nobility had re-established their presence in
196   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


both the army and the civil administrations. From their positions of
influence, they regrouped to further the interests of their families and
friends, like the Florentine Corsini who ‘placed’ Fabbroni and other
Tuscans in imperial service. Their power and prestige were used to
counterbalance or isolate surviving democratic voices.
    Collaboration cannot be interpreted purely from the viewpoint of
personal or family advantage. It always implies reciprocal
dependence. Those who rallied to the Napoleonic regime must in turn
have been influenced by the values embodied in the modernising
administration. Even reluctant auditors like Cesare Balbo carried the
imprint of their early experiences through the Restoration.
Collaboration implied acceptance, whatever the mental reservations.
It is reasonable to conclude that, but for the sudden military debacle
of Napoleon, ralliement and collaboration would have continued
silently to push an ever larger number, even among the provincial,
status-ridden local elites, towards the new ideas of a lay liberalism,
while diluting the progressive modernity of the administration itself.


ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
It is in the nature of major political upheavals, such as war, revolution
or conquest, to create in the short term artificial conditions that
disrupt established economic patterns and sometimes even question
deep-rooted social relations. The military campaigns and institutional
reorganisation, on the scale imposed or induced by the French,
inevitably created new opportunities as well as imposing new burdens.
Much has been written about the great fortunes made (and lost) by the
army provisioners and bankers in their golden period during the
Directory, like Tort de la Sonde in Belgium, the Poissonnier and
Lanchère companies in the Rhineland, the Flachat, Laporte and
Castelin group, and their successor the Swiss Haller in Italy, or
Ouvrard in Paris.12 Napoleon bitterly resented his dependence on such
civilian contractors, who regained importance at every campaign,
despite the existence of a ministry for war administration. But the
opportunities open to enterprising bankers, businessmen and
speculators, as well as to ordinary citizens, extended far beyond the
specific and highly capital intensive field of army supplies. The
constant changes in frontiers and hence trade routes blurred the
distinction between legal and illegal transactions. Smuggling and
protection equally offered opportunities for manufacturer and
merchant. The impact of war on capital movements in London and
                                               Responses to conquest   197


Amsterdam made the fortune of Hamburg bankers, or exceptionally
enterprising Jewish financiers like the Rothschilds.
   The institutional restructuring was not just unprecedented in scale;
through the continuity and insistence of the administrative presence
and demands, it led to a hitherto unknown degree of penetration of
civil society, at the most intimate levels of family and community. By
this very fact, it forced the heads of households (identified by the
functionaries as the base line of authority) to assume responsibilities in
a new manner in order to mediate the growing pressure. But, for
identical reasons, it offered novel opportunities. At Castelletto, in
southern Piedmont, for example—where the community had
traditionally maintained a certain autonomy through the collective
exercise of decision-making in a frontier region with poor
communications and disputed distant seigneurial authority—the years
of French rule operated a process of selection among the heads of
household, in which the most enterprising families turned to their
profit the increasing fiscal and military demands.13
   The number, powers and social status of the administrative
personnel led to overlaps, and sometimes identification, of public and
private interests. Compared to the patrimonial concept of office of the
ancien regime, the Napoleonic ethic polemically affirmed the
distinction between public and private. But the very procedures and
responsibilities laid down for functionaries gave ample opportunities
to make killings in the sales of national properties, to procure
contracts or sell licences (like Bourrienne in Hamburg), perhaps above
all to reinforce family and community ties by judicious
recommendations for appointments. Equally, the investment in
infrastructures of this modernising administration opened up new
peacetime perspectives as lucrative as those of the armies. Rambuteau,
as a young prefect of the Alpine Simplon department, was indignant
that the local civil engineer continued to give huge contracts for the St
Bernard roadworks worth over 1 million francs to a local
entrepreneur, when an Italian competitor with considerable
experience offered 16 per cent discount.14 But roads and bridges have
always offered particularly fertile terrain for collusion and corruption.
   The philosophy of the Napoleonic regime was premised on the
separation of the administration from the economy. But insistence on
the presence of the state also led to expectations that the government
should always be present and ready to give support. Encouragement of
entrepreneurship implied a growing demand for concessions or
monopolies of production and trade. Alexandre Boury, owner of an
iron foundry at Saint Denis, proposed to increase France’s metal ore
198   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


supplies, if he was given a monopoly to exploit the isle of Elba’s
deposits. The annexation of Rome kindled entrepreneurial ambitions,
as French and Italians vied with each other in asking for convents and
ancient Roman sites (even Diocletian’s baths!), besides subsidies, in
order to set up mechanised textile factories to employ the city’s idle
orphans. In Bavarian Trent, the Pangrazzi family proposed to
commercialise mineral water by piping it from the source. 15
Manufacturers in ‘old France’ rejected proposals of potential
competition, whether from established firms across the Rhine or
through the establishment of a technical school at Prato.16 The demand
for protection became incessant and was in good part responsible for
the Berlin decrees. But the patently unfair discriminations of the
blockade and occupation up to the Baltic encouraged manufacturers
and traders all across Europe to demand compensatory measures from
their own governments or engage in smuggling.
   The economic opportunities embedded in the institutional
restructuring should not be seen exclusively as always relating directly
to personal or family advantage. The possibility also existed of using
institutional mechanisms to limit or distort measures that local
notables regarded as damaging their interests. Where such measures
were considered by the government as vital to the immediate needs of
war—as in the extension of the blockade and annexation of
Hamburg, despite the destruction of its role as entrepôt and financial
centre—opposition was ineffective. Otherwise the responses to
unpopular decisions with potentially damaging consequences could
make themselves heard at a variety of levels, from formal complaints
at the sub-prefectoral or departmental councils to informal lobbying
of prefect or Parisian protector. In Piedmont, the local notables
successfully carried their complaints against interference with the
communal boundaries to the council of state.17
   Perhaps the most interesting example is that of the cadaster. A
rational land tax was essential, not only definitively to settle the
continuing complaints within France, but even more in the annexed
and satellite territories as the foundation on which to construct the
whole complex of fiscal and social reforms of a modernising
administration. Initially the method had been to evaluate the land on
the basis of estimates of the types and overall quantities of crops
produced within the communal territory. This was replaced in 1807
by a far more ambitious, and theoretically neutral plan to measure
every single property as well as its usage. In order to ensure equality
of taxation and to temper the radical nature of the cadaster, the
Revolutionary principle of representation of landowners was
                                              Responses to conquest   199


maintained: the evaluations between communes within the canton,
and between cantons in the sub-prefecture were submitted for
discussion between proprietors and officials. These consultative
procedures were exploited so effectively in the Rhineland that they
distorted the rationality of the official estimates, to the advantage of
the larger landowning notables.18
   Resistance to boundary changes and to the cadaster showed the
capacity of landowners to utilise the new institutional structures in
defence of their private property. Purchase of the national properties
offers the most general and consistent example of their capacity to
take advantage of new possibilities.

The sale of national properties offered the most widespread
opportunity to obtain a commitment to the new regimes, as the
revolutionaries had realised from the outset. In the eyes of the
legislators and administrators, such sales served multiple purposes,
symbolic as well as material: the confiscation of properties from the
Church and émigré nobles represented a deliberate rupture with the
past, while their sale provided a crucial resource for state finances, a
means of pledging substantial and influential segments of the
population against an anti-Revolutionary property settlement, and
(for the more egalitarian) an opportunity to create a society of peasant
small-holders. Underlying these more immediate aims was the
generalised conviction, inherited from the philosophes and
physiocrats, that private property was intrinsic to liberty and a
precondition for increased production. The experiences of the
Revolutionary decade seemed to confirm at least the social
implications of the sales, given the eagerness of Frenchmen—even in
the most Catholic regions—to buy formerly ecclesiastical properties.
   Inevitably the same policy was applied wherever a French presence
was established. In territories occupied under the Directory, like
Belgium and the Rhenish departments, the confiscations and sales
were contemporaneous and motivated by the same immediate
pressures as in France. The urgent need to absorb the inflationary
circulation of paper money and to obtain further credit through the
settlement of at least some of the accumulated debts to army
provisioners, bankers and local elites explains the hasty alienation of
institutional properties, sold without prior division into smaller lots,
and hence effectively excluding peasants. The terms of the sales—
payment of the greater proportion in paper credits, with extended
periods for the settlement of the remainder in cash—encouraged
collusion and speculation among the purchasers. But, as in France,
200   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


demand sufficiently outstripped supply to uphold the prices well
above the initial valuations and normally to ensure reasonable market
values. The main difference from France was the virtual absence of
émigré properties, since the threat of sale persuaded the relatively few
great nobles and landowners who had fled to return. In Mont-
Tonnerre, for example, even families like that of the future Austrian
chancellor Stadion, who had followed the elector of Mainz across the
Rhine, returned to save their sequestered estates.19
   After Brumaire, the sale of national properties formed an intrinsic
part of the new administrative measures introduced by the French.
Not surprisingly, they were put into practice more systematically than
in the Directorial years, since expertise had been accumulated and the
end of the throttlehold of the army provisioners ensured substantially
greater financial breathing space.
   The sources of these properties varied considerably: Crown or
domain possessions were a constant element, guild or similar
institutional properties were normally not very substantial, émigré
estates rarely materialised, except in Spain. But within French-
controlled territories, a fundamental distinction, which conditioned
the dimensions of the alienable patrimony, was that between
Protestant and Catholic countries. In Protestant states, like Holland or
many German principalities, there were no monastic properties, as
they had already been expropriated centuries earlier, during the
Reformation. By contrast, Napoleon’s encouragement of the abolition
of the prince-bishoprics in the Holy Roman Empire at the Rezes of
1803 gave German princes a unique opportunity to secularise
ecclesiastical possessions, sometimes on a scale far greater than in
Italy or France: in Bavaria, ecclesiastical property was estimated in
1800 to include 14,000 of a total 30,000 farms, with 47,000 families
of a total 116,000; here the Crown was able to amortise its public debt
by the sale of monastic lands, and still increase public revenues by
perhaps a quarter through the enlargement of its own domain. In
general, the French example of confiscating Church lands was widely
followed in Germany, more frequently to incorporate them in the
domain than to sell them, not just by rulers under French influence—
as in Württemberg, Baden, Hessen-Darmstadt and Berg—but even by
Prussia. Only Austria refused, as much because of Joseph II’s earlier
attack on the monastic orders as for ideological reasons.20
   More than in France, the sales of national properties were carried
out in order to reduce or extinguish the public debt. This explains the
rapidity with which inventories of the patrimony of the religious
orders were drawn up in the annexed territories, compared for
                                               Responses to conquest   201


example to the leisurely pace of secularisation in parts of Germany,
even in a Napoleonic state like Berg, where eleven chapters were still
intact in 1812.21 The acceptance of responsibility by the new rulers for
the state’s debt towards most private creditors not only corresponded
to the conventional respect of property, but also was a necessary and
tangible measure to win the support of influential members of the
local elites. In this sense, the consolidation of the public debt
functioned as a counterpart to the sale of national properties, as it
represented a means of committing creditors to the stability of the new
order. While institutional creditors lost heavily in the partial
conversion of their patrimonies into state bonds, wealthy individuals
and families—who had sometimes been penalised by forced loans
during a recent military occupation—were salvaged through
recognition of their credits, at the same time as they were offered
advantageous opportunities to acquire properties.
   Absence of such possibilities could have profoundly negative effects
on the new regime’s credibility: in Holland, Napoleon’s reduction of
the public debt by two-thirds at the stroke of a pen (like the
Directory’s declaration of bankruptcy in 1797) was disastrous for the
merchant and banking community of Amsterdam and other cities,
whose transactions were premised on the honouring of debts.
Elsewhere the potential of the national properties as a means of
attachment to the new rulers was also severely limited, particularly in
the later years, by Napoleon’s reservation of substantial portions of
the domain as endowments for favoured institutions and persons
(even if some of these properties—as in Rhin-et-Moselle—
subsequently reached the market for pressing fiscal reasons). In the
department of Mont-Tonnerre (formerly part of the Palatinate), 9,400
hectares of a total 32,000 were reserved for the Legion of Honour and
the imperial stud farm of Deux-Ponts; in the kingdom of Italy, the
incomes guaranteed to the grand feudatories jeopardised the national
debt sinking fund; in Poland, 20 per cent of the income of Crown
properties was committed to the endowments of twenty-seven
marshals and generals.22
   The opportunities provided by the sale of national properties varied
in each region, according to the pre-existing structures of agricultural
exploitation, the scale, formalities and period of sale, the availability
of capital, and (in exceptional cases, like Spain) the political
situation.23 In the department of Jemappes, for example, farms in the
Hainaut region were of medium size (40–60 hectares), whereas
around Mons the smallholdings allowed peasant acquisitions. In
Tuscany, the properties offered for sale ranged from the classic share
202   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


cropping farms near Siena to the large holdings without farms of the
Maremma. The methods of sale could be crucial in determining the
social composition of the purchasers. In Piedmont, the first and most
substantial sale, ordered by the republican General Jourdan in July
1800, encouraged peasant participation by the facility of dividing up
properties; while a sale later in the same year was a barely disguised
form of forced contribution, imposed on wealthy citizens, who were
obliged to pay the entire cost in cash within twelve months. Nine years
later, in Tuscany, the overriding concern to extinguish the public debt
was expressed in the nomination of a commission composed of the
state’s major creditors, who rapidly decided to limit competition at
the land auctions by reimbursing those with small credits of less than
300 francs. Where capital was lacking, as in most of the provinces of
the kingdom of Naples, the sales failed to live up to expectations; by
the later years, where there were repeated sales, such was the case
even in wealthy states like the kingdom of Italy, given the
contemporaneous pressure of fiscal exactions and the poorer quality
of the properties on offer. In Spain, there were virtually no purchasers
for the lands of the powerful grandee families opposed to the French,
whereas there was a high demand for the communal lands that local
administrations (in Guipúzcoa, for example) were forced to put up for
sale in order to pay the exactions of the occupying armies.
    The sales offered to vast strata of the peoples of western (and, to a
lesser degree, of central) Europe the chance to acquire properties over
a short period of time and usually on an unprecedented scale.
Moreover, this occurred after a prolonged period in which access to
the land market had been severely restricted by ecclesiastical mort-
main, juridical definitions of status and aristocratic inheritance
practices. Alienation of ecclesiastical possessions was not new. Indeed,
it had become the standard practice of reformist monarchs, often with
the agreement of the Papacy; even the most anti-Revolutionary ruler,
like the last king of Sardinia, Charles Emanuel IV, had had no scruples
about imitating the French in a last desperate effort to pay for his war
against them. Probably only the alienations of Peter Leopold of
Tuscany, his brother Joseph II of Austria and Charles IV of Spain
affected larger areas than those of the Napoleonic years. In some
departments as much as 11 per cent (Jemappes) or even 16 per cent
(Rhin-et-Moselle) of the cultivated land became national properties;
28,000 hectares were put up for sale in Tuscany, 62,000 in Piedmont,
92,000 in the Rhineland departments.
    Hence it is not surprising that the response to this new opportunity
should have been so positive. Where detailed studies exist, they show
                                                 Responses to conquest   203


that the purchasers varied in their social composition and bought land
and buildings for very different reasons. Inevitably, given the pre-
dominance of explicitly fiscal over social purposes, the sales of
national properties everywhere attracted those with capital resources.
The presence of Jews among the large purchasers, from Italy to
Poland, was not surprising, given their important mercantile activities
and the fact that previously they had been forbidden from buying
landed property. Monastic buildings were bought or begged by
manufacturers to set up workshops. Urban bourgeois bought town
houses.
   Leading civilian and military functionaries and courtiers were to be
found in most regions. A president of the criminal court, a general in
command of the department, an inspector of domains, all outsiders to
the department, were in a good position to know about worthwhile
properties, whose acquisition represented an excellent investment.
Where there was a court—in Munich, Turin, Florence, Naples or
Madrid—the great and lesser nobles bought some of the largest
estates. In Tuscany, the nobility constituted 39 per cent of all
purchasers in the Arno department; families like Cavour in Piedmont,
Dandolo in Venetia, Lullin de Châteauvieux in Léman (Switzerland)
expanded their substantial properties for livestock breeding. Some
aristocrats, like Countess Isabelle von Waldbott-Bassenheim in Rhin-
et-Moselle, or the Milliet d’Arvillard in Mont-Blanc, were able to buy
back their confiscated estates from the new owners.24 New families,
often close to the administration, established their wealth and status
through systematic pursuit of such opportunities, accumulating vast
patrimonies, like the Bolognese Antonio Aldini or the son of the
former steward of the Tuscan grand-ducal estate of Foiano,
Ferdinando Redditi, or the Flemish functionary Charles Ghillenghien.
In Spain, ministers like Miot de Mélito and the duke of Campo Alegre
were particularly prominent, whether to set an example, or to make
up for the reluctance of local capitalists, or because of favourable
prices.
   As in France, the largest and most valuable properties attracted a
handful of men, often speculators. In the kingdom of Naples, 154 or
7 per cent of all purchasers were responsible for 65 per cent of all
sales. Of the 1866 purchasers in the Rhin-et-Moselle department, the
top twenty-four spent 23 per cent of the total capital. They were
described as ‘proprietor’, ‘trader’, ‘notary’, ‘clerk to the justices’, ‘wine
merchant’, ‘cloth manufacturer’; a few were Jewish. Though most
lived in the capital, Coblenz, some came from cities like Cologne in
nearby departments. For the most expensive purchases, these leading
204   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


capitalists grouped together, as they bought with the deliberate
intention of reselling, usually rapidly: 60 per cent of the properties
bought by the largest Rhin-et-Moselle purchasers were resold.
   Alongside such major figures, who bought national properties as a
means of investing capital, sometimes—like Jewish banker-merchants
at Leghorn—because of the limited alternatives during the blockade,
sometimes as pure speculation, there was always a substantial number
of smaller purchasers. There can be no doubt that the numbers of new
proprietors increased significantly, as well as of those expanding their
holdings. Entry into the land market was facilitated by the relatively
lengthy periods of time allowed for payment, as well as the use of the
national properties to reimburse state creditors. The social location of
these proprietors was as one would expect: rentiers and tenant farmers
buying the farms they cultivated, lawyers and others exercising free
professions, merchants and traders acquiring country properties,
usually near their city of residence, as a form of security for their
commercial activities as much as for reasons of prestige. In Piedmont,
‘traders’ and ‘merchants’ constituted over 19 per cent of all purchasers
and bought 31 per cent of the land, free professionals and employees
each numbered over 17 per cent with 19 per cent of the land. In Rhin-
et-Moselle merchants and traders were responsible for over 17 per
cent of the capital, wine growers another 7 per cent, innkeepers,
bakers and millers a further 6 per cent. In Hainaut the liberal and
commercial professions bought middling and small properties
amounting to 40 per cent of the land; in highly urban areas, like
Charleroi, their share rose to 82 per cent.
   In all regions a substantial proportion of the purchases were of
minute or small plots of land—over 70 per cent in Tuscany, over 50
per cent in Guipúzcoa. This was not necessarily proof of strong
peasant participation, but merely of that of local inhabitants, at all
social levels, consolidating their properties, as well as buying the land
they worked; in Rhin-et-Moselle, 60 per cent of the purchasers bought
more than one lot—a clear sign that they were not peasants.
Nevertheless, even though the sales, from the Directory onwards,
were structurally unlikely to facilitate peasant purchases—given the
predominance of explicitly fiscal over social purposes—the very
dynamics of so large-scale and accelerated a process of property
transfer in some regions boosted peasant ownership. The peasants
ranged from wealthy tenants of abbeys to the poorer. In the Mons sub-
prefecture of Jemappes, where 35 per cent of the alienated properties
were bought by the peasants, twenty-one of them bought over 50
hectares each; religious scruples seem to have held back peasant
                                              Responses to conquest   205


participation in this department until the Concordat of 1801, after
which an evidently poorer stratum bought lots of 1 hectare or less.
   The Rhineland was the region where the peasantry most benefited.
Their land-hunger was reflected in the massive purchase of properties
that were split up and resold on the market by the initial large
purchasers. In the Trier sub-prefecture (Sarre) 40 per cent of
ecclesiastical properties were resold by 1814; the average size of plots
bought by peasants in these resales was 0.88 hectares (and only 0.13
hectares for vineyards), and the number of new peasant and day-
labourer owners increased by 95 per cent. In the Rhin-et-Moselle
department, about a quarter of the peasant tenants were able to buy
their land. The effects of these resales were to continue into the 1830s
and 1840s in some regions of Germany. Elsewhere, especially in Italy,
the peasantry seem to have obtained little. Even where auctions were
aimed to favour them (as in General Jourdan’s auction of July 1800 in
Piedmont), it was the non-peasant professional and trading classes
who were able to buy medium-sized farms.
   Nevertheless, whether by choice or necessity, the ideological
determination to confiscate ecclesiastical property and encourage
private ownership provided unprecedented opportunities in many,
perhaps most areas of French-controlled Europe. The wealthy were
able to create or increase their landed holdings, and substantial
numbers of bourgeois and peasants became proprietors. The sales of
national properties were least successful, or even failed, only in
regions where capital was scarce and political conditions disturbed:
Calabria, Spain and, to a lesser degree, Poland (where the collapse of
land prices under the blockade was, to a limited extent,
counterbalanced by the important presence of Jews).
   Even then, the division of communal lands, as in Léman, or their
enforced sale, as in Guipúzcoa, multiplied ownership by the alienation
of small plots, but increased the social differentiation within the
villages. The most influential families appropriated the best
communal land at the expense of the poorer. The result was to
increase the gap between owners and landless within the ranks of the
peasantry. The process was vividly described in 1816 by the
representative of the village of Elgneta (Guipúzcoa):

    As a result the poor and less poor have been expelled from the
    right to collect ferns and leaves to dung and manure their land.
    The consequence has been to deprive the worker of his liberty and
    leave him short of the greater part of the vegetable matter he
    needs to grow his crops. Thus, those who bought commonlands
206   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      have benefited, as they have profited from their natural products,
      whereas most of their neighbours, greater in number and of lesser
      wealth, find themselves deprived of manuring their crops with the
      facility and abundance that they previously enjoyed.25


RELIGION
In no area as much as that of religion can one observe the differences
between the norms of the administrators and the practices of the
administered. It is customary to interpret the religious history of the
period in terms of direct conflict: the resistance of faithful Catholics to
the dechristianising onslaught of the revolutionaries, and of Rome to
Napoleonic aggression. The reality was more complex, not just
because the Catholic Church incorporated an infinite variety of
institutional situations and social relations, particular to each locality,
but even more because the radical institutional restructuring of all
organised religions modified profoundly established relationships and
repercussed at the most intimate level of community and family.
   The authorities were never interested in popular religious life, at
least after the initial expectation that the people could be won over to
the new revolutionary creed, whose discourse, symbols and rituals
owed so much to Catholic practices. Religion—for the revolutionaries
and Napoleonic administrators, as for their opponents—was
identified with its organisational forms; and expressions of religious
faith were interpreted through intellectual or political filters. The
revolutionaries were the heirs of the enlightened reformers and
progressive clergy in their conviction that external signs of popular
religious devotion, such as processions or veneration of relics, were
proof of the ignorant people’s dependence on intriguing (and usually
as ignorant) priests. Intransigent anti-revolutionaries, whether the
parish priests of the Vendée, Flanders or Arezzo, or Cardinal Ruffo in
Calabria in 1799, manipulated religious devotion for the purposes of
political revolt.
   In a comparative perspective, it is reasonable to assume as a
starting-point that the severity of the language and decrees of the
French authorities corresponded to the degree of external visibility of
popular religious life. This applied to the entire period and may well
have been exacerbated by the religious insensibility of the military in
the Napoleonic years, which was to contribute to such disastrous
consequences in Spain. Charles Lafolie, a French administrator in the
kingdom of Italy, recalled the offence caused by Ramel, the French
adjutant-general at Rome in 1806, who galloped with twenty-four
                                               Responses to conquest   207


dragoons through a canonisation ceremony of some new saints: ‘It is
a feast-day that greatly attracts the people.’ 26 In earlier years,
particularly during the Directory, the distinction between the attitude
of military and civilian authorities towards religious manifestations
was by no means so clear-cut. The closure of chapels and shrines, the
removal of crosses, the dismantling of church bells, all formed part of
a common conviction that superstitious beliefs could be eradicated by
their removal from public view. There was surprise, as much as
indignation, at the repeated and sometimes unexpected resistance as,
for example, the insistence by a participant at a funeral on the use of
a burial cross as a sign of social distinction, ‘which he wanted in the
manner of all the citizens of the town, that burials should be held
according to custom. Such an innovation did not exist even at Mainz.
He insisted that dying Catholics should not be buried like Jews,
Protestants or dogs’.27 In some regions, like Flanders, the Swiss
Catholic inner cantons (Schwyz, Uri, Unterwalden), the Aretino or
Calabria in 1798–9, as later in Spain, resistance (never just for
religious reasons) was to lead to revolt. It is difficult to explain why
the response was not so violent in other regions, like the Rhineland. It
seems likely that where an established practice of regulation of
religious life by state authorities already existed—as in Mainz, where
the pre-Revolutionary prince was also an archbishop, but also in
Lombardy or Venetia—the faithful adapted to interference in their
religious practices in a less intransigent manner.
   The bitter experience of the religious divide during the
Revolutionary years, whether in France or the early occupied
territories, made both state and Catholic Church more cautious. The
French representatives in such territories were mostly careful in their
application of the Revolutionary decrees. In the Rhineland, for
example, the days chosen for the Revolutionary public holidays were
those of popular religious ones. For both Napoleon and Pius VII the
Concordat was essential in order to restore order and authority. But
the Concordat abruptly terminated the Utopian hopes of democratic
clergy, like Grégoire, for the inner renovation of the Church, while
also cutting short the painful search for a new political theology of the
more perspicacious of the émigré episcopate.
   The Napoleonic administrators recognised the utility of a Church
firmly subordinated to the state, and the functionality of a register of
civil status maintained by the parish priests. But they remained
suspicious of the power over the people that they attributed to such
priests. Felici, minister of the interior of the Italic kingdom, expressed
the official view in a report to Napoleon in 1805:
208    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      Although the conduct of the ministers of religion cannot be
      described as totally negative, it has always been obscure and
      enterprising. Despite the mystical affectations in which this class
      of persons tries to cloak itself, in general it must be considered as
      not attached to the new order of things. Political theology, which
      has always tended towards independence, indeed towards
      domination, cannot submit to the idea of even a minimal
      restriction of ecclesiastical pretensions. The true character and
      inner nature of this class is revealed by the occasional statement or
      expression that sometimes escapes the lips of some zealous
      preacher or missionary.28

Given the dismemberment and incorporation of the Papal States in the
kingdom of Italy and the French empire, the hostility of a clergy
whose temporal loyalties to the Pope coincided with their spiritual
dependence is hardly surprising. The French annexation of Rome
signified a massive upheaval in the social relations of a city structured
around the religious and charitable patronage of cardinals and nobles
close to the Curia.

New political frontiers and institutional reforms forced fundamental
changes on all religions, not just the Catholic Church. Their effects
inevitably repercussed on the comportment of both clerics and laity, as
they disturbed credos and practices consolidated within each Church,
in defence and opposition to other faiths, in the centuries since the
wars of religion. Traditionalism and reform were equally affected by
the radical nature of the Napoleonic restructuring of religion.
   Above all in Germany, but also in Switzerland and wherever political
frontiers had marked out the territory of a state religion in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, the abolition of ecclesiastical principalities
and free cities and the continuous remodelling of states led to the
coexistence for the first time under the same ruler of Catholics and
Protestants of differing sects: Catholic Minister became part of
Protestant Prussia, Catholics, Lutherans and Calvinists found
themselves subject to laws of religious tolerance under French rule on
the left bank of the Rhine, in Berg, Westphalia and Holland. Tolerance,
as the twentieth century has tragically demonstrated, is a quality that is
more easily accepted for others than in one’s backyard. In Bavaria, the
last abbot of Weltenberg opposed the lifting of the ban on Protestant
immigration to this most Catholic of states. In the French Rhineland,
where non-Catholics constituted over 40 per cent of the population in
the departments of the Sarre and Mont-Tonnerre, there was as little love
                                               Responses to conquest   209


lost between Calvinists and Lutherans as between both sects and
Catholics, and a generalised intolerance of Jews.29
   The reforms imposed on these religions were aimed at reinforcing
the structure of authority within the organisation of the creed in
correspondence to the hierarchical representation of civil society. It
was not surprising that Napoleon should have preferred Lutheranism
to Calvinism given, on the one hand, the former’s close identification
with the state and, on the other, the democratic participatory practices
of the Calvinist communities. Nevertheless, the apparent success of
the Concordats (France 1801, Italian republic 1803) in recruiting the
clergy as a subsidiary corps of functionaries in the service of the state
and the Napoleonic credo in the necessity of rationally structured
administrations under identifiable and responsible leaders justified the
imposition of parallel organisational reforms on Calvinists, Lutherans
and even Jews.
   In the Catholic case, the ecclesiastical boundaries (fixed unilaterally
by Napoleon in the Organic articles attached to the Concordat)
strictly reflected the civilian administration’s concern with population
and territory: the number of bishops and parish priests was reduced
according to the population of departments and cantons. Calvinists,
Lutherans and subsequently Jews (1808) were grouped in consistories
similarly based on population and administrative boundaries, each
under a council of wealthy notables and a pastor or rabbi, with the
faithful responsible for the property and good order of the
community; on paper, a hierarchical structure grouped these separate
organs under a central consistory. Such a module, for the Calvinists
and Jews at least, fundamentally contradicted the proud insistence on
independence of each community and the egalitarian participation of
clerics and faithful which lay at the core of the maintenance of their
identity in hostile environments. The Napoleonic reform transmuted
existing economic distinctions into formalised social disparities by the
identification of the lay leadership with the most wealthy and the
assumption that pastors and rabbis played a similar role of control to
that of parish priest and bishop.
   At the same time, the removal of the cohesive force of minority
segregation and the pressure towards assimilation that followed from
the Revolutionary decrees of religious toleration weakened the ties on
which the religious identity of these non-Catholic communities
depended. In the case of the Calvinists, the communities survived by
maintaining the autonomous practices of each parish. In the case of
the Jews, whose traditionally minded religious leaders had complained
of the corrosive effects of the emancipation decreed in 1790–1, the
210    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


structures created in 1808 re-established authority, but created
innumerable tensions, not only between communities, but also
internally between rabbis and laity, rich and poor. Outside France,
even in Westphalia—the only German state where full emancipation
was decreed—the leadership of the enlightened banker Israel Jacobson
led to widespread complaints among the Jews because of his
authoritarian attempts to utilise the Napoleonic model of centralised
control to impose heavy taxes and ‘revolutionise the former state of
the Jews from the ecclesiastical and lay point of view’.30
   Uniformity was the order of the day. But popular responses denied
the very premisses on which such uniformity was attainable. Two
examples can be given, the first revelatory of the reactions of the
faithful themselves, the second confirming popular hostility to
toleration.
   In religions based on an individual relationship to the faith, whose
identities depended on deep distrust of other sects as much as on past
histories of persecution, uniformity had no sense. Nowhere could this
be seen better than in Holland, where Napoleon—impatient with the
anarchy of practical tolerance—urged his representative Lebrun to
simplify the organisation of the creeds by forcing the small sects to
merge into three officially recognised religions. Lebrun, an
enlightenment sceptic of the old school, was horrified: ‘It is both
politic and convenient not to create one single faction, but to leave the
Churches separate, to recognise each one’s consistorial churches.’ He
then elaborated on the problems, demonstrating in the process how
religious differences were inextricably entwined with social
prejudices. The Dutch and French-speaking (Walloon) Calvinists
agreed on dogma and discipline. But the Dutch

      only know their own language and customs; they have no contact
      except with the most middling class of society and no influence on
      the rest. They do not want to be under the control of the
      Walloons: so, on their side, all that can be expected is disorder and
      discord, in which the people will take part. The Walloons are
      more French, they pride themselves on their more refined
      education, their better social ties, their more elegant style of life
      and conversation.

The anabaptists could not unite with the pure Calvinists, not only
because of their reciprocal dislike, but also because they turned
towards the anabaptists of Germany and the Hanseatic departments.
The remonstrants were rejected by the Protestants and in any case
                                                Responses to conquest   211


were harmless. It would be dangerous to join the Jansenists to the pure
Catholics, lest they gain control. The old and new Lutherans ‘hate
each other cordially’. Finally, ‘you would imagine that here at least
there would be no problem with the Jews’, but the Portuguese
(Sephardi) and German (Ashkenazi) communities could not stand
each other and an enforced union would make the Portuguese Jews in
England break relations with Amsterdam. ‘All that can be said about
this double type of Jews is that they will always be separated,
whatever one does. The Portuguese Jews would feel degraded by a
reunion, while the Germans would not be uplifted.’31
   Whatever the social distinctions between Sephardi and Ashkenazi
Jews, the centuries of anathema launched against them by the
Churches made all Jews unacceptable to ordinary Christians. It was
only through the special pleading of Grégoire and Mirabeau that they
had been emancipated in France. The dense, crowded, poor Ashkenazi
communities in Alsace and Lorraine aroused a popular antisemitism,
which Napoleon shared. Alone among religions, all Jews were
subjected by the Emperor for a period of ten years to a series of
restrictions on their civil rights and economic activities which were
intended to cure them of what was considered their innate vice of
usury and accelerate their regeneration (30 May 1806). Uniformity
again displayed its limits, as the prefects and elites of the departments
with long-established Sephardi communities in south-east France and
Italy protested. But quite apart from this official introduction of
discrimination, antisemitism at all levels limited the practical effects of
emancipation. In most of the Rhenish Confederation states, specific
restrictions on Jews were lifted, without the concession of full citizen
rights; even in the reforming states of Bavaria and Baden some
discrimination was retained. In Westphalia, where emancipation was
complete, the head of the police arbitrarily prohibited Jews from
freedom of movement without prior authorisation and the payment of
a special tax; artisan woollen cloth producers protested at the
competition of Jewish pedlars. In Rome, there were popular outcries
against Jews opening shops in the central Corso to sell liturgical
objects from confiscated churches.32 Official and popular prejudice
combined to defeat the attempt of an enlightened minority to remove
by decree age-old, religiously inspired discrimination.

Such radical intervention by the state aroused a variety of responses
among both clergy and laity and forced the Catholic Church to
reconsider its role. The attack on the monastic orders combined with
the unremitting pressure of government control to reinforce the
212   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


authority of the episcopate. In Bavaria and the kingdoms of Italy and
Naples, as much as in the Empire, civil administrators and bishops
resumed with greater vigour the efforts of their pre-Revolutionary
predecessors to raise the level of instruction and comportment of the
priesthood and to contain, if not repress, what were regarded as
superstitious practices among the laity. In the kingdom of Italy the
Jansenist minister of religion Bovara provided a personal link with the
reformist years of Joseph II in his suspicious control of clergy and
church. His Neapolitan colleague Ricciardi affirmed categorically
about parish priests that ‘a few good ones are enough to serve the
church, the bad ones are a deadweight, indeed harmful to it’. Mass-
priests, a widespread phenomenon in the southern Italian state, who
were independent of the bishop’s control as they derived their living
from endowed masses under the patronage of local notable families,
now found themselves in difficulties. In Venice the bureaucratic
rationalisation of parishes, with the closure of alternative local places
of worship, confraternities and schools, accelerated the insertion of
the parish priests within the state under the close supervision of their
bishops.33
   The results were by no means those anticipated by the civilian
authorities. Collaboration by bishops and clergy seemed successful in
states with an earlier reforming tradition, like the kingdoms of Italy
and Naples, the Rhineland and Bavaria, or where Catholics had
previously lived in discriminatory conditions as a religious minority, in
Utrecht or Swiss Fribourg. Parish priests used their influence to
convince the peasants to accept conscription, taught the imperial
catechism or celebrated the Emperor’s victories or even St Napoleon’s
feast-day. The bishops, in words of the prefect of the Ourthe, were
‘apostles of the state as much as of the Church’.34 In states without a
tradition of religious reform—such as the Papal States or Belgium—
clerical collaboration was far less sure: even though the bishops
appointed in Belgium from 1803 were all French, many of them
identified with the ultramontanism of their clergy. Everywhere the
interference of the state, contemporaneous with the compromises and
persecution of the Popes, not only forced the episcopate to search for
new relations with civil power, but also aroused reservations about the
claims of Rome. Missionaries had to be trained, the people had to be
‘recovered’. The abduction and imprisonment of Pius VII in 1809
restored to Rome the moral authority of martyrdom. At Fribourg a
new generation of priests emerged, better trained in the seminaries
than their predecessors, and ultramontane, who were prepared to
enter secret associations and then to propagate their principles openly
                                              Responses to conquest   213


after Napoleon’s fall. In Venetia, under Jesuit influence, ‘Christian
friendships’ were formed among the laity. Tempered by the secular
onslaught of enlightenment, revolution and Napoleonic control, some
among the clergy responded by the affirmation of the superior values
of Christianity incorporated in the authority of the Papacy.
   An essential element of this renewed reforming drive within the
Catholic Church was the attempt to assert a closer control over the
laity. Perhaps the deepest fear of the clergy during the 1790s was the
withdrawal of the people from the sacraments, the very essence of
religion. In France, Grégoire, a convinced revolutionary, was just as
concerned as the clergy who had refused to swear the oath to the
republic and set up a nationwide network of correspondence to advise
and uphold the morale of the constitutional priests. At the other
extreme, an anonymous exponent of the non-jurors circulated a
pamphlet from London, after the Concordat of 1801, that denounced

    those villages where instead of religion without worship, there is
    worship without religion. The peasants go to church every
    Sunday, chant in the choir every morning and evening, but
    nobody goes near the confessional…. Without confession, there is
    no communion; without sacraments, there is no religion; without
    religion, there is no morality. That’s the chain.35

Such a fear was not limited to France. It characterised every Catholic
region under French control or influence. At Modena in 1803 the
bishop lamented the expulsion of the Jesuits, followed by that of
missionaries from the order of St Vincent de Paul in 1796, given ‘the
evil that subsequently affected the souls of this country, especially in
the past few years, when philosophism and incredulity caused such
terrible slaughter’.36
    The Napoleonic years witnessed an intense campaign to win back
the people to their religious obligations. Redemptorists, Passionists,
Lazarists, as well as the priests newly trained in the reopened
seminaries, crisscrossed the western European countryside in repeated
missions. Books of devotion, which had proved their reliability by
their longevity, were circulated in Germany and along the Rhine, even
if some of them encouraged ‘popular devotions based on apocryphal
and ridiculous legends’. In the diocese of Treviso, a former Jesuit,
Luigi Mozzi, led successful popular pilgrimages to sanctuaries.37 The
tone of this organised and controlled evangelical campaign was
redolent with echoes of the ‘recovery’ of the people following the
Council of Trent. Popular piety had to be encouraged but guided.
214   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Local devotions that smacked of superstition, processions and
pilgrimages to pray for the intervention of saints to ensure health and
protection for men, animals and crops, were disapproved of, but
almost with resignation:

      The people refused to give up frequenting such places, even when
      the pilgrimages were abolished. There are some striking examples:
      Monsignor de Saint-Simon banned a chapel called Rehbach, no
      services are held there anymore; despite this, the people continue
      to go there to pray for rain.38

The diffusion of the Marian cult and of the stations of the cross can be
considered as attempts to retain and direct the obstinate persistence of
popular religion.
   The clergy were caught between their fear of losing the people and
the strait-jacket of Napoleonic control: in the kingdom of Italy
missions were forbidden after the imprisonment of the Pope. The
people, on the other hand, demonstrated a remarkable capacity to
find their own routes amidst the crisis of the Church and the
dechristianising interference of the state. There can be little doubt
that, at least among the French, the experiences of the Revolution and
the armies secularised many: the soldier Jacquin’s travel notebook is
noteworthy in its absence of any references to religion; the soldiers
dying in military hospitals at Moscow resolutely refused the
sacraments.
   This was certainly not the case with the majority of peasant
families outside France. Here the laity insisted in their faith in a
variety of ways, that ranged from the secret or priestless masses of
Flanders to exploitation of new possibilities, such as adoption of the
Protestant example of election of priests by parishioners in the
Rhineland. The people were not necessarily faithful to their parish
priests, but to what they identified with as their religion. This could
lead to a regular exorcism, as at Montaigne (Dyle) at the peak of
Directorial anticlericalism; to the successful insistence on maintaining
the right to elect the priest in a parish in Pamplona diocese; to the
insistence of 50,000 faithful at Rome that they had seen a statue of the
Virgin in tears in 1798; or to the participation of all classes in the
traditional processions in the kingdom of Naples.39 But popular faith
was also expressed in an infinity of adaptations to the new conditions
that were separate from and even in opposition to their priests. In the
Ourthe, during the worst moments of persecution of the non-jurors,
many parishioners distanced themselves from their priests, petitioning
                                               Responses to conquest   215


the government to reopen their church and liturgical ornaments: The
undersigned inhabitants have no power to oblige their parish priest to
swear the oath, while it is because of his insubordination that they are
deprived of all their objects of religion.’ In Napoleonic Rome, the
churches remained empty when the government ordered a Te Deum.
In the Rhineland, where the former bishop-princes had accustomed
their subjects to such patriotic rites, a peasant could welcome the
reunion with France, as ‘now at last we are free; now at last we can
hold our services in total liberty, that is in Latin’.40
   The gap between popular and reformed ecclesiastical practices was
certainly greater in areas without previous reforming traditions. Here,
as in Piedmont, a patriot priest who played an active administrative
role, like the theologian Vigna who was sub-prefect at Alba, lost his
reputation among the faithful, as the republican governor-general
Jourdan recognised: ‘A priest who busies himself with other things
besides the duties of his office is regarded as a sort of political
monster’.41 In Spain parish priests increased their influence by their
identification of the French with anti-Christ. But for the most part the
clergy were conscious of their difficulties in regaining their traditional
influence over the people. Missions might prove momentarily
successful, through the fervour of the orator, yet this was precisely
because they were exceptional and ably staged. But, as a Modenese
parish priest reflected: True conversion of sinners does not normally
occur in a moment. It requires time, reflection and a readiness to stop
and consolidate; this means patience, instruction and prayer.’42 The
spontaneous growth of lay initiatives, such as pilgrimages and the
Marian cult, were to deepen the differences between the elite and
popular representations of religion. Such were the responses to the
Revolutionary-Napoleonic regulation of the Church.


SOCIAL PRACTICES
The years of French dominion in Europe constitute too short a period
to identify unequivocal shifts in the slow process of change of
mentalities—except in France itself, the epicentre of this violent
drive towards extension of the social base and enforced
administrative modernity. Nevertheless, the impact of this new
presence on the multiple forms of sociability that characterised the
heterogeneity of space and varieties of cultural identity in Europe
merits a discussion, however brief, as it offers yet another spy into the
intangible but crucial relationship between the expectations of the
French and the comportment of the local elites. Three very different
216   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


fields—freemasonry, education and charity—provide valuable
examples of the limits of the regime’s attempts to penetrate existing
forms of sociability and superimpose their own.
   Sociability was of importance to the French elites for conceptual as
much as for practical reasons. D’Alembert, in the Encyclopédie,
described France as ‘a nation primarily characterised by sociability’.
Portalis, Napoleon’s minister of cults, expressed a conviction, relayed
by the philosophes and idéologues, that ‘man’s perfection is tied to his
sociability’. What was at issue was the relationship between private
virtues, collective habits and the progress of civilisation.43 France’s
primacy as standard-bearer of civilisation was demonstrated in the
superiority of her forms of sociability, as much as in her language,
revolutionary values and administrative practices. By sociability was
understood the quality of institutions which set public rules for social
relationships that transgressed conventional status barriers: for
example, academies and learned societies, salons or masonic lodges.
Other countries could vaunt their primacy in alternative forms of
civilised sociability, such as the English coffee-house or the Italian
opera. But the French model, which developed apace in the eighteenth
century, was accepted and envied across Europe.
   This was the moment of triumph of that distinctively female
institution, the Parisian salon, which had played a central role for the
philosophes in testing and directing opinion by providing an informal
setting where aristocrats and writers could meet and converse. In the
Directory and Consular years, noted de Gérando’s wife, who was of
German origin and kindly disposition, Madame Récamier embodied
the virtues that the male elite desired: The French want only youth,
charm, pleasures and vivacity in the sex they so spoil. Madame
Récamier is the very embodiment of this sort of person.’44 Madame de
Staël, Marie-Anne de Gérando’s friend, was out of fashion as well as
out of favour. The unconventionality of the salon as a form of
sociability which overrode separation of the sexes perhaps explains
the difficulties of its acceptance in countries with rigid social and
status barriers, as well as those of gender. Even if the salon spread to
German provincial capitals, like Berlin, Dresden, Leipzig or Vienna, it
was virtually killed by (false) association with Jacobinism in the anti-
Revolutionary reaction of the 1790s. In Berlin, after Frederick II’s
death, only wealthy, cultured Jewish ladies, like Henrietta Herz and
Rachel Levin, succeeded in creating successful salons, precisely
because they were Jewish and hence provided a neutral terrain where
nobles, intellectuals, Germans, foreigners, Jews and Christians could
exchange conversation on what seemed to the young theologian
                                               Responses to conquest   217


Friedrich Schleiermacher an astonishingly wide range of topics. Such
salons were slowly to contribute to what in the nineteenth century
would be a typically German form of sociability.45
    Export of French modes of sociability thus formed an integral part
of that process of raising the level of civilisation of other nations.
More pragmatically, French administrators were always highly
sensitive towards local associative structures and other less formal
expressions of sociability as they provided precisely the ambience and
occasions of cordial contact and conversation in which outmoded
social distinctions or political dislikes could be overcome, new
relationships forged or consolidated and elites integrated within the
new order. For Napoleon sociability was an essential part of
administrative responsibility.
    The memoirs of the period about occupied territories, whether of
civilians or military, are replete with descriptions of receptions,
dinners, balls and social events. Their tone oscillates between
indulgence towards the old-fashioned way of life and the conviction
that the new French style was successfully winning over the local
elites. Duret de Tavel, an officer in Calabria, wrote home in 1808 that:

    Since the arrival of the French, Cosenza has gained considerably
    in terms of sociability. There are balls and many brilliant social
    circles where liqueurs and sorbets are offered…. Charmed by our
    manners, the ladies have become very accessible…. The
    voluptuous waltz has taken over from the bizarre dances of this
    country.46

Germans, rather than Italians, required particular attention,
presumably because to the French they appeared more distant from
practices of civilised behaviour, as well as potentially more hostile.
Beugnot, in Düsseldorf, described his troubles to his daughter:

    His Majesty the Emperor and King had ordered me to represent
    him with dignity. Now what the Germans most enjoy on formal
    occasions is that they can dance. On the anniversary of the
    coronation, there was a grand dinner, a great ball and a veritable
    on-slaught of finery. Only one thing was forgotten—the supper!
    Because here one needs to reverse the proverb ‘after the belly, the
    ball’. Twenty officers dying of hunger at two in the morning, just
    as many ladies, who eat like officers, and girls with appetites like
    wolves. For all that, the only expedient my wife could find was a
    milk soup…. For the next ball I’ve told her in private to kill a stag.
218   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


In Cologne, the prefect Ladoucette decided on more total
identification with the local people: to celebrate the birth of
Napoleon’s son (June 1811), he invited the local Mädchen,
confraternities and farmers to come in their medieval costumes.47 The
purpose of such festive occasions, as spelt out by the prefect of the
Bouches du Weser, the Belgian d’Arberg, was to ‘to profit from every
favourable circumstance to further fusion and little by little work
towards the disappearance of that separation between old and new
French which differences of customs and habits still maintain in these
regions’. He too had held a ball and supper at Bremen for the birth of
the king of Rome, to which he had invited the 500 ‘wealthiest and
most worthy of the upper bourgeoisie, a class that includes an
interesting part of the population which enjoyed no consideration
under the former sovereigns.’ Six months later, at his next ball, he felt
satisfied with his progress: The occasion was remarkable in terms of a
certain intimacy and a greater union than at previous balls…. One and
all of the guests seemed to belong to a single family.’48 We have no
means of knowing whether his guests were of the same opinion.
   Such festive occasions provide an excellent example of the
determination of the Napoleonic regime to superimpose its own forms
of sociability on existing associative structures. Napoleon and his
collaborators were always concerned to revive or encourage
institutions and associations which attracted and hence involved local
notables with the administration. Under the Consulate, two-thirds of
the pre-Revolutionary French provincial academies had been
reopened, with official subventions and the prefect as honorary
president. In Tuscany, where relations with Paris were solidly
established among scientists and intellectuals, progressive landowners
of the academy of the Georgofili hastened to elect to their ranks the
members of the French junta, like de Gérando and Menou, in
reciprocity for their interest. If associations were viewed as potentially
dangerous and not socially open, they could be suppressed. Napoleon
was very angry that at Turin nobles and bourgeois held balls
reciprocally excluding the other class: ‘this division displeases me and
is contrary to the principles of government’. At Florence, the casino,
or noble circle, exclusively limited to families in the golden book, was
closed. Otherwise associations were to be encouraged.
   This applied in particular to scientific societies which, out of a
common matrix of ‘useful’ sciences, became increasingly specialised;
but artistic, musical and even historical societies were also established
in Germany, Switzerland and elsewhere in French-controlled Europe;
a great archaeological programme was initiated in Rome. Political
                                               Responses to conquest   219


criticism was not tolerated in this most official of regimes, as was soon
apparent with the expulsion of Constant from the Tribunate (January
1802), the closure of the idéologue-dominated class of moral and
political sciences of the Institut (January 1803), the exile from Paris of
Madame de Staël (October 1803), and the progressively tighter
censorship of the press. This still left ample domains where official
patronage of culture and science could be extremely beneficial:
Berthollet, organiser of the Société d’Arcueil, hub of the international
scientific network during the regime, was able to publish the memoirs
of its members through money advanced by Napoleon.49

Alongside this policy of casting the official cloak over local social
institutions, the regime introduced its own forms of sociability. With
military discipline, the Emperor set the example with his Court,
copying the ceremonial of the ancien regime and offering banquets
distasteful to his frugal eating habits. At a Tuileries recital he
displayed more musical discernment than his concert secretary
anticipated, as Hector Berlioz later recounted. His sisters, Elisa,
Pauline and Caroline held salons, even before their elevation to
thrones, frequented by the elites and administrators of Europe.
Napoleon was insistent that his family, ministers and marshals follow
his example, and even justified his notable generosity towards them as
providing the means to uphold their rank. Marbot commented that
the grand dignitaries vied with each other in organising social
occasions. Between the sumptuous dinners of a Cambacérès or
Talleyrand and the masked balls of a Marescalchi, there can be no
doubt that the most hostile legitimist families were seduced. ‘In the
first period of the Empire’, recalled Madame de Boigne,

    it was extremely agreeable to be in the company of the opposition.
    …This lasted for three or four years; but then desertions became
    more frequent, until the marriage with the archduchess [Marie
    Louise] did the rest. From then on, it was easy to count the
    women who did not go to Court.50

The collapse of the Empire was to revive and exacerbate the divisions.
   What was fashion at Paris was law elsewhere. The Courts of
Napoleon’s family performed the same function at Turin, Florence,
Naples, The Hague and Cassel; only in Madrid (which he was twice
forced to abandon precipitously) was Joseph unable to attract a broad
spectrum of the old aristocracy. Taking the waters—at Spa (Belgium),
Aix (Savoy), Baden (Germany), Montecatini (Tuscany), Barège or
220   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Eaux-Bonnes (Pyrenees)—revived again as a form of sociability
among functionaries, lawyers, notaries and especially proprietors and
rentiers (as well as wounded military), in the wake of the Bonapartes,
Talleyrand, marshals and ministers.51 The ubiquitous presence of
often thick clusters of functionaries guaranteed at least an appearance
of success to these official forms of sociability.
   In social terms, probably the most successful forms of sociability
deliberately diffused by the regime were the army and freemasonry.
There is no need to elaborate further on the spread of military values
discussed on pp. 167–70. It is enough to note that the continuous
presence of French troops outside the Empire’s frontiers, particularly
in peacetime, accentuated the identity of the officers as a group,
separate from both civilian administrators and the local elite, and with
a distinctive pattern of life. Social contact with local notable families
always existed, not least because the officers were frequently lodged in
their houses; but it was structured around entertainments, usually
described with overtones of galantry, and only filled interludes in an
otherwise monotonous routine. Shooting, hunting and riding were the
mainstay of Stendhal’s description of his life in Brunswick. Griois,
commander of the Longone fort on Elba, searched for distractions in
visits to hermitages, picnics and weekly balls.52 The life style and
forms of sociability of the officers all derived from the idea of glory,
from the uniforms and parades to the heroic gestures and medals.
They influenced the society that surrounded them, where civilian
administrators wore uniforms and lycées were organised with military
attributes. But they remained parallel to, rather than part of civil
forms of sociability.
   The major exception to this was freemasonry. After the serious
persecutions of the Terror in France and the counter-revolutionaries
elsewhere, freemasonry had re-emerged, in its different sects, during
the Directory. With Napoleon, it was absorbed into the establishment
and, like all official organisations, was peremptorily centralised under
a single rite, the deist, rationalist obedience of the Grand Orient.
Headed by Napoleon’s brothers, led by Cambacérès and Lebrun,
populated by ministers, generals, prefects and administrators,
alongside local notables, freemasonry rapidly expanded in France: by
1814 the Grand Orient controlled 886 lodges and 337 chapters. Not
surprisingly, given the hierarchical associative structure of the
military, it spread most rapidly in the armies, despite the republican
and anticlerical loyalties of many of the veterans: by 1805, there were
132 masonic lodges in the regiments, and the initiated included a
quarter of all infantry officers.
                                               Responses to conquest   221


   French freemasonry followed the routes of the victorious armies,
contacting and often absorbing indigenous lodges and creating new
ones. Army officers set up some 400 masonic lodges in French-
controlled Europe. ‘How can one not admire the Great Napoleon who
has bound masonic ties ever tighter in establishing his Grand Empire
and confederating nations?’, proclaimed the lodge of La Confiance at
Novi in 1810.53 In Germany, Italy and Switzerland, the local notables
joined forces with the French in the new lodges. Only in Bavaria was
freemasonry strictly forbidden, following the dangerous experience of
the radical sect of ‘Illuminati’ in the 1780s. In the Rhineland, the
number of lodges rose from three to seventeen, with 170 French and
345 local members. In Tuscany, lodges were founded at Leghorn,
Siena, Florence and Portoferraio, where the prefects Capelle and
Gandolfo swore obedience alongside nobles like Marquis Torrigiani,
Jewish merchants from Leghorn like Giuseppe Luzzatti, national
property speculators, police commissioners, intellectuals, lawyers and
rentiers. Some freemasons withdrew, for reasons of pique or for more
serious ideological motivations. Others exploited the very mystery of
masonic rites to maintain their old faith or assert their new ones in
secret groups within the womb of the official organisation. In terms of
the exponents of the regime, freemasonry functioned as an effective
form of sociability to win the confidence of the local elites. Indeed, its
failure to penetrate certain countries can be taken as an indicator of
the limits of acceptance. In annexed Holland, the Grand Orient was
able to set up only nine feeble lodges. In the grand-duchy of Warsaw,
where freemasonry had been an important social institution before the
French arrived, the Catholic clergy identified freemasonry with
collaboration. Above all in Portugal and Spain, where the French
military introduced freemasonry, the local notables refused to join the
French military lodges, even in cities where they set up their own
indigenous ones. Such were the difficulties of reconciling the
perspectives of the new regime with those of the local establishments,
at least in countries where political and religious opposition was able
to brand such secular forms of sociability as tainted by the invader.54

The French perceived of social institutions as a crucial means of
penetration for their ideas. But the very forms of sociability denied the
possibility of direct control which their administrative approach
assumed. Associations, salons, reading rooms or coffee-shops could be
regulated or spied upon. But, as all authoritarian regimes have
discovered, society offers the resourceful individual, family or group a
constant possibility of withdrawal or escape. The spoken word is
222   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


ephemeral, the content of social gatherings can lend itself to different
readings. Whatever the compression of the private sphere within the
embrace of the Napoleonic order, alternative spaces could often be
identified in which to assert old values or cultural identities, whether
within or outside the officially approved forms of sociability. If
administrative sensitivity towards what might be construed as
political criticism reduced the printed channels of expression that had
proved so effective in the late enlightenment and Revolution, the
existence of what were officially recognised as apolitical institutions
provided an ambiguous terrain where the views and comportment of
the local elites did not necessarily correspond to the expectations of
the regime.
   On many matters there was a convergence of ideas or practical
ends between administrators and administered. Intellectuals like the
Tuscan Giovanni Fabbroni or the Swiss Jean de Müller were in close
unison with the Napoleonic model of modernity, whatever their
mental reservations about national identity. Police repression of petty
thieves and vagrants was warmly supported by right-thinking
notables. Napoleonic town planning, with its destruction of city walls,
wide straight avenues, and bridges, offered major opportunities to
local citizens for building speculation and commerce (whatever the
reservations about new Napoleonic names of squares and streets). On
a more frivolous level, no doubt there was a meeting of minds among
those so inclined about the renewed authorisation of gambling in the
ample foyers of Italian opera houses.55
   In other respects, however, it is not difficult to observe divergences.
The learned historical associations that were founded in Switzerland
or Prussia, like the award of a prize by the Turin intellectual
establishment to Alessandro Saluzzo’s History of the Piedmontese
militia and the wars of Piedmont from the year 1536 until 1747, were
muted references and hence appeals to the survival of a cultural
identity. Language and literary precedents, like history, assumed new
importance in intellectual debates in the annexed territories as they
could be read as indirect protests against the suffocating
administrative imposition of French uniformity. In the heartland of
Flemish-speaking Belgium a theatrical piece in Flemish was printed
and performed for the first time in the imperial years.56 Education
offered perhaps the most significant terrain for this battle of shadows
between opposing perceptions of culture.
   The revolutionaries, in the sister republics as much as in France,
had shared a conviction of the importance of universal, public free
education, which they saw as complementary to the liberty of culture.
                                               Responses to conquest   223


Hence—in the projects of Condorcet and Talleyrand and the practices
of the Directory—primary schooling went hand in hand with the
radical revision of secondary education and university instruction in
favour of scientific, technical and useful knowledge. With the
Consulate, education was explicitly linked to the representation of
society as properly pyramidal. In Chaptal’s words: ‘the different
degrees of public education…must correspond to the great divisions
that can be noted in the social body’. 57 The implication was
abandonment of interest and relative neglect of primary education,
which was left to the whims of each prefect, and increasingly
centralised control of secondary and university instruction, which was
to culminate in the creation of the single Imperial University, with
subordinate academies across the Empire (1806–8). The effective
competition of private Catholic schools, following the Concordat,
underlay the concern to impose the control of the lay state; although
the choice as grand master of the University of Elisa Bonaparte’s
protégé, the conservative Catholic Fontanes, left recurrent suspicions
that the educational system was less than intransigent in its attitude
towards the Church.
   Within the annexed and satellite territories, imperial educational
policy was contested both within and outside the official institutions.
There was no appeal against the closure of famous universities like
Siena or Louvain. But where such institutions were renamed and given
full official recognition as academies, they could offer greater
possibilities than hitherto existed to indigenous intellectuals willing to
seize their opportunity. In Turin, the Piedmontese nobles who had
founded the Academy of Sciences, like Cesare Saluzzo and Prospero
Balbo, supported by professors many of whom had participated in the
republican experiences, now attempted to further their projects for
educational reform through their control of the academy.
   Outside the frontiers of the Empire, primary education retained its
importance for influential members of society. Pestalozzi’s methods,
open to observation at his school in Yverdon, attracted considerable
attention and imitation outside the public sector, not only in
Switzerland but also in central Europe among both advanced Catholic
and liberal educators. In the kingdom of Italy the purpose of
education for country boys was at the opposite extreme from
Pestalozzi’s Rousseauian ideal of developing individual personality,
except in the prohibition of corporal punishment: hygiene, religious
principles, respect for king, patria and officials and ‘above all the
gratitude that is due to those who have obtained a free education for
them and endeavour to ennoble their spirit’, were to reinforce
224   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


instruction aimed at improving the skills practised by their parents.
Nevertheless, despite Napoleon’s insistence on uniformity with the
French model and the restrictions of wealth and selectivity that
characterised a system of secondary education directed towards the
technical training of future administrators, free primary education
suitable for peasants and artisans was systematically and relatively
successfully pursued in the kingdom of Italy, particularly in the poorer
rural areas. Above all in Holland, Adriaan van den Ende not only
translated the patriots’ conviction of the moral duty of primary
education into a national system, based on Pestalozzi’s
philanthropism, but also convinced Louis Bonaparte, anxious to
identify with his subjects, of the validity of this Dutch concern and,
after annexation, obtained the powerful support of Cuvier for its
continuation.58 The examples of both the Italic kingdom and Holland
point to the possibility of local opinion utilising the resources and
opportunities provided by the new administrative structures to exploit
that space of educational policy abandoned by French policy in order
to develop systems of primary education consonant with what were
judged to be the needs of the country.

Determination to penetrate and utilise modes of sociability, casting
over them the official protection of public approval, thus proved
uncertain and sometimes treacherous terrain for the French
administrators in their pursuit of social integration. Their concern,
which resulted inevitably from their dichotomic analysis of society,
was exclusively with the fusion of the elites. This led to a
conventionally repressive attitude towards popular forms of
sociability. Knives, which in Piedmont as much as Naples, were used
to settle private vendettas (as well as on French soldiers looking for
women), should be confiscated, were it only possible.59 Festivities
were judged likely to cause public disorder; cabarets, gambling and
drink were seen as morally debauching and responsible for outbreaks
of violence; popular religious manifestations were disapproved of for
analogous reasons. There was nothing new in the French ideology,
only in the greater thoroughness of the repressive machinery.
   Whether such repression led to changes within popular forms of
sociability can be known only after detailed local research. It is
possible that the legitimising of the soldier, alongside the weakening of
obedience to the Church, led to a diffusion of the beerhouse and
tavern and a greater promiscuity, particularly in popular dancing, that
was denounced by rural parish priests and urban social observers in
the years of the Restoration.60
                                               Responses to conquest   225


   What is certain is that the entire corpus of changes imposed by
French rule—with their insistence on individualism, property and
highly regulated social relations—accentuated the divide between the
respectable and the poor labouring classes. Official legitimising of the
respectable reached far deeper into the social structure than during the
ancien regime, as much because of the requirements of the
administrative machine as through the sales of national properties.
The pressures of war and fiscality that marked the later years of the
Empire worsened the divide, as they rendered the presence of the poor
more visible. It was not fortuitous that administrative measures and
local initiatives in the relief of poverty should have assumed a higher
profile at precisely this moment.
   Reflections on poverty and charity and on how best to organise
assistance could vaunt distinguished ancestry. The application of
useful science and statistics to the relief of the poor had led to radical
initiatives already in the 1780s, particularly in Germany and Holland,
along the lines proposed by Rumford (now married to Lavoisier’s
widow at Auteuil), Voeght and Büsch. Charity provided another
instance of a terrain where there was a convergence of preoccupations
between regime and local notables, exemplified in the person of de
Gérando, senior functionary and philanthropist, who knew or
corresponded with the leading figures of European charity. But here
too the approaches of administrators and private notables differed
fundamentally. For the authorities, relief of poverty demanded a
rationalisation of administrative structures and a clear demarcation
between the worthy and the unworthy, the former meriting assistance,
the latter requiring punishment. The local notables, often inspired by
an inner religiosity characteristic of the new century, agreed to serve in
the charitable administrations not only for humanitarian motives, but
also out of an extreme concern to uphold communal solidarities.
Municipal and private poor relief again assumed a central role: the
good burghers of Amsterdam and Hamburg extended their welfare
system of income supplementation and family support outside the
governmental structures, precisely at the peak of the blockade.61
   In these same years, the failure of the regime to appropriate a space
that traditionally formed part of local notable initiative was
demonstrated in a minor but revealing episode: the transformation of
a private Parisian association to assist poor pregnant mothers—the
Society of Maternal Charity—into an Imperial Society under the
patronage of Marie Louise. It was decided, at the highest level, that
this female voluntary association (so much more controllable than the
salons) should be extended across the Empire. Despite the strongest
226   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


recommendations of the minister of the interior and determined
efforts of the prefects, only the wives of top functionaries and a
handful of wealthy proprietors and merchants closely tied to the
administration could be persuaded to pay their admission fee to this
exclusive social club.62 Charity remained within the sphere of civil
society and the Church.
   Attitudes towards poverty provide yet one more facet of the
elusive, intangible quality of social modes of comportment that
resisted the drive of the French administrative modernisers to
rationalise and categorise. The representations of poverty by local
notables were not antagonistic to those of the government. They
reflected an anxiety at the consequences of what they perceived, by
the final years, as the daemonic pursuit of an unachievable end: the
absolute conquest of Europe by Napoleon in order to render it
uniform. It is less evident that the local notables were aware that the
very ideology of the regime, by its driving concern for the conditions
of social order and stability that would guarantee individual property
and person, reinforced the new self-image of a bourgeois society, from
which the popular classes were excluded.


RESISTANCE
Armed resistance is always an ultimate choice, in any period, under
any regime. It is an irrevocable gesture of defiance against the
constituted authorities of a territory, a renunciation of alternative
forms of protest. Armed resistance thus represents the negative
counterpart to collaboration, although both may share certain values.
In Napoleonic Europe, for example, family, military glory and an
elitist perception of society were values common to Italian generals in
Napoleon’s armies, like the Lechi brothers, and to the Spanish
commander of the army of Navarre resisting the French invasion,
Espoz y Mina; and the conscripted peasants who killed each other on
the unending sequence of battlefields undoubtedly held to a common
social representation of family and land. Hence it is as important to
set armed resistance to Napoleonic rule in the perspective of
alternative comportments, as to enquire carefully into the examples of
armed resistance, above all of the Spanish people.
    The previous chapters have been concerned to discuss responses to
the imposition of French rule as forms of adaptation. Even
collaboration rarely implied unconditional acceptance, as each
individual interpreted the different aspects of so radical a regime
through the filter of his pre-existent hierarchy of values. For some, like
                                               Responses to conquest   227


the Piedmontese Cavour and Saluzzo, expectation of the
improvements that would come from the new administration
outweighed loyalties to a deposed dynasty; for others, like the Belgian
C.A.Ghillenghien, the economic opportunities overcame all scruples.
Yet others, like the Tuscan noble F.A.Corsi Salviati, limited their
collaboration to areas where they felt a strong commitment, such as
charity, while otherwise maintaining a dignified distance.
    Collaboration was not always a free choice. In extreme cases,
members of leading noble families could be drafted by direct order of
the Emperor, like the young Cesare Balbo. Far more frequently, at a
modest level, heads of household were obliged to accept local office
through the pressure of their peers as an expression of communal
solidarity. Senior French administrators always complained
(frequently with reason) about the lack of competent personnel in
villages and small towns. Seen through the eyes of the wealthy
peasant, artisan or petty lawyer, service as mayor or councillor was
not just a more time-consuming duty than before, given the
implacable activism of the new administration; the extended range of
responsibilities, because of their very novelty, placed the office-holder
at risk. Custom was affronted, established practices abused, privacy
invaded by the removal of cemeteries outside the habitat, the
alignment of roads, or the imposition of minimal hygienic
precautions; such thankless tasks as making up the lists of the
conscriptable, allocation of the new taxes, or even division of
communal properties, were destructive of the ties of reciprocal trust
on which pacific coexistence within the village depended. When the
mayor of the Alpine village of Neydens (Léman) attempted to measure
illegally appropriated communal land in 1803, he was threatened by
one François Dufour:

    He said to me like a madman, ‘What are you measuring there?’ I
    replied, ‘I’m measuring the land you usurped from the commune.’
    He replied, ‘And if I took your yard-stick and smashed it over
    your head, what would you have to say about that?’63

Small wonder that collaboration was sometimes unwilling; or that
many who filled the French criteria for candidates for office resisted
the blandishments of the authorities.
   Such withdrawal into the private sphere, or refusal to be involved
in public activities, was certainly a reflection of the conditions
particular to the later years of the Napoleonic Empire. It could be a
sign of opposition, and was usually interpreted in that way by prefects
228    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and police commissioners. There was every reason to be cautious, as
open signs or even suspicions of opposition could provoke
disproportionate reactions. Personal family reasons, which were
regularly put forward as excuse, were often true. But prudence
characterised the attitude of the local elites, even initially in Spain. As
the Seville clergyman Félix José Reinoso recalled in 1816: ‘No general,
no magistrate, no provincial leader, no guild, no scholar raised the cry
of battle. Were they French collaborators? Or did they take more time
to think and feared that we were powerless to wage the battle?’ The
Savoyard Marquis Costa justified silent withdrawal as the only
realistic possibility for legitimists, even when Napoleon’s final debacle
was close:

      The Savoyards must hold their silence about their discontent and
      regrets…until further order. They must consider their country as
      no more than a province whose fate has not been decided and
      whose unhappy inhabitants have done all they could when
      submitting to force, supplying labour and paying taxes. Those
      who depart from such a line will put their head on the block and
      risk confiscation only too easily. Such a risky attitude is to be
      discouraged, above all for heads of families and great landowners;
      I doubt that under any circumstances it could lead to esteem and
      fortune in the future…. The only thing to be done now is to hold
      to an individual neutrality, which nobody has the right to make us
      quit; and to expect anything and everything from impending
      events which we are unable to hasten through vain efforts and
      dangerous steps.64

In other cases there was a genuine dislike of the demands and
artificiality of the Napoleonic style of socialising, which contrasted so
totally with the intense, highly personal religiosity or sentimentality
that began to penetrate the more intellectual among the post-
Revolutionary elites. Marie-Anne de Rathsamshausen, de Gérando’s
serious-minded German wife, writing in 1808, expressed the heritage
of Rousseau and the young Werther in her private complaints about
the obligations of her position: ‘Proprieties are the sacred code of
narrow spirits and withered hearts…I hold to my retreat in so far as
proprieties allow it.’ As she confessed to the worldly prince-primate
Dalberg, she resented her obligations at Court:

      the atmosphere at Court is not for me; life seems to me to pass so
      quickly that I would like to make better use of it…. I feel sorry for
                                              Responses to conquest   229


    those who appear so singularly agitated, even the most sensible of
    them, when it is a question of getting to the foremost positions so
    as to attract a glance, to be in the right place where one can hope
    for a word from the sovereign or a sign of distinction.65

Madame de Gérando was always conscious of the different
perspectives that gender imposed, which she accepted with greater
resignation than her friend Madame de Staël: ‘I don’t know what my
feeling would be if I were a man, but as a woman my ambition does
not go far.’ Outside France, for educated young men raised on a diet
of literary individualism and military heroism, a sense of cultural
identity could arouse contrasting responses. Two examples can be
given, both from Italy, indicative of the more general issue of national
identity that began to be voiced in many parts of Europe in reaction
to French imposition of uniformity.
   For the 16-year-old Cesare Balbo and his adolescent comrades from
the cream of the Piedmontese aristocracy, the utilisation of the well-
used model of the literary society was the only means to vindicate the
identity of Italians. The programme of the Accademia dei Concordi,
which was proclaimed in the privacy of the Balbo family palace in
1805, was explicit:

    It becomes clearer day by day that language is a national tie, a
    reliable countermark of a people, the only one in Italy, divided
    and so strangely subjected as she is to so many dominant
    foreigners. If the different Italian peoples recognise themselves as
    brothers since Dante, this is because of that blessed harmony that
    is our language. And to think that now they want to remove even
    that sign from us!66

Almost contemporaneously, in 1804, a young officer from Vicenza,
Ermolao Federigo, writing home from Boulogne, where the Grande
Armée was waiting to invade England, proposed a very different
solution to the affirmation of identity:

    I never disapprove of those means that can contribute to make
    Italians into good soldiers. I believe this should be the primary
    thought of every good Italian…. What does it matter whether one
    is serving the ambition of this or that man? The great aim must be
    to learn to make war, which is the only skill that can free us. …I
    see matters in this light. I serve my country when I learn to be a
    soldier, and even if I served the Turk, it wouldn’t matter. Our
230    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      [Italic] Republic will certainly gain a greater reputation and glory
      from its few soldiers than from all the sessions and laws that the
      Legislative body can pass. Let us think of being soldiers and when
      we’ll have a hundred thousand bayonets, then we can start
      talking. In the meantime, let us thank heaven that we have not
      been deprived of the sole means of one day being free, that is, by
      being soldiers.67

Armed resistance against the French occurred sporadically throughout
the Napoleonic years. For Napoleon, such risings were a regular
consequence of occupation: ‘Be quite clear in your calculations’, he
wrote to Joseph in 1806, ‘that two weeks earlier or later you will have
an uprising. It always happens in a conquered country’.68 His initial
underestimate of the Spanish revolt was undoubtedly influenced by
such assumptions. Established techniques existed to deal with such
episodes: rapid despatch of gendarmerie or other army units to the site
of the troubles, exemplary punishment of those identified as
responsible, and if necessary temporary transfer of administrative
authority to the general in command. Some of his collaborators urged
a more humane approach. Lebrun, as governor-general of Liguria,
affirmed on the occasion of an insurrection in the Apennine valleys
between Parma and Piacenza in 1805 that, once it had been put down,
it need be followed only by ‘serious disarming of the population (not
just a hand-over of good or poor weapons, simply on the word of the
parish priests), punishment of some of those responsible and leniency
for the rest’; Napoleon promptly gave responsibility for the area to
General Junot, who was ordered to burn five or six villages and
execute some sixty persons.69
    The initial revolts under the Directory, in 1798 and above all in
1799, in Belgium, Switzerland and Italy, constituted massive responses
against the brutal exploitation of the French occupants, with strongly
religious connotations—as in the Vendée—in reaction to the
Revolutionary assault on the Church. The rising of the Arezzo
peasants in 1799 to the cry of ‘Long live the Virgin Mary’ was the
explosive culmination of popular hostility to the pre-Revolutionary
Leopoldine reform movement, and especially its ecclesiastical policies.
The Calabrian ‘Holy Faith’ revolt against the Parthenopean republic
was so powerful because it combined popular despair over disastrous
economic conditions, land-hunger and religious fanaticism with
vendettas between the rural elites. In these early risings—as later in
Spain—religion could intensify, legitimise and momentarily gel
peasant protest, but it was never adequate by itself as the motor of
                                               Responses to conquest   231


revolt: Cardinal Ruffo had continually to reform his Sanfedist army,
as few peasants were prepared to march beyond their own region.
   The counter-revolution of 1799 branded a deep scar in the official
memory. The concordats and subordination of the Church were
important to Napoleon, as they neutralised an enemy of unknown
potential, whose resources were restored to the conventional role of
established religion, that of preaching obedience to constituted
authority. The less intelligent of the functionaries continued to live
with the neurosis that the people, incited by priest and legitimist
noble, would seize the first occasion to rise against them. Unlike the
police, they failed to realise that urban plotters—‘the gentlemen of
next week’, as a Turin police commissioner contemptuously described
the royalists—neither wished nor were capable of starting up mass
peasant risings. Even the ‘Jacobin’ patriots who were behind the
Bologna disturbances of 1802 were incapable of moving outside the
city.70
   As the Napoleonic administration acquired experience in
assimilating new territories, armed protest became less frequent.
Banditry and disorder continued, primarily in the remoter areas of the
European countryside, although the institution of the gendarmerie
was more effective than its ancien regime equivalents, at least in times
of peace. The front-line of the Empire and its allies was always more
liable to disturbance than the interior, because of the ease of
communications, supplies and escape routes to foreign territory. The
distinction between conventional banditry and armed revolt was
always a fine one, as use of arms and smuggling were traditional
pastimes wherever there were frontiers; while deserters, particularly
from defeated armies, nourished the ranks of those living outside the
law. But the distinction was blurred even more by the tendency of
exponents of the tougher branches of the administration—the
gendarmerie, Customs and droits réunis officials—to describe as
brigandage any manifestation of collective resistance and disorder. For
brigandage permitted the due processes of law to be set aside.
   In practice, outbreaks of collective political opposition were rare
and local. They usually occurred in coincidence with military
campaigns (Parma 1805, Tyrol 1809), when the forces of order were
temporarily thinner on the ground; foreign promises, and sometimes
practical assistance, encouraged the rebels. Until the final years, such
revolts seemed characteristic of Mediterranean Europe, rather than
the northern or central areas: differences in terrain, between the
mountainous south and great plains of northern-central Europe,
played their part; as did the closer presence of the British fleet. But in
232   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


the final debacle, revolt moved to the north, with risings of industrial
workers in Berg, of the population in Hamburg and the fisherfolk in
Holland (1813).
   Wherever they occurred, the risings were linked directly to a
sudden worsening of economic conditions and taxation. Over the
period, conscription seems to have been accepted increasingly with
resignation, although it took time before it could acquire in each
annexed region the quality of an unavoidable curse: in Holland, only
recently annexed and totally lacking a military tradition, conscription
sparked off the riots at Scheveningen and other small ports in 1813.
Taxation aroused the most generalised resentment everywhere,
particularly the administration of the droits réunis on alcohol, salt and
tobacco, whose officials often behaved brutally. Of the Spanish
functionaries of Joseph’s government who fled to France in 1814, over
40 per cent were employees of the ministry of finances, compared to
21 per cent police officials.71 The spread of revolt from the Tyrol in
1809 to the valleys north of Brescia owed as much to the dreaded
introduction of a new consumption tax as to the excess production
crisis of their iron ore mines: alongside the peasantry, millers, bakers,
innkeepers, winesellers and shopkeepers had closed shop in protest
against the new tax. In Berg, the revolt of the manufacturing workers
in January 1813 was caused by the acute industrial crisis.
   Apart from Spain, only two revolts seriously challenged French
authority: the endemic war in Calabria and the Tyrol rising. Both were
dependent on outside support from a major power. In Calabria,
initially the English general operating from Sicily, Sidney Smith,
continued to pay the rebel bands, as otherwise they would have
dissolved. Favoured by the inhospitable terrain, the brigand bands in
Calabria persisted, despite the ferocious tactics of Murat and Manhés,
because they were locked into the thick texture of faction and clientist
kin and community networks. These bands of notorious fame—like
those of Fra Diavolo or Sciabolone—fought the new regime not
because they were ardent Bourbon royalists, but because the French
were foreigners and representatives of state authority.72
   The Tyrol revolt was more complex, as well as more worrying for
French authority. It consisted of a general rising of the peasantry,
initially supported by innkeepers and cattle-dealers, whose livelihood
had been seriously threatened by the collapse of the transit trade
following French-imposed protection of the Italian market. But the
rising was far more than a protest against economic crisis. It was a
clarion call to the political and cultural identity of the region, against
the centralising measures of Bavaria, to whom this semi-autonomous
                                              Responses to conquest   233


province had been ceded by a defeated Austria (1805). Without the
Austrian propagandist Hormayr and the military support of Archduke
John, it is doubtful whether Andreas Hofer could ever have succeeded
in rousing his compatriots to the cry of ‘God, Emperor and
Fatherland’. It was the exemplary counter-revolution, with religious
overtones, discrimination against foreigners, Protestants and Jews,
and demands for a return to the privileges and liberties of yesteryear.
But the Tyrol rising, by its very identification with its own local and
ethnic identity, could never act as a focal point for a broader revolt,
despite incursions into the Venetian and Lombard valleys. The
example of Spain had provided a model for the Tyrolese conspirators;
until Napoleon’s defeat of Austria, the French feared the Tyrolese
example might spread to Berg. In practice, although peasant risings
affected two-thirds of the departments in the Italic kingdom, each
remained closely tied to the horizons of its local community; there was
no sense of common identity or attempt at coordination, least of all
with the Tyrolean Austrians.

Armed resistance in Spain was of a different order. The French
invasion of Portugal aroused a similar popular reaction, but it was
quickly overshadowed by the Spanish revolt and controlled by the
occupation of the country by the British army. In Spain too, popular
resistance, whether in guerrilla bands or army units, could hardly have
continued so long and effectively without the campaigns of
Wellington’s army. The inability of the French generals, divided by
personal rivalries, to destroy the British army decisively was an
essential precondition of the Spanish resistance.
    Nevertheless, the Spanish war was a war of the people, from the
immediate risings of 2 May 1808 in Madrid, immortalised by Goya,
to Suchet’s final withdrawal from Catalonia in February 1814. In this,
it differed from the Russian resistance in 1812, which developed
essentially in the wake of the military campaign against the Grande
Armée already in retreat. Hence the uniqueness of the Spanish revolt
requires explanation.
    Spanish historiography has long interpreted this dramatic episode
in the country’s history as a nationalist war; for conservative writers,
it is usually also regarded as a Catholic crusade for throne and altar.
Unquestionably it was a war of independence (as it is described in
Spain), in the sense that it was directed against a foreign invader, as
had been the Catalan and Basque resistance to the French
Convention’s invasion in 1794. It is also beyond doubt that the
representatives of the constitutional structure that emerged from the
234   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


anti-French resistance, in particular the Cortes of Cadiz, saw
themselves as spokesmen for the Spanish nation. But the evidence of
this prolonged struggle—from the popular seizure of the initiative in
1808 to the composition and character of the ‘war by bands’—argues
against any identity of view between the guerrillas and people of the
different regions of Spain and either the constitutionalists or the
Church. Regional particularism, always so powerful in the Spanish
monarchy, was stronger in 1808 than it had been under Charles IV,
although it would be historically anachronistic to ascribe to the
popular resistance in Catalonia or elsewhere in Spain a political
nationalism that was to develop only later in the nineteenth century.
As for the Church, although individual clerics were among the
guerrillas and there were strong religious overtones in many episodes
of this ferocious war, both episcopate and secular clergy preached
obedience to Joseph’s government.
   The seizure of the initiative by the people, after Murat’s heavy
suppression of the ‘May the Second’ tumult, occurred because of the
total loss of credibility of all groups of the ruling classes. The
weakness of the enlightenment reforms in Spain, the discredit thrown
on the political class by the public-faction fighting around the rival
figures of Charles IV, his heir Ferdinand and the Queen’s favourite
Godoy, and the economic crisis and financial bankruptcy caused by
the interruption of trade with the American colonies and the French
war had already created a dangerous situation of loss of credibility
when Napoleon deposed the Bourbon dynasty in 1808. Unlike France
in 1789, however, there was no Third Estate or other social group able
to profit from this vacuum, because of the weakness of the Spanish
middle classes and passivity of the established organs of government.
Murat’s appeal to ‘gentry, landowners, merchants and manufacturers’
to use their influence in defence of social order proved as illusory as
the conviction of Joseph’s Spanish advisers that the local elites could
exert their traditional influence. Popular pressure was responsible for
the creation of the eighteen provincial juntas (May-June 1808) which
assumed the responsibilities of government. But the fear of revolution
facilitated the dominance of conservative notables within these bodies
and even more in the central junta (September 1808).
   The very fact of the war facilitated the affirmation of counter-
revolutionaries within the central junta and then the extraordinary
Cortes of Cadiz (September 1810): one-third of the deputies at the
Cortes were ecclesiastics, one-fifth were lawyers and nearly as many
functionaries. It is hardly surprising that the liberal deputies—like
their French predecessors in 1790–1—compromised over radical
                                              Responses to conquest   235


social measures, such as the abolition of feudalism, or were forced to
concede in the constitution—in exchange for acceptance of individual
liberty and representation—the recognition of Catholicism as the sole
religion of the Spanish nation. There is an ideological parallelism
running through the reforms and administrative modernisation
proposed by Joseph’s government and by his constitutional
opponents. But just as popular threats isolated the French
collaborators or afrancesados, cutting through the normal ties of
family and friendship, so the constitutional liberals were always on
the defensive, caught between the constant demonstration of the loss
of social control and the rhetoric of the counter-revolutionary
exponents of a regression to absolute monarchy and spiritual
discipline.
   The war operated in highly localised contexts, in which the main
concern of the guerrillas was to harass and drive out the invaders.
Initially, entire populations rose to defend their provinces, as in
Galicia, the Asturias and Catalonia. The ties between the armed bands
and local patterns of land distribution or seasonal migration remain
unknown, but they must have existed, given the scale of guerrilla
warfare, and would have reinforced provincial identity. Then, the very
method of constituting a ‘war by bands’ accentuated local identity, at
the same time as it diluted the calls to patriotism. The central junta
offered a full pardon to all smugglers who joined the bands. As the
considerable number of mountain peasants and fishermen who
habitually practised contraband were joined by soldiers from the
former Spanish armies, Spanish deserters from the French armies,
peasants and outlaws of all types, the blurring of the distinction
between collective resistance and brigandage upheld by the French
became ever more realistic. Indiscipline, desertions, and highly
personal motivations were intrinsic to the war by bands, whose
presence was often far from welcome to local villagers. General
Noguès, in command of the Catalonian city of Gerona, noted how the
artisans were ‘too often pillaged and ill-treated both by our troops and
Pyrenean irregulars and by their guerrillas’.73 Despite the growth in
scale, organization and discipline of some guerrilla forces between
1809 and 1812—especially those of Espoz y Mina, who commanded
an army of 13,000 by 1813 and administered Navarre as effectively as
Soult ruled Andalusia—the armed bands continued to contribute their
elements of ferocity and fanaticism to this cruel war.74

National historiographies have always done less than justice to the
experience of the French conquest of Europe. Later developments—the
236    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


struggles for national independence, the formation of new nation-
states—provided historians with a teleological interpretation that saw
the nation-state as an inevitable culmination. In such a context, French
occupation could be seen at best only as a negative interlude, at worst
as an insult to the nation. But it is misleading to write of a national
identity in a political sense where a nation-state had not yet emerged.
The Polish gentry and intellectuals certainly asserted their right to
restore a recently lost national independence; the Dutch and Swiss
retained their national identity. Napoleon played on the hopes of the
former and kept a wary eye on the latter. In Portugal, the double insult
of French invasion and the proposition to incorporate the country—yet
again—in the Spanish state confirmed an apparent tie between this
small, proud people and its exiled monarchy; here, as in Spain, religious
fanaticism reinforced monarchical counter-revolution. In Spain,
Napoleon’s affront to national pride led to national resistance,
although those in revolt expressed themselves—in accord with the
history of the Spanish monarchy—most immediately in the form of
many nationalisms, Asturian, Catalan, Galician, Valencian and so on,
and only at a more distant and traditional level by identification with
the legitimate king of Spain.
   Far more problematic are the territories which were only later to
become nation-states. The nationalism of the Belgians (even of the
Flemish speakers) was not aroused by French rule, but by the enforced
incorporation into Holland in 1815. Patriotism, in a generically
national sense, certainly emerged among some young intellectuals in
Italy and Germany as a response to the increasingly rigid
uniformisation imposed by Napoleon, as much as by his final military
campaigns. The rapidity with which it acquired its new connotation
can be gauged by comparing it to Madame de Gérando’s reflections
on what was a patriot in the years of the Consulate. Classical culture
and modern philanthropy combined to limit the reproductive power
of patriotism to its dimensions of a local identity:

      Love of one’s country should not be represented as an abstract
      and unnatural sentiment; but it is limited, like all human faculties,
      and cannot dilate over too large a space…. The Frenchman and
      the German possess the vanity of their race rather than a patriotic
      passion. Because 20 or 30 million individuals need to be rallied
      around the tie that unites them to their compatriots, the tie itself
      so loosens that, in place of a patriotic enthusiasm, all that is felt
      is a sort of general benevolence…. A deep attachment to one’s
      native land nowadays exists above all in small states, and even
                                             Responses to conquest   237


    more in the free cities which rule themselves, where everybody is
    interested in the prosperity, conservation of the monuments and
    public security of the city where he was born and will die.75

The Italians, with rare exceptions like some Piedmontese and Roman
aristocrats, were ready to adapt and take advantage of the French
presence, even if they never accepted Gallic pretensions to a superior
civilisation. In Germany, idealist philosophy and romanticism
provided props for the construction of a reactionary alternative theory
of civilisation—that of the German community, based on Herder’s
theory of language and the Grimm brothers’ image of the Volkstum.
It was an intellectual construct, which circulated in German
universities. The French were aware of the hostility among some
intellectuals and, as always, suspected plots among the student secret
societies. For Bignon, writing in 1812, ‘a feeling for the ideal of so-
called German independence, this Germanic purity which wants its
own philosophy, its own literature, its own political existence, is a
commonplace to be found in all contemporary writings’. But for the
experienced Alsatian diplomat Reinhard nationalism in Germany was
no danger: In Germany there is no reason to fear any event similar to
those of Spain because there exist neither ideas nor interests that can
act uniformly on a great mass of persons’.76 He might have added a
few years later, with his knowledge of the Prussia that Stein,
Hardenberg and Gneisenau had renovated, that for such German
leaders the Spanish example was also a warning against the dangers of
appealing to the people except under carefully controlled conditions.
The significance of this was to emerge after the end of the French
conquest of Europe.
6 Epilogue:
  the heritage




    In France…everything had been moving towards democracy
    already for a long time. Anyone who refuses to be taken in by
    external appearances, who has a clear idea of the state of moral
    impotence into which the clergy had fallen, the poverty and
    degradation of the nobility, the wealth and enlightenment of the
    Third Estate, the remarkable division of landed property that
    already existed and the large number of mediocre fortunes, who
    recalls the theories professed at the time, the principles tacitly but
    almost universally admitted; such a person, I say, who has
    assembled these different aspects into a single point of view,
    cannot fail to conclude that France—for all its nobility, state
    religion, laws and aristocratic usages—was, all considered,
    already then the most truly democratic nation of Europe; and that
    Frenchmen at the end of the eighteenth century, in terms of their
    social status, civil constitution, ideas and habits, were far in
    advance even of those peoples who today move most visibly
    towards democracy.
          (Alexis de Tocqueville, Etat social et politique de la France
                                            avant et depuis 1789, 1836)

Civilisation as progress is an ideology with a very distinguished
ancestry, from ancient Rome to the Spanish conquest of South
America and China. Cultural imperialism as a means of justifying
conquest and integration was not new and, expressed in terms of an
ethnocentric mission, was to play an ever more explicit role in the
imperialism of the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The
civilising claims that accompanied the Directorial conquest and
Napoleonic attempt at integration of Europe may appear easy to
dismiss as little more than legitimising the imposition of uniform

                                  238
                                              Epilogue: the heritage   239


administrative rule on the cultural diversity that characterised groups
and peoples in Europe.1 But in at least two respects such claims are of
importance because of their immediate and continuing influence.
   On the one hand, it was not just the French administrators and
their intellectual allies who were confident that they had elaborated
scientific methods that allowed them to understand and govern the
mechanisms of society. Such convictions were to remain unquestioned
after the military collapse of the Napoleonic regime: statistics,
utilitarian principles, administrative science, and a professional
bureaucracy were typical aspects of the development of the
nineteenth-century state, supported by a burgeoning social science
that demanded an active presence of the state, irrespective of its
constitutional base.2
   On the other hand, in the decades that followed Waterloo, at least
until the revolutions of 1848, the experience of French rule reinforced
the sense of French civilisation among the educated elites of Europe,
whether by acceptance or by refusal. In part, this reflected the
personal experiences of an entire generation of men, who had
participated directly in the Napoleonic administration or armies and
had frequented the Parisian salons; for many, it was the formative
experience of their early life, which they were to carry through to
1848 and beyond. For others, like the young Leopardi, the underlying
parameter of civil progress remained the France that had emerged
from the Revolution, where the salons, academies, circles and societies
imposed rules and judgements, providing that stimulus of honours
and public recognition which he searched for in vain in Italy; it was
France that Leopardi had in mind when he contrasted the ‘customs’—
expression of the common culture of civil nations—with the ‘usages’
or inherited habits of backward societies like Rome, where public
commitment was lacking and life turned around the promenade,
public spectacles and the Church. Italians have no customs; they have
usages, just like all civil peoples who are not nations.’3
   Certainly France’s cultural claims were now strongly contested—by
a Giuseppe Mazzini or a Friedrich Karl von Savigny, for example—in
the name of national individuality. But this very antagonism reflected
the depth of penetration of Napoleonic rule. The radical political and
administrative rupture with the past, the attempt to create and
consolidate new loyalties in place of traditional passive ties of
authority, deference and local identity, the even more ambitious
aspiration to forge out of the heterogeneity of the European past a
new identity on the model of Napoleonic France inevitably provoked
resistance, less at the immediately political level than among the
240   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


deeper social relationships of each society. In reaction to the
Napoleonic experience old solidarities, tempered by centuries of
exercise—such as language, community or popular religion—were
reinforced; new solidarities emerged, like the discovery and
construction of national individuality. The Napoleonic conquest of
Europe, because of the determination and relative effectiveness of its
administrative class, backed up by armies, acted as a liberating force,
albeit often in ways unintended by its exponents. Its repercussions
were felt far beyond Europe, as in Brazil, where it could be argued that
the achievement of independence and national integration was an
indirect consequence of Junot’s invasion of Portugal.4 In the European
scale of its ambitions, it bequeathed a heritage that cut across national
frontiers and imposed an unusual, perhaps unprecedented unity on
political behaviour within the different European states during the
Restoration. Until 1848 or even 1870, and indirectly until much later,
the impact of these years conditioned the aspirations and practices of
the opponents as much as of the friends of the Revolution and
Napoleonic modernity. The complexity of this heritage can be
illustrated by a brief discussion of three themes—nationalism,
liberalism and administrative modernisation.
   Nationalism, which was to become so dominant a theme of
European politics by 1848, is considered in modern historiography as
a consequence of the French Revolution. Unquestionably the
Revolutionary wars stimulated a popular loyalty in France, as
Napoleonic imperialism aroused a reaction among peoples resentful
of the weight and exactions of the French presence. It is necessary,
however, to distinguish between these two very different responses. In
France, a nation-state was forged, as much by the legitimising of the
leading role of the state as by military patriotism; the survival of a
strong ‘spirit of locality’ (to employ the language of the July
monarchy) was compatible with, and in times of extreme necessity
subordinate to, identification with France; there was no longer a
principled antagonism between local and national loyalties.
Elsewhere, nationalism could be invoked as a means of arousing
enthusiasm against the French invader: in Britain, Spain or Russia, it
achieved a notable popular response; in a state like Prussia,
uncertainties about peasant reactions persuaded even a farsighted
leader like Hardenberg to proceed cautiously.
   Military defeat, not nationalism, was the cause of the sudden
collapse of the Napoleonic empire. The elites everywhere were
immediately concerned—like the French administrators—to ensure
the maintenance of order through a peaceful handover of authority. In
                                              Epilogue: the heritage   241


so far as popular loyalty manifested itself, it was towards a dynasty
rather than a nation—Victor Emanuel I in Piedmont, Ferdinand IV in
Naples, the Elector William of Hesse-Cassel in the rump of
Napoleonic Westphalia. Legitimism, or restoration of the dynasty,
was an obvious and effective rallying cry at the moment of the anti-
French reaction. More significant was the response in regions without
a ‘native’ dynasty—in Lombardy, Genoa, the Belgian provinces, even
the Swiss cantons. Here the elites sought in vain to retain or restore
their regional identities, even fomenting popular demonstrations, as in
the Ligurian valleys; or, as in the former Rhineland departments,
remained loyal to France. Whatever the assumptions of some literary-
minded patriots, nationalism could not function as a rallying-cry,
simply because it was devoid of significance to the mass of the people
and appeared as a dangerous abstraction to most of the elites in
territories without experience of a nation-state—and even within such
states.
   Nationalism was to be constructed as a powerful ideology in the
subsequent decades, when the experience of the French occupation
became part of the armoury of the political struggle to attain
independence. For Mazzini or von Savigny, those years gave birth to
the emergence of an awareness of an innate national identity. For the
Belgian patriots in 1830, as for the Lombards, whether liberal or
conservative, some of whom had made careers in the Napoleonic
administration, a political sense of national identity only developed
against the foreign rulers imposed by the Congress of Vienna, whether
the Dutch King William I or the Austrian Emperor Francis. Nowhere
did nationalism as a political ideology replace the pre-existing
loyalties to community and region or integrate state with nation. Only
after the creation of such nation-states, from Greece and Belgium to
the ethnic states of the Austrian empire, was nationalism to be
constructed, in opposition to what were considered as the
disaggregative forces of local identities, by the transference within
national boundaries of the same techniques of administrative
uniformity, linguistic imposition and pressure for social integration
that had characterised the European experience of the Napoleonic
regime. Like the imperial administrators, the politicians and
bureaucrats of these new states were to meet with social adaptations
and resistance that made the building of an integrated nation a
prolonged process.
   Liberalism was more directly related to the Napoleonic experience.
In its political connotations of constitutionalism, widened liberty and
economic liberalism, as voiced by Benjamin Constant and Jean
242   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Baptiste Say, it expressed a reaction against the authoritarian
centralism and economic dirigisme of the Napoleonic state. The
reaction was strongest in France, to the point that to foreigners,
Restoration France appeared as the country of liberty, possibly even
more so than Britain before the electoral reform of 1832, with its
system of representation extended to local government, formal
equality of civil rights, limitation of state intervention and affirmation
of landed notables. Constitutions, as the mechanism to reconcile
liberty with monarchical order, were invested with the force of a
symbolic value for the liberals of Restoration Europe, from Cadiz,
Palermo and Lisbon to Brussels, Vienna and Berlin. Economic
liberalism or laissez-faire, by which was understood an end to state
interference over international trade and the maintenance of
entrepreneurial freedom, was enthusiastically promoted by Britain
and theorised by Continental economists like Jean-Baptiste Say,
Frédéric Bastiat and Friedrich von Hermann.
   In reality, liberalism rapidly lost its distinctive quality as opposition
to the Napoleonic experience. Liberalism as the practice of
government derived from the same matrix as Napoleonic
administration, with the single and practically restricted exception of
elected representation as a check on arbitrary rule. Like the
Napoleonic functionaries, liberals were convinced that they embodied
social and economic progress, were favourable to science and
technology, and proclaimed rational, utilitarian principles as the basis
of a superior and neutral administration. The continuity between the
Napoleonic experience and liberalism was accentuated by the strong
defence of former imperial administrators against the legitimist claims
of some Restoration monarchies, as well as by their leading role in
statistical propositions to resolve social problems. In terms of
economic theory, the political economy of Say, however influential in
France, was contested in Italy by the philosophy of statistics of
Melchiorre Gioia and in Germany by Friedrich List’s analysis of the
comparative advantages of protection. In economic practice, the
flooding of the Continental markets with British manufactures led
many governments to revalue the lessons of the Continental blockade
and conserve protective Customs barriers. Above all, the political
liberalism of the Restoration bore an indelible imprint from the
Napoleonic years in its identification with the propertied bourgeoisie
and its insensitivity towards the labouring classes.
   Liberalism, whose popularity in 1815 was based on the
progressives’ opposition to Napoleonic despotism (in contrast to the
reactionary and religious opposition of a Joseph de Maistre), was
                                              Epilogue: the heritage   243


ambivalent in its attitude towards administrative modernisation. Like
the enlightenment philosophes, the liberals were seduced by the
apparent application of their ideas by the prince, but diffident towards
the dangers of the concentration of power. A state guided by
utilitarian principles was seen as necessary for the moral elevation of
the labouring classes as much as for national identity; while
despotism, it was hoped, could be avoided by representation restricted
to the notables.
   In fact, the Napoleonic experience of administrative modernisation
was to serve as a model as much for the opponents of French
domination as for their supporters. Very few rulers attempted to
abolish the Napoleonic reforms, and those who did—like the
Sardinian King Victor Emanuel—were soon forced to abandon such
Utopian reaction. In most states or regions that had experienced
French dominion, the Restoration monarchs retained the structures, if
not the names, of the Napoleonic administrative, fiscal or juridical
reforms: an excellent example is the completion of the French cadaster
in the former Rhineland departments by the king of Prussia and in
Tuscany by the grand-duke. The unprecedented restructuring of the
organisation of the state and social system by Prussia, as the price of
its survival after Jena, was conceived by Stein and Hardenberg
through critical observation of the French model. The Austrian civil
code of 1811 and administrative centralisation, which were to be
applied to the Lombard-Venetian kingdom after 1815, owed as much
to Napoleon as to Joseph II. The administrative unification of the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicily in 1816 would have been inconceivable
without the French decade at Naples. Even in Britain utilitarians like
Jeremy Bentham urged their government to acquire statistical
information as the basis for a more interventionist policy. In some
states, like Bavaria, Baden and Württemberg, the collapse of the
Napoleonic Empire was without any negative effect on the process of
administrative modernisation, which accelerated between 1809 and
1819 under the leadership of Montgelas, Reitzenstein, Brauer and
Friedrich of Württemberg, and proved more successful than Prussia in
forging a unified state identity.5
   Centralised administrative modernisation has become the
characteristic of the nation-state. The Napoleonic model, with its
expectations that the pace of national integration could be forced
through the administrative grid, underlay the practices of the
governments of many of the European states that survived the collapse
of the Napoleonic Empire and most of those that achieved
independence subsequently in the nineteenth century. The social limits
244   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of such a bureaucratic shortcut to national integration in the
Napoleonic period have been explored in the earlier chapters. A final
general remark on this fundamental question of the relationship
between state and society may not appear out of place.
   National integration, in the Napoleonic experience, required the
subordination and ultimate disappearance of what were in effect two
different oppositions, even if they were not normally distinguished—
loyalty towards what were formerly separate political territories, and
defence of the privileges and autonomy of specific social groups and
communities. In territories where there was a strong identification
between state and dynasty, where the addition of new territories was
marginal to the pre-existing core of population, with a thick texture of
relationships between state and society—as in the south German
states, Piedmont or France itself—uniformising administrative reform
and the formation of a sizeable professional bureaucracy that
identified with the state could subordinate the privileges and
independence of such social groups as the aristocracy or guilds. In
states with a substantial agglomeration of territories—like Prussia or
Austria after 1815—resistance to imposed administrative change was
strengthened and facilitated by the ability of the local elites (whether
the east Prussian landed magnates, the Rhineland bourgeoisie or the
Lombard aristocratic nobles) to defend their privileges in terms of the
traditional social relations and loyalties of their region. It was the
strength of these regional elites and their capacity of resistance that
conditioned the attitude of modernising administrations towards
maintaining tight control over local government or granting elective
forms of representation; and it was such attitudes in turn that
contributed to the contemporary reputation of administratively
minded governments as ‘liberal’ or ‘reactionary’. In Lombardy, the
Austrian administration alienated the landowners who retained a
fundamental role as opinion leaders. In Baden, to a Restoration liberal
like Ludwig Winter, administrative reform could be hailed in pure
enlightenment terms as the triumph of civilisation over the traditional
forces of obscurity:

      The struggle between the institutions of the Middle Ages and the
      needs of our epoch is over, the inalienable rights of state power
      have reverted to their original source…the obstacles to progress
      towards constitutional liberty have been removed.6

Whatever the political connotation of a government, its practices of
administrative modernisation—as under Napoleon—reinforced the
                                               Epilogue: the heritage   245


social position of the propertied classes and bureaucracy and their
separateness from the people. Even though the consequences of the
post-Napoleonic industrial revolution were the prime cause of the
class tensions and conflict that were to characterise the nineteenth
century, the pressure for the integration of elites that was an intrinsic
part of the Napoleonic philosophy of administration widened the
social gap between the propertied and property-less. This was the final
and most profound heritage of the Napoleonic experience. Alexis de
Tocqueville foresaw the danger:

    The French Revolution, which abolished all privileges and
    destroyed all exclusive rights, has still let one survive—that of
    property.
       Landowners should be under no illusions about the strength of
    their situation, nor should they imagine that the right of property
    is an insurmountable bulwark because it has not yet been
    overcome….
       Soon, without any doubt, the struggle of political parties will
    be between those who own and those who do not own. The great
    battlefield will be property…7
Appendix:
chronology 1789–1821
Notes




Preface
 1 H.Berlioz, ‘Les concerts des Tuileries sous l’Empire’, Revue et Gazette
   Musicale de Paris, 34, 1837, pp. 379–80; P.P.de Ségur, De 1800 à 1812.
   Un aide de camp de Napoléon, Paris, 1894–5, vol. 1, p. 395; W.
   Friedländer, ‘Napoleon as “roi thaumaturge”’, Journal of the Warburg
   and Courtauld Institutes, 4, 1940–1, p. 141 n. 1; G.Pascoli, ‘Romagna’
   (1892).

1 The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest
 1 Quoted in C.Capra, ‘Il Settecento’, in D.Sella and C.Capra, Il Ducato di
   Milano dal 1535 al 1796, Turin, 1984, p. 411.
 2 N.Broc, La Géographie des philosophes. Géographie et voyageurs
   français au XVIIIe siècle, Lille, 1972, pp. 182–204.
 3 D.Roche, Le Siècle des lumières en province. Académies et académiciens
   provinciaux, 1680–1789, Paris—La Haye, 1978, I, p. 322.
 4 First published 1775, with six editions by 1788.
 5 Catalogue des livres, la pluspart précieux, de la bibliothèque du feu M.
   Duquesnoy, Paris, 1808, in S.Woolf, ‘Les bases sociales du Consulat. Un
   mémoire d’Adrien Duquesnoy’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et
   Contemporaine, 31, 1984, pp. 605–6.
 6 Woolf, ‘Les bases sociales’, p. 605.
 7 J.-C.Perrot, L’Age d’or de la statistique régionale française (an IV–
   1804), Paris, 1977; S.Woolf, Towards the history of the origins of
   statistics: France, 1789–1815’, in J.-C.Perrot and S.Woolf, State and
   Statistics in France 1789–1815, Chur—London—Paris—New York,
   1984; M.-N.Bourguet, Déchiffrer la France. La statistique
   départementale à l’époque napoléonienne, Paris, 1988.
 8 Recueil des mémoires sur les établissements de l’humanité, nos 1–38,
   Paris, ans VII–XII.
 9 C.-F.Volney, Questions de statistique à l’usage des voyageurs, Paris, an III
   (Oeuvres complètes, Paris, 1864, pp. 748–52), quoted in F.Sofia, ‘La
   statistica come scienza politica e dell’amministrazione’, in
   L’Amministrazione nella storia moderna, Milan, 1985, I, p. 580, and cf.
   pp. 628–9 n. 8, 607–9.
10 Woolf, ‘Origins of statistics’, pp. 106–8.


                                     270
                                                                 Notes   271


11 J.Godechot, La Grande Nation. L’expansion révolutionnaire de la
   France dans le monde de 1789 à 1799, Paris, 1983 (second edition), p.
   64.
12 Godechot, Grande Nation, p. 16.
13 Recueil des lettres circulates, instructions, programmes, discours et
   autres actes publics du ministère de l’Intérieur (16 vols, Paris, an VII–
   1816), vol. 3 (an X), 21 floréal an VII, p. 38.
14 Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier (28 vols, Paris, 1857–69),
   vol. 21 (1867), no. 16,824, 23 August 1810.
15 L.de Lanzac de Labourie, Paris sous Napoléon, Paris, t. 8, 1913, p. 234.
16 Archives Nationales, Paris, F2 1,367 to 1,37712.
17 Godechot, Grande Nation, pp. 75–6.
18 M.Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts
   du royaume de Bavière 1806–1810, Paris, 1942, p. 273.
19 A.Dansette, Napoléon, pensées politiques et sociales, Paris, 1969, p. 398,
   quoted in F.Bluche, Le Bonapartisme. Aux origines de la droite
   autoritaire (1800–1850), Paris, 1980, p. 16.
20 O.Connelly, Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms, New York, 1965, pp. 333–
   5, ascribes the change in policy also to Napoleon’s new belief that he
   could father an heir, following the birth of an illegitimate son to
   Countess Walewska (4 May 1810).

2 The tools of conquest
 1 Exposé de la situation de l’Empire, présenté au Corps législatif dans sa
   séance du 25 février 1813 par Son Excellence M.le comte de Montalivet,
   ministre de l’Intérieur, Paris, 1813; Atlas administratif de l’Empire
   français rédigé par ordre de S.E.M.le Duc de Feltre, ministre de la
   Guerre. Au Dépôt Général de la Guerre, 1812 (partially republished,
   with explanatory notes, by F.de Dainville and J.Tulard, Geneva—Paris,
   1973).
 2 Cited in M.Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et
   les débuts du royaume de Bavière 1806–1810, Paris, 1942, p. 311.
 3 Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier (28 vols, Paris, 1857–69),
   vol. 22 (1867), no. 18,042, 17 August 1811.
 4 Marbot, Mémoires du général baron de Marbot (2 vols, Paris, 1983),
   vol. 1, p. 296.
 5 S.Woolf, The Poor in Western Europe in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
   Centuries, London, 1986, pp. 102–3.
 6 Ch. Schmidt, Le Grand-Duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la
   domination française en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier, Paris, 1905, p.
   409.
 7 M.Dunan, ‘Napoléon et le système continental en 1810’, Revue d’His-
   toire Diplomatique, January–April 1946, p. 1.
 8 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 287 n.
 9 P.Verhaegen, La Belgique sous la domination française (5 vols, Bruxelles,
   1923–9), vol. 4 (1929), p. 14.
10 Of the 930 members appointed to the Legislative body between 1800
   and 1813, 88 were Italians, 55 Belgians and Luxembourgeois, 26 Dutch,
   23 Germans, 4 Swiss and 7 Savoyards. Of the 121 new members of the
272    Notes


      Senate nominated between Year IV and 1813, there were 18 Italians, 4
      Belgians, 3 Germans and 6 Dutch. J.-L.Halperin, ‘Corps Législatif’ and
      ‘Sénat’, in J.Tulard (ed.), Dictionnaire Napoléon, Paris, 1987.
11    Lebrun insisted, as governor-general of the Ligurian departments, that as
      ‘sole repository’ of the Emperor’s authority, all ministers—especially the
      police—had to correspond with him, not directly with officials in the
      departments: Opinions, rapports et choix d’écrits politiques de Charles
      François Lebrun, due de Plaisance, Paris, 1829, p. 106 n. 1. Tournon,
      prefect of Rome, expressed enormous relief when the Roman Consulta
      was wound up at the end of 1810, because of its interference in his
      relations with ministers at Paris: J.Moulard, Le Comte Camille de
      Tournon. 2. Préfet de Rome 1809–1814, Paris, 1929, p. 101.
12    J.Bourdon, ‘L’Administration militaire sous Napoléon ler’, Revue des
      Etudes Napoléoniennes, 1917; F.Monnier, ‘Intendance des armées’ and
      ‘Inspection aux revues’, Dictionnaire Napoléon, cit.
13    Correspondance, vol. 14 (1863), no. 12,178, 26 March 1807.
14    Correspondance, vol. 17 (1865), no. 13,900, 16 May 1808.
15    Marbot, Mémoires, vol. 2, p. 185.
16    Correspondance, vol. 17 (1865), no. 13,923, 18 June 1808.
17    G.Six, Les Généraux de la Révolution et de l’Empire, Paris, 1948, p.
      301; the careers of individual generals are taken from G.Six,
      Dictionnaire biographique des généraux et amiraux de la Révolution et
      de l’Empire (1792–1814), Paris, 1934.
18    J.Courvoisier, Le Maréchal Berthier et sa principauté de Neuchâtel
      (1806–1814), Neuchâtel, 1959, p. 34.
19    E.Las Cases, Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, cited in Dictionnaire
      Napoléon, p. 136.
20    Six, Les Généraux, pp. 298–301.
21    Correspondance, vol. 12 (1863), no. 9951, 9 March 1806, cited in
      Courvoisier, Le Maréchal Berthier, pp. 30–1.
22    Marbot, Mémoires, vol. 2, pp. 45–7, 81–3, 103, 149–50.
23    All figures relating to the diplomatic corps come from Ch. Prettre, ‘Le
      Consulat et le premier Empire’, in Les Affaires Etrangères et le Corps
      Diplomatique Français, 2 vols, Paris, 1984, and A.E.Whitcomb,
      Napoleon’s Diplomatic Service, Durham, 1979.
24    Ch. Prettre, ‘Le Consulat et le premier Empire’, vol. 1, p. 418.
25    F.R.de Chateaubriand, Mémoires d’Outre-Tombe, Paris, 1964, pp. 94, 716.
26    Prettre, ‘Le Consulat’, p. 373.
27    Prettre, ‘Le Consulat’, p. 472.
28    Prettre, ‘Le Consulat’, p. 461.
29    Details of careers have been assembled from a variety of sources,
      primarily Dictionnaire biographique des Français; R.Bargeton,
      P.Bougard, B. Le Clère and P.-F.Pinaud, Les Préfets du 11 ventôse an VIII
      au 4 septembre 1870, Paris, 1981; Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg;
      Courvoisier, Le Maréchal Berthier; Dictionnaire Napoléon; Six,
      Dictionnaire biographique des généraux.
30    J.Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806–1808, Paris, 1911, p.
      276.
31    M.Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts
      du royaume de l’Allemagne 1806–1810, Paris, 1942, pp. 395–6.
                                                                  Notes   273


32 Ch. Durand, ‘L’Emploi des conseillers d’état et des maîtres de requête en
   dehors du Conseil’, Annales de la Faculté de Droit, Université d’Aix, n.
   5, 45, 1952, pp. 5–142.
33 A.E.Whitcomb, ‘Napoleon’s prefects’, American Historical Review, 79,
   1974, pp. 1,089–118. All figures relating to the entire prefectoral corps
   come from this article. Those for the annexed departments have been
   elaborated by myself from Bargeton et al., Les Préfets, from which I have
   drawn most biographical details.
34 One Italian department, Tanaro, was suppressed in 1805, so that the
   annexed departments numbered 43 of the total 130 in 1812.
35 The figures have been calculated on the basis of all appointments of
   prefects (excluding those who never took office). Hence some prefects are
   counted more than once, for a total 112 tenures of office (by 98 men).
36 Other examples are: A.de Sauzay (b. 1745), prefect of Mont-Blanc 1800–
   2, J.Bexon d’Ormschwiller (b. 1738), prefect of Sarre 1800–3,F. M.J.de
   Viry (b. 1736), prefect of Lys 1800–4, or F.Becaus-Ferrand (b. 1726),
   prefect of Meuse-Inférieure 1800–2.
37 Isnard was sent to the kingdom of Italy, Thoron-Montirat and Pommard
   to Naples, and Le Couteux and Doäzen to Italy in 1806–7 to report on
   trading prospects, Bardel to Spain and Portugal in 1807, Camille Périer
   to Germany in 1807–8, Héron de Villefosse to Berg and various German
   states in 1807–9 to examine the metal mines, Mottet de Gérando to the
   Frankfurt and Leipzig fairs in 1810.

3 The practices of conquest: administrative integration
 1 Recueil des lettres circulates, instructions, programmes, discours et
   autres actes publics du ministère de l’Intérieur (16 vols, Paris, an VII–
   1816), vol. 3, 16 ventôse an IX (7 March 1801).
 2 J.Courvoisier, Le Maréchal Berthier et sa principauté de Neuchâtel
   (1806–1814), Neuchâtel, 1959, p. 149.
 3 M.-N.Bourguet, Déchiffrer la France. La statistique départementale à
   l’époque napoléonienne, Paris, 1988.
 4 C.J.Bonnin, Principes d’administration publique, Paris, 1812 (third
   edition), vol. 1, p. 167, quoted in F.Sofia, Una Scienza per
   l’amministrazione. Statistica e pubblici apparati tra età rivoluzionaria e
   restaurazione, Rome, 1988, vol. 1, pp. 104, 247.
 5 J.M.de Gérando, Programme du cours de droit public positif et
   administratif, à la faculté de droit de Paris, pour l’année 1819–1820,
   Paris, 1819, pp. 25–6, quoted in Sofia, Una Scienza, pp. 110–11.
 6 Ch. Schmidt, Le Grand-Duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la
   domination française en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier, Paris, 1905, p.
   484.
 7 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 310–13; Archives Nationales, Paris,
   F14 1,058, 1,094.
 8 A.de Plancy, Souvenirs, Paris, 1904, p. 29.
 9 Bibliographies of the statistical memoirs are in: J.C.Perrot, L’Age d’or de
   la statistique régionale française (an IV–1804), Paris, 1977, pp. 71–235,
   and Bourguet, Déchiffrer la France, pp. 373–7. Piedmont merited only a
   memoir covering all six departments, on its annexation in 1802.
274   Notes


10 S.Schama, Patriots and Liberators. Revolution in the Netherlands 1780–
   1813, London—New York, 1977, p. 618.
11 Archivo de la Corona de Aragón, Barcelona, Guerra de la Independencia,
   Hacienda, Caixa 1, ‘Mémoire statistique, historique et administratif
   présentant le tableau de l’administration du département des Bouches de
   l’Ebre avant la guerre, les changemens qu’elle a éprouvés depuis la guerre
   et sa situation au 1 janvier 1813’.
12 C.F.Lebrun, Opinions, rapports et choix d’écrits politiques de Charles
   François Lebrun, due de Plaisance, Paris, 1829, p. 102, n. 1: ‘Smuggling
   would not stop me, as I would place thirty brigades in the Alps which
   would be enough to check the counterband of tobacco. Salt smuggling
   cannot be stopped’ (Napoleon to Lebrun, 11 prairial year XIII).
13 M.G.Broers, ‘The restoration of order in Napoleonic Piedmont, 1797–
   1814’, unpublished D.Phil, thesis, Oxford, 1986, pp. 310–19 (quotation
   p. 319).
14 W.C.Quigley, ‘The public administration of the first kingdom of Italy
   1805–1814’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Harvard, 1938, p. 906.
15 Schama, Patriots, p. 621.
16 S.Woolf, ‘Towards the history of the origins of statistics: France, 1789–
   1915’, in J.-C.Perrot and S.Woolf, State and Statistics in France 1789–
   1815, Chur—London—Paris—New York, 1984, p. 115.
17 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 485.
18 P.E.A.du Casse (ed.), Mémoires et correspondance politique et militaire
   du roi Joseph, vol. 2, Paris, 1855, p. 84.
19 Schama, Patriots, p. 458.
20 L.Antonielli, I Prefetti dell’Italia napoleonica. Repubblica e Regno
   d’Italia, Bologna, 1983, pp. 71–2, 99–101, 266, 307–9.
21 Broers, ‘Restoration of order’, p. 175.
22 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 241–2; J.A.Davis, ‘Naples during
   the French “decennio”. A problem unresolved?’, in Villes et territoires
   pendant la période napoléonienne (France et Italie), Rome, 1987, p. 342.
23 N.P.Desvernois, Mémoires, Paris, 1898, pp. 420–1.
24 Stendhal, Oeuvres intimes, vol. 2, Paris, 1982, p. 507.
25 S.J.Woolf, ‘Les bases sociales du Consulat. Un mémoire d’Adrien
   Duquesnoy’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 31, 1984, p.
   610.
26 M.Molé, Souvenirs d’un témoin de la Révolution et de l’Empire (1791–
   1803), Geneva, 1943, p. 371.
27 Antonielli, Prefetti, pp. 236–7.
28 Woolf, ‘Les bases sociales’, p. 601.
29 Molé, Souvenirs, p. 376.
30 J.Vidalenc, ‘Les “départements hanséatiques” et l’administration
   napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973, p. 427. The ideal and the practice did
   not necessarily coincide: the Roman Consulta, whose task was to
   introduce the new regime by 1 January 1810, survived until the end of
   1810. But its presence was resented by the prefect Tournon as interfering
   with the proper hierarchical lines of authority: J.Moulard, Le Comte
   Camille de Tournon, vol. 2, Rome, 1929, p. 101; C.Nardi, Napoleone e
   Roma. La politica della Consulta Romana, Rome, 1989.
31 Antonielli, Prefetti, 53–7; Sofia, Una Scienza, 163–71.
                                                                   Notes   275


32 Schama, Patriots, pp. 363–9, 380, 458, 544–5.
33 J.Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806–1808, Paris, 1911, p.
   312.
34 Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier (28 vols, Paris, 1857–69),
   vol. 16 (1864), no. 13,315, 31 October 1807; M.Dunan, Napoléon et
   l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts du royaume
   d’Allemagne 1806–1810, Paris, 1942, p. 109.
35 Correspondance, vol. 16 (1864), no. 13,357, 13 November 1807.
36 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 220–4.
37 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 215. Lafolie, who served as a
   functionary in the kingdom of Italy from 1805 to 1814, was convinced
   that the imposition of the French codes without adaptation was a failure,
   as the Italian judges interpreted their application: C.Lafolie, Mémoires sur
   la cour du prince Eugène et sur le royaume d’Italie, Paris, 1824, p. 63.
38 L.Bergeron and G.Chaussinand-Nogaret, Les ‘masses de granit’. Cent
   mille notables du Premier Empire, Paris, 1979, have analysed the lists of
   the grands notables; see also the dictionary of departmental notables,
   edited by L.Bergeron and G.Chaussinand-Nogaret, Grands Notables du
   Premier Empire, Paris, 1978-, 17 volumes published by 1988.
39 Fouché’s enquiry was in April 1809, that of Savary in 1811. But only
   relatively few replies by the prefects were sent, such as Archives
   Nationales, Paris, F7 3,670 (Doire), F7 3,682 (Marengo), F7 3,685 (Pô).
40 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 448, n. 18.
41 Casse, Mémoires…du roi Joseph, vol. 2, pp. 86–7.
42 Broers, ‘Restoration of order’, p. 381.
43 Quigley, ‘Public administration’, pp. 328–33, 703.
44 F.Bodmann, Annuaire statistique du départment du Mont-Tonnerre pour
   l’an 1808, Mayence, n.d.; Annuaire du département du Léman pour
   l’année 1811, Geneva and Paris, 1811; Almanach du départment de
   l’Escaut pour l’année 1811, Gand, n.d.; Calendario politico-statistico del
   dipartimento dell’Arno, Florence, n.d.
45 C.Capra, ‘Il Settecento’, in D.Sella and C.Capra, Il Ducato di Milano dal
   1535 al 1796, Turin, 1984, p. 413; H.Kiesel and P.Münch, Gesellschaft
   und Literatur im 18 Jahrhundert, Munich, 1977, p. 90.
46 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 361, n. 53.
47 Antonielli, Prefetti, pp. 302–3.
48 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 142, n. 2.
49 Broers, ‘Restoration of order’, p. 380.
50 S.J.Woolf, ‘Frontiere entro la frontiera: il Piemonte sotto il governo
   napoleonico’, in C.Ossola, C.Raffestin and M.Ricciardi (eds), La
   Frontiera da stato a nazione. Il caso Piemonte, Rome, 1987.
51 C.Zaghi (ed.), I Carteggi di Francesco Melzi d’Eril duca di Lodi (9 vols,
   Milan, 1958–66), vol. 4, p. 418, quoted in Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 182.
52 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 83.
53 K.G.Farber, ‘Die Rheinländer unter Napoleon’, Francia, 1 (1973), p. 385.
54 M.Ardit Lucas, Rivolución liberal y rivuelta campesina. Un ensayo sobre
   la disintegración del régimen feudal en el País Valenciano (1793–1840),
   Barcelona, 1977, pp. 202–7; L.-G.Suchet, Mémoires…sur ses campagnes
   en Espagne, Paris, 1828, vol. 2, pp. 283–301.
55 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 145.
276   Notes


56 H.C.F.Barthélemy, Souvenirs d’un ancien préfet 1787–1848, Paris, 1885,
   p. 76.
57 Archives Nationales, Paris, AF IV. 1710B (December 1807), cited in
   Quigley, ‘Public administration’, pp. 978–85.
58 Schama, Patriots, p. 529.
59 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 168.
60 A.Beugnot (ed.), Mémoires du comte Beugnot (1783–1815), Paris, 1866,
   vol. 1, p. 321.
61 H.Berding, Napoleonische Herrschafts- und Gesellschaftspolitik im
   Königreich Westfalen 1807–1813, Göttingen, 1973, p. 117, n. 12.
62 Lebrun, Opinions…de…Lebrun, p. 101, n. 1.
63 Zaghi, I Carteggi di Francesco Melzi, vol. 3, pp. 241–2.
64 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 98; Casse, Mémoires…du roi Joseph,
   vol. 2, p. 89.
65 Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, p. 121.
66 Archive de la Corona de Aragón, Barcelona, Guerra de la Independencia,
   Hacienda, Caixa 1, ‘Mémoire statistique’, ch. 5.
67 Marbot, Mémoires du général baron de Marbot (2 vols, Paris, 1983),
   vol. 2, pp. 264–8.
68 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 313, n. 5.
69 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 485.
70 Casse, Mémoires…du roi Joseph, vol. 2, p. 87.
71 Lebrun, Opinions…de…Lebrun, p. 105.
72 P.Vilar, ‘Quelques aspects de l’occupation et de la résistance en Espagne
   en 1794 et au temps de Napoléon’, in Occupants occupés 1792–1815,
   Brussels, 1969, pp. 250–1.
73 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 218.
74 Schama, Patriots, p. 700, n. 198.
75 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 376.
76 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 100; Stendhal, Oeuvres intimes, p. 487.
77 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 284.
78 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 284.
79 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 96; Barthélemy, Souvenirs, pp. 27–8;
   D.A.P.Thiébault, Mémoires, Paris, 1962, p. 277.
80 Schama, Patriots, p. 399; Casse, Mémoires…du roi Joseph, vol. 2, p. 86.
81 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 236.
82 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 192–5.
83 Barthélemy, Souvenirs, p. 76; Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 168.
84 Courvoisier, Maréchal Berthier, p. 122; Ardit Lucas, Rivolución liberal,
   p. 207.
85 Schama, Patriots, p. 456.
86 F.R.Chateaubriand, Mémoires d’Outre-Tombe, Paris, 1964, pp. 710–13;
   Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 393, n. 40; P.Verhaegen, La Belgique sous la
   domination française (5 vols, Bruxelles, 1923–9), vol. 4 (1929), pp. 43–6.
87 Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, p. 100.
88 Correspondance, vol. 16 (1864), no. 13,361, 15 November 1807.
89 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 485; cf. S.Woolf, ‘French civilization
   and ethnicity in the Napoleonic empire’, Past and Present, 124, 1989,
   pp. 96–106.
90 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 206.
                                                                   Notes   277


91 Berding, Napoleonische Herrschaftspolitik, p. 54.
92 Mémoires et correspondance du roi Jérôme et de la reine Catherine (6
   vols, Paris, 1861–5), vol. 3, p. 116, 17 December 1807, cited in Berding,
   Napoleonische Herrschaftspolitik, p. 28.
93 Correspondance, vol. 21 (1867), no. 16,894, 11 November 1810.
94 Berding, Napoleonische Herrschaftspolitik, pp. 46–8, 127–8, and
   passim.
95 Antonielli, Prefetti, p. 475.
96 Suchet, Mémoires, vol. 1, pp. 276–318.

4 The practices of conquest: exploitation
 1 Prefect of Dordogne to C.A.Costaz, 7 October 1812, in S.Woolf,
   ‘Contribution à l’histoire des origines de la statistique: France, 1789–
   1815’, in La Statistique en France à l’époque napoléonienne, Brussels,
   1981, p. 123.
 2 L.Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et manufacturers parisiens. Du
   Directoire à l’Empire, Lille—Paris, 1975, vol. 2, p. 796, n. 1.
 3 J.-A.-C.Chaptal, Essai sur le perfectionnement des arts chimiques en
   France, Paris, Year VIII (1800), quoted in Dunan, Napoléon et
   l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts du Royaume de Bavière
   1806–1810, Paris, 1942, p. 323.
 4 J.B.Harrison, ‘The Continental system in Italy as revealed by American
   commerce’, Ph.D. thesis, Wisconsin, 1937, p. 41.
 5 S.Schama, Patriots, and Liberators. Revolution in the Netherlands
   1780–1813, London—New York, 1977, p. 687, n. 101.
 6 Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, p. 311.
 7 E.Olivé y Serret, ‘Pirates i comerciants. Les relacions d’un corsari francès
   amb comerciants catalans (1807–1811)’, Ricerques, 17 (1985).
 8 J.-A.-C.Chaptal, Mes souvenirs sur Napoléon, Paris, 1893, p. 275.
 9 G.Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade. The case of Alsace, Oxford,
   1981, pp. 118–19.
10 Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade, pp. 136, n. 70, 288–9.
11 Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade, pp. 285–6.
12 S.Chassagne, ‘Aspects des phénomènes d’industrialisation et de
   désindustrialisation dans les campagnes françaises au XIXe siècle’, Revue
   du Nord, 63, 1981; L.Bergeron, ‘Remarques sur les conditions du
   développement industriel en Europe occidentale à l’époque
   napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973, p. 552, n. 31; Bergeron, Banquiers,
   vol. 2, ch. 9.
13 Bergeron, Banquiers, vol. 2, p. 758.
14 Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade, p. 116 and n. 24.
15 Bergeron, Banquiers, vol. 2, p. 770.
16 Bergeron, Banquiers, vol. 2, ch. 9; M.Lévy-Leboyer, Les Banques
   européennes et l’industrialisation internationale dans la première moitié
   du XIXe siècle, Paris, 1964, p. 55; B.Mitchell, European Historical
   Statistics, London, 1975, p. 427; P.Butel, ‘Crise et mutation de l’activité
   économique à Bordeaux sous le Consulat et l’Empire’, Revue d’Histoire
   Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970, pp. 540–58.
17 Ellis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade, p. 143.
278   Notes


18 Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, pp. 326–39.
19 Ch. Schmidt, Le Grand-Duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la
   domination française en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier, Paris, 1905, pp.
   385, 492–7.
20 Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, p. 356.
21 M.Brunet, Le Roussillon. Une société contre l’Etat 1780–1820,
   Toulouse, 1986, p. 104.
22 G.Assereto, ‘La fine dell’antico regime: la dominazione napoleonica a
   Prato’, in E.Fasano Guarini (ed.), Prato storia di una città. 2. Un
   microcosmo in movimento (1494–1815), Prato—Florence, 1986, pp.
   802–3.
23 Harrison, ‘Continental system’, p. 104.
24 Harrison, ‘Continental system’, p. 184.
25 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 344 and n.
26 S.Marzagalli, Amburgo nell’età napoleonica: una città mercantile di
   fronte ai problemi del blocco e dell’occupazione, tesi di laurea, Milan
   University, Faculty of Letters, 1987–8, pp. 177–8.
27 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 497.
28 R.Dufraisse, ‘La contrebande dans les départements réunis de la rive
   gauche du Rhin à l’époque napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973, p. 515;
   Brunet, Le Roussillon, p. 326; Marzagalli, Amburgo, pp. 166–70.
29 Marzagalli, Amburgo, pp. 180–1; Brunet, Le Roussillon, pp. 166–7.
30 Marzagalli, Amburgo, p. 161; Dufraisse, ‘La contrebande’, pp. 528–9;
   Harrison, ‘Continental system’, p. 85.
31 C.Schmidt, ‘Sismondi et le blocus continental’, Revue Historique, 115,
   1914, pp. 89–91.
32 S.Woolf, ‘L’impact de l’occupalion française sur l’economie ilalienne’,
   Revue Economique, 40, 1989, p. 1,115.
33 Bergeron, Banquiers, vol. 2, p. 652.
34 Marzagalli, Amburgo, p. 168.
35 A.Corvisier, L’Armée française de la fin du XVIIe siècle au ministère de
   Choiseul: le soldat, Paris, 1964; S.F.Scott, The Response of the Royal
   Army to the French Revolution: the role and development of the line
   army 1787–93, Oxford, 1978.
36 Scott, The Response, pp. 106, 155, 177; J.A.Lynn, The Bayonets of the
   Republic. Motivation and Tactics in the Army of Revolutionary France,
   1791–94, Urbana—Chicago, 1984, p. 72.
37 Discours prononcé par Daru, orateur du Tribunat, sur la conscription
   militaire. Séance du 28 floréal an 10. Corps législatif, pp. 39–40, quoted
   in I.Woloch, ‘Napoleonic conscription: state power and civil society’,
   Past and Present, 111 (1986), p. 105, and passim for an excellent
   summary of conscription procedures.
38 R.Darquenne, La Conscription dans le département de Jemappes (1798–
   1813), Mons, 1970, pp. 184–5.
39 The most thorough study of Hargenvilliers’ tables is that of Darquenne,
   La Conscription, pp. 184–5, especially tables 8 and 11.
40 A.Forrest, ‘Conscriplion and crime in rural France during the Directory
   and Consulate’, in G.Lewis and C.Lucas (eds), Beyond the Terror: Essays
   in French Regional and Social History, Cambridge, 1983; Forrest, ‘Le
   recrutement, les désertions et l’Etat napoléonien’, paper delivered at the
                                                                  Notes   279


     Convegno Internazionale sull’Armata Napoleonica, Portoferraio, Elba,
     17–20 September 1986.
41   A.de Caumont, due de la Force, L’Architrésorier Lebrun, gouverneur de
     la Hollande 1810–1813, Paris, 1907, p. 204; D.van Hogendorp,
     Mémoires, The Hague, 1887, p. 278.
42   Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier (28 vols, Paris, 1857–69),
     vol. 12 (1863), no. 10,009, 23 March 1806.
43   J.A.Davis, ‘The Neapolitan army during the decennio francese’, Rivista
     Italiana di Studi Napoleonici, 25, 1988, pp. 174–5.
44   O.Connelly, Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms, New York, 1965, pp. 165–
     7; Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 58–9; J.Corvoisier, Le Maréchal
     Berthier et sa principauté de Neuchâtel (1806–1814), Neuchâtel, 1959,
     pp. 282–4; van Hogendorp, Mémoires, pp. 181–3, 219.
45   Noguès, Mémoires du général Noguès (1777–1853) sur les guerres de
     l’Empire, Paris, 1922, p. 218.
46   F.-J.Jacquin, Carnet de route d’un grognard de la Revolution et de
     l’Empire, Paris, 1960, pp. 54–5.
47   Archivo de la Corona de Aragón, Barcelona, Guerra de la Independencia,
     Hacienda, Caixa 1, ‘Mémoire statistique…1 janvier 1813’.
48   M.Molé, Souvenirs d’un témoin de la Révolution et de l’Empire (1791–
     1803), Geneva, 1943, p. 144.
49   J.-P.Bertaud, ‘Napoleon’s officers’, Past and Present, 112, 1986, p. 94.
50   P.Crouzet, Discours sur l’honneur prononcé à la distribution des prix du
     Prytanée militaire français, le 14 août 1806, Paris, 1806.
51   Crouzet, Discours sur l’honneur’ pp. 4, 11.
52   Courvoisier, Maréchal Berthier, p. 282.
53   Quoted in J.Tulard, Le Mythe de Napoléon, Paris, 1971, p. 37.
54   Jacquin, Carnet de route.
55   Noguès, Mémoires, pp. 215–16.
56   Noguès, Mémoires, p. 225; Jacquin, Carnet de route, pp. 73–5.
57   G.Six, Dictionnaire biographique des généraux et amiraux français de la
     Révolution et de l’Empire (1792–1814), Paris, 1934; Darquenne, La
     Conscription, tables 8 and 11; W.Barberis, Le Armi del principe. La
     tradizione militare sabauda, Turin, 1988, p. 251.
58   C.F.Lebrun, Opinions, rapports et choix d’écrits politiques de Charles
     François Lebrun, due de Plaisance, Paris, 1829, p. 105 and n.
59   Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, p. 395.
60   Darquenne, La Conscription, pp. 107–8, 176, 186, table 21; J.Garnier,
     ‘Campagne de Russie (1812)’, in Dictionnaire Napoléon, pp. 355–8. The
     figures quoted for the Grande Armée in its invasion of Russia vary
     according to the geographical point of assembly where their numbers
     were estimated.
61   J.Gabillard, ‘Le financement des guerres napoléoniennes et la conjoncture
     du premier Empire’, Revue Economique, 4, 1953, pp. 548–72.
62   P.E.A.du Casse (ed.), Mémoires et correspondance politique et militaire
     du roi Joseph, vol. 2, Paris, 1855, pp. 81–3, 105–6; Davis, The
     Neapolitan army’, pp. 165–6; H.Berding, Napoleonische Herrschaftsund
     Gesellschaftspolitik im Königreich Westfalen 1807–1813, Göttingen,
     1973, pp. 25–6, 28–9; Connelly, Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms, p. 143.
63   B.Abrahamsson, Military Professionalization and Political Power,
280    Notes


      Stockholm, 1971; S.Andreski, Military Organization and Society,
      London, 1968.
64    H.C.F.Barthélemy, Souvenirs d’un ancien préfet 1787–1848, Paris, 1885,
      pp. 83–92.
65    L.Bergeron and G.Chaussinand-Nogaret, Les ‘Masses de granit’. Cent
      mille notables du Premier Empire, Paris, 1979; R.Forster, The French
      Revolution and the “new” elite, 1800–1880’, in J.Pelensky (ed.), The
      American and European Revolutions Reconsidered, 1776–1848, Iowa,
      1980.
66    L.Bergeron, L’Episode napoléonienne. Aspects intérieurs 1799–1815,
      Paris, 1972, p. 140; L.Bergeron, ‘La place des gens d’affaires dans les
      listes de notables du premier Empire, d’après les exemples du Piémont et
      de la Ligurie’, Annuario dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per l’Età Moderna
      e Contemporanea, 23–4, 1971–2, pp. 316–17; C.Capra, ‘Nobili,
      notabili, élites: dal modello francese al caso italiano’, Quaderni Storici,
      37, 1978, p. 30.
67    J.Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse d’Empire, Paris, 1986, p. 40.
68    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, pp. 33–50. Officers of the Legion
      received 1,000 francs, and ordinary Legionaries 250 francs, when the
      income of a small farm above the subsistence level might be 500 francs:
      Bergeron and Chaussinand-Nogaret, ‘Masses de granit’, p. 51.
69    Woloch, ‘Napoleonic conscription’, pp. 231–46, 314–15, 320, 336–7.
70    Bertaud, ‘Napoleon’s officers’; Berding, Napoleonische
      Herrschaftspolitik, pp. 66, 151; Woloch, ‘Napoleonic conscription’, p.
      261 n. 51.
71    P.H.Earl Stanhope, Notes of Conversations with the Duke of Wellington,
      1831–1851, London, 1888, p. 81, quoted in M.Howard, War in
      European History, Oxford, 1976, p. 82.
72    van Hogendorp, Mémoires, pp. 198–9.
73    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, p. 89.
74    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, p. 26 n. 8; Bertaud, ‘Napoleon’s
      officers’, pp. 109–11.
75    J.Tulard, ‘Problèmes sociaux de la France napoléonienne’, Revue
      d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970, p. 656.
76    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, pp. 148–50.
77    S.Woolf, The Poor in Western Europe in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
      Centuries, London, 1986, pp. 91, 138; S.Woolf, ‘The Société de Charité
      Maternelle’, in C.Jones and J.Barry (eds). Medicine and Charity Before
      the Welfare State; Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, pp. 157–9.
78    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse; J.Zieseniss, ‘Noblesse d’Empire’, in
      Dictionnaire Napoléon, pp. 1,243–50; Capra, ‘Nobili, notabili’, pp. 30–2.
79    6 May 1808, quoted in Zieseniss, ‘Noblesse d’Empire’, p. 1249.
80    van Hogendorp, Mémoires, pp. 198–9.
81    Fain, Mémoires, Paris, 1908, pp. 92, 95, quoted in Berding,
      Napoleonische Herrschaft, pp. 65–6, 133 n. 38; see also the tables in
      Berding, pp. 48–51; and H.Berding, ‘Les dotations impériales dans le
      royaume de Westphalie’, Revue de l’Institut Napoléon, 192, 1976, pp.
      91–101.
82    Tulard, Napoléon et la noblesse, pp. 111–13.
                                                                   Notes   281


5 Responses to conquest
 1 For a fuller discussion of the relationship between the stages of
   civilisation and the structures of society, see S.Woolf, French civilization
   and ethnicity in the Napoleonic Empire’, Past and Present, 124, 1989,
   pp. 96–106.
 2 P.E.A.du Casse (ed.), Mémoires et correspondance politique et militaire
   du roi Joseph, vol. 2, Paris, 1855, p. 89.
 3 M.Artola Gallego, Los Afrancesados, Madrid, 1976, p. 65.
 4 W.Barberis, Le Armi del Principe, Le tradizione militare sabauda, Turin,
   1988, p. 243; R.Pilati, La Nunziatella. L’organizzazione di un’accademia
   militare 1787–1987, Naples, 1987, pp. 74–99; R.Pasta, Scienza politica
   e rivoluzione. L’opera di Giovanni Fabbroni (1752–1822) intellettuale e
   funzionario in servizio dei Lorena, Florence, 1989, pp. 535–79.
 5 S.Schama, Patriots and Liberators. Revolution in the Netherlands 1780–
   1813, London—New York, 1977, pp. 497–513, 618–20; Schama,
   ‘Schools and politics in the Netherlands, 1796–1814’, Historical Journal,
   13, 1970, pp. 589–610.
 6 C.Durand, Les Auditeurs au Conseil d’Etat de 1803 à 1814, Aix, 1958,
   p. 77 n. 45.
 7 J.Nicolas, ‘Le ralliement des notables à l’Empire dans le département du
   Mont-Blanc’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 19, 1972, p.
   122 n. 4.
 8 J.P.Filippini, ‘Ralliement et opposition des notables toscans à l’Empire
   français’, Annuario dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per l’Età Moderna e
   Contemporanea, 23–4, 1971–2, p. 347 n. 49.
 9 Nicolas, ‘Le ralliement’, p. 107 n. 2.
10 R.Dufraisse, ‘Les notables de la rive gauche du Rhin à l’époque
   napoléonienne’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970,
   p, 773.
11 Nicolas, ‘Le ralliement’, p. 126.
12 J.Godechot, La Grande Nation. L’expansion révolutionnaire de la
   France dans le monde de 1789 à 1799, Paris, 1983 (second edition), pp.
   443–6; L.Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et manufacturers parisiens.
   Du directoire à l’Empire, Lille—Paris, 1975, vol. 1, pp. 395–427.
13 L.Carle, L’Identité cachée. Paysans propriétaires dans l’Alta Langa aux
   XVIIe–XIXe siècles, Paris, 1989.
14 Mémoires du comte de Rambuteau, Paris, 1905, pp. 110–11.
15 I.Tognarini, ‘Siderurgia e “guerra marittima”: iniziative e insuccessi di
   uno dei “meilleurs mécaniciens de France” all’isola d’Elba (1803–1810)’,
   in I.Tognarini (ed.), La Toscana nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica,
   Naples, 1985, pp. 307–20; Archives Nationales, Paris, F 12 1612;
   R.Taiani, ‘L’Acqua e la sua anima: il contributo della scienza chimica allo
   sfruttamento delle fonti di acqua minerale nella prima metà del XIX
   secolo’, in course of publication in Nuncius, 2, 1991.
16 See above, pp. 147, 149.
17 S.Woolf, Frontiere entro la frontiera: il Piemonte sotto il governo
   napoleonico’, in C.Ossola, C.Raffestin and M.Ricciardi (eds), La
   Frontiera da stato a nazione. Il caso Piemonte, Rome, 1987, pp. 171–81.
282   Notes


18 M.Samland, ‘La riforma francese della contribuzione fondiaria ed i suoi
   effetti in Toscana e nei paesi del Reno’, EUI unpublished paper, 1989.
19 Dufraisse, ‘Les notables’, p. 756.
20 Les Dix commandements du bourgeois et du paysan (1800), in
   M.Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts
   du royaume de Bavière 1806–1810, Paris, 1942, pp. 112–13.
21 Ch. Schmidt, Le Grand-Duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la
   domination française en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier, Paris, 1905, p.
   314.
22 W.Schieder and A.Kube, Säkularisation und Mediatisierung. Die
   Veräusserung der Nationalgüter im Rhein-Mosel-Department 1803–
   1813, Boppard am Rhein, 1987, pp. 34–5; R.Dufraisse, ‘Diskussion’, in
   E. Weis and E.Müller-Luckner (eds), Reformen im rheinbündischen
   Deutschland, Munich, 1984, pp. 47–8; W.C.Quigley, ‘The public
   administration of the first kingdom of Italy 1805–1814’, unpublished
   Ph.D. thesis, Harvard, 1938, pp. 386–7; M.Senkowska-Gluck, ‘La
   propriété foncière en Pologne (1789–1815)’, Annales Historiques de la
   Révolution Française, 53, 1981, pp. 524–5.
23 Details of the following discussion are to be found in : I.Delatte, La Vente
   des biens nationaux dans le département de Jemappes, Brussels, 1938;
   P.Notario, La Vendita dei beni nazionali in Piemonte nel periodo
   napoleonico (1800–1814), Milan, 1980; F.Mineccia, ‘La vendita dei beni
   nazionali in Toscana (1808–1814): i Dipartimenti dell’Ombrone e del
   Mediterraneo’, in I.Tognarini (ed.), La Toscana nell’età rivoluzionaria;
   P.Villani, La Vendita dei beni dello Stato nel Regno di Napoli (1806–
   1815), Milan, 1964; R.Zangheri, La Proprietà terriera e le origini del
   Risorgimento nel Bolognese. I. 1789–1804, Bologna, 1961; M.Müller,
   Säkularisation und Grundbesitz. Zur Sozialgeschichte des Saar-Mosel-
   Raumes 1794–1813, Boppard, 1980; Schieder and Kube, Säkularisation;
   C.Dipper, ‘Vente des biens nationaux et développement du capitalisme en
   Allemagne’, La Révolution française et le développement du capitalisme,
   Revue du Nord, Hors-Série, Collection Histoire, N° 5, 1989; A.Otaegui
   Arizmendi, ‘Guerra y crisis de la hacienda local: las ventas de biens
   comunales en Guipúzcoa, 1793–1814’, doctoral thesis, Universidad
   Autónoma de Barcelona, 1988; Desamortización y hacienda publica,
   Madrid, 1986.
24 Schieder and Kube, Säkularisation, p. 93; J.Nicolas, ‘Le ralliement des
   notables au régime impérial dans le département du Mont-Blanc’, Revue
   d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 19, 1972, p. 119.
25 Otaegui Arizmendi, ‘Guerra y crisis’, pp. 381–2.
26 C.Lafolie, Mémoires sur la cour du prince Eugène et sur le royaume
   d’Italie, Paris, 1824, pp. 129–30.
27 H.G.Molitor, ‘La vie religieuse populaire en Rhénanie française, 1794–
   1815’, in B.Plongeron (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans l’Europe
   révolutionnaire: mentalités et spiritualtiés, 1770–1820, Turnhout, 1989,
   p. 64.
28 L.Antonielli, I Prefetti dell’Italia napoleonica. Repubblica e Regno
   d’Italia, Bologna, 1983, pp. 492–3.
29 Molitor, ‘Vie religieuse’, pp. 59–61.
                                                                   Notes   283


30 H.Berding, ‘L’émancipation des juifs dans la Conféderation du Rhin’,
   Revue de l’Institut Napoléon, 139, 1982, p. 60.
31 C.F.Lebrun, Opinions, rapports et choix d’écrits politiques de Charles
   François Lebrun, due de Plaisance, Paris, 1829, pp. 138–41 n. (13 and
   28 November 1811).
32 Berding, ‘L’émancipation’, pp. 53, 58–60; J.Moulard, Le Comte Camille
   de Tournon. 2. Préfet de Rome 1809–1814, pp. 97–9.
33 E.Robertazzi delle Donne, ‘Potere politico e clero parrochiale nel Regno
   di Napoli durante il governo dei Napoleonidi’, Ricerche di Storia Sociale
   e Religiosa, 13, 1978, p. 162; G.De Rosa, ‘Rapport’, in Pratiques
   religieuses, pp. 55–6; A.Gambasin, ‘Parrochia veneta: evoluzione
   strutturale dalle riforme napoleoniche al neogiuseppismo asburgico’, La
   Società religiosa nell’età moderna. Naples, 1973, pp. 269–305; F.Python,
   ‘De quelques effets de la Revolution dans le diocèse de Lausanne (1798–
   1818)’, in Pratiques religieuses, pp. 147–53.
34 J.Godechot, Les Institutions de la France sous la Révolution et l’Empire,
   Paris, 1968, p. 720.
35 B.Plongeron, Conscience religieuse en Révolution, Paris, 1969, p. 171.
36 G.Orlandi, Le Campagne modenesi fra rivoluzione e restaurazione
   (1790–1815), Modena, 1967, pp. 317–18.
37 R.Schneider, ‘Dévotions et vie spirituelle dans les paroisses de Moselle
   selon une enquête de 1807’, in Pratiques religieuses, pp. 631–2;
   O.Chadwick, The Popes and European Revolution, Oxford, 1981, p.
   524.
38 Schneider, ‘Dévotions’, p. 629.
39 Plongeron, Conscience religieuse, p. 159; De Rosa, ‘Rapport’, pp. 35–6,
   50.
40 A.Minke, ‘La vie religieuse dans le département de l’Ourthe de 1797 à
   1802’, in Pratiques religieuses, p. 72; Molitor, ‘Vie religieuse’, p. 66.
41 M.G.Broers, The Restoration of order in Napoleonic Piedmont 1797–
   1814’, unpublished D.Phil, thesis, Oxford, 1986, p. 202.
42 Orlandi, Campagne modenesi, p. 323 n. 131.
43 M.Agulhon, Introduction. La sociabilité est-elle objet d’histoire?’, in
   E.François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en France, en
   Allemagne et en Suisse (1750–1850), Paris, 1986, pp. 14 n. 3, 20. Similar
   concerns were expressed in Germany in these same years by Friedrich
   Schleiermacher, Versuch einer Theorie des geselligen Betragens (1799).
44 Lettres de la baronne De Gérando née de Rathsamshausen suivies de
   fragments d’un journal écrit par elle de 1800 à 1804, Paris, 1881, pp.
   185–6.
45 R.Vierhaus, ‘Jüdische Salons in Berlin und Wien zu Beginn des 19.
   Jahrhunderts’, in François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise, pp. 95–
   102.
46 J.Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806–1808, Paris, 1911, pp.
   526–7.
47 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, p. 425; K.G.Faber, ‘Die Rheinländer
   unter Napoleon’, Francia, 1, 1973, pp. 377.
48 J.Vidalenc, ‘Les “départements hanséatiques” et l’administration
   napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973, pp. 422–3.
49 J.P.Chaline, ‘Sociétés savantes et académies de province en France dans la
284    Notes


      première moitié du XIXe siècle’, in François (ed.), Sociabilité et société
      bourgeoise, p. 171; M.Tabarrini, Degli studi e delle vicende della Reale
      Accademia dei Georgofili nel primo secolo di sua esistenza, Florence,
      1856; M.Tacel, ‘L’agitation royaliste à Turin de 1805 à 1808’, Revue de
      l’Institut Napoléon, 52, 1954, pp. 94–5; Filippini, ‘Ralliement’, p. 346;
      U.Im Hof, ‘Vereinswesen und Geselligkeit in der Schweiz, 1750–1850’, in
      François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise, p. 59; C.Nardi, Napoleone
      e Roma; M.Crosland, The Society of Arcueil. A View of French Science at
      the Time of Napoleon I, Cambridge, Mass., 1967, pp. 277–8.
50    H.Berlioz, ‘Les concerts des Tuileries sous l’Empire’, Revue et Gazette
      Musicale de Paris, 34, 1837, pp. 379–80; Marbot, Mémoires du général
      baron de Marbot (2 vols, Paris, 1983), vol. 2, pp. 29–30; J.P.Aron, Le
      Mangeur du XIXe siècle. Paris, 1973, pp. 29–31, 40–1; Récits d’une
      tante. Mémoires de la comtesse de Boigne, née d’Osmond, Paris, 1921,
      vol. 3, pp. 209–10.
51    P.Gerbord, ‘Une forme de sociabilité bourgeoise: le loisir thermale en
      France, en Belgique, et en Allemagne (1800–1850)’, in François (ed.),
      Sociabilité et société bourgeoise, pp. 106–7.
52    Stendhal, Oeuvres intimes, vol. 1, Paris, 1981, pp. 473–510; Mémoires
      du général Griois 1792–1822, vol. 1, Paris, 1909, pp. 141–2.
53    J.L.Quoy-Bodin, ‘Une religion laïque: la franc-maçonnerie dans les
      armées (1793–1808)’, in François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise,
      p. 421.
54    F.Collaveri, La Franc-Maçonnerie des Bonaparte, Paris, 1982; J.L.
      Quoy-Bodin, L’Armée et la Franc-Maçonnerie: au déclin de la
      monarchie, sous la Révolution et l’Empire, Paris, 1987; Dufraisse, ‘Les
      notables’, pp. 771–2; F.Bertini, ‘La massoneria in Toscana dall’età dei
      lumi alla restaurazione’, in Z.Ciuffoletti (ed.), Le Origini della
      massoneria in Toscana (1730–1890), Foggia, 1989; J.A.Ferrer Benimeli,
      ‘La masonería bonapartista en España’, in Les Espagnols et Napoléon,
      Aix-en-Provence, 1984, pp. 335–86. For the opposition to Napoleon
      within freemasonry: J.M.Roberts, The Mythology of the Secret Societies,
      London, 1972, ch. 8.
55    J.Rosselli, The Opera Industry in Italy from Cimarosa to Verdi,
      Cambridge, 1984, p. 28.
56    I wish to thank Paul Lambrechts for this information.
57    J.A.Chaptal, Rapport et projet de hi sur l’instruction publique, Paris, an
      IX (1801), p. 24.
58    Barberis, Le Armi del Principe, pp. 256–73; E.Brambilla, ‘L’Istruzione
      pubblica nella Repubblica Cisalpina al Regno Italico’, Quaderni Storici,
      23 (1973), pp. 520–1; S.Schama, ‘Schools and politics’.
59    Broers, ‘Restoration of order’, p. 299; Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, p. 95.
60    F.Mineccia, ‘La montagna pistoiese e le migrazioni stagionali: tradizioni
      e mutamento tra età leopoldina e restaurazione’, in I.Tognarini (ed.), Il
      Territorio pistoiese e i Lorena tra 700 e 800: viabilità e bonifiche,
      Naples, 1990, p. 242 n. 153. For the ‘moral statistics’ of the Restoration
      years, which were to crystallise in the representation of the urban poor as
      ‘dangerous classes’, L.Chevalier, Classes laborieuses et classes
      dangereuses à Paris pendant la première moitié du XIX siècle, Paris,
      1958.
                                                                 Notes   285


61 S.Woolf, The Poor in Western Europe in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth
   Centuries, London, 1986, pp. 23, 128–45; S.Marzagalli, Amburgo
   nell’età Napoleonica: una città mercantile di fronte ai problemi del
   blocco e dell’occupazione, tesi di laurea, Milan University, Faculty of
   Letters, 1987–8 pp. 52–9; M.Lindemann, ‘Unterschichten und
   Sozialpolitik in Hamburg, 1799–1814’, in A.Herzig, D.Langewiesche
   and A.Sywottek (eds), Arbeiter in Hamburg. Unterschichten, Arbeiter
   und Arbeiterbewegung seit dem ausgehenden 18. Jahrhundert,
   Hamburg, 1973, pp. 61–70.
62 S.Woolf, ‘The Société de Charité Maternelle’, in C.Jones and J.Barry
   (eds), Medicine and Charity Before the Welfare State, London, 1991.
63 P.Guichonnet, ‘Biens communaux et partages révolutionriaires dans
   l’ancien département du Léman’, Etudes Rurales, 36, 1969, p. 28 n. 3.
64 F.J.Reinoso, Examen de los delitos de infidelidad a la patria imputados a
   los españoles sometidos bajo la dominación francesa, quoted in
   J.Fontana, La Crisis del Antiguo Régimen, Barcelona, 1979, p. 103;
   Nicolas, ‘Le ralliement’, p. 120.
65 Lettres de la baronne De Gérando, pp. 199, 224–5, 403.
66 Barberis, Le Armi del Principe, p. 252.
67 S.Woolf, A History of Italy 1700–1860, London, 1979, p. 205.
68 Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier (28 vols, Paris, 1857–69),
   vol. 12 (1863), no. 9,911, 2 March 1806.
69 Lebrun, Opinions…de…Lebrun, pp. 111 n. 2, 144 n. 1;
   Correspondance, vol. 11 (1863), no. 9,678, 19 January 1806; vol. 12,
   no. 9,744, 4 February 1806.
70 Tacel, ‘L’agitation royaliste’, p. 102; Antonieili, Prefetti, pp. 103–55.
71 G.Dufour, ‘Pourquoi les Espagnols prirent-ils les armes contre
   Napoléon?’, in Les Espagnols et Napoléon, p. 321.
72 Rambaud, Naples sous Joseph, pp. 89–125; A.Mozzillo, Cronache della
   Calabria in guerra (1806–1811), Naples, 1972; G.Cingari, Brigantaggio,
   proprietari e contadini nel Sud 1799–1900, Reggio Calabria, 1976.
73 Noguès, Mémoires du général Noguès (1977–1853) sur les guerres de
   l’Empire, Paris, 1922, p. 249.
74 Excellent analyses of the Spanish war can be found in: J.R.Aymes, La
   Guerra de la Independencia en España (1808–1814), Madrid, 1974;
   L.Roura i Aulinas, ‘La crisis del Antiguo Régimen. Del “panico” de
   Floridablanca a la guerra de la Independencia’, in A.Dominguez Ortiz
   (ed.), Historia de España. 9. La Transición del Antiguo al Nuevo
   Régimen (1789–1874), Barcelona, 1988, pp. 91–136.
75 Lettres de la baronne De Gérando, pp. 420–1.
76 Schmidt, Grand-Duché de Berg, pp. 447–8.


6 Epilogue: the heritage
 1 S.Woolf, ‘French civilisation and ethnicity in the Napoleonic Empire’,
   Past and Present, 124, 1989, pp. 96–106; L.Febvre, Civilisation: le mot
   et l’idée, Paris, 1930; J.B.Bury, The Idea of Progress, London, 1920;
   I.Sachs, ‘Selvaggio/barbaro/civilizzato’, in Enciclopedia, vol. 12, Turin,
   1981; A.Pagden, The Fall of Natural Man: the American Indian and the
286    Notes


      Origins of Comparative Ethnology, Cambridge, 1982; W.T.Rowe,
      ‘Education and empire in southwest China: Ch’en Hung-mou in Yunnan,
      1733–38’, unpublished paper to the Conference on Education and
      Society in Late Imperial China, Montecito, California, 8–14 June, 1989.
2     S.Woolf, ‘Statistics and the modern state’, Comparative Studies in Society
      and History, 31, 1989.
3     P.Boutry, ‘Società urbana e sociabilità delle élites nella Roma della
      Restaurazione: prime considerazioni’, in M.Malatesta (ed.), Sociabilità
      nobiliare, sociabilità borghese, Reggio Emilia, 1989, p. 59.
4     E.da Cunha, A Marjem da história, Porto, 1926, pp. 218–19.
5     P.Nolte, Staatsbildung als Gesellschaftsreform. Politische Reformen in
      Preussen und den süddeutschen Staaten 1800–1820, Frankfurt, 1990.
      This important work has unfortunately appeared too late for me to take
      it into adequate account.
6     Nolte, Staatsbildung, p. 206.
7     A.de Tocqueville, ‘De la classe moyenne et du peuple’, in Oeuvres
      complètes. T. 3. Ecrits et discours politiques, Paris, 1985, p. 740.
Bibliography




This bibliography is highly selective and lists only those works that I have
found directly useful or that I believe could be of value to the reader who
wishes to pursue further the history of individual countries or themes
discussed in the preceding pages. Virtually all the works cited in the notes are
included. I have divided the bibliography into publications by contemporaries
relating to France, general works and individual countries.


CONTEMPORARY PUBLICATIONS
Almanach du départment de l’Escaut pour l’année 1811, Gand, n.d.
Annuaire du département du Léman pour l’année 1811, Geneva—Paris,
   1811.
Barthélemy, H.C.F.de, Souvenirs d’un ancien préfet 1787–1848, Paris, 1885.
Beugnot, A. (ed.), Mémoires du comte Beugnot (1783–1815), Paris, 1866, 2
   vols.
Bodmann, F., Annuaire statistique du départment du Mont-Tonnerre pour
   l’an 1808, Mayence, n.d.
Boigne, comtesse de, Récits d’une tante. Mémoires de la comtesse de Boigne,
   née d’Osmond, 4 vols, Paris, 1907.
Bonnin, C.J., Principes d’administration publique, Paris, 1812.
Calendario politico-statistico del dipartimento dell’Arno per l’anno 1813,
   Florence, n.d.
Chabrol de Volvic, G.J.G., ‘Essai sur les moeurs des habitans modernes de
   l’Egypte’, in Description de l’Egypte, 2:2. Etat Moderne, Paris, 1822.
Chaptal, J.A., Rapport et projet de loi sur l’instruction publique, Paris, an IX
   (1801).
—Mes Souvenirs sur Napoléon, Paris, 1893.
Chateaubriand, F.R.de, Mémoires d’Outre-Tombe, 4 vols, Paris, 1964.
Combier, A. (ed.), Mémoires du général Radet, St Cloud, 1892.
Constant de Rebecque, B., De l’Esprit de conquête, Lausanne, 1980.
Crouzet, P., Discours sur l’honneur prononcé à la distribution des prix du
   Prytanée militaire français, le 14 août 1806, Paris, 1806.
Dainville, F.de and Tulard, J., Atlas administratif de l’Empire français rédigé
   par ordre de S.E.M.le due de Feltre, ministre de la Guerre. Au Dépôt
   Général de la Guerre, 1812, Geneva—Paris, 1973.
Dansette, A., Napoléon, pensées politiques et sociales, Paris, 1969.


                                     287
288   Bibliography


De Gérando, J.M., Programme du cours de droit public positif et
   administratif, à la faculté de droit de Paris, pour l’année 1819–1820, Paris,
   1819.
De Gérando, Mme, Lettres de la baronne De Gérando née de
   Rathsamshausen suivies de fragments d’un journal écrit par elle de 1800 a
   1804, Paris, 1881.
Desvernois, N.P., Mémoires du général baron Desvernois, Paris, 1898.
Exposé de la situation de l’Empire, présenté au Corps Législatif dans sa
   séance du 25 février 1813 par Son Excellence M.le comte de Montalivet,
   ministre de l’Intérieur, Paris, 1813.
Fain, baron, Mémoires, Paris, 1908.
Fairon, E. and Reuse, H., Lettres de grognards, Courville, 1936.
Griois, général, Mémoires du général Griois 1792–1822, 2 vols, Paris, 1909.
Jacquin, F.-J., Carnet de route d’un grognard de la Révolution et de l’Empire,
   Paris. 1960.
Lafolie, C., Mémoires sur la cour du prince Eugène et sur le royaume d’Italie,
   Paris, 1824.
Las Cases, E.de, Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène, 2 vols, Paris, 1951.
Lebrun, Ch. F., Opinions, rapports et choix d’écrits politiques de Charles
   François Lebrun, due de Plaisance, Paris, 1829.
Marbot, J.-B.-A.-M., Mémoires du général baron de Marbot, 2 vols, Paris,
   1983.
Miot de Melito, Mémoires du comte Miot de Melito, 3 vols, Paris, 1873.
Molé, M., Souvenirs d’un témoin de la Révolution et de l’Empire (1791–
   1803), Geneva, 1943.
Napoléon, Correspondance de l’Empereur Napoléon Ier, 32 vols, Paris,
   1858–69.
Noguès, A., Mémoires du général Noguès (1777–1853) sur les guerres de
   l’Empire, Paris, 1922.
Plancy, A.de, Souvenirs du comte de Plancy (1798–1816), Paris, 1904.
Rambuteau, Mémoires du comte de Rambuteau, Paris, 1905.
Recueil des lettres circulaires, instructions, programmes, discours et autres
   actes publics du ministère de l’Intérieur, 16 vols, Paris, an VII—1816.
Ségur, P.-P., comte de, De 1800 à 1812. Un aide de camp de Napoléon.
   Mémoires du général de Ségur, 3 vols, Paris, 1894–5.
Senfft von Pilsach, F.C.L., Graf, Mémoires du comte de Senfft ancien ministre
   de Saxe. Empire. Organisation politique de la Suisse 1806–1813, Leipzig,
   1863.
Stanhope, P.H.Earl, Notes of conversations with the Duke of Wellington,
   1831–1851, London, 1888.
Stendhal, Oeuvres intimes. 1. Journal, Paris, 1981.
Thiébault, D.A.P., Mémoires, 2 vols, Paris, 1962.


GENERAL WORKS
Bargeton, R., Bougard, P., Le Clère, B. and Pinaud, P.-F., Les Préfets du 11
   ventôse an VIII au 4 septembre 1870, Paris, 1981.
Bercé, Y.M. (ed.), La Fin de l’Europe napoléonienne, 1814. La vacance du
   pouvoir, Paris, 1990.
                                                             Bibliography   289


Centro Studi Napoleonici e di Storia dell’Elba, Studi napoleonici. Atti del
   primo e secondo Congresso internazionale 3–7 maggio 1962/3–6 maggio
   1965, Firenze, 1969.
Chadwick, O., The Popes and European Revolution, Oxford, 1981.
Collaveri, F., La Franc-maçonnerie des Bonaparte, Paris, 1982.
Connelly, O., Napoleon’s Satellite Kingdoms, New York, 1965.
Crawley, C.W. (ed.), New Cambridge Modern History. 9. War and Peace in an
   Age of Upheaval, 1733–1830, Cambridge, 1965.
Crouzet, F., L’Economie britannique et le blocus continental, 1806–1813, 2
   vols, Paris, 1958.
—‘Wars, blockade and economic change in Europe, 1792–1815’, Journal of
   Economic History, 24, 1964.
—‘Bilan de l’économie britannique pendant les guerres de la Révolution et de
   l’Empire’, Revue Historique, 234, 1965.
Dictionnaire de biographie française.
Dunan, M., ‘Napoléon et le Système Continental en 1810’, Revue d’Histoire
   Diplomatique, January-April 1946.
François, E. (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en France, en Allemagne et
   en Suisse (1750–1850), Paris, 1986.
Furet, F. and Ozouf, M. (eds), Dictionnaire critique de la Révolution
   française, Paris, 1988.
Godechot, J., L’Amérique et l’Europe à l’époque napoléonienne, Paris, 1967.
Martin, A. and Walter, G., Catalogue de l’histoire de la Révolution française,
   6 vols, Paris, 1936–43.
Napoléon et l’Europe, Paris—Brussels, 1961.
Occupants occupés 1792–1815, Brussels, 1969.
Les Pays sous domination française, 1799–1814, Paris, 1967.
Plongeron, B. (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans l’Europe révolutionnaire:
   mentalités et spiritualtiés, 1770–1820, Turnhout, 1989.
Popkin, J.D., ‘The book trades in western Europe during the revolutionary
   era’, Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America, 78, 1984.
Roberts, J.M., The Mythology of the Secret Societies, London, 1972.
Sofia, F., ‘La statistica come scienza politica e dell’amministrazione’, in
   L’Amministrazione nella storia moderna, Milan, 1985.
Tarle, E.V., Napoléon, Paris, 1937.
Tulard, J., Bibliographie critique des mémoires sur le Consulat et l’Empire,
   Geneva, 1971.
—Le Mythe de Napoléon, Paris, 1971.
—(ed.), Dictionnaire Napoléon, Paris, 1987.
Villat, L., La Révolution et l’Empire, Paris, 1936.
Woolf, S., ‘French civilization and ethnicity in the Napoleonic Empire’, Past
   and Present, 124, 1989.
—‘Statistics and the modern state’, Comparative Studies in Society and
   History, 31, 1989.


FRANCE
Les Affaires étrangères et le corps diplomatique français, 2 vols, Paris, 1984.
Aron, J.P., Le Mangeur du XIXe siècle, Paris, 1973.
290   Bibliography


Bastid, P., Siéyès et sa pensée, Paris, 1970.
La Bataille, l’armée, la gloire. Actes du colloque de Clermont-Ferrand, 1983,
   Clermont-Ferrand, 1985.
Bergeron, L., L’Episode napoléonien. Aspects intérieurs 1799–1815, Paris, 1972.
—‘Remarques sur les conditions du développement industriel en Europe
   occidentale à l’époque napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973.
—Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens. Du Directoire à
   l’Empire, 2 vols, Paris, 1975.
Bergeron, L. and Chaussinand-Nogaret, G., Les ‘Masses de granit’. Cent mille
   notables du Premier Empire, Paris, 1979.
—Grands notables du Premier Empire, 17 vols (1988), Paris, 1978-.
Berlioz, H., ‘Les concerts des Tuileries sous l’Empire’, Revue et Gazette
   Musicale de Paris, 34, 1837.
Bertaud, J.-P., ‘La “petite guerre” des honneurs sous Napoléon’, L’Histoire,
   66, 1984.
—‘Napoleon’s officers’, Past and Present, 112, 1986.
Bertho, J., Naissance et théologie d’une théologie de guerre chez les évêques
   de Napoléon, Paris, 1975.
Bluche, F., Le Bonapartisme: aux origines de la droite autoritaire (1800–
   1850), Paris, 1980.
Bourdon, J., ‘L’administration militaire sous Napoléon 1er’, Revue des
   Etudes Napoléoniennes, 1911.
Bourguet, M.-N., ‘Désordre public, ordre populaire à l’époque napoléonienne’,
   in Mouvements populaires et conscience sociale, Paris, 1985.
—Déchiffrer la France. La statistique départementale à l’époque
   napoléonienne, Paris, 1988.
Broc, N., La Géographie des philosophes. Géographie et voyageurs français
   au XVIIIe siècle, Lille, 1972.
Brunet, M., Le Roussillon. Une société contre l’Etat 1780–1820, Toulouse,
   1986.
Butel, P., ‘Crise et mutation de l’activité économique à Bordeaux sous le
   Consulat et l’Empire’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 17,
   1970.
—‘Le port de Bordeaux sous le régime des licences, 1808–1815’, Revue
   d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 19, 1972.
Charles-Roux, F., Bonaparte, gouverneur d’Egypte, Paris, 1936.
Chassagne, S., ‘Aspects des phénomènes d’industrialisation et de
   désindustrialisation dans les campagnes françaises au XIXe siècle’, Revue
   du Nord, 63, 1981.
Chevalier, L., Classes laborieuses et classes dangereuses à Paris pendant la
   première moitié du XIX siècle, Paris, 1958.
Chisick, Harvey, The Limits of Reform in the Enlightenment: Attitudes
   towards the Education of the Lower Classes in Eighteenth-Century
   France, Princeton, NJ, 1981.
Church, C., Revolution and Red Tape: The French Ministerial Bureaucracy,
   1770–1850, Oxford, 1981.
Corvisier, A., L’Armée française de la fin du XVIIe siècle au ministère de
   Choiseul: le soldat, Paris, 1964.
Crosland, M., The Society of Arcueil. A View of French Science at the Time
   of Napoleon I, Cambridge, Mass., 1967.
                                                             Bibliography   291


Delpech, F., ‘Les juifs en France et dans l’Empire et la genèse du Grand
    Sanhédrin’, in Le Grand Sanhédrin de Napoléon, Toulouse, 1979.
Dufraisse, R., ‘Blocus et système continental. La politique économique de
    Napoléon’, Revue de l’Institut Napoléon, 99, 1966.
Durand, C., Les Auditeurs au Conseil d’Etat de 1803 à 1814, Aix-en-
    Provence, 1958.
Durand, Ch., ‘Le régime juridique de l’expropriation pour utilité publique
    sous le Consulat et le premier Empire’, Annales de la Faculté de Droit
    d’Aix, 41, 1948.
—‘L’emploi des conseillers d’état et des maîtres de requête en dehors du
    Conseil’, Annales de la Faculté de Droit d’Aix, 45, 1952.
—‘L’exercice de la fonction législative de 1800 à 1814’, Annales de la Faculté
    de Droit d’Aix, 48, 1955.
—‘Le pouvoir napoléonien et ses légitimités’, Annales de la Faculté de Droit
    d’Aix, 58, 1972.
Ellis, G., Napoleon’s Continental Blockade. The Case of Alsace, Oxford,
    1981.
Forrest, A., ‘Conscription and crime in rural France during the Directory and
    Consulate’, in G.Lewis and C.Lucas (eds), Beyond the Terror: Essays in
    French Regional and Social History, Cambridge, 1983.
—‘Le recrutement, les desertions et l’Etat napoléonien’, paper delivered at the
    Convegno Internazionale sull’Armata Napoleonica, Portoferraio, Elba,
    17–20 September 1986.
Forster, R., ‘The French Revolution and the “new” elite, 1800–1880’, in J.
    Pelensky (ed.), The American and European Revolutions Reconsidered,
    1776–1848, Iowa City, 1980.
‘La France à l’époque napoléonienne’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et
    Contemporaine, 17, 1970.
Friedlaender, W., ‘Napoleon as “Roi Thaumaturge”’, Journal of the Warburg
    and Courtauld Institutes , 4, 1940–1.
Gabillard, J., ‘Le financement des guerres napoléoniennes et la conjuncture du
    premier Empire’, Revue Economique, 4, 1953.
Godechot, J., Les Institutions de la France sous la Révolution et l’Empire,
    Paris, 1969.
—La Grande nation. L ’expansion révolutionnaire de la France dans le
    monde de 1789 à 1799, Paris, 1983.
—‘Les variations de la politique française à l’egard des pays occupés’, in
    Occupants occupés 1792–1815, Bruxelles, 1969.
Gusdorf, G., Les Sciences humaines et la pensée occidentale. 8. La Conscience
    révolutionnaire. Les idéologues, Paris, 1978.
Huart, S.d’, ‘Daru et le projet impérial de code militaire’, Revue de l’Institut
    Napoléon, 88, 1963.
James, E., ‘Napoléon et la pensée économique de son temps’, Revue de
    l’Institut Napoléon, 100, 1966.
Langlois, C., ‘Le plébiscite de l’an VIII ou le coup d’état du 18 pluviôse an
    VIII’, Annales Historiques de la Révolution Française, 24, 1972.
Lanzac de Labourie, L.de, Paris sous Napoléon, Paris, 8 vols, 1905–13.
Latreille, A., L’Ere napoléonienne, Paris, 1974.
Lefebvre, G., Napoléon, Paris, 1965.
292   Bibliography


Lévy-Leboyer, M., Les Banques européennes et l’industrialisation
   internationale dans la première moitié du XIXe siècle, Paris, 1964.
L’Huillier, F., Recherches sur l’Alsace napoléonienne de brumaire à l’invasion
   (1799–1823), Strasburg, 1945.
Lynn, J.A., The Bayonets of the Republic. Motivation and Tactics in the Army
   of Revolutionary France, 1791–94, Urbana—Chicago, 1984.
Marion, M., Histoire financière de la France depuis 1715, 6 vols, Paris,
   1927–31.
—Le Brigandage pendant la Révolution, Paris, 1934.
Masson, F., Le Département des Affaires Etrangères pendant la Révolution,
   1787–1804, Paris, 1877.
Morvan, J., Le Soldat impérial, 2 vols, Paris, 1904.
Ozouf, M., ‘De thermidor à brumaire: Le discours de la Révolution sur
   ellemême’, Revue Historique, 243, 1970.
—L’Ecole de la France. Essais sur la Révolution, l’utopie et l’enseignement,
   Paris, 1984.
Perrot, J.-C., L’Age d’or de la statistique régionale française (an IV–1804),
   Paris, 1977.
Perrot, J.-C. and Woolf, S., State and Statistics in France 1789–1815, Chur—
   London—Paris—New York, 1984.
Plongeron, B., Conscience religieus révolution. Regards sur l’historiographie
   religieuse de la Révolution française, Paris, 1969.
Ponteil, F., Napoléon I et l’organisation autoritaire de la France, Paris, 1965.
Poulot, D., ‘Les musées à la gloire de l’Empire: notes pour une recherche’,
   Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 1981.
Quoy-Bodin, J.L., L’Armée et la franc-maçonnerie: au déclin de la monarchie,
   sous la Révolution et l’Empire, Paris, 1987.
—‘Une religion la’ique: la franc-maçonnerie dans les armées (1793–1808)’, in
   E.François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en France, en Allemagne
   et en Suisse (1750–1850), Paris, 1986.
Regaldo, M., Un Milieu intellectuel: la Décade philosophique (1974–1807),
   5 vols, Lille, 1976.
Roche, D., Le Siècle des lumières en province. Académies et académiciens
   provinciaux, 1680–1789, 2 vols, Paris—La Haye, 1978.
Schmidt, C., ‘Jean-Baptiste Say et le blocus continental’, Revue d’Histoire des
   Doctrines Economiques et Sociales, 4, 1911.
Scott, S.F., The Response of the Royal Army to the French Revolution: the
   Role and Development of the Line Army 1787–93, Oxford, 1978.
Shinn, J., L’Ecole Polytechnique, 1794–1914. Savoir scientifique et pouvoir
   social, Paris, 1980.
Six, G., Dictionnaire biographique des généraux et amiraux français de la
   Révolution et de l’Empire (1792–1814), Paris, 1934.
—Les Généraux de la Révolution et de l’Empire, Paris, 1948.
La Statistique en France à l’époque napoléonienne, Brussels, 1981.
Tocqueville. Alexis de, Etat social et politique de la France avant et depuis
   1789, 1836.
Tulard, J., ‘Problèmes sociaux de la France napoléonienne’, Revue d’Histoire
   Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970.
—Le Grand Empire, 1804–1815, Paris, 1982.
—Napoléon et la noblesse d’Empire, Paris, 1986.
                                                             Bibliography   293


Welch, C.B., Liberty and Utility. The French Idéologues and the
   Transformation of Liberalism, New York, 1984.
Whitcomb, A.E., ‘Napoleon’s prefects’, American Historical Review, 79, 1974.
—Napoleon’s Diplomatic Service, Durham, N.C., 1979.
Woloch, I., ‘Napoleonic conscription: state power and civil society’, Past and
   Present, 111, 1986.
Woolf, S., ‘Les bases sociales du Consulat. Un mémoire d’Adrien Duquesnoy’,
   Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 31, 1984.
Ymbert, J.-G., Moeurs françaises. Moeurs administratives, 2 vols, Paris,
   1825.
Zieseniss, J., ‘Noblesse d’Empire’, in J.Tulard (ed.), Dictionnaire Napoléon,
   Paris, 1987.

BELGIUM
Darquenne, R., La Conscription dans le département de Jemappes (1799–
   1813), Mons, 1970.
Delatte, I., La Vente des biens nationaux dans le département de Jemappes,
   Brussels, 1938.
Devleeshouwer, R., ‘Le Cas de Belgique’, in Occupants occupés 1792–1815,
   Brussels, 1969.
François, L., ‘Politikie integratie of exclusie? Belgische notabelen tussen 1785
   en 1835’, Revue Belge d’Histoire Contemporaine, 1–2, 1977.
Lanzac de Laborie, L.de, La Domination française en Belgique: Directoire,
   Consulat, Empire, 1795–1814, 2 vols, Paris, 1895.
Minke, A., ‘La vie religieuse dans le département de l’Ourthe de 1797 à
   1802’, in B.Plongeron (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans l’Europe
   révolutionnaire: mentalités et spiritualités, 1770–1820, Turnhout, 1989.
Verhaegen, P., La Belgique sous la domination française 1792–1814, 5 vols,
   Brussels, 1923–9.

GERMANY
Berding, H., Napoleonische Herrschafts- und Gesellschaftspolitik im
   Königreich Westfalen 1807–1813, Göttingen, 1973.
—‘Les dotations impériales dans le royaume de Westphalie’, Revue de
   l’Institut Napoléon, 132, 1976.
—‘L’émancipation des juifs dans la Conféderation du Rhin’, Revue de
   l’Institut Napoléon, 139, 1982.
—‘Le royaume de Westphalie, état-modèle’, Francia, 10, 1982.
Blanning, T.C.W., The French Revolution in Germany: Occupation and
   Resistance in the Rhineland 1792–1802, Oxford, 1983.
Bonaparte, Jerome, Mémoires et correspondance du roi Jérôme et de la reine
   Catherine, 6 vols, Paris, 1861–5.
Bruguière, M., ‘Remarques sur les rapports financiers entre la France et
   l’Allemagne du Nord à l’époque napoléonienne: Hambourg et “le parti de
   la paix”’, Francia, 1, 1973.
Brunschwig, H., La Crise de l’état prussien à la fin du XVIIIe siècle et la
   genèse de la mentalité romantique, Paris, 1947.
294   Bibliography


Demel, W., Der bayerische Staatsabsolutismus, 1806/08–1817, Munich,
   1983.
Deutsches Historisches Institut in Paris, Francia. Forschungen zur
   westeuropäische Geschichte, 1, 1973.
Diefendorff, J.M., Business and Politics in the Rhineland, 1789–1834,
   Princeton, NJ, 1980.
Dipper, C., ‘Vente des biens nationaux et développement du capitalisme en
   Allemagne’, Revue du Nord, Hors-Série, Collection Histoire, 5, 1989.
Dreyfus, F.G., ‘Bilan économique des Allemagnes en 1815’, Revue d’Histoire
   Economique et Sociale, 43, 1965.
Dufraisse, R., ‘Les notables de la rive gauche du Rhin à l’époque
   napoléonienne’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970.
—‘La contrebande dans les départements réunis de la rive gauche du Rhin à
   l’époque napoléonienne’, Francia, 1, 1973.
—‘L’influence de la politique économique napoléonienne sur l’économie des
   états du Rheinbund’, in E.Weis (ed.), Reformen im rheinbündischen
   Deutschland, Munich, 1984.
Dunan, M., Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le système continental et les débuts du
   royaume de Bavière 1806–1810, Paris, 1942.
Faber, K.G., ‘Die Rheinländer und Napoleon’, Francia, 1, 1973.
Grab, W., ‘La réaction de la population de Rhénanie face à l’occupation par
   les armées révolutionnaires françaises 1792–1799’, in Occupants occupés
   1792–1815, Brussels, 1969.
Klueting, H., ‘Die Folgen der Säkularisation. Zur Diskussion der
   wirtschaftlichen und sozialen Auswirkungen der Vermögenssäkularisation
   in Deutschland’, in H.Berding and H.P.Ullmann (eds), Deutschland
   zwischen Revolution und Restauration, Königstein/Ts., 1981.
Lesage, C., Napoléon ler, créancier de la Prusse (1807–1814), Paris, 1924.
Lindemann, M., ‘Unterschichten und Sozialpolitik in Hamburg, 1799–1814’,
   in A.Herzig, D.Langewiesche and A.Sywottek (eds), Arbeiter in Hamburg.
   Unterschichten, Arbeiter und Arbeiterbewegung seit dem ausgehenden 18.
   Jahrhundert, Hamburg, 1973.
Marzagalli, S., Amburgo nell’età napoleonica: una città mercantile di fronte ai
   problemi del blocco e dell’occupazione, tesi di laurea, Università Statale di
   Milano, 1987–8.
Molitor, H.G., ‘La vie religieuse populaire en Rhénanie française, 1794–
   1815’, in B.Plongeron (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans l’Europe
   révolutionnaire: mentalités et spiritualtiés, 1770–1820, Turnhout, 1989.
Müller, M., Säkularisation und Grundbesitz. Zur Sozialgeschichte des Saar-
   Mosel-Raumes 1794–1813, Boppard am Rhein, 1980.
Nolte, P., Staatsbildung als Gesellschaftsreform. Politische Reformen in
   Preussen und den süddeutschen Staaten 1800–1820, Frankfurt, 1990.
Patemann, R., ‘Die Beziehungen Bremens zu Frankreich bis zum Ende der
   französischen Herrschaft 1813’, Francia, 1, 1973.
Schieder, W. and Kube, A., Säkularisation und Mediatisierung. Die
   Veräusserung der Nationalgüter im Rhein-Mosel-Department 1803–1813,
   Boppard am Rhein, 1987.
Schmidt, C., Le Grand-duché de Berg (1806–1813). Etude sur la domination
   française en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier, Paris, 1905.
Schneider, R., ‘Dévotions et vie spirituelle dans les paroisses de Moselle selon
                                                             Bibliography   295


   une enquête de 1807’, in B.Plongeron (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans
   l’Europe révolutionnaire: mentalités et spiritualtiés, 1770–1820,
   Turnhout, 1989.
Vidalenc, J., ‘Les notables des départements hanséatiques’, Revue d’Histoire
   Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970.
—‘Les “départements hanséatiques” et l’administration napoléonienne’,
   Francia, 1, 1973.
Vierhaus, R., ‘Jüdische Salons in Berlin und Wien zu Beginn des 19.
   Jahrhunderts’, in E.François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en
   France, en Allemagne et en Suisse (2750–1850), Paris, 1986.
Weis, E. and Müller-Luckner, E. (eds), Reformen im rheinbündischen
   Deutschland, Munich, 1984.

HOLLAND
Alphonse, baron d’, Eenige hoofdstukken uit het ‘Aperçu sur la Hollande,
   présenté à S.E.le ministre de l’Intérieur par M.d’Alphonse’ , The Hague,
   1900.
Bonaparte, Louis, Documents historiques et réflexions sur le gouvernement
   de la Hollande, 3 vols, Brussels, 1820.
Caumont, A.de la Force, L’Architrésorier Lebrun, gouverneur de la Hollande
   1810–1813, Paris, 1907.
Duboscq, A., Louis Bonaparte en Hollande, d’après ses lettres, Paris, 1911.
Hogendorp, D.van, Mémoires du général Dirk van Hogendorp, The Hague,
   1887.
Kossman, E.H., ‘The crisis of the Dutch state, 1780–1813: nationalism,
   federalism, unitarism’, in J.S.Bromley and E.H.Kossman, Britain and the
   Netherlands, vol. 4, The Hague, 1971.
Schama, S., ‘Schools and politics in the Netherlands, 1796–1814’, Historical
   Journal, 13, 1970.
—‘The exigencies of war and the politics of taxation in the Netherlands
   1795–1810’, in J.M.Winter (ed.), War and Economic Development,
   Cambridge, 1975.
—Patriots and Liberators. Revolution in the Netherlands 1780–1813, New
   York—London, 1977.

ILLYRIA
Pivec-Stelé, M., La Vie économique des provinces illyriennes (1809–1813),
   Paris, 1930.
Senkowska-Gluck, M., ‘Illyrie sous la domination illyrienne 1809–1813’,
   Acta Poloniae Historica, 41, 1980.

ITALY
Antonielli, L., ‘Alcuni aspetti dell’apparato amministrativo periferico nella
  Repubblica e nel Regno d’Italia’, Quaderni Storici, 37, 1978.
—I Prefetti dell’Italia napoleonica. Repubblica e Regno d’Italia, Bologna, 1983.
Assereto, G., ‘I gruppi dirigenti liguri tra la fine del vecchio regime e
  l’annessione all’impero napoleonico’, Quaderni Storici, 37, 1978.
296   Bibliography


—‘La fine dell’antico regime: la dominazione napoleonica a Prato’, in
   E.Fasano Guarini (ed.), Prato storia di una città. 2. Un microcosmo in
   movimento (1494–1815), Prato-Florence, 1986.
Barberis, W., Le Armi del principe. La tradizione militare sabauda, Turin,
   1988.
Bergeron, L., ‘La place des gens d’affaires dans les listes de notables du
   premier Empire, d’après les exemples du Piémont et de la Ligurie’,
   Annuario dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per l’Età Moderna e
   Contemporanea, 23–4, 1971–2.
Bertini, F., ‘La massoneria in Toscana dall’età dei Lumi alla restaurazione’, in
   Z.Ciuffoletti (ed.), Le Origini della massoneria in Toscana (1730–1890),
   Foggia, 1989.
Bertoli, B. and Tramontin, S. (eds), La Visita pastorale di Ludovico Flangini
   nella diocesi di Venezia (1803), Rome, 1969.
Bollati, G., L’Italiano. Il carattere nazionale come storia e come invenzione,
   Turin, 1983.
Borel, J., Gênes sous Napoléon 1er, Paris, 1929.
Boutry, P., ‘Società urbana e sociabilità delle élites nella Roma della
   Restaurazione: prime considerazioni’, in M.Malatesta (ed.), Sociabilità
   nobiliare, sociabilità borghese, Reggio Emilia, 1989.
Boyer, F., ‘La famille de Cavour et le régime napoléonien’, Revue Historique,
   185, 1939.
Brambilla, E., ‘L’istruzione pubblica dalla Repubblica Cisalpina al Regno
   Italico’, Quaderni Storici, 23, 1973.
Broers, M.G., ‘The restoration of order in Napoleonic Piedmont, 1797–
   1814’, unpublished D.Phil, thesis, Oxford, 1986.
Caldora, U., Calabria napoleonica, 1806–1815, Naples, 1960.
Capra, C., ‘Nobili, notabili, elites: dal modello francese al caso italiano’,
   Quaderni Storici, 37, 1979.
—‘Il Settecento’, in D.Sella and C.Capra, Il Ducato di Milano dal 1535 al
   1796, Turin, 1984.
Carle, L., L’Identité cachée. Paysans propriétaires dans l’Alta Langa aux
   XVIIe—XIXe siècles, Paris, 1989.
Cingari, G., Brigantaggio, proprietari e contadini nel Sud 1799–1900, Reggio
   Calabria, 1976.
‘Colloquio internazionale sulla storia dell’Italia giacobina e napoleonica’,
   Annuario dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per l’Età Moderna e
   Contemporanea, 23–4, 1971–2.
Davico, R., ‘Prix et conjoncture: la période napoléonienne en Piémont’, Revue
   Historique, 503, 1972.
—Peuple et notables (1750–1816). Essais sur l’ancien régime et la Révolution
   en Piémont, Paris, 1981.
Davis, J.A., ‘Naples during the French “decennio”. A problem unresolved?’,
   in Villes et territoires pendant la période napoléonienne (France et Italie),
   Rome, 1987.
—‘The Neapolitan army during the decennio francese’, Rivista Italiana di
   Studi Napoleonici, 25, 1988.
Della Peruta, F., Esercito e società nell’Italia napoleonica. Dalla Cisalpina al
   Regno d’Italia, Milan, 1988.
                                                            Bibliography   297


Du Casse, P.E.A. (ed.), Mémoires et correspondance politique et militaire du
    roi Joseph, 10 vols, Paris, 1853–4.
Filippini, J.P., ‘Ralliement et opposition des notables toscans à l’Empire
    français’, Annuario dell’Istituto Storico Italiano per l’Età Moderna e
    Contemporanea, 23–4, 1971–2.
Gambasin, A., ‘Parrocchia veneta: evoluzione strutturale dalle riforme
    napoleoniche al neogiuseppismo asburgico’ , La Società religiosa nell’età
    moderna, Naples, 1973.
Harrison, J.B., ‘The continental system in Italy as revealed by American
    commerce’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin, 1937.
Madelin, L., La Rome de Napoléon, Paris, 1906.
Marmottan, P., Le Royaume d’Etrurie (1801–1807), Paris, 1896.
—Le Général Menou en Toscane, Paris, 1903.
Mineccia, F., ‘La vendita dei beni nazionali in Toscana (1808–1814): i
    dipartimenti dell’Ombrone e del Mediterraneo’, in I.Tognarini (ed.), La
    Toscana nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica, Naples, 1985.
Montagna, L., Il Dominio francese in Parma (1791–1814), 1906.
Mori, G., ‘Clero e istituzioni religiose nel distretto napoleonico delle Alpi
    Apuane’, Studi Parmensi, 24, 1979.
Moulard, J., Le Comte Camille de Tournon, 3 vols, Paris, 1929–1933.
Mozzillo, A., Cronache della Calabria in guerra (1806–1811), Naples, 1972.
Nardi, C., Napoleone e Roma. La politica della Consulta Romana, Rome,
    1989.
Nicolas, J., ‘Le ralliement des notables au régime impérial dans le
    département du Mont-Blanc’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et
    Contemporaine, 19, 1972.
‘Notabili e funzionari nell’Italia napoleonica’, Quaderni Storici, 37, 1978.
Notario, P., La Vendita dei beni nazionali in Piemonte nel periodo
    napoleonico (1800–1814), Milan, 1980.
Orlandi, G., Le Campagne modenesi fra rivoluzione e restaurazione (1790–
    1815), Modena, 1967.
Outram, D., ‘Education and politics in Piedmont, 1796–1814’, Historical
    Journal, 19, 1976.
Paci, R., L’Ascesa della borghesia nella Legazione di Urbino dalle riforme alla
    restaurazione, Milan, 1966.
Passerin d’Entrèves, E., La Giovinezza di Cesare Balbo, Florence, 1940.
—‘Dal Piemonte pre-rivoluzionario al Piemonte costituzionale’, Bollettino
    Storico-Bibliografico Subalpino, 57, 1959.
Pasta, R., Scienza politica e rivoluzione. L’opera di Giovanni Fabbroni
    (1752–1822) intellettuale e funzionario in servizio dei Lorena, Florence,
    1989.
Pilati, R., La Nunziatella. L’organizzazione di un’accademia militare 1787–
    1987, Naples, 1987.
Quarantotti, G., Trieste e l’Istria nell’età napoleonica, Florence, 1954.
Quigley, W.C., The public administration of the first kingdom of Italy 1805–
    1814’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis. Harvard, Mass., 1938.
Rambaud, J., ‘L’église de Naples sous la domination française’, Revue
    d’Histoire Ecclésiastique, 9, 1908.
—Naples sous Joseph Bonaparte 1806–1808, Paris, 1911.
Robertazzi delle Donne, E., ‘Potere politico e clero parrocchiale nel Regno di
298   Bibliography


   Napoli durante il governo dei Napoleonidi’, Ricerche di Storia Sociale e
   Religiosa, 13, 1978.
Saitta, A., ‘Appunti per una ricerca sui notabili’, Critica Storica, 9, 1972.
Savarese, G., Tra Rivoluzioni e reazioni. Ricordi di Giuseppe Zurlo (1759–
   1828), Turin, 1941.
Scirocco, A., ‘I corpi rappresentativi nel Mezzogiorno dal “decennio” alla
   restaurazione: il personale dei consigli provinciali’, Quaderni Storici, 37,
   1978.
Sofia, F., Una Scienza per l’amministrazione. Statistica e pubblici apparati tra
   età rivoluzionaria e restaurazione, Rome, 1988.
Tacel, M., ‘L’agitation royaliste à Turin de 1805 à 1808’, Revue de l’Institut
   Napoléon, 52, 1954.
Tarle, E.V., La Vita economica dell’Italia nell’età napoleonica, Turin, 1950.
Tognarini, I. (ed.), La Toscana nell’età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica, Naples,
   1985.
—(ed.), Il Territorio pistoiese e i Lorena tra 700 e 800: viabilità e bonifiche,
   Naples, 1990.
Ungari, P., Storia del diritto di famiglia in Italia (1796–1942), Bologna, 1974.
Vaccarino, G., ‘Annessionismo e autonomia nel Piemonte giacobino dopo
   Marengo’, Studi in memoria di Gioele Solari, Turin, 1954.
Villani, P., Italia napoleonica, Naples, 1978.
Villes et territoire pendant la période napoléonienne (France et Italie), Rome,
   1987.
Woolf, S., A History of Italy 1700–1860, London, 1979.
—The Poor in Western Europe in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries,
   London—New York, 1986.
—‘Frontiere entro la frontiera: il Piemonte sotto il governo napoleonico’, in
   C.Ossola, C.Raffestin and M.Ricciardi (eds), La Frontiera da stato a
   nazione. Il caso Piemonte, Rome, 1987.
—‘L’impact de l’occupation française sur l’économie italienne’, Revue
   Economique, 40, 1989.
—The Société de Charité Maternelle’, in C.Jones and J.Barry (eds), Medicine
   and Charity Before the Welfare State, London, 1991.
Zaghi, C. (ed.), I Carteggi di Francesco Melzi d’Eril duca di Lodi, 9 vols,
   Milan, 1958–66.
—Potere chiesa e società. Studi e ricerche sull’Italia giacobina e napoleonica,
   Naples, 1984.
—L’Italia di Napoleone dalla Cisalpina al Regno, Turin, 1986.
Zangheri, R., La Proprietà terriera e le origini del Risorgimento nel
   Bolognese. I. 1789–1804, Bologna, 1961.

POLAND
Bielecki, R., ‘L’effort militaire polonais 1806–1815’, Revue de l’Institut
   Napoléon, 132, 1976.
Grochulska, B., ‘L’économie polonaise et le renversement de la conjoncture
   (1805–1815)’, Revue d’Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine, 17, 1970.
Jedlicki, J., ‘Bilan social du duché de Varsovie’, Acta Poloniae Historica, 14,
   1966.
                                                            Bibliography   299


Senkowska-Gluck, M., ‘Pouvoir et société en Illyrie napoléonienne’, Revue de
   l’Institut Napoléon, 113, 1980.
—‘La propriété foncière en Pologne (1789–1815)’, Annales Historiques de la
   Revolution Française, 53, 1981.

PORTUGAL
Neto, V. (ed.), A Revolução francesa e a peninsula iberica, Revista de Historia
   das Ideas, 10, Coimbra, 1988.
‘A Revolução francesa e a península ibérica’, Revista Portuguesa de Historia,
   23, 1987.

SPAIN
Ardit Lucas, M., Rivolución liberal y rivuelta campesina. Un ensayo sobre la
   disintegración del régimen feudal en el País Valenciano (1793–1840),
   Barcelona, 1977.
Artola-Gallego, M., Los Afrancesados, Madrid, 1953.
Aymes, J.R., La Guerra de la independencia en España (1808–1814), Madrid,
   1974.
Canales, E., ‘Patriotismo y desertion durante la guerra de la independencia en
   Cataluña’, Revista Portuguesa de Historia, 23, 1987.
Delgado Ribas, J.M., ‘Catalunya y el sistema de libre comercio (1778–1818).
   Una reflexión sobre las raices del reformismo borbónico’, unpublished
   Ph.D. thesis, Universitat de Barcelona, 1981.
Desamortización y hacienda publica, Madrid, 1986.
Esdaile, C., The Spanish Army in the Peninsular War, Manchester, 1988.
Les Espagnols et Napoléon. Actes du colloque international d’Aix-en-
   Provence 13, 14, 15 octobre 1983, Aix—Marseille, 1984.
Ferrer Benimeli, J.A., ‘La masonería bonapartista en España’, in Les
   Espagnols et Napoléon. Actes du colloque international d’Aix-en-
   Provence 13, 14, 15 octobre 1983, Aix—Marseille, 1984.
Fontana, J., La Crisis del Antiguo Régimen, Barcelona, 1979.
—La Quiebra de la monarquía absoluta 1814–1820, Barcelona, 1987.
—La Fi de l’Antic Règim i la industrialització (1787–1868). 5. Història de
   Catalunya, Barcelona, 1988.
Fontana, J. and Garrabou, R., Guerra y hacienda. La hacienda del gobierno
   central en los años de la guerra de la independencia (1808–1814),
   Alicante, 1986.
Fugier, A., Napoléon et l’Espagne, 2 vols, Paris, 1930.
‘La guerra del Francès, 1808–1814’, L’Avenç, 113, 1988.
La Invasió napoleónica. Economia, cultura i societat, Bellaterra, 1981.
La Parra López, E., El Primer liberalismo español y la Iglesia. Las Cortes de
   Cadiz, Alicante, 1985.
Mercader Riba, J., José Bonaparte, rey de España, 1808–1813. Historia
   externa del reinado, Madrid, 1971.
—José Bonaparte, rey de España (1808–1813). Estructura del estado español
   bonapartista, Madrid, 1983.
Moliner Prada, A., ‘Estructura, funcionamiento y terminología de las Juntas
   supremas provinciales en la guerra contra Napoleon: Los casos de
300   Bibliography


   Mallorca, Catalunya, Asturias y León’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
   Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 1981.
Olivé y Serret, E., ‘Pirates i comerciants. Les relacions d’un corsari francès
   amb comerciants catalans (1807–1811)’, Ricerques, 17, 1985.
Otaegui Arizmendi, A., ‘Guerra y crisis de la hacienda local: las ventas de
   biens comunales en Guipúzcoa, 1793–1814’, unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
   Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, 1988.
Roura i Aulinas, L., ‘La crisis del Antiguo Régimen. Del “panico” de
   Floridablanca a la guerra de la independencia’, in A.Dominguez Ortiz
   (ed.), Historia de España, 9. La Transition del Antiguo al Nuevo Régimen
   (1789–1874), Barcelona, 1988.
Suchet, L.-G., due d’Albufera, Mémoires du maréchal Suchet, due d’Albufera
   sur ses campagnes en Espagne depuis 1808 jusqu’en 1814, 2 vols, Paris,
   1828.
Vilar, P., ‘Quelques aspects de l’occupation et de la résistance en Espagne en
   1794 et au temps de Napoléon’, in Occupants occupés 1792–1815,
   Brussels, 1969.

SWITZERLAND
Bandelier, A., Porrentruy, sous-préfecture du Haut-Rhin. Un arrondissement
   communal sous le Consulat et l’Empire, 1800–1814, Neuchâtel, 1980.
—‘Les collèges des pays réunis a la France dans l’Université impériale:
   monopole napoléonien ou concurrence ecclésiastique?’, in Cinq siècles de
   relations franco-suisses. Hommage à Louis-Edouard Roulet, Neuchâtel,
   1984.
Courvoisier, J., Le Maréchal Berthier et sa principauté de Neuchâtel (1806–
   1814), Neuchâtel, 1959.
Dictionnaire historique et biographique de la Suisse, 7 vols, 1921–33.
Fankhauser, A., ‘Die Exekutive der Helvetischen Republik 1798–1803’,
   Studien und Quellen. Etudes et Sources. Studi e Fonti, 12, 1986.
Guichonnet, P., ‘Biens communaux et partages révolutionnaires dans l’ancien
   département du Léman’, Etudes Rurales, 36, 1969.
Im Hof, U., ‘Vereinswesen und Geselligkeit in der Schweiz, 1750–1850’, in
   E.François (ed.), Sociabilité et société bourgeoise en France, en Allemagne
   et en Suisse (1750–1850), Paris, 1986.
Python, F., ‘De quelques effets de la Révolution dans le diocèse de Lausanne
   (1798–1818)’, in B.Plongeron (ed.), Pratiques religieuses dans l’Europe
   révolutionnaire: mentalités et spiritualtiés, 1770–1820, Turnhout, 1989.
Schmidt, C., ‘Sismondi et le blocus continental’, Revue Historique, 115,
   1914.
Suratteau, J., ‘Occupation, occupants et occupés en Suisse de 1792 à 1814’,
   in Occupants Occupés 1792–1815, Brussels, 1969.
Name index




Abruzzi 71                             Arberg, C.P.A. d’, prefect 79, 218
Adriatic 150–1                         Arcole, battle of (1799) 168
Adriatic, department 73                Arcueil 219
Agar, J.A.M., count Mosbourg 70,       Arezzo 83, 206–7, 231
   73, 119                             Arno 111, 149, 203
Ain, department 78                     Asturias 235, 236
Aisne, department 73                   Athens 66
Aix-la-Chapelle 39, 46, 142, 147       Atlantic 20, 137–8, 141, 144, 145,
Alba 215                                  150
Alban de Villeneuve, prefect 89,       Auerstädt, battle of (1806) 25
   118                                 Augereau, C.P.F., marshal 47, 55,
Aldini, A., minister (Italy) 41, 203      57
Alembert, J.Lerond d’ 216              Augsburg 142, 147
Alessandria (Piedmont) 176             Austerlitz, battle of (1805) 25–6,
Alexander I, Tsar 24–7, 29–31, 55,        167–8, 170
   65                                  Austria 8, 15, 19, 23, 24–6, 33, 40,
Alps 23, 38, 90, 160, 169, 197            51, 52, 54, 56, 83, 94, 142,
Alsace 6, 13, 78–9, 142, 211, 237         145, 146, 148, 149, 151, 153–4,
Altona 151–2                              164, 169–70, 172, 195, 200,
Amiens, treaty (1802) 5, 22–3, 70,        202, 233, 241, 243–5
   137, 144, 170                       Auzers, L. de Douhet, count d’,
Amsterdam 5, 6, 66, 72, 101, 115,         director of police 92
   137, 151, 154–5, 189, 197, 201,     Avignon 13
   211, 226                            Azanza, M.J.de, minister (Spain)
Ancona 26                                 109
Andalusia 61, 236
Andréossy, A.F., general 58, 65–7      Babeuf, Gracchus 11
Angiolini, Francesco 124               Bacher, T., diplomat 42, 64, 67,
Antwerp 39                                129, 151
Aosta, valley 143                      Baciocchi, Félix 25
Apennines 230                          Baden 26, 27, 41, 106–7, 118,
Apennines, department 81                  142–3, 153, 200, 211, 243, 244
Aragon 52, 61, 90, 132                 Bailen, battle of (1808) 29
Aranjuez, treaty (1801) 23, 51


                                   301
302   Name index


Balbo, Cesare 44, 51, 72, 73, 196,    Bernadotte, J.B.J., marshal 58, 61,
   227, 229                              130, 170
Balbo, Prospero 195, 223              Berne 65
Bâle 6, 65, 154                       Berthier, L.A., marshal 27, 41, 52,
Balkans 105, 151                         54, 70, 74, 77, 85, 124, 163,
Baltic 6, 31, 169, 198                   167, 177, 183
Balzac, Honoré de 83                  Berthollet, C.L., scientist 190, 219
Barcelona 99                          Bertrand, H.G., general 51, 61–2,
Barras, P.F.J.N., viscount de 17         71, 172
Barthélemy, H.F.C, prefect 7, 73,     Beugnot, J.C. 38, 71, 73, 75, 88,
   115, 122                              93, 95, 106, 115, 117, 119,
Bas-Rhin, department 79, 114, 175        121–3, 125, 131, 173, 217–18
Basque country 52, 61                 Beurnonville, P.R., general 65, 71
Basses-Alpes, department 80           Bexon d’Ormschwilier, J., prefect
Bastiat, Frédéric, economist 242         79
Batavian republic 16, 23, 31, 43,     Biamino Arborio, P.A., prefect 77–9
   47–8, 69, 86, 89, 93, 100, 104,    Biella 79
   111, 117, 123, 189                 Bignon, L.P.E., diplomat 52, 68,
Bavaria viii, 25–7, 30, 41, 61, 71,      237
   74, 85, 100, 106–7, 110, 118,      Bohemia 13, 143, 148, 154
   121, 126, 129, 143, 146, 147–8,    Boigne, L.E.C.A. d’Osmond,
   149, 153, 162, 164, 167, 171,         countess de 219
   178, 182, 198, 200, 208–9,         Bologna 92, 99, 231
   211–12, 221, 233, 243              Bonaparte, Caroline 27, 45, 70,
Bayonne 56, 109, 126, 168, 173           219
Beauharnais, Eugene de 10, 59, 73,    Bonaparte, Elisa 25, 52, 63–5, 70,
   92, 95, 96, 117, 162–3, 170,          219, 223
   189                                Bonaparte, Jerome 27–8, 30, 52,
Beauharnais, family 75                   59, 66, 71, 117, 120, 127, 131,
Beauharnais, Josephine 27, 38, 44        155, 163, 181, 221
Belgium 10, 13–15, 17–18, 19, 23,     Bonaparte, Joseph 26, 27, 29, 52,
   39, 40, 43–4, 45–6, 48, 62, 76–       58, 61, 71, 93, 100, 104, 106,
   7, 79–80, 83, 86, 89, 91, 94–5,       109–10, 117, 119–21, 122, 126,
   98, 110, 113–14, 142, 144–5,          160, 163, 173, 181–2, 187, 190,
   160–1, 167, 171, 192, 193–5,          221, 232, 234–6
   199, 212, 214, 218, 220, 230,      Bonaparte, Louis 27, 30, 41, 52,
   236, 241                              59, 78, 89, 95–6, 100, 106, 111,
Benevento 41, 130                        114, 117, 120, 133, 151, 163,
Bentham, Jeremy 243                      167, 170, 178, 182, 191, 221,
Berg 27, 30, 38–9, 41, 52, 70–1,         224
   73, 86, 91, 95, 99, 105–6, 109,    Bonaparte, Lucien 71, 75, 93, 176
   113–14, 117, 119, 124, 126,        Bonaparte, Pauline 58, 183, 219
   129–30, 131, 141–3, 146–7,         Bonnin, C.J. 87
   154–5, 162, 164, 200, 208,         Boos-Waldeck, family 195
   232–3                              Bordeaux 6, 20, 145, 151
Bergamo 169                           Borghese, Camillo, prince 192
Berlin 63, 65–6, 72, 217, 242         Borodino, battle of (1812) 31, 59,
Berlin, decree (1806) 144, 198           170
Berlioz, Hector vii, 219              Bosnia 153
                                      Boucher de la Richarderie, G. 3
                                                        Name index   303


Bouches-de-l’Ebre, department 89      Cambacérès, J.J.R., consul 75, 219–
Bouches-de-l’Elbe, department 78,        21
   115                                Campo Alegre, duke de 203
Bouches-de-l’Escaut, department 78    Campoformio, treaty (1797) 16,
Bouches-de-Meuse, department 78          22, 26, 47, 70, 80
Bouches-du-Rhin, department 43        Canope, battle of (1798) 58
Bouches-du-Weser, department 79,      Capelle, G.A.B., prefect 221
   218                                Carinthia 30, 142
Boucqeau de la Villerie, P.J.M.,      Carniola 72
   prefect 80                         Casanova, Giacomo 5
Boulogne 54, 229                      Cassano, dukes di 95, 109, 188,
Boulouvard, director of customs          190
   152                                Castelletto 197
Bourbons, dynasty 23, 26, 27, 29,     Catalonia 51–2, 61, 71, 73, 80, 84,
   56, 233, 234                          89, 91, 99, 109, 113, 118, 140,
Bourrienne, L.A.Fauvelet de,             152, 165, 233–5, 236
   diplomat 70, 123, 151, 197         Catherine II, empress 8
Boury, A., entrepreneur 198           Catineau La Roche, inspector of
Bovara, G., minister (Italy) 212         Customs 82
Brabant 142                           Caulaincourt, A.A., marquis de,
Brauer, minister (Württemberg) 243       diplomat 66–7, 68
Brazil 145, 240                       Cavour, family 195, 203, 227
Bremen 79, 86, 99, 218                Chaban, prefect 143
Brescia 115, 124, 143, 232            Chabrol de Volvic, prefect 85, 89
Briot, P.J., sub-intendant (Naples)   Chabrol, intendant general 51
   71                                 Chambéry 169
Brissot de Warville, J.P. 14          Champagny, J.B.Nompère, count
Brittany 164                             de, minister 51, 67, 106, 141,
Bruguière de Barante, A.G.P.,            145, 148
   prefect 72                         Championnet, J.E., general 16, 47,
Brune, G.M.A., marshal 48, 58, 60,       71
   61, 65, 123                        Chaptal, J.A.C.de, minister 64, 87,
Brunswick 14, 96, 121, 220               89, 136, 139, 140, 190, 223
Brussels 29, 46, 124, 242             Charlemagne 25
Bülow, L.F.V.F.von, minister          Charles IV, king of Spain 202, 234
   (Westphalia) 109, 188–9            Charles V, emperor 25, 39
Büsch, J.G., economist 225            Charles-Emmanuel IV, king of
                                         Sardinia 191, 202
Cabarrùs, F., minister (Spain) 109,   Chateaubriand, F.R.de 65, 66, 124
  190                                 Chaussard, P., commissaire 46
Caccia di Romentino, G.M., prefect    Chauvelin, B.V.de, prefect 80
  111                                 China 2–3, 238
Cadiz 67, 190, 234–5, 242             Cisalpine, republic 16, 19, 23–4,
Caen 151                                 31, 47, 49, 62, 69, 77, 80, 93–
Cagliari 67                              4, 109, 189
Cahors 70                             Civitavecchia 26
Cairo 117                             Clarke, H.J.G., general 37, 58, 65,
Calabria 29, 60, 84, 90–1, 114,          75
  117, 122, 164, 178, 205–7, 217,     Clary, sisters 58
  231, 232
304   Name index


Cochon de Lapparent, C., prefect      Deux-Nèthes, department 43, 79
  43, 79                              Deux-Ponts 78, 201
Colmar 79, 123                        Di Breme, L.G.Arborio, minister
Cologne 39, 142, 147, 153, 204,          (Italy) 108, 115
  219                                 Dijon 163
Condorcet, J.A.N.de 223               Doire, department 72, 79
Coninck-Outrive, P.C.G.de, prefect    Dortmund 124
  78–9, 80                            Drenthe 78
Constant, Benjamin 33, 219, 241       Dresden 217
Constantinople 30, 64, 65–6, 68       Dublin 5, 66
Copenhagen 65, 68                     Dumas, Alexandre, novelist 168
Coquebert de Montbret, C.E.,          Dumas, M., general 58, 61, 65
  bureaucrat 5, 66, 70, 72, 139,      Dunkirk 154
  141, 150                            Duquesnoy, A., bureaucrat 4, 84,
Corfù 150                                96–7
Corsi Salviati, F.A. 227              Durand, F., merchant 149
Corsica 69                            Durazzo, G., doge 43, 78
Corsini T., prince 196                Duret de Tavel, officer 217
Cosenza 217                           Duroc, G.C.M., general 58, 65
Costaz, C.A., bureaucrat 149          Düsseldorf 38, 119, 151, 217
Croatia 30, 177                       Dutens, L., writer 3
Crouzet, P. 167                       Dyle, department 73, 99, 214
Cuneo 110
Cuoco, V. 89                          Egypt 15, 16, 22, 58, 68, 70, 71,
Custine, R.V.G.de, general 47            75, 172, 190
Cuvier, G., scientist 190–1, 224      Elba, island 24, 162, 198, 220
                                      Elbeuf 147
D’Alphonse, F.J.B., intendant         Ems-Occidental, department 74
  general 89                          Ems-Oriental, department 79
Dalberg, K.von, prince-primate 21,    Enghien, duke d’ 25, 124, 179
  27, 44, 100                         England, Great Britain 3, 4, 6, 8,
Dalmatia 30, 56, 62, 73, 124             13, 15–16, 19, 22–6, 28–9, 31,
Damas, brothers, generals 59, 71,        33, 40, 78, 131, 133, 137, 139,
  163                                    141–2, 143, 144–50, 152–3,
Dandolo, V., intendant 124, 203          154, 164, 211, 216, 230, 233,
Danube 151                               240, 242–3
Danzig 68, 72, 106, 148               Erfurt 30, 39, 52, 55
Daru, P., minister 55, 56, 72, 158    Escaut, department 71, 111, 161
Dauchy, L.J.E. 51, 73                 Espoz y Mina, F., general 227, 236
David, J.L., painter 168              Essling, battle of (1809) 30, 168
Davout, L.N., marshal 58, 62, 169,    Estève, M.R.X., treasurer and payer
  174, 183                               general 57, 58
Degregory di Marcorengo, G.L.,        Etruria 191
  prefect 77–8                        Eudel, director of Customs 152
Dejean, J.F.A., general 49, 55, 61,   Europe, central 42, 149, 224, 232
  66                                  Europe, east 6, 19, 29, 53, 129,
Delacroix, C., diplomat 18, 63, 139      142, 146, 148, 202
Denmark 27–8                          Europe, north 6, 19, 28, 91, 141–2,
Denon, D.V. vii                          150, 232
Derville-Maléchard, prefect 72        Europe, south 141
                                                         Name index   305


Europe, west 7, 28, 148, 202, 213     Gaudin, N.M.C., minister 40–1, 72,
Eylau, battle of (1807) 26, 168          100, 172
Eymar, A.M.d’, prefect 48, 69–70,     Gaultier de Kerveguen, P.L., general
   79                                    47
                                      Geneva 16, 20, 23–4, 43, 76, 80,
Fabbroni, G., inspector of ponts et      99, 153
   chaussées 191, 196, 222            Genoa 39, 43, 47–8, 62, 66, 69,
Fain, A.F.J., secretary to Napoleon      73, 77, 78, 80, 95, 98, 100,
   183                                   120, 143, 171, 180, 241
Faipoult de Maisoncelles, G.C. 71     George III, king of Great Britain 25
Falletti di Barolo, O.A.C., senator   Gérando, J.M.de 7, 51, 71, 73, 85,
   43                                    87, 186, 218, 225
Fauvel, L.F.S., vice-consul 66        Gérando, M.A.von
Federigo, E., officer 229                Rathsamshausen, Mme de 216,
Felici, D., minister (Italy) 208         229, 236–7
Ferdinand VII, king of Spain 234      Gérard, F.P.S., painter vii
Ferdinand IV, king of Naples 241      Germany 2, 4–5, 10, 15, 23–6, 27,
Fesch, J., cardinal 65                   30–1, 42–4, 46, 50–1, 53, 54,
Finland 27, 29, 30                       59, 63, 64, 73, 76–7, 82, 88,
Flachat, company 17, 18, 196             93, 105–7, 111–13, 119, 121–2,
Flanders 160, 162, 206–7, 214            127–9, 130, 141, 142, 143,
Fleurus, battle of (1794) 16             145–9, 151, 153, 162–3, 167,
Florence 38, 65, 66, 69, 196, 203,       169, 171–2, 178, 182, 193, 200,
   219–20, 221                           205, 208, 210–11, 214, 216–17,
Fontainebleau, decree (1807) 28          219–20, 221, 225, 236–7, 244
Fontainebleau, decree (1810) 152      Gers, department 79
Fontanes, L., grand master of the     Ghillenghien, C.A. 203, 227
   University 65, 223                 Gianni, F.M. 109, 190
Forlì 114                             Gioia, M. 242
Fossombroni, V.M., senator 43         Girona 99, 236
Fouché, J., minister 108, 272         Giulio, C., prefect 77
Francis II, emperor of Austria 25,    Gneisenau, A.N.von, field marshal,
   30, 241                               minister (Prussia) 237
François de Neufchâteau, N.L.,        Godoy, M.de, minister (Spain) 86,
   minister 87, 136                      234
Frankfurt 6, 100, 125, 129, 141,      Gogel, I., minister (Holland) 92–3,
   151, 155                              109, 115, 117, 124, 191
Frederick II, king of Prussia 217     Gouda 142
Frederick William III, king of        Gouvion Saint-Cyr, L., marshal 59,
   Prussia 25, 85, 116                   61, 65
Frémin de Beaumont, N., prefect 43    Goya y Lucientes, F.de, painter 185,
Friburg (Switzerland) 212–13             233
Friedland, battle of (1807) 26        Gracin, general 170
                                      Great Britain, see England
Galanti, G.M. 89                      Greece 9, 14, 241
Galicia (Spain) 235, 236              Grégoire, H.B., abbé 207, 211, 213
Gallois, inspector of mines 88        Grimm, brothers, writers 237
Gandolfo, A., prefect 77, 221         Griois, L., general 220
Gardane, C.M., general 65             Gros, A.J., painter 168
Garrau, P.A. 16                       Grouchy, E.de, marshal 59
306   Name index


Guipùzcoa 84, 202, 204, 205            150–2, 153, 154–5, 162–3, 164,
                                       170, 171–2, 173, 175, 178, 182,
Habsburg, dynasty 23, 26–7, 30,        189, 191, 193, 195, 200, 201,
  53, 102                              208, 210–11, 224, 225, 232,
Habsburg, John, archduke 233           236, 241
Habsburg, Marie-Louise, empress      Holland, kingdom of 27–8, 30, 39,
  27, 30, 38, 180, 219–20              40, 43–4, 52, 59, 62, 71, 72,
Hainaut 201, 204                       73–4, 76–7, 78, 95, 98, 105,
Haller, army supplier 17, 196          106, 109–11, 114–15, 117,
Hamburg 5–6, 62, 66, 70, 78, 99,       121–2, 128, 189
  106, 123, 137, 151–2, 154–5,       Holvoet, B.J., prefect 79
  164, 192, 197, 226, 232            Hormayr, I., writer 233
Hampesch, minister (Bavaria) 146     Hugo, Victor, novelist 168
Hanover 25, 85, 131, 183             Hultman, C.G., prefect 78
Hanseatic 30, 40, 51, 52, 59, 62,
  73, 79, 86, 91, 98–9, 103, 117,    Illyrian provinces 30, 40, 51, 62,
  151, 154, 160, 162, 174, 195,          72–3, 82, 105, 128, 142, 151,
  211                                    153, 162
Hardenberg, K.A.von, minister        Ionian islands 16, 27
  (Prussia) 189, 237, 240, 243       Ireland 179
Hargenvilliers, A.A., bureaucrat     Italian republic 24, 41, 50, 52, 59,
  160                                    86, 90–1, 93–6, 99, 103, 109,
Hauterive, A.M.Blanc de la Naulle        116, 126, 131, 141–4, 162, 164,
  d’, diplomat, 64, 68                   189, 194, 209
Hautes-Alpes, department 79          Italy ix, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9–11, 15–18,
Haut-Rhin, department 78, 154,           23, 24–6, 28, 30, 39, 40, 43–4,
  175                                    47, 49, 59, 62, 63, 76–7, 79,
Hédouville, G.M.T., diplomat 65          82, 99, 110–12, 116–17, 127–8,
Heligoland 151                           119–30, 141–2, 144–5, 146–9,
Helvetic Confederation 41, 83, 86,       150, 152, 154, 162, 163, 166–8,
  152                                    171–2, 173, 178, 190, 193, 196,
Helvetic republic 16, 23, 48, 103        198, 200, 203, 205, 211, 216,
Helvétius, A.C.de Ligneville, Mme        217, 221, 229–33, 236–7, 239,
  d’ 45                                  242
Herman, F.von, economist 242         Italy, kingdom of 10, 25–6, 39, 41,
Héron de Villefosse, A.M.,               50, 52, 59, 66, 72, 88, 89, 91,
  inspector of mines 88                  95, 98, 105, 108–9, 110–11,
Hesse-Cassel 241                         115, 117, 121, 130, 131, 142,
Hesse-Darmstadt 106, 129, 143,           143, 147, 149, 153–4, 161, 166,
  163, 200                               173–4, 175, 181, 182–3, 189,
Hoche, L., general 16, 47, 90–1          201–2, 208, 211, 214, 224, 233
Hofstede, P., prefect 78
Hogendorp, D.van, general 59,        Jacob, diplomat 64
  163, 178, 182                      Jacobson, Israël, banker 210
Hohenlinden, battle of (1800) 23     Jacquin, F.J., soldier 164–5, 168–
Hohenzollern, dynasty 53                70, 214
Holland 2, 4, 10–11, 13, 15, 16,     Janet, L.M., bureaucrat 51
  19, 23, 51, 83, 84, 89, 91–2,      Jannesson, S.L.J., prefect 78
  94, 95, 103–4, 106, 116–17,        Jeanbon-Saint-André, called A.
  131, 137, 141, 143, 144, 147,         Jeanbon, 72
                                                          Name index   307


Jefferson, T., president of the        Lechi, G.A. and T., brothers,
   United States of America 150            generals 227
Jemmapes, battle of (1792) 14          Leclerc, V.E., general 58, 62
Jemmapes, department 78, 154,          Lefebvre, F.J., marshal 148
   201, 202, 204                       Leghorn 18, 204, 221
Jena, battle of (1806) 25–6, 52, 90,   Leipzig 6, 70, 141, 217
   243                                 Leipzig, battle of (1813) 31
Jolivet, J.B.M., prefect 72            Léman, department 80, 99, 111,
Jomini, A.H.de, general 146                175, 194, 203, 205, 227
Joseph II, emperor 200, 202, 212,      Leoben, treaty of (1797) 16, 70
   243                                 Leopardi, Giacomo, poet 239
Jourdan, J.B., general 49, 58, 61–2,   Lerida 165
   65–6, 77, 103, 158, 202, 205,       Lespérut, F.V.J. 70, 74, 85
   215                                 Levant 6, 68, 145, 153
Jourdan, son, prefect 67               Lezay-Marnésia, P.A.F.de, prefect 79
Jourdan-Delbrel, law (1798) 158,       Liège 46, 98–9, 142
   160                                 Liguria 49–50, 72–3, 80, 88, 103,
Jubé de la Perelle, A., prefect 79         131, 160, 192, 230
Juliers 176                            Ligurian republic 23, 25, 49, 51,
Junot, A., general 58, 65, 177, 230,       78, 80–1, 116
   240                                 Lille 7, 78
Jura 79                                Lisbon 65, 67, 242
                                       List, Friedrich, economist 242
Kassel 220                             Loire, department 79
Keppler, M.X., prefect 79              Lombardy 45–7, 70, 86, 90, 92,
Kettler, baron 115                         99, 104, 126, 142–3, 149, 155,
Kléber, J.B., general 16, 58               181, 188, 207, 233, 241, 243–4
Koblenz 153, 204                       London 5, 65–7, 70, 151, 189, 213
Königsberg 72                          Lorraine 6, 211
Krefeld 147                            Louis XIV 8, 159
Küster, J.E., diplomat (Prussia) 116   Louis XVI 175, 180
                                       Louisiana 24
La Bouillerie, F.M.P.R., treasurer     Louvain 223
   and payer general 57                Louviers 147
La Fayette, M.J.P.du Mottier de 64     Lovatelli, I. 114
Lacuée, J.G., minister 55, 61, 167     Low Countries, see Holland
Ladoucette, J.C.F.de, prefect 79,      Loysel, P., prefect 80
   218                                 Lubeck 99, 195
Lafolie, C., 207, 272                  Lucca 25, 47, 52, 63
Lagarde, P., director of police 193    Lullin de Châteauvieux, inspector
Lamarque, J.M., general 71                 of merino sheep 203
Lambrechts, C.J.M., senator 43         Luneburg 99, 115, 124
Lameth, A.de, prefect 80               Lunéville, treaty of (1801) 23–4
Lannes, J., general 58, 65, 67         Lunigiana 131
Laplace, P.S.de, scientist 190         Luxembourg 39, 142
Larrey, J.D., surgeon 170              Luzzatti, G., banker 221
Lavoisier, A.L., scientist 225         Lyons 6, 49–50, 109, 127, 142,
Lebrun, C.F., consul 51, 72, 73, 75,       145, 147, 149, 154
   103, 116, 120, 122, 160, 171,       Lys, department 43, 78–9, 80
   186, 210, 221, 230, 269
308   Name index


Maasland 78                             Miot de Mélito, A.F. 69, 203
Macao 69                                Mirabeau, H.G.Riqueti, count de 9,
Macdonald, E.J.J.A., general 17,          211
  59, 65                                Modena 23, 166, 195, 213, 215
Macedonia 153                           Molé, M.L., minister 97, 102, 165
Madrid 65, 203, 220, 233                Mollien, N.F., minister 56, 138–9
Mainz 7, 27, 39, 83, 153, 163–4,        Mondovì 113
  200, 207                              Monferrato 161
Maistre, J.de 195, 242                  Mons 202, 204
Malta 16, 150                           Montalivet, J.P.Bachasson, count
Manche, department 43                     de, minister 10, 37, 100, 154
Marihès, C.A., colonel 91, 232          Mont-Blanc, department 43, 98,
Marbot, J.B.A.M., general 38, 56,         194, 203
  61, 169, 219                          Montenotte, department 89
Marches (Italy) 29, 112, 142            Montgaillard, J.B.M.R., publicist
Maremma 202                               28, 139
Marengo, battle of (1800) 23, 48        Montgelas, M.von, minister
Marengo, department 73                    (Bavaria) 85, 100, 148, 171, 243
Marescalchi, F., minister (Italy) 94,   Mont-Tonnerre, department 79,
  116, 148, 219                           111, 114, 194, 200, 201, 209
Maret, H.B., minister 41                Morand, general 152
Maria Theresa, empress 1                Moratìn, F.de, writer 190
Mark 142, 164                           Moravia 148, 151, 154
Marmont, A.F.L.Viesse de, marshal       Moreau, J.V., general 23, 58–9, 71
  51, 55–6, 58, 62, 124                 Moreau de Saint-Méry, bureaucrat
Marseilles 6, 144                         51
Masséna, A., marshal 9, 17, 19,         Mosca, Gaetano, political scientist
  47–8, 55, 58, 61, 71, 90–1, 121,        174
  123, 169, 177                         Mosca, prefect (Italy) 131
Max-Joseph, king of Bavaria 27,         Moscow 170, 214
  85, 140, 167                          Mouchard de Chaban, F.L.R.,
Mazzini, Giuseppe 239, 241                prefect 73
Mazzoni, V., industrialist 143          Mulhouse 143, 154
Mediterranean 6, 16, 90, 139, 141,      Müller, J.von, historian 222
  148, 232                              Munich 66, 67, 118, 143, 147, 203
Mella, department (Italy) 115           Munster 115, 208
Melzi d’Eril, Francesco, vice-          Murat, Joachim, king of Naples 27,
  president (Italy) 50, 93–5, 103,        41, 52, 54, 58, 70, 71, 89, 96,
  109, 114, 116–17, 120, 122,             109, 117, 119–20, 122, 146,
  172, 188–9                              149, 160, 162–3, 172, 173, 178,
Menou, J.F.de Boussay de, general         181–2, 189, 232, 234
  49, 51, 59, 62, 92, 94, 121, 218
Metternich, C.W.L., prince 37–8,        Nancy 79, 163
  140                                   Nantes 6
Meuse-Inférieure, department 80         Naples viii, 26, 27–8, 41, 48, 52,
Michaud, C.I.F., general 59               59, 62, 70–1, 73, 75, 83, 86,
Milan 41, 65, 109, 164                    89–90, 93, 94–5, 100, 104–5,
Milan, decree (1807) 28, 144, 164         106, 109–10, 111, 114, 117,
Milliet d’Arvillard, family 203           119, 121–2, 126, 128–9, 142,
Miollis, C.F.M.E.de, general 59           144, 149, 160, 163, 166–7,
                                                         Name index    309


   173–4, 178, 181–2, 187, 190–1,        181, 192, 208, 212
   195, 202, 203, 212, 215, 220,      Paris 2, 6, 8, 10, 19, 36–7, 41–2,
   224, 241, 243                         44–5, 46, 48, 64, 77, 82, 84,
Nardon, H., prefect 51, 72               88–9, 94, 96, 101, 109, 122,
Narzole 91                               124, 138, 144, 145, 151, 154,
Navarre 52, 61, 227, 236                 189, 192, 196, 198, 216, 218–
Necker, J., minister 49                  20, 226
Nelson, Horatio 23, 24                Parisi, G., general 191
Nerval, G.de, writer 168              Parma 24–5, 29, 39, 40, 50–1, 72,
Nesselrode, K.R.V., minister (Berg)      230, 232
   109, 115, 119, 189                 Parthenopean republic 16, 47, 71,
Neuchâtel 27, 41, 52, 57, 60, 70,        86, 231
   74, 85, 109, 124, 161, 163,        Pascoli, Giovanni, poet vii
   167, 189                           Pasquier, E.D., prefect of police 180
Ney, M., marshal 61, 65, 177, 183     Pavia 111, 166
Nice 13, 20, 77                       Percy, P.F., surgeon 170
Nicolaï, S.L.M.F.de, prefect 72       Périer, C. 145
Nijmegen 169                          Perpignan 149
Nile, battle of (1798) 23             Persia 30
Noguès, A., general 164, 170–1,       Pestalozzi, H., pedagogue 224
   236                                Peter Leopold, grand-duke of
Nord, department 79                      Tuscany 134, 202, 231
North Sea 51, 73, 99, 151             Pétiet, C., army inspector 49, 70
Novara, department (Italy) 111        Petit de Beauverger, A., prefect 73
Novi 221                              Peuchet, J., writer 1, 7
Nuremberg 148                         Piacenza 51, 230
                                      Piedmont 23–4, 39, 43–4, 47–50,
O’Farrill y Herrera, G., minister        62, 66, 69, 72, 77, 83–4, 86,
  (Spain) 109                            88, 90–2, 94–5, 98–9, 103, 110,
Oberkampf, C.P., industrialist 143,      113, 116, 121, 128, 142, 149,
  144–5, 155                             153, 155, 161, 171, 175, 176,
Oder 151                                 181, 191–2, 194, 197, 202–5,
Oldenburg 99, 151                        215, 223, 224, 227, 237, 241,
Oneglia 69                               244
Orange, dynasty 50, 175               Piombino 24–5, 70
Osnabrück 99                          Pistoia 83
Otto, L.G., diplomat 64, 67, 118      Pius VII 23, 26, 207, 213, 214
Ottoman empire 16, 25, 27, 29, 30,    Plancy, prefect 88
  69, 105, 144, 151, 153, 162         Po, department 77, 80
Oudinot, N.C., marshal 57, 60         Po, river 169
Ourthe, department 99, 212, 214       Poissonier, company 196
Ouvrard, G.J., banker 196             Poland 6–7, 27, 29, 53, 54, 68,
Overijssel 78                            105, 111, 114, 126, 128, 129–
                                         30, 146, 148, 151, 162–3, 168,
Padua 164                                171, 172, 175, 178, 181, 201,
Paisiello, G., composer vii              203, 205, 236
Palermo 242                           Pomerania 169
Palestine 68                          Pontecorvo 130
Pamplona 214                          Portalis, J.E.M., minister 216
Papal states 30, 51, 72, 99, 112,     Portugal 25, 27–9, 61, 64, 83, 141,
310   Name index


   144–5, 147, 149, 150, 172, 177,        212
   221, 233, 236, 240                   Robert, G., prefect 77
Prato 143, 149, 198                     Robespierre, M.M.I.de 10
Presburg, treaty of (1805) 26           Roederer, A.M., son 66
Prina, G., minister (Italy) 72, 105,    Roederer, P.L., minister 39, 41, 71,
   110                                    100, 104–5, 117, 119, 121–2,
Provence 164                              128, 176
Prussia 13, 16, 25–7, 29, 40, 52,       Roer, department 79, 80, 147
   54, 56, 60, 72, 90, 107, 116,        Roggieri, J.B., prefect 80
   145–6, 151, 156, 163–4, 169,         Roland de la Platière, Jeanne-Marie
   172, 189, 200, 208, 222, 237,          Phlipon, Mme 44
   240, 243                             Roman republic 16
Pyrenees 90, 149, 152, 160, 220         Rome 8, 44, 47, 59, 62, 65, 66, 69,
                                          73, 98–9, 101, 103, 106, 117,
Quesnay, F., economist 134                124, 195, 198, 207, 211, 213,
                                          215, 219, 237, 239
Radet, E., general 62                   Romme, Gilbert 5
Ragusa 72                               Rothschild, family 151, 197
Rambuteau, C.P.Barthelot de,            Rotterdam 151, 154
   prefect 197                          Rougemont, G.de 119, 189
Ratisbon 66, 67                         Rousseau, J.J. 4, 6, 229
Ratisbon, Rezes (1803) 24               Roussillon 152
Récamier, Mme J. 45, 216                Rudler, F.J., bureaucrat 47, 48, 51,
Redditi, F. 203                           69
Reinhardt, C.F., diplomat 42, 63–4,     Ruffo, F., cardinal 206, 231
   237                                  Ruhr 143
Reinoso, F.J., priest 228               Rumford, B.Thompson, count 225
Reitzenstein, S.von, minister           Russia 3, 6, 8, 16, 23, 24, 25–7,
   (Baden) 243                            29–31, 33, 40, 42, 53, 54, 57,
Reno, department (Italy) 131              59, 68, 105, 141, 144–5, 146,
Reubell, J.F., 15–16                      151, 159, 164, 169, 172, 234,
Reynier, J.L., general 58, 59, 61, 71     240
Rhine 8, 15–16, 19, 70, 123, 131,
   141, 151–3, 155, 183, 198, 200,      Saint-Bernard pass 168, 197
   214                                  Saint-Cloud 124
Rhine, Confederation of 21, 26–7,       Saint-Cloud, decree (1810) 28, 152
   41, 50, 52, 63, 86, 107, 118,        Saint-Cyr 166–7, 192
   129, 141, 143, 146, 149, 151,        Saint Helena 57, 72, 172
   154, 162, 171, 211                   Saint Petersburg 65–7, 68
Rhine, left bank of, see Rhineland      Salamanca 169
Rhin-et-Moselle, department 73,         Saliceti, C. 16, 50, 69, 71, 94
   79–80, 195, 201, 202–5               Salonica 153
Rhineland 6, 15, 16, 19–20, 23–4,       Saluzzo di Monesiglio, family 191,
   43, 45–7, 48, 49, 51, 62, 69,           195, 222–3, 227
   72, 76–7, 79–80, 86, 89, 91, 93,     San Domingo 24, 62, 144
   98, 113, 128–9, 141, 145, 160–       San Martino della Motta, G.F.,
   1, 163, 177, 194, 195, 196,             prefect 77
   199, 203, 205, 207–8, 212, 214,      Sardinia 13, 27, 67, 195
   221, 243, 244                        Sarre 79–80
Ricciardi, F., minister (Naples) 109,
                                                           Name index   311


Sarre, department 80, 114, 161,            190, 193, 195–6, 200, 202–3,
    194, 205, 209                          205, 207, 215, 221, 228, 231,
Savary, J.M.R., minister 65, 108,          233–7, 238, 240
    180, 272                            Stadion, J.P.C, count von, minister
Savigny, K.von, writer 239, 241            (Austria) 140, 200
Savoy 13–14, 20, 23, 40, 48, 77,        Staël, Mme G.de, writer 33, 45,
    80, 81, 89, 98, 113, 128, 175,         216, 219, 229
    193, 220                            Stein, H.F.K.von, minister (Prussia)
Saxony 27, 114, 126, 143, 148,             189, 237, 243
    155, 169                            Stendhal, H.Beyle, called 40, 55,
Say, J.B., economist 242                   96, 121, 167, 170, 220
Scandinavia 3, 4                        Strasburg 8, 42, 123, 151, 153
Scarzello, bandits 91                   Stura, department 78–9, 110
Scheldt 19                              Suchet, L.G., marshal 58, 61, 89,
Scheveningen 232                           114, 129, 132, 233
Schimmelpenninck, R.J., grand           Sweden 27, 28, 69
    pensionary (Holland) 43, 94,        Switzerland 4, 13–15, 16–17, 23,
    109, 116, 139, 188–9                   24, 27, 48, 50, 65, 76, 82, 94,
Schleiermacher, F. 217                     104, 130, 142–3, 147, 149, 151,
Schönbrunn, treaty of (1809) 30            153, 156, 161, 162–4, 169, 171,
Schwyz 207                                 193, 203, 207, 212, 219, 221,
Scopoli, G., minister (Italy) 89, 112      222, 224, 230, 241
Sébastiani, H.F.B., general 58, 68
Sedan 147                               Tagliamento, department (Italy) 112
Seine-Inférieure, department 71         Talleyrand-Périgord, C.M.de,
Sesia, department 78                       minister 17, 41, 63, 66–7, 75,
Seville 228                                123, 130, 219, 223
Sicily 25, 27, 91, 150, 232, 243        Tanaro, department 77, 81
Siena 202, 221                          Tarentaise 193
Sièyes, E.J. 19                         Taro, department 72
Sila 91                                 Teheran 65, 68
Silesia 70, 72, 148                     The Hague 39, 220
Siméon, J.J., minister (Berg) 71–3,     Thiébault, P.C.F.D., general 52,
    121–2, 128                             123, 169
Simplon, department 72                  Ticino 30
Simplon pass 24, 197                    Tilsit, treaty of (1807) 26–7, 29,
Sismondi, J.C.L.Simonde de, writer         100, 144, 182
    153                                 Tocqueville, Alexis de 37, 239, 245
Smith, Adam, economist 134              Tönning 151
Smith, S., general 232                  Tornielli, G., prefect 111
Soult, J.de Dieu, marshal 61, 177,      Tort de la Sonde, company 196
    236                                 Toulon 58
South America 25, 238                   Tournon, C.de, prefect 52, 269,
Spain 2, 6, 13, 16, 17, 19, 23–4,          271
    28, 29–30, 42, 52, 53, 56, 59,      Trafalgar, battle of (1805) 24, 140
    61–2, 64, 68, 71, 83, 86, 90,       Trasimeno, department 183
    95–6, 109, 119, 120, 123, 126,      Trent, council of 214
    127–8, 132, 137, 141, 144–5,        Trentino 26, 169, 198
    147, 149, 150, 155, 159, 163,       Treviso 214
    168, 169, 172, 174, 178, 181,       Trianon, decree (1810) 28, 151–2
312   Name index


Trier 205                             Vienna 63, 65–6, 151, 217
Trieste 30, 150, 153                  Vienna, congress of (1815) 241
Trouvé, C.J., diplomat 48             Vienne, department 43, 79
Turgot, A.R.J., minister 134          Vieusseux, G.P., merchant 8
Turin 80, 166, 169, 203, 219–20,      Vigny, Alfred de, writer 168
   222–4, 231                         Villemanzy, J.P.Orillard, count de,
Turkey, see Ottoman empire               army inspector 57
Turreau, general 65                   Vilna 72
Tuscany 8, 16, 23, 29, 40, 43, 47,    Viry, J.J.M.de, prefect 43
   51, 62, 70, 72–3, 91, 98, 101,     Vis 150
   104, 109, 113, 117, 119, 128,      Voeght, K.von, philanthropist 225
   131, 180, 190, 191, 193, 196,      Volney, C.F., count de 5, 70
   198, 202, 218, 220, 221, 243       Voltaire, F.M.Arouet, called 3, 6,
Tyrol 26, 72, 148, 162, 232–3
                                      Wagram, battle of (1809) 30, 59,
Ulm, battle of (1805) 25, 68, 168       148, 168, 170
United Provinces, see Holland         Waldbott-Bassenheim, I.von 203
United States of America 6, 20, 24,   Warsaw 68, 70, 72, 126
   68, 137, 145, 150, 152             Warsaw, grand duchy 27, 30, 52,
Unterwalden 207                         62, 74, 86, 106, 114, 122, 126,
Uri 207                                 129, 143, 146, 148, 181, 221
Utrecht 212                           Washington 65
                                      Waterloo, battle of (1815) 170, 239
Valais 24, 30, 72, 83, 86             Wellington, A.Wellesley, duke of 30,
Valencia 114, 178, 236                  61, 177, 233
Valmy, battle of (1792) 14            Westphalia viii, 27, 41, 52, 59, 66,
van den Ende, A. 191, 224               73, 86, 88, 91, 93, 96, 99, 106,
Vannes 164, 169                         109, 110, 113–14, 116, 117,
Vaucluse, department 78                 119, 121, 126–31, 134, 155,
Vendée 90–1, 160, 206, 231              163–4, 172, 173, 181, 183, 189,
Venetia 25, 50, 95, 112, 121, 123,      208, 210, 211, 241
   130, 149, 164, 182, 203, 207,      William I, king of Holland 241
   213                                Winter, L. 244
Venice 47, 62, 83, 99, 195, 212       Wirion, general 49, 62, 91
Verhuell, K. 124                      Württemberg 25–6, 27, 153, 200,
Verri, C., prefect 115                  243
Verri, Pietro, writer 188
Verviers 142, 143, 147                Zaragoza 61
Vicenza 229                           Zeeland 113
Victor, C.V.Perrin, called, general   Zurich 83
   61, 68                             Zurich, battle of (1799) 19, 168
Victor Emmanuel I, king of Sardinia   Zurlo, G., minister (Naples) 100,
   195, 241, 243                        109, 128, 190
Subject index




academy 61, 77; military 44, 166–          192, 194, 198, 201, 208, 223,
   7, 191, 216, 218, 229, 239              232
administration: financial 95; local     aristocracy 5, 8, 9, 43–4, 50, 63,
   39, 42, 48, 103–4, 106, 112,            66, 75, 77, 78, 93, 95, 99, 109–
   114–15, 119, 123, 195; military         11, 113–14, 126, 129–30, 148,
   61, 89–90, 114, 132, 165, 236;          162, 166–7, 175, 177–82, 189–
   science of 87, 125, 239                 91, 193–6, 199–200, 202–3,
administrative centralisation 33, 38,      208, 216, 219–20, 227, 229,
   46, 53–4, 89, 97, 100, 103, 117,        231, 237–8, 244
   126, 132, 189, 210, 233, 242–3;      army vii, 10, 11, 18, 29, 45, 54,
   integration 83–132, 184–7, 217,         69–70, 150, 156–7, 159, 165–
   238, 243–4; personnel 33, 37,           74, 177, 193, 214, 220–1, 226–
   42, 44, 74–82, 87, 95, 132, 136,        7, 235, 240; inspectors 49, 55–
   197; system viii, 13, 33, 37, 39,       6; of Italy 9, 18, 58–9, 62;
   44, 52, 73–4, 81–2, 103, 112,           officers 54, 157–8, 165–6, 168–
   116–24, 131, 133–4, 152, 155–           70, 173–4, 177–8, 182, 192–4,
   6, 161–2, 216, 227, 235, 240,           217–18, 220–1, 229; paymasters
   243                                     55–8, 123; suppliers 18, 45, 55,
administrators viii, 4–5, 38, 44–5,        173, 196, 199–200; uniforms
   52, 69–74, 85, 109, 117, 119,           54, 165, 168, 178, 220; see also
   124, 127–8, 159, 174, 177, 185,         conscription; desertion; Imperial
   219–21, 227, 235, 239–42; -             Guard
   general 49, 51, 62, 70, 73, 149      artillery 55–6, 123, 166, 170, 191
afrancesados 190, 235                   artisans 2, 7, 157, 188, 211, 224,
amalgame 109–10, 117, 166, 218             227, 236
ambassadors 48, 65–8                    assemblies, representative 96–7, 157
ancien regime 12, 49, 63, 66, 83,       assembly: Constituent 13, 37, 128,
   102, 104–5, 125, 134, 157, 175,         157, 174; Convention 14–15,
   178, 181, 197, 219, 225, 231            45, 69, 80, 234; Legislative 13,
annexation, annexed territories 15,        19–70, 97; legislative body 43–4,
   17–18, 40, 43–4, 46–51, 72–5,           179, 230; Senate 43–4, 71, 78,
   80, 98, 103, 111–12, 142, 147,          176, 179, 181, 189; Tribunate
   149, 153–4, 175, 180–2, 188–9,          43, 79, 176, 219
                                        associations 213, 218–19, 222, 226


                                    313
314   Subject index


auditors 44, 64, 66, 72–4, 76, 81,          96, 212–13, 221–2, 226–8, 235;
  88, 100, 115, 166, 192, 196               see also ralliement
                                         colonial goods 148–54
banditry, bandits 90–1, 149, 164,        colonies 6, 19–20, 24, 28, 38, 137,
   235–6                                    140–1, 143–4, 234
Bank of France 138                       commissaires 16, 17, 19, 45–8, 55,
banks, bankers 7, 150–1, 153, 196–          61, 69, 96, 110
   7, 201, 204, 210                      commune 108, 112–15, 158, 198–
blockade, see Continental blockade          9, 202, 205–6, 227–8
boundaries, see frontiers                community 156, 161, 187, 197,
brigandage, brigands 61, 90–2,              206, 209–11, 232–3, 237, 240–
   119, 163, 231–2, 235                     1, 244
Brumaire coup (9 November 1799)          concordats 23, 205, 207, 209, 213,
   9, 11, 13–15, 19–20, 22, 31, 37,         223, 231
   48, 57–9, 63, 65, 70, 71, 79,         conscription 1–2, 17, 40, 54, 68,
   80, 84, 87, 93, 96, 103, 109,            91, 100, 120, 132–3, 156–65,
   125, 140, 174, 194, 200                  167–8, 171, 173, 212, 227, 232
budget, accounts 56, 61, 138             Conservatory of arts and crafts 136
bureaucracy 12, 239, 244; see also       Constituent assembly, see assembly
   administrators                        constitutions 11, 31, 47, 49–50, 64,
                                            71, 117–18, 121–2, 125–7, 235,
cadaster 102, 105–6, 113, 115,              239, 241–2
   175, 198–9, 243                       consular service, consuls 63–4, 66–
capital city 98–9, 117, 119, 138,           70, 75, 123, 140
   195, 217                              Consulate viii, 4, 5, 49, 51, 53, 56,
categories, see classification              59, 61–2, 65–6, 69–70, 75, 80,
catholics, see church, Catholic             81, 84, 87, 90, 105, 116, 154,
chambers of arts and commerce               158–60, 165, 170, 174, 176,
   108, 144, 153                            179, 216, 218, 223
charity 107, 154, 216, 225–7             consulta, Roman 51, 72, 73, 103
church, Catholic 24, 112, 162,           Continental blockade 22, 28–31,
   199–200, 206–9, 212–15, 221,             38, 40, 52, 63, 67–8, 82, 120,
   223–6, 231, 234, 239; churches,          133–4, 137, 140–55, 198, 204–
   Protestant 24, 200, 207–9, 214,          5, 226, 242; system 118, 120,
   233; church-state relations 207–         123
   9, 212–13; see also clergy, parish    Convention, see assembly
   priests                               corporations, see guilds
civilisation vii, 8–10, 12, 23, 51,      corsairs, see privateering
   85, 107, 119, 128, 162, 174,          Cortes 234–5
   185, 187, 216–17, 237–9, 244          cotton, see textiles
civil-military relations 40, 51, 61–2,   council, councillors of state 40, 43–
   174, 207                                 4, 56, 61, 64, 71, 73–4, 80,
classification 4, 12, 84, 87                100–1, 103, 120, 166, 176, 179,
clergy 126, 129, 206–7, 213, 221,           181, 198; for Dutch affairs 40;
   234–5, 238                               for seals of nobility 180–1
code, civil 102, 106–7, 118, 121,        councils, communal 108;
   127–8, 177, 183, 243; penal              departmental 96–7, 108, 195,
   102, 121; rural 136                      198; subprefecture 108, 195,
collaboration 45, 48, 74, 86–7, 93–         198
   4, 106, 109, 114–15, 117, 185–        Court 219–20, 229
                                                         Subject index   315


Customs administration 29, 40–1,          224, 226, 228, 231, 240–1,
  72, 82, 92, 105, 123, 140–1,            244–5
  143, 152, 154–6, 177, 231;           émigrés 66, 75, 80, 137, 179, 195,
  barriers 2, 12, 50, 60, 131, 139–       199–200, 207
  41, 242                              Empire, French viii, 10, 12, 13, 25,
                                          27–38, 43–4, 50–1, 58, 60–6,
democracy 238                             69, 72–3, 75–6, 81–2, 87–8, 99–
democrats 194, 196, 207                   100, 108, 110, 112, 115, 130–1,
departments 18, 30, 40, 43–4, 47–         143, 147, 154, 162, 167, 174,
   9, 51, 56, 62, 72, 73, 75–82,          177–8, 182–4, 188, 212, 219–
   88, 95–101, 110–12, 116, 118,          21, 223, 225–6, 228, 231, 243
   144, 149, 157, 159–61, 163,         employees, ministerial 63, 93, 100–
   167, 171, 174–5, 180, 191, 197,        1, 110–11, 232
   199, 203, 205, 211, 233, 241        Encyclopédie 7, 216
desertion 17, 90, 157, 160–1, 163–     endowments 130, 182–3, 201
   5, 231, 235                         engineers 62, 82, 88, 111, 166,
diplomacy, diplomats 23–4, 38–40,         190–1, 197
   47, 60, 62–9, 74, 75                Enlightenment 2, 8, 12, 21, 85, 89,
Directory viii, 4, 5, 10, 12, 14–20,      134, 156, 167, 191, 210, 213,
   22, 26, 28, 43, 46–7, 49, 55,          222, 234, 238, 243–4
   62–3, 69–71, 73, 75, 80, 83,        entails 176, 180, 182
   86–7, 90, 96, 109, 123, 128,        entrepreneurs 107, 136–7, 142–3,
   139, 141, 146, 157, 176, 199–          146, 148–9, 154, 197, 242
   201, 204, 207, 214, 216, 220,       equality 9, 11, 14, 102, 104, 114,
   223, 230, 238                          122, 125, 127, 130–1, 134,
domain 41, 105, 130–1, 200–1; see         174–5, 198, 242
   also endowments                     Estates General 69, 73, 80, 125
donations, see endowments              extraction agencies 18–19, 45–6
Droits réunis 92, 105, 155–6, 231
                                       family 2, 5, 58, 63–4, 75, 79, 86,
école polytechnique 166                    90, 94–5, 109, 113, 123, 156,
economic, crisis 144, 147, 152–5,          161, 165, 180–1, 187–8, 191–3,
    232–5; exploitation 118;               195–7, 201–3, 205–6, 212, 222,
    nationalism 19; opportunities          226–9, 232, 235
    196–206; policy 18, 27–8, 133–     feudal, feudalism 45, 84–5, 105,
    7, 145, 149; theories 38, 134,         114, 119, 124, 128–9, 131, 187,
    136–7, 242                             235
economy 6–8, 100–1, 107, 118,          fiefs 179, 182–3, 201
    131, 135–44, 173, 197–8;           fiscal exactions 83, 92, 132, 197,
    international 136–7, 139, 141;         225; reform 104–6, 198–9, 243;
    national 136–7, 139; regional          system 102, 104–5, 139
    142; war 144, 153                  fraternity 9, 14
education 7, 111, 166–7, 177, 191,     freemasonry 2, 216, 220–2
    216, 220, 223–4                    frontiers 2, 5, 7, 20, 27, 29, 38, 48,
election systems 11                        74, 90, 98–9, 113, 131, 141–3,
electoral colleges 174, 176, 192           154–5, 160–2, 186, 196–9, 208–
elites 2, 5, 8, 10, 13, 18, 32, 42,        9, 220, 223, 231
    49, 74–5, 86, 91, 96, 107–9,       fusion, see amalgame
    121–2, 131, 166–7, 186–8 192–
    3, 195, 199, 201, 211, 215–22,     gendarmerie 49, 62, 72, 90–2, 101,
316   Subject index


   105, 156, 230–1                     Jews 114–15, 118, 121, 197, 203–
gender 216–17, 229                        5, 207, 209–12, 217, 221, 233
generals 16–17, 19, 20, 23, 45–8,      judges 43, 74, 92, 95, 101, 111,
   52–63, 65–9, 81, 96, 131, 155,         228
   169, 171, 178–9, 183, 201, 221,     junta, Tuscan 40, 51, 72, 73, 218
   233                                 juntas, Spanish 235
girondins 14–15, 22
glory 54–5, 57, 167, 193, 220, 226     Kameralwissenschaft 4
governors general 51, 62, 84, 92,      kin, see family
   94, 116, 192, 215, 230
grand pensionary 43, 94, 189           labouring classes, see poor
grand tour 2–3                         landowners 90–1, 94, 106, 114,
Grande Armée 11, 29–30, 38–9,              126, 148, 163–4, 167, 175–6,
   50, 57, 59, 71, 118, 168, 171–2,        189, 195, 199–200, 203–4, 218,
   229–30, 234                             220, 226, 228, 234, 242, 244–5
Grande Nation, see nation, French      language 2, 7, 8, 15, 64, 72–3, 77–
guards, civic 122; of honour 167,          9, 102, 111, 115, 169, 195,
   193–4; national 91, 171;                210–11, 216, 229, 237, 240–1
   provincial 114                      laws 92–3, 98, 102–3, 107, 112,
guerrillas 61, 91, 149, 233–6              238; criminal 92, 102
guilds 102, 115, 121, 136, 156,        lawyers 220–1, 227, 235
   188, 200, 228, 244                  lazzaroni 117, 120, 163, 187
                                       Legion of Honour 130, 169, 176,
hero vii, 168, 193, 229                    201
hierarchy 38, 54, 57, 100, 166,        legislation 40, 137
   174, 177–80, 188, 209, 221          Legislative assembly, body, see
history 3, 8, 178–9                        assembly
Holy Roman Empire 26, 106, 200;        legitimism 234, 241–2
   free cities in 24                   liberal professions 175
honour 167–9, 176, 239                 liberalism 127, 196, 224, 240–4;
Hundred Days 59                            economic 12, 241–2
                                       liberty 9–11, 14, 33, 97, 199, 235,
identity 98, 100, 171, 186, 189,           241, 244
   193, 209–10, 216, 222–3, 229–       licensing system 152
   30, 233, 239, 241                   lists 107–8, 112–13, 174–5, 180
idéologue 5, 7, 12, 21–2, 70, 136,
   186, 216, 219                       maître des requêtes 44, 73, 79, 100
Imperial Guard 54                      manufacturers 6–7, 31, 126, 137,
imperial nobility 130, 134, 179–84,      139–44, 146, 148–9, 152, 154–
   192; system 25, 27–30                 5, 175, 181, 191, 196, 198,
individualism 12, 102, 125, 128,         203–4, 234, 242
   136, 225, 229                       market 6, 19, 24–5, 28–9, 31, 136,
industries 137–8, 140, 145, 153–5        138–9, 141–9, 152–4, 242; land
intendancies, intendants 30, 40, 51,     200, 203–6
   71, 72, 73, 75, 80, 89, 100;        marriage 5, 58, 159, 181, 192
   army 54–7                           mayors 74–5, 108, 110, 112–13,
                                         115, 179–81, 195, 227
Jacobins 11, 14–15, 48, 63, 71, 77,    merchants 6–8, 15, 103, 126, 138,
   94–5, 110, 231
                                                         Subject index   317


   144, 146, 150–1, 175, 181, 196,      ‘neo-jacobins’, see jacobins
   198, 201, 203–5, 226, 234            neutral states 140, 144–5, 149–50,
metal goods, metallurgy 141–3,             152
   145–7, 198, 232                      nobility, see aristocracy
migration 2, 235
military 176–8, 181, 183, 194,          occupation 16–18, 20, 45–53, 60,
   220–1, 236; campaigns 54, 170,          69, 72–3, 75, 82–5, 96, 132,
   177, 196, 233; divisions 48, 81,        177, 198, 202, 207, 217, 230,
   98, 101, 121; policies 131, 134;        233
   surgery 170–1; tribunals 92          office 121–2, 194–5, 197, 227–8
mines 82, 88, 148, 155                  oligarchy, see patricians, urban
minister-secretary of state 41, 71      opinion 97, 100, 108–9, 124, 125,
ministry, of cults 100, 216;               186, 188, 216, 224, 244
   Extraordinary demesne 40–1; of       Orders in Council 28, 145
   education 89; of finances 40,
   70–2, 100, 110, 172, 232; of         parish priests 84, 108–9, 112, 162,
   foreign affairs 5, 40–2, 63, 65–        164, 188, 192, 208–9, 212–15,
   8, 80, 100–1; of the interior 40,       225, 230
   42, 49, 66–7, 72–3, 75, 87, 93,      patrician, urban 50, 86, 94, 99,
   97, 100, 108, 110, 124, 136,            103–4, 109–10, 115
   139, 145, 190, 208, 226; of          patriotism 11, 14, 17, 157, 165,
   justice 101; of manufactures and        235–7, 240
   commerce 5, 66, 70, 101; of          patriots 11, 15–16, 19, 45–8, 86,
   marine 63, 100; of police 71,           93–5, 99, 103–4, 111, 121, 189,
   94, 100–1, 108; treasury 40, 55–        215, 224, 231, 241
   6, 101, 138, 152, 172; of war        patronage 42, 56, 58, 63–5, 70–1,
   40–1, 54–5, 70, 100, 158, 160,          75, 95, 111, 124, 126, 208,
   163, 178; of war administration         212, 219, 226
   40–1, 54–5, 100, 196                 peasant risings 17, 29, 83, 160; see
model, administrative viii, 3, 5, 12,      also revolts
   18, 32, 81–2, 85, 97–8, 100–1,       peasantry, peasants 2, 84, 90, 92,
   103, 114, 116–21, 173, 186;             124, 148, 156–7, 168, 188, 199,
   military 134; political 8, 10, 12,      202, 204–6, 212–15, 224, 227,
   29, 31–2, 50, 154; state 52,            231–3, 235, 240
   129–30, 134, 167, 189, 216,          Peninsular war 61, 68
   222, 224, 239, 243                   ‘people’ 11, 13, 187–8
monetarist policy 138, 173, 199         philosophes 4–5, 8, 85, 134, 156,
                                           199, 216, 243
Napoleonic myth vii, 168–9              plebiscites 96, 109
nation 5, 11, 31, 234, 239, 243;        police 90, 95, 111, 121, 177, 211,
   French 9, 12–13, 15, 18, 20,            221, 222, 231–2
   168; -state viii, 1, 12, 236, 240–   policing 1, 102, 113
   1, 243–4                             political authority 85–6, 90–3, 97
national aspirations 168, 171, 178,     political economy 5, 134
   189, 193, 236, 240, 243;             poor 104, 156, 158–9, 188, 205–6,
   independence 14–15, 171–2               210, 225–6, 242, 243; see also
national properties 113–14, 150,           poverty
   176, 182–3, 188, 197, 199–206,       popular practices 11, 13, 224–5;
   221, 225                                religion 206–7, 213–15, 225,
nationalism 240–1                          240; societies 46
318   Subject index


popular sovereignty 9, 11, 13–14,       republics, sister 11, 15, 17, 20, 46–
   20, 125                                 50, 86, 189, 231
population 159                          resistance 226–37; see also revolts
ports 6, 19–20, 26, 28, 141, 145,       resources 88, 107, 134
   151, 154, 232                        Restoration 94, 134, 155, 195–6,
postal service 111, 119, 135               225, 240, 242–3
poverty xix, 4–5, 154, 173; see also    ‘reunion’, see annexation
   poor                                 revolts 83–94, 120, 148–9, 155,
prefects 40, 42–3, 49–51, 54, 61,          160, 162, 186, 207, 230–6
   66, 71–82, 88–9, 92, 94, 97,         Revolution, French vii, 5, 7, 8–20,
   100–1, 103, 108, 110–15, 117,           33, 37, 57, 63, 71, 75, 84–5,
   120, 124, 134, 158–9, 161, 174,         101, 116, 125, 128, 134, 137,
   179–81, 194, 197–8, 211–12,             157, 159, 170, 174, 176, 181,
   218, 221, 223, 226, 228                 190, 199, 214, 222, 239
prisoners 163–4                         roads 38, 112, 190, 197, 227
privateering 139–40, 151–2              romanticism 193, 237
privilege 102, 119, 127, 129, 134,
   147, 156, 174–84, 244                sailors 120, 156, 160, 171
professions, liberal 103, 114, 204–     salons 44–5, 168, 216–17, 219,
   5; medical 6                             222, 226, 239
progress vii, 8, 9, 12, 133, 238–9,     sanitary measures 112, 127
   242; see also civilisations          sansculottes 11
propaganda 68, 110, 168, 233            scientists 190–1, 218–19
property 102, 113, 125, 128, 136,       secularisation 125, 223
   155, 174, 177, 179, 183, 185,        seigneurial rights 128–30, 183
   188, 199, 200–6, 209, 225–6,         Senate, see assembly
   245; ecclesiastical 102, 118,        serfdom 127–9
   199–202, 204–5; see also             Seven Years’ War 3
   national properties                  shipbuilders 144
proprietors, see landowners             silk 6, 141–2, 145–9, 152, 154
protection 137–40, 143, 145–55,         smuggling 7, 28, 82, 90–1, 123,
   196, 198, 242                            139, 141, 146–7, 150–4, 196,
Protestants, see churches, Protestant       198, 231, 235
public debt 105, 131, 173, 200–2;       sociability 5, 8, 44, 67, 107, 187,
   finances 102, 104–5, 125, 138,           216–22, 224–5
   155, 172–3, 183, 199–201;            social conflict 85, 110; practices
   order 42, 60, 86, 90–3, 224–5,           215–26; reconciliation 93;
   240; works 111                           relations 186–7, 196, 206, 208,
                                            216, 225, 239–40, 244; utility
ralliement 109–10, 113, 181, 192,           4–5, 12
    195–6                               soldiers 2, 54–5, 91, 156–7, 165,
religion 100, 114, 161, 206–15,             168–71, 177, 182–3, 194, 214,
    231, 236, 238; see also popular         230, 235
    religion                            state 12, 47, 125–7, 136–7, 143,
representation 96–7, 125–6, 199,            156, 166–7, 179–80, 185, 197–
    234–5, 242–4                            8, 223, 239, 244–5; allied viii,
republic of letters 2, 5                    41, 68, 118, 121, 146–7, 149,
republicanism 15, 17, 130, 182,             155, 159, 161–2, 166, 171–2,
    189, 221                                231; satellite, vassal viii, 15, 50,
                                            59, 63, 68, 71–4, 86, 111, 115,
                                                            Subject index   319


   120–1, 125, 130–1, 134, 146,             242; British 25, 27–8; treaties
   160, 162, 171, 174–5, 181–2,             19, 144, 148–9
   194, 196, 198, 223                    traders, see merchants
statistics, statistical topography ix,   travellers, see voyages
   4, 37, 42, 64, 67, 84, 87–90,         Tribunate, see assembly
   100, 107, 120, 136, 160, 188,
   225, 239, 242–3; bureau of 5,         uniformity 11–12, 76, 106, 119–20,
   70                                        132, 210–11, 223–4, 226, 229,
status 33, 125, 176, 179–80, 187,            237–9, 241, 244
   196, 202, 207, 216, 238               universities 111, 118, 166–7, 223,
sub-prefects 72, 75, 78–9, 81, 84,           237
   99, 100, 103, 111–13, 115, 124,       utilitarianism 239, 242–3
   158, 161, 180, 215
superstition 8, 11, 84–5, 187, 207,      veterans 91, 164–5, 170–1, 176–7,
   212                                      221
Swiss ‘mediation’ (1803) 50, 103         volunteers, army 11, 17, 156–7,
                                            163, 167–8, 171, 193
talent 166, 175, 188                     voyages 2–4, 5, 6, 168–70
taxes 60, 104–6, 112, 117, 175,
    178, 198–9, 210, 211, 227–8,         war 14, 16–17, 22, 53, 57–62, 83,
    232                                    85, 89–90, 118, 120, 134, 137–
textiles 30, 138, 141–3, 145–9,            8, 142, 171, 177, 198, 225, 240
    151, 153–4, 198, 211                 wool, see textiles
titles 180–3                             workers 147, 151–2, 154–5, 232
tolerance 112, 156, 208–10
trade 6–8, 38, 131, 137–42, 144,
    146–7, 149–50, 153–5, 233–4,         zadruga 162, 177
