                  Habsburg Monarchy, eighteenth century-1918                255


with the short-lived Court Auditing Chamber (Hofrechenkammer),
the customs administration (Zollregie, Bancogefällenadministration) and
the provincial governors’ offices (Landesgubernien). In 1828 a Central
Commission of Statistics (Statistische Zentralkommission) was founded.
    The Bohemian Council of Trade was an advisory board responsible
to the Court Commercial Council (Kommerzienkollegium) in Vienna,
while the Trieste Harbormaster’s Office was subordinated to the
Supreme Commercial Intendancy (Hauptkommerzialintendenz; Suprema
Intendanza Commerciale) between 1731 and 1776. In turn, the institu-
tions responsible for compiling the central trade statistics of both the
customs union and the whole state (from 1790 on) were subordinated
to the Court Chamber (Hofkammer) and for a short period to the
ephemeral central governance institution (the so called Hofstelle). Only
the provincial governors remained under the Court Chancellery
(Hofkanzlei), although they were incorporated into the Hofstelle as well.


4. Motivations
   The earliest provincial trade accounts for Bohemia were compiled
in order to calculate a balance of trade to help establish to what degree
Bohemia’s trade was active or passive. Subsequently, this information
was used in order to settle conflicts over the external customs policy
between regional textile producers seeking protection from abroad and
merchants pressing for the removal of trade barriers.
   The close connection of these statistics with mercantilist and
cameralist ideas on the balance of trade is characteristic of the whole
period between 1720 and at least 1815. At this time, the governmental
authorities including the monarch made use of the trade accounts in
order to devise their commercial policies. This was particularly true
during the “protectionist period” from 1784 to the 1830s. In addition,
there was a fiscal interest in customs revenue although this seems to
have been less important than the policy motive.


5. Methods
    The original information was derived from the customs posts on
the borders as well as customs posts within the provinces. The quan-
tities and values registered were based on declarations, although the
authorities occasionally checked these declarations by measuring and
weighing the commodities. In some cases, discrepancies were reported.
However, this issue has not been researched in detail. Hence, more
work has to be done on (a) how the customs administration worked on
