256                                  Klemens Kaps


      the local and regional level and (b) how the information was subse-
      quently transferred to the central authorities. The sources I have found
      so far reveal that data were cross-checked only at the central level (by
      the Accountancy Office, the Auditing Chamber and the monarch
      himself) by comparing customs revenue with the trade statistics (see
      Kaps 2015). In some cases, provincial governors also raised doubts
      about the credibility of the collected data.

         In general the trade accounts provide a credible representation of
      the flow of goods. However, there are several issues that need to be
      considered when analysing these figures. The main methodological
      shortcoming of these statistics is the measurement of prices, both in
      their spatial and their temporal dimensions.

         The existing literature (e.g. Otruba 1950: 4; Hassinger 1964: 74-77)
      assumes that state-wide statistics are more reliable than provincial
      ones, as the former were compiled according to unified standards that
      avoid some of the regional biases. The point may be questioned as the
      Habsburg Empire can hardly be assessed as an integrated national
      economy. The eighteenth-century Habsburg Monarchy was a frag-
      mented economic space with administrative differences and geo-
      graphic constraints that drastically hindered market integration until
      well into the 1760s and 1770s. Hassinger (1964: 76) demonstrates this
      when comparing Tyrol’s trade statistics with those of the customs
      union for 1778/79. Hassinger argues that the different prices applied
      by the authorities of both customs entities resulted in a pronounced
      overestimation of Tyrol’s external trade flows. However, as the author
      acknowledges, Tyrol’s prices for colonial goods reflect market prices far
      better than data from the customs union, whereas the difference in
      wheat and rye prices simply reflect market price divergences between
      the two entities. Thus, wheat price in L’viv, the capital of Galicia,
      amounted to 60.5% (1775-84) and 69.3% (1785–90) of the Viennese
      price. If the same type of discrepancies existed for other products and
      regions, this would imply that integrating the single region statistics of
      the Habsburg Monarchy into a unique document for the whole state
      constructed according to the Viennese methodology might have
      distorted considerably the estimated trade volume (Kaps 2015).

          Standardization and administrative centralization do not neces-
      sarily improve the quality and reliability of data. This point requires
      further research and systematic analysis of prices applied by the
      regional trade councils before 1775, on the one hand, and prices
