258                                   Klemens Kaps


      1804 and their sharp decline in 1811 – both movements seem to have
      been influenced by price changes. More information about the admin-
      istrative setting of prices is needed to construct a satisfactory time
      series, hence the Banco-Hofbuchhaltung’s administration files need to
      be systematically researched.
          To correct these distortions, one should take into account both the
      temporal discontinuity of price adaptations and its selective scope. The
      first issue is quite difficult to address since no price series exists for a
      wide range of products, a fact that has prevented the calculation of
      inflation rates for the eighteenth century. The only price index avail-
      able starts in 1800 and runs to 1913 for a few Austrian cities (Vienna,
      Innsbruck, Linz, Salzburg, Graz) (Mühlpeck et al. 1979). Sources for the
      eighteenth century are scarce because the official price statistics only
      list grain prices starting with five-year averages in 1775 and yearly
      values from 1796. Price series for other foodstuffs were only registered
      from 1828 on. Series of prices for the cities of Vienna (Pribram 1938),
      Cracow (Górkiewicz 1950), and L’viv (Hoszowski 1934) with a wider
      temporal coverage were published, but they list the prices for a limited
      range of products only.
         The construction of a complete series of prices would have to
      address two different issues. First, the prices for the products, whose
      prices were fixed may be adjusted by calculating an individual price
      increase index and applying it to them. Second, for products which are
      registered in official price series or in the source editions just
      mentioned (Hoszowski 1934; Pribram 1938), these price indexes may
      be used. However, additional information is probably necessary, e.g. in
      international price statistics from border regions and states. Thus, the
      bias apparent in the official trade statistics could only be corrected by a
      very time-intensive approach.
         Further shortcomings of the statistics such as the omission of
      trading partners and transit trade should be mentioned here, although
      they do not question the reliability of the quantitative material, but
      limit the scope of analysis.


      6. Information
         The accounts register all commodities, classifying external and
      internal trade flows separately and summing them up in 21 main
      groups of commodities (capi). As mentioned before, these categories
      were stable up to the reorganization of the trade statistic in 1827/28.
      Only the sporadically available customs extracts give more detailed
