                  Habsburg Monarchy, eighteenth century-1918                 261


and exports. While much effort has been made here to understand the
quality of commodities and original nomenclature, hardly any
attempts have been made to correct trade balances for their multiple
biases mentioned in this questionnaire. Similarly, so far no studies
have been published trying to contribute to the Habsburg Monarchy’s
balance of trade by using trade statistics of other European countries,
in particular neighbouring states.
   Studies like the ones on Hungarian-Polish trade relations in 1764
(Lech/Stępkowski 1988) and on Polish-Austrian trade (Kazusek 2007)
indicate the benefits that might be gained by using a comparative
approach and cross-checking trade data from the Habsburg Empire
against data of its trading partners.
   International comparative studies, so far largely lacking and
suggested by Kazusek (2007) for Polish-Austrian trade, could be a first
step towards an integrated European trade history. In the case of the
Habsburg Monarchy trade with the Ottoman Empire, Italy, Poland,
and also the integration in overseas trade via Hamburg, Danzig, and
the Italian ports could be promising research topics.
    Nevertheless, the most urgent task would be to systematically
compile original data in a dataset, starting from regional trade accounts
and finishing with the better accessible and organized statistics of the
late eighteenth century. Once this data collection is completed, the
multiple corrections, addressing the problems of nomenclature, prices,
weights, etc., might be undertaken. In particular, an attempt might be
made to calculate foreign trade balances from regional data, although
with great caution concerning the points mentioned earlier in this
questionnaire. In fact, this calculation needs a more in-depth analysis.
Only in the last step should use be made of statistics from different
countries in order to cross-check the credibility of data, but also to add
to the geographical dimension of Habsburg Central Europe’s external
trade, which is not recorded in most of the original statistics.


9. Bibliography

9.1. Primary sources
Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Finanz- und Hofkammerarchiv
Alte Hofkammer, Hoffinanz:
Patente 120.10. Merkantil-Tabelle für Böhmen, 30.12.1755
SUS
Oberster Rechnungshof Nr.109: Bankale Sign. C34 und 38
