                  Habsburg Monarchy, eighteenth century-1918                 259


information on traders or transporters of the goods and their places of
origin and destination.
   The information on trade flows was usually recorded in weight/
volume/quantity and in money values. Prices were given in Austrian
Florins (Gulden) and Kreuzer in the CM standard (CM = Conventions-
münze, 1 Gulden = 60 Kreuzer, valid between 1753 and 1857).
Hassinger (1964) states that Viennese prices were used from 1776 on,
but the method of establishing commodity prices has not been studied
so far. Scattered evidence suggests that prices were determined by the
Accountancy Office. It seems that the latter tried to mitigate local
prices with international prices. This is certainly an area in which in-
depth studies are badly needed.
   Quantities were predominantly given in hundredweights (Zentner)
and pounds (Pfund), but, depending on the product registered, a wide
range of quantity measures was used such as the bushel (Metzen,
Scheffel), piece (Stück), pair (Paar), dozen (Dutzend), box (Kiste), bolt
(Ballen), cask (Fassl, Fass), or bucket (Eimer). Weight was given in gross
value (so called sporco).
   From at least 1788 on, the classification had to be made according
to a detailed instruction manual drawn up by the Central Customs
Administration in German. This nomenclature listed all goods and
their corresponding prices. The number of categories of products used
in the statistics differed from year to year. The trade accounts for the
Bohemian-Austrian customs union for 1783 and 1784 listed 265 indi-
vidual goods, summing them up into 41 subgroups and 21 main
groups. The statistics for Galicia for 1787, in turn, registered 864 prod-
ucts, although this large number is in part due to different attributes of
some products. Trading partners were registered starting in 1820, but
the data mainly reflect the borders crossed by commodities leaving and
entering the territory and therefore do not always identify the real
trade partners.


7. Availability
    A detailed record of Habsburg trade statistics before 1831 does not
exist in print form. While Kaltenstadler (1967, 1968), Erceg (1970), and
Panjek (2003) give a partial compilation of commodity data in their
works, they were more interested in the aggregate data on trade
volume. Hassinger (1964) provides data for the Habsburg dominions as
a whole, but he focuses on the aggregate level and calculates trade
structures broken down into raw materials, foodstuffs, and manufac-
