

descension. I have the Honour to inclose Lists * ofthe Ships LfcatvAdodraPSh SMney Smith's Cispatcli-.-s.

of Wa r which were known to. have left Lisbon thin Morning, and which were in Sight a few Hours ago. There remain at Lisbon Four Ships of the; Line, and the fame Number of Frigates, but only one of each Sort is serviceable. I have thought it expedient to lose no Tirre in communicating to His Majesty's Government the important Intelligence contained in this Ditpatch. 1 have therefore to apologise for th:; hasty and imper fect Marnier in whicii it is written. I hayc the Honour to be, 'cc. STRANGFORD .

Admiralty-Office, December 2 1, 1807.

D ISPATCHES , of which the following ate Extracts and Copies, were-received at this Os sice on Saturday last, by Captain Yen, of His Ma jesty's Sloop the Constance, from Rear-Admiral Sir William Sidney .Smith, addressed lo tlic Honourable Wiliiam Wellclley Pole. His Majesty's Ship Hibcinia, 22 Leagues S I R, West ofthe Tagus, Dec. I, 1807.

I N a former Dispatch, dated the 23d November, with a Postscript of the 26th, I conveyed to you, for the Information of my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, the Proofs contained in various Documents of the Portuguese Government being so much influenced by Terror of the French Arms, as to have acquiesced to certain Demands of France operating against Gna t Britain'. Th e F.illribution of the Portuguese Force was made wholly on the Coast, while the Laud Side was left totally un guarded. British Subjects of all Descriptions were detained ; and it therefore became nectiury to in form the Portuguese Government, that the Case had arisen which required, in obedience to mv In structions, that I stiould declare the Tagus in a State of Blockade ; and Lord Strangford agreeing with me that Hostility should lit- met by Hostility, the Blockade was instituted, and the Instructions we had received were acted upon to their full Extent ; still, however, bearing in Recollection the first Ob ject adopted by His Majesty's Government of open ing a Refuge for the Head of the Portuguese Go - vernment, menaced as it wns by the powerful Arm, aud baneful Influence of the Enemy, 1 thought it my Duty to adopt the Means open to us, of en deavouring to induce the Prince Regent of Portu gal to reconsider his Decision " to unite Himself with the Continent of Europe, " and to recollect that H e had Possessions on that of America, affording an ample Balance for any Sacrifice He might make here, and from which He would be cut off by the'Nature of Maritime Warfare, the Termination of which could not be dictated by the Combination of the Continental Powers of Europe. In this View, Lord Strangford having received .in Acquiescence to the Proposition whicii had been made hy us, for hisLordstiip to land and confer with the Prince Regent under the Guarantee of a Flag of Truce, I tuitiilhed his Lordlhip wiih that Con veyance ami Security! in order that he might give to the Prince that Consilience which his Word of lit uour as the Kuig's Minister Plenipotentiary, united with that of > British Admiral, could not sail to inspire towards inducing His Royal High ness to throw Himself aud His Fleet into the Arms