

[ 1727 ]

of Great Britain, in perfect Reliance on the King's overlooking a forced Act of apparent Hostility I li. flag ami Subjects*, nnd establishing Hia . iverumeiu in His Ultra-Marine 1'ossclTioit; illy promised. I have now llie In.iiiliit Satisfaction of announcing to you, that our Hopes aud Expectation* have been realiltd to the utmost Extent. On the Morning of the 29th, ibe Portuguese Fleet (as per List annexed) came out qf the Tagus with His Royal Highness the Prince of Brazil and the whole of the Royal Fa mily of Braganza on board, together with many of His faithful Counsellors and Adherents, as well as other Persons attached to His present Fortunes. This Fleet of Eight Sail of the Line, Four Fri gates, Two Brigs, aud One Schooner, with a Crowd of large Armed Merchant Ships, an-anged itself under the Protection of that of His Majesty, while the tiring of a reciprocal Salute of Twenty one Guns announced the friendly Meeting of those who but the Day besore were on Terms of Hosti lity ; the Scent- impressing every Beholder (ex cept the French Army on the Hills) with the most lively Emotions of Gratitude to Providence, that there yet existed a Power in the World able, as well as willing, to protect the oppressed. 1 have the Honour to be, &c. W. SIDNE Y SMITH .

List os the Portuguese Fleet that came out of the Tagus on the 2gth of November 1807. Principe Rt-alc, of 84 Guns. Rainha de Portugal, of 74 Guns. Conde Henrique, of 74 Guns. Meduza, of 74 Guns. Affonfo d'Albuquerque, of 64 Guns. D . Joao de Castro, of 64 Guns. Principe de Brazil, of 74 Guns. Martitio de Freitas, of 64 Guns. Frigates. Minerva, of 44 Guns. Golfinho, of 36 Guns. Urania, of 32 Guns. A n d one other, Name not as yet kThown. Brigs. Voador, of 22 Guns. Vinganea, of 20 Guns. Lebre, of 22 Guns. Schooner. Curioza, of 12 Guns. (Signed) JOAQ^JOZ E MONT . TORRES , Major-General. (Copy.) W . SIDNE Y SMITH .

His Majesty's Ship Hibernia, 22 Leagues SIR , West of the Tagus, Dec. I, 1807.

I N Another Dispatch of this Day's Date, I.have transmitted a List of the Portuguese Fleet that came out of the Tagns on the 29th Ultimo, which I received that Day from the Flunds of the Admiral commanding it, when I went 011 board the Principe Re iii to pty my Yilit of Respect and Congi at illation to 1 I'S Royal Highness the Prince of Brazil, who was embaiktd in that Ship. I here inclose the List of those left behind. Th e Absence of but one of the Four Ships is regretted by the Portuguese (the

Vasco de Gama ) (he being under Repair: He r Guns have been employed to arm thcFrcitas, Sixty four, a new Ship, and one of those whicii came out with the Prince. Th e other Thre e arc mere Hulks; and there is also one Ship on the Stocks, the Prin cipe Regente, but she isonjy iii Frame. T h e Prince said every Thin g that the most cordial Feelings of Gratitude towards, and Confidence in, His Mnjcsty and the Britistl Nation might be sup posed to dictate. I have by Signal (for we have no other Mode of communicating in this Weather) directed Captain Moore in the Marlboruugb, with the London, Mo narch, aud Bedford, to stay by the Body of trie Portuguese Fleet, and render it every Assistance. I keep in the Hibernia close to the Prince's Ship. I cannot as yet fend the Foudroyanr, Flantagenet, and Conqueror, on to Adm.-ral Purvis, according to their Lordsliips' Order of the 14th, which, I trust, will be the less felt as an Inconvenience off Cadiz, as tbey appear to have been ordered thither with Re ference to the Russians being within the Straits, be fore it was known they were on my Station. 1 have the Honour to be, &c. W . SIDNE Y SMITH .