

List of the Portuguese Ships that remained in Lisbon. 
S. Sebastiao, of 64 Guns—unserviceable without a 
thorough Repair. 
Maria Prima, of 74 Guns—unserviceable; ordered 
to be made into a Floating Battery, but not yet 
fitted. 
Vasco de Gama, os 74 Guns—under Repair, and 
nearly ready. 
Princesa da Beira, os 64 Guns—condemned\ erc 
dcred to be fitted as a Floating Battery. 
Frigates. 
Fenix, of 48 Guns—in need of thorough Repair. 
Amazona, of 4 4 Guns—in need of ditto. 
Perola, of 4 4 Guns—in need of ditto. 
Tritao, of 40 Guns—past Repair. 
Veney, of 30 Guns—past Repair. 
(Copy.) W . SIDNE Y SMITH . 

Hibernia, at Sea, Lat. 37^ 47' Long. SIR , 14° if' Dec. 6, 1807. I HAV E the Satisfaction to acquaint you, for the Information of my Lords Commiffiom-rs of the Admiralty, that I succeeded in collecting the whole of the Portuguese Fleet, except a Eiig, after the Gale, and that the Weather was such as to allow the necessary Repairs and such Distiibution of Su pernumeraries and Resources to be made, as to enable Vice-Admiral Don Manuel d'Acuuha Sotto. mayor to report to me Yesterday all the Ships capable of performing the Voyage to Rio Janeiro, except One Line of Battle Ship, which he requested might be conducted to an Englisti Port. 1 meant to escort her Part of the Way, but she did not quit the Fleet with me last Night as settled. 1 hope, however, she may arrive safe, as Ihe is not in a bad State, being substituted for the Martino de Freitas, which was at first destined to go to England, in consequence of a fresli Arrangement nyde Yester day on the latter being found in the best State for the Voyage of the Two . I have detached Captain Moore in the Marlborough, wiih the

C 1728 3

London, Monarch, aad Bedford, to attend the Portuguese Fleet to the Brazils. I \\avi thought it my Duty in Addition to the usual Order, to take the above Ship* undei his Orders, to give Captain Moore One to hoist a broad Pendant after passing Madeira, in order to give him greater Weight and Consequence in the Performance of the import ant and unusually delicate Duties I have confided to him. I feel the most perfect Reliance in that Officer's JudKm n'ti Ability, and ZeaL The Portuguese Ships did not after tlicir Repar tition want more Provisions or Slops from us than the List inclosed, whicii I supplied from this Ship and the Conqueror. This Dispatch will be delivered by Captain Yeo, of His Majesty's Sloop Constance, who has shewn great Address and Zeal in opening the Communica tions by Flag of Truce, wliich it was the Interest of those in Power, who were against the Measure of

Emigration, to obstruct, Lord Strangford speaki of his Conduct in Terms of warm Appr .bat ion ; oa this Giound I beg Leave to recommend him to their Lordships, to whom his general Merits as an Officer art- already well known Having been in Lisbon without Restraint during the Intercourse, he is qua lified to answer any Questions their Lordstiips may wish to put to him. I have the Honour to be, & c W. SIDNE Y SMITH .