

C 1726 3

did not reeeivi them tinlil T had actually taken my Departure from that Court, still, upon a careful Consideration of the Tenor of your Inllruc-, I thought that it would be right lo act as if that Cafe had not occurred. I resolved, therefore, to piocccd forthwith to ascertain the Effect pro duced by the Blockade of Lisbon, and to propose to the Portuguese Government, as the only Con dition upon which that Blockade could cease, the Alternative (stated by you) cither of surrendering the Fleet to Hii Majesty, or of immediately employing it to remove the Prince Regent and his Family to the Brazils. I took jipon myself this Responsil'ilr'ry in renewing "Negotiations after my public Functions had actually ceased, convinced that, although it was the fixed Determination of His Majesty not to suffer the Fleet of Portugal to fall into the Possession of Hi-s Enemies, still His Majesty's first Object con tinued to be the Application of that Fltet to the original Pot pose, of i.isitlg the Royal Family of Braganza from tht T\ rannyof France. I accordingly requested an Audience of the .Prince Regent, together with due Assurances of Protection aud Sccuiity ; aud upon receiving His Royal Highness'* Answer, I proceeded to Lisbon on the .i-th, iu Hii Majelly's .Ship Constance, bearing a Mag of Truce. I had immediately most interesting Communications with the Court of Lis bon, the Particulars ot which lliall be fully detailed in • future Dispatch. It suffice! to mention In this Place, that the Prince Regent wifely directed all Apprehensions ton French Army, and all His Hope s to an English Fleet; that H e received the moll explicit Assurances from me that His Majesty would ginciotiilv overlook those Adts of unwilling and momentary, Hostility to which His Royal High ness's Conlent had been extorted ; and that I pro unfit! to Hia Royal Highnels, on the Faith of my Sovereign, thai the Fiitilh Squadron before the Tagus Ihould be employed to protect His Rctieat from Lilbop, ai fY tS e t 0 ' h e Brazils. A, Decree "• " pnbliihed Vtstcrday, in which the .Prince Regent announced his Intention of retiripg to the City of Rio de Janeiro until the Conclusion general Pc.ce, and of appointing a Regency to a t the Administration of Governmental Lis bon during His Royal Highncfs's Absence from pc. This Morning the Portuguese Fleet left the Taj-us. I had the Honour to accompany the Prince in Hia Passage over the Bar. The Fleet consisted ot Fight Sail of tlm Line, Four large Frigates, se veral Armed Brigs, Sloops, aud Corvettes, and a Number of Bia/.ii Ships, amounting, 1 btlievc, to about Thirty six Sail in all. They passed through the Britistl Squadron, and His'Majesty's Ships tired a Salute of 1 sveuty-one Guns, which w.is returned with an equal Number. A more interesting Spec tacle than that afforded by the Junction of the Two Fleets Ir • been rarely beheld. On quilting ihe Prince Regent's Ship, I repaired.

• on ho..id iif tlic.H'herniq,but returned immed accompanied by Sir Sidney Smith, vyhom I presented to ihe I'lincc, aud who svr.8 rectived by His Royal s ith ihe most n-..ir!;tj aud gracious Con 