Contemporaries knew of this possibility and attached probabilities to it as the Napoleonic
Wars and debt accumulation dragged on. In particular, to get an idea regarding valua-
tion induced future inflation agents would assess what fiscal sustainability came across
as in the future. If, for instance, the fiscal outlook looked grim, because hostilities in-
tensified and public spending increased, debt relief by devaluation and, hence, inflation
would become more likely.


The type of information that mattered at the time for fiscal sustainability and, hence,
anticipated inflation was related to war finance. War was not only a costly endeavor.
It could, in the worst of cases, render otherwise solid public finances unsustainable and
induced in every case a great deal of uncertainty regarding the prospects for government
finances. Given these uncertainties, agents would try to incorporate all available infor-
mation that could help assess the probability of an unfavorable outcome of war and its
implications for the sustainability of public finances and the aggregate price level.


I demonstrate this nexus by identifying structural breaks in the price level. These break
dates reflect the historical events that shaped market sentiments. I find that significant
changes in prices coincide with events that command a reassessment of Britain’s expected
military fate. In particular, unfavorable news - concerning a battle lost by the British,
for example - has an inflationary impact, as it potentially makes a British victory less
probable and, hence, public finances less sustainable. On the contrary, favorable news
causes inflation to recede.


My results are further corroborated by the analysis of interest rates on long-term public
debt. In particular, the evolutions of the latter during the Restriction Period were af-
fected by anticipated inflation rather than the default premium. These pieces of evidence
are in line with the statement that the monetary policy regime in place determines the
type of debt stabilization agents anticipate for the future, if ever the economy’s fiscal
limit is attained.


Thus, in terms of the long standing debate attributing evolutions in the price level dur-
ing the Restriction Period to either real or monetary factors, I propose a novel, third
explanation. This one is based on the fiscal determinants of the price level. These results


                                            4
