are of timely relevance, since they corroborate the effects of mounting fiscal pressure on
prices in a fiat currency regime with flexible exchange rates, the mode of economic or-
ganization chosen by most industrialized economies today.


The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the analytical
background linking evolutions in public debt and the price level. Section 3 outlines links
to the relevant literature, after which section 4 briefly recalls the events that led to the
suspension and resumption of the gold standard in 1797 and 1821 respectively. Section
5 then details the econometric procedure used to detect the events shaping fiscal an-
ticipations and, hence, asset prices. The following section 6 comments on the results.
Section 7 discusses the hypotheses underlying my interpretation of events, while section
8 concludes briefly.




2        Background

Understanding macroeconomic evolutions and notably price movements during the first
long restriction of the gold standard does less hinge on knowing what happened when
Britain initially suspended convertibility or why it did so. What really matters for such
an understanding is to comprehend the economic and political circumstances that pre-
vailed when Britain came to resume the gold standard.


By the time discussions regarding the gold standard’s resumption started after Napoleon’s
final defeat at Waterloo in 1815, the debt to GDP ratio had climbed to 226%; the price
level exceeded its 1797 level by 22.3% (Officer, and Williamson, 2013; Gayer, Rostow,
and Schwartz, 1953).2 Under these circumstances, getting back to the pound’s prewar
parity would come at high deflationary costs. In particular, wartime inflation had to be
made undone by peacetime deflation in order to peg the paper pound to its pre-war gold
content.3
    2
        Both metrics would reach 260% and 20.6% respectively when resumption was finally decided in
1819.
   3
     A functioning gold standard relies on precisely this adjustment mechanism. Inflationary outbursts
are countered by deflationary episodes, guaranteeing the stability of the price level. As Meltzer and
Robinson (1989) have pointed out, the gold standard’s perceived long-term stability, thus, masks high



                                                  5
