1        Introduction

In terms of a sovereign’s reputation and, hence, market access, some types of default
are worse than others. Default may be excusable when it occurs in bad states of the
world, which are unforeseeable and beyond the sovereign’s immediate influence (Gross-
man and Van Huyck, 1988). Unjustifiable repudiation and strategic default, on the
contrary, may hamper the sovereign’s prospects to borrow or allow it only at prohibitive
costs. In a setting in which unjustifiable repudiation can be excluded, default occurs in
equilibrium and agents price its probability based on fiscal prospects. This establishes a
link between agent’s expectations in terms of fiscal sustainability and certain asset prices.


This paper documents a historical case in which institutional settings, among which
the Bank of England’s restrictions on the uses and abuses of public debt (North and
Weingast, 1989), allowed excluding the possibility of strategic default. I will show in the
following that under these particular institutional circumstances, expectations of how
debt would be stabilized in the future shaped the observed evolution of the price level.


Between 1797 and 1821, the so-called Restriction Period, Britain under George III sus-
pended the convertibility of Bank of England notes in order to finance the Napoleonic
Wars. This exceptional measure was accompanied by important degrees of debt accumu-
lation and inflation. After Napoleon’s final defeat at Waterloo in 1815, the debt to GDP
ratio had climbed to 226%; the price level exceeded its 1797 level by 22.3% (Officer, and
Williamson, 2013; Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, 1953).


Given these circumstances, returning to the pound’s prewar parity would come at high
deflationary costs. Thus, getting back to the gold standard at a devalued pound was by
no means excluded a priori (Acworth, 1925; Fetter, 1965; Kindleberger, 1982). Not only
would devaluation have spared the war-ridden economy from deflation and its detrimen-
tal effects on activity. By decreasing the purchasing power of the pound, it would also
have alleviated the burden of outstanding debt.1


    1
        Not paying back all or part of someone’s debt or doing so in a currency that suffered an engineered
decrease in its purchasing power are two different types of default, but default after all (see section 7).




                                                      3
