Thus, the debate surrounding the resumption of cash payments was very vivid and an-
other option, namely getting back to the gold standard at a devalued pound, was by no
means excluded a priori (Acworth, 1925; Fetter, 1965; Kindleberger, 1982). Not only
would devaluation have spared the war-ridden economy from deflation and its detrimen-
tal effects on activity. By decreasing the purchasing power of the pound, it would also
have alleviated the burden of outstanding debt.4


Policy makers, therefore, had two options, both of them characterized by a trade-off
between the nominal value of the pound and the real amount of outstanding government
debt. One choice entailed getting back to the pound’s pre-war parity and price level but
would come at the cost of deflation and an increased debt burden. The other option
implied devaluing the pound; while alleviating the debt burden, this would also have
been inflationary.


Contemporaries knew of these alternatives and attached probabilities to each of them as
the Napoleonic Wars and debt accumulation dragged on. In particular, to get an idea
regarding future inflation – i.e. regarding the policy choice between valuation induced
de- or inflation – agents would assess what fiscal sustainability came across as in the
future. If, for instance, the fiscal outlook looked grim, because hostilities intensified and
public spending increased, debt relief by devaluation and, hence, inflation would become
more likely.


The type of information that mattered at the time for fiscal sustainability and, hence,
anticipated inflation was related to war finance. Roughly two thirds of Britain’s budget
were dedicated to war fare; the same was true for most other European countries dur-
ing that period (O’Brien, 1988; Hoffman, 2012). Moreover, war was not only a costly
endeavor. It could, in the worst of cases, render otherwise solid public finances unsus-
tainable and induced in every case a great deal of uncertainty regarding the prospects
short to mid-term volatility in prices and activity (see also section 7).
   4
     A third option to cope with the war’s legacy would have been to default on some of the outstanding
debt. As did contemporaries, so do I exclude outright default from the politically feasible. Section 6 and
a companion paper of mine (Antipa, 2014) provide narrative and quantitative evidence for this claim.




                                                    6
