for government finances.


For instance, severe territorial losses and their impact on an economy’s tax base or im-
minent reparation payments (Oosterlinck, 2012) could become prohibitive. A war could,
hence, push an economy to a point, its fiscal limit, were the government would not be
able to finance its expenditures any more. Once an economy’s fiscal limit was reached,
default or devaluation induced inflation would become inevitable.


Rather than being a fixed point, an economy’s fiscal limit could be thought of as a dis-
tribution affected by various factors. The latter included contingencies that were beyond
a government’s domain of influence and that a government, thus, could simply not com-
mit to (Bi, 2012; Trabandt and Uhlig, 2011). Moreover, as the outcome of a war was
often well be beyond a government’s will, it was difficult to convince people that public
finances would remain sustainable under all circumstances.5


The above did not necessarily entail that governments or central banks were not credible
in their policy commitments. On the contrary, the soundness of British institutions at
the time was broadly established (Bordo and Kydland, 1995). Yet, given the economic,
political, and institutional uncertainties induced by war, agents would nonetheless try to
incorporate all available information that could help anticipate the future state of public
finances, and, hence, the aggregate price level. This was a rational strategy irrespective
of the government’s initial commitment to sound fiscal and monetary policies.




3        Related Literature

Two analytical frameworks have been put forward in the economic literature to formal-
ize the link between people’s expectations of how debt will be stabilized in the future
and price evolutions today. The first one goes back to seminal contributions by Sar-
gent (1982) and Sargent and Wallace (1981) and has freely been dubbed the ‘unpleasant
monetarist arithmetic’. The second approach is owned to Leeper (1991), Sims (1994)
    5
        A similar strain of argumentation could be applied to financial crises or any other circumstances
that entail a surprisingly large burden to an economy’s budget.



                                                     7
