nical constraint as price indices did not exist at the time and available data were not
exploited thoroughly (Arnon, 1990). Primarily, this is, however, done to grant historical
coherence between my findings, contemporaries’ information set, and the Bullion Re-
port’s sources and basic hypotheses.


Contemporaries paid attention to prices of specific, widely traded goods, such as wheat,
gold bullion and sterling bills of exchange (notably on Hamburg and Amsterdam). Of
these data, I will concentrate on the difference between the market and the mint price
of gold bullion9 , the agio (see also section 3.2), for the following reasons:



       • Absent efficient storage technologies, wheat prices were affected by various real
         factors, such as bad harvests (Tooke, 1824) or the various trade barriers installed
         during the period under consideration (for the Continental System, see Crouzet,
         1964; for the US embargo, see Frankel, 1982). These factors stood in no connection
         with agents’ expectation on fiscal sustainability and would render the interpretation
         of thus noisy price data difficult.

       • The exchange rate was affected by (real) factors that had no direct relevance for
         the internal valuation of the currency. When, for instance, the pound sterling
         depreciated on the Hamburg exchange between 1800 and 1801, this was due to bad
         harvests and deflation in Hamburg (Newby, 2008).

       • The supply of precious metals was stable during the Restriction Period (Barro,
         1987). In addition, melting down and export of British coin were prohibited. I
         also posit that changes in the demand for non-monetary uses of gold did not occur
         during the Restriction Period.10

       • Financial data offer the advantage of reflecting subjective expectations of decision
         makers about the future. Therefore, their use avoids certain selection biases: fi-
   9
       In 1717, Newton fixed the pound sterling at a gold price of £3 17s 10.5d. This mint price lasted
with lapses for the two restriction periods until 1931.
  10
     It is well known that prices for precious metals increase in times of financial or political turmoil.
This reflects precautionary motives for the detention of gold or ‘the flight to quality’. As this entails a
hedge against future inflation, I consider that this motive for the acquisition of gold is in line with my
hypothesis and that it can be understood as a future monetary use of gold.


                                                    17
