financial needs during the Napoleonic Wars.


The above contributions analyze the part of the nominal interest rate that reflects the
real expected interest rate. Although Bordo and Kydland (1995) demonstrate why long-
term inflationary expectations could have been stable over the period, there is no series
available that could definitely corroborate this hypothesis. In the absence of such evi-
dence, movements in interest rates may also reflect changes in anticipated inflation or
the default premium (Barro, 1987). This is my underlying assumption for what follows,
as it has been the case for Calomiris (1988), Frey and Kucher (2000), Guinnane et al.
(1996), and Webb (1986).




4    Course of Events

The Onset of Convertibility Suspension: Changing Money Demand


The Reign of Robespierre in France in early 1793 had produced a sharp outflow of capi-
tal, inducing silver and gold to leave France for Britain (Neal, 1991; Sargent and Velde,
1995). This had provided ample liquidity for the British banking system. When the
assignats collapsed in France in 1795, money for ordinary payments became short and
those with claims or credit in Britain drew on them to fill the gap. The ensuing outflow
of capital put deflationary pressure on Britain (Kindleberger, 1984).


Gold outflows induced supply shortage and, thus, an increase in the market price of gold.
Yet, under convertibility, gold still exchanged into bank notes for the same predetermined
amount of pounds. In itself, this discrepancy in value (mint versus market) implied an
incentive to convert even more bank notes into gold. Under these circumstances, minor
French military actions triggered a bank run aiming at converting bank notes into gold
specie (Chadha and Newby, 2013). The consequences of that run were felt throughout
the country, putting numerous (country) banks out of business (Feavearyear, 1964).


Subsequently, on 27 February 1797 the Bank of England (BoE henceforth) was given
permission, to cease payment of its notes in gold, before running out of reserves. With


                                           11
