and Woodford (1995 and 2001) and is called the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL
henceforth).


Paraphrasing Keynes, Sargent (1982) points out that the size of a government’s gold
reserve is not the determinant of whether it can maintain or, for that matter, return
to convertibility with gold; its fiscal policy is. According to this view, a government is
like a firm, for which the value of its debt equals the present value of current and future
surpluses. Thus, in order to assign a value to public debt, it is necessary to anticipate
the government’s revenue streams as a function of the state of the economy now and in
the future.


In particular, in Sargent and Wallace’s (1981) framework, agents anticipate that un-
sound fiscal policy today will make it necessary for the government to raise revenues by
printing money tomorrow. However, agents’ demand for money holdings declines with
anticipated inflation. For a given current money supply, the value of money, therefore,
declines and the price level increases. By this mechanism, fiscal profligacy today may
necessitate future money supply growth, causing inflation through seigniorage.


The FTPL also explains movements in the aggregate price level by changes in govern-
ment debt sustainability. Here it is, however, agents’ investment, consumption, and price
setting decision that induce the price level to adjust the real value of outstanding debt.
Long-term debt sustainability is, hence, guaranteed by movements in the price level,
rather than by adjustments in the real backing of debt through seigniorage (Leeper,
2013).


In both frameworks current and future fiscal deficits affect inflation. As fiscal policy
determines prices, the central bank is incapable of controlling inflation. This hinges on
the existence of a point beyond which a government’s possibilities of financing its ex-
penditures are constrained for economic or political reasons. In fact, this restriction is
equivalent to relaxing the postulate that the fiscal authority accommodates the central
bank’s policies by keeping debt on a sustainable path.


Institutional settings of the time and observed evolutions in the price level and public


                                            8
