the suspension, local bank notes were convertible only into BoE notes. The 1797 sus-
pension of the BoE to convert its notes into bullion shifted Britain’s monetary system
from a commodity standard towards a flexible exchange rate.


Note (Over) Issue or the Lender of Last Resort


The internal and external value of the paper pound started decreasing around 1809 (fig-
ures 1 and 2).6 Classical value theory, to which Ricardo (1817) was a major contributor,
held that the equilibrium price of a good was determined by its production costs. It was
believed that the production prices of gold and silver were relatively stable. A rise in the
sterling price of gold bullion, and, hence, an increase in the difference between the mint
and the market price of gold, was perceived as evidence for inflation (figure 3). After
the suspension of convertibility of Bank of England notes into gold in 1797, a fall of the
exchange rate on foreign currencies was interpreted identically (Laidler, 2000).


These evolutions induced government to appoint an investigating committee that pub-
lished its work in 1810 as the Bullion Report. According to it, rising prices and falling
exchange rates had a common source in the over-issue of BoE notes. The latter was un-
dertaken to buy government debt - used to finance the Napoleonic Wars -, which would
have been impossible had the BoE still the obligation to convert its liabilities into bullion.


Neal (1991) argues that it was rather the interruption of trade with the Continent that
had caused the exchanges to fall. By implementing the Continental System, Napoleon
had consciously sought to undermine British war financing on the Continent. In par-
ticular, by rendering it difficult to import British goods, Napoleon was attempting to
constrain corresponding capital flows from the Continent to Britain.


In addition, while the BoE had indeed expanded its note issue, the peak of it was reached
when the burst of the South America bubble in late 1810 induced wide spread panic and
business failures (Feavearyear, 1964; O’Brien, 2010). Amid spreading commercial dis-
tress, country banks had started contracting their note issue drastically. The liquidity
  6
      The price indices presented here were constructed ex post and not available at the time of the Bullion
Report.



                                                     12
