debt fit well with the FTPL. As posited by the framework, the fiscal authority was the
leading one, in the sense that monetary policy decisions were subordinate to fiscal needs.
At the time, the Bank of England primarily financed government expenditures and it
was Parliament that made decisions regarding the suspension and resumption of cash
payments (Clapham, 1944 and Homer and Sylla, 1991). Moreover, the suspension of
convertibility was clearly understood as part of the Nation’s war effort (Newby, 2008;
O’Brien, 2010).


Another precondition for the workings of the FTPL was fulfilled by the absence of out-
right default on government debt. As various authors have pointed out, outright default
on public debt became absent of British public finances after Parliament gained broad
decisionary powers over public expenditures and taxation through the Glorious Revo-
lution (North and Weingast, 1987; Sussman and Yafeh, 2006). Partisan constellations
made hard default even less likely (Stasavage, 2007) (refer also to discussion further be-
low).


As will be shown further below, the adjustment of outstanding government debt was
operated by discrete jumps in the price level. When unfavorable news brought about a
change in expectations regarding the sustainability of public finances, a higher price level
increased the nominal backing for public debt. On the contrary, seignorage accounted
for less than 5% of war revenues (Bordo and White, 1991). Given that seignorage con-
tributed so little to the real backing of public debt, it seems unlikely that anticipated
future money growth affected agents’ inflationary expectations.


Finally, there is an inherent contradiction between Sargent and Wallace’s predictions for
and observed evolutions of the price level. In their framework, expansionary monetary
policy reduces the need for future money growth and seigniorage, being, thus, disinfla-
tionary (Loyo, 1999). However, most scholars have put forward that around the 1813-14
price peak, the BoE’s monetary policies were at their most expansionary (Duffy, 1981).


Fiscal determinants of the price level are also the principal component that differentiates
my contribution from a long standing literature that has sought to explain evolutions
in the price level during the Restriction Period by either real or monetary factors. This


                                             9
