Hence, I should be able to identify these unexpected11 events as structural breaks in the
price level, measured by the agio.


This type of analysis is different from an event study or the narrative approach, as
the starting point is not a predefined list of historically important dates with the data
telling which matter. On the contrary, the methodology employed here allows detect-
ing the events that contemporaries considered to be significant for the future course of
British finances without any ex post bias. This pays attention to the concern that his-
torical events are not a prequel to what ensues but have to be analyzed in their historical
context.


In addition, the understanding of contemporaries’ perception is enhanced by the use
of financial market data. The latter are highly informative when one wishes to assess
the contemporaneously perceived importance of events, since any misinterpretation of
incoming information has adverse pecuniary consequences (Frey and Waldenström, 2008
and Oosterlinck et al. 2013).


The Joys of Archival Evidence


My approach bears, however, the risk of ‘over-interpretation’, i.e. the risk that historical
events of minor importance are matched with the determined break dates at any costs.
I verify the importance of events matched with the detected break dates by considering
contemporary sources and archival evidence. In particular, I consult the The London
Times, Britain’s highbrow daily newspaper of the period (Bignon and Flandreau, 2014),
for which archives are available over the whole period.


I also examine The London Gazette, government’s official journal. The latter was pub-
lished twice a week (on Tuesdays and Saturdays) and as a ‘Gazette Extraordinary’ when-
ever deemed necessary by the nature of news. The The London Gazette contained official
government announcements, such as declarations of war and peace, and intelligence from
different war fronts. The enclosed intelligence came in the form of dispatches, composed
by the actors of war themselves (to a lesser extent that was the case for the The London
 11
      Market efficiency entails that expected events would have been incorporated beforehand.


                                                   19
