Times as well).


Beyond the obvious historical interest of these pieces of information, they also conveyed
information regarding transmission times for news. For instance, Madrid capitulated to
the French on 4 December 1808, news of the capitulation, however, only reached London
on the 19th. I, thus, paid close attention to the fact that break dates had to coincide
with the moment at which information concerning an event attained Britain, rather than
with the timing of the event itself.


While it was rather straightforward that Madrid’s capitulation made the news in Decem-
ber 1808, it was less easy to determine which event affected contemporaries’ perceptions
when there were several important battle lines. In these cases, I searched both jour-
nals for keywords in the vicinity of the break date and retained the event obtaining the
highest number of references. Along those lines, I also paid particular attention to the
frequency of mentions in the The London Times lead articles. In August 1812, for ex-
ample, intelligence from neither the Russian nor the Spanish fronts made the headlines,
it was information regarding the American declaration of war that occupied most news
space.


In addition to these sources, I relied on evidence from the BoE archives. The publi-
cations I considered were ledgers and related publications12 that contained prices for
gold and different titles of public debt. Beyond the otherwise known price data, these
publications also recorded significant events of the time. This established a direct link
between observed price movements and events that had caused them. In other words,
contemporaries were well aware of the fact that political and military events had their
bearing on the evolutions of asset prices.


Moreover, the ledger used in particular (see figure 9 in the appendix), recorded fort-
nightly averages of price data and was completed over time. Together with references
to ex post seemingly minor events this made it an adequate reflection of how the impor-
tance of events was appreciated in real time. It is, therefore, reassuring that practically
all estimated break dates are also mentioned in the ledger.
 12
      BoE archives, items 10A270/1 and 10A321/1.


                                                   20
