      nancial decisions have pecuniary consequences, which implies incentives to behave
      as a profit-maximizer. Traders attempt to pin down what did or will happen, not
      for its own sake or historical purposes, but in order to assess the future value of
      the asset they hold or intend to acquire (Frey and Kucher, 2000).

   • Finally, evolutions in the agio reflect accurately the movements in the aggregate
      price level. For the available monthly and yearly price indices, correlation co-
      efficients range from 0.65 to 0.72 and from 0.68 to 0.79 respectively during the
      suspension period. Table 6 in the appendix presents more detailed statistics.

The data set spans the years 1718-1873 and is based on Castaing’s Course of the Ex-
change, published twice a week (reproduced in Neal, 1990 and Boyer-Xambeu et al.
1994). As presented in figure 3, the agio increased substantially after 1808 and reached
a peak of 45% mid 1813. Recall that contemporaries interpreted increases in the agio
as a metric of the pound’s internal devaluation. An increase of gold’s market value in
terms of paper pounds entailed that more pounds were required to purchase the same
commodity. Absent any significant changes in the supply of gold, an increase in the
agio, therefore, necessarily implied a devaluation of the pound. Table 7 in the appendix
provides descriptive statistics for the agio.



5.2   Identification Strategy and Estimation Procedure

Contemporaries’ Views and Actions


Irrespective of prior policy commitments, agents could rationally be expected to incorpo-
rate all available information that could help anticipate the future state of public finances
(see section 2). Based on their assessment regarding the sustainability of British public
debt, agents would then adjust their consumption, investment, and pricing decisions.
These, in turn, would affect the aggregate price level, through which adjustments in real
outstanding public debt would operate.


The aggregate price level, therefore, reflected agents’ assessment of fiscal sustainability in
the future. Important changes in the price level, should, thus, convey information on the
events that caused contemporaries to alter their predictions regarding public finances.

                                                18
