         Times on the 26th ) resulted in the complete victory of the French over the Spanish,
         and opened central Spain to invasion. The battle preceded Madrid’s capitulation
         to Napoleon on 4 December and the installation of his brother Joseph as the King
         of Spain. In line with these events, the agio increased.19

       • February 1811: An outnumbered French force nearly destroyed the Spanish Army
         of Extremadura at the battle of Gebora (19 February). This victory allowed the
         French to seize the important fortress and well supplied town of Badajoz, opening
         the route to Portugal.20 At this occasion, the agio increased further.

       • July 1815: The month of July witnessed decisive military and political events,
         sealing Napoleon’s final defeat. Wellington and the King of France enter Paris On
         after the Battle of Issy, won on the 3 July.21 On 15 July, Napoleon surrendered
         himself to the British22 and was in the following sent to the the island of Saint
         Helena, where he died in May 1821 (see section on daily data).

       • May 1819: Peel’s Act definitely fixed the details and time-line for the resumption
         of the gold standard (see section 3 and results for daily data further below).


6.2       Daily Data

I now turn to the results of the break date estimation on the daily data, presented in
figure 6 and table 2 (tables 9 and 10 in the appendix provide confidence intervals and
parameter estimates). The results for overlapping periods from the daily procedure cor-
roborate the monthly results. The following events coincide with the detected break
dates:



       • 8 February 1811: No military or political events occurred at that exact date.
         However, the confidence interval encompasses the battle of Gebora, on 19 February
  19
       In the meantime, Napoleon had initiated the Peninsular War. In order to punish the Portuguese
for not enacting the Continental System against the British, French troops were sent to Spain, France’s
ally. Taking advantage of the troops’ presence in Spain, Napoleon had turned on his ally.
   20
      Dispatches announcing the Spanish defeat at Badajoz are published in the London Gazette the 3
March.
 21
    London Gazette, 11 July.
 22
    London Gazette, 21 July.



                                                  25
