Not only is predictability of inflation under the gold standard restrained to long term
evolutions.35 Forecasting inflation gets even thornier when the probability of resumption
at the pre-war parity is not equal to one. To make things even worse, it is likely that
the probability of resumption varies with the length of convertibility suspension and so
induced inflation, since its deflationary counterpart comes at increasing economic and
political costs.


Thus, any meaningful forecast of inflation under the gold standard hinges on the probabil-
ity of resuming convertibility at the pre-war parity. This, in turn, reflects the probability
that average rates of inflation will equal zero at the time of resumption. The timing of
resumption and the inflationary overhang, finally, allow forecasting the scale of deflation
to come.


It’s all about Anticipated Inflation


In the following, I examine the yields’ variance under different monetary regimes (the
gold standard and its suspension, i.e. a commodity and a fiat currency regime) and
different states of the world (peace and war). In particular, the yield series is partitioned
into four segments: peace under the gold standard, war under the gold standard, peace
during the suspension and war during the suspension.36 To pin down the part in the
variance of consols that is attributable to this segmentation or treatment, I conduct an
analysis of variance (ANOVA). This procedure is in spirit and, under certain assump-
tions on the residuals, in practice close to difference-in-difference estimation (Iversen and
Norpoth, 1987).


Mean yields for every segment are presented in table 3. The means are significantly
different from each other.37 In the following, I test whether the differences in means
are accounted for by the way the series is partitioned. To do so, the variation be-
tween means can decomposed following equation 4. Here SStotal equals the total sum
  35
       Recall what Keynes said about this horizon.
  36
       The minimal segment size for this partitioning is of 49 observations, ensuring the validity of the test
procedure.
  37
     These results are based on a host of tests, including those allowing for unequal sample variances.


                                                      35
