7.2       How Monetary Regimes Shape Expectations

The Object of Analysis: Interest Rates on Public Debt


A more formal way to test the hypothesis that default will occur by inflation rather
than in an outright manner is to examine interest rates on public debt, disentangling
the premia for default and anticipated inflation. The series used for this exercise is the
market yield on three percent consolidated annuities, so-called consols, which were the
benchmark instrument of British debt management over the period (Ashton, 1959). At
the monthly frequency, this series has so far not been exploited.32


Consols formed the larger part of Britain’s funded debt before World War I and were the
focal point of the yield curve. As such they were not subject to redemption or interest
rate reductions.33 Unlike most other private debt instruments, neither were consols sub-
ject to the usury laws, imposing a five percent interest rate ceiling. The interest rate on
consols, thus, freely reflected conditions of demand and supply in the government debt
market.


Furthermore, consols were a perpetual bond, for which holders received an annual three
percent coupon. The yield of a consol then equaled interest payments as a percentage
of the market price. Yields, thus, reflected price movements on the secondary market
that incorporated investors’ expectations of inflation and default risk (Chamley, 2011).
Figure 7 displays the evolution of market yields between 1750 and 1950.


With the above in mind, it is possible to decompose the nominal interest rate on consols,
                                                                           e , expected
rnom , into its expected real component, the marginal product of capital, rreal
  32
       Existing research, such as Barro (1987) relies on interest rate series at an annual frequency. These
annual series are obtained by averaging monthly data, which entails potential problems of temporal
aggregation, i.e. changes in the property of time series by averaging out observations (Christiano and
Eichenbaum, 1987; Sims, 1971). As a matter of fact, annual consol yields are significantly different from
observations for the first and last month of each year. Moreover, this phenomenon is exacerbated in
years of high volatility. It is, thus, to be expected that my results differ from those found in earlier
studies on the subject.
  33
     From 1752 up until to Goschen’s conversion in 1888, the coupon rate on consols remained indeed at
three percent.



                                                     32
