      observation on 29 May.


7     Discussion

So far, I have shown that expectations regarding the sustainability of public finances
affected the price level during Britain’s first experience with fiat money. This inter-
pretation of events hinges on one critical assumption, namely the absence of outright
default. In the framework proposed here, it is only when outright default on some or all
of government debt can be excluded that debt adjustments will occur by (devaluation
induced) inflation.


Given the importance of this assumption, this section first lays out some narrative evi-
dence that contemporaries did indeed exclude the possibility of outright default from the
politically feasible. This finding is then further corroborated by the analysis of interest
rates on public debt.



7.1    Hard versus Soft Default: Narrative Evidence

What I have stated so far depends on the assumption that if default there is, it will
be default by inflation. In practice that means the following: suppose worst comes to
worst, Britain loses the war and hits its fiscal limit. My assumption of soft rather than
hard default entails that contemporaries attached a higher probability to the event of
getting back to the gold standard at a devalued par than to the event of government not
reimbursing some or all of outstanding public debt.


Many authors have pointed out that contemporaries indeed excluded the possibility of
outright default (Acworth, 1925; Neal, 1990). O’Brien (2010) states that ‘neither domes-
tic nor foreign investors in the securities of the island could have rationally contemplated
[..] that the government’s debt be repudiated either as an outcome of conquest or as the
result of any unmanageable fiscal and financial crisis [..]. Reasons for this certainty were
numerous:

    • British public finances had been in order for more than a century, ever since Parlia-
      ment had gained spending and taxing power with the Glorious Revolution (North

                                            30
