In order to account for varying lags in the formation of expectations, I compute average
inflation over different time horizons (one, two, and five years). The series used for this
exercise is based on Gayer et al. (1953), as it is the only one available at a monthly
frequency. These averages are then compared to observed inflation during the suspen-
sion period. If anticipated inflation was the same for the suspension period and the gold
standard, the residuals of these equations should be white noise.


Figure 8 depicts the residuals; for the residuals to be white noise, they ought to have
a zero mean and a constant variance, while being serially uncorrelated. None of these
conditions are met34 confirming that the residuals do not follow a white noise process.
I can, thus, exclude that the same rate of inflation was expected for the gold standard
and the suspension period. This finding entails also that anticipated inflation was not
stable throughout the suspension period.


This result hinges on the nature of the gold standard as a devise imposing the stability
of the price level. In particular, a stable price level entails that rates of inflation will
on average be zero over the whole duration of the gold standard. The same is true for
restrictions of convertibility, when ended by a resumption at the pre-war parity, as the
latter necessitates getting back to the pre-war price level. Thus, average rates of inflation
will equal zero between endpoints of the gold standard and its suspension at the time of
resumption. This is, however, the only feature that the operation and resumption of the
gold standard allow forecasting.


Being on the gold standard or resuming it at a non-predetermined date in the future
does by no means provide any useful information for forecasting short to mid-term rates
of inflation. The adjustment mechanism the gold standard -and for that matter any
type of price level targeting- relies on, requires that inflationary outbursts are countered
by deflationary episodes. This, however, induces high short to mid-term volatility in
prices and activity, making both series hard to predict (Meltzer and Robinson, 1989). In
addition, the same feature of the gold standard also practically excludes cases in which
inflation rates are close or equal to zero, as this only has to be the case on average.
  34
       See table 11 in the appendix for descriptive statistics; autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity test
results are available upon request.



                                                     34
