     and Weingast, 1987; Sussman and Yafeh, 2006). Partisan constellations had further
     contributed to excluding outright default from the politically acceptable (Stasav-
     age, 2007).

   • The credibility of British public debt was essential for the funding of war. It was
     part and consequence of an institutional environment that facilitated war finance,
     leading eventually to Britain’s military and, hence, commercial supremacy over
     most of continental Europe (Bordo and White, 1991; Brewer, 1988).

   • A broadly acknowledged national consensus entailed that national elites contributed
     to the war effort by holding government debt. In return, war debt would not be
     defaulted on, as successful wars enhanced prospects for growth and investment
     opportunities, thus rendering war debt self-amortizing (Ritschl, 1996).

   • Due to property qualifications that guaranteed an important intersection between
     Members of Parliament and creditors of public debt, default became even more
     unlikely, given Parliament’s prerogatives on the issue (Dickson, 1967; Johnston,
     2013).

By contrast, alleviating some of the debt burden by increased inflation would have im-
plied a more extensive mutualization of war losses. Moreover, this was the first long sus-
pension of the gold standard. The discussion around resumption and its exact modalities
was vivid: no options, including devaluing the pound and maintaining the paper pound
indefinitely, were excluded ex ante. The decision to resume at the pre-war parity was,
thus, by no means predetermined (Kindleberger, 2000).


The above entails also that the choice between soft and hard default was above all a
redistributive one. Outright default would have entailed a capital levy on the holders of
government debt, while default by inflation would have affected everybody, but to a lesser
extent. Given the political circumstances of the time - 1.5% of the British population
were registered to vote in Parliamentary elections (Johnston, 2013) - I have supposed
that contemporaries attached a higher probability to the latter.




                                           31
