                        Table 5: Consol yields, standard deviations
                                                  Peace   War
                              Gold standard       0.25    0.46
                                Suspension        0.42    0.48



from peace to war did not cause a significant increase in the volatility of the yield series.
This is indicative of the fact that the evolutions of consols during the suspension period
were influenced by anticipated inflation rather then the default premium.


These findings are further corroborated by the analysis of rolling standard deviations:
increased volatility in consols commences and seizes with the onset and resumption of
convertibility (see figure 10 in the appendix). In particular, mean yields remained high
after the end of the war in 1815. The segmentation between war and peace does, there-
fore, not well account for the differences in average yields.


More broadly speaking, these pieces of evidence are in line with the straightforward
assumption that default is going to happen by devaluation induced inflation or in an
outright manner, but not both. When the monetary regime ties policy makers’ hands,
default premia increase, as outright default is anticipated in the worst case scenario.
When a fiat currency is in place, premia for expected inflation augment, since outstand-
ing public debt can now be adjusted by soft default, i.e. inflation.


The above falls short of a more rigorous analysis that also accounts for the evolutions
on the marginal rate of capital. The stance adopted here is close to O’Brien (2006) and
Heim and Mirowski (1987), in that I assume that the degree of crowding out was limited
and could not have caused short-term evolutions as the ones observed in the monthly
series used here. Given this constraint, my findings, along with the qualitative evidence
presented, entail that it were inflation expectations that primarily affected yields on pub-
lic debt over the period under consideration. It seems straightforward that this applied
to the price level as well.




                                             38
