A.2    A famous absentee: the battle of Leipzig

Ex-post historiography has posited that the battle of Leipzig (16-19 October 1813) sealed
Napoleon’s defeat well before the French surrender in March 1814. This date does, how-
ever, not show up as a break-point. The readings of contemporary sources allow un-
derstanding contemporaries’ perception surrounding that event and, hence, its absence
among break dates.


Not only was the outcome of the battle anticipated and, hence, as posited by market
efficiency, already factored in. Uncertainty also prevailed regarding the strength of the
French army’s remnants, entailing the necessity to continue martial and budgetary ef-
forts. In particular:



   • The French defeat was largely anticipated

      “In point of fact they (the French) have, for the most part, been compelled to
      abandon the right bank of the Elbe; and the attempt, already thrice repeated, of
      penetrating into Bohemia, has every time had no other effect than the discomfiture
      and destruction of the troops employed.
      All accounts agree in stating, that the French army in the Saxon Erzgebirge is
      a prey to the most dreadful privations; that they daily, from want of forage, lose
      hundreds of horses; and that, the men, to satisfy the cravings of hunger, are obliged
      to have recourse to horse flesh.” London Gazette, 19-23 October 1813

      “We feel little apprehension for the consequences. The chances of war are, indeed,
      proverbially uncertain; but neither his 160,000 men, nor his imperial title, nor his
      military talents, affect us with the slightest doubt as to the result of a conflict.”
      Times, 21 October 1813

   • A high degree of uncertainty surrounded French strength after defeat

      “It is difficult to calculate the diminution of the Tyrant’s force, produced by these
      three days of heroic achievement.” Times, 4 November 1813

      “The extent of the result of this important day cannot as yet be ascertained. Near
      half a million of soldiers fought in this battle, probably one of the most extensive


                                            54
