     and most generally engaged that ever took place, at least modern history.” Dispatch
     from General Viscount Cathcart, dated 19 October; published in London Gazette,
     23 November

     “The force of Buonaparte, as he retired on the great line of his communications,
     was probably augmented by troops at Erfurt, and other places on its march, and
     in his battles with General Wrede, he seems to have brought forward seventy or
     eighty thousand men, a force much beyond what we estimated him to possess, after
     his various losses.” Dispatch from Lieutenant General Charles Stewart, dated 11
     November; published in London Gazette, 24 November

   • It was repeatedly announced that martial and budgetary efforts needed
     to continue

     “I cannot but deplore most deeply the continuance of this extended warfare, and of
     all those miseries which the insatiable ambition of the Ruler of France has so long
     inflicted upon Europe.
     The restoration of that great blessing upon principles of justice and equality has
     never ceased to be my anxious wish; but I am fully convinced that it can only be
     obtained by a continuance of those efforts which have already delivered so large a
     part of Europe from the power of the enemy.” Prince Regent’s opening speech of
     Lords Sitting, 4 November; published in London Gazette, same date

     “.. it is not yet time to lay aside our arms. The enemy is defeated; he is humbled
     beyond any former period; but he may, he will, rise again, should the Germans
     prematurely imagine that they may take rest. It ought not to be concealed, that
     for a time to come, ample sacrifices, as well as further efforts of our long-tried
     valour, are indispensable.” Letter from the Privy Councilors of the King of Great
     Britain, 4 November

The above example shows that the combination of ex-ante agnostic break tests and the
reading of contemporary sources allows detecting the events that influenced contempo-
raries’ expectations, without any historiographical ex post bias. This pays attention to
the concern that historical events have to be analyzed in their contemporary context.




                                          55
