

The exception being that food exports were occasionally banned when domestic food 5 supplies were scarce.

stamp duty (McCusker 1996, pp. 360-1). Thus it was that British attempts to raise taxation in North America, as well as the stationing of a large royal army there, provided a spark for the American Revolution. In turn, French fiscal problems, aggravated by France’s support for the American colonists, led to attempted reforms in France, and helped produce the French Revolution of 1789. A series of mercantilist wars were therefore followed by a larger conflagration, into which an additional ideological dimension had now been injected. In 1792, France declared war on Austria and Prussia; and on February 1 , 1793, the French National Convention st

declared war on Great Britain. The ensuing period of warfare between the two countries, which lasted almost uninterrupted until 1815 (there was a brief interlude of peace which lasted from the Peace of Amiens in March 1802 until the renewal of war in May 1803, and another during 1814-15), had profound and long-lasting effects on international trade worldwide. Within a month, the Convention had prohibited the importation of large classes of British goods, and in October it banned all British manufactured goods; meanwhile, the British side adopted a policy of blockading the coast of France. As Eli Heckscher’s classic account emphasizes (Heckscher 1922), each side was motivated by a mercantilist desire to prevent the other exporting, and thus acquiring precious metals, rather than by a desire to prevent the enemy from importing food or other goods which might be useful to the war effort. There was also the hope that by preventing exports, the enemy’s economy could be 5 damaged, causing unemployment and political unrest. This gave the blockades of the 1790s, as well as the later Continental Blockade, a distinctly 18 century flavour; thus, in 1809 and th

Rose (1902); Heckscher (1922); Olson (1963); Crouzet (1987, pp. 564-571), Crouzet 6 
(2003). In fact, Napoleon was also motivated by the desire to help French farmers, who were 
struggling with the effects of a bumper crop; and by the need for government revenue. 
6 

1810, when Britain was suffering from poor harvests, but France had food in abundance, Napoleon authorized food exports to its enemy. Such a policy stance, based on the hope that one’s opponent could be brought to its knees by supplying it with food in return for gold, relied on the assumption that Britain needed trade surpluses to finance its war effort on the Continent; it ignored the possibility that the war effort could be financed via capital flows (Neal 1991), and invites counterfactual speculation as to what would have happened had Napoleon understood correctly that imports are desirable, and attempted to starve out the British. 6

Both the French and the British took measures against neutral shipping which transported enemy goods, but the bilateral trade dispute took on a multilateral nature in December 1800, when Russia, Denmark, Sweden and Prussia formed the League of Armed Neutrality (which succeeded a similar arrangement between the two Scandinavian countries in 1794), agreeing to provide naval protection for their merchant shipping. This arrangement came to an end in 1801, but not before the British had announced a blockade on trade with the League (bar Prussia), and physically attacked Copenhagen. Trade disruption was to become far more widespread in the aftermath of Napoleon’s military victories over Austria in 1805 and Prussia in 1806. In November 1806, his Berlin Decree declared that the British Isles were under blockade (somewhat fancifully, since Britain controlled the seas), that all trade in British goods were prohibited, and that all vessels coming directly from Britain or her colonies were to be turned away from French ports. More importantly, Napoleon began applying these restrictions, not just in France, but in vassal states such as Spain, Naples and