

The only Continental country to hold out was Sweden, which was eventually forced 7 to join the blockade in 1810.

Holland. His forces defeated those of Russia in 1807; the ensuing Treaty of Tilsit implied that not just Russia, but Denmark and Portugal, joined the blockade (the former voluntarily, the latter as a result of a French invasion), as did Prussia; the result was that virtually the entire Continent was now in a state of ‘self-blockade’ against the exports of Britain, the overwhelmingly dominant industrial power of the time. 7

Nor did matters end there. In November 1807 the British declared that neutral ships 
could be seized if found to be carrying goods from enemy colonies to their mother countries, 
even if they first transited via neutral ports; on the other hand neutral ships could still carry 
goods from enemy colonies to their own home ports, or from enemy colonies to British ports, 
or from their own home ports to British ports, or from British ports to enemy ports. The 
practical effect of this was that neutrals would have to put into British ports if they wanted to 
ship goods from, say, French colonies (or indeed, from their own country) to France. 
Napoleon retaliated by declaring that any neutral ship putting into a British port was fair 
prize, and could be seized. Faced with a situation where neutral ships carrying goods to the 
Continent were now subject to seizure from either one side or the other, the young U.S. 
government closed its ports in December to belligerent shipping and forbade its own ships to 
leave these ports. This Embargo Act was repealed in 1809, and replaced with a non 
Intercourse Act which only banned trade with Britain and France (and which was clearly 
difficult to enforce, once ships had been given leave to sail to Europe). Nonetheless, for 
fourteen months the United States found itself in a state of virtual autarky (Irwin 2001). 
Russia broke with France in 1810, by 1813 Napoleon was in retreat and the 
Continental Blockade was unravelling in several directions, and the Blockade legislation was 

finally repealed following Napoleon’s abdication in 1814, having effectively collapsed in the 
summer of 1813. On the other hand, in 1812 continuing friction over trade-related issues led 
to the United States declaring war on Britain. There followed British attempts to blockade the 
US coastline, attempts which were greatly helped by victory over Napoleon in 1814, which 
allowed the Royal Navy to redeploy its forces there. The day after the peace treaty between 
France and Britain was signed, Britain ordered that the entire US coastline be blockaded. The 
war between Britain and its former colony, and the ensuing damage to trade, was to last for 
the rest of the year. 
The period was also marked by war and revolution in the Carribean and Latin 
America. In 1791, slaves on the French sugar colony of Saint Domingue rose against their 
masters, and after resisting British and French invasions, Haiti became an independent 
republic in 1804. Naval warfare between Spain and Britain (1796-1802 and 1804-8) seriously 
disrupted Latin American trade; this was followed by a series of revolutions in the following 
decade, following Napoleon’s invasion and occupation of Iberia in 1808. By the 1820s 
independent republics (or, the case of Brazil, an independent Empire) had been established 
across the continent. 
For over 20 years leading governments had acted so as to severely disrupt 
international trade, and under the Continental System that disruption had been widespread 
and rather extreme. The question now arises as to what were the economic consequences of 
this disruption, in both the short and longer run. 