

In turn, these terms of trade effects reduced the economic welfare of the countries concerned. Estimates of the welfare loss depend on the economic model used to calculate them; I use the simplest possible computable general equilibrium (CGE) model that can generate such estimates. This is a simplification of the CGE model suggested by Anderson and Neary (1996) to estimate their trade restrictiveness index; and its appeal lies in the fact that the only information needed to calibrate the model is the trade share. All production takes place in one sector, which uses a single factor of production (call it ‘value added’ or VA) to produce two composite outputs, a non-traded good (NT) which is entirely consumed, and an exportable good (X) which is entirely exported (see Figure 12). Production takes place according to a constant elasticity of transformation production function, with elasticity of transformation J. The exportable good is exchanged on international markets for a composite imported good, M, which is entirely consumed. The exportable is taken to be the numéraire good, and trade is assumed to be balanced. The key relative price in the model is then the (exogenous) relative price of the import good, which is set equal to one in the benchmark equilibrium, but can be changed in order to simulate the effects of terms of trade shocks. In order to calibrate the model, let the export share (equal to the import share by assumption) equal t, and assume that the country’s endowment of value added equals 100 (the number chosen here is of course irrelevant to the results). Then the production of the non-traded good will equal (1-t)*100; the production of the exportable will equal t*100; and imports will equal t*100. Consumption of the non-traded and imported goods will take place in the proportion (1-t) to t respectively. There are two key elasticities in the model: the elasticity of transformation J between the non-traded good and the exportable in production, and the elasticity of substitution F in consumption between the non-traded good and the importable. The results depend in

Anderson and Neary’s baseline assumption is that F = 0.7. 16

particular on the latter elasticity: the higher is the elasticity of substitution in consumption, the easier it is for consumers to switch away from imports when wartime blockades raise their price, and the lower the resultant welfare loss. Welfare losses should also depend on the value of J, with higher values leading to lower welfare losses; but in practice the results seem remarkably insensitive to the value of this parameter. I therefore follow Anderson and Neary in assuming a value of 5 for J throughout. Table 4 presents a range of welfare estimates for each country, for values of F ranging from 0.25 to 2 (the latter being an absolute upper bound, since typically CGE models assume elasticity values less than unity: see Irwin 2001). The results suggest that French welfare 16

losses were roughly twice as high as British losses, lying in the 3-4% range, as opposed to British losses of 1.7-1.8% per annum. Per annum losses were even lower in Sweden if the period 1807-14 as a whole is considered, but were closer to 3% during 1810-1814. The table thus confirms the earlier impression that the blockades hit Britain much less severely than they did her main Continental rival. The most striking result of Table 4, however, concerns a country which had initially been neutral, namely the United States. The results suggests that per annum American welfare losses were much higher than those incurred in either France of Britain, lying in the 5-6% range. These estimates are remarkably close to Irwin’s estimate of a 5% welfare loss for the United States during the period of Jefferson’s embargo; the difference is that these are average estimates calculated for the period 1807-14 as a whole, since, as the terms of trade figures suggest, wartime curtailment of trade continued to impose a cost on the American economy well after the repeal of the Embargo Act. Indeed, the terms of trade data suggest that