

years of the most intense blockade (1807-12) did not have any particular impact on the 
relative price of a good imported in the main from the Caribbean and Latin America, rather 
than Continental Europe. As for raw cotton, its relative price did increase in 1808 and 1809, 
as a result of the US Embargo, as well as in 1814, but Figure 3 makes it clear that these 
increases were not out of the ordinary, and have to be set against a trend which was steadily 
favourable as far as Britain’s cotton producers were concerned. Relative cotton prices were 
indeed lower after the war than during it, but the figure suggests that it would be difficult to 
attribute this fact to the cessation of hostilities alone. 
On the other hand, there is clearer evidence of war-time increases in the relative prices 
of Asian imports. The relative price of tea was 16% higher during than after the wars (and 
note also the very substantial spike in 1780-84, coinciding with the Fourth Anglo-Dutch 
War). As for the relative price of pepper, it was 53% higher during the peak of the wartime 
trade disruption (1807-12) than before the war, and 44% higher than after, reflecting war-time 
increases in freight and insurance rates. However, there were also pronounced spikes in this 
relative price both before (1784, 1789) and after (1824-5) the war. While the two earlier 
spikes can plausibly related to conflict or fears of conflict (the end of the Anglo-Dutch war, 
and the French Revolution), it is less clear what was driving the latter one. 
To summarize: these annual price data suggest a pronounced wartime effect on British 
imports from Europe, and a less pronounced (if still sizable) effect on imports from Asia and 
the Caribbean/Latin America. Given that the French were able to influence trade between 
Britain and large areas of the Continent, which were under their control, but had no power 
whatsoever to influence Britain’s overseas trade, this makes sense. What about other 
countries participating in the conflict? 
Figure 4 looks at relative prices in France, but only from 1798 onwards (which is 

when data become available in the standard source for the period, Chabert 1945). This means that war-time prices can only be compared with post-war prices. As can be seen from the figure, the key British export to the Continent, textiles, was a lot more expensive relative to wheat during the war than afterwards: prices during 1798-1815 were 77% higher than during 1816-30. While there was a peak in the relative price during the Continental Blockade period, it does not stand out from similar, earlier peaks, although relative import prices did fall sharply and permanently in 1812-13. War, rather than the blockade itself, seems to have had an important impact on French relative prices in this instance. The situation is different as regards the other major industrial commodity of the early Industrial Revolution, iron: its relative price rose substantially during the Continental Blockade (to a level 41% higher than its postwar average) but was not higher on average during the war as a whole than afterwards. Iron (as opposed to hardware and other iron products) was not smuggled at all, and it may be that this explains the greater effect of the Blockade per se on iron prices; but this is speculation. The Blockade also appears to have had an important effect in making overseas imports, such as sugar, raw cotton, pepper and coffee, scarcer within France (and indeed this effect is much more clearly discernible than for the European industrial commodities just mentioned): the peaks in the prices of these four commodities relative to the major European exportable (textiles) are very pronounced, with the relative prices during 1807-12 exceeding average postwar levels by 53%, 124%, 39% and 50% respectively. Another noteworthy feature of the figure, which reinforces the impression that war and blockades did have an important effect on relative prices, is the decline in the relative price of importables coinciding with the Peace of Amiens of 1802-3. The available price evidence also suggests that the relative prices of overseas importables rose considerably in the Netherlands during the wars, and especially during the