

Section 5. Welfare losses: some simple estimates For a few countries, there are estimates of average export and import prices during this period, and hence of their aggregate terms of trade. Figure 11 graphs the price of imports, relative to the price of exports, for four such countries: the two main belligerents, Britain and France, as well as the United States and Sweden. The shaded area in the figures refers to the high-water mark of war-time trade restrictions, 1807-14. The figure indicates substantial increases in relative import prices during the conflict, consistent with the diplomatic and naval histories of the period. Sweden’s terms of trade suffered a sharp deterioration in 1810, when she was forced to join the Continental Blockade; while in France the terms of trade improved during the Peace of Amiens, before deteriorating dramatically during the period of the Blockade. The figure also bears out the impression given by the data on individual commodity prices, namely that Britain was less severely affected by these trade disputes than

France, presumably as a result of the Royal Navy’s supremacy at sea: intra-European trade 
disruption might have affected both of the main belligerents in a similar manner, and even 
raised import prices to a greater extent in Britain than in France (as Panel A of Table 3 
suggested); but the impact of the wars on the price of non-European imports was so much 
greater on the Continent than in the British Isles that this swamped any other effects. Indeed, 
the effect of war on aggregate British relative import prices seems to be smaller than that in 
America as well: there were spikes in the relative price of imports in Britain in 1809 and 
1814, but these were dwarfed by the enormous increase in the United States in 1814, when 
the Royal Navy successfully blockaded much of the US coastline. It looks therefore, as if 
Britain was the economic ‘victor’ in these trade disputes, emerging relatively unscathed while 
her rivals did not. 
In order to take account of the fact that there were long run trends in these series (for 
example, rapid technological progress in key export industries such as textiles in Britain 
implied a long run tendency during this period for Britain’s terms of trade to deteriorate: see 
Imlah 1958, Cuenca Esteban 1997), I once again regressed the log of each country’s terms of 
trade on time and time-squared, plus a dummy variable representing the blockade period; and 
used the regression coefficients to infer how much lower relative import prices would have 
been in the absence of the blockade. According to this procedure, Britain suffered a terms of 
trade loss (i.e. higher relative import prices) of 11.9% during 1807-14 , as compared with 
terms of trade losses of 8.6% in Sweden, 49.4% in the United States, and an impressive 
61.2% in France. In the Swedish case, it makes sense to also look at the impact of the 
blockade from 1810 onwards, since it was only then that Sweden was forced to become a part 
of it: relative Swedish import prices were 21.0% higher during 1810-14 than during a no 
blockade counterfactual. 