

effects of war were propagated through domestic political processes. 
Thus far, this paper has stressed the negative effects of the Twenty-Three Years War 
on trade and welfare; and these were indeed considerable. But the conflict had other, longer 
run and more systemic effects which ran in the other direction, and it would be wrong to 
conclude the paper without mentioning these. 
First, one of the most striking long run impacts of the conflict of these years was the 

virtual collapse of Europe’s New World empires, and the transformation of the Americas into 
a land mass divided into independent states. To be sure, these states were now able to pursue 
their own commercial policies, and on the whole chose to impose high tariffs on imports 
(Coatsworth and Williamson 2004). On the other hand, however, mercantilist efforts to 
privilege bilateral trade between New World colonies and their mother countries, at the 
expense of multilateral trade, now lapsed. This had an immediate effect, as can be seen, for 
example, by the increase in British exports to Latin America during and after the Napoleonic 
Wars. In the mid-1780s, Latin America had accounted for just 0.06% of British manufactured 
exports; the proportion was 3.3% in 1804-6, 6.3% during 1814-6, and 15% in the mid-1820s 
(Davis 1979, p. 88). 
Second, traditional mercantilist restrictions on trade between Europe and Asia were 
also disintegrating during the period, and again war was at least a proximate cause. In 
Holland, the VOC was severely weakened by the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War of 1780-84, losing 
half its ships; while it had not been profitable for some time, it now became “a ward of the 
state” (de Vries and van der Woude 1997, p. 455). When the French revolutionaries invaded 
the Netherlands in 1795, and the Batavian Republic was declared, the VOC’s activities were 
taken over by the government, who found, however, that war made trade with Asia next to 
impossible. In 1806, the Dutch government permitted free trade with Asia (ibid., p. 456). 
Meanwhile, the English East India Company lost its monopoly on the trade with India in 
1813, following a very partial relaxation of this monopoly in 1793. According to Webster 
(1990), this decision was also a by-product of wartime conditions: in an inflationary 
environment in which many imports were in scarce supply, and with consequent fears of 
social unrest, it became more difficult to justify trade monopolies caused by British 
legislation and which further restricted supplies. 

The English East India Company would to hang on to its monopoly of the Anglo Chinese trade until 1833; however, the Napoleonic wars brought to an end the era of great European trading monopolies. While this did not imply the dawn of a free-trading Golden Age, the typical trade restriction of the long 19 century would be a tariff, rather than the non- th tariff barriers which had distinguished the 18 century, and which would distinguish the 20 th th

century. International trade between 1815 and 1914 would thus be conducted on a more 
multilateral basis than had been true before, a tendency that was further strengthened in 1860 
when the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty placed the MFN principle at the heart of European 
commercial policy. 
Third, by the war’s end Britain was firmly established as the world’s dominant power, 
and especially as its dominant naval power. The French had lost Haiti, their major Caribbean 
possession and source of colonial imports, while by 1830 the Spanish presence in the New 
World had been reduced to Cuba and Puerto Rico. The Dutch had lost the South African 
Cape Colony and Ceylon to Britain, as well as territories in the West Indies; more 
importantly, Amsterdam’s once central role in international trade had been destroyed, as a 
result of the combined effects of the British blockade, the French Continental System, and 
French Imperial protectionism (de Vries and van der Woude 1997, p. 687). One measure of 
British immediate post-war dominance is her share of world shipping, which had been just 
17.9% in 1670; it jumped from 25.3% in 1780 to an impressive 42% in 1820 (Maddison 
2001, p. 95). And as Patrick O’Brien (1989, p. 383) points out, British military hegemony at 
sea was an important precondition for the broadly liberal international economy of the long 
19 century. th 