
===== [Texel1797-15000] chars 85181-87381 =====
and. October, 1796. 2 April 1 8th, 1797. INVASION OF ENGLAND 21 of Marine, outlined in a letter to Hoche, dated 2ist June, 1797, the chief features of a plan of campaign for another attempt on Ireland. The Directory had decided to send six thousand Republican soldiers to Holland under General Humbert, who, it will be remembered, had taken part in the Bantry Bay fiasco, to swell the Dutch force of fifteen thousand men which had been held ready for some time The Batavian Government was so anxious to throw herself against her former ally that it by General Daendels. even offered to guarantee the courage of the troops. 1 Admiral de Winter's squadron of sixteen sail-of-the-line and twelve frigates then lying in the Texel was to take over the twenty-one thousand troops thus concentrated and land them in the At north of Ireland. twelve men-of-war and several same time a fleet of frigates was to leave Brest the with from six to eight thousand men, under the undaunted Hoche, and make for the south or west coast. The services of tioned, the Wolfe Tone and Lewens were again and the "peacemaker of La Vendee" requisi- set off for make final arrangements. Contrary to abandon his part in he to Truguet's instructions, proposed the project and join the Dutch expedition. The proffered Hague to Tone managed to curry favour Before the Dutch put to sea, Hoche, after serving for a short time as French Minister of Marine in succession to Truguet. was a dead man. 2 Had De help was refused, but Wolfe and was accepted. during the early months of 1797, when the 3 mutiny of the sailors at the Nore and elsewhere occupied the attention of Great Britain, success might have been Winter sailed 1 Desbriere, Vol. 2 Hoche died on September I, 3 April-June, 1797. p. 258. iQth, 1797. NAPOLEON AND THE 22 The chance offered by the naval troubles in England was unaccountably missed. De Winter still clung to the Texel, although General Daendels urged upon him the necessity for immediate action, even if he were compelled to fight Duncan, the British admiral, who was his. waiting for him to come out. He thought the Firth of Forth favourable for landing, and after Edinburgh and Glasgow had capitulated the 

===== [Camperdown] chars 88653-90153 =====
3 bring from Great Britain. Take what you please it shall be all your own. Arms and ammunition you shall have, Once and vessels find your to carry you over. way to London. landed, you " will soon HOCHE." On the loth October, 1797, the Dutch fleet weighed anchor and received so severe a handling off Camperdown at the hands of Admiral Duncan, who took nine ships out of a possible fifteen, 1 that the Irish expedition had of whose hand had been forced to go to war with France, was now the only one maintaining it, but there could be no turning back. It was well for Great Britain that she was supreme on the necessity to be abandoned. Pitt, bulwarks still protected her coasts, otherwise she must assuredly have perished. In maritime measures alone, so far as Europe was concerned, were her sea, that her floating efforts attended with success; but France found that in conquest her antagonist had lost none of her colonial prowess, for Tobago, Martinique, St. Lucia, and Grenada were captured one by one, as well as the Dutch possessions of Ceylon, Malacca, Cochin, The Spanish island of Trinidad also capitulated. army in Holland, under the Duke of York, Hope. The and the Cape of Good British met with nothing but disaster and although it served as a subsidiary defence of the British Isles, and the military measures taken for the protection of the kingdom itself cannot be regarded as adequate which England was placed. retreat, in the serious situa- tion in At the end of 1792 the militia was 