viii   Preface


modernisation constituted a continuous and uninterrupted experience
of a dramatically radical nature. It is necessary to follow this
experience as it evolved, from the years of the Directory to the
collapse of the Empire, in terms of the interaction between the attempt
of the French conquerors to create a new and integrated Europe in
their own image and the responses of the conquered to this
unprecedented experiment. Without French arms, the experiment
could never even have been initiated. But in all other respects, to write
of conquerors and conquered risks misunderstanding. The aim of the
Napoleonic administrators was to convince the peoples who came
under their control of the benefits of integration or imitative
association by demonstration of the superiority and applicability of
the French model of government; it was essentially peaceful and
dependent on active collaboration rather than enforced submission.
The fundamental problem was the resistance posed by the
heterogeneity of the societies over whom the French established
control, the multiplicity of cultural identities that have always
characterised Europe.
    To study this remarkable experience, which was to influence the
course of European history through the nineteenth century, has meant
reversing the conventional historiographical approach in which what
happened outside the frontiers of present-day France is regarded
almost as an appendage to the internal history of Napoleonic France
or—seen from the other side—as (a usually undesirable) interruption
in a teleologically oriented history of individual nation-states. I have
attempted to bring together in an explicitly comparative manner the
experiences of French rule across the entire Continent. This has
meant, on the one hand, a constant attention to the relationship
between internal developments in France during the Directory,
Consulate and Empire and the evolution of the French administrative
presence outside her frontiers; and, on the other hand, a concern to
highlight the similarities and dissimilarities between different
European societies, as they responded to the French presence. Hence,
geographically, I have not limited myself to the regions progressively
annexed by France, but have sought to bring into my discussion states
which were directly controlled by France, whether they were satellites
(like Westphalia or Naples) or formally more independent allies (like
Bavaria).
    Inevitably there are limitations to so vast and challenging an
enterprise. The first is linguistic. My inability to read the
historiography in Dutch, Flemish, Polish or Russian has necessarily
impeded me from acquiring that depth of knowledge that provides the
