Preface




Napoleon as man and military leader has always attracted writers and
readers. Such has been the fascination of his meteoric career that
historians have been hard put to defend their hegemony against the
incursions of more creative novelists, artists and film-makers. The
fascination is easy to understand, the closer one approaches this most
private of public personages. There is an unknown Napoleon (perhaps
many unknown Napoleons) of whom glimpses are caught
unexpectedly in the vast literature. Who would expect the Emperor to
be a discerning connoisseur of Paisiello’s music (as Berlioz recalled)?
Or that this eternal military hero’s ‘keen sense of smell ill tolerated the
stench that accompanied a pillage’, in the words of his aide-de-camp,
Ségur? The personal sobriety of this corrupter of men is well
established; but where did the reality blur into a consciously
constructed myth? As Denon, his official fine arts adviser, instructed
Gérard: Take care to emphasise the full splendour of the uniforms of
the officers surrounding the Emperor, as this contrasts with the
simplicity he displays and so immediately marks him out in their
midst.’ To quote the great poet Giovanni Pascoli, writing three
quarters of a century later: ‘my silent room is filled with the echo of
Napoleon dictating’.1
   But history does not just consist of great men, nor are the years of
Napoleonic domination explicable in terms of his battlefields.
   My concern has been to understand what I believe to be the central
problem of the Napoleonic period: the attempt by the political class
that had emerged from the Revolution to extend their ideals of
progress and civilisation to every region of Europe touched by French
armies. The military victories were the necessary premiss and
condition of the French presence; but it is simplistic to regard the wars
as either the causal factor or indeed an adequate explanation of the
Napoleonic years. For contemporaries, the political changes and
imposition of a new and uniform model of administrative

                                    vii
