6   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


known—and learned societies, especially the medical profession,
transmitted cultural knowledge and models of comportment. At yet
another level, economic exchange explained the wide-ranging
information about Europe possessed by French commercial families.
   The group of Frenchmen probably best informed about, and most
sensitive to changes in European affairs, alongside, or even more than,
official representatives, were the manufacturers and traders. Despite
the loss of much of her empire in 1763, France had participated
actively in the expansion of the international economy in the latter
half of the century. The rapid growth in colonial trade, in which
France divided the lion’s share with Britain, not only benefited the
great ports of Bordeaux, Nantes and Marseille, but also had a
multiplier effect on the general level of economic activity and urban
demand. By the eve of the Revolution, re-exports to other European
countries of colonial goods—sugar, coffee, tea, spices, rum, tobacco—
amounted to about one-third of total French exports, while colonial
demand in the Antilles and Spanish colonies—for silks and other
luxury products, as well as slaves—absorbed perhaps a quarter of
French industrial production. By the eve of the Revolution, British
technological superiority in textile production and ironworks was
impinging on traditional French export markets in the Levant and
Mediterranean. But if the entrepôt trade was unquestionably the most
rapidly growing sector of the French economy, some manufactures—
especially silk and fashionable goods—and agricultural products such
as wine benefited from the growth of both domestic and European
markets. In a world of poor and seasonably impossible
communications, the development of a national market in France was
facilitated by an inland transport system admired by foreign travellers,
even the British. The great centres were developing their trade
contemporaneously within France and across Europe. Marseille was
expanding its activities from its traditional Levant woollen exports to
re-export of North American colonial goods; Bordeaux developed
contacts with Hamburg, at the expense of Amsterdam; Paris and Lyon
imposed their needs on the ports and sold their silks and fashion
products throughout the interior. The Rhineland areas, Alsace, the
Bishoprics and Lorraine, were drawn into the national network;
exchanges with the Italian states and Spain developed primarily with
Lyons and the Midi; above all, northern and eastern Europe—the
German states, Poland and Russia—provided important markets via
the Baltic and the fairs at Frankfurt and Leipzig, for French wines,
silks and luxury goods.
   Much attention has been paid, understandably, to the activities and
