2   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


recruited some 2.5 million men (both French and others) between
1700 and 1789 and itself stimulated the flow of emigration. He was
not necessarily unknown—for pedlars and migratory rural artisans
regularly followed the same routes—but unattached to the standard
networks of identification, kin and village, and frequently speaking a
different native tongue. Few of the 1 million French men and women
who took to the roads every spring and summer of the later eighteenth
century ventured as far as Italy, Spain, Germany or the Low
Countries; nor indeed were ‘national’ frontier posts so different in
kind from the multiplicity of customs and toll barriers within France.
For the other 20-odd million peasants, whose daily life was firmly
rooted within the physical limits of walking distances, the elements of
information about other peoples and states, on which they
constructed their mental world, must have come essentially through
the channels of such migrants, the lurid fireside fantasies of the
soldiers, or the tales of pedlars’ chapbooks.
   A mere generation later, as a result of Napoleonic conscription,
every French peasant family must have acquired knowledge of one or
more of the countries of Europe directly or indirectly, through the
military experiences of relatives or neighbours. One can hypothesise
that, in the early years, this immediate contact with other peoples and
places must have juxtaposed uneasily with the traditional knowledge
and practices, based on maps, memoirs and hearsay, of the pre-
Revolutionary professional soldiers. How such experiences filtered
into and modified the popular representation of the outside world is
an interesting but ultimately probably unanswerable question.
   Not only the peasantry, but also (as Daniel Roche has shown) the
great majority of the local elites who provided the public of the
enlightenment had rarely travelled afar, and then usually only to
Paris. Their knowledge of foreign parts was based on the written
‘voyages’ of travellers and that more or less intense correspondence
so characteristic of the ‘republic of letters’, occasionally enriched by
meetings at their local academy or masonic lodge with the wealthy,
cultured foreigner on his grand tour or the officer returning from
foreign parts. Undoubtedly the numbers of educated and curious
travellers increased continuously and rapidly in the latter decades of
the century, possibly even more than the printed voyages and
descriptions. Within this corpus of publications, Europe—and finally
France as well—occupied an increasing space. The geographer
Langlet-Dufresnoy could assert in 1742, following the publication of
the great Jesuit Geographical, historical, chronological, political and
physical description of the Empire of China and of Chinese Tartary
