8   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


networks. Natural or man-made interruptions, such as through a poor
olive crop in Apulia or threat of war in Poland, were registered
immediately with the sensitivity of a thermometer. Whatever the
geographical range—from the pre-Revolutionary small tobacco
processor of Strasbourg trading across the Rhine to the Restoration
Swiss merchant and liberal G.P.Vieusseux, who wrote accounts of the
European-wide commerce in Scandinavian salted cod and Black Sea
grain—knowledge of Europe was an essential pre-requisite for the
businessman.


THE POLITICAL MODEL OF THE REVOLUTION
By 1789 the leading role of France in the forward march of civilisation
was accepted by educated elites throughout Europe—even by the
British. Although the reforms advocated by the philosophes seemed to
have made far greater progress in other states, such as Tuscany,
Austria, even the Russia of Catherine II, and although the economic
success of Britain was undeniable, France—which usually meant
Paris—remained the intellectual powerhouse of enlightenment ideas
about how to improve the present and construct the future. Such a
role was based on France’s remarkably high and intense level of
philosophic and scientific enquiry. But it was also a consciously
constructed reputation, based on a self-confidence in the superiority
and leadership of French civilisation, that dated back to the cultural
affirmations of the Court of Louis XIV and appeared continuously
confirmed by the generalised acceptance of French as the language of
international discourse. The cosmopolitan diffusion of the French
model of aristocratic sociability, which imbued the practices and
comportment of the European nobilities, underpinned such self-
confidence and paradoxically was reinforced by the abrupt and
massive emigration of nobles with the Revolution.
   Civilisation, a new word that entered the French language only in
the mid-eighteenth century to describe the level of perfection of a
society, was identified with the progress of reason. In the hands of so
influential a writer as Voltaire, it was demonstrable through the
evidence of history, from the millennial ‘barbarism’ and ‘superstitions’
that followed the fall of ancient Rome to the early manifestations of
the new spirit of reason of the Renaissance, culminating in the current
age of enlightenment. Each progressive age was characterised by the
achievements of a particular people: in classical times the Greeks and
Romans, in recent centuries the Italians, then the British and now the
French.
