                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   7


merchants of the maritime ports. But the traders, merchants and
merchant-manufacturers throughout the kingdom formed the infantry
(or at best the non-commissioned officers) of this army of
international trade. In an economy which remained overwhelmingly
agricultural, the numbers and geographical range of activities of these
manufacturers and traders should not be exaggerated. The market, for
most producers and merchants, was an extremely local one, although
indirectly through the exchange of goods, the links with the great
ports and metropolises of Paris and Lyons, via river traffic and inland
trading towns, were increasing rapidly. In the absence of a banking
system, credit was in short supply at all levels, from the pedlars who
stocked up at Lyons to the Alsatian calico print manufacturers reliant
on the sleeping partnership of Basel bankers. Throughout France,
along the frontiers and coasts, elaborate and sophisticated systems of
smuggling involved entire villages and towns, from carters and
bargees to respectable businessmen and Customs officers. Smuggling
(except of domestic salt, a state monopoly) implied a considerable
knowledge and network of supply routes and markets, at least across
the neighbouring frontiers. Far more general were the regular and
routine exchanges of manufacturers and merchants at their
warehouses, or with clients on their order-books, either directly or on
commission.
   The eighteenth century witnessed a growing concern in the
technical education of manufacturers and merchants, in France as
elsewhere, with proposals of professional courses and publication of
technical instructions and guides. The Encyclopédie had already
popularised the technology of production, with articles by educated
skilled artisans. Jacques Peuchet, former secretary of Morellet, saw
the market for a Universal dictionary of trading geography, published
in six volumes in the Years VII–VIII. But most manufacturers and
merchants undoubtedly learnt their trade on the job. A small minority
acquired their apprenticeship (and languages) abroad. The political
vagaries of the Revolution increased their number, through the forced
apprenticeship in foreign trading houses of many children of the
wealthy bourgeoisie, such as the future prefect H.C.F. Barthélemy at
Mainz, or the idéologue and civil servant J.M.de Gérando at Naples.
The larger merchant houses, such as Briansiaux of Lille, were engaged
in intense commercial correspondence with expeditioners and
commissioners across all western Europe. Whether through direct
experience or business correspondence, these manufacturers and
merchants were acutely conscious of their reliance on the established
trading routes around which they had so carefully cultivated their
