                                                              Preface   ix


historian with confidence; I hope my discussions of the relevant
regions are not too superficial. In one case—the Russian response to
Napoleon’s invasion—I have preferred, out of ignorance, not even to
attempt any remarks.
   The second limitation is that a work of synthesis and interpretation
of this sort cannot be based on original research on all aspects. I began
my research in the archives many years ago on Italy under French rule
and then extended this, in the Archives Nationales of Paris, to
prolonged study of the mechanisms and social implications of the
administration of the Empire, and in particular of the significance
attributed to statistics and of the problems of poverty. But necessarily
I have been dependent on the research of generations of scholars
across Europe in order to understand the overall dimensions of the
task I had set myself. The hypotheses which lay at the origins of this
book emerged out of a combination of my own research and the
cumulative results of such historiography. My knowledge remains
deeper of some parts of Europe than of others, although I hope this
has not affected my overall interpretation.
   I owe a debt of gratitude to more people than I can name here. I
would like to thank Louis Audibert for offering me the challenge of
writing this book. It could not have been written without the
exhilarating experience of my years in the Department of History and
Civilization of the European University Institute, where the
juxtaposition of national intellectual approaches and academic
traditions necessitates an unending reflection on the meaning of
Europe and its cultural identities; I am deeply grateful to my
colleagues and research students from whom I have learnt so much in
formal seminars, innovative theses and informal discussions. I wish to
thank Paola Querci, Anna Debenedetti and Bonnie Bonis for their
eagle eyes in spotting obscurities of expression. Daniel Roche and
Heinz-Gerhard Haupt have been patient and understanding friends,
as well as professional colleagues, always ready to read and suggest
improvements. Naturally the responsibility for the opinions and
conclusions expressed in this book remains wholly mine.

                                                             May 1990
