                        The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   11


changing succession of constitutional devices which endeavoured to
regulate the degree of political participation of the new citizens. The
intense debates and bitter political struggle over equality and liberty
that characterised the early years of the Revolution were never
directly experienced in the neighbouring countries: at most, they
echoed in the discussions, debates and propaganda of the Italian and
Dutch democratic patriots, or in the shadowy conspiratorial
aspirations of a handful of ‘neo-Jacobins’ or ‘anarchists’ (to use the
contemporary terms) associated in some form with the Babeuf
conspiracy (1796). Of the thirteen constitutions promulgated in the
‘sister republics’, eleven were modelled on the thermidorian
constitution of the Year III, with its elaborate, rigid and ultimately
unworkable separation of powers and graduated system of election.
Hence in the countries subject to the control of the Directorial armies,
and even more in those invaded after Brumaire, the terms of the
political debate had shifted decisively away from the sovereignty of
the people, in the direction of a definition of representation restricted
to the appropriately qualified (whatever the criteria employed to
define them).
   Secondly, a new concept of political nation had provided the early
revolutionaries with their political strength and had become
increasingly sharply defined with the patriotism engendered by the
wars. It was a concept initially based on the Revolutionary unity of
the patriots, aspiring towards the Utopian vision of a unified fraternal
society which, particularly in the sections and among the sansculotte
volunteers of the armies of 1792–3, was expressed in the form of
direct popular sovereignty. There was growing uneasy awareness of
the fragility of this new construct, evidenced internally by popular
reluctance or resistance to so many of the Revolutionary practices and
beyond the frontiers by incomprehension among the conquered
peoples of the appeal to fraternise. This did not destroy the belief itself
in the identification of ‘people’ and ‘nation’, only in the optimism of
Revolutionary spontaneity as an adequate method to achieve it.
Alternative but complementary means were elaborated. On the one
hand, it was seen as necessary to eliminate, albeit carefully and
gradually, the historical, traditional and customary legacies of a
superstitious past, whose survival in popular practices was regarded
as a fundamental obstacle to the existence of an ultimately uniform
nation. On the other hand, the suppression of elective procedures
within the army already in 1794–5 and the return to traditional
methods of advancement heralded a different form of combative
