14   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and Liégeois, who acted as organised pressure groups, fell on
increasingly responsive ears. War was urged and finally declared by
Brissot and the Girondins, with almost casual nonchalance (to our
contemporary ears), in rhetoric redolent with references to the ancient
Greek city-states and the recent victory of the Americans, to the
tempering effects of war on the character of peoples and the innate
strength of free peoples against despots. How this came about can
most easily be understood in the context of what was then
unprecedented and has become too sadly familiar in the twentieth
century—the search for a solution to domestic problems by an appeal
to the ideology of patriotism.
   The experience of war (as historically is usually the case) assumed
forms and dimensions wholly unforeseen by its initiators. As all
historians agree, it conditioned the internal development of the
Revolution, from the overthrow of the monarchy and the Jacobin
dictatorship to the anti-Jacobin reaction of Thermidor and Directory
until the coup of Brumaire. In terms of France’s relations with Europe,
it requires discussion from three different perspectives—political,
military and economic—as in each case they contained important
elements of Napoleon’s future policies.
   There can be no doubt about the deliberately subversive ideological
fervour of the revolutionaries in the earliest stages of the war, a
response in kind to the counter-revolutionary declaration of
Brunswick (25 July 1792) and immediate consequence of the victories
of Valmy (20 September) and Jemappes (6 November). Between 19
November 1792 and 8 January 1793 the republican Convention
declared its will to accord ‘fraternity and aid to all peoples who want
to recover their liberty’ and instructed its generals, on occupation of
enemy territory, to encourage the local populations to ‘enfranchise
themselves…to give themselves a free government, through the
exercise of their legitimate sovereignty…to regenerate themselves by a
universal change in accordance with the principles of equality and
liberty’.17 Words were followed by actions, with the Convention’s
confirmation of a vote by the peoples of Savoy and Nice to become
part of the French republic (27 November 1792, 31 January 1793).
   The Convention accepted the will of the people in this instance. But
the conflict between a disinterested policy of liberation and one of
national power emerged at once over the explicit request of the
democrats in occupied Belgium that their independence be recognised by
France, and the obvious hostility of the populations of other occupied
areas to annexation. By the end of March 1793, inebriated by success, the
Convention had decreed that the French and Flemish-speaking Belgians,
