18   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


reality unlimited, since the latter had to provide for the needs of their
armies. Effectively this forged a bond between each army unit and its
general, in which military success and the daily problems of pay and
food explained the degree of identification between soldier and
commanding officer. This fundamental shift in mentality is
demonstrated by the sharp contrast between the fiasco of General
Dumouriez’s attempted coup of March 1793, when his troops turned
against him, and the constant suspicion and occasional employment of
generals by the Directors to bolster their own authority. The much-
quoted promise of Bonaparte to his ragged penniless troops in April
1796 that they would find ‘happiness, glory and riches’ in the
mythically wealthy Italian plain was perhaps less important in gaining
the loyalty of the Army of Italy than the triumph of actual victory and
the part-payment of their wages in hard cash.
   If military comportment and the internal logic of maintaining large
armies explained popular resentment, the economic policies of the
successive revolutionary governments in the occupied territories
disillusioned and alienated the urban elites. To write of economic
policies in this decade of revolution is probably excessive, as it
consisted of economic hopes and ambitions, constantly overtaken and
confused with immediate contingencies. The realities of economic
policy in the short term, in relation to the occupied territories, fell into
two, overlapping phases, the first characterised by the ‘extraction
agencies’, set up in the Belgian and German lands in 1794, the second
by the return to private initiative in the supply of the armies. The
ransacking of the occupied territories by the extraction agency and
related requisitioning agencies in Belgium was so uncontrolled and
inefficient that it was a major cause of the annexation and
reorganisation of the country in departments, on the French model
(1795). The power and abuses of the speculators and bankers who
formed companies to supply the armies was legendary, as they tried to
protect themselves against paper money and a defaulting state by
requisitions and contributions in the occupied lands: the neutral
Tuscan port of Leghorn was occupied by Bonaparte in 1796 under
pressure from the Flachat-Laporte company, who demanded
compensation for its credits in the form of the English merchandise
stocked in this entrepôt.
   But if day-to-day problems dominated and effectively created the
economic policy of the Directory, projects and plans about the future
of the Great Nation were not lacking and are of interest because of
their similarity to aspects of later policies introduced under Napoleon.
The main author of these proposals was Charles Delacroix, one of the
