12   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


patriotism, embodied in the superiority of the Grande Nation and
expressed in the disciplined élan of the Grande Armée.
   Thirdly, the new social and economic order was defined most
clearly in negative form, by contrast to the highly elaborate juridical
and institutional orders and ties identified with the society and
economy of the ancien regime. At the simplest level, the abolition of
‘intermediary bodies’, the feudal regime and internal customs tolls
exemplified the initial optimistic expectation that the new
individualism and economic liberalism would generate social
harmony and economic productivity. Once again, the painful
experiences of the Revolutionary decade did not modify the basic faith
in either individualism or the ‘hidden hand’ of the free market, but
focused attention on those best equipped, by resources, education and
capacity, to turn the opportunities to good use, and to provide the
social homogeneity and solidity on which the social fabric was
believed to depend.
   Finally, the prerequisite for the achievement of all other aims was
the provision of appropriate institutional, administrative, financial
and juridical structures, based on the application of enlightened
reason to the body politic. In a sense, it is hardly surprising—given the
lengthy preparation of an enlightenment increasingly oriented
towards the end of ‘social utility’—that, to accomplish these ends,
reliance should have been placed on the state, almost uninterruptedly
even in the Revolutionary years. Particularly after the failure of the
Directory to fulfil this role, the state acquired the right to intervene,
protect and direct civil society in order to ‘liberate’ both individual
and productive forces. What was novel in this relationship was the
increasing centrality and legitimising of the executive bureaucracy, the
extension of whose role was indirectly stimulated by the idéologues’
utilitarian conviction that systematic classification of empirical facts
provided the basis for the identification and demonstration of the
social interest to potentially irrational individuals.
   It was on this bureaucracy that the direct responsibility was to fall
for the extension of the French political model to the rest of Europe.
For reasons of climate, levels of civilisation, forms of social
organisation and human egoism, in so vast a geographical area as the
Empire and its satellite states, genuine (and ultimately desirable)
uniformity could not be expected. But there was an increasingly
explicit belief in the Napoleonic years that the new nation-states could
and were to be remoulded from above, through the application of an
administrative blueprint. The evidence of progress and benefits that
would result from such institutional remodelling of state structures
