                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   13


and social relations would attract the support of educated and hence
rational elites and local notables. But the anonymous mass of the
people were slow to reject the prejudices and practices of the past.
Precisely because the greater number of individuals who constituted
society were lethargic in their acceptance of the advantages of
modernity, an administrative grid, elaborated according to rational
and enlightened criteria, was expected to force the pace and orient
society in the appropriate direction.


THE REVOLUTIONARY EXPERIENCES OF EXPANSION
The administrative project for modernity was to be developed only
after Brumaire and to reach its fullest elaboration at the height of the
Empire, in the very years when its fulfilment was rendered ever less
plausible by the competing military and economic ambitions of
Napoleon. But already before Brumaire, the experience of territorial
expansion had revealed contradictions and conflict, particularly in the
years of the Directory, when the diffusion of power permitted, indeed
encouraged, the contemporaneous pursuit of incompatible policies.
   As is well known, at the outset of the Revolution the members of
the Constituent Assembly, wholly engaged in the regeneration of
France and imbued with the pacific ideals of the enlightenment, had
formally renounced any aggressive intent: The French nation
renounces any intention of engaging in a war of conquest and will
never employ its forces against the liberty of any people’ (22 May
1790). Within two years, on 20 April 1792, the Legislative Assembly,
almost unanimously, had declared war on the ‘king of Bohemia and
Hungary’, and within ten months found itself at war with Prussia,
Sardinia, Britain, the Low Countries and Spain. (See Appendix for a
chronology.) How the revolutionaries reached this position has been
recounted innumerable times and requires little recapitulation. The
right of peoples to determine their nationality and allegiance, initially
formulated by the populations of Avignon and Alsace (subject
respectively to papal sovereignty and the feudal lordship of German
princes) raised an issue of far wider import than the specific cases, as
it challenged the validity of international law and encouraged the
populations of other states to follow suit, particularly in francophone
regions economically or socially close to France, such as Savoy, Nice,
areas of romand Switzerland or Belgium. As fears of counter-
revolution and international conspiracy grew, cause and consequence
of the deepening divisions between Court and Assembly and among
the revolutionaries, the appeals of foreign exiles, especially the Dutch
