16   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


(February-July), a general European settlement remained implausible,
given the irreducible hostility of Britain and Austria.
    In subsequent years, the pursuit of such a peace became ever more
a mirage, essentially for two reasons. On the one hand, the Directory
proved increasingly incapable of controlling its generals and army
commissaires. Kléber rejected a policy of conquest, Hoche urged the
creation of a ‘Cisrhenian’ republic, the commissaires Saliceti and
Garrau encouraged the Italian patriots in their hopes of an
independent republic, Championnet set up the Parthenopean republic
against the explicit orders of the Directory. Above all, Bonaparte
pursued his private policy, creating the Cisalpine republic, negotiating
its recognition by Austria at Leoben and Campoformio (1797), and
obtaining the expedition to Egypt. This lack of authority of the
Directors derived not only from their need to make the war pay for
itself, but also increasingly from their dependence on successful war to
enable them to overcome their financial and political problems at
home. But the consequence of the very multiplicity of initiatives, at
different levels and locations, was to negate the capacity and
credibility of the Directors to follow a coherent policy, and frustrated
Reubell’s efforts—even after he had gained a majority within the
Directory—to obtain the Rhine frontier by concessions in Italy and
elsewhere. On the other hand, by pursuing simultaneously different
and contradictory policies, the wars of the Directors spread to an ever
wider geographic area, hence confirming the mistrust of existing
enemies and inciting new ones. The extension of military activities and
political changes from the Low Countries and Rhineland to
Switzerland and Italy, with the annexation of the Rhineland and
Geneva and the creation of the Roman and Helvetic republics (1798),
effectively nullified the Campoformio agreement. The further
extension of strategy to the entire Mediterranean, with the annexation
of the Ionian islands and Malta and the invasion of Egypt and Syria,
added Russia and Turkey to France’s enemies.
    At the same time, the very policies of occupation and creation of
new states destroyed the sympathy enjoyed earlier by the French
revolutionaries, even among the patriots. Wherever French armies
passed, pillaging, billeting, requisitions and war contributions
followed. After the victory of Fleurus (26 June 1794), official policy
was to consider all occupied countries initially as enemy territory, in
which the army was expected to live off the land. Local proposals for
a change in status—‘reunion’ with France or the creation of a
republic—dressed up with the fiction of popular support, owed not a
little to hopes that the army presence would be removed or at least
