                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   17


regulated. The inadequacy of logistic arrangements for mass armies
before the state of emergency declared by the Jacobins, and the
subsequent inflation and chronic financial collapse of the
thermidorian and early Directorial government, offered justification
and opportunity for private initiatives. Generals, like Masséna and
Macdonald, and army suppliers, like Flachat and Haller, engaged in
looting and exactions, which were protected by the corruption of
politicians and Directors, such as Barras and Talleyrand. The ‘sister
republics’, like the other occupied territories, were forced to pay
extraordinary taxes as well as maintain their ‘protector’ armies.
Whatever the overall amount of such exactions (estimated by
Godechot as at least 360 million francs between 1792 and 1799), they
constituted an essential part of the Directory’s revenues, perhaps a
quarter by the Years VI and VII.
    The undisciplined behaviour of French troops and heavy
exploitation of the occupied territories aroused popular peasant
resistance in Belgium, Switzerland, Spain and—most spectacularly—
in Italy during the retreat of 1799. Unquestionably, the novelty and
scale of the military problem of creating a national army was partly
responsible. The restructured army, following the breakdown of
authority, mass desertions and the withdrawal from service of 60 per
cent of the officer corps (1791–3), was dependent initially on a major
influx of volunteers, which must have presented problems of
discipline, in times of victory as much as of defeat. At the peak of Year
II, when the ‘nation in arms’ had developed a formidable instrument
of war, there were 750,000 soldiers (compared to an army of about
165,000 in 1789), creating logistic problems on an unprecedented
scale.
    The continuing war on multiple fronts required many sizeable
armies, which the Directory proved incapable of paying and
equipping. The consequences were dramatic and of importance in two
particular respects, which were to mark Napoleonic policies in
subsequent years. On the one hand, desertion began again on a
massive scale: by the beginning of Year VII, the armies had dropped to
325,000. The introduction of conscription in 1798 marked the
Directory’s recognition that Revolutionary patriotism was no longer
able to arouse a voluntary response. On the other hand, the very
ambiguities of the policies of expansion confused and ultimately
submerged the patriotism of the early Revolutionary years: the quality
of altruistic idealism was lost, the rhetoric of France’s mission
remained. Despite the official powers of the civil representatives, the
army commissaires, the Directory’s delegation to the generals was in
