                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   15


the French and German-speaking populations of substantial areas of the
left bank of the Rhine, form part of the ‘Great Nation’. In the following
years (1793–9), at successive upturns of the wars, ‘liberation’, ‘reunion’
and ‘sister republics’ became the code words to describe the occupation,
annexation or restructuring as satellite states of the entire left bank of
the Rhine, the Low Countries, Switzerland, and all mainland Italy.
Even the Muslims of Egypt were ‘liberated’ by Napoleon (1798–
1801).
    Certain aspects of the political expansionism initiated by the
Girondins merit comment. In the first instance, throughout these
years, the form and direction taken by the expansionist policy
remained unclear, because they were internally contested. The basic
conflict was between France’s ‘natural frontiers’—by which the
Alsatian Director Reubell meant the Rhine—and expansion
elsewhere. There seem to have been few hesitations about the
annexation of Belgium, only about how to ensure that Austria (its
legitimate sovereign) and Britain would accept this in a future peace
treaty. The main bone of contention was the deployment of French
victories in other areas—primarily the Dutch Low Countries, western
Germany, Switzerland and northern Italy—and the character of the
institutional arrangements to be established in these areas, in the light
of a future settlement. ‘Natural frontiers’ conflicted fundamentally
with the policy of ‘sister republics’, in that it implied a territorial
expansion of France, even at the expense of like-minded
revolutionaries from such areas. The ‘sister republics’—for their
supporters—served at one and the same time ideological, political and
military purposes: to hold faith to the ideals of the Revolution by
creating states in the image of republican France; to requite the
expectations of the native patriots, the most loyal supporters of the
French; and to strengthen French defences through a semi-circle of
cushion states. But even the supporters of sister republics were careful
not to allow them to become political or economic threats to France.
If, after much hesitation, the Dutch patriots were allowed to create a
state with a far more unified political structure than the previous
federation of jealously independent provinces, Dutch merchants were
crippled economically and financially by loss of territory, a heavy
indemnity and a costly alliance with France. The Italian Jacobins’
aspirations for a large Unitarian republic were consistently rejected by
the Directors, as by Bonaparte.
    In theory, total victory could have reconciled the two policies. But
even in 1795, when French successes induced Tuscany, Prussia, the
new Batavian (Dutch) republic and Spain to sign peace treaties
