                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   23


(Aboukir: 2 August 1798). The basic contradiction of the
irreconcilability of French imperialist ambitions with the achievement
of peace not only remained, but also had worsened by Brumaire, with
the advance of the forces of the second coalition across Italy and
Switzerland. Initially, even the independence of initiative of the
generals remained, as Bonaparte was unable to make Moreau accept
his strategy of a rapid dual-pronged attack across the Rhine and Alps.
   Military victories at Marengo and Hohenlinden (14 June, 2
December 1800) brought a general peace nearer—as in 1795—with
Habsburg Austria’s enforced acceptance of French annexation of the
left bank of the Rhine and Napoleon’s settlement of Italy by the treaty
of Lunéville (9 February 1801). Exploitation of a favourable
international conjuncture by a now vigorous and unified French
diplomacy momentarily promised a Continental coalition against
Britain, with the Russian-led league of neutral states. Finally economic
and political difficulties in Britain turned the mirage of peace into
reality, with the treaty of Amiens, signed by a mutually suspicious
Britain and France (25 March 1802).
   It would be difficult to underestimate the importance of Amiens, as
for the first and only time between 1792 and 1814 it ended the state
of war between France and one or (usually) more European powers.
General Bonaparte had displayed his capacities to make peace, the
prerequisite for stability; grateful citizens voted overwhelmingly to
transform the first consul’s constitutional position into that of consul
for life (2 August 1802). If British control of the seas was confirmed,
with recognition of her conquest of Dutch Ceylon and Spanish
Trinidad, France had achieved not only her natural frontiers (Belgium,
the Rhineland left bank, Geneva, Savoy), but also a hegemony that
extended far beyond them: the military occupation of Piedmont and
the Batavian republic, the recognition of the Batavian, Helvetic,
Ligurian and Cisalpine republics and territorial enlargement of the
Cisalpine, the expulsion of the Habsburgs of Tuscany and Modena in
favour of the Spanish Bourbons, for whom a new kingdom of Etruria
was established (treaty of Aranjuez between France and Spain, 21
March 1801), tacit acceptance of France’s right to interfere in German
and Spanish affairs. Papal recognition, in the form of a Concordat (18
April 1801), consecrated France’s new role in Europe.
   But if Lunéville and Amiens testified to Napoleon’s capacity to
enforce a pacification on the European states, the very expansion of
direct French control beyond her natural frontiers threatened the
durability of the peace. Napoleon’s actions increased the diffidence of
his rivals and ultimately provoked the renewal of war. British
