28   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


exclude British manufactures dated back to the outbreak of the
Revolutionary wars and had marked a high point of Directorial
economic ambitions. British mastery of the seas implied not only a
defence against invasion, but also a naval blockade of Continental
ports and the ability to disrupt the crucial two-way trade with the
colonies and Americas. Napoleon’s progressive extension of land
control paradoxically accentuated this sharp division of influence
between the two rivals, as Britain attacked or seized the warships of
allied or neutral states (Spain, Holland, Denmark, Naples, Portugal)
and destroyed France’s merchant marine. Through the campaigns of
1805–7 Napoleon achieved land-mastery over all northern and
western Europe, except Sweden and Portugal, which provided him
with the necessary conditions to reverse the relative relationship of
power between the two countries by declaring Britain to be ‘in a state
of blockade’ (Berlin decree, 21 November 1806). The assumption
underlying the blockade, argued with increasing success by
Montgaillard, was that, by closing all Continental markets to British
exports, British tax revenues would fall drastically, its government
would be unable to finance hostile coalitions or service its national
debt and so ultimately would be forced to sue for peace.
   In a spiral of reciprocity the measures were exacerbated on both
sides: in response to the British Orders in Council (1807), the decrees
of Fontainebleau and Milan (13 October, 23 November, 17 December
1807) extended the prohibition of imports to neutral carriers and to
entire categories of colonial and manufactured goods regarded by
definition as British, irrespective of their real place of origin. With the
manifest failure of the blockade to bring Britain to her knees and the
ubiquitous evidence of massive smuggling of British goods to the
Continent, the system was tightened further by the introduction of
prohibitive import dues at France’s borders (decrees of Trianon and
Saint-Cloud, 5 July, 12 September 1810).
   Three aspects of the blockade need to be noted, because of their
profound implications for the territories under French control. First,
the blockade was not only a negative weapon of France’s economic
warfare against Britain, but also the basis of a positive project to open
up Continental outlets for French products, as substitute—or indeed
definitively alternative—markets for the lost colonies. Hence an
underlying tension persisted in relations with allied or vassal states
with competitive manufactures or other products. Secondly, the very
mechanics of the blockade required the imposition of a customs line
along not only the coasts, but also the inland frontiers. The manifest
incapacity of the Customs service (despite the steady increase in
