22   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


grounded in a practical, realistic, utilitarian approach to politics,
eager and rapid to exploit every opportunity, in diplomatic matters as
much as on the battlefield. There can be little doubt that he was
describing a genuine conviction when he remarked, with unusual self-
irony, that ‘high policy is nothing more than good sense applied to
great matters’.19
   Such pragmatism permeated Napoleon’s attitude to Europe, a
continuous adaptation to changing circumstances, in which real or
apparent successes laid the ground for a successive, ever more
ambitious stage. Whatever contemporary English suspicions about the
unlimited aims of the Corsican upstart, Bonaparte’s policies and wars
are best understood not as the unveiling over the years of a blueprint
already in existence, nor as the obsessive pursuit of a single aim (such
as the total defeat of Britain), but rather as successive phases rendered
possible or (in Napoleon’s eyes) necessary by the presence and
behaviour of hostile forces. Nor can any one phase be described as the
pursuit of a single dominant objective, for within each one different
and often conflicting policies were inextricably enmeshed, while every
successive phase inevitably included the increasingly contradictory
load of the innovations and consequences of the previous stages. At
most it is possible to note—as did contemporaries—that the
continuation of the wars became ever more inevitable in direct
relationship to Napoleon’s expanding ambitions and self-confidence.
   A convenient (albeit simplified) approach to Napoleon’s policies in
Europe is to separate his political from his economic aims. The former,
elaborated in two phases, separated by the peace of Amiens, were
concerned with the establishment of a political and then a dynastic
hegemony, until 1806–7. The latter then played an increasingly
dominant role, with the Continental blockade—at least in part a
response to the British Orders in Council—becoming the centre-piece
of the economic struggle with Britain.
   The first phase, until 1802, marked no change from the Directory’s
policies. Nor was this surprising, given the prime role played by
Bonaparte in forcing and extending the ambitions of the Directors,
from the occupation of northern Italy and the treaty of Campoformio
(October 1797) to the Egyptian expedition (July 1798). The latter
episode, launched with as much insouciance as the initial Girondin
war of liberation, combined a traditional anti-British policy—with its
immediate threat to trade routes and its vague intimations of an
invasion of India—with Bonaparte’s romantic vision of an Oriental
civilisation that merited modernisation. Such hopes had foundered
with Nelson’s destruction of the French fleet at the battle of the Nile
