                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   27


Westphalia, Saxony and hence Warsaw entered the Confederation of
the Rhine and were to function as military frontier posts against any
future threat from Prussia or Russia; French armies remained
garrisoned at Warsaw and in what remained of Prussia, which was
subjected to payment of a massive indemnity. In exchange for
promises of expansion into Swedish Finland and the Turkish empire,
Alexander also ceded the Adriatic port of Cattaro and the Ionian
islands to Napoleon. As important was the decision to exclude British
trade, with the agreement of the two allies to force the neutral states
of Denmark, Sweden and Portugal into this Continental federation.
   All the elements of the Napoleonic imperial system were already in
place before Prussia’s unfortunate sortie of October 1806, and they
were consolidated by Tilsit. Europe was to be reconstructed around a
system ‘of federated states, or a true French empire’, in Napoleon’s
words. Within this federation, states could be made and unmade,
sovereigns appointed or transferred, frontier lines shifted to extend
French territory or to make adjustments between vassal states—all by
the Emperor’s decision, sometimes without even advising the rulers
concerned. The Emperor’s family was the prime beneficiary: his
brother Joseph was appointed king of Naples (30 March 1806), his
brother-in-law Joachim Murat grand-duke of Berg (15 March 1806),
his brothers Louis king of Holland (3 May 1806) and Jerome king of
Westphalia (18 August 1807). But allied rulers, such as Max Joseph of
Bavaria or Dalberg, former elector of Mainz, were richly rewarded, as
were meritorious generals, like Berthier, for whom the Swiss
principality of Neuchâtel was created (30 March 1806). Arguably,
Napoleon’s desire to legitimise his dynasty by marriage ties with old
ruling houses played a role in his intense involvement in Germany (in
contrast to Italy, where he had chased out the only surviving dynasties
of Savoy and Bourbon to the islands of Sardinia and Sicily): his wife
Josephine de Beauharnais’ family was married into the Bavarian and
Baden ruling families, Jerome to that of Württemberg, and even the
faithful Berthier to a Bavarian princess. Napoleon himself was to set
aside Josephine in order to marry Marie Louise, daughter of the
Habsburg emperor, in 1810. Although formally the allied states
remained independent, their rulers were forced to collaborate in the
Emperor’s wars and to submit to his economic policies. This imperial
system was a political, military, dynastic and economic federation of
very unequal states.
   The Continental blockade was a logical complement to the imperial
system, which became possible precisely as a consequence of the new
dimensions of Napoleon’s military successes. The French attempt to
