                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   25


   The extension of the maritime economic struggle with Britain into
the war on land against the third coalition was the direct consequence
of Napoleon’s continued affirmation of his power. Prussia was
worried by the French occupation of George III’s duchy of Hanover,
bordering on its frontiers. With the kidnapping and execution of the
duke of Enghien (March 1804), the unstable Tsar Alexander turned
against Napoleon, whom he saw as a dangerous rival in Germany and
the Ottoman empire. But above all Austria, in serious economic
difficulties, was provoked into war by Napoleon’s deliberate
challenge to Habsburg imperial authority. By taking the title of
emperor rather than that of king (18 May 1804), Napoleon asserted
his European pretensions, with deliberate evocation of Charlemagne,
whose authority had extended over Germany and Italy. If Francis II’s
immediate riposte was to proclaim himself hereditary emperor of
Austria (11 August 1804), within a year he felt goaded into war by
Napoleon’s assumption of the title of king of Italy (19 March 1805),
his annexation of the Ligurian republic, his direct administration of
Parma, and his creation of petty principates at Piombino and Lucca
for Elisa Bonaparte and her husband Felix Baciocchi (March-July
1805). Italy had been Napoleon’s chosen ground to expand his
territories and humiliate the Austrian emperor. With the outbreak of
war against Austria and Russia, Napoleon’s intention to extend and
shift his influence and activities to Germany was confirmed by the
alliance with the southern German states of Bavaria and
Württemberg.
   The spectacular victories over the Austrian-Russian armies at Ulm
(15 October 1805) and Austerlitz (2 December 1805) and then—after
Frederick William III’s wholly unexpected declaration of war—over
the Prussian armies at Jena and Auerstädt (14 October 1806)
transformed Napoleon’s vision of his role in Europe. The Carolingian
empire of the west, oriented primarily towards Italy—to which
Napoleon made deliberate rhetorical allusions—began to assume even
more ambitious dimensions, with echoes of Charles V’s realm
extending across Europe. At the same time, Napoleon’s very mastery
of Europe convinced him of the possibility of compensating loss of
control of the seas by imposing a land blockade against Britain. Both
developments implied indefinite French presence across the Continent,
until such time as the states and societies of Europe would recognise
their debt to France by accepting its political and economic hegemony,
and Britain would be forced to capitulate.
   Austria’s defeat meant her expulsion from Italy (treaty of Presburg,
26 December 1805): Venetia (given by Napoleon to Austria only eight
