                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   19


foreign ministers of the Directory, but he expressed ideas that were
circulating in the thermidorian Year III among such leaders as Sieyès,
Merlin de Douai and Pelet de la Lozère. The continuity with pre-
Revolutionary preoccupations is as marked as the total abandonment
of the initial Revolutionary respect for the rights and interests of other
peoples. By 1789 there was considerable worry among textile
producers—documented in the cahiers de doléances—about the
moderate liberalisation of trade with Britain resulting from the Eden
treaty (1786), and a more generalised concern for technological
modernisation. The outbreak of war rapidly led to confirmation of
British naval superiority, not least through the haemorrhage of officers
from the French navy. Colonial trade, the most dynamic sector of the
French economy, was wholly disrupted, despite attempts to substitute
supply routes through Spanish and Dutch ports.
   Economic nationalism was the French response. The extraction
agencies in Belgium and the Rhineland in 1794, the commissaires and
generals who crossed the Rhine in 1796, were instructed to send back
to Paris potentially useful mechanised machinery, and even to destroy
machinery in direct rivalry to national textile production. With the
conquest of Belgium, the river Scheldt (closed in the sixteenth century
by the Dutch during their war of independence) was reopened to
international traffic, possibly to please the Belgian patriots, certainly
in order to embarrass the British and Dutch, while developing French
trade routes to northern and eastern Europe. Plans were drawn up to
negotiate trade treaties with other continental states which would
favour French exports and prohibit imports of British goods. The
Cisalpine republic was forced to grant France exclusive navigation
rights and customs reductions for trade between the two states.
Although Delacroix’s project for negotiating favoured market outlets
for French products in the neighbouring states was never realised, it
continued to circulate in government milieux after Brumaire.
   Before Bonaparte’s coup of 18 Brumaire Year VIII (9 November
1799), revolutionary France’s relationships with Europe had already
been set. Political frontiers had been drastically modified to France’s
benefit and, primarily, Austria’s loss. If France proved unable to
achieve peace because of her continuously expanding ambitions, her
enemies were equally incapable of defeating her decisively. Masséna’s
victory over the Russians at Zürich (25–7 September 1799) was the
latest example of France’s apparently unlimited military resources and
superior fighting skills. With the extension of her frontiers to include
Belgium, the Rhineland, Savoy, Geneva and Nice and the creation of
dependent republics, the Great Nation could claim to have
