20   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


counterbalanced, if not compensated, the loss of colonies and freedom
of the seas. For the policy of passing on the costs of such uninterrupted
warfare to defeated or dependent states had paid healthy cash
dividends. And if the crises of the Atlantic ports and their great
trading families were to appear irreversible (American ships at
Bordeaux fell from fifty-one in 1797 to zero in 1799), the prospects of
expanding land markets for French producers looked promising.
   In his relations with Europe, as in his reordering of France,
Napoleon was to develop many of the policies already initiated under
the Directory. Many, but not all. In two particular respects, Brumaire
marked a rupture with the past. First, the generals were brought under
control, as a unity of direction was imposed on France’s external
policies that had been lacking since the Jacobin Year II. In the second
place, since the credibility of the liberation of peoples and popular
sovereignty had been irrevocably compromised, new methods and
policies of ensuring collaboration had to be elaborated to provide
political and social stability for the new order Napoleon’s France was
imposing on Europe. The price paid for this was the definitive
discrediting of pro-French local patriots and unequivocal popular
hostility to the arbitrary, unregulated exactions and behaviour of
French occupying forces.


NAPOLEON AND EUROPE
The conquest of Europe has always constituted the centre-piece of the
historiography of the Napoleonic years. Nor could it be otherwise,
given the prolonged sequence of military victories, the profound and
often irreversible changes imposed on the political geography of the
Continent, and the imagery of the triumphant hero so crucial to the
fabrication of the Napoleonic myth. But within a historiography that
has overwhelmingly privileged military-political events,
interpretations of the motivations underlying Napoleon’s actions and
policies have differed radically, conditioned (like all historical
interpretations) by the political beliefs and moral values of the periods
and societies in which successive generations of Napoleonic experts
have written.
   Today few historians would claim that, from the outset, Bonaparte
had a single plan in mind, whether for the rule of France or the
settlement of Europe. Unequivocally influenced by the reforming
ideals of the enlightenment, he remained hostile to the dogmatic
systems of its more theoretical exponents, whose abstract coherence
