26   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


years earlier at Campoformio), was annexed by the kingdom of Italy,
Tyrol and the Trentino (hereditary Austrian lands) by Bavaria. The
Bourbon dynasty of Naples, protégé of the Tsar, ‘has ceased to reign’,
declared Napoleon (27 December 1805), who assigned the kingdom
to his brother Joseph (30 March 1806). Of the former rulers of Italy,
only the Pope survived and his protests were ignored with the
occupation of the Papal ports of Ancona and Civitavecchia.
   The policy in Germany represented a greater innovation, in the
sense that Italy was firmly within the French sphere of influence, and
for almost a decade Napoleon had manipulated the peninsula’s
political geography. In Germany, France traditionally had looked to
Prussia as a counterweight to Habsburg Austria and Russia. The idea
of encouraging a third, francophile force in Germany among the
central and southern states had originated with Sieyès and Talleyrand
under the Directory and had assumed material form with the Rezès of
1803. Until Austerlitz Napoleon was hesitant, frequently changing his
ideas about Germany’s future. Now he enlarged the territories of his
allies, Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden. But the real novelty was his
insistence, against the reluctance of the German princes, on the
creation of the Confederation of the Rhine, of which sixteen princes
formed part (12 July 1806), in place of the Holy Roman Empire
(declared defunct by Napoleon on 1 August 1806). A central-southern
bloc had been set up, with a population of over 7 million and
Napoleon as its Protector; the initial intention of creating a new
constitutional structure faded away, but the military commitment to
provide France with 69,000 soldiers remained. The new sovereign
rulers, various of whom proclaimed themselves king, constituted an
effective counterbalance to Austria. Until Jena Prussia was left as the
dominant state in the rest of Germany.
   Prussia’s defeat inevitably expanded Napoleon’s ambitions.
Russia’s support for Prussia determined him not only to truncate the
Hohenzollerns of their western territories, but also to use the kingdom
indefinitely as a military base in order to pursue the war eastwards.
Although the battle of Eylau (8 February 1807) was indecisive, the
French victory at Friedland (14 June 1807) convinced Alexander to
come to terms with Napoleon. The treaty of Tilsit (7 July 1807)
marked the end of this renewed phase of war, with Napoleon at the
peak of his power. In agreement with his new ally Alexander of
Russia, Prussia was dismembered: its lands west of the Elbe were
assigned primarily to create a new kingdom of Westphalia, under
Jerome Bonaparte, while its Polish provinces were turned into an
independent grand-duchy of Warsaw, under the king of Saxony.
