24   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


commercial and manufacturing interests felt frustrated and threatened
by the refusal to open the French market and by the colonial interest
again displayed by Paris, with the cession of Louisiana to France by
Spain (1 October 1800), Bonaparte’s despatch of an expedition to
reconquer San Domingo and Guadaloupe (February 1802), and
renewed diplomatic activities in the direction of India. In Italy,
Napoleon had assumed the presidency of the Cisalpine republic and
provocatively changed its name into the ‘Italian republic’ (24–6
December 1801); Piedmont was annexed by France (11 September
1802), as well as Elba and Piombino, while Parma was occupied
(October 1802). In Switzerland Napoleon imposed a constitutional
settlement by military threat, which created a new republic of the
Valais, controlling the Simplon pass, rectified the Geneva frontier in
France’s favour, and forced the federal cantons into an alliance with
France (29 May 1802; act of mediation, 19 February 1803). In
Germany, Napoleon incited Tsar Alexander’s ambitions to play a
leading role in Europe and exploited the territorial greed of German
princes to weaken the Austrian emperor’s authority as overlord. The
infinitely complicated tangle of demands for compensation resulting
from France’s annexation of the Rhineland left bank was transformed,
through able diplomacy, into a political opportunity to create, at the
expense of the Catholic Church and the imperial free cities and
knights, a limited number of southern German states and a Protestant
majority of imperial electors, jealous of their independence and hence
attracted, through hostility to Austria, into the French orbit (Rezes of
Regensburg, 25 February 1803).
   The renewal of war with Britain (May 1803) and Austria and
Russia (August 1805) marked a new phase, in which the implications
of the control of sea and land respectively by the opposing forces of
Britain and France became reality. Whatever the reciprocal
provocations, the underlying reason for the revival of hostilities
between Britain and France, after so brief a pause, was the clash of
conflicting imperialisms. Bonaparte sold Louisiana to the United
States, partly to finance the invasion of Britain (3 May 1803). British
naval superiority prevented Napoleon’s army from crossing the
Channel and definitively ended the threat with Nelson’s destruction of
the French and Spanish fleets at Trafalgar (21 October 1805). Control
of the seas meant not only the development of British trade,
particularly in Spanish America, but also harassment of neutral ships
to the Continent, and the ability to supply forces hostile to the French,
as in Sicily or Portugal. But Britain remained impotent to challenge
Napoleon’s control of the land-mass of Europe, her major market.
