                                                The tools of conquest   37


these years led to a progressive refining of the wheels of
administration and of the selection of their human cogs. It is this that
explains the contrast between the political-military crisis of the final
years and the unprecedented and sophisticated administrative self-
confidence that produced the great statistical enquiries of 1812–14,
the minister of the interior Montalivet’s Exposition of the state of the
Empire, presented to the Legislative Body of 1813, or the minister of
war Clarke’s Administrative atlas of the French Empire of 1812.1
   Since Tocqueville, the political rupture represented by the
Revolution has been redimensioned by the insistence of observers and
historians on the administrative continuity between the ancien regime,
the Revolution and the Napoleonic experience. What tends to be
ignored in these considerations of the long-term trend of the French
state is the radical change of scale imposed by the expansion of France
in the Revolutionary-Napoleonic period: the problems of organising
an Empire of 130 departments with 44 million inhabitants were of a
different order from those faced by the Constituent legislators in a
France of 83 departments inhabited by a population of 27–8 million.
Space, time and language assumed other dimensions in this new
context.
   The bureaucratic developments should be seen as a response to the
rapid political changes imposed on Europe by Napoleon. Their most
novel feature was the forging of an administrative corps and practices
in the field, for there were few precedents to build on or react against,
as had been the case in the early Consulate in relation to the
Revolutionary decade. The composition of so far-flung a corps
constitutes the main theme of this chapter. But some preliminary
remarks are required about the allocation of responsibilities at Paris.


THE ROLE OF PARIS
After the initial, fertile period immediately following Brumaire, it is
unclear how often Napoleon himself provided the initiative for
administrative modifications. But it is certain that he always
maintained a direct and close control over all proposals, and that he
would intervene, even in the details of minor affairs, displaying that
remarkable memory and knowledge of men, matters and milieux that
so impressed his entourage and visitors. Prince Metternich, a hostile
but attentive observer of the French emperor from the time of his
nomination as ambassador at Paris in 1805, contested the reality of
Napoleon’s knowledge of his domain: ‘A truth that is not sufficiently
well known…is the shallowness of Napoleon’s knowledge about a
