                      The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   29


personnel) to police such prolonged lines meant the deployment of
regular troops, frequent disregard for legal procedures, and arbitrary
modification of territorial frontiers. Inevitably this application of a
tariff policy geared to French interests in the most narrow sense
conflicted with the efforts to win over local populations to the model
of French rule. Finally, if the blockade developed as a natural
complement to the enlargement of the imperial system, in turn it
became a propulsive element for the pursuit of ever more extensive
control by military means.
   It was the application of the blockade, in fact, that underlay the
progressive transformation of the imperial system into the mirage of a
universal empire. This is not to say that Napoleon’s military
expansionism was simply a response to the impossibility of sealing off
the Continent to British products. Political elements were undoubtedly
important in the decision to take over Spain; fear that Alexander was
about to change sides explains the invasion of Russia. Nevertheless,
success of the blockade, both to defeat Britain and to ensure France’s
economic markets, was ever more inextricably linked to political
calculations, not least because such success was dependent on Russia’s
collaboration in controlling eastern Europe.
   The invasion of Portugal (October 1807) was the counterpart to
Alexander’s invasion of Swedish Finland and Ottoman Turkey, agreed
at Tilsit. The annexation of Tuscany and Parma to France (December
1807, May 1808), and of the Papal Marches to the kingdom of Italy
(April 1808) met the requirements of both Empire and blockade,
through direct administration. But precisely because military control
of the Continent was believed to be the means to arrive at an effective
stranglehold of Britain, the very dimensions of the land-mass to be
controlled made the objective unobtainable. Thus the insurrections in
Spain, following Napoleon’s brusque replacement of the Bourbons by
his brother Joseph (May-July 1808), initially seemed no more
problematic than earlier popular resistance—as in Calabria—even
after Dupont’s defeat at Baylen (22 July 1808). The armies that
Napoleon sent into Spain were relatively limited in size and contained
a high proportion of foreign troops (Germans, Italians, Swiss and
Poles), because the Grande Armée was required to keep control of
eastern Europe. The terms imposed on Prussia (French occupation of
key fortresses and limitation of its army to 42,000) and the apparent
confirmation at Erfurt of the alliance with Alexander (September
1808) appeared to ensure the control of eastern Europe. Nevertheless
the displacement of the Grande Armée to Spain (November 1808) was
