                       The Revolutionary-Napoleonic ideals of conquest   31


was unable to destroy his enemy, despite the victory of Borodino (7
September 1812), and his army disintegrated as it withdrew in the
Russian winter. Alexander’s decision to invade Germany was the
direct cause of the renewed coalition of 1813, the abandonment of
France not only by its traditional antagonists, but also by many of its
allies and rulers created by Napoleon. The defeat of Leipzig (16–19
October 1813) led to the collapse of the Empire and Napoleon’s
abdication (6 April 1814).
    The dramatic events of these intense years tend to mask the close
correspondence between the internal evolution of France and that
outside her frontiers. The ties between domestic and external
developments were not only close but also reciprocally influential. At
the political level, for example, the north Italian (Cisalpine) and Dutch
(Batavian) republics adapted their constitutions to Brumaire and, at a
second stage following Napoleon’s assumption of an imperial title,
were transformed into kingdoms. But, equally, the assumption of the
title of emperor—an essentially domestic development—played a not
insignificant role in the creation of the third coalition and the renewal
of war. At the economic level, a similar correspondence can be
identified. The struggle between France and Britain, which dominated
the history of the Napoleonic years, dated back to long before the
Revolution. Its imposition on the entire Continent, with the blockade,
was a direct extension of France’s domestic concerns; the
determination to exploit France’s military hegemony to open up
markets for French manufactures provided a further example. In both
instances, the attempt to resolve French economic domestic problems
by turning to the territories under French control contradicted the
ambitious efforts to implant by administrative fiat, outside her
frontiers, a French model of modernity, which would sink roots and
attract a broad and long-term consensus.
    For however dependent ultimately on the army, Napoleon’s
hegemony of Europe was not (and could not be) dependent on
military rule. The territories incorporated within French Europe were
conceived of (with only marginal exceptions) as the constitutive
elements of a new form of state and society that would characterise
the new era. The new model was not born in the dawn of Brumaire,
but developed over the years, in direct dependence on the evolution of
Napoleon’s concept of his own role. Hence the policies imposed on
the conquered lands corresponded, according to their date of
incorporation, to the phase of administrative restructuring within
France herself, and changes in policies towards the external territories
paralleled domestic changes. Contemporaneously, the very existence
