38   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


great part of the internal administration of his immense state. Above
all, he understands nothing about trading relations’. 2 There is
considerable evidence to support Metternich’s judgement about the
superficiality, indeed the simplicity, of Napoleon’s economic ideas. But
the very centralisation of the system, from its creation in the Year VIII
until the abdication, with its insistence on hierarchical control of
individual decision-making and nomination of officials, ensured that
Napoleon was informed about personalities and administrative
problems in all corners of his Empire to a degree inconceivable to
bureaucrats or ministers of our times.
   The price paid for such personalised centralisation was delay.
Major progress had been achieved in modernising the land and water
routes within France already before the Revolution. The difficulty was
the absence of anything comparable beyond France’s old frontiers
(except in Britain). Napoleon’s almost obsessive insistence on
constructing roads, even across the Alpine passes, is proverbial and—
like his extension of the Revolutionary telegraph lines—corresponded
to military strategy and political needs. Every new route, as he
observed in 1811, ‘ensures and consolidates the reunion of these
countries to the Empire and is hence a matter of prime importance’.3
But with the extension of the frontiers, the heavy use to which the
roads were subjected by increasingly frequent troop movements and
the deployment of the Grande Armée ever further east, the problem
worsened of how to force the pace of road construction in order to
meet the ever more urgent pressures of administration and war. In
fact, Napoleon tended to use special couriers, not just to coordinate
military movements or announce a victory during his campaigns, but
for all important matters. And such couriers, as Marbot recalled in his
memoirs, might carry not just secret despatches, but silks for the
empress imported illegally despite the Continental blockade.4
   There was a fundamental incompatibility between Napoleon’s
constant mobility and the requirement of his authorisation for an
infinity of minor administrative acts. It took fourteen months, for
instance, for the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova at Florence to be
granted permission by Napoleon to sell some houses it owned in order
to pay its creditors.5 Major decisions could be transmitted with
remarkable speed, such as the decree to confiscate all colonial goods
in the grand-duchy of Berg, signed by Napoleon at Nossen (between
Dresden and Leipzig) on 8 May 1813, received by special courier at
Paris on 14 May and by Beugnot, the minister responsible at
Düsseldorf on 16 May.6 But delay became ever more the norm as
Napoleon was increasingly absent: between 1805 and 1814 the
