40   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


opinions of one or more ministers, state councillors or mere
functionaries, a practice that was formalised in Year X by the creation
of a privy council of changing composition. Diplomatic matters were
channelled exclusively through the ministry of foreign affairs (except
for major negotiations, which Napoleon dealt with personally or for
which he often nominated his own representatives). But their
repercussions, for example relating to the economic blockade, could
find their way to the council of state, the privy council, the Customs
general directorate, the ministry of finances, the consultative general
councils on manufacturing and trade, the ministerial board of trade,
and elsewhere. Fiscal matters would primarily be processed and
prepared within the ministry of finances and the treasury, but—
depending on the object—could be the responsibility of the
Extraordinary demesne or the Customs. Military affairs belonged to
the domain of the ministries of war and war administration, but
involved the interior ministry over conscription and civil-military
relations. Most matters relating to legislation and public
administration would be discussed within the council of state. In
short, as one would expect, a primary degree of specialisation oriented
the regular bureaucratic channels of communication between Paris
and the world beyond France’s frontiers, although overlapping (and
sometimes conflictual) spheres of competence and the creation of
consultative and interministerial councils, as well as Napoleon’s
specific instructions and the repercussions of earlier decisions, could
easily generate a wider diffusion of paper and discussion. Above all,
the expanding use of the council of state by ministers cuts across any
clear-cut image of functional specialisation. Increasingly, as is evident
from an infinity of sources like Stendhal’s Journal, the councillors of
state were transformed into all-purpose experts.
   Territorial status provides clearer distinctions, as the areas can be
grouped in apparently distinct categories. Thus the territories
progressively ‘reunited’ to France—from Savoy and the Belgian Low
Countries to Italy, Holland and the Hanseatic seaboard—were
administratively treated in uniform manner as part of France, divided
in departments with prefects, and hence the responsibility of the
ministry of the interior. Only if these territories were subjected to a
special transitional regime, like the Tuscan junta, Parma or the Illyrian
intendancy, was responsibility provisionally assigned to Gaudin,
minister of finances. Holland was treated analogously on its
annexation in 1810, with the creation of a Council for Dutch Affairs
under Gaudin. At the other extreme, established states which survived
France’s military onslaught (primarily Russia, Britain and Austria,
