48   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


personal antagonisms between military and civilian agents, Jacobins
and moderates, in 1797–9 there was little difference in the operational
techniques deployed by Generals Bonaparte and Brune and
ambassador Trouvé in the Cisalpine, the agents Mengaud, Lecarlier
and Rapinat in the Helvetic republic, the delegates Noel and
Delacroix in the Batavian republic, commissaire Abrial at Naples, or
General Masséna at Genoa. Only in Piedmont, where commissaire
Eymar supervised the actions of the provisional government on a daily
basis, can any variation be noted, when Eymar’s successor Musset
dissolved the government and (like Rudler in the Rhineland) began to
reorganise Piedmont on a departmental basis in apparent preparation
of annexation (1799).
    By Brumaire, successive French governments had experimented
with the mechanics of occupation and elaborated certain techniques.
Purely military occupation, treating the country as enemy territory,
was limited to the short term or to emergencies (such as Masséna’s
seven requisitions in Switzerland in five months of 1799). If
occupation was prolonged, the standard practice was to replace the
local administrators (many of whom had fled) by a provisional
administration of patriots or less willing collaborators. The precise
physiognomy of such provisional administrations varied, as did their
titles, but the primary concern of the French representatives was to
ensure collaboration, not demonstrations of independence. Up to this
point these territories were certainly regarded as potential bargaining
counters in a future peace. Wherever the extension of France’s
frontiers was seen as both desirable and feasible, the territory was
restructured on French departmental lines, whether after annexation
(Savoy, Belgium) or in preparation (Rhineland, Piedmont). Elsewhere
the very plurality of sources of power under the Directory, at Paris and
in the occupied territories, sometimes offered the possibility to local
patriots to transform provisional administrations into new republics,
under the sympathetic eye of the French general in command. The
Directory adapted to this situation, sending out members of the
legislature as commissaires with extensive powers to control both
generals and republican administrations. Their success was normally
greater with the latter than the former. But the very conflict of power
continued to offer a political space for the local patriots, without
providing any stable prospects for the future of the republics.
    Napoleon, after Marengo, could exploit two advantages in the
reoccupied territories lacking to his predecessors: unity of command
(in contrast to the previous diffusion of power) and a degree of
support from the local elites (because of the discreditable behaviour of
