                                                   The tools of conquest   43


   Nevertheless ‘new’ Frenchmen formed part of the constituted
organs of government in the capital. Their presence was a deliberate
political gesture, a consecration of the reality of the expanding
Empire, for which Napoleon was directly responsible. A very general
indicator of evolution of attitudes towards the incorporation of these
new compatriots is provided by their presence in the legislative
assemblies. Lambrechts, the sole Belgian senator in 1800, was
sceptical about getting a compatriot appointed to the Tribunate:
There is little hope, as they do not seem to be very generous in offering
places to men from the annexed departments’.9 There seem to have
been none among the 120 members of the Tribunate appointed in
1800 or 1802, despite the annexation of Belgium, Geneva and the left
bank of the Rhine (fourteen departments). In the Legislative body,
membership became automatic in that all departments were
represented (constitution of Year X). Although the departments of the
annexed territories constituted one-third of the total number, the 22
per cent ‘new French’ members of the Legislative body between 1800
and 1813 represented a fair proportion, given that over half their
departments became part of France only in the later years. A similar
conclusion can be drawn for the Senate. Of the initial sixty-three
senators only Lambrechts was born outside France (in Belgium) and
he had served as minister of justice during the Directory; in sharp
contrast, of senators nominated between the Year IX and 1813 over a
quarter of the new members came from Italy, Belgium, Holland and
Germany. Some of the French members of the Legislative body were
prefects of annexed departments, like Frémin de Beaumont, who
represented the Manche for ten years until he was appointed prefect of
the Bouches du Rhin in 1810, or Sauzey, who was the first prefect of
the Mont Blanc until his election to the Legislative body as
representative of the same department in Year X. Successful French
prefects were more often rewarded by their appointment as senators,
like Viry, prefect of the Lys, Cochon de Lapparent, prefect successively
of Vienne and Deux-Nèthes. The ‘new Frenchmen’ appointed to the
legislative assemblies were overwhelmingly influential figures,
politically or socially, in their countries of origin, like Durazzo, the last
doge of Genoa, the Piedmontese noble Falletti di Barolo, the Tuscan
minister and engineer Fossombroni or Schimmelpenninck, former
grand pensionary of the Batavian republic.10
   When Holland was annexed in 1810, guarantees were given of
posts within the Empire: six senators, six councillors of state, two
judges in the supreme court, twenty-six deputies of the Legislative
body. Holland was unique among the incorporated territories,
