                                                The tools of conquest   39


Emperor spent only 900 of 3,500 days at Paris;7 and it was not
accidental that so many major political and administrative decisions
were taken in 1810, the only year he spent in or near France. With the
Russian campaign the delays worsened. Authorisation for expenditure
in Berg was granted by Roederer, the minister responsible at Paris,
only for expenditure from January to April 1813 on 19 March, for
May and August expenditure on 14 August, for June and July on 8
September, for September on 1 October, and never thereafter.8
   It is this insistence on personal control irrespective of geographical
displacements that gives an impression of fluidity to the channels of
administrative communication along which the Empire was run.
Napoleon’s official visitations to one or another part of the lands he
ruled directly or controlled (as distinct from, though sometimes
connected to, his sudden, frightening appearances at the head of the
Grande Armée) were like sharply accelerated versions of the stately
progress of medieval monarchs or of the Emperor Charles V. He was
at Bruges, Ghent, Antwerp, Brussels and Maestricht in July 1803, at
Aix-la-Chapelle, The Hague, Cologne, Coblenz, Mainz, Trier and
Luxemburg in September-October 1804, in Piedmont, the kingdom of
Italy, Parma and Genoa in spring 1805, in northern Italy again in
November-December 1807, at Erfurt in autumn 1808, in Belgium in
spring 1810, in Antwerp, Holland and Berg in October-November
1811. Such occasions were marked by a sudden flurry of
administrative activity, including the resolution of long delayed
matters. For besides the continuous round of receptions, these visits
regularly comprised intense sessions between Napoleon, the ministers
and councillors of state he had brought with him and local
administrators, in which individuals were praised or blamed, and
decrees passed to relieve or develop the local economy and embellish
the privileged city with new roads or promenades.

It is not always easy to understand why a particular issue should have
left its documentary traces in one rather than another ministry or
council. But the broad lines of responsibility at Paris relating to the
territories outside France’s pre-Revolutionary frontiers can be
attributed within the twin parameters of functional specialisation and
territorial status.
    Functional specialisation—diplomatic, military or fiscal affairs, for
example—was the least precise. For however direct and personal a
control Napoleon exercised over political, diplomatic and generally
all major decisions, he was meticulous in his demand for information,
and often ready (particularly in his earlier years) to listen to the
