42   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


   The facade of a rationally organised central administration with
functional or territorial allocation of responsibilities at Paris for the
effective maintenance of France’s domination of Europe, masked a
complexity that, far from disappearing, probably increased over the
period, because of the conflicting expectations and demands made
by the different branches of the administration. The result was not
the confusion that might have been expected, but effective control,
which can be attributed to Napoleon’s personal role, the implacable
demands of the military and the professionalism of the bureaucratic
corps. It is difficult to impose a neat interpretative grid on such
complexity, although it is easy to illustrate it, for example through
the occasional irritation of a prefect in responding to the demands of
different ministers about the same object, such as statistics on cereal
production or public order. Far less tangible is the problem of how
information was filtered, and at what levels, before it reached the
Emperor. Indeed, in a deeper sense, one is forced to ask to what
extent a socio-cultural filter operated throughout the system,
constructing those very realities that Napoleon and his servants
expected to find, whether about the nature of the territories under
French control, the functioning of the economy, social behaviour or
any other aspect of the organisation of society. It is a problem of
considerable significance (and not only for the Napoleonic regime),
as such information contributed in the process of decision-making.
What is certain is that, following the retreat from Russia and the
renewed formation of the anti-Napoleonic coalition, as French
armies were pushed back across central Europe and Spain in 1813,
control rapidly gave way to evidence of opposition and disorder.
Worried local elites hastened to prepare for a pacific transfer of
power on Napoleon’s defeat.

The Parisian civil service remained almost exclusively French. The
only ministry which contained a small proportion of foreigners or
natives of newly annexed regions was foreign affairs, where the
tradition of a specialised training at Strasbourg and linguistic skills
encouraged the recruitment of Alsatians and Germans, such as
Reinhardt and Bacher. In other ministries the enlargement of France’s
frontiers does not appear to have had any effect on recruitment. Nor
is this surprising, given the small size of the ministries (the interior
numbered only 220 employees in the late Empire), the strong influence
of patronage and presence at Paris on chances of recruitment, and the
opportunities and needs of employment in the new local
administrations.
