                                                The tools of conquest   45


tone (like Caroline Murat’s), scientific (like Madame d’Helvétius at
Autueil) or in opposition (like Juliette Récamier or Germaine de
Staël), the Parisian salons were now frequented by a new imperial and
European elite. The cultural legacy, beyond France’s borders after
1815, was to be no less marked than the directly political experience.


THE MECHANICS OF OCCUPATION
How to occupy a country and what to do with it was a process that
the French learnt by trial and error during the Revolutionary decade.
In later years Napoleon built on these experiences, but continued to
improve on the mechanics of the operation, introducing major
variations.
   The Convention, in a decree of 15 December 1792, proclaimed the
abolition of feudalism in all the occupied territories, and despatched
commissaires to prepare elections as the manifest proof of liberation.
But already in these earliest years of hostilities, the logistic problems
of warfare and the manifest reluctance of the populations to be
liberated rapidly led French generals, like their superiors at Paris and
the civilian commissaires accompanying the armies, to regard
occupied territory as enemy territory. Two immediate consequences
followed. First, the military commander felt free to requisition and
exact what (at the least) he judged necessary to supply his army, and
(at the worst) he believed could be extorted for his soldiers, his
suppliers, his government and, last but not least, himself. Secondly, the
commander, while asserting control over all state institutions, was
reliant on civilian collaboration to facilitate his exactions, and hence
normally reluctant to encourage the proposals of local patriots to
purge the existing administrators or (worse) to set up new
Revolutionary administrative structures. In addition, lack of
experience, authority or concern often meant that a general in charge
of an army was unable to control his subordinates, so that local
pillaging and illegal exactions accompanied the official efforts to meet
the demands for supplies and indemnities of the occupying forces.
This was certainly the experience of the Belgian Low Countries and
Rhineland in 1793–4. The creation of ‘extraction agencies’
(euphemistically called ‘commercial agencies’) in the Belgian and
German territories in 1794, as of a ‘military agency’ in Lombardy in
1796, was essentially an attempt to cut out private initiative, since it
weakened the ability of the constituted authorities to make the local
populations pay their share of the military-imposed ransom. The
