46   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


problem worsened in the Directory years because of the inability of
the government at Paris to control its generals.
   Treatment as enemy territory was dependent on the formal status
assigned to each country by the French authorities. For, in theory at
least, the French troops would be evacuated once a new friendly
government (such as a sister republic) had been set up, or the
population had voted for reunion to France. Hence the pressures on
local populations to change their status were compelling. But local
voices, whether patriotic or desperate, were rarely heard, as they fell
foul of the conflicting ambitions or policies of French commissaires,
generals and Parisian politicians. Even where the patriots were able
momentarily to seize the initiative—as in Liège, the Low Countries or
Lombardy—they were soon constrained by the French occupying
forces. The very early experience of the patriots in the principality of
Liège can be regarded as paradigmatic of this process. Here the
popular societies had played a central role, with the French
occupation in 1792–3, in setting up a provisional administration and
preparing a vote in favour of reunion to France, despite the ferocious
attacks on their commitment by a Convention commissaire, Publicola
Chaussard. In 1794, although both the municipal and the provisional
central administrations were re-established, the French commissaire
Frécine radically reduced their powers, and then, ignoring local
opinion, carved up the former principality into two parts, assigned
respectively to the nearby (and hence resented) authority of Brussels
and Aix-la-Chapelle.
   In general, the change from simple military occupation to some
form of provisional civilian administration was usually the result of
the diminishing returns of military exactions. Thus in the Rhineland,
where there was an army of occupation of 100,000, a central
administration was set up in 1794, consisting of equal numbers of
French and Germans. The administrative problem was complicated in
the Rhineland (on both sides of the river), because previously
sovereignty had been divided between 101 petty states. In Lombardy,
after only a few months of occupation, Bonaparte accepted a central
administration of patriots as it facilitated the monthly payments for
his army.
   The underlying problem was the uncertainty about the future in
each territory, about which local patriots, occupying generals, civilian
commissaires and the authorities at Paris could have different and
conflicting views. Thus the Belgian (and hence Liège) experience of
provisional administrations and ‘extraction agencies’ rapidly led to
annexation (1795), which meant not only the removal of military
