44   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


because of concern about the political reaction against annexation
among a population with a proud tradition of independence, so soon
after its previous remodelling into a Bonapartist kingdom. But there
can be little doubt that in general Napoleon saw the presence of these
new compatriots in the legislative assemblies as symbolising the unity
and indivisibility of the French Empire. At the same time, their landed
wealth and in most cases noble origins served to consolidate the
conservatism of these bodies.
   Membership of the Legislative body and Senate was a mark of
honour and source of privilege, but hardly an onerous burden.
Appointment to the council of state was a different matter, as it was
the very core of the central administrative system, on which rested
Bonaparte’s affirmation of advancement through merit. Here too only
Frenchmen seemed to have been appointed in the earliest years as
councillors of state (or maîtres des requêtes), but from 1802 Napoleon
included natives of the annexed departments: of 112 councillors, six
were Italians, two Germans (including Dalberg) and four Dutch. The
council of state was conceived as the seedbed of the future
administrative class for the entire Empire, the civilian equivalent of
the military academy. Nowhere is its importance demonstrated more
clearly than in Napoleon’s insistence on the presence of young nobles
from the annexed departments among the auditors. From the creation
of this category of trainees in 1803, Belgians and then Italians
requested appointments; in 1811, of thirty-three nominations,
fourteen were from the newly annexed Rome. As striking as the
competition to enter the ranks of the auditors was Napoleon’s
overriding of the hostility to their appointment of the scions of leading
Roman and Piedmontese aristocratic families, like Cesare Balbo. For
a rigorous experience as auditor, initially at Paris, was regarded as
ideal preparation for service in the field, not just in terms of
professional training, but as a form of acculturation. The auditors
were seen as crucial tools in the transmission of the values and hence
the durability of the French Empire.
   Paris was to play the role of imperial Rome, not just as the brain of
an administrative body, but as its heart, drawing in and pumping out
the life-blood of a culture which was assumed to have attained new
levels. The boundless ambition and underlying ambiguity of this
intimate mesh of political-administrative responsibilities and socio-
cultural aspirations was reflected in the assiduous presence of the
leading functionaries in the fashionable salons. From Pompadour to
Mme Roland, Récamier and Josephine de Beauharnais, political
sociability had characterised the Parisian salons. Whether official in
