                                                The tools of conquest   47


exactions, but also a total rupture with the administrative practices of
the past through the division of the territory into departments. In the
Rhineland, on the other hand, the successive military administrators
(Generals Custine, Hoche and Augereau) only tampered with the
administrative structures, replacing the central administration with
French-staffed general directorates (May 1796) to improve the flow of
payments. Only after the peace of Campoformio (October 1797),
when the Directory was convinced that the left bank would remain
French, was military authority replaced by the appointment of a
general commissaire, F.J.Rudler, to restructure the administrative,
financial and judicial system in preparation for annexation. In yet
another variant, the Directory accepted the Dutch patriots’ creation of
the Batavian republic (May 1795), but only at the price of annexing
territory to improve the French frontier, payment of a huge indemnity
and the maintenance of an army of 25,000 French soldiers. In Italy,
provisional administrations were set up in Genoa and Venice, as
subsequently at Lucca and Rome (1797–8). Only at a second stage
was General Bonaparte prepared to transform the Lombard
provisional general administration into a sister-republic, the Cisalpine
(July 1797), which remained responsible for the maintenance of the
French army; and it was similarly the initiative of a French general,
Championnet, that allowed the creation of the Neapolitan republic
(January 1799). The reluctance of the Directory to change the existing
administrative structures in Italy was shown in the refusal to allow the
Piedmontese patriots to overthrow their government, and then
(December 1798) in its acceptance only of a provisional
administration. In Tuscany, despite the sympathy of the French
commanders Gaulthier and Schérer towards a change of regime, the
Directory insisted on a purely military occupation (1799).
   In the eyes of the local patriots, the proclamation of a republic
signified the creation of an autonomous sovereign state. From the
point of view of the Directory, the republics (apart from their possible
diplomatic implications at a future peace treaty) merely constituted
another experiment in the mechanics of occupation. Ultimate
authority remained firmly in the hands of the military commanders.
Some, like Masséna and Augereau, were legendary for their systematic
pillaging. Irrespective of their personal greed, these military leaders,
like the French civilian commissaires, intervened at will in the
activities of the local republican authorities, writing and rewriting
their constitutions, purging their assemblies, appointing new executive
commissions, according to their political inclinations and the
fluctuations in the life of the Directory. Whatever the political and
