                                                 The tools of conquest   41


and Prussia until 1806) remained within the exclusive domain of the
ministry of foreign affairs.
   In between these extremes, at least two further classifications can
be made. In the first group can be placed the states assigned to
members of Napoleon’s family. Such states, whether already in
existence like Naples or Holland or newly created like Westphalia,
were formally independent, and hence merited a diplomatic
representative and correspondence through the foreign affairs
ministry. But Napoleon’s exactions of troops and his reservation to his
crown of substantial incomes in these states, as much as the Bonaparte
family relationship, led to parallel channels of communication with
the ministry of war, the Extraordinary demesne, and via Napoleon’s
copious personal correspondence with his brothers and brother-in-
law.
   The second group contained the states over which Napoleon
claimed direct authority, either permanently or for a long period: the
republic-kingdom of Italy and the grand-duchy of Berg. As absentee
head of the Italian state, with a vice-president-viceroy at Milan, he
maintained the formal distinction between his two domains by
employing the foreign affairs ministry but, after the creation of the
kingdom, insisted on the permanent presence at Paris of a minister
(Aldini). Responsibility for relations with Berg had initially been
placed in the hands of Gaudin, minister of finances, possibly because
of the reserved crown incomes. With Murat’s departure (1808) and
the choice of Louis of Holland’s 5-year-old son as grand-duke,
Napoleon shifted responsibility for control of the administration of
Berg to the minister-secretary of state Maret, and then (because of
Maret’s passivity) to Roederer, who was given the same status.
   It is evident from these examples that even territorial status does
not provide clear-cut distinctions about responsibilities at Paris for
non-French territories. Military demands and the increasingly
arbitrary attempts to enforce the Continental blockade involved the
war ministries and Customs, who on occasion bypassed foreign affairs
in their relations even with established allied states, such as Bavaria or
Baden. The alliances imposed on these states, particularly within the
Rhine and Helvetic (Swiss) Confederations of which Napoleon was
Protector, and the reservation to the French crown of properties and
incomes within conquered states multiplied the channels of
communication with Paris. The allocation to favoured ministers of
mini-states—Benevento to Talleyrand, Neuchâtel to Berthier—led to
the utilisation of official channels (foreign affairs, war) for what was
virtually patrimonial administration.
