50   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


president, a Constitution and entirely native administration under
Melzi d’Eril based on the French prototype, and the maintenance of a
French army at the new republic’s expense, seemed to offer a viable
solution in the form of a vassal state that could be restructured in the
French image. The refusal of the Ligurians to go to Lyon, through
their fear of being swallowed up in the new Lombard state, perhaps
explains why Napoleon gave them a separate constitution, with a
legislative council, electoral colleges and senate, but under the firm
control of the French representative Saliceti (June 1802). The
uncertainties and disadvantages of their status (trade with Piedmont
was hit by a new tariff barrier, obligations were imposed to provide
soldiers and sailors for France) encouraged enthusiasm for
annexation, as had been the Piedmontese experience.
   The third method was less direct—an attempt to ensure control of
foreign territories without the difficulties of occupation. In the case
of Holland, the Batavian republic was replaced by a more traditional
collegial regency, which restored power to the former urban
oligarchies and Orange aristocrats (September 1801), while
imposing the obligation on the Dutch to maintain an army of 18,000
men. In Switzerland, Napoleon proposed a more original formula,
carefully avoiding further annexations or commitments by ensuring
the return to power of the former cantonal oligarchies in a
‘mediation’ which he guaranteed as Protector. In return the Swiss
were committed to supply France with a regular military contingent
(1803). The Swiss precedent was to be repeated on a far grander
scale in Germany, where the invention of the Confederation of the
Rhine among (initially) sixteen states, with Napoleon as Protector,
confirmed and indeed extended the territorial sovereignty of the
participant members, while committing them to recruit 63,000
soldiers for France (1806). In both instances, the shadow of
Napoleon’s protection acted as an effective substitute for direct
intervention, the Grande Armée was ensured of substantial
contingents, and the example of state modernity provided by France
encouraged emulation among the dependent rulers.
   The creation of the Empire and Napoleon’s military triumphs of
1805–7 raised the techniques of occupation to a new level.
Annexation became a skilled art, as repeated recourse was made to it.
With the annexation of Venetia in 1806, local notables were
appointed as special commissaires, a temporary measure until the
nomination of experienced prefects from the kingdom of Italy.
Already in 1802, on the death of the duke of Parma (whose state had
been ceded to France by the treaty of Aranjuez, March 1801), the
