58   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


the continuous state of warfare, but also because of the patronage of
senior officers. Kinship and marriage alliances grew stronger within
this military caste, perhaps the defensive mechanism of parvenus or
political trimmers, as Georges Six has argued. 20 Berthier’s two
younger brothers became generals; Davout, who married the sister of
Pauline Bonaparte’s husband General Leclerc, helped a brother and
uncle to become generals, while a cousin’s husband became a colonel;
two Clary sisters married Joseph Bonaparte and Bernadotte, while the
son of the third sister became a general and the two daughters married
the future Marshal Suchet and General Saligny. Bessières, Beurmann,
Beylié, Damas, Dumas, Lanusse, Wimpffen and many others were
families with two brothers as generals. Six has estimated that at least
240 generals were fathers, sons, brothers, uncles, nephews, cousins,
fathers-in-law, sons-in-law, brothers-in-law or husbands of widows of
other generals.
   While nepotism assisted a military career, personal contact with
Bonaparte and alignment with his meteoric political career were
even more important. The crucial moments were those of his early
years—the Army of Italy, the Egyptian campaign and Brumaire.
Careers were made or broken in those years, dependent more on
attitudes adopted than on strictly military achievement. For
example, Berthier, Bessières, Lannes, Andréossy, Bertrand,
Marmont, Murat and Duroc were close to Bonaparte in all three
episodes and were appropriately rewarded. Masséna, Suchet,
Clarke, Brune, Sébastiani and Bernadotte established or
consolidated their careers in Italy. The Egyptian expedition forged
particularly close ties, which were to last through the Empire. The
future paymaster-general Estève’s career began there; Davout, who
was presented to Bonaparte by Desaix and immediately despatched
to Toulon to prepare the Egyptian expedition, owed his spectacular
career to this. Junot and Menou were repeatedly offered career
opportunities by Napoleon, despite the excesses of the former and
mediocrity of the latter. It would be tedious to prolong the list.
   As revealing are the instances of officers whose careers were
broken by attitudes judged unacceptable by Bonaparte’s close
entourage. General Damas, Kléber’s protégé in Egypt, was accused
by Menou, after his patron’s murder, of the defeat at Canope (21
March 1801) and was disgraced, along with his brother, also a
general. Reynier, Damas’ superior at Canope, was placed under
arrest by Menou and subsequently exiled to Italy. Napoleon himself
oscillated in his willingness to distinguish military capacities from
personal or political prejudices. He persecuted Moreau and
