52   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Italy more than the allied states of the Rhine Confederation. For,
although formally independent, Berg, Naples, Holland and
Westphalia, like Elisa’s petty state of Lucca and Berthier’s principality
of Neuchâtel, had French advisers and ministers, were subjected to
military contingents, and above all were obliged to adopt the French
machinery of government. Indeed Berg under Murat and even more
Jerome’s new kingdom of Westphalia were expected to become model
states whose example would be followed by their neighbours.
Precisely because he regarded these family states as an extension of the
Empire, Napoleon saw no reasons for formalities (even consultation)
before interfering in their affairs, as Louis of Holland discovered when
he lost his throne, and Joseph of Spain when Napoleon created
military administrations in Catalonia, Aragon, Navarre and the
Basque country. Spain was a special case, since the unending war
inevitably subordinated civilian administration to the military. But it
is evident from Napoleon’s ample correspondence with his kin
sovereigns that he would brook no discussion of the subordination
of their states to France, not only in terms of political hegemony, but
also as a cultural model demanding close imitation. If Joachim
Murat, alone among Napoleon’s family, was able to affirm
expressions of independence, this was primarily because by these
years the emperor was distracted by other, more pressing problems
in distant parts.
   Continuous warfare, as well as the economic blockade, explains the
renewed importance of military occupation in the later years.
Increasingly Napoleon sent in his generals to impose a military
administration. Sometimes, when an extended though temporary
occupation was anticipated, civilian administrators might be
appointed—like the prefects Thiébault and Tournon at Erfurt and
Bayreuth in 1810, who were instructed not to make any
administrative changes. Elsewhere military occupation could lead to
subsequent institutional changes, although without removing the
presence of French troops, like the creation of the grand-duchy of
Warsaw (1807) or the annexation of the Hanseatic cities (1812).
Mostly, military occupation was seen as a deliberately heavy-handed
method of ensuring payment of indemnities by a defeated enemy. This
necessitated the presence of civilian administrators, like Bignon,
imperial commissaire in charge of the conquered Prussian provinces in
1806 and of occupied Austria in 1809. Nowhere was this policy
clearer than in Prussia, where French forces remained after Jena until
1810, then returning in February 1812 to use the humiliated state as
supply base for the Russian campaign. The distinction in the handling
