                                                 The tools of conquest   49


the old regimes during their brief restoration in 1799–1800). His
immediate solution to the administration of these territories was to
employ as model the constitution of the Year VIII, just as the
Directory had turned to the constitution of the Year III. In Piedmont,
the Cisalpine and Liguria executive government commissions and
legislative councils were set up (June-July 1800). But the real power
was placed more firmly than ever in the hands of French
representatives—Generals Jourdan and Dejean in Piedmont and
Liguria, army inspector Petiet in the Cisalpine—who acted as virtual
proconsuls, combining military and civil authority, receiving orders
directly from the First Consul, presiding over the meetings of the
executive commissions. Within a year (April 1801) the military
control was formalised in Piedmont and Liguria by transforming them
into the 27th and 28th military divisions of France, even though
neither of them had yet been annexed.
   Three alternative methods were employed during the Consulate in
the search for stable solutions to the control of foreign territories.
Piedmont was ‘prepared’ for annexation by the nomination of a
general administration under General Jourdan, responsible for
introducing the entire French machinery of government (April 1801).
Within a month, prefects had been appointed to the six departments.
To assist Jourdan and his council of six, experts were imported for the
more specialised branches of administration: A.J.Hennet, a financial
bureaucrat who had served under Necker, G.A.Jourde to set up the
new judicial system, General Wirion to establish a gendarmerie, the
bishop of Amiens to sort out the ecclesiastical hierarchy. For political
reasons annexation was delayed until 11 September 1802, the local
population being informed two weeks later. Jourdan, too republican
for Napoleon’s taste, was replaced by the conservative General
Menou. As in the Rhineland, where the extraordinary authority of a
general commissaire continued until Year X, although prefects had
been appointed already in Year VIII, a two-tier system was continued
until 1805, with both Menou as administrator-general and regular
prefects, creating ambiguities over the respective responsibilities of the
minister of the interior and the administrator-general. Piedmont
provided the model for future annexations.11
   The second method, apparently as definitive, was the creation of
republics under direct French rule. Here too northern Italy provided
the experimental field. Consultation of local notables, with the
summoning to Lyon of carefully selected figures of the Cisalpine
republic, was the consular version of proclaiming consensus. The
creation of the Italian republic (January 1802) with Napoleon as
