56   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


while engaged at Bayonne in forcing the Bourbon dynasty to cede him
the kingdom of Spain, he took time off to dismiss the paymaster of the
army of Dalmatia, Duliège, and confiscate his deposit and possessions
for irregularly granting funds to Marmont.14
   It is not surprising that these highly specialised services should have
attracted more administrative attention than the army intendancies,
as they dealt with matters about which Napoleon was particularly
sensitive—artillery power, the strength and smartness of his regiments,
and honest accounting. Mindful of his initial training, Napoleon was
increasingly concerned to develop the firing power of his armies,
particularly to compensate for the decline in the proportion of
experienced veterans in the army. He took a personal interest in
reviewing the turnout of the regiments. Marbot recalled how he
would ridicule commanders for their inadequate knowledge of their
troops.

     Besides the standard questions about numbers of men and horses,
     armaments, etc., he threw a host of unexpected question at them,
     for which they were not always prepared. For example: ‘How
     many men have you taken from a given department over the past
     two years? How many carbines produced at Tulle or Charleville?
     What’s the average age of your soldiers? of your officers? of your
     horses?’ Such question, always delivered in the most peremptory,
     abrupt manner, accompanied by a penetrating expression,
     disconcerted many a colonel. But a hesitating reply was ill
     advised, as Napoleon mentally put a black mark against the
     officer’.15

As warlord and head of state with an almost kitchen economy concern
to balance the budget, for Napoleon the review inspectors performed
an inestimably valuable task in not making him pay for non-existent
troops—even if he seemed resigned to a decline in their efficacy after
the initial Consulate years (They make me pay for all the dead
soldiers’, he complained to Mollien, minister of the treasury in
1808). 16 The army paymasters, sticking to the letter of their
instructions, retained his confidence, in contrast to the intendants.
Hence it was not surprising, when the administration of conquered
territory was changed from military government (under a general) to
civilian, that the responsibility should have been given to review
inspectors or military paymasters rather than intendants-general, or
alternatively to councillors of state. Daru, in charge of exacting war
indemnities from Austria in 1805 and Prussia in 1806, was councillor
