                                                The tools of conquest   51


French resident, Moreau de Saint-Méry, was appointed administrator-
general for the unusually lengthy transitional period of four years
(October 1802 to January 1806). It was presumably the revolt at
Piacenza (December 1805) that decided Napoleon to ‘prepare’ the
territory for annexation, with the appointment of a special
‘administrative prefect’, Nardon (1806–8). The diplomat Champagny
was first sent to prepare the annexation of the Ligurian republic. But
he was immediately followed by the former consul Lebrun and a team
of experts to create three new departments (June-September 1805).
On the Piedmontese model of a two-tier structure, Lebrun was to
remain governor-general of Liguria for two years, alongside the three
prefects. With the annexation of Tuscany (December 1807), Dauchy
was first appointed as administrator-general with specialised staff
transferred from the Piedmontese departments, then Menou was sent
as military commander and head of a provisional junta of experts to
establish the French system. The members of the Roman consulta
charged with an identical task following the annexation of the Papal
States (May 1809) were partly the same as those of the Tuscan junta
(Gérando, Janet, Balbo). With the annexation of Holland (1810), the
aged Lebrun was once more employed as lieutenant-general to set up
the prefectoral system, then staying on—as previously in Liguria—as
governor-general (1811–13). Special intendants were despatched to
absorb the three Hanseatic departments on the North Sea (1812), and
French commissaires were sent to set up four departments in
Catalonia in 1812, in the widespread expectation that the region was
to be annexed.
   In many ways, the most interesting example of the mechanism of
annexation is that of the Illyrian provinces, created out of territories
seized from Austria in 1809. Ruled by a governor-general (Marmont,
then Bertrand), an intendant-general of finances (Dauchy, then
Chabrol) and six intendants, despite a decision in April 1811 to
assimilate the area to the French system of government, Napoleon was
forced to accept its practical impossibility. Culturally and ethnically
remote from the French experience, at the very frontiers of
civilisation, the Illyrian provinces were assigned a special status,
neither a simple military occupation nor rapid annexation, but
necessitating adaptation at a much slower pace than the three months
prescribed to Rudler in the Rhineland or the seven months given to
Gérando in Tuscany.
   Besides annexation, the Empire innovated in terms of techniques of
occupation through the elevation of Napoleon’s family to new and old
thrones. These Bonaparte states resembled the republic-kingdom of
