54   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


individual army corps. The second was the relative indifference of the
Emperor to major aspects of military administration. The latter point
may appear somewhat paradoxical, given the significance of military
attributes in the Napoleonic myth. There is little reason to doubt
contemporary descriptions of the general’s capacity to arouse
boundless enthusiasm and loyalty as he moved among his soldiers at
the Boulogne camp or on the battlefield. And he was intensely
interested (and interfering) in every detail of military uniforms, which
symbolised so well his values of hierarchy and glory. But his
enthusiasms were selective and rarely extended to the humdrum
details of army administration, as can be illustrated by a rapid survey
of the main sectors.
   Recruitment of armies was always a matter of crucial importance,
which (as will be discussed later) demanded central control in terms of
its volume, regularity and methods of enforcement. But, although
subject to the war ministries and involving army officers, it was
essentially a responsibility of civilian administrators—the prefects.
   The strategy of campaigns was even more centralised, in the
person of Napoleon, whose orders were transmitted to the army
commanders by his minister of war and faithful and efficient chief of
general staff Berthier. But this very strategy, which lay at the core of
Napoleon’s military genius, denied the possibility of an effectively
centralised administration of the armies. For the Napoleonic
campaigns were structured around sudden, rapid movements of
armies, often over very long distances, whose unexpected
convergence took the enemy by surprise, so facilitating the decisive
mass attack. For this reason it made no sense to set up an overall,
central intendancy for the military forces, but only intendancies at
the level of the individual army corps. The 1805 campaign in
Germany involved seven army corps, Murat’s cavalry corps and the
Imperial Guard (180,000 men), the 1806 campaign in Prussia six
army corps and the Guard (160,000 men), the 1807 campaign in
Poland seven army corps, two cavalry corps and the Guard (150,000
men), the 1809 Austrian campaign ten army and one cavalry corps,
besides the Guard (200,000 men), the 1812 invasion of Russia
twelve army and four cavalry corps (530,000 men).
   If strategic and tactical reasons underlay this unexpected but real
lack of centralisation, Napoleon’s notorious disinterest in the practical
details of the logistics of his armies helps explain the tardiness and
relative paucity of development of appropriate structures for their
supply and administration. A ministry for war administration had
been created in 1802, under Generals Dejean (until 1810), Lacuée
