                                                 The tools of conquest   53


of Austria and Prussia is significant. Napoleon never proposed
depriving the Habsburgs of their core territories, nor even apparently
tried to subordinate this traditional enemy within France’s direct
sphere of influence. Prussia, on the other hand, was treated brutally
and deprived of its most ‘Europeanised’ territories (Poland), as a
punishment for the irresponsible behaviour of the Hohenzollerns in
1806. It seems likely that Napoleon never wanted to absorb eastern
Europe. By these final years, his involvement in Germany and eastern
Europe was so predominantly geared to warfare, that military
occupation, rather than other techniques of administering territories,
had inevitably returned to the fore.
   The range of methods adopted to administer French-dominated
territories provides the clearest evidence of the continuing uncertainty
and ultimate inability to find a definitive solution to the mechanics of
occupation. This failure to identify and refine a single model of
occupation rendered inevitable the personal intervention of the
Emperor and his direct agents. In a sense, the return to military
occupation—in which Spain acted as a precocious standard-bearer—
can be seen as cutting the Gordian knot, a simplified, exasperated and
appropriately belligerent means of resolving the issue. Each variant in
the mechanics of occupation carried with it immediate and longer-
term implications in the relations between occupiers and occupied.
For the establishment and consolidation of an expanded Empire,
indeed of a Europe modelled on France, depended on the possibility or
impossibility of a prolonged dialogue. Military occupation negated
dialogue.


THE GENERALS
If Napoleon was the most civilian of military rulers, who owed his
undeniable popularity in the Consulate years to his qualities as
administrator and peace-maker, he was a general and under no
illusions that the durability of his regime and its ability to sink roots
was ultimately dependent on military strength. The army remained
the essential tool of the spread of French control and influence. Hence,
given that the upkeep, administration and logistics of the army
constituted the military counterpart to the mechanics of occupation,
one could expect to find a broadly similar pattern of evolution,
growing professionalisation and centralisation. In fact, the parallelism
does not hold good, essentially for two reasons. The first relates to the
very essence of Napoleonic warfare, which rendered ultimately
impossible the centralisation of military logistics above the level of the
