                                                The tools of conquest   55


(until 1813) and Daru, but its responsibilities remained essentially
limited to the coordination of the activities of the individual army
intendancies, the general state services (régies) (for the provision of
bread, meat, forage and hospital services), transport and clothing.12
The intendants-general, successors to the Jacobin representatives on
mission and Directorial army commissaires, were meant to act as the
counterbalance to the army commanders, but already under the
Directory had failed to contain the pillaging of such generals as
Masséna and Augereau. In the Napoleonic years, their performance
was better but certainly failed to keep up with the needs of the troops,
who continued to be inadequately equipped, ill-clothed and often
underfed, with their wages overdue. Napoleon was far from unaware
of these inadequacies, but never got beyond the denunciation of
civilian suppliers he expressed to Dejean in 1807: ‘Our armies will
never be organised until there is a single administrator, until
everything is military…. Until then we shall continue to be at the
mercy of rogues like those we know too well’.13 But it is questionable
whether even militarisation would have been successful, given that
appointment to posts within these intendancies was heavily dependent
on recommendations, particularly by generals, more so than in most
other fields. Stendhal owed his position as war commissaire in 1806 to
his cousin Pierre Daru, then intendant-general of the Grande Armée.
   Compared to the intendants-general and their staff of intendants
and commissaires aux guerres, three other services responsible for the
regular administration of the armies enjoyed a better reputation, not
least because of Napoleon’s interest in their effectiveness. First, a
carefully chosen inspectorate of officers was responsible for the
development of artillery. With the exception of Marmont, their
names—Songis, Lariboisière, Eblé, Sorbier, Drouot—do not figure on
the roll-call of military glory recognisable by later generations through
the literature of the Napoleonic legend and the street names of Paris.
But Napoleon never forgot his origins as an artillery second
lieutenant, indeed he recalled it proudly at a banquet in honour of
Tsar Alexander at Erfurt. Secondly, a distinctive and well-paid corps
of inspectors (‘inspecteurs aux revues’) was created in 1800 in order to
carry out regular reviews that the numbers of soldiers actually present
corresponded to the numbers declared by their officers. Finally, a
special body of military paymasters was set up, appointed by and
exclusively responsible to the ministry of the treasury (not the war
ministries), and subjected to detailed and rigorously applied
regulations (1805) to keep them independent of the army staffs.
Napoleon’s close supervision of this corps was such that in 1808,
