                                               The tools of conquest   65


secretary of the legation at Rome on the recommendation of Fontanes
and Napoleon’s sister Elisa. Chateaubriand later complained that his
duties were as insignificant as those of an office-boy in a prefecture.
But this was hardly surprising, given his disregard for diplomatic
protocol, his predilection for royalist exiles, his romantic
identification with the myth of Rome, and his conviction that he was
predestined personally to reconcile Christianity and politics. As the
ambassador, Cardinal Fesch, wrote in irritation to his nephew, the
First Consul Bonaparte, Chateaubriand was ‘a man launched by a
faction, a Doctor who wants to dogmatise, a writer incapable of
satisfaction just from producing books’.25
   Initially the major beneficiaries of Napoleon’s personal choice of
diplomats were the generals. To represent France diplomatically with
military men was a logical sequence to the coup of Brumaire—and in
some cases compensation for aid received. In twenty-nine diplomatic
postings, seventeen generals were named under the Consulate as head
of mission, and eleven during the Empire. Between diplomatic and
consular posts, seventy-one officers were named as heads over the
entire period. During the brief spell of general peace in 1801–2,
virtually all the ambassadors or plenipotentiaries were generals—
Beurnonville in Berlin and then Madrid, Brune at Constantinople,
Andréossy at London, Clarke in Florence, Mathieu Dumas at Naples,
Jourdan at Milan, Gouvion Saint-Cyr at Madrid, Hédouville at St
Petersburg, Lannes at Lisbon, Macdonald at Copenhagen, Ney at
Berne, Turreau at Washington. Many of them insisted on bringing a
full military ‘household’ with them, causing some friction with the
ministry of foreign affairs about responsibility for the costs. Other
generals, particularly close to Napoleon, were sent on special
missions: Duroc to Berlin, Basel, Vienna, St Petersburg and
Copenhagen; Savary in 1805 to Alexander I as a cover to spy on the
Austro-Russian forces.
   Many of these generals were ill-suited for their diplomatic duties,
and some clearly preferred the battlefield. Gouvion Saint-Cyr
floundered amidst the diplomatic intrigues of Madrid of 1801–2; Ney
found himself a diplomat malgré lui as military commander in
Switzerland, through the failure of his civilian predecessors to work
out a viable constitutional settlement. Brune, like Lannes, tried to
shorten his term of office. Junot at Lisbon, like Gardane at Teheran,
simply abandoned their posts when they heard that the fighting had
started again.
   On occasions these military diplomats were used to impress the
Court to which they were sent: almost all the ambassadors to
