68   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Bignon, resident at Warsaw, made up for the inability of the
ambassadors at St Petersburg, Caulaincourt and Lauriston, to send
reliable information on the Russian forces by setting up a network of
Polish spies in Russia’s western provinces.
   The most continuous function of the diplomats, besides reporting
information, was to act as instruments of propaganda. As Hauterive
stated in 1812:

     One of the responsibilities of the ministry of foreign affairs,
     whenever hostilities commence again, is to prove that France has
     always faithfully fulfilled her commitments to peace and that the
     crime of aggression must be imputed to the governments against
     whom she is at war.28

Regular circulars were sent to all legations outlining the French
viewpoint. Military victories, the solidity of the imperial regime,
Napoleon’s personal popularity, the lies of allied propaganda about
the impact of the Spanish war on French opinion, were main themes
of the diplomats’ united front.
   In allied or satellite states, diplomats were expected, sometimes
even encouraged, to play a more leading role. At Danzig, Massias,
jointly with the military governor Rapp, employed the Danziger
Zeitung as a means to rally opinion. At Warsaw, Bignon was officially
responsible for recruiting and equipping Polish troops, besides his
indefatigable involvement in guiding the creation of the new state’s
administrative structures and persuading the faction-ridden nobility
to work together. In general, the diplomats’ responsibilities in
dependent states were to ensure respect of the blockade and regularity
in payment of subsidies and recruitment of troops. In neutral states,
besides the traditional role of winning a favourable attitude towards
their country, on occasions they reverted to earlier expertise: when
British fleets attacked Copenhagen (1801) and Constantinople (1807)
the French ambassadors, Generals Victor and Sébastiani, hastened to
organise their defences.
   Napoleon’s ambitions necessitated an active diplomatic and
consular corps, not just in Europe, but in the Levant, the United States
and even further afield. The recurrent mirage of the Orient, as much
as the need to neutralise Russia, explains not only his consistent
concern for representation at Constantinople (where generals were
thought more likely to impress the divan), but also the despatch of
Sébastiani on a secret mission to Egypt and Palestine already in 1802,
missions and a legation at Teheran (from 1805), even the nomination
