                                                The tools of conquest   67


ministries; bonuses were given for successful negotiations, as well as
honours and titles. Outward display was of importance to uphold
France’s prestige and justified expense: Andréossy, as ambassador at
London, received 240,000 francs a year, Caulaincourt at St
Petersburg 480,000 in order to maintain an appropriate style.
Napoleon granted Talleyrand’s successor as foreign minister,
Champagny, additional funds, as ‘my intention is that my minister
for foreign affairs should have more livery, ostentation, servants and
ceremony than the minister of the interior’.26 Great stress was placed
on the quality of the highly visible social activities at the embassies,
with fêtes and receptions: Madame Lannes’ balls at Lisbon were
renowned.
    The diplomats served the customary two functions of their
trade—as sources of information and as agents of their country’s
policies—but in a more specific and integrated manner than was the
norm. Despite Napoleon’s correspondence with his generals in the
field and his family sovereigns and his use of experts and spies on
special missions, diplomatic reports remained his main and most
regular source of information about the external world. Napoleon
insisted on daily reports from the minister, as well as the texts of all
important despatches; at one moment he even demanded to see all
the diplomatic correspondence, although he soon accepted the need
to filter the mass of paper within the ministry. As the demands for
information steadily increased, the department reminded its
representatives ‘that they should neglect no detail, however small, if
it can shed light on the state of the country, the spirit of the Court,
the character and attitudes of influential persons’.27 The demands on
the consuls were even greater: no doubt bowing to the statistical
fashion of those years, in 1802 Talleyrand sent a circular to all
consuls, asking for periodic commercial statistics, with a model
questionnaire specifying the information required, sometimes dating
back to 1792. Following the blockade decrees of 1806 ever more
frequent reports were demanded on the state of commerce, shipping
movements, trading practices, food supplies, grain prices, monetary
exchange rates and smuggling.
    High priority was obviously placed on military information. The
Cadix consul-general sent detailed reports on the movements of
British squadrons in 1805; Ornano, consul-general at Cagliari,
reported on the Sardinian army and the island’s fortifications, should
Napoleon decide on an invasion. In 1805 Otto at Munich and Bacher
at Ratisbon sent precise information about the position of the Austrian
armies that enabled Napoleon to trap them at Ulm. In 1811–12,
