                                                 The tools of conquest   61


difficulties of repressing the revolt led to the delegation of civilian
authority by Joseph to a special commissaire, combining military and
civilian powers, with the authority to report judicial abuses (such as
the acquittal of captured ‘brigands’) and make appointments to local
offices. Above all, it was characteristic of Spain, where the inability of
the French armies to inflict a decisive defeat on Wellington and the
guerrilla forces led to a dual system of administration, divided
between Joseph and the more successful generals, with Napoleon’s
connivance.
   The Emperor’s unilateral decision of 8 February 1810 to place
Catalonia, Aragon, Navarre and the Basque country under military
rule in effect subordinated his brother’s authority to that of the
generals. General Barthélemy, for example, ignored the protests of the
civilian intendant at Santander, Aldamar, in exacting 300,000 francs
to cover the costs of his troops, and then imprisoned the unfortunate
administrator of the rentes for trying to carry out his duty. The two
most successful military leaders, Marshals Soult and Suchet, acted as
virtual viceroys for nearly three years in Andalusia and Aragon. In an
attempt to reaffirm his authority, Joseph sent a commissaire with
special powers and the rank of minister to Andalusia, but this royal
representative, count de Montarco, rapidly identified himself with
Soult. Suchet disciplined his troops, ensured honest public accounts
and regular justice and reopened the academy of Zaragoza; but he
refused to accept the nomination by Joseph’s government of a
councillor of state and three prefects to administer Valencia. Such
were the possibilities open to ambitious generals in special
circumstances at the periphery of the Empire. The consequences could
be disastrous, as the military and personal rivalries of these proconsuls
effectively destroyed the unity of action required to defeat the
exceptionally tenacious enemies in the Peninsula. Marbot, aide-de-
camp to Masséna in 1810, recalled disconsolately Suchet’s failure to
assist Saint-Cyr, Victor’s lethargy in supporting Soult’s invasion of
Portugal, the refusal of Ney, Reynier, Soult and Bessières to accept
Masséna’s authority.22
   Employment as administrators would seem to have been more
appropriate to the talents of military officers. Inevitably, some of the
generals closest to Bonaparte were appointed to the council of state in
the early Consulate: Caffarelli, Admiral Bruix, Dejean, Mathieu
Dumas, Gouvion Saint-Cyr, Bernadotte (replacing the uncomfortable
Brune), the former deputies Lacuée and Jourdan. As France’s
territories expanded, the skills of officers in specialised branches were
put to good use. Bertrand was sent to Bavaria in 1805 to train its
