                                                The tools of conquest   63


THE DIPLOMATS
The diplomats constituted a substantial and distinctive group, like the
generals, although their numbers were always far smaller: career
personnel at the ministry at Paris never rose to more than 55 (or 75
including translators and temporary employees), diplomats in the field
averaged around 130, with a further 250 in the consular service.23 The
cost of the diplomatic service was little more than 1 per cent of the
French budget throughout the Napoleonic period. In some respects
these figures provide an accurate reflection of the subordination of the
normal channels of international relations during these years. But they
are misleading as an indicator of the importance of the functions
assigned to diplomats in the Napoleonic vision of the world.
   The ministry of foreign affairs had been badly disrupted during the
Revolutionary years because of its identification with the ancien
regime in terms of functions and aristocratic personnel. By the end of
the Jacobin Year II, France had only four accredited diplomatic
representatives, all in neutral states. Under the Directory, Delacroix,
Talleyrand and Reinhardt reconstructed the professionality of the
ministry, but by Brumaire there were still only eight posts abroad.
France’s diplomatic representation fluctuated along with Napoleon’s
manipulation of Europe’s political geography, expanding or
contracting according to the state of peace and extension of the
Empire’s frontiers. But the relationship was fairly loose, since the
extinction of sovereign states consequential upon the expansion of the
Empire was partly compensated by the creation of vassal states, and
because Napoleon and Talleyrand tended to maintain the traditional
ancien regime pattern of representation, despite the political changes.
Thus, out of a total of twenty-nine diplomatic posts in 1802, there
were nine in Germany, besides Berlin and Vienna; later, eleven posts
were accredited to Rhine Confederation states; in Italy, where
Napoleon progressively swallowed up the former states, he
maintained a diplomatic mission at Lucca, his sister Elisa’s mini-
duchy, as late as 1809. The number of consulates (responsibility for
which had been transferred from the ministry of marine to foreign
affairs in 1793) remained stable at ninety to ninety-five until 1810,
despite annexations and the interruptions of war, as posts were
maintained or newly opened to monitor the economic blockade.
   Appointment to the ministry or to posts abroad, among diplomats
as with generals, was strongly influenced by family patronage and
recommendation. Roederer’s son was one of Talleyrand’s three
personal secretaries; consul Lebrun, minister Chaptal, even Lafayette
