64   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


gave a helping hand to protégés or kin; diplomatic bureaucrats in
service, like Caillard, assisted their relatives. Professional continuity
had survived through the Revolutionary years, particularly in the
persons of Alsatians and Germans, often trained at Strasbourg
University, like Reinhardt, Otto and Bacher. Their presence certainly
assisted the professional and linguistic competence of the diplomatic
representation in Germany throughout the period, just as the earlier
experiences as consul of Hauterive and Dhermand facilitated the
commitment to reconstitute an ample consular network.
   The concern to provide specialist training certainly existed. A
school of oriental languages to train interpreters or drogmans (1795)
was maintained at Paris and Constantinople. Hauterive was
responsible for a school for aspiring diplomats (April 1797): the pupils
needed to know French, Latin, one or two modern languages and the
geography of universal history; they were to be taught public law,
modern political history, the constitutions and ‘statistics of states’, and
above all analysis of reports in order to form judgement and acquire
method and style; they were to serve in both the ministerial bureaux
and abroad. But in practice, less than one-third of these ‘aspirants’
made a career in the service, as advancement (a note from the ministry
observed in 1805) ‘depends entirely on the connections their relatives
have with the persons responsible for nominations or with the
political agents themselves, who normally obtain satisfaction if they
ask that their protégés accompany them on their political missions’.24
An attempt to extend to the diplomatic service the use of the council
of state as a training ground for a future professional class by
reserving posts of legation secretaries to auditors (1806) was
effectively reversed by the ministerial éminence grise, Hauterive, who
utilised it to obtain nomination as auditors for some young diplomats
already in service. In practice, there was no bureaucratic development
of professionalism—except for linguistic requirements—but a
professionalism acquired in the field by a core of long-serving
diplomats, like Reinhardt, Bacher, Helflinger, Jacob or Siméon. In the
consular service, especially in the earlier period of reconstruction, the
stress on experience, continuity and local knowledge—and hence on
family ties—was even greater; only in the later years of the Empire did
military events prise consuls out of their favoured posts in Spain and
Portugal to the cold north German coasts.
   Personal appointment by Napoleon, in so small a corps, inevitably
played a disproportionate influence on career prospects, as he chose
men without previous diplomatic or consular experience. The results
could be disastrous, as in the case of Chateaubriand, nominated
