66   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Constantinople were generals, starting with Brune. Some, under the
Consulate, acted as virtual proconsuls, like Dejean at Genoa or
Jourdan in Piedmont. In other cases, their military qualifications fitted
them particularly to report on potential enemy forces, like Andréossy
at Vienna in 1806, who was accompanied by the future General
Mériage as secretary; both of them were to return in 1809 in military
command of Vienna. Very few were used repeatedly as diplomats, to
the extent of abandoning their vocation: Beurnonville, ambassador at
Berlin (1799) and Madrid (1802), was then retired to the Senate;
Andréossy, a military engineer, served as ambassador in London
(1802–3), Vienna (1806) and Constantinople (1812–14);
Caulaincourt, Talleyrand’s protégé, was regarded as particularly
suited as an ancien regime noble to be ambassador at St Petersburg
(1807–11), subsequently becoming Napoleon’s foreign minister
(1813–14). All in all, Napoleon’s initial experiences of using generals
as diplomatic representatives would seem to have made him gradually
more wary of their suitability.
   Increasingly, with the return of émigré families, especially from
1810, aristocrats resumed their traditional role in the diplomatic
service: between 1800–8 and 1812–13 the proportion of aristocratic
heads of missions rose from one-third to 60 per cent, and at all levels
noble diplomats tended to be younger than non-nobles. The
expansion of the Empire marginally increased the aristocratic element,
as Napoleon appointed the Piedmontese San Marzano to the embassy
at Berlin and the Belgian Mercy-Argenteau to Munich. Turnover
tended to be limited, advancement prospects uncertain, particularly
given these exogenous influences. One consequence was that many
able men, in both the diplomatic and consular services, preferred to
turn elsewhere. Fauvel, vice-consul at Athens, was unperturbed, given
his passion for archaeology. For the young Roederer, foreign affairs
was only a staging post, before his appointment as auditor and then
prefect; Marivault and Jordan followed a similar path. The young
Siméon, after postings to Florence and Rome, took service (like his
father) under Jerome of Westphalia; Jacob moved his career to the
kingdom of Italy; Chateaubriand and the young Portalis, both
promoted rapidly to Rome and Ratisbon, abandoned the service. The
most senior of the consuls, Coquebert, after serving in Hamburg,
Amsterdam, London and Dublin, made his career in the ministries of
the interior and commerce.
   Napoleon never underestimated the importance of the diplomatic
service in France’s international relations. Stipends of foreign affairs
bureaucrats were higher than for corresponding grades in other
