60   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


in the historical record. Among the more able—or more powerfully
sponsored—Napoleon chose to use some in three roles which
demanded different capacities than the purely military: as
commanders of occupied territories, as administrators, or as
diplomats. These roles were not mutually exclusive, for some generals
in the course of their careers fulfilled two or, like Brune, even all three
of such functions. Their employment by Napoleon responded to the
accelerating demands imposed by the dynamism of the Empire, as well
as reflecting the importance assigned to the military.
   Little need be said about military occupation, as its very repetition
must have accustomed commanders to its techniques, which became
increasingly regulated. The underlying principles—maintenance of
public order and exaction of taxes—implied strict control over the
comportment of the soldiers and continuity of administrative
operations. Typical were Napoleon’s orders to Oudinot for the
occupation of Neuchâtel:

     You must go to Neuchâtel and take possession of this principality
     in my name. You will order that all taxes continue to be raised as
     normal. You will take care not to change the customs barriers that
     separate Neuchâtel from France…. You will confirm all the
     authorities in office…. You will ensure the maintenance of good
     discipline. You will settle your troops so that they can rest. You
     will speak well of Prussia. You will print and display the following
     proclamation: ‘In the name of H.M. the Emperor and King, my
     sovereign, I have taken possession of the principality of
     Neuchâtel, which the king of Prussia has ceded him. The troops
     under my command will maintain strict discipline. On the other
     hand, they must be welcomed by the inhabitants with appropriate
     sentiments.’ You will change nothing in the administration until I
     give you new orders.21

The clear concern to obtain at least passive acceptance by the
population—a tenet first applied explicitly and effectively by Brune in
his pacification of the chouan departments of western France in
1800—reflected the negative experiences of the revolutionary
occupations and the permanent worry over undisciplined soldiery.
   If the generals appointed to act as governors of cities or larger
territories regarded their post as temporary and transitional,
particular conditions of warfare offered possibilities to commanders
to transform military occupations into more prolonged and complex
structures of administration. This was the case of Calabria, where the
