72   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


have harmed his subsequent rapid career, which was to end with his
personal accompaniment of the Emperor to St Helena.
    Service in the new vassal states was ambiguous: it could signify
equally a sign of promotion in a promising career, recall from the
oblivion of previous disgrace, temporary banishment, or permanent
exile into the outer circle. Despatch to territories where Napoleon
intended to maintain direct control, by contrast, became an
increasingly professional affair. Sometimes continuity had been
ensured by the appointment of the transitional administrators as the
first prefects, like Shée, Jolivet and Jeanbon-Saint-André in the
Rhineland in 1800; the same method was to be employed with the
transformation of Parma into the department of the Taro by Nardon
(1806–8), and the creation of the Valais into the Simplon department
(1810), where the diplomatic resident Derville-Maléchard became
prefect. Expertise became a requirement, with teams being sent in to
adapt the existing systems to French structures at successive
annexations. In Piedmont in 1801–2, French technicians of finances,
the judicial system, the gendarmerie and ecclesiastical matters were
joined by Prina, the future minister of finances in the kingdom of Italy.
When Liguria was annexed in 1805, not only was the former consul
Lebrun sent to head the team, but so too was the minister of finances
Gaudin, who was subsequently to be despatched to Holland in 1811
with the same task of reorganising the financial system. Daru,
intendant-general of the civil list, was made responsible for the
administration and exaction of the huge indemnity imposed on
conquered Prussia in 1806. Coquebert de Montbret, who had served
in Amsterdam and was an acknowledged expert on Customs and
Excise, was detached from the ministry of the interior on a special
mission to Holland after its annexation to organise the new Customs
line.
    By the middle years of the Empire, service in the newly occupied or
annexed territories became a step in the career of young auditors,
often in place of a sub-prefecture. Bruguière de Barante’s vocal dislike
of his posting as intendant to Danzig, Warsaw and Silesia (1806–7) led
to his downgrading as sub-prefect, before promotion to prefect.
Rouen des Mallets was intendant of Ragusa and Carniole in the
Illyrian provinces for two years (1811–13) before appointment as
prefect; Stassart was intendant of the Tyrol, Elbing, Königsberg, east
Prussia and Berlin (1806–7), before becoming sub-prefect and then
prefect; Cesare Balbo was secretary to the junta absorbing Tuscany
and the consulta annexing the rump of the Papal states (1808–10);
