                                               The tools of conquest   73


Nicolai was intendant at Vilna (1811–12) before becoming prefect of
the Piedmontese Doire department.
   The growing professionalism was reflected in linguistic
expectations. If some of the older French ministers serving in the
vassal states—like Agar and Beugnot in Berg and Siméon in
Westphalia—did not know German, by the later years language
became one of the necessary qualifications. Italian, still the language
of culture, seemed to have presented no problems. But in Germany,
the need for personnel in the new Hanseatic departments and the
continuous occupations led to a major shake-up of French diplomatic
representatives in 1811–12.
   There had emerged a category of senior bureaucrats of territorial
occupations, skilled in the art of inducting newly annexed regions into
the French methods of administration, and able to pass on their
expertise to the young auditors who accompanied them. A few
examples are sufficient to illustrate the point. L.J. E.Dauchy, a
moderate of the Estates-General and Directory assemblies, who had
served as prefect in the Aisne and Piedmontese Marengo departments,
and as councillor of state since 1802, was proposed by Eugene de
Beauharnais as prefect of the newly annexed department of the
Adriatico (Venice). He was then appointed administrator-general of
finances and domains in Dalmatia in 1806, intendant for the treasury
in the junta responsible for assimilating Tuscany in 1808, and then
intendant-general in the Illyrian provinces (1809). F.L.R.Mouchard de
Chaban, whose competence as a prefect successively in the Rhineland
Rhin-et-Moselle and Belgian Dyle departments led to his nomination
as maître des requêtes in 1802, was appointed to the Tuscan junta
(1808), then as intendant of the interior and finances in the Hanseatic
departments in 1810 and intendant-general of finances of the 32nd
military division (north Germany) in 1813. J.M.de Gérando, who had
fled from the Terror to Naples and then from the Fructidor purge to
Germany, was seconded from the ministry of the interior to assist in
the annexation of Genoa in 1805, the Tuscan junta in 1808 and the
Roman consulta in 1809, returning as councillor of state until he was
once more sent into the field as intendant for upper Catalonia.
C.F.Lebrun was sent successively to Liguria (1805–7) and Holland
(1810–13) to supervise their absorption into the Empire. The
reluctance of the young auditor Balbo to serve in the Tuscan and
Roman special commissions of annexation was anomalous. H.C.F.
Barthélemy enthusiastically seized the opportunity offered by his
knowledge of German to serve in a newly absorbed Hanseatic
department; A.Petit de Beauverger specialised in the North Sea area,
