                                                The tools of conquest   75


satellite states—like Bavaria, Holland or Warsaw—French presence
(apart from the military) was normally limited to diplomatic
representation and temporary missions by experts; even in the
Bonaparte family kingdoms (except for Naples), French advisers were
not more than a handful. The role of these local elites, whether in the
annexed territories or the formally independent states, will be
considered later. For the present, in this discussion of the tools of
conquest, it is necessary to look at the composition of the prefectoral
corps responsible for administering the annexed territories.
   Between 1800 and 1814 306 prefects were nominated; we have
details of the careers of 281.33 Political patronage inevitably played a
major role in the initial appointments, given the rapidity with which
ninety-seven prefects were chosen: about twenty prefects had studied
or served with Napoleon in his youth, seven had belonged to the
scientific commission of the Egyptian campaign, two had been
diplomats in Italy. The Beauharnais clan, Lucien Bonaparte as
minister of the interior (aided by Beugnot), Talleyrand, General
Clarke and the two Consuls Cambacérès and Lebrun exercised
considerable patronage, while family and personal relationships
played, as always, an important role. In later years, patronage and kin
remained important, but their effects were more diffused.
   Politically, the prefects were men of the Revolution, few of whom
had administrative experience before 1789. Over 40 per cent of all
prefects had belonged to a Revolutionary assembly, but inevitably as
the years passed the proportion dropped; by 1807 it was 38 per cent,
by 1813 only 23 per cent. Socially, although bourgeois prefects always
remained a majority (61 per cent over the whole period), the
proportion of nobles grew already under the Consulate and early
Empire with the return of the émigrés and the substantial increase in
the number of posts (23 per cent in 1800, 31 per cent in 1804, 39 per
cent in 1808, 41 per cent in 1813). It seems likely that, as in the
diplomatic service, these nobles made careers more rapidly than their
bourgeois peers; it is certain that they were given preference in
nominations to the more important departments.
   But whether noble or bourgeois, administrative capacity was
always of prime importance. About sixty prefects of the initial list had
been members or presidents of departmental administrations, or
commissaires of the Directory supervising these local administrations,
or mayors of large cities. Over the entire period, 32 per cent of the
prefects were recruited from the administration, having previously
served as sub-prefects, secretaries-general, intendants of occupied
territories, bureaucrats, diplomats or consuls; 20 per cent came from
