                                                The tools of conquest   71


what could be described as the outer circle of service, in the new states
created by Napoleon. To be employed in the outer circle was not an
unambiguous proof of success, nor was it without its dangers. Jean-
Claude Beugnot had been recommended by General Beurnonville to
Lucien Bonaparte after Brumaire and had played a major role in the
creation of the prefectoral system, then serving ably as prefect of the
Seine-Inférieure department (1800–6) before being called to the
council of state. As minister of finances in the new kingdom of
Westphalia he felt particularly exposed because of the conflicting
orders of Jerome and Napoleon and returned to Paris within a year; as
commissaire and minister of finances at Berg, he felt cheated when
Roederer was appointed as his superior and secretary of state in 1810
and requested (in vain) to be transferred to Holland. Joseph
Bonaparte’s entourage at Naples was heavily marked by Frenchmen
who had fallen into disgrace: the former Jacobin P.J. Briot (a protégé
of Lucien Bonaparte) was intendant in the Abruzzi, Saliceti (whom
Napoleon mistrusted, but who had once acted as Joseph’s secretary)
was minister of police. Roederer himself, who had rewritten the
Cisalpine constitution, but had then fallen out of favour in 1802 and
been retired to the Senate, was appointed as minister of finances at
Naples only through Joseph’s insistence. Faipoult de Maisoncelles,
who had a chequered career in the Revolutionary years, culminating
as Directory commissaire contesting General Championnet’s creation
of the Neapolitan republic, had been dismissed from his post as
prefect of the Belgian department of Escaut (1808) and was only saved
by Joseph, who appointed him councillor of state in Spain. Gérando
found himself removed from the list of councillors of state, while
serving as commissaire in Catalonia in 1812, like Siméon in the duchy
of Berg.
   For the military, despatch to these outlying vassal states could also
be a sign of disfavour and risky in its consequences. Marshal Masséna,
temporarily out of favour with Napoleon through his financial
malpractices, constantly demanded his recall from Naples. General
Reynier, who had killed in a duel his former superior officer in Egypt,
was exiled to Naples. General Damas had been retired in 1803,
arrested with Moreau in 1804 and managed to remake his career only
through Murat’s insistence that he was the ideal man to create an
army in Berg. General Lamarque refused to follow Joseph from
Naples to Spain as it meant resigning from the Grande Armée: ‘I wish
to remain French’.30 Whether or not Napoleon refused to grant the
Bavarian chief minister Montgelas’ request for the services of General
Bertrand,31 it seems probable that such service in a vassal state would
