74   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


as secretary-general of the commission responsible for the
organisation of the Hanseatic departments (1810–12), before his
appointment as prefect of Ems-Occidental (1813).
   The pace of annexation had produced its professional specialists,
senior bureaucrats of the absorption of conquered territories. Few if
any were appointed specifically with this purpose in mind. Most had
acquired experience in the council of state, where it was not
uncommon for its members to be employed in specialised services or
ministries.32 Nevertheless, if initially their deployment in occupied
territories was the outcome of their duties and skills within the normal
course of administration, they developed into a specialist group. With
exemplary rapidity, they rendered the areas under their control
administratively similar to France, before handing over responsibility
to the prefects. It seems likely that their physical presence in the
territory was as important as their professional training in order to
achieve such radical restructuring. The counterproof is offered by the
principality of Neuchâtel where virtually nothing was changed in
eight years: its ruler, Marshal Berthier, never set foot in it, while his
representative Lespérut spent only a few months there intermittently.
The accumulated experience of these senior bureaucrats presumably
would have been passed on to the generation of auditors. Time was
lacking and was abruptly brought to a halt by military defeat.

THE PREFECTS
Assimilation to the cultural model of France, and even more
absorption within its frontiers, was recognised as a lengthy process. If
military means were necessary to impose French hegemony, only
civilian rule could achieve the broad social consensus on which the
solidity of the regime necessarily rested. Like their Revolutionary
predecessors (or most imperialist ideologists), the most convinced of
the Napoleonic elite do not seem to have regarded the ultimate
achievement of a new Europe fashioned in the image of France as a
chimera, but to have accepted that it would require a new generation
to overcome the deep-rooted superstitions and prejudices inherited
from the past. In the meantime it was the task of the administration to
create the conditions which would facilitate and accelerate the process
of acculturation.
   The prefects personified this responsibility. Obviously they could
not act alone, nor were they judged omnicompetent. Local
collaboration was essential for the functioning of the administration,
from sub-prefects to judges, from financial agents to mayors. In the
