                                                The tools of conquest   77


prefects. There was evidently a deliberate policy of favouring such
appointments, whose evolution can be traced through successive
phases. Initially only Frenchmen were appointed. All the seven
prefects who served in the two departments of former Savoy and
Geneva were French, as were fifteen of the sixteen who served in the
four departments of the Rhineland left bank. The twenty-eight
prefects who administered the nine Belgian departments included only
two Italians and one Belgian. With the annexation of Piedmont, the
policy seemed to change: of twenty-two prefects, nine were Italian, all
except one from the former Sardinian state; two of the nine prefects of
the three Genoese departments came from Genoa. But with the later
annexations in central Italy, such consideration for local appointments
vanished, with only one Italian (and then from a different state) out of
nine prefects. In Holland, because of the particular circumstances,
policy changed again, with seven Dutch and four Belgian
appointments, compared to only three French. In the Hanseatic
departments, evidently for linguistic reasons as well, three Belgians
were appointed, alongside two French.35
   A closer look at the twenty-four ‘new French’ prefects throws
further light on the underlying policies. In Piedmont, the initial
appointments to all six departments were of Italians, all except one
from Piedmont or the ex-Sardinian county of Nice; in three
departments the second nomination was also of a Piedmontese. Two
of these prefects, Angelo Gandolfo and Carlo Giulio, were professors
at the University of Turin; Giulio had been a member of the so-called
‘Jacobin’ triumvirate that collaborated with Jourdan. Giulio Robert,
who died in office as prefect of the Tanaro department in 1803, had
been a member of the Italian deputation to Paris during the 1798–9
retreat of the French armies, in the provisional administration in
1800, and Piedmontese minister to the Cisalpine government. Others
came from noble families, often leading ones—like Giovanni
Francesco San Martino della Motta or P.A.Biamino Arborio—but
always with some previous political or intellectual qualification that
brought them to the attention of the French authorities and explained
their willingness to serve. Thus San Martino, a botanist, was a
member of the Academy of Sciences, who had formed part of the
provisional government in 1800 and of the municipal administration
of Turin in 1801. Vittorio Federico Ercole della Villa di Villastellone,
who had been chamberlain to the king of Sardinia, was nominated by
Berthier to the Piedmontese Legislative assembly in 1800 before his
appointment as prefect to the most important department, that of the
Po, where he served for four years. Giovanni Lorenzo Degregory di
