                                               The tools of conquest   69


of consuls to the Cape and Macao (1802). Given Napoleon’s highly
personal direction of foreign affairs, his diplomatic representatives
enjoyed virtually no autonomy. At most, like Sébastiani in Turkey or
Alquier in Sweden, they were pawns in a vast game of chess whose
credibility could be burnt by sudden changes of diplomatic alliances.
In his relations with states that remained at least formally
independent, Napoleon’s diplomats, like his generals and senior
bureaucrats, were expendable tools of conquest.


THE PROFESSIONALS OF ANNEXATION
Repeated seizures of territory on the scale of Directorial-Napoleonic
France required personnel with particular political and administrative
skills to absorb them. A rapid glance at the careers of some
representative figures involved in the mechanics of occupation offers
some insight into the gradual emergence of a class of civilian
professionals, convinced of the potential of modern administration
and expert in its application. As always, neat classifications break
down before the realities of the overlap of functions and the highly
personalised careers of individuals under Napoleon. But a study of the
men responsible for the civil administration of occupied territories
merits attention.
   Many of the officials involved in the multiple forms of occupation
of the consular and imperial years gained their initial experience as
members of the Revolutionary assemblies sent into the field as
commissaires.29 François-Joseph Rudler had served in the Legislative
assembly before transforming the left bank of the Rhine into four
departments of France; A.-F.Miot de Mélito, a feuillant in 1792, was
commissaire at Florence, Rome and in Corsica in 1795, minister-
plenipotentiary in Piedmont in 1796 and despatched to Holland in
1798; Ange-Marie d’Eymar was a deputy to the Estates-General
before serving as commissaire to the Cisalpine republic in the Year VI
and to the provisional administration in Piedmont in 1798–9; the
notorious Antoine-Christophe Saliceti, fellow Corsican and patron of
Bonaparte, was also a deputy to the Estates-General, as well as a
member of the 1792 Convention, who acted as commissaire in
Corsica, Oneglia and Genoa between 1793 and 1797, and intrigued
unofficially at Genoa, Florence and Rome in 1798–9. With the
exception of Saliceti, almost all these politicians had opposed the
Jacobins and some had had to flee or hide during Year II.
   Besides the assemblies, alternative paths of experience were service
in a ministry or an army, or previous experience abroad. Claude
