84   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


attributed to the influence of priests and reactionary local notables,
manipulating religious superstition and traditional ties of respect and
dependence.
   To what extent were the French authorities aware of the social and
economic crises of the territories they occupied, particularly in the
specificity of their local contexts? In the earlier years of the
Revolution, wherever tensions had climaxed in political revolt, there is
ample documentation that information and rumours about such
episodes circulated widely at Paris, where they were transmuted into
elements of the domestic political struggle. Nor could this be
otherwise, given the presence of political exiles and enthusiasts. Many
of the 40,000 Dutch who had fled their country to escape the
repression that followed the failure of their revolution in 1787 went to
Paris. On the other hand, riots, demonstrations and risings against
bread prices, urban speculators or feudal exactions during the
Revolutionary decade—as in Guipúzcoa, Piedmont or Calabria—
were interpreted in purely political terms. The inevitable lack of
detailed local knowledge combined with the high level of
politicisation to obscure perception of deeper social or economic
processes, be they the decline of the Dutch economy or the antifeudal
struggle of Catalan peasants.
   After Brumaire, characteristic of the Napoleonic years was the
determined effort to collect information about the territories and
peoples under French rule as an instrument of government. There was
a need, in the words of Adrien Duquesnoy, who bore much of the
responsibility for formalizing statistical enquiries in the Consulate
years, not only for a regular flow of information about economic
matters and administrative arrangements but, even more, ‘adequately
precise details about the habits, prejudices, opinions, customs and
energy of the inhabitants, so that the Government can determine the
appropriate measures of surveillance, repression, encouragement and
protection to obtain the best results in each different locality’.1 The
correspondence of the administrators at all levels—from the sub-
prefects as much as from the governors-general and senior officials—
are replete with descriptions and explanations of the areas and
societies for which they were responsible. But here too, now that
politics had become administration, the information was structured in
categories that fixed knowledge into administrative modules. The
formal mould into which the information was ordered and presented,
by its very insistence on a uniform matrix, distanced and inhibited the
possibility of analysis of social and economic relations in localised
contexts. At the same time, it encouraged an indulgence in platitudes
