82   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of departments as an important check, and sometimes counter-
balance, to the civil authority of the prefects. He and his ministers
regularly sent out specialists into these new departments for a range of
purposes. Thus, engineers, mining experts and trade specialists were
despatched to regions of the expanding Empire in order to assess
economic potential.37 With the blockade, agents were sent out to
explore how smuggling could be checked, like the Customs inspector
Catineau La Roche in the Illyrian provinces in 1810 and in Italy,
Germany and Switzerland in the following years. At one point or
another, almost everywhere, spies, like Pellenc in Illyria, were sent to
report on both the administered and the administrators. As the Empire
grew, the complexities of its administration and the contradictions
resulting from the attempt to impose an essentially single and static
model became ever more evident. The prefects, as the central cogs of
this wide-flung machine, were the most exposed to the pressures.

The tools of conquest had been forged over the years as an inevitable
response to the repeated experiences of conquest and occupation. At
Paris the cultural benefits of the French model were never placed in
doubt, but constituted a shared assumption which explains the
unusually corporate unity of vision and which was translated into a
remarkable esprit de corps. But unity of vision and of administrative
action regularly ran up against the bedrock of regional diversity,
whether historical, cultural, economic or social. The experiments of
different mechanisms of control were conceived as means to create
and consolidate acceptance or support, but provoked expressions of
independence. As the frontiers of the Empire expanded, the pressing
insistence on centralisation was contradicted by autonomous
comportments at the periphery. It is to these contrasts between unity
of vision and diversity of practices, between the language of
centralisation and the realities of the periphery, between control and
independence, that we need to turn in order to understand the
Napoleonic conquest of Europe.
