                                              The practices of conquest   85


about social characteristics, an anthology of commonplaces culled
from the philosophes and economists of the enlightenment, sometimes
updated by the more recent writings on the science of man and
progress of civilisation. In lieu of explanation, social groups and entire
peoples were allocated to an appropriately labelled and preformulated
box, as ‘idle’ or ‘industrious’, ‘superstitious’ or ‘enlightened’, ‘feudal’
or ‘civilised’, and so forth.
   Such indifference towards an analysis of the social reality was not
accidental. The concerns of the Napoleonic administrators were not
those of the scholar (even if the more exceptional among them, like
Chabrol or de Gérando, displayed marked scientific interests). They
were of an eminently practical nature, often sustained by a genuine,
albeit Utopian faith in the possibility of arriving at a well-ordered
society. To achieve this end, two complementary routes were
indicated. On the one hand, the experiences of the Revolutionary
decade, including those in occupied territories, imposed an obligatory
and negative reading: they provided clear signposts of what was to be
avoided, especially divided authority, uncontrolled political
expression and social conflict. On the other hand, the French system
of administration, progressively elaborated over the years, constituted
a standard and increasingly mandatory model, whose application was
expected to produce a stable and modern society, freed of the dross of
the past.


THE RESTORATION OF ORDER
Virtually every state brought within the French sphere of influence
carried with it a legacy of recent disruption. Perhaps the only
exceptions were the electorate (from 1806 kingdom) of Bavaria and
the tiny Swiss principality of Neuchâtel. In the former, from the
accession of the young pro-French elector Max-Joseph in 1799, the
leading minister Montgelas accelerated a reforming tradition, then
applying the new system to the territories periodically granted to
Bavaria by grace of Napoleon. In the latter, ceded to Napoleon by the
king of Prussia in exchange for Hanover (1806), Lespérut,
representative of the newly enfeoffed Prince Berthier, warned against
precipitous change precisely because of the stability of the society:
‘One must be cautious about changes with a people which is happy
with its laws and tends to believe that this is because of these laws’.2
   War, invasions, occupations, dismemberment of territory, punitive
indemnities, economic upheaval, sometimes change of regime, were
the causes of the disruption. They were experiences not only of the
