86   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


‘sister republics’ of the Directorial years, from the Batavian to the
Parthenopeian, but also common to defeated states like Spain and
Naples, to regions annexed by France, such as Belgium, the Rhenish
left bank, or Holland, as much as to politically remodelled states, like
the Rhine and Swiss confederations or the grand-duchy of Warsaw.
They were experiences that spanned the entire Napoleonic period,
from the termination of the Batavian (1801) and creation of the
Italian republic (1802) to the occupation of Spain (1808) and the
annexation of the Hanseatic ports and Swiss Valais (1810).
    Whether in territories annexed by France or heavily subject as
satellite states, the administrators called to mark a break with the past
were confronted with two major consequences of the previous years.
First, the deliberate dismantling of political and administrative
institutions within each state, or their progressive decomposition
under external pressures, had created a political vacuum, in which
power effectively devolved from the centre to the periphery, where the
local patriciates and landowners, traditionally incorporating
authority, wealth and reasonably continuous presence, reaffirmed the
authority of municipal and provincial institutions. Secondly, the
political experiences of these years had created deep divisions among
the elites, often as profound as those resulting from the Revolutionary
struggle in France. Where there had been a change of regime followed
by a repressive restoration—as in Belgium, Piedmont, Lombardy or
Naples—the bloodshed and persecutions had added a new dimension
of vendetta to the political enmities between patriots and
conservatives, enmities which already too easily coincided with long-
standing feuds between local factions and families. Even where there
was no restoration, hostility and divisions ran deep among the elites,
whether through the direct experience of revolution—as in the
Batavian republic—or its indirect consequences, in the form of
economic crisis and political humiliation, as in the pro- and anti-
Godoy factions in Spain or the resentment of the smaller bourgeoisie
of Bremen against the city patricians. Perhaps only in the states newly
created by rapid military victory out of formerly separate
sovereignties—like the grand-duchy of Berg, the kingdom of
Westphalia or the grand-duchy of Warsaw—was there no time for
such divisions to sink root; although here, more than elsewhere, local
authority and power was entrenched.
    Confronted with these legacies, the immediate tasks confronting
the new administrators were the restoration of order, the affirmation
of political authority and the acquisition of local collaboration. All
three tasks required knowledge of the area.
