                                                 The tools of conquest   81


Of the ninety-eight prefects who served in the new departments, ten
were appointed successively to two departments and two (Lameth,
Coninck) to three.
   During the imperial years, the period of administrative experience
before appointment tended to lengthen for prefects of the annexed
departments, as elsewhere. Increasingly use was made of auditors,
which tended to reduce the age of prefects. Of the 112 appointments
of prefects in the 44 departments, one-third (37) were of men who had
already served as prefect elsewhere, and a notably higher proportion
who had served as sub-prefects or in equivalent positions. Of these
prefects, twenty had begun their careers as auditors, of whom
seventeen were nominated from 1808 (six in 1813). By these later
years, the experiences of the annexed departments did not differ
significantly from the overall pattern of the Empire, where (as
Whitcomb has shown) the period of previous administrative
experience increased, contemporaneously to a slight fall in average
age, through the steady increase in the number of auditor-trained
prefects.
   It is in the earlier years that the policy towards the new
departments shows its specificity in the care displayed from the outset
in the choice of prefects. Unlike many departments of ‘ancienne’
France, very few of the initially appointed prefects were changed
rapidly. In the twenty-eight departments annexed before 1808, three
of the first prefects died in office within three years, three others were
promoted, and only two were moved out of administrative
responsibility; in all other cases, including the immediate successors of
the defunct prefects, the prefects served from between three and
thirteen years. Stability was characteristic of prefectoral rule within
the annexed departments, already firmly established by the end of the
Consulate and consolidated during the Empire. The only major
changes that can be observed are clearly related to overall policy.
Thus, in preparation for the annexation of the Ligurian republic
(spring 1805), policy towards the entire bloc of Piedmontese
departments was reconsidered: the three surviving Italian prefects
were removed, and the department of the Tanaro was suppressed,
with its prefect transferred to the new neighbouring department of the
Apennins. The replacement of the two prefects of the departments in
former Savoy in 1810 formed part of the far larger turnover of that
year that affected the entire Empire.
   The prefects were not the sole agents responsible for absorbing the
new departments into the French system. Napoleon regarded his
generals in the thirty-two military divisions that incorporated groups
