80   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


seem to be coincidental, and in any case far less significant than other
factors, such as previous experience: Ange-Marie d’Eymar was not
appointed as first prefect of the Genevan department of Léman
because he was born at Forcalquier in the Basses-Alpes, but because as
representative of the Directory in the Cisalpine republic and at Turin
he had acquired considerable knowledge and contacts within the
region.
   The common denominator to the prefects in the new departments
was experience, particularly in the administrative field. It was not
unusual, particularly in the early annexations (Savoy, Belgium,
Rhineland), for men to be appointed in their fifties, like Ange-Marie
Eymar (b. 1747), prefect of Léman 1800–3, whose experience dated
back to the Estates General.36 Indeed in the earlier years young
appointments were the exception, where administrative experience
and often political contacts explained the rapid promotion. Thus
P.J.M.Boucqueau de la Villeraie (b. 1773), a Belgian lawyer, had been
actively pro-French since the Year II and had demonstrated his
qualities as commissaire of the Directory with the central
administration of the Sarre (Years VI–VIII), until his appointment as
prefect of Rhin-et-Moselle at the age of 27 (1800). Even in these early
appointments, under the Consulate, a majority of the prefects had
already served at least two to three years in an administrative
capacity, and some had a prolonged political-administrative past.
Thus, Alexandre de Lameth, a deputy to the Estates-General and
émigré from 1795, had already served as prefect of Basses-Alpes since
1800 before his appointment to Rhin-et-Moselle in 1805; Pierre
Loysel, a deputy of the Legislative assembly, the Convention and the
Council of the Elders, was employed in the registration and demesne
department from the eve of Brumaire until his appointment as prefect
of Meuse-Inférieure in 1802 and then of the Po department in 1805;
the Ligurian G.B.Roggieri, who had first met Bonaparte at
Campoformio, had been the Genoese representative at the Cisalpine,
member of the Ligurian Legislative assembly in 1800, minister of
foreign affairs of the Ligurian republic from 1803 until annexation,
when he became prefect of Meuse-Inférieure.
   Some prefects were obviously regarded as particularly suited or
skilled in the administration of the new departments, as they were
transferred from one to another, like Loysel and Coninck, or Lameth
who moved from Rhin-et-Moselle to Roer (1806) and then to the Po
department (1809). B.V.de Chauvelin, who had served for six years as
prefect of Lys (1804–10), before his appointment as councillor of
state, was then despatched to Catalonia as intendant-general in 1812.
