98   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


The context of Napoleon’s utterance was the resistance of the leading
councillors in his kingdom of Italy to the abolition of the departmental
assemblies. The episode is symptomatic of the difficulties experienced
in exporting the French model of administration. For if the model was
single, the multiplicity of societies to which it was applied meant that
the fit was rarely perfect. ‘The knowledge of facts’ was the
bureaucratic answer. But for reasons of history, administrative
practices, tradition or simply prejudice, even the most enlightened
subjects somehow did not always seem to accept the reasonableness of
the proposals. Behind the impatience of the French and the often
frustrated evasiveness of their local correspondents was the objective
difficulty in each of the territories of the entrenched presence of
juridical categories and institutions that were ill adapted to the new
French laws.

The demarcation of space presented a delicate problem in all the areas
where French authority was established or its influence accepted,
precisely because it incorporated the difficulties and often the
impossibility of reconciling the new and the old concepts. To redesign
the territory of a state in new administrative units conformed to the
French experience not only in practical terms, but also as a symbolic
gesture of rupture with the past. But space has always constituted an
object of jealous attachments and material prerogatives, capable of
opening new wounds or reviving slumbering rivalries. Hence it is not
surprising that the determination to rationalise boundaries should
have aroused opposition, nor that, at the lower level of the communes
where territory, interests and identity were most intimately linked,
such rationalisation should often have been rejected.
   In the areas annexed by France the redrawing of internal frontiers
constituted a deliberate attempt to break with previous political
identity. In the case of former provinces, like the Austrian Low
Countries, Savoy or the fragmented territories of the left bank of the
Rhine, the transformation into departments was straightforward:
Savoy became the department of Mont-Blanc, the nine Belgian
departments were easily drawn up as they corresponded to the main
cities of a highly urbanised region. Where entire states or capitals were
swallowed by France—Liège, Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, Holland,
Rome, the Hanseatic ports—the division into single military divisions
and multiple departments became the exclusive terms of reference in
official and public documents. The pride of the former capitals was
assuaged by tacit recognition of their pre-eminence as the first among
equals. But this was little recompense for the patriots of Liège, capital
