96   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


new administrations. In Italy, Holland, Berg, Naples and Westphalia,
the protest was unanimous against Parisian pressure (backed by
French generals stationed in the territories) for appointments of
Frenchmen. Only in Spain was their presence necessary, given the
unwillingness of local elites to serve. Eugene in Italy and Louis in
Holland resisted most effectively; Murat threw fits of fury at the 2,000
requests for posts he had received at Paris in 1811.23
   These difficult relations between occupiers and occupied were
never satisfactorily resolved, not just because of the relative brevity of
French rule, but perhaps even more because of an increasing
reluctance of Napoleon and his followers to reconcile Parisian
certainties with local expectations, despite the protests of his relatives
and administrators in the occupied territories. There was an
impatience with local inadequacies, expressed revealingly by the
young Stendhal in his private journal, after two years spent in
Brunswick attached to the French war commissiares (1806–8):

     My attitude towards the people of this country has been typical of
     that of a young man, of a true Frenchman, criticising to their face
     what seemed to me criticisable, as if they were philosophers
     without prejudices, and even letting them glimpse my contempt
     for their heavy dullness.24


MODERNISATION OF THE STATE
Brumaire had occurred as a response to the demand for effective
authority. The propaganda of its victors attacked elected assemblies
and eulogised undivided authority. The inevitable consequence was a
deep shift in the concept of representation. Demonstration of popular
sovereignty through the right to vote, already battered and
manipulated under the Directory, was reduced to the symbolism of the
Napoleonic plebiscites and the infrequent exercise of indirect elections
by a suffrage limited to the wealthy and educated. Elected
representatives were deprived of legislative authority, and summoned
to meet for restricted periods in a consultative capacity. At the
departmental level, however, at least in the early years, they retained
an important function—that of expressing public opinion. For Adrien
Duquesnoy, who was responsible for coordinating the activities of the
departmental general councils, such an institution

     had the precious advantage of providing the government with the
     pure expression of public wishes and of making it know the
