90   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


French influence were signposted by the outward march of statistics,
like those ordered by Marshal Suchet in 1810 as military governor of
Aragon, as he settled in for a lengthy stay. Perhaps the most intriguing
example of the success of the French model of ‘state statistics’ was the
1806 short-lived decision by Prussia (which possessed its own
distinguished and autonomous statistical tradition) to set up a bureau
of statistics in imitation of the Parisian one; Jena truncated the
experiment.

The restoration of order required both less and more than the
statistical collection of information could provide. In the immediate
instance, the solution to disorder was armed repression; over the
longer term, the destruction of banditry necessitated a knowledge of
kin and communal networks that escaped official administrative
sources, and usually the police.
   The wars and upheavals of the Directorial years were inevitably
accompanied by the breakdown of order in the countryside. Bandits
and bands were no new phenomenon, and their repression had been
utilised by late-eighteenth-century governments as a means to extend
central authority by the creation of militarised patrols. Wherever there
were frontiers—and hence smuggling—unlicensed carrying of arms
was common and the presence of bands hardly less so. But banditry or
brigandage was not confined to frontier areas. It was traditional in the
mountainous areas of the Mediterranean, where it was normally
contained within the local structures of power. In times of major crisis
of state authority, factionalism destroyed the consent underlying the
exercise of local authority and banditry increased, as in Calabria, the
Pyrenees and the western Alps. Where large armies existed, military
defeat encouraged the rapid diffusion of banditry through
disbandment and desertion, as in Piedmont, Lombardy, Naples and
Spain, or later, during the Napoleonic debacle, across northern
Europe.
   The restoration of order was given high priority during the
Consulate as, in practice and symbolically, it constituted a necessary
condition to win the support of landowners and peasants. Where
whole regions defied authority—as in the Vendée and Calabria—
military force was used. Hoche’s tactics of isolating and destroying the
bases of the counter-revolutionaries in the Vendée were deployed with
some success by Masséna against the brigands in Calabria; at first
Napoleon assumed that a similar response would be adequate in
Spain. Elsewhere—initially in the departments of the French Midi,
Piedmont and the Italian republic, then in every new territory
