                                            The practices of conquest   95


obligation to move to a different department, giving priority to their
family and administration of their patrimony. In the end, a substantial
proportion of Melzi’s aristocratic prefects soon resigned or were
removed through incompetence, as were the Venetian nobles
appointed by Melzi’s successor Eugene de Beauharnais.20
   Melzi’s experiences were reasonably typical, even if he complicated
them by his hatred of Jacobins. Reluctance to serve if this required
physical displacement was general, as it had been initially in France
too. Nor was such reluctance restricted to prefectures. Appointments
to posts as judges were declined for identical reasons, as a judge at
Alessandria (Piedmont) explained his refusal of nomination to the
appeal court at Genoa: ‘Given my personal situation, under no
circumstances could I distance myself from my country and leave my
properties and family…. This promotion would be nothing but a
misfortune for me and would bring me to destitution’.21 Moreover,
administrative capacity was not easily detectable from the personal
friendships, family loyalties or exercise of patronage that lay behind
perhaps the majority of early appointments; which explains the
unusually high proportion of replacements in all states, including
Brumairean France. The result was that in departments and states
with previous revolutionary experiences, like Piedmont, the Italian
republic and Holland, posts in the police and civil judiciary tended to
be thronged with patriots. In countries without such experiences, like
Venetia, Naples, Berg or Spain, it often proved difficult or impossible
to recruit the respectable (and respected), particularly to the more
onerous or less prestigious offices. In Berg, the nobles were unwilling
to serve as judges, as this required legal training and hard work,
according to Beugnot. In the city of Naples the police were accused of
being agents of one noble clan, the Cassano.22
   The situation was aggravated, particularly in the first round of
appointments in each newly administered region, by the preference
given to Frenchmen. In Belgium there was resentment at the exclusion
of locals; perhaps this was the reason for the initial appointment of
Italians (including locals) in Piedmont—many of whom were soon
replaced. Only in the Dutch departments annexed in 1810 was there
a notable continuity of personnel from Louis’ reign, as a sop to the
strong tradition of national independence. Throughout the annexed
departments, preference was given to Frenchmen for the senior posts
in the financial administration and criminal judiciary. Outside the
Empire, the situation was if anything worse, given the contempt for
locals of many of the senior French in charge of the territories and the
expectations of their compatriots of jumping on the bandwagon of the
