                                              The practices of conquest   91


conquered by the French—the most obtrusive manifestations of
banditry were rapidly suppressed by the creation of a corps of military
police, the gendarmerie, recruited locally and stiffened by a leavening
of seasoned French soldiers. General Wirion organised the
gendarmerie in the Belgian departments, the Vendée (following
Hoche’s military campaign) and Piedmont, where he insisted with the
Parisian ministry of war on a large enough force of veterans of the
Italian campaigns. Protection of the main roads and patrols in most
turbulent areas were normally adequate to restore order relatively
rapidly—as in Belgium, Piedmont, the Italian republic or Tuscany.
   The effectiveness of the repression of bandits and brigands was
dependent on the scale of the phenomenon and the attitude of the
local population. In Calabria, the difficulties of penetrating the
inaccessible Sila mountains, the vicinity of British-controlled Sicily
and the collusion of large numbers of landed proprietors encouraged
a vigorous brigandage: long after Masséna’s military repression, the
gendarmerie General Manhès was deploying three mobile columns to
fight pitched battles with bandits. In Catalonia, the distinction
between brigands and guerrillas was often a fine one, and rendered the
restoration of order permanently fragile: for patriotic resistance
enveloped and cloaked episodes of simple banditry, while hostility to
the French was so widespread that it proved impossible to create a
gendarmerie. By contrast, in Piedmont even tightly organised bands
near the Ligurian border, like Scarzello’s at Narzole, were ultimately
destroyed when local support was withdrawn. If salt smuggling could
never be eliminated, as Napoleon himself acknowledged,12 the active
cooperation of local landowners, organised as national guards, had
restored a tranquillity to Piedmont by 1808 which remained
undisturbed even when French power collapsed in 1814. Presumably
the apparent absence of banditry of a serious nature further north in
Europe—from the Rhineland to Berg, Westphalia, Holland and the
Hanseatic departments—can be explained in terms of the rapid
handover or seizure of power, the established authority of local elites,
and the presence of substantial military forces. In these regions, the
main concern of the gendarmerie (as also in Piedmont or the kingdom
of Italy) was to enforce conscription and search for smugglers.
   The safety of citizens in their persons and property lay at the very
core of the Napoleonic settlement. It constituted the complement to
the Revolutionary affirmation of the monopoly of public power by the
state. It implied respect for the due processes of law. In the light of the
gross infractions of respect for legality of Napoleonic rule—from the
kidnapping and execution of the duke of Enghien to the practices of
