94   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


idealist of 1794 and determined but frustrated minister of finances of
the Batavian republic of 1798–1801, by 1804 was calling for

     an energetic government which…does not have to be in conflict
     with subaltern bodies and which is not obstructed by every kind
     of provincial claim, but is limited only by some rules and may
     proceed freely so long as it does not infringe them.19

The problem was that various of the new leaders appointed by
Bonaparte—Melzi as vice-president of the Italian republic, Menou as
governor-general of Piedmont, Schimmelpenninck as grand
pensionary of the Netherlands—were hostile to the patriots and
maintained that the employment of men too openly identified with the
previous governments would frighten off the moderate and
conservative land-owners and notables. Melzi was obsessed with the
need to make a break with the past, vetoing candidates who had
served in the Cisalpine assemblies or (even worse) been deported by
the Austrians in 1799. The experience of the Batavian republic was
still recent enough in 1805 for Schimmelpenninck to agitate the
spectre of ‘anarchists’. In reality, at least in the states where the
restoration governments of 1799 had displayed their persecutory zeal
for vendetta, a more likely reason for the reluctance to serve of the
hitherto politically neutral was prudence—at least until Bonapartist
rule proved its durability. As the years passed and the Napoleonic star
continued to rise, the problem seemed to disappear. Fear of so-called
‘Jacobins’ was of major importance in Belgium, Piedmont, the Italian
republic and Switzerland; by 1806 Joseph was appointing some
genuine Jacobins to posts in Naples (including Bonaparte’s early
patron Saliceti as minister of police). In Spain, where the patriot
experience of the 1790s had never occurred, it was fear of popular
vengeance that effectively discouraged collaboration with the French.
But the suspicion and resentments that resulted from the attitude of
leading families and individuals towards collaboration were to mark
the years of the Restoration, as evoked so tellingly in ‘The Chartreuse
of Parma’.
   Where patriots were excluded, it became even more difficult to
appoint capable and willing men, particularly at the higher levels.
Melzi’s correspondence with his foreign minister Marescalchi at Paris
is replete with complaints about the reluctance of wealthy, noble
landowners or urban patricians to accept appointment as prefects.
Some were so wealthy that the not insubstantial stipend of 20,000–
24,000 lire was only a relative attraction. Most refused because of the
