92   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


conscription—such a statement may seem to ring hollow. Extreme
situations were regarded as justifying extreme solutions. Thus military
tribunals were employed in the repression of revolt or what was
defined as brigandage (an elastic term, which made the accused liable
to the additional, serious offence of association). But even such an
exceptional procedure could backfire—as in the failure to convict
those accused of responsibility for the Bologna revolt of 1802 or the
judicially debatable suppression of the Scarzello band in 1808—
because of inadequate knowledge of criminal law.
   There can be no doubt about the constant concern of the civilian
administrators to protect the citizens from arbitrary actions. At a
general level, respect for the private sphere of citizens acted as an
ultimate but effective constraint on the expansive aspirations of the
administration. In the day-to-day handling of affairs, the tendencies of
those directly responsible for the maintenance of order to ignore or
infringe the legal rights of citizens was a continuous source of friction.
Whether inside or outside imperial frontiers, there was a litany of
protests from prefects and rulers against the abuses of the military or
corps like the gendarmerie, Customs officials and officers of the
alcohol and tobacco monopolies (droits réunis), with quasi-military
functions and comportment. In Piedmont, the readiness of the
governor-general Menou to impose collective fines or quarter
gendarme mobile units on villages suspected of collaborating with
bandits was opposed by the prefect and overruled by the minister of
the interior in 1807, because this punished the innocent with the
guilty. D’Auzers, head of the police in Piedmont, condemned the
comportment of the tax officials in 1809:

     I am inundated by complaints against the droits réunis…some of
     their petty agents are gallows birds, recruited from the dregs of
     society…. They entangle the peasants in a maze of laws or
     regulations that these poor wretches cannot hope to know or
     understand; they threaten them with legal proceedings, they
     frighten them too, even over the most simple matters and…by the
     use of such odious means, exact a sort of tax on ignorance and
     weakness.13

In Lombardy, the viceroy Eugene ordered the chief judge to respect the
rights of individuals accused of involvement in the 1809 risings: ‘I
shall say no more than tell the Minister that the circumstances do not
justify the violation of due forms and hence I recommend he ensure
that respect for procedure and prosecution of the guilty march
