                                            The practices of conquest   93


together’.14 The Dutch were shocked by the behaviour of tax officials
and gendarmes following the annexation of their country. As Gogel
complained, ‘The Dutch public has always been accustomed to being
treated according to the letter of the law’.15 The reconciliation of the
maintenance of order with respect for legality was essential for the
civilian administrators as an affirmation of political authority. It
represented a precondition of the search for a social base of
acceptance, if not of collaboration.

From the outset, the new administrators of the territories annexed by
France or set up as sovereign states were dependent on local
collaboration. There was rarely, if ever, any lack of administrative
personnel at the middling or lower levels. On the contrary, the
immediate and pressing problem was how to reduce the exuberant
number of public employees, which was a common feature to the
former regimes, whether or not affected by revolutionary upheavals.
In France, after Brumaire, Lucien Bonaparte had slimmed down the
ministry of the interior from 345 to 66.16 Melzi, vice-president of the
Italian republic, found the administrative offices of the Cisalpine
swollen with politicians persecuted or deported during the Austrian
restoration. Beugnot observed of Westphalia that ‘administrative
posts are the old perquisite of a class of poor nobles. Such posts have
multiplied far beyond the need’.17 Joseph of Naples, reporting to his
brother, immediately noted that ‘the great scourge of this country is
the wholly excessive number of employees; I shall be obliged to
discharge many of them’. 18 In fact, his administrative reforms
threatened half the civil class with unemployment.
   The difficulties confronting the new administrators were of a
different nature: how to choose collaborators who would be at one
and the same time politically impartial, administratively capable and
willing to serve.
   The political divisions of the previous years made social
reconciliation a prime necessity for future stability, as Bonaparte had
demonstrated in consular France. The same conditions prevailed in
virtually all the regions annexed by France, as well as the newly
conquered states, with the exception of Germany, where only the
Rhineland had been seriously affected by the Revolution. The patriots
and politicians of these countries, disillusioned by the Revolutionary
fragmentation of authority or adapting adroitly to new times, were
ready to support an administration with extensive executive powers,
even at the expense of political representation. Isaac Gogel, the
