                                            The practices of conquest   99


of the Ourthe department, whose former principality was truncated,
despite their protests, to the advantage of Dyle. Geneva, formally
reduced to capital of Léman, was allowed to conserve privileges
unknown elsewhere in the Empire, more because of its unique prestige
in late-eighteenth-century Europe than for its economic importance.
Rome was given the title of second capital of the Empire, which not
surprisingly was regarded as insulting by the nobility of the former
capital of Christianity. But Catalonia, whose latent sense of national
identity was stimulated by the French occupation, was divided into
four departments, with its administrative capital even displaced from
Barcelona to Gerona.
   Political overtones thus coloured the division into departments,
which constituted the essential unit for all purposes of administration.
Less desirable, because of its negative consequences on social
reconciliation, was the major discontent generated among the smaller
cities by the new administrative divisions. Attempts to soothe
provincial feelings were made by proposing the formation of
numerous sub-prefectures. But for reasons of administrative costs
their numbers were rapidly reduced: in Piedmont from thirty-one to
twenty-one (1801). The choice of Hamburg, Bremen and Osnabrück
as capitals of the Hanseatic departments on the Baltic offended
Lübeck, Oldenburg and Lüneburg (1810).
   Outside France a distinction needs to be made between newly
created states and those which continued to exist but where the regime
was changed. In the former, carved out of the territories of various
states with radically different institutions and administrative
practices, departments and sub-prefectures were created. In Berg and
Westphalia, their boundaries were marked—as in France eighteen
years earlier—by attempts to achieve a rational balance between space
and population, where administrative centres would be within
reasonable access of all inhabitants. In the republic-kingdom of Italy,
where historical traditions remained strong, the same pattern and
problems emerged as in the annexed departments of France: on the
one hand, official ostracism of all references to earlier ‘national’
identities, with the division into departments of the former territories
of Lombardy, the Papal States and Venetia; on the other, discontent of
urban oligarchies at Bologna and Venice, offended at their relegation
to the level of other departments.
   The experience of the states whose political identity was
maintained without rupture is revealing of the sensitivity of the
administrators towards the rhetorical and emotive appeal of local
identity. In Naples, Joseph stressed the continuity with the previous
