                                             The practices of conquest   107


as an alternative model. A jurist, von Allmedingen, expressed the
general reluctance in a highly Germanic form: ‘Perfect laws are the
beautiful and free forms of the interior life of a nation: they come out
of life itself. The Civil code has not come out of the life of the German
nation.’ 37 Introduction of the code was impossible without
reorganisation of the judicial system. The one and the other touched
so close to the orderly functioning of civil society that even reforming
Bavaria took care not to adopt them.


ADMINISTRATION AND SOCIETY
Administration could yield its positive effects only through a detailed
knowledge of society and its leaders. Statistical enquiry was the
instrument to provide the factual information about society—the
resources, economy and institutional organisation of an
administratively delimited area. The range of such enquiry could be
extended, given the ethnographic curiosity about the science of man
and earlier stages of civilisation, to descriptions of social practices and
even physical appearance. But the observations remained extremely
general, as they were predominantly confined to the behaviour of the
common folk, by definition anonymous. The conduct of elites was
normally too familiar to require comment, except in so far as it related
to the public sphere. Their attitude towards the French, their level of
education or religious prejudice might merit a prefectoral note, but
not their forms of sociability except in so far as these contained
implications for the conduct of the administration.
   On the other hand, effective administration also demanded the
identification of those individual members of the local elites who were
judged to possess particular qualities. Napoleonic rule displayed an
unquenchable thirst for lists of persons deemed worthy of attention
because of their wealth, family, reputation, talents or other merits.
Such lists were essential for a multiplicity of purposes—to appoint to
administrative posts, to classify the richest and most respectable, to
gauge attitudes towards the regime, to identify economic
entrepreneurs or philanthropists, or (most common of all) to present
the names of those from whose ranks would be chosen the members
of representative or consultative councils at all levels. The
departmental lists of the thirty or the six hundred paying the highest
taxes, of the sixty ‘citizens distinguished by their civil and private
virtues’, or ‘the most outstanding’ or ‘remarkable persons’, of the
candidates for appointment to the judiciary, the communal, sub-
prefecture and department councils, to the local consultative
