104   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


commissioners who proved incapable of exacting the obedience of the
town regents. The following years of the Regency of State (1801–5)
witnessed the full restoration of the urban patriciates. As Gogel
complained:

      The present government succeeds in combining the worst…by
      having an infinity of governments all endowed with constitutional
      laws and separate powers, so that the departmental councils
      dispute with the government and the towns and communes with
      those first councils. All power is disposed to self-extension.

It needed the bankruptcy of the cities, through falling revenues and a
rising wave of pauperism, for the Dutch burghers to accept the
dependence of local administrations on central government.32
   Fiscal reform was the touchstone of Napoleonic modernisation of
the state. It signified the emancipation of the state from the throttle-
hold of spiralling public debt that characterised the ancien regime
governments and consecration of its role as sole tutor of legal equality
through the fair distribution of taxes. Precisely because it touched so
many interests, of individuals and categories, its implementation was
massively difficult. Roederer, former member of the Constituent
assembly’s taxation committee, as Joseph’s minister of finances in
Naples, was fully aware of the immensity of the issues, which he
described as ‘not so much a question of the administration of finances
but rather the creation of an administration’. The only method was to
utilise the existing fiscal mechanisms through which to introduce the
new system: ‘I departed as little as possible from the practices of the
Revenue office and its agents…. The basis for every projected tax
already existed at Naples, the form I proposed to adopt came from
France.’33
   Not surprisingly, given the common enlightened matrix, there were
many points of similarity between the French model of public finances
and taxation and those of reforming states such as Lombardy,
Tuscany, some Swiss cantons, and even Naples (as Roederer
observed). The comprehensive reform of the fiscal system in the
Netherlands, which the great finance minister Gogel finally managed
to impose in 1806, and which spread the burden of taxation more
uniformly between provinces and among social groupings within each
province, owed more to Gogel’s earlier abortive reform of 1801 than
to the French. The existence of such earlier or contemporaneous
reforms rendered assimilation to the French system easier, particularly
in the Consulate years, when the pressure of taxation was still
