                                            The practices of conquest   101


economy (manufactures and commerce), or matters affecting the
judiciary (justice) or revenue (treasury). In fact, since appointments to
posts or honours were based on the names proposed by the prefects,
all ministries (except foreign affairs) were to a degree reliant upon
them. However comprehensive the prefects’ responsibilities, their
jurisdiction did not extend over all the representatives of the state. The
generals in charge of the thirty-two military divisions of the Empire
acted not only independently, but also on occasion in rivalry with the
prefects. The judiciary, from the tribunals and assize courts in all
departments to the thirty-seven appeal courts and the supreme court
at Paris, responded to the minister of justice, in homage to the
Revolutionary principle of the separation of powers. The numerous
financial employees responded to their hierarchical superiors and
turned to the prefects only for support in carrying out their duties. The
police, including the directors-general at Rome and Amsterdam and
the directors responsible respectively for the Piedmontese and Tuscan
departments, were subject to the minister of general police, whose
authority also extended over the thirty gendarmerie legions. In theory
separated by the precise nature of their responsibilities, in practice the
presence of these officials in the departments easily generated friction
or conflict with the prefect, because of overlapping spheres of
competence and the impossibility, to a greater or lesser degree, of any
of them acting without his knowledge and involvement.
   It was the duty of this army of functionaries to ensure the rapid
execution of those general laws and specific measures by which the
government intended, on the one hand, to complete the Revolutionary
task of liberating the economy and society from obstacles to free
initiative, and on the other hand, to force the pace—within the legal
limits of a respect for property and persons—in the direction of its
own model of modernity. To the student of the Napoleonic civil
administration, there can be no doubt about the care and seriousness
with which the laws and decrees were discussed and prepared, any
more than about their lack of novelty in terms of the juridical and
economic ideas circulating since the later eighteenth century.
   The most publicly spectacular measures had already been passed in
the earliest phase of the Revolution. Napoleonic legislation was
elaborated in the more discreet environment of the council of state
and the ministries. But, like the Revolutionary reforms, it derived
directly from the pre-Revolutionary discussions, both within and
outside France. This can be illustrated by the two most radical
initiatives of the Napoleonic period—the reordering of finances and
the legal codes. The separation of finances from the administration
