106    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


thoroughly than in France. Once again, the effectiveness of reform—
in this instance the distribution of the land-tax—was closely tied to
the collaboration or obstructive capacities of the landowners and local
administrators. In regions where feudalism was strong (even in
Naples, let alone in Bavaria or much of Germany), fiscal reforms were
impaired and distorted, at the expense of the socially weak.
   For Napoleon, the civil code possessed universal value. He brooked
no delays in its introduction in the territories he annexed and exerted
notable pressure on family and friends in favour of its adoption. He
ordered its introduction into the grand-duchy of Warsaw, Hamburg
and Danzig. On 31 October 1807 he instructed Joseph and Louis that
‘from 1 January the Napoleonic code becomes the law of their
peoples’. Champagny, his foreign minister, explained to the rulers of
Bavaria, Hesse-Darmstadt and Baden that the code

      is an object of study and admiration throughout Europe by
      everyone concerned with the science of laws…. It is not just a
      great empire that feels the need for a uniform legislation. There
      are few states, even small ones, where the differences in customs
      do not create difficulties for transactions and damage the
      execution of justice in civil matters. This is even truer for
      Germany than for other countries. Many states and provinces
      formerly ruled according to their own laws and those of the Holy
      Roman Empire are now under a new rule and united to other
      states with an entirely different legislation. Hence the adoption of
      the Napoleonic code will be a blessing for the peoples of these
      states as it will eliminate the variety of customs that rule them.34

Napoleon, in his more imperious moments, aspired to iron out and
render uniform laws, customs and practices. After all, as he explained
to Louis, the Romans had imposed their law on their subject peoples,
why should not the French do the same with the Dutch?35
   Precisely for the same reasons his brothers and allies resisted his
urgings. In Westphalia, his writ ran free. In Holland and Naples, Louis
and Joseph finally submitted, but modified sections of the code which
conflicted with local juridical principles and practices. Beugnot
proposed to introduce it gradually into Berg; when he was overruled
and the code took effect with less than two months’ advance notice,
the local mayors resigned in mass against the obligation personally to
view all corpses and newborn babes.36 Baden accepted the code, with
modifications. Bavaria and others within the Confederation of the
Rhine resisted, pointing to the example of the Prussian code of 1794
