108   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


chambers of arts and commerce and bureaux of philanthropy, to the
imperial guards of honour, were compiled to meet the demands of
central government.38 An expanding and ambitious administration
knew no bounds to its search for personal information about the
elites. By the later years of the Empire the ministers of police, Fouché
and Savary, asked the prefects for ‘personal and moral statistics’: For
reasons of social order, the government needs to know who are the
most influential persons. Since, in general, wealth is the basis of the
greatest influence, it is of interest to the government to identify all the
rich families, without exception’, including information about
unmarried daughters and their likely dowry, their physical
appearance, qualities and religious principles.39 In this case at least,
such police files remained incomplete, partly through the reticence of
the prefects to violate the privacy of respectable citizens beyond the
immediately practical needs of administration.
    While these lists were ordered by the central government, they also
acted as a means of acquiring knowledge of local notables essential to
a prefect for the smooth discharge of his responsibilities. The annual
tour of the department which formed part of the prefect’s duties
served the same purpose. It enabled the functionary to assess the
public spirit through his personal contact with those regarded as
opinion-makers in an essentially static society. Who these leaders were
and how they were to be approached was specified with unusual
precision by Di Breme, minister of the interior in the kingdom of Italy,
in his instructions of 1807:

      Furthermore, they shall ensure that they get to know those
      persons whose capacity, morality and attachment to the
      government indicate that they will be best able to discharge the
      duties of podesta, mayor or registrar…. Prefects will pay
      particular attention to find out about public opinion…. They will
      ensure that they get into conversation with various persons and
      lead them to explain their attitude frankly and in confidence…. In
      each commune, they will note those persons who have most
      influence over the common-right peasants; and will take care to
      find out whether they are attached to the government, through
      sentiment, principles or other reasons, or if their conduct makes
      them suspect of contrary opinions. Above all they will obtain the
      most exact information about the behaviour and opinions of the
      parish priests and other ministers of religion, whose ministry puts
      them into a position to be useful, if good, or harmful, if bad.40
