100   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


regime, accepting the provinces created by Zurlo in 1801 and
employing the traditional terms of districts, compartments and
universities for the sub-divisions, with intendants in place of prefects.
In the Netherlands, the attempt of the centralising Batavian republic
of 1798–1801 to eliminate the historical identity of the provinces by
the creation of new departments barely lasted two years; and when
King Louis reintroduced departments, he paid attention not to change
the boundaries of the provinces. In Frankfurt, the ruler of the new
grand-duchy, Dalberg, took care to create departments whose
boundaries respected the historical prerogatives of the cities (1810). In
Bavaria (where there was no change of regime), Montgelas,
enthusiastic and active reformer in the Bonapartist mould, waited
until the apparent security of the peace of Tilsit to consolidate the
enlarged kingdom by the abolition of all the old names except Bavaria
and the creation of new administrative units, on the basis of statistical
enquiry into their geography and population.

The French model of administration was hierarchical and centralised.
It assumed, as Roederer expressed it with that penchant of politicians
for recent scientific terminology, that ‘the executive chain descends
without interruption from the minister to the administered and
transmits the law and the government’s orders to the furthest
ramifications of the social order, with the rapidity of an electric
current’.28
    At the centre, the council of state combined legislative and
judicial functions with political advice; the ministry of the interior
was responsible for all administrative matters except in those sectors
for which a specific ministry existed. Alongside the interior, war (for
which Napoleon created three ministries) and foreign affairs,
finances represented the most important ministry, which under
Gaudin’s uninterrupted direction retained total autonomy from all
other branches of the administration. The central administration
grew in size and complexity over the years, in consequence of the
wars and the growth of the Empire. Auditors and maîtres de requêtes
were added to the council of state, the number of ministries
increased to twelve; under Montalivet, the ministry of the interior
rose to about 220 staff.
    In the departments, prefects and sub-prefects represented the
administration. Directly responsible to the ministry of the interior,
their very role as sole representatives of central authority inevitably
involved them in functions relating to other ministries, over
conscription (war), public opinion (police), religion (cults), the
