                                            The practices of conquest   105


contained. Elsewhere, as in Germany, the impact of the French
reforms was immediate and radical, in that it implied the separation of
public from domain or Crown revenues, the destruction of feudal
privileges and the compilation of land cadasters. For Roederer, always
an optimist, the land tax destroyed feudalism and encouraged
smallholdings in Naples. In Poland, Illyria and parts of Germany,
however, feudalism remained so strong that it prevented the effective
functioning of the French reforms.
   In the end, the French model of public finances was adopted, albeit
with variations, in virtually all Continental states except Russia and
the Ottoman Balkans. Public finances were legally regulated, fiscal
administration was restructured, budgeting was introduced, unified
and rationalised and simplified systems of public expenditure, revenue
and debt were adopted. Over the longer term, these reforms laid the
bases for modern systems of public finance. But at the time, their
impact and success was far from uniform. A general reason for this
was the rapidly rising increase of demand on revenue to meet the
military requirements of Napoleonic hegemony. In all the states public
debt—the cause of the breakdown of ancien regime finances—
increased vertiginously, particularly from 1806–7. In the kingdom of
Italy, revenues increased by 50 per cent between 1805 and 1811, while
the deficit rose from 1 million to 5 million lire. In the German states,
the increase of the public debt was on an even greater scale. If direct
taxation remained structured around the land and moveable property
taxes and trading licence (foncière, mobilière and patente), the
number, pressure and proportion of indirect taxes relative to overall
revenue rose steeply. Some of these taxes, like that on salt or customs
duties, were common to all states; others, like the French tobacco
monopoly, were applied only in some states, such as Berg. But
everywhere their collection incited official abuse and popular hostility.
It was not coincidental that Customs and droits réunis officials,
alongside gendarmes, were the object of popular assaults at the
moment of collapse of Napoleonic rule in 1813–14; nor that the only
minister to be murdered by a mob was Prina, Gaudin’s counter-part in
the kingdom of Italy responsible for public finances.
   It seems likely (although it is still virtually impossible to
demonstrate, in the absence of detailed studies of its impact on the
distribution of wealth) that in their adoption of the French fiscal
system, these states replicated its structural inequalities, possibly on a
greater scale. Land cadasters were compiled with great haste, once
Napoleon urged their completion in 1807, sometimes with the
assistance of French technicians, and almost certainly far less
