                                            The practices of conquest   103


eighteen months passed between Piedmont’s ‘preparation’ for the
French system under General Jourdan (April 1801) and its annexation
(September 1802); Lebrun was given six months to adapt Liguria
(1805), as was the consulta responsible for Rome (1809); within six
weeks of the decision to introduce French legislation into the
Hanseatic departments, the imperial printing office produced copies
of complete collections of French laws and decrees in French and
German that amounted to 32,000 volumes.30 More interesting as
illustrating the attractions and difficulties of exporting the French
model of administrative centralisation are the experiences of the states
within the Napoleonic sphere of influence. Three themes provide
illuminating examples: centralisation, fiscal reform and the civil code.
    A centralised structure of administration was the aspiration of all
eighteenth-century regimes. Hence it is not surprising that councils of
state, prefects and sub-prefects should have been adopted (with
minimal variants in form and terminology) with alacrity by the rulers
of these states. The problems of translating these structures into the
exercise of power can be located on the one hand in the effective
authority of the prefects and, on the other, in the degree of autonomy
of the lowest level of the new organisation, municipal administration.
    In the Italian republic, where Melzi enjoyed a notable degree of
autonomy, the prefects’ authority was potentially restricted by the
presence of two lieutenants, chosen among the local notables, and
effectively counterbalanced by a departmental administration with
vaguely defined powers and real financial control. There can be no
doubt about Melzi’s tendency to identify with his peers of the urban
patriciates. However, he saw an objective need to reconcile the new
French institution of the prefect with the traditions of local self-
government by oligarchies whose powers had been reinforced by the
Habsburg reforms.31
    In states with federalist structures, like the Low Countries or Swiss
confederation, the same problem presented itself even more acutely.
The unitarian patriots of the Helvetic republic (1798) had invented
prefects even before Brumaire. But they lacked the strength to break
the hostility of the merchant and professional bourgeoisie of the cities,
who returned to power with Bonaparte’s restoration of cantonal
autonomy in the Mediation of 1803.
    The Dutch experience initially seemed to follow a similar
trajectory: in a country whose national independence was equated
with provincial and municipal autonomy, the energetic patriots of
1798–1801 managed to set up only the embryo of a French-style
structure, with national agencies at the centre and local
