                                            The practices of conquest   113


reluctance to assume responsibility often depended on attitudes that
were extraneous to the new order, and the new issues that now
appeared were only gradually mediated into terms and interests of
relevance to the local leading families. In the small town of Werden in
Berg, the local notables forced the resignation as mayor of the local
innkeeper, who was judged to have stepped out of place.48 In southern
Piedmont, the refusal of royalists to serve alongside patriots was not
simply political, but covered longer-standing local family rivalries;
after years of French rule, the same men would unite as natives of
Mondovì to attack an outsider, ‘who has little consideration for local
men’.49
   In the newly annexed departments, the French authorities were
aware of the dangers of being sucked into such introspective local
affairs. Two examples can be given—the redrawing of communal
boundaries and measures of administrative policing (haute police).
Abstract rationality and the practical needs of cadastral measurements
for fiscal purposes argued in favour of rectifying the illogical confines
of communes. In Piedmont, the prefects applied themselves with
dedication and tact to negotiate between communes for exchanges of
territory or settle age-old disputes. Such was the wasps’ nest that their
endeavours provoked that finally the council of state itself decreed the
boundaries should be left untouched.50
   A similar caution was displayed in the use of measures of haute
police, punishment imposed by the administration without trial, in
response to requests from local officials or even individuals. Haute
police was used by the French in Piedmont or Tuscany as an
instrument to achieve calm or reconciliation where unrest or divisions
existed between or even within families. Acceptance of the
impartiality of the French as an outside authority was an essential
condition of ralliement. The evidence of success was to be found in the
slow acceptance—first in Belgium and the Rhenish departments, from
1806–7 in Savoy and Piedmont—by leading noble families of
appointments as mayor of a city or president of the departmental
electoral college.
   It would be inaccurate to conclude that reluctance or resistance was
universal at the local level. There were always some who were
convinced of the advantages and opportunities offered by French rule,
particularly among purchasers of national properties or the free
professions. But the particularity of the problem of imposing the new
administrative system at the level of commune and sub-prefecture was
the traditional impermeability of local notables to abstract calls to
