110   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and servative, noble and non-noble, would work together in the service
of the state. But the ideal was not always realisable, and the Napoleonic
administrators were satisfied with less committed attitudes which could
be interpreted as evidence of ‘rallying round’. It is evident that the
transformation of the French republic into an Empire, soon followed by
the creation of a host of courts outside and within the imperial frontiers,
offered new and attractive possibilities of ralliement to the old
aristocratic families, with the relatively few exceptions of those
obstinately faithful to the former dynasties. But reputation requires time
to sink roots. Much effort was expended by Napoleon and his
propagandists to counter the recurrent sense of instability engendered
by his international adventures. ‘Announce my imminent arrival at
Naples’, Napoleon wrote to Joseph two weeks after the latter’s
occupation of the southern Italian capital, ‘Naples is so distant that I
cannot promise you that I shall get there; but for both the army and the
peoples of the country, there is no harm in announcing that I’m
coming’.41 Every victory appeared to reinforce ralliement, with the most
distinguished nobles and patricians, even those of staunchly dynastic
loyalties—in Piedmont and Belgium, Naples and Holland, as much as in
France—accepting court office or appointment as mayor of their local
city. But every renewal of war as regularly revived suspicions and
potential withdrawal: ‘The moment that a campaign starts is always
marked by plots’, were the resigned, cynical words of the police
commissaire of Cuneo to the prefect of the Stura in July 1809.42

It is useful to distinguish between career and non-career posts. The
establishment of administrations on the French model meant not only
the dismantling of the old offices, but also new career opportunities.
Prina in the kingdom of Italy employed nearly 250 within his ministry
of finances in 1805, the ministry of the interior over 100;43 by 1810
the central administration had expanded to some thousands. In
Holland, Bavaria, Westphalia or any other of the states where
administration was modernised, there was a corresponding creation of
career posts. Ministry of finances officials operating in the
departments of the kingdom of Italy numbered over 5,000 already in
1805. In the absence of detailed research in local archives, it is
impossible to calculate precise figures for posts in the departments.
But on the basis of the incomplete listings of the published almanachs
of four annexed departments—Mont-Tonnerre for 1808, Léman and
Escaut for 1811 and Arno for 1813—it is clear that, taken all together,
administrative, financial and judicial posts were numerous and
increasing in number. The prefectures and sub-prefectures were the
