                                             The practices of conquest   117


developments closely, but advised caution against the wholesale
application of the French administrative machinery.
   However, increasingly the French system was imposed or urged on
prefects and allies as a model that brooked little modification or delay,
except in the light of political (which normally meant military)
exigencies. As always, the change was neither abrupt nor definitive; it
was not the clear-cut application of a blueprint, but a progressive
exercise of pressure. Thus, outside imperial frontiers, the insistence on
close conformation to French practices was most visible initially in the
region where Napoleon exercised direct sovereignty—north-central
Italy—with the creation in 1805 of the kingdom of Italy (often called
the Italic kingdom), whose administrative structures were
immediately revised to reduce the anomalies of Melzi’s republic. The
kingdom of Holland (1806–10) provides a transition case, where in
the earlier years Napoleon’s constant recommendations to his brother
Louis that he should take over the French system were accompanied
by a practical acceptance of the often substantial differences of the
Dutch reforms. By contrast, Napoleon was more insistent with his
brother Joseph, possibly because of the widespread prejudice that the
Neapolitans were less civilised: the ‘semi-barbarians’ of Calabria,
‘savages of Europe’, the lazzaroni, the rabble of the capital city, were
not to be won over by conciliating their feelings, but only by
threatening them immediately with cannon, as he himself had done at
Cairo, and then imposing firm French rule.64
   The change in style and insistence was marked by 1808 and became
absolute by 1810. The time allowed administrators and prefects to
impose French laws and procedures in the new departments in
Tuscany, Rome, Holland and the Hanseatic coast shrank to a few
months. From 1808 the Emperor was constantly urging Murat in
Naples, Louis in Holland, Roederer and Beugnot in Berg, to hasten the
adoption of the French system. Eugene de Beauharnais in Italy was
informed by his stepfather that he would brook no disobedience;
Jerome in Westphalia was presented with the fait accompli of a
constitution and administrative package.
   Napoleon’s representatives and close collaborators expressed his
belief that France was offering other states the possibility of enjoying
the benefits of her success in creating the pattern for the future,
without suffering the pains of its revolutionary parturition. The
experienced diplomat Otto reported from Munich in May 1808:

    The entire Bavarian administration is convinced that this kingdom,
    which is so closely united to France by the most sacred political ties,
