                                            The practices of conquest   109


Knowledge of the reputation and comportment of local opinion
leaders was the prerequisite for gaining their acquiescence and, if
possible, their active involvement in the administration. For wherever
a new regime was set up, it required the consent and collaboration of
leading personalities. The Cisalpine notables were summoned to
Lyons in 1801, like the Genoese senators to Milan in 1805, the
Spanish grandees to Bayonne in 1808 and the Dutch ministers to Paris
in 1810, to provide a fig-leaf of responsible opinion to decisions that
had already been taken; they were the Bonapartist sequel to the faked
plebiscites of the Directorial years. Such grand notables constituted a
handful of personalities known to Bonaparte and his advisers for
reasons of political career or social prestige. Their future attitudes
could not easily be judged from their behaviour during such artificial
and browbeating meetings.
   More substantial and necessary was the commitment of leading
local figures to act within their own countries as catalysts for
acceptance and support of the new regime. Melzi in the Italian
republic, Schimmelpenninck in the Netherlands, Bülow in Westphalia,
Nesselrode in Berg, even Rougemont in tiny Neuchâtel, performed
such a function. In Naples faction ran so deep that Joseph’s
appointment of great nobles like the Cassano clan alienated other
leading figures. In Spain, the fragmentation of the elites in the years
before Bayonne meant that the pro-French, like Azanza and O’Farrill,
were few and isolated. To obtain the visible participation of
personalities with a widely accepted reputation, usually from a
leading aristocratic or patriciate family, was of major importance. The
collaboration of reforming ministers of earlier political experiences,
such as Zurlo and Ricciardi in Naples, Gianni in Tuscany, Cabarrús in
Spain, was an inadequate substitute as, whatever their commitment,
they were politically isolated and usually socially insignificant through
lack of appropriate kin and influence. Murat in Naples was forced
into increasing reliance on the military. The failure of the French
administrators in Spain, whether serving Joseph or in Catalonia
(albeit under the particular conditions of war), was highlighted by the
absence of collaboration of local notables.
   In France, from Brumaire, the operational words in the search for
stability were ‘amalgamation’ (amalgame) and ‘rallying round’
(ralliement). ‘Amalgamation’, or its synonym ‘fusion’, was an
ambiguous term, as it implied not only reconciliation of the political
opponents of the recent Revolutionary years, but also an end to the
social divides of the ancien regime. The ideal way to achieve
amalgamation was through a military or civilian career, where Jacobin
