112   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


this level that the prefect’s lists should have served to identify the
appropriate candidates. The matter was of crucial importance for the
effective introduction of French practices in newly annexed regions, as
it was often difficult to recruit with adequate rapidity the professional
technicians of local government. Two years after Venetia was annexed
to the kingdom of Italy, the new prefect of the department of the
Tagliamento, Giovanni Scopoli, reported that:

      The communes are all in the greatest administrative disorder,
      because few have a revenue office, and no land registrars or other
      administrative directors were set up in the cantons, so that
      everything is entrusted to the mayors in a new country, with a
      multitude of completely new laws.47

The complaints of the prefects and sub-prefects were universal about
the impossibility of finding candidates with appropriate qualifications
for the rural communes and small towns. There is little doubt that, at
least within the Empire, the demands made on local administrators
were on a different level from those of previous governments, whether
in terms of responsibility for taxation, maintenance of communal
roads, registry of births, marriages and deaths, or sanitary measures.
Lack of adequate private means, education or reputation were the
explanations the prefects put forward, often to justify the continuing
dependence on the local parish priest. The attitude of the new
authorities towards these parish priests was ambivalent, inevitably so
given the suspicion and respect attributed contemporaneously to the
Church. The local clergy was mistrusted as potential catalysts for
reactionary opposition to the new order—and often fulfilled this
function where religious conservatism was the norm, as in the ex-
Papal Marches in Italy, or in regions of the remodelled German states
where Protestantism or Catholicism had formerly excluded toleration.
However, the parish priests were also needed by the new
administrators who utilised them as public officials for the civil
registry and were often dependent on their role and prestige as
intermediaries between the state and the local community.
    In reality, the comments of the prefects revealed the limits of the
lists of the good and the worthy that were compiled so assiduously.
They often masked an uneasy sense of their ignorance of the hidden
complexity and moral assumptions of kin, neighbourhood, property
and working relations that characterised life at the local level, whether
in an Emilian village, a Westphalian seigneurial village, the Zeeland
dykelands or a Catalan peasant community. For willingness or
