                                            The practices of conquest   119


territories. Physical space and social organisation worked against the
practicality of the immediate adoption of the entire French system. An
underlying sense of the backwardness that resulted from the irregular
process of civilisation surfaced in platitudes about the character of the
different peoples—the docility of the Tuscans, the feudal mentality of
German seigneurs, the idleness of Spaniards and Neapolitans, the
stolidity of the Dutch. Time was needed to provide the necessary
material conditions and to counter the prejudices of the local
populations. The tyranny of physical geography could be overcome
through knowledge of the terrain, construction of new roads and
bridges and state monopoly of the postal system. In the mean-time,
military repression of brigands and personal administrative inspections
served as preparatory measures: ‘I believe that the true system to follow
in a country where there is need to ensure uniformity in the methods
and where there is little change in posts is few directorates and many
inspections’, Roederer advised Joseph in his kingdom of Naples.68
Napoleon agreed with Joseph that immediate suppression of the
mendicant orders was dangerous and accepted that the introduction of
the metric system required time. For Beugnot, in his report to Napoleon
on what was needed to structure Westphalia, the social organisation of
feudalism imposed the gradual introduction of reforms:

    for the feudalism that exists in your state of Westphalia is not the
    weak and almost extinct feudalism that existed in France in 1789,
    where one could only observe privileges and honorific rights.
    Here feudalism is part of the social order, it is at its roots…. All
    reforms must be slow and measured: this is one of those matters
    where time is required for success.69

Murat’s councillors in Berg, Agar and Nesselrode, were cautious
about reform of municipal administration, first experimenting in the
capital Düsseldorf, with the appointment of an executive Stadt-
Direktor and only slowly extending the solution to other cities.
   Even more than graduality, adaptation of the French model to the
historical, social and institutional particularities of each state became
the central issue in dispute. Napoleon did not deny the existence of
such particularities, only the method of dealing with them. Ever more
forcefully, he reprimanded his relatives and representatives for their
desire to conciliate the local populations. Lebrun was castigated for
suspending the conscription of sailors at Genoa, Joseph mocked for
trying to win the sympathy of the lazzaroni. From the height of his
power, Napoleon drew on his experiences to conclude that, as the key
