                                          The practices of conquest   123


he exchanged at Frankfurt at a profit of 50 to 60 centimes per coin.
Thiébault recorded that in Spain the paymasters-general of the armies
in like manner profited from the funds under their control, which they
used to lend at high interest rates.79 Corruption was rife among
Customs officials at every frontier, particularly where smuggling
became a full-time business, as at Strasbourg or Hamburg. Nor were
such weaknesses limited to lower-level officials. Military leaders
continued to abuse their positions for private profit: Brune demanded
half a million guilders and got 80,000 as a ‘gift’ when he left the
Netherlands in 1799; Napoleon was furious with Masséna for
extracting 3 million francs illegally from the local administrations
with the occupation of Venetia in 1806 and insisted that he disgorge
them.80 Bonaparte’s artillery school comrade Bourrienne, as consul at
Hamburg, turned the Continental system to his private advantage,
accumulating at least 1 million francs from illegal licences, before
Napoleon ordered an official investigation in 1810. Talleyrand’s
penchant for bribes was notorious throughout Europe.
   It would be inaccurate to conclude that the Napoleonic
administration was vitiated by corruption. It is difficult to imagine a
regime holding power over an extended period without scandals or
individual examples of corruption, which naturally figure prominently
in contemporary memoirs. The Napoleonic administration upheld
high standards, partly in reaction to the lax permissiveness of the
Directorial years, far more out of a genuinely collective sense of
professionalism and duty (besides the importance attributed to
administrative controls). Such isolated cases of private profit from
public service essentially only dirtied minor cogs in the vast machine—
except for the administrative machinery of the Continental system,
which was seriously clogged up.
   More serious a constraint on the smooth running of this massive,
sophisticated complex was the scarcity of local men imbued with the
skills and convictions of the French functionaries. As Beugnot
commented gloomily: ‘It’s already a great deal to take our institutions
to neighbouring peoples, but it always remains a difficult matter to
form men for these institutions, until the time arrives when they will
be born from the institutions themselves’.81 This was particularly
evidenced in the refusal (or inability) to accept the new bureaucratic
lines of communication, which (it was believed) could be short-
circuited by personal contacts. Where new administrations were still
in their infancy, outside the Empire, such practices were not
uncommon. Precisely because of the accentuated centralisation, access
to decision-makers was crucial. Without such access, causes could
