128   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


feudalism, free exercise of individual activities and circulation of
goods, full property rights—were introduced most effectively in
territories subject directly and for an extended period to French rule.
Within these territories, the local avant-garde often shared a common
cultural tradition, sometimes an earlier reforming experience, which
rendered less radical the imposition of the new French system on
societies where feudal and corporative structures had vanished or lost
their force. When French administrators negatively described a society
they came into contact with as displaying the characteristics of an
earlier stage of civilisation, they expressed the differences, in their
eyes, between societies which, however imperfectly, functioned like
their own and those that seemed to equate to an earlier phase of the
evolution of France: ‘One would have to go back four or five centuries
to find such examples in France’, exclaimed Beugnot about feudal
rights in Westphalia.89 Not only Piedmont, Lombardy, Tuscany or
Holland, but even Savoy, areas of Belgium and parts of the Rhine left
bank where seigneurial rights still survived, were societies which the
French felt they could ‘read’ without excessive difficulties. They also
happened to be geographically close to France, which explained more
widespread knowledge (from cultural and commercial contacts and
the Directorial wars) and permitted more direct and continuous
pressure.
   Southern Italy, Germany, Spain and then Poland and Illyria were
more distant and less known. At times the reports of the French
administrators read as if they were explorers. They identified
feudalism as the dominant social system of regions or even the entire
area of these countries and recognised with shock that it could not be
destroyed at the stroke of a pen. Hence their insistence on the
graduality of reform. At the same time, juridical respect for property
was strong among ex-Constituent deputies, like Beugnot and
Roederer, or members of the civil code commission, like Siméon:
serfdom was unacceptable, as a personal obligation; but distinctions
needed to be made (as in France, in the days following the abolition of
feudalism on 4 August 1789) between feudal and property rights. In
Naples, where ex-Bourbon reformers like Zurlo welcomed strong
French government as the means to destroy feudal power, a feudal
commission was created—unique in Europe—to sort out the division
of feudal lands between their former owners and the communes.
   Elsewhere, particularly in Germany, the new or reforming rulers
preferred compromise. In Berg and Westphalia, as in Bavaria,
Frankfurt and Hesse, only personal serf obligations were abolished,
while seigneurial dues required redemption by the peasants. The
