120    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


to conquest was the application of an established sequence of military
operations, so standard procedures existed for the consolidation of
new regimes, including harsh repression of the inevitable
insurrection.70 ‘Peoples are not governed with weakness, which only
draws misfortunes on them’, he told Lebrun.

      Did you hope to govern the people without discontenting them
      first? …You know well that in matters of government, justice
      signifies force as a virtue. As for those who say that this will make
      the Genoese discontented and push them to behave badly, for me
      this is unacceptable language. I know their weight and worth.71

It was this indifference to popular reaction that led him initially to
underestimate the strength of Spanish hostility.
   His respondents, for their part, did not deny that the French path
to modernity was the best and indeed the only (or at least the
inevitable) one. Like the Emperor, they were convinced of the benefits
of a council of state and prefects, of statistical enquiries and free
circulation of goods, of industrial exhibitions and urban
embellishments. They shared his conviction that the mechanisms
through which society operated could be understood and controlled:
it was a question of identifying the leaders and ensuring their
acquiescence. Even in Spain, Joseph’s ministers thought it would be
possible to negotiate an end to opposition, as it was led by local
notables who were their relatives and friends.72 Where they differed
from him—even before conscription and the Continental system of the
later years rendered administrative modernisation irrelevant as a
means of integration—was in their assessment of the dangers of
discontent, and their conviction that concessions to national
susceptibilities would prove more effective in consolidating their rule.
   Causes of friction were multiple, inevitably so given the infinity of
local situations; the final ruptures between Napoleon and the relatives
he had raised to thrones resulted from the untenable strains of war
and blockade. But the impossible dream of a uniform administrative
system probably forced the satellite rulers into stronger affirmations
of identification with their peoples than might have been expected.
Joseph and Louis Bonaparte, Murat and even young Jerome were
genuinely concerned, like Melzi before them, to revive or create
national pride: To uplift a humiliated nation, one has to imagine it
today as it will be tomorrow’, reflected Joseph in 1806.73 Nothing
could have been further from Napoleon’s thoughts: for him, the
morrow belonged to states modelled on and in the service of France.
