                                             The practices of conquest   121


   The faithful reproduction of the French administrative system
touched on sensitive nerves. It is significant that the aspect which
aroused greatest hesitation and resistance was that of the new legal
codes. For the adoption of a new legal system was not limited to
retraining practitioners of the law; it affected profoundly day-to-day
practices, established conventions and ingrained prejudices. In Naples,
the civil code was modified to avoid too sharp a break over
inheritance and dowry practices. In Westphalia, Siméon wanted to
adjust the penal code to local usages. In Holland, Reuvens insisted
that the codes be adapted to fit ‘our institutions, our physical and
moral situation, our manners and customs’.74
   Only the allied states, like Bavaria, were able to adopt a more
gradualist and controlled approach, experimenting with reforms by
their application in specific localities, modifying articles of faith of the
French system (such as the regulation rather than the abolition of the
guilds), quietly abandoning what was regarded as unrealisable, such
as the French legal and judicial system.
   Resistance to adoption of the French administrative model was
undoubtedly heightened by its association with the intrusive presence
of Frenchmen. The military commanders and officers, stationed in the
eleven military divisions covering the annexed departments, in the five
divisions in the kingdom of Italy, or in the satellite states, were a
constant source of friction with the civilian authorities. Their
suspicion or contempt for the local inhabitants (including their elites)
hardly encouraged good relations. Whether pro-patriot (like Masséna
in Naples) or conservative (like Menou in Piedmont), they tried to
exert pressure in favour of appointment of French civilians. The
prejudices of some of the leading French administrators pushed in the
same direction. According to Roederer, French functionaries worked
even without pay, Neapolitans expected pay without work: ‘it’s the
division of leisure’.75 Beugnot expostulated that the Germans were
‘convinced that the French constitutions are worthless and that they
serve their country well by opposing when possible, hampering when
they cannot oppose, and delaying when they cannot hamper’. For the
young Stendhal, the only lively personality in Brunswick was a Jewish
banker.76 A minor figure like Pierre Legarde, director-general of police
in the Venetian departments, argued that:

    A people destined to be dependent on France for a long time
    cannot be governed by its own men, as they have an interest in
    paying as little as possible and hence are always inclined to hide
    the country’s resources and protest that the taxes are too high.77
