                                             The practices of conquest   125


with the state, by the very fact of the continuous extension of the
former, implied changes in the concept of the latter and expansion of
its role. It is only too easy to point to the radical shifts in the
institutional arrangements Napoleon imposed on France and the
satellite states or to the contrast between some of the constitutional
norms and the practices of government to conclude that there was no
consistency, merely the political contingencies and propagandistic
benefits of the moment. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that
Napoleon always regarded the institutional organisation of the state
as the only sure means of laying foundations (in the Machiavellian
sense of ‘gittar fondamenti’). It is equally clear that in the organisation
of the state he held firmly to a few fundamental ideas, mostly derived
from the pre-Revolutionary critique of the ancien regime: equality of
citizens before the law, control and accountability of public finances,
absolute property rights, legal protection of individual initiative,
secularisation of the state, participation in public affairs open to all
elites, who were defined by wealth, education and comportment. The
science of administration, through which these concepts were to be
translated into practice, was probably the most recent and certainly
the most novel of Napoleon’s ideas about the state.
    Until the marked tightening of control in 1810, Napoleon’s vision
of the relationship between society and the state contained elements of
the ancien regime concept of representation, however reduced and
controlled in reaction to the Revolutionary experiences. In the late
ancien regime, the political ideas of sovereignty of the people had
conflicted with the social practices of organic representation by status
and group. Now the concept of popular sovereignty had been totally
abandoned, whereas organic representation was revived under
different names. From the first constitution (the Brumairean model of
Year VIII) to the last one (grand-duchy of Frankfurt, 1810),
representation was restricted to specific categories of the populations,
whose selection procedures were kept as distinctly separate as those of
the former Estates-General. Political representation of groups was an
old idea among French political theorists, elaborated, for example, by
the Huguenot Hotman in the sixteenth century. The Bonapartist
categories constituted what were regarded as the elites or opinion
leaders of each particular society; they represented both the
description of its social composition and Napoleonic assumptions
about specific groups whose influence or contribution merited
recognition. Landed proprietors were always present and were often
given a greater share of representation; in terms of wealth, the
category was defined broadly, so as to include relatively modest
