122   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Far from encouraging such self-interested propositions, the
administrators and rulers of the new regimes resisted the
recommendations and urgings from Paris and locally to appoint
Frenchmen. Naples was exceptional, regarded as potentially wealthy
and legitimate booty; but even here Joseph and Murat argued strongly
in favour of employing locals; the constitution of 1808 specified that
all offices be reserved to Neapolitan subjects. Melzi had already
refused to give in to French pressure, whether from Paris or military
commanders. In Germany and Holland, Beugnot, Siméon and Lebrun
insisted on the need to reserve the posts to the local elite in order not
to create unemployment and discontent. Napoleon accepted that only
Poles could hold office in the grand-duchy of Warsaw. The hostility
against French office-seekers was often out of proportion to the
numbers actually employed. But resentment at their possible
employment hardly assisted administrative integration.

Roederer, one of the most experienced administrators of foreign
territories, was a convinced exponent of French administration, which
he regarded as the solution to the problem of maintaining equality and
stability without oppression. In 1810 (the year of the tightening of
control), he wrote to Napoleon:
      A characteristic of your government is to conduct affairs through
      institutions and not to rely on men endowed with arbitrary power.
      You have thus given the lie in your immense Empire to the grand
      theory that asserts that great empires are incompatible with
      moderate government, since it was thought impossible to govern
      distant provinces without sending and being an oppressor.
      Because you cannot answer to your peoples for so many agents,
      you have institutions that answer for them, and they answer to
      you for the institutions.78

Despite Roederer’s optimism, the problem remained, that the
excellence of the institutions was in practice dependent on the men
who made them function. Inevitably not all lived up to expectations,
even among the French. In Calabria, the local commanders sold
exemptions from service in the civic guards. The prefect Barthélemy
recalled that his first superior Reiset (in whose office he had been
placed at the age of 14 by a friend of his stepmother’s family) laid the
basis of his fortune by using his position as general tax collector at
Colmar to speculate against French currency: he used to cross the
Rhine, carrying bags of 2,000 louis d’or—symbol of Napoleonic
monetary stabilisation in 1803, officially quoted at 20 francs—which
