                                           The practices of conquest   127


constitutions were an integral part of Napoleon’s perception of how
to lay foundations, the counterpart to the modern administration, the
bridge between state and society through their expression of what
Napoleon defined as liberal government.
   Nowhere was this expressed more clearly than in the creation of the
kingdom of Westphalia (1807). More confident than ever that his
genius enabled him to empathise with the wishes of the peoples of
Europe, Napoleon explained to Jerome, with a dose of rhetoric, how
good government would win the affection of his new subjects:

    What the peoples of Germany impatiently desire is that
    individuals who are not noble and have talent should have an
    equal right to your consideration and employment; that all forms
    of serfdom and intermediary ties between the sovereign and the
    last class of the people should be wholly abolished. The benefits of
    the Napoleonic code, the publicity of procedures, the creation of
    juries will all be distinctive characteristics of your monarchy. Let
    me spell out my thoughts to you completely: I count more on the
    effects [of such reforms] than on the greatest of victories in
    extending and affirming your monarchy…. The peoples of
    Germany, of France, Italy and Spain want equality and liberal
    ideas. I have been leading the affairs of Europe for some years
    now and I have become convinced that general opinion is against
    the buzzing of the privileged. Be a constitutional king…. This way
    you will find that you have the strength of opinion and a natural
    ascendancy over the absolute kings, your neighbours.88

Given Napoleon’s ambition to demonstrate, through the kingdom of
Westphalia, the possibility of creating a model state, his insistence on
the appropriate ways to attract social support is not surprising.
Perhaps more interesting in this son of the Revolution is his
identification of such means with the attack on privilege of 1789,
albeit now tempered by more recent liberal constitutional ideas.

In a peaceful world (and Napoleon’s administrators, even in Spain,
envisaged such a world, almost till the end), it might have been
possible to judge how far this massive experiment in modernisation
was feasible and what changes it induced at the social level. But it was
never a ‘pure’ experiment, as it was increasingly vitiated by
contradictory exigencies.
   The fundamental social conquests of the Revolution, whole-
heartedly incorporated in the Napoleonic model—abolition of
