126   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


proprietors. Manufacturers and merchants equally constituted a
general category. In the republic of Italy, an additional electoral
college was created of dotti, presumably because of the reputation of
the intellectuals in the Lombard reforming tradition and universities;
savants and artists were similarly recognised with an electoral college
in the constitutions of Bayonne, Naples and Berg, where jurists in
particular enjoyed considerable prestige. In the Spanish, Neapolitan
and Polish constitutions, the traditional power of nobility and clergy
was recognised by the creation of colleges reserved for them.
   In terms of parliamentary democracy, the limited powers and
restricted and contorted electoral procedures—which in some cases
(Spain, Bavaria, Berg) were never even put into practice—reduced
Napoleonic representation to a mere simulacre. Only in Warsaw,
highly conscious of its recent parliamentary tradition, did the diet
express animated and on occasions effective criticism of the executive.
But it would be a mistake to dismiss the constitutions as mere
window-dressing. They were drawn up either as the basis for the
creation of a wholly new state (Italian republic, Westphalia), where
representation of the new ‘national’ entity complemented
administrative efforts to overcome regionalist and particularist
tendencies; or as a means of legitimising the new political power
through the participation of powerful and potentially dangerous
social groups (Warsaw, Spain, Naples).
   The constitutions (with the exception of the republic of Italy,
created immediately in the image of France) belonged to a particular
moment of the Napoleonic trajectory—1807 to 1808—when military
and diplomatic successes brought nearer the mirage of French
hegemony over Europe. It was the moment when Napoleon signed his
decrees emperor, king and protector ‘by the grace of God and the
constitutions’. 87 Napoleon personally dictated the draft of the
constitution of the grand-duchy of Warsaw, before assigning the new
state to the king of Saxony. The Polish constitution of 1807 was the
model for the new kingdom of Westphalia, was closely imitated by
Bavaria and was the basis of discussions for representation in Berg.
The Spanish constitution of 1808 (copied by Joseph as his parting gift
from Naples) was again personally supervised by Napoleon at
Bayonne, in a manner closely resembling his patronage of the Italian
constitution of 1801 at Lyons: in both instances, his concern was to
render the leading notables coresponsible, and hence to legitimise the
reordering of the state. From 1810 more authoritarian methods of
administrative centralisation were judged the most effective path to
the future. But in the earlier years, above all at the peak of his success,
