                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   137


role through the consequences of both Revolutionary legislation and
war, and in response to the demands of manufacturers and traders.
During the Revolutionary decade, the state found itself responsible for
manufactories abandoned by émigrés; at the same time, it was forced
to extend its control over whole sectors of the economy, like
metallurgy, in order to supply the armies. For their part,
manufacturers and traders gave few signs of appreciating the value of
statistical data, whereas they never ceased to appeal for state aid.
Ministers and bureaucrats were under continuous pressure to impose
protective tariffs, provide subsidies, guarantee large-scale orders or
constrain foreign competition. In this sense, the Continental blockade,
at least initially, constituted a logical extension of the function
attributed to the state, rather than a turning-point in economic policy.
At the same time, it represented the economic counterpart to the role
the administration assigned itself in modernising society: with the
blockade, the state claimed the right to force the pace and direction of
the new European economy, although (as in other fields) it remained
ultimately dependent on the willingness of its collaborators—the
entrepreneurs—to seize their opportunities.
   The leading importance of the relationship between the national
and international economy derived directly from the wars. Economic
theories before (and after) the Revolution were premised on a
condition of peace, necessary for the analysis of the domestic factors
of production, distribution and consumption. The realities of the
Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience denied such an assumption.
The immediate implication of war with Britain and the coalition
powers was the sharp diminution and rapid loss of commerce with the
colonies, previously the fastest growing sector of the French economy.
The wars and naval defeats throttled trade with the British, Spanish
and soon the Dutch empires. Initially neutral, especially American,
ships ensured some continuity of traffic with the colonies, albeit at a
lower level. By 1798 the English fleet had effectively interrupted
Atlantic exchanges; the revival following the peace of Amiens proved
ephemeral. The consequences for the French economy were multiple.
The collapse of colonial trading repercussed on the general level of
economic activity throughout the country, affecting agricultural
exports, manufactures and processing and re-export of colonial
goods. France’s external balance of payments deficit deepened, thus
rendering French currency vulnerable to enemy rumours and bankers’
speculations in financial centres like Amsterdam and Hamburg. The
wars affected the economy ambivalently, on the one hand disrupting
