130   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


financial independence of some of the satellite states, with the
reservation of revenues for the benefit of the new dignitaries. Both
nobility and endowments will be discussed in more detail on pp. 174–
84. For the moment, it is enough to note that the new titles and
entailed revenues fell almost exclusively outside the frontiers of the
Empire. The principalities and duchies created by Napoleon from
1806, first in the annexed Venetian territories and throughout the
Italian peninsula, then ever more heavily in Germany, as well as in
Switzerland and Poland, created exceptions to the administrative
unification of the satellite states and even left political enclaves within
their territorial sovereignty, like the former Papal possessions of
Benevento and Pontecorvo in the kingdom of Naples, transformed
into duchies for Talleyrand and Bernadotte.
   Napoleon’s purposes in creating a nobility did not signify the
abandonment of his ambitions to construct a new society. On the
contrary, as he stated in his message to the Senate setting up the first
duchies: ‘He had been guided principally by the great idea of
consolidating the social order and his throne, which was its
foundation and base, and creating corresponding centres of support
for the great empire’.91 But the existence of an ever more numerous
class with material and honorific privileges (30,000 had been
admitted to the Legion of Honour by 1814) could not but work
against the principles of legal equality central to the administrative
concept of the state and reinforce the resistance of the landed
aristocracies to the abolition of their seigneurial dues in the dependent
states.
   The practical consequences were directly contradictory to the aim
of integration. Nowhere was this seen more clearly than in the
kingdom of Westphalia, which had been created explicitly as a model
state, the excellence of whose administration would win the support
of the population and invite imitation throughout Germany.
Napoleon’s reservation as military entails of half the Crown allodial
domains destroyed all possibilities of balancing the state budget and
funding the necessary reforms and new administrative structure
without exercising inequitable pressure on the population. The right
of military conquest was deliberately deployed by Napoleon as
adequate justification for ignoring the principles and practices which
Jerome’s functionaries had been appointed to administer: These
domains belong to my generals who conquered your kingdom; that is
a commitment I took towards them and which nothing can make me
abandon’. 92 A principle systematically applied by Napoleon as
essential to reconcile the local elites was the acceptance of at least a
