134   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of more backward societies through administrative guidance. It was a
project intimately linked to the universalist values of the Revolution,
corrected of their excesses. It depended on the force of example that
could be expressed only in peaceful conditions over an unspecified but
certainly not brief period of time. It was this that justified integration
within an expanding empire and the export of French theories and
practices of good administration to neighbouring states. The very
premisses on which the administrative project was based were denied
by French economic and military policies. For the one and the other
inevitably signified the exploitation of the material and human
resources of the territories within the French sphere of influence. At
every turn, the economic and military practices of conquest negated
the advantages of administrative modernity, to the frustration of the
prefects in the annexed departments and councillors in the satellite
states.
   War and the blockade, it could be hoped, would be of limited
duration. But the same years when their impact was felt most heavily
were also those in which the most central values of the administrative
project were challenged by the steady diffusion of social privileges.
These were the years when the military offered an alternative model to
that of the civilian administration, when the introduction of an
imperial nobility denied the equality of citizens, when Napoleon’s
practices of distributing state revenues as largesse to his relatives and
favourites destroyed the viability of such model states as Westphalia.
From 1810, as the blockade tightened, the wars accelerated and social
privileges increased, the impossibility of reconciling the practices of
integration and exploitation came to the surface.


ECONOMIC POLICY
The Revolutionary legislators possessed a body of theories about how
economies functioned unprecedented in quantity, range and level of
sophistication. They were of the essence of the philosophes’ debate
and some propositions had inspired radical changes in policies under
reforming ministers and princes like Turgot and Peter Leopold of
Tuscany. In the initial dismantling of the ancien regime by the
revolutionaries it would be difficult to overestimate the importance of
the ideas central to French and Scottish economists like Quesnay and
Adam Smith and the multitude of other theorists. The study of
economic theories during the Revolutionary-Napoleonic period has
attracted far less attention than enlightenment theorists or the
utilitarians and political economists of the Restoration. But without
