                                             The practices of conquest   129


distinctions were often vague and local tribunals supported the lords.
The peasants in these states, most surely aware of the successful
abolition of all seigneurial rights in France and then in the (formerly
German) Rhine left bank, continued their legal battle for years,
sometimes with the support of French administrators, like Siméon.
The result was to discontent the seigneurs, without winning the
support of the peasantry. Bacher, the experienced chargé d’affaires at
Frankfurt, reflected that, since the nobility and regular clergy would
never support ‘the new order of things’, the governments ‘in the end
would be forced to admit that they were politically obliged to favour
the redemption of rights in order to gain popularity and win the
support of the rural population’.90 In Spain, war conditions and the
need to raise revenue persuaded Suchet to ignore the Emperor’s decree
abolishing feudalism. In Poland, Napoleon did not even propose to
abolish noble privileges.
   The contrast between the decisive determination of the French
within the annexed departments of the Empire and the cautious
pragmatism with which they approached the abolition of feudalism in
Germany and Poland cannot be explained simply in terms of
awareness of the greater social dimensions of the issue. It also resulted
from practical exigencies of the wars and the political situation. Since
Napoleon’s initial invasion of 1796, Italy had entered definitively into
the French sphere of influence: hence the Neapolitan feudatories could
be attacked with vigour as the kingdom formed part of the future
configuration of Europe. Napoleon’s control of Germany was both
more recent and less sure, particularly as he moved further east. Its
future lay with the model states of Westphalia and Berg, perhaps in
due course of Warsaw. But time was too short to risk the immediate
opposition of the local nobility. Given the example of French
procrastination, it was not surprising that even reforming states in the
Confederation of the Rhine, like Bavaria, should also have progressed
slowly. The strategic demands of international politics and war
worked against the effective abolition of feudalism, thus under-mining
a central social pillar of the Bonapartist construction of the new state
and society.
   This was not the only contradiction of the civil project of
integration. It is a commonplace of historiography that the end of the
republic marked a conservative shift in Napoleon’s evolution. The
implications of the proclamation of the Empire went far beyond
questions of style or of international politics. It led directly, on the one
hand, to the abandonment of the concept of equality, with the creation
of the new imperial nobility and, on the other, to an erosion of the
