138   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


normal economic activities and generating inflation, on the other,
opening up new opportunities and the possibilities of new markets.
   The immediacy and persistence of the crisis of colonial trading and
the recurrence of wars led to a profound reorientation of the structure
of the French economy. The south-west, whose prosperity had been
developed around the Atlantic trade, was affected most deeply, with
the deindustrialisation that resulted from the dislocation of its
activities. Elsewhere the new conditions produced extremely varied
responses within the different sectors, industries and regions. Some
traditional industries, like linen and hemp, declined with the closure of
the colonies and subsequently the fall in naval demand for ropes and
canvas; others, above all cotton, expanded and modernised in the
absence of British competition. Paris asserted its primacy as the
banking centre and cotton capital of the country. River and land
transport and inland entrepôts gained in importance. In contrast to
the uncertainties of the 1790s, the agricultural sector ceased to be a
source of concern for most of the Napoleonic years, until 1812.
Against this reassuring background, trading and manufactures
assumed and were to retain a new level of importance for policy-
makers, because of the structural shift of direction of the economy
towards the Continental land markets, away from the Atlantic
seaboard.
   The Revolutionary decade had been marked by inflation and state
bankruptcy, as well as the crisis of foreign trade. Napoleon, whose
ideas about economics were traditional and at times primitive,
responded by a rigid monetarist policy, alongside measures to boost
exports and production. Such policies were basically contradictory, as
the monetary and budget measures had deflationary effects on the
economy. Fearful of the inflationary dangers of paper currency (after
the only too recent experience of the assignats and the Directory’s
bankruptcy), Bonaparte restricted circulation to the metallic monetary
mass; he inhibited the level of loans and hence the potential
contribution of the new Bank of France as a source of credit. State
finances were considered in terms of their political implications and
regarded as entirely separate from the needs of the economy. The
budget was to be balanced from year to year, as deficits (which were
only officially recognised in 1811) were seen as putting at risk public
confidence. The correspondence between Mollien, minister of the
treasury, and Napoleon shows clearly the Emperor’s unawareness of
the negative consequences on the general level of economic activities
of such rigid accountancy, or of how fiscal requirements could affect
the capital market. When the tobacco monopoly was established in
