                                           The practices of conquest   131


substantial portion of the public debt of their predecessors by the new
regimes. But in Westphalia it was rejected in favour of the holders of
endowments: ‘I know that there are donees whom one would like to
make responsible for the debts of their predecessors, whereas I gave
them their properties free of all expenses’.93 A convention was
imposed (10 May 1811) which exempted the entailed lands from all
taxes and charges, requisitions or billeting, and set special conditions
for the redemption of feudal tithes.94 To all effects and purposes, the
943 beneficiaries of Napoleon’s generosity in Westphalia enjoyed
extra-territorial status that frustrated the uniformity and equality of
every administrative measure. Westphalia and the former British
Crown state of Hanover were the most heavily burdened with
Imperial endowments. But the total 30 million francs’ revenue
received by nearly 5,000 beneficiaries was drawn almost exclusively
from the territories under French control outside the Empire.
   Military and political priorities were always in conflict with the
necessarily long-term and patient efforts at consolidating support
through administrative action. The boundaries imposed on some of
the new states, usually for strategic reasons, denied the necessary
continuity of territory and hindered economic activity. In the republic
of Italy, the traditional frontier area of the Lunigiana, between
Tuscany and Liguria, was almost cut off from the rest of the state in
the interests of a military corridor. Beugnot strove continuously but
ineffectively to bring together the northern and southern parts of Berg,
which were connected only by a narrow strip of land, and to obtain an
uninterrupted stretch of territory along the Rhine as a major trade
route between Holland and southern Germany. Napoleon was
impervious to arguments of the rationalisation of territories of states
outside the Empire: with the annexation of Holland in 1810, he also
absorbed the neighbouring areas of Berg, with a quarter of its
population, in order to rectify the French customs line.
   As imperial ambitions expanded, so the military and fiscal
pressures on the satellite states increased, contradicting and
jeopardising the regularity and normality of civil administration. In
1808 Mosca, prefect of the Reno department in the kingdom of Italy,
commented on the positive effects of the new system,

    as the new political and administrative institutions gain in
    solidity, so the tranquillity and confidence of the populations seem
    to grow proportionately, as they understand the advantages of
    this progressive settlement of things which is now happening so
    eventfully, after many years of muddled opinions.95
