136   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


doubt the fundamental concepts inherited from the late eighteenth
century—from individualism to the natural order or invisible hand of
the market, from utility to the role of exchange, from rapidity of
circulation to economic interdependence—were influential, not only
in the theorising of the idéologues, but as part of the mental baggage
of the French administrative class. Nor could this be otherwise, given
the extensive overlap in personnel between the worlds of the scientists
and French officialdom.
   Nevertheless, in the Napoleonic years theoretical debate about the
workings of an economy appears to have lost its pride of place. In
part, this may have reflected Bonaparte’s impatience and growing
intolerance of abstract reasoning; in part, it was doubtless an aspect of
the compression of autonomous discussion that resulted from the
dilatation of an ever more conventional official wisdom. But as
important was the divergence between the concerns of economic
theorising and the objectives of economic policy. For the axis of the
theoretical debate had always been the analysis of the national
economy, whereas the unprecedented conditions of continuous
warfare distorted the established framework of policy decision-
making within the national economy by enhancing, on the one hand,
the role of the state and, on the other, the relationship between the
national and the international economy.
   Private initiative and property remained articles of faith for official
representatives, which were seen as marking clear limits to state
action. Even at the peak of the administrative drive for economic
statistics, in 1812, a prefect could explain his failure to provide
detailed figures on forges in that they ‘have to be obtained from
private individuals over whom I have no power, who are free to reply
or not without any possibility of my compelling them’.1 In theory, the
role of the state was primarily to remove the obstacles and create the
conditions for a self-regulating internal market based on initiative and
competition. This was the purpose of the early Revolutionary
prohibition of corporations and workers’ coalitions (1791), as of the
later Napoleonic attempts to regulate out of existence collective rights
in the countryside through a rural code (1811–14). It explained the
creation of institutions for the diffusion of technological knowledge,
like the Conservatory of arts and crafts (1794). It underpinned the
great statistical effort of the ministers of the interior François de
Neufchâteau and Chaptal (1797–1804), for whom the public
availability of regional data was to serve as a stimulus to economic
activity and entrepreneurship.
   In practice, however, the state was forced into an ever more active
