                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   139


1811 to boost revenues, the minister of the treasury Mollien
commented bitterly at how it drained liquidity: ‘all available capital at
the moment is utilised in the securities demanded by the tobacco
monopoly administration…. One should first of all decide whether
fiscal needs or trade are more fundamental to an empire.’2
   Nevertheless, if Napoleon was less sophisticated than many of his
advisers in his understanding of economic mechanisms, he was
vigorously decisive in his support of French manufactures against the
British. His policy developed that advocated by Delacroix during the
Directory, in the imposition of favoured market outlets for national
products outside France’s frontiers, as much as in the exclusion of
British manufactures. Whatever the opinion of the theorists about
leaving the national market unfettered so that it could achieve its
natural harmony, in the international economy such liberal ideas were
rejected out of hand. The economic world view of Napoleon and
influential publicists like Montgaillard remained essentially
mercantilist—a static concept of a fixed stock of wealth, in which the
increase of France’s share implied a diminution of that of her eternal
enemy, Britain. Not all Napoleon’s advisers were in agreement. Some,
like Chaptal or Coquebert de Montbret (both significantly with
scientific leanings), were opposed to highly protective measures.
Chaptal, before his appointment as minister of the interior, affirmed:

    It is not true, despite general belief, that prohibiting the entry of
    foreign goods will benefit our national factories. Such a ban
    results in three major inconveniences: firstly, it deprives the State
    of customs revenue; secondly, it encourages smuggling; thirdly, it
    deprives our manufacturers of the stimulus of competition.3

Such liberal views, still respectable during the Directory, were soon to
sound as rarefied as voices in the desert. Economic competition
became part of a larger struggle, expressed in military metaphors and
equipped with weapons of war. Already during the Directory, war by
corsairs had become a major industry. American consular sources
estimated (no doubt with gross exaggeration) that French and Barbary
corsairs had seized 3,000 British vessels in the Mediterranean between
1793 and 1800.4 In 1798 Schimmelpenninck privately confessed his
conviction that the French government lay behind the systematic
attack on ships reaching Dutch ports:

    I am more and more convinced in these unhappy circumstances
    that the system of French privateering is so organised and in such
