142   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Directory tariff reductions on its exports to France, which were
progressively lost, until they ceased by 1806–7. On the other hand,
inclusion within France’s frontiers offered access to the largest unified
market in Europe for Belgian, Luxembourg and Alsatian cotton and
iron producers. The major exception to such possibilities (at least
before the annexations resulting from the blockade) were the
Piedmontese silk weavers, whose production and outlets were
deliberately sabotaged in order to protect Lyons’ monopoly.
   The political imposition of frontiers and their continuous
modification had immediate and profound consequences on regional
economies. The absorption of Belgian Brabant within the French
republic deprived the pipe-makers of Gouda of Ardennes clay and
Dutch brewers and distillers of Flemish hops, grain and coal. The
complementarity of economic exchange on the two sides of the Rhine
was abruptly broken. Augsburg commission agents suffered from the
new barriers on the traditional trade routes between Italy, northern
Germany and eastern Europe. Piedmontese wine producers lost access
to their traditional Lombard markets in the kingdom of Italy. Woollen
cloth production in the Italian Marches, incorporated in the kingdom
of Italy, fell with its severance from the good quality wool supplies of
Lazio. Zinc and lead mines in Carinthia lost their markets in Austria
with the creation of the Illyrian provinces. The examples could easily
be multiplied. But if well-established regional patterns of production
and trading were thus dismembered by political means, new economic
areas were created by precisely the same artificial measures. The new
state of Berg created in 1806 brought together for the first time the
coal-mines and metal forges of Mark and Berg. Within France’s
frontiers, a new industrial region was created, stretching from Liège
and Verviers to Aix-la-Chapelle and Cologne. The annexation of the
southern Black Forest by Baden gave its manufacturers an elastic
labour supply.
   The repercussions of the French-imposed reorientation of European
manufacturing and trade were multiple and in many ways unforeseen.
For even where the frontiers introduced discriminatory policies, they
could not prevent the transfer of entrepreneurs, capital and techniques
from south Alsace and north Switzerland; German and Swiss
entrepreneurs introduced advanced cotton technology in Lombardy,
Piedmont and Naples.
   Napoleonic efforts to force the pace of French manufacturing and
trade were probably effective until 1806 and in the early period of the
blockade. In aggregate terms, French foreign trade increased
significantly from the disastrous years of the 1790s wars: total trade,
