                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   143


estimated officially at about 1,000 million francs in 1787–9, had
fallen to under 500 million in 1797–9 and rose to over 900 million in
1804–6.11 Woollen and cotton cloth, iron and steel increased in
volume of production and in some cases modernised technologically.
But the very protection from British competition that encouraged
French manufacturers played an analogous role in the development of
rival industries outside France. For many of the same factors operated
in like manner inside and without France’s frontiers.
   As with France, there was a direct relationship between
entrepreneurial activity and size of internal market: the Munich beer
industry benefited from the enlargement of the kingdom of Bavaria to
3.5 million inhabitants; Lombard woollen cloth production increased
in the republic (then kingdom) of Italy, whose population rose from 3
million to 7 million; the Rhenish Confederation led to Customs
agreements between some of its states, to the benefit of Baden cotton
production; Saxon cotton manufacturers gained access to a market of
3 million with the creation of the grand-duchy of Warsaw under the
king of Saxony.
   As in France, many of the entrepreneurs in these other states
remained closely tied to the state. There were few who relied on
traditional export markets, like the great cotton entrepreneur
Oberkampf or the Prato woollen fez manufacturer Mazzoni. Mining
and metallurgy, whether in the Ruhr, Bas-Rhin, the Aosta or Brescia
valleys, gained from the constant military demand for armaments.
The demand for woollen cloth and tanned skins was related directly to
the provision of uniforms and shoes for soldiers. The sharp
contraction of navies and merchant marines was immediately
reflected in the crisis of rope and canvas producers, in Holland and
Genoa, as in lower Normandy.
   The blockade encouraged the development of industries capable of
taking advantage of the protection provided by the new measures and
competing effectively with French producers outside the Empire’s
frontiers. For price differentials and transport costs now worked against
the competitivity of French products. Mechanization of cotton spinning
spread rapidly in Berg, Baden, north Switzerland and Saxony. The
productivity level of Mulhouse printed cottons was far lower than that
of Belgian producers within the Empire; Berg and Saxon cottons,
according to the prefect Chaban, cost 20 per cent less than those of
Brussels. A French manufacturer like Oberkampf actively tried to open
up new export markets, but he was unable to compete against Swiss and
south German printed cottons.12 Woollen cloths from Bohemia, Saxony,
Hesse and especially Berg under-cut the cheapest French cloth from
