                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   145


French-dominated Europe, even to Russia after Tilsit; then, in
retaliation to the British Orders in Council, the same principle of
confiscation as prizes was extended to all neutral ships with British
licences or products. Initially the measures aroused considerable
expectations, as they followed the defeat of Austria and, most
recently, of Prussia. Whether or not the British economy would
collapse through the glut of over-production caused by closure of her
major markets, the French-controlled Continent was protected from
competition. Political pressure or military force (it was assumed)
could enforce obedience, as with the invasion of Portugal (1807). The
markets of Europe lay open. In the words of an advertisement of the
wholesale metal dealer Deloche in 1807: ‘What prospects cannot be
imagined for our trade today, now that political and friendly relations
have turned Germany, Holland, Spain and Italy into vast fairs where
France will always find a certain sale for her surplus industrial
products?’15
   No economic policy could satisfy all interests. The blockade
accelerated cotton mechanisation and production. But cotton printers
like Oberkampf experienced constant difficulties in substituting
Indian cottons with ‘national’ fabrics of equivalent quality, and even
more in ensuring adequate and regular raw cotton supplies from
Brazil (through Portugal), the United States, southern Italy and the
Levant. In fact, while raw cotton consumption in France doubled
between 1785 and 1809 from 4,000 to 8,000 metric tons, it
quintupled in Britain from 8,000 to 42,000 tons. With the re-
establishment of peace on the Continent in 1807 many inland areas of
the Empire—Paris, the Lyons area, Belgium, the left bank—enjoyed
economic expansion until 1810. French export of cotton products
increased tenfold in these years, and silkstuffs, woollens, mixed
textiles, metal and luxury goods all benefited. By contrast, the Atlantic
ports definitively lost their lifeline of neutral shipping: American ships
entering Bordeaux dropped from 121 in 1807 to 6 in 1808; and
traditional outputting industries, like linen, persisted in their
irrevocable decline.16
   The success of the blockade depended on Napoleon’s capacity both
to keep out British goods, and to ensure adequate alternative supplies
of foodstuffs, raw materials and manufactures. In the event, neither of
these conditions was met. According to Camille Perier, sent to
Germany by the interior minister Champagny in 1807–8, British
cotton yarn and sewing cotton was still 16 per cent cheaper than
French yarn nine months after the introduction of the blockade.17 His
explanation was stockpiling by importers. But sealing off the coastal
