144    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Verviers, Montjoie and Aix-la-Chapelle: ‘the abundance of raw
materials and the low cost of labour prevent other factories from
competing against the factories of these countries’.13 The failure of the
economic project to create a vast land market for French manufactures
in place of the lost colonies was to become ever more apparent with the
development of the Continental blockade.


THE CONTINENTAL BLOCKADE
The decrees of Berlin (21 November 1806) and Milan (23 November,
17 December 1807) raised the economic war with Britain to a new
level. Since Brumaire, Bonaparte had insisted that his allies exclude
British goods. He had negotiated preferential trade treaties with
Naples (1800), Spain (1801, 1803), Portugal (1801), Russia (1801),
Turkey (1802) and the Italic republic (1803, 1806). These
complementary policies of impeding British trade and encouraging
French exports had been pursued by clearly delimited measures, which
still left ample scope—within the limits of repeated bouts of warfare—
for the continuation of existing patterns of international commerce,
and for trade with the colonies, carried in particular by neutral ships.
Following the peace of Amiens, the merchants and shipbuilders of the
Atlantic ports, financed by Parisian bankers, had invested in a
restoration of the pre-Revolutionary colonial oriented economy; even
as late as summer 1806, with the renewal of diplomatic contacts with
Britain, many turned their hopes overseas. But on each occasion the
outbreak of war led to a sharp commercial crisis, as in 1803 and 1805,
with loss of ships, interruption of colonial trading and bankruptcies.
    French manufacturers and merchants were insistent on the need to
find alternative markets. From 1805 Oberkampf took active steps to
find new outlets in Italy, the Belgian departments and Holland. The
Marseilles chamber of commerce stressed that the Italian and Spanish
markets were needed to replace Santo Domingo:

      The loss of our main colony must attribute an ever higher value to
      the outlets that our factories and manufactures still hold in
      Europe…. It is in the interest of France to supply, if not the
      totality, at least the greater part of all the manufactured articles
      that Spain consumes and supplies to her colonies.14

The Berlin and Milan decrees appeared to offer the means to meet the
demands of the business community. First, they extended the
prohibition and seizure of goods from Britain or her colonies to all
