146   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


areas proved an arduous and impossible task, which stimulated the
ingenuity of traders to circumvent the law. Smuggling became a highly
organised commercial activity of major proportions. A major reason
for this was the inability of the French to substitute British supplies of
raw or semi-finished materials.
   At the same time, as we have already noted, the very conditions of
protection encouraged the rapid expansion of textile firms in
Germany, Prussia and Austria which competed successfully against
the French. Many of the German states, according to the military
expert Jomini in November 1806, were hostile to Britain and ready to
respond to some form of joint Customs agreement. But the blockade,
for Napoleon and his advisers, was conceived of only as a very
unequal partnership, with no serious consideration of reciprocity.
France’s allies, even the satellites, were formally independent and
hence able to set up their own Customs policies. In a world of
protection, liberal ideas were impractical, as the free-trader Bavarian
minister of finances, Hampesch, reluctantly recognised.18 Champagny
recognised the problem as early as August 1807, when he urged
Napoleon to insist on free passage or extremely preferential transit
and import duties for French goods in the Confederate states.
Germany was not only a market, but also the obligatory route for
exports of wines and spirits, silkstuffs and luxury goods, fashion ware
and quality woollens to Poland and Russia. It is hardly surprising that
the German princes refused to accept French propositions and only in
individual cases submitted under pressure, reluctantly and partially, to
lower tariffs on French exports to their states. The effect of this first
phase of the blockade on trading relations with Germany and eastern
Europe can be illustrated by the examples of the two major western
German states, Berg and Bavaria, and of Poland.
   Berg was of major importance in pre-Revolutionary Franco-
German economic relations, both as a manufacturing centre of textile
and metal products, and as the export route for German manufactures
to France. Hence it was particularly vulnerable to French protective
tariffs, the more so as many of its manufactures were similar to those
produced in Britain. The effect of the blockade was to impose duties
on Berg goods of up to nearly three times their value. Murat supported
his manufacturers’ appeal for special treatment (as under the
Directory), but to no effect. Berg entrepreneurs searched desperately
for alternative markets. They sent a deputation to Napoleon (which
finally caught up with him at Warsaw), asking for preferential
treatment for textile exports to Italy; momentarily he agreed, but
within months, on his return to France and Italy, had revoked his
