                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   147


decision. Northern German trading relations became more important
and Berg textile manufacturers resisted, despite rising wage levels, till
1809. But then the crisis came. Appeals for transit concessions across
France to Spain and Portugal were rejected. The result was an attempt
to compensate the manufacturing crisis by a huge increase of trade in
smuggled British goods which transited across the country towards
France, Switzerland and Italy.
   When Napoleon absorbed Holland within the Empire in 1810, he
also annexed northern Berg to the south of the Dutch border, with
nearly a quarter of its 1 million inhabitants. The 4,000 industrialists of
this small state of Berg, now land-locked, its exports blocked not only
by France but also by its German neighbours, were induced by the
blockade measures of 1810 to appeal for reunion with France as the
sole solution. The episode revealed the real interests at stake. The Berg
manufacturers argued, somewhat disingenuously, that the absorption
within France of Belgian textile manufactures at Verviers and Aix-la-
Chapelle had not lessened production at Louviers, Sedan or Elbeuf,
nor had Crefeld silk and cotton ruined Lyon’s monopoly: The struggle
against England’s mercantile tyranny can be sustained only if the
industrial states are themselves privileged’. For the Cologne chamber
of commerce, across the Rhine in the department of the Roer, despite
ten years of tariff discrimination, Berg competition remained too
keen. In a remarkable admission of inferiority, the manufacturers
successfully urged the prefect to keep their Berg rivals out of their
protected French and Italian markets, as

    We conclude that: (1) our labour costs must be higher than on the
    right bank of the Rhine, as our labourers work less and spend
    more than those of Berg; (2) our goods are of a lower quality than
    those manufactured in the grand-duchy because, since our
    workers no longer find subsistence in the convents, they only
    work out of necessity, whereas Berg workers strive to make their
    products as perfect as possible; (3) as a result, our factories could
    not withstand the competition of those of the grand-duchy of
    Berg, if it were annexed to the French empire.19

Berg, like the kingdom of Italy, was directly dependent on French
authority. Bavaria, by contrast, was France’s major and most loyal
ally, not just in Germany. So long as Napoleon’s preoccupation was
the coastal blockade of British goods, Bavaria benefited: sugar-beet
and tobacco production increased, optical glass was manufactured at
Munich, textiles at Augsburg, calico printing, pins and needles and
