148   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


ceramics at Schwabach. The 1806 measures, because they applied to
the kingdom of Italy, were a direct threat to Bavaria’s traditional
exports and transit trade to Italy. Max Joseph was surprised at
Napoleon’s rigidity, since Bavaria had continuously given way to
demands for tariff concessions on French wines and manufactures.
The Italian and Bavarian ministers, Marescalchi and Montgelas,
negotiated a trade treaty, which confirmed the French prohibition of
British goods, but reciprocally reduced Customs duties by 50 per cent
(2 January 1808). Champagny convinced Napoleon to annul the
treaty, not only because Bavarian woollens were too competitive for
the French, given ‘the proximity [to Italy] of Bavarian factories, their
cheap labour, their perfect knowledge of consumer tastes’, but also
because Bohemian, Moravian and other German cheap cloths would
be exported to Italy under cover of the treaty.20 The consequences for
Bavaria were dramatic but not disastrous. Economically, Bavaria
responded in kind: she introduced her own protective tariff in 1809,
mechanised and expanded production for her large internal market,
and exploited her geographical location to obtain advantages in the
new transit route of raw cotton from the Ottoman empire imposed by
Napoleon on Austria after Wagram (1809). Nuremburg experienced a
new age of prosperity as the centre of Bavarian manufacturing exports
and even colonial imports. But politically the breakdown of trade with
Italy was a major cause of the revolt of her recently acquired territory
of Tyrol in 1809.
   The vitality of the Polish economy depended on its exports of
cereals from Danzig to western Europe, overwhelmingly to Britain.
The decrees of 1806 and occupation of Danzig by Marshal Lefebvre
(1807) led to a sharp inversion of the formerly favourable terms of
trade, as wheat exports collapsed. The result was disastrous for the
already indebted Polish landowners and catastrophic for the peasants,
who fled the land. As elsewhere in the Continent, the protection
provided by the blockade opened up opportunities, especially for
textile entrepreneurs: Saxon cottons and Silesian woollens expanded
into the Polish market. The protectionist tariffs introduced by the
government of the new grand-duchy of Warsaw encouraged
investment and expansion of national production of woollens, mines
and distilleries. French manufacturers were unable to compete with
such cheap textiles, while their traditional luxury exports—such as
wines and silks—presumably suffered with the rapid decline in income
of Polish noble households.
   As evidence mounted of the inability of French entrepreneurs to
take over the central role of British manufactures in Germany and
