140   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      a formidable and extended state that an announcement of the
      arrival and landing of a neutral ship…is now synonymous with a
      confiscation.5

Nothing came more naturally to Bonaparte than the active
encouragement of such a policy. For, as Metternich perceptively
observed to Stadion in 1808,

      he has supreme contempt for the status of the merchant and
      confuses industry with usury, trading with monopoly and profit
      with theft. I’m sure that he thinks he is trading by means of his
      corsairs. He protects them because he regards them as military
      merchants and their ships as nobler shops than those of peaceful
      citizens.6

After Trafalgar and the definitive loss of any hopes of naval victory,
the corsairs represented the sole means of challenging British control
of the seas and an effective weapon against neutral ships smuggling
illegal British manufactures to the Continent. As late as 1811 a
Corsican privateer, Pollan, was able to defy British naval surveillance
of the Catalan coast.7
    Napoleon’s methods in boosting national manufactures and trade
were characteristically brusque and authoritarian. Political pressure
and legislative intervention were regarded as appropriate weapons
through which French trade would replace the lost colonies with the
territorial markets of Continental Europe. Trade could be disciplined
like armies, as Chaptal later recalled: ‘he presumed to manoeuvre it
like a battalion and demanded that trade submit as passively’.8 States
within the French sphere of influence were to be persuaded to offer
preferential treatment to French goods, while Customs barriers were
erected to protect French manufacturers against English competition.
Such a policy was not new, but dated back to the war with Britain and
the anti-French coalition. Nine Customs laws to exclude British goods
had been decreed between 1793 and Brumaire, seventeen more before
the 1806 imposition of the blockade, compared to six subsequent
measures. If the immediate purpose was to extend the military and
naval war against Britain into the industrial and commercial spheres,
the longer-term aim was to enable France to replace Britain as the
workshop of the Continent. Even before the blockade, there was an
awareness of the need to gain time behind protective barriers in order
to catch up with Britain’s technological superiority. As the preamble
to publication of the official Customs tariff of 1804 stated: ‘Foreign
