156   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


officials, together with gendarmes, should have been the chosen object
of popular attacks when French authority collapsed. Their
comportment negated the bureaucrats’ dream of winning support
through the superior quality of their administration.


CONSCRIPTION
Conscription, wherever it occurred, touched the most sensitive nerve
of individuals, families and communities. It was an intrusion in private
and social life, it could destroy the equilibrium of the family economy,
it threatened delicate balances of interests within small communities
based on trust by the arbitrary choice of who should depart. Above all
it was novel in its annual regularity.
    The pre-Revolutionary armies and navies of Europe—with the
partial exception of Prussia—were composed of more or less willing
volunteers, mercenaries who had chosen a career to which entry was
incomparably easier than to the guilds. Popular fear of enrolment and
diffidence towards soldiers was reinforced by a climate of opinion
which, by the later eighteenth century, was hostile to the deep-rooted
exaltation of military prowess that had accompanied and
characterised European societies since feudal times. The
enlightenment insistence on values of rationality, order,
humanitarianism, tolerance and peace argued against military service.
The noble officer, in his ignorance, superficiality and arrogance,
symbolised the negative attributes of a privileged caste, chosen butt of
the philosophes’ scorn. Economic criticism of the wasteful cost of
armies, of their distraction of useful hands from gainful employment,
combined with Rousseau’s ideal of the citizen in arms. Contempt for
the common soldier or sailor, recruited from the dregs of society,
combined with horror at the brutality of his treatment.
    The Revolutionary army marked a rupture with this past in terms
of scale and social composition. Previously cost had acted as a decisive
constraint on size: in the 1760s, Prussia and France, the states with the
largest armies, maintained 160,000–170,000 troops; in 1789, the
French line army amounted to about 165,000 men. Although
mercenary, the armies had become increasingly ‘national’, to avoid the
expenses of distant recruitment, so that even the foreign regiments of
the French army (with the exception of the eleven Swiss ones)
consisted for over 90 per cent of Frenchmen. Peasant resentment
against the obligatory militia system that supplemented the
professional regiments perhaps explains why the volunteers were
drawn primarily from the urban poor. The French army in 1789 was
