                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   149


eastern Europe, the Mediterranean assumed increasing importance as
a reserved market. The initial hopes of the Iberian market rapidly
vanished with the difficulty of access to the Portuguese and Spanish
empires and popular resistance in Spain. The major objects of trading,
constantly endangered by guerrillas and bandits, were food supplies
for the French armies and import of colonial goods to France. It is
hardly surprising that such trade should have been monopolised by a
well-established Perpignan merchant, François Durand, who gained
immunity for his mule trains across the Pyrenees by supplying both
French troops and their enemies: ‘his profits are so enormous that they
touch on the indecent’, commented the Spanish authorities.21
   Italy inevitably became the focus of interest. Italy supplied between
50 per cent and 75 per cent of French raw silk and organzines. With
annexation, Piedmontese silk production was colonised, as Lyons
insisted on a monopoly, not only for its own manufactures, but also—
since it never utilised more than half Piedmontese production—as an
entrepôt for re-export of the surplus to central Europe. As a
precautionary measure, the head of the Parisian bureau responsible
for manufactures, C.A.Costaz, vetoed the transfer to Prato (in the
annexed department of the Arno) of models of textile machinery, lest
Prato entrepreneurs emerged to challenge established French
manufacturers. 22 The kingdom of Italy was subjected to similar
pressure, particularly with the imposition of the preferential trade
treaty of 1808, which gave the monopoly of cotton imports to French
producers and confirmed the high tariffs on Lombard and Venetian
exports to their traditional trading partners—Switzerland, Austria,
Bavaria and the German states. It was precisely this policy of turning
the Italian peninsula into a subordinate market for French
manufactures that precipitated relations between Napoleon and
Murat at Naples. For Murat, like the princes of the Rhenish
Confederation, reacted against France’s ever more peremptory
imperialistic economic policy by imposing his own highly protective
tariff barrier in 1809. Cotton, woollen and silk factories were set up
in Naples by foreign entrepreneurs with government support and
orders; raw cotton production rose in three to four years (according to
the American consul in 1815) from 5,000 to 20,000 bales.23
   The ability of the French government to enforce the blockade
depended on a range of only partly controllable factors: absence of
military campaigns, British hostility towards neutral shipping,
relations between different corps of the administration, the level of
commitment or corruption of individual bureaucrats, the degree of
resistance of France’s allies and local populations to the dislocation
