                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   153


of economic warfare launched by the decrees and annexations. But in
broader geographical terms, the authoritarian application of the
blockade, so blatantly in favour of France, distorted the normal flows
of trade, diminished the level of economic activities throughout
Europe, diverted capital from industrial investment into trading and
smuggling, and worsened relations at all levels between France and
the states and peoples within her sphere of influence.
   The consequences of the new measures for trade flows and
economic activities were immediately visible in all regions. The axis of
traffic on what had been Europe’s main waterway, the Rhine, which
had moved north-south with the import of colonial goods from
Holland, was reversed as colonial imports dried up and were replaced
by wood for construction and heating sent north from Baden and
Württemberg. Far more widespread were the negative effects of
Napoleon’s decision (12 November 1810) to establish a French-
controlled cotton route from the Ottoman empire in order to replace
overseas cotton supplies and thus damage both Britain and France’s
Continental competitors. From 1 January 1811 the established Levant
route—from Salonika via Austria, Germany and Switzerland to
Cologne, Mainz, Coblenz and Strasburg—was replaced by caravans
that crossed Macedonia and Bosnia and the Illyrian provinces to
Trieste, then bypassing Austria via Bavarian territory and the
kingdom of Italy to Piedmont. Sismondi, secretary to the Geneva
chamber of commerce, protested at the losses caused by so abrupt a
change, and in general at the impossibility of trading under
continuously changing regulations:

    It is a question of trading with a country with whom
    correspondence is slow and unsure, where there is a minute
    number of men with the appropriate knowledge and where all
    information is difficult to obtain. Hence trade has a basic need of
    time in order to change its former direction; it needs time above
    all because it has suffered from so many ruinous shocks which
    have terrified all speculators…. For some time now the financial
    laws of France and all the countries subjected to it have lacked all
    stability…. Commercial speculations are based on the existing
    order, whatsoever it is, and on the belief in its duration, so that
    every shock produces a disruption of private wealth, the ruin of
    mercantile enterprises and universal discouragement.31

The industrial crisis of 1810–11 was caused by the immediate slump
in trading outlets. As stocks built up, bankers and merchants tightened
