                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   151


cost Louis his throne in 1810. But French pressure, before and after
1810, merely shifted the epicentre of British activities further east, to
Danish Tönning in 1807 and then to Oldenburg and then Altona, just
outside Hamburg. Heligoland became the North Sea depot for British
goods, with Frankfurt as the distribution centre. Bourrienne, the
French representative at Hamburg, sold over 150,000 authorisations
for the export of illegally imported goods between August 1807 and
December 1810, at fixed rates of 0.25 per cent to 0.50 per cent the
value of the merchandise; he was estimated to have made 1 million
francs out of this private initiative, which implied the export of goods
worth 200 million to 400 million francs, or 60 million to 120 million
annually.26 It is hardly surprising that colonial cotton, sugar and coffee
continued to circulate in Germany, Switzerland and Austria at prices
often lower than at Paris, even after the 1810 decrees. As the North
Sea coast became more difficult for smuggled goods between 1810
and 1812, British ships increased their activities in the Balkans and
Adriatic, even clearing the Illyrian coast of corsairs in order to win the
goodwill of the local merchants. Bacher, the minister at Frankfurt,
noted the immediate effect of the Trianon decree (5 August 1810)
imposing prohibitive entry duties into France:

    Since the coasts of Holland and the Hanseatic cities as far as the
    Oder are no longer as accessible as in the past to colonial goods
    and merchandise, it is claimed that such traffic now takes a new
    direction. All the routes that lead from different points of Russia,
    on the one hand towards Prussia, on the other towards Poland
    and Moravia as far as Vienna, and from the Ottoman provinces
    into the Austrian empire, have been successively activated for
    English goods unloaded in the Levant ports. It is said that the
    Danube will replace the Rhine as the canal through which the
    states of the Rhenish Confederation will be able to obtain supplies
    in the future.27

In many regions smuggling offered the possibility of relatively high
earnings, whether for the trader or the worker. Gaudoit of Caen,
officially a lace merchant, imported illegal British goods worth
probably 750,000 francs between 1801 and 1808, from London via
Amsterdam or Rotterdam to Düsseldorf or Frankfurt, on to Paris,
whence they were redistributed to Bordeaux and Strasbourg. The
Rothschilds emerged as leading bankers at Frankfurt, London and
Paris by financing illegal trading and working both the British and
French licensing systems contemporaneously. Along the Rhine, a
