150    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and deprivation caused by the blockade. When the positive factors
tended to converge—as in the first half of 1808, when active warfare
was confined to Spain, President Jefferson prohibited American
trading, and the coasts were closely guarded—the result was a
downturn in British foreign trade. At other times, laxity of
surveillance led to the immediate revival and increase of smuggling,
with the support of the British navy.
   Smuggling, by definition, is impossible to quantify, as confiscations
are not necessarily proportionate to the quantity of goods illegally
transferred. But its structure, topography and intensity in these years
are well documented. Alongside supply of armies and speculation in
national properties, smuggling offered the major possibility of making
large fortunes. A graphic description is offered by Winn, an American
merchant in Malta, in a letter to his partners of 1 August 1808:

      The Rebecca arrived here 23 ult.° and sails again tomorrow with
      your humble servant on board for Trieste. I take $10,000 on
      board myself in Sugar and Coffee, and the Brig is filled up on
      freight…. As I am to be convoyed to and from…I consider the risk
      but very trifling. The principal danger, I fear, is in port…. I don’t
      fear the Austrians, but the French may make a sudden move and
      take Trieste, or they may march an army and frighten the
      Austrians into these measures, and then farewell to the little
      Rebecca and $10,000…the temptation is so great I can’t resist it.
      …Should I be fortunate, and find the markets in the state they
      were in at the date of the last advices, I shall make from 100 to
      150 per cent.24

Malta was one of a series of islands in the Mediterranean—like Sicily,
Corfu and Vis in the Adriatic—occupied and deployed by the British
as depots for colonial goods and manufactures to be smuggled on to
the mainland. Portuguese ports served the same purpose on the
Atlantic coast. But Holland and the northern European coasts were
inevitably the most attractive for British producers. Coquebert de
Montbret, who had a broader experience of European trading than
anyone in the imperial administration, had argued that the only
effective means to win over Holland was a genuine customs
confederation linking France, Holland and Italy: ‘Holland will never
be brought to reject English merchandise; it is a trading country, not
an industrial one, so that it is wholly in its interest to handle England
considerately’.25 The open collusion between the Dutch government,
bankers and traders was insufficient to restore Dutch prosperity and
