                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   155


capital and workers and the spread of mechanisation in textiles and
mining, in Lombardy and Piedmont as in Berg and Saxony, was
facilitated by the blockade and survived the short-run crisis of the
final years of French domination. The Napoleonic-style Customs
union, because it was so one-sided, diverted trade rather than creating
it. But it led to a heightened awareness of the advantages of
protection, as a form of defence against unequal industrial
competition, as a source of public revenue, as a means of reducing the
administrative costs of government. Administrative rather than
economic reasons explain the initial creation of the Zollverein in
Restoration Germany.
    If the economic consequences of the blockade thus need to be
nuanced, there can be no doubt about the negative social consequences.
The blockade sowed doubts, aroused resentment and even led to revolt.
Within France, manufacturers as loyal as Oberkampf protested at ‘the
tyranny or, more exactly, the piracy’ of the French generals in Spain.33
The public burning of confiscated British manufactures in 1812—worth
2 million francs in Amsterdam, 500,000 francs in Hamburg, 200,000
francs in Frankfurt—outraged the bourgeois sense of property. Above
all, the behaviour of the corps of Customs officers, whose numbers had
increased from 12,000 in the Year V (1796–7) to over 35,000 by 1810,
aroused hostility at every level. In July 1809, 300 French Customs
officers crossed the Rhine and cut off all communications between
Holland and Berg without consulting the rulers and administrators of
these two formally independent states; Jerome of Westphalia
experienced similar contempt for his sovereignty. The Danish
representative at Hamburg, Rist, noted the indignities to which the
Customs officers subjected the ordinary folk:

    The Customs was no longer satisfied with stopping the carriages
    and searching them at their convenience…; pedestrians were also
    subjected rigorously to body searches, and those less well dressed
    were touched all over; even women of a better class were
    subjected to this.34

In Berg, economic crisis and unemployment led to open revolt by
industrial workers in January 1813. The hostility of the local
population was compounded by the behaviour of the Customs
officials, as they attempted to perform the impossible task of sealing
off the imperial frontiers between Holland and the grand-duchy, and
searched houses in the inland cities to rout out deposits of illegal
goods. It was hardly surprising that Customs and droits réunis
