154    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


credit terms and raised interest rates, leading to bankruptcies of small
firms and speculators in all major cities, from Paris and Lyons to
Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Hamburg and Basel. Some industries within
the Empire recovered, holding or even increasing production in 1812–
13, like the cotton firms of Mulhouse and the Belgian Bauwens at
Passy, or the coal-mines of Jemappes. The Italian market undoubtedly
gave a respite to French manufacturers, like the cotton printers of the
Parisian region and the Haut-Rhin. But by these years French
protectionism had become increasingly inward-looking. Holland and
the Hanseatic cities, although annexed by France, continued to be
excluded from her markets by the new Customs barriers until October
1812. The results were disastrous: the closure of the ports to colonial
goods meant the collapse of Dutch processing industries. Hamburg,
which had replaced Amsterdam as the financial centre of the
Continent since the years of the Consulate, used its wealth to redeem
confiscated British goods and relieve the poverty of its citizens by a
sophisticated charitable system.
   Outside France’s frontiers, the effects were everywhere negative
and in some cases disastrous. Within the Rhenish Confederation,
many of the states sought protection and above all public revenue, on
the model of France, through tariff barriers. Others, like Austria, in
practice failed to apply the 1810 decrees, thus further disadvantaging
states like Berg, whose textile workers migrated to Austrian Moravia
and Bohemia. In the kingdom of Italy, the crisis of over-production
that resulted from the blockage of market outlets was so widespread
that by August 1811 Montalivet was paradoxically suggesting to
Napoleon that contraband exports of silk to Britain be encouraged. It
would be advantageous, he wrote,

      to authorise the smugglers at Dunkirk to carry organzines to
      England. Their operations will be extremely active again in a
      month or six weeks’ time as the nights grow longer. This sort of
      trading is a normal activity, practised at all times, the outlets it
      procures are important.32

It is always difficult to assess the responsibility of political measures in
economic conjunctures. The blockade, even after 1810, cannot be
compared with the total economic warfare of 1939–45. Nor can the
crises of specific industries or regions be ascribed necessarily to the
blockade: Dutch industry and trade was already in decline before the
1790s; labour costs in Berg textile firms were already making
production uncompetitive before 1810. Movement of entrepreneurs,
