                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   161


Piedmontese Alps or Neuchâtel, battalions of chasseurs were allowed;
but they tended to desert across the frontiers.
   Analysis of resistance to conscription shows definite regional
variations. As one would expect, the evaders were most numerous in
areas where the physical terrain facilitated evasion, in mountainous,
heavily forested or frontier areas. Religious or ethnic differences
sometimes counted, which explains the greater opposition in the
Flemish departments like Escaut, compared to French-speaking
Belgium. By contrast, in areas where there were strong pre-
Revolutionary traditions of military service—as in the northern and
eastern frontier regions of France, the Swiss cantons, Sarre on the left
bank of the Rhine, or the Monferrato in Piedmont—conscription
proved far easier, even in the early years. It is probably such discipline
that explains the positive response to conscription in a poor, wooded
and mountainous department like the Sarre. Desertion after
enrolment, usually on the march to the military depots, would not
seem to display any particular pattern of regional differentiation,
presumably because the conscripts had finally accepted their lot.
   ‘Insubordination’, the official description for evasion of
conscription, steadily diminished over the years. The turning point can
be dated in 1805–6, coinciding with the end of the period of
Napoleon’s reorganisation of his army. In the Rhine left bank
departments, desertion accounted for about 10 per cent of the annual
levies between 1800 and 1805, falling sharply to under 2 per cent in
1806–10, with 1809 as a crisis year for the authorities, because of the
imposition of a supplementary levy; from 1811 such pre-conscription
resistance virtually disappeared, even though these were the years
with the heaviest levies. Only in the final debacle in 1813 was there a
sharp rise in the number of deserters among serving soldiers. The
Belgian departments followed a similar trajectory.
   Such a development is paradoxical, as the enforced removal of men
for an indefinite duration, if not permanently through death, touched
the most sensitive nerve of the familial and communal organisation of
daily life. There can be no doubt about the massive hostility of the
populations in the early years both in France and the allied states: in
the kingdom of Italy, conscription was enforced only by virtual press-
gangs. It seems likely that the increasing efficiency of the
administrative machine accustomed the people to obedience. The
passive resistance of entire communities was certainly broken by
transferring their administrative responsibilities to the sub-prefects
and prefects. The resentment against substitution as a discriminatory
measure of wealth would appear to have diminished as the annual
