                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   165


Jacquin’s experiences within France were applicable throughout
Europe, wherever there was conscription. In Catalonia desertion was
as continuous a drain on recruitment to the Spanish armies as ever it
was to the French. Even patriotism had its limits, particularly in a
region whose population had previously been exempt from
conscription. The French prefect at Lerida could not be accused of
wishful thinking when he wrote: They detest military service and it’s
only by force that they can be torn from their families to serve in the
rebel bands’.47


ARMIES
Mathieu-Louis Molé, descendant of a dynasty of magistrates and the
most civilian of Napoleon’s ministers, had no doubts that Napoleon
was happiest when he was with his soldiers:

    The Army above all was the object of the First Consul’s care and
    his warmest concern. The fortnightly reviews that he held at the
    Carrousel and in the courtyard of the Tuileries were famous
    throughout Europe. The beauty of the troops and the precision of
    the manoeuvres were not what attracted most attention. One
    came to see Bonaparte in his element, amidst such rich and elegant
    uniforms he was recognisable in his single-toned dress, his small
    hat without braids and, if it was raining, his grey overcoat. When
    the troops were assembled, he dismounted and walked among the
    ranks. He stopped in front of each soldier, examined his uniform,
    called those he recognised by their name—and there were always
    a large number—recalled the occasion on which they had
    distinguished themselves, accepted their requests with good grace
    but without committing himself to any of them. In my opinion, in
    no other role did he reveal himself so directly, nor display more
    ably and profoundly the art of leading men.48

Napoleon upheld and magnified the tribute rendered by the
Revolution to its defenders. Indifferent to the tiresome details of
military logistics and administration, to the point of often leaving his
soldiers without pay, food or adequate clothing and shoes, he never
wavered in his conviction that armies were only as good as the quality
of their men. If a marshal’s baton was no longer carried in any
private’s sack, soldiers and non-commissioned officers could still
make careers, so long as they possessed a minimal education. Veterans
continued to be lodged and honoured at the Invalides, as before and
