164   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


was that they deserted so rapidly. Colonel Noguès created a
Westphalian regiment mostly of Prussian, Austrian and Russian
prisoners; when he took them to Hamburg in 1808, he lost thirty a
day, bribed by the British and Russian ambassadors.45
   Conscription created massive resistance and evasion everywhere,
except where there were earlier traditions of military service, as in
Switzerland or at Mainz where the Elector had already introduced it.
Resistance was particularly marked in regions which previously had
been specifically exempted from conscription, as in Mark, formerly
Prussian, now part of Berg. But where the social structure remained
heavily seigneurial, conscription could never succeed, because of the
dependence on the landed owners. In Bavaria entire social categories
were exempted when conscription was introduced in 1804–5, and
only with the invasion of 1809, and then with the heavy demands of
1812, was the system tightened.
   Elsewhere, as in the Italic republic from 1803, Venetia from 1806
or Holland from 1810, the familiar pattern of flight, self-mutilation,
local collusion and heavy-handed bureaucratic measures was the
order of the day. In regions where banditry had been common, as in
southern Piedmont or Calabria, evaders and deserters were seen as
reinforcing their numbers and structures, and certainly did so with the
collapse of French power in 1813. Elsewhere, particularly where the
priests preached obedience and resignation, as in Venetia, evaders
tended to give up, at the most after two to three years, through the
material difficulties of living in hiding, dependent on kin and friends.
Those who could afford them bought substitutes for their sons; but
besides the rising cost, there was the danger of desertion by
substitutes: one unfortunate citizen of Padua paid four times, as the
first two deserted and the third was then drawn by lot for the reserves.
In 1813 Napoleon illegally conscripted those who had bought
substitutes.
   As in France, violent methods were deployed to overcome
resistance. Villages, towns, even a city like Milan, were surrounded by
troops and subjected to house-by-house searches, with the arrest of all
males of conscript age. Once captured, they were rapidly marched
away from their local areas, to diminish the chances of desertion.
Jacquin, a veteran in service since 1798, recalled how he marched
from Brittany to Turin in 1806 in order to be close at hand to receive
recruits from Provence: ‘there was no way of getting any of them to
Brittany, as they deserted en route through fear of being embarked on
ships. The recruiting non-commissioned officers responsible for
accompanying the detachments arrived at Vannes, as it were, alone’.46
