166   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


during the Revolution. The widows and orphans of soldiers killed in
battle could expect assistance, the wounded received pensions. The
recognition of obligations by civil society towards the military once
they had ceased to fight was without parallel in Europe.
   Officers received particular attention, to the point that Napoleon
personally followed their promotions, even at the level of lieutenant
and captain. But the favours lavished upon the officer corps did not
derive purely from the Emperor’s passionate interest in the ceremonies
and ritual of the parade-ground. In the hierarchical philosophy of the
regime, officers were crucially important for at least three reasons.
First, because in the confusion of the battlefield, victory depended,
even more than on the officers’ bravery, on their ‘talent’—and by
talent was understood technical instruction in the art of war. Secondly,
the role of officers in the world of the military was seen as
corresponding to that of the elites in civil society: the example of the
few was necessary, if not sufficient (for good order and discipline were
also required), to ensure the proper comportment of the many.
Thirdly, service within the officer corps was seen as the means of
overcoming the divisions inherited from the past, whether between the
aristocracy and the bourgeoisie, or between the old and new citizens
and subjects of France.
   Instruction became increasingly important as the key to promotion,
alongside number of years in rank and bravery. Indeed, officers
sometimes got together to pay ‘military teachers’ for lessons in
mathematics, map-reading and foreign languages.49 Promotion in the
artillery and engineering corps was virtually dependent on
examinations. The stress on technical expertise, so characteristic of
the Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience, was not confined to
France, but remained strong in Italy: the military academy at Modena
had long-established traditions; at Naples an engineering school was
set up; if the outstanding Piedmontese artillery school was suppressed
on annexation, its personnel continued to collaborate in French
military schools and the école polytechnique, as well as the University
of Turin.
   Military schools and academies were of importance not only to
provide appropriate instruction and discipline to the future officers,
but also to ‘amalgamate’ the elites in the service of the state. They
were to act as the military equivalent of the auditors in the council of
state, training grounds for the most able young, where talent
supported by wealth replaced birth. It was not surprising that Saint-
Cyr and La Flèche were imitated in the allied states. The University of
Pavia in the kingdom of Italy was transformed into a military
