                              The practices of conquest: exploitation   163


difficulties already experienced by the French, but with variations
which are revealing of the different traditions and social structures.
   A problem common to many of these countries was how to raise
troops rapidly without an appropriate administrative structure, at a
time when neighbouring states were in the same predicament. Two
long-established solutions were tried: enrolment of convicts and
sometimes orphans, and recruitment of prisoners and deserters from
other armies. The Neapolitan contingent to Spain in 1807 consisted of
convicts and captured brigands; when Napoleon demanded a further
contingent of 3,000 for Germany in August 1812, they were taken
from the Vicaria prison and were of such poor quality that 1,000 were
sent back.43 The Dutch, a people of naval bellicosity with a horror of
landed warfare, traditionally bought mercenaries, German by
preference. The size of army Napoleon demanded from his brother
Louis (30,000 to 40,000 men) created multiple repercussions, because
of the Dutch refusal to introduce conscription (except for orphans);
instead, they offered high pay and bonuses to encourage Dutch
volunteers, while enlisting Germans and Swiss and Prussian prisoners
held at Mainz and elsewhere on the left bank. The result was that
when the Berg administrators tried to meet their commitment of 5,000
soldiers in 1807, they found that Dutch recruiting officers had
preceded them. General Damas, appointed by Murat to create the new
Berg army, sent his recruiters to the military prisons in Nancy and
Dijon to enlist prisoners; but because the Spanish, Swiss, Dutch and
Poles had already been taken, they managed to raise only 800 and
were forced to turn their attention to neighbouring Hesse. Berthier,
newly created prince of Neuchâtel, decided there was no need to
introduce conscription, given the tradition of military service, and in
this same year (1807) forbade recruitment of his subjects by other
states. When the kingdom of Westphalia was created, also in 1807,
van Hogendorp (until recently Dutch minister of war) arranged for
the soldiers originating from the ex-Prussian territories of Westphalia
and recruited by Holland to be transferred to Jerome’s service.44 The
same pattern of fishing in neighbours’ pools could be observed in
Italy: evaders and deserters who fled across the border from the
neighbouring French departments found themselves conscripted in the
Italian republic; Neapolitan recruiters for Joseph tried to persuade
soldiers to desert from Beauharnais’ army. Murat’s prolonged
hesitation in introducing conscription in Naples (1809), and the
practice of convict supplementation derived from the resistance of the
landed barons and worry about the reaction of the lazzaroni of the
capital. But the danger of recruiting convicts or captured prisoners
