160   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


considerable scope for evasion, were compounded by passive
resistance and open collusion by local authorities, who covered up for
those who failed to turn up to the examination or conscription lottery.
   With due statistical zeal and closer correspondence to reality than
in fields where private collaboration was essential, the head of the
conscription bureau of the ministry of war, A.A.Hargenvilliers, drew
up tables specifying the size of levy in each department, the number
rejected as physically handicapped or too small, and the differences
between the numbers of those called up, despatched and actually
enrolled into the army, attributable to desertions at the various
stages.39 An average of one in three of the recruitable classes was
rejected as unfit between 1798 and 1809. Of those chosen, to 1804–
5, 8.7 per cent were judged draft evaders (réfractaires) as they failed
to turn up, and a further 33.5 per cent subsequently deserted. In the
nine Belgian departments, the proportion of evaders rose from 10.7
per cent (till 1804–5) to 42.4 per cent in 1805–9, while that of
deserters fell from 49.3 per cent to 14.8 per cent.
   Local studies uniformly document the general hostility to
conscription under the Directory, extending well into the Napoleonic
years. As Alan Forrest argues,40 the opposition from the peasantry—
which exploded at its most spectacular in the Vendée rising—reflected
the sharp shift in the composition of the French army from an urban
to a heavily peasant one, a shift accentuated by the practice of
substitution, which tended to diminish the presence of reasonably
wealthy (and hence primarily) urban families. The experience of such
wide-spread hostility made the authorities hesitant about imposing
conscription in some regions, both in France and the satellite states.
Thus the Vendée was initially exempted from the Jourdan law; its
attempted imposition in the Flemish departments led to a peasant
revolt (1798). In the kingdom of Naples, Joseph Bonaparte never
imposed conscription, while Murat, when introducing it in 1809, kept
it initially at the very low proportion of one in 1,500 inhabitants
(compared to one in 500 in the early years in the Belgian
departments). The more recalcitrant among the newly annexed
departments (in Belgium, the left bank of the Rhine and elsewhere)
tended to be given lighter quotas in the initial conscription levies,
though this was then adjusted in subsequent years within each region.
Similar difficulties were experienced in the coastal areas: Lebrun
hesitated immediately to introduce conscription of sailors in Liguria,
although by 1810 rougher methods were being used in the Hanseatic
ports. In mountainous frontier areas, like the Pyrenees, the
