162   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


levies enrolled ever larger numbers, as brothers, friends and entire
classes of age were marched away. There are instances of self-
regulation, where the conscripted justified or denounced their peers
who had failed to turn up. At least in the heyday of the Empire the
Church gave its support to the authorities, with parish priests
preaching obedience. Amnesties had some effect. But ultimately it was
the use of force against recalcitrant conscripts that ensured obedience:
spies, billeting and above all mobile columns broke the back of
insubordination, arresting 63,000 in 92 departments between 1810
and 1812. To this can be added great care in obeying the letter of the
law, not least through fear of sparking off mass popular revolts, such
as occurred in the Tyrol in 1809. The recaptured deserters were then
despatched to safe locations, like the isle of Elba, where they were
trained with notable professionalism.
    Within France’s frontiers, conscription had been forced into
acceptance by the civilian population—whether French, Flemish,
German, Swiss or Italian—as an unpleasant but inevitable fact of life.
A bureaucratic machinery had been developed, whose methods could
be applied to newly annexed regions like Holland and the Hanseatic
cities, whose populations were still recalcitrant: Napoleon despatched
Real, a councillor of state, to Holland and his military aides-de-camp
to Germany in 1811 to enforce obedience to conscription and round
up evaders.41 Outside the frontiers, it proved more difficult to develop
similarly effective techniques.
    Napoleon introduced conscription wherever he assumed direct
control—in the Italian republic in 1802, Berg in 1807, Holland and
the Hanseatic departments in 1810. The only exception was at the
extreme periphery of the Empire, the south-eastern frontier of the
Illyrian provinces, where French civilisation met the once threatening
Muslim Ottoman empire. Here, in military Croatia (as it was
described), the Austrian system of permanent military collective
settlements (zadruga) was left in place. Elsewhere the Emperor
insisted that his dependants and allies raise armies for his wars. A
prime reason for the creation of the Rhenish Confederation was to
obtain an abundant supply of German troops. For, as he advised
Murat, newly nominated duke of Berg: ‘According to French practice,
troops cost too much; Bavarian style, they are much cheaper’.42
    The rulers of the satellite states were also anxious to create their
own armies, some—like Eugene de Beauharnais and Murat—because
of their military vocation, others—like the Polish nobles—as a pledge
of their independence, all because it would reduce the crippling cost of
maintaining French troops on their soil. Everywhere they ran into the
