                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   167


academy. Max Joseph of Bavaria and Louis of Holland both set up
military schools; given the military reluctance of the Dutch, it was not
surprising that in their school discipline was attenuated and education
accentuated. For Lacuée, the military schools would unite the future
elite of the Empire more effectively than the state schools organised by
the Imperial University; the list of prize-winners at Saint-Cyr in the
Year XI included boys from annexed Italian and German
departments.50 The creation of elite corps in the armies served the
same function. The guards of honour and velites restricted to the
nobility and wealthy, whose social exclusiveness attracted volunteers,
were introduced into the kingdoms of Italy and Naples, on the model
of France.
    The entire ethos of society shifted dramatically away from the
critical attitudes towards the army of the enlightenment. Honour
became the key concept, in the fullness of its military connotations.
‘Even for a Frenchman it is difficult to explain with precision what
honour is’, Pierre Crouzet exhorted the pupils at Saint-Cyr soon after
Austerlitz, citing the examples of Bayard, Duguesclin, Turenne, Jeanne
d’Arc and—curiously—the Dutch Barneveldt.

    Facts, far better than words, can define and prove its existence.
    Honour, gentlemen, is the second religion of the French warrior.
    …Sons of our heroes, consider your august Emperor as your
    father: overwhelmed by his benevolence, you owe him your
    blood. …For him you must live, for him you must die: to sacrifice
    your life for him is to sacrifice it for honour itself, which has never
    had a more noble image on earth.51

The cult of individual glory and a romantic image of the military life
were again leading values, as can be seen in Stendhal’s Journal of his
military campaigns in these years, as much as in his later novels.
   There is considerable evidence that the families of the notables, not
only in France, but also in the annexed regions, responded to the
appeal of a military career. In Paris, the sons of merchants, land-
owners and rentiers volunteered alongside students, merchants’
assistants, notaries’ clerks. In the Belgian departments, there were
initially over 2,600 volunteers and velites, or nearly 4 per cent of the
conscripted in the Years VII to XIII, although the numbers fell
dramatically in the following years (523 in 1805–9). In Neuchâtel, the
leading families sent their children to Berthier with the advice: In the
career you are about to enter, he is the most powerful protector that
you could possibly meet. It is essential that you be one of the first to
