                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   175


defined as ‘proprietors’, ‘farmers’, or ‘functionaries’, ‘merchants’ or
members of the liberal professions. One-third was described as
proprietors, but since a large proportion of those listed as belonging to
local administrations (18 per cent) were also dependent on their landed
incomes, the category of landowner covered probably half the total
number of notables; the functionaries were the next largest group (16
per cent), more than the liberal professions (14 per cent) or traders and
manufacturers (11 per cent). These were Napoleon’s ‘masses of granite’,
who were to hold together ‘the grains of sand-dust’ of the ordinary
people by their example, connections, wealth and influence; from their
ranks were chosen the men of ‘talent’ to serve the state in civilian or
military capacity.
   There was a strong continuity in professions between the notability
of ancien regime France and that of the Empire: if the most senior
officials of Louis XVI’s administration and army had vanished, the
middle ranks retained their natural place among the ruling elites. But
this continuity extended beyond occupations to social positions and
wealth: most of the wealthiest landlords were nobles. In France, their
strong presence in the departmental listings of the top twelve land tax
payers (1802) reflected the remarkable resilience of the old noble
families in the face of the persecutions and confiscations of the
previous decade. In the annexed territories and satellite states, the very
absence of the intense Revolutionary experience ensured the
continuing influence of the great aristocratic families, whose wealth
was based on land. Naturally this was not the case in regions where
great estates had never been characteristic, such as Savoy, Haut- and
Bas-Rhin or Léman, nor did it apply (except in the Orangist northern
provinces) to mercantile societies like the Dutch. But in the
Piedmontese departments in 1810, for example, 114 of the 150 names
in the lists of the 30 ‘most heavily taxed’ were ex-nobles, while in the
Italic kingdom three-quarters of the electoral college of the
‘proprietors’ were the old nobility. Further east in Europe, supremely
in Poland, there was never even any pretence at challenging the
continuity of aristocratic political and social power.66
   To conclude from this that little had changed from the ancien
regime would be erroneous. If great landed families had survived the
vicissitudes of political upheaval, they had still lost their fiscal
privileges. The weight of the land tax remained highly
disproportionate between departments, and even the radical decision
to introduce the theoretically impartial cadaster (1808) was weakened
by local opposition. But equality before the law meant equal liability
