174   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


if the army continued to offer a career open to talent, this was truer
for the French than for the others, as too many French officers viewed
the satellite armies as providing alternative opportunities for quick
advancement. This may have been worse in Italy than elsewhere, but
certainly the presence of French officers in the kingdoms of Italy and
particularly of Naples was a source of constant friction. More in
general, the behaviour of military commanders, not only outside
France, but also within the new territories—of which Davout in the
Hanseatic departments offers a prime example—outraged impotent
civilian administrators.64
    Gaetano Mosca considered that the subordination of the armed
forces to civilian authority was among the most distinctive and crucial
features of European civilisation. He attributed this to the integration
of the officer corps within the ruling elites, contemporaneous to the
rigid class divisions within the armies. Military intervention in the
political life of post-Napoleonic Spain offers the most obvious
exception to this generalisation about the history of Europe since
1815. But the pre-eminent role assigned to the army and the privileges
given to the officer corps in Napoleonic society itself must raise
questions about the nature of their subordination.


SOCIAL PRIVILEGE
Aspirations to social equality had flickered and died like fireflies in the
summer’s night of the Revolution. Long before Brumaire, equality had
been restored—but in restrictive manner—to the sphere initially
assigned it by the deputies of the National Assembly—a political
weapon against privilege, defined juridically as equality before the law.
The Consulate succeeded not only because it imposed political stability,
but also because it ensured continuity with the social identity of the
Directory: ownership of property marked an ever sharper divide from
the labouring classes. The very insistence in identifying those regarded
as notables at every level, the listings drawn up repeatedly by the
administrators for this purpose, the terminology employed to describe
their qualities, are all revealing of the strictly hierarchical representation
of society under Napoleon. In the heyday of the Empire, in 1810, over
100,000 notables were classified by the prefects in tables of candidates
judged suitable for membership of the departmental and sub-prefectural
electoral colleges.65 The revenues attributed to them ranged widely,
from over 50,000 francs to under 500 francs, reflecting the low level of
wealth in many departments. Landed property was the common
denominator of all professional categories, whether these notables were
