                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   171


services meant a far greater toll of death through disease and
hospitalisation than on the actual battlefield. Napoleon’s contempt
for human life, masked by his charismatic presence among his
soldiers, was ultimately responsible for the debacle of the Grande
Armée.
   A consequence of Napoleon’s need for ever larger military forces,
combined with the decline in the numbers of veterans, was an increase
in the numbers of soldiers provided by the satellite states. The
Napoleonic armies had always contained many ‘foreigners’, just as the
forces of the satellite states included French officers, and all armies
utilised captured troops. Service in Napoleon’s armies offered prestige
and greater career prospects, particularly in the Grande Armée, the
army directly commanded by the emperor. ‘French’ generals included
seventy Italians, thirty-two Poles, fifteen Swiss, eighteen Dutch, ten
Belgians, twenty Germans and nineteen Irish and English. French
armies of course included conscripts from the annexed departments.
In the absence of detailed studies (except for Belgium), it is impossible
to know with any precision what proportion of the total forces these
represented. The nine Belgian departments provided 90,000 to
100,000 soldiers by between 1798 and 1809, the six Piedmontese
departments about 95,000 between 1802 and 1814.57 Napoleon
deliberately and systematically incorporated such new Frenchmen
within the existing regiments and battalions, in order to prevent the
development of significant ‘national’ armies. Piedmontese proposals
for a national guard were blocked and only volunteers were allowed
to remain in Piedmontese regiments. Given the legendary reputation
of Swiss soldiers, the refusal to allow the formation of a federal army,
and even a Swiss military school, was perhaps inevitable. Instead, the
autonomy of the cantons was stressed by allowing each its own
militia; the contribution of the cantons to French armies may have
amounted to 20,000 men.
   The policy towards armed forces in the satellite and allied states
was more ambivalent. On the one hand, such armies might be used as
the basis to create or reinforce a national identity. After all, this was
one of the functions of the imperial armies, as Napoleon angrily
reminded Lebrun when he failed to conscript 15,000 Genoese sailors:
‘I repeat, only when I shall have sailors aboard my ships will this
country have become wholly French’.58 On the other hand, allied
armies were essential for the wars. A condition of the creation of the
Confederation of the Rhine was that its states supply 63,000 men. Of
these, Bavaria was responsible for 30,000. To forge an effective
Bavarian army, Montgelas had asked Napoleon for a French general
