178   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


however exaggerated, confirmed a contemporary impression difficult
to refute. Under the Empire the military had acquired the visible
characteristics of a privileged caste. In official ceremonies, the officers
insisted on and ultimately won precedence over their civilian
counterparts. Their uniforms set the tone for civilian administrators.
Their marriages were controlled by the minister of war to ensure they
did not demean their standing.
   From France, the privileged position attributed to the military
spread outwards across Europe. This was hardly surprising, given the
high proportion of generals who ruled or governed territories—from
Murat and Eugene de Beauharnais to the marshals in Spain and
Germany—not to speak of the plethora of French officers seeking to
make careers in the satellite states. Nor could it be otherwise in a
country like Poland, where the aristocratic officers of the vastly
expanded army could legitimately assert that the nation’s newly
recovered independence was primarily dependent on military valour.
Perhaps more unexpected, and certainly misplaced, was Louis’
decision to affirm Holland’s autonomy in the military sphere by the
sudden nomination of Dutch marshals. As General van Hogendorp,
minister of war, recalled: ‘It was absurd and pointless to create six
marshals for a small state like Holland’; the only effect was to irritate
Napoleon by the implicit challenge to his exclusive monopoly of such
promotions.72 The social origins of the officer corps in the different
satellite states would merit study. One can confidently surmise that,
while the local nobilities lost their monopoly (except in Poland),
outside France the officers lacked the genuinely popular component
that had characterised the French revolutionary armies. Whether in
Holland or Italy, Bavaria or Poland, the military set the tone for
society, through their parades and uniforms as much as through their
exorbitant demands on public resources. Indeed, within states like
Naples and Spain the endemic threat of war in regions such as
Calabria or Valencia led to a virtual militarisation of society, where
the senior civilian administrators were often former officers, taxes
were collected by the army, and the donning of uniforms throughout
the civil administration symbolised the presence of the state.

If the military was encouraged to affirm itself as a caste, the nobility was
deliberately created as an accompaniment to the Empire. The
assumption of the imperial title required a Court and the assignation of
appropriate titles to the sovereign’s family. In the one and the other case
the protocol of the ancien regime was assiduously copied. Even more
symptomatic of the blatant desire to affirm the hierarchical order of an
