170   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


through the artificial conditions of military life into a prolonged
socialisation that cut across linguistic and geographical boundaries.
The linguistic problems should not be underestimated. Noguès, who
served Louis in Holland, explained somewhat complacently the
failure of the French General Gracin to put some Dutch regiments
through their paces in a review ordered by Bernadotte: ‘In fact he did
not know how to issue his orders in Dutch and instead of saying
gueswinde pas (quicken pace), he pronounced chuinte pas, which
means pig pace’. But Jacquin, who spoke only French, when he found
himself alone in an Austrian village, managed to persuade the hostile
peasants that he was not really their enemy.56 The numbers and
nationalities of the men who fought in or against Napoleon’s armies
ensured that the campaigns would enter the collective memory of vast
numbers of families, in a manner subsequently paralleled only by the
First World War. It would appear that for many, particularly the
officers, the sense of making history more than compensated for the
disappointments and discomforts. Even so unusual and sensitive an
officer as Stendhal—who not only read all the time and was bored by
the company of his peers, but also witnessed the bloodshed of the
1809 Austrian war and the burning of Moscow—retained his
admiration for this military epic.

Napoleon had concentrated on the reorganisation of his armies
between the peace of Amiens and Austerlitz. The aim of such a
reorganisation was to strengthen their strategic flexibility, by
increasing the autonomy of the individual armies under a single
supreme command, which could always summon them at short notice
to march rapidly across Europe during campaigns. All the armies
depended on the core of Revolutionary or Consulate veterans, who
disciplined the recruits as they marched them to their bases and
tempered their performance on the battlefield. But as the demands on
the troops grew heavier, their quality declined. From about 1806 the
proportion of troops with experience of the Revolutionary wars
dropped rapidly. In consequence the manoeuvres under fire, which
were central to Revolutionary and Napoleonic tactics, proved less
possible and the later battles became ever bloodier: 8,000 were killed
at Austerlitz (1805), 30,000 at Wagram (1809) and Borodino (1812),
25,000 of a total army of 72,000 at Waterloo (1815). Napoleon tried
to compensate for the inexperience of his infantry by strengthening
the role of the artillery, but his arsenals were never able to produce
enough guns. Even worse, despite the major improvements in field
surgery introduced by Larrey and Percy, the inadequacy of the medical
