                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   177


Alessandria in Piedmont and Juliers in the Rhineland. Confirmation of
the military settlements of Croatia, the zadrugas, may well have been
encouraged by similar sentiments. In the same vein, 6,000 respectable
dowries were offered in 1810 to induce veterans to marry and
reproduce.69
   There can be no doubt that, as Napoleon became more
conservative over the years, his preference for the military became
more marked. Victorious war offered officers and soldiers multiple
opportunities for income supplementation, hierarchically structured
according to grade. The enormous fortunes of favourite marshals—
some of whom, like Berthier, Masséna and Ney, accumulated official
incomes of 700,000 to over 1,200,000 francs annually—were the
result of Napoleon’s generosity, not to speak of his normal willingness
to turn a blind eye to the ‘voluntary donations’ they extracted in
occupied territories. But apart from military campaigns, the military
were granted solid material benefits and growing social prestige. The
officers received stipends that, particularly at the higher grades,
compared very favourably to those of the civilian administrators.
Over 4,500 wounded soldiers and officers were given incomes ranging
from 500 francs to over 4,000 francs. Despite the civil code, officers’
property was given protection against seizure, free education was
enjoyed by their daughters, scholarships to military schools were
given to their sons (and from 1812, exclusively to them). Retired
officers were employed in the civil administration, especially at the
lower levels, as head clerks in the police, Customs and financial
administrations, where presumably the requirements of discipline and
force particularly suited their military qualifications.70
   The duke of Wellington recalled an imperial France that, in his old
age, had already acquired the blurred and inaccurate contours of a
mythical past:

    That country was constituted upon a military basis. All its
    institutions were framed for the purpose of forming and
    maintaining its armies with a view to conquest. All the offices and
    rewards of the State were reserved in the first instance exclusively
    for the army. An officer, even a private soldier, might look to the
    sovereignty of a kingdom as a reward for his services.71

Wellington’s memories were coloured by his experiences in Portugal
where, to someone of his aristocratic and military background, his
French opponents—Junot, Soult, Masséna—may well have seemed
upstarts who had risen from the ranks. Nevertheless, his comment,
