                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   169


1801 until they received their backlog of eleven months’ pay and new
shoes. His notebook reveals what was undoubtedly the most common
experience of soldiers in Napoleon’s armies—marches across huge
distances, alternating with periods in the barracks. He marched an
average 6 leagues a day (or 24 kilometres), but when necessary would
cover 10–11 leagues. He marched across Switzerland, Germany,
Prussia and Austria in 1799–1800, across France in 1801 to
Salamanca, where he stayed only twenty-eight days before hastening
up to Brest. In October 1805, from Vannes in Brittany he crossed
northern France and Belgium by forced marches to Nijmegen in
Holland in ten weeks, resting for two weeks before retracing his steps
(presumably lighter on equipment) in five weeks. Within months, he
marched from Vannes to Chambéry in six weeks and then slowly
across the Alps to Turin with his recruits. Late in November 1806 he
hastened by forced marches across the Po plain to Bergamo and
Brescia, and then via the Trentino across Germany, marching 9–14
leagues a day, to Saxony and Pomerania on the Baltic (July 1807).
After a leisurely walk back to France, he was given sixteen days’ leave
in the December snows to visit his family for the first time in eleven
years. By 1809 he was marching through Austria and in 1811 was
stationed in Holland.
   Officers rarely marched (unless their horses were shot). Their
abundant memoirs, on which the Napoleonic myth was fed, mostly
recall battles, great men and the quality of their lodgings. For many,
like A.Noguès, one of three martial brothers, military activity appears
as the sole purpose of life: ‘When offered…employment at Court, I
replied that I preferred battlefields in Germany to standing around
like a crane in antechambers’.55 The ferocity of the war in Spain and
the debacle of the Russian campaign made at least some officers
confess to less bellicose feelings. Nevertheless, alongside the bravado,
a constant theme of these memoirs, is the nagging sense of rivalry, of
petty injustices in the attribution of awards or promotion. Jacquin’s
disgust at being passed over for the Legion of Honour is at one with
the acid criticisms of Thiébault, Marbot and innumerable other
officers that acknowledgement of true valour should have been
subordinated by marshals like Davout and Masséna and lesser
generals to personal favouritisms and clientelistic considerations. For
the price of honour—a consequence of its renewed centrality in the
values of the time—was how to obtain its public recognition.
   Personal experience of participation in the Napoleonic wars
remains opaque, but was undoubtedly profound. The armies acted as
a melting pot for both officers and soldiers, forcing the recruits
