176   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


to taxation, as well as access to landownership and to careers
unhampered by legal restrictions.
   Nevertheless, already under the Consulate, one sector of society
was regarded as more equal than others—the military. Recognition of
individual acts of military valour by the award of arms of honour
dated back to the Directory. The Legion of Honour (19 May 1802),
forced through the council of state by Napoleon despite the
reservations of some councillors, was justified precisely in terms of
recompense of honour. For Roederer, it was a means of shifting power
away from the Brumairean notability of the electoral colleges to
Bonaparte, on whom nominations to the Legion depended. The
Legion was given a military and hierarchical structure (organised in
fifteen cohorts, with grand officers, commandants, officers and
legionaries) and was presented as a means of strengthening cohesion
in a society atomised by the Revolution. It was expected, Lucien
Bonaparte told the Tribunate, that ‘this happy system of union
established among the legionaries will hopefully spread through
society’.67 To facilitate the effectiveness of this collective military
injection into civil society, the knightly Order was entailed with
national properties worth 76 million francs. From the outset (as in the
creation of ‘sénatoreries’ for particularly meritorious senators in
1803), an income was assigned with each title. The purpose was to
ensure that the beneficiaries enjoyed adequate financial means to
uphold publicly attributed status, while avoiding the danger of
creating a hereditary class. In practice, the rapid and continuous
inflation of nominations reduced appointments to a sign of
distinction, with an income guaranteed to keep the legionaries,
irrespective of their social origin, above the labouring classes. From
the initial 5,000 awards, the Legion grew to over 11,000 in 1805 and
38,000 by 1814. But, from its outset, the Legion remained an almost
exclusive reserve for the military. In 1814 only 1,500, or under 4 per
cent, were civilians, mostly leading dignitaries of the regime.68 Lucien
Bonaparte’s sibylline phrase at the moment of the creation of the
Legion of Honour perhaps masked an unconfessed hope that the
corporate ownership and military organisation of the Order’s estates
would act as an embryonic model for a future French society.
Napoleon, at his most self-confident, attracted by the example of the
Roman empire, even tried to imitate the deployment of legionaries as
a means contemporaneously to defend and stiffen society, particularly
in the border or new territories. Initially (1802) he proposed to
establish ten landed settlements, each with 400 veterans, retired
because of their wounds; two experimental camps were opened at
