                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   179


imaginary past was the juridical language employed to decree the grant
of principates and duchies as grand fiefs of the Empire to Napoleon’s
relatives and a few favoured generals and ministers (1806). The concept
of primogeniture through the male line adopted for these fiefs, with
reversion to the Crown in the absence of legitimate heirs, incorporated
the ideal of what was seen as the original model of feudalism, as it was
imagined to have existed in Carolingian times, purified of the accretions
and corruptions of later ages. The same neo-gothic imagery can
subsequently be found in the oath of fealty sworn by the new nobles,
who vowed as true knights ‘to march to the defence of the patrie on
every occasion that its territory is threatened or that His Majesty goes
forth at the head of his army’.73 An excellent example, if ever there was,
of a terminology replete with meanings shifting in significance from
contemporary to imagined past in its references to ‘patrie’, ‘territory’
and the king ‘at the head of his army’.
   The creation of a nobility (March 1808) was more than either a
logical development from the initial principates or a means to reward
the great and favoured. Titles consecrated the hierarchy of function,
with level of honour corresponding to administrative grade: ministers,
senators, councillors of state, presidents of the Legislative body and
archbishops were counts; presidents of electoral colleges and of the
highest tribunals, bishops and the mayors of the thirty-seven ‘good
towns’ were barons. Progress in the service of the state could be publicly
acknowledged by elevation from chevalier to baron. Prefects and
generals could be rewarded by nomination at different points in the
hierarchy of titles, according to Napoleon’s estimation of their service.
   At the same time, a title could be made hereditary on condition that
the holder entailed his estate to guarantee an appropriate level of
income, as well as demonstrate his reputation and standing. The aim
was to create a new nobility that would replace and absorb the old
aristocracies. The discretionary power of concession of heritable titles
functioned as a weapon both to protect the social exclusiveness of the
imperial nobility, and to divide the ranks of the old families of great
name who remained aloof from the regime.
   Napoleon’s concern to rally the old nobility to himself was one
more aspect of his growing conservatism. As consul, his policy had
been clear: on the one hand, to offer legal guarantees of person and
property to those who were prepared to accept the new France, on the
other, to reduce to impotence impenitent royalists by terrorism (the
kidnapping and execution of the duke of Enghien) and confiscation of
émigré properties. With the consolidation of his power, the prestige of
service to the state attracted the younger generation of nobles. The old
