180    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


aristocracy had almost vanished from the 1802 list of notables, where
it represented only 3 per cent; but 58 per cent of the prefects in 1806
were ancien regime nobles, as were one-third of the sub-prefects and
mayors.74 The creation of new noble titles, while the old remained
abolished, was both a deliberate challenge and a veiled suggestion to
the old families that it was time to rally openly to the regime. Pasquier,
who came from their ranks and was the leading figure in the new
Council for seals of nobility, warned them:75

      Those who are called by their wealth, name or condition to play
      a useful role in public life too often deceive themselves into
      believing that their abstention attracts attention to them and gives
      them a real importance. Should a reaction arrive, of any sort, it is
      not to them that the government would ever appeal. It would turn
      to the men of action, to those whose acts or words could carry the
      strength or means to be truly useful, to those who have followed
      the current and are not some twenty years behind the times.

From 1810 discretion gave way to open pressure as Napoleon, now
married to Louis XVI’s niece, Marie Louise, demanded open
obeisance from all the nobles, even the most nostalgic. The brusque
change in approach can be detected in all directions. In a long note
dictated on 14 June 1810, the Emperor recognised that without the
participation of the old families, the imperial nobility ‘would never
convince those who formerly enjoyed the prerogatives of nobility to
forget’. He proposed a hierarchy of privileges and titles to attract
them. ‘Give support to the present dynasty, get people to forget the old
nobility, that’s the end to reach’.76 The insistence on entails and
adequate income to live in a manner appropriate to status was carried
to the point of granting regular subsidies to the poor nobles of
Tuscany and Genoa (1810). An independent charity for poor pregnant
mothers, taken over in the Empress’s name, became the occasion to
attempt to rally the grand old families via their philanthropically
minded wives (1810). The nobles of the newly annexed departments
were given the opportunity to request titles in place of those they had
enjoyed before annexation (1811). Most sinister, the minister of
police, Savary, asked prefects for a listing of the unmarried daughters
of the leading families, with comments on their qualities and dowries
(1810–11). As Savary explained:

      Such information is all the more necessary as most of the old
      families only seek to ally among themselves because they are
