                               The practices of conquest: exploitation   181


    persuaded that they can revive and give greater brilliance to titles
    that the government does not recognise and which today are no
    more than the recompense granted to those who gave
    considerable service in the civil career…. They believe they would
    lower themselves if they united with families whose fathers have
    shed their blood so gloriously for their country.77

The imperial nobility numbered about 3,350, the greater part of
whose titles were granted between 1808 and 1810. The lion’s share
went to the military, 59 per cent of the total, rising to 80 per cent of
the chevaliers; 22 per cent were leading functionaries (councillors of
state, prefects, bishops, magistrates) and 17 per cent notables
(senators, members of electoral colleges, mayors); there were few
scientists, artists, manufacturers or merchants. If the ‘grand old world’
successfully resisted the conscription of its daughters (only about ten
of whom married into the new nobility), it rallied increasingly to the
regime: 950 (or one-third) of the new titles went to ancien regime
families, of whom 680 came from within France’s pre-Revolutionary
frontiers. In a satellite state like the Italic kingdom, where 227 titles
were created, the proportion of military among its new nobles fell to
10 per cent; although old families constituted 70 per cent, this was
more the automatic result of the posts they held than clear evidence of
‘rallying round’.78
   The creation of this new nobility, whether to reward the military
and civilian servants of the state or to absorb the old aristocracy, was
oriented primarily towards ‘old’ France. This is not to ignore the fact
that non-French generals and aristocrats from the annexed
departments were ennobled, nor that nostalgic nobles persisted in
their passive resistance to rally in territories like Piedmont, Lombardy
or the former Papal States. It is not accidental that of the 285 titles
given to the leading families of the annexed departments or satellite
states, 170 should have been given to Italians, compared to 70 granted
to the highly committed Poles and a mere handful to the other
nationalities. Indeed, of the five members of the council created to
examine applications for titles and entails, San Martino was a
Piedmontese of ancient lineage.
   Nevertheless, Napoleon’s concern was quintessentially with the
France divided by the Revolution. In his visions of grandeur, the
ralliement of the ancien regime great families assumed a central role of
legitimising his dynasty. Hence his readiness to allow Murat and
Joseph to recognise the old nobility in the monarchical states of
Naples and Spain, as the grand-duke of Warsaw recognised the Polish
