188   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


other hand, the destruction of conventional institutional intermediary
bodies, such as guilds or confraternities, had the unexpected
consequence of removing traditional channels of communication—
and hence of mediation—with the people.
    Dependence on the elites was accentuated by this difficulty in
reading the codes of the people. The only alternative—to which the
administrators were forced to resort more often than they wished—
was the parish priest. The insistence in drawing up lists of notables
and the very criteria employed in selecting those judged worthy of
public recognition confirmed the centrality of the role of the elites as
opinion leaders and mediators of opaque societies. Property, now
reaching down into the social structure to incorporate artisans and
wealthy peasants, often beneficiaries of the sales of national
properties, was regarded as the most effective tie to the social order.
Reputation, even more than wealth, was essential as it signified family
and local roots, essential elements in ensuring the esteem and proper
comportment of the peasantry and respectable poor. Public service
was the seal of commitment to the common good, irrespective of
political regime. If ‘talent’—professional competence—had acquired a
novel weight in the choice of administrators and magistrates, its
definition at the local level was negotiable, because of the importance
of obtaining the collaboration of the provincial elites. The notables
were crucial mediators at all levels, as exclusive source of information
for the statistical enquiries, as representatives of local opinion, and as
leaders whose political opinion would influence the lesser ranks of
society. The dependence of the administration on their collaboration
was the greater in the newly annexed territories, where the stock of
intimate knowledge that derived from long familiarity was inevitably
lacking.
    Given this analysis of society and recognition of the role of the
elites, what was the response of the latter? Outside the Empire, at the
very top of the social hierarchy, Napoleon had made a special appeal
to personalities distinguished by reason of family, wealth or political
position. Why did a Melzi, a Schimmelpenninck, a Bülow or a
Cassano agree to assume leading roles? We do not often have their
direct testimonies, which in any case need to be read critically as they
were written after the debacle, usually in self-defence. But a brief
glance at some of their careers suggests replies.
    Francesco Melzi d’Eril, a wealthy and educated Lombard
aristocrat, brother-in-law of the Milanese reformer Pietro Verri, had
met Bonaparte in 1796 and was untainted by association with the
Cisalpine republics. Vice-president of the Italian republic, with greater
