                                                 Responses to conquest   187


relative liberty of individual choice, but also in terms of their
significance for the differing structures and forms of organisation of
family, communal and social life. The responses are most visible not
only at the political level of collaboration, withdrawal or resistance,
but also where the utilisation of the new economic opportunities
offered by the Napoleonic regime have left ample traces in the
documentation. Less immediately apparent, but no less important for
an assessment of the capacity of the new model to penetrate the inner
structures of communities and societies, are the responses expressed in
the forms of religious and lay sociability and patterns of social
relations. A discussion of these themes, however brief, offers another
dimension to our understanding of this experiment in imposed
integration, as well as a means of gauging its success.


COLLABORATION
The Napoleonic analysis of society only partially adhered to the
conventional image of the pyramid. In reality, all societies—for the
Napoleonic administrators—were dichotomous, consisting of elites
and ‘people’. The ‘people’ was always ignorant, normally passive and
rationally unknowable. Its ignorance was not only proof of its inferior
status, but also surviving evidence of an earlier stage of civilisation. Its
passivity resulted from the bonds of obedience and deference inbuilt
into family and social relations, and was likely to be upset only
through prolonged hunger or subversive incitement. It was
unknowable precisely because its comportment corresponded to the
irrationality of earlier ages, described and dismissed in (usually
dichotomous) platitudes about unchanging social characteristics: thus
the ‘people’, always regarded as an anonymous mass, was
‘industrious’ or ‘idle’, ‘superstitious’ or ‘enlightened’, ‘feudal’ or
‘civilised’. 1 At most, the ties of influence and dependence that
explained the functioning of all societies (and their pyramidal form)
were deployed to explain the behaviour of even the most primitive and
ignorant. As Napoleon instructed Joseph after his occupation of
Naples in 1806: ‘The lazzaroni must have leaders; these must be made
responsible for all of them.’2
   Such judgements could claim a distinguished lineage, from
Montesquieu back to Montaigne and earlier. But the functionaries’
sense of remoteness from the people was accentuated by two aspects
of the Revolutionary-Napoleonic experience. On the one hand, the
perennial gulf between the labouring poor and the propertied classes
was deepened by the very stress on property of the new regime. On the
