186   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


of the arena of action opened up by the continuous outgrowth of
political frontiers generated an equivalent, indeed a disproportionate
difficulty in translating norms into practices.
   What is certain is that the French civilian administrators sought
actively to involve the local elites in their experience as the necessary
condition of success, ultimately the only sure means of sinking roots
and ensuring the viability of the new model. They recognised the
interdependence between their actions and the comportment of
those they identified as the opinion leaders in each society. They
sought to coopt such elites, they exploited and manipulated shared
values as a means of building up confidence and ultimately trust,
they accepted the need to transact, according to the demands of each
locality, person or group. We have discussed the limits to such efforts
imposed by the very heterogeneity of space and history, as well as the
contradictions created by military and economic exploitation. But
the Napoleonic analysis of society, precisely because of its static
quality, constrained the capacity of the administrators to understand
how the changes they were introducing modified existing attitudes,
preferences and values, at the same time as introducing new
elements, in an unending dynamic of changing social relations that
questioned the very bases of their efforts, blocked or distorted the
penetration of their ideas, and in some instances aroused armed
resistance.
   For the historian, the Napoleonic experiment in administrative
integration offers a unique possibility in modern history to explore the
moment of exercise of political and social power, because the state
identified itself to an unusual degree with a single, unifying model. For
exactly the opposite reasons, it is difficult to offer as complete or
satisfactory an interpretation of the responses to the introduction of
this model. For such responses were quintessentially local, the old and
new expressions of different levels of cultural identity, social relations
and constellations of power. The interaction between a state power
that imposed itself with unprecedented thoroughness, and the thick
structures of numerous societies of varying dimensions can be fully
apprehended only by a worm’s eye view, an approach that holds
firmly to the local context and examines the relationships and
interdependence between a plurality of powers at different levels and
from different perspectives. A multitude of such studies are needed,
not a single chapter in a study concerned to draw out the overall
structures and mechanisms of the Napoleonic conquest of Europe.
Nevertheless, it remains possible to sketch at least some of the range
of responses. Such responses inevitably varied, not only because of the
