                                The practices of conquest: exploitation   183


State revenues and national properties were reserved, above all in the
German states, in order to guarantee entailed incomes and donations
to select members of the new nobility and others (for donations were
also given without titles).
   The distribution of such personal largesse was guarded jealously by
Napoleon. The two large volumes in which the names and amounts
were listed ‘he always kept on the corner of his table’, recalled his
cabinet secretary Baron Fain;

    when the Emperor wanted to distribute some endowed incomes,
    he himself calculated them, keeping his eye on what he had
    already donated…. After turning a number of pages of the great
    book, he stopped and looked at me: ‘Aha, old chap’, he said, ‘I’ve
    found you one! Here you are! Ten thousand francs’ income in
    Pomerania! Let it not be said that I’ve forgotten my secretaries.’81

By 1814 Napoleon had made grants to 4,994 persons, at a cost of
nearly 30 million francs a year. The greatest part went, inevitably, to
the military: 824 generals received 1,261 grants, worth over 16
million francs, while the smallest gifts (nearly 3,000, of 500 francs)
went to soldiers and officers wounded in the wars. At the top of the
league, Napoleon’s relatives and favourite marshals, such as Paolina
Borghese, Berthier, Ney and Davout, in all 486 recipients, or 10 per
cent of the total, shared 28 million francs’ revenue, or 80 per cent of
the total.
   No relationship existed between the geographical location of the
properties from which the endowments were derived and the titles to
which they were tied. Ney, duke of Elchingen, for example, was given
revenues in Westphalia, Hanover, Trasimeno, on the consolidated debt
of the Italic kingdom and the Rhine octroi.82 It is possible that such
wide, apparently haphazard distribution reflected Napoleon’s
intention of tying the material interests of his generals to the future of
the Empire. It is certain that all territories were regarded as equal
sources of revenue for entails and gifts—so long as they lay outside the
frontiers of pre-Revolutionary France. For the beneficiaries, this
created problems (and protests) in obtaining the money promised
them. For the countries from which the revenues were exacted,
Napoleon’s policy of reserved donations was at the least onerous, at
the worst—as in Westphalia—catastrophic. Nearly a thousand
beneficiaries were guaranteed 7 million francs, or nearly 20 per cent of
Westphalia’s public revenues. Friction and unending lawsuits resulted
from the demands of these absentee owners of entailed national
