182   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


magnate families and Jerome the old families of his Westphalian
territories. Begrudgingly, Napoleon allowed them to create their own
nobilities, but took care that their titles remained inferior to those of
France. ‘Kings shall not have the right to name princes; such a right is
inherent to the imperial crown’, he reprimanded Louis, whose
proposals to create a Dutch nobility seemed to him inopportune in a
country with such strong republican traditions: ‘My institutions do
not exist to be turned to ridicule’.79 Joseph’s elevation of General
Salligny as duke of San Germano in Naples and then grandee of Spain
was placed in proper perspective by the Emperor’s appointment of the
same general as a French baron. Napoleon was happy to exchange
nominations to chivalric orders with an established dynasty like that
of Bavaria, but was reluctant to recognise the orders instituted by
Louis or Murat. In the federative system he had created, as
contemporaries from its outer provinces, like van Hogendorp,
observed:

      secondary states attached to France (governed by Napoleon’s
      brothers or others) were not allowed to take any measures, to
      create any institution, above all military, which was not in
      keeping with the principles of government of the grand empire,
      head of the confederation.80

Yet the possibilities of success of Napoleon’s policy of a ‘fusion’ of old
and new nobility in France depended directly on the existence and
integration of the Empire and federative system. This was illustrated
unequivocally by the imperial policy of entails and donations that
underpinned the heredity of titles. From the outset, in 1806, the titles
assigned by Napoleon were located in the satellite or annexed
territories. The principates and duchies were located initially in
Venetia and central Italy, then in the kingdom of Naples and Germany.
The Emperor of the French, heir to the Revolution, carefully avoided
employing the toponymy of France for his new dukes. Equally, the
incomes that went with the titles were no longer available in France,
since the greater part and the most worthwhile national properties
had already been alienated. Newly conquered territories offered the
obvious solution. A condition of the cession of Venetia to the kingdom
of Italy was that one-fifth of its revenues, as well as national
properties to the value of 30 million francs, were attached to the new
fiefs; a further annual income of 1.2 million francs was set aside for
distribution to generals, officers and soldiers designated by Napoleon.
After Tilsit, the same policy was employed on an ever larger scale.
