194    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


   For many, service—whether military or civilian—offered the
prospect of a good stipend. Officers were in general better paid than
their civilian counterparts, although those of modest origins rarely
made fortunes. For reasons of prestige, once retired, their presence
among the notables was virtually guaranteed; and they then had
privileged access to civilian employment. Indeed, from 1811 some
posts were reserved for them, arousing an enthusiastic response
among the military:
      To have the right to share almost half the posts in civil employment
      is an act of such generosity that what soldier, what officer would
      not give his last drop of blood for the most magnanimous sovereign
      there has ever been? My brother Amédée has asked for a tobacco
      warehouse in the Mont-Blanc or Léman department,
wrote V.-A.de Lannoy, a former officer of the Sardinian army.9
   The evidence is equally clear that collaboration came early and was
widespread at the middling ranks of the civilian administration, if not
initially at the highest level. There was never any problem in recruiting
the democrats of the 1790s, whose offer of services not only exceeded
the supply of posts, but also frightened the moderate leaders. Indeed,
where the post-Brumairean settlement was imposed on previous
revolutionary agitations—as in the southern Rhineland (Sarre, Mont-
Tonnerre), Belgium, the Italian republic, or southern Piedmont—the
consistent presence of former democrats in the lower echelons of the
administrations and magistracies constituted a powerful lobby against
the recruitment of nobles, counteracting the efforts of the prefects.
Soon, even in these regions and from the outset in areas without a
revolutionary past, competition for posts was brisk, not least because
stipends were high (at least for the heads of administrative, financial
and judicial services) or offered lucrative possibilities, such as for
justices of the peace. Increasingly the main obstacle to service was the
practical implications of transfer to another area, costly in terms of
income and influence.
   It is probable that collaboration was encouraged by the principle—
applied with greater or lesser conviction—that all except the top posts
should be generally reserved for the local population of annexed or
satellite territories. Competition for posts underlay the sometimes
vitriolic exchanges about character and talent between native and
French administrators. In practice, it was inevitable that the vast
majority of positions should have gone to residents rather than
newcomers, particularly at the middling and local administrative and
fiscal levels and in the magistracy, for reasons of language, local
