198   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


supplies, if he was given a monopoly to exploit the isle of Elba’s
deposits. The annexation of Rome kindled entrepreneurial ambitions,
as French and Italians vied with each other in asking for convents and
ancient Roman sites (even Diocletian’s baths!), besides subsidies, in
order to set up mechanised textile factories to employ the city’s idle
orphans. In Bavarian Trent, the Pangrazzi family proposed to
commercialise mineral water by piping it from the source. 15
Manufacturers in ‘old France’ rejected proposals of potential
competition, whether from established firms across the Rhine or
through the establishment of a technical school at Prato.16 The demand
for protection became incessant and was in good part responsible for
the Berlin decrees. But the patently unfair discriminations of the
blockade and occupation up to the Baltic encouraged manufacturers
and traders all across Europe to demand compensatory measures from
their own governments or engage in smuggling.
   The economic opportunities embedded in the institutional
restructuring should not be seen exclusively as always relating directly
to personal or family advantage. The possibility also existed of using
institutional mechanisms to limit or distort measures that local
notables regarded as damaging their interests. Where such measures
were considered by the government as vital to the immediate needs of
war—as in the extension of the blockade and annexation of
Hamburg, despite the destruction of its role as entrepôt and financial
centre—opposition was ineffective. Otherwise the responses to
unpopular decisions with potentially damaging consequences could
make themselves heard at a variety of levels, from formal complaints
at the sub-prefectoral or departmental councils to informal lobbying
of prefect or Parisian protector. In Piedmont, the local notables
successfully carried their complaints against interference with the
communal boundaries to the council of state.17
   Perhaps the most interesting example is that of the cadaster. A
rational land tax was essential, not only definitively to settle the
continuing complaints within France, but even more in the annexed
and satellite territories as the foundation on which to construct the
whole complex of fiscal and social reforms of a modernising
administration. Initially the method had been to evaluate the land on
the basis of estimates of the types and overall quantities of crops
produced within the communal territory. This was replaced in 1807
by a far more ambitious, and theoretically neutral plan to measure
every single property as well as its usage. In order to ensure equality
of taxation and to temper the radical nature of the cadaster, the
Revolutionary principle of representation of landowners was
