                                               Responses to conquest   197


Amsterdam made the fortune of Hamburg bankers, or exceptionally
enterprising Jewish financiers like the Rothschilds.
   The institutional restructuring was not just unprecedented in scale;
through the continuity and insistence of the administrative presence
and demands, it led to a hitherto unknown degree of penetration of
civil society, at the most intimate levels of family and community. By
this very fact, it forced the heads of households (identified by the
functionaries as the base line of authority) to assume responsibilities in
a new manner in order to mediate the growing pressure. But, for
identical reasons, it offered novel opportunities. At Castelletto, in
southern Piedmont, for example—where the community had
traditionally maintained a certain autonomy through the collective
exercise of decision-making in a frontier region with poor
communications and disputed distant seigneurial authority—the years
of French rule operated a process of selection among the heads of
household, in which the most enterprising families turned to their
profit the increasing fiscal and military demands.13
   The number, powers and social status of the administrative
personnel led to overlaps, and sometimes identification, of public and
private interests. Compared to the patrimonial concept of office of the
ancien regime, the Napoleonic ethic polemically affirmed the
distinction between public and private. But the very procedures and
responsibilities laid down for functionaries gave ample opportunities
to make killings in the sales of national properties, to procure
contracts or sell licences (like Bourrienne in Hamburg), perhaps above
all to reinforce family and community ties by judicious
recommendations for appointments. Equally, the investment in
infrastructures of this modernising administration opened up new
peacetime perspectives as lucrative as those of the armies. Rambuteau,
as a young prefect of the Alpine Simplon department, was indignant
that the local civil engineer continued to give huge contracts for the St
Bernard roadworks worth over 1 million francs to a local
entrepreneur, when an Italian competitor with considerable
experience offered 16 per cent discount.14 But roads and bridges have
always offered particularly fertile terrain for collusion and corruption.
   The philosophy of the Napoleonic regime was premised on the
separation of the administration from the economy. But insistence on
the presence of the state also led to expectations that the government
should always be present and ready to give support. Encouragement of
entrepreneurship implied a growing demand for concessions or
monopolies of production and trade. Alexandre Boury, owner of an
iron foundry at Saint Denis, proposed to increase France’s metal ore
