                                             Responses to conquest   193


French had worked actively to reintegrate the officers of former
enemy armies who wished to continue service, or to ensure them
pensions, overriding the opposition of the democratic patriots. It was
important, in regions like Savoy where military service characterised
the nobility, to avoid the opposition of suddenly unemployed and
usually poor nobles. We do not know how many accepted in Savoy,
but it is reasonable to assume that this old aristocracy remained
hostile. However, gradually, examples appear of young sons who
threatened to run away from home unless they were allowed to
volunteer. Three of the four Verger brothers from the Tarentaise
(Savoy), whose father had been killed in 1794 fighting in the
Piedmontese army, were to die in Russia in 1812. The provost of
Breslau Cathedral, Ch.-Th.-Frédéric de Regnauld de Bissy, saw the
death of his 21-year-old nephew Bon de Regnauld in Spain almost as
inevitable retribution for his lack of filial respect: ‘He insisted on
joining the military against his father’s wishes, threatening to run
away if he was not allowed to volunteer: and now here we have the
result.’7
    To fight under Napoleon could mean the search for glory at more
than the individual level. It could signify the transformation into
action of that broader aspiration towards a national identity which—
like the concept of glory itself—formed constitutive elements of the
new romanticism. If there is little evidence that Belgians, Dutch or
even Swiss saw military service as a path towards the forging of
national identity, such a sentiment was certainly present among some
of the more literary-minded Italians and Germans who fought in
Napoleon’s armies—as it explained the commitment of many of the
young Spaniards who resisted the French so bitterly in defence of their
independence. In such contradictory instances, there was an intimate
link between military valour and national independence.
    Even without such longer-term ideals, the evidence is overwhelming
that the image of Napoleon as military hero functioned as an effective
catalyst for the young elites. Even during the Emperor’s final, brutal
reconstitution of his armies in 1812 and 1813, it would seem to have
been the families rather than the elite recruits who voiced their
resentment at the abrupt end to the private negotiation of exemptions.
‘It is not so much those leaving as their families and mistresses who
scream in protest’, observed the Tuscan director of police, Lagarde, on
8 August 1812; a year later (12 July 1813), he noted that The best
society, from whose ranks the guards of honour have generally been
chosen, is deeply discontented, and many of the guards have still not
left’.8
