                                               Responses to conquest   189


authority than his successor Eugene or any other head of state
nominated by Napoleon (except Murat), this whiggish patrician was
convinced of the need to forge a modern and stable state socially
based on enlightened, moderate, wealthy landed proprietors. At the
same time, he translated into secret diplomatic negotiations his
Utopian hopes of restoring independence to a Lombard-dominated
north Italian state. Although removed from effective power with the
transformation of the republic into a kingdom, he willingly accepted
the honours that were showered upon him, was personally responsible
for the selection of the new Italian nobility and reaffirmed his belief in
an independent state at the moment of Napoleon’s abdication.
   The Dutch grand pensionary, Schimmelpenninck, a lawyer
involved in politics since the troubles of 1784, representative of
Amsterdam in the 1795 revolution and envoy of the Batavian republic
at Paris and London, saw his role as saviour of his country. A
committed patriot and moderate, he believed he could retain what
was best in the Dutch republican tradition by reversing the
centralising drive of the radical patriots and negotiating the
independence of his country directly with Napoleon. His failure in the
one and the other proposition led to his opposition to the creation of
the kingdom of Holland, but not to his nomination to the French
Senate after the annexation of 1810.
   These two contrasting examples point to the principled belief in the
possibility of retaining, if not independence, at least some form of
identity, alongside the conviction—shared by Melzi and
Schimmelpenninck with the French administrative class—of the need
to modernise the state. Once involved in the affairs of state, whatever
their disappointment and disillusion, they were irretrievably identified
with the Napoleonic regime and ready to accept its rewards. Similar
motivations of a personal sense of capacity and public duty in a
moment of national crisis, inextricably enmeshed in the temptations of
playing a primary role in the administrative modernisation of a new
and potentially more powerful state, no doubt explain the role of
other leading landed aristocrats such as Bülow in Westphalia or
Nesselrode in Berg—just as in the case of Stein and Hardenberg in the
enemy kingdom of Prussia.
   It would be simplistic to pretend that these motivations were shared
by all. In the tiny principality of Neuchâtel, the driving concern of the
chief magistrate Georges de Rougemont was to neutralise rather than
to encourage rapid and radical administrative change. In the kingdom
of Naples the acceptance of the interior ministry by the duke of
Cassano was correctly viewed as the appropriation of political power
