196   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


both the army and the civil administrations. From their positions of
influence, they regrouped to further the interests of their families and
friends, like the Florentine Corsini who ‘placed’ Fabbroni and other
Tuscans in imperial service. Their power and prestige were used to
counterbalance or isolate surviving democratic voices.
    Collaboration cannot be interpreted purely from the viewpoint of
personal or family advantage. It always implies reciprocal
dependence. Those who rallied to the Napoleonic regime must in turn
have been influenced by the values embodied in the modernising
administration. Even reluctant auditors like Cesare Balbo carried the
imprint of their early experiences through the Restoration.
Collaboration implied acceptance, whatever the mental reservations.
It is reasonable to conclude that, but for the sudden military debacle
of Napoleon, ralliement and collaboration would have continued
silently to push an ever larger number, even among the provincial,
status-ridden local elites, towards the new ideas of a lay liberalism,
while diluting the progressive modernity of the administration itself.


ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
It is in the nature of major political upheavals, such as war, revolution
or conquest, to create in the short term artificial conditions that
disrupt established economic patterns and sometimes even question
deep-rooted social relations. The military campaigns and institutional
reorganisation, on the scale imposed or induced by the French,
inevitably created new opportunities as well as imposing new burdens.
Much has been written about the great fortunes made (and lost) by the
army provisioners and bankers in their golden period during the
Directory, like Tort de la Sonde in Belgium, the Poissonnier and
Lanchère companies in the Rhineland, the Flachat, Laporte and
Castelin group, and their successor the Swiss Haller in Italy, or
Ouvrard in Paris.12 Napoleon bitterly resented his dependence on such
civilian contractors, who regained importance at every campaign,
despite the existence of a ministry for war administration. But the
opportunities open to enterprising bankers, businessmen and
speculators, as well as to ordinary citizens, extended far beyond the
specific and highly capital intensive field of army supplies. The
constant changes in frontiers and hence trade routes blurred the
distinction between legal and illegal transactions. Smuggling and
protection equally offered opportunities for manufacturer and
merchant. The impact of war on capital movements in London and
