                                              Responses to conquest   195


knowledge and connections. There was a marked continuity between
former office-holders and the newly appointed, in Naples as much as
in Holland or the Hanseatic departments. Stipend, interest and the
fresh prestige associated with the post of functionary, all contributed
to attract local notables to take office, especially in regions where
private fortunes were relatively small and few. It was hardly surprising
that the elections to sub-prefectoral and departmental councils should
have favoured public officials, lawyers and notaries, as well as
increasingly nobles, as these were the persons best known to their
peers and clients, even more in the countryside than in the towns.
Office thus played a crucial role in the interdependence between
public and private interests, which probably grew closer, as networks
of relationships closed the means of access to the inner circles.
   Ralliement needs to be set in the context of this increasingly
favourable climate of collaboration. There were always grand families
who ostentatiously refused support or silently withdrew. This was true
of the overwhelming majority of Spanish elites. It characterised the
hostility of many among the oligarchs of formerly capital cities, like
Modena, Venice or Lübeck, or the intransigently Catholic aristocrats
of Belgium or Rome. There were noble landowners whose initial tepid
collaboration turned to open hostility, like the baron de Gudenau,
who accepted nomination as mayor of Villip (Rhin-et-Moselle), but
then refused to be renewed or to be presented to Napoleon in 1811,
sold his properties and emigrated to Austria.10
   Nevertheless the Napoleonic wooing of the old nobility was
undoubtedly successful. The threat of confiscation of their properties
determined many of the aristocratic émigrés to return. The conviction
that the example of the few influences the many was not without
basis, as slowly the readiness of a Balbo, a Saluzzo or a Cavour in
Piedmont, a Boos-Waldeck or a Belderbusch in the Rhineland, to
accept nomination or election to office resolved doubts and isolated
those who remained intransigent. By 1806 Joseph de Maistre, the
ideologist of the Restoration, appealed in despair for assistance to his
exiled monarch in Sardinia:

    Sire, I am the head of one of the most numerous families of your
    former duchy of Savoy, the only family in the country, I think, that
    has remained wholly in the service of Your Majesty until the last
    moment, without exceptions or changes.11

In the following years, throughout the Empire and in all the satellite
states except Spain, the nobility had re-established their presence in
