190   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


by a factious clan within the aristocracy. Nevertheless it is reasonable
to conclude that acceptance of office by leading personalities at the
moment of the loss of independence was based on a genuine belief in
public duty combined with a (usually excessive) sense of self-
importance. In many ways the counterproof of this was the decision of
the Spanish afrancesados to join Joseph’s government. Against all the
evidence of their impotence and isolation, they collaborated with this
new French king because of their fear of revolution and social
anarchy, their faith in monarchy and constituted authority, and their
belief in the need for political and social reforms: ‘An extraordinary
revolution will improve the existence of the monarchy, establishing it
on the solid foundations of reason, justice and power’, wrote
Moratín. 3 These were sentiments shared by their constitutional
opponents at Cadiz. It was their misfortune that the realisation of
their expectations, which had been demonstrated in the administrative
practices of so many other states, was destroyed almost before it could
take shape in the fire of popular resistance.
   The sense of participating in a most successful and important
experience of reformism was not of course restricted to these leading
personalities. It was shared by many of the old reformers, discredited
or frightened by the revolutionary upheavals of the previous decade,
who now returned, some in their old age, to governmental
responsibility: Zurlo in Naples, Gianni in Tuscany, like Cabarrús in
Spain, were symbols of the continuity that these reformers saw
between the work of the enlightened despots and Napoleon. They
were few, because age and disillusionment had taken their toll. Far
more numerous and active were the intellectuals and ‘technicians’,
mostly of recent decades.
   It was hardly surprising that civil and military engineers,
cartographers, scientists and educationalists should have collaborated
freely and often enthusiastically with the French administration.
‘Useful’ science enjoyed a privileged relationship with the political
class from the outset of the Revolution, and many of the leading
scientists—from Chaptal and Laplace to Berthollet and Cuvier—
continued to play a central role throughout the years of the regime.
The Egyptian expedition, with its 167 scientists and artists, gave
Bonaparte an aureole of intellectual sensibility that he was never to
lose. Administrative modernisation included a vast programme of
infra-structural works and scientific research, from the great roads
and bridges that were among Napoleon’s most lasting legacies, to
mechanical, chemical or medical investigations for the improvement
of manufactures and the art of warfare. The very size of the
