192   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


practice cherished theories and principles to those who were willing to
reciprocate by official involvement.

Collaboration, however, was not a matter primarily of leading
personalities or scientists, but of elites. The sources, so lavish in their
information about the identity of the elites, are more ambiguous in
their evidence about the nature of collaboration. Refusal to
collaborate could appear to be dangerous in some instances, such as
when Napoleon ordered his brother-in-law Prince Borghese, governor-
general of Piedmont and Liguria, that he should take

      measures to ensure that the pupils chosen for Saint-Cyr go there
      promptly, of their own free will or under threat of being
      disinherited and their properties confiscated. The prince should
      adopt the same measures to ensure that those nominated auditors
      go to Paris forthwith…. These wealthy Piedmontese families try
      to keep out of the way, but I want to force them to come to Paris.6

Nomination to a post might have no practical consequences, as in
failure to turn up to vote in electoral colleges. Acceptance of
appointment could mean many things, from barely veiled disapproval
to energetic commitment, or indeed a changing experience, from the
former towards the latter. The very ambivalence about motivation has
offered fertile terrain for one of those less helpful historical debates,
replete with references to mental reservations, based more on
nationalist susceptibilities and facile psychologisms than on reliable
evidence. For while there can be no doubt that at certain moments,
among some groups and in specific areas there was a generalised
reluctance to collaborate—as for instance at Hamburg after its
annexation, among the clergy in some Belgian departments or the
former Papal States, or probably in most annexed territories in
1813—the weight of recent research points to the conclusion that
after initial difficulties, the policy of ralliement was successful.
Whatever the resistance to Napoleon’s later policy of forcing the pace
of social fusion by the creation of an imperial nobility and attempted
marriage alliances, at the administrative and honorific level the French
regime had won acceptance—at least as long as its presence seemed
solid and permanent.
   Military service as officers, with its connotations of glory and
prospects of rapid career, attracted the younger generation, to the
point of creating tensions and ruptures within noble families who had
retained their distance from the new regime. From the outset the
