202   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


cropping farms near Siena to the large holdings without farms of the
Maremma. The methods of sale could be crucial in determining the
social composition of the purchasers. In Piedmont, the first and most
substantial sale, ordered by the republican General Jourdan in July
1800, encouraged peasant participation by the facility of dividing up
properties; while a sale later in the same year was a barely disguised
form of forced contribution, imposed on wealthy citizens, who were
obliged to pay the entire cost in cash within twelve months. Nine years
later, in Tuscany, the overriding concern to extinguish the public debt
was expressed in the nomination of a commission composed of the
state’s major creditors, who rapidly decided to limit competition at
the land auctions by reimbursing those with small credits of less than
300 francs. Where capital was lacking, as in most of the provinces of
the kingdom of Naples, the sales failed to live up to expectations; by
the later years, where there were repeated sales, such was the case
even in wealthy states like the kingdom of Italy, given the
contemporaneous pressure of fiscal exactions and the poorer quality
of the properties on offer. In Spain, there were virtually no purchasers
for the lands of the powerful grandee families opposed to the French,
whereas there was a high demand for the communal lands that local
administrations (in Guipúzcoa, for example) were forced to put up for
sale in order to pay the exactions of the occupying armies.
    The sales offered to vast strata of the peoples of western (and, to a
lesser degree, of central) Europe the chance to acquire properties over
a short period of time and usually on an unprecedented scale.
Moreover, this occurred after a prolonged period in which access to
the land market had been severely restricted by ecclesiastical mort-
main, juridical definitions of status and aristocratic inheritance
practices. Alienation of ecclesiastical possessions was not new. Indeed,
it had become the standard practice of reformist monarchs, often with
the agreement of the Papacy; even the most anti-Revolutionary ruler,
like the last king of Sardinia, Charles Emanuel IV, had had no scruples
about imitating the French in a last desperate effort to pay for his war
against them. Probably only the alienations of Peter Leopold of
Tuscany, his brother Joseph II of Austria and Charles IV of Spain
affected larger areas than those of the Napoleonic years. In some
departments as much as 11 per cent (Jemappes) or even 16 per cent
(Rhin-et-Moselle) of the cultivated land became national properties;
28,000 hectares were put up for sale in Tuscany, 62,000 in Piedmont,
92,000 in the Rhineland departments.
    Hence it is not surprising that the response to this new opportunity
should have been so positive. Where detailed studies exist, they show
