                                               Responses to conquest   207


dragoons through a canonisation ceremony of some new saints: ‘It is
a feast-day that greatly attracts the people.’ 26 In earlier years,
particularly during the Directory, the distinction between the attitude
of military and civilian authorities towards religious manifestations
was by no means so clear-cut. The closure of chapels and shrines, the
removal of crosses, the dismantling of church bells, all formed part of
a common conviction that superstitious beliefs could be eradicated by
their removal from public view. There was surprise, as much as
indignation, at the repeated and sometimes unexpected resistance as,
for example, the insistence by a participant at a funeral on the use of
a burial cross as a sign of social distinction, ‘which he wanted in the
manner of all the citizens of the town, that burials should be held
according to custom. Such an innovation did not exist even at Mainz.
He insisted that dying Catholics should not be buried like Jews,
Protestants or dogs’.27 In some regions, like Flanders, the Swiss
Catholic inner cantons (Schwyz, Uri, Unterwalden), the Aretino or
Calabria in 1798–9, as later in Spain, resistance (never just for
religious reasons) was to lead to revolt. It is difficult to explain why
the response was not so violent in other regions, like the Rhineland. It
seems likely that where an established practice of regulation of
religious life by state authorities already existed—as in Mainz, where
the pre-Revolutionary prince was also an archbishop, but also in
Lombardy or Venetia—the faithful adapted to interference in their
religious practices in a less intransigent manner.
   The bitter experience of the religious divide during the
Revolutionary years, whether in France or the early occupied
territories, made both state and Catholic Church more cautious. The
French representatives in such territories were mostly careful in their
application of the Revolutionary decrees. In the Rhineland, for
example, the days chosen for the Revolutionary public holidays were
those of popular religious ones. For both Napoleon and Pius VII the
Concordat was essential in order to restore order and authority. But
the Concordat abruptly terminated the Utopian hopes of democratic
clergy, like Grégoire, for the inner renovation of the Church, while
also cutting short the painful search for a new political theology of the
more perspicacious of the émigré episcopate.
   The Napoleonic administrators recognised the utility of a Church
firmly subordinated to the state, and the functionality of a register of
civil status maintained by the parish priests. But they remained
suspicious of the power over the people that they attributed to such
priests. Felici, minister of the interior of the Italic kingdom, expressed
the official view in a report to Napoleon in 1805:
