                                              Responses to conquest   199


maintained: the evaluations between communes within the canton,
and between cantons in the sub-prefecture were submitted for
discussion between proprietors and officials. These consultative
procedures were exploited so effectively in the Rhineland that they
distorted the rationality of the official estimates, to the advantage of
the larger landowning notables.18
   Resistance to boundary changes and to the cadaster showed the
capacity of landowners to utilise the new institutional structures in
defence of their private property. Purchase of the national properties
offers the most general and consistent example of their capacity to
take advantage of new possibilities.

The sale of national properties offered the most widespread
opportunity to obtain a commitment to the new regimes, as the
revolutionaries had realised from the outset. In the eyes of the
legislators and administrators, such sales served multiple purposes,
symbolic as well as material: the confiscation of properties from the
Church and émigré nobles represented a deliberate rupture with the
past, while their sale provided a crucial resource for state finances, a
means of pledging substantial and influential segments of the
population against an anti-Revolutionary property settlement, and
(for the more egalitarian) an opportunity to create a society of peasant
small-holders. Underlying these more immediate aims was the
generalised conviction, inherited from the philosophes and
physiocrats, that private property was intrinsic to liberty and a
precondition for increased production. The experiences of the
Revolutionary decade seemed to confirm at least the social
implications of the sales, given the eagerness of Frenchmen—even in
the most Catholic regions—to buy formerly ecclesiastical properties.
   Inevitably the same policy was applied wherever a French presence
was established. In territories occupied under the Directory, like
Belgium and the Rhenish departments, the confiscations and sales
were contemporaneous and motivated by the same immediate
pressures as in France. The urgent need to absorb the inflationary
circulation of paper money and to obtain further credit through the
settlement of at least some of the accumulated debts to army
provisioners, bankers and local elites explains the hasty alienation of
institutional properties, sold without prior division into smaller lots,
and hence effectively excluding peasants. The terms of the sales—
payment of the greater proportion in paper credits, with extended
periods for the settlement of the remainder in cash—encouraged
collusion and speculation among the purchasers. But, as in France,
