200   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


demand sufficiently outstripped supply to uphold the prices well
above the initial valuations and normally to ensure reasonable market
values. The main difference from France was the virtual absence of
émigré properties, since the threat of sale persuaded the relatively few
great nobles and landowners who had fled to return. In Mont-
Tonnerre, for example, even families like that of the future Austrian
chancellor Stadion, who had followed the elector of Mainz across the
Rhine, returned to save their sequestered estates.19
   After Brumaire, the sale of national properties formed an intrinsic
part of the new administrative measures introduced by the French.
Not surprisingly, they were put into practice more systematically than
in the Directorial years, since expertise had been accumulated and the
end of the throttlehold of the army provisioners ensured substantially
greater financial breathing space.
   The sources of these properties varied considerably: Crown or
domain possessions were a constant element, guild or similar
institutional properties were normally not very substantial, émigré
estates rarely materialised, except in Spain. But within French-
controlled territories, a fundamental distinction, which conditioned
the dimensions of the alienable patrimony, was that between
Protestant and Catholic countries. In Protestant states, like Holland or
many German principalities, there were no monastic properties, as
they had already been expropriated centuries earlier, during the
Reformation. By contrast, Napoleon’s encouragement of the abolition
of the prince-bishoprics in the Holy Roman Empire at the Rezes of
1803 gave German princes a unique opportunity to secularise
ecclesiastical possessions, sometimes on a scale far greater than in
Italy or France: in Bavaria, ecclesiastical property was estimated in
1800 to include 14,000 of a total 30,000 farms, with 47,000 families
of a total 116,000; here the Crown was able to amortise its public debt
by the sale of monastic lands, and still increase public revenues by
perhaps a quarter through the enlargement of its own domain. In
general, the French example of confiscating Church lands was widely
followed in Germany, more frequently to incorporate them in the
domain than to sell them, not just by rulers under French influence—
as in Württemberg, Baden, Hessen-Darmstadt and Berg—but even by
Prussia. Only Austria refused, as much because of Joseph II’s earlier
attack on the monastic orders as for ideological reasons.20
   More than in France, the sales of national properties were carried
out in order to reduce or extinguish the public debt. This explains the
rapidity with which inventories of the patrimony of the religious
orders were drawn up in the annexed territories, compared for
