                                                 Responses to conquest   203


that the purchasers varied in their social composition and bought land
and buildings for very different reasons. Inevitably, given the pre-
dominance of explicitly fiscal over social purposes, the sales of
national properties everywhere attracted those with capital resources.
The presence of Jews among the large purchasers, from Italy to
Poland, was not surprising, given their important mercantile activities
and the fact that previously they had been forbidden from buying
landed property. Monastic buildings were bought or begged by
manufacturers to set up workshops. Urban bourgeois bought town
houses.
   Leading civilian and military functionaries and courtiers were to be
found in most regions. A president of the criminal court, a general in
command of the department, an inspector of domains, all outsiders to
the department, were in a good position to know about worthwhile
properties, whose acquisition represented an excellent investment.
Where there was a court—in Munich, Turin, Florence, Naples or
Madrid—the great and lesser nobles bought some of the largest
estates. In Tuscany, the nobility constituted 39 per cent of all
purchasers in the Arno department; families like Cavour in Piedmont,
Dandolo in Venetia, Lullin de Châteauvieux in Léman (Switzerland)
expanded their substantial properties for livestock breeding. Some
aristocrats, like Countess Isabelle von Waldbott-Bassenheim in Rhin-
et-Moselle, or the Milliet d’Arvillard in Mont-Blanc, were able to buy
back their confiscated estates from the new owners.24 New families,
often close to the administration, established their wealth and status
through systematic pursuit of such opportunities, accumulating vast
patrimonies, like the Bolognese Antonio Aldini or the son of the
former steward of the Tuscan grand-ducal estate of Foiano,
Ferdinando Redditi, or the Flemish functionary Charles Ghillenghien.
In Spain, ministers like Miot de Mélito and the duke of Campo Alegre
were particularly prominent, whether to set an example, or to make
up for the reluctance of local capitalists, or because of favourable
prices.
   As in France, the largest and most valuable properties attracted a
handful of men, often speculators. In the kingdom of Naples, 154 or
7 per cent of all purchasers were responsible for 65 per cent of all
sales. Of the 1866 purchasers in the Rhin-et-Moselle department, the
top twenty-four spent 23 per cent of the total capital. They were
described as ‘proprietor’, ‘trader’, ‘notary’, ‘clerk to the justices’, ‘wine
merchant’, ‘cloth manufacturer’; a few were Jewish. Though most
lived in the capital, Coblenz, some came from cities like Cologne in
nearby departments. For the most expensive purchases, these leading
