208    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      Although the conduct of the ministers of religion cannot be
      described as totally negative, it has always been obscure and
      enterprising. Despite the mystical affectations in which this class
      of persons tries to cloak itself, in general it must be considered as
      not attached to the new order of things. Political theology, which
      has always tended towards independence, indeed towards
      domination, cannot submit to the idea of even a minimal
      restriction of ecclesiastical pretensions. The true character and
      inner nature of this class is revealed by the occasional statement or
      expression that sometimes escapes the lips of some zealous
      preacher or missionary.28

Given the dismemberment and incorporation of the Papal States in the
kingdom of Italy and the French empire, the hostility of a clergy
whose temporal loyalties to the Pope coincided with their spiritual
dependence is hardly surprising. The French annexation of Rome
signified a massive upheaval in the social relations of a city structured
around the religious and charitable patronage of cardinals and nobles
close to the Curia.

New political frontiers and institutional reforms forced fundamental
changes on all religions, not just the Catholic Church. Their effects
inevitably repercussed on the comportment of both clerics and laity, as
they disturbed credos and practices consolidated within each Church,
in defence and opposition to other faiths, in the centuries since the
wars of religion. Traditionalism and reform were equally affected by
the radical nature of the Napoleonic restructuring of religion.
   Above all in Germany, but also in Switzerland and wherever political
frontiers had marked out the territory of a state religion in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries, the abolition of ecclesiastical principalities
and free cities and the continuous remodelling of states led to the
coexistence for the first time under the same ruler of Catholics and
Protestants of differing sects: Catholic Minister became part of
Protestant Prussia, Catholics, Lutherans and Calvinists found
themselves subject to laws of religious tolerance under French rule on
the left bank of the Rhine, in Berg, Westphalia and Holland. Tolerance,
as the twentieth century has tragically demonstrated, is a quality that is
more easily accepted for others than in one’s backyard. In Bavaria, the
last abbot of Weltenberg opposed the lifting of the ban on Protestant
immigration to this most Catholic of states. In the French Rhineland,
where non-Catholics constituted over 40 per cent of the population in
the departments of the Sarre and Mont-Tonnerre, there was as little love
