204   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


capitalists grouped together, as they bought with the deliberate
intention of reselling, usually rapidly: 60 per cent of the properties
bought by the largest Rhin-et-Moselle purchasers were resold.
   Alongside such major figures, who bought national properties as a
means of investing capital, sometimes—like Jewish banker-merchants
at Leghorn—because of the limited alternatives during the blockade,
sometimes as pure speculation, there was always a substantial number
of smaller purchasers. There can be no doubt that the numbers of new
proprietors increased significantly, as well as of those expanding their
holdings. Entry into the land market was facilitated by the relatively
lengthy periods of time allowed for payment, as well as the use of the
national properties to reimburse state creditors. The social location of
these proprietors was as one would expect: rentiers and tenant farmers
buying the farms they cultivated, lawyers and others exercising free
professions, merchants and traders acquiring country properties,
usually near their city of residence, as a form of security for their
commercial activities as much as for reasons of prestige. In Piedmont,
‘traders’ and ‘merchants’ constituted over 19 per cent of all purchasers
and bought 31 per cent of the land, free professionals and employees
each numbered over 17 per cent with 19 per cent of the land. In Rhin-
et-Moselle merchants and traders were responsible for over 17 per
cent of the capital, wine growers another 7 per cent, innkeepers,
bakers and millers a further 6 per cent. In Hainaut the liberal and
commercial professions bought middling and small properties
amounting to 40 per cent of the land; in highly urban areas, like
Charleroi, their share rose to 82 per cent.
   In all regions a substantial proportion of the purchases were of
minute or small plots of land—over 70 per cent in Tuscany, over 50
per cent in Guipúzcoa. This was not necessarily proof of strong
peasant participation, but merely of that of local inhabitants, at all
social levels, consolidating their properties, as well as buying the land
they worked; in Rhin-et-Moselle, 60 per cent of the purchasers bought
more than one lot—a clear sign that they were not peasants.
Nevertheless, even though the sales, from the Directory onwards,
were structurally unlikely to facilitate peasant purchases—given the
predominance of explicitly fiscal over social purposes—the very
dynamics of so large-scale and accelerated a process of property
transfer in some regions boosted peasant ownership. The peasants
ranged from wealthy tenants of abbeys to the poorer. In the Mons sub-
prefecture of Jemappes, where 35 per cent of the alienated properties
were bought by the peasants, twenty-one of them bought over 50
hectares each; religious scruples seem to have held back peasant
