                                              Responses to conquest   205


participation in this department until the Concordat of 1801, after
which an evidently poorer stratum bought lots of 1 hectare or less.
   The Rhineland was the region where the peasantry most benefited.
Their land-hunger was reflected in the massive purchase of properties
that were split up and resold on the market by the initial large
purchasers. In the Trier sub-prefecture (Sarre) 40 per cent of
ecclesiastical properties were resold by 1814; the average size of plots
bought by peasants in these resales was 0.88 hectares (and only 0.13
hectares for vineyards), and the number of new peasant and day-
labourer owners increased by 95 per cent. In the Rhin-et-Moselle
department, about a quarter of the peasant tenants were able to buy
their land. The effects of these resales were to continue into the 1830s
and 1840s in some regions of Germany. Elsewhere, especially in Italy,
the peasantry seem to have obtained little. Even where auctions were
aimed to favour them (as in General Jourdan’s auction of July 1800 in
Piedmont), it was the non-peasant professional and trading classes
who were able to buy medium-sized farms.
   Nevertheless, whether by choice or necessity, the ideological
determination to confiscate ecclesiastical property and encourage
private ownership provided unprecedented opportunities in many,
perhaps most areas of French-controlled Europe. The wealthy were
able to create or increase their landed holdings, and substantial
numbers of bourgeois and peasants became proprietors. The sales of
national properties were least successful, or even failed, only in
regions where capital was scarce and political conditions disturbed:
Calabria, Spain and, to a lesser degree, Poland (where the collapse of
land prices under the blockade was, to a limited extent,
counterbalanced by the important presence of Jews).
   Even then, the division of communal lands, as in Léman, or their
enforced sale, as in Guipúzcoa, multiplied ownership by the alienation
of small plots, but increased the social differentiation within the
villages. The most influential families appropriated the best
communal land at the expense of the poorer. The result was to
increase the gap between owners and landless within the ranks of the
peasantry. The process was vividly described in 1816 by the
representative of the village of Elgneta (Guipúzcoa):

    As a result the poor and less poor have been expelled from the
    right to collect ferns and leaves to dung and manure their land.
    The consequence has been to deprive the worker of his liberty and
    leave him short of the greater part of the vegetable matter he
    needs to grow his crops. Thus, those who bought commonlands
