                                               Responses to conquest   215


the government to reopen their church and liturgical ornaments: The
undersigned inhabitants have no power to oblige their parish priest to
swear the oath, while it is because of his insubordination that they are
deprived of all their objects of religion.’ In Napoleonic Rome, the
churches remained empty when the government ordered a Te Deum.
In the Rhineland, where the former bishop-princes had accustomed
their subjects to such patriotic rites, a peasant could welcome the
reunion with France, as ‘now at last we are free; now at last we can
hold our services in total liberty, that is in Latin’.40
   The gap between popular and reformed ecclesiastical practices was
certainly greater in areas without previous reforming traditions. Here,
as in Piedmont, a patriot priest who played an active administrative
role, like the theologian Vigna who was sub-prefect at Alba, lost his
reputation among the faithful, as the republican governor-general
Jourdan recognised: ‘A priest who busies himself with other things
besides the duties of his office is regarded as a sort of political
monster’.41 In Spain parish priests increased their influence by their
identification of the French with anti-Christ. But for the most part the
clergy were conscious of their difficulties in regaining their traditional
influence over the people. Missions might prove momentarily
successful, through the fervour of the orator, yet this was precisely
because they were exceptional and ably staged. But, as a Modenese
parish priest reflected: True conversion of sinners does not normally
occur in a moment. It requires time, reflection and a readiness to stop
and consolidate; this means patience, instruction and prayer.’42 The
spontaneous growth of lay initiatives, such as pilgrimages and the
Marian cult, were to deepen the differences between the elite and
popular representations of religion. Such were the responses to the
Revolutionary-Napoleonic regulation of the Church.


SOCIAL PRACTICES
The years of French dominion in Europe constitute too short a period
to identify unequivocal shifts in the slow process of change of
mentalities—except in France itself, the epicentre of this violent
drive towards extension of the social base and enforced
administrative modernity. Nevertheless, the impact of this new
presence on the multiple forms of sociability that characterised the
heterogeneity of space and varieties of cultural identity in Europe
merits a discussion, however brief, as it offers yet another spy into the
intangible but crucial relationship between the expectations of the
French and the comportment of the local elites. Three very different
