218   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


In Cologne, the prefect Ladoucette decided on more total
identification with the local people: to celebrate the birth of
Napoleon’s son (June 1811), he invited the local Mädchen,
confraternities and farmers to come in their medieval costumes.47 The
purpose of such festive occasions, as spelt out by the prefect of the
Bouches du Weser, the Belgian d’Arberg, was to ‘to profit from every
favourable circumstance to further fusion and little by little work
towards the disappearance of that separation between old and new
French which differences of customs and habits still maintain in these
regions’. He too had held a ball and supper at Bremen for the birth of
the king of Rome, to which he had invited the 500 ‘wealthiest and
most worthy of the upper bourgeoisie, a class that includes an
interesting part of the population which enjoyed no consideration
under the former sovereigns.’ Six months later, at his next ball, he felt
satisfied with his progress: The occasion was remarkable in terms of a
certain intimacy and a greater union than at previous balls…. One and
all of the guests seemed to belong to a single family.’48 We have no
means of knowing whether his guests were of the same opinion.
   Such festive occasions provide an excellent example of the
determination of the Napoleonic regime to superimpose its own forms
of sociability on existing associative structures. Napoleon and his
collaborators were always concerned to revive or encourage
institutions and associations which attracted and hence involved local
notables with the administration. Under the Consulate, two-thirds of
the pre-Revolutionary French provincial academies had been
reopened, with official subventions and the prefect as honorary
president. In Tuscany, where relations with Paris were solidly
established among scientists and intellectuals, progressive landowners
of the academy of the Georgofili hastened to elect to their ranks the
members of the French junta, like de Gérando and Menou, in
reciprocity for their interest. If associations were viewed as potentially
dangerous and not socially open, they could be suppressed. Napoleon
was very angry that at Turin nobles and bourgeois held balls
reciprocally excluding the other class: ‘this division displeases me and
is contrary to the principles of government’. At Florence, the casino,
or noble circle, exclusively limited to families in the golden book, was
closed. Otherwise associations were to be encouraged.
   This applied in particular to scientific societies which, out of a
common matrix of ‘useful’ sciences, became increasingly specialised;
but artistic, musical and even historical societies were also established
in Germany, Switzerland and elsewhere in French-controlled Europe;
a great archaeological programme was initiated in Rome. Political
