                                                Responses to conquest   211


were harmless. It would be dangerous to join the Jansenists to the pure
Catholics, lest they gain control. The old and new Lutherans ‘hate
each other cordially’. Finally, ‘you would imagine that here at least
there would be no problem with the Jews’, but the Portuguese
(Sephardi) and German (Ashkenazi) communities could not stand
each other and an enforced union would make the Portuguese Jews in
England break relations with Amsterdam. ‘All that can be said about
this double type of Jews is that they will always be separated,
whatever one does. The Portuguese Jews would feel degraded by a
reunion, while the Germans would not be uplifted.’31
   Whatever the social distinctions between Sephardi and Ashkenazi
Jews, the centuries of anathema launched against them by the
Churches made all Jews unacceptable to ordinary Christians. It was
only through the special pleading of Grégoire and Mirabeau that they
had been emancipated in France. The dense, crowded, poor Ashkenazi
communities in Alsace and Lorraine aroused a popular antisemitism,
which Napoleon shared. Alone among religions, all Jews were
subjected by the Emperor for a period of ten years to a series of
restrictions on their civil rights and economic activities which were
intended to cure them of what was considered their innate vice of
usury and accelerate their regeneration (30 May 1806). Uniformity
again displayed its limits, as the prefects and elites of the departments
with long-established Sephardi communities in south-east France and
Italy protested. But quite apart from this official introduction of
discrimination, antisemitism at all levels limited the practical effects of
emancipation. In most of the Rhenish Confederation states, specific
restrictions on Jews were lifted, without the concession of full citizen
rights; even in the reforming states of Bavaria and Baden some
discrimination was retained. In Westphalia, where emancipation was
complete, the head of the police arbitrarily prohibited Jews from
freedom of movement without prior authorisation and the payment of
a special tax; artisan woollen cloth producers protested at the
competition of Jewish pedlars. In Rome, there were popular outcries
against Jews opening shops in the central Corso to sell liturgical
objects from confiscated churches.32 Official and popular prejudice
combined to defeat the attempt of an enlightened minority to remove
by decree age-old, religiously inspired discrimination.

Such radical intervention by the state aroused a variety of responses
among both clergy and laity and forced the Catholic Church to
reconsider its role. The attack on the monastic orders combined with
the unremitting pressure of government control to reinforce the
