210    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


structures created in 1808 re-established authority, but created
innumerable tensions, not only between communities, but also
internally between rabbis and laity, rich and poor. Outside France,
even in Westphalia—the only German state where full emancipation
was decreed—the leadership of the enlightened banker Israel Jacobson
led to widespread complaints among the Jews because of his
authoritarian attempts to utilise the Napoleonic model of centralised
control to impose heavy taxes and ‘revolutionise the former state of
the Jews from the ecclesiastical and lay point of view’.30
   Uniformity was the order of the day. But popular responses denied
the very premisses on which such uniformity was attainable. Two
examples can be given, the first revelatory of the reactions of the
faithful themselves, the second confirming popular hostility to
toleration.
   In religions based on an individual relationship to the faith, whose
identities depended on deep distrust of other sects as much as on past
histories of persecution, uniformity had no sense. Nowhere could this
be seen better than in Holland, where Napoleon—impatient with the
anarchy of practical tolerance—urged his representative Lebrun to
simplify the organisation of the creeds by forcing the small sects to
merge into three officially recognised religions. Lebrun, an
enlightenment sceptic of the old school, was horrified: ‘It is both
politic and convenient not to create one single faction, but to leave the
Churches separate, to recognise each one’s consistorial churches.’ He
then elaborated on the problems, demonstrating in the process how
religious differences were inextricably entwined with social
prejudices. The Dutch and French-speaking (Walloon) Calvinists
agreed on dogma and discipline. But the Dutch

      only know their own language and customs; they have no contact
      except with the most middling class of society and no influence on
      the rest. They do not want to be under the control of the
      Walloons: so, on their side, all that can be expected is disorder and
      discord, in which the people will take part. The Walloons are
      more French, they pride themselves on their more refined
      education, their better social ties, their more elegant style of life
      and conversation.

The anabaptists could not unite with the pure Calvinists, not only
because of their reciprocal dislike, but also because they turned
towards the anabaptists of Germany and the Hanseatic departments.
The remonstrants were rejected by the Protestants and in any case
