                                               Responses to conquest   217


Friedrich Schleiermacher an astonishingly wide range of topics. Such
salons were slowly to contribute to what in the nineteenth century
would be a typically German form of sociability.45
    Export of French modes of sociability thus formed an integral part
of that process of raising the level of civilisation of other nations.
More pragmatically, French administrators were always highly
sensitive towards local associative structures and other less formal
expressions of sociability as they provided precisely the ambience and
occasions of cordial contact and conversation in which outmoded
social distinctions or political dislikes could be overcome, new
relationships forged or consolidated and elites integrated within the
new order. For Napoleon sociability was an essential part of
administrative responsibility.
    The memoirs of the period about occupied territories, whether of
civilians or military, are replete with descriptions of receptions,
dinners, balls and social events. Their tone oscillates between
indulgence towards the old-fashioned way of life and the conviction
that the new French style was successfully winning over the local
elites. Duret de Tavel, an officer in Calabria, wrote home in 1808 that:

    Since the arrival of the French, Cosenza has gained considerably
    in terms of sociability. There are balls and many brilliant social
    circles where liqueurs and sorbets are offered…. Charmed by our
    manners, the ladies have become very accessible…. The
    voluptuous waltz has taken over from the bizarre dances of this
    country.46

Germans, rather than Italians, required particular attention,
presumably because to the French they appeared more distant from
practices of civilised behaviour, as well as potentially more hostile.
Beugnot, in Düsseldorf, described his troubles to his daughter:

    His Majesty the Emperor and King had ordered me to represent
    him with dignity. Now what the Germans most enjoy on formal
    occasions is that they can dance. On the anniversary of the
    coronation, there was a grand dinner, a great ball and a veritable
    on-slaught of finery. Only one thing was forgotten—the supper!
    Because here one needs to reverse the proverb ‘after the belly, the
    ball’. Twenty officers dying of hunger at two in the morning, just
    as many ladies, who eat like officers, and girls with appetites like
    wolves. For all that, the only expedient my wife could find was a
    milk soup…. For the next ball I’ve told her in private to kill a stag.
