212   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


authority of the episcopate. In Bavaria and the kingdoms of Italy and
Naples, as much as in the Empire, civil administrators and bishops
resumed with greater vigour the efforts of their pre-Revolutionary
predecessors to raise the level of instruction and comportment of the
priesthood and to contain, if not repress, what were regarded as
superstitious practices among the laity. In the kingdom of Italy the
Jansenist minister of religion Bovara provided a personal link with the
reformist years of Joseph II in his suspicious control of clergy and
church. His Neapolitan colleague Ricciardi affirmed categorically
about parish priests that ‘a few good ones are enough to serve the
church, the bad ones are a deadweight, indeed harmful to it’. Mass-
priests, a widespread phenomenon in the southern Italian state, who
were independent of the bishop’s control as they derived their living
from endowed masses under the patronage of local notable families,
now found themselves in difficulties. In Venice the bureaucratic
rationalisation of parishes, with the closure of alternative local places
of worship, confraternities and schools, accelerated the insertion of
the parish priests within the state under the close supervision of their
bishops.33
   The results were by no means those anticipated by the civilian
authorities. Collaboration by bishops and clergy seemed successful in
states with an earlier reforming tradition, like the kingdoms of Italy
and Naples, the Rhineland and Bavaria, or where Catholics had
previously lived in discriminatory conditions as a religious minority, in
Utrecht or Swiss Fribourg. Parish priests used their influence to
convince the peasants to accept conscription, taught the imperial
catechism or celebrated the Emperor’s victories or even St Napoleon’s
feast-day. The bishops, in words of the prefect of the Ourthe, were
‘apostles of the state as much as of the Church’.34 In states without a
tradition of religious reform—such as the Papal States or Belgium—
clerical collaboration was far less sure: even though the bishops
appointed in Belgium from 1803 were all French, many of them
identified with the ultramontanism of their clergy. Everywhere the
interference of the state, contemporaneous with the compromises and
persecution of the Popes, not only forced the episcopate to search for
new relations with civil power, but also aroused reservations about the
claims of Rome. Missionaries had to be trained, the people had to be
‘recovered’. The abduction and imprisonment of Pius VII in 1809
restored to Rome the moral authority of martyrdom. At Fribourg a
new generation of priests emerged, better trained in the seminaries
than their predecessors, and ultramontane, who were prepared to
enter secret associations and then to propagate their principles openly
