                                              Responses to conquest   213


after Napoleon’s fall. In Venetia, under Jesuit influence, ‘Christian
friendships’ were formed among the laity. Tempered by the secular
onslaught of enlightenment, revolution and Napoleonic control, some
among the clergy responded by the affirmation of the superior values
of Christianity incorporated in the authority of the Papacy.
   An essential element of this renewed reforming drive within the
Catholic Church was the attempt to assert a closer control over the
laity. Perhaps the deepest fear of the clergy during the 1790s was the
withdrawal of the people from the sacraments, the very essence of
religion. In France, Grégoire, a convinced revolutionary, was just as
concerned as the clergy who had refused to swear the oath to the
republic and set up a nationwide network of correspondence to advise
and uphold the morale of the constitutional priests. At the other
extreme, an anonymous exponent of the non-jurors circulated a
pamphlet from London, after the Concordat of 1801, that denounced

    those villages where instead of religion without worship, there is
    worship without religion. The peasants go to church every
    Sunday, chant in the choir every morning and evening, but
    nobody goes near the confessional…. Without confession, there is
    no communion; without sacraments, there is no religion; without
    religion, there is no morality. That’s the chain.35

Such a fear was not limited to France. It characterised every Catholic
region under French control or influence. At Modena in 1803 the
bishop lamented the expulsion of the Jesuits, followed by that of
missionaries from the order of St Vincent de Paul in 1796, given ‘the
evil that subsequently affected the souls of this country, especially in
the past few years, when philosophism and incredulity caused such
terrible slaughter’.36
    The Napoleonic years witnessed an intense campaign to win back
the people to their religious obligations. Redemptorists, Passionists,
Lazarists, as well as the priests newly trained in the reopened
seminaries, crisscrossed the western European countryside in repeated
missions. Books of devotion, which had proved their reliability by
their longevity, were circulated in Germany and along the Rhine, even
if some of them encouraged ‘popular devotions based on apocryphal
and ridiculous legends’. In the diocese of Treviso, a former Jesuit,
Luigi Mozzi, led successful popular pilgrimages to sanctuaries.37 The
tone of this organised and controlled evangelical campaign was
redolent with echoes of the ‘recovery’ of the people following the
Council of Trent. Popular piety had to be encouraged but guided.
