216   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


fields—freemasonry, education and charity—provide valuable
examples of the limits of the regime’s attempts to penetrate existing
forms of sociability and superimpose their own.
   Sociability was of importance to the French elites for conceptual as
much as for practical reasons. D’Alembert, in the Encyclopédie,
described France as ‘a nation primarily characterised by sociability’.
Portalis, Napoleon’s minister of cults, expressed a conviction, relayed
by the philosophes and idéologues, that ‘man’s perfection is tied to his
sociability’. What was at issue was the relationship between private
virtues, collective habits and the progress of civilisation.43 France’s
primacy as standard-bearer of civilisation was demonstrated in the
superiority of her forms of sociability, as much as in her language,
revolutionary values and administrative practices. By sociability was
understood the quality of institutions which set public rules for social
relationships that transgressed conventional status barriers: for
example, academies and learned societies, salons or masonic lodges.
Other countries could vaunt their primacy in alternative forms of
civilised sociability, such as the English coffee-house or the Italian
opera. But the French model, which developed apace in the eighteenth
century, was accepted and envied across Europe.
   This was the moment of triumph of that distinctively female
institution, the Parisian salon, which had played a central role for the
philosophes in testing and directing opinion by providing an informal
setting where aristocrats and writers could meet and converse. In the
Directory and Consular years, noted de Gérando’s wife, who was of
German origin and kindly disposition, Madame Récamier embodied
the virtues that the male elite desired: The French want only youth,
charm, pleasures and vivacity in the sex they so spoil. Madame
Récamier is the very embodiment of this sort of person.’44 Madame de
Staël, Marie-Anne de Gérando’s friend, was out of fashion as well as
out of favour. The unconventionality of the salon as a form of
sociability which overrode separation of the sexes perhaps explains
the difficulties of its acceptance in countries with rigid social and
status barriers, as well as those of gender. Even if the salon spread to
German provincial capitals, like Berlin, Dresden, Leipzig or Vienna, it
was virtually killed by (false) association with Jacobinism in the anti-
Revolutionary reaction of the 1790s. In Berlin, after Frederick II’s
death, only wealthy, cultured Jewish ladies, like Henrietta Herz and
Rachel Levin, succeeded in creating successful salons, precisely
because they were Jewish and hence provided a neutral terrain where
nobles, intellectuals, Germans, foreigners, Jews and Christians could
exchange conversation on what seemed to the young theologian
