                                               Responses to conquest   223


Hence—in the projects of Condorcet and Talleyrand and the practices
of the Directory—primary schooling went hand in hand with the
radical revision of secondary education and university instruction in
favour of scientific, technical and useful knowledge. With the
Consulate, education was explicitly linked to the representation of
society as properly pyramidal. In Chaptal’s words: ‘the different
degrees of public education…must correspond to the great divisions
that can be noted in the social body’. 57 The implication was
abandonment of interest and relative neglect of primary education,
which was left to the whims of each prefect, and increasingly
centralised control of secondary and university instruction, which was
to culminate in the creation of the single Imperial University, with
subordinate academies across the Empire (1806–8). The effective
competition of private Catholic schools, following the Concordat,
underlay the concern to impose the control of the lay state; although
the choice as grand master of the University of Elisa Bonaparte’s
protégé, the conservative Catholic Fontanes, left recurrent suspicions
that the educational system was less than intransigent in its attitude
towards the Church.
   Within the annexed and satellite territories, imperial educational
policy was contested both within and outside the official institutions.
There was no appeal against the closure of famous universities like
Siena or Louvain. But where such institutions were renamed and given
full official recognition as academies, they could offer greater
possibilities than hitherto existed to indigenous intellectuals willing to
seize their opportunity. In Turin, the Piedmontese nobles who had
founded the Academy of Sciences, like Cesare Saluzzo and Prospero
Balbo, supported by professors many of whom had participated in the
republican experiences, now attempted to further their projects for
educational reform through their control of the academy.
   Outside the frontiers of the Empire, primary education retained its
importance for influential members of society. Pestalozzi’s methods,
open to observation at his school in Yverdon, attracted considerable
attention and imitation outside the public sector, not only in
Switzerland but also in central Europe among both advanced Catholic
and liberal educators. In the kingdom of Italy the purpose of
education for country boys was at the opposite extreme from
Pestalozzi’s Rousseauian ideal of developing individual personality,
except in the prohibition of corporal punishment: hygiene, religious
principles, respect for king, patria and officials and ‘above all the
gratitude that is due to those who have obtained a free education for
them and endeavour to ennoble their spirit’, were to reinforce
