                                               Responses to conquest   221


   French freemasonry followed the routes of the victorious armies,
contacting and often absorbing indigenous lodges and creating new
ones. Army officers set up some 400 masonic lodges in French-
controlled Europe. ‘How can one not admire the Great Napoleon who
has bound masonic ties ever tighter in establishing his Grand Empire
and confederating nations?’, proclaimed the lodge of La Confiance at
Novi in 1810.53 In Germany, Italy and Switzerland, the local notables
joined forces with the French in the new lodges. Only in Bavaria was
freemasonry strictly forbidden, following the dangerous experience of
the radical sect of ‘Illuminati’ in the 1780s. In the Rhineland, the
number of lodges rose from three to seventeen, with 170 French and
345 local members. In Tuscany, lodges were founded at Leghorn,
Siena, Florence and Portoferraio, where the prefects Capelle and
Gandolfo swore obedience alongside nobles like Marquis Torrigiani,
Jewish merchants from Leghorn like Giuseppe Luzzatti, national
property speculators, police commissioners, intellectuals, lawyers and
rentiers. Some freemasons withdrew, for reasons of pique or for more
serious ideological motivations. Others exploited the very mystery of
masonic rites to maintain their old faith or assert their new ones in
secret groups within the womb of the official organisation. In terms of
the exponents of the regime, freemasonry functioned as an effective
form of sociability to win the confidence of the local elites. Indeed, its
failure to penetrate certain countries can be taken as an indicator of
the limits of acceptance. In annexed Holland, the Grand Orient was
able to set up only nine feeble lodges. In the grand-duchy of Warsaw,
where freemasonry had been an important social institution before the
French arrived, the Catholic clergy identified freemasonry with
collaboration. Above all in Portugal and Spain, where the French
military introduced freemasonry, the local notables refused to join the
French military lodges, even in cities where they set up their own
indigenous ones. Such were the difficulties of reconciling the
perspectives of the new regime with those of the local establishments,
at least in countries where political and religious opposition was able
to brand such secular forms of sociability as tainted by the invader.54

The French perceived of social institutions as a crucial means of
penetration for their ideas. But the very forms of sociability denied the
possibility of direct control which their administrative approach
assumed. Associations, salons, reading rooms or coffee-shops could be
regulated or spied upon. But, as all authoritarian regimes have
discovered, society offers the resourceful individual, family or group a
constant possibility of withdrawal or escape. The spoken word is
