                                               Responses to conquest   219


criticism was not tolerated in this most official of regimes, as was soon
apparent with the expulsion of Constant from the Tribunate (January
1802), the closure of the idéologue-dominated class of moral and
political sciences of the Institut (January 1803), the exile from Paris of
Madame de Staël (October 1803), and the progressively tighter
censorship of the press. This still left ample domains where official
patronage of culture and science could be extremely beneficial:
Berthollet, organiser of the Société d’Arcueil, hub of the international
scientific network during the regime, was able to publish the memoirs
of its members through money advanced by Napoleon.49

Alongside this policy of casting the official cloak over local social
institutions, the regime introduced its own forms of sociability. With
military discipline, the Emperor set the example with his Court,
copying the ceremonial of the ancien regime and offering banquets
distasteful to his frugal eating habits. At a Tuileries recital he
displayed more musical discernment than his concert secretary
anticipated, as Hector Berlioz later recounted. His sisters, Elisa,
Pauline and Caroline held salons, even before their elevation to
thrones, frequented by the elites and administrators of Europe.
Napoleon was insistent that his family, ministers and marshals follow
his example, and even justified his notable generosity towards them as
providing the means to uphold their rank. Marbot commented that
the grand dignitaries vied with each other in organising social
occasions. Between the sumptuous dinners of a Cambacérès or
Talleyrand and the masked balls of a Marescalchi, there can be no
doubt that the most hostile legitimist families were seduced. ‘In the
first period of the Empire’, recalled Madame de Boigne,

    it was extremely agreeable to be in the company of the opposition.
    …This lasted for three or four years; but then desertions became
    more frequent, until the marriage with the archduchess [Marie
    Louise] did the rest. From then on, it was easy to count the
    women who did not go to Court.50

The collapse of the Empire was to revive and exacerbate the divisions.
   What was fashion at Paris was law elsewhere. The Courts of
Napoleon’s family performed the same function at Turin, Florence,
Naples, The Hague and Cassel; only in Madrid (which he was twice
forced to abandon precipitously) was Joseph unable to attract a broad
spectrum of the old aristocracy. Taking the waters—at Spa (Belgium),
Aix (Savoy), Baden (Germany), Montecatini (Tuscany), Barège or
