226   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


recommendations of the minister of the interior and determined
efforts of the prefects, only the wives of top functionaries and a
handful of wealthy proprietors and merchants closely tied to the
administration could be persuaded to pay their admission fee to this
exclusive social club.62 Charity remained within the sphere of civil
society and the Church.
   Attitudes towards poverty provide yet one more facet of the
elusive, intangible quality of social modes of comportment that
resisted the drive of the French administrative modernisers to
rationalise and categorise. The representations of poverty by local
notables were not antagonistic to those of the government. They
reflected an anxiety at the consequences of what they perceived, by
the final years, as the daemonic pursuit of an unachievable end: the
absolute conquest of Europe by Napoleon in order to render it
uniform. It is less evident that the local notables were aware that the
very ideology of the regime, by its driving concern for the conditions
of social order and stability that would guarantee individual property
and person, reinforced the new self-image of a bourgeois society, from
which the popular classes were excluded.


RESISTANCE
Armed resistance is always an ultimate choice, in any period, under
any regime. It is an irrevocable gesture of defiance against the
constituted authorities of a territory, a renunciation of alternative
forms of protest. Armed resistance thus represents the negative
counterpart to collaboration, although both may share certain values.
In Napoleonic Europe, for example, family, military glory and an
elitist perception of society were values common to Italian generals in
Napoleon’s armies, like the Lechi brothers, and to the Spanish
commander of the army of Navarre resisting the French invasion,
Espoz y Mina; and the conscripted peasants who killed each other on
the unending sequence of battlefields undoubtedly held to a common
social representation of family and land. Hence it is as important to
set armed resistance to Napoleonic rule in the perspective of
alternative comportments, as to enquire carefully into the examples of
armed resistance, above all of the Spanish people.
    The previous chapters have been concerned to discuss responses to
the imposition of French rule as forms of adaptation. Even
collaboration rarely implied unconditional acceptance, as each
individual interpreted the different aspects of so radical a regime
through the filter of his pre-existent hierarchy of values. For some, like
