                                               Responses to conquest   227


the Piedmontese Cavour and Saluzzo, expectation of the
improvements that would come from the new administration
outweighed loyalties to a deposed dynasty; for others, like the Belgian
C.A.Ghillenghien, the economic opportunities overcame all scruples.
Yet others, like the Tuscan noble F.A.Corsi Salviati, limited their
collaboration to areas where they felt a strong commitment, such as
charity, while otherwise maintaining a dignified distance.
    Collaboration was not always a free choice. In extreme cases,
members of leading noble families could be drafted by direct order of
the Emperor, like the young Cesare Balbo. Far more frequently, at a
modest level, heads of household were obliged to accept local office
through the pressure of their peers as an expression of communal
solidarity. Senior French administrators always complained
(frequently with reason) about the lack of competent personnel in
villages and small towns. Seen through the eyes of the wealthy
peasant, artisan or petty lawyer, service as mayor or councillor was
not just a more time-consuming duty than before, given the
implacable activism of the new administration; the extended range of
responsibilities, because of their very novelty, placed the office-holder
at risk. Custom was affronted, established practices abused, privacy
invaded by the removal of cemeteries outside the habitat, the
alignment of roads, or the imposition of minimal hygienic
precautions; such thankless tasks as making up the lists of the
conscriptable, allocation of the new taxes, or even division of
communal properties, were destructive of the ties of reciprocal trust
on which pacific coexistence within the village depended. When the
mayor of the Alpine village of Neydens (Léman) attempted to measure
illegally appropriated communal land in 1803, he was threatened by
one François Dufour:

    He said to me like a madman, ‘What are you measuring there?’ I
    replied, ‘I’m measuring the land you usurped from the commune.’
    He replied, ‘And if I took your yard-stick and smashed it over
    your head, what would you have to say about that?’63

Small wonder that collaboration was sometimes unwilling; or that
many who filled the French criteria for candidates for office resisted
the blandishments of the authorities.
   Such withdrawal into the private sphere, or refusal to be involved
in public activities, was certainly a reflection of the conditions
particular to the later years of the Napoleonic Empire. It could be a
sign of opposition, and was usually interpreted in that way by prefects
