228    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


and police commissioners. There was every reason to be cautious, as
open signs or even suspicions of opposition could provoke
disproportionate reactions. Personal family reasons, which were
regularly put forward as excuse, were often true. But prudence
characterised the attitude of the local elites, even initially in Spain. As
the Seville clergyman Félix José Reinoso recalled in 1816: ‘No general,
no magistrate, no provincial leader, no guild, no scholar raised the cry
of battle. Were they French collaborators? Or did they take more time
to think and feared that we were powerless to wage the battle?’ The
Savoyard Marquis Costa justified silent withdrawal as the only
realistic possibility for legitimists, even when Napoleon’s final debacle
was close:

      The Savoyards must hold their silence about their discontent and
      regrets…until further order. They must consider their country as
      no more than a province whose fate has not been decided and
      whose unhappy inhabitants have done all they could when
      submitting to force, supplying labour and paying taxes. Those
      who depart from such a line will put their head on the block and
      risk confiscation only too easily. Such a risky attitude is to be
      discouraged, above all for heads of families and great landowners;
      I doubt that under any circumstances it could lead to esteem and
      fortune in the future…. The only thing to be done now is to hold
      to an individual neutrality, which nobody has the right to make us
      quit; and to expect anything and everything from impending
      events which we are unable to hasten through vain efforts and
      dangerous steps.64

In other cases there was a genuine dislike of the demands and
artificiality of the Napoleonic style of socialising, which contrasted so
totally with the intense, highly personal religiosity or sentimentality
that began to penetrate the more intellectual among the post-
Revolutionary elites. Marie-Anne de Rathsamshausen, de Gérando’s
serious-minded German wife, writing in 1808, expressed the heritage
of Rousseau and the young Werther in her private complaints about
the obligations of her position: ‘Proprieties are the sacred code of
narrow spirits and withered hearts…I hold to my retreat in so far as
proprieties allow it.’ As she confessed to the worldly prince-primate
Dalberg, she resented her obligations at Court:

      the atmosphere at Court is not for me; life seems to me to pass so
      quickly that I would like to make better use of it…. I feel sorry for
