220   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Eaux-Bonnes (Pyrenees)—revived again as a form of sociability
among functionaries, lawyers, notaries and especially proprietors and
rentiers (as well as wounded military), in the wake of the Bonapartes,
Talleyrand, marshals and ministers.51 The ubiquitous presence of
often thick clusters of functionaries guaranteed at least an appearance
of success to these official forms of sociability.
   In social terms, probably the most successful forms of sociability
deliberately diffused by the regime were the army and freemasonry.
There is no need to elaborate further on the spread of military values
discussed on pp. 167–70. It is enough to note that the continuous
presence of French troops outside the Empire’s frontiers, particularly
in peacetime, accentuated the identity of the officers as a group,
separate from both civilian administrators and the local elite, and with
a distinctive pattern of life. Social contact with local notable families
always existed, not least because the officers were frequently lodged in
their houses; but it was structured around entertainments, usually
described with overtones of galantry, and only filled interludes in an
otherwise monotonous routine. Shooting, hunting and riding were the
mainstay of Stendhal’s description of his life in Brunswick. Griois,
commander of the Longone fort on Elba, searched for distractions in
visits to hermitages, picnics and weekly balls.52 The life style and
forms of sociability of the officers all derived from the idea of glory,
from the uniforms and parades to the heroic gestures and medals.
They influenced the society that surrounded them, where civilian
administrators wore uniforms and lycées were organised with military
attributes. But they remained parallel to, rather than part of civil
forms of sociability.
   The major exception to this was freemasonry. After the serious
persecutions of the Terror in France and the counter-revolutionaries
elsewhere, freemasonry had re-emerged, in its different sects, during
the Directory. With Napoleon, it was absorbed into the establishment
and, like all official organisations, was peremptorily centralised under
a single rite, the deist, rationalist obedience of the Grand Orient.
Headed by Napoleon’s brothers, led by Cambacérès and Lebrun,
populated by ministers, generals, prefects and administrators,
alongside local notables, freemasonry rapidly expanded in France: by
1814 the Grand Orient controlled 886 lodges and 337 chapters. Not
surprisingly, given the hierarchical associative structure of the
military, it spread most rapidly in the armies, despite the republican
and anticlerical loyalties of many of the veterans: by 1805, there were
132 masonic lodges in the regiments, and the initiated included a
quarter of all infantry officers.
