                                               Responses to conquest   225


   What is certain is that the entire corpus of changes imposed by
French rule—with their insistence on individualism, property and
highly regulated social relations—accentuated the divide between the
respectable and the poor labouring classes. Official legitimising of the
respectable reached far deeper into the social structure than during the
ancien regime, as much because of the requirements of the
administrative machine as through the sales of national properties.
The pressures of war and fiscality that marked the later years of the
Empire worsened the divide, as they rendered the presence of the poor
more visible. It was not fortuitous that administrative measures and
local initiatives in the relief of poverty should have assumed a higher
profile at precisely this moment.
   Reflections on poverty and charity and on how best to organise
assistance could vaunt distinguished ancestry. The application of
useful science and statistics to the relief of the poor had led to radical
initiatives already in the 1780s, particularly in Germany and Holland,
along the lines proposed by Rumford (now married to Lavoisier’s
widow at Auteuil), Voeght and Büsch. Charity provided another
instance of a terrain where there was a convergence of preoccupations
between regime and local notables, exemplified in the person of de
Gérando, senior functionary and philanthropist, who knew or
corresponded with the leading figures of European charity. But here
too the approaches of administrators and private notables differed
fundamentally. For the authorities, relief of poverty demanded a
rationalisation of administrative structures and a clear demarcation
between the worthy and the unworthy, the former meriting assistance,
the latter requiring punishment. The local notables, often inspired by
an inner religiosity characteristic of the new century, agreed to serve in
the charitable administrations not only for humanitarian motives, but
also out of an extreme concern to uphold communal solidarities.
Municipal and private poor relief again assumed a central role: the
good burghers of Amsterdam and Hamburg extended their welfare
system of income supplementation and family support outside the
governmental structures, precisely at the peak of the blockade.61
   In these same years, the failure of the regime to appropriate a space
that traditionally formed part of local notable initiative was
demonstrated in a minor but revealing episode: the transformation of
a private Parisian association to assist poor pregnant mothers—the
Society of Maternal Charity—into an Imperial Society under the
patronage of Marie Louise. It was decided, at the highest level, that
this female voluntary association (so much more controllable than the
salons) should be extended across the Empire. Despite the strongest
