222   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


ephemeral, the content of social gatherings can lend itself to different
readings. Whatever the compression of the private sphere within the
embrace of the Napoleonic order, alternative spaces could often be
identified in which to assert old values or cultural identities, whether
within or outside the officially approved forms of sociability. If
administrative sensitivity towards what might be construed as
political criticism reduced the printed channels of expression that had
proved so effective in the late enlightenment and Revolution, the
existence of what were officially recognised as apolitical institutions
provided an ambiguous terrain where the views and comportment of
the local elites did not necessarily correspond to the expectations of
the regime.
   On many matters there was a convergence of ideas or practical
ends between administrators and administered. Intellectuals like the
Tuscan Giovanni Fabbroni or the Swiss Jean de Müller were in close
unison with the Napoleonic model of modernity, whatever their
mental reservations about national identity. Police repression of petty
thieves and vagrants was warmly supported by right-thinking
notables. Napoleonic town planning, with its destruction of city walls,
wide straight avenues, and bridges, offered major opportunities to
local citizens for building speculation and commerce (whatever the
reservations about new Napoleonic names of squares and streets). On
a more frivolous level, no doubt there was a meeting of minds among
those so inclined about the renewed authorisation of gambling in the
ample foyers of Italian opera houses.55
   In other respects, however, it is not difficult to observe divergences.
The learned historical associations that were founded in Switzerland
or Prussia, like the award of a prize by the Turin intellectual
establishment to Alessandro Saluzzo’s History of the Piedmontese
militia and the wars of Piedmont from the year 1536 until 1747, were
muted references and hence appeals to the survival of a cultural
identity. Language and literary precedents, like history, assumed new
importance in intellectual debates in the annexed territories as they
could be read as indirect protests against the suffocating
administrative imposition of French uniformity. In the heartland of
Flemish-speaking Belgium a theatrical piece in Flemish was printed
and performed for the first time in the imperial years.56 Education
offered perhaps the most significant terrain for this battle of shadows
between opposing perceptions of culture.
   The revolutionaries, in the sister republics as much as in France,
had shared a conviction of the importance of universal, public free
education, which they saw as complementary to the liberty of culture.
