                                              Responses to conquest   235


social measures, such as the abolition of feudalism, or were forced to
concede in the constitution—in exchange for acceptance of individual
liberty and representation—the recognition of Catholicism as the sole
religion of the Spanish nation. There is an ideological parallelism
running through the reforms and administrative modernisation
proposed by Joseph’s government and by his constitutional
opponents. But just as popular threats isolated the French
collaborators or afrancesados, cutting through the normal ties of
family and friendship, so the constitutional liberals were always on
the defensive, caught between the constant demonstration of the loss
of social control and the rhetoric of the counter-revolutionary
exponents of a regression to absolute monarchy and spiritual
discipline.
   The war operated in highly localised contexts, in which the main
concern of the guerrillas was to harass and drive out the invaders.
Initially, entire populations rose to defend their provinces, as in
Galicia, the Asturias and Catalonia. The ties between the armed bands
and local patterns of land distribution or seasonal migration remain
unknown, but they must have existed, given the scale of guerrilla
warfare, and would have reinforced provincial identity. Then, the very
method of constituting a ‘war by bands’ accentuated local identity, at
the same time as it diluted the calls to patriotism. The central junta
offered a full pardon to all smugglers who joined the bands. As the
considerable number of mountain peasants and fishermen who
habitually practised contraband were joined by soldiers from the
former Spanish armies, Spanish deserters from the French armies,
peasants and outlaws of all types, the blurring of the distinction
between collective resistance and brigandage upheld by the French
became ever more realistic. Indiscipline, desertions, and highly
personal motivations were intrinsic to the war by bands, whose
presence was often far from welcome to local villagers. General
Noguès, in command of the Catalonian city of Gerona, noted how the
artisans were ‘too often pillaged and ill-treated both by our troops and
Pyrenean irregulars and by their guerrillas’.73 Despite the growth in
scale, organization and discipline of some guerrilla forces between
1809 and 1812—especially those of Espoz y Mina, who commanded
an army of 13,000 by 1813 and administered Navarre as effectively as
Soult ruled Andalusia—the armed bands continued to contribute their
elements of ferocity and fanaticism to this cruel war.74

National historiographies have always done less than justice to the
experience of the French conquest of Europe. Later developments—the
