                                              Responses to conquest   233


province had been ceded by a defeated Austria (1805). Without the
Austrian propagandist Hormayr and the military support of Archduke
John, it is doubtful whether Andreas Hofer could ever have succeeded
in rousing his compatriots to the cry of ‘God, Emperor and
Fatherland’. It was the exemplary counter-revolution, with religious
overtones, discrimination against foreigners, Protestants and Jews,
and demands for a return to the privileges and liberties of yesteryear.
But the Tyrol rising, by its very identification with its own local and
ethnic identity, could never act as a focal point for a broader revolt,
despite incursions into the Venetian and Lombard valleys. The
example of Spain had provided a model for the Tyrolese conspirators;
until Napoleon’s defeat of Austria, the French feared the Tyrolese
example might spread to Berg. In practice, although peasant risings
affected two-thirds of the departments in the Italic kingdom, each
remained closely tied to the horizons of its local community; there was
no sense of common identity or attempt at coordination, least of all
with the Tyrolean Austrians.

Armed resistance in Spain was of a different order. The French
invasion of Portugal aroused a similar popular reaction, but it was
quickly overshadowed by the Spanish revolt and controlled by the
occupation of the country by the British army. In Spain too, popular
resistance, whether in guerrilla bands or army units, could hardly have
continued so long and effectively without the campaigns of
Wellington’s army. The inability of the French generals, divided by
personal rivalries, to destroy the British army decisively was an
essential precondition of the Spanish resistance.
    Nevertheless, the Spanish war was a war of the people, from the
immediate risings of 2 May 1808 in Madrid, immortalised by Goya,
to Suchet’s final withdrawal from Catalonia in February 1814. In this,
it differed from the Russian resistance in 1812, which developed
essentially in the wake of the military campaign against the Grande
Armée already in retreat. Hence the uniqueness of the Spanish revolt
requires explanation.
    Spanish historiography has long interpreted this dramatic episode
in the country’s history as a nationalist war; for conservative writers,
it is usually also regarded as a Catholic crusade for throne and altar.
Unquestionably it was a war of independence (as it is described in
Spain), in the sense that it was directed against a foreign invader, as
had been the Catalan and Basque resistance to the French
Convention’s invasion in 1794. It is also beyond doubt that the
representatives of the constitutional structure that emerged from the
