236    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


struggles for national independence, the formation of new nation-
states—provided historians with a teleological interpretation that saw
the nation-state as an inevitable culmination. In such a context, French
occupation could be seen at best only as a negative interlude, at worst
as an insult to the nation. But it is misleading to write of a national
identity in a political sense where a nation-state had not yet emerged.
The Polish gentry and intellectuals certainly asserted their right to
restore a recently lost national independence; the Dutch and Swiss
retained their national identity. Napoleon played on the hopes of the
former and kept a wary eye on the latter. In Portugal, the double insult
of French invasion and the proposition to incorporate the country—yet
again—in the Spanish state confirmed an apparent tie between this
small, proud people and its exiled monarchy; here, as in Spain, religious
fanaticism reinforced monarchical counter-revolution. In Spain,
Napoleon’s affront to national pride led to national resistance,
although those in revolt expressed themselves—in accord with the
history of the Spanish monarchy—most immediately in the form of
many nationalisms, Asturian, Catalan, Galician, Valencian and so on,
and only at a more distant and traditional level by identification with
the legitimate king of Spain.
   Far more problematic are the territories which were only later to
become nation-states. The nationalism of the Belgians (even of the
Flemish speakers) was not aroused by French rule, but by the enforced
incorporation into Holland in 1815. Patriotism, in a generically
national sense, certainly emerged among some young intellectuals in
Italy and Germany as a response to the increasingly rigid
uniformisation imposed by Napoleon, as much as by his final military
campaigns. The rapidity with which it acquired its new connotation
can be gauged by comparing it to Madame de Gérando’s reflections
on what was a patriot in the years of the Consulate. Classical culture
and modern philanthropy combined to limit the reproductive power
of patriotism to its dimensions of a local identity:

      Love of one’s country should not be represented as an abstract
      and unnatural sentiment; but it is limited, like all human faculties,
      and cannot dilate over too large a space…. The Frenchman and
      the German possess the vanity of their race rather than a patriotic
      passion. Because 20 or 30 million individuals need to be rallied
      around the tie that unites them to their compatriots, the tie itself
      so loosens that, in place of a patriotic enthusiasm, all that is felt
      is a sort of general benevolence…. A deep attachment to one’s
      native land nowadays exists above all in small states, and even
