                                               Responses to conquest   231


revolt: Cardinal Ruffo had continually to reform his Sanfedist army,
as few peasants were prepared to march beyond their own region.
   The counter-revolution of 1799 branded a deep scar in the official
memory. The concordats and subordination of the Church were
important to Napoleon, as they neutralised an enemy of unknown
potential, whose resources were restored to the conventional role of
established religion, that of preaching obedience to constituted
authority. The less intelligent of the functionaries continued to live
with the neurosis that the people, incited by priest and legitimist
noble, would seize the first occasion to rise against them. Unlike the
police, they failed to realise that urban plotters—‘the gentlemen of
next week’, as a Turin police commissioner contemptuously described
the royalists—neither wished nor were capable of starting up mass
peasant risings. Even the ‘Jacobin’ patriots who were behind the
Bologna disturbances of 1802 were incapable of moving outside the
city.70
   As the Napoleonic administration acquired experience in
assimilating new territories, armed protest became less frequent.
Banditry and disorder continued, primarily in the remoter areas of the
European countryside, although the institution of the gendarmerie
was more effective than its ancien regime equivalents, at least in times
of peace. The front-line of the Empire and its allies was always more
liable to disturbance than the interior, because of the ease of
communications, supplies and escape routes to foreign territory. The
distinction between conventional banditry and armed revolt was
always a fine one, as use of arms and smuggling were traditional
pastimes wherever there were frontiers; while deserters, particularly
from defeated armies, nourished the ranks of those living outside the
law. But the distinction was blurred even more by the tendency of
exponents of the tougher branches of the administration—the
gendarmerie, Customs and droits réunis officials—to describe as
brigandage any manifestation of collective resistance and disorder. For
brigandage permitted the due processes of law to be set aside.
   In practice, outbreaks of collective political opposition were rare
and local. They usually occurred in coincidence with military
campaigns (Parma 1805, Tyrol 1809), when the forces of order were
temporarily thinner on the ground; foreign promises, and sometimes
practical assistance, encouraged the rebels. Until the final years, such
revolts seemed characteristic of Mediterranean Europe, rather than
the northern or central areas: differences in terrain, between the
mountainous south and great plains of northern-central Europe,
played their part; as did the closer presence of the British fleet. But in
