234   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


anti-French resistance, in particular the Cortes of Cadiz, saw
themselves as spokesmen for the Spanish nation. But the evidence of
this prolonged struggle—from the popular seizure of the initiative in
1808 to the composition and character of the ‘war by bands’—argues
against any identity of view between the guerrillas and people of the
different regions of Spain and either the constitutionalists or the
Church. Regional particularism, always so powerful in the Spanish
monarchy, was stronger in 1808 than it had been under Charles IV,
although it would be historically anachronistic to ascribe to the
popular resistance in Catalonia or elsewhere in Spain a political
nationalism that was to develop only later in the nineteenth century.
As for the Church, although individual clerics were among the
guerrillas and there were strong religious overtones in many episodes
of this ferocious war, both episcopate and secular clergy preached
obedience to Joseph’s government.
   The seizure of the initiative by the people, after Murat’s heavy
suppression of the ‘May the Second’ tumult, occurred because of the
total loss of credibility of all groups of the ruling classes. The
weakness of the enlightenment reforms in Spain, the discredit thrown
on the political class by the public-faction fighting around the rival
figures of Charles IV, his heir Ferdinand and the Queen’s favourite
Godoy, and the economic crisis and financial bankruptcy caused by
the interruption of trade with the American colonies and the French
war had already created a dangerous situation of loss of credibility
when Napoleon deposed the Bourbon dynasty in 1808. Unlike France
in 1789, however, there was no Third Estate or other social group able
to profit from this vacuum, because of the weakness of the Spanish
middle classes and passivity of the established organs of government.
Murat’s appeal to ‘gentry, landowners, merchants and manufacturers’
to use their influence in defence of social order proved as illusory as
the conviction of Joseph’s Spanish advisers that the local elites could
exert their traditional influence. Popular pressure was responsible for
the creation of the eighteen provincial juntas (May-June 1808) which
assumed the responsibilities of government. But the fear of revolution
facilitated the dominance of conservative notables within these bodies
and even more in the central junta (September 1808).
   The very fact of the war facilitated the affirmation of counter-
revolutionaries within the central junta and then the extraordinary
Cortes of Cadiz (September 1810): one-third of the deputies at the
Cortes were ecclesiastics, one-fifth were lawyers and nearly as many
functionaries. It is hardly surprising that the liberal deputies—like
their French predecessors in 1790–1—compromised over radical
