230    Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


      [Italic] Republic will certainly gain a greater reputation and glory
      from its few soldiers than from all the sessions and laws that the
      Legislative body can pass. Let us think of being soldiers and when
      we’ll have a hundred thousand bayonets, then we can start
      talking. In the meantime, let us thank heaven that we have not
      been deprived of the sole means of one day being free, that is, by
      being soldiers.67

Armed resistance against the French occurred sporadically throughout
the Napoleonic years. For Napoleon, such risings were a regular
consequence of occupation: ‘Be quite clear in your calculations’, he
wrote to Joseph in 1806, ‘that two weeks earlier or later you will have
an uprising. It always happens in a conquered country’.68 His initial
underestimate of the Spanish revolt was undoubtedly influenced by
such assumptions. Established techniques existed to deal with such
episodes: rapid despatch of gendarmerie or other army units to the site
of the troubles, exemplary punishment of those identified as
responsible, and if necessary temporary transfer of administrative
authority to the general in command. Some of his collaborators urged
a more humane approach. Lebrun, as governor-general of Liguria,
affirmed on the occasion of an insurrection in the Apennine valleys
between Parma and Piacenza in 1805 that, once it had been put down,
it need be followed only by ‘serious disarming of the population (not
just a hand-over of good or poor weapons, simply on the word of the
parish priests), punishment of some of those responsible and leniency
for the rest’; Napoleon promptly gave responsibility for the area to
General Junot, who was ordered to burn five or six villages and
execute some sixty persons.69
    The initial revolts under the Directory, in 1798 and above all in
1799, in Belgium, Switzerland and Italy, constituted massive responses
against the brutal exploitation of the French occupants, with strongly
religious connotations—as in the Vendée—in reaction to the
Revolutionary assault on the Church. The rising of the Arezzo
peasants in 1799 to the cry of ‘Long live the Virgin Mary’ was the
explosive culmination of popular hostility to the pre-Revolutionary
Leopoldine reform movement, and especially its ecclesiastical policies.
The Calabrian ‘Holy Faith’ revolt against the Parthenopean republic
was so powerful because it combined popular despair over disastrous
economic conditions, land-hunger and religious fanaticism with
vendettas between the rural elites. In these early risings—as later in
Spain—religion could intensify, legitimise and momentarily gel
peasant protest, but it was never adequate by itself as the motor of
