                                              Responses to conquest   229


    those who appear so singularly agitated, even the most sensible of
    them, when it is a question of getting to the foremost positions so
    as to attract a glance, to be in the right place where one can hope
    for a word from the sovereign or a sign of distinction.65

Madame de Gérando was always conscious of the different
perspectives that gender imposed, which she accepted with greater
resignation than her friend Madame de Staël: ‘I don’t know what my
feeling would be if I were a man, but as a woman my ambition does
not go far.’ Outside France, for educated young men raised on a diet
of literary individualism and military heroism, a sense of cultural
identity could arouse contrasting responses. Two examples can be
given, both from Italy, indicative of the more general issue of national
identity that began to be voiced in many parts of Europe in reaction
to French imposition of uniformity.
   For the 16-year-old Cesare Balbo and his adolescent comrades from
the cream of the Piedmontese aristocracy, the utilisation of the well-
used model of the literary society was the only means to vindicate the
identity of Italians. The programme of the Accademia dei Concordi,
which was proclaimed in the privacy of the Balbo family palace in
1805, was explicit:

    It becomes clearer day by day that language is a national tie, a
    reliable countermark of a people, the only one in Italy, divided
    and so strangely subjected as she is to so many dominant
    foreigners. If the different Italian peoples recognise themselves as
    brothers since Dante, this is because of that blessed harmony that
    is our language. And to think that now they want to remove even
    that sign from us!66

Almost contemporaneously, in 1804, a young officer from Vicenza,
Ermolao Federigo, writing home from Boulogne, where the Grande
Armée was waiting to invade England, proposed a very different
solution to the affirmation of identity:

    I never disapprove of those means that can contribute to make
    Italians into good soldiers. I believe this should be the primary
    thought of every good Italian…. What does it matter whether one
    is serving the ambition of this or that man? The great aim must be
    to learn to make war, which is the only skill that can free us. …I
    see matters in this light. I serve my country when I learn to be a
    soldier, and even if I served the Turk, it wouldn’t matter. Our
