232   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


the final debacle, revolt moved to the north, with risings of industrial
workers in Berg, of the population in Hamburg and the fisherfolk in
Holland (1813).
   Wherever they occurred, the risings were linked directly to a
sudden worsening of economic conditions and taxation. Over the
period, conscription seems to have been accepted increasingly with
resignation, although it took time before it could acquire in each
annexed region the quality of an unavoidable curse: in Holland, only
recently annexed and totally lacking a military tradition, conscription
sparked off the riots at Scheveningen and other small ports in 1813.
Taxation aroused the most generalised resentment everywhere,
particularly the administration of the droits réunis on alcohol, salt and
tobacco, whose officials often behaved brutally. Of the Spanish
functionaries of Joseph’s government who fled to France in 1814, over
40 per cent were employees of the ministry of finances, compared to
21 per cent police officials.71 The spread of revolt from the Tyrol in
1809 to the valleys north of Brescia owed as much to the dreaded
introduction of a new consumption tax as to the excess production
crisis of their iron ore mines: alongside the peasantry, millers, bakers,
innkeepers, winesellers and shopkeepers had closed shop in protest
against the new tax. In Berg, the revolt of the manufacturing workers
in January 1813 was caused by the acute industrial crisis.
   Apart from Spain, only two revolts seriously challenged French
authority: the endemic war in Calabria and the Tyrol rising. Both were
dependent on outside support from a major power. In Calabria,
initially the English general operating from Sicily, Sidney Smith,
continued to pay the rebel bands, as otherwise they would have
dissolved. Favoured by the inhospitable terrain, the brigand bands in
Calabria persisted, despite the ferocious tactics of Murat and Manhés,
because they were locked into the thick texture of faction and clientist
kin and community networks. These bands of notorious fame—like
those of Fra Diavolo or Sciabolone—fought the new regime not
because they were ardent Bourbon royalists, but because the French
were foreigners and representatives of state authority.72
   The Tyrol revolt was more complex, as well as more worrying for
French authority. It consisted of a general rising of the peasantry,
initially supported by innkeepers and cattle-dealers, whose livelihood
had been seriously threatened by the collapse of the transit trade
following French-imposed protection of the Italian market. But the
rising was far more than a protest against economic crisis. It was a
clarion call to the political and cultural identity of the region, against
the centralising measures of Bavaria, to whom this semi-autonomous
