242   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


Baptiste Say, it expressed a reaction against the authoritarian
centralism and economic dirigisme of the Napoleonic state. The
reaction was strongest in France, to the point that to foreigners,
Restoration France appeared as the country of liberty, possibly even
more so than Britain before the electoral reform of 1832, with its
system of representation extended to local government, formal
equality of civil rights, limitation of state intervention and affirmation
of landed notables. Constitutions, as the mechanism to reconcile
liberty with monarchical order, were invested with the force of a
symbolic value for the liberals of Restoration Europe, from Cadiz,
Palermo and Lisbon to Brussels, Vienna and Berlin. Economic
liberalism or laissez-faire, by which was understood an end to state
interference over international trade and the maintenance of
entrepreneurial freedom, was enthusiastically promoted by Britain
and theorised by Continental economists like Jean-Baptiste Say,
Frédéric Bastiat and Friedrich von Hermann.
   In reality, liberalism rapidly lost its distinctive quality as opposition
to the Napoleonic experience. Liberalism as the practice of
government derived from the same matrix as Napoleonic
administration, with the single and practically restricted exception of
elected representation as a check on arbitrary rule. Like the
Napoleonic functionaries, liberals were convinced that they embodied
social and economic progress, were favourable to science and
technology, and proclaimed rational, utilitarian principles as the basis
of a superior and neutral administration. The continuity between the
Napoleonic experience and liberalism was accentuated by the strong
defence of former imperial administrators against the legitimist claims
of some Restoration monarchies, as well as by their leading role in
statistical propositions to resolve social problems. In terms of
economic theory, the political economy of Say, however influential in
France, was contested in Italy by the philosophy of statistics of
Melchiorre Gioia and in Germany by Friedrich List’s analysis of the
comparative advantages of protection. In economic practice, the
flooding of the Continental markets with British manufactures led
many governments to revalue the lessons of the Continental blockade
and conserve protective Customs barriers. Above all, the political
liberalism of the Restoration bore an indelible imprint from the
Napoleonic years in its identification with the propertied bourgeoisie
and its insensitivity towards the labouring classes.
   Liberalism, whose popularity in 1815 was based on the
progressives’ opposition to Napoleonic despotism (in contrast to the
reactionary and religious opposition of a Joseph de Maistre), was
