                                              Epilogue: the heritage   243


ambivalent in its attitude towards administrative modernisation. Like
the enlightenment philosophes, the liberals were seduced by the
apparent application of their ideas by the prince, but diffident towards
the dangers of the concentration of power. A state guided by
utilitarian principles was seen as necessary for the moral elevation of
the labouring classes as much as for national identity; while
despotism, it was hoped, could be avoided by representation restricted
to the notables.
   In fact, the Napoleonic experience of administrative modernisation
was to serve as a model as much for the opponents of French
domination as for their supporters. Very few rulers attempted to
abolish the Napoleonic reforms, and those who did—like the
Sardinian King Victor Emanuel—were soon forced to abandon such
Utopian reaction. In most states or regions that had experienced
French dominion, the Restoration monarchs retained the structures, if
not the names, of the Napoleonic administrative, fiscal or juridical
reforms: an excellent example is the completion of the French cadaster
in the former Rhineland departments by the king of Prussia and in
Tuscany by the grand-duke. The unprecedented restructuring of the
organisation of the state and social system by Prussia, as the price of
its survival after Jena, was conceived by Stein and Hardenberg
through critical observation of the French model. The Austrian civil
code of 1811 and administrative centralisation, which were to be
applied to the Lombard-Venetian kingdom after 1815, owed as much
to Napoleon as to Joseph II. The administrative unification of the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicily in 1816 would have been inconceivable
without the French decade at Naples. Even in Britain utilitarians like
Jeremy Bentham urged their government to acquire statistical
information as the basis for a more interventionist policy. In some
states, like Bavaria, Baden and Württemberg, the collapse of the
Napoleonic Empire was without any negative effect on the process of
administrative modernisation, which accelerated between 1809 and
1819 under the leadership of Montgelas, Reitzenstein, Brauer and
Friedrich of Württemberg, and proved more successful than Prussia in
forging a unified state identity.5
   Centralised administrative modernisation has become the
characteristic of the nation-state. The Napoleonic model, with its
expectations that the pace of national integration could be forced
through the administrative grid, underlay the practices of the
governments of many of the European states that survived the collapse
of the Napoleonic Empire and most of those that achieved
independence subsequently in the nineteenth century. The social limits
