240   Napoleon’s Integration of Europe


deeper social relationships of each society. In reaction to the
Napoleonic experience old solidarities, tempered by centuries of
exercise—such as language, community or popular religion—were
reinforced; new solidarities emerged, like the discovery and
construction of national individuality. The Napoleonic conquest of
Europe, because of the determination and relative effectiveness of its
administrative class, backed up by armies, acted as a liberating force,
albeit often in ways unintended by its exponents. Its repercussions
were felt far beyond Europe, as in Brazil, where it could be argued that
the achievement of independence and national integration was an
indirect consequence of Junot’s invasion of Portugal.4 In the European
scale of its ambitions, it bequeathed a heritage that cut across national
frontiers and imposed an unusual, perhaps unprecedented unity on
political behaviour within the different European states during the
Restoration. Until 1848 or even 1870, and indirectly until much later,
the impact of these years conditioned the aspirations and practices of
the opponents as much as of the friends of the Revolution and
Napoleonic modernity. The complexity of this heritage can be
illustrated by a brief discussion of three themes—nationalism,
liberalism and administrative modernisation.
   Nationalism, which was to become so dominant a theme of
European politics by 1848, is considered in modern historiography as
a consequence of the French Revolution. Unquestionably the
Revolutionary wars stimulated a popular loyalty in France, as
Napoleonic imperialism aroused a reaction among peoples resentful
of the weight and exactions of the French presence. It is necessary,
however, to distinguish between these two very different responses. In
France, a nation-state was forged, as much by the legitimising of the
leading role of the state as by military patriotism; the survival of a
strong ‘spirit of locality’ (to employ the language of the July
monarchy) was compatible with, and in times of extreme necessity
subordinate to, identification with France; there was no longer a
principled antagonism between local and national loyalties.
Elsewhere, nationalism could be invoked as a means of arousing
enthusiasm against the French invader: in Britain, Spain or Russia, it
achieved a notable popular response; in a state like Prussia,
uncertainties about peasant reactions persuaded even a farsighted
leader like Hardenberg to proceed cautiously.
   Military defeat, not nationalism, was the cause of the sudden
collapse of the Napoleonic empire. The elites everywhere were
immediately concerned—like the French administrators—to ensure
the maintenance of order through a peaceful handover of authority. In
