                                              Epilogue: the heritage   241


so far as popular loyalty manifested itself, it was towards a dynasty
rather than a nation—Victor Emanuel I in Piedmont, Ferdinand IV in
Naples, the Elector William of Hesse-Cassel in the rump of
Napoleonic Westphalia. Legitimism, or restoration of the dynasty,
was an obvious and effective rallying cry at the moment of the anti-
French reaction. More significant was the response in regions without
a ‘native’ dynasty—in Lombardy, Genoa, the Belgian provinces, even
the Swiss cantons. Here the elites sought in vain to retain or restore
their regional identities, even fomenting popular demonstrations, as in
the Ligurian valleys; or, as in the former Rhineland departments,
remained loyal to France. Whatever the assumptions of some literary-
minded patriots, nationalism could not function as a rallying-cry,
simply because it was devoid of significance to the mass of the people
and appeared as a dangerous abstraction to most of the elites in
territories without experience of a nation-state—and even within such
states.
   Nationalism was to be constructed as a powerful ideology in the
subsequent decades, when the experience of the French occupation
became part of the armoury of the political struggle to attain
independence. For Mazzini or von Savigny, those years gave birth to
the emergence of an awareness of an innate national identity. For the
Belgian patriots in 1830, as for the Lombards, whether liberal or
conservative, some of whom had made careers in the Napoleonic
administration, a political sense of national identity only developed
against the foreign rulers imposed by the Congress of Vienna, whether
the Dutch King William I or the Austrian Emperor Francis. Nowhere
did nationalism as a political ideology replace the pre-existing
loyalties to community and region or integrate state with nation. Only
after the creation of such nation-states, from Greece and Belgium to
the ethnic states of the Austrian empire, was nationalism to be
constructed, in opposition to what were considered as the
disaggregative forces of local identities, by the transference within
national boundaries of the same techniques of administrative
uniformity, linguistic imposition and pressure for social integration
that had characterised the European experience of the Napoleonic
regime. Like the imperial administrators, the politicians and
bureaucrats of these new states were to meet with social adaptations
and resistance that made the building of an integrated nation a
prolonged process.
   Liberalism was more directly related to the Napoleonic experience.
In its political connotations of constitutionalism, widened liberty and
economic liberalism, as voiced by Benjamin Constant and Jean
