6 P. E. TRTLOCK AND A. BELKIN

model) that will enable him to deduce a counterfactual situation from institutions
and relationships that actually existed. (Fogel! 1964, 224)

In this view, counterfactual reasoning is a straightforward application of
Hempel’s (1965) covering law of historical explanation: “Counterfactual
propositions [in quantitative economic history] are merely inferences from
hypothetico-deductive models” (Fogel 1964).

Following the Hempel-Fogel neopositivist tradition, many game theorists,
neoclassical economists, and structural realists display impressive confi-
dence in their counterfactual claims. They know that if one changes the
incentives confronting rational actors, those actors will quickly identify the
new utility-maximizing course of action. If a currency is under- or over-
valued, arbitrageurs will seize upon profit-making opportunities. If state reg-
ulations reward inefficiency and punish efficiency, aggregate economic out-
put will fall. If a status quo power offers weak or incredible promises of
extended deterrence to its allies, aggressors with much to gain and little to
lose will strike. The calculus of rational action is not, however, the only
theoretical logic that we can use to infer what would have happened in this,
or that counterfactual scenario. We can draw upon sociological theories that
stress normative and institutional rules of fairness, cultural theories that
stress group values and identifications, political theories of bureaucratic and
interest-group competition, and cognitive theories of belief systems and
bounded rationality.

Consider this sampling of the range of theories that political observers
draw upon to “fill in” missing counterfactual data points:

(1) Keohane (1984) supports his claim that “if there were no international
regimes, there would be less cooperation” by appealing to the Coase-Wil-
liamson tradition of institutional economics that stresses the role that institu-
tions play in reducing the transaction costs of cooperation and in increasing
the reputation costs of defection.

(2) Breslauer (Chapter 3) reviews the work of comparativists and area
specialists who bolstered counterfactual claims about the causes of the Rus-
sian Revolution and the impact of Stalin’s modernization policies by invok-
ing theories of economic development.

(3) In their recent book, Lebow and Stein (1994) use Janis and Mann's
(1977) psychological theory of decision making under stress to defend their
claim that even if Kennedy had displayed more resolve at the Vienna sum-
Khrushchev still would have deployed missiles in Cuba. Lebow and
Stein argue that Khrushchev confronted a strategic dilemma that may well
have induced a psychological state of defensive avoidance that, in turn,
would have rendered Khrushchev insensitive to any plausible American sig-
nal of resolve.

(4) Kiser and Levi (Chapter 8) note how large classes of “agency” coun-

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 2

terfactuals are ruled out by structural theories of revolution. If we view
revolution as inevitable when certain structural preconditions are satisfied—
intense international and demographic pressures on the state, fiscal crisis,
deep divisions within the dominant class, and mass mobilization of discon-
tented groups—then there is little point in contemplating counterfactuals that
assign decisive roles to the actions of individuals. Within structuralist frame~
works, it is impossible to undo the English, French, or Russian revolutions
by simply positing wiser kings.

(5) Cederman (Chapter 11) draws on cartel theory to support his critique
of neorealism and his claim that if defense-dominance had prevailed
throughout history, there would have been less stability,

(6) Herrmann and Fischerkeller (Chapter 6) invoke Huth and Russett’s
theory of extended deterrence (a theory indigenous to political science, not
aan import) to argue that even if Truman had not threatened Stalin, the So-
viets still would have withdrawn from Iran.

(7) Perhaps the most systematic use of theory to assess counterfactuals
‘occurs in the chapters by Bueno de Mesquita and Weingast. These authors
argue (among other things) that possible worlds become plausible only inso-
far as they are logically consistent with the equilibrium conditions of the
game that captures the strategic interdependence obtaining between actual
historical actors. For example, it does not make much sense to posit a hypo-
thetical world in which both players cooperated in a single-round game if
one or both of the players could have been much better off by defecting
whenever the other player cooperated. Using this game-theoretic screening
rule, itis possible to eliminate vast numbers of counterfactuals.

This overview is, however, disturbing. It suggests that each school of
thought can foster its own favorite set of supporting counterfactuals (Chapter
12, Weber). Moreover, these schools of thought will sometimes prescribe
contradictory rules for assessing counterfactuals. Where does this leave us?
Consistency with well-established theory is a reasonable standard for gaug-
ing the plausibility of counterfactuals but we should expect disagreement
about what counts as well-established theory in world politics. To prevent
‘competing schools of thought from simply inventing counterfactuals of con-
venience, we need reality constraints. Counterfactuals must not only fit
existing historical and statistical data (the emphasis in our third and fifth
standards), they must stimulate testable predictions that hold up reasonably
well against new data (the emphasis in our sixth standard, projectability).

5. Consistency with Well-Established Statistical Generalizations

In many contexts, we rely not on theoretical laws but on statistical general-
izations to fill in “what would have happened if this rather than that event had

