

During the Industrial Revolution cotton became cheaper to import, and various machines were invented to make the process of manufacturing quicker and on a larger scale. These spinning and weaving machines were powered initially by water, but with the development of the steam engine several spinning or weaving machines could be connected to one engine, producing far more yarn or cloth than could be done by individual spinners or weavers. Here are some comparisons of cottage industry and mechanical processes:

Spinning

- In the 1730s it took one skilled worker at a hand-operated spinning wheel 65 days of work to produce 45 kilograms of cotton yarn on a single spindle or rod.
- By 1733 the development of the flying shuttle doubled that rate.
- By 1764 the ‘spinning jenny’ could handle eight spindles at once, so productivity increased eight times.
- By 1830 water- or steam-powered spinning jennys could be worked by one skilled adult with the help of two or three boys to operate up to 1600 individual spindles simultaneously.

Weaving

- In the 1730s a very good adult male hand weaver could weave two pieces of cloth of about 24 metres in a week.
- By 1823 a steam-loom weaver aged 15 attending two looms could weave seven similar pieces in a week.
- By 1833 a steam-loom weaver aged 15–20 and assisted by a child about 12 years of age, attending to four looms, could weave 18–20 similar pieces in a week.

These machines and processes were adapted to do the same for wool, especially after 1850, when merino wool from Australia, with its longer fleece length than previous wool, became more suited to machine spinning. This increased the demand for raw wool to keep the mills of Britain producing.

Adapted from B Trinder, Britain’s Industrial Revolution, Carnegie Publishing, Lancaster, 2013, pp. 389–393 and RL Hills, Power From Steam, Cambridge University Press, 1989, p. 244

1. How was wool turned into clothing during medieval times?

2. What was invented during the Industrial Revolution that helped to improve the manufacturing of wool?

3. Write a short summary describing the impact of the Industrial Revolution on wool manufacturing in England.

##### Evidence File B

First merinos in Australia

Read the Defining Moment in Australian history: 1797 Introduction of the merino sheep to Australia and identify this information:

4. When were merino sheep introduced into Australia?

5. Who introduced the first merino sheep to Australia?

6. Why were merino sheep valued?

7. Why were they so rare at first?

8. Who were three people responsible for establishing the wool industry in Australia?

9. Why was merino wool better suited to the expanding wool industry in Europe?

10. Write a short summary about the importance of merino sheep during the Industrial Revolution in Australia.

##### Evidence File C

The break out from Sydney

Read these two Defining Moments in Australian history: 1813 Blaxland, Lawson and Wentworth cross the Blue Mountains and 1815 Governor Macquarie establishes Bathurst — first inland European settlement and identify this information: