

✕

Eliane Touma

i

Map showing 1813 route across the Blue Mountains

Eliane Touma

1x

11. In which direction did the colonisation expand once people had crossed the Blue Mountains?

12. Identify at least three factors that help explain why people wanted to expand the Sydney area settlement. (There may be more than three.)

13. What was the main appeal of the new area?

14. What other impacts or consequences were there for the colony?

15. Write a short summary of how the Industrial Revolution played a role in the breakout from Sydney.

##### Evidence File D

The spread of the pastoral frontier

Read the commentary below and answer the questions that follow.

There was demand for both meat and wool from 1860, giving pastoralists a choice between cattle and sheep. Cattle were usually preferred during the early stages of pastoral occupation. They are hardier than sheep, able to cope with coarser feed (uncrushed materials requiring less preparation) and a greater range of environmental conditions, particularly in the wetter areas where sheep are prone to diseases such as footrot and catarrh. Cattle can range almost twice as far for water. They are better at defending themselves against attacks from dingoes, and they can be walked to market. But for an established pastoralist supplying both meat and wool, sheep offered better profits. Only in areas where environmental conditions were too harsh for sheep, such as the tropical north and the wetter areas, did cattle remain dominant.

JCR Camm and John McQuilton (eds), Australians. A Historical Atlas, Fairfax, Syme & Weldon Associates, Sydney, 1987, p.65

16. Which two farm animals were strongly preferred by pastoralists from 1860? What did they provide?

17. What were some of the advantages and disadvantages of both in terms of spreading the pastoral frontier?

18. Would the expansion of pastoral areas have been impacted by the Industrial Revolution in Europe? How?

Now look at this map of sheep and wheat growing areas in Australia, created in the 1920s.

✕

National Library of Australia, obj-234331946

i

A map showing sheep and wheat growing areas of Australia, published in the 1920s

National Library of Australia, obj-234331946

1x

19. What further evidence does the map provide about the spread of sheep and the pastoral frontier throughout Australia?

20. Write a short summary describing the impact of the Industrial Revolution on the spread of the pastoral frontier.

##### Evidence File E

Black Line

Read the Defining Moment in Australian history: 1830 The ‘Black Line’ – settler force attempts to corral Aboriginal people on the Tasman Peninsula and identify this information:

21. What was the ‘Black Line’ and when was it created?

22. In what part of Tasmania was it implemented?

23. What was its aim?

24. What was the connection between the ‘Black Line’, sheep and the Industrial Revolution?

25. What was the impact of European colonisation in Tasmania on Aboriginal people?

26. Write a short summary of how the ‘Black Line’ was related to the Industrial Revolution.