

✕

WL Crowther Library, Tasmanian Archive and Heritage Office, SD_ILS:994395

i

Map showing movements of the Black Line, 1831

WL Crowther Library, Tasmanian Archive and Heritage Office, SD_ILS:994395

1x

##### Evidence File F

Sheep and the Australian environment

Read this information about the impacts of sheep on the local environment:

Sheep are not native to Australia. They have hard hooves which compact the soil, and suppress the growth of many native grasses and plants. When compacted, the hardened soil does not support new growth; it cracks and dries out, and rain and wind cause soil erosion and degradation.

The continuous movement of sheep and cattle wore tracks in the soil, which resulted in erosion and damage to the banks of rivers, lakes and ponds.

The sheep competed with kangaroos for native grasses. Once eaten out, the native grasses found it hard to regenerate due to the disturbance to the soil. This destruction of native habitat caused a reduction in natural species variety.

The development of wire fencing enabled large flocks of sheep to be kept close to each other. This made them easier to manage, but resulted in the overgrazing of many areas.

Adapted from Ann Young, Environmental Change in Australia Since 1788, Oxford University Press, South Melbourne, 2000, p. 42

27. How did the introduction of sheep lead to an increase in soil erosion and degradation in Australia?

28. Did the introduction of fencing help reduce the environmental impact of sheep? Explain your answer.

29. Write a short summary describing the impact of the Industrial Revolution on the Australian environment.

##### Evidence File G

Improving the merino sheep breed

Read this information about the way merino sheep were adapted to Australian conditions.

The earliest merino sheep were carefully bred to maintain and improve the qualities of their wool.

Between 1850 and 1880 two breeders used breeding techniques to transform the short-stapled Spanish fine-wool sheep into new domestic types, with longer but fine and medium wool. These were Thomas Shaw in South Australia, and the Peppin brothers in the Riverina.

This transformation meant that the industrial machines used for cotton could be adapted and used to process this longer wool.

Breeds were also adapted to meet the environmental conditions in different places. Different areas, such as those with high rainfall or with hot and dry conditions, required differences in the sheep. These were achieved through selective breeding to achieve the best mix of fine wool on an animal that was also best adapted to survive the particular conditions.

Adapted from Laurissa Smith, ‘Wool powerhouse turns 150’, ABC News, 29 September 2011

✕

National Museum of Australia

i

Envelope with an illustration of a merino ram on it

National Museum of Australia

1x

30. How did the development of new domestic types of Australian wool affect the development of industrial machines?

31. Why would producing breeds of sheep to meet the Australia’s varying environmental conditions be important?