4        PITT'S BLUNDERS, 1 793-1 796             chap.

long before that, the market price of recruits had risen
to thirty guineas.
    One cause of the extreme clearness of recruits was
dread of service in the West Indies, where Pitt had
decided to make his principal military effort. Nor was
this repugnance unreasonable, for West Indian duty
in those days was practically synonymous with death.
But, apart from this, the Government, by its own
military policy, had done its utmost to hinder recruiting
for the Line.    The Militia was, very properly, at once
embodied and made up to strength as soon as the
danger of war became serious ; but substitutes were
allowed, and these substitutes were precisely the men
who, but for the heavy bounty which they could gain
from serving comfortably at home, would gladly have
enlisted in the Army.    Furthermore, by enrolling many
scores of thousands of Volunteers as independent units,
dissociating them, contrary to all precedent, from
the  Militia, and exempting them from the ballot,
Ministers diminished seriously the number of men who
were liable to be drawn for the Militia, threw the
obligation upon a smaller class of the population, and,
as a natural consequence, increased the demand for
substitutes.  Then again, they had raised several thou-
sand Fencible regiments, both horse and foot.    These,
being engaged for home service alone, differed from
Militia only in that they were not chosen by the ballot,
and, consequently, they absorbed thousands of men
who would otherwise have taken service with the
Regulars.    Meanwhile the mortality among the troops
in the West Indies was appalling ; and yet, for military
reasons, it was urgently necessary to obtain more men
by some means for both Navy and Army. An Act was
therefore passed for levying men from every parish
in the United Kingdom, after the precedent of Queen
Anne. The measure was a total failure so far as the
Army was concerned, and in the Navy it was generally
considered, from the bad character of the men produced,
to have been a chief cause of the Mutiny of 1797.
