I              THE ARMY FED BY MILITIA                             5

    By 1796, therefore, the Government was at its wits'
end, and in that year there was serious danger of in-
vasion.  In spite of all its Fencibles and Volunteers, it
did not feel safe, and so fell, during the next two
years,    to    raising     more    Fencibles, a       Supplementary
Militia, more Volunteers, and, last of all, a force called
the Provisional Cavalry, which was supposed to include
all   mounted men not already gathered into the Fencible
and Yeomanry Cavalry.      The Provisional Cavalry was
a crying failure.   " It passed," in Windham's words,
'*
   over the country like a blight.     It was a pleasant
*'
   conceit to make every man ride another's horse, till
"at length when the men and horses were all brought
" together, no man knew how to mount, and so they all
" separated." So short-lived was this force, that the fore-
going caustic sentence is almost all that is discoverable
concerning it ; but it is very evident that the class
which the Government desired to enlist in it contrived
to evade service by procuring substitutes, though paying
dearly for them.       The Supplementary Militia was
more successful. Ministers had the good sense not to
grant any exemption to the Volunteers until the ballot
had been held. But even so, between these various
calls for men, bounties, or, more accurately speaking,
the cost of recruits and substitutes, rose in 1798 to
sixty, seventy, and even eighty guineas.^
     It was very plain that such a state of things could
not continue; wherefore, in 1798 Ministers passed
an Act to enable ten thousand Militiamen to enlist in
the Army for a bounty of ten pounds.          The Lords-
Lieutenant set their faces against it, not wishing to see
their men shipped off to the West Indies ; and the
measure was a failure. But, fortunately, the demand
for men in the West Indies ceased about this time, and
the Government was able to reintroduce the Act in
 1799, with the additional provision that the service of
the enlisted Militiamen should be confined to Europe.
Then the ten thousand, most of whom had already
                     *    H.D. New Series, iii. 599.
