I               MILITIA ACT OF 1757                     3

recruits   furnished   thereby to the   Army in Germany
were of miserable quality. In fact, greatly though the
sudden peace of 1763 was blamed, it came none too
soon for the British Army.
    That war, however, brought with it one great and
solid advance in our military system, namely, the
Militia Act of 1757.       This measure provided for
passing the entire manhood of the country through
the Militia by ballot, in terms of three years ; but it
was never properly executed, and hence lost very much
of its value.   The ballot itself was never enforced^
until the American trouble became serious in 1775,
and then, since substitution was allowed, the traffic
in substitutes interfered gravely with recruiting for the
Regular Army. The price of a substitute rose to ten
guineas before the close of the war, which meant that
recruits for the Line could not be obtained for less than
eleven or twelve guineas.      This was the first serious
symptom of a very grave mischief.
    From 1784 until 1792 Pitt allowed the military
forces of the country to sink to the lowest degree of
weakness and inefficiency; and in 1793 he found himself
obliged to improvise not merely an army, but, owing to
the multiplicity of his enterprises, a very large army.
He fell back on the old resources of raising men for
rank and calling into existence new levies, allowing the
system to be carried to such excess that the Army did
                                              ;


not recover from the evil for many years.        Never did
the crimps reap such a harvest as in 1794 and 1795 ;
and never was a more cruel wrong done to the Army
than when boys fresh from school, in virtue of so many
hundred wretched weaklings produced by a crimp, took
command of battalions, and even of brigades, over the
heads of good officers of twenty and thirty years'
service.    In 1793 the bounty offered to men enlisting
into the Line was ten guineas   ; within eighteen months
the Government was contracting with certain scoundrels
for the delivery of men at twenty guineas a head, and,
         X H.D. Speech ofW. Windham, 21st Feb. 1805.
