2                    THE OLD SYSTEM                            chap.

    Ordinary recruiting was a regimental matter, which
kept two or three officers and a small party of men
constantly absent from regimental duty. It was usually
stimulated at the outbreak of a war by adding two
troops or companies to every regiment or battalion,
which gave a step without purchase to a limited number
of officers.^
     The raising of new regiments is a thing that explains
itself.     Practically it offered commissions to any enter-
prising gentleman or gentlemen who, by hook or crook,
could get together a body of men ; and in its essence
it differed very little from raising men for rank, which

signified the grant of a step of promotion to all officers
and of a commission to all civilians who would collect
a given number of recruits.         An increased bounty,
of course, necessarily accompanied the whole of these
arrangements ; and though, in certain instances, men of
rank and station could raise whole regiments of excel-
lent soldiers, yet the backbone of an improvised army
was the crimp.
     The replacing of casualties suffered on active service,
that is to say the maintenance as distinguished from
the formation of an army, was left wholly to ordinary
recruiting ; and it need hardly be said that in a long
war this meagre resource invariably failed. Increased
bounties led always to increased desertion ; and even
in Queen Anne's time it was necessary to enlist men
for short service, instead of, as usual, for           life,   and to
make a levy of so many men from every parish in the
country. As time went on, the difficulty of keeping
corps in the field up to strength constantly increased.
In Marlborough's day every regiment sent its recruiting
parties home as soon as the Army went into winter
quarters ; but when winter quarters ceased to be, and
campaigns were no longer bounded by the seasons, the
problem became almost insoluble. Towards the end
of the Seven Years' War new levies were raised as fast
as men could be found to undertake them, but the
     ^    This mode of augmentation lasted till the Crimean War.
