CHAP. II      VOLUNTEER ACTS, 1802                         13

one horse, in addition. Corps which, when called on,              1802.
consented voluntarily to march out of their counties to
repel invasion or to suppress riots were, under section
10, entitled to receive the same pay as regular troops,
and were subjected to military discipline, with the pro-
viso that they could be tried only by courts-martial
composed of officers of Yeomen or Volunteers. Under
section 1 1 officers and men disabled on active service
were entitled to half-pay or to a Chelsea pension respec-
tively ; and therewith the enactment was complete.     Not
a word was said as to the preservation of discipline
during the days of exercise ; not a word to prevent the
multiplication of small corps, a thing which had been
the curse of the Volunteers from 1794 to 1801 ; finally,
not a word as to pay and allowances, except in case
of invasion.
    The Act having been passed, the Secretary of State
for War, on the 2nd of July, sent round a circular to
the Lords-Lieutenant inviting offers of service, and
tendering the following allowances        : ;^2 a year to
every   Volunteer   for  his  clothing  and  appointments
^60 a year   for every  troop  of Yeomanry   which counted
not  fewer  than forty  rank  and file.

    A fair number both of cavalry and infantry accepted
these terms, more often as isolated troops and companies
than as regiments or battalions ; but a great many
refused further service, not seeing any occasion for such
patriotic display in time of peace.
    The Irish Volunteers Act differed not a little from
the British. Therein it was enacted that the men should
receive clothing, arms, and pay from Government while
out on exercise, which exercise was not to exceed two
days in each month.       Permanent pay also was allowed
to one sergeant in  each  troop ; and the provisions seemed
to point to real desire for efficiency, until the third section
stated expressly, with startling abruptness, that neither
enrolment nor the receipt of pay or allowances should
subject either Volunteers or Yeomen to military duty or
discipline.
