         14                 MILITIA ACT OF 1802                        chap.

1802.       The next measure of Addington's Government was
        a new Militia Act,^ whereby several previous Militia
        Acts were repealed, and the purport of them, with some
        amendments, re-enacted. The population of the United
        Kingdom at this time was, roughly speaking, 14,500,000,
        namely, England, 9,000,000 ; Scotland, 1,500,000; Ire-
        land, 4,000,000.    The Act (together with its affiliated
        Acts^) provided for raising altogether 51,489 men,
        between the ages of eighteen and forty-five, in Great
        Britain, according to a regular quota for every county,
        and for giving the King's authority to augment that
        number by one-half on calling Parliament together
        within fourteen days.    This augmentation was known
        as the Supplementary Militia, the original 51,489 being
        distinguished as the Old Militia       —
                                             technical terms which
        should be borne in mind.
            All Militiamen were to be chosen by ballot, and by
        no other means whatever, and were positively forbidden,
        under penalties (sec. 4), to enlist in the Regular Army.
        The regular period of training was fixed at twenty-one
        days annually (sec. 88).
                The machinery for the levy was as follows          :   —For
        the purposes of the Militia each county as a whole was
        governed by " General Meetings of the Lieutenancy,"
        that is to say, by a Council of the Lord-Lieutenant and
        of his Deputies.     The Lord-Lieutenant himself was
        appointed by the Sovereign ; the Deputies, of whom a
        qualification in respect of property was required, were
        appointed by the Lord-Lieutenant, subject to the
        Sovereign's approbation.   In the absence of the Lord-
        Lieutenant, the Sovereign could give three deputies a
        commission to act in his stead. With the Council of
        the Lieutenancy was a Secretary, known as the Clerk of
        the General Meeting, who was appointed by the Lord-
        Lieutenant and removable by him (sec. 18).
            Each county was further parcelled out into sub-
            1   42 Geo. III. cap. 90.
            2   The Affiliated Acts mean those for the City of London, the
        Cinque Ports, and the Stannaries, which were dealt with separately.
