        8       ADDINGTON'S FALSE POLICY                    chap.

1803.   without seeing the force harassed to destruction on
        its retreat.   Calabria and Apulia were ripe for revolt
        against him, and the rest of Italy was by no means so
        quiet that he could afford to leave it weakly occupied
        when there was a chance of a reverse to his arms. The
        British force could have been doubled or trebled as the
        augmentation of the Army progressed, and Napoleon
        would thus have been forced to fight us amid a hostile
        population, at the end of a long line of communications,
        in a country which favoured the action of our fleet
        even more than Spain.
            It may be urged that a policy so audacious was too
        much to expect of British Ministers in the presence of
        such a man as Napoleon ; and such an objection must
        not be lightly dismissed.    Addington was such a proverb
        for mediocrity that, though he was popular among the
        country gentlemen, the nation felt little confidence in
        him ; and if he had attempted such a stroke as is out-
        lined in the preceding paragraphs, he might well have
        brought a storm about his ears and have been compelled
        to cancel any offensive expedition, even if he had
        designed it.    But this is not the main point. The real
        question at issue is whether in the particular circum-
        stances he should have devoted his principal effort to
        reinforcing the Army, which could serve abroad, or to
        creating a huge defensive force, which could only serve
        at home.     Obviously, regular troops, which from their
        nature are superior to half-trained levies as well for
        internal defence as for foreign attack, were preferable if
        they could be raised in sufficient numbers and at reason-
        able expense.   Indeed, though the fact is occasionally
        obscured, the Regular Army is, and always has been, the
        only land force that we can depend upon for any
        description of war.   All inquiries, therefore, into our
        military preparations at any period must be conducted,
        primarily and above all, to ascertain how they affected,
        for good or evil, the strength, numbers, and efficiency of
        the Regular Army.
            War was declared, as has been told, on the 1 6th of
