I             RENEWAL OF THE WAR                                 7

    An attitude of passive and inert defence              is   very   1803.
rarely sound, and was never more false than         1803.
                                                        in
It has generally been assumed that, in the circumstances,
it was impossible for England to think of taking the

offensive.    Yet this is at least open to question.           The
enemy to be encountered was indeed most formidable                ;


but before rushing to the conclusion that the initiative
must necessarily have been yielded up to him, some
account at least should be taken of his position.
    Napoleon was not prepared for war.           He was
entangled in costly and most difficult operations at
St. Domingo when hostilities began ; and the inter-
vention of the British fleet turned them into utter
disaster.   Of forty-eight ships of war which he had
sent off to the West Indies, only seven ever returned
to Europe ^ except as British prizes ; while the soldiers
captured by the British amounted to over seven thousand,
quite apart from thirty to forty thousand men who had
already perished of yellow fever or deserted to the
enemy.     The British fleet, owing to the mistaken
economies of St. Vincent, was by no means so efficient
as it should have been, but the French fleet was so
contemptible in numbers and unreadiness as to be
hardly worth mentioning.     It may be asserted without
hesitation that the     British   Government      could, so far
as the safety of the sea  was concerned, have sent any
force that it pleased to any point that it pleased ; and
thirty thousand, or even twenty thousand, men de-
spatched to Sicily or to Naples in the summer of 1 803
must almost certainly have broken up the camp at
Boulogne.     Napoleon had violated Neapolitan terri-
tory by occupying Brindisi, Tarento, and Otranto with
a small force. The appearance of a formidable British
expedition would have compelled him to reinforce it
and the whole of his Italian garrisons very heavily ;
for he could hardly have withdrawn this detachment
without endangering his reputation in France, or, indeed,
   * They could not even return to France, but were obliged to take
refuge in Spanish ports.
