6             TREATY OF AMIENS                       chap.

received large   sums as substitutes, swarmed joyfully to
the colours, and having received their bounty, by some
extraordinary folly, in advance, reeled round them in
a state of crapulous insubordination for some days until
the   money was spent.    After that, they proved to be
good men, decidedly      superior,  by Sir Ralph Aber-
cromby's testimony, to the ordinary class of recruit.
Many of them volunteered for service in Egypt, though
their engagement did not bind them to do so ; and in
fact the Army depended chiefly on Militiamen for its
recruits until the signature of the preliminaries of peace
in October 1801.

                            II

    The Treaty of Amiens was admittedly only an
experiment, and an experiment so doubtful that it could
deserve no higher title than a suspension of arms.       In
such circumstances it was impossible for Addington to
reduce the military force to a peace establishment, and the
lowest number of regular troops for which he dared to
estimate was 1 32,000. On the other hand, the Fencibles,
both horse and foot, were totally disbanded, which
diminished the force for home defence by at least
20,000 men. It had been hoped that most of these
men, who from long divorce from any but military
employment were practically soldiers, would have en-
listed in the Line ; but they did not.  The nation seemed,
not unnaturally, to be sick of warlike exercises, and
recruits were by no means plentiful.         True prudence
and forethought would have dictated special efforts
to make up the Regular Army to its full establishment,
for if war was to come again, the surest method of
defence was certainly to take the offensive.          Such a
policy, however, would have been construed as lack
of faith on Addington's part towards his own experi-
ment, though it was less for this reason than from sheer
want of foresight and ignorance of war that the Ministry
turned all its energies, as shall presently be seen, towards
purely defensive preparations.
