I                  STRENGTH OF THE ARMY                            9

May 1803. Exact returns of the effective strength of                    1803.
the Regular Army on the ist of June are fortunately
to hand,^ and it will be profitable to begin by
abstracting them here. It must be premised that the
Regular Army consisted at that time of three regiments
of Household Cavalry ; seven regiments of Dragoon
Guards     ;twenty-five regiments of Dragoons ; seven
battalions of Foot Guards        ninety-six regiments of the
                                   ;


Line, all of one battalion apiece, except the First Royals,
which had two battalions, and the Sixtieth, which had six
seven Garrison Battalions         a small independent corps
                                   ;


at Goree     another of five hundred men in New South
               ;

Wales ; seven foreign corps (about 3500 of all ranks)
of infantry the Royal Waggon Train, numbering just
                   ;


over two hundred men          and the Staff Corps, or War
                               ;

Office Engineers, which had been called into being during
the last war because the established Engineers under the
Office of Ordnance acknowledged no master but their
own Master-General, and made difficulties about obeying
the orders of the Comniander-in-Chief.             The above
were all white troops, and it will be convenient to reckon
them all together, for the men of the Sixtieth were for
the most part as truly foreign as De Roll's or De Watte-
ville's.   Besides these there were four thousand native
troops in Ceylon, all of them useless and some of them
dangerous, and six West Indian regiments, which for
West Indian service were excellent and invaluable troops.^
     The effective strength of the whole (deducting the
Ceylonese) was 14,734 cavalry and 79,508 infantry,
effective rank and file^ that is to say, corporals and privates
only.    Adding one-eighth for drummers, sergeants, and
officers, we obtain, in round numbers, a total of 1 5,600
cavalry, and 89,500 infantry, or as nearly as may be

    1   Military Transactions of British Empire^ 1803-1807.   Printed
for the Commander-in-Chief's office.
    2 The return shows nine West India regiments, but not one of

them was 600 strong ; and they were in process of reduction into
six.   They were, and of course still are, composed of negroes of
African origin, and frequently of African birth.
