        i6   EXEMPTIONS FROM BALLOT, 1802                              chap.

1802.   succeeding classes in their order, then the Deputy-
        Lieutenants might take those classes complete, without
        ballot, and use the ballot only for the remainder
        (sec.    134).
            The Deputy-Lieutenants were required to discharge,
        without further claim, all ballotted men under the height
        of five feet four inches, and all men physically unfit,
        provided that they were not possessed of property to the
        value of ;^ 100.  Exemption was granted (sec. 43) to
        peers ; to  all officers on full or half pay in the Army,

        Navy, and Marines to all non-commissioned officers
                                   ;

        and men serving in any of the King's other forces       to       ;

        any officer who was serving or who had served for four
        years     in   the        to resident members of the
                             Militia ;
        universities, clergymen,  duly registered teachers, con-
        stables and other peace-officers, articled clerks, appren-
        tices,          men and men employed in the royal
                 seafaring
        arsenals, dockyards, or factories ; to men free of the
        Company of Watermen of the Thames and finally, to  ;

        any poor man (which was construed under sec. 53 to mean
        a man possessing less than the value of j^ioo) who had
        more than one child born in lawful wedlock.^                  Besides
        these, the Volunteers could claim their exemption under
        the Volunteer Act.
            Ballotted men, or, as they were frequently called,
        lot-men, if they accepted personal service, were sworn
        in to serve as privates for a term of five years (sec. 41),
        after which time they were exempt until their turn
        came in rotation to be ballotted again.        They were
        known technically as principals^ to distinguish them from
        substitutes^ the persons who must next engage our atten-
        tion, for there were various        means provided by the Act
        for commutation of personal service.             In the first place,
            ^ A nice point was raised as to the exemption of a man whose

        second legitimate child was born after he had been ballotted, but
        before he had been enrolled.     It was decided that in this case he
        was exempt ; but that if the child was born after he had been enrolled,
        then he was not exempt (JV. O. Mi/a. Books, S. W. to Tho.
        Wright, 26th Jan. 1803). How far this decision may have affected
        the domestic arrangements of poor families we are not told.
