        24          INCREASE OF FINES, 1803                 chap.

1803.   cumulatively every quarter until the deficiency should
        be made good (sec. 4).    A     new oath was also required
        of a Militiaman to the effect, among other matters, that
        he had no rupture, nor ever was troubled with fits, and
        was no ways disabled by lameness or otherwise (sec. 9
        and Schedule B). The fine for commutation of five years
        service was also raised, from the 28th of May onward,
        from ^10 to ^15 (sec. 10). Lastly, at the very end
        came a section threatening high constables and con-
        stables, as well as adjutants or non-commissioned officers,
        with a fine of ^^50 if they should insure, or in any way
        be concerned in insuring, any persons for the provision
                     —
        of substitutes a very significant matter which shall be
        duly explained in its place.
            So much for the Militia ; it is now necessary to turn
        for a moment to the Volunteers.       On the 3 ist of March
        the Government issued circulars inviting the services
        of more Volunteers under the Volunteer Act of 1802,
        setting forth the pay and allowances which they were
        prepared to grant to them as well as the number of
        days' training required of them, and promising exemption
        from the Militia ballot to those who fulfilled these
        conditions.     This, as     shall  be told later, caused
        some increase in the number of Volunteers ; and the
        Government followed this up by producing an Act to
        provide more effectually for the defence and security of
        the realm (43 Geo. III. cap. 55, nth June 1803), a
        measure which I shall call by the name of the First
        Defence Act.
            Hereby the Lords-Lieutenant of the United Kingdom
        were required to procure returns of all able-bodied men
        between the ages of fifteen and sixty, distinguishing
        those who were already serving in the Yeomanry or
        Volunteers, those who were willing to serve in defence
        of the country (stating their terms), those who were
        willing to serve gratuitously or for hire as waggoners,
        pioneers, and the like, and those who from age, infirmity,
        or extreme youth were incapable of service.     The Lieu-
        tenants were further ordered to furnish particulars as to
