        20 DEFICIENCIES IN COUNTY QUOTAS chap.

1802.       Privates whose time was within four months of
        expiring could give notice if they were willing to
        prolong their service, stating the bounty for which they
        asked.   If accepted, they were treated as parochial sub-
        stitutes,   and   their bounties   were raised by a parochial
        rate (sees. 1 23, 1 24).   A guinea was also allowed to them
        for renewal of their necessaries at the close of their five
        years, part of which was expended by their captain for
        their benefit,                     —
                       and the rest by custom one moiety
        handed  over  to   them.    This was known as renewal
        money. The like sum was paid also to substitutes at
        the end of their first five years' service, and also at the
        end of every three years over and above the original
        five years (sec. 126).     Substitutes who deserted or
        absented themselves from duty could be sentenced by
        court-martial to serve in the Militia for a limited period,
        or in the Regular Army for life (sec. 127).     Militiamen
        generally, who absented themselves or deserted, were
        liable to a fine of £20 upon conviction before a Justice
        of the Peace, or six months' imprisonment in default
        (sec. 99).
           If any county failed to produce           its   quota of men
        within six months after the passing of the Act, or within
        three months of notice given by the officer commanding
        the Militia regiments of the county, it was liable to a
        fine of £10 annually for every man deficient.    For the
        payment of this sum Quarter Sessions were required to
        make an assessment upon parishes at large or upon the
        particular parishes that were responsible for the defici-
        encies.   The money thus raised was retained in the
        hands of the County Treasurers for three months,
        during which time the Deputy-Lieutenants were per-
        mitted to agree with       men to      enlist voluntarily in the
        Militia for a bounty not exceeding ^10.             The balance
        of the money was then paid to the Receiver-General of
        the county, and by him to the Imperial Exchequer ; and
        after the Receiver-General's receipt for the same the
        county was acquitted of its default for that year (sees.
        158-166).    If any county failed to raise the fines
