        22              THE IRISH MILITIA, 1802                            chap.

1802.        Both Acts received the Royal assent on the 26th
        of June 1802.
            Subsidiary to these was an Act to regulate the Militia
        of the Stannaries (42 Geo. III. cap. 72), wherein the
        general procedure was the same, but the fine for com-
        mutation of five years' service was ^15 instead of ^10.
             The Militia of Ireland was not dealt with until the
        following session, in December 1802, when an Act (43
        Geo. III. cap. 2) was passed '* for the more speedy and
        effectual enrolment of the Militia of Ireland."       The
        preamble set forth that " the mode of ballot hath not
        been generally adopted in Ireland, and that it might
        therefore be attended with inconvenience to proceed
        by that mode only " ; the " inconvenience " being an
        euphemism for desperate riots. The Lord-Lieutenant
        was therefore empowered to recruit men by voluntary
        enlistment for the Militia during the space of four
        months, offering a bounty of two guineas a man. The
        men so raised were sworn to serve upon the same
        terms as the substitutes in England, that is to say, for
        five years, or if the Militia were embodied within those
        five years, then until disembodiment.        ^^40,000 was
        set apart for the payment of bounties, whence it may
        be inferred that the Government desired to raise about
        20,000 recruits, though the ordinary strength of the
        Irish Militia was 15,000 men.      It is important to note
        that the Irish Act, unlike the British Act, contained
        no authority to raise Supplementary Militia.


                                           II


1803.      Before the New Year had come, the prospects of
        prolonging the truce of Amiens became very doubtful ;

             New Organisation of the Scottish Militia   :




         No.                  Regiment.                         Colonel,

             13. Inverness, Banff, Elgin, Nairn.            Sir F.   Grant.
             14. Kirkcudbright, Wigtown.                    Sir J. Dal. Hay.
             15. Stirling, Dunbar,   Clackmannan, Kinross. Dukeof Montrose.
