II               THE FIRST DEFENCE ACT                              25

vehicles, horses, boats, cattle, food, and forage, so as to               1803.
enable       them    to   be removed or utilised in case of
invasion (sec. i).         The King was empowered to com-
mand the Lords-Lieutenant to appoint officers, approved
by him, to train men who were willing to be armed
 (sec. 2).   General Meetings and subdivision-meetings
could be held, as under the Militia laws, to enforce the
Act (sees. 3-6).    The King was empowered to order
the destruction of buildings and the destruction or
removal of waggons, cattle, etc., in case of emergency
 (sec. 7).  Persons enrolled in Volunteer corps after
the passing of the Act were not to be called out except
according to their offers of service, nor except in case of
invasion or imminent danger of invasion (sec. 8).      The
King was authorised to treat for the purchase of land
necessary for military purposes ; and, in case of urgent
need, machinery was provided for compelling its sale
(sec. 10).   Provision was also made for compensation
to the owners of property destroyed in case of invasion
or threat of invasion (sec. 1 1).
     This Act was apparently designed to encourage men
to enrol themselves in the Volunteers ; but it was, on
the face of it, a half-hearted measure, and it is difficult
to see why the Lieutenants should have been put to the
trouble of ascertaining whether men were willing to serve
in defence of their country, when the King had the
undoubted right to call on them to serve whether willing
or unwilling.    However, the Act was circulated in the
counties on 24th June for what it might be worth.
     Then came a new complication. Sailors were wanted
for the Navy, and a good many seafaring men had been
enrolled in the Militia, probably as substitutes, being
tempted either by the bounty or by this opportunity of
escaping impressment.     An Act (43 Geo. III. cap. 62)^
was passed on the 24th of June authorising all such men to
be discharged from the Militia into the fleet, provided
that not more than one-tenth of the full number of

     ^   A similar Act for Ireland (43 Geo. III. cap. 76) was passed on
4th July 1803.
