II      POSITION OF MILITIA SERGEANTS                             19

as a tax it was local and personal, instead of general and             1802.
imperial,   and, as    such,   necessarily   levied   with great
inequality.^
     The only form of evasion against which the Act
pretended to guard was that of persons who fraudulently
bound themselves apprentices to qualify themselves for
exemption.    Such persons could be compelled to serve,
if detected, and the masters to whom they bound them-
selves were liable to a fine of ^^lo (sec. 49).
     To provide against malingering, it was enacted that
though men who became physically unfit might be dis-
charged, yet such discharge must be confirmed by two
Deputy-Lieutenants (sec. 55). Vacancies by death or
discharge were filled up by a fresh ballot from the sub-
division, and presumably (though it was not laid down by
the Act) within the parish from which the dead or
discharged man had been originally drawn (sec. 56).
     Vacancies through the promotion of privates to be
non-commissioned officers were, however, not filled up
by ballot, the parish being conceived to have fulfilled its
duty by producing a non-commissioned officer (sec. 57).
The point is worth noting, for the position of non-com-
missioned officers and drummers of Militia was peculiar.
They were sworn in to serve until legally discharged by
their colonel, that   is   to say, practically for    life,   though
after  twenty years' service in the Militia they were
qualified for a Chelsea pension (sec. 86).    If reduced
to the ranks by a court-martial, non-commissioned
officers and drummers were liable to serve as privates
for fifteen months at ordinary times ; but if the Militia
was embodied they were not entitled to discharge until
its disembodiment (sec.    105).   In the event of the
death or discharge of any one of them, the Deputy-
Lieutenants for the subdivision from which they were
drawn might apply to Quarter Sessions for the average
price of a substitute in the parish concerned, and so
provide a man to take his place (sec. 58).
    ^ Clode, i.
                289,  But Clode's analysis and comprehension of the
Militia Acts are extremely imperfect.
