        30            ARMY OF RESERVE ACT                     chap.

1803.   except that the fines for commutation of service were
        to be made over entirely to the parish authorities for
        the provision of substitutes, any remaining surplus
        being remitted to the Paymaster -General of the
        Army.
             The Irish Act enacted that the ballot should be
        employed to raise the Army of Reserve (sec. 11), but
        if five members of any General Meeting were of opinion
        that the men could be more expeditiously raised by beat
        of drum, the Lord-Lieutenant might authorise them to
        dispense with the ballot (sec. 38). If within five weeks
        of authorisation the county raised two-thirds of its
        quota by voluntary enlistment, the Lord-Lieutenant
        could grant it three weeks' grace to raise the remainder.
        If without such authority from the Lord-Lieutenant
        the full quota was not raised in six weeks, or if the three
        weeks of grace proved to be unavailing, then appeal
        must be made to the ballot.
            Judging from the surface of this Act, the Govern-
        ment's intention was to raise by ballot 50,000 additional
        Militiamen.   The points wherein members of the Army
        of Reserve mainly difi^ered from Militiamen were
        that they could be draft:ed into second battalions of the
        Regular Regiments     at   home   ;   that they could enlist
        from   these for general service in the Regular      Army
        that they need not be      more than five feet two inches
        in height ;   and that substitutes could be men with
        any number of children.
            This measure had not been law for a fortnight
        when, on the i8th of July, the Government brought
        in yet another bill to amend the Defence Act of the
        nth of June, "and to enable His Majesty more
        speedily and eff^ectually to exercise his ancient and
        undoubted prerogative in requiring the military service
        of his liege subjects in case of invasion of the realm."
        This bill passed on the 27th of July, and was known as
        the Levy en Masse Act (43 Geo. III. cap. 96), the
        execution of which was as usual thrown upon the Lords-
        Lieutenant and their Deputies, under the machinery of
