        34             THE BILLETING ACT                        chap.

1803.   number of Volunteers in any county were satisfactory
        to the King, he could suspend the operation of the
        Levy en Masse Act, even though they did not amount
        to the prescribed tale of three-fourths of the first class
        (sec. i).
             On the same day, however, the nth of August,
        yet another Act was passed, which was fraught with
        consequences far more serious. This bore the innocent
        appellation   of an Act to authorise the billeting of
        Yeomanry and Volunteers when assembled for training,
        and was known as the Billeting Act (43 Geo. III. cap.
        121).    The measure certainly contained provisions to
        justify its title but it contained also much more. For it
                        ;


        ordained the qualification of an effective Yeoman to
        be twelve days' exercise, and of an effective Infantry
        Volunteer to be twenty-four days' exercise in the year ;
        and it exempted all such effective men from the ballot
        not only under the Army Reserve Act, but under any
        future Act to raise an Additional Force (sees, i and 2).
        The measure contained also two important provisions of
        another kind.       Section 9 subjected the Yeomanry and
        Volunteers    to the  Mutiny Act, when called out to repel
        invasion ;   while   section    1 1 removed them from the
        control   of   the  Lords  -  Lieutenant    in the same emer-
        gency,  and   placed   them   under   the  Generals  command-
        ing  districts.    Section   13   vested  funds  subscribed for
        Volunteer     and    Yeomanry       corps,   as  well as   arms
        and stores purchased therewith, in the officers com-
        manding those corps ; and section 14 made it lawful
        for such Volunteers as refused to pay sums required
        from them under the rules of their corps to be haled
        before a Justice of the Peace, who had power to cause
        the same, together with a fine of double the amount, to
        be levied by distress, if necessary, and to be paid to the
        general stock of the corps.
             The meaning of these two last provisions shall in
        its place be more fully explained.         For the present it is
        enough to draw the reader's attention to them, and to
        point out that section 14 gave the only power that
