II             LEVY EN MASSE ACT                        33

men of any age between seventeen and fifty, equal to         1803.
three-fourths of the            engaged themselves to
                          first class,

serve as Volunteers, and to march to any part of Great
Britain, the King was empowered to suspend the train-
ing prescribed by the Act.    For the rest, two guineas
were to be paid to every man when called out to repel
invasion, in order to provide him with necessaries, and
one guinea to enable him to return home after expul-
sion of the enemy (sees. 59, 60).     Their wives and
families were also entitled to parochial relief during
their absence, as under the provisions of the Militia
Act (sec. 61). Meanwhile it was expressly provided
that this Act should not exempt men from the ballot
for the Militia or the Army of Reserve (sec. 62).
    On the same day (27th July) there was passed
another Act for the more speedy completion of the
Militia and the Army of Reserve (43 Geo. III. cap. lOo),
making men who refused to be examined for their fit-
ness   for   the               to compulsory service, if
                   Militia liable
found physically          and lowering the standard of
                       able,
substitutes for the Militia to the height of five feet two
inches.   Both provisions showed clearly enough that
men were difficult to obtain.
    Then, though the Levy en Masse Act was the
second of its kind, it had hardly been passed before it
was found to need amendment.           No provision had
been made for exonerating persons who changed their
parish, or who went abroad, from the penalties imposed
by the Act.       The King had been empowered to
remove officers appointed by the Lords-Lieutenant,
but no power had been given to the Lords-Lieutenant
to supply the vacancy by a fresh appointment.         The
number of non-commissioned officers allowed under
the Act was insufficient, and, finally, section 32 forbade
the Deputy-Lieutenants to hire any sergeant-instructors
except out-pensioners of Chelsea.       All these matters
were set right by the Levy en Masse Amendment Act
(43 Geo. III. cap. 120; nth Aug. 1803). One im-
portant alteration was also added, namely, that if the
                                                    D
