II              LEVY EN MASSE ACT                             31

the Militia Laws.      They were required first to obtain          1803.
lists   of all men between the ages of seventeen and fifty-
five (sec. 3), and to sort them into four classes   :   viz. ( i
unmarried men under thirty, with no child living under
ten years of age ; (2) unmarried men between thirty
and fifty, with no child as aforesaid ; (3) married men
from seventeen to thirty, with not more than two
children living under ten years of age ; (4) all other
persons (sec. 4). Exemption was granted to the Judges
of the Courts of Law, to persons too infirm for service,
clergymen, schoolmasters, Quakers, officers and men actu-
ally serving in the Army, Navy, Marines, Militia, and
Volunteers, Lords-Lieutenant, Deputy-Lieutenants, and
peace officers (sec. 12).  But ministers, churchwardens,
and parochial officers at large were all required to help
in making out the lists (sec. 13).   This done, the King
could direct any parishes to be provided with arms,
which arms were to be stored in the church or other
convenient place under the care of the churchwardens,
acting under the directions of the Deputy-Lieutenants
(sec. 25).   The King could order the three first classes
to be trained in the use of arms for two hours at least
on every Sunday (or other convenient day) in the week,
for the entire period between the 25 th of March and
the 25 th of December, the Deputy-Lieutenants being
held responsible for such training (sec. 27).   In case of
emergency the King could further require them to be
trained, before Christmas 1803, on successive days
during three or more weeks as the Deputy-Lieutenants
might arrange, the total number of successive days not
to fall below fourteen or rise above twenty (sec. 28).
The Deputy - Lieutenants could further appoint a
captain, two lieutenants, and an ensign to every 120
men (subject to removal by the King), and the
captains could appoint non-commissioned officers (sec.
30).    The Deputy-Lieutenants were also empowered
to hire out-pensioners to train their men, and to pay
them not more than half- a - crown a day out of the
parochial rates (sec. 32) ; but a constable was also
