II            ARMY OF RESERVE ACT                                27

Lieutenant of the fact in a circular of the 20th of June,               1803.
intimating at the same time that no Volunteers accepted
after the i6th of June should be exempt from the ballot
for a new force, which was about to be called into exist-
ence.    On that same day, the 20th of June, Mr. Yorke
introduced the measures for the creation of this new
force.   These, though entitled the Additional Force
Acts, became better known as the Army of Reserve
Acts (England, 43 Geo. III. cap. 82 ; Scotland,
cap. 83 ; Ireland, cap. 85 ; 6th July 1803).    The Acts
ordained that there should be raised by ballot, under
the Militia laws, 34,000 men for England, 6000 for
Scotland, and 10,000 for Ireland.-'      Exemption, over
and above the exemptions granted by the Militia Acts
of 1802, was given to poor men who had more than
one child born in lawful wedlock under ten years of
age, or who were infirm ; and the Deputy-Lieutenants
were further empowered to discharge any ballotted man
who was unfit for service through infirmity or otherwise,
if his worldly possessions did not amount to the value
of ^100 (sees. 6, 13).^ Exemption was also granted to
any who had served personally or by substitute in the
Militia (unless their turn to be ballotted should in rota-
tion have come round again), and to all Volunteers and
Yeomanry who had been enrolled and had entered their
names on the muster-roll before the 22nd of June 1803 ;
provided that, in the case of country corps, their offer
of service extended, in event of invasion, to the whole
of their military district, or in the case of London,
Bristol, Exeter, Liverpool, Chester, Manchester, Hull,
Norwich, Leeds, York, Sheffield and Birmingham,
Edinburgh and Glasgow, to the defence of these cities
and their respective vicinities. Men who had served in
the Army, or as substitutes, personal or parochial,^ in
     Besides these, the City of London, which by charter was exempt
     1

from furnishing men    for military service, volunteered to raise 800
men for the Army of Reserve, and was empowered to do so by 43
Geo. III. cap. loi ; 27th July 1803.
   2 The references are to the English Act.

   ^ The words of the Act are " substitutes or volunteers," as usual
