        26           FURTHER MILITIA ACTS                         chap.

1803.   privates In any regiment were so discharged at any one
        time.    The men on being taken into the Navy were to
        receive the usual    bounty granted to seamen, and were
        bound to serve till the end of the war and until three
        months after the ratification of a definitive treaty of
        peace.   Their late colonels were authorised to fill their
        places by the enlistment of voluntary recruits,^   by beat
        of drum or otherwise, and were to receive ten guineas
        a man for the purpose, which sum was to be ultimately
        charged to the account of the Navy. Thus to the three
        different descriptions of recruits already supplied to the
        Militia under the Militia Act, viz. lotmen, personal
        substitutes, and parochial substitutes, there was added a
        fourth   —voluntary enlisters for an increased bounty.
        Moreover, as the Militiamen transferred to the Navy
        were not required to disgorge the bounty which they
        had received upon entering the Militia, the country was
        put to the expense of paying twice over for their services.
        It will be remembered that seamen and seafaring men
        were exempted from the Militia ballot under section 43
        of the Militia Act of 1802 ; but there was no provision
        to prevent them from being enrolled either as principals
        or as substitutes.
            Yet another little Act was rendered necessary by
        the fact that, though the Militia Act of 1802 duly
        provided for raising the Supplementary Militia, it had
        omitted the means of supplying the increased numbers
        with a due proportion of officers.   This defect was
        accordingly made good by an Act for Augmenting the
        Number of Field Officers and other Officers of Militia
        within Great Britain (43 Geo. III. cap. 71, 8th July
        1803.

                                       Ill

             Meanwhile the Government had decided, or thought
        that it had decided, upon a definite plan for Volunteers.
        The Secretary of State accordingly informed the Lords-
            ^ They are called volunteers under the Act, but I have avoided

        the word to save confusion.
