II             ARMY OF RESERVE ACT                        29

provided that his worldly estate was less than ^^500 in         1803.
value (sees. 23, 25).     Moreover, every principal upon
accepting service, was to receive two guineas bounty, and
every substitute one guinea, from the general funds of
the county, the money being paid to the captains of the
companies and accounted for by them to the men (sees.
25, 26).   It may be reckoned that each man received
one-half of this sum after deduction of half a guinea for
necessaries.
     All   men enrolled under the Act were sworn to
serve in the United   Kingdom and Channel Islands only,
principals     for five years, substitutes for five years or
until six months after a definitive peace.       All enrolled
men, whether principals or                were further
                                  substitutes,
required to swear that they were not ruptured nor
subject to fits, nor otherwise physically disabled, and
that they were not apprentices, seamen, members of the
Army, Navy, Marines, or Militia (sec. 19). After enrol-
ment they could either be formed into new corps or
embodied in old regiments, though never outside the
United Kingdom and Channel Islands, and they were
to be subject to the Mutiny Act (sec. 29).         Vacancies
through death or discharge were to be filled up, as in
the Militia, by ballot (sec. 31)     ;and the wives and
families of Army Reserve men were entitled to parochial
support in the same way as Militiamen (sec. 33).    They
were allowed to enlist into the Regular Army if they
wished ; and in this case the parishes were not compelled
to fill the vacancies thus made (sec. 33).    Colonels of
regiments were required to furnish lists of vacancies to
the Quarter Sessions of each county on the 29th of
September 1803 and for every man deficient of the
                     ;


quota a fine of j^20 was to be imposed, a further fine
of the same sum being added cumulatively every quarter
until the deficiency should be    made good (sec. 35).     It
was specially added that the raising of men under this
Act was to be no excuse for not levying men as usual
for the embodied Militia.
    The Scottish Act was the same mutatis mutandis.
