        28            ARMY OF RESERVE ACT                            chap.

1803.   the Militia, and had been discharged therefrom, were
        expressly excepted from this exemption (sec. 8).
            The standard of height for the Army of Reserve
        was five feet two inches only, if the man were " other-
        wise able-bodied and fit for service " (sec. 9) ; and it
        was enacted that notice to a ballotted man's wife, family,
        or servant was to be sufficient to subject him to the
        penalties of desertion if he did not present himself
        within fourteen days of such notice.
            Service could be commuted in two ways       (i) by   :



        producing a substitute of the same or some adjoining
        county, the limitation placed by the Militia Act upon
        the     number of a substitute's children being removed
        (sec.  14) ; (2) by payment of a fine of ;^20, which,
        however, did not purchase immunity from the ballot
        for more than one year.       Ballotted men who neglected
        to pay this fine or to find a substitute could be compelled
        to serve (sec. 15).    Of each fine of ;^20 one-half was
        paid to the overseers to provide a parochial sub-
        stitute (sec. 17), and the remainder to the Paymaster-
        General of the Army ; and, as in the case of the Militia,
        parishes were empowered to evade a ballot, in whole or
        in part, by producing " volunteers," that is to say,
        parochial substitutes, and paying them the " average
        price of a substitute " out of the parochial rates.   If the
        number of parochial substitutes presented before the
        ballot by any subdivision amounted to two-thirds of its
        quota, the ballot could be suspended for six days, and
        these days of grace could be still further prolonged by
        the Royal consent, to give time for the production of
        the remaining third (sec. 22).        It was also ordained
        that half the current price of a substitute, according to
        the estimate of the Deputy-Lieutenants, should be paid
        to every man who served in person or by substitute,
        without defining what description of Volunteer is intended, though
        (as the reader may have remarked) the word Volunteer has already,
        in the Acts already cited, been used in three different senses.    I
        take the purport of the Act, however, to have been that no service
        in the Militia, except in person or by (not as) a substitute, was to
        grant exemption.
