        32                LEVY EN MASSE ACT                             chap.

1803.   required to be present, under pain of ten shillings fine.
        The Deputy-Lieutenants were to appoint days of exer-
        cise, and residents within four miles of the place of
        muster were subject to a fine of five shillings in the
        case of the rich, and one shilling in the case of the poor,
        if they failed to attend ; the above fines being raised
        respectively to forty shillings and five shillings for non-
        attendance on three successive days.        If the classes
        should be called up for extraordinary training under
        sec. 28, the labouring men were to be entitled to
        pay of one shilling for each attendance (sec. 37). Any
        man misconducting himself during exercise could be
        haled before a Deputy- Lieutenant or Justice of the
        Peace, and fined five shillings or, in default, imprisoned
        for a week (sec. 44).   In case of invasion, or imminent
        danger of invasion, the King ^ was to direct the whole or
        part of the men enrolled under the Act, either to be
        embodied and placed in existing regiments of Regulars,
        Militia, and Fencibles, or to be formed into new corps.
        When thus embodied the levies were liable to march to
        any part of Great Britain and were subject to the
        Mutiny Act (sec. 44). The King was also empowered
        to give provisional orders for embodiment previous to
        invasion (sec. 48) ; but no man serving under the Act
        could, under any pretence whatever, be compelled to
        serve outside Great Britain.                 The
                                              Lieutenants were
        further       required   to   fix of assembly and to
                                            places
        arrange signals for drawing out the men ; and such
        persons as disobeyed the order or signal to assemble
        were to be deemed deserters (sec. 50). If any man
        presented himself on horseback, armed and equipped at
        his own expense, he was to be attached to some corps of
        cavalry, and not compelled to serve with the infantry.
            If only a part of the classes was to be embodied,
        the Deputy-Lieutenants were to choose the required
        number by ballot (sec. 52) ; but in places where
        Volunteer corps were formed, or where a number of
             ^   The words are " His Majesty shall order and direct."    (The
        italics are   mine.)
