          40             THE BALLOT IN PRACTICE                           chap.

1802-3.   it was apparently recognised and approved for a time
          at headquarters,^ it is easy to see that it was unfair to

          poor men and tended of itself to raise the price of
          substitutes.  Thus if a really poor man were drawn by
          the first ballot, he had practically no choice but to
          accept six guineas and serve.    If, on the other hand,

          he escaped the first ballot, he could be sure of at least
          ten pounds on being drawn for the second ; and if, on
          the second ballot, additional men paid the fine, and it
          was necessary to proceed to a third ballot upon the
          same principle, the men then drawn might well receive
          ^15 or ^20.2
              But throughout the whole of the vast correspond-
          ence upon the subject the most remarkable point is,
          that no one, from the parish overseer to the Secretary
          of State, ever expected a principal to accept service in
          the Militia.    It was assumed in every quarter that
          substitutes would be provided practically in every case ;
          and, in fact, in 1803-5, ^^^ ballot was simply an
          instrument for compelling the parishes to organise at
          their own expense recruiting depots for the Militia.
          The means contrived to attain this end were various.
          The Act itself prescribed one by allowing parishes to
          produce their quota of so-called volunteers in anticipa-
          tion of the ballot.   In Carnarvonshire' the practice
          was as follows. The Deputy-Lieutenants grouped the
          parishes together by twos and threes " to make the
          choice of men as equal as possible " ; and the ballot
          was duly held. But before the ballot it was customary
               ^   But Mr. Bragge, when Secretary     at   War, opined   that   the
          practice was illegal, unless the fines paid for exemption     were in-
          sufficient for the purchase of substitutes.      Sec. at War to S.D.C.
          Essex, 2nd Sept. 1803.    It is most improbable that the practice
          was discontinued in spite of this opinion.
              2 But these sums must not be accepted as exact, for the price

          of substitutes of course varied according to the demand ; and
          though j^6 was by law the extreme fee to be granted to the
          parochial substitutes known as volunteers, yet section 122 of the
          Militia Act, as has been seen, gave ballotted men, worth less than
          j^50o, half the current price of a substitute.
               3   I.D. vol. vi. C.G.M. Carnarvon, to S.S. 29th Jan. 1803.
