II        MILITIA CEASES TO BE LOCAL                              45

extended their branches as far as Warwick, probably                    1803.
indeed further, and it seems that they made enormous
profits.^  Sometimes the insurance society consisted of a
single enterprising individual, who openly advertised his
readiness to provide substitutes at a figure which seemed
extravagantly low but beyond question brought him a
very handsome income.              A
                                 Mr. Pearce of Hackney
thus filled the ranks of the Tower Hamlets Militia for
twelve years, until in 1 808 the parish officers, finding
that they received no share of his gains, decided to reject
every man that he offered, and so ruined his business.
Pearce was, of course, hardly, if at all, other than a
crimp ; yet, amazing as it may seem, his friends appealed
to the Secretary of State to support him against the
parish officers.^
    Thus it has been made sufficiently plain that all the
energy and intelligence of the nation, not wholly with-
out countenance by the Legislature, was directed from
the very first to evasion of personal service in the
Militia.    The result was to stultify all legislative pro-
vision for making the Militia a strictly local force.    In
the first place, the Act, as has been seen, did not enact
that the parochial substitutes, to be provided by the
Deputy-Lieutenants out of the fines for exemption,
should be of the same or the adjoining county.       In the
second place, the main object of the Deputy-Lieutenants,
who were but human, was to produce the men required
of them and to free themselves from the heavy, irksome,
and often distressing duty imposed upon them by the
Act.    Men did not travel far afield in those days, and
the squires, great and small, knowing all that was to
be known about every family in their parishes, could
appreciate how hardly the ballot would bear             upon this
man or that. Moreover, the ballottable men were often
their own workmen, whom, for their own sakes, they
would naturally be unwilling to lose. Hence it is hardly
matter of surprise       if,   after   harrowing interviews with
     1   I.D. vol. cli. C.G.M. Warwick, to S.S. 23rd Jan. 1808.
                            J. Bugby to
           2 Ibid. vol. cH.             S.S. i8th Feb. 1808.
