II          THE BALLOT IN PRACTICE                              39
whether as substitutes they were personal or parochial,                1802-3
there were special clauses designed to safeguard the
local character of the Militia ; and though, in the case
of substitutes provided by the Deputy-Lieutenants from
the proceeds of exemption-fines, there were no special
words to enact that these men should be drawn from
the district or county, yet the whole spirit of the Act
intimated that this was its intention.
     It must be said at once that, even before war broke
out, the bare allowance of the principle of substitution
sufficed to nullify these particular provisions of the
Militia Act completely.    This was due to two principal
causes ; first, to the want of uniformity in the method
of conducting the ballot, and, secondly, to the practice
of insurance.
    The ballot has been for so long obsolete that the
traditions concerning it have utterly perished ; and it is
now exceedingly difficult to discover anything about it.
The one thing that appears certain is that the Deputy-
Lieutenants of every subdivision were at liberty, so far
as the Act was concerned, to arrange matters as they
found most convenient, and that they availed themselves
of that liberty with edifying readiness.    It is, indeed,
probable that there were almost as many methods as
counties.
    It should seem, however, that the commonest pro-
cedure was as follows.   First the lots were drawn,^ and
the men upon whom they fell furnished their substitutes
or paid the fine which entitled them to five years'
exemption.      Asecond ballot was then held, in which
the names of the men who had been chosen by the first
ballot were omitted ; and the victims of the second
ballot, upon enrolling themselves or[finding a substitute,
received the proceeds of the fines paid by the men of
the first ballot.^    The method was curious, and though
   1 The approved method was to write the names of ballottable

men on slips of paper, place the slips, folded, in a bag or box, and
draw them out one by one in public.
   2 IF.O. Mila. Book, S.W. to C.G.M. Yorks, 26th July 1803.
