II       INDUSTRY OF THE LIEUTENANTS                                37

the counties in which, owing to density of population,                     1803.
or extent of territory, or difficulty of communication,
or to all three combined, the demands upon them were
greatest ; but in none of the maritime counties were
their duties light. Curiously enough, nearly all of them
—  even such great men as the Duke of Portland and
                       —
Lord Fitzwilliam wrote the whole of their numerous
letters with their own hands.                A
                                         very few always
employed a clerk, either because they were crippled by
gout or, in at least one case, because the Lieutenant's
own handwriting was illegible. The Lieutenant of
Devon frequently used his wife as his amanuensis, and
it is probable that others did the same.

     Apart from their correspondence, the Lords-Lieu-
tenant of necessity were constantly making journeys to
their provincial capitals, to other centres of population,
and to the most important of their neighbours and
friends, either to consult them or to reconcile differ-
ences and put an end to quarrels.        In many counties,
where the roads followed the old tracks chosen to suit
the peculiar requirements of pack-horses, riding was
practically the only means of travelling from place to
place    and it must have been no uncommon thing for
         ;


the Lieutenants to be in the saddle at dawn in order
to ride thirty or forty miles to a county meeting and
return before dark.^       The postal arrangements were
very primitive, and the Post Office, strangled in red-
tape, was often a hindrance rather than an aid to the
practical transmission of correspondence.    It will hardly
be believed that as late as November 1803 Lieutenants
and Deputy -Lieutenants were called upon to pay
postage-fees for letters delivered on the business of
the State.       Complaints to the Secretary of State brought
no relief, until a Deputy-Lieutenant of Sussex wrote to
     1   A generation has arisen which has no idea of the part that
riding played formerly in the life of a country gentleman. The
present writer, as a boy, was brought up, according to the old
traditions, to order out a pony and ride     for distances so short that
itwould have saved time to walk    ;   but to make the shortest journey
on foot was unheard of.
