II          THE BALLOT IN PRACTICE                    41

for the   men liable to service to collect money (from       1802-3.
what source   is not specified) to pay the fine in lieu of
personal service.     Instead, however, of paying this
money to the Deputy-Lieutenants as a fine, pursuant to
the directions of the Act, they handed it to the parish
overseers, who agreed with them to find their substi-
tutes.   The advantage of the plan was this. The mere
payment of, the fine to the Deputy-Lieutenants would
have brought exemption to a man for five years only,
whereas the provision of a substitute gave him per-
manent immunity from the ballot. If the price of a
substitute exceeded the means in the hands of the
overseers, the overplus was paid by the parish on which
the lot happened to fall, on the understanding that the
other parishes should in due time contribute their share.
The other parishes, however, sometimes declined to pay
their contribution when called upon ; and owing to this
accident the history of this particular method of apply-
ing the ballot has been preserved.      For the Deputy-
Lieutenants, dismayed at finding the peculiar machinery
of their county thrown out of gear, and doubtless
stimulated by the cries of the parish which had so
imprudently trusted to the good faith of its fellows,
actually appealed to the Secretary of State to know if
they had any legal remedy against the parishes which
had declined to pay the money expected of them.
    The whole transaction was, on the face of it, of an
extremely doubtful character, for the overseers under
the Act were responsible for the preparation of the
Militia lists ; yet none of the county authorities saw
any harm in converting them into contractors for the
supply of recruits.    It is hardly to be imagined that
the overseers failed to make money out of the business,
so that in point of fact they were neither more nor less
than official crimps.    Section 15 of 43 Geo. III. cap.
50, was of course designed to check this evil, but it
could be so easily evaded that it can hardly be treated
with serious consideration.
    More commonly, however, precisely the same end
