          38        WORKING OF THE MILITIA ACT chap.
 1803.    his chief that       he had recently paid seven shillings for
          two packets, and that he would receive in future no
          letters on the public service that did not arrive free of
          charge.^
                   Of the Deputy-Lieutenants, who formed altogether
          a very large body, it         is   less   easy to speak.   •   Some of
          their failings will appear in the ensuing narrative of
          the administration of the various Acts under the Militia
          Laws; but in England it seems that the majority did
          their work with intelligence, loyalty, and goodwill.
          In some of the wilder parts of the country they had
          long distances to travel ; stupid and inefficient parochial
          officers to instruct ;     ignorant, prejudiced, and occasion-
          ally lawless      peasants to soothe, convince, reconcile or
          overpower.        The work must have made great demands
          upon their time, their patience, and even their physical
          endurance, yet as a rule they seem not to have shrunk
          from it, though their sympathy with their people was
          often greater than their respect for the law.




1802-3.       Let us now pass from the letter of the laws, and
          from those who executed them, to the actual history
          and effect of their working in the years under review.
          It will be remembered that the Militia and Volunteer
          Acts of 1 802 were passed in time of peace.  The first
          ballot of the Militia under the new law was likewise
          held in time of peace, in the course of the winter of
          1802, when the defects of the measure very soon
          became apparent.    The purport of the Act was to
          make a levy of men in just proportion to its population
          from every parish in the three Kingdoms. The very
          essence of the force in theory was that the contingent
          of each county should be drawn from that county, or
          at least from the border of a neighbouring county.
          Whether the men were principals or substitutes, and
               1   I.D. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. nth Dec. 1803 ; Lord
          Gage to L.L. Sussex, i8th Dec. 1803.
