          42                  INSURANCE SOCIETIES                      chap.

1802-3.   ^^^ attained by different means, namely insurance. In
          Scotland the practice was " carried to a great height " ;
          but the Militia was so new a thing in North Britain
          that the country had not learned the higher application
          of insurance.   The policy of a Scottish society insured
          men only for the price of the exemption fine. The
          English institutions provided their clients with a
          substitute or the price of a substitute.  In their incep-
          tion these insurance societies arose in the most natural
          manner possible. In any given parish or town there
          was a given number of men liable to be ballotted, of
          whom in normal times only a small fraction probably
          less than one- tenth          —
                                  was required at one time for
                                                                 —
          service.  So many of these as could afford a small
          outlay met together and agreed to subscribe so much
          apiece to purchase substitutes for such of their number
          as might be drawn for service.     This was the simplest
          form of insurance ; and hence in the Parliamentary
          debates the words subscription society and insurance
          society are used synonymously.         In many cases the
          parochial authorities took the lead in the management
          of       these   societies,   made   the   necessary   calculations,
          collected the subscriptions, transacted the whole of the
          necessary        business,    and doubtless remunerated them-
          selves, with the full consent        of their subscribers, with a
          small commission for their pains.           In Lichfield we learn
          that at ordinary times the subscription for substitutes
          was no more than five shillings,^ though for reasons
          presently to be shown, it rose to four times that amount
          before the end of 1803.
              In Blackburn, later on in the same year, a still
          more curious instance came to light which, though it
          deals with a later phase of affairs, enables us to study
          the question of insurance in closer detail.    After the
          ballot-list had been published,but before the ballot had
          taken place, a subscription was set on foot in the town
          which was open to all whose name appeared on that
               1    I.D. vol. xxix. Magistrates of Lichfield to L.L. 19th Nov.
          1803.
