        36      LIEUTENANTS' DIFFICULTIES                         chap.

1803.                         Three only in the whole of the
        patriotic or efficient.
        United Kingdom seem to have been thoroughly unfit
        for their place and of these one was a sensitive mag-
                         ;


        nate   of slender intellect, who delighted in raising
        difficulties, the second was disabled by age and infirmity,
        and the third was accused of giving commissions in the
        Volunteers to uncertificated bankrupts in order to annoy
        a brother landlord who was politically opposed to him.^
        In Scotland, where Lords-Lieutenant and Militia were
        new things, the jealousies of county against county
        often found expression through their administrative
        chiefs, but this fault really lay rather in the body of
        the Scottish people than in the individuals directly
        concerned.
            Probably the greatest trouble of the Lords-Lieu-
        tenant all over Great Britain lay with brother magnates
        of as high position as themselves who, though to the
        last degree loyal, patriotic, and generous, often wanted
        to conduct matters according to their own ideas, to
        erect the corps which they had raised, and which no
        one but themselves could have raised, into independent
        units, and to employ them only upon such service as
        they themselves considered appropriate.        Such men
        required to be handled with much delicacy and tact.
        If their political opinions differed from those of the
        Lieutenant, they scented a job in every order and every
        appointment ; and it was only by timely concessions
        and judicious flattery that they were kept in compara-
        tive subordination and good-humour.         One of their
        worst failings was their preference for addressing the
        Secretary of State direct, instead of through the Lord-
        Lieutenant, a fault which it was not always easy for
        the latter, if he happened to be a personal friend, to
        correct or reprove.
             The work thrown upon the Lords-Lieutenant was
        in many cases extremely heavy.        Devon, Lancashire,
        Hampshire, and the West Riding of Yorkshire were
            * I.D.   vol. ii. Berks, passim ; vol. xxxiv. Worcestershire^
        passim j vol. xii. Edinburgh, C. Hope to S.S. 25th Aug. 1803.
