II               INSURANCE SOCIETIES                            43

list.   The mento be supplied numbered 36      the          ;          1803.
          amounted to 512. A contribution of ^^i
subscribers
a head was reckoned to be sufficient to enable the
subscribers to hire parochial substitutes for the bene-
ficiaries   of the society at large, and to pay bounties to
men who provided substitutes for themselves. The
sum of ;^i89 los. was thus paid out on account of
                  :



ten of the subscribers, in bounties varying from j^i6 to
£20. As these amounts were equal to the full current
price of substitutes, and any additional expenditure on
the part of the ballotted  men was therefore voluntary
and unnecessary, the Deputy-Lieutenants considered
that any surplus, remaining after repayment to them of
their subscription of ^i and of any little additional
expenses, should go to the general fund for the benefit
of all the subscribers. The ten men, however, thought
differently.   Under section 122 of the Militia Act
of 1802 ballotted men, worth less than ^^500, were
entitled to receive half the current price of a parochial
substitute ; and this they claimed as their right.  The
Deputy-Lieutenants flatly refused to pay it. The men
had found their substitutes at a trifling cost, they had
also gained exemption from the parish rate levied for
the payment of bounties, and the Deputies were furious
at the idea of their making also ^7 or ^^8 out of the
transaction.   It was contrary to all precedent in Lich-
field, where the rule was that men who served person-
ally should alone receive back their subscription and
half the current price of a substitute.  Thereupon the
ten men concerned carried their appeal to the Secretary
of State, and demanded their half bounty as a right.
The matter was referred to the law officers, who were
fain to confess that the law was on the side of the
claimants, and that the money must be paid.^        The
Secretary of State gave orders accordingly, and the
Deputy-Lieutenants were left to take such satisfaction
as they might from these very ingenious men.

   1 I.D. vol. cliv.. Twelve Liverpool men to   S.S. 4th   March   ;

Mr. W. Carr to C.G.M. Lanes, 28th Jan. 1804.
