        48          MILITIA HATED IN SCOTLAND                     chap.

1803.   to suppose that the Surrey Militia can have included
        many Surrey men.
                                        VI
                 The reader will naturally ask whether the reluctance
        to serve in the Militia was so general as the foregoing
        narrative would lead one to suppose.     The answer is
        certainly in      the affirmative ;   and the prime reasons
        undoubtedly were        that, contrary to the spirit     of the
        elder Pitt's original Act, personal service was not insisted
        upon and the Militia was not made a truly national
        force.  There was, however, far less reluctance in
        England than in Scotland, where the Militia had been
        unknown until 1797.           From almost every county in
        Scotland, even before the war broke out, came the same
        tale of difficulty in obtaining not only men but officers,
        and of perfunctory conduct, or worse, on the part of
        Deputy-Lieutenants. In Aberdeen ballotted men invari-
        ably paid the fine for exemption, and no gentleman
        would accept even a captain's commission when offered
        to him.^    In Banff, again, only one duly qualified
        gentleman could be persuaded to become a captain.^ In
        Haddington there was the like dearth of officers, and in
        Peebles the like unwillingness of men.^   In Bute there
        were only five men in the Militia who had not been
        drawn from other counties, and not one single ballotted
        man had been enrolled.* From Ross came the report
        that the Highlanders would have nothing to do with
        the Militia ; that the most mountainous district had not
        produced a man ; that the Militia laws were ill under-
        stood by magistrates and Deputy-Lieutenants, and that,
        being an innovation, they were detested by the High-
        landers as an intolerable grievance.^   In Stirling the

             1I.D. vol. i. L.L. to S.S. 15th Jan., 22nd July 1803.
             2Ibid. vol. iii. L.L. to S.S. 4th April 1803.
            3 Ibid. vol. iv. L.L. Haddington, to S.S. 16th March ; C.G.M.

        Peebles, to S.S. 19th June 1803.
            * Ibid. vol. xxxvii. L.L. Argyll and Bute, 5th Sept. 1804.
            5 Ibid. vol. vi. V.L. Ross, to S.S. 1803.
