II            UNFAIRNESS OF EXEMPTIONS                               ^2

can be little doubt as to who was in the right of the                      1803.
question.^
        was unfair, again, that such a misfortune as
         It
physical infirmity should in   no case have given relief
from the Militia ballot unless a man were worth less
than ;^ioo.    Of course, the Deputy-Lieutenants could
always reject a man for the Militia if he were below
five feet four inches in height ; and no doubt this rule
was frequently stretched in the interests of humanity to
give deliverance in many hard cases.      But it is to be
noted that the Deputy-Lieutenants were not bound to
reject men who fell below that stature       and that the
                                                    ;


deficiency of inchesof itself gave no immunity from the
ballot and its consequences,^    By the letter of the law,
therefore, a hunchback from three to four feet in height,
under forty-five years of age, and worth ;^ioi, was
liable to pay a fine of j^io for five years' exemption,
provide a substitute, or serve in person      and the fine
                                                     ;


could be extorted from him by distraint upon his
goods. ^ It is noticeable too, in reference to the posi-
tion of the sick and infirm under the Militia Act, that
not a word was said as to the exemption of practis-
ing doctors, an omission which was resented in those
days, and would be still more resented in these, from the
hardship which it meted out both to members of a
singularly self-denying profession and to their unfor-
tunate patients.


                                  VII

         Enough       has been said to show, without further
analysis of the          list of exemptions, that apart fi-om all


     1    I.D. vol.      L.L. Leicestershire, to S.S. 9th Nov. ; S.S.
                      clxvii.
to L.L. 15th Nov., 18th    Dec; Mr. Burnaby to S.S. 28th Dec.
1809 ; S.S. to Mr. Burnaby, 29th Jan. 18 10.
    2 W.O. Mila. Books, S.W. to F. Davies, 28th June 1803.
    3 Ibid. S.W. to R. Else, 26th July 181 1.       "The Law officers
have decided that a man worth more than £,\oo, ballotted and
willing to serve, but physically unfit, is obliged to find a substitute,
under sections 45 and 52 of 42 Geo. IIL cap. 90."
