        52       UNFAIRNESS OF EXEMPTIONS                            chap.

1803.   a weak point throughout the Act that it conferred no
        advantages for previous good service to the State.
        There was a case in which the last remaining son of a
        poor old couple in Northamptonshire was ballotted.
        They had given two sons to the Guards, and had lost
        them both on active service, and they had at the
        moment three more sons serving in the Militia.                Yet
        it was only by appeal of the Lord-Lieutenant to the
        Secretary of State that any consideration could be
        obtained for them ; and meanwhile they were unavoid-
        ably kept for many days in miserable suspense.*
             Another most amazing fact is that though parish
        officers, being concerned with the ballot, were exempt
        from it, Deputy-Lieutenants were not. The question
        was actually raised through the ballotting of a Deputy-
        Lieutenant by his brethren, and the matter was referred
        to the Secretary of State.     His answer was that he
        would make inquiry as to the general practice in the
        kingdom ; to which the Lord-Lieutenant rejoined that
        the practice varied, and that the Law-Officers of the
        Crown ought to settle the question once for all without
        loss of time.    The Law-Officers opined that Deputy-
        Lieutenants were not exempt from the Militia ballot.
        To this the Deputy-Lieutenant concerned made answer
        that in that case he would resign.      If, he said, there

        were no exemption at all, he would not complain, but
        if peers were exempted, why not Deputy-Lieutenants }
        Officers of Militia were required and bound to obey the
        orders of the Deputy-Lieutenants ; and any three Deputy-
        Lieutenants, commissioned to act as the Lord-Lieu-
        tenant, could review the Militia.        How could ballotted
        privates give     commands to their own officers ? The
        Secretary      of State wisely made no attempt to meet
        these      unanswerable arguments,      but   replied   in    true
        official              Government would not submit
                    style, that   the
        to Parliament any bill to exempt Deputy-Lieutenants
        from the ballot ; and there the matter ended. There
             1   I.D. vol. XXV. Mr. de C. Brooke to L.L. Northants, 28th
        Sept. 1804.
