II        INEQUITY OF THE BURDEN                            51

within their means.     Had the fine been ;Cioo instead          1803.
of ;^io, the distribution of the burden would have been
infinitelymore equitable.
     Yet another cause which brought the Militia into
general      dislike   was   the principle   of   paying for a
national object out of strictly local taxation.       To take
the simplest instance of its injustice, a battalion of Militia
stationed in an unhealthy quarter, or detailed for duty
in exposed situations, necessarily suffered greater losses
from sickness and death than others in more favourable
circumstances.   Yet the burden of making good the
casualties was thrown upon the unfortunate county, and
in that county upon the unfortunate parishes, which had
provided the dead or disabled men. And closely bound
up with the inequality of this taxation was the extreme
crudity of the system of exemptions.           To give but
one example, any man who had served for four years
as an officer in the Militia was exempt. But a man who
had served for twenty years in the Regular Army and
had, it might be, sold his commission and retired to the
country broken down by wounds or disease after active
service in pestilent climates, was still liable to enter the
ranks, pay a fine, or purchase a substitute, provided that
he was, as he very well might be, under forty-five years of
age.    There was no point upon which the Secretary of
State insisted more strongly than that neither officers
nor men who had served in the Regular Army were,
or ever had been, exempt from the Militia ballot
solely on that account.^    It is easy to conceive of cases
in which this decision was perfectly just ; but it is not
less easy to see that it might be both unfair and oppres-
sive.   Moreover, it was false policy to put a soldier,
who might have given the best years of his life to his
country's service, on the same level with petty attorneys
and tradesmen, who had never worked for any interest
except their own, and never intended to do so.        It was

    1 W.O. Mila. Books, Mr. Lewis to Col. Matthew, 28th Oct.
S.W. to Captain Hardwicke, 13th June ; to F. Davies, 28th June
J803.
