        46        MILITIA CEASES TO BE LOCAL                                chap.

1803.   tearful mothers, wives, and daughters, they should have
        listened to plausible persons                 who   offered to provide
        any number of substitutes at a moderate charge, without
        ascertaining too particularly whether the said substitutes
        really came from the same or an adjoining county.       It
        was always easy for a crimp or an insurance agent to say
        that they were from the county town, and very difficult
        to prove that they were not.     The wording of the Act
        also permitted much laxity of interpretation, for it did
        not provide that substitutes should be men on the ballot-
        listsof the same or an adjoining county, which they
        certainly ought to have been if they were to be properly
        qualified.        The desire, then, for a quiet life and for the
        sight of        happy faces about them did much to make
        Deputy-Lieutenants disregard the enactments for making
        the Militia a local force.
            In the large towns a different set of causes produced
        precisely  the same effect.    About London the five
        Militia battalions of Middlesex and Surrey, after many
        ballots and many disappointments, abandoned in despair
        the task of raising men upon the spot and sought them
        elsewhere.  Any number of men were forthcoming in
        London itself, but they disappeared with amazing speed
        as soon   as their bounty was in their pockets.      The
        Lord-Lieutenant did his best to meet this evil by
        marching the men out of the county as soon as they
        were enrolled, so as to make desertion more difficult
        and he actually suspended the ballot until he could
        obtain permission to do so.     But even so, his success
        was small.^ In September 1803, after eight or nine
        months of effort, the West Middlesex and Westminster
        battalions had not yet made up the numbers of their
        original establishment, and had not raised a man of their
        Supplementary Militia.^ The East Middlesex battalion
        was stronger, but this was because the commanding
        officer had early sent recruiting parties to Norwich to

             1   I.D.   vol.   xxiii.   L.L. Middlesex, to S.S. 6th and 9th July
        1803.
             2   Ibid. vol. xxiii. L.L.    Middlesex, to S.S. 15th Sept. 1803.
