        so      APATHY OF THE MIDDLE CLASS chap.
1803.   remembered that flogging formed as essential a part of
        civilas of military punishment at that period.    The
        officers of the Militia, especially in the higher ranks,
        bore some of the greatest names in England ; and even
        if occasionally petty squires and their sons were disposed
        to be tyrannical, there were probably always men of
        higher social position in the same battalion to keep them
        in restraint.   But when the ranks of the Militia were
        filled with men who, if they had not become substitutes,
        would have enlisted in the Army, the case was completely
        changed.     The lash was absolutely necessary for the
        enforcement of discipline; and flogging, though unknown
        in some battalions, was certainly not unknown in others.
        The waged class in those days, it must also be remem-
        bered, was far more lawless, violent, and reckless than
        in these, and, unless subjected to some born leader of
        men, did not understand gentle measures.
             But, in the writer's opinion, the prevailing prejudice
        and contempt towards the Militia, which is as strong
        to-day as it was then, was only a part of the general
        dislike and distrust which Englishmen had for generations
        been trained to cherish against a Standing Army. Before
        the elder Pitt took the Militia in hand in 1757, the
        force was popular but utterly useless.       When it was
        founded upon an effective basis its popularity rapidly
        waned ; and when, after long years of disuse, the ballot
        was applied to it, it became hateful. The truth is that
        the ballot hit the class which has always been most
        averse from military service, and loves nothing of war
        except its trappings, because it may possibly gain money
        by them.    It   was    this class that,   by its superiority of
        education and      greater power and facility of self-
                         its

        protection, formed subscription societies and insurance
        companies, and made the largest fortunes by crimping.
        Its   members, which could have best           afl?brded to  pay
        dearly for substitutes, obtained the first      call   upon them
        and bought them        at the cheapest rate.     Even failing a
        substitute, the purchase of five years' exemption for ^^ 10,
        which was prohibitive to a labouring man, was well
