II         MIDDLESEX AND SURREY MILITIA                     47

collect men.  The Westminster battalion followed his               1803.
example by sending a party to Birmingham, nominally
to arrest deserters, but really to enlist recruits. The
practice was plainly illegal, and the Secretary at War
repeatedly pointed out that it was so ; but Colonel
Wood of the East Middlesex let the letters from the
War Office pass unheeded and went his own way,
knowing that if he were to conform to the law he would
have not a      man in his battalion.-'    Moreover, as the
Secretary at     War was fain to confess, there was no
penalty provided in any Act to check this particular
breach of the law, which meant that there was no pro-
tection for any district against any other district which
chose to steal its men.    It is an actual fact that in the
ranks of the Middlesex Militia, whose quota (including
the Supplementary Militia) was over 4500 men, there
was but one principal to be found ; and when his time
of service expired in 1808, the Lord-Lieutenant begged
to be allowed to keep him as a curiosity.^
     On the south side of the Thames the case was pre-
cisely the same.   Substitutes were presented as fast as
they were called for, only to disappear beyond hope of
recall within forty-eight hours.     At the beginning of
April 1803, after endless ballotting, the southward dis-
trict of Surrey had produced only 22 men out of its quota
of 288 ; and the Clerk of the General Meeting declared
the task of raising the rest to be hopeless unless the
substitutes could be at once carried off to headquarters,
dressed, powdered, and furnished with queues, so as to
make them easily recognisable.^ It is not recorded that
the difficulty was overcome in the same way as in
Middlesex, but it is reasonable to assume so ; and with
all London open to them for substitutes, it is impossible

      W.O. Mila. Entry Books, Sec. at War to T. Kerrison, Esq.,
       ^

 1stJune, to O.C., E. Middlesex Mila. 15th June, 3rd Oct. 1803 ;
6th Jan., 22nd June 1804 ; 14th Feb. 1805 ; to O.C., Westminster
Mila. 28th June 1803; to O.C, E. Middlesex Mila. nth Feb.
1808.
    2 I.D. vol. cxlii. L.L. Middlesex, to S.S. 24th March 1808.

    8 Ibid. vol. xxxi. C.G.M. Surrey, to L.L. 4th April 1803.
