II          MILITIA DESPISED IN ENGLAND                         49

Lieutenancy had done         its    work so ill   that in several     1803.
cases the same man had been enrolled and            had received
bounty for several different subdivisions.^ In Selkirk
the Lord-Lieutenant despaired of providing his quota
of tvi^elve men for the Supplementary Militia, though
he could count upon payment of the fines.^ Forfar
could show but one principal to every six substitutes,
and to every five men that paid the fine for exemption.^
From Kirkcudbright the Lord-Lieutenant reported that
almost the whole of the Militia would be substitutes,
and that the insurance societies had been largely
patronised in the towns.*  In Perth it was a case of few
enrolments and many fines.^ In fact, the service was not
only unpopular but suspected ; for it was bound up
with an oath and a red coat, and it was hard to make the
cautious Scots believe       that    this   combination did not
signify compulsory military service for life.
         In England, though there were a few places in which
the same superstition existed, there was generally no
dread of unfair treatment of Militiamen ; and yet the
Service was disliked, and not only disliked,      but not
unfrequently despised.     This was due, no doubt, to the
practice, consecrated by Pitt, of permitting men to serve
their country as Volunteers, or, in other words, of allow-
ing the mass of the citizens to substitute undisciplined
for disciplined service. The Militia, during embodiment,
was subjected to the same penal code as the Army, not
excluding the lash.    Had personal service been enforced,
the character ^ of the men would have been so superior
that the cat-o*-nine-tails would have fallen almost into
disuse except in rare cases, when, in the judgment of that
day, it was the only possible penalty.     For it must be
     I.D. vol. viii. L.L. Stirling, to S.S. 3rd June 1803.
     1

     Ibid. vol. xi. L.L. Selkirk, to S.S. 15th June, 3rd July 1803.
     2

   3 Ibid. vol. xiv. L.L. Forfar, to S.S. 4th July 1803.

   4 Ibid. vol. xvii. L.L. to S.S. 23rd Jan. 1803.
   5 Ibid. vol. xxvii. L.L. to S.S. 24th June 1803.

   ^ It will be remembered that Abercromby pronounced the

Militiamen under his command in 1799 to be of a superior class to
the ordinary recruits.
                                                           £
