    II             CONFUSION CAUSED BY IT                                57

    same exemption for             less       than ;^I5 ;   men drawn for     1803.
    the      Army of Reserve could purchase only one year's
    exemption from that particular ballot by payment of
    j^20.  Again, the payment of fines for exemption from
    the Militia gave no immunity from the Army of
    Reserve, though service in person or by substitute in
    either force gave    exemption from service in the other.
    Also, the exemption fines of the Militia were given
    complete to the Deputy-Lieutenants for the purchase of
    substitutes ; but those of the Army of Reserve were, in
    England, divided between the Deputy-Lieutenants and
    the Paymaster-General.       Next, the standard for the
    Militia was five feet four inches until the 27 th of July,
    when the Act 43 Geo. III. cap. 100, lowered the
    height required for substitutes to five feet two inches,
    leaving that for principals untouched ; while the
    standard for the Army of Reserve was five feet two inches
    for all. Lastly, Volunteers enrolled before the 22nd of
    June alone were exempted as such from the Army of
    Reserve ; a simple matter which is repeated here because
    it presently became complicated to the last degree.

        The unhappy Lieutenancies bent themselves once
    more to the eternal round of ballots amid ever-increasing
    difficulties, for the Army of Reserve Act was loathed
    as alike oppressive and unfair.   Men who had paid ^^lo
    or ^^15, sometimes indeed both sums in succession, in
    purchasing exemption from the Militia, complained that
    the Government should have warned them that this
    penalty would not avail them against the Army of
)   Reserve, so that they might have spent their money on
    a substitute.  " The people," wrote the Duke of Rich-
    mond fi-om Goodwood, ".               .   .   have become suspicious of
    the magistrates. They cannot understand how a new Act
    can violate the engagement of the old.     ballot is a   A
    ballot with them, and when they have bought exemp-
    tion from one, they cannot understand how they are
    liableto another.  I warned Addington of this, and

    hoped Parliament would make some remedy." ^ It was
             ^   I.D. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S, 23rd Aug. 1803.
