        6o                COLONEL VYSE'S ADVICE                            chap.

1803.   as                  —
                        (i) Do not be too hard in grudging
                 follows:
        pay to            they throw it into a general fund to
                     officers ;
        make good deficient allowances.        (2) Make every
        corps swear to serve in any part of Great Britain in case
        of invasion ; and (3) to obey the orders of the King and
        of the Generals appointed by him.     (4) Form regular
        regiments in the great towns only ; ^ encourage inde-
        pendent companies in the coast towns only, and possibly
        a few in the north, but not so as to incur the heavy and
        useless expense of the last war.      Seventy-five corps,
        with 12,560 men, will be ample for Scotland ; in the
        last war you had 228 corps with 30,000 men.           You
        might add a few more men on the coast, but always as
        parts of battalions.    (5) The great defect of our last
        Volunteers was the confused and unmilitary conditions
        under which they were formed. Establish one system
        for all for clothing, interior economy and discipline, and
        we shall hear no more of committees, quarrels, and insub-
        ordination.    (6) Men should be required to give so
        many days' notice of resignation. (7) The Govern-
        ment should have arms ready to give to every accepted
        corps.
            This was excellent and sound advice. Against the
        second article the Secretary of State wrote the words,
        " I prefer to trust to the spirit of the corps"; and against
        the third, " Very proper, but quaere ^      It will presently
        be seen that the Government gave much the same degree
        of attention to the whole of Vyse's recommendations.
            Meanwhile the offers of Volunteers increased ; and
        in June the Government at last produced and circulated
        their definite plan for the Volunteers.^

             ^    Three regiments in Edinburgh ; two in Glasgow ; one each in
        Perth, Dundee, and Aberdeen.
             2   I cannot give the date of the circular, for I cannot find a sign of
        it   in the Entry Books ; but the  new plan seems to have been cir-
        culated to the Scottish Lords- Lieutenant on 20th June. Other impor-
        tant letters were also unentered ; and I have been obliged to gather
        their purport from the answers sent to them.     Nay, so careless were
        the clerks, that the " June Allowances " themselves, the centre of
        thousands of letters and the subject of innumerable speeches, would
