        58       NEW SCRAMBLE FOR SUBSTITUTES chap.
1803.   useless for men to chafe.  The question was raised more
        than once, but the Secretary of State was inexorable
        fines paid in composition for service in the Mihtia were
        not valid as against the Army of Reserve ; nor fines
        paid for the Army of Reserve against the Militia.^
            If there had been a rush for substitutes before,
        there was now a headlong scramble.        Their price, in
        spite of the relaxation of the rules concerning them,
        flew up     by leaps and bounds to an extravagant
        height.   The Secretary of State himself recognised
        that it was hard to expect the ranks to be filled
        while recruits were so dear, but he made no sign of
        relaxing the fines upon the parishes for               men deficient.
        As to   the Deputy-Lieutenants, they were driven in
        desperation to hoard the exemption -fines which were
        paid to them against the happy day when recruits should
        be cheaper, or when a lucky windfall should deliver into
        their hands poachers or other criminals who would be
        glad to serve in order to escape the gaol.^          They
        suffered a sad shock when the Law-Officers of the Crown
        pronounced in July that, though the payment of a fine
        exonerated an individual from serving in person or by
        substitute in the Militia or Reserve, it did not exonerate
        the parish from fulfilling the vacancy.^    Since the price
        of a substitute exceeded twice the amount of the fine,
        this decision practically required them, to put matters
        crudely, to make one sovereign purchase as much as two.
        But even so their cup was not yet full, for over and
        above three separate levies and the voluminous returns
        required by the first Defence Act, there fell upon
        them in August the heaviest blow of all, namely, the
        wholesale and unexpected exemption fi-om the ballot
        of some hundreds of thousands of Volunteers.

             1   fF.O.     Mi/a. Books, S.S. to Sir A. Duckenfield, 1st July; to
        W. Walcot, 20th July 1803          ; I.D. vol. i. L.L. Beds, to S.S. 2nd
        July 1803.
             2   HiJ. S.W. to Messrs.      Edwards and Hughes, 1 1 th July ; to
        Sir H.     Hanley, 22nd July 1803.
             3   Il>id.   S.W. to High-SherifF of Cardigan, 1st Aug. 1803.
