        62             THE JUNE ALLOWANCES                                       chap.

1803.   men are to receive pay at the same rate as the disem-
        bodied Militia for two days in every week from the
        25th of February to the 24th of October, and for one
        day a week from the 25th of October to the 24th of
        February, making in all eighty-five days' pay for effec-
        tives under arms on each day.

            (9) Corps called out to suppress riots will receive
        pay as disembodied Militia ; ^ if called out to repel
        invasion they will receive the same pay as the Regular
        Army.
           (10) Clothing for infantry is to be red ; for artillery
        blue ; for rifles, green with black belts.

                                    Clothing Allowances

        For each Sergeant                       '   IZ     3    9"
              „      Corporal                         I   12             Once in
              „      Drummer
                     Private
                                         .      •     236 10
                                                                        three years
              „                                       I



              For permanent non-commissioned                   officers the like
        allowance will be made annually.

                           Allowance for Contingencies

              £2^ per annum for every company of fifty men.
              ^5 for every ten men over.
            (12) Field officers and Adjutants will be excused the
        horse tax for one horse.
            The proposed regulations of March had added that
        all officers and men would be exempt from the Militia

        Ballot during their period of service ; but this was a
        matter already regulated by the Volunteer Act of 1802.
        The June Allowances, in fact, were purely a financial
        matter, which incidentally tempted Volunteers to undergo
        training for eighty-five days in the year. For their pur-
        pose they were liberal ; and, attracted by them and
        stimulated by the First Defence Act, the Volunteers
        began to come forward very rapidly. It seems, how-
          ^   Sergeants,   is.   6d. ; Corporals, is. 2d. ; Privates,   is.   a day.
