        S6             ARMY OF RESERVE BALLOT                                    chap.

'803,   a new method of evasion was discovered.             Some
        ingenious person on studying the Act found out that
        if he refused to swear that he was not ruptured, nor
        subject to fits, nor physically disabled, the Deputy-
        Lieutenants had no power to enrol him even if they
        knew his objection to be false. Instantly the epileptic
        and the afflicted with hernia were multiplied manifold in
        Essex, and the Secretary of State could only make a
        memorandum to omit this clause from future enact-
        ments.^
             Such new enactments, as we have seen, were not
        long in coming.     Before the Lieutenancies had well
        digested the proclamation for the Supplementary Militia
        and the Militia Completion Act, they were required to
        swallow the Army of Reserve Act, bidding them levy
        before Michaelmas yet another forty thousand men by
        ballot in Great Britain, on pain of a cumulative
        quarterly fine of £20 for every man deficient.       This
        brought up the total of men to be raised in Great
        Britain within less than twelve months to 117,000.
        Moreover, by comparison of the Acts of Parliament it
        will be seen that the Lieutenants had practically to
        collect this number under three different sets of condi-
        tions.   Men ballotted for the Militia before the 28th of
        May (the date of summons to the Supplementary
        Militia) were exempt for five years on payment of
        ^10 ; men ballotted after that date could not gain the
                                           Fina/ Ballot
        Total     enrolled for     County of    Forfar, Principals, 12 ;       Sub-
                  stitutes,   76                                                      88
        Unfit or exempt, for whom others were ballotted           •        .      .88
        Paid the j^ 1 5 penalty                                                        60
        Allowed time to find Substitutes         . .      .       .        .      .     2
        Failed to appear (warrants issued)   .                .   .        .      .18
                                   Total                                              256
        (7.2). vol. xiv. Forfar, 4th July 1803).
             ^   l.D. vol. xiii. Essex, Mr. Bosanquet to L.L. 3rd July 1803.
        But the      clause, or rather the oath, as to rupture and fits was
        never abrogated.
