        64          THE AUGUST ALLOWANCES                   chap.

1803.   under the Act. I recommend an appeal to the inhabi-
        tants of the country to procure a return of the arms in
        their possession in order that they    may for a time be
        appHed to the    serviceof the country, and to take
        measures for distributing them. Twenty-five firelocks
        is considered enough for the training of one hundred

        men. The information given by these returns will aid
        the Government much in arranging for the distribution
        of arms.
             " The object of the Act is to obtain such a force, in
        addition to that which has been already provided, as
        may enable any attack on the country to be frustrated,
        and by combining economy and vigour to continue the
        contest as long as may be necessary for the honour and
        security of the empire.     This communication is made
        under the impression of the inexpediency of establishing
        a voluntary force to the extent now proposed upon the
        allowances already transmitted to you [/.<?. the June
        Allowances], and I am persuaded that in the offers of
        service made to you greater proofs will be afforded of
        the liberality and public spirit which have been so justly
        excited by the inordinate ambition and avowed inten-
        tions of the enemy."
            This last sentence hinted unmistakably that the
        June Allowances were to be discontinued for future
        corps of Volunteers ; and a new circular of the 3rd of
        August set all doubts at rest. "Although in many
        instances the persons forming new corps have offered
        to put the Government to no expense, yet it could not
        be expected, no matter how great the public spirit of
        individuals, that such an arrangement should become
        general."    And therewith were promulgated the new
        allowances, known thenceforth as the August Allow-
        ances, for the Volunteers accepted after the 22 nd of June.
            They were as follows   :



            In the case of Infantry ;^ i a man was to be granted
        for clothing once in three years, and a shilling a day
        per man was to be given for twenty days' exercise in
        the year.
