II               EFFECT OF BILLETING ACT                             6s
         In the case of cavalry ;^I20 a year, payable half-               1803.
yearly, was to be allowed for every troop.^
    This arrangement, it was added, was to be final,
unless it could be so altered as to produce no increase

of expense to the public.   Notice, therefore, must be
given to corps which had tendered their services but
had not been accepted, in order that they might re-
consider the matter before renewing their offer under
altered conditions.
    Here, then, was another vast burden of work, both
difficult and complicated, laid upon the Lieutenancies,
a full examination of which shall presently follow. But
within a little more than a week the Billeting Act was
passed which, it will be remembered, exempted all
Yeomen who attended twelve days' exercise, and all
Volunteers who attended twenty-four days' exercise in
the year from the ballot for the Army of Reserve and
for any other Additional Force that might be raised in
the future.   How Ministers contrived to commit this
extraordinary blunder is a mystery.   It is certain from
sec. 8 of the Army of Reserve Act, and indeed from
their own admissions, that they had no intention of
granting this exemption ; and for some time they would
not confess that they had granted it. But indeed they
were so ignorant of the effect of their own enactments
that the Secretary at War actually thought that no
Volunteers, saving those whose offer of service had been
accepted before the 22nd of June 1803, were exempt
from           in the Militia.^
               service           According to one
Member        Parliament, the clause which did the
                   of
mischief was smuggled through the Commons after
most of the country members had left London in order
to drill their Yeomanry and Militia at home.^                But the
insertion of the fatal words, however surreptitious, can
hardly have              been   unknown   to   Ministers.   It   seems

     ^   This item does not appear in the circular of 3rd August, but
in a later circular of 28th Sept. 1803.
     2   /r.O. Mi/a. Books, S.W. to C.G.M. Argyll, 30th July 1803
     ^   SirW. Yonge's speech, 14th Dec. 1803, H.D. Commons.
                                                                 F
