II   LIMITATION OF THE VOLUNTEERS                                    63

ever, that early in the day Ministers became alarmed as                     1803.
to the effect of the exemptions of Volunteers upon the
ballot ; and that early in June they circulated an inti-
mation that no further oifers of Volunteers would be
accepted until the ballots for the Supplementary Militia
were ended.-'   Certain it is that, in spite of the Govern-
ment's invitation to Volunteers to come forward, few
corps were accepted in June and July,^ and that there
were loud complaints that the Government was damping
the ardour of the people.   However, the Levy en Masse
Act was passed on the 27th of July, and circulated on
the 30th, with a letter which sought with indifferent
success to make matters clear.
    "Under section 29 (such was the purport of the
Secretary of State's circular) provision is made for the
training of a certain number of men in the first instance,
to avoid the delay if all training be deferred until the
returns of the classes required by the Act are made.
This proportion should be not less than six times the
number of Militia named by the Militia Act of 1802,^
exclusive of the Supplementary Militia quota.        It is
the decided opinion of Ministers that in all places where
Volunteer corps can be formed, upon such conditions
as the King shall approve, it would be advisable to give
every encouragement for that purpose ; such an arrange-
ment being calculated to concentrate the force, in order
to promote the convenience of the public, and to render
it  unnecessary to have recourse to the compulsory
clauses of the Act.   I need not point out the difficulty

of issuing arms for the extensive training required

   ^ I can nowhere find this Circular, but I deduce its existence

and its date from a letter of L.L.BanfF, to S.S. 25th June, I.D. vol.iii.
   2 I judge this from statements in the Commons' debates and from

the Entry Book, which contains the letters as to the offers of Volun-
teers at this period {H.O.M.E.B. vol. ciii.) but it is impossible to
say whether these entries are complete.
    ' That number was, for Great Britain,
                                             51,489; therefore the
number of men to be trained in the first instance under the Levy
en Masse Act would be 308,934, distributed according to              the
quota of Militia in each county.
