II          THE JUNE ALLOWANCES                                       6i

   This plan or code of regulations was known by the                       1803.
name of the '* June Allowances," a name which the reader
must be careful to bear in mind for he will shortly be
                                        ;

confronted with another code under the name of the
" August Allowances." Its purport was as follows                  :




     (1) Every man must take the oath of allegiance.
     (2) Every corps that claims pay must engage to
serve in any part of its Military District.
   (3) Battalions of ten companies, or of 250 to       500
men, will be allowed to have an Adjutant and a Sergeant-
Major on permanent pay.
   (4) Companies are not to be of fewer than 50 men,
or of more than 100.     Four officers will be allowed to
companies containing 80 or more men.
    (5) Sergeants on daily pay and drummers on con-
stant pay are to be subject to military law.
    (6) In each company one officer, not above the rank
of Captain, will be allowed to draw pay.     If he is taken
from the half-pay and has served eighteen months in the
Regulars, Embodied Militia, or Fencibles, he will receive
the constant pay of his rank as a Volunteer.   One such
officer, not on half-pay, who has served two years in the
Regulars, Embodied Militia, or Fencibles, may receive
constant half-pay of his rank as a Volunteer.    Other
officers are to receive pay for each day's exercise, as
 do the men.         No officer is to receive pay           for   two
 commissions.
    (7) The former services of the officers on constant
 pay must be stated in the pay-list.
    (8) When Volunteers are not called out, constant
 pay will be allowed for one sergeant and one drummer
 in each company at the same rate as in the disembodied
 Militia.  The rest of the non-commissioned officers and
 have been undiscoverable had not a Lieutenant fortunately sent his
 own copy back to the Home Office to emphasise his views as to their
 meaning. Indeed, if a paper were printed at that time, the chances
 are that not a copy of it is to be found. The clerks appear to have
 kept loose copies for their own use, but only occasionally to have
 stuck one into the Entry Book for record.      This is all of a piece
 with the general slovenliness of their conduct of business.
