        72       FAILURE OF THE RESERVE ACT                             chap.

1803.   a ruined and broken-hearted     man. Shortly afterwards
        it  was discovered that the returns of the battalions were
        wrong, and that he ought not to have been ballotted at
        all.   The Deputy-Lieutenant wrote an indignant report
        of the occurrence to the Secretary of State, but the
        mischief was done, and there was no undoing it.^
            The difference between the accounts of the Inspector-
        General and the counties was generally explicable by
        desertion, aggravated not unfrequently by the omission
        or the inability of military officers to send a sufficient
        escort to bring the recruits in.    For, as the bounties
        rose, so fraudulent enlistment and desertion increased,
        until at last, by the actual admission of Mr. Secretary
        Yorke,'^ the recruits gained for the Army of Reserve
        during the first three months of 1 804 barely outbalanced
        the loss by deserters.   Meanwhile crimping had been so
        general as to engage the energies of an appreciable
        portion of the population.    Even Adjutants of Militia
        turned their attention to it occasionally, and doubtless
        made a handsome profit.^ Deputy-Lieutenants, more-
        over, in despair passed men both for the Militia and the
        Reserve who were quite unfit for service in either ; * but
        even so they could not prevent the accumulation of
        enormous fines upon the parishes in their districts.
        Before long they abandoned the attempt altogether,
        and Addington himself was fain to confess that aft:er
        November 1803 the inconveniences of the Act exceeded
        its advantages.    In April 1804, to adopt the official
        language used by the Horse Guards, the Act died a
        natural death, men having ceased to come in, and the

             1   I.D. vol. xxxvii. Minute of D.L. of Bute, 30th July 1804,
        in L.L. to S.S. 26th Oct. 1804.
             2   H. D. Yorke's speech, 28th March 1804.
             '   I.D. vol. xxiv. O.C. Montgomery Militia        to   A.G.   17th
        May 1803.
             General Simcoe reported that he was training the Volunteer
             *

        Artillery of the Stannaries to   work the great guns at Plymouth.
        " They are of sufficient stature for the duty, which the Militia
        attached to the Artillery strikingly are not " {I.D. vol. xxviii. Simcoe
        to Warden of Stannaries, 26th Nov. 1803).
