        68   VOLUNTEER SYSTEM ANOMALIES chap.
1803.   was open to him, and issued another circular of 31st
        August to settle matters once for all.
             *'
               All the offers are accepted," he said, " provided
        that they do not militate against the regulations of the
        Defence Act and Levy en Masse Act, or against the
        general rules adopted or to be adopted.     The limit of
        six times  the Militia must be  preserved, but Volunteers
        exceeding that proportion may be attached to established
        corps, though without any allowance for pay, arms, or
        clothing, and without claim to exemption from any
        ballot.   Further, all corps accepted since the passing of
        the two Acts above named must be formed with refer-
        ence to the general Militia system, that is to say, com-
        panies of infantry must be at least sixty, and troops of
        cavalry at least forty men strong ; and no infantry of
        fewer than three companies, or cavalry of fewer than
        two troops, will be reckoned a corps."
            Thus the question was at last decided, so far as
        rules could decide it ; and the country was finally
        committed to the maintenance of a huge amorphous
        mass of undisciplined men, subject to two different
        Acts of Parliament, two different sets of regulations,
        and two different spheres of service, namely the
        Military District and Great Britain at large ; the whole
        of them immune from the Militia ballot under one set
        of conditions prescribed by the Militia Act of 1802,
        and from the Army of Reserve under a second set
        ordained by the Billeting Act of 1803.
            Meanwhile for some weeks there was great un-
        certainty as to the true state of the law respecting
        exemptions.    It is demonstrable that many men knew
        the purport of the Billeting Act long before the Lieu-
        tenants ; and Yorke was bombarded with queries as to
        its legal bearing upon the question,-^ for in all quarters
        the Magistrates held different opinions, and framed
        their conduct of the ballot accordingly.         Ministers,
        alive by this time to the effect of the Billeting Act, and

          1 E.g. I.D. vol. i. L.L. Beds, to   S.S.   13th   Sept.;   vol. iv.
        Brecon, C. Morgan to S.S. 24th Oct.
