        74       RECRUITING FOR ARMY KILLED                                 chap.

1803.   to 829.      It is therefore safe to assume that the deficiency
        for the three     kingdoms must have reached a total of
        fully    8000 ; but this was relatively much smaller than
        in the  Army of Reserve, the proportion of men lacking
        being only one-twelfth as compared with one-fourth.
        Nevertheless the position was very far from satisfactory.
             As to the Regular Army, its powers of recruiting
        were simply killed by the competition of the Militia and
        the Army of Reserve.      During the last six months of
        1803 there were 360 recruiting parties out, offering a
        bounty of ^^7 12 6 to men who as substitutes could
                            :      :


        gain at any time from £iq> tO;^50.         They succeeded
        in raising 3481 recruits, of whom 291 deserted, leaving
        a net total of 3 1 90. It is true that several thousand of
        the Army of Reserve in due time enlisted in the Regulars
        for an additional bounty of eight to ten guineas,^ which,
        added to that which they had already received as sub-
        stitutes, made them probably the most expensive recruits
        that ever were obtained.^    Had Addington sought first
        to fill the ranks of the Regular Army before increasing
        the Militia or forming the Reserve, he might have
        secured exactly the same men for one half of the price.
             The sum of the whole of his elaborate measures,
        therefore, amounted to this          —
                                        that he starved the Army
        to make a large body of Militia and Reserve, and starved
        the Militia and Reserve in order to raise a vast crowd of
        Volunteers.

                                             X
            It is now time to examine the composition and value
        of those Volunteers, again reminding the reader that
        with them is included the Yeomanry, which originally
        bore the designation of Volunteer Cavalry. The Govern-
        ment's action towards the Volunteers, so far as we have
        followed it, may be summarised as follows       In 1802    :   —
        they called them into existence upon their own terms

             1   Eight guineas at once and two guineas more (subject to deduc-
        tions for   necessaries)   upon joining the first battalion.       C.C.L.6.
        25th Feb. 1804.                               2   See Appendix.
