II           NUMBERS OF THE VOLUNTEERS                              69

greatly  dismayed by it, referred its interpretation in                   1803.
despair to the Attorney-General, who could not but
pronounce that Volunteers who fulfilled the require-
ments of that Act were indeed exempt from the ballot
for the Army of Reserve. There was nothing for them
but to give in, to circulate this unwelcome construc-
tion^ of their own Act and submit to the consequences.
It may be added that this decision was by no means
received with deference in all quarters.    The Lieu-
tenant of Roxburgh announced boldly that he differed
from the Law-Officers; and many magistrates of the
West Riding of Yorkshire equally declared themselves
unconvinced.    They could not believe that the old
Volunteers, who had come forward from patriotic
motives, were to be put on the same footing with the
new, who, as the Lieutenant put it, were only Volun-
teers under compulsion.^   In counties where there had
hitherto been hesitation on the part of Volunteers to
present themselves, there was now great eagerness to
form corps, for the sake of the exemption ; and thus
the Government found its scheme for the Volunteers
legally defined in a          form which was exactly contrary
to its own intentions.


                                     IX
    The result of the withdrawal of some hundreds or
thousands of men from the ballot was immediate. By
December 1803 the effective Volunteers of all ranks
in Great Britain were returned at 380,000, which, added
to 70,000 in Ireland, made a round total of 450,000.

    1 The circular appears to have been dated the 7th of October,

but the Lieutenant of Roxburgh was evidently aware of it several
days earlier, so possibly it may have been circulated on an earlier
date.  The circular of 7th October purports to enclose two im-
portant decisions of the Law-Officers ; but the Entry Clerks, with
their usual intelligence, give no clue to the nature and date of
the enclosures.
       2    I.D. vol. xi. L.L. Roxburgh, to S.S. 28th     Sept.   1803;
vol.       XXXV. L.L. Yorks W.R. to S.S. 2nd Oct. 1803.
