II            LIEUTENANCIES AND ARMY                                 71

passed       by   themedical authorities of the county                    1803.
were              by the doctors of the Army.^
           rejected                                      But
the most fruitful source of dispute lay in the dis-
crepancies between the county returns of the men
who had been produced and the regimental returns of
the men who had been received.         It had been wisely
arranged by the Government to draft the Army of
Reserve into fifty battalions, numbered as the second
battalions of as many regiments of the Line ; and
England, for the purposes of the Act, was divided into
sixteen districts, to each of which sufficient officers were
furnished to form young, sickly, or worn-out recruits
into distinct Reserve battalions.      Between these two
separate sets of regular officers the Lieutenancies some-
times suffered severely.    In innumerable cases counties
were summoned to make good deficiencies in their
quota upon the showing of the Inspector-General of the
Reserve, and made answer by indignantly producing
their      own    figures,    and showing that no         deficiency
existed.
         Again, Ministers had        never made any secret of
the fact that they           hoped by means of bounties to pass
most of the Army of Reserve as Volunteers into the
Line ; and very soon rumours were current that the
officers were putting the largest clothes upon the smallest
men, giving them misfitting shoes, and applying other
such methods of petty tyranny in order to force them
to take service at once with the Regulars.^
    This, of course, did not promote good-will between
the two parties, and sometimes an unfortunate mistake
made the relations between them very bitter. In Bute
the local battalion of the Army of Reserve reported one
man to be wanting, and the Deputy-Lieutenants held a
ballot to fill the vacancy.  The lot fell upon a thrifity
and industrious shepherd who had contrived to buy and
breed a few sheep of his own.    In despair he sold all
that he had, bought a substitute for £26 ^ and was left
     1   E.g. I.D. vol. xixvii. L.L. Ayr, to S.S. 26th March 1804.
         ^ I.D. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 26th Sept. 1803.
