        66         READINESS TO VOLUNTEER                      chap.

1803.   probable   that   they   really   aimed   at   increasing   the
        number of days prescribed by the Volunteer Act of
        1802 to qualify Volunteers for exemption from the
        Mi/ilia, znd  that by some mistake or conspiracy the
        term Army of Reserve was inserted in its place. Be
        that as it may, the thing was done, and the country had
        to take the consequences.
             Meanwhile, quite apart from this particular question
        of exemption, it may be said that the entire nation had
        sprung to arms, and was anxious to form itself into
        Volunteer corps.     Though, on the one hand, Volunteer-
        ing brought with it immunity from the Militia ballot,
        and, on the other, the Levy en Masse Act threatened to
        drill every able-bodied man whether he liked it or not,
        there was much sound patriotic feeling in the movement.
        The people were zealous to defend their country, and
        though they decidedly preferred to do so in the way
        which they thought best, chiefly because it was easiest,
        yet they asked above all for guidance.     The Secretary
        of State had called for more Volunteers in March, and
        his appeal had met with a willing response.          The
        Lieutenants, seeing that the Government had committed
        itself to the policy of Volunteers, backed it with loyal
        energy and good-will, albeit there were not wanting
        men among them who, in their hearts, considered that
        policy fallacious.   Even after the Levy en Masse Act
        had been passed, they abated none of their energy,
        since Ministers evidently wished the people to come
        forward of themselves without compulsion. But the
        Government, despite of loud murmurs, had checked
        the patriotic movement by delaying the acceptance of
        offers during the best part of two months, and seemed
        about to pin its faith to the ballot ; and hence when
        it backed once     more, like an unstable wind, to the
        voluntary principle, there was a sigh of relief and a
        rush to be enrolled. But then came another disappoint-
        ment. The Government limited the number of Volun-
        teers, as has been seen, by its circular of the 30th of
        July.   Many willing men who aspired to shoulder a
