II           CONCESSIONS TO VOLUNTEERS                               83

"But this," wrote Sir John Murray, from Perthshire,                       1803.
*'makes no allowance for time consumed in dressing
and coming to parade, in these parts often six or eight
miles.    Moreover, two hours a day is not training
enough for recruits.     Men cannot be disciplined as
soldiers in 1 70 hours, much less in 40 hours.  Again,
it is urged that the men have the advantage of clothing.
This is no advantage.      The men have only the trouble
of cleaning it, and the Government pays not one-third
of the cost.          .  The eighty-five days' drill was
                          .   .



claimed in return for the use of an adjutant, as if it
were a personal advantage to the Volunteers. But the
Government will not get the value even of its trifling
twenty shillings [twenty days' pay for one man] unless
it provides proper instructors."^

     Complaints such as this could hardly be passed
over ; and the Government presently receded once more,
granting in January both adjutants and sergeant-
majors on easier terms, and adding in February that
Volunteers who attended inspections should receive pay
for the same, provided such inspections did not recur
more frequently than once in two months. Thus, under
the pretext of anxiety for frequent musters of Volunteers,
Government doled them out pay for six additional days
in the year.^ These concessions, having been wrung from
Ministers against their will, were, of course, received with
a growl instead of with thanks ; but this was always the
fate of Addington and his colleagues.      Having by sheer
ignorance and carelessness called the Volunteers into being
on easy terms, they tried to impose harder conditions by
a side wind, and were invariably beaten in the attempt.


                                   XI
         The most serious trouble of all arose out of the
lack of arms.   Colonel Vyse, it will be remembered,
had particularly cautioned Ministers against creating
     ^    I.D. vol. xxvii. Sir John Murray to S.S. 14th Dec. 1803.
                        2 Circular of 1 5th Jan. 1804.
