        84         DIFFICULTIES AS TO ARMS                                     chap.

1803.   corps which they could not arm ; but they boldly
        enrolled hundreds of thousands of men on the under-
        standing that twenty-five muskets for every hundred men
        would be sufficient for purposes of instruction, and that
        pikes  would be cheerfully accepted by the remaining
        seventy-five.   Never were the authorities more pitifully
        deceived.   It has already been mentioned that the clerks
        in Downing Street were extremely casual as to the gazet-
        ting of officers ; and as no corps could receive arms until
        gazetted, this formed an initial source of discontent.
        There was one case of twenty-four companies, which
        were offered in May, accepted in June, and still waiting
        to be gazetted in September.^   But the majority of the
        complaints upon this head arose from actual failure in the
        supply of arms.    Such complaints are very numerous,
        but the selection of a certain number will show how
        serious would have been the danger of an invasion, had
        Napoleon attempted it in the autumn of 1803. From
        Ayr it was reported in November that many of the
        Volunteer corps were still incomplete, want of arms
        having checked the spirit of the people.^ The Lieu-
        tenant of Berkshire asked plaintively how he was to
        distribute 603 muskets among 2763 men ; and one of his
        commanders complained in October that his men had been
        clothed and drilled for weeks, but that unless weapons
        were given to them at once they would learn nothing
        about them till next summer,^ From Nairn came in
        September a wail that was distressing.   " The situation
        of the North of Scotland is truly deplorable, left with-
        out arms of any description.      All efforts to get arms
                                            .   .   .


        for the Volunteers so far useless.              .       .   .   Not a man in
        arms (though many are willing) to north of Aberdeen,
        except two companies at Elgin.        We are all at the
                                                    .   .   .


        mercy of any petty privateer." * From Sutherland a com-

             1I.D. vol. i. V.L. Argyll, to S.S. nth Sept. 1803.
             2Ibid. vol. i. L.L. Ayr, to S.S. 9th Nov. 1803.

                                                                   J. Weyland
            ^ Ibid. vol. ii. L.L. Berks, to S.S. 19th Sept. 1803
                                                                 ;

        to S.S. 24th Oct. 1803.
            * Ibid. vol. iii. L.L. Nairn, to S.S. 6th Sept. 1803.
