II   CONFLICTING VOLUNTEER ACTS                             8i

makes   it   impossible."   However, the Duke         called a     1803.
meeting to collect subscriptions ; and by the generosity
of himself and of his brother landlords the full proportion
of Volunteers for the county was completed.       None the
less it was iniquitous that these gentlemen should have
been subjected to an extraordinary tax, simply to make
good the mismanagement of the Government.^
    Another miserable complication was that no one knew
whether Volunteers receiving the August Allowances
were governed wholly by the Levy en Masse Act, or in
part also by the Volunteer Act of 1802.          Under the
Volunteer Act all claims for exemption from the ballot
had to be furnished by the 21st of September in every
year, so that the days of exercise necessary to qualify
for exemption had to be accomplished before that day.
The magistrates in various parts, possibly indeed in the
whole of England, very naturally and sensibly took the
Volunteer Act of 1 802 as their principal guide in dealing
with that particular force ; and finding that few of the
new corps had performed the necessary number of drills,
promptly declined to allow them exemption. The case
was hard, because the Government had so long delayed
the acceptance of Volunteers, and the clerks, moreover,
were so dilatory in giving them official recognition in the
GazettCy that many corps, with the best of good will,
could not possibly have fulfilled the necessary days of
training.  They went out, however, as often as they
could ; and their commanders appealed to the Secretary
of State to be indulgent.     In Surrey the magistrates,
perceiving the hardships that might be involved in the
question, suspended the ballot until all doubts should be
resolved by the Law-Officers, lest men who had really
earned their exemption should be drawn. The Secretary
                                             —
of State's answer, however, was short he could not
interfere with the working of Acts of Parliament        —
                                                        and
there arose new causes of discontent among the Volun-

   ^ I.D. vol. XV. Gloucestershire, Capt. Bricknell to S.S. 27th
Feb. 1804; vol. xxvii. L.L. Perth, to S.S. 14th, 27th Aug., 8th
Oct. 1803.
                                                        G
