        78   DIFFICULTIES OF LIEUTENANCIES chap.
1803,   because the direction of the Volunteers, as has been seen,
        changed hands from the War Office to the Home Office
        in the course of 1803.              A
                                     few of the Lieutenants were
        opposed to the whole principle of Volunteering, but
        though these did not conceal their opinions, only one of
        them, Lord Essex in Herefordshire, frankly set his face
        against them until the ballots should have been held.
        He was at once taken to task for neglecting the
        Volunteers. He answered sharply enough, " Every one
        will offer [to volunteer] to escape the ballot. . .   The            .



        Militia are 246 men short ; and the subdivison-clerks
        supported by the country gentlemen ballot illegally by
        throwing several parishes into one, so that the parishes
        guilty of failing to complete their quota shall not be
        detected.    I thought that I was acting in conformity
        with your orders in discountenancing Volunteers until
        the ballots were complete, but now that I know to
        the contrary I will act differently.              Most of the Volun-
        teer offers here have originated with a view to                meet the
        approach of the next General Election rather than the
        enemy. I shall be glad to leave the whole business to
        the Vice-Lieutenant." ^ On the other hand, in the county
        of Montgomery, where Volunteers were unknown
        before the passing of the Levy en Masse Act, the
        Lieutenant submitted no offers until he had received all
        that were likely to be sent in.  Whereupon Mr, Yorke
        wrote in the margin, " Perfectly right. I wish every one
        had done the same." ^     No doubt it would have been
        more convenient if all the Lieutenants had acted upon
        this principle ; but Ministers solely were to blame, for
        at the beginning they had only asked vaguely for more
        Volunteers, upon which the Lieutenants naturally for-
        warded every offer that was sent to them.
            Another extraordinary mistake on the part of the
        Government lay in fixing the same quota for all counties,
        whether inland or upon the coast.         The maritime
        counties naturally demanded, and some of them ulti-
             1       I.D. vol. xvi. L.L. Hereford, to S.S. 12th Oct. 1803.
                 2   Ibid. vol. xxiv.   Mr. Mytton to S.S. 5th Sept. 1803.
