        82 DIFFICULTIES             AS TO EXEMPTIONS chap.
1803.   teers, and new confusion as to the enactments by
        which they were governed.^
            Yet another trouble arose from the action of the
        Government in combining the requirements of the June
        with the pay of the August Allowances. The new Volun-
        teers of course needed adjutants and sergeant-majors as
        much as the old, but were informed first that no pay would
        be allowed for a permanent staff, except in very special
        circumstances, in corps raised after the 3rd of August.2
        This position proving untenable, Ministers in November
        offered pay for an adjutant to every infantry corps of
        500, and every cavalry corps of 300 ; for a sergeant-
        major to every infantry corps of 200, and every cavalry
        corps of 120    and both adjutant and sergeant-major to
                        ;


        every infantry corps of 1000 and every cavalry corps
        of 600 effective rank and file, provided that they agreed
        to undergo eighty-five days' exercise in the year.   This
        roused much indignation in the parties concerned, for
        whereas the corps under the June Allowances received
        pay for the whole of the eighty-five days, those under
        the August Allowances received pay for but twenty.
        The theory seems to have been that fifty-two out of
        the eighty-five drills were to be held on Sundays, on
        which day no man received wages ; that twenty days'
        payment made up the fifty-two to seventy-two, and
        that each corps must make its own shift to eke out the
        remaining thirteen days, or, in other words, must be in-
        demnified by the officers.  The complaints against such
        treatment were bitter, especially in Scotland.    "              We
        enlisted our Volunteers for twenty days' drill," wrote
        Lord Dalkeith ; " we cannot now call on them for
        sixty-five days more ; and yet on that account we must
        lose our adjutant." ^   The Secretary of State then fell
        back on the excuse that twenty days* pay was enough
        for eighty-five days' drill of only two hours a day.

           ^  I.D. vol. iv. Brecon, Charles Morgan of Tredegar to S.S. 24.1!!
        Oct. ; vol. xviii. Kent, Capt. Powis to S.S. 25th Nov.; vol.xxxi. V.L.
        Surrey, to S.S. 8th Dec. 1803.           2 Circular of 28th Sept.

             3 J D  yoi^ y.\ L L_ Dumfries, to S.S. 3rd Nov. 1803.
