II            DIFFICULTIES AS TO ARMS                               85

mander reported late in October that he had had 11 20                       1   803.
men enrolled in his two battalions for some months but
had no weapons for them.^ In Dumfries, at about the same
time, only 106 firelocks had been supplied for 1200
men.2      The Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire protested
at the end of October that so far the county had not
received a single musket or pike.^   In Cornwall the
Lieutenant, after war had been declared fifteen months,
went near to lose his temper. "No new corps," he
wrote, " will ever be effective unless the Ordnance
supply arms.    I lately applied for some, and was told

that Cornwall had a thousand more than she was
entitled to.   If you continue to accept corps, pray
order the Ordnance to arm them, or acceptance is a
farce." *  From Denbigh, towards Christmas time, the
Lieutenant, having      with reason lost patience, wrote
likewise with unusual     warmth     '*
                                        I cannot get from
                                         :



the Ordnance a single musket, nor a word as to the
price that they will allow to those who provide themselves
with arms.    Unless something is done soon, the Volun-
teer corps will disperse." ^    In Derbyshire the lack of
arms was lamented as a grievous misfortune,^            In
Durham the Lieutenant took a higher tone " If only      :



half the Volunteer force is to be armed, and if that half
is to depend on the arms issued during the last war, it

will damp the spirit and energy of the people, who are
already in some degree hurt and disgusted by all the
changes in the arrangements for the Volunteers." "              .   .   .



From Flint, in July 1804, a gentleman who had offered
to raise and clothe a corps if the Government would
arm it, reported that he had been obliged to exceed his
contract and purchase weapons as well as clothes, and
would therefore be obliged by the grant of the usual
1    I.D. vol. vi. Sutherland, David Campbell to S.S. 2 1st Oct. 1803.
        2 Ibid. vol. xi. V.L. Dumfries, to S.S. 22nd Oct. 1803.
           3 ji,jj^ voi_ v.L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 28th Oct. 1803.

        * Ibid. vol. xliv. L.L. Cornwall, to S.S. 25th Oct. 1804.
         5 Ibid. vol. ix. L.L. Denbigh, to S.S. 24th Dec. 1803.
          * Ibid. vol. ix. Joshua Strutt to S.S. 17th Nov. 1803.
         ' Ibid. vol. xii. L.L. Durham, to S.S. loth Sept. 1803.
