        76                     THE VOLUNTEERS                       chap.

1803.   While circulating these allowances the Secretary of State
        announced that corps accepted after the i6th of June
        would not be exempt from the ballot for the Army of
        Reserve.^
             Ministers then again became nervous as to the
        expense of raising Volunteers upon the June Allowances,
        and delayed the acceptance of offers of service.
            They then passed the Levy en Masse Act on the
        27th of July for the compulsory training of all able-
        bodied men, with a clause to suspend the operation of
        the measure if a sufficient proportion of Volunteers
        should be produced for each county, which Volunteers
        should be bound to serve in any part of Great Britain.
        A  circular of the 30th of July directed that immediate
        training should be given to a number of men equal at
        least to six times the quota of the Ordinary Militia.
            Next, on the 3rd of August, were produced the new
        regulations known as the August Allowances, making
        the third set of such regulations issued within twelve
        months, for the government of the new Volunteers to
        be created under the Levy en Masse Act.
            Then on the 1 1 th of August they passed two
        Acts, the one to cancel the rigid rule as to the pro-
        portion of Volunteers to be raised under the Levy en
        Masse Act ; the other to grant Volunteers exemption
        from the ballot for the Army of Reserve, on condition
        that the infantry underwent twenty-four days' and the
        Cavalry twelve days' training within the year.
            Finally, on the 31st of August Ministers accepted the


        I.   of Wight.                  ...            Maj.-Gen. Hewett.
        Severn.          Glos., Worcester,     Here-   Lt.-Gen. the Duke of
                           ford,Monmouth, S.        Cumberland.
                         Wales.
        Home.         Middlesex, Herts, Berks. Lt.-Gen. Lord Cathcart.
        North Inland. Derby, Notts, Staffs, Leic, Lt.-Gen. Gardiner.
                        Warwick, Rutland,
        South Inland. Beds.,   Oxon,      Bucks, Lt.-Gen. Gvvynn.
                               Northants.

             ^   W.O. 6/193.     Circular of 20th June 1803.
