II       DIFFICULTIES OF LIEUTENANCIES                             77

offers     of all Volunteer corps, only stipulating that any              1803.
men over and above the quota of                  six times the old
Militia should be supernumeraries and not entitled to
exemption of any kind.
    It is hardly surprising that the Lord-Lieutenants
should have been puzzled by the amazing confusion of
these successive measures.     " I wish," wrote the Lieu-
tenant of Devon,^ plaintively on the 29th of August,
•*
   that the Acts of Parliament and instructions framed
upon them were clearer.         The general idea is that
Volunteers to any extent are to be accepted, and there
is disappointment owing to the corps being refused.

Refusals also spread a false notion that the danger is
abated."    And this is but one example out of many.
Much trouble also was caused by the carelessness of the
Home Office in omitting to forward copies of Acts of
Parliament to the Lieutenancies, but communicating them
to the newspapers.     **
                          I never heard," wrote the Vice-
Lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire on the 2nd
of May 1804, " of the Act of 27th July 1803 for com-
pleting the Militia until yesterday, nor had another very
active magistrate of this county." ^    The Lieutenant of
Bedford, a peer of the realm, complained bitterly that
the Acts were not forwarded to him ; but he was obliged
to write twice before he could obtain a copy of the
Billeting Act.^    " Your last circular," wrote the Lieu-
tenant of Cornwall, " I read complete in the Sun news-
paper before I received it.       In the newspaper it was
dated the 22 nd of September ; in the official copy it
                           '^

is   dated the 28 th."
   Added to the difficulty of ascertaining the law of the
land was that of divining the wishes of the Govern-
ment.   Did Ministers really want Volunteers or not }
This was a question which the Lieutenancies found
it hard to answer, and they found it none the easier


     1   The writer's great-grandfather, the    mild patience of whose
protest he cannot but admire.         ^  I.D, vol. Ixvii. 2nd May 1804.
     3   LD. vol. i. LL. Beds, to S.S. 13th, 30th Sept. 1803.
     *   Ibid. vol. viii. LL. Cornwall, to S.S. 5th Oct. 1803.
