II         THE THREE VOLUNTEER CODES                                   79

mately obtained, a larger allowance than the rest ; but                       1803.
the omission to discriminate between them led to vast
correspondence and to a good deal of ill-feeling.
   But the most fruitful source of confusion undoubtedly
lay in the existence of three different codes for the
regulation of the Volunteers, and in the variety of their
conditions of service, which not only gave enormous
trouble to all concerned, but in case of invasion must
have caused great embarrassment to the Generals in
the   field. Of the whole number of 342,000 effective
rank and file (that is to say corporals and privates)
comprised in the Volunteers of Great Britain, 207,000,
or, including supernumeraries, 211 ,000, were more or
less subject to the Levy en Masse Act and the August
Allowances, and were therefore liable to serve in any
part of Great Britain ; 67,000 were more or less under
the June Allowances, and by the positive act of the
Government were liable to serve in their Military Dis-
trict only ; and 63,000 were more or less self-supporting
and subject to special terms which might extend to
service all over Great Britain or might limit their
sphere of action to their parish or a short radius beyond
it.-^   The Government was naturally anxious to have as
few little isolated corps as possible, and rightly encour-
aged the amalgamation of troops and companies into
regiments and battalions.     But the inevitable result was
that within the same corps were to be found perhaps
two troops on the June Allowances, and five or six on
the August Allowances. The latter were, of course, very
jealous of their more favoured brethren, and this
inevitably gave rise to friction.   Again, there arose the
 difficulty as to filling vacancies in the corps on the
June Allowances. Were these corps to be kept up
 to strength or not ?    There could be but one answer.
The men who raised them having undertaken to do so
      ^   I derive these figures from a long MS. return in the Library at
Windsor Castle, dated i6th Dec. 1803.          I have used the modifica-
tion, more or less, because it is often extremely difficult to   understand
what were the allowances granted to some of the corps.
