II                AVERSION FROM PIKES                             89

The whole             was complicated by the fact
                question                                                1803.
that   some          from natural and proper un-
                officers,
willingness to use up the whole of the twenty days'
drill without a day's instruction in the use of arms,
reserved a certain number of drills against the happy
moment when the long-expected weapons should be
delivered.  By so doing they prevented their men from
earning their exemption in time ; and up came a fresh
crop of indignant letters to the Secretary of State.
    The Government feebly endeavoured to right itself
by averring that pikes to any number would be fur-
nished, if only officers would apply for them.  But the
Volunteers would not be content with pikes.    In Scot-
land the people entertained not only material but senti-
mental objections to them ; the weapon of rebel Ireland
being in their judgment unfit for a loyal Scot.** In
Flintshire the Volunteers would hardly take pikes into
their hands, except on the assurance that they would
be speedily exchanged for muskets.^       The Duke of
Richmond, a soldier of experience, declined to receive
pikes for the Volunteers of Sussex, declaring them to
be useless except in the hands of perfectly trained men
and yet capable of being turned to dangerous account
by a mob.* In Berkshire one officer concentrated his
objections to the weapon into a single enthymeme.
" The pikes issued by the Ordnance are eight feet long ;
the French ones taken last week were thirteen feet long
therefore an English regiment so armed could not
attack and beat a French one."* Finally, in Somerset
a Major of Volunteers, who disliked pikes as much as
did his men, gave his company orders to leave their
pikes at home when they came to drill, and being

permanent duty.        The hardship was redressed, as shall presently
be seen, at the first possible moment by Act of Parliament.
     1 I.D. vol. V. L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 6th Nov. 1803.

     2 Ibid. vol. iii. L.L. Inverness, to S.S. loth March 1804 ; vol,

viii. L.L. Kinross, to S.S. i6th Sept. 1803.
     3 Ibid. vol. xiv. L.L. Flint, to S.S. 7th Nov. 1803.

     * Ibid. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 23rd Aug. 1803.

     5 Ibid. vol. ii. Sir I. Pocock to S.S. i6th Nov. 1803.
