II             DIFFICULTIES AS TO ARMS                           87

from Surrey a Colonel of Volunteers wrote that his men                  1803.
had provided themselves with 220 muskets out of 600,
and that unless the remaining 380 were at once found
by the Ordnance, the corps would be broken up                      :


" The men," he added, " have drilled for three months
without arms, and are tired of it." ^
    Such are samples of the cries that assailed the War
Office and the Home Office during the years 1803 and
1804     but these by no means indicate the whole of
         ;


the mischief and confusion.    Owing sometimes to the
carelessness of Lieutenants, and sometimes to sheer
foolishness at headquarters, violent local jealousies were
aroused by the partial issue of arms.    Staffordshire was
much affronted at receiving no muskets, while Derby-
shire, Leicestershire, and Warwick were fully supplied.'*
Berkshire was rent asunder and the Lieutenant much
incensed by the action of the Ordnance in consigning
190 muskets direct to the Windsor Volunteers, an
insignificant corps of 180 men, and that though they
were only entitled to one firelock for every four men,
and the distribution was supposed to be left to the
Lieutenant.^    In Shropshire, by a similar blunder, the
whole proportion of the county's arms was delivered to
the Shrewsbury Volunteers, the last corps which came
forward to offer its services and, even so, under 600
strong.       The Secretary of State, being adjured to make
these Shrewsbury men disgorge their ill-gotten treasure,
declined in the name of peace and quietness to inter-
fere ; whereupon the commander of another corps of
1 800 men peremptorily demanded the muskets in order

to keep his men in a good humour.  And so the battle
raged in Salop, with the general result that every one
was aggrieved.* In Hertfordshire similar dissensions

     ^   I.D. vol. xxxi. Letter enclosed in L.L. Surrey, to S.S. loth
Sept. 1803.
     2                L.L. StafFs, to S.S. 26th Dec. 1803.
         Ibid. vol. xxix.
     3                                  20th Nov. 1803.
         Ibid. vol. ii. L.L. Berks, to S.S.
   * Ibid. vol. xxviii. L.L. Salop, to S.S. 31st Oct. 1803 ; Mr.

Kynaston Powell to S.S. loth Nov. 1803.
