II        COMPOSITION OF VOLUNTEERS                          95

The careful publication of this clause was of course the           »8o3.

work of mischief-makers          ;   and one of the Deputy-Lieu-
tenants drafted a short bill to declare such rules of
such Societies to be null and void. But it would need
a very long bill to guard against all the contrivances
imaginable by men who wish to shirk their duty towards
their country.
     I   pass next to the composition of the Volunteer
corps.     This of course varied greatly according to
locality.       When powerful magnates, such as the Duke of
Northumberland or the Duke of Bedford, enrolled their
tenants into one or more corps and provided them with
everything but arms, the procedure was simple.       The
great man summoned his people, and called upon all
who were able and willing to take service with him for
the King, under command of himself or of one of his
family.   Such a lead was readily followed, feudal
feeling and the example of the landlord being sufficiently
strong to rally every able-bodied man on the estate to
the ranks.    Lesser magnates in like fashion formed
their tenants into troops, companies, and squadrons, and
sometimes (but by no means always) amalgamated them
under the command of one of themselves into regiments
or battalions.           From the relative position of officers
and privates        in               was comparatively
                          these corps, there
little   difficultyenforcing discipline.
                         in                In the first
place the men were often of superior station and intelli-
gence.   In the second every one of them wished to
stand well with his landlord ; and even if the landlord
refrained from using the enormous powers which he
then enjoyed over his tenant, yet expulsion and liability
to be ballotted as a Militiaman, meaning as they did not
only personal inconvenience      but social degradation,
were sufficient deterrents from insubordination.
    But in cases where no individual's station marked him
out from among his fellows as the natural leader, and most
notably in the towns, the proceedings were uniformly as
follows         —
            A meeting of the citizens or parishioners was
            :



summoned, an individual was called to the chair, and
