II            VOLUNTEERS IN SCOTLAND                                    91

quota on foot and effective.       In Argyll more than half                   1803.
the quota was already enrolled in June ; Banff supplied
nearly its full contingent before the introduction of the
Levy en Masse Act ; Elgin in the same time had
furnished 480 out of the 780 assigned to her, and
Inverness 2540 out of 3320.            Dumbarton produced
two-thirds of her men in May and June, and had small
difficulty in enrolling the rest; Fife, Forfar, and Kincardine
could show half, or more than half, of their respective
quotas early in June. In Ayr voluntary enrolment soon
exceeded the demands of the Government ; though certain
parishes stood aloof, and a few positively refused any
service.    Ross also found few men before the Levy en
Masse Act compelled her to do so, and in Stirling
there was less forwardness than usual, some difficulty
being found in raising the allotted number before
the end of October.          In Linlithgow two-thirds of
the quota had been enrolled before the 26th of July;
and Nairn, Caithness, Peebles, Cromarty, and Suther-
land had furnished their full contingent before the end
of June. So it was also in Selkirk and in Roxburgh,
even though the Lieutenant gave preference to the
men who were less likely to be drawn for the Army of
Reserve. In Clackmannan no corps were accepted until
September, but on the other hand the whole contingent
was self-supporting, receiving no allowance whatever
from Government. Lanark added 300 Supernumeraries
to the 4473 privates which were due from her.             The
difficulties in Perth have already been mentioned, but
they did not prevent her from doing even more than
her duty, half of her Volunteers having come forward
in time to receive the June Allowances.       Lastly, Renfrew
had over four thousand offers from which to choose
her quota of 2424.        Altogether the record would be
creditable to North Britain, were we not compelled
to bear in mind that she was extremely backward in
producing any Militia.^
     ^   Returns   at   Windsor Castle.   LD. vol.   i.   L.L. Aberdeen, to
S.S. 8th Sept.; L.L. Argyll and Bute, to S.S. 17th Aug. ;         L.L. Ayr,
