        94        REASONS FOR LUKEWARMNESS                                chap.

1803.   suspicion does not appear to have prevailed elsewhere
        except in the Isle of Man, where the people disliked
        the combination of oath and red coat as much as in
        Scotland.   " They will be difficult to persuade of their
        error," wrote the Lieutenant-Governor, " and even if
        persuaded they will be undisciplined."   The Manxmen
        may be pardoned for their ignorance, which was re-
        ported to be excessive ; but it is extraordinary that
        their misgivings should have been shared by men living
        within twenty miles of London.^
            In Lancashire, where the deficiency was less than
        400 out of a quota of 14,600, the fault seems to have
        been due chiefly to the blunderingof the Government in
        the matter of regulations and arms, for the people came
        forward with enthusiasm enough ; and the same holds
        good of Staffordshire, where the deficiency amounted
        to over 700 on a quota of 6800.         In Warwickshire
        the Lieutenant wrote that he could not trust arms in
        the hands of many men who came forward ; but to
        show that he was not lacking in zeal, he offered to
        subscribe £ 10,000 towards the cost of arming the loyal
        to which generous offer, astounding as it may appear,
        he received no answer.^ In Wiltshire and Northampton
        no particular cause for lukewarmness of patriotism can
        be traced. In Norfolk excessive jealousy of the different
        corps among themselves may have accounted for the
        fact that only 6900 Volunteers were forthcoming instead
        of 7254. But it is difficult to say what petty agencies
        may have affected the levy for good or for evil. In
        Salop the enrolment of Volunteers was checked for a
        time completely by the action of some Friendly Societies,
        founded for the support of the sick and infirm, whose
        rules contained a clause ordaining the expulsion of any
        member from the moment when he became a soldier.^
             1   I.D. vol. V. L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 31st July, 6th Oct. 1803 ;
        vol. xxi. Lt.-Gov. of     Man to S.S. 26th April 1803.
             2   Ibid. vol. xxxiii. L.L. Warwick, to S.S. 12th, 22nd, 25th Aug.
        1803.
             3 Ibid, vol. xxviii.   Salop, J.   Kynaston Powell to S.S. 17th July
        1803.
