II         REASONS FOR LUKEWARMNESS                               93

number lacking had increased from 300 to 800 owing                        1803.
to   the   persistent        of the larger parishes to
                        refusal
produce a man. It seems that the people had grown
suspicious over the 58 th section of the Levy en Masse
Act, which ordained that the men raised under that
Act could be attached to other regiments, whether
of Militia or Regulars, if called out for service. The
Duke of Richmond found exactly the same apprehen-
sion prevalent in Sussex, and was so nervous as to its
results that he urged the Government to proclaim that
the King would not enforce this particular section.  In
another section, the 54th, it was expressly laid down
that Volunteers should not in any circumstances be
placed in corps of Regulars ; but Yorke as usual chose
to maintain, for as long as he dared, that this applied
only to men enrolled under the Volunteer Act of 1802.
The folly of leaving so important a point for a moment
doubtful is obvious ; but such was the way of Adding-
ton's Ministry.^
     In Buckinghamshire the failure in Volunteers seems
to have been due mainly to lack of men, for the county
had always done its duty admirably both towards
Militia and Regulars, and had before June mustered
1000 Yeomanry. Moreover, the Grenvilles, who mainly
controlled all local business, were most zealous in
military matters.   The quota of Volunteers required of
itwas 3594 ; and the Militia lists contained in all but
9900 names. Strangely enough, however, many of the
inhabitants were troubled with ignorant fears lest the
oath of allegiance required from every Volunteer should
 bind them to some unknown military service.    Lord
 Grenville went in person to argue with them and to
 reassure them, but they would not be convinced
 wherefore, lest such an example should spread, he at
 once called up the peccant parishes to undergo com-
 pulsory training under the Levy en Masse Act.   This
    1 I.D. vol. vi. L.L. Cambs, to S.S. nth Sept.; vol. xli. C.G.M.

 Cambs, to S.S. i6th Sept. 1804 ; vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 23rd
 and 30th Aug. 1803.
