        92        VOLUNTEERS IN ENGLAND                              chap.

1803.        In England there was by no means the same
        uniform eagerness to volunteer, and in some parts
        there was a positive reluctance.   Speaking generally, it
        may be said that a few counties, notably Anglesey,
        Middlesex, Brecon, Monmouth, Bedford, Devon, and
        Kent, came forward with the same enthusiasm as the
        best counties of Scotland.   Kent, indeed, whose natural
        quota was just under 8000 men, wished for her own
        safety to raise 15,000, and actually raised 10,000.    It
        is, however, noteworthy that the Mayor of Canterbury

        at first refused to call a meeting to form a Volunteer
        corps for that city, one citizen averring that there was
        no occasion to arm the people, as the Government
        would send soldiers enough.^ The Cinque Ports, under
        the leadership of Pitt, brought forward 3500 men.
        Devon, whose quota was 9000, produced over 16,000 ;
        and the rest of the maritime counties, from considera-
        tions of their own security, generally obtained permission
        to  enrol additional men.   Lancashire, Norfolk, and
        Somerset, however, were exceptions, having failed to
        make up even the quota required of them. Middlesex,
        with London, Westminster and the Tower Hamlets,
        turned out about 35,000 men.      For the rest, Derby,
        Hereford,    Nottinghamshire,   Radnor,    Shropshire,
        Worcester, and the East Riding of Yorkshire hand-
        somely brought forward more than their complement.
        Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire,
        Stafford, Warwick, Wiltshire, and the West Riding
        of York showed deficiencies more or less great ; and
        the remainder produced their quota or thereabout.
            Of the counties that failed, Cambridge seems to
        have been the worst, though her deficiency amounted
        to only 300 wanting out of 2886.      Her Volunteers
        gave a deal of trouble; and by September 1804 the

        to S.S, 9th Sept.; vol. iv. D.Ls. Berwick, to S.S. 7th Sept.; L.L.
        Haddington, to S.S. 23rd Sept.; vol. viii. L.L. Kinross, to S.S. 24th
        Aug.; vol. xii. Edinburgh returns of 9th Aug.; vol. xvii. L.L. Wig-
        town, to S.S. 25th Aug. 1803.
            1 I.D. vol. xviii. L.L. Kent, to S.S. 15th Aug. 1803.
