        98                PERMANENT DUTY                      chap.

1803.   efficiency,such was not the case when the direction
        of affairs lay in the hands of the great middle class,
        which, with all its merits and all its virtues, seems
        unable to crush down its imperious instinct to give
        nothing without expecting something in return. Under
        its guidance the associations broke down in all direc-

        tions, and there was not only insubordination but
        occasionally sheer chaos.
             To understand the story thoroughly it is necessary
        briefly to mention a further proceeding     of the Govern-
        ment   towards   the Volunteers in  1803,  after its decision

        to  accept  the whole  of the corps  that had  been  offered.
        Its first step was, in the circumstances, eminently wise
        and prudent.       Napoleon's preparations, though as a
        matter of fact hopelessly backward and misdirected,
        were reported to be far advanced ; and there was reason
        to fear that the local forces in the maritime counties
        might at any time during the winter be called into the
        field.     Preference had rightly been given to these
        counties in the distribution of arms ; and early in
        October Ministers determined to invite such corps in
        England as were ready and willing to come out on
        permanent pay and duty within their own counties and
        districts.    The defence of Newcastle in particular was
        recommended for special attention, and the Lieutenant
        was asked to ascertain if any of the corps within reason-
        able distance of that city were prepared to assemble
        there, relieving each other successively either in fractions
        or as complete battalions after a fortnight's duty. " The
        King," added the Circular, " can invite the Volunteers to
        do so ; he cannot compel th.Qm except in case of invasion, or
        appearance of invasion on the coast."         The response
                                                      -^




        to the invitation was for the most part hearty ; and in
        the winter of 1803 the Volunteers had a chance of
        showing their quality.
           The signs of indiscipline in that year were relatively
        unimportant, though they brought into glaring relief the
        defects of the Government's measures.    Thus, under the
                      1   Circular to L.Ls. 12th Oct. 1803.
