        96         VOLUNTEER ASSOCIATIONS                      chap.

1803.   after a   solemn preamble setting forth the ambition and
        the vices of the hated Bonaparte, a series of resolutions
        was passed that an Association for the defence of the
        locality should be formed, that subscriptions      should be
        invited, and that a   committee should be organised for
        the general direction of   its   affairs.   Then followed the
        rules of the Association, which included the conditions
        of service and the regulations for internal economy and
        discipline.  The Committee did not necessarily include
        none but officers of the corps. On the contrary, it
        consisted commonly of the largest subscribers who, with
        sound commercial instinct, claimed an influence propor-
        tioned to their contribution.   It was the great ambition
        of every Association to be, if possible, self-supporting,
        to the end that it might be self-controlled.   In fact the
        Associations were, or aspired to be, simply clubs formed
        for purposes of defence, on the principles of equality
        that govern social clubs ; that is to say, that the Com-
        mittee was elected ; that the officers also were either
        elected or chosen by the Committee; and that the
        general proceedings of the Committee, together with
        any matters of extraordinary importance, were subjected
        to the criticism of General Meetings, ordinary and
        extraordinary.
            There were, of course, cases, notably among the
        metropolitan corps, where the system worked well.
        Such corps were composed of men, indeed of gentlemen,
        to whom self-suppression for a common object came as
        an instinct, and who thought it no shame, but rather a
        proud duty, to yield obedience to their fellows. The
        rules of such corps, and indeed of many other corps
        besides them, were exceedingly drastic ; the need for
        vesting all power of discipline in the commanding officer
        was generally recognised ; and there was always sufficient
        moral support in the mass of the regiment to enable
        him to enforce the rules without hesitation.
             A few samples of such rules will not be out of place.
        Among those of the Monmouthshire Cavalry, subject
        to the Duke of Beaufort, it was enacted that no member
