        102    INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                              chap.

1803.   he was compounded chiefly of vanity and egoism.^
        The triumph of such a man upon such a question was
        the worst possible example for self-governing corps ;
        and in the winter and spring of 1803-4 there was a
        succession of very discreditable incidents.
            The St. Pancras Volunteer Association was governed
        by a *' Military Committee " with undefined powers,
        the said Committee consisting of three officers and
        twelve     privates,    with a    private   for   president.     An
        inferior  mechanic and a disreputable attorney, by fre-
        quenting night clubs and public-houses in company
        with the lowest class of privates, obtained election as
        officers, and therewith demanded for the Committee the
        control of the subscriptions, which by law were vested
        in the Commanding Officer.         The Attorney-General,
        being consulted upon the point, declared that beyond
        all question the control of the subscriptions lay with the

        Commanding Officer, and that the legality of the Mili-
        tary Committee was very doubtful. Upon this, without
        consulting the Colonel, the malcontents summoned a
        general meeting of the corps, and after a scene of
        scandalous indeceny persuaded forty-five members to
        sign a protest denying, in the face of the law, that the
        funds were vested in the Colonel.           The case was
        examined by the Deputy-Lieutenants, who recom-
        mended the expulsion of the offenders, but blamed the
        Colonel also for his unconciliatory bearing. On receipt of
        this report the Secretary of State wrote a letter annulling
        the appointment of the Military Committee, and the
        rules as to election of officers by the corps. This letter
        the Colonel read on parade, and at the close called upon
        the five ringleaders to fall out.       Several voices from the
        ranks answered,        *'
                                    One and all, one and all," and the
        Colonel, after manoeuvring the regiment for an hour,
            ^ As a   Colonel of Volunteers he was helpless without a
        card to recall to him his words of command, and very inefficient
        with one. But Lord Ellenborough, afterwards Lord Chief Justice,
        even, with the aid of chalked marks upon his boots, could never
        remember to step off with the appointed foot. Campbell's Lives of
        the Chancellors^ vi. 547.
