II        VOLUNTEERS' RIGHT TO RESIGN                               loi

Association Volunteers, or " Devil's Own," immediately                      1803.
took the field against the Law-Officers, and in a public
letter to the newspapers upheld precisely the opposite
contention.   This letter, with marvellous rapidity, made
its way all over England, and put new heart into the

insubordinate.         In   Devon     it   caused great agitation ;
and in two different corps men who under their regi-
mental rules had been summoned for absenting them-
selves from exercise, pleaded that they meant to resign.
In Yorkshire likewise Erskine's flowery speeches and
letters were read with avidity, so pleased were the
Volunteers to find yet one more opening for the evasion
of discipline.^    Meanwhile, however, the Secretary of
State's faith in the Law-Officers was beginning to totter ;
and he actually wrote to one of the Devonian com-
mandants that he had better allow all men who did not
choose to stay in his corps to go about their business,
" If there are not Volunteers enough, the classes will be
called up," he added, doubtless wishing in vain that he
had never allowed the nation to be trained to arms at all
except under the Levy en Masse Act.         But it was too
late.   The   question  was  presently brought  before the
Court of    King's  Bench,  which  decided that Volunteers
had undoubtedly the right in law to resign whenever
they chose, though not to the prejudice of regimental
regulations to the contrary.
    In Norfolk the effect of this decision was startling.
Men sent in their kits and arms from all quarters, without
taking the trouble to obtain a proper discharge ; and
the officers, to check the evil, begged that the seceders
might be called out under the Levy en Masse Act.^ But
the mischief was by no means confined to displays of
this kind.    Such a defeat of Government by a popular
hero of Erskine's type was in principle extremely bad
for discipline ; for with all his ability as an advocate,

   1 I.D. vol. xlv. Devon, Lord Rolle to S.S. 24th Jan.; Lt.-Gen.

Simcoe to S.S., 4th Feb. 1804 ; vol. Ixvii. V.L. Yorks, to S.S. 3rd
Feb. 1804.
     2   Ibid. vol. Iviii. Norfolk, P. L. Powell to S.S. 24th March 1804.
