          I04              INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                        chap.

1803-4.        In Lambeth there was a Loyal Lambeth Corps,
          wherein the right of electing officers was supposed to be
          vested in such members as had clothed and equipped
          themselves.    The original officers had been nominated
          by a Civil Committee, whose members, no doubt, had
          given liberal subscriptions ; but the Commanding Officer
          presently appointed a Military Committee, consisting of
          officers, non-commissioned officers and privates, for the
          regulation of military, as distinguished from financial,
          affairs.           A
                       vacancy for a Lieutenant occurred, and the
          Civil Committee recommended several persons for elec-
          tion.  The corps, ignoring the recommendations, elected
          a   man not mentioned by the Civil Committee, whose
          name was then submitted, without any details of the
          circumstances, to the Lord-Lieutenant.                     Five ensigns,
          feeling themselves                 aggrieved, thereupon     addressed   a
          remonstrance to both committees through the Com-
          manding Officer, who, after expostulating with them in
          vain, laid the letter before the Military Committee,
          which decided against them.           The ensigns then
          threatened to appeal to the parish, when the Command-
          ing Officer invoked the Lieutenant's authority to
          prohibit publication of the appeal ; and the whole body
          of the officers was appointed a court to inquire into the
          matter.     Unfortunately, I have been unable to trace the
          further career of this interesting corps.^
               Later in the same year a company of Camberwell
          Volunteers, with the connivance of their officers, held a
          mutinous and disorderly meeting, subversive of all
          discipline.    It was at once disbanded by the Vice-
          Lieutenant, when the men offered themselves to a
          South wark corps and were readily accepted.
              But such occurrences were by no means confined
          to London and its vicinity.        Major-General Jeffery
          Amherst, after thirty years' service in the Army, in an
          evil moment for himself, yielded to patriotic enthusiasm
          and took command, as Major, of the Evesham Volun-
                      1    I.D. vol. Ixiv. V.L. Surrey, to S.S. 26th Jan. 1804.
                  2       Ibid. vol. Ixiv. V.L. Surrey, to S.S. nth Aug. 1804.
