        loo       VOLUNTEERS' RIGHT TO RESIGN chap.
1803.   subalterns to withdraw their letter, under pain of instant
        dismissal, forwarded              it   to the Secretary of State,        who
        likewise contented himself with rebuking the writers
        severely.   Thereupon twelve officers of the corps
        resigned on the spot, and doubtless made the county ring
        with the fame of their spirited behaviour.^ In yet another
        case a sergeant of Volunteers refused to collect the fines
        imposed on privates by the rules of the corps, abused his
        officers, and even threatened them with his pike.                         He
        was brought up before a Justice and fined five shillings
        in pursuance of the Act    after which he calmly sent in
                                               ;


        his kit and retired into private life.^ " Discipline will
        be injured if every discontented man can thus discharge
        himself," commented the writer of this memorandum ;
        and his opinion was shared by many other officers.
            There was, indeed, a sharp controversy as to this same
        right of Volunteers to quit the service at their pleasure
        before the conclusion of peace, which, until decided, led
        to much trouble.     The question was one which had not
        been anticipated by Ministers, otherwise they would
        undoubtedly have settled it by Act of Parliament, and
        settled it, moreover, in the negative.     They referred it,
        however, to the Law-Officers of the Crown, Spencer
        Perceval and Manners-Sutton, who decided against the
        right of resignation.    " If," said Perceval afterwards in
        the House of Commons, " Volunteers enter into an
        engagement, as undoubtedly they do, they ought not to
         be able to renounce it at all times except at the period of
         actual invasion." ^ This, on the face of it, appeared to be
         common sense ; and the opinion was at once circulated *
         to the Lieutenants without a doubt that it would be
         final.  But a champion of the right of resignation
         arose in the person of Thomas Erskine, the future
         Chancellor, who being at the time Colonel of the Law

              1   I.D.   vol.   1.   V.L. Hereford,   to   S.S. 28th   Jan.; Colonel   J..
         Matthews to S.S. 6th April 1804.
              2   Ibid. vol. xviii.    Kent,   Memo, of 27th Dec. 1803.
              3   H.D. Perceval's speech, 8th Feb. 1804.
              *   Circular of 7th Oct. 1803.
