II        INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                              103

left the dismissal of the ringleaders to the Adjutant.                  1803-4.
Both parties then appealed with much mutual recrimi-
nation to the Lord-Lieutenant and the Secretary of
State ; to which the Lieutenant, being a sensible man,
replied by recommending that the corps should be
disbanded.^
    The Royal Southwark Volunteers, commanded by
Tierney, the politician, distinguished itself in somewhat
sinilar fashion.  The Colonel had rejected a sergeant
chosen by the men of one company in favour of a
candidate selected by himself; and against this the
company handed in resolutions of protest, as also against
his  appointment of an officer without first consulting
then. Tierney at once paraded the company and
ordered it to deliver up its arms, which the men did
without a murmur, being ignorant of the meaning of
subordination rather than insubordinate.^
     In another London corps, the North Britons, a
corporal refused to be silent on parade, or to obey an
officer who bade him hold his tongue, on the ground
that the officer in question belonged to a different
company. The corporal then addressed the following
letter to his Commanding Officer        :




        —
   Sir I am desired by several privates in my company to
acquaint you it is their determination to withdraw themselves
unless you immediately order Leake ^ to resign.    I think he
ought to bless his stars I did not bayonet him   —   but, damn him,
I have done with him   —  Yours, etc.                P.   Wood.

       And the Commanding Officer, instead of turning
Mr.  Wood out of the corps and taking measures to
have him drawn by the ballot, reported the case to the
Secretary of State in utter helplessness and despair.*
    1 I.D. vol. Ivi. Middlesex, Report of 5th Jan.; CO. St. Pancras

Vol. to S.S. 30th Jan. ; L.L. Middlesex, to S.S. 30th Jan.; CO. St.
Pancras Vol. to R. Pole-Carew, 19th March 1804.
    2 Ibid. vol. Ivi. Tierney to S.S. loth Jan. 1804.

    ^ I  take Leake to have been the officer who ordered the
writer of the letter to be silent.
    * I.D. vol. Ivi. Lt.-Col. Alex. Davison to S.S. Jan. 27th.
