II         INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                               99
Levy en Masse Act, provision had been made for fining                     1803.
men who neglected to attend their drills, but none for
imprisoning them in default of payment.     The result
was that early in the day a Volunteer in Hampshire
attended the first day's drill, for which his Commanding
Officer had provided a dinner, and refused to come out
again.    He was fined to the extent of thirty-six shillings,
but, having no property,snapped his fingers at the penalty
and remained master of the situation.^     The Lieutenant
of Gloucestershire was confronted with exactly the same
difficulty, and complained that men with no property
to distrain upon were uncontrollable.                  "A
                                                  force," he
said, *' which depends upon the good-humour of several
hundred illiterate persons cannot last long." ^         The
other cases recorded in 1 803 seem to have arisen out of
the changes which distinguished the system initiated in
 1802 from that which obtained between 1794 and 1801.
In Devon during the month of July a battalion refused to
work, except in separate companies under sergeants of
their own election, as in the last war.     They repented
very speedily, for the Lieutenant disbanded them on the
spot, and swept every man into the ballot for the Army
of Reserve ; but this salutary example was of course
unknown except in the immediate district, and insubordi-
nation was not always so well-timed as to bring on itself
immediate punishment.^       In another case, in Hereford-
shire, it was the officers who showed a mutinous spirit ;
a number of subalterns protesting very discourteously to
the Vice-Lieutenant against the action of the Command-
ing Officer who had recommended a stranger to be his
Major, instead of allowing promotion to go by seniority
within the battalion.     The real grievance was that the
Colonel had hitherto consulted his officers before making
any such appointments, and on this occasion had omitted
to do so.    The Vice-Lieutenant, instead of ordering the
     1   I.D. vol. viii. Cornwall (misplaced letter), Lawrence Reynolds
toV.L. Hants, 13th Nov. 1803.
     2   Ibid. vol. 1. L.L.   Gloucester, to S.S. 15th Jan. 1804.
     8   Ibid. vol. X. L.L. Devon, to S.S. i6th July 1803.
