II        VOLUNTEER ASSOCIATIONS' RULES                               97

 of the troop should leave it unless he produced a sub-                        1803.
 stitute, on pain of a fine of twenty guineas ; that no
 horse should measure less than fourteen hands two
 inches ; and that no horse once approved should be
 exchanged, except for a better, under penalty of a fine
 of one guinea.^ In the Isle of Ely Association it was
laid down that the members should be householders;
that officers should be recommended by the Associa-
tion to the Lord-Lieutenant ; that the majority should
be entitled to reject any proposed member ; and that
the Government should supply arms only.^         The regu-
lations of the Gravesend Rifle Corps provided that
every private and non-commissioned officer should
subscribe five shillings a quarter, and every officer half
a guinea a quarter, the officers and non-commissioned
officers being elected by ballot of the members.^         In
Clapham the Association resolved to form two companies
of infantry and one or more of cavalry ; the officers and
men to serve without pay and the whole to be governed
by a military committee of twenty, elected by the members.
Zachary Macaulay commanded one of the companies,
and doubtless exercised it on Clapham Common under
the eyes of his marvellous little boy Tom, who at three
years old was probably ready with historical parallels
for the transformation of so staid a citizen into a soldier.
The Battersea Association was formed on much the
same lines, the Committee supplying uniforms out of a                      .




general subscription of the parish.^ But the variations
of rules and terms of service could be indefinitely
multiplied, the Government having taken no precau-
tions before the passing of the Levy en Masse Act to
secure uniformity.
         But   if   associationsof enlightened gentlemen and
corps of tenants             commanded by landlords were
comparatively successful            in   securing    discipline     and
     1   /.Z>. vol. iv. L.L. Brecon and Monmouth, to S.S. 2nd Jan. 1804.
     2   Ibid. vol. vi. Cambridge, Owen Gray to S.S. 30th July 1803.
     8   Ibid. vol. xviii. Kent, Regulations dated 24th July 1803.
     ^   Ibid. vol. xxxi. Surrey, 21st July and ist Aug. 1803.
                                                                H
