II      INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                          109

     The first call upon Volunteers for permanent duty              1803-4.
led also to considerable insubordination, and fortunately
to one very salutary example.      In Cambridgeshire the
appeal for this service was a failure.  Few of the com-
manding officers took the trouble to answer at all ; only
four thought that their men would be willing to come
out, and of the four one doubted the success of embody-
ing his corps outside the limits of his parish.      The
company at Little SwafFham could not even refuse to
go on permanent duty without riotous and disorderly
conduct ; and the West Wrathing company declined
either to drill at home or to march out to drill else-
where.   Both were disbanded ; and by September 1 804
Cambridge had increased the number lacking to her
quota of Volunteers from 300 to 800.^ In Caermarthen
one regiment mutinied while on permanent duty, but
the fact was not reported by the Commanding Officer,
and would not have been known at headquarters had
not some of the officers favoured the Secretary of State
with a criticism on the judgment of a court of inquiry
upon some of their fellows.^ In Dorset two companies
marched to Dorchester for permanent duty, but declined,
in spite of remonstrances and a strong feeling against
them, to proceed to Weymouth. The Lieutenant was
weak enough to write to the Secretary of State for
orders, instead of disbanding them with ignominy in
their county town, but in due time they were sent
about their business.^
    In Devon the Sidmouth Artillery Volunteers came
out with others on permanent duty, and were warned
that while so engaged they were subject to the same
discipline as the Army.  One man appeared on parade
an hour late, asked his officer for leave of absence, and
abused him violently on being refused.        The officer
ordered some men to take charge of him, but they

   1 I.D. vol, xH. C.G.M. Cambs, to S.S. 15th April, i6th Sept.;

L.L. to S.S. 13 th, 23rci May 1804.
   2 Ibid. vol. Ixxi. Maj.-Gen. Gascoigne to S.S. 23rd July 1805.

   3 Ibid. vol. xlvi. L.L. Dorset, to S.S. 7th, 12th May 1804.
