          io6     INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS chap.
1803-4.   refused to do so he      was dismissed.       Next day the
          privates of his company met, and after duly debating
          the conduct of the Commanding Officer, passed, with
          nine dissentients, resolutions that they could not attend
          another muster until their comrade was reinstated, and
          that it was ungentlemanlike for officers of one company
          to interfere with men of another.       These resolutions
          they handed to their Captain to be laid before the
          Colonel, together with an expression of their confidence
          in the said Captain.   That individual, who, though fully
          cognisant of what was going forward, had not moved a
          finger to prevent it, thereupon approached the Colonel
          and he, good, easy man, offered to refer the affair to a
          General Committee of the regiment, though he delayed
          to do so for some hours, in the hope that matters would
          right themselves spontaneously.     On the following day,
          however, the men who had held the meeting printed
          and published a full account of the proceedings,
          announcing at the close that no alternative remained to
          them but to resign. The entire city of Bath, at that
          time by no means the most orderly in the kingdom,
          was stirred to its foundations ; and the Lieutenant, for
          reasons best known to himself, referred the matter to
          the Secretary of State. That functionary, more in sorrow
          than anger, rebuked the original offender, who then
          apologised to the officer.    The men who had held the
          meeting also apologised ; and, in fact, there seems to have
          been a carnival of apology, without, however, any remark-
          able benefit to the discipline of the Bath Volunteers.^
              In the East Riding of Yorkshire the officers of the
          Derwent Dale Volunteers resigned in a body, their
          grievance being that their Commanding Officer never
          convened them for consultation upon any subject relat-
          ing to the regiment.     So well satisfied were they as to
          the legitimacy of their complaint that they urged it
          without concealment in a letter to the Lord-Lieutenant,
          and were somewhat taken aback when he disbanded the
             1 l.D. Somerset, vol. liiii. Statement of 21st Aug. O.C. Bath

          Volunteers to L.L. 8th Sept. 1803.
