          io8     INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                      chap.

1803-4.   company, whereupon the ensign brandished his sword in
          the intruder's face, and retired with twenty of his men to
          a cask of ale hard by, from whence, after further refresh-
          ment, they marched off the ground. A court of inquiry
          was held, when it appeared that the ensign and five of
          the ringleaders were drunk on this occasion         indeed,
                                                              ;


          one of them, bent upon maintaining his character, was
          drunk when he came before the court. The chief
          offenders were dismissed, but to no purpose, for the
          company only repeated its misconduct a few weeks
          later, and was then disbanded.^
               In Cheshire there was trouble with the Nantwich
          troop of Volunteer Cavalry, which refused to go out
          for ten days' training or for eighty-five days' drill in
          the   year.^   In Yorkshire the Wakefield Volunteers
          declined to obey an officer not of their own election,
          and nominated a Committee of officers and privates to
          give such directions as the privates thought proper ;
          but they came to their senses after the dismissal of their
          leaders, and submitted to officers of the Lieutenant's
          appointment.^     At Ripon there were scandals in a
          Volunteer corps which occupied the pens of the clerks
          at the Home Office for months.         Even in Scotland
          there was one corps at Falkirk which joined issue with
          the Lord-Lieutenant over the right to elect its own
          officers, and threatened to resign unless indulged with
          its own way.     The Lieutenant commanded them to
          parade without arms, ordered in another corps with
          muskets loaded with ball cartridge, and resolved to
          disband them on the spot unless they repented.        The
          General, however, deprecated any display of force and
          contrived to bring the regiment to reason ; the entire
          trouble being due to a few turbulent men who were
          disarmed and dismissed on parade.*

             1 I.D. vol. xli. M. Brackenbury to L.L. Cambs, 12th April;

          L.L. Cambs, to S.S. 4th May 1804.
             2 Uid. vol. xlii. Cheshire, L.L. to S.S. i8th Feb. 1804.
             3 Ibid. vol. Ixvii. Yorks W.R. V.L. to S.S. 19th Jan. 1804.

             ^ Ibid. vol. xliii. L.L. Stirling, to S.S. 2nd Feb. 1804.
