11               VOLUNTEERS' CLOTHING                                      115

either       broke down entirely or begged for the August                          1803-4.
Allowances.    From that instant their ultimate dis-
appearance was only a question of time.    Subscriptions
were forthcoming in the first moments of excitement and
enthusiasm, but after a short time the excitement palled
and the enthusiasm waned. Moreover, expenses tended
to increase rather than the contrary.    The regulation
that all infantry should be clothed in scarlet naturally
caused such a demand for scarlet cloth that the price
rose appreciably.^   Again, the extravagance of a few
wealthy corps set an example of gorgeous raiment for
the men, and in particular for the bandsmen, which
regimental emulation and masculine vanity soon con-
spired to render infectious.    Many a subscription-list
was squandered in absurdly expensive clothes and head-
dresses ; and the exultation of the Volunteers in their
plumes and trappings is, after a century's interval,
positively humiliating to contemplate.        Scores     I                 —
believe that I might say hundreds           of Volunteer—
officers all over England and Scotland called in the
painter's aid to immortalise their " regimentals " and
their martial bearing.^ Every one of the London corps,
whether by its own act or by the enterprise of some
print-seller, obtained commemoration at the hands of
some limner of fashion-plates, and has been visible in the
windows of print-shops ever since. The likeness even
of Pitt himself, whose scorn of frippery was hardly
exceeded by his deep love of his country, was tendered
to the public in the full uniform of the Cinque Ports
Volunteers, mounted on a prancing charger and flourish-
ing a sword ; while for pendant there was off^ered a
similar presentation of the vain and ridiculous Erskine.
   All this was very well for a few months in London           —
and a few more rich towns for even longer but then              —
     1   I.D. vol. ix. L.L. Denbigh, to S.S. i6th Aug. 1803.
     2   I   speak   as   a collector, for several   years   past, of   engraved
portraits of distinguished officers of the Army.         To such a collector
the portraits of the illustrious obscure, many of them of great merit
AS works of art, are little short of a curse.
