          112            VOLUNTEER OFFICERS                             chap.

1803-4,   that agricultural labourers of a great             many    counties
          both    England and in Scotland changed their master
                 in
          annually at Michaelmas or Martinmas, shifting into
          new parishes and consequently taking service in new
          Volunteer corps, or at any rate in different companies of
          the same corps.     As Parliament met in November it
          was necessary to prepare the returns of the Volunteers
          for the estimates and for the perusal of the House
          immediately before this annual change ; and hence the
          returns were never more than approximately, if even
          approximately, correct.
              As regards the officers of the Volunteers, the reader will
          have gained some idea already from certain of the instances
          of indiscipline.   Taken ^s a body they were probably
          not very efficient, though of course there were excep-
          tions.   It is worthy of remark that many officers of
          high rank in the Army gave their services willingly to
          their local corps.    The case of General Amherst has
          already been cited ; and again, there were in Sussex
          alone Lieutenant- General Whyte, who had held an
          independent command over nearly ten thousand men on
          active service, Lord Gage, Colonels Newton and Crosbie,
          and the Duke of Richmond. This advantage, how-
          ever, was not without its drawbacks.       The Government
          early in 1804 appointed inspecting field-officers from
          the half-pay list to every county for the Volunteers,
          and, as these held the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel only,
          there was some discontent among such men as those
          above named at being placed under the orders of an
          officer of inferior rank.       The Commander-in-Chief,
          however, set his foot at once and firmly upon any
          complaints of this kind. " While you are in the Volun-
          teer service," he wrote to Colonel Crosbie, " you cannot
          avail yourself of your Army rank, not even if your
          corps is on permanent duty and serving with other
          corps." ^
              Occasionally an officer of the Regulars would give
              1 I.D. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 3rd Oct. 1803 ; vol. Ixv.

          Sussex, D.A.G. to Col. Crosbie, 5th April 1804.
