II              VOLUNTEER OFFICERS                               113

enormous time and trouble gratuitously to the improve-                  1803-4.
ment of the Volunteers in the neighbourhood of his
quarters ^ but for the most part corps were dependent
           ;

on such few half-pay officers as they could collect under
the regulations, and upon their adjutants.   Good adju-
tants, again, were not very easy to procure, as is
usually the case in time of war ; and the best of whom
record remains was a man of fifty-two years' service.
He had passed through the whole of the American War
as a private in the loth Foot, with many wounds ; he
had then served as sergeant-major for between twenty
and thirty years in the same regiment, had finally
received a commission, and after yet another ten years
as an officer, had retired, only to emerge, still possessing
the vigour and activity of youth, to be the soul and
the mainstay of a Volunteer corps.^ Such men, how-
ever, were rare.    In many parts of Wales adjutants
were especially difficult to find, for unless they could
speak Welsh they were useless.^ Indeed officers of any
kind were so scarce in some counties of the Principality
that the Lieutenant of Denbigh declared it to be im-
possible to find     enough for the Volunteers unless the
clergy received commissions.      With this view he sub-
mitted the names of three reverend gentlemen for a
single gazette, having first received the sanction of their
diocesan ; and was greatly disappointed when their
services were not accepted.     In Rutland also the Lord-
Lieutenant urged that a parson should be posted Lieu-
tenant, as every single gentleman in the country was
already absorbed by some corps or another.*       But the
Secretary of State set his face on principle against the
drawing of a red coat over a cassock, and the Church,
as far as the Volunteers were concerned, remained
restricted to spiritual warfare.

     J.D. vol. V. L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 28th Oct. 1803.
     1

     Ibid. vol. Ixvi. Maj.-Gen. Amherst to S.S. nth Feb. 1804.
     2

   3 Ibid. vol. Iv. L.L. Montgomery, to S.S. 8th March 1804.

   * Ibid. vol. ix. L.L. Denbigh, to S.S. 20th Nov. 1803; vol. xxvii.

L.L. Rutland, to S.S. 17th Oct. 1803.
                                                             I
