           no               A SALUTARY EXAMPLE                         chap.

1803-4.   declined, one of them saying that he knew the rules of
          the Volunteers and that "he would be damned if he would
          take the prisoner to the guard-room."          The officer
          thereupon seized the first offender by the collar and
          dragged him off, fighting furiously all the way, while
          the second mutineer harangued the populace and tried
          to stir up a riot.    Matters became serious ; the local
          magistrates were feeble ; and it was at last necessary to
          send for an escort of the Army of Reserve to bring in
          the prisoners.     But now the case was taken up by
          stronger hands.      The two men were tried by regi-
          mental court-martial and sentenced, the one to 150
          lashes, the other to 1 00 lashes, and both to be drummed
          out.    The Commanding Officer rightly and wisely
          reduced the punishment to thirty lashes and twenty
          lashes, but the drumming out was performed with all
          due ceremony ; and the effect was good.      " The
                                                   "
          Sidmouth company," wrote General Simcoe, consider-
          ing     all   circumstances   —the   village politics, the tea-table
          interferences, the         want of energy in the magistrates
          have behaved tolerably well.      Thirteen resignations
          have taken place (out of a full strength of 269) ; and
          two of these wished to withdraw their resignations but
          were not allowed."^
              It may be asked whether it were not an indignity
          to resort to the lash in the case of the Volunteers.
          The answer is that, with the exception of some of the
          corps from the larger towns, the ranks were filled
          chiefly with ordinary labouring men, that is to say, with
          the same class as supplied the rank and file of the
          Army. There are no statistics to show actually that
          this was so, but there are casual allusions which prove
          that it was true of Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire,
          Cornwall, Denbigh, Gloucestershire, Middlesex, Norfolk,
          Radnor, Stafford, Sussex, and Yorkshire in England,
          and of Lanark and Ross in Scotland, so that it would
          be reasonable to conclude that it was not otherwise in
              ^   I.D.   vol. xlv.   Lt.-Gen. Simcoe to S.S. 23rd March, 12th
          -April ; L.L. Devon, to S.S.     27th March 1804.
