II           INDISCIPLINE OF VOLUNTEERS                                         107

regiment "without regret, owing to their unmilitary                                    1803-4.
behaviour." ^
     In Gloucester two companies of Volunteers were
formed at Wotton-under-Edge, under the direction of
a Committee which undertook to provide, not for its
finances, but for its support and for making the neces-
sary regulations. The Committee consisted of a Magis-
trate, who was chairman, two clothiers, a doctor (none
of them Volunteers), and the officers of the corps ; and
the chairman was the person who had recommended
the officers for appointment by the Lord-Lieutenant.
One day on parade a lieutenant addressed some con-
temptuous words to an ensign, who replied by challeng-
ing him to mortal combat.       The Committee took the
matter up, and recommended to the Lieutenant the
dismissal of the ensign, who was duly gazetted out.
The non-commissioned officers thereupon drew up an
address to the General commanding the district, pro-
testing against the ensign's dismissal as highly arbitrary
and contrary to the rules of the corps. It is noteworthy
that of 108 signatories to this document, 37 were unable
to write their names.   The case is curious as an example
of a Volunteer corps appealing to a military chief against
the action of its own Committee.       But in truth they
would appeal to any one in order to get their own way.^
     In Cambridgeshire there was an extremely interest-
ing corps, in which one company fell at variance with
the Colonel because he objected to their drinking in the
ranks when at drill.     The Colonel appealed to the
officers of the company, who declined to intervene,
saying that the practice was usual ; and one of the men,
having finished his draught, stripped off his coat, rolled
up his sleeves, and doubling his fists challenged his
Colonel to fight him.    Meanwhile another officer came
forward to remonstrate with the ensign of the erring

    1 I.D. vol.            xciii.   L.L.   Yorks, E.R.   to   S.S.   29th Sept., 5th
Oct. 1805.
     2   Ibid. vol.   1.   L.L. to S.S. 3rd Jan.; Richard Nelmes to L.L. 6th
April 1804.
