          114             VOLUNTEER OFFICERS                         chap.

1803-4.          Iri   Scotland, too, there was   a   dearth   of   officers,
          chiefly owing to lack of wealthy men. In Ross the
          Volunteers numbered under 1700 rank and file, but the
          Commandants found it impossible to get men to lead
          them. A few came forward at first under the idea that
          the menace of invasion would at once be realised, and
          that the repulse of the French would leave them free to
          go home ; but prolonged service they could not afford,
          so they either resigned, or left their names as a favour
          on the list and declined to attend any drills. It was
          not surprising, for many of them depended on their
          own industry for a living.^     In Banff, a county that has
          never lacked military enterprise, the Lieutenant begged
          that the officers should receive as many days' pay as
          the men, for there were few who could afford to buy
          a uniform or serve without compensation.^
               Nor were such difficulties wholly unknown in
          England, though they presented themselves in a
          different form.    It was rare for an officer openly to
          solicit pay   but one Commandant had the courage to
                          ;


          ask that it should be given during permanent duty,
          and put forward very good reasons for the request.
          " Government allows twenty days' pay for the men,"
          he said, " but we, the officers, make it up to eighty-four
          days', besides the expense of £2 ^ ^^^ ^^^ clothing."'
          There lay the heart of the matter. The Government
          might boast of their economy in limiting the mass of
          the Volunteers to the August Allowances, but as a
          matter of fact the whole of them received the June
          Allowances by the generosity of their officers or of other
          private individuals.    Even so, from want of money,
          innumerable corps collapsed or were stifled in their
          birth.   First, those that had aspired to be self-support-
           ing found the burden heavier than they could bear, and

                I.D. vol. vi. Donald M'Leod (Ross) to S.S. nth April ; O.C.
                 1

           1stRoss Volunteers to Donald M'Leod, 5th Sept. 1804.
              2 /^/V. vol. iii. L.L. Banff, to S.S. 15th April 1803.
              3 Hid. vol. xxiv. Lt.-Col. Robert Harvey (Norwich Vols.) to

          S.S. 19th Dec. 1803.
