Ill                   CONSOLIDATION BILL                         123

consent of the majority of the members.^ On the other                  1804.
hand, it was argued that it was dangerous to give a
commandant authority to subject a man to the ballot
and to the probable expense of finding a substitute,
without any appeal ; but none the less the clause was
carried as it stood.
    The question of fines for irregular attendance
or misconduct was also brought forward ; but the
Attorney-General was shy, as he said, of proceeding too
far with a compulsory system for the Volunteers ; and,
though Pitt took a different view, a great many mem-
bers seem to have held with Perceval.     One member,
Mr. Giles, had from the first maintained that Volun-
teers might discipline themselves, but that Parliament
had no right to impose discipline.^           Yorke condemned
the enforcement of attendance and discipline by fines
and imprisonment as " inconsistent with the Volunteer
system; " ^ and Whitbread said roundly that any attempt
to enforce fines with severity would cause many Volun-
teers to run away.*
    In truth, the more the question of the Volunteers
was debated, the more obvious it became that, whether
their military value were great or small, they were ex-
tremely expensive and utterly unmanageable.     No one
knew how to draft a Bill which could control them ;
and if any one knew how to draft it, no one knew how
to carry it.  Addington and his colleagues shuffled and
shifted their ground upon every point with pitiable
weakness, trying always to obtain some mastery of
the huge creature that they had called into existence ;
but invariably they failed, and were always not un-
deservedly chastised by biting comments from Fox and
Windham. By the 19th of March 1804 the Bill had
been committed and recommitted four times ; twenty-
four        new   clauses   had been added ;      nearly   all   the
original clauses had been altered and amended ;            and yet
it       was as far from passing as ever.
     1    H.D. Commons, 6th March 1804.   2 /^/^_ 13th Dec. 1803.

           8 Ibid. 2nd March 1804.  * Ibid. 19th March 1804.
