Ill           CRAUFURD'S CRITICISMS                      125

Reserve, and finally we fall back on the Volunteer              '804.
system, which is the most expensive of all." ^
     But by far the most clear-sighted man in either
House was the soldier, Robert Craufurd. Being im-
bued with the foolish notion that it was his business to
treat his audience to all the paraphernalia of exordium,
peroration, and so forth, he spoke at enormous length,
and hence received little attention. From the first he
declared that the Volunteer system was a mistake from
beginning to end, wrong in its constitution, in the
defrayal of its cost, in its committees of management, in
its training, in the use to be made of it, even in its cloth-

ing. The system of private contribution was wrong.
The country ought to bear the entire expense of the
Volunteers, and would thus do away with the necessity for
committees which were constantly coming into collision
with Government.      The training was wrong. The
Prussian system of drill was ill-adapted for fighting in
England, and would be a mistake for the whole Army if
the troops were to be employed in England only. The
whole of the first class under the Levy en Masse Act
ought to be called up, dressed in an uniform coat, and
trained principally to marksmanship and to withdraw at
 the word of command from shelter.   The clothing was
 wrong. It was an error to dress Volunteers in red, for,
                    Regular troops might think that their
 if they retired, the
 comrades of the Line had been defeated, and would be
 disheartened, whereas the enemy would be encouraged.
 It was wrong also to cheapen military titles.      Lastly,
 it was a  fatal defect that among the Volunteers it
 was impossible to enforce discipline. " If you try to
 enact regulations, you are told, not that they are unjust
 or just, but that they are not agreeable to the Volun-
 teers.  So delicate a machine is unfit for war." ^
     The unhappy Volunteer Consolidation Bill dragged
 on its weary way through both Houses until the middle
 of April without making any great progress ; but mean-
                  1    H.D. Commons, 8th Feb. 1804.
              2            27th Feb., 22nd March 1804.
                      iiifj^
