CHAP. Ill   VOLUNTEER EXEMPTION ACT 121
had been maltreated, when it had been conceived in            '8°4-
fallacy, brought forth in weakness, and was foredoomed
by constitutional debility to an early grave.
    But the great battle of the session, as may be
imagined, was fought over the Volunteers.     In order to
extricate Ministers from the thousand difficulties in
which haste, feebleness, and carelessness had involved
them, Yorke, on the 13th of December, introduced,
in the first place, a Volunteer Exemption Bill, a simple
measure which was designed to set all doubts upon
exemption at rest, and to enable Commanding Officers
to certify that men had undergone training without
arms in cases where no arms had been issued. This
was passed on the 20th of December 1 803 (44 Geo. III.
cap. 18) ; and Yorke shortly afterwards presented a
more important Bill to consolidate all existing Acts
concerning the Volunteers.     This was, in fact, an effort
to correct the many blunders of the past session, and
as such was likely to enjoy a stormy career.
     As a first step it was proposed that the number of
days' exercise required to exempt Volunteers from the
Militia ballot should be raised from five to twenty-four,
so as to place exemption from the Militia and the Army
of Reserve upon the same footing. This was at once
opposed as a breach of faith, and Addington was fain
to plead that the ntw regulation would not come into
force   until   May, so that Volunteers who disliked it
would have plenty of time to resign.
    An attempt was also made to override by enact-
ment the decision of the Court of King's Bench as to
the right of Volunteers to resign, when Perceval, as has
been seen, upheld his own contention against that right,
while Erskine vindicated the judgment of the court.
Fox summed up the action of Ministers on the question
in a single sentence. '* First," he said, " it was intended
that the Volunteers might resign ; then the Attorney-
General said that they couM not resign ; then the Court
of King's Bench said that they could resign ; and now
Ministers bring in a Bill to say that they can resign,
