II         FALSE SYSTEM OF TRAINING                           117

 1806 reckoned that the Volunteers had cost in three                  1803-4.
and a half years five millions from the public purse,
and at least as much more from individual contributions.
This entire sum of ten millions of course came out of
the pockets of the nation, and impoverished it by that
amount, whether it was gathered in the form of taxation
or of a patriotic gift.     The burden of expense was
unwisely and inequitably laid upon the willing who
made shift to bear it but no part of the outlay was
                           ;


thereby saved. The only difference was that the country,
by leaving its defence in great measure to private
enterprise, renounced even such proportion of control
as was due to it in return for a grant of public funds.
    Incidentally this relaxation of the Government's hold
upon the Volunteers led also to a false system of train-
ing.   Being left to themselves, these amateur soldiers, of
course, aped their professional brethren ; and hours were
zealously devoted to the       classical   eighteen manoeuvres
of David Dundas and             the   stiff   formality of the
Prussian system.      All this was utterly useless.      General
Money, a retired officer who had fought in command
of troops of Revolutionary France in 1792 and had
written one of the best books extant upon the work of
Light Infantry, trained and armed three companies of
Volunteers as sharpshooters. This, it must be remarked,
must have cost him an appreciable sum, for the Govern-
ment while countenancing by its regulations the forma-
tion of Rifle corps, would issue no rifles, nor grant
more than the contract price of muskets for corps that
provided rifles for themselves.^   " You cannot make
men equal to regular troops in twenty-four days' drill,"
wrote Money, " but you can make them good sharp-
shooters in ten days ; whereas long, tedious drills weary
the peasantry."^   The plea fell upon deaf ears. In
Parliament, as shall presently be seen, a soldier who
later won immortality in the command of the Light

    1 I.D. vol. xxxiv. Yorks N.R., Lt.-Col. Morritt to S.S.    14th
Oct. 1803.
    2 Ibid. vol. Iviii. Money to L.L. Norfolk, 12th Aug. 1804.
