          ii6          FAILURE OF SUBSCRIPTIONS                         chap.
1803-4.   the subscriptions were            exhausted, and the civil sub-
          scribers, having          done   theirduty as they thought by
          their first contributions, buttoned up their pockets and
          would give no more. Further, the more zealous the
          Volunteers, the more rapidly of course was their raiment
          worn out. ".Eighty-five days' drill and twenty-one
          days' permanent duty have reduced the clothing allowed
          to my corps by Government to rags," wrote an officer
          of a Welsh corps ; " the Captains will subscribe their
          contingent money, if the Government will help."^         But
          if the Government helped one corps, it must help all ;
          and the answer to the above application could only be
          in the negative.    Thence followed as a natural conse-
          quence the humouring by their superiors of rich officers,
          so as to keep them in their corps at any cost, and of
          poorer officers in consideration of the sacrifices that they
          had made ; while a general tenderness on the part of
          the  Government towards indiscipline at large in the
          Volunteers evoked from Windham in the House of
          Commons the statement that the Cabinet was afraid
          of them. And this was perfectly true.        How could
          Ministers not be afraid of a vast body of men,
          many of them voters, whom they had practically invited
          to serve their country in the way which they thought
          best and easiest for themselves, and at the expense
          of the most patriotic individuals among them?       The
          entire force naturally claimed the indulgence that was
          due only to the unselfish minority among them. The
          subscribers as naturally demanded some share in the
          control of the levies which they had helped to raise and
          equip ; and the State's rightful hold upon the Volun-
          teers in the matter of discipline was lost.
              Nor was anything gained economically.           The
          expense of the Volunteers to the country, as it ap-
          peared on the estimates and returns, might seem
          relatively small  but this was only because the balance
                                ;


          was defrayed by private subscription.       Windham in
                1   I.D. vol. ilix. Glamorgan, Rowley Lascelles to S.S. 9th July
          1804.
