           124               CONSOLIDATION BILL                         chap.

1   804.       There were suspicions in more than one quarter that
           the whole principle of Volunteers was wrong ; and even
           Pitt, in course of the debates,     betrayed some misgiving
           as to their usefulness.    He admitted that the Volunteer
           system had been pushed to a far wider extent than had
           been at first foreseen, and that he looked with great
           concern upon its imperfections ; but he vowed none the
           less that he believed in it.^  He admitted further that
           there should be permanence and consistency in a defen-
           sive force, which should render it equal not only to the
           present but to all future dangers ; and added that in his
           opinion the principles upon which the Volunteer system
           had been founded were perfectly right. " But," he
           continued, " it is impossible to trust continually to the
           operation of the Volunteer spirit. When the danger is
           past they may doubt the necessity of future exertions.
           It then    becomes the duty of Parliament to do that for
           the country which spontaneous zeal cannot do.                  .    .   .


           If the Volunteer system fails,      we can fall back on the
           National Defence Act." 2
                                       when a permanent defen-
                 It is difficult to see why,
           sive forcewas wanted, Pitt should have approved the
           expenditure of enormous sums in creating one which
           was avowedly built upon ephemeral sentiment. " Zeal
           is   in its nature a very transitory feeling," said          Wind-
           ham, " and a permanent Volunteer system is almost a
           contradiction in terms."   Whitbread put the case more
           strongly still.  The Volunteers, as he truly said, were
           in daily danger of being dissolved. The dismissal of a
           corps was the only remedy for a difference between it
           and the Government.      Moreover, every corps that he
           knew of was more or less in debt and the calls for a
                                                     ;


           second subscription would only collect from the liberal
           that which should be exacted from all.      " We have
           gone to enormous expense in drawing men from the
           Militia to the Regulars [from 1799 to 1801]    we have   ;


           gone to enormous expense in raising an Army of
                ^   H.D. Commons, 27th Feb.      2   /^/^^   29th Feb. 1804.
