        122          CONSOLIDATION BILL                          chap.

1804.   and   insert a provision which renders it impossible for
        many to resign." ^     Against Fox and Erskine united
        the Ministry could make litde fight, and the clause
        containing the obnoxious provision was withdrawn.
             The third and most important novelty introduced
        into the Bill was a declaration that Volunteers should
        no longer be allowed to elect their own officers ; and
        this proposition was warmly combated.         Whitbread,
        a shrewd, sensible man and Colonel of a Volunteer
        battalion at Bedford, defended the practice of electing
        officers, provided that their names were submitted to the
        King through the Lieutenant for approval. " Had I
        offered my services as private in my Volunteers," he
        said, " I own that I should be very unwilling to serve
        under any officer appointed by the Crown to command
        me without my own consent."          Sheridan warned
        Ministers against interference with the right as a
        breach of faith, and Fox adjured the Volunteers not
        to allow themselves to be bullied.^   The question was
        compromised by making all future rules of corps
        subject to disallowance by the King.     From this point
        to the general question of discipline the transition was
        easy ; and since most of the members were officers of
        Volunteer corps, there were few who had not stories to
        tell or suggestions to put forward.    Yorke considered
        that discipline was sufficiently safeguarded by giving
        Commanding Officers power to discharge men, and so
        to make them liable to the ballot, and by using the
        machinery of the Levy en Masse Act to call up dis-
        orderly or irregular men for training.^   Pitt, full of his
        experience as Colonel of the Cinque Ports Volunteers,
        actually moved to omit as unnecessary the clause em-
        powering commandants to discharge men ; but Yorke,
        who knew the ways of Volunteer Committees better
        than Pitt, insisted upon it, because the regulations or
        many corps forbade the dismissal of any man without
                     1   H.D. Commons, 19th March 1804.
                         2   Ibid. 8th Feb.,   27th Feb. 1804.
                                3   Ibid. 8th Feb. 1804.
