Ill      CRITICISM OF THE SCHEME                          131

ness of the scheme, and prophesied that if parish officers      1804.
produced any men at all they would buy them from the
crimps.   Other members predicted that the Bill might
produce money but would never produce men, and that
the fines would be equivalent to a double land-tax on
landed proprietors ; for which reasons they deprecated
the disuse of the ballot. One member, Mr. Elliot, very
pertinently pointed out that to offer a   man £16 i6s.:



to enlist directly into the Line, and   ^23 2s. to enter
                                             :



the Line through the new force, was on the face of it an
absurdity.   But most conspicuous among the objectors was
Robert Craufurd, speaking as usual at extravagant length,
who opposed the measure without reserve or com-
promise.    The Bill, as he urged with unanswerable force,
held out no inducements to recruits, increased the com-
petition between the Line and the Militia, and was suffi-
ciently drastic to irritate the parishes though not enough
so to produce men.      He advocated compulsory training
for all men between certain years of age, but not as an
embodied force ; and then there would be an end of
enlisting men for service at home and bribing them to
serve abroad.   His remedies for the Regular Army were
(i) substitution of limited service for service for life ;
(2) liberal provision   for retired soldiers ;    (3) aboli-
tion  of military service in the West Indies for the
regiments of the Line.
    The arguments of the opponents of the Bill were
thrown away. Pitt thought that he had made a master-
stroke by turning the parish -officers into recruiting
sergeants, and would listen to no prophecies of evil.
                —
Upon one point that of keeping a Reserve to feed the
ranks of the Army, and feeding that Reserve by a steady
                          —
annual supply of recruits he felt most rightly that his
views were sound ; and in respect of other opinions he
showed strong sense and an open mind by declaring his
readiness to accept short service for the        Army if it
could safely be introduced. But to contemplate the
possible failure of his scheme he utterly refused.
Perhaps with declining health, with the knowledge
