            126   GOVERNMENT'S NEW PROPOSALS chap.
1804.       while the repeated remonstrances of Craufurd, Windham,
            and others against the neglect of the Regular Army and
            the want of an offensive force had borne fruit, and on
            the 29th of March Yorke unfolded a fresh bundle of
            proposals.   The Army of Reserve Act, as he was fain
            to confess, had ceased to produce any recruits.     He
            proposed therefore, first, to suspend it for a year, and to
            limit the   bounty in such counties as had not yet pro-
            vided their quota to ten guineas ; secondly, to bring
            10,000 Militia over from Ireland in order to set free
            as many Regular troops     ;   thirdly, to make good the
            loss to Ireland by augmenting the Irish Militia from
            1 5,000 to 28,000 men.      Castlereagh, who supported the
            measure, added that this would be the cheapest way of
            accomplishing what was needed, since Irish Militiamen
            could be obtained for a bounty of four guineas, whereas
            the price of substitutes in England ranged from forty to
            fifty guineas.-^    The Bills were accordingly brought in,
            the one to enable 10,000 Irish Militia to volunteer for
            service in England ; a second for raising the additional
            Militiamen by beat of drum and without local expense
            to the counties, the bounty of four guineas being fixed
            by the Treasury ; and, lastly, a bill to suspend the Army
            of Reserve Act.
                Even so the Government's resources were not quite
            exhausted.     They now proposed to increase the " dis-
            posable   "  force of the country, that is to say, the force
            that could be spared to strike outside England, from
            10,000 to 25,000 men. This they hoped to do by
            levying new regiments on the old system of raising men
            for rank ; but no officer was to gain more than one
        •
            step ; the step was not to be granted at all unless the
            men were produced within six months ; and the pre-
            scribed bounty was not to be exceeded under penalty of
            a court-martial.     This experiment, it must be added,
            was tried, and resulted in the raising of second
            battalions to the 78th and 79th Highlanders, and of
            four new battalions in Ireland, three of which became
                              1 H.D. 29th March 1804.
