       I30             PITT'S NEW SCHEME                      chap.

1804   to reduce bounties ; and Pitt hoped to achieve this end
       by putting an end to the ballot and throwing upon the
       parochial officers the responsibility for      producing the
       quota of men assigned to their parishes.         He proposed
       to empower      them    to  give  a bounty,   which  was not,
       under   penalties,  to  exceed   three-fourths  of the bounty
       offered to  recruits  for  the Regular  Army,   and to take an
       appointed share of it for their own encouragement.         On
       the other hand, they would be forbidden to accept men
       who resided more than twenty miles away from the parish,
       if in the same county, or more than ten miles distant
       if in another county.         If they failed to produce their
       men, the parish was to be fined ^^20 for every man
       deficient of the quota, and was therewith to be quit of
       all further trouble.    Effective Volunteers and Yeomanry
       were to be exempted from the rates levied for payment
       of these fines. The money thus collected was to be paid
       into the general recruiting fund of the kingdom ; and
       the Commanding Officer of the regiment concerned was
       then to fill the vacancy by ordinary recruiting, paying
       the same bounty as that offered by the parish and no
       more.     Finally, the men were to be enlisted for home
       service only, and for five years or until six months after
       the cessation of war ; and the bounties proposed were as
       follows :   —
                   For the Regular Army, ^^16 i6s.; for the
                                                    :



       Reserve, under the new Bill, £12        12s.; to the Re-
                                               :


       servists upon enlisting in the Regular Army, ^^ 10     los.
                                                              :


       The fee granted to the parish officers for each recruit
       was to be^^i is. The men when raised were to be
                       :


       formed into second battalions to the Regular Army,
       promotion of officers being interchangeable between the
       two battalions, so that the attachment between officers
 '     and men might encourage enlistment for general service.
           Such was the plan proposed by Pitt in his introduc-
       tory speech, and such it remained in substance when the
       Bill, on the 27th of June, became an Act.       Not, how-
       ever, that it passed uncriticised.       Windham, while
       approving the reduction of the Militia and the abolition
       of the ballot, declared himself sceptical as to the sound-
