        134          VOLUNTEER ACT, 1804                   chap.

1804.   expense of bounties from the parochial funds to the
        Imperial Treasury, thus marking a temporary advance
        in the more equitable distribution of the expense of
        recruiting the Army.

                                    II

            A   few weeks before this Act, Pitt's administration
        passed also the Volunteer Consolidation Act (44 Geo.
        III. cap. 54 ; 5th June 1804), which in its final shape
        contained the following provisions.    First, the Volun-
        teer Act of 1802, the Billeting Act of 1803, and the
        Exemption Act recently passed, were repealed. The
        King was empowered to continue the services of
        accepted corps and accept the offers of new corps
        (sec. i).  Volunteers entitled to exemption under the
        repealed Acts were to have the benefit of the n until the
        1st of July 1 804 (sec. 2).   Effective Volunteers were
        also to be exempt from the ballot for the Militia and
        for any additional force; though such corps as had
        disclaimed exemption were to be held to their bargain
        (sec. 4) ; and an effective member was defined to be
        one who in the cavalry attended four days and in the
        infantry eight days of exercise every three months
        (sec. 5).   Men belonging to corps to which arms and
        accoutrements had not been issued were equally entitled
        to the exemption if they duly attended muster and
        exercise (sec. 6). Men on leave of absence were per-
        mitted to do the whole of their drills within four months
        (sec. 7), or in two successive periods of four months
        each (sec. 8).   It is to be noted that effective men
        enrolled in the Yeomanry or Volunteers were by the
        new Act not exempted from the ballot, but from service
        in the Militia and Army of Reserve, their names being
        kept on the ballot- list so that they might be called up
        at once if discharged from the Volunteers (sec. 17) ;
        and the like exemption was guaranteed to them after
        the signature of peace if they continued to serve as
        effective Volunteers throughout the war (sec. 18).
        Infantry corps voluntarily assembling for permanent
