Ill          PITT'S RECRUITING ACT                       133

Regular   Army from the Additional Force (sec. 15).            1804.
Parish-officers   were   authorised   to   obtain   men, and
were to be entitled to a share of bounty for every man
produced (sec. 20), provided such men had resided for
thirty days in the parish or in some other parish not
more than ttn. miles distant from it in the same county,
and provided that the parish-officers brought a certificate
of the recruit's residence to the magistrate on attesting
him ; the penalty for refusing to bring such certificate
being a fine of£ i to £^ (sec. 21).   The levying of rates
and raising of subscriptions to induce persons to enlist
was forbidden, and the penalty for offering more than
the prescribed bounty was a fine of ^^20 (sec. 22).   The
bounty was not to exceed three-fourths of the bounty
given for the Regular Army ; it was to be paid out of
the Imperial Treasury ; and it was to be accepted in
lieu of all payments and allowances prescribed by the
Army of Reserve Act (sec. 24). Parishes failing to
produce men within one month after notice given (in
the first instance, within six weeks after the passing of
the Act) were to be fined ^20 for every man deficient,
after which the Commanding Officer of the corps con-
cerned was to be at liberty to enlist recruits to the
number deficient, for the bounty named in section 24
and no more (sec. 26). The men were to be enlisted
for five years or until six months after the signing of
peace, and were to swear that they were not lame,
ruptured, or subject to fits (sec. 28). If a parish paid
its fine for any man deficient, but managed to produce
a man before a recruit had been enlisted by the Com-
manding Officer, three-fourths of the fine were to be
remitted (sec. 33).   Rates levied for payment for fines
were to be separated from the poor rates. Effective
Yeomen and Volunteers and Militiamen serving by
person or substitute were exempted from such rates, if
the property on which they were assessed for poor rates
did not exceed the annual value of j^20.
    The most noticeable point in the Act, apart from
the dispensation with the ballot, was the shifting of the
