Ill           VOLUNTEER ACT, 1804                     135

duty were subjected to the Mutiny Act and Articles of        1804.
War (sec. 23) but not corps of Yeomanry cavalry
                ;

(sec. 24).  Officers of Yeomanry and Volunteers were
to rank with those of the Militia and Regular Army
as the youngest of their respective grades (sec. 26).
Commanding Officers were authorised to discharge men
for misconduct, though not to the prejudice of any
rules, made by the corps, which had received the King's
approval, and subject always to the King's pleasure
(sec. 27).  Commandants were further empowered to
disallow the day on which a man misbehaved as a day
of attendance, or to disallow his day's pay, unless the
case were otherwise provided for by the rules of the
corps (sec. 28). They could also order a man into
custody for misbehaviour for so long as the corps might
remain under arms on the occasion (sec. 29). The
right of resignation was affirmed conditionally upon a
man giving fourteen days' notice, delivering up his
arms, and paying all fines due from him (sees. 30, 31).
Upon resignation a man became liable to serve in the
Militia or any Additional Force ; and the Commanding
Officer was required to certify his discharge to the Clerk
of the General Meeting of the Lieutenancy (sec. 32).
Persons aggrieved by the refusal of the Commanding
Officer to accept their resignation might appeal to two
Deputy-Lieutenants, whose decision was to be final
(sec. 33).   The clause in the Levy en Masse Act
allowing 2s. 6d. a day to be paid to persons employed to
instruct Volunteers was repealed (sec. 34).    On being
called up for active service two guineas were to be paid
to the Captains for each man, and    when called out for
permanent duty, one guinea ; for which sums the
Captain was required to account to the men (sec. 36).
Another guinea was to be allowed them on return from
active service (sec. 39). Finally, no future rules and
regulations of Volunteer corps were to *be binding
unless submitted to the Secretary of State and not
disallowed by the King (sec. S^)     ^^^ ^^^ right was
                                    '^




reserved to the King of annulling any rules which might
