        128          PITT'S NEW GOVERNMENT                                chap.

1804.   by drawing its recruits from the locality would leave
        the market towns open without competition to the
        Regulars.^
              Such   initiative   in   suggestion,   added to so much
        careful and explicit detail, showed pretty clearly that Pitt
        expected very shortly to take the reins of Government
        into his own hands.     The scheme, however, did not
        pass without criticism.  Yorke declared that it was
        hopeless to think of drawing substitutes only from the
        same hundred as the ballotted men, and impracticable to
        expect to put down subscription-clubs ; while Fox,
        an acknowledged authority on such matters, averred
        that " he had never heard of an Act which laid down
        that five men must not subscribe ^5 apiece to provide
        a substitute for the one among them that might be
        ballotted, but must toss up which of them must pay
        ^25."^     But the House was more eager to condemn
        Yorke's measures than to consider those of Pitt, and the
        majority in Addington's favour was so small that on the
        following day he resigned office.
            Owing to difficulties which need not detain us
        here, fully three weeks passed before Pitt was able to
        form a new Administration, wherein Lord Camden held
        the office of Secretary for War and the Colonies.
        Hence Pitt was unable until the 5 th of June to bring
        forward the Bill which embodied his new and mature
        scheme for raising men.      The objects which he set
        before himself were good and statesmanlike, namely,
        first, to put an end to the competition for recruits
        between the Regular Army, the Militia, and the other
        forces engaged for home-service only ; secondly, to
        abolish the obstacles in the way of establishing a Per-
        manent Additional Force as a standing foundation for the
        recruiting of the Army.   As a first step he proposed to
        repeal the Army of Reserve Act and reduce the estab-
        lishment of the Militia to its original figure of 40,000
        men for England and 8000 for Scotland. He then
        proposed to merge the quota of the Army of Reserve
          1   H.D. Pitt, 25th April 1804.            2   j^j^^   25th April 1804.
