Ill           CONCESSIONS TO VOLUNTEERS                        137

Volunteer Force was made by the War Office, for the                    1804.
speedier concentration of the Volunteers upon any
threatened point, and for that purpose a muster of the
regimental waggons was ordered.^     But then arose a
difficulty. The farmers of the West Riding of York-
shire refused to produce their waggons for a muster                :


they were ready enough to give them up if wanted, but
muster them they would not.^ Their reason is not
stated, but was probably not unconnected with the
Department of Excise ; and though no similar objec-
tions seem to have been urged by other counties, the
example was likely to spread among folk so suspicious
as British farmers.
   Some further pecuniary concessions had also been
made to the Volunteers. A day's pay, over and above
the twenty days' pay allowed annually by the August
Allowances, was promised to every non-commissioned
officer and private present at an inspection of his corps
by a General Officer or Inspecting Field-Officer, pro-
vided that such inspections did not recur more
frequently than once in two months.^            A
                                            grant of pay
for one sergeant to every company on the August
Allowances was also conceded,* as also a further sum
for hiring or obtaining safe dep6ts for arms.   At about
the same time were issued, in anticipation of the Volun-
teer Act of 1804, further regulations to encourage all
corps, whether of maritime or inland counties, to go on
permanent pay and duty for periods of not more than
a month or less than ten days.        But here, as usual,
     1 Circular of lith and 17th Aug. 1804.    This Circular of llth
August is not in the Circular Book, but may be found in I.D. vol.
Ixviii. Miscellaneous.    It was arranged to take troops by post-
carriage for the last four stages to London, the stations fixed upon
for the purpose being Guildford, Andover, Marlborough, Bedford,
Banbury, Davcntry, Northampton, Kettering, Stilton, and Cam-
bridge.    It was reckoned that the waggons would carry the troops
forty miles a day for three days ; and the proprietors were directed
to send three days' forage with them.
     2 I.D. vol. Ixvii. L.L. Yorks W.R. to S.S. 22nd Aug. 1804.

      5   Circular, loth Feb. 1804.
      *   Circular, 19th   March 1804.
