Ill           DEFECTS OF VOLUNTEERS                      141

forbade them to      work together under        a   competent   1804.
instructor.    The tone of the entire force was parochial,
or at best provincial, never national.    Its   commanders
clamoured for non-commissioned officers from the
King's Regular regiments, for these were their inferiors,
or at most their equals ; but Volunteer officers thought
themselves hardly used when the Colonels of the Line
declared, very truly, that their sergeants and corporals
could not be spared from their legitimate work.      Yet
they revolted from guidance by the King's Regular
officers, who knew nothing of their local importance
and judged them simply by their fitness or unfitness
for their work.   It must be remembered also that they
                                     —
were wholly under the protection one cannot call it
the control   —
              of the Home Office ; the War Office and
Horse Guards having no part in them.             General
Tarleton, commanding the Severn District, complained
to the Commander-in-Chief that he could not get a
Yeoman in his district to travel for him five miles with
an  official order. After ten days' delay he received a
" cold, phlegmatic answer " from the Adjutant-General
that he had nothing to     do with the Volunteers.       The
reply was strictly true, nor could have any other have
been returned. Had the Adjutant-General infused any
warmth into his letter, he would doubtless have added
that he thanked Heaven that he had nothing to do with
the Volunteers, seeing that their obedience was volun-
tary.  When on permanent duty, which it must be
remembered was not compulsory, or called out to repel
invasion,      Volunteers were indeed bound under
              the
military law to obey the King's Generals, but at other
times they could and did snap their fingers at them, and
indeed very often at every other authority.        Well
might Craufurd exclaim that so delicate a machine was
unfit for war.

                             Ill

   So the winter of 1 804 drew on, and the Govern-
ment's attention became fixed chiefly on Pitt's Per-
