        136            MOBILISATION OF VOLUNTEERS                  chap.

1804.   have been made in the past or should be made in the
        future (sec. 57).
            The passing of the Act was of very solid advantage,
        for       it   any rate some powers of discipline to
                       gave   at
        Commanding                 Officers, and
                                  assured all ranks of pay
        during permanent duty. The only misfortune was that
        it should have come so late, when indiscipline had
        already become     deeply ingrained in many corps.      It
        was        shameful to enforce by enactment the dis-
                  also
        claimer of exemption given by the 7000 patriotic men
        at the opening of the war.      They might at least have
        been left at liberty to continue their offer gratuitously.
        But this was practically the only blemish in the Act,
        and a few additional regulations tended to heighten the
        improvement brought thereby. The first step in 1 804
        was to appoint and station field-officers to inspect the
        Volunteers.^    The next was to arrange for the mobilisa-
        tion of the Volunteers themselves.        Orders had been
        issued on the 31st of October 1803 for the removal of
        all cattle and so forth, or, as it was called, for " driving
        the country " upon the enemy's approach or landing ;
        but these were contested by the Duke of Richmond in
        Sussex,       declared the plan to be impracticable ; ^
                        who
        and as Sir John Moore agreed with this opinion, it may
        be accepted with confidence that the Duke was right.
        Incidentally, however, the order            had led to thoroughly
        careful registration of horses and vehicles ; and the Duke
        of York took advantage of this to suggest that one light
        cart for every company should be set apart and marked
        for regimental transport,^ and that waggons also should
        be set apart, marked and provided with seats for the
        conveyance of men from the remoter districts to London,
        the expense being borne by the Imperial Treasury.*
        Later on, in August, an improved disposition of the

              1   Circular of I2th Jan.    1 804.

              I.D. vol. xxxii. L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 3rd Nov. 1803.
              2

            8 Of course the phrase " regimental transport " was unknown in

        those days ; but I use it for convenience.
            * Circular of i6th and 19th Jan. and lOth Feb. 1804.
