Ill     DENUNCIATION OF PITT'S ACT                      143

churchwardens and overseers of every parish were                1804.
informed that they would receive a guinea, free of all
deductions, for every man produced, and that for every
man so found no expense or burden would be laid upon
the parish, whereas for every recruit raised by the
Colonels of regiments a fine would be imposed ? " It is
conceived," continued the circular, *' that by such a
comparative statement it will be made manifest to the
inhabitants   how materially they will consult their own
advantage by providing the men required of them by
the 15th of November."        Then at last there was some
little sign of movement in the counties ; and it was high
time, for by the ist of November only 778 recruits had
been raised out of the 19,782 which were required, and
of these 95 had deserted. The amelioration was not
such as to prevent violent attacks upon the measure
when Parliament met in January 1805.          Returns were      1805.
called for, and on the 1 5th of February a motion was
brought forward in the Lords for the repeal of the Act
as a total failure.      Lord Hawkesbury defended it,
alleging that practically it had not come into force until
November 1804, and that during the past fortnight it
had produced 300 recruits a week, at which rate it would
bring in 1 1 ,000 in the year.     Upon this very incon-
clusive assurance the House rejected the motion for
repeal ; but a week later (21st February) the attack was
renewed in the Commons by far more powerful advo-
cates.    Windham led the way with a detailed criticism
 of all past measures of recruiting, and pointed out that
 such men as had been raised had been produced chiefly
 by crimps who, in spite of the professed limitation of
 the bounty, received in practice both the fines from the
 parish and the sums allotted to tempt recruits, making
 a total of ;^34 for every man.      He contended that the
 Army could be maintained by voluntary enlistment if
 it were made attractive enough ; and to that end he

 advocated short or (as it was then called) limited service,
 the abolition of drafting, special regulations of service in
 the West Indies, abolition of flogging except for certain
