        I40         DEFECTS OF VOLUNTEERS                            chap.

1804.   General Money, if called out to repel actual invasion.
        Lord Rous, it may be observed, was not himself an
        officer of Yeomanry at this time, though he had been
        so during the last war.   Moreover, though Suffolk sup-
        ported thirteen troops of Yeomanry, these were so jealous
        of each other that they were not even regimented.
        Lastly, Money, though a retired General of considerable
        reputation, had given enormous pains to the Volun-
        teers, and actually commanded a regiment of Norfolk
        Yeomanry. However, the General of the District, Sir
        James Craig, was obliged to come forward, smooth the
        ruffled feathers of the incensed magnate, and point out
        ostentatiously to Money, who had been guilty of no
        more than announcing the organisation of the brigade
        in orders, that his    command as a brigadier was strictly
        limited to the event of active service, and that great
        caution must be employed in proclaiming such facts, as
        the Volunteer's obedience was only voluntary.^
            Thus,   at every turn, the old difficulty recurred.
        The    Volunteers had undoubtedly improved greatly
        under permanent duty, but large numbers of them were
        still utterly useless.  In Norfolk, in May 1804, the
        Inspector could report only three corps out of thirty-
        three to be fit for service ; and the Lord-Lieutenant,
        himself a General, was obliged to confirm his judgment.^
        This was a maritime county, which had enjoyed for
        eight months the privilege of sending men on per-
        manent duty ; and the condition of the Volunteers in
        inland counties can hardly have been as good. Moreover,
        such improvements as there were had been bought only
        by enhanced expenditure, by doles of pay for this,
        allowances for that, bounties or marching-guineas for
        the other.    And though the men might be steady on
        parade and proficient at their manual exercise, their
        officers remained always a weak point ; nor was this
        weakness likely to be strengthened while their jealousies
            ^ I.D. vol. Ixiv. Suffolk Mil. Sec. to Mr, King (with enclosure),
        4th Aug. 1804.
           2 Ibid. vol. Iviii. L.L. Norfolk, to S.S. ist May, 17th June 1804.
