         142          FAILURE OF PITTS ACT                           chap.

1804.   manent Additional Force Act.              Passed on the 25 th of
        June, it allowed a fortnight's grace to the parish officers
        to master its contents, and one month more for the
        raising of the allotted number of men, so that, according
        to the wording of the law. Ministers expected the first
        batch of 20,000 men to be raised by the 9th of August.
        On the 23rd of August they issued a circular to the
        Lords-Lieutenant asking what measures they were
        taking to execute the Act and with what success, repeat-
        ing the request on the 30th of August.     Answers came
        in slowly, but were uniformly the same. Hardly a man
        could be obtained ; the area of recruiting was too much
        restricted ; the bounties were too low ; the reward to
        parish officers was too small. The Lieutenant of Norfolk
        added that recruiting was much hampered by the number
        of young labouring men serving in the Volunteers. It
        made little difference what reasons were assigned. The
        parish officers, after perusal of the Act, had made up
        their minds that it was hopeless to obtain recruits under
        such conditions, and that the Government only wanted
        fines in lieu of men     so they christened the measure
                                   ;


        "TheTwenty Pound Act," and resigned themselves to the
        inevitable payment.     The Government, therefore, issued
        another circular on the 25th of September, pointing
        out that, after all, only the men deficient of the Army
        of Reserve and Supplementary Militia were required
        for the present, and that the limit of time would be ex-
        tended to the 15 th of November, after which the officers
        of the Regular Army would receive orders to raise
        recruits, and the fine of £20 upon the parishes would be
        rigorously enforced.           This produced no greater result
        than an exceedingly sharp answer from Inverness to
        the effect that, from a county where some districts were
        two hundred miles distant from the county town, the
        Secretary of State was expecting impossibilities.^
            The Government then sent round another circular,
        of the 17th of October, conceived in terms of bland
        insinuation.    Would it not help the levy if the
           1   I.D. vol. xxxviii. L.L. Inverness, to S.S. 4th Oct. 1804.
