        138                 THE MARCHING-GUINEA                  chap.

1804.   Addington and his colleagues contrived to import con-
        fusion into their orders. In a circular of the 5th of March
        they promised an advance of a guinea, which was known
        as the marching-guinea, to all men who would come out
        on permanent pay and duty as aforesaid. In a second
        circular of 1 2th April they engaged to give also ten days'
        additional pay to all men under the August Allowances
        who within the next two months would do so many
        additional days' exercise without leaving their homes ;
        but denied them the marching-guinea.         Men under the
        June Allowances, on the other hand, were to receive no
        special pay when on permanent duty, as the days taken up
        thereby were to be reckoned among the eighty-five for
        which they received pay annually ; but they were to
        receive the marching-guinea.       It appears, further, that
        yet more regulations were issued, which I have been
        unable to discover, reducing the extreme term of per-
        manent duty to three weeks, but still holding out the
        reward of the marching-guinea. Then came a series of
        painful disillusions.   The Haddington Volunteers went
        out for permanent duty for fourteen days, and received
        only fourteen shillings instead of the twenty-one which
        they had expected.      Some of the Durham Volunteers
        went out and received pay, but could obtain no guinea.
        In Glamorganshire a corps under the June Allowances
        went out, claimed its guinea, and was refused because it
        had agreed to serve in its Military District only, and
        not in any part of Great Britain. All of these cases
        occurred before the passing of the new Volunteer Act
        of 1804, and were partly due to the old confusion
        between June and August Allowances ; but they did not
        fail (and they were by no means solitary instances) to
        rouse bitter discontent.^
             The new Act, however, set doubts upon these
        points at rest, and in September the Government gave
        still further encouragement to the training of Volun-


              I.D. vol. xxxviii. Lord Haddington to S.S. 5th June 1804 ;
               1

        vol.        L.L. Durham, to S.S. 6th Feb. 1804; vol. xlix. R.
                   xlvii.
        Lascelles (Glamorgan) to S.S. 1 8th Jan. 1804.
