Ill    MILITIA ENLISTMENT ACT, 1805                     i45

the same month of March the French fleet had appeared         1805
in the Caribbean Sea, threatening raids upon the British
West   Indies ; there was an unpleasant httle cam-
paign going none too favourably in Ceylon ; and in
India the Mahratta war, so brilliantly opened by Lake
and Wellesley, was beginning to assume a disagreeable
aspect.  Also there were signs that Russia, Prussia,
and Austria would shortly incline to renew the contest
against France, and it would be necessary for England
to produce a military force as well as subsidies.
Ordinary recruiting was practically at a standstill, the
number of men obtained both in 1803 and in 1804
being far less than in 1800; and that though the
bounty had been swelled more than twofold between
1 803 and 1 804.  The Commander-in-Chief gave orders
for the enlistment of boys,     since   men could not be
obtained ; but   it was perfectly clear that some other
method must be found for filling the ranks of the
Regular Army.       Pitt, therefore, notwithstanding the
fair promise which he professed to detect in his Per-
manent Additional Force Act, was fain to supersede it,
for the time at any rate, by an old-fashioned expedient.
    On the 3 ist of March, therefore, he brought in a Bill
to enable the excess of the British Militia over the estab-
lished quota, or, in other words, the Supplementary
Militia, to enlist in the Regular Army.       There were,
he said, 68,000 Militia embodied in Great Britain at the
moment. Of this number he proposed to set aside
34,000 as the nucleus of an ultimate quota of 51,000      ;

                                 —
and to take what he wanted 17,000 men was the
                         —
number named by him from the remaining 34,000,
restoring the balance to the establishment.    With a few
sarcasms the Bill was allowed to pass, and became law on
the loth of April (45 Geo. III. cap. 31).
    Its main provisions were as follows.    The King was
empowered to appoint Regular Regiments and divisions
of the Marines into which Militiamen might enlist (sec.
i), the number of men enlisting being restricted         in
every regiment of Militia to the excess over the ordinary
                                                    L
