        148         MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITION                                           chap.

1805.   against any one point.     Past experience might have
        warned him against frittering away his troops in small
        detachments    but even before he came back to office he
                                  ;


        had foreshadowed a division of his forces between the
        north of Germany and the south of Italy         and to             ;
                                                                               ^


        these expeditions was now added a third to the Cape
        of Good Hope.
           The first of these armaments was that designed for
        the Mediterranean, which seems to have been under
        consideration as early as February, and was actually
        despatched in April, before the drafting of the Militia-
        men into the Line. It consisted of rather fewer than
        5000 men under Sir James Craig, and was destined
        primarily for the protection of Sicily, but secondarily to
        join the Russians in operations for the defence of Naples,
        to occupy Alexandria, to defend Sardinia, or even to
        capture Minorca.      Napoleon's comment upon it was
        as follows    " The celebrated secret expedition entered
                         :



        Lisbon on the 7 th of                        May and left it on the loth.
        Whither          is                bound ?
                                      That's the problem.
                                      it                                                My
        opinion is that the only reasonable thing it can do is to
        capture the Cape or reinforce Jamaica or the Windward
        Islands.   If it is destined for Malta [its actual destina-
        tion in the first instance] all the better.   Nothing can
        better prove the folly (jneptie) of the English Cabinet ;
        for these combined continental movements founded on
        a few thousand men are pygmy combinations.                                 If there-
        fore you find that the expedition is gone to Malta, you
        may rub your hands (rejouissez vous), for the English
                                                  men and of
        will have deprived themselves of 6000 (sic)
        a certain number of ships." ^                        This force in the Medi-
        terranean,   may be added, did little profitable work
                             it

        from the beginning to the end of the war. The one of
        its       achievements which                 is   remembered is the battle of

              ^   Stanhope's Life of Pitt, iv, 223-224.
              2
              Corres. de Napoleon, ^7^7- Robert Craufurd's criticism in
        the House of Commons was precisely to the same effect    Craig's           —
        force was larger than was wanted for defensive purposes and too
        small to take the offensive.
