Ill              COST OF MILITIA RECRUITS                    147

number of enlistments still fell short of the appointed              1805.
tale,   the process was repeated for another ten days, after
which      all   further effort was to be abandoned (sec. 7).
The recruits were allowed to choose their own regi-
ments, were entitled to a bounty of ten guineas (sec. 10),
and were not to be drafted from their chosen corps
without their own consent (sec. 20).         Non-commis-
sioned officers retained their rank upon enlisting into
the Line, though they might be reduced to the ranks
for misconduct ; but no sergeant or corporal could
enlist as such into the Artillery (sec. 13).
     Under this Act 10,696 Militiamen^ passed into the
Regular Army between the loth of April and the 26 th
of June, four-fifths of them into the Infantry, and about
one-tenth (to the huge indignation of many Regular
officers) into the Marines.   It is noticeable that neither
Middlesex nor Surrey contributed a man to these
figures    and that Kent with two battalions of Militia
           ;


supplied but eleven men.     Assuming that these Militia-
men received, one with another, ^20 to serve as substi-
tutes, their net cost to the country in bounties before
they could be finally bribed to enter the Regular Army
amounted to some ^^ 3 30,000. Had they been enlisted
directly in 1803 they would have been obtained for one
half of that sum.     However, by these means, and by
contributions from the Army of Reserve, the effective
strength of the Regular Army, infantry and cavalry,
rose from 152,000 on the ist of May to 159,000 on the
 I St of June ; and in view of the steady ripening of the

Coalition of Russia, Austria, and Prussia against France,
 Pitt decided to take the offensive.



                                 IV
   It was characteristic of the man that he could not
bring himself to direct the whole of his available force
   1 But another return in W. O. Mi/a, E.B., dated 5th June, gives

the figure at 170 sergeants, 236 corporals, 10,755 ™c"-     Total,
 11,161.
