Ill     THE KING'S GERMAN LEGION                       151

all.  The King of Sweden, whose hatred of the Emperor        1805.
of the French amounted to a mania, had assembled a
few troops in Pomerania.      Hanover, though occupied
by French troops, had shown strong attachment to her
lawful sovereign ; and it was imagined that, even if
Prussia held aloof, the Swedes, together with a corps of
Russians recently disembarked from the Baltic, might,
with the aid of yet another corps from England,
operate on the north-eastern frontier of Holland, and
make a powerful diversion against the French in
Moravia.
    The corps from England, thanks to the blunders
of Addington and Pitt, was not likely to be a very
formidable one ; but it chanced that at this time the
Government had the good fortune to meet with a
windfall.    Immediately upon the declaration of war
in 1803 the French had invaded Hanover and com-
pelled, under a convention, the disbandment of the
Hanoverian army. Burning with shame and indigna-
tion, both officers and men sought to pass over to England
in order to form themselves anew into regiments and
fight for their sovereign.      The scheme was eagerly
encouraged by King George ; and in August 1 803
authority was given for the formation of a King's
German Regiment, which by November had expanded
into a King's German Legion.       The corps grew apace,
so that by the end of December 1 804 it had grown to
two regiments of cavalry, five batteries of artillery, and
six battalions of infantry ; and within a year the six
battalions had been increased to nine.     And these were
no mere mercenaries like the Hessians whom England
had hired in the eighteenth century. They were not
only excellent soldiers under excellent officers, but
spirited, patriotic men, devotedly loyal to their King,
and thirsting to avenge the humiliation thrust upon
them by a pusillanimous commander in 1 803.
   Thus it was that Pitt, besides his detachments to
the  Mediterranean, was actually able to send a small
expedition to Germany in the winter of 1805.       A
                                                 first
