Ill         EXPEDITION TO THE CAPE                    149
Maida in 1806, a brilliant action which might have been      1805.
turned to great account had not both the General and
the Admiral concerned been shallow impostors.
   The expedition to the Cape had been originally
designed to reinforce the West Indies, in consequence
of Villeneuve's abortive raid on the Windward Islands.
It was not ready until the end of May ; and mean-
while Nelson's pursuit of the French Admiral made the
despatch of a force to the Antilles unnecessary.       At
the end of July, therefore, its destination was altered to
the Cape of Good Hope.     It numbered rather more
than 6000 men under Sir David Baird ; and, reaching
the Cape after a very tedious passage, compelled the
Dutch to yield up the Colony on the i8th of January
1806.  This object accomplished, Baird was persuaded
by the Commodore, Sir Home Popham, to lend him a
battalion for an absurd expedition to Buenos Ayres,
which, as shall presently be seen, entangled England,
much against the wishes of the Government, in unprofit-
able operations in that quarter.
   Meanwhile during the spring and summer of 1805
England awaited Napoleon's attack with breathless
suspense. Towards the end of June confidence in the
security of the British Isles seems to have been pretty
firmly   established ;   but Robert Craufurd warned the
Commons that the danger was not yet passed.          The
enemy, he      might draw off our naval force to the
             said,
West Indies, and, hurrying back to Europe, gain
temporary command of the Channel, capture the anchor-
age of the Downs, and bring their army over.     Mr.
Bragge, the Secretary at War, answered this by a smile,
whereupon Craufurd retorted that the plan had actually
been proposed by the Marquis de Bouille to Count de
Grasse in 178 1, before the battle of the Saints. It is
curious that Craufurd should actually have divined
Napoleon's intentions.^    Once indeed, on the night
of the 15th of August, when some burning rape-
straw was mistaken for a beacon, a false alarm was
               1   H.D. Commons, 28th June 1805.
