        154      PITT'S RECRUITING ACT FAILS chap.

1805.   peccant parishes, Government proceeded to analysis of
        their contents.    It then appeared that of all the men
        obtained under the Act, three-fifths had been produced
        by ten counties, and two-fifths by eighty-one remaining
        counties of the United Kingdom ; and, further, that
        five-sixths of the whole had been supplied by twenty
        counties, while among the rest, twenty-five actually
        had not furnished a man.^ The reasons put forward to
        account for this failure of the Act were various ; though
        all the Lieutenants concurred in the opinion that the

        parish-officers, from ignorance and negligence, had made
        but indifferent recruiting agents.
             But some few of the Lieutenants gave details which
        were the reverse of reassuring.       From Perth it was
        reported that the bounty offered was too low            —
                                                           a com-
        plaint echoed by practically every county              —
                                                          that no
        liberal provision was made for the families of the
        Permanent Additional Force, as had been made for
        the Militia and for the Army of Reserve, that there
        was want of individual interest in the levy, and that
        there was a great demand for labour by manufacturers.'-^
        The Lieutenant of Edinburgh explained that, among
        other discouragements, men had not been allowed to select
        their own regiments.^      Caithness pleaded exhaustion
        owing to the numbers of recruits taken for the new
        battalions of the Seventy-eighth and Seventy-ninth.*
        The Lieutenant of Caermarthen reminded the Govern-
         ment that in the American War a battalion had been
         raised in his county and had been sent to Goree, from
        which not a private returned home, and added that in
        Merthyr-Tydvil there were to be found not only high
        wages, but total impunity for all deserters, no man
        daring to execute the King's warrant therein.^             In other
        counties, again, there was conclusive evidence of evasion

           1   Circular to Ls.L. 31st Dec. 1805.
           2   I.D. vol. Ixxxvi. L.L. Perth, to S.S. 19th Nov. 1805.
           8   Ibid. vol. Ixxvi. L.L. Edinburgh, to S.S. ist Oct. 1805.
           *   Ibid. vol. Ixxi. L.L. Caithness, to S.S. 9th Oct. 1805.
           ^   Ibid. vol. Ixxi. L.L. Caermarthen, to S.S. 22nd Oct. 1 805.
