        146   MILITIA ENLISTMENT ACT, 1805 chap.
1805.   quota, or, in other words, to the actual strength of the
        Supplementary Militia in each county. Not more than
        one non-commissioned officer for every twenty men was
        to be accepted (sec. 2).    The Commanding Officer of
        every Militia regiment was empowered to ascertain how
        many of his men were ready to enlist, and if their
        number equalled four-fifths of the full quota permitted
        to enlist, then these could be handed over to the
        Regulars at once, and no more could be claimed (sec.
        3).    (The object of this last provision seems to have
        been to reward Colonels who stimulated their men to
        enlist, by taking fewer men away from them.)         Again
        the Commanding Officers of the Militia might set apart
        any number not exceeding one-half of the original quota
        of a regiment, complete with non-commissioned officers,
        and forbid them to be enlisted (sec. 4). (This was
        doubtless intended as a sop to reconcile the officers to the
        weakening of their battalions.)     Commanding Officers
        were also empowered to refuse to discharge any Militia-
        man upon due cause shown (sec. 16) ; no drummer,
        musician, clerk, or armourer could be enlisted without
        their consent (sec. 14) ; no men could be enlisted at all
        unless duly discharged by Commanding Officers from
        their regiments (sec. 10) ; and enlistment of men not
        duly discharged was strictly forbidden (sec. 17).       The
        men enlisted were not to be under 5 feet 4 inches in
        height, nor above thirty-five years of age (sec. 5).       If
        four-fifths of the allotted quota were not ready to enlist,
        the Commanding Officer was to read out to the battalion
        the terms of enlistment and explain them, and on the
        next day call on the men to come forward.          If more
        than the appointed number offered themselves, they
        were to be reduced to the required number by ballot
        (sec. 6).   If less   than   the   appointed   number came
        forward, the  Commanding Officer was to open a book
        in which for ten days men might cause their names to be
        inscribed.  At the close of the ten days the terms were
        to be again explained and the names of the men enlisted
        forwarded to the Clerk of the General Meeting.         If the
