        I50         NAPOLEON'S MARCH TO ULM                           chap.

1805.   given, and all the forces in Derbyshire and the West
        Riding of York at once got under arms. The behaviour
        of the Volunteers generally on this occasion was most
        praiseworthy.        The Rotherham infantry in particular, a
        battalion nearly six hundred strong, was at its appointed
        rendezvous, with all its waggons and every man present,
        within twelve hours, having made a march of twenty-
        two miles.^     But Napoleon was never really in a condi-
        tion to execute his project.      He had started on the
        wrong lines by constructing a flotilla of vessels which
        were designed to be both fighting ships and transports,
        but answered the purpose of neither.       The difficulty of
        bringing these small craft to the ports of the Channel in
        the face of the British cruisers was very formidable, and
        even when assembled there they could not, despite of
        much money spent on improving the harbours, put
        to sea in less than two tides.    The distribution of the
        troops among these boats was indeed settled upon paper,
        but except on paper it was absurd.        The great man's
        orders to his fleets had also been faulty ; and as a matter
        of fact he never had more than 90,000 troops ready for
        immediate embarkation. Upon the failure of his fleets
        to clear the Channel, therefore, he broke up his camp at
        Boulogne and marched on the 28 th of August for the
        Danube, covering his failure by a number of letters
        wherein he laid the blame for all shortcomings upon
        his Admirals.
            Shortly afterwards Austria and Russia declared war
        upon France. On the 21st of October Napoleon gained
        his first signal success against the Austrians at Ulm ;
        and having captured Vienna, marched into Moravia to
        combat the Russians and the remnant of the Austrians
        which lay at Austerlitz. The issue of the struggle
        depended upon the part that should be played by
        Prussia ; and a special embassy was sent from London
        to Berlin urging King Frederick William to throw in
        his lot with the Allies and to crush Napoleon once for

           1    I.D. vol. Ixxv. Lt.-Col. Jebb (Derby) to S.S. 4th Sept.; vol.
        xcli,   Yorks W.R., B. Frank to S.S. 17th, 19th, 28th Aug. 1805.
