        i6o          WINDHAM'S REFORMS                       chap.

1806.      After this preamble he discussed the means of
        making it an eligible calling. High pay, though the
        only certain method of ensuring his object, he rejected
        as economically impossible ; but there remained encour-
        agements, rewards, and short service. As to encourage-
        ments, the dignity of the Service had been impaired by
        the Volunteers, but there was still the resource of a
        generous provision for aged and disabled soldiers.      As
        to rewards, he considered that they had been too much
        neglected in favour of rigorous discipline which drove
        men to desertion ; and to enforce this point he reminded
        the House that of 13,000 men raised under Pitt's Addi-
        tional Force Act 2800 had deserted.       Apart from this,
        however, looking to the unpopularity of service in the
        West Indies, he advocated an additional allowance to
        men serving in the Colonies. But the reform upon
        which he relied above all others was short service, which
        both he and Robert Craufurd had already frequently
        pressed upon the Government.         To this end he pro-
        posed that men should be enlisted first for seven years,
        such being the usual term of apprenticeship, and should
        enjoy the usual privilege on discharge of exercising their
        trade wherever they wished.     If at the close of his first
        term a man was ready to re-engage for a second period
        of seven years, he was to receive extra pay of sixpence a
        week and be entitled after fourteen years' service to a
        pension for life.   If he re-engaged for a third term his
        extra pay was to be raised to one shilling a week, and at
        the end of twenty-one years' service he was to be assured
        of a full Chelsea pension of one shilling a day. Incident-
        ally Windham proposed to increase the whole of the
        Chelsea allowances, so that the first class of pension
        should be worth a shilling a day, the second ninepence,
        and the third sixpence. The grand difficulty, namely
        that of men whose service expired abroad in time of war,
        he proposed to face boldly by enacting that Commanding
        Officers should be empowered to retain them for six
        months beyond their term and for no longer, at the
        end of which period they were to be entitled to their
