        1   62           SHORT SERVICE                             chap.

1806.   but shrewd old soldier of great experience, thought that
        short service would undoubtedly be better in time of
        peace, but not in the field.    Lord Mulgrave advocated
        short service upon every account, and particularly for
        the likelihood that it would attract a better class of
        man ; and Lord Moira, probably the only man in the
        Army who was of the calibre of Moore and Wellesley,
        summed up uncompromisingly in its favour. So also did
        Sir James Craig, though he did not think that it would
        solve the problem of keeping the ranks full in time of
        war.    Lord Chatham, who, when he took the trouble,
        could both think and write, reviewed the proposal
        thoughtfully, and decided against it as likely to be pro-
        hibitive in regard to expense and prejudicial alike to esprit
        de corps and to discipline, especially in the matter of non-
        commissioned     officers.   Sir   John Moore condemned
        the proposal utterly, anticipating much evil and no good
        from it. " If," he said, " limited service and enormous
        bounties could tempt men to enlist, would the Army of
        Reserve and the Permanent Additional Force be incom-
        plete now } "   No change (such was his conclusion) in
        terms of enlistment would obtain men who could not be
        got without it. Nevertheless he admitted that compulsory
        service, if enforced, should be limited as to time.      Finally,
        the veteran Lord Grey thought that short service might
        answer as a temporary expedient, but was convinced
        that it would not produce as good soldiers as service for
        life.^

            Windham in summing up these opinions said that
        seven out of the fourteen answers were in favour of the
        reform, six against it, and one doubtful.  In the House
        of Commons Colonel Thomas Graham, the future Lord
        Lynedoch, spoke with approval of it ; but the most
        striking testimony was adduced by Lord de Blaquiere,
        who stated that in 1759 ^^ ^^"^ helped to raise the 17th
        Light Dragoons, and, finding no law to prevent him, had
        enlisted the men for three years.  In 1762 he re-enlisted
          ^ These opinions were printed in   Military Transactions, Supple-
        ment to vol. i.
