Ill               WINDHAM'S REFORMS                                     159

recruited   for   service   at       home        only ;   making   in    all   1   806.
100,744,    or, including artillery,110,000 men.      The
cavalry was 8820, and the infantry of all kinds 22,501
short of establishment.      Besides these there were
75,152 effective Militia, or 8000 deficient of the estab-
lishment, and 350,000 nominally effective Volunteers.
Hence, if means could be provided for making good
the wastage of war, it may be said that England at the
beginning of 1806 possessed a striking force of from
40,000 to 50,000 men ; for by withdrawing some of
Craig's battahons from Sicily and Malta, or, better still,
by adding 40,000 men from England to them in
the Mediterranean, not far short of 50,000 men might
have been put into the field.
    It was to the problem of keeping the ranks of the
Army filled by some permanent system that Windham
addressed himself.     Hitherto he had been merely a
bitter critic of the methods of Addington and Pitt, and,
so far as destructive criticism went, he had a good
case, for both ballot and parochial recruiting as enforced
by his predecessors had failed with ignominy. But he
had also adumbrated the principles which should govern
 his own action if he should be called upon to take
 their place, and upon his accession to office he did not
 shrink from putting his ideas into force.     " We have
 made it our first object to make an Army," he said in
 the House of Commons on the 3rd of April. " Hitherto
 measures have been taken to create not an Army but a
 substitute for an Army.         An Army must be made
                                 .       .   .



 by force or by choice. Compulsory service on every
 ballotted man would not be borne ; therefore force must
 be abandoned for choice     and choice so far has been
                                     ;


 stimulated by bounties.   But bounties mean that the pay
 and condition of the soldier are not the trade-value of
 his service ; and our recruiting service can never rest
 on a proper basis until the necessity for bounties has
 ceased.    Men receive no premium for other callings ;
 they pay one.     The Army therefore must be made an
 eligible calling or voluntary enlistment fails."
