Ill       WINDHAM'S ARMY REFORMS                         165

distinct periods,  each of seven years ; cavalry for three         1   806.
distinct periods of ten    years, seven years, and seven
years ; artillery for three periods of twelve years, five
years, and five years.     No man could re-enlist until
within twelve months of the end of his first period
of service, or until within two years of the expiration
of his second period. No man could re-enlist into
another regiment until completely discharged from the
first.   The period of service could be extended for six
months by the Commanding Officer of any colony or
station abroad, and by the King, in respect of all men
serving either at home or abroad, until six months
after the signature of a definite treaty of peace, provided
that such extension of service should in no case exceed
three years.   Men concluding their last period of service
could not be called upon to serve for more than six
months after its expiration.     No man could be drafted
to another regiment without his own consent. Every two
years of service in the East or West Indies were to count
as three.   Every man who had earned his discharge was
entitled to a free passage home, and to marching-
money to carry him from the place of discharge to his
own dwelling.       The pay of corporals and   privates in
the cavalry was to be raised by one penny a day upon their
re-engagement for a second term, and again for a third
term of service.   The pension to all ranks of non-com-
missioned officers and to privates after completion of
their second term was fivepence a day.      At the con-
clusion of the third term sergeants could retire on is. to
IS.   lod.; corporals on is. to is. 6d.; and privates on
IS.   a day.   If they served beyond their third period,
they were entitled to an extra halfpenny a day.
    However, in case the supply of recruits thus obtain-
able should fail, or, as Windham put it, because " a
custom had grown up for Irish Militiamen to enter the
Line," an Act was passed to enable Volunteers from the
Irish Militia to enlist in the Army (46 Geo. III.   c.   1   24,
2 1st July 1806).     Hereby the King was empowered to
allow Volunteers from the Militia to enlist in the Line
