Ill               REPEAL OF PITT'S ACT                      163

the whole of them, except two, for a bounty of two                  1806.
guineas, and finally re-enlisted them a third time in
1775 before they went out to America, where, as he said,
they fought like lions.^
     It was, however, necessary as part of Windham's
scheme that Pitt's Additional Force Act should be
repealed, and it was over this issue that the dead states-
man's friends rallied to the fight. Castlereagh declared
that the Act was only just beginning to be understood,
that during the first ten weeks it had produced 300 men
a week, and was furnishing men at the rate of 1 6,000 a
year, though not yet enforced in more than half of the
counties.^ Generals Pulteney and Tarleton also defended
it ; but Fox declared it to be miserably bad.  " Where I
live," he said, "it has never been acted on, within five miles
of the Commander-in-Chief. It was absurd and imprac-
ticable, and therefore not executed."    He added, with
not unfair sarcasm, that it had taken its own framers
eighteen months to understand it and put it into opera-
tion.^ Wilberforce adverted to its total failure in the
North and West Ridings of York, where not a man had
been raised.    A Mr. Hawthorne averred that the men
had only been obtained by crimps and through flagrant
breaches of the law, and that the circular to the
Lords-Lieutenant of the 31st of December to all intent
sanctioned both practices.     Castlereagh tried hard to
stem the torrent by adducing the case of Leicestershire,
which, he maintained, had raised two hundred men at a
much cheaper rate than those of the Army of Reserve.
Mr. Babington, himself from Leicestershire, thereupon
explained that these two hundred men were undersized
boys who had been purchased from recruiting officers at
five guineas a head.   In fact there was no good defence
      1   H.D. Commons, 17th April 1806.
     Perceval {H.D. 18th April) gave the following figures.
      2                                                       The
Additional Force Act had produced
 258 men a week, equal to 13,200 men a year, in last 15 weeks
 277 „        „      „     14,600   „     „     „    10     „
  356 «       „      „     18,000   „     „     „     5     „
   3 H.D. Commons, 3rd April 1806.
