          156           TREATY OF PRESSBURG                          chap.

1805-6.   the Permanent Additional Force Act in his county was
          due to scarcity of men, the despatch of a military officer
          would only be a useless expense.^
              This, however, was the expiring struggle of the
          unfortunate measure, which, none the less, the authori-
          ties at the Horse Guards pronounced to be the most
          valuable that had ever been produced.    For in the first
          place it connected the Army with the country, and in
          the second permanently established         second battalions
          for   all   the regiments of the Line that were serving
          abroad.^      Then on the 23rd of January Pitt died, and
          his administration gave place to the " Ministry of all
          the Talents " under the presidency of Lord Grenville.
          The war department was entrusted to Windham, the
          great advocate of short service and the uncompromising
          enemy of the Volunteers, who entered upon his new
          functions on the 5th of February 1806. Thus it was
          evident that great changes of military policy would
          certainly ensue ; and it will be well, therefore, to review
          the situation at the moment.




              In the first place, all immediate danger of invasion
          had been banished by the total defeat of the French and
          Spanish fleets at Trafalgar on the 21st of October 1805.
          But, on the other hand, the European Coalition had
          been broken up.       Austria, heavily defeated at Ulm
          and Austerlitz, withdrew from the struggle immediately
          after the latter action, and on the 26th of December
          agreed to the humiliating Treaty of Pressburg.      The
          Tsar, though mightily discouraged, was determined to
          fight in Polish territory, having been excluded from
          that of Austria under an armistice preliminary to the
          Treaty.   But as the disaster of Ulm had caused the
          hasty withdrawal of the Austrians from Upper Italy,

             1 I.D. vol. xciv. L.L. Berks, to S.S. 8th Jan. 1806;   vol. cii.
          L.L. Sussex, to S.S. 3rd Jan. 1806.
             2 Military Transactions, Supplement,
                                                  pp. 3-4.
