Ill                   SHORT SERVICE                           i6i

discharge and to a free passage home.As to the existing              1   806.
Army, the intention was to discharge no man until he
had completed his twenty-one years, but to grant the
additional sixpence a week to all who had served more
than seven      and   less    than   fourteen   years,   and the
additional shilling to       all   who had served more        than
fourteen and less than twenty-one years.
    The scheme was a bold one, but it came as less of a
surprise thanmight have been expected, for the Duke
of York had circulated a sketch of it, with some modi-
fications, in June 1804, to fourteen General Officers,
seven of whom could be reckoned the most distin-
guished men in the Army. Their replies differed very
greatly.   General Hewett, the Inspector-General of
Recruiting, strongly opposed it, alleging the difficulty
and expense of supplying foreign garrisons and prefer-
ring the system, favoured by Pitt, of establishing a Per-
manent Reserve of 70,000 men, of whom 20,000 might
be induced to volunteer annually into the Line.
General Fox, the brother of Charles James, on the other
hand, seconded the proposal, opining that desertion
would be less frequent and the service less unpopular if
men returned to their friends young and well, instead of
reappearing only as worn-out cripples at Chelsea and
Kilmainham. He did not fear any injury to discipline,
believing that the soldier, being better contented, would
be more subordinate.     Incidentally he mentioned that
very cruel and severe punishments had been disused
from about 1775 ^^^^^ about 1798, when they had
reappeared and seemed likely to increase.
   Lord Harrington confessed that he had been opposed
to short service, but had been converted to it by the
practice in the East India Company's Army and the
French Army. Sir David Dundas, upon the whole,
favoured short service, but would not allow men to be
discharged in time of war ; and Lord Cornwallis took
much the same view. General Whitelocke, who had
enjoyed considerable experience of recruiting, was
decidedly for the change.  Sir James Pulteney, a quaint
                                                          M
