Ill               STATE OF THE ARMY, 1806                             157

so that of Austerlitz had forced the Tsar to recall from                      1   806.
Naples the small corps with which Craig had hoped to
co-operate ; and the detachment under Craig's orders
was obliged therefore to stand on the defensive in Sicily.
All offensive movements in the Mediterranean, on this
account, were for the present paralysed.      It depended
mainly upon the attitude of Prussia whether an effective
field for offensive operations could be found in Northern
Europe, though in point of fact no better sphere could
have been selected than that of Italy, which lay per-
fectly open and ready.
     The effective strength of the Army on the 17 th of
March 1806 was, including artillery, 192,372 ; of
which 165,790 were engaged for general service, and
the rest for         home service only.^          The cavalry at this
time consisted, over and above the Blues and Life
Guards, of thirty-two regiments of Dragoon Guards
and Dragoons, to which must be added five regiments
of the King's German Legion.
   The infantry counted three regiments (seven
battalions) of Guards, one hundred numbered regiments
of the Line, three Garrison Battalions,'^ nine Veteran
Battalions, six independent corps specially formed for
garrisons in West Africa, New South Wales, and Canada,
and the Royal Staff Corps.       The above were all
European troops, and to them may be added nine foreign
battalions, besides the ten battalions of the King's
German Legion.
   There were, further, eight West India Regiments
and four independent West Indian companies.
   The artillery numbered 17,927 of all ranks, over
      1   These   figures are   from Castlereagh's speech of 3rd April.   I
use them because they include the artillery ; but they do not tally
with the official returns in Military Transactions, and I do not
think that the omission of the artillery in the latter accounts for
the difference.   The returns show a grand total of 185,701, of
which 167,701 engaged for general service.
   2 These had been made up of the sixteen Reserve battalions,

consisting of boys and worn-out old men recruited for the Army of
Reserve.
