        i68        NATIONAL TRAINING BILL                  chap.

1806.   Yeomanry by reducing the pay of the officers, and the
        allowances both for drill sergeants and for permanent
        duty. As to the Volunteers he would give them clothing
        for the current year, but would not promise it for the
        following year.    The principle upon which he meant
        to work was that Volunteers should not exist except at
        their own expense.    No men who accepted more than
        arms and accoutrements from the Government were
        worthy of the name of Volunteers ; and nothing in
        future was to    exempt a man from national training
        unless he became such a Volunteer.
             Next, as to the national training itself, it must be
        enforced by compulsion, but by as light compulsion as
        possible ; and he therefore proposed that men should
        undergo it without leaving their homes, and that dis-
        cipline should be as mild as might be.       But obviously
        all could not be trained at once, and there must be

        selection.    For this purpose he would divide the able-
        bodied men into three classes, and choose from them by
        ballot 200,000 men to be trained annually for twenty-
        six days, receiving pay of one shilling a day.        If a
        certain proportion of men voluntarily offered themselves
        for training, the ballot might be so far diminished ; and
        if. a sufficient number came forward he would be pre-

        pared to accept it in lieu of the full quota prescribed by
        law.    The training itself he proposed to conduct by
        means of detachments of Militia and of the Regulars
        nominally attached to the counties. In particular he
        would take advantage of the officers appointed to the
        skeleton second -battalions raised under the Army of
        Reserve Act, who, at great expense to the country, had
        been placed on full pay from the half- pay list or
        removed from their proper duty some time before a
        recruit had been levied, and had stood " waiting and
        gaping for their men like oysters at ebb-tide." ^ All of
        these provisions and regulations for the present, however,
        would apply to England only ; for in Scotland the
        people were more military and the Volunteers more
                     1   H.D. Commons, 3rd April 1806.
