    Ill   WINDHAM'S VOLUNTEER REFORMS                             167

    brought into the Regulars. He would have encouraged                 1806.
    the Volunteer Associations to arm and discipline them-
    selves at their own expense ; but the mass of the people
    he would have had loosely trained, so as to make
    useful recruits for the Regular Army.    Another matter
    also needed to be set right, namely, section 26 of the
    Volunteer Consolidation Act, which gave rank to
    officers of Volunteers and Yeomanry next to those of
    Militia or the Regular Army of the same grade.      This
    cheapening of military rank had caused great discontent.
    Craufurd, it must be mentioned, in a previous debate
    had adduced the case of a retailer of tarts and cheese-
    cakes, who, being a Colonel of Volunteers, was authorised
    to    give   orders   to   Lieutenant-Colonels    commanding
    Regular battalions.    " Such a man," he said, *' might
    be very superior to such officers in civil life, but not in
    military ; and yet if a General of a brigade were killed
    in action, the command of the brigade might devolve
    upon the vendor of pastry." ^ All such nonsense as
    this Windham intended to bring summarily to an end
    by enacting that in no case should an officer of the
    Yeomanry or Volunteers take rank above field-officers
    of the Regulars or Militia. An Act of one section
    (46 Geo. in. cap. 125) to this effect was accordingly
    passed on the 21st of July.
        There remained the problem of reducing the expense
    of the Volunteers, a problem which needed to be faced
    at once, for the private subscriptions were nearly ex-
    hausted, and it was plain most of the corps must lean
    wholly upon the Government in a little while. Windham
    admitted that the reduction must be gradual ; and there-
    fore proposed to begin by diminishing their allowances,
    cutting off their pay and granting them privileges in
    return.   This would, of course, lead to a curtailment of
    their numbers, but even if a Volunteer corps were dis-
    banded the men remained. First, therefore, he would
    reduce the eighty-five days' training in the year to
    twenty-six, and lessen the pecuniary grants to the
           1   H.D. Commons, 28th June 1805, Craufurd's speech.




m
