        1   66    WINDHAM'S MILITIA REFORMS chap.
1806.   during twenty days in each year after the 24th of July
        (sees. I, 2). The proportion was not to exceed fifteen
        men for every company annually (sec. 7), and if a
        greater    number offered themselves, the Commanding
        Officer might select among them which he would let go
        and which he would retain (sec. 9). The establishment
        of the Irish Militia being at the time 26,480, this source
        of recruiting, if the full number of men volunteered,
        would bring in close upon 4000 men annually.
            Next Windham dealt with the Militia, which he
        declared to be our true army for home defence, and for
        that service equal to any part of our force.      The one
        change which he purposed to institute was to continue
        the suspension of the ballot, and to rely upon a limited
        bounty to produce sufficient recruits. An Act was there-
        fore passed (46 Geo. III. cap. 91, i6th July 1 806) for the
        return of corrected lists of persons liable to serve in the
        Militia, and to suspend the ballot for two years.     This
        enacted simply that new lists should be made out (sees.
        1-5) ; and that as the Militia still exceeded the original
        quota fixed by the Act of 1802, the ballot should be
        suspended for two years (sec. 6).       But powers were
        reserved   to    the   King to cause deficiencies in that
        original quota to be      made good by the ballot at any
        time (sec. 7).

                                      VI
            Finally, Windham attacked the great question of
        the Volunteers ; and here he was absolutely uncom-
        promising.   He admitted that, when the Levy en Masse
        Act was passed, the difficulty of enforcing it had made
        him favour a voluntary system. But it would have been
        a   very different system to that which was actually
        adopted.   He would have scattered depots of arms and
        schools of instruction all over the country, and trained
        the mass of the people simply to fire and hit their
        mark. This would have been far cheaper than the
        existing arrangement, which was exceedingly expensive,
        and moreover locked up       recruits who might have been
