        172          ALLOWANCES REDUCED                           chap.

1806.   under penalty of a      fine,   elaborately graduated to suit
        variations of income, for non-attendance.     In cases of
        misconduct the offender was to be delivered by the
        officer or sergeant to the parish constable, and to be
        brought by the constable before a magistrate, who was
        empowered to fine him to the extent of los., with two
        days* imprisonment in default of fines not exceeding 5s.,
        and of five days' for fines not exceeding £ i    Finally,
                                                            .



        Deputy-Lieutenants were empowered to offer rewards
        (to be defrayed out of fines) for skill in marksmanship.
        Otherwise all fines under sec. 59 were to be applied to
        the expense of training within the county.
             Parliament rose on the 28 th of July, after a
        momentous session ; but Windham had already begun
        his reforms among the Volunteers.     On the 9th of June
        he issued a circular to the effect that the allowance of
        £110 per troop of Yeomanry for contingent expenses
        would be discontinued after the 24th, and that £2 per
        annum for every non-commissioned officer and man
        would be substituted.       Amonth later, on the 17th of
        July, he circulated, in the form of letters to the Secre-
        tary at War, the revised regulations for the pay and
        allowances of the Volunteers and Yeomanry at large ;
        whereby in effect he swept away the June Allowances
        altogether.^   To cavalry under the June Allowances he
        granted ;^3 a man for clothing, and ;^2 a man for all
        other expenses, and an adjutant for corps of three troops
        of forty rank and file and upwards. To cavalry under the
        August Allowances he gave ;^2 a man for all expenses,
        an adjutant to corps over 300 strong, and a sergeant-
        major to corps of over 120 and under 300 men.        The
        infantry he appears to have placed uniformly under the
        August Allowances ; and to corps raised after the 24th
             ^ As usual the Clerks at the Home  Office inserted no printed
        copies of the enclosures which are the essence of the circular. It
        is certain that Windham intended to put all the Volunteers on the

        August Allowances {H.D. 22nd April 1806, vol. vi. p. 850), but
        apparently he was induced to relent so far as the cavalry was con-
        cerned.  The new rules as to cavalry I found in I.D. Miscell.
        July 1806.
