Ill            CHANGE OF MINISTRY                        173
of July 1 806 he refused to give any allowance                 1806.
whatever.
     Not unnaturally there was loud and dismal outcry.
Multitudes of corps succumbed, or disbanded them-
selves in indignation, to the number altogether of over
11,000 men ; and many counties vented their wrath by
passing votes of confidence in the Volunteers, and
lamenting their unhappy destruction.        Windham re-
mained unmoved, for this was no more than he expected.
The Training Act, however, proved to be a more
difficult experiment than he had looked for.          His
first step, on the 15 th of September, was to send a

circular to the Lords-Lieutenant saying that he pro-
posed to station detachments of certain regiments in
every county to assist in the training of the population
and to collect recruits, and desiring to know if the
regiments which he had selected would be acceptable, or
whether any county would prefer some other or others.
This as a preliminary step was sensible, but meanwhile
all further arrangements were suspended while the new

lists of men liable to the Militia ballot were being made

out.    This business took much time; and in spite of
repeated reminders,^ the lists were not ready until the
end of the year, so that it was February 1 807 before
copies of the Act were circulated to the counties, and
directions given for the apportionment of the quotas.
The royal warrant for holding the ballots under the Act
followed on the 17th of February, and Windham
declared in Parliament that, if necessary, it would be
enforced in the spring.   But in the middle of March
the Ministry of all the Talents resigned    and Castle-
                                                  ;


reagh, Windham's ablest critic, succeeded him as
Minister for War and the Colonies.


                               VII
   Before going further it will be well to summarise           1807,
once again the position of England and of Europe. In
           1   Circulars of 2nd Aug., 19th Sept. 1806.
