Ill               NATIONAL TRAINING ACT                                 169

efficient, while the            Militia   laws        also   were of more     1806.
recent introduction.
     It was not to be supposed that changes so drastic
would pass unchallenged in a House full of Volunteer
field-officers, and yet the opposition was very moderate.
Castlereagh protested that the new Training Act would
be a breach of the engagement given, that the Levy en
Masse Act should not be enforced if a certain quota of
Volunteers were produced by the counties ; ^ but this
contention, though perfectly just, carried little weight.
Perceval, on the 22nd of April, initiated a debate in
defence of the Volunteers, but gained little by it, and
when the Training Bill was actually introduced it was
received for the most part in no carping spirit. General
Pulteney, in his shrewd way, went to the heart of the
matter by observing that much as he admired the
Volunteers, he would no more trust to voluntary
services for the defence of a nation than to voluntary
contributions for the support of its finances.'^                  In fact,
despite a few vehement protestants to the contrary, the
House appeared to favour some form of compulsory
training.The one doubtful point was, how should that
training be carried out ; and this Windham left far too
much to chance.    Indeed he provoked a roar of laughter
by insisting upon the wisdom of a provision that the
parish constable should be present at all drills to enforce
the instruction given by the sergeant.^
     However, on the i6th of July the Training Act
became law, being confined to England only (46 Geo.
III. cap. 90).  It began by repealing the First Defence
Act and the Levy en Masse Act (sec. i), and com-
mitting the execution of the present Act to the
Lieutenancies of counties (sees. 2, 3).         Upon the
return of the lists of persons liable to serve in the
Militia, the Privy Council was to apportion among the
counties 200,000 men to be trained, which portions
were to be redistributed by the Lieutenancies among
                     1   H.D. Commons, 3rd April 1806.
      2   Ibid.   24th June 1806.         ^   /^/^.   27th June 1806.
