         176           NEEDS OF THE ARMY                           chap.

1807.   could be recruited, experience having shown that men
        who had once embraced a military life were generally
        willing to extend their service without limit ; and,
        thirdly, to form a more extended Militia, which might
        obviate all the objections to the present system and to
        the Volunteers.       The Commander-in-Chief therefore
        recommended that the Infantry of the Line should con-
        sist of its existing loi regiments, and that each of them

        should consist of two battalions, 1000 strong apiece,
        the first battalion enlisted for general and the second for
        home     service.  Each of these regiments should be
        allotted   and attached to one of the counties of the
        United Kingdom.         The second      battalions   should   be
        raised and kept complete by ballot for seven years, their
        service being limited to the British and Channel Islands,
        but with liberty to enlist for general service in the first
        battalions.  The deficiencies in the second battalions only
        should be filled by the ballot.
            As to the Militia, it should be increased from
        84,000 to 150,000, either by ballot or exemption,^
        formed into battalions which should be officered by
        county gentlemen, and which should not be liable to be
        moved from their counties except in case of invasion or
        internal commotion.       The battalions should be called
        out for one month's training in the year ; the companies
        should be further exercised once a week or once a
        fortnight in their parishes, and there should be an
        inspecting field-officer to each four or five thousand men
        to superintend their discipline, and to take command of
        them in the event of their marching out of their counties.
            The cavalry, artillery. Guards, and Sixtieth Rifles^
        would be able to maintain themselves by ordinary
        recruiting.
            The cost of the new plan, for pay and clothing for
        the Regular Infantry and Militia, would be ^9,799,000 ;

           1 I use the exact words of the memorandum, but I do not know

        what " by ballot or exemption " means.
           * The Sixtieth, it must be repeated, was practically a foreign

        corps.
