        1   82   MILITIA TRANSFER ACT, 1807                 chap.

1807.   be discovered.    He had therefore revived the Inspecting
        Field-Officers,   who had been aboHshed by Windham,
        and should encourage the Volunteers to come out on
        permanent duty.       Therewith he introduced bills to
        enable the Militia to enlist in the Line, and to provide
        for refilling it upon the consequent depletion.
           Castlereagh's expedients were obviously only meant
        to bridge over a single year until he could devise some
        permanent scheme.        He wished, as he said, to disturb
                                                 There were
        existing arrangements as little as possible.
        of course strong speeches made, condemning resort to
        the ballot and recommending that if it must be employed
        it should be for the purpose of re-creating the Army of
        Reserve.     Great objection also was taken, not without
        reason, to the depletion of the Militia, Addington in
        particular averring that it had led to the resignation of
        a vast number of officers in 1804.^        Windham went
        back to his old argument that ballot created bounty,
        bounty rising to excess created new ballot, and so on in
        a vicious circle until bounties became unendurable; and he
        urged that he alone had tried to move out of that circle.
        This might be true ; but it must be said in justice to
        Castlereagh that he meddled as little as possible with
        Windham's measures, and that if he introduced drastic
        treatment of his own, he was compelled to do so by the
        pressure of the military and political situation abroad.
            The bills for permitting enlistment from the Militia
        into the Army became law on the 1 3th of August (Ireland,
        47 Geo. III. sess. 2, cap. ^^; Great Britain, cap. 57).
        They provided that any number of Militiamen might be
        enlisted in excess of three-fifths of the establishment of
        each regiment (sec. i), a provision which set free 16,327
        to enlist in England, 4160 in Scotland, and 8680 in
        Ireland.     If five-sixths of the allotted number came
        forward at once in any regiment, no more were to be
        enlisted (sec. 2).    If five-sixths did not come forward
        within thirty days, the Commanding Officer was to
        explain the terms of enlistment, and, if the number even
                           1   H.D. 27th July 1807.
