Ill        BAD NEWS FROM ABROAD                         179

parishes by means of fines, as in the case of the Army         1807.
of Reserve Act.     The latter expedient had so recently
failed  that he could not hesitate to recommend the
former ; and he therefore inclined to call for 20,000
men from the Militia of Great Britain, and so to regu-
late the process of volunteering from that force as to
shorten as far as possible the period of drunkenness and
disorder v/hich invariably accompanied it.        Lastly, in
order to avoid a ballot if possible, he suggested that
j^io should be given to the Colonels of Militia for every
man taken from them, to be applied by them to the
purpose of obtaining voluntary recruits.
    But now bad news began to flow in from all quarters
with dismal iteration.     First came that of the mutiny at
Vellore, which, though happily quelled by the amazing
gallantry and readiness of a single officer, called for the
immediate despatch to India of 4000 men. Then came
the story of the disgraceful failure in Egypt, accom-
panied by what was, in the circumstances, deplorable
waste of lives.    Then Lord Hutchinson wrote from the
Russian headquarters pleading earnestly for a diversion
in the Baltic ; and the King of Sweden pressed as
earnestly for a force to co-operate with him and with
the remnant of the Prussian Army to save Stralsund.
For the French had begun to move again, always with
success in spite of Eylau.     Dantzig surrendered to them
on the 24th of May ; and Stralsund was one of the few
ports left open to British merchandise on the Continent.
The case was so urgent that the Cabinet resolved to
send at once such men as could be spared; and on the 9th
of June Lord Cathcart received orders to take command
of about 28,000 British and Germans, and to proceed
with a first division of about 8000 Germans to Stralsund,
as soon as transports could be procured for them.
    The despatch of this detachment caused Castlereagh
deep searchings of heart. He reckoned that it would
leave the British Isles with but 21,290 trustworthy
infantry, including the Guards, for home defence ; the
second battalions, formed from the Army of Reserve
