        1   84        MILITIA COMPLETION ACT                          chap.

1807.            The corresponding Act for Great Britain (47 Geo.
                            was to the following effect. First,
        III. sess. 2. cap. 71)
        the Act for suspending the ballot was repealed (sec. i).
        It was then enacted that within three months of the
        passing of the Act, a number equal to three-fourths
        of the quota under the Militia Act of 1802 should
        be raised (sec. 2).    Where new or amended lists
        were required the time was extended to five months
        and four months (sec. 8).      The fine for exemption
        was raised to ;^20     which, or any part of it not
                                    ;

        falling below half the average price of a substitute,
        could be paid to the ballotted man who was enrolled in
        place of the person paying the fine  but the man who
                                                          ;


        accepted the ;^20, or any part of it, as aforesaid, was
        not to be entitled to the allowance usually granted to men
        worth less than £soo      (sees. 16-18).   The bounty to
        be given to parochial substitutes was not to exceed ;^ i o,
        and not more than ^5 was to be paid to any substitute
        whatever until he joined his regiment.     All fines, unless
        expended as aforesaid, were to be paid into the
        Imperial Exchequer (sees. 19, 20).        Volunteers were
        not exempted from the ballot unless they had served
        the full number of days provided by the Volunteer
        Consolidation Act of 1 804 ; nor were persons ballotted
        under the Training Act exempted, nor officers on half-
        pay, unless they had tendered their services as officers
        of Militia or Volunteers (sees. 22, 23).          Counties,
        hundreds, or parishes not producing their full quota of
        men were liable to a fine of £60 for every man deficient,
        subject to a remission of three-fourths, one-half, and
        one -quarter if the deficiency were made good within
        one, two, or three months respectively (sees. 28, 31).
        Counties that refused to ballot could be subjected to the
        same       fine   of ^^60       (sees.   32,   23)-   When   the   full
        number of men had been supplied, the ballot was to be
        suspended until the ist of January 18 10 (sec. 34).
        Finally, the Act was not to apply to London (sec. 27).
            Dealing first with the transfer of Militiamen to the
        Line, it appears that most of the Commanding Officers
