Ill     THE COPENHAGEN EXPEDITION                      i8i

      The peril was very great.   It   seemed certain that    »8o7.
England must be driven back once more to the defen-
sive,  and must undergo yet another term of the miser-
able anxieties of 1803 and 1804.         Fortunately some
inkling of the secret agreement between Napoleon and
the Tsar reached the British Cabinet, which determined
it to forestall France in her designs upon Denmark.    On
the 19th of July a powerful fleet was ordered to proceed
to the Baltic, and Cathcart was directed to bring his
German troops back from Stralsund to Elsinore, where
the British part of his force would meet him.        With
an army completed to 28,000 men he was then to
demand the surrender of the Danish fleet, and, if it
were refused, to besiege and capture Copenhagen.
    Three days after this momentous decision, and while
the country was still quaking over a fresh alarm of
invasion, Castlereagh unfolded his plans to a newly-
elected Parliament.    Having first dwelt upon     the in-
sufiiciency  of ordinary recruiting to fill the ranks of
the Army, he declared his intention of calling on the
British Militia to provide 2 1 ,000 men, and on the Irish
Militia to provide 7000 men, for the Line. The vacancies
made through this call and through the discharge of
Militiamen who had served their five years were to be
filled up by ballotting 36,000 men for England, and pro-
curing by ballot or voluntary enlistment 8000 men for
Ireland.  It was a heavy demand, as he admitted, but it
would render further ballot unnecessary for two or three
years.   He proposed also to give the men who joined the
Line the alternative of enlisting for life if they wished,
and to grant them an increased bounty if they did so.
   Passing to Windham's Training Act, he declared that
he had found it impossible to carry out ; but he pro-
posed to use its machinery for classifications and ballots,
and if possible to lengthen the training to two if not
three years.  From thence he hoped to evolve a Local
Militia, and so to render the Act really useful.    Mean-
while he thought that the Volunteers should      be upheld
until some decidedly superior substitute to them should
