Ill   IRISH MILITIA COMPLETION ACT                        183

then fell below the quota, a book was to be opened to           1807.
receive men's names for ten days (sees. 5, 6).     At the
close of those ten days all enlistment without special
leave of the Commanding Officer was forbidden for three
months, after which three days were to be allowed for
volunteering, and so again at the end of the next three
months ; no man, however, being allowed to offer him-
self at the end of twelve months after the passing of the
Act (sec. 7). No man five feet four inches in height
and under thirty-five years of age was to be rejected
(sec. 3), and men might enlist for short service or for
life (sec. 12).  Finally, no man was to be drafted from
his chosen regiment against his will.
     The draft from the Militia of Ireland, it must be
remembered, was to be in addition to that of 15 per
cent annually taken from that force ; and was reckoned
to deplete it to the extent of 35 per cent.   The bounty
offered to enlisting Militiamen was ^^ 10; and the Duke
of York further encouraged the levy by offering an
ensigncy in the Line to every officer of the Militia who
could bring with him forty volunteers for the Army.^
     For replenishing the Militia, the Irish Act (47 Geo.
III. sess. 2, cap. 56, 13th Aug. 1807) provided for
raising a number of men equal to one-half of the estab-
lished quota, either by ballot or by ordinary enlistment
at the discretion of the Lord-Lieutenant ; any men in
excess of the establishment being retained as super-
numeraries (sees. 1-3).        A
                              bounty of four guineas was
granted to the Colonels for each man, and one additional
guinea for expenses, no part of which last was to go to
the recruit (sees. 4-6).     Any county deficient of its
quota after six months was to be fined ^^30 for every
man wanting but three-fourths, one-half, or one-third
                ;



of the fine could be remitted if the deficiency were
supplied within one month, two months, or three
months (sec. 17). Seven-tenths of the expense of find-
ing men to make good casualties was to fall upon the
counties (sec. 18).
            1   Castlereagh, Desp. viii. pp. 20, 72-75.
