        i8o         FRIEDLAND AND TILSIT                        chap.

1807.   and nominally nearly 29,000 strong, being too poor to
        be relied on for service in the field. Ordinary recruiting
        could not be counted on at best to produce more than
        16,000 men a year, which was about the figure of the
        casualties in each of the two years last past.  The Army
        was therefore stationary. The second battalions were
        valuable as recruiting dep6ts, but no more.         There
        were fifty-six of them, complete in officers but with only
        200 men apiece. The cost of the recruits which they
        gathered worked out altogether at ^73 a head.        They
        kept 16,000 men, enlisted for general service, in idle-
        ness because these could only be transferred to the first
        battalions of their own regiments; in fact, unless they were
        at once filled   up by 20,000 men from the Militia, they
        could never answer their double purpose of feeding their
        first battalions and furnishing an efficient force for home

        defence.     The deficiencies in the Militia consequent
        upon so heavy a draft could only be made good by the
        ballot, more especially as the five years' service of some
        6000 principals would expire at the beginning of 1808.^
            Such, then, was the conclusion to which Castlereagh
        had been driven by the end of May, and to this he
        rigidly adhered in spite of much private advice to the
        contrary.    For, as the summer progressed, the situation
        became more and more serious. Cathcart, pursuant to
        his orders, sailed for Stralsund with his German troops,
        and arrived there on the i6th of July ; but mean-
        while not only had the Russians been utterly defeated at
        Friedlandon the 14th of June, but the Tsar had thrown
        himself into the arms of Napoleon by the conclusion of
        the Treaty of Tilsit on the 7 th of July.       Thereby not
        only was England left without a friend in Europe except
        hapless Sweden, governed by a half-demented King ;
        but she was threatened with the forcible closing of the
        ports of Sweden, Denmark, and Portugal against her, and
        with the active hostility of all three countries. Thus with
        the Danish fleet at his command           Napoleon might hope
        to renew his plans of invasion.
                          1   Castlereagh's Desp. pp. 53-66.
