Ill   UNFAIR TREATMENT OF MILITIA                                185

of Militia behaved very handsomely in encouraging                         1807.
their men to enlist ; though as the deficiency of officers
in the service increased from 301 on the ist of July
1807 to 449 on the ist of April 1808, it must be feared
that their subordinates were not equally patient.       It
must be confessed too that the Militia was not treated
fairly in the matter.  An order was sent out that, during
the thirty days set apart for the enlistment of Militia-
men, no officers of the Regular Army must appear near
the quarters of any Militia regiment ; but the Adjutant-
General sent a circular to all the Regular battalions to
inform them of the date when the thirty days would
expire, and to intimate that their recruiting parties
might then go to the Militia regiments, though they
" must be careful not to disturb their discipline." Such
a caution as was contained in these last words might
suffice to save the conscience of the Horse Guards, but
could not avert the scenes of riotous drunkenness which
inevitably accompanied the treating and other methods
of suasion employed by recruiting officers. The whole
proceeding was an infringement of the spirit of the law ;
and it is not surprising that in some quarters it was
deeply resented. The Lieutenant of Lancashire, indeed,
on receiving directions from the Adjutant-General to
admit the recruiting parties, flatly refused to obey them
until ordered by the Home Secretary.^
    Again, no fewer than thirty-two counties produced
five-sixths of their quotas at once, and were con-
sequently excused from producing the remaining sixth.
None the less the Secretary of State sent a circular to
the Lieutenants asking them to use their influence with
the Commanding Officers to squeeze this little residue
of men out of them.     This was ill received, as well it
might be, and in at least one county the request was
curtly refused.^  However, in spite of all drawbacks,
    1 /.D. vol. ex. O.C., Dumfries Mila. to S.S. 9th Oct. 1807; vol.

cxvi. L.L. Lanes, to S.S. 28th Sept. 1807.
    2 Ibid. vol. cxxvii., Circular of S.S, to thirty-two counties, 25th

March 1808 ; O.C. Derby Militia to S.S. nth April 1808.
