Ill            THE BALLOT OF 1807                            191

and insurance companies drove a roaring trade. Crimp-                1807.
ing, indeed, reached such a height that it was carried on
not only by publicans, parish officers, and such like, but
by privates, non-commissioned officers, and even officers
of the Army, Militia, and Volunteers ; nor was there one
who failed to make from ^5 to ^ 1 5 out of every substi-
tute that he provided.   In one case a man was engaged
for the Warwick Militia by a corporal for a bounty of
j^io ; the corporal sold him to a sergeant for ^{^ 18 ; the
sergeant made him over to a crimping publican for
some unrecorded price ; and the publican finally disposed
of him to a parish officer for ^27 6s.:  Indeed, parochial
officers lay generally at the mercy of the professional
crimps, who controlled the market by laying hold of the
substitutes, selling them to one another, and keeping
them in pay until the unhappy parishes, rendered
desperate by fines and repeated ballots, were driven at
last to give them their own price.
     Nevertheless parishes were not without resources of
their own.     Their principle was, very naturally, to
avoid above all things the burden of supporting the
Militiamen's families ; and consequently they always pre-
ferred to enlist single men.     They would take any boy
who could reach the standard of height and pass a
medical examination, rather than the finest of married
men. In Warwickshire the military officers complained
loudly that the Deputy-Lieutenants were remiss in the
execution of their duty.      The Lieutenant who, with all
his subordinates, plumed himself upon the methods by
which his Lieutenancy was ruled, indignantly repudiated
the charge.     The General of the district retorted that
two hundred children had been furnished as substitutes,
who might grow into men, but were at present only fit
 for drummers.^     And beyond all question vast numbers
 of the so-called men all over England were even as these
 children of Warwick.        As crimps the parish officers
 appear only to have mastered the elements of their
    1 /.D. vol. cxlviii. L.L.Warwick, to S.S. 26th Jan.; Maj.-Gen.

 Cockburn to L.L. Warwick, and to S.S. 6th February 1808.
