Ill               TRAFFIC IN SUBSTITUTES                                   195

   But it need hardly be said that the law upon the one                             1   807.
point as upon the other was a dead letter. In Nuneaton
notices were publicly issued offering bounties of ^30
and j^ 1 7 respectively for recruits for the Northampton
and Leicester Militia.^ From Berwick the Lieutenant
reported without concealment to the Secretary of State
in January 1808 that he could not fill the ranks of his
Militia from the county.  The people were all agricul-
tural ; labour being scarce, they were not to be tempted
by bounties   and hence he was obliged to recruit " at a
                     ;


distance " with great delay and expense.^   In Birming-
ham there was a Major of Volunteers who was also
Lieutenant-Colonel in the Leicester Militia, and kept a
regular recruiting agency for his Militia in the town.
The county of Leicester, it seems, made a practice of
encouraging the payment of exemption-fines instead of
the production of substitutes.  As the fines under the
Militia Act of 1802 were payable to the stock-purse of
the county's Militia regiment, the Leicester Militia
was always in funds, and was not only able but willing
to outbid any other county by ^^5 in the purchase of
recruits.^          But all legislative efforts to secure that the
Militia should be a strictly local force were obviously
futile,      so long as substitution was permitted, and                   it   is

needless to multiply examples of the fact.
          For the        rest the wild traffic in substitutes literally
raged during the weeks of the ballot ; and it is probable
that in England the national taste for gambling made it
a positive enjoyment.     In some cases the substitutes
firmly declined to engage themselves to serve, unless the
whole of their bounty was paid into their hand instead
ofthe^5 which alone was allowed to them by law before
they reached their regiments.   The Deputy-Lieutenants
in Lancashire in vain offered printed papers to their men
acknowledging the further sum due to them, and
promising to pay it at the appointed time.    The Lanca-
      1   I.D. vol. cxxii.       C.G.M. Warwick, to S.S. 14th Dec. 1807.
      2   Ibid.   vol. cxxvii.    L.L. Berwick, to S.S. 15th Jan. 1808.
      3 Ibid. vol.       cli.   C.G.M. Warwick, to S.S. 23rd Jan. 1808.
