in                      INSURANCE SOCIETIES                               193

of their bounty.   Captain Whittaker, late of the Surrey                          1807.
Militia, being one of the proprietors of this office,                 .   .   .


will receive all your county can furnish him with." ^

      1   I.D.   vol.   cli.   C.G.M. Warwick, to S.S. 23rd Jan. 1808.        I
print the whole circular below          :




                     "63 Newman Street, London, Oct. 5, 1807.
            —
    " Sir As this office has many subscribers in your county, many of
whom must of course be ballotted upon us, and as the peculiar cir-
 cumstances of Middlesex render the C.O.'s of that Militia glad to
 accept men which the county regiments will reject, I conceive that
 this office   and the Sergeant-Majors of the following counties
 through which the recruits from Lancashire must pass, viz. Lanca-
 shire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Warwick, Northamptonshire, Buck-
 inghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hertfordshire, may be of reciprocal
 advantage to each other, and that too in no small degree.     There-
fore I propose to you in the first place to influence those sergeants
 who may be detached from the regiment you belong to into War-
 wick to receive the men under the approaching ballots for that
 county, to engage for the Middlesex Militia all such persons as
 may be deemed unfit for your regiment and yet be fit for service.
     " For instance, we shall be glad to receive in Middlesex growing
 boys five feet two inches high, and men near fifty years of age
 unless their age is too manifest.    Those are circumstances which
 must be left to the sergeants, and which every one of them are of
 course acquainted with, for which {sic) I propose to allow two
 guineas to the sergeant and his party engaging the recruit, and one
 guinea to you for each person we may pass from your county ; the
 men and boys to be obtained for us at as low a rate as possible,
 and in no case to stand us in more than ^^15 when delivered in
 London.      I should suppose that being refused by your regiment
 they will afterwards be had for ;^8 or^^io ; and the whole of
 their subsistence till they can arrive in town must be borne out of
their bounty.
      " Captain Whittaker, late of the Surrey Militia, being one of
the proprietors of this office, will be at Manchester for the purpose
of recruiting, and will march from thence all the way with the
recruits, and receive at Coleshill, Meriden, Coventry, and Dunchurch
allyour county can furnish him with. The exact day of his being
at each of these places, you shall be made acquainted with in due
time, for the information of the sergeants, to enable you to collect
and deliver their men under your directions. But as the men so
engaged by you and received by us may desert before they are enrolled,
or by chance not be accepted, the allowance to you and the sergeants
can only be made on the return of the party, when, if any should
desert or be rejected, they shall either be restored at the place we
received them or satisfactorily accounted for.  The guinea to you for
                                                                  O
