Ill         THE QUESTION OF STANDARD                         189

other hand, any men ballotted in future, and exempted               1807.
as effective Volunteers, would, on ceasing to become
effective, be liable to supply any vacancies which might
then exist, or might hereafter arise.^
    Another question, which was more easily decided,
was this          —
            Was a man who had found a substitute in the
              :




Army of Reserve, liable to be ballotted under Castle-
reagh's Act, since under 43 Geo. III. cap. 123, such
men were exempted from the Militia.? ^ The answer was
decisive. The Army of Reserve Act had been repealed ;
therefore the Act above quoted was no longer in force,
and such men were liable to be ballotted.'
    Yet another trouble, which exercised the Deputy-
Lieutenants sorely, and not for the first time, was the
standard of height.    The Militia Act of 1802 fixed the
standard at five feet four inches. The Act 43 Geo. III.
cap. 100, sec. 2, enacted that no substitute, personal or
parochial, should be rejected if he were five feet          two
inches in height, provided that he were otherwise fit for
service.          Some Lieutenants and their Deputies, not un-
naturally, construed this to mean that principals were to
be    five feet four inches high,     and substitutes   five feet
two inches.    Others, quite indifferent as to the physical
quality of their men so long as they could produce them
in some shape or form, took five feet two inches as the
standard for all ; while others again, being conscientious
public servants, rejected men under five feet four inches.
By all the folly of having two coexistent standards was
impartially denounced, until the question was finally set
at rest by the decision of the Secretary at War that the
standard of five feet two inches was now universal.*
   Lastly, an old failing at the Home Office was brought
to light by a sarcastic letter from a Deputy-Lieutenant
   1 W.O. Mi/a. E.B. 784, Sub-div. Clerk of Leominster to Sec. at
War, loth Nov. 1807.
   2 W.O. Mila. E.B. War Office to
                                    J. Allen, 12th Nov. 1807.
      3   See page 35.
      I.D. vol. cxviii. O.C. Northampton Mila. to S.S. 2nd Nov.
      *

1807 ; vol. cxx. L.L. Somerset, to S.S. 4th Dec. 1807 ; fV.O.
Mila. E.B. W.O. to Major Durbin, 23rd Nov. 1807.
