        I90    EVILS OF CRUDE LEGISLATION                    chap.

1807.   of Somerset.     "On the 14th of August last," wrote
        this   indignant gentleman in October, " an Act was
        passed for speedily completing the Militia.      It has not
        reached the Deputy-Lieutenants yet, nor have they any
        reason to expect it, unless you order copies to be sent
        without delay."
             Under such initial difficulties was the ballot of 1 807
        set on foot.    Even at the risk of wearying the reader,
        I have not shrunk from setting down legal difficulties
        which have long been dead and can never rise again,
        in order to show how infinitely the natural obstacles to
        the levying of recruits may be increased by hasty and
        ill-considered enactments, and even more by additional
        Acts passed to amend and explain the same. The root
        of the matter, of course, lay in the absence of a definite
        policy, the inevitable result of which was the hurried
        abandonment of one set of expedients, and the equally
        precipitate adoption of another set.           But though
        it is   too much to expect of human wisdom that
        it can foresee all the ingenious tricks which a people

        may discover for the evasion of an unpopular duty, yet
        there are far too many signs of sheer blindness and
        carelessness in all the legislation which so far has passed
        under review. And it must be remembered that every
        doubt as to the state of the law seriously impeded the
        progress of the levy.     Every legal question was hotly
        discussed before it reached the Secretary of State, setting
        all the authorities within each Lieutenancy at variance,

        embroiling Lieutenancies with their neighbours, raising
        ill-feeling between commanders of Militia regiments and
        county magnates, and embittering the perennial strife
        between the civil power and the military. It is a reproach
        to our statesmen that such friction should still have
        abounded after fourteen years of almost unbroken war.


                                    VIII

           Let us now turn to the progress of the ballot itself.
        There was, of course, a rush for substitutes and crimps
                                                      ;
