         192               INSURANCE SOCIETIES                       chap.

1 807.   profession, for we hear of one who engaged a substitute at
         Warwick for forty pounds, and offered the man as much
         as fifty guineas if he would lend him the money for
         five years free of interest. The crudity of this proposal
         suggests ambition, indeed, but hardly financial genius.^
            The insurance companies and subscription societies
         were very prominent in the ballot of 1807.         In all
         counties near      London they indemnified the holders of
         their policies by producing either a fine or a substitute
         who had cost them less than £10^ and who invariably
         deserted with the £ 5 which the law permitted to be paid
         to him.   The Lord-Lieutenant of Buckingham deplored
         the inefficacy of the law to check this evil, and suggested
         that it might be possible to attack it by invalidating the
         policies, on the ground that they were not stamped.'^           In
         Gloucestershire and the Western counties there was a
         very extensive insurance office which charged three
         guineas     for    an   insurance   of ;^20,      an extravagant
         premium for which they might well have returned ;^50.
         But the London societies spread their branches wide over
         the country, bribing recruiting-sergeants and non-com-
         missioned officers right and left, and sowing corruption
         thickly wherever they went.     "      We
                                               shall be glad," runs
         one of their circulars to the sergeant-majors of Militia,
         " to receive in Middlesex growing boys five feet two
         inches high, and men near fifty years of age, unless their
         age is too manifest. ... I propose to allow two guineas
         to the sergeant and his party engaging the recruit, and
         one guinea to you for each person we may pass from
         your county ; the men or boys to be obtained for us at
         as low a rate as possible, and in no case to stand us in
         more than ^^15 when delivered in London, I should
         suppose that men refused by your regiment will be after-
         wards had for j^8 or ^10 ; and the whole of their sub-
         sistence till they can arrive in town must be borne out

           1   The authority for the statements in the two last paragraphs
         will be   found in I.D. vol. cli. C.G.M. Warwick, to S.S. 23rd Jan.
         1808.
            2 I.D. vol. cvi. L.L. Bucks, 23rd Oct. 1807.
