Ill   DIFFICULTY OF RE-FILLING MILITIA 187
      The replenishing of the Militia, however, was a very               1   807.
different story.       In the first place, the levy was delayed
by the necessity of making out new lists in almost
every county, so as to include boys who had grown up
since the last ballot, and to enable Volunteers to work out
their exemption.      Then there were very thorny ques-
tions raised as to the meaning of the sections which
governed exemption. The reference in the new Act
was to the Volunteer Consolidation Act of 1 804, which
required that returns of eff'ective Volunteers should be
furnished on the ist of August and ist of December.
Was it sufficient for a Volunteer's exemption that he
should have served for sixteen days during the previous
eight months or the full number of twenty-four days in
the previous twelve months ?       Such was the kind of
question from county after county which flooded the
Secretary of State's office for days ; and finally it was
decided, by very strict construction of the law, that no
Volunteer should be exempted unless he had attended
drill eight times between the ist of April and the ist
of August.^ This decision probably seemed severe, but
it was lenient compared with the       suggestion of the
Lord-Lieutenant of Surrey, who did not love the Volun-
teers   " Will not all the Volunteers, if they attend all
        :



their drills before the ist of December, be exempt from
any ballot after it ? If so, why not direct all ballots
to be taken before the 30th of November ^       It can be
done."    The worthy nobleman did not gain     his point ;
but he was not to be troubled by Volunteers much   longer.
     Another hideous complication arose out of the
various changes of attitude and legislation in respect of

York, 185.     Scotland:   —Aberdeen, 12 Dumfries, 61
                                         ;              ;   Edinburgh,
                                                                   —
13 ; Forfar,  09 ; Inverness, 6 ; Ross, 19 ; Stirling, 7. Ireland'.
               1

Fermanagh, 3 ; Kerry, 68 ; Kilkenny, i ; Leitrira, 40 ; Limerick,
I ;  Longford, 90.   Of the number deficient 453 men were due
from seven English counties, 227 from as many Scottish counties,
and 203 from six Irish counties.
    1 I.D. vol. civ. Minutes of G.M. Aberdeen, 29th Oct. ; vol.

cvi. Minutes of G.M. Ross, 14th Oct.; vol. cxv. L.L. Kent, to S.S.
2nd Nov. 1807.
