        1   88      QUESTIONS OF EXEMPTION                   chap.

1807.   the Militia since the war began.  It will be remembered
        that  Addington at once called out the Supplementary
        Militia, and that Pitt, by the Permanent Additional
        Force Act, enacted that the Supplementary Militia
        should be absorbed, and the Militia generally reduced
        to its ordinary establishment under the Act of 1802.
        It will be remembered further that, by the Volunteer
        Consolidation Act of 1804, Volunteers were not
        exempted actually from the ballot ; but any Volunteer
        on being baUotted could show his certificate of efficiency,
        and thereby obtain exemption from service in the
        Militia.  His name, however, was retained on the ballot-
        list,    so that, if he ceased to be effective, he could be
        called up for service, and if his name had actually been
        drawn for the Militia, he was liable, in this case, to fill
        the first vacancy that occurred in the Militia.  In 1 807
        there were many Volunteers in this predicament, owing
        partly to Windham's reforms, partly to a selfish calcula-
        tion that, if there were to be no more ballot, it was not
        worth while to work for exemption. Now arose the
        question whether such men could be forced to fill the
        vacancies caused by Castlereagh's Militia Transfer Act
        and Militia Augmentation Act. The vacancies had not
        been brought about in the ordinary way, but by whole-
        sale sweeping of the Militiamen into the Line ; and,
        moreover, Castlereagh, after thus reducing the Militia
        by three-fifths of its ordinary quota, had ordered the loss
        to be more than made good by calling up three-fourths of
        the ordinary quota under the ballot.     Was it reasonable
        that Volunteers drawn under a former ballot and then
        exempted but since become ineffective, should be called
        upon without fresh ballot to make up deficiencies thus
        artificiallycreated     The question, after much argu-
                               .?




        ment, was submitted to the Law-Officers of the Crown,
        who decided that such men were not legally liable to fill
        such artificial vacancies, though they were liable to fill
        natural vacancies if their county's Militia, at the time
        when Castlereagh's Act was passed, was short of its
        ordinary establishment under the Act of 1802.     On the
