        194                   INSURANCE SOCIETIES                           chap.

1807.   The circular proceeded to say that if any of the office's
        clients in the county needed a substitute, one must be
        procured as " unlikely to desert as possible, because
        much of the success of our insurance depends upon our
        receiving the parochial allowances, which we are only
        entitled to in case of the substitute actually serving a
        month."
                  Compared with this lordly way of doing business,
        there is a pathetic helplessness in the appeal made by the
        " Praeses of Delegates of twelve Militia Societies in and
        about Glasgow " to the Secretary of State. This digni-
        tary complained that the officers appointed to receive
        substitutes for the Militia regiments gave them no sub-
        sistence, and that consequently the Societies were put to
        the great expense of keeping them alive until they were
        sent to their battalions. Moreover, a number of ballot-
        table men had been drawn away from the county as
        substitutes to other counties a hundred miles away, which
        was contrary to law. " The bounties," so ended the
        letter, " have been very oppressive, and if the societies
        are to furnish subsistence too, the burden will be very
        heavy."             The writers apparently had not the slightest
        idea that they were themselves contravening the law, or
        at any rate what had been the law, when they called upon
        the Secretary of State to protect them, though they were
        ready enough to invoke the Act which prohibited the
        procuring of substitutes from distant counties.^

        each man may possibly be better remitted from town ; you can receive
        it,however, in any way you direct.
           '* Should any person
              .                 be ballotted upon our insurance funds in
        your county, all we have to request is, that the sergeants to whom
        the person ballotted will be directed to apply, will procure, as
        reasonable as he can, a substitute as likely not to desert as possible,
        because much of the success of our insurance depends upon our
        receiving the parochial allowances, which we are only entitled to
        in case of the substitute actually serving a month, for which we
        shall make the same allowance to them and to you as for the recruits
        they may engage for, as for the Militia of Middlesex."
            Addressed   To the Sergeant-Major of the Warwickshire (or
                              :



        other) Militia.
                  1   I.D. vol. cxiv. Praeses of Delegates to S.S. 5th Dec. 1807.
