CHAP. IV      WINDHAM'S SCHEME FAILS                             203

swelled the expenses for Chelsea and Kilmainham by                      1808.
j^ 2 00,000 annually ; and this sum would be still further
augmented within a few years as the periods of service
of the various batches of men began to expire. Lastly,
constant changes of station made it impossible to apply
accurately the rules for the increase of a man's pay after
each term of seven years' service, particularly in con-
junction with the privilege that two years' service in the
East and West Indies should count as three. In those
days men had a passion for shifting from regiment to
regiment as often as they had opportunity, and it was
impossible to register their movements so closely as to
do justice either to them or to the public.
     Castlereagh, on receiving this report, very mag-
nanimously urged every consideration that could be
brought forward in favour of Windham's system ; but
the Horse Guards met the statements and arguments
with facts and figures which were neither to be contro-
verted nor ignored.^     Accordingly, when the Mutiny
Bill came before Parliament, in March 1808, Castle-
reagh was obliged to represent that short service, though
it might answer for work in Europe, was impossible for

a country which had to supply so many foreign gar-
 risons as England.   Of 204,000 Regular troops in the
Army, 70,000     were engaged for short service ; 36,000
 of them, enlisted during the past twelve months, would
 all be lost in seven years, and in fact limited service
 could not cover its own waste. He mentioned incident-
 ally that the great increase of recruits gathered by
 voluntary enlistment had been due really to an extra-
 ordinary cause.    Windham had threatened to disband
the whole of the fifty-four second battalions formed by
the Army of Reserve, unless they were increased to four
hundred men apiece within six months, and this menace
had led the officers of these battalions to make unusual
exertions lest they should be relegated to the half-pay
list.   He therefore moved a clause, not to sweep away
short service altogether, but to allow recruits the option
 1   Corresp. in Supplement to Military Transactions^ Appendix   1 8.
