IV          CASTLEREAGH'S REFORMS                               205

be glad to turn to them in order to evade other service ;                1   808,
the State imposing on them such conditions as would
make them a cheap, useful, and efficient force.
     2.   To create       200,000 Sedentary     Militia,   to       be
trained for twenty-eight days annually, but not to leave
their counties except in case of invasion or rebellion.
   3. To    train, under  Windham's Training Act,
200,000 men, and make them liable to serve in the
Line in case of invasion.
   Though he set down these three descriptions of
force in the order thus given, he intended originally
that the two first should be based upon the last, that              is

to say, upon the Training Act.            He
                                    found fault with
Windham's measure upon three principal grounds viz.        —
that   Windham had offered to pay the men called out
for exercise an equivalent for the loss of their time
and labour, which the country could not afford ; that
it was impossible to provide adequate training for
men within the space of twelve months ; and that,
though it was obviously useless and dangerous to bring
large bodies of men together unless previously organised
and provided with officers, it was impossible con-
veniently     to   find   officers   for so large a   number        as
200,000.
    He proposed, therefore, to establish the following
principles as the basis for a new system of training            :



    1. That instruction in the use of arms should be

imposed upon all able-bodied men between eighteen
and thirty as a positive duty, to be enforced by fine ;
and that every parish should keep a list of men between
those ages.
    2. That the State should provide the means and dis-
charge the expenses of instruction, but allow no pay for
attendance at drill.  Every effort, however, should be
made to train in their own parishes men who lived at a
long distance from the places of assembly.
    To facilitate the teaching, the Government was to
distribute and employ drill-sergeants in all the counties,
taking them from the permanent staff of the Sedentary
