        204         CASTLEREAGH'S REFORMS                       chap.

1808.   of enlisting for a term or for life as they might prefer.^
        He carried the House with him. The Mutiny Act of
         1808 bound every recruit to serve until legally dis-
        charged ; but short service none the less remained as an
        alternative open to such men as preferred it.
            Windham, as was natural, stood up for the system
        which he had introduced, setting forth his side of the
        question in a series of thirteen propositions, with a vast
        array of figures all tending to show that recruits were
        better, cheaper, and more numerous under his scheme
        than under any other.      Castlereagh, unfortunately, had
        yet more facts and figures to his hand to overthrow these
        in a series of counter propositions ; and it must be con-
        fessed that in the duel of statistics he came off the
        better.^   In fact there was no gainsaying the unpleasant
        truth that, without some such heroic measure as the
        quadrupling of the private soldier's daily pay, it was
        impossible to keep the ranks of the Army filled without
        some form of compulsion ; and Castlereagh was pro-
        foundly convinced that it was imperative not only to
        maintain but to increase the Army.        Enforced service
        abroad was out of the question ; but enforced service
        at home was consecrated by constitutional usage and
        confirmed by the Militia Acts.      The Army of Reserve
        had been an experiment in another department of com-
        pulsion, but it had not been successful.     Practically the
        only resource, therefore, was to turn the Militia once
        more into a recruiting dep6t for the Army.
             To this end Castlereagh had been maturing his plans
        for increasing the Militia at the expense of the Volun-
        teers.   His idea was to select first all that was good of
        his predecessor's schemes, and to graft upon that stock
        a new shoot of his own ; and he therefore put forth the
        following suggestions, the figures being, with one exce{>-
        tion, reckoned for England only    :



               To keep 100,000 Volunteers only of the best de-
              I.

        scription, in Great Britain and those chiefly in large towns
                                       y


        and populous manufacturing districts, where men would
           1    H.D. 8th March 1808.       2   /^/^, 13th Aug. 1807.
