         200           VOLUNTEERS' INDISCIPLINE                          chap.

J 807.   to strike Colonel Drew, the Commanding Officer. Drew
         returned the blow with the flat of his sword, and caused
         the sergeant to be disarmed and turned out.     The ser-
         geant thereupon brought an action against the Colonel,
         when Mr. Justice Heath laid it down that Drew had no
         right to take the sergeant's sword, and that the sergeant
         had a right to defend            it.      He therefore summed up
         against Drew, and the jury brought in a verdict of ^^200
         damages with ;^300              costs.^     This was probably the
         heaviest blow struck at the subordination of the Volun-
         teers throughout their existence ;           and it fell just at a time
         when discipline particularly needed to be strengthened.
         It was now discovered also that there had been gross
         abuses in connection with the allowances granted to the
         Volunteer corps for the maintenance of their arms ; and
         a circular was issued to intimate that in future these would
         be granted only for such arms as were certified by the
         Inspecting Field-Officers to be in good repair.^ In Wilt-
         shire it seems that good reason existed for extraordinary
         wear and tear of muskets ; for the Volunteers, weary of
         waiting for the invasion of the French, had turned them
         to the destruction of game and rabbits, an operation
         which was probably little less perilous to the King's
         subjects than invasion itself; and had certainly not been
         contemplated when the weapons were issued.^ In fact
         whatever the Volunteers may have been in 1804, they
         stood revealed in 1 807 in their primitive condition as an
         armed rabble.
            With this stern fact before him, Castlereagh spent the
         winter of 1807 in devising means for replacing this
         rabble by something which should return better value
         for the money expended upon it.          Meanwhile the
         year closed with a stroke of misfortune, which was
         hardly redeemed by real and effective success in another
         quarter.  The expedition returned from Buenos Ayres
         wrathful and humiliated after a desperate fight in the

                1    I.D.            L.L. Surrey, to S.S. 18th April 1807.
                            vol. cxxi.
                              2Circular to L.Ls. 8th Aug. 1807.
            3       I.D. vol. cxxii. C.G.M. Wilts, to S.S. 12th Dec. 1807.
