IV              LOCAL MILITIA ACT                      213

by entering the Local Militia, whatever the rules of the       1808.
Societies (sec. 25). Corps of Volunteer Infantry, irrespec-
tive of age, might transfer themselves bodily to the Local
Militia, with the King's approval ; also Artillery Volun-
teers and Yeomen; but any vacancies remaining after such
transference were to be supplied by ballot if not filled
voluntarily within three months.    All transferred Volun-
teers were required to declare that they had received no
bounty exceeding two guineas (sees. 29, 30).             On
assembling for exercise Local Militiamen were entitled in
the first year to one guinea, and in subsequent years to
half-a-guinea for necessaries also to a further guinea on
                             ;

being called out or embodied under any Order in Council
or proclamation under the Act (sec. 31).            Persons
serving in the Local Militia were entitled to the same
exemptions from the Regular Militia as the Volunteers
had received under the Training Act, also to two years
exemption after the end of their four years' service, unless
their turn to be ballotted came round earlier (sec. 32).
The Local Militia could be formed into battalions and
regiments, and a proportion of the regimental staff kept
on permanent pay. Officers were to rank after those of
their grade in the Regular Militia ; but no higher title
than Lieutenant-Colonel Commandant was to be held,
except by Lords-Lieutenant and officers who had held the
rank of Colonel in the Regular Army or Militia (sees.
34, 35).   Officers of Volunteers transferred with their
corps to the Local Militia retained their rank, but were
forbidden in any case to take rank above a Lieutenant-
colonel in   the Regular Army (sec. 36). The Local
Militia could be put under the command of General
Officers, and called out for annual training for not
more than twenty-eight days, and to no greater distance
than an adjoining county (sec. 38). Men could remove
from the Militia of one county to that of another on
giving notice to their Commanding Officers (sec. 39).
In case of invasion or rebellion the Local Militia could
be embodied and marched to any part of Great Britain
(sec. 40).  It could also be called out by the Lord-
