IV              LOCAL MILITIA ACT                         211

deficient number of Volunteers, because a circular had           1808.
been issued to stop all further increase of that force.
To all this Castlereagh responded with much tact that
he had borrowed a great deal from Windham's Train-
ing Act, and was not the least ashamed of it.      Upon
the whole, the opposition to the Bill seems to have been
half-hearted, though more than one member urged
consideration of an alternative plan suggested by Lord
Selkirk.    This was to   call   up   all   young men from
eighteen to twenty-five years of age, train them for
three months in their first year and for smaller periods
in subsequent years, until at twenty-five they became
exempt.   Castlereagh disposed of this by saying that it
would destroy the whole system of quotas, and bear
very unequally upon the counties unless the Volunteers
were at once abolished. And it must be remembered
always in connection with Castlereagh's scheme, that he
had inherited the *' fleeting and inapplicable mass " from
his predecessors, and that its existence was a perpetual
bar to any but a very gradual reorganisation of the
people for military purposes.
    The Local Militia Bills became law on the 30th of
June (48 Geo. III. cap. 1 1 1, Scotland, cap. 150). They
enacted that a Permanent Local Militia should be
enrolled in Great Britain, not to exceed, together with
the Volunteers, six times the quota of the Militia under
the Militia Act of 1802, that is to say, not to exceed
308,934 men ;    and that   deficiencies     among   effective
Volunteers should be      supplied by Local Militiamen
(sees. 1-3).  Only men between the ages of eighteen and
thirty were to be ballotted ; and no substitution nor
bounty to ballotted men was to be allowed (sec. 8).
Sick or infirm persons could be exempted by two
Deputy-Lieutenants under medical certificate (sec. 11).
Ministers of religion, schoolmasters, and practising
doctors were likewise exempted ; also men who were
serving, or had served, in the Army of Reserve or had
found a substitute or paid the fine for exemption from
service therein.  Men who were in the like case in
