IV            CASTLEREAGH'S REFORMS                             207

who were to be liable to fill vacancies in the order in                  1808.
which they were drawn. The Sedentary Militia were
to be at liberty to enter the Army, Navy, Marines, or
Regular Militia, the places of men who enlisted being at
once filled out of the supplementary quota.   Its number
would be 200,000 men for England, and a propor-
tionate number for Scotland ; the full strength to be
arrived at gradually, and the Volunteers to be reduced
as the Sedentary Militia increased.
    The Regular Militia was to be ballotted for as under
the existing Acts, neither the trained men nor the
Sedentary Militia being exempt, but the men being still
chosen between the ages of eighteen and forty-five, so
as not to throw too heavy a burden upon a limited
class.    " Necessity," he wrote, " may lead hereafter
and    consequently justify us in applying the principle of
conscription more directly, but in the first instance our
object should be to make the service of the Sedentary
Militia as little onerous as possible, and to try what
resources can be drawn by proper encouragement and
voluntary enlistment from a body so constituted." ^ But
the Regular Militia, through the additional facility
of procuring men by enlistment, would be much
strengthened ; and, as Castlereagh observed, " a corps
of this description seems an indispensable ingredient in
the Army of a state which must reduce its military
force suddenly in time of peace, and call it forth as
suddenly upon the recurrence of war."
     Finally, the Regular Army, when the system was
perfected, would be kept up partly by ordinary recruiting,
partly by Volunteers from the Sedentary Militia, and in
the third place by a school to be established on a large
scale for the reception of boys, who should pass two or
three years there in education before being attached to
regiments. He conceived that both parents and parishes
 would be glad to send children to such an institution if
   1 This sentence is faithfully transcribed, so the faults in it must

not be ascribed to the author.     Castlereagh's English was always
detestable.
