'
        214          LOCAL MILITIA ACT                       chap.

1808.   Lieutenant to suppress riots, when its assembly was
        limited to fourteen days only and was to be counted as
        part of its training (sec. 42).   In both of the above cases
        it was to be entitled to the same pay as the Regular
        Militia, and the wives and families of the men were
                                                         Local
        likewise entitled to parish relief (sees. 43, 44).
        Militiamen might enlist in the Army, Navy, Marines,
        and Regular Militia except during the period of annual
        training ; and the vacancies thus created were to be
        filled up like all other vacancies for the Militia, any
        suspension of the ballot for the Regular Militia notwith-
        standing (sees. 45, 46).    Counties were liable to a fine
        of ;^I5 for every man deficient of their quota on every
        14th of February, subject to remissions of two-thirds
        and one-third of such fines if the deficiency were made
        good before the 14th of March and 14th of April
        respectively (sees. 47, 48).   Finally, there was inserted
        at the instance of Whitbread ^ a section for the relief of
        men who had paid fines or found substitutes for the
        Army of Reserve, and had since been compelled to
        serve as principals under Castlereagh's Act of 1 807 for
        completing the Militia (sec. 47).
             It will be observed that the Act in its final form
        varied somewhat from the original plan sketched by
        Castlereagh, most notably in the omission to provide a
        body of supplementary men for the immediate filling of
        vacancies.    The invitation to entire Volunteer corps to
        enrol themselves as Local Militia was also a concession,
        though possibly a wise concession, which marred the
        original idea of composing the new force wholly of
        young men, who should have received their elementary
        instruction under the Training Act.     There was, more-
        over, as shall be seen, another weak point in the loose
        wording of the sections concerning the " marching-
        guinea."     But, on the other hand, it converted at a
        stroke a large number of uncontrollable men into corps
        which could be disciplined and compelled to obey
        orders ; and this was a great step in advance.     More-
                          1   H.D. 2nd May 1808.
