IV               THE LOCAL MILITIA                               209

really needed    —
                national training in arms      the ideal
                                                 ;                     1808.
which had been foreshadowed in the elder Pitt's original
Militia Act of 1757.   It is very evident too, from one
of the sentences which have been quoted, that Castle-
reagh designed it to be permanent, and to be valid in
peace as in war.       Endless embarrassments, difficulties,
and disasters would have been averted if it could have
been erected and maintained in the form which he
suggested ; but this was not to be ; and when he laid his
Local Militia Bill before Parliament it was shorn of
very much of its usefulness.     None the less his speech
in introducing it was so statesmanlike that it is worth
while very briefly to abstract it here.
     He began by saying, most rightly, that the Regular
Army must be his first care, and took credit to himself
for having by his measures added 40,000 men to it.
Omitting the Artillery, the Regular Army and the Militia
                  numbered 200,000 men. If every
in the British Isles
company in the Regular Infantry were raised to 100
men, 50,000 more soldiers could be admitted and it   ;

would be of great advantage to have these men ready
trained without occasion for a ballot.      This could be
done by establishing a Local Militia (it will be observed
that the phrase Sedentary Militia had been discarded), with
forty-eight days' drill near their homes, and twenty-one
days of embodiment in their own counties. The Volun-
teers would suffice if they were always as efficient as at
present, but it was necessary to organise a permanent
force of the same strength.      Then in the First Line
there would be the Army and Established Militia ; in
the Second the Volunteers ; and in the Third a Local
Militia which need not exceed six times the Established
Militia, that is to say, 320,000^ men in Great Britain.
Add to this 70,000 effective Volunteers in Ireland and       ;


there would be 400,000 trained men, ready to fall into
the Line and Militia if required.    The effective Volun-
teers in Great Britain numbered 290,000, of which
240,000 were under arms at the last inspections. To
             1   The number should be 309,000.
                                                         P
