        2o6         CASTLEREAGH'S REFORMS                     chap.

1808.   Militia (whose organisation will presently be explained),
        give them charge of a certain number of firearms, and
        pay them five shillings apiece for every man certified
        by proper inspectors to be perfected in the use of the
        firelock.      Men so passed were      to be   exempt from
        further drill for three years, after which they would be
        required to renew their certificate to prove that they
        were   still completely trained.  Men not certified as
        efficient were to be mustered once every six months in
        their parishes, and, if found not to be trained, were to be
        fined ten shillings, with an increase of ten shillings at
        every half-year until their certificate had been gained.
        If (so he argued) men found that they must train them-
        selves under penalties, they would soon organise
        themselves into squads and companies for their own
        convenience.
            From the men thus trained, he proposed to form
        the Sedentary Militia by annual ballot ; for after their
        previous instruction they would find twenty-eight days'
        drill in the year sufficient to   make them fairly expert in
        the higher branches of exercise.        They were to serve
        for    three   years,   and then be exempt from further
        service until their turn came round in rotation ; but they
        were to complete their three years' service even if they
        passed the military age during the course of it.       Ex-
        emptions were to stand as under the Additional Force
        Act.   Ballotted men were to be allowed to find a substi-
        tute upon paying a fine, but such substitute was to be
        also a trained man of military age ; and if he were
        ballotted during his term of service as a substitute, he
        was to serve first his three years as a substitute, and
        then proceed with his three years as a principal. The
        Sedentary Militia was to be organised in battalions of
        1000 rank and file, with a permanent staff of an adjutant,
        a sergeant-major, a quartermaster -sergeant, twenty
        sergeants, twenty corporals, and twelve drummers.       At
        every ballot  there was  to  be drawn  not  only   the full
        number required from the ranks, but a supplementary
        number of one-third or fourth of the establishment,
