        2IO           THE LOCAL MILITIA                   chap.

1808.   bring these 290,000 to 320,000, only 30,000 men were
        wanted   ; but the deficiency was so unequal in different
        districts that not fewer than 60,000 would answer the
        purpose.    He proposed therefore to create a Local
        Militia of 60,000 men, to be gradually increased as the
        Volunteers diminished, and to supersede them in time
        of peace. The force would be raised by ballot, but
        only in districts where sufficient Volunteers, or men
        between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five, did not
        spontaneously come forward. To encourage such volun-
        tary offers, he would give a small bounty to those who
         entered the new force of their own will ; and he hoped
        also   to tempt gentlemen of rank to join as officers.
        The  qualifications of the Regular Militia would be
        required of captains but not of subalterns.    Service
        would be for four years, and always within the county
        except in case of invasion.   When a ballot was held, no
        substitutes would be allowed, the case of the Provisional
        Cavalry having given warning against such a course.
        The fine for exemption would be so great as to dis-
        courage men from paying it ; and finally all insurance
        against personal service would be made penal.        The
        force would be cheaper, man for man, than Windham's
        levies, and would finally reach the number of 400,000
        men. With such a force, and 200,000 regular troops,
        the Empire would be secure.^
             It will be observed that though Castlereagh hinted
        that he looked forward to the disappearance of the
        Volunteers, he adroitly dissembled his true feelings
        concerning them ; so much so that he brought down
        the usual denunciation of them from Windham.          But
         Windham's chief quarrel with the measure was that
         Castlereagh had practically adopted his Training Act,
         only altering the number of days' training, and incor-
         porating the men into battalions, whereas he himself
         wished to keep them as a great reserve to be passed
         straight into the Line.    He also declared that Castle-
         reagh had other designs than merely making good the
                           1   H.D. 12th April 1808.
