         212          LOCAL MILITIA ACT                     chap.

1 808.   respect of the Regular Militia were exempt for four
         years after the expiration of their term of service, or
         for six years   from the date of the enrolment of their
         substitute (sec. 13).  Articled clerks and apprentices,
         poor men with fewer than three children born in lawfiil
         wedlock, and persons under five feet four inches in
         height but not under five feet two inches, though
         exempted from the Regular Militia, were liable to serve
         in the Local Militia (sec. 14) ; but ballotted apprentices
         might not enlist in the Army without their master's
         consent (sec. 15).   Ballotted men were to be sworn to
         serve for five years unless sooner discharged (sec. 16).
         Any ballotted man not presenting himself to be enrolled
         was to be fined ;C30 » or ^20 if his annual income were
         less than £100 ; or ^^ 10 if his income were under ;^ 100
         which fines were to be paid to the Paymaster-General
         of the Forces, and were to give exemption for two
         years only (sec. 17).       Persons imprisoned for not
         paying these fines were liable to serve for their full
         term of four years after expiration of their period of
         imprisonment (sec. 18).       Ballotted men engaging to
         serve in Volunteer corps at their own expense were
         entitled to remission of half the fine, but if they failed
         to continue to serve for four years, they were liable to
         forfeit treble the sum remitted, and to serve in the
         Local Militia (sec. 20).    Persons paying the fine were
         required to declare that they had not insured themselves
         against such payment ; and on refusing so to declare,
         or on making a false declaration, were to forfeit thrice
         the amount of the fine, with alternative of three months'"
         imprisonment. The penalty for insuring persons against
         fines was a fine of ^^50 (sees. 22, 23).      When men
         between the ages of eighteen and forty voluntarily
         enrolled themselves in any parish, the ballot was to be
         held only for the number deficient of the quota ; and such
         voluntary recruits were to receive a bounty of £2 2s.,.
                                                             :



         which, however, they were to forfeit if they enlisted in
         the Regular Army within two years (sees. 24, 26, 27)..
          Members of Friendly Societies were not to be prejudiced
