            222    MILITIA ENLISTMENT ACT, 1809                     chap.

1809.       41,500 had joined their regiments.        He proposed, there-
            fore, once again to encourage       Militiamen to enlist in the
            Army to such an extent as to leave, as in 1807, three-
            fifths of    the establishment untouched.    But whereas in
            1807   it   was necessary not only to complete the establish-
            ment but to raise men in excess, in this year it would be
            necessary only to cover deficiencies, so that for England
            only 24,000 would be called for instead of 36,000.
            He purposed if possible to dispense with the ballot, and
            to throw the expense of raising these men not upon the
            counties but upon the public.           He would therefore in
            the first place try to gather the necessary Militia recruits
            by voluntary enlistment, offering a bounty often guineas
            from the Imperial Treasury. If a ballot were found
            necessary, he would give this sum to the ballotted man,
            either as a bounty if he served himself, or as a subsidy
            towards the price of a substitute.    He hoped that the
            county gentlemen and Colonels of Militia would forward
            the levy, since the expense was to fall upon the Imperial
            Treasury and not on the counties and upon the whole
                                                      ;


            he was sanguine that the ballot would be unnecessary
            and that general recruiting for the Army would not be
            injured.
               These proposals, of course, met with some opposition.
            Tierney saw no occasion to increase the Army until the
            House knew on what service it was to be employed, and
            Lord Milton declared that to make the Militia fill the
        .   ranks of the Regulars was nothing less than conscription
            for the Army.^   On the other hand, Colonel Wood of
            the Middlesex Militia declared that he and his fellow-
            commanders had overcome their prejudices against the
            system, inasmuch as by furthering it they could best
            serve their country.    Bounties, observed the Colonel,
            were not high ; for he had lately got thirty men for
            eight guineas apiece      —
                                  a statement of delightful effrontery,
            since as a matter of fact he was employing an agent in
            Norwich to gather recruits from the Local Militiamen,
            to the exasperation of that county and to the infraction
                                  1   H.D. 25th Jan. 1809.
