        2i6    CONVERSION OF VOLUNTEERS                     chap.

1808.   would lose the privileges of effective Volunteers and be-
        come subject to the ballot for the Local Militia. There
        was to be no delay, no evasion, no parleying. The ** fleet-
        ing inapplicable mass" must become stable and applicable,
        or it would find itself turned into Local MiHtia.
            Then came the question whether the Volunteer
        corps would or would not as a rule transfer themselves
        bodily to the Local Militia.     Speaking generally, they
        seem to have been somewhat backward in doing so.
        In some cases the officers were willing enough, but their
        men would not follow them. In Suffolk the Helming-
        ton battalion was ready to furnish ten officers but only
        three men.     In the same county the transfer of the
        Risbridge battalion was wrecked by the conduct of two
        captains, who were incensed because their Commanding
        Officer refused to recommend one of them for pro-
        motion to major. It is satisfactory to know that in
        accordance with the recommendation of the Colonel
        this corps was at once disbanded.          In Sussex the
        Volunteers as a body declined to have anything to do
        with the Local Militia ; and in Nottinghamshire
        some revolted from the very name and could not
        be won over.     In Ross likewise they stood haughtily
        aloof until they discovered that their parishes would be
        liable to heavy fines, when, like true Scots, they begged
        hastily to be transferred, and offered even to sacrifice
        their bounty if permitted to do so.         In Kent the
        Volunteers dissolved themselves in dudgeon in all
        directions ; and for a quota of 7776 no fewer than
        5074 needed to be ballotted. In Lancashire over 5000
        Volunteers accepted service in the Local Militia, but even
        so compulsion was necessary to force nearly 7000 more
        into the ranks and a certain number, until brought to
                            ;


                                                    In Lincoln-
        their senses, positively refused to be ballotted.
        shire again    it   was necessary to invoke the
                                                     ballot for
        nearly half of the quota.   On the other hand, there
        were many counties in which the spirit was very much
        better.  Caermarthenshire, Denbigh, and Wiltshire pro-
        duced the whole of their men without a ballot ; Hamp-
