        224      SUGGESTED ARMY REFORMS                          chap.

1809.       Meanwhile, at the Horse Guards there had been
        thought out a further plan for the improvement of the
        military force of the country, to which the enlistment
        of men from the Militia was but auxiliary.
            The proposal was to increase every regiment of the
        Line to two battalions ; the first battalions to be for
        unlimited service as to time and place, and of the strength
        of 800, 1000, or 1200; the second battalions to be
        uniformly 1000 strong, composed of men obtained by
        ballot, but officered by officers of the Regular Army
        only, who   would pass to the first battalion according
        to their rank.   This would give a " disposable " force
        of about 100,000 men, and a force for home defence
        of the same strength, but having the advantage over the
        Militia, that the officers would be thoroughly trained.
           The rest of the armed strength of the country was to
        be distributed into Local Militia, Yeomanry, and Volun-
        teers only, the Regular Militia passing out of existence.
           The   Volunteers should     be in corps not    less   than
        600 strong, and entirely self-supporting, so as to be of
        no expense to the public except for their arms and for
        their pay when called out on permanent duty, at which
        time they ought to be subject to martial law.
            The Local Militia should be formed on the same
        principle as the rest of the Army, the establishments
        being equalised so far as the populations of the counties
        permitted.    The arrangements for calling them out for
        training should be such as to make the service as little
        burdensome as possible, so that the country gentlemen
        might be encouraged to hold commissions. The Local
        Militia should in every case assume the uniform, colours
        and equipment of the regiment of the Line belonging
        to its county, and in fact become a part of it.         The
        men of the second battalions should be encouraged by
        bounties to extend their services to their first battalions,
        and those of the Local Militia in like manner to the
        second battalions.   Probably enough men would come
        forward voluntarily to fill the gaps in the second bat-
        talions, but if not the ballot must be resorted to ; for
