IV             CALVERT'S MEMORANDUM                                 225

the essence of the plan was that the second battalions                    1809,
should be kept complete.      Thus a real and useful
connection would be established between the different
branches of the milit^r^ force ; the regiments of the
Line would be closely connected with the counties whose
names they bore ; and the Militia would become what
it ought to be constitutionally         —
                                the basis of the national
force.       Only thus could the          recruiting for the     Army
be placed on an assured and permanent footing.                     The
amount of the force thus produced would be
Infantry of the Line for general service, exclusive of
    Guards, Veteran battalions, and Sixtieth         .     .   100,000

               .......
Second battalions, limited to service in the British
     Isles
                 ......                                    .   100,000

               ........
Local Militia, at least
Yeomanry
Volunteers     ........
                                                               200,000
                                                                32,000
                                                               100,000

         Total (all foreign corps excluded)         .      .   532,000^


    This memorandum, which bears the signature of Sir
Henry     Calvert, the Adjutant-General, expanded the
scheme proposed by the Commander-in-Chief in 1 807.
It anticipated, as will be at once remarked, the terri-
torial system which at present obtains in the Army ; and
there can be no doubt of its soundness in many respects.
It was an absurdity to have two descriptions of Militia,
one of which in practice only duplicated the
second battalions of the Line, and competed with them
for recruits ; and the division of the forces into the
Regular and Movable Army recruited by voluntary
enlistment, and the Sedentary Army recruited by ballot
without power of substitution, would have been more
intelligible, more  business-like, and    more efficient.
Castlereagh, however, seems to have shrunk from the
change, and though, as shall in due time be seen, the
Local Militia practically displaced the Volunteers, yet
no steps were taken wholly to abolish the Regular
Militia.
                1   Castlereagh's Desp. viii. 194- 1 97.
