        21 8   WEEDING OF VOLUNTEER CORPS chap.
1808.   farmers' sons, and subalterns were not to be obtained
        unless all (as was the rule in Fusilier regiments) enjoyed
        the same rank and pay.      The wealth of Lancashire, on
        the other hand, may account for the fact that the
        county considered the change to the status of Militia
        as a degradation.        In this case no defect more damning
        to the whole principle of the Volunteers as founded by
        Pitt and Addington could possibly be instanced.
            Meanwhile the process of weeding out inefficient
        Volunteer corps proceeded steadily, with the result that
        some curious specimens were discovered. One of the
        Inspecting Field -Officers held a review of the South
        Elmbridge Company, which possessed arms for seventy-
        two men. Five men only appeared on parade ; and the
        inspector approached the Commanding Officers of the
        Kew and Ham Volunteers in order to obtain returns of
        their numbers.    One of them returned no answer what-
        ever ; and the other replied that he had resigned, and
        that his corps had not attended the last inspection.^ It
        was for such useless and absurd bodies as these that the
        Office of Ordnance had been plagued to find arms.
        Another rather pathetic but very ridiculous case was
        that of the Somerset House Volunteers, formed for the
        defence of that building only, and commanded, for its
        sins, by Colonel Richard Brinsley Sheridan.        Somehow
        Sheridan could never remember to issue orders for his
        corps to be inspected, with the result that it forfeited
        its exemptions from the Militia ballot.       The officers in
        despair appealed to LordTitchfield, the Lord-Lieutenant,
        who, with a dry humour that was characteristic of him,
        reported as follows on the loth of September. " I have
        written two letters to Colonel Sheridan (in July), one a
        private letter to Carlton House, where I believe he
        resides ; the other a public one directed to him in
        London. I cannot tell whether either has reached
        him, for I have received no answer.        I shall be much
        surprised if I ever do receive any answer."         No such
        surprise was in store for Titchfield ; but in February 1 809
           1   I.D. vol. cxlviii. I.F.O. Surrey and Kent, to S.S. 7th June 1 808.
