        232          LOCAL MILITIA RIOTS                     chap.

1809.   Officer upon the twenty-eighth, threatening him with
        their bayonets and with cries of " no knapsacks " ; the
        grievance being that some of the captains, following the
        custom of the Volunteers, had given the men their
        guinea, while others had spent it upon knapsacks and so
        forth.    It was   necessary for the Lord-Lieutenant to   go
        down in person to explain     matters to the men, after
        which five ringleaders were tried by regimental court-
        martial and flogged. In Merioneth again the men were
        discontented because the money was spent on knapsacks
        instead of being placed in their hands.     In Hertford-
        shire the Archenfield Local Militia, at the instance of
        a sergeant, rose against their officers for no apparent
        reason, but doubtless owing to trouble over the wretched
        guinea ; and all the townspeople joined the mutineers
        in a disorderly riot.  Once again it was imperative to
        flog four men, though the Commander-in-Chief left it
        to the Colonel to remit any excess over one hundred
        lashes.  In Taunton a far more serious affray arose from
        the attempt of a corporal and several men to rescue a
        prisoner from the guard-room.          The townspeople
        joined in the riot ; one of the officers was wounded by
        the bayonet of one of the ringleaders, and order was not
        restored until the Thirteenth Light Dragoons, the
        Taunton Rifle Corps, and the recruiting parties in the
        town had turned out in arms. The cause of the trouble
        could not be traced.    There was no complaint about
        the marching-guinea ; and on the morning of the day
        the battalion had done no more work than a march of
        five miles to the Commandant's country house, where
        he treated them to bread and cheese and beer.     In fact
        the riot seems to have been due to a kind of infection
        of disorder which ran all through the Local Militia
        most of them, it must be remembered, converted
                    —
        Volunteers during the lastfortnight of June. However,
        the Commandant at Taunton was equal to the occasion.
        He assembled the regiment, disarmed it, summoned a
        drum-head court-martial which sentenced the leader to
         500 lashes and four more men to 100 apiece ; tied up the
