IV                   MILITIA RECRUITING                             227
not providing their quota by the i st of October 1 8 1 o were             1   809.
to be fined ^^40 for each man deficient (sec. 24), which
fines, together with the £10 exemption-fines, were to be
paid over to the Imperial Exchequer (sec. 34).         Power
was reserved to the King to order a ballot at any
time before the ist of June and after the ist of October
1 8   10 to complete the Militia         (sec.   36) ; but, after the
men had been raised, the ballot was to be suspended
until the ist of January 18 12 (sec. 29).
   The process of raising Militiamen by beat of                    drum
seems to have gone on fairly quietly, though occasion-
ally there was trouble.  London, as usual, was forward
in attempting to steal men from other counties.  Thus
the    Tower Hamlets           Militia sent a      recruiting party,
without any beating order, to Stroud in Gloucestershire,
where they offered a reward of a guinea to any man who
would bring them recruits for their regiment. Recruits
having been brought in, received five guineas on the
spot, were sent up to the regiment, and from thence
were at once sent back on furlough to their homes, with
the intimation that they too would receive a guinea
for every recruit that they in their turn should produce.
By this ingenious method the Tower Hamlets enlisted
numbers of men at a cheap rate, leaving the people
of Gloucestershire enraged but impotent.^      Another
difficulty was that under voluntary enlistment a parish
often provided more than its quota, and thus as a
reward for its patriotism incurred an undue burden for
the support of the Militiamen's families.^   But on the
whole the complaints were few, and matters seem to
have proceeded with great smoothness.
    In Ireland (49 Geo. III. cap. ^6, 3rd June 1809) the
men for completion of the Militia were to be voluntarily
enlisted, at a bounty not exceeding eight guineas (sec.
i).   Counties not producing their quota within twelve
months were to be fined ^30 for every man deficient.
But over and above this an Irish Militia Consolidation
         1   I.D.  vol. clxiv. L.L. Glos. to S.S. 4th Aug. 1809.
         2   Ibid. vol. clxiv. L.L. Glos. to S.S. 8th Dec. 1809.
