           234      CASTLEREAGH'S RESIGNATION                   chap.

1   809.   raids upon the French in Naples and Calabria ;   and it will
           be seen that in all some 84,000 rank and file, or say
           95,000 of all ranks, were employed in offensive operations
           during this year, though with lamentably small results.
              Meanwhile, apart from Walcheren, the country had
           encountered a series of misfortunes.     First, the Duke
           of York had been forced by the scandals concerning
           Mrs. Clarke to resign the post of Commander-in-Chief
           and the weight of this blow to the military administration
           can only be appreciated by students who know what
           the Army was before the Duke took it in hand. Again,
           the Ministry had been broken up, and Castlereagh, the
           ablest   man that ever controlled the War Office, had
           been driven from it. Spencer Perceval had become
           Prime Minister ; Castlereagh's place had been taken by
           Lord Liverpool, a sound, sensible man, whose reputation
           is far below his desert ;     and Palmerston had been
           appointed Secretary at War.      Moreover, the Austrian
           attempt to break down the power of Napoleon had
           proved a failure.      Wagram had forced her to a
           humiliating peace ; and the Emperor of the French
           was free once more to turn all his force against Spain.
           The only comforting feature in the situation, known
           only to a few in England, and hardly apprehended by
           them, was that Russia had not thrown in her lot
           against Austria with a whole heart, as her alliance with
           France required of her.     In England, therefore, all was
           grumbling and discontent ; and the denunciations in
           Parliament of the fiasco of Walcheren were hardly more
           bitter than the criticisms concerning Wellington and his
           campaign of Talavera.

                                       Ill

              In such a temper of the nation the tone of all
           opponents whether to the new or to the old Govern-
           ment in Parliament was, not wholly without excuse, to
           the last degree captious. When, therefore, the Army
           Estimates were brought forward there were loud cries
