IV                     LOCAL MILITIA RIOTS                              231
economical reform, namely, that the recruits should be                          1   809.
called out for a period of training half as long again as
that of the rest of the battalion.^   But indeed it may
be said that Buckinghamshire, under the guidance of the
Grenvilles, was always one of the foremost counties for
any patriotic work. From Denbigh the Lieutenant
reported that his Local Militiamen were ready to enter
the Army without any bounty or solicitation.^      In fact,
though no sufficient evidence exists absolutely to prove
the fact, it should seem that a number of young
fellows no sooner found themselves obliged to serve,
without option of finding a substitute, than they became
ready to make the Army their profession in earnest.
    Nevertheless there was, as it happened, a great deal of
trouble with the Local Militia during 1 809. In Aberdeen
the people of Garioch rose tumultuously to prevent the
enrolment of their quota ; and the Deputy-Lieutenants
only accomplished their duty at great personal risk and
under the protection of a military force.' But this
isolated outbreak was of small importance compared
with a turbulent spirit which appeared in all parts of the
Kingdom. It seems that certain women, by whom
inspired it is impossible to say, made it their business to
tramp from regiment to regiment of the Local                        Militia,
                      The pretext for disturbance was
trying to excite riots.
a pretended right of the men to the guinea allowed
under                                   Act         provide    them     with
necessaries
            sec.
                 —31" of          the          to
             that fatal clause," as the Lord-Lieutenant
                                     —
of Carnarvon termed it and certainly as a pretext it
proved very successful. There were petty mutinies in
various quarters, of which many were hushed up ; though
some record of the more serious remains. At Ely a Cam-
bridgeshire regiment, after perfectly orderly behaviour
for twenty-seven days, turned against their Commanding

     1   I.D.   vol.   civ.   L.L. Bucks, to   S.S. 27th   June ;   21st Dec.
1809.    I have been unable to discover the circular alluded to, but
its existence and purport are proved by the former of these letters.
    2 Ibid. vol. clix. L.L. Merioneth, to S.S. loth June 1809.

    ' Ibid. vol. ccxxxvi. L.L. Aberdeen, to S.S. 2nd Jan. 1813.
