IV              LOCAL MILITIA AMENDMENT                                  229

of Castlereagh's speech, namely, that the recruiting                            1809.
sergeants of the Army had been unable to resist the
temptation to enlist Local Militiamen during the period
of training ; ^ an evil which also required to be checked.
Accordingly the Act, when passed on the 12th of May,
contained the following provisions (49 Geo. III. cap.
40).    Voluntary enlistment for supplying deficiencies
was permitted at any time (sec. 2), and vacancies in the
Local Militia were to be filled at once without orders
from headquarters, irrespective of the suspension of the
ballot for the Regular Militia, or of the fact that the
Local Militia and Volunteers in any county might, taken
together, exceed six times the quota of the Regular
Militia (sec. 3).     Local Militiamen were allowed to
enlist in the Regular Militia (but of their own counties
only, 49 Geo. III. cap. 129, 21st June 1808).         The
enlistment of Local Militiamen, during the period of
training, into the Army or Regular Militia was for-
bidden under penalty of a fine of £20 (sec. 6). Powers
were given to the Deputy-Lieutenants to make new
apportionments of quotas among parishes and districts,
and to regulate the inequalities of numbers in the
divisions of the counties (sees. 8-10).   The section (26)
of the original Act as to the bounty of two guineas to
voluntary recruits was repealed ; and powers were given
to the parochial authorities to offer any bounty up to that
sum ; but the bounty to Volunteers transferring them-
selves to the Local Militia was done away, unless such
Volunteers were actually serving before the present Act
was passed (sees. 11-14). Volunteers transferred to
the Local Militia were exempted from service in the
Regular Militia (sec. 15).   Non-commissioned officers,
drummers, and bandsmen of the Local Militia were
forbidden to enlist in the Regulars without consent of
their Commanding Officer (sec. 28).^

     1   I.D.   vol.   cliii.   Col. Whitbread (Beds.)   to S.S.   26th April
1809.
     2   A second amending Act (49 Geo. III. c. 82) was also passed
later in the session, but contains nothing essential to
                                                        our purpose.
