        230             DECAY OF VOLUNTEERS                               chap.

1809.       It will have been gathered from Castlereagh's speech
        quoted above that the Volunteers had declined as the
        Local Militia increased ; and in June those that were not
        genuinely self-supporting received their death-blow in
        an intimation that no further allowance for clothing
        would be granted to Volunteer Infantry.^ Little more
        therefore will remain to be said of this force, though,
        curiously enough, the services of the Volunteers were
        really needed in Cornwall in February 1809.         trans-    A
        port containing 240 soldiers of Junot's army, which
        was bound to France in pursuance of the Convention of
        Cintra, came into Penzance in a sinking state.        The
        men on board her were out of all discipline and
        control, and threatened to break out of the ship and land.
        The Volunteers in the district were therefore hastily
        called out to overawe the Frenchmen and to patrol the
        countryside ; so that on this occasion it may be said that
        they were of real value.^ But from this time forward
        they were wholly eclipsed by the Local Militia, which
        now demands a slight review.
           Windham's criticism of the new force was that it
        contained, no doubt, a fine body of men but were they ;

        soldiers ?          To this it can only be answered that, if they
        were not in some measure soldiers, the Volunteers, from
        which two-thirds of them were sprung, must have been
        incurably inefficient. Out of the 195 battalions, 116
        came out for a month's or a fortnight's training during
        1809, which was a creditable number considering that
        the Local Militia was only called into being on the 30th
        of June 1808. In any case they furnished a useful
        number of recruits to the Army and Regular Militia.
        In June 1 809 a circular was issued empowering Lords-
        Lieutenant to offer a bounty of eight guineas to all men
        who would join the Regular Militia ; and from the
        Bucks regiments alone nineteen men were collected in
        a few days.    The Lord-Lieutenant of that county also
        suggested and obtained approval of a useful and
                        ^   Circular to the L.Ls. 30th June 1809.
              2   J D   vol. clviii. L.L. Cornwall, to S.S. 23rd Feb. 1809.
