        242               LOCAL MILITIA EVADED                          chap.

1810.   stopped from their pay            (sec.   7).    Local Militiamen
        who were members of Friendly Societies were not to
        be subject to fines imposed by such societies for non-
        attendance during their period of service (sec. 13).
        Apprentices were forbidden to transfer themselves from
        the Volunteers to the Local Militia without their masters*
        consent (sec. 14). It was further ordained that military
        oiFences of Local Militiamen should be triable by court-
        martial, whether their regiment was embodied or not
        (sec. 3).
              It   will   have been noticed that the Government
        resolved to save money in the first instance by reducing
        the number of days' training for the Volunteers rather
        than for the Local Militia ; but early in 1 8 1 o an order
        was issued for the reduction of the permanent staff of
        the Local Militia, as an initial economy, and the first
        section of the Act above quoted was intended to comfort
        commandants under the bereavement of their favourite
        non-commissioned officers.^     But unfortunately there
        were other matters besides economy to be attended to,
        for which no provision was made in the Act.           The
        original measure, binding men, as it practically did, to
        personal service by ballot, bred in those liable to serve
        not only considerable stubbornness, but an amazing
        talent for evasive trickery, while at the same time
        developing deplorable weakness in some of the Lieu-
        tenancies.   In Kent over seventy ballotted men refused
        either to pay the fine or to serve ; and the Lord-Lieu-
        tenant wrote to ask the Secretary of State what was to
        be done, though the Act distinctly said that such men
        could be imprisoned and were liable to serve after their
        imprisonment.     Again, several wealthy tradesmen of
        Maidstone, on being drawn for the Local Militia, con-
        sented to be enrolled, but, on the day before the training
         began, took the bounty to enter the Regular Militia,
        and so excused themselves for not attending. They
              ^ I have been unable to find this order or circular, but its issue

        is   proved by I.D. vol. cxcii. O.C. 4th Oxford L.M. to S.S. 5th
        Jan. 1810.
