IV              RIOTS IN LOCAL MILITIA                                   245
prevent the Act from being executed.   In the Cinque                              1810.
Ports the magistrates faithfully and courageously did
their  duty in collecting their Local Militiamen amid
daily insults and menaces. In the Romney division
not a man would serve nor pay the fine ; but the magis-
trates at once issued warrants against the recalcitrants,
and in Hastings, Pevensey, and Tenterden they suc-
ceeded in enforcing the Act.    They ordered the recruits
to Dover ; and the men were peaceably and contentedly
approaching the town when the people of Dover
waylaid them, and either persuaded or intimidated
them into returning home.          Some of them were
retrieved and taken to Deal barracks, as the only
chance of training them, and the rest were warned
that they were deserters and that unless they presented
themselves within a fortnight they would be treated as
such.^   In other quarters the old supposed grievance
about the " marching-guinea " or allowance for neces-
saries, reduced after the first training to half a guinea,
was again made the pretext for mutinous outbreaks.
More than one commandant was nervous lest the men
should claim the whole of it in cash, though the Secre-
tary of State had directed it to be spent, as the law
intended, upon necessaries.    The question was compli-
cated by the fact that in many of the regiments
of Regular Militia, which from long standing and
good management possessed a heavy stock-purse, it
had been the custom to pay the men the half-guinea
without any deductions.^ It seems, moreover, to have
been the fact that, at any rate in some quarters, the men
could purchase necessaries for themselves more cheaply
than their officers could purchase for them.^ However
that may be, it is certain that the rank and file, in spite
of Acts of Parliament, regulations, and the punishment

     1   I.D. vol. clxxxii. Clerk to Magistrates of Cinque Ports to
Lord Warden, i8th Sept. 1810.
   2 Ibid. vol. clxxxv. O.C. Glamorgan L.M. to S.S. 22nd March

 1810.
     3   Ibid. vol. clxxxvii. L.L. Kirkcudbright, to S.S.   1   8th June 18 10.
