IV            TROUBLES WITH BALLOT                               237
the Supreme Court until the last day of the ballot had                   1810^
expired.  Their suits were all of them dismissed with
costs ; but meanwhile they had gained their point and
were safe until the next ballot.
   This, however, was but one manifestation of the
general hatred of the Militia in Scotland.  The Vice-
Lieutenant of Bute reported at the end of October that
the Arran division could not possibly produce its quota
owing to the       invincible aversion of thepeople from
personal service ;    and he requested that the Militia
might be completed by ballot and that the exemption-
fines might be applied, as in former cases, to the pur-
chase of substitutes.    He added that the people had
begun to claim exemption as seafaring men, and that
if this claim were allowed it would be preferred by the
entire population, whereas, if his recommendation were
accepted, the fines would certainly be forthcoming, for
there was an insurance company ready to oblige its
clients with the money for a premium of four guineas a
year.*    Nairn, again, one of the counties that had
pleaded for extension of the time wherein the ten-guinea
bounty might be granted, declared that without this
privilege she could not raise her quota of men.     " The
business," added the unfortunate Lieutenant, " is so
intricate, owing to the number of Acts of Parliament, that
scarcely two counties have acted upon them under the
same construction." Perth begged likewise for postpone-
ment of the ballot.^ In Lanark matters were so far
behind-hand that even a fortnight after the time for the
ballot had expired, the new lists had not been distributed
to the Deputy-Lieutenants.      This was due in part ta
certain legislation of 1804 which deprived the Lieu-
tenancies of Scotland of the power to remunerate their
own servants, and made it in consequence exceedingly
difficult to get the     work done.        But, unlike the other
counties,   Lanark lamented the prolongation of the
     1I.D. vol. clxxix. V.L. Bute, to S.S. 30th Oct., 27th Nov. 18 10.
     2Ibid.vol. clxxix. L.L. Nairn, to S.S. 2nd Sept. 1810; vol.
cxcii. L.L. Perth, to S.S. 20th June 18 10.
