IV             TROUBLES WITH BALLOT                                  39
free without the Secretary of State's order/            In Cardigan         1   8io.
a new and unexpected complication came to light.       The
county had duly supplied its quota of men under the Act
of 1809, but the Militia was still short of its strength by
eighty-four men ; the Government having calculated its
last contributions to the Line upon the assumption that
its   regiment was up to         its   establishment, whereas 102
men were wanting to complete it.^ In Lancashire there
was as much trouble with the Deputy- Lieutenants as
with the people.  The mercantile community at large
had come to an amicable agreement that apprentices
should enlist when trade was slack, and be claimed by
their masters when trade was brisk.    The rest of the
population, stricken with envy of so happy a solution
of a difficult problem, bound their sons, brothers, and
cousins apprentices pro forma^ so as to be able to claim
them likewise whenever they were wanted.                      Thus in
Lancashire military service was converted into a kind
of out door relief, which could be repudiated as soon
as suited the convenience of the recipient.    The case of
the Deputy-Lieutenants was different.       Always highly
critical in the North as to the interpretation of Acts of
Parliament, possibly because they were unwilling to
execute them, the Deputies were divided in opinion as to
the construction of the last Act for completing the Militia.
The enactment, so argued one party, was designed to
procure men by the ist of October          after that date
                                                  :



there could be no fresh ballot ; and therefore the
payment of the fine of ^40 would exonerate any parish
from further operation thereof          On the contrary,
contended the opposite party, the intention was that
the  ballot should be continued until the men were
supplied, and then suspended until the ist of January
18 12.   The question was carried to the Secretary of
      1   I.D. vol. clxxx. L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 14th Oct.;   vol. clxxxix.

Subdiv. Clerk, Leicester, to S.S. 24th Aug.; vol. clxxx. L.L. Berks,
to S.S. 22nd Oct. 18 10.
    2 lbid.\o\. clxxxi. O.C. Cardigan Mila. to S.S. nth March

j8io.
