        244           TRICKS OF LOCAL MILITIA                    chap.

1810.   giving commandants, who at best were only amateurs,
        a plain code for the government of their regiments, it
        was constantly referring them to Militia Acts and
        Volunteer Acts of which they had no knowledge.
             Yet another besetting sin of the Local Militiamen,
        a sin begotten of cupidity, was to enlist as Volunteers or
        as substitutes in the Regular Militia of other counties
        than their own, contrary to the law.         Such men of
        course received good bounty ; but the only penalty was
        imprisonment for " neglecting to appear at the place of
        exercise " as Local Militiamen.      In at least one case
        such an offender gave information against himself in
        order to keep his bounty at the cost of imprisonment,
        thus exemplifying once more the error of keeping
        two different descriptions of Militia simultaneously.^
             In Scotland there was occasionally unpleasantness
        because some corps of Local Militia had carried with
        them the habits acquired when they were Volunteers,
        particularly in cases where independent companies, each
        under its own petty magnate, had been united into
        battalions.   In one battalion of this kind some of the
        captains were Deputy-Lieutenants, and as such assumed
        the right to control the Commandant.      On one occasion
        when their Commanding Officer's views did not coincide
        with their own, they formed a meeting of the Lieu-
        tenancy and delivered to the men their arms, accoutre-
         ments, and camp equipage, contrary to his orders and
        indeed contrary both to Act of Parliament and the
         King's regulations ; and the unhappy Commandant,
         submitting at the moment " to avoid the appearance of
         dissension," carried his sad story to the General of the
         District, who forwarded it to the Secretary of State.^
             But the greatest obstacle of all with which com-
         mandants of Local Militia had to contend was the
         undisguised hostility of the population in many quarters
         towards the force, and the efforts of violent men to
              ^   l.D. vol. clxxx. L.L. Bucks, to S.S. 3rd June 18 10.
              2   Ibid. vol. clxxxvii. O.C. Kirkcudbright L.M. to G.O.C.,
        Scotland, 7th May i8io.
