        236        TROUBLES WITH BALLOT                           chap.

1810.   men's families.    It was further enacted, for the pre-
        vention of abuses, that the provisions of the Mutiny
        Act as regards the enlistment of apprentices should
        apply to the Militia.
            The Government, from leniency towards the counties
        and to give them time to prepare their lists, prolonged
        the time for voluntary enlistment to the 30th of June ;
        but the ballot was duly applied to complete the Militia
        after the ist of July ; and the usual crop of troubles at
        once sprang up.     In many counties it seems that there
        was something like a revolt of the Deputy-Lieutenants
        and Justices, " whose conduct and language checked the
        operation of the law."   From others there were pathetic
        appeals that the bounty of £10 to parochial substitutes,
        which was ordered to cease on the ist of September,
        might be prolonged to the ist of October, owing to the
        time consumed in making out new ballot -lists.^ But
        the Act reserved no power to the Crown to do this ;
        and the aggrieved counties were fain to submit to the
        inevitable.   Where new ballot-lists had not been made
        out, there were still more formidable obstacles.      In
        Inverness twenty-eight indignant tradesmen complained
        that they had all of them been drawn for the Militia, to
        the omission of many others who had not been included in
        the ballot because the lists were two years old.   They
        alleged further that the number of constables had been
        doubled from forty to eighty within the past eighteen
        months to secure exemption for a certain number of
        young men and they appealed frantically for new lists,
                     ;


        because trade, since they had been ballotted, was at a
        standstill.'^ In another subdivision of the same county
        the ballot failed completely.     Several of the lotmen
        disappeared or deserted ;      others raised legal objections
        which procured them bill after bill of suspension from

           1 I.D. vol. clxxx. L.L. Linlithgow, to S.S. 2nd August 1810.

        Eight more counties made the same request.
           * liU. vol. clxxix. Enclosure in David Macpherson to S.S. 24th

        Aug. 1 8 10. Memorial of a subdivision of Inverness to S.S. Dec.
        1810.
