        238         TROUBLES WITH BALLOT                          chap.

iSio.   enlistment by beat of drum for one month, and the
        consequent loss of power during that month to raise
        parochial substitutes for ten guineas.^      Edinburgh made
        a like complaint of the suspension of the ballot during
        June.    In Midlothian only seven men had been raised
        by beat of drum, and most of the ballotted men had
        paid fines instead of finding substitutes, which did
        not deliver the parishes from the fine of ^^40 for every
        man deficient. Private bounties for substitutes, added
        the Vice-Lieutenant, had in some counties reached the
        height of£^o ; and this was confirmed by the Lieutenant
        of Fife, who reported that he had raised the quota for
        his county, but that bounties had indeed exceeded the
        above figure, the £^0 paid being in addition to the
        ten guineas allowed by the Act, so that the total
        amounted to ;^6o los.   :     In consideration of the
        circumstances the Vice-Lieutenant of Edinburgh begged
        that the fines of ^20 paid for exemption might be
        accepted as part of the penalty of £^0 levied on the
        county for every man deficient. He pleaded in vain.
        To one and all of these requests that the law might be
        wrested to one side or another in their favour, there
        could be but one reply       —
                                    that the Secretary of State
        could grant no dispensations from Act of Parliament.^
            In England there were difficulties of much the same
        kind as in Scotland. In Buckinghamshire the Lieutenant
        urged that a short Bill should be passed to extend the
        time for the ballot until March 1 8 1 1 , so that recalci-
        trant counties might be brought to their senses by
        heavy fines. His own quota was nearly complete, but
        in his virtuous indignation he omitted to mention that
        some of his men had been raised at Leicester, where the
        crier had been sent round to offer forty guineas apiece
        for three or four men for the Buckinghamshire Militia.
        In Berkshire the Lieutenancy took upon itself to ballot
        men after the ist of October, and would not set them
          1  I.D. vol. clxxxvii. L.L, Lanark, to S.S. 19th Oct. 1810.
          2  Il>id. vol. clxxxiv. L.L. Edinburgh, to S.S. 3rd Oct, ; vol.
        clxxxv. V.L. Fife, to S.S. 25th Aug. 18 10.
