IV       LOCAL MILITIA AMENDMENT                          241

consequence of these doubts, and of the bad blood               1810.
engendered thereby, was that in 18 10 there were levied,
instead of the 18,512 men still required to complete
the number laid down by the Act, no more than
14,934.     Of these 6055 had been raised by beat of
drum and 8879 by ballot, and of the latter 797 only
were principals against 8082 substitutes.^
    The Local Militia appears to have stopped short
somewhat in the progress made at the beginning of
1809.    Whitbread stated in the House of Commons
that  half of that in his own county, Bedford, had never
been out on permanent duty nor received their clothing,
while in other counties none whatever had been called
out for training. The Government seems to have been
uneasy about its expense, which was set down at ;^i6 a
man annually ; and it was further alleged that military
duty was unsettling the men for their ordinary pursuits.'
Accordingly an Act to amend the Local Militia Act
was passed on the i8th of April (50 Geo. III. cap. 25),
which contained the following provisions.
     In case of reduction of the permanent staff, com-
mandants were empowered to engage other non-com-
missioned officers at a reduced rate of pay (sec. i).
The days of exercise to qualify Volunteers for exemp-
tion from service in the Regular and Local Militia were
reduced from twenty-four to eighteen annually (sec. 2).
The fine of ^^ 1 5 upon counties for every man deficient
of the quota on the 14th of February was suspended,
though it was to be enforced for every man not present
at the annual training (sec. 5). Constables were required
to make returns of deficiencies on the 14th of November,
and the counties were obliged to make them good
before the 14th of February on pain of a fine of ^^i 5 (sec.
 6). Local Militiamen who enlisted in the Line and made
no declaration of the bounty that they had received,
in order that the same might be refunded, were subject
to a fine of twice the amount of the bounty, to be
                     1
                         C.J. vol. Ixvi. p. 561.
          2   H.D. Whi thread's Speech, ist March 1810.
