         240         OBSCURITY OF THE ACTS                                 chap.

1810.   State, who   laid     it    down    that both sides were wrong.
        No ballot, he wrote, can be    held after the ist of
        October until the       of January 18 12 without the
                                     ist
        King's special directions ; but if such directions be
        given, payment of the fine will not exonerate the
        parishes in default.^
            Once again I must apologise for quoting at length the
        difficulties raised   by the construction of the enactments
        that so rapidly succeeded            each other in these times.
        The judgment           of     the   Secretary     of State, quoted
        immediately above, shows             how drastic        this   particular
        Act really was.            Practically   it     counties
                                                      said to   the             :


         " You shall produce so many men for the Militia by a
        certain day, or you shall pay a fine of £^0 for every
        man deficient, and still be liable to produce them later
        on.**   But the Act did not say so in so many words,
        and possibly Ministers refrained from inserting any
        phrase which should exactly convey such a meaning, in
        the hope that they might not be compelled to enforce
        this particular interpretation of it.   If this were the
        case, they were greatly disappointed.     So many Acts
        dealing with the Militia, some in full force, some
        obsolete, were before the Lieutenants and their Deputies,
        to say nothing of the complications produced by the
        establishment of the Local Militia, that they became
        very pardonably confused.        They therefore either
        construed the Acts according to the precedents known
        to themselves, or wrangled over their true meaning, or
        in the last resort unanimously lost their tempers, and
        shrank from putting the measures into force. The
        exaction of a fine for men not raised was, according to
        the Militia Act of 1802, in the nature of a composition
        which balanced the two sides of the account ; and it
        would have been better in the first instance to have
        made it perfectly clear that what held good in 1802
        was not intended to apply to 1809.          The natural
            ^ I.D. vol. clxxxvii. L.L. Lanes, to S.S. 20th Feb.; Lord
        Stanley to S.S. 25th Sept. 1810; H.O. Mila. E.B. S.S. to L.L.
        Lanes, 28th Sept. 18 10.
