IV           RIOTS IN LOCAL MILITIA                      249
     There were other mutinies in the Local Militia in            »8io.
Wiltshire, Warwickshire, and Worcestershire in the
course of the summer and winter, all nominally due
to the miserable marching-guinea, but ail obviously
excited and stimulated by the townspeople.     In Wor-
cestershire, indeed, the Commanding Officer had spent
only one shilling of the half-guinea in necessaries, and
was prepared to give the balance to the men ; but even
so there ensued a riot, to suppress which it was
necessary to call in a battalion of Regular troops.^
It will be seen that an effort was presently made to
end the trouble about the marching-guinea once for
all ; but this did not go to the root of the matter.

The heart of the mischief lay in the general aversion
of a large section of the population from all obedience
and subordination whatever. Such aversion still exists,
and is encouraged by the ignorant and foolish, who
would gladly place arms in the hands of all Volunteers
that ask for them, forgetting that undisciplined men in
numbers are neither more nor less than a mob, and
that an armed mob is the most dangerous of all. Yet
these same men, if they chance to suffer from the
insubordination of Regular troops, are always the first
to cry out against the indiscipline that they themselves
have encouraged.
    It remains now to summarise briefly the offensive
operations of England in the course of 18 10.      These
consisted in the West Indies of the attack and capture
of Guadeloupe early in the year ; in the Mediterranean,
of some petty work in the Ionian Islands ; in the East,
of the capture of Banda, Amboyna, and Bourbon ; and
in the Peninsula, to which Napoleon was now again
able to devote  the greater part of his force, of the
defensive campaign which is identified with the names of
Bussaco and Torres Vedras.  By reason of the number of
troops, over 20,000, engaged in operations within the

   1
     I.D. vol. cxcvi. L.L. Warwick, to S.S. 22nd Nov.; O.C.
Wilts L.M. to S.S. loth June ; vol. cxcvii. O.C. Worcestershire
L.M. to S.S. 28th May 1810.
