        252   MILITIA ENLISTMENT ACT, 1811                    chap.

1811.   the Line; and in Ireland fifteen men from every company
        (cap. 20, sec. I ; cap. 30, sec. 4).   In Great Britain the
        Secretary of State was to ascertain annually the number of
        men (not exceeding the above total in all) to be enlisted
        from each regiment of Militia, which number was not in
        any case to rise above one-seventh of the quota of 1 802   ;

        and he was to signify it before the ist of February to the
        Commanding       Officer   of every regiment   (sec. 3).   A
        greater   number might be enlisted by the King's order
        in cases where counties had not contributed to the Line
        the full quota allowed to them under former Acts, and
        had therefore an excess of men over the establishment
        laid down by the present Act (sec. 4).   In Ireland, if
        the full quota were not enlisted in any one year, the
        deficiencies might be added to the quota of the next
        year, and enlisted together with it (cap. 30, sec. 5).
        Commandants of Militia were to explain the terms of
        enlistment into the Line to the men within two days
        of receiving the order, and men were to be allowed to
        enlist for the  seven days immediately following ; after
        which, at intervals of not less than a fortnight, periods
        of three more days apiece were to be appointed for
        enlistment (sees. 6, 8).
             The remainder of the provisions dealt with the
        reduction of the Militia ; so it will be well first to state
        that, by an Order in Council of the nth of March, the
        ballot had been continued in such counties as had not
        completed their quota of Militia to the establishment laid
        down by the Act of 1 809 ; and that on the 4th of April
        there had been passed an Act (51 Geo. III. cap. 17)
        validating all enrolments under ballots held, without
        such order, after the ist of October 18 10.             The
        deficiency under the Act of 1809 was therefore in
        process of being made good ; and it was now enacted
         under 51 Geo. III. cap. 20, that fines incurred by
         parishes for men deficient on the ist of October 18 10
         should be remitted to the extent of three-fourths, one
         half, and one-third, if the men were produced by the
         ist of June, ist of July, and ist of September 181
