IV             MILITIA COMPLETION                        253

                     When the men required under
respectively (sec. 21).                                         181 1.
the Act of 1809 had been raised, the ballot was to be
suspended until     ist   July 18 13 (sec. 23) ; and Militia-
men might thenceforth be raised by beat of drum for
a bounty of twelve guineas, of which part was to go
towards the expense of obtaining the recruit, and part
to be paid into his hand (sees. 23, 25).         Boys of
fourteen and upward could, by the King's order, be
enlisted to a proportion not exceeding one-fourth of
the whole number of men required for the year ; their
standard of height to be fixed by regulation (sec. 26).
The Militia of Great Britain after the passing of this
Act was to be gradually reduced to the quota of 1802 ;
but the King was empowered to order supernumeraries
to be raised by beat of drum in numbers equal to that of
the men enlisted into the Line in each year under the
present Act ; which supernumeraries were to be taken
to fill no vacancies except those of the men so enlisted
into the Line (sees. 29-31).      Officers and non-com-
missioned officers, who would become supernumerary
upon this reduction, could be ordered to remain with
their regiments ; and special arrangements were made
for supernumerary field-officers (sees. 32-3$)- The King,
after the reduction of the Militia as aforesaid, was em-
powered to order a number of men, equal to that which
had been allowed to enlist into the Line, to be raised
by ballot in each county, whether such number should
have enlisted or not ; and if a ballot were so ordered,
all vacancies from death, discharge, etc., were to be
 filled according to the provisions of the Militia Act of
 1802 (sec. 36).     A  bounty of ten guineas was to be
 paid to    every  ballotted  man, whether principal or
 substitute, and   no  further allowance whatever (sees.
37,    38).   Deputy-Lieutenants   were to apportion the
voluntary    and ballotted recruits among the various
parishes   (sees.39, 40) ; and Local Militiamen were
permitted to enlist into the Militia of their own
counties (sec. 41).  Lastly, support to the families of
Militiamen raised after the passing of this Act was to
