IV             BALLOT DIFFICULTIES                          255
any part of the United Kingdom were to receive a                   1811.
bounty of two guineas. It was specially provided that
Commanding Officers should explain to their men that
there was no compulsion (sees. 10-14),
   Meanwhile the ballot, prolonged by royal order for
the completion of the Militia under the Act of 1 809,
continued during the opening months of 18 11, and was
not furthered by the fact that no bounty to ballotted
men was now granted by Government. In Scotland the
proceedings were still delayed by petty actions brought
against the Lieutenancies by lotmen, by endless
ingenious pleas for exemption, by the absconding of
ballottable men until the ballot was over, and by the old
dispute with the Barons of the Exchequer over the
payment of the Lieutenancies' clerks and other servants.
The price of substitutes, also, had risen to an appalling
height.    In Forfar it was reported to range from ^^50
to j^8o; and the county declared itself unable, even by
rigid enforcement of the law, to produce its quota.
Nevertheless there were signs that, either from better
feeling or from hard necessity, there was rather less
reluctance in Scotland to serve in the Militia, for
Sutherland among her quota furnished sixty-six prin-
cipals as against four substitutes. On the other hand, in
Skye and other parts of the west coast men prepared to
emigrate to Carolina rather than serve their country ;
and one gentleman in Haddington had formed so low
an opinion of the zeal of his compatriots that he recom-
mended the Secretary of State to discharge the whole ot
the Scottish Militia. " You have 1 1 ,000 men in Scotland,"
he wrote, "doing nothing, and unwilling to volunteer for
the Line as they will lose support for their families, which
is the great inducement to them to serve.       If you were
to discharge the 11,000 you would get 9000 recruits,
                                                             ^
for most of them are weavers who cannot get work."
    In England matters were little different.      In Man-

   1 I.D. vol. cc. L.L. Inverness, to S.S. May, 12th June; Angus
Mackintosh to S.S, 5th July 181 1 ; vol. cci. O.C. Berwick Mila.
to S.S. 1 2th March.  Return of men raised in Sutherland under
