          246           RIOTS IN LOCAL MILITIA                      chap.

1 8 10.   of rioters in 1809, still harboured a vague notion that
          they had the right to this allowance in cash without
          deductions, and that, if it were withheld, they were being
          defrauded.    No man likes to be cheated, and no men
          enjoy it less than those who spend their lives in en-
          deavouring to get the better of their neighbours.      No
          class is so suspicious as the waged class, and thus its
          feelings are easily worked upon by unscrupulous men.
              The first mischief occurred at Bath, where the
          regiment of West Mendip Local Militia, usually a
          loyal and orderly corps, was assembled for training.
          On the morning of the i6th of May the men on
          receiving the order to march refused to move, but
          presently obeyed, and went without further ado through
          a field-day, at the close of which the Commandant
          addressed them on the subject of the marching money,
          read out the words of the Act of Parliament concern-
          ing it, and apparently satisfied them thoroughly.      On
          returning to the town the Commandant ordered the
          leading sections to be marched as prisoners to his
          lodgings, where he intended to read them a lecture.
          The regiment thereupon broke its ranks as if to
          rescue them, but was checked by its officers ; and the
          prisoners were then marched to gaol.        In the evening
          the men paraded, perfectly sober and orderly, expressed
          regret at their behaviour of the morning, and begged
          for release of the prisoners, to which the Colonel
          replied he would make no conditions, but that their
          treatment would depend on the behaviour of the regi-
          ment.    There would have been no more trouble but
          that the rabble of Bath came up,^ led away a few of the
          worst characters, and, going with them to the gaol,
          forced the doors and released the prisoners.      Then all
          order was lost.     The Colonel, attempting to re-arrest
          one of the prisoners, was threatened by the bayonets
          of his own men.       His officers were attacked by the
              1 The letter says that they had " Burdett " upon their hats
                                                                          ;
          that very absurd person being the popular champion of liberty at
          the moment.
