IV              RIOTS IN LOCAL MILITIA                          247
mob      ;   and the whole town was         in uproar, until    the     '^'°-
Lancashire       Regular    Militia     from Bristol to
                                       arrived
restore order.    Then the Local Militia came to their
senses and, though the populace was still raging, escorted
the prisoners back to gaol.     Two of them were then
tried by court-martial, sentenced to fifty lashes, tied up
before the whole regiment, without the slightest sign
of indiscipline, and pardoned at the last moment. The
riot lasted for three days    and the sympathies of the
                                   ;


lower class were so entirely with the mob, both at Bath
and at Bristol, that the Lancashire men were hardly
allowed by their landlords to leave the houses in which
they were billeted, and indeed in some cases were obliged
to force the doors.^
    Within a few days this was followed by another
mutiny of the Upper Tivy Local Militia of the county
of Cardigan, which had been assembled for twenty days'
training at Aberystwith on the loth of May.       The
men were quite orderly and contented until a news-
paper arrived with an account of the riot at Bath. The
Commanding Officer at once published in regimental and
company orders the King's Regulations as to the
expenditure of the half-guinea for necessaries ; but on
parade that day there were signs of insubordination,
though after the reading of the Regulations to the men
once more in the Colonel's presence, these disappeared.
The parade was then dismissed, and the leaders in
disobedience, on expressing contrition, were pardoned,
with the exception of one man who was tried by court-
martial and sentenced to three hundred lashes. Upon
this the Colonel received warning from several indi-
viduals that he and his officers would be murdered if
the sentence were carried out ; and this was no vain
threat, for Aberystwith was a kind of Alsatia, a home
of the lawless, fiill of men who could serve their
country but would not, nor might be constrained to do
so but by an armed force.
     ^   I.D. vol. cxciii. O.C. West Mcndip (Somerset) L.M. to S.S.
          1 8th May ; G.O.C. Western District, to S.S. loth May
17th,                                                           1810.
