        254        MILITIA INTERCHANGED                    chap.

1811.   be discontinued, except in the case of ballotted     men
        who were enrolled as principals (sec. 20).
            These enactments for England and Ireland, as will
        have been remarked, were a new departure, inasmuch as
        they provided for a fixed annual draft of, roughly
        speaking, 10,000 men from the Militia into the Line,
        which draft, if not complete in one year, could be made
        good in the next ; and it was obviously intended that,
        if possible, the equivalent for this draft should be
        voluntarily enlisted every year into the Militia so as to
        silence all invidious statements that men were being
        ballotted or conscribed for the troops of the Line.
        Thus at length effect was in part given to Sir Harry
        Calvert's recommendations of 1809 ; and though the
        two descriptions of Militia, the Regular and the Local,
        were still preserved, the first was reduced to its peace
        establishment, and the ballot was reserved, except in
        cases of emergency, for the latter only.
           A   further important step in respect of the Militia
        was an Act to permit the interchange of the British and
        Irish Militias, pursuant to Castlereagh's advice (51 Geo.
        III. cap 118).    Hereby it was enacted that in future all
        Militiamen should be engaged to serve in any part of
                        —
        the British Isles   that in fact there should no longer be
        a Militia of Great Britain and a Militia of Ireland, but
        one Militia of the United Kingdom (sees. 1-6). No
        British corps was to continue in Ireland, nor Irish corps
        in England, for more than two years successively ; and
        at no time was more than half of the British Militia to
        be in Ireland, or more than one-third of the Irish Militia
        in England, except in case of rebellion or invasion.
        Moreover, British or Irish Militia who had once served in
        the sister Kingdom were not to be liable to serve there
        again except in rotation after an interval of four years
        or six years respectively (sees. 8, 9).   No corps was to
        be called upon to serve in a sister Kingdom without the
        King's orders.     The King was empowered to accept
        voluntary offers of the present Militia so to serve ; and
        existent Militiamen voluntarily engaging for service in
