IV           PALMERSTON'S MEASURES                           251

to enlist voluntarily into the Line. Hereby no new                  181 1.
ballot would be needed until the
                               end of 18 12. In the
matter of expense he pointed to over ^^ 300,000 saved
in the past year by curtailing the annual term of
exercise for the Volunteers, and added that he now
proposed also to reduce the training of the Local
Militia to fourteen days annually.
    Palmerston's plan for raising men was entirely ap-
proved by Castlereagh, who, however, wished in the first
place to encourage volunteers from the Militia by con-
tinuing the support of the families of the enlisting Militia-
men, which hitherto had ceased from the moment that
they entered the Line ; and in the second to recruit the
Militia as far as possible for a fixed bounty, lower than
that given to the Regulars.    For the English at large
he adhered to the existing system of a Regular Army
for offensive operations over sea ; a Regular Militia to
occupy the principal garrisons and advanced positions
against invasion ; and a Local Militia to assemble
under their protection for the repulse of the enemy.
Finally, he urged the advantages of making it possible
to transfer British Militia to Ireland and Irish Militia
to England in rotation, so that       all   the regiments might
in   succession   take   a   turn   of service    in   the sister
islands.
    Accordingly a Bill for permitting a certain number
of Militiamen to enlist was introduced, and passed with
no great difficulty. Windham was dead, but a few of
his followers still advocated his plans for voluntary
enlistment only, coupled with short service ; to which
Mr. Ryder replied that short service was still optional
with recruits, but that not one-fourth of them cared to
avail themselves   of it, though the difl^erence in bounty
for limited and unlimited service amounted only to the
difference between five guineas and six.       The Bill
therefore became law on the nth of      April (51 Geo.
III. Great Britain, cap. 20; Ireland,    cap. 30).    It

provided that 5714 men from the      English, and  1142
from the Scottish Militia should be allowed to enlist in
