IV             NEW LOCAL MILITIA ACT                    263
not to vacate contracts with masters, unless the servant        181 2.
did not return to the same master as soon as possible
after the end of the training.  Any dispute concerning
wages under the value of ^^20 might be settled by a
Justice of the Peace, who had power to levy distress if
the money were not paid as he decided (sec. 62). Local
Militiamen were allowed to enlist into the Line, with the
exception of non-commissioned officers and musicians,
who could only do so with their Commanding Officer's
consent, and of apprentices, who needed to obtain their
master's consent (sec. 65).       All vacancies were to be
filled up as appointed in sec. 60, even though the ballot
for the Regular Militia might be suspended     ; but volun-
tary recruits, as in sec. 37, were allowed to enter until the
quotas fixed by the present Act were complete (sec. 66).
The Local Militia was to be formed into companies of not
less than sixty, or more than one hundred and twenty
privates, with three officers ; and these, where the num-
bers in the county sufficed, were to be organised into
one or more regiments of not more than twelve or less
than ten companies ; or, failing this, into battalions of
not more than seven or less than four companies.       Regi-
ments of eight hundred men and upwards were to have
four field-officers ; corps of 480 to 800 men, three field-
officers ; battalions of less than 480 men, two field-
officers ; and corps of three companies, one field-officer.
Corps of five companies and upwards were allowed to
have a Light, or a Grenadier company ; to regiments of
eight companies and upwards, both Light and Grenadier
companies were permitted, each with two lieutenants
instead of lieutenant and ensign.      Every company over
ninety strong might have three subalterns (sec. 68).
Officers in excess of the establishment at the time of the
passing of the Act could be retained (sec. 69). Counties
could be divided into districts for the supply of different
corps within them (sec. 62). Local Militia upon embodi-
ment were entitled to the same pay and allowances as the
Regular Militia; with a grant of los. 6d. a man in the first
year, and 5s. 3d. a man in subsequent years, for necessaries
