IV                 GOOD SPIRIT OF MILITIA                                  257
   In the matter of volunteering for the Line the                                181 1.
Militia seems to have shown laudable alacrity, supplying
11,453 recruits, or 1143 in excess of the number
required of them, in the course of the year 181 1.    In
the West Middlesex Regiment so many above the full
quota offered themselves on the first day that it was
possible to select the best from among them ; ^ and this
is the more remarkable, for the operations in the
Peninsula had not yet assumed the brilliancy to which
they were later to attain.     Other corps were equally
forward ; ^ though some of course held back ; but
the policy of asking for a small number of men only
was in this year successful. Nor were the regiments,
as a body, less ready to volunteer for duty in Ireland.
Some         hesitation        was shown   at   first,   for   there       was
nervousness among principals lest they should commit
themselves to service beyond their covenanted term ;
but they were speedily reassured when they learned
that strict faith would be kept with them.   The Home
Office, however, when inviting offers from the various
corps made one very foolish mistake by omitting to
mention that the men serving in Ireland would be paid
in Irish currency, which was below the British currency
in value.    No doubt the purchasing value of the Irish
currency in Ireland was equal to that of the British in
England ; but Commanding Officers, after representing
to their men in good faith that they would receive the
same pay and allowances, felt greatly the awkwardness
and humiliation of having to explain to them, after they
had volunteered their services, that their pay would be
reduced.  The War Office, which also sent a circular
upon the subject to the Militia regiments, was careful
to make the matter clear   and the Home Office was
                                     ;

quite inexcusable for neglecting to do so.   It was just

such folly as this that shook the faith of the forces in

   1 l.D. vol. ccxii. O.C. West Middlesex Mila. to S.S. 3rd                May
1811.
     -'
                       O.C. N. Hants Mila. to S.S, 2nd
          Ibid. vol. ccviii.                                    May    ;   voL
ccxiii.    O.C. Montgomery Mila. to S.S. 1st May 181 1.
                                                                   S
