        262      NEW LOCAL MILITIA ACT                     chap.

i8iz.   Parishes might be grouped together for convenience of
        ballotting (sec. 28), The clauses forbidding insurance
        and substitution were re-enacted but voluntary recruits
                                         ;


        might be accepted, and parishes could levy a rate to pay
        them a bounty of not more than two guineas (sees. 34-
         36).    Persons voluntarily enlisting themselves, if
        between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five, with not
        more than two children, and five feet two inches in
        height, could avert the ballot to the extent of their
        numbers (sec. 37). Exemption was granted, over and
        above the persons in the former Acts, to poor men with
        more than two children and to students on an eleemosyn-
        ary foundation.     Men who had served by substitute
        in the Regular Militia or in any additional force were
        exempted for four years after the expiration of their
        period of service, and men who had served in person for
        six years (sec. 38).   Men already enrolled in the Local
        Militia were exempted from the ballot for the Regular
        Militia for two years after the expiration of the period
        of service, unless they neglected to attend training ; but
        men enrolled after the passing of this Act were to be
        exempt for one year only (sees. 39, 40). The fine for
        exemption was, as before, ;^30, reduced to ^^20 for men
        with annual incomes of less than ^200, and to ;^io for
        those whose income fell below ;^ioo.       Payment of the
        fine or personal service ensured certain exemption for two
        years (sec. 44, and cap. 116, sec. i).    Men imprisoned
        for not paying their fine could be compelled to serve
        their four years after the term of imprisonment had
        expired (sec. 45).   Deputy-Lieutenants might re-appor-
        tion quotas in cases where they seemed inequitable
        (sec. 48).    Vacancies were to be filled up by fresh
        ballot, the parish to supply the vacancy of a man pro-
        moted to be non-commissioned officer being chosen by
        lot, unless the promotion were due to the reduction of
        another non-commissioned officer to the ranks (sec. 60).
        Special directions were given as to the timely ballotting
        of men to fill the place of those whose term of service
        was expired (sec. 61). The enrolment of servants was
