IV           LOCAL MILITIA IMPROVES                                259
the  conduct of the force seems to have improved                                181 1.
greatly, while the Lieutenancies shrank less than before
from executing the Act for keeping it up to strength.
In Buckinghamshire the Deputy-Lieutenants did not
hesitate to draw a young gentleman, past eighteen years
of age, upon the foundation of Eton College, for the
Local Militia, a proceeding which called forth a noble
and dignified protest from the Provost. To this the
Secretary of State replied that, though there was no
legal provision to exempt the lad, who must therefore
pay his fine or be enrolled for four years, yet he would
take care that no hardship should come of it, and, in
case a new Militia Act were required, would consider the
propriety of giving exemption to students upon
eleemosynary foundations.^ But this was by no means
all.  The Local Militia began to display a fine and
enterprising spirit.  When the Cornish Regular Militia
volunteered for service in Ireland, the 4th Cornwall
Local Militia offered to do duty for it in England
during its absence ; and in the course of the summer
the Banff Local Militia, 1074 strong, tendered itself
for service in any part of the world, and the Berkshire
for service in the Peninsula.^
   The operations of the year were confined to the
capture of Mauritius and Java in the Far East, and to the
campaigns in the Peninsula which are remembered by
the names of Barrosa, Fuentes d'Onoro, and Albuera.
The casualties for the year numbered 19,019.         The
recruits raised by voluntary enlistment amounted to
9532 men and 1940 boys, or 11,472 altogether, which,
added to 1 1,453 men transferred from the MiHtia, made

deem it necessary to claim them [note this evasion of responsibility
on the part of the Secretary of State] you      will transmit to the
Home Office such particulars as are necessary to bring the men to           *




condign punishment."
   1 I.D. vol. cci. Provost of Eton      to   S.S.   8th   May   1811   ;


H.O.M.E.B. vol. xlvii. S.S. to Provost, nth May 181 1.
  2  I.D. vol. cciii. L.L. Cornwall, to S.S. 13th June 181 1 ; vol.
cc. V.L. BanfF, to S.S. 23rd July ; O.C. Berks L.M. to S.S. 30th
June 181 1.
