         256            BALLOT DIFFICULTIES                            chap.

181 1.   Chester the fines paid for deficiencies in the          number of
         men amounted          to £']ioo.        In Brecon the price        of
         substitutes    rose   above   £60   ;   and   in   Staffordshire    it

         became so prohibitive that the Lieutenancy suspended
         enrolment for a time in the hope, which was fulfilled, of
         lowering it.    In Yorkshire a Deputy-Lieutenant sug-
         gested a general commutation of service for money, to
         be paid by hundreds and even larger districts within the
         county, as a certain means of raising men at less cost and
         with less oppression, and of diminishing the abuse of in-
         surance. The method had, he said, been practised, though
         prohibited by law, and when exercised by honourable
         Colonels had been found beneficent both to the regiment
         and the county. Thus, even in the ninth year of the
         war, the one idea of filling the Regular Militia was still
         to find substitutes, or in other words to compete with the
         Regiments of the Line for recruits at enormous expense
         to individuals and local bodies.     Yet the Government
         continued to prefer this system to that advocated by
         Calvert    and though at this distance of time it seems
                    ;


         utterly to be condemned, we should perhaps be rash to
         infer that it was wrong in practice.    I can only account
         for Ministers' adherence to it upon the hypothesis which
         I have already suggested, that the strong element of

         gambling which it contained was palatable to the people.^
         It must be added, however, that when the ballot was
         ended and enlistment by beat of drum restored, the
         Government did its best to ease matters by allowing
         every Militia regiment to recruit its full proportion of
         boys, and left the standard of their height to the un-
         trammelled judgment of Commanding Officers.^

         Act of 1809, 9th Jan. 181 1 ; vol. ccvii. L.L. Forfar, to S.S. 23rd
         Feb. 181 1 ; vol. ccxx. Mr. J. Brown, Haddington, to S.S. 15th April
         1811.
            ^   I.D. vol. ccxi. T. Stanley to Attorney-General, 12th March
         (enclosing memorial from Manchester) ; vol. ccxvi. L.L. Staffs, to
         S.S. 4th Jan. ; vol. cci. L.L. Brecon, to S.S. 27th April ; vol. ccxx.
         Sir J. Duckett (Yorks) to S.S. 20th March 181 1.
            2  Circular to O.C. Militia Regts. 15th July ; to O.C. 1st Somer-
         set Militia, 4th Sept. 181 1.
