IV      LOCAL MILITIA RE-ENGAGED                       265

as an abandonment of the original principle of putting         iSri.
the   whole population through the ranks.           It  was
defended on the ground that it would produce a more
effective force, avert the need for calling men from
their ordinary avocations, and save ^100,000 a year.
No doubt at so critical a time these were important
considerations ; and yet it was a great misfortune that
Ministers should have yielded to them.         For the first
time Castlereagh had compelled the country to recognise
that it was the duty of every able-bodied citizen in the
prime of life to be trained to arms, and had introduced
legislation, none too drastic, to enforce that duty.    Yet
the Act vitiated this good service, first by admitting
Volunteer corps without regard to the age of the Volun-
teers, and, secondly, by allowing men who were ready to
do their duty to take the place of men who were not.
In both cases they admitted the very principle which
they professed to repudiate  —   that of substitution—  and
this was a most objectionable compromise.            It was
unstatesmanlike since it took no thought for the future,
whereas Castlereagh had designed the Local Militia to
be a permanent force ; and it was unnecessary, because
the country was still conscious that its fate was uncertain
and could only be assured by a great effort.
    The truth seems to have been that Government had
not foreseen an embarrassment which was bound inevit-
ably to show itself when, as was the case in 1 8 1 2, the
four years' service of the first batch of Local Militia-
men should expire. As the entire force was created
practically at the same moment, it followed necessarily
that the entire force became entitled to its discharge at
the same moment, and that consequently, unless a
certain number of men were allowed to re-engage, no
old soldiers would be left to leaven the raw recruits.
An officer in the Edinburgh Local Militia pointed out
a remedy for this by suggesting that every man on
reaching the age of eighteen should, as a matter of
course, be enrolled in the Local Militia, and that some
machinery should be devised for the automatic enlist-
