          264       NEW LOCAL MILITIA ACT                       chap.

J 8 12.   (sec. 86).    The annual training was to be for not more
          than twenty-eight days, and the men could not be
          ordered to march outside their own counties (sec. 88)
          unless the Lieutenant recommended for convenience of
          training that the regiment should be assembled in an
          adjoining county (sec. 90), and except in case of invasion
          or insurrection (sec. 123).    Offences committed during
          the training could be tried afterwards (sec. 95).    Local
          Militiamen, when embodied, could be subjected to
          stoppages for linen and necessaries, not exceeding four-
          pence a day (sec. 102).        Men absenting themselves
          from training were to be treated as deserters and liable
          to a fine of ^20 or six months' imprisonment (sec. 105) ;
          but their vacancy was to be filled up by ballot if they
          were absent for three months, though they were none
          the less liable to serve if they returned (sec. 106).      A
          proportion of non-commissioned officers could be kept
          on permanent pay by the King's order (sec. 116); and
          these could be called upon to raise voluntary recruits for
          the Regular Army or Militia (sec. 119).      Commanding
          Officers were required to make out a list of men, of the
          age and standing prescribed by sec. 17, who were willing
          to prolong their service for a bounty not exceeding
          ^2 2s. ; and such men were to be enrolled as volun-
                :



          teers for the place or parish for which they originally
          served (sec. 135).      The King was empowered to
          increase the Local Militia to six times the quota of the
          Regular Militia, on summoning Parliament within four-
          teen days (sec. 156).    Counties were to be fined £1 ^ for
          every man deficient of their quota on the 14th of February
          every year (sees. 176, 177) ; and the payment of this
          fine was to be accepted in discharge of its duty in raising
          and training men (sec. 185). Local Militiamen actually
          serving were exempted from payment of rates towards
          these fines.
             The most important novelties in this Act were, first,
          the reduction of the strength of the Local Militia, and,
          secondly, the power given to Local Militiamen to pro-
          long their service, which was justly criticised in Parliament
