         270         MILITARY MEASURES, 1813                     chap.

181 3.   required   to  arm the insurgent Prussians against
         Napoleon/ The Yeomanry, on the other hand, was
         left untouched    ;indeed later in the year Ministers
          announced that they desired to increase its efficiency,
          and to that end encouraged the incorporation of all
         isolated troops into regiments, offering also the pay of
         Regular cavalry to all which would come out for twelve
         days' permanent duty annually.^ The Government was
         evidently awaking to the fact that the Yeomanry was a
         far more valuable force than the Volunteers, of which
         it had formerly been reckoned a part.

            The     military measures brought         before Parliament
         in the spring   were comparatively unimportant.     The
         Militia of the Stannaries had complained that they were
         not allowed to enlist into the Line,^ having volunteered
         in vain for service as a complete regiment in the Penin-
         sula ; and an Act was accordingly passed to enable them
         to enlist, to the proportion of one-seventh of the quota
         of 1802 (53 Geo. III. cap. 20; 23rd March 18 13).           A
         short amending Act was also passed to alter slightly the
         dates for holding the ballots for the Local Militia, -to
         allow battalions of the force to consist of no more than
         six companies, and to regulate the appointment of the
         quotas in counties where there were effective Yeomanry
         and Volunteers (53 Geo. III. cap. 28, England ; cap.
         29, Scotland).    A short Act to amend the Militia laws
         was also passed (53 Geo. III. cap. 81   2nd July 18 13),
                                                  ;


         which enacted that a Volunteer, whose corps had been
         discontinued by Royal order, should not be liable to
         serve in the Militia if drawn for the ballot while he was
         an effective Volunteer (sec. 4). The King was further
         empowered to order supernumerary Militiamen to be
         raised by beat of drum to the proportion of one-half of
         the quota fixed by 51 Geo. III. cap. 20        and Com-
                                                           ;

         manding Officers of Militia were authorised to raise men
           1 Circular to L.Ls. of England, 17th March 181 3.
           2  Circular to L.Ls. 29th Oct. 1813.
           ' I.D. vol. ccxxxiii. Warden of the Stannaries to Col. Lemon,

         18th Nov. 1812.
