        274         REGULAR MILITIA DEPLETED                                     chap.

1813.   principals upon the expiration of their term of service.
        The Adjutant of the Notts Militia reported that he had
        five hundred men who had never handled a firelock,
        and fourteen sergeants out of thirty-one who were new
        to       their   work.         He therefore begged that he might
        be allowed to give his non-commissioned officers seven
        days of preliminary instruction before the training ; ^
        but his letter was not even answered.          Many other
        regiments   must   have  been in much the  same  condition,
        but no heed appears to have been taken of them.
        Events were moving fast in Europe, and Ministers
        appear to have left all minor details to chance.     Mem-
        bers of disbanded Volunteer Corps complained loudly,
        and not unreasonably, that after all their years of service
        they had lost their exemption from the Local Militia
        ballot   through no fault of their own.           Ministers
        expressed   regret.    They   had hoped   that  the  ballots
        would have been over before the time appointed for the
        dissolution of the Volunteer Corps ; but as it was not
        so, the Volunteers must take the consequences,^      More-
        over, as the Regular Militia ballot recommenced on the
        I St of July 1 8 13, the Volunteers became subject to that

        also, with the alternative of paying from ^^30 to ^^40
        for a substitute.^     Emphatically the last state of the
        Volunteers was worse than the first.
            But there was much excuse for ignoring such small
        matters as these, for as the year waned disaster upon
        disaster befell the hated Bonaparte.   Prussia had turned
        upon him early in the year ; Sweden had followed her
        later ; and in August Austria at last threw in her lot
        against him.     Two long and chequered campaigns were
        ended in October by the decisive overthrow of Napoleon
        at Leipsic ; and in November the wreck of his army


             ^   I.D.    vol.   ccxlvi.   Adjt.   Notts Mila. to   S.S.   20th   March
        1813.
             2   Ibid. vol. ccxlviii.     Geo. Jackson (Surrey) to S.S. 23rd April ;
        S.S. to Geo. Jackson, 26th April 1813.
             3    IbU.   vol.   ccl.   L.L. York West Riding, to S.S. 25th April
        1813.
