IV        ORDINARY RECRUITING IMPROVES                      271

by beat of drum at the headquarters of their regiments,             181 3.
or within ten miles thereof, even though such head-
quarters should be remote from their own county (sees.
6, 7).  The number of men enlisting into the Line in
counties having more than one regiment of Militia was
restricted to one-seventh of the establishment of the
Militia, irrespective of the number actually serving ; but
if,on the 24th of January in any year, the actual number
of men serving, after deduction of the quota allowed to
enlist into  the Line, exceeded the establishment, such
excess  of men   was to be allowed to enlist also (sees. 8,
9).    For the  first time since the war began no special
provision was necessary for raising recruits ; and the
existing machinery worked smoothly and well.        Never-
theless, one or two regiments of Militia began to show
signs of exhaustion, or at any rate of unwillingness to
furnish their quotas of men to the Line ; for between
the ist of April and the 25th of November 18 13 the
Militia furnished no more than 9095 recruits, out of its
appointed 10,000, for the Regular Army.^ Ordinary
recruiting, however, flourished astonishingly under the
new regulations, producing in the course of the year
12,824 men and 1874 boys, or an average of a full
thousand men a month.
    It must, however, be noted that some of these recruits
were obtained by exceptional methods.          In order to
increase the force in    America   the Militia  of thirteen
Scottish counties, and   of  Wicklow,  South Lincolnshire,
West Suffolk, South Hants, and West Norfolk, received
permission to enlist men for the Forty-Ninth Foot for
service in North America only, with an assurance of
discharge within six months of a general peace ; of a
grant of             of land to privates, sixty acres to
              fifty acres
corporals, and seventy-five to sergeants ; and of a free
passage for their wives and families to Quebec within
twelve months of the husbands' departure.*

     Return in C.J. vol. Ixix. p. 638.
      1

     The English and Irish regiments above named, together with
      2

the Fife, Perth, Berwick, Kirkcudbright, and Ross regiments,
                                                             were
