IV       FRICTION BETWEEN MILITIAS                             273
purposes of recruiting by the standing order which                    1813.
forbade Local Militiamen to be enlisted in any Regular
Militia but that of their own county.^  It was useless to
give commanders power to invite recruits outside their
counties when all the finest young men, being absorbed
by the Local Militia, were withheld from them. In
truth, the competition between the Local and the Regular
Militia had become acute, and the Commanding Officers
of the latter began to complain bitterly. * The Local
Militia has become a source of patronage to its com-
manders," wrote the Colonel of the Cardigan Militia.
" Lately sixty young men offered themselves to one
of our County Local Militia regiments. The Com-
manding Officer took forty of them, and discharged
that number of undesirable men.       Hence the ballot for
the Regular Militia falls on old and married men, in
fact, on the rejected of the Local Militia.   If they serve
in person, they are fit for nothing ; and their substitutes
from the manufacturing districts desert." From Lanca-
shire came a similar remonstrance owing to the difficulty
of raising Regular Militiamen by beat of drum. "Exemp-
tion from the Militia ballot draws the finest young men
to the Local Militia, because if they wish to enlist from
thence into the Line, they can do so when they please.
These men if ballotted [for the Regular Militia] would
serve ; or they would enlist in the Line or Regular
Militia rather than risk losing the bounty.       As it is,
service in the Regular Militia is forced upon men to
whom it is almost ruin, or they must give enormous
bounties to substitutes."
     These were serious symptoms ; and not less formid-
able   was the depleted condition of some of the
Militia regiments in consequence of the heavy drafts
required from them by the Line, and the discharge of

   1  I.D. vol. ccxl. O.C. Devon Mila. to S.S. nth July ; S.S. to
O.C. Devon Mila, 12th July 1813.
   2 Ibid. vol. ccxli. O.C. Glamorgan Mila. to S.S. 20th Jan.; vol.

ccxxxviii. O.C. Cardigan Mila. to S.S. 26th Feb. ; vol. ccxliii.
O.C. 1st Lanes Mila. to S.S. Feb. 18 13.
                                                           T
