        266      LOCAL MILITIA RE-ENGAGED                           chap.

1812.   ment and discharge every year of a certain fraction of
        the men liable to service.^     In the absence of such
        machinery the Lieutenancies were at a loss to know
        what to do. Many of them recognised the importance
        of making the Local Militia a means of national
        training ; but on the other hand the officers naturally
        clamoured for a few old soldiers to be left to them.
        Here, however, a further difficulty arose. A bounty was
        to be allowed under the Act to every Local Militiaman
        who extended his service, but the bounty was to be paid
        not by the counties but by the parishes.      Now when
        the Volunteers transferred their services to the Local
        Militia, it had frequently happened that through the zeal
        and good example of the gentry one parish had contributed
        every able-bodied man to the service, while its neighbour,
        from want of natural leaders, had contributed none. The
        Local Militiamen of the zealous parish were ready and
        eager to re-engage for a further period of service ; but
        the parochial ratepayers felt it to be a poor return for
        their patriotism that they should be subjected to an extra
        tax for bounties because they had provided more men
        than their neighbours for defence of the country ; and
        complaints upon this account were very common.^
            However, in spite of these drawbacks and of some
        perilous reforms wrought by the new Act, the Local
        Militia appears to have passed through the year 1812
        very quietly.   Some Commanding Officers dreaded the
        abolition of the marching-guinea and the change which
        gave Local Militiamen exemption for only one instead
        of two years from the Regular Militia ballot ; but on
        the other hand the grant of relief to their wives and
        families in all circumstances, theexemption from the
        duty of acting as peace-officers, and the promise, if
           ^ I.D. vol. ccxxvi. Sir A. Muir Mackenzie to the Lord Chief

        Baron, 24th Dec. 1812.
           2 Ibid. vol. ccxxvii. C.G.M. Glamorgan, to S.S. i6th Sept. 18 12,

        one specimen which must serve for many. The Sec. of State
        expressly disclaimed the provision of the bounty from the Imperial
        Exchequer in a letter to L.L. Caithness, 14th Aug. 18 12, H.O.L.M.
        E.B. vol. liv.
