        272      MILITIA RECRUITING TROUBLES chap.
1813.      There was some                 little   trouble   with   the   Scottish
        Militia in some quarters, owing to the claim of a great
        many substitutes to be discharged on the completion of
        ten years' service.             It seems that this was the result
                                                               of
        a regular agitation set  on foot by some pettifogging
        lawyers in various parts of Scotland    but the wording
                                                             ;


        of the Act was so plainly adverse to any such claim, that
        the men were easily persuaded of their folly, and the
        mischief was stamped out with little trouble.^
            Another and more serious difficulty was that the
        system of maintaining the Regular Militia by voluntary
        enlistment began to show signs of breaking down,
        even though the bounty offered to both boys and men
        was ten guineas.^ The provision in the Act of 18 13
        which allowed Commanding Officers to recruit men at
        their regimental headquarters, wherever they might be
        stationed, was intended to remedy this failing, but it is
        extremely doubtful whether it did so.      Commanding
        Officers were loth to destroy the local character of their
        regiments by taking in aliens from other counties ; and
        in cases where their numbers were fallen very low, they
        asked rather to be sent back for a time to their county
        town than for power to enlist recruits in a strange
        land.^   On the other hand it appears that Highlanders
        would follow a Highland Militia regiment to any
        quarter, and refuse to enlist in any other.*     But the
        concession granted by the Act of 1 8 1 3 was vitiated for

        informed at the same time that on the istof June they might offer
        the following bounties to men who would enlist in the Regular
        infantry  :   —
                    viz. to men who were serving before the 1st of April,

        14 guineas for life service and 10 guineas for limited service ; to
        men who had served only since 31st March, 10 guineas for life
        service and 6 guineas for short service. I.D. vol. ccl. Circ. of S.S.
        14th May 1813.
           ^  I.D. vol. ccxxxvi. O.C. Banff and Inverness Mila. to S.S. 29th
        Jan., nth, 26th Feb., 23rd March ; vol. ccxxxvii. Lieut.-General
        Wynyard to A.G. 2nd Jan. 181 3.
           2 liiJ. vol. ccxli. Commdt. Edinburgh Mila. Depot to S.S. 7th

        Oct.; S.S. to Commdt. nth Oct. 18 13.
           3   Hid.   vol. ccliii.   O.C. Beds. Mila. to S.S. 7th Jan. 18 14.
           *   Ibid. vol. ccxxxviii. O.C.     Ross Mila. to S.S. 17th Feb. 1813.
