V            SUMMARY— CASTLEREAGH                      285
with not even Militia intervening between them, and           18 14.
with no man wearing uniform except the Regular Army.
His plan failed. Short service proved to be a dis-
appointment as a temptation to recruits. The national
training, as he projected it, was impossible ; and the
one great service which he rendered was the suppression
of such Volunteers as were not self-supporting. Never-
theless, his brief administration marked a real turning-
point in the history of the war, for he had at least
upheld principles that were sound.
    Then came Castlereagh, better known for his work
at the Foreign Office than at the War Office, and better
remembered, unfortunately, for the Six Acts than for his
part either in war or diplomacy.    Grasping at once all
that was good in Windham's teaching, he started      from
the postulate that " learning the use of arms should be
imposed as a positive duty upon all individuals within
certain ages, to be enforced by fine."  For the moment
circumstances compelled him to maintain the Volunteers
for a year ; but in his own mind he had sealed their fate.
To make national training a genuine institution he
established a Sedentary or Local Militia, to be chosen
by ballot, without liberty of substitution, from the
entire male population between the ages of eighteen and
thirty, for four years' service, during which period the
men were to be exercised from time to time as companies
near their own homes, and assembled once annually as
battalions for not more than twenty-eight days.       Into
this force he swept as many of the false Volunteers as
cared to take service, retaining as Volunteers only such as
were self-supporting. At the same time, after making an
enormous draft upon the Regular Militia to bring the
Army    to   respectable          and reinforcing the
                           strength,
Militia through the ballot, by an even greater number
than the draft, he laid down the principle that a
regular supply of 10,000 men should be drawn from it
annually and made good as far as possible by voluntary
enlistment.  He thus returned in some measure to
Addington's system, using the Local Militia as Adding-
