IV     MILITIA ENLISTMENT ACT, 1813                     277

be formed into provisional battalions (sec. 5).           No    181 3.
officer of Militia was to rank with the Regulars higher
than as a Lieutenant-Colonel of Militia ; and if sufficient
Militia officers did not offer themselves, the King might
appoint others (sees. 6, 7). The Militia officers accepting
service under the Act were entitled to half-pay, and
their widows to pensions (sec. 8). All ranks of Militia-
men were to be subject to the Mutiny Act (sec. o) ;
but in other respects they were to retain their immunities
and privileges, provision for wives and families, etc. (sec.
10).    In the case of men enlisting into the Line, the
King could grant commissions in the Regular Army to
Militia officers in the proportions of a captain, lieutenant,
and ensign for every hundred men; and five sergeants and
six corporals could likewise be enlisted for every hundred
privates.    Officers could be allowed also to smaller
numbers of men enlisted. Such companies could be
attached to existing battalions of the Line, or massed
together into additional battalions (sec. 12).         Their
officers were to be entitled to half-pay (sec. 18).    Com-
manding Officers of Militia were empowered to refuse,
on sufficient cause shown, to discharge Militiamen
anxious to enlist in the Line ; and no clerk or bands-
man could be enlisted without the consent of the Com-
manding Officer (sees. 14, 15). No man was to be
drafted from the regiment in which he had enlisted
without his own consent (sec. 16).          The number of
men to be enlisted for service in any part of Europe
was not to exceed 30,000 men, nor three-fourths of the
actual strength of any regiment (sec. 19).
    Another Act (54 Geo. III. cap. 10, 6th Dec. 18 13)
enabled the Regular Militia to be employed in any part
of the United Kingdom without reference to the re-
strictions in 51 Geo. III. cap. 118.       Yet another (54
Geo. III. cap. 12) empowered the King to augment his
foreign force by the addition of eighth, ninth, and
tenth battalions to the Sixtieth Rifles ; and a third (54
Geo. III. cap. 19) authorised the King to accept offers
of Local Militia to serve out of their counties until the
