IV           FAILURE TO RAISE THEM                           279
officers and men tendered their service in large numbers ;           i8n.
but they withdrew their offer unanimously as soon as
they learned that their Colonel, Sir Watkin Wynn,
would not be allowed to accompany them ; and instead
sent 67 recruits to the Line.^     In the South Devon
Militia every officer and most of the non-commissioned
officers volunteered to go abroad if they could do so
with three-fourths of their men ; but the privates, who
were mostly substitutes of ten years' service, were dis-
inclined to move unless they received some reward for
all the work that they had done.       The East Devon
Militia, which had long shown prejudice against enlist-
ment into the Army, sent one man to the Line only ;
and in the North Devon, though 1 1 officers came forward
to form a Provisional Battalion on condition that 300
men would join them, only 21 men were forthcoming.
In Dumfries 14 officers and 6 men volunteered for
Militia service abroad and one man for the Line.^    In
Forfar the officers presented themselves in a body, but
only two men would consent to serve abroad either as
Militiamen or in the Line.^ In Lancashire the men
would have nothing to do with extended service in the
Militia, and declined to enter the Line unless they
could choose their own regiments.* But it is useless to
multiply instances.  Suffice it that, with a few notable
exceptions, the Militiamen were disinclined for service,
as such, abroad ;    and that ultimately after much
difficulty and confusion, owing to the withdrawal of
many men upon second thoughts from their engage-
ments, there were formed by the end of February only

   1
     I.D. vol. ccxxxix. Return of Cornish Mila. 2nd Dec, O.C.
Cornish Mila. to S.S. 12th Dec. ; O.C. Cumberland Mila. to S.S.
3rd Dec. ; O.C. Westmoreland Mila. to S.S. 28th Nov. ; L.L.
Denbigh, to S.S. nth Dec. 18 13.
   2 Ibid. vol. ccxl. O.C. S. Devon Mila. to S.S. 27th Nov. ; Re-

turns of East and North Devon Mila. 27th Nov., 1st Dec. ; Returns
of Dumfries Mila. Nov. 18 1 3.
   3 Ibid. vol. ccxli. O.C. Forfar Mila. to S.S. 9th Dec. 1 81 3.

   4 Ibid. vol. ccxliii. O.C. ist and 2nd Lanes Mila. to S.S. 2nd,

3rd Dec. ; Return of Lanes Mila. 7th Dec. 18 13.
