CHAP.v       SUMMARY—ADDINGTON                           283

Act these 94,000 were forbidden to enlist in the Regular         1814.
Army, and as they consisted chiefly of substitutes, they
simply deprived the Army of that number of recruits.
Having thus drained the recruiting market heavily to
produce a defensive force, Addington in the second
place bethought him of the Regular Army, and tried to
call the Army of Reserve into existence to supply it
the said Army of Reserve being simply additional to the
Militia, formed once again by ballot, with the principle
of substitution again admitted, and differing from
the ordinary Militia only in that the men were allowed to
enlist in the Regulars. This done, he allowed the Volun-
teers to take the bit between their teeth and to mass
themselves in extravagant numbers and then proceeded
                                     ;


to reduce the ballot-lists to skeletons by exempting all
Volunteers both from Militia and Army of Reserve.
As he was unprepared with rules to govern this mob
of men, which had sprung into existence against his wish,
his Home Secretary was obliged to introduce, by side-
winds and sly devices, regulations which gave rise to
endless friction and discontent, and yet were powerless
to enforce discipline. It is not too much to say that to
the end of the war our military system never recovered
from the mischief wrought by Addington and                 his

Secretary for War, Hobart, during the year 1803.            It

was no fault of theirs that England was not ruined both
in a financial and a military sense, so unspeakable were
their blindness, their weakness, and their folly.
    The ballot having been discredited, and the recruit-
ing market thrown wholly into the hands of the crimps
by these two unhappy men, Pitt took over the military
administration in a state of utter chaos.       His remedy
was to turn parish officers into recruiting sergeants, give
them a reward for every recruit that they produced fi-om
Imperial funds, and to fine them for every man deficient
of their quota, such fines being payable of course out of
local funds.    Such a system might possibly have suc-
ceeded had it been tried at first in time of peace, and
                                             for, financially.
become familiar to the parish officers   ;
