          290             LESSONS OF THE WAR                chap.v

1 8 14.   Scotland and Ireland put together ; and, as a matter of
          fact, there were English regiments, as well as the
          Highlanders and Irish, engaged in all of Wellington's
          actions, though they do not talk so much about it.
          Each of the three kingdoms, indeed, did its duty ; and
          impartial observers at the time were of opinion that the
          best regiments of all were those which, like old Ninety-
          five, contained a mixture of English, Scots, and Irish.
               For the rest the broad lessons to be deduced from
          the foregoing pages seem to be the following  :




               England cannot, any more than any other nation,
          fill the ranks of her Army in a great war without com-

          pulsion.
               Compulsion cannot be applied for    service outside
          the British Isles.
             The admission of the principle of substitution in
          any scheme of compulsory service leads to ruinous
          expense, demoralisation, and inefficiency.
             Compulsory personal service for home-defence has
          been tried and not found wanting.
             The ultimate end for which all our military organisa-
          tion must exist is the maintenance of the Regular
          Army, our only offensive land force. (Windham.)
             The true basis of such an organisation is National
          training.      (Windham, Castlereagh.)
             " Learning the use of arms should be imposed as a
          positive duty upon all individuals within certain ages,
          to be enforced by fine."  (Castlereagh.)
               AVolunteer who asks more from the State than his
          arms, except on active service, is no Volunteer.
          (Windham.) False Volunteers are alike troublesome,
          expensive, and useless.
             England felt the false measures of Pitt from 1793
          to 1798, and of Addington in 1803-4, until the very
          end of the war in 18 14. All measures of National
          Defence and military organisation must be thought out
          and tested as far as possible in time of peace. Im-
          provisation doubles the cost of war, while imperilling
          its success.
