V         RECRUITING OF CONVICTS                        289

in the   West Indies or the West Coast of Africa, as           1814.
also  were such few soldiers as chose to commute five
hundred or a thousand lashes for service in the same
much-dreaded quarters. Nor was the principal penal
battalion, the Royal York Rangers, a bad one.          At
first, under an unintelligent commander, it seems to have

been a hell upon earth, where the cat was in daily use ;
but presently it passed into good hands, when flogging
became unknown and the men were perfectly docile and
well-behaved, earning praise from the Commander-in-
Chief.    Certainly convicts did not make up one per
cent of the recruits.     No doubt Deputy-Lieutenants
passed a good many doubtful or simply wild characters
into the Militia, who were gladly transferred by their
Colonels to the Line ; but to suppose that the ranks
were filled by the criminal class is to assume that we
were a nation of criminals.
   Two more fallacies may likewise be briefly dismissed.
It is often said that the aristocracy, which governed
England at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
did indeed, by its high spirit and stubborn resolution to
continue the war, fairly wear Napoleon down and bring
about his fall, but that it did not bear its fair share of
the burden of expense.     This is conclusively disproved
by the fact, abundantly evident in these pages, that the
expense of the ballot, and of thefines and bounties incident
to it, except in rare instances, was thrown wholly upon
the parochial rates, or, in other words, upon the landed
interest.  So severe indeed was the pressure upon the
landowners, that many of the less wealthy among them
were obliged to close their country-houses and retire
into the towns.
    Again it is averred and believed by many good
Irishmen that England's battles against Napoleon,
especially in the Peninsula, were fought and won by
their compatriots ; and not a few Scots are imbued with
precisely the same notion with regard to their country-
men.   This, of course, is simple nonsense.   England
produced, as indeed she ought, far more  recruits than
                                                u
