        288         SUMMARY—BOYS— CONVICTS                          chap.

1814.   hand, the ideal arrangement that there should be one
        hundred   first battalions abroad, and as many second
        battalions at home, broke down completely.         The
        second battalions for the most part may hardly be said
        to have existed, except on paper, until Windham became
        Minister for War ; although there were two of them
        in Cathcart's force which sailed to         North Germany in
        1805. Later, there were, of course, many both in the
        Peninsula and at Walcheren.     The territorial attach-
        ment of regiments to counties also, though greatly
        improved, was not perfected ; and recruits from the
        Militia, in not a few instances, preferred another
        regiment to that which was assigned to them.       The
        favourite corps, as has been told, were those of the
        Light Division ; and it is no more than natural that
        young soldiers should have preferred to enter regiments
        which were daily adding to their fame.^
               Two small points, upon which there is often much
        loose talk, may be briefly touched upon before I bring
        this sketch to   an end. The first is the enlistment of
        boys.   This was begun in 1805 by sanction of the Duke
        of York, and he was doubtless wise to permit it early
        in order that the boys might have time to grow up.
        The Army of Reserve was in great measure composed
        of raw lads who drew pay as men. Boys, on the other
        hand, enlisted as such, received only ninepence instead
        of one shilling a day.^ The total number of boys,
        recruited as such into the Army during the war, did
        not exceed 20,000, or, roughly, one-twelfth of the whole.
           Again, it is often said that the ranks of the Army
        were filled with the sweepings of the gaols. Undoubtedly
        convicts sentenced to transportation were discharged
        wholesale from the hulks on condition of their enlisting,
        occasionally in batches of five hundred together, but they
        were all sent to battalions, which were practically penal,

           1   During the late South African war young men flocked from all
        parts of   England to the dep6ts of counties whose regiments had
        distinguished themselves.
           2 H.D. Palmerston's speech, 26th Feb. 18 10.
