 Viii                            PREFACE

  readers may judge for themselves. Certainly, something of
  the topicality of the analogy has been lost; but of the reality
  of the market question in Napoleon’s ee               policy I
  remain as convinced as I ever was.
     It is a pleasure to acknowledge my ree to colleagues and
  friends from whose criticism and advice I have benefited in
  the present undertaking. Professor Richard Cobb, who
  supervised my thesis, has given me much more than help and
  encouragement. By communicating in his unique way the
  love and joy of France and its archives, a privilege all his
  research students have known, his friendship has been a con-
  stant stimulus to me. Dr Angus Macintyre was kind enough
  to read the typescript of this work before its submission to
  the publishers and his advice was invaluable. Dr John Roberts
  gave me critical guidance at an early stage of my research,
  when — just conceivably — it might have taken a rather dif-
  ferent route into the obscure recesses of Rhenish réfractair-
  isme. I was also immensely fortunate to have the helpful
- criticism of Professor Frangois Crouzet and Dr Patrick
  O’Brien at the oral examination of my thesis, and both sub-
  sequently advised me on particular details. Professor Louis
  Bergeron and Professor Maurice Lévy-Leboyer have kindly
  allowed me to use the matter which appears in my Table 9
  on p. 190. My debt to the participants at Richard Cobb’s
  graduate seminar over the years, and to so many pupils, is
  happily and gratefully acknowledged. It would be a churlish
  return for such kindnesses if I did not dissociate all those
  named from the shortcomings of this study.
     On the institutional side, I should like to thank the many -
  archivists and librarians who have helped me in this research,
  not least at the departmental and communal archives in Stras-
  bourg and Colmar. I am particularly indebted to the Chamber
  of Commerce and Industry in Strasbourg for allowing me
  access, both   in 1969   and    1970, to the detailed   minutes   of
 meetings held during the Napoleonic period. I would simi-
 larly thank the Dean and Students of Christ Church, Oxford,
 for leave of absence and financial assistance in 1968-9, when
 the basis of my thesis was laid in France, and when the
 Blockade seemed at times barely distinguishable from the
 barricades and tear-gas of another quarrel. I should also like
