                          PREFACE


This book is the result of research first launched in the later
1960s, the backbone of which was my Oxford D.Phil. thesis
presented in 1972. Since then it has undergone the inevitable
and I can only hope profitable process of revision and re-
casting for publication in the present series. My original
interest in and concept of the subject formed at a time when
Britain had not yet entered the European Economic Com-
munity, and indeed when French opposition to our entry was
well known. The very crude analogy with Napoleon’s Contin-
ental Blockade, however superficial and misleading it might
have been, assimilating modem peacetime conditions and
attitudes to much earlier wartime ones, was yet too tempting
not to indulge.
   I ask for the reader’s tolerance of such licence. The Napo-
leonic power bloc roughly corresponded, at least in its most
secure parts, to the area of the original Common Market of
our own time. Spain, Portugal, the Illyrian provinces, and the
duchy of Warsaw, though part of the ‘Grand Empire’ too,
did not experience the continuity and immediacy of French
rule to which subject Germany, the Benelux countries, and
Italy were exposed. The image of a great Continental Zoll-
verein, with its back perforce turned to le grand large and
with Britain shut out, came naturally to one projecting him-
self from an English university into the archives and libraries
of France. And yet, of course, Napoleon’s aim was not to
create a European Common Market, but rather a protected
one at home and (so far as possible) a preferential one for
France abroad. Its internal features, quite apart from its
economic prematurity, hardly square with those of the
Common Market in de Gaulle’s time. It seemed nice, then,
to stand the analogy on its head and present an image of
Napoleon’s ‘Uncommon Market’. How well that motif has
weathered the intervening years, with Britain now a member
of the Community and my own chosen base of Strasbourg
the very seat of its first democratically elected assembly, my
