                             INTRODUCTION                                   9

influenced the approach to the topic in two main ways. It
brutally demonstrated       that blockades are not always
localized naval affairs and that even those which appear so
can have complex economic repercussions much further in-
land than the immediate hinterlinder of the beleaguered
ports or estuaries. It also prompted some writers to tenden-
tious analogies between the wartime blockades and the
famous Napoleonic precedent for the illustration of ‘lessons
for our time’. The comparisons, for instance in the works of
Conrad,    Lulvés, Sommerlad,        and   Rocke during or just after
the war, were often sadly wrong-headed. Many of the more
polemical writings had been provoked by the current of
Anglophobia which, stimulated by wartime propaganda,
spilled over well into the peace, carrying such zeitgebundene
Schriften along with it.
   Happily, however, the tradition of serious scholarly
work on the Blockade in Germany also survived the war.
Throughout the 1920s and early 1930s in fact the subject
enjoyed something of a vogue as material for inaugural and
other lectures, or else for more substantial theses, in German
universities. If Decker, V6ltzer, Remigolski (at first),
Mohrhenn, and Bohlmann all then chose mainly maritime
angles to it, a fresh interest in its mainland details also
developed. This reflects in the works of Robert Naumann on
Silesia, Josef Strauch on the woollens of Aachen, Hans Saring
on-Prussia, and Hugo Arenz on Frankfurt. These writers and
others like them are little known nowadays, least of all in
the Anglo-Saxon countries, and yet their early efforts remain
the standard introduction to some of the Blockade’s ‘land
aspects’.
   Such     an    introduction,    moreover,      is not    confined      to
German works. Marcel Dunan’s publications before the First
World War had been limited to bibliographical essays of short
compass, but in many ways Charles Schmidt’s cited volume”®
had set a model for German and other scholars. Good
Alsatian that he was, he drew on a vast knowledge of the
German sources, and before his death in 1956 he produced
its effects were most complex. He adds, fairly, that German accounts   of the
subject had been up to then the most advanced in depth and method.
   23 Grand-duché de Berg.
