4                               INTRODUCTION

been widely used by writers approaching the subject in the
traditional way. The crude weight of Napoleon’s own direc-
tives on the matter,® again chiefly in the period 1810-13, also
suggests that the maritime details of his Blockade com-
manded most attention.
   Altogether, then, the traditional emphasis in Blockade
studies seems fair.” It applies as much to the scattered and
sparse English writings on the subject as to the more substan-
tial works in French          and German, at least until the decade or
two preceding the First World War.® Indeed, from that time
to the present there has been a steady flow of works in which
the main focus has been on the familiar ‘sea aspects’ of the
question.? No leading contributor would better deserve the
current title of ‘doyen du sujet’ than Professor Frangois
Crouzet. The main direction of his research illustrates the
present point as clearly and massively as any other. His
exhaustive account of the Blockade’s impact on Britain’s
foreign trade, and so on her domestic economy more gener-
ally, is an indispensable source.'® More than twenty years
   Notably the official Correspondance de Napoléon Ier publiée par ordre de
lVEmpereur Napoléon III (32 vols., Paris, 1858-69). An important supplement to
this is Lettres inédites de Napoléon Ier (an VIII-1815) (ed. L. Lecestre, 2 vols.,
Paris,   1897). The volume Napoléon Ier: Lettres au comte Mollien        ministre du
trésor public du 16 mars 1803 au 9 juin 1815 (ed.J.Arnna, Rochecorbon, 1959)
has much crucial material on Napoleon’s financial and closely related commercial
policies.
     7This is not the place for a substantial analysis of secondary literature in the
field. My historiographical review, ‘Napoleon’s Continental Blockade in History
and Historiography’, will appear in the Historical Journal shortly. Along with a
more detailed citation of the major titles, it offers a critique of the central themes
and controversies in Blockade studies, past and present. The chance to publish
an up-to-date bibliography    at the end of this study (below, pp. 308-21) also
enables me to lighten footnote coverage of that sort in these introductory pages.
Full title references here are confined to the most important works and to the
acknowledgement of specific matter from other sources. Full details of studies
alluded to only by authors’ names, where not subsequently cited here, appear in
the bibliography.
    5See e.g. the titles, in order of publication, given under Rocke, Lumbroso,
Hitzigrath, Baasch, Bertin, Holland Rose, Levasseur, Héniger, Drottboom, Stuhr,
and Kiewning.                                                     ;
    ° Prominent among them, again in order of publication, are those by Peez and
Dehn, Vogel, Tarlé (early works), Schafer, Conrad, Masson, Melvin, Heckscher,
Véltzer, Remigolski, Mohrhenn, Bohlmann, de Jouvenel, Riba, Thomazi, Roustit,
Heils, Engelsing, Bonnel, Butel, ROhlk, and Kutz.
   1° L’Economie britannique et le Blocus continental (1806-1813) (2 vols., Paris,
1958).
