8                              INTRODUCTION

before     the First World War, in certain cases from the 1880s
and 1890s, but still merit their central place in the historio-
graphical roll-call of the Blockade.
   Thus, for instance, Louis Bein, Albin Koénig, and Wilhelm
Stieda all focused their attention on the Saxon industries,
and an early history of the Leipzig fairs by Ernst Hasse still
offers useful material on the Napoleonic period. Hermann
Freymark’s old text on Prussian trade and tariff reform
(1800-21) has also worn well. While Paul Darmstadter and
Charles Schmidt looked at the economic effects of French
rule only as part of much bigger works on two of the satellite
states in Germany,!® Otto Redlich (for Berg), Aloys Vollmer
(for Essen more specifically), and Anton Schmitter (for
Frankfurt!?) produced studies more directly linked with the
Blockade. Similar regional works by Max Voretzsch on Alten-
burg, by Richard Zeyss on the department of the Roer
(Rur),2° by Hans Roemer on the Silesian cotton enterprises,
and by Johann Slokar on the Habsburg industries?! also
date from about that time. Bernard de Cérenville’s account
of the Swiss economy under Napoleonic rule is probably
still the best-known general text on that country, though it is
slanted and unreliable.
    The twenty or thirty years preceding the First World War
were altogether a productive period in Blockade studies. With
a few exceptions like Bertin, Collignon, Charléty, and espe-
cially de Lanzac de Laborie, German historians had very
clearly been the most active in this research.** The war itself

    *® Darmstadter’s Das Grossherzogtum Frankfurt. Ein Kulturbild aus der Rhein-
bundzeit (Frankfurt, 1901) and Schmidt’s Le Grand-duché de Berg (1806-1813).
Etude sur la domination frangaise en Allemagne sous Napoléon Ier (Paris, 1905)
are works of great learning and understanding.
    ? Unless otherwise stated, the reference throughout this study is to Frankfurt
am Main.
    20His volume    Die Entstehung der Handelskammern          und die Industrie am
Niederrhein   wdahrend der franzdsischen   Herrschaft.   Ein Beitrag zur Wirtschafts-
politik Napoleons I (Leipzig, 1907) was influential in both content and method.
    1 Geschichte der dsterreichischen Industrie und ihrer Férderung unter Kaiser
Franz I, (Vienna, 1914.)
    ??Much the best short review of 19th- and early 20th-century writings on the
Blockade is Marcel Dunan, ‘Le Systéme continental. Bulletin d’histoire écono-
mique (1900-1911)’, R. Et. nap., iii (1913), 115-46. No major study up until
virtually the outbreak of the war escaped his scrutiny. Dunan contends here
that of all the lands subjected to the Blockade, Germany was the one in which
