                               INTRODUCTION                                       7
centuries.!° Articles by Herbert Kisch on the textile in-
dustries of the Rhineland and Silesia have an obvious bearing
on the inland significance of the French hegemony.
Otherwise, the scattered English writings on the question,
whether seen in economic,                diplomatic, military or naval
terms, have had a maritime               orientation. This reflects, for
example, in the articles by G. W. Daniels on the English
cotton trade and more recently by A. N. Ryan on British
naval involvements in the Baltic. The European range of J. M.
Sherwig’s study of British foreign aid in the wars with France
(1793-1815) is broader, but its coverage of the Blockade as
such is restricted. Our standard English textbook on the topic
remains the not impartial account by E. F. Heckscher, the
Swedish economic historian, and is now fast approaching
its sixtieth anniversary.!7



Studies of the Blockade across the Channel, especially those
in French, present much more convincing evidence of its full
regional importance, both in aim and effect. What, then, may
be said of the ‘land aspects’ in the present state of the subject
there? The first reply must be that, in themselves, the
primary sources for inland industry and trade during the
Napoleonic period are vast enough, and that they repay the
effort of close inspection. Their very mass indeed has
demanded a rather specialized topical or regional approach
in the better secondary accounts already available. As for the
latter, historiographical emphases are of course relative too,
and the implication of my earlier general comments is not
that the ‘land aspects’ have had no serious attention at all.
Many worthy attempts to examine these aspects, until the
early 1930s perhaps chiefly by German-speaking historians,
and since then very largely by French-speaking ones, might
be mentioned. Several of the best among them date from
    16Vol. vi of the Cambridge Economic History of Europe (1965), revised and
enlarged as The Unbound Prometheus. Technological Change and Industrial
Development   in Western   Europe from   1750   to the Present (Cambridge,   1969),
chaps. 1-3.
   17The Continental System. An Economic Interpretation (Eng. edn., Oxford,
1922).
