                              INTRODUCTION


A title linking Napoleon’s Continental Blockade with Alsace
may look odd at first glance. If the combination seems un-
likely, and even perhaps self-contradictory, this is due no
doubt to a traditional lopsidedness in the historiography of
Napoleon’s economic war with Britain. When dealing with
the Blockade,’ most writers of the nineteenth century con-
centrated on what might be called its ‘sea aspects’. They saw
it as primarily an episode, albeit a protracted and far-reaching
one, in a much wider maritime conflict. So far as it touched
the Continent, their main concern was with its counter-
effects on the sea ports of the Empire? and of the subject
and allied states, and with its generally unhappy consequences
for the ancillary industries of those coastal regions. Its ‘land
aspects’, or its bearing on the industry and trade of the Con-
tinental mainland, attracted much less attention.
   That was not at all a mistaken approach to the subject;
but it was,      and remains, a restricted one. It is germane,                  for
instance, to the long controversy over Free Trade v. Protection
during the last century. For most of the early polemicists, the
Blockade was a convenient shuttlecock to bandy about,
whether in support of selective embargoes and protectionist
tariffs or (more commonly) as a classic example of their ulti-
mate futility. The polemical overtones of all this carried over
well into the present century, but fortunately much more of
the historical substance of the subject has also come to light.

    ‘The ‘Blockade’ (with a capital B) refers throughout this study to the Con-
tinental Blockade of 1806-13. Like so many of Napoleon’s contemporaries,
writers over the years have tended to use the term loosely as a synonym for the
‘Continental System’. For good reason (discussed below, pp. 108-9) a distinction
between the two can and should be made. Both also need to be distinguished
from the British naval blockade officially in force along specified stretches of the
Continental coastline during that period.
    ?The ‘Empire’ (with a capital E) and the adjective ‘imperial’ refer, unless
otherwise stated, to the Napoleonic Empire or to the emperor himself.
