                            INTRODUCTION                                       3

to drain off her bullion reserves in payment for essential
imports, and so to precipitate the kind of inflation that
would destroy her ability to continue the war or finance new
coalitions against France. Thus presented, the ‘drama’ of the
Blockade certainly seems most striking in its ‘sea aspects’.
Professor F. E. Melvin, for instance, thought that Napoleon’s
‘navigation system’ was ‘preéminently a controlling factor’ of
his rule.* In his opinion, ‘a study of the diplomacy of the
Consulate and Empire furnishes incontrovertible proof that
its navigation policy was the dominating element of the
Napoleonic régime’.* This is a typical statement of the most
familiar approach in earlier studies of the Blockade.
   If such an approach accentuates the ‘sea aspects’ of the
topic, one might conclude prima facie that this merely
reflects the nature of the primary sources. If Frenchmen at
the time themselves thought of the Blockade in those terms,
then it must surely have been the part of it which counted
most with them. And indeed it has to be said that the crude
mass of primary material copiously supports this view. The
two main documentary series for the subject in the Archives
Nationales, F!? and AF, weigh heavily in that direction. The
departmental series M for industry and trade in the Empire
as a whole has the same disparity specifically in relation to
the Blockade. There are innumerable documents on the
imperial maritime ports (by their own lamentations. the
‘villes-martyres de |’Empire’) and their problems, on British
and neutral shipping, on the Orders in Council and naval
blockade of the Continental coastline, on the plight of
French oceanic trade and the uncertainties of even coastal
traffic, on the chronic issue of smuggling and difficulties in
the imperial customs surveillance, on the ‘licences’ and ‘per-
mits’, especially in the years 1810-13, and so forth. The
balance of the printed primary sources leads similarly to the
conclusion that the ‘sea aspects’of the Blockade were pre-
dominant. The published reports, exposés, tracts, letters,
petitions, and memoirs of officials and private commentators
alike offer a great reservoir of material, and already they have

    4 Napoleon’s Navigation System. A Study of Trade   Control during the Con-
tinental Blockade (New York, 1919), Foreword, xi.                   5 Tbid. 350.
