                                  INTRODUCTION                                           5

after publication it remains much the most authoritative
statement on this particular regional detail of the topic. It is
primarily concerned, as are his later articles,!! with the ‘sea
aspects’ of the question, which was of course implicit in the
nature of his subject and his sources.
   Crouzet’s thesis filled what up to then had been far and
away the largest and most surprising gap in the whole
sequence of Blockade studies. That is itself a comment on the
abject state of our own contributions to them, at any rate
since the 1930s. Why the subject has attracted so little de-
tailed    research        here,   when        the      Blockade      threatened     such
potential disasters and at times in the years 1810-12
certainly exacerbated the discomfort of the British economy,
has often puzzled writers across the Channel. It is fair to say
that the topic is virtually unapproachable through a substan-
tial and recent work in English. The writings of John Holland
Rose, published mostly before the First World War, are still
very readable, but they cannot be regarded now as more than
bold pioneer sketches. As might be expected, there is useful
information to be quarried in the celebrated pages of Tooke’s
History of Prices and Smart’s Economic Annals, but its
relevance to the Blockade is incidental. Much the same could
be said of the works of J. H. Clapham, R. G. Hawtrey, T. S.
Ashton,         E. V. Morgan,          and Arthur         Redford, among others,
where the specific coverage is slight. Other economic text-
books, as well as J. Steven Watson’s Oxford ‘History’, offer
only basic facts and general comment on the question. One
notable exception here is the collaborative study of A. D.
Gayer, W. W. Rostow, and A. J. Schwartz, which has impor-
tant statistical material on the British economy during the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars.’? Another is Judith
Blow Williams’ wide-ranging survey of British overseas trade,
which has useful sections on smuggling and the impact of
war during the same period.'?
   11The most influential of these (all listed in the bibliography) has probably
been   ‘Wars, Blockade,    and Economic       Change in Europe, 1792-1815’, J. Ec. H.,
xxiv (1964), 567-88.
    12The Growth and Fluctuation of the British Economy 1790-1850 (2 vols.,
Oxford, 1953).
   13 British    Commercial   Policy    and    Trade    Expansion,   1750-1850    (Oxford,
1972), 345-418.
