2                            INTRODUCTION

We   are now    better informed       on the aims, the working, and
the effects of the Blockade in the inland parts of Napoleonic
Europe, as indeed we are on its maritime aspects. Yet if the
historiographical balance has been adjusted in this way, it is
still far from even. The dominant image of the Blockade
remains that of a ‘coast system’, a far-flung imperial ‘dike’
pushed out to stem the tide of British trade with the Con-
tinent, an extraordinary ‘war machine’ set in motion on the
land to quarantine the Continent from British maritime
supremacy. Marcel Dunan speaks of ‘la lutte entre le Con-
tinent et l’?Océan pour la domination ou l’équilibre du
monde’.? This vision of a titanic confrontation of two
elemental powers was once impressive, but it has been
reduced by over-use to a melodramatic platitude.
    The persistence of the lopsidedness in Blockade studies is
not, perhaps, difficult to explain. One thinks first of British
maritime power, French land might, and the many economic
conflicts which the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars
brought to a head. The context of Anglo-French hostilities
fits into, or itself absorbs,        that of long-standing industrial
and commercial rivalries. Britain’s particular advantages over
France then lay in clear naval superiority, a lengthening
industrial and technological lead, a more widespread and
expanding foreign trade, a more developed and flexible
financial system both at home and abroad. One thinks also
of the obverse: Napoleon’s overbearing military power on the
Continent, following his successive victories of 1805-7 and
the reconstruction of subject Europe, which alone made the
Blockade conceivable in the first place. Unable to strike at
Britain effectively by sea, he withdrew from any consistent
pursuit of the early Boulogne flotilla project. Implicitly
after Trafalgar (21 October 1805) and explicitly after the
Berlin decree (21 November 1806) his attack was directed
at British trade, whose bases on the Continent were of course
the principal target. The strategic idea was to ‘conquer Eng-
land by excess’: that is, to induce industrial and commercial
surpluses there by forcing her out of Continental markets,

    *Napoléon et l’Allemagne. Le Systéme continental et les débuts du royaume
de Baviére, 1806-1810 (Paris, 1942), 369.
