6                           INTRODUCTION

   In most of the writings of those named, aspects of the
Blockade are presented as part of much broader overviews.
This has the merit of situating it relative to the longer-term
business cycles and is a necessary reminder against myopic
inferences from a particular episode, however dramatic,
within them. But it is not much help in explaining the critical
issues of 1803-13 and contemporary responses to them
under existing conditions. It is for instance a truism that the
Blockade was an extraordinary contrivance born of war, of
economic     dislocation,    and would      have been unthinkable          in
a peacetime context. And yet in so many of the works which
condemn it asa form of doctrinaire economic retrogressivism,
that conjuncture is overlooked, as is the equally plain evidence
of French naval eclipse. The Blockade of 1806-13 was
unique to its power-base. Given Napoleon’s wish to come to
terms with his most elusive enemy, whose economic liquidity
on the Continent was also a major lubricant of the allied
coalitions, a policy like the Blockade was no doubt seen as an
unavoidable pis aller.
   The Blockade as such has generally come out rather better
in the more substantial American accounts, though most of
these are dated now.!* Like the British, they focus invariably
on the ‘sea aspects’ of the subject. For a time between the
wars there was even what could be called an American tradi-
tion in Blockade studies, and the University of Pennsylvania
was then its most fashionable seat; but such energies were
soon dispersed. Apart from the usual passing references and
occasional discussion in American books and articles of wider
range,'* recent Anglo-Saxon contributions to the topic have
been singularly few and thin. David Landes’s masterly
account of the comparative conditions and development of
early European industrialization still seems to me to offer
the best long-term perspective on the Anglo-French economic
disparity in the later eighteenth and early nineteenth
    44 Apart from Melvin’s Navigation System, the major work, two substantial
theses are W. F. Galpin, The Grain Supply of England during the Napoleonic
Period (New York, 1925) and P. A. Heath, Napoleon I and the Origins of the
Anglo-American War of 1812 (Toulouse, 1929).
    SSee e.g. those by N. J. Silberling, R. G. Albion, Geoffrey Bruun, S. B.
Clough, G. S, Graham, and A. H. Imlah. An article by R. Ruppenthal     on the
Continental System in Denmark is more specific, but short.
