                                INTRODUCTION                                      19

of production was differently directed, or at least was
capable of redirection, given the primacy of agriculture as an
economic sector and the predominance of home markets in
the normal pattern of supply and demand. The primary
sources, not least those of the departmental archives and the
various local repositories, offer abundant evidence of this. My
own work on the detailed minute-books of the Chamber of
Commerce in Strasbourg, an active inland entrepdt during the
Empire, suggests that a study of similar material elsewhere on
the mainland trade routes will cast new light on the
Blockade’s significance there.
   The present study is a contribution to the inland range of
the subject. It spans the period from the rupture of the peace
of Amiens in 1803, with some brief glimpses further back,
to the final collapse of the Blockade in 1813. Its starting
assumption is that the latter was never solely a ‘coast system’,
either    in aim     or   effect, but      had    inland    facets   of a more
positive kind. The caricature of Napoleon playing King
Canute with the tide of British trade needs to be redrawn.
Altogether, this work presents the Blockade more as a market
design (dessein des marchés) than as a war-machine (machine
de guerre). The implication, emphatically, is not that the
market objectives were more important than the military
ones, nor that the inland areas were necessarily more crucial
than the maritime ports. It would be equally false to insist on
a rigid distinction between the Blockade’s ‘sea aspects’ and
‘land aspects’. The premiss is rather that the whole historio-
graphical balance of the subject needs to be redressed in the
present     direction.    This, in effect, is to pursue the Blockade
as a double-edged sword, what Albert Sorel once called a
‘machine a double détente’.©
    The ramifications of the whole market question have only
a slender base in earlier secondary works. It remains true,
as Bertrand Gille remarked more than twenty years ago, that
the evolution of market structures on the Continent in the
first half of the nineteenth century has not been examined in
much detail.°? More specifically, there is no substantial
   66 7 "Europe et la Révolution frangaise (8 vols., Paris, 1885-1904), vii. 114.
   677es archives d’entreprises’, R. h., ccviii (1952), 201; and Recherches sur la
formation de la grande entreprise capitaliste (1815-1848) (Paris, 1959), 46. Gille’s
