                                  INTRODUCTION                                  11

in the Hanse towns, that is in the ‘sea aspects’ of the
question. The same wide canvas characterizes the volume by
A. Jacobs and H. Richter on wholesale prices in Germany
between 1792 and 1934, which appeared a year after its
terminal date. More recently, Wolfram Fischer, Herbert Milz,
Wolfgang Zorn, Herbert Hassinger, Hermann Ringel, and
Knut    Borchardt     have all added substantially to our
knowledge of early German industrialization, but they deal
with the Blockade itself only incidentally and with a view to
earlier or later developments.?? The statement on it in
Wilhelm Treue’s Wirtschaftsgeschichte der Neuzeit is just a
brief outline, as befits such a handbook. The essays by Rolf
Engelsing (on the Silesian linen trade through Bremen and
the commerce of the Baltic ports) and by Manfred Kossok
(on the Prussian linen trade to Spanish America) are most
noteworthy in connection with the maritime aspects of the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. The two outstanding
German studies on the topic in recent years are by Frauke
Rohlk*° and Martin Kutz.*! Both have full statistical appen-
dices and detailed bibliographies, but their central focus is
again plainly on the ‘sea aspects’. Equally thorough and well-
supported accounts of the economic fortunes of towns like
Frankfurt, Leipzig, Brunswick, Breslau, and Berlin still await
their modern Blockade historians.
   An up-to-date reappraisal of the Blockade’s effects in
Germany as a whole, and by a native of that country well
versed in its considerable archival and library material, is long
overdue. A survey by F.-G. Dreyfus gives some interesting
pointers to the long-term effects of the wars and the Blockade
   29 Fischer’s Der Staat und die Anfdnge der Industrialisierung in Baden 1800-
1850 (Berlin, 1962) has rather more material on the Napoleonic period. An essay
by him, one by Zorn, and two by Hassinger in the collected volume Die wirt-
schaftliche Situation in Deutschland und Osterreich um die Wende vom 18. zum
19. Jahrhundert (Forschungen zur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, vol. vi,
Stuttgart, 1964) discuss the problems of German and Habsburg industry and trade
during the French wars. These deal mainly with inland economic structures and
are useful to the study of the Blockade in that context.
    30 ‘Schiffahrt und Handel zwischen Hamburg und den Niederlanden in der
zweiten Halfte des 18. und zu Beginn des 19. Jahrhunderts’, Vjs. f. Soz.- u.
Wirtsch., suppl. no. 60 (1973).
   31 Deutschlands Aussenhandel        von der franzosischen Revolution bis zur
Griindung des Zollvereins. Eine         statistische Strukturuntersuchung zur vor-
industriellen Zeit’, ibid., suppl. no. 61 (1974).
