10                              INTRODUCTION

a number of articles on the Blockade. Some are regional
surveys; others deal with celebrated critics of Napoleon’s
economic policy; all are rooted in rich archival learning. His
contributions to Alsatian economic history during the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic period have been particularly
useful to my own research. Eugene Tarlé was another who
kept up a productive interest in the subject. His original
Russian work was mostly concerned with the Blockade’s
maritime aspects,** but it was soon followed by a substantial
and seminal essay on Franco-German trade in all its dimen-
sions.2> He widened his range still further after the war in
several articles, all of them useful secondary references,”®
and a major study of the Blockade in Italy.?7 Of the other
inter-war publications in French, Marcel Blanchard’s work on
the strategic Alpine passes covered new ground. So did
Melitta Pivec-Stelé’s account of the Illyrian provinces, where
the economic coverage is necessarily ‘amphibian’ in range.
    The  mainstream     of German    historiography on _ the
Blockade, from whatever angle, ran out rather abruptly in
1933. There has been surprisingly little work specifically on
the topic in that country since then. Neither the spate of
clumsy analogies between Hitler and Napoleon nor the Berlin
crisis of 1949 aroused any serious academic interest in
Blockade studies there. Ludwig Beutin, Hermann Kellenbenz,
and Percy Schramm occasionally touch on the subject, but
only in passing and usually within a much broader sweep of
German maritime history.*8 All show a particular interest

   4 Kontinentalnaia Blokada (Moscow, 1913), which has detailed references to ,
Blockade studies up to that time but is regrettably not available in a western
European language.
    75 Deutsch-franzésische Wirtschaftsbezichungen zur napoleonischen Zeit’,
in Schmollers Jahrbuch, new ser., xxxviii/1 (Munich and Leipzig, 1914), 667-726.
    76 Notably ‘Napoléon Ier et les intéréts économiques de la France’, Revue du
XIXe siécle: Napoléon, xv (1926), 117-37; ‘L’Union économique du continent
européen sous Napoléon’, R.h., clxvi (1931), 239-55; and ‘Russland und die
Kontinentalsperre’,   Zeitschrift fiir die gesamte   Staatswissenschaft,   xciv (1933),
70-106.                                                            ;
     ?7e Blocus continental et le royaume d’Italie. La situation économique de
l'Italie sous Napoléon Ier (Paris, 1931).
     78 An important exception is Schramm’s ‘Kaufleute wahrend Besatzung, Krieg
und Belagerung (1806-1815). Der Hamburger Handel in der Franzosenzeit, dar-
gestellt an Hand von Firmen- und Familienpapieren’, Tradition, iv (1959), 1-22,
88-114. This has much more obvious bearing on the Blockade as such.
