                                INTRODUCTION                                     iby)

gaps and future possibilities in Blockade studies.
   The area of the subject still most urgently in need of com-
prehensive review, it seems to me, lies in mainland Germany.
The point is made not simply for the Rhenish departments
of the left bank which were part of the Empire itself, or for
the Confederation         of the Rhine across the river, but also for
the truncated Prussian lands and even with licence for certain
Habsburg dependencies.       In topical coverage, the most
neglected detail is the structure and working of inland
markets under the regime of the wars and of the Blockade.
Whole sectors of French trade and industry then either had
to turn from traditional connections overseas towards alter-
native supply-lines and outlets on the Continental mainland,
or to rely on the precarious lifeline of the neutral carriers and
contraband traffic, or else go under. Some suffered perman-
ent damage through the prolonged and brutal dislocation
 of their local economies.®? But the obverse of this is that, for
 many inland parts of the Empire, the plight of the maritime
ports and their immediately dependent industries was remote
 anguish. On the transcontinental trade routes by river and
 road, and in the inland markets which they served, business
 was often brisk and the results of the Blockade were on the
 whole more positive. Within the more or less free trade area
 of the Empire itself, old commercial relationships on the
 mainland were reinforced. Foreign trade was certainly not
 helped by the erratic moods of the douwaniers, and the whole
weight     of the    official    prohibitions,      restrictions,    and tariffs
bore down on it, placing artificial barriers in the way of
natural and traditional intercourse. Yet somehow, by legiti-
mate circumvention or if necessary by illicit trade, the old
links survived the rigours of the customs and in several of the
more favoured branches were actually strengthened. To these
links the Blockade added newer currents of deflected traffic
as the sea lanes were formally closed to France and her allies.
   The main beneficiaries of this reorientation of the trade
routes were the inland entrepots. In the manufacturing

    62On this see Crouzet, ‘Les origines du sous-développement économique du
Sud-Ouest’, Annales du Midi, \xxi (1959), 71-9; and ‘Les conséquences écono-
miques de la Révolution: A propos d’un inédit de Sir Francis d’Ivernois’, A.h.R.f.,
xxxiv (1962), 182-217, 336-62 (text).
