18                           INTRODUCTION

sector, the opportunities for expansion were best in the
industries whose markets traditionally lay or could be culti-
vated on the Continental mainland, in the presumed absence
of British competition. The Rhenish regions were at the hub
of that process. Commenting on the effects of the maritime
wars and of the Blockade, Francois Crouzet goes so far as to
speak of a ‘shift of industry from the seaboard to the heart-
land of western Europe’ which was so marked that by 1814
‘the axis of the Continental economy had now moved from
the Atlantic toward the Rhine’.®? Louis Bergeron leads into
the same theme in his conference paper of 1969, arguing that
the cumulative effects of the wars and the inland thrust of
Napoleon’s policies were to ‘reorganize by force’ what he
calls ‘l’espace politique et économique de part et d’autre du
Rhin’.® In his grand livre indeed he sets out to show just how
far one     orbit,   ‘le milieu    parisien    des    affaires,   outre    son
attachement a une structure traditionnelle des échanges,
méme dégradée, a porté attention aux possibilités d’une
réorientation des échanges vers un marché européen “‘le dos
aleeier veh
    Those are the broad brush strokes of a picture whose local
and topical details need to be filled in if we are to have a full
view of the Blockade’s aims and effects. It is unlikely that
such details will conform to the major theme in all particu-
lars, but the current hint of a shift of the historiographical
limelight towards the Continental interior is in itself a good
thing for Blockade studies. For it is a plain fact that the great
mass of the Continental people at that time, as today, did not
inhabit the maritime ports. They lived inland, at various
distances removed from the naval blockade and coastal
batteries. They did not experience the conflict of the
Blockade directly through the interruption of maritime trade,
whether that of France or of any other state, but by more
oblique repercussion. For most of them the familiar orbit
    6? ‘Wars, Blockade, and Economic Change in Europe’, 586-7. Some of the
more controversial implications of Crouzet’s strongly worded point are taken up
by Richard Tilly in his ‘Discussion’ of this article in J. Ec. H., xxiv (1964),
589-90, and by Dufraisse in ‘Régime douanier, Blocus, Systéme continental’,
esp. 539.
    * ‘Conditions du développement industriel’, Francia (1973), 552.
    °5 Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, ii. 766.
