16                              INTRODUCTION

Blockade study in a specific sense, it is unquestionably the
work of recent years which offers most to historians of the
subject. It carefully analyses what can be extrapolated from
the finely intermeshed elements of high finance, commercial
ventures, manufacturing enterprise, and proprietary wealth
of the Parisian banking élite during the Directory, Consulate,
and Empire. It looks equally at the social, economic, and
regional framework (structure) and at the particular case
histories (conjoncture) of that intricate and so often private
world. The author had also traced some of the eighteenth-
century background to his central thesis topic at a conference
of economic        historians in October 1973,°° at which the mari-
time sector of French trade before the Revolutionary
upheaval once again commanded most attention.®!

                                      *        *       *



The researches of Louis Bergeron and Roger Dufraisse are
important moves in the direction of a more balanced view of
the Blockade’s regional variations. They have come not
before     time, as some        of the old German                  texts on its inland
aspects are so obscure that they are not accessible even in
major repositories like the British Library and the Biblio-
théque Nationale. These aspects still await the sort of defini-
tive    treatment      which     the maritime               details    have     attracted,
most of all in Francois Crouzet’s writings. He has himself
pointed to the crucial links between those aspects, chiefly in
his articles, but it is fair to say that his coverage of the inland
details is comparatively slight. Now, Roger Dufraisse has
devoted much          of his work, as I have, to the Rhenish regions
of the Napoleonic Empire. It is surely significant that from
this inland angle, and quite independently, we should have
reached what seem rather similar conclusions on the main

     6° «Paris dans l’organisation des échanges intérieurs francais 4 la fin du XVIIe
siecle’, in Aires et structures du commerce francais au XVIIIe siécle (ed. Pierre
Léon: Colloque national de 1l’Association frangaise des historiens économistes,
Paris, CNRS,    4-6 octobre   1973:       Centre   d’Histoire   économique    et sociale de la
région lyonnaise, Lyon, 1975).
    °1 Exceptions here are the essays by Frangois-Yves Le Moigne (on Alsace,
the Trois-Evéchés, and Lorraine) and by Maurice Garden (on the Lyonnais),
which have a more inland focus: ibid.
