20                              INTRODUCTION

account of French market aims in the ‘Outre-Rhin’®® during
the Blockade. This study attempts to mark out some general
features of that obscure terrain, although it covers only a
relatively short period and deals with commercial and indus-
trial fluctuations rather than with the internal structure and
working of markets as such. Its emphasis is on commodity
markets, not capital markets, to which Maurice Lévy-
Leboyer’s detailed work is an authoritative introduction.®
An analysis of the internal structure and operations of com-
modity markets in the Rhineland would have been entirely
appropriate to these chapters, but alas that would also have
required a book of twice the present length.
    So far as it is possible to generalize for the Napoleonic
period itself, the problem of French markets lay both in the
insecurity of their tenure, especially those with any maritime
associations, and in the variability of their demand. Before
the Revolution, almost a third of the total export trade of
France had consisted of colonial re-exports, while at peak
times like 1787-8 anything up to a quarter of French
industrial production had had outlets in the Antilles and the
Spanish colonies. About three-quarters of French colonial
exchanges in the 1780s had been with Santo Domingo, ‘the
jewel of the Caribbean’.”° But France had lost nearly all of
that trade as a result of the maritime wars and her successive
colonial ruptures. It was of course a cumulative loss, which
came in stages and in fact preceded the Blockade by several
years. The problem was basic to the battle of French industry
and trade against British and other foreign competition from
the renewal of hostilities in 1803 to the peace of 1815, and
indeed beyond it.
    It is suggested here that the loss of French transmarine
markets and sources of supply had some influence on the
own chapter on the topic, ‘Les déformations du marché           concurrentiel’   (ibid.
147-62), is confined to the post-Napoleonic period.
     68 This term recurs frequently in contemporary     documents, where it is used
adverbially and written ‘outre Rhin’. I use it as a proper noun, in an adapted
form, and as shorthand for the German hinterland beyond the Rhine.
    ° Les Banques européennes et Vindustrialisation internationale dans la premi-
ere moitié du XIXe siécle (Paris, 1964), esp. 116-82.
     7 The foregoing familiar estimates are reproduced, e.g., in Crouzet, ‘Angleterre
et France au XVIIle siecle: Essai d’analyse comparée de deux croissances écono-
miques’, Ann. E.S.C., xxi/1 (1966), 264-5.
