22                               INTRODUCTION

All this may explain the inland orientation of my research,
but it does not quite answer the particular question: why
Alsace? A formal reply might be that the economic history
of this French province, which had been divided into the
departments of the Bas-Rhin and Haut-Rhin early in the
Revolution, is almost entirely unapproachable through English
works of whatever vintage. Apart from an interesting survey
of the pre-Revolutionary background in the capital city by
Franklin Ford,’? and some more specialized articles by
Szajko Frydman (Zosa Szajkowski) on the Alsatian Jews,’
I know of none which bear on the present subject at all.
Yet the main reason for my choice of region is the central
importance of Alsace to the whole direction of French
economic       aims in the Outre-Rhin.         There, too, the kicks and
the kindnesses of the Blockade were less unevenly delivered
than in the beleaguered coastal regions. In other words,
Alsace was squarely in the picture during the formative
period of the French Continental market design, and it is
also an exemplary case of the Blockade’s more positive
effects. Summing up his account of Alsatian economic
history under Napoleon, Fernand L’Huillier speaks of ‘une
surprenante impression d’effort et, dans l’ensemble, de
réussite’.’* That was substantially the same conclusion
reached at the start of this century by a German scholar to
whose work we are all indebted.”
   By Napoleon’s time, Alsace had long since ceased to be a
geographical cipher sandwiched between two great Powers
which played tug-of-war for its affiliations and resources. It
had also lost its earlier status as une province a l’instar de
l’étranger effectif. Former customs anomalies outside the
cing grosses fermes had been suppressed during the Revolu-
tion,    and    Alsace     had    been    assimilated     to   the   reformed
national system. Within the extraordinary power structure of
the Grand Empire, it was not the peripheral point of French
     ” Strasbourg in Transition 1648-1789 (Cambridge, Mass., 1958), esp. 131-57.
    Published since the 1950s, these are listed in the Alsatian section of my
bibliography below, pp. 321-6,
   4 Alsace napoléonienne, 466.
   *Paul Darmstadter, ‘Die Verwaltung des Unter-Elsass (Bas Rhin) unter
Napoleon I. (1799-1814)’, Zs. f. d. Gesch. d. Oberrh., lvii (1903), 286-330,
538-63; lviii (1904), 122-47, 284-309, and 631-72.
