                                INTRODUCTION                                     21
aims of Napoleon’s Blockade. If the vacuum left in the
French economy was to be filled, the key to recovery seemed
to lie in the resources of the Continental mainland. New, and
it appeared inevitably non-oceanic, supply-lines and outlets
had to be found to give the imperial economy the stimulus
for expansion, especially when from 1807 onward neutral
trade lay in the stranglehold of the belligerent Powers.
Napoleon’s aim to ‘conquer the sea by mastery of the land’,
or to ‘conquer the colonies by the land’, was grandiloquent
and no doubt rousing stuff. The ‘logistics’ of the Blockade
may well have implied an extravagant route to the eventual
regeneration of French sea power, being as it were a strategy
of ‘remote control’, reminiscent of the marquis d’Argenson’s
plan to ‘conquer America in Germany’. But its emphasis
throughout was on exerting pressure nearer home, within the
de facto orbit of imperial power. Like Bismarck’s map of
Africa later in the century, Napoleon’s map of the world lay
in Europe. His priorities were essentially Europocentric, for
if his power was land-based, it was also land-locked.
   And so, of all the symbolical motifs which have been ad-
vanced to incapsulate the essence of Napoleon’s ambition —
‘mirage     de   l’Orient’,     ‘idéal   romain’,     ‘grandeur     universelle’,
and the like — none fits the facts better than the Carolingian
analogy. This properly stresses the essentially Latin and
Teutonic bases of the Grand Empire. It also points to
Napoleon’s practical and, what is more, practicable interest
in a ‘German policy’. His work in Italy was important by
any standards and had far-reaching effects; yet Marcel Dunan
seems to me right when he argues that, outside France, ‘la
grande idée de Napoléon c’est la réorganisation de |’Alle-
magne’, and that this was the main function of his pre-
occupation with ‘la question anglaise’ after 1806.7! The
Blockade, its market design, or the Continental System more
widely made sense only in terms of his control of the vast
German hinterland beyond the Rhenish frontier.

                                  *      *      *


    7 Napoléon et ‘les Allemagnes’ (extract from the Institut Napoléon, Paris,
1946), 8. The point is discussed more fully in his Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 273 ff.,
and esp. 289-304.
