                A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC                  DISTRESS?                29
langueur et de nullité’ from which the city’s trade was re-
portedly suffering. Indeed, judging from the Chamber’s
minutes for the years 1803-7 as a whole, one is left with the
unavoidable impression of recession and distress in the major
sectors of the local economy. This is explained generally
in terms of the Revolutionary upheavals and, more pointedly,
of the severities of Napoleonic policy itself. The issues were
closely interrelated, and the categories which follow here
are simply one attempt to bring order to their complexities.

                                    *    *     *k



One of the most recurrent problems was the official regula-
tion of Strasbourg’s entrepot and transit trade. Local
merchants attributed some of the difficulties to the in-
adequacy of the consular government’s commercial conces-
sions    to   the   city.   Others,     they        believed,   were   due    to a
malfunctioning of the prerogatives actually allowed them.
The legal technicalities governing the trade of Strasbourg
were so complex that confusion over their enforcement was
not surprising. One can sympathize alike with the merchants
who chose to work within their rules, where they did so, and
with the local officials who somehow had to apply them uni-
formly, where this was in fact their honest motive.
   After a period of severe commercial restraint under the
prohibitions of the Convention and the Directory, the
consular government had allowed Strasbourg certain conces-
sions. An arrété of 20 Prairial IX (9 June 1801) had granted
the city a limited entrepot status, which rather belatedly
brought it into line with the prerogatives granted on 9
Floréal VII (28 April 1799) to other Rhenish ports. The
latter measure had conceded restricted entrepot and transit
facilities to Cologne, Coblenz, and Mainz in the carrying
trade from Holland which eventually passed through the
Alsatian customs posts at Bourglibre* and Bourgfelden* to
    3 ‘Bourglibre’ was the Revolutionary name for the frontier post of Saint-Louis.
Strategically placed on the ‘route de Strasbourg’ at the approach to Basel, it was
also a junction for the Alsatian town of Huningue.
   4The neighbouring post of Bourgfelden (usually referred to in contemporary
documents as ‘Bourgfeld’ or ‘Biirckfeld’) was situated on the road linking Basel
with Hirsingue and Altkirch in the Haut-Rhin.
