                            INTRODUCTION                           25

especially in times of stress. In this its inhabitants were not
untypical of the many local communities which made up the
polyglot Empire. Yet what might be called the ‘frontier
complex’ of the Alsatians strengthened their own belief that
their position was unique, and by a simple extension of that
presumption they felt entitled to special treatment. This gave
rise to simmering disaffection with the policies of the central
government. It also fuelled a popular economic mythology,
one inbred in and invoked by Alsatians at all levels of
sophistication, in which fabulous allusions to other ‘more
favoured’ regions or to former ‘more prosperous’ times
present the historian with the problem of rhetorical exaggera-
tion, with frequent diversions from the hard economic reality
behind the public fagade, in short with elaborate histrionics
rather than history.
    The details of this economic mythology, however, are
crucial to an understanding of local attitudes and aspirations.
Along with the endless protests, petitions, and the archetypal
language of complaint, they were all part of the legendary
‘esprit frondeur des Alsaciens’, not least among their
merchant and industrial classes. The official reports by
prefects,   sub-prefects,   mayors,   and   — par excellence   —   the
record of the Chamber of Commerce in Strasbourg should be
seen in that light. Alsatians as a rule viewed their fortunes
more in relation to their foreign neighbours across the
Rhine and their newly acquired compatriots of the lower left
bank than to their fellow-countrymen across the Vosges.
In professing their hardships, they were predisposed to seek
and find ironic counterpoises elsewhere on their frontier and
to present these in theatrical contrast. This idiosyncratic
mask, so often sour, so seldom benign, has its hazards as well
as its fascination for the historian. The following chapters are
an attempt to penetrate that mask, to distinguish the real
history and meaning of the Blockade in Alsace from the con-
ceits of local lore.
