                               INTRODUCTION                                  23

influence it had once been. It was a crucial, in some ways
the crucial link between the territorial unit known as
‘V’ancienne France’, the so-called ‘pays réunis’ of the Rhenish
left bank,’© and the subject and allied states                    of central
Europe. As contemporaries liked to think, it had become
‘le boulevard de la France’, and Strasbourg in particular had
developed into ‘la ville des routes’, as one historian puts it.””
Alsace was the base of the fifth imperial military division and
a focal point for the movement of troops and transports in
the east. As a frontier province it was a major post in the
imperial customs cordons. It was also a nerve-centre of the
imperial intelligence network and of secret diplomacy. In
short,    it had     assumed    a much     more     influential   role    than
that of a mere outlying province.
   The commercial and industrial ramifications of this are the
principal concern here. Alsace was the main meeting-point
of the routes which carried trade from Paris, Lyons, and the
French Midi to Germany, and from there to the north, to
Poland,     and on    to Russia.    Throughout       the Blockade, Stras-
bourg was the major imperial entrepot for exports and re-
exports to those parts. It was also the leading entrepdt for
imperial imports from the Outre-Rhin and Switzerland. Until
the summer of 1811 it was the chief and at times the exclu-
sive inlet for cotton expeditions from the Levant, which
arrived overland via the Habsburg territories and the southern
states    of the Rhenish Confederation.           Its merchants also had
a stake in the carrying trade of the Rhine valley between the
Low      Countries    and Switzerland,      where    there was a link to
Italy. Alsatians as a whole, and the Strasbourgeois in
particular, were thus at the crossroads of the transcontinental
routes carrying both regular and illicit traffic during the
Blockade. They had long-standing ties with Mainz and Frank-
furt, by river on the Rhine and on the Main, and with the
Swabian hinterland and Switzerland to the east and south.
One local historian speaks of ‘l’orientation de la production
alsacienne vers l’extérieur’ as a central theme in the

   7Namely,   the four predominantly   German-speaking   departments   of Mont-
Tonnerre (Mainz), Sarre (Trier), Rhin-et-Moselle (Coblenz), and Roer (Aachen).
   777 Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 20.
