24                              INTRODUCTION

province’s      history and refers to its traditional ‘mission ex-
portatrice’.”°
    None of this, however, should conjure up an unreal image
of the Alsatians as international citizens or detract from the
clear preponderance of their home markets in Napoleonic
times. The evidence of the economic sources suggests that the
great majority of them remained as local in their preoccupa-
tions and mentality as ever before. In terms of national
awareness, of the Empire at large, they seem to have made
little advance on their stand in the cahiers de doléances of
1789, which all commentators agree had displayed a regional
particularism second to none in France. The cotton town of
Mulhouse,       ‘le Manchester        frangais’ of a later age, is a case in
point. For several years under the Convention and the
Directory its citizens had fought hard to preserve what they
could of their political independence. In doing so they had
suffered      the   worst    economic          constraints,   as Mulhouse       was
enclosed in French territory, and they had finally succumbed
to the pressure for political ‘reunion’ with France in 1798
largely for reasons of economic survival.’? Other Alsatian
towns had a similar sense of local independence, and some
had come through the Revolutionary upheaval almost as
traumatically.
   To talk of Alsatian particularism is, then, itself an over-
simplification. It lumps together a mass of local particular-
isms, so small and at times so fierce, that even the conventional
distinction between the ‘commercial interest’ of the Bas-Rhin,
the ‘industrial interest’ of the Haut-Rhin, and the ubiquitous
‘agricultural interest’ of both seems too glib. Alsace tended’
to subdivide into fairly small units of economic identification,

    78W. Rinckenberger, ‘L’Exportation, tradition alsacienne’, in Etudes stras-
bourgeoises (publ. by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Strasbourg,
1953), 122, 123. L’Huillier puts the same theme forward for the Haut-Rhin in
‘Deux siécles d’exportation textile haut-rhinoise      (1750-1950)’, Bull. Soc. ind.
Mulh., cxxiv (1950), 111-22.
     The    importance   of French   markets   to the printed calicoes of Mulhouse is
outlined in J.-J. Hémardinquer,      ‘Aspects du marché francais des indiennes au
début du XIXe siécle: une “Mulhouse extérieure”’, Actes du quatre-vingt-
douziéme Congrés national des Sociétés savantes, Strasbourg et Colmar 1967,
see d’hist. mod. et contemp., vol. ii, Le Commerce et l'industrie (Paris, 1970)
     -26.
