30     ALSACE AND THE CENTRAL                GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

Switzerland. Across the Rhine, moreover,                   Rastatt, Stuttgart,
and Ulm had also benefited from this trade at Strasbourg’s
expense. The Neckar and Danube had grown in importance,
albeit only briefly, as waterways for Switzerland’s import
trade in colonial goods from Holland. Strasbourg had won
limited transit rights on 2 Pluvidse X (22 January 1802).
These had been modified and slightly widened by the laws of
3 Thermidor X (22 July 1802), 22 Vendémiaire XI (14
October 1802), and 4 Pluvidse XI (24 January 1803).° But
the crucial arrété was that of 8 Floréal XI (28 April 1803),°
and it formed the basis of Strasbourg’s entrepOt and transit
status for the rest of the Napoleonic period.
   Now, what the local merchants had wanted and petitioned
for on many occasions was the restoration of their commer-
cial privileges under the old regime. Ideally, they would have
liked Strasbourg to have the same facilities of a free port for
foreign dealings as it had enjoyed while Alsace was une
province a l’instar de l’étranger effectif.’ They would also
have wished for the restitution of their pre-Revolutionary
prerogatives in the transit trade between foreign states. This
had meant the right to participate freely in the river traffic
of the upper Rhine, as well as in the overland carrying trade
between the Low Countries and Switzerland or Italy along
the stretch between Oppenheim and Basel. Within weeks of
the peace following the Marengo campaign, the Strasbour-
geois had voiced hopes of recovering their former commercial
position. An example of their optimism is the house of J.-M.
Papelier, tobacco processers, merchant bankers, and com-,
missioners. Their confidence in happier times ahead had
shown in a new advertisement of their services to old clients
soon after the treaty of Lunéville.? According to Papelier’s
notice, the firm had ‘tous les jours des rouliers en charge
pour tous les points de la France et de l’Allemagne, et nous
     °A.N. F!? 503. For a brief discussion of the consular arrétés affecting Stras-
bourg’s commercial rights, see F. L’Huillier, ‘Le Rhin dans la France napoléoni-
enne’, Als. fr., xxxiv (10 Aug. 1939), 202;.and R. Dufraisse, ‘Les fonctions com-
merciales de 1’Alsace napoléonienne’, Saisons d’Alsace, special no. 5 notion
‘Napoléon et l’Alsace’, viii (Winter, 1963), 39-54.
   CAN, F}? 503; Min. i.                                  7 Dufraisse, art. cit. 40-1.
    *A copy of the notice, dated 10 Floréal IX (30 Apr. 1801), was sent to the
merchant house of Briansiaux in Lille. It is kept among the full dossiers of the
Briansiaux correspondence under ‘Papelier & Cie’ at A.N. 3 AQ 339.
