32      ALSACE       AND THE CENTRAL          GOVERNMENT           1803-1807

   Otherwise, Strasbourg was bound by the official customs
restrictions. The limited entrep6t and transit concessions not
surprisingly failed to satisfy the local merchants, particularly
the houses dealing on commission with foreign suppliers and
clients. Several of their spokesmen stated publicly that their
rights were illusory. Pressure for reform through official
protests and petitions to Paris started at once. The govern-
ment responded with two measures. One, dated 6 Brumaire
XII (29 October 1803), in effect added insult to injury. It
granted entrepot facilities to Mainz and Bourglibre, but not
Strasbourg, for the trade in cotton yarn and cloth of either
cotton or cotton and linen. The other measure was issued on
28 Frimaire XII (20 December 1803) and slightly extended
the range of goods permitted in transit through Strasbourg,
but the basic position as laid down on 8 Floréal XI was not
changed.
   Entrepot and transit rights became one of the most vexed
issues debated by the Chamber in Strasbourg during the
following few years. A sarcastic comment early in 1804, once
it had become clear that the government was not going to
make any further concessions of substance, was that ‘celui
qui a été accordé par la loi du 8 floréal n’est rien, absolu-
ment rien, et l’expérience démontre tellement cette vérité
que tel négociant de la ville et du département dont les
relations en affaires sont multipliées ignore si le transit existe
ou      non’.?      Observations      on   the   matter     were    received    and
debated. Many reports and petitions were drafted for the pre-
fects to send on to Paris. For what their support was worth,
both Laumond!® and Shée’! strongly backed the Chamber’s
case in their own reports and recommendations to the
Minister.
   A full statement of what the Strasbourgeois were demanding

    * Report to the prefect of Pluvidse XII, A.D. (B-R) XII M 3; report to the
Minister of the Interior of 24 Ventdse XII (15 Mar. 1804), A.N. F!? 6397.
   The prefecture of Jean-Charles-Joseph Laumond lasted from Mar. 1800 to
Sept.   1802.    On him see the brief details in L. Spach, ‘Die Reihenfolge der Praf-
ekten des niederrheinischen Departements’, Moderne Culturzustande im Elsass
(3 vols., Strasbourg, 1873-4), i. 6-7; and M. de Fourcauld, ‘Un préfet du Bas-Rhin
sous le Consulat’, Als. fr., xvii (24 Mar. 1929), 275-6.
   ‘The prefecture of Henri Shée lasted from Sept. 1802 to Feb. 1810: Spach,
Op. Cit., i. 7-8.
