                  A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC          DISTRESS?                  35

several letters on the city’s behalf. The details varied with
events, but the central demand for more liberal entrepdt and
transit rights was the same. On 4 Prairial XIII (24 May 1805),
for example, the Chamber focused on refined sugar and
tobacco         twists   (tabacs en carottes)     —   ‘qui de tout tems
formaient la cargaison principale de la Hollande sur le Rhin
pour le transit en Suisse’.!? It wanted these articles to be
added to the goods whose transit through Alsace was
permitted.         On    3 Nivose       XIV   (24 December        1805) the
petition was repeated, but on this occasion the Chamber
thought that Mainz, Oppenheim, and Bourglibre should also
be intermediate points for the trade in question.”° Or again,
on 19 and 25 June 1806 a case was made for the right to
import cotton plaincloth from Holland and the duchies of
Cleves and Berg through Strasbourg.”!
   The Chamber’s      supporting arguments    also remained
substantially the same. One hardy annual was the notion of
a natural geographical function. In the cited petition of 4
Prairial XIII, for instance, the Chamber noted that Strasbourg
was admirably placed to be an intermediate station in the
trade from Belgium to the upper Rhine. This raised hopes
that traffic from Antwerp would soon be stimulated, since
the freedom of the Scheldt was expected to boost the
Rhenish exchanges between Cologne and Strasbourg. So, too,
in its appeal of 7 Vendémiaire XIV (29 September 1805)
the Chamber wrote that ‘la part que la nature des choses
assigne a l’Alsace dans le commerce général de l’Europe, lui
est marquée par sa position topographique. C’est un vallon
le long du Rhin qui sert de communication commerciale de
la Hollande a la Suisse et souvent a I’Italie . . .’.2* By simple
inference from that premiss, the Strasbourgeois argued that
the city should be allowed a more active role in such traffic.
   The point of this kind of reasoning was that happier for-
tunes lay ahead for local merchants if the government
granted their petitions. Yet to reinforce their demands by
ironic contrast, the Chamber never failed to emphasize

   19 Min. i.                20 Thid.            21 Min, ii; A.D. (B-R) XII M 4.
    22 xtract from the petition whose publication was agreed at the meeting of
that day. This direct appeal to Napoleon was entrusted to the intermediary
Rémusat: Min. i.
