              A PORTRAIT     OF ECONOMIC   DISTRESS?            Sil

pouvons garantir aux arrivages pour quelques destinations
qu’elles puissent étre, une expédition sire et prompte’. It
added that Rhenish navigation had already resumed and
would be as safe and economical as before. The cheerful
prediction was that ‘notre ville va redevenir une place d’entre-
pot qui doit fixer l’attention du commerce fran¢ais’.
   Such    hopes, however,    had not materialized. The position
as defined by the consular arrétés was that of a restricted
entrepot and an even narrower transit status for Strasbourg.
One need not doubt that those measures were in fact very
limiting. The entrepdt concession, for instance, was confined
to a maximum period of six months for the clearance of any
one expedition, whereas the status of an entrepdt réel
normally allowed a year. Furthermore, as a rule only trade in
goods not formally prohibited was ‘granted, with import
dealings in tozles peintes, muslins, and certain types of
tobacco (tabacs en feuilles and tabacs en carottes) specifi-
cally forbidden. Entrepots réels, by contrast, were allowed to
receive even banned goods, provided they were held in
transit and ultimately destined for a foreign state.
    The commissioners and middlemen of Strasbourg would
have welcomed similar rights. Admittedly, the law of 8
Floréal XI did allow some modest facilities of an entrepot
réel. The city had the right, for example, to receive such
goods of French colonial origin as sugar (sucres tétes and
sucres    terrés), coffee, cocoa,   and pepper, on   the condition
that these were in transit to another destination. The goods
were also subject to complicated procedures of verification
and ‘naturalization’, which in practice meant tiresome
customs delays. Certain other permitted foreign goods fell
within the range of the city’s regular transit dealings, though
they were subject to the same provisos. For official pur-
poses, ‘transit’ was defined as ‘le passage sur le territoire
francais    d’une  marchandise      expédiée   de J’étranger a
’étranger’. In all cases the essential condition of Strasbourg’s
transit status was that the goods should travel to the city by
land, enter the Empire either there or at Bourglibre, and leave
in a direct routing via Oppenheim for the Outre-Rhin. The
reverse sequence was allowed for the transit trade from north
to south.
