               A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC             DISTRESS?                39

large-scale military provisioning, and provoked from the
government diatribes against the whole ‘capitalist’ fraternity.
Another effect was an active illicit traffic in grain, helped by
the proximity of the frontier and by the collusion of foreign
dealers. Close vigilance by the police des grains and heavy
penalties could not stop the Rhenish smuggling or fraudulent
trade in grain.
   On    the whole,       though,    Alsatian    farmers, manufacturers,
and merchants were more vexed by the laws bearing on the
trade in tobacco and hemp. The tobacco question involved
much more than export restrictions and is discussed more
fully in the next sub-section. The focus here is on hemp.
As the Bas-Rhin was one of the Empire’s main hemp-
producing regions, its economic notables felt that interested
parties were entitled to generous concessions in their trade
with Rhenish and Swiss customers. The chief points of their
petitions might be illustrated from the Chamber’s minutes
for many a debate between 1803 and 1806, but the fullest
discussion of the issue took place on 18 Pluvidse XII (8
February 1804).*! Again current difficulties were stressed by
a nostalgic account of earlier prosperity. In those happier
times before the Revolutionary upheavals, it was argued,
Alsatians had enjoyed a lucrative trade to Germany and
Switzerland in raw hemp and a range of semi-worked or
finished hempen products. Cloth for domestic use (tozles de
ménage),      cheap     working     clothes,    handkerchiefs,     sailcloth,
and rope had all sold well there. The main demand for ‘grey
hemp’ had come from Swiss clients, that for ‘white hemp’
from German ones. Alsatian manufacturers had in turn
imported semi-finished hempen articles from these dealers
and worked them up for disposal on their local market. The
associated benefits to merchant carriers and middlemen had
been important. But the Revolutionary wars had undermined
this trade,     in which      Strasbourg,      Brumath,   and    Bischwiller
had suffered the worst losses.**

   31 Min. i; A.D. (B-R) XII M 3.
   32Tn its report for Nivose XII (Dec. 1803-Jan. 1804) the Chamber estimated
that those three cantons had once produced 20,000 quintals of hemp annually,
but it added that output had long since dropped, with the loss of traditional
employment to many rural labourers: A.D. (B-R) XII M 3.
