36     ALSACE     AND THE CENTRAL            GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

existing hardships. In the same report of 7 Vendémiaire it
gave a bleak account of the city’s trade during the preceding
years. The current position was described in this and many
later petitions as appalling. So apparently it remained. Stras-
bourg received no satisfaction on the issue of its entrepot
and transit status before the Blockade and its accompanying
policies gave a new harsh twist to the regulation of Rhenish
trade. The petition of 7 Vendémiaire was not only rejected;
it evinced a sharp rebuke from the Minister of the Interior.”
He announced that the duties of the local chambers of com-
merce were ‘administrative’. It was for the central govern-
ment to decide which matters needed to be publicized and
which petitions printed.
   Given that the prefects nearly always and the Conseul
général de commerce sometimes backed the Chamber’s re-
quests,** one might wonder why the government denied
Strasbourg entrepot and transit rights beyond those of 8
Floréal XI. Unquestionably the fact of war, linked with the
mounting attack on British trade and Continental merchants
in touch with it, is part of the explanation. Fernand L’Huillier
suggests that another reason was Napoleon’s greater concern
for Alsatian agriculture, especially after Austerlitz.?° The
argument here is that the restrictive policy towards Alsatian
trade was designed to help local agriculture by holding down
the potential competition of foreigners and so maintaining
good prices for home producers. This interpretation, how-
ever, does not explain why Strasbourg rather than Cologne
and Mainz, whose hinterldnder also had important agri-
cultural interests, was commercially               so penalized. It is, more:
over, a non sequitur that the interests of Alsatian agriculture
could be best served by a restrictive commercial policy. More
generous concessions to Strasbourg might have stimulated
local agriculture to greater things and given a timely boost
to what was already an important export trade in its products.

     ? Letter of 31 Mar. 1806: meeting of 9 Apr., Min. ii.
    4The Council for example supported the Chamber’s petition of 27 Aug. 1806
for the local entrep6t to be opened for fuller trading relations with Holland, Berg,
and other states of the Rhenish Confederation. It even thought some exceptions
might be made in the case of prohibited goods, believing that this was in the
national interest. A.N. F!? 609-10.                 25 Alsace napoléonienne, 298-9.
