               A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC             DISTRESS?                 37

   A more plausible explanation of the government’s strict
line, noted already in another connection, was the genuine
concern in Paris to have the official customs policy applied
as nationally and as uniformly as possible. This resolve
hardened as the war on British trade intensified. There was
no outstanding reason why Strasbourg should be allowed
special favours. It seems, furthermore, that the government
did not yet rate the city’s commercial potential equally with
that of Cologne and Mainz. It sometimes made the irritating
point that Strasbourg was not literally ‘on the Rhine’ but lay
on the river Ill some three miles away. As ministers were
loath to duplicate the more precisely defined Rhine alloca-
tions, this pedantic argument was useful. It served as a long-
stop to disqualify Strasbourg from becoming an entrepét
réel or ‘free port’ like other towns actually on the Rhine.

                                 *    *     *



The second broad group of Alsatian economic troubles, often
barely separable from the first, involved the range of import
and export restrictions applicable throughout the Empire on
certain goods. As frontier people all Alsatians, not only the
Strasbourgeois, felt their pressure directly. Frontier provinces
were more immediately exposed to the disruption of traffic
implied by the prohibitions or stiff tariffs.
   The Chamber’s general stance vis-a-vis the customs restric-
tions and import duties had formed well before the Blockade.
Briefly put, its feeling was that:
. .. les partisans du systéme prohibitif assure[nt]        qu’il favorise |’in-
dustrie nationale et nuit au commerce rival. L’expérience détruit ces
assertions; les objets prohibés sont introduits, la bonne foi n’admet
aucun doute sur ce point, et dés lors la prétendue faveur accordée aux
manufactures   est illusoire . . . La seule et unique cause de la contre-
bande est dans le systéme prohibitif ...
The problems posed by the Napoleonic customs laws were
discussed by the Chamber frequently and at length. Some-
times its minutes move laboriously through masses of small
local detail of only technical importance. Yet often, as in the

               26 Meeting of 14 Floréal XI (4 May 1803), Min. i.
