               A PORTRAIT        OF ECONOMIC       DISTRESS?                 33
was made in a special report of 17 Prairial XII (6 June
1804).'? It began by referring to the lucrative carrying trade
through Alsace before the upsets of the Convention and the
Directory. The value of that trade in 1791 was estimated at
1.4 million francs.'? As a result of the subsequent distur-
bances, it was claimed, the Alsatian carrying trade had been
virtually annihilated. Hostilities along the Rhenish frontier
and a succession of commercial embargoes had undermined
it. Alsace had felt the counter-effects of the stringent entre-
pot restrictions imposed on Holland and of the continuing
ban on British goods. It had also suffered from the cutting of
the overland transit trade from Frankfurt to Switzerland via
Oppenheim and Bourglibre. Whole classes of goods, including
Brazilian     (Pernambuco)          cotton,    colonial    foodstuffs,      and
industrial primary materials had been proscribed by the suc-
cessive customs laws. Permitted goods had been heavily
taxed. The earlier benefits of the trade had passed to
merchants on the Rhenish right bank. The consular govern-
ment had done little to right these difficulties and much
which actually worsened them.
   Altogether, the Chamber’s view was forcefully put, and the
report ended with a string of suggestions for practical reform.
These fairly sum up the major points of earlier and later peti-
tions on the same question. All goods either produced in or
forming part of the traditional commercial exchanges of the
Rhine valley should be allowed to pass freely through the
entrepots at Cologne, Mainz, and Strasbourg. The transit of
goods formerly permitted along the Oppenheim-Strasbourg-
Basel connection, and vice versa, should be restored. Only
competing      British    goods like cottons,       woollens,     linens, and

   12 Meeting of the same date, Min. i.
   13Cf. the assessment that the annual transit trade had been worth between 1.4
and 1.5 million francs to Strasbourg alone before the Revolutionary troubles:
Chamber’s report for Nivése, meeting of 4 Pluvidse XII (25 Jan. 1804), Min. i;
and A.D. (B-R) XII M 3. The figure of 1.5 million francs was repeated in the
prefect’s letter of 7 Jan. 1806 to the Minister of Police, A.D. (B-R) III M 3;
also in the Annuaire du Bas-Rhin for the Year XIV-1806, 163. According to
Dufraisse, from 5,000 to 7,000 wagons in Alsace had carried up to 50,000
quintals a year along the route between Strasbourg and Basel on the eve of the
Revolution. The trade from Holland to southern Germany and Switzerland Had
been so active that Strasbourg’s north-south trading axis was then its principal
interest. ‘Fonctions commerciales de l’Alsace napoléonienne’, 40.
