                A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC               DISTRESS?                   45

1805) had no more success than the Chamber’s efforts, not-
withstanding strong prefectoral backing.*! A freer hemp
trade was one of the many unsatisfied demands made by the
Strasbourgeois and others on whose behalf they spoke for the
rest of the Napoleonic period, and the problem continued
under the Bourbon Restoration.

                                    *    *    *



The Alsatian ‘tobacco question’ was raised and publicized by
the chamber so often and in such detail, and was the object
of so many petitions to Paris, that it must be rated as a
crucial local issue throughout this period. It was also a parti-
cularly sensitive one, for as the Empire’s largest producer of
tobacco, the Bas-Rhin was most affected by the constraints
of official policy. On many occasions the Chamber described
tobacco as the ‘principal branch’ of the department’s trade,
and some thought of it as the ‘hereditary cultivation’ there.
Their views on this matter, or on the related question of
Dutch and American tobacco imports, were relentlessly
argued years before the annexation of Holland to the Empire
in July 1810 and the new State monopoly of the following
December.
   Laumond’s account had located the heartland of tobacco
farming in the Bas-Rhin in the region of Barr.*? There were
also large plantations in and around Strasbourg, Benfeld,
Marckolsheim, Erstein, Obernai, Molsheim, Soultz, Ober-
hausbergen, and Truchtersheim. The processing or curing of
tobacco was concentrated chiefly in Strasbourg, with smaller
enterprises active in the more rural communes of Barr, Ben-
feld,   Bischwiller,      Marckolsheim,           Haguenau,     Ingwiller,     and
Sélestat.    The    department’s        annual      crop had amounted            to
120,000     or 130,000        metric    quintals early in the Consulate,
and the total value of this yield had then been put at between
5 and 6 million francs.** Laumond had thought the producers

   41It was supported by the Chamber in a letter of 10 Fructidor XIII (28 Aug.
1805): meeting of 3 Fructidor XIII (21 Aug. 1805), Min. i. The official refusal
from the Minister of the Interior, acting on the advice of Decrés, was noted at the
Chamber’s meeting of 19 Oct. 1806: Min. ii.
   42 Statistique, 15.                                                  43 Ibid. 23.
