               A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC              DISTRESS?                 49

claimed that the concessions had been ignored during the
preceding months, that the duty had in fact been levied and
even made retroactive to April that year. Turckheim (pére),
the city’s representative on the Conseil général de commerce
in Paris, was urgently instructed to use all his influence to
have the lethal duty suppressed.°® But in spite of the
Council’s backing of the Chamber in this case and Shée’s
almost automatic support of its various petitions, the govern-
ment was unmoved. The presumption of fiscal gain was
strong. The export duty on processed tobacco was not re-
pealed during the next few years, only modified in technical
ways from time to time.
   On the ‘tobacco question’, as in the case of the hemp
trade, the Chamber used the ploy of rhetorical contrast. It
claimed that the government’s measures had driven the
profits of the tobacco industry abroad. Dealers across the
river, finding their former connections with the Bas-Rhin cut
or else too costly, had been forced to look for supplies else-
where and even to develop their own. As a result the
Bas-Rhin had lost many of its old clients, and the hope of
recovering them under existing conditions was fast receding.
The Chamber often predicted that more liberal tobacco laws
across the Rhine would lead to an eventual self-sufficiency in
the product among the German states. Even if French policy
was then relaxed, it would be too late to save the home pro-
ducers from a miserable decline into obscurity. In particular,
the Strasbourgeois feared the potential of the tobacco
factory at Lahr in Baden. Its proprietor, Lotzbeck, was said
to be improving his trade each year. Given more unintended
help by the French government, the Chamber warned, this
enterprise would soon erase the memory of Germany’s
former tobacco dealings in Alsace.*?
   The Haut-Rhin was not an important tobacco-producing
department. Official policy raised much less protest there
    58 Bernard-Frédéric (later Baron) Turckheim had been so nominated at the
meeting of 23 Floréal XI (13 May 1803), Min. i. In Aug. 1806 he was reappointed,
and Pierre-Michel Saglio was also then nominated, Strasbourg having been granted
two seats on the Council: Min. ii; A.N. F?? 521-2.
    59 For details of the tobacco industry in Baden, Wirttemberg, and Bavaria
in 1806, see A.D. (B-R) XI M 194. These include a report by Shée, dated 8 Oct.,
observing how much lower tobacco prices were across the Rhine than in France.
