               A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC               DISTRESS?                   47

between growers and processers. Furthermore, all the re-
quests made in the petition of 7 Floréal XI scarcely disguised
the fact that the Chamber was voicing the interests of the
tobacco processers and clearing-houses alone. This was not
surprising in view of the close professional links many of
its members had with the large enterprises in question.
The processers and merchant expeditioners who served
them — some firms of course performed both functions
themselves — constituted a powerful and vociferous lobby in
Strasbourg. It was little inconvenience for interested parties
to cover the short distance to the Chamber’s meeting-rooms
at Place Gutenberg to press their case. Alternatively, they
could count on members of the Chamber being willing to do
so for them. Several of their petitions openly differed from
those of the tobacco farmers who, being more widely spread
out in the department, did not have the Chamber’s ear or
such close professional ties with its members. The growers
were understandably in favour of the ban on or heavy taxa-
tion of competing foreign leaves, and in this had a funda-
mental disagreement with the other group. They would hardly
have objected to the prospect of an export bounty for
processed tobacco, since any stimulation of that branch was
likely to boost their own sales of the raw material. But they
were altogether opposed to a stiffer export duty on un-
processed leaves. Had the suggested figure of 16 francs the
metric quintal been imposed, it would have amounted to
more than a tenfold increase of the existing duty. Faced with
such divergent interests in the Bas-Rhin, the government
tended to opt for the status quo, at any rate until the Régie
was set up.
   As for that, a prefiguration of the State tobacco monopoly
had haunted the Chamber for years before it eventually
materialized on 29 December             1810.°? Indeed, the debates on
the issue during the earlier period offer a rather curious study
in historical prolepsis drawn in the image of the Bourbon pre-
cedent. The State monopoly of 1789 had confined tobacco
farming to the so-called pays conquis (Alsace, Franche-
Comté, Hainault, Cambrésis, Flanders) and trade in the
    52 The working of the Napoleonic   tobacco   monopoly   in Alsace is discussed
more fully below, pp. 257-60.
