                 A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC                  DISTRESS?                  41

Chamber        explained     in a letter to Decrés,** Minister of the
Marine,
Les marchés de Strasbourg abondent en toiles communes, que les cul-
tivateurs y apportent, et qu’ils colportent méme dans les maisons des
particuliers. OU donc en serait le débouché si la fabrication pouvait
en étre augmentée, ce qui d’ailleurs . . . est impracticable dans ce
Départem'? Ce ne sont donc plus les enlévemens en chanvre qui
diminuent      ou nuisent   a la fabrication     des toiles, puisqu’il est avéré
qu’on en fabrique autant qu’il est possible.
There were not enough manufacturers in the department to
draw out the productive potential of the growers, while the
former could have increased their demand for raw hemp only
if an improving market for their own products had material-
ized. Unfortunately, the market for Alsatian hemp and
hempen goods was static, or worse. Output in the 150 com-
munes of the Bas-Rhin still engaged in the industry varied on
the eve of the Blockade from 2.5 to at most 3 million kilo-
grammes. Its annual value of around two million francs was
less than that of the former export trade alone.?’ Everywhere
the bugbear of glut intruded into production plans and profit
margins were generally low. Competition from Germany,
Switzerland, and Holland meant that Alsatian producers were
not assured of easy sales beyond the frontiers even if the
government relaxed its export ban.
   One instance of market trouble in the Alsatian hemp
industry is particularly illuminating. It is the case of Gau
fréres, an enterprise specializing in sailcloth and based near
Strasbourg. Its annual consumption of hemp was put at
around 1,500 quintals, rising to 2,500 quintals when the navy
increased its demand during preparations for combat.*® It
was    clear    to all observers,       as Gau      fréres     themselves        often
pointed out, that the firm had the technical capacity to
treble or even quadruple output, given the incentive. But
that, precisely, was the problem. Laumond had reckoned in
1802 that the Toulon fleet, the largest buyer of sailcloth
from the Bas-Rhin, took only 60,000 aunes on annual

   36It followed the discussion of 18 Pluvidse and is recorded verbatim in the
minutes of that meeting.
    37These figures are taken    from   the retrospective    tables   compiled   by the
Chamber in 1813: A.D. (B-R) XI M 185.
   38 Chamber’s cited letter to Decrés of 18 Pluvidse.
