 46    ALSACE AND THE CENTRAL             GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

 markets. Imports of unprocessed tobacco had actually been
 helped for a time by the law of 5 September 1792. That of
 22 Brumaire VII had banned foreign processed tobacco,
 ostensibly to compensate home curers for the excise, and it
 had not saddled imports of raw leaves with an excessively
 heavy duty. Alsatian exports during the pre-Blockade years
 were in leaf rather than processed form, because the applic-
 able export duty was much lower. It was only 1.50 francs
 the 100 kilogrammes during the Consulate and early Empire.
 Local merchants considered the tax wrong in principle, but
 at least it was not as stifling as the import duties on per-
 mitted foreign tobacco or the home excise on processing.
    The Chamber often argued that the duties and excise re-
 strained the demand for tobacco on the home market at a
 time when Alsatian varieties were up against the pressure of
 American     competition.    The   government’s    fiscal gain,
 reckoned at 30,000 francs a year from the Bas-Rhin — ‘that
 insignificant sum’ — was no match for the department’s
 loss.°! The Chamber asked for the abolition of the excise on
 processed tobacco and its replacement by a system of special
 patents. It also wanted the suppression or at least drastic
 reduction of the import duties on permitted imports, and an
 end to the ban on certain foreign tobacco products. To assure
 the local processers plentiful and cheap supplies, it requested
 an export duty of 16 francs the metric quintal on raw
 tobacco     (feuilles de cru) leaving the department                 for the
 Outre-Rhin, At the same time it pressed for an export bounty
 (prime) of 8 francs the metric quintal on processed tobacco
 (tabacs fabriqués) over a two-year period, so as to help the’
 local branch apparently most in need of a boost.
      Now, the Chamber’s stance vis-a-vis the government might
 have been more acceptable in Paris if it had been broadly
 representative of Alsatian tobacco interests. In fact, however,
 this industry was, like several others in the province, not a
 coherent interest. The needs of its various branches did not
 always     square,    and   bad    feeling was      quite often      aroused

    : * Cited letter of 7 Floréal XI. An extract from the minutes of the Conseil
  général du Bas-Rhin for 17 Floréal XI (7 May 1803) put the total revenue from
  tobacco in France at 1.2 million francs a year: A.D. (B-R) XI M 194; A.N. F??
- 511a.
