40     ALSACE     AND THE CENTRAL            GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

    Félix Ponteil’s figures,?* drawn from the official sources,
illustrate the decline of this branch of the Alsatian economy.
In 1778 some 60,000 quintals** of hemp had been produced
in the Bas-Rhin and a total of 194 towns and villages had
been engaged in its cultivation. Until 1802 about half of the
total output had been exported to Germany and Switzerland,
a trade worth around 2.25 million francs to the department
each year. Apart from the Revolutionary losses, the most
serious set-backs had come during the Year IX. In 1802
output had slumped to 37,500 quintals, itself indeed the im-
mediate reason for the official ban on exports of raw hemp.
According to the cited account of 18 Pluvidse XII, the export
restrictions had quashed all hopes of reviving the old trade
 and had also encouraged speculative abuses and frauds.*
Official policy, the Chamber complained, was misguided as
well as unfair. On the one hand, Alsatian output exceeded
 any conceivable military or naval needs, so that there was no
good reason to fear that the latter would be jeopardized if
the export ban was lifted. On the other, the export conces-
sions asked for applied to a type of hemp (chanvres gris)
which was considered unsuitable for naval use in any case,
 and so the restriction seemed pointless.
    During the years preceding the Blockade, the Alsatian
hemp problem lay not in the capacity to produce but in
markets. Falterimg demand on the local or even the wider
home market left all branches of this industry chronically
underemployed. The interests of growers and manufacturers
 alike were linked in a circular problem of market default.
 So were those of the middlemen serving them, although they
usually had other irons in the fire to fall back on. As the

     °° Situation économique du Bas-Rhin, 74-5.
     34 All figures given in these pages are as originally cited. Unfortunately, the
primary sources and some secondary ones based on them do not always make it
clear which unit of measurement is being used. Contemporary documents some-
times distinguish between the ‘old quintal’ (hundredweight) and the ‘metric
quintal’ (100 kg). My assumption is that the latter applies, unless otherwise speci-
fied, since it was the official unit of weight adopted under the Empire for produc-
tion in bulk.
    °° The relevant measures were those of 26 Messidor XI (15 July 1803), pro-
hibiting exports of raw hemp until 1 Vendémiaire XII (24 Sept. 1803), and 30
Fructidor   XI (17 Sept.   1803), extending the ban permanently until the peace:
ALN.   F!? 503.
