42    ALSACE      AND THE CENTRAL           GOVERNMENT           1803-1807

average.°? This demand could be met by forty or fifty active
installations (métiers), whereas the prefect believed that the
department had the capacity to produce 300,000 aunes a
year if required. After 1805 the orders placed by the Toulon
fleet were modest, and Gau fréres reluctantly settled for an
output level well below their full potential. The firm was as
it were ‘leashed’ by unfavourable market conditions and as
such was typical of many imperial enterprises at that time.
In turn, its own demand for primary materials like hackled
hemp and rope had to be cut back, with the result that all
their suppliers also found themselves working below full
capacity. In this cumulative sense the hemp industry of the
Bas-Rhin could be seen as one distant victim of the Empire’s
naval eclipse.
   Yet if the absence of new markets was a major restraint,
loss of old ones was perhaps still more serious. The Chamber
in Strasbourg argued that because of the French ban on raw
hemp exports, manufacturers beyond the frontiers had taken
their custom elsewhere.*° Although the rope-makers had
traditionally found supplies of stripped hemp on the right
bank, since Alsace did not produce much of this primary
material, clients for the ‘grey hemp’ which the province could
produce in quantity had also turned elsewhere to satisfy their
needs. Most of the earlier benefits of the Alsatian hemp trade
to Switzerland       and Germany, it was claimed, had thus passed
to the right bank. The Breisgau, for example, was said to be
prospering as Alsace languished.
   The recommended answer to the problem was familiar
enough. The export ban on ‘grey’ and hackled hemp at least,’
and if possible that on ‘white’ hemp as well, should be lifted
forthwith. Local producers should receive more practical
encouragement to recover their foreign markets. Specifically,
they needed the incentive to send their products to the
potentially good markets in Saxony, the Franconian lands,
and Switzerland. These staple requests were repeated with
several different embellishments and as often refused in Paris
with none. A special petition signed by fifty-nine hemp
manufacturers of Bischwiller on 10 Thermidor XIII (29 July
    * Statistique du département du Bas-Rhin (Paris, 1802), 48-9. An old French
aune (or ell) was equivalent to 1.19 metres.             *° Cited letter to Decrés.
