            A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC       DISTRESS?           45

than during the preceding twelve months, with a consequent
drop in output of some 25 per cent. These details found their
way into the Chamber’s report of 7 Floréal XI noted already,
along with the less discreet conclusion that the tobacco
policy of the consular government had made _ recovery
impossible. The Chamber spoke of ‘alarming decline’, and
this lugubrious refrain was taken up a year later at the im-
portant   debate of 3 Prairial XII (23 May 1804).*? The
minutes here record that the current consumption of Stras-
bourg’s 26 processing firms was running at 1,000 to 1,200
metric quintals of tobacco a year. Since the import of two
basic primary materials (tabacs en feuilles and tabacs en
carottes) was illegal, this branch of the city’s trade had been
virtually extinguished. At its meeting of 4 Prairial XIII (24
May 1805) the Chamber described the government’s tobacco
policy as ‘a local calamity for the town of Strasbourg’.°°
Worse rural unemployment in the industry was feared. The
traditional agricultural cycle of corn-tobacco-hemp and crop
rotations dependent on it had been undermined.
   The disgruntlement of the Chamber in this whole matter
intrudes to the point of tedium. Its statistics of catastrophe
varied a good deal, but its conclusions and demands for re-
dress had a gloomy similarity. The specific causes of its dis-
tress cannot always be recognized in such pervasive darkness,
but some are too recurrent in the minutes to be missed. For a
start, the Directory’s unpopular restriction and processing
duty (taxe de fabrication) of 22 Brumaire VII (12 November
 1798) had not been repealed under the Consulate. Indeed,
it had been stepped up on 29 Floréal X (19 May 1802), when
the excise had been fixed at 4 décimes the kilogramme, or
40 francs the 100 kilogrammes, on all leaves used for pro-
cessing. A law of 5 Ventdése XII (25 February 1804) had con-
firmed the excise, and another of 24 April 1806 had doubled
it. What rankled most with Alsatian processers was that the
Revolutionary measures, so often decried at the time,
appeared in retrospect much less demoralizing than the con-
sular and early imperial laws. Legal obstacles had then been
less bothersome than the disruption of home and foreign

                    49 Min. i.       5° Ibid.
