56    ALSACE     AND THE CENTRAL            GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

   Whatever its achievements, the convention treaty of 1804
was inadequate in scope and short-sighted in purpose. Its
confirmation of the droit d’étape and tour de réle not sur-
prisingly provoked remonstrations against Mainz and Cologne
in other Rhenish         ports, as well as in Frankfurt,°* from the
start. In theory, Mainz had sufficient legal authority to
monopolize the through traffic (‘la grande navigation’) of the
upper Rhine, as officially defined. Cologne had the same
rights in the through traffic of the lower Rhine, while the
middle stretch was shared by the two staples. In practice,
however, the volume of Rhenish traffic was too great and the
official controls too cumbersome for such monopolies to
work. Cologne thus tended to concentrate increasingly on the
lower    Rhine, Mainz        on the middle        Rhine and on the Main,
dividing the latter and upper Rhine traffic with Strasbourg.
It was common for bargees from other ports to try and cir-
cumvent the forced stops by claiming the status of ‘la petite
navigation’ within the permitted limits of the two staples.
But conversely, the port authorities there, alerted to the risk
of fraudulent trade, often applied rather arbitrary rulings on
cargoes at the expense of bargees genuinely engaged in ‘la
petite navigation’. Another problem was that the tour de réle
tended to exclude poorer bargees, who had only ‘la petite
navigation’ and the variable passenger traffic to fall back on,
and generally lengthened the gap between dispatches. The
favoured proprietors naturally did not wish to embark
without a full load, with the result that clients wanting a
prompt service were inconvenienced. The loading period did
not have to be the permitted maximum of ten days, and the’
larger the barge, the longer the wait for others on the roster.
   Yet the main anomaly from Strasbourg’s point of view was
that the city had not been a party to the octroi convention of
1804, a major cause of later friction.®? The effect was that

    ** Detailed dossiers on this regional aspect are available at A.N. F!? 608 and
619; and in the Stadtarchiv, Frankfurt, at Ugb. (alte Bezeichnung) C 38 Nr. 43
a-b and 47 b (Handel und Handelseinrichtungen, Messe und fremde Fahrmarkte).
The latter dossier contains a copy of Montalivet’s blunt letter to the comte de
Beust of 16 Nov. 1809, upholding the droit de reléche that Mainz enjoyed in
through traffic to and from Frankfurt.
    6° See for instance the Chamber’s ‘Note sur les motifs pour lesquels la naviga-
tion de Strasbourg n’a pas été comprise dans la Convention sur l’Octroi du Rhin,
