54   ALSACE   AND THE CENTRAL         GOVERNMENT     1803-1807

had to rely on the help of the navigation authorities; con-
versely, where surveillance lapsed and contraband traffic was
rife, the customs men were not the only, ones to blame. In
spite of the penalties, corruption among the Rhenish customs
and octroi personnel seems to have been common. In cases of
professional misconduct by the bargees themselves, the
punishment might amount to the forfeiture of their liveli-
hood.   For in such instances, duly proven, the bargees and not
the owners of goods were held accountable. In addition to
reimbursing the latter for any losses, the bargee was liable to
have his vessel confiscated. At the very least he might expect
to forfeit his cautionary deposit and find his name struck off
the tour de role.
   Altogether, the agreements of 1804 and the following
years did not satisfy the Strasbourgeois. From their point of
view the difficulties of the existing system had several forms.
Sometimes     the   problem     was   how,   when,   and   where   to
summon a new Rhenish convention to revise the treaty of
August 1804. Sometimes it concerned the freight charges,
or the rules governing the arrival and dispatch of the barges,
or lengthy customs formalities in the ports, or the inspection
and verification of cargoes in transit. It sometimes touched
on the hazards of Rhenish shipping (accidents, safety pre-
cautions, and periods when the river was impassable because
of ice or floods) and on the laws binding the various bargees’
Associations. It often had to do with the allocation of costs
of upkeep: the maintenance of trade depots, planking, jetties,
embankments, bridges, ditches, and the like. Whatever the.
immediate   difficulty, the broader issue nearly always
involved the regional interests and rivalries of the major
Rhenish ports. This alone explains its complexity, as the
fortunes of many merchant communities were at stake.
And so if new plans were always under discussion, nothing
could be rushed through in the way of reform.
   The technical details of all this are daunting, but at least
the general principle involved is easily stated. It was enun-
ciated by Jeanbon Saint-André, among others, in words
reminiscent   of the saws       of Friedrich   von   Gentz   on the
European communities:         ‘Aucune des parties de la rive gauche
du Rhin depuis Basle jusqu’a Nimégue ne peut, ne doit exister
