                  A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC             DISTRESS?                    55

isolément. Tous les points de cette ligne sont par la nature
mises [sic] en contact immédiat, et la politique agira sage-
ment quand elle renforcera ces liens naturels de toute la force
des   institutions       administratives.°°       Few      on   the left bank,
or surely even on the right, would have been churlish enough
to begrudge lip-service to such fair sentiments. But Saint-
André was more insistent, calling for common effort in the
shape of money and labour. Here lay the rub. Though accept-
able in principle, ‘la chose publique’ tended to break down
on matters of hard detail.
   The respective navigation rights of Strasbourg and Mainz
on the upper Rhine, for example, had been laid down at a
joint convention concluded on 25 Brumaire XIII (16 Novem-
ber 1804) — in other words after, not at, the great octroi
convention. That agreement in the event raised as many prob-
lems as it solved. Mainz and Cologne fought a running war of
words with Frankfurt, when they were not quarrelling with
each other, over the working of the droit d’étape and tour de
role during the Napoleonic period. Cologne had additional
disputes with the Dutch ports on the navigation rights of
the lower Rhine. The Dutch bargees for their part, like their
counterparts in Coblenz, more than once complained that the
Colonais were using their legal prerogatives to engross the
traffic of the lower and lower middle Rhine. Coblenz,
equally, was often at loggerheads with Metz over navigation
rights on the Moselle. Disseldorf had perennial grievances
(not unjustified ones in fact) against several of the left-bank
ports on the ‘favoured’ side of the imperial customs frontier.
On 5 October 1805 Chaptal wrote to assure the chamber in
Cologne that ‘’Empereur a manifesté son intention bien
arrétée de ne sacrifier aucune des villes de la rive gauche
[du Rhin] en faveur de la rive droite’.®’ This principle hardly
appealed to merchants on the right bank; nor did it preclude
persistent squabbles among the left-bank communities for
a larger share of the imperial favour.

   66 Saint-André was then prefect of the Mont-Tonnerre at Mainz. The quoted
passage is from his letter to Laumond of 30 Germinal X (20 Apr. 1802): A.D.
(B-R) XII M 49.
   67 Quoted   in Gothein,   Geschichtliche Entwickelung   der Rheinschiffahrt,   18;
and in Dufraisse, ‘Batellerie 4 Cologne’, 198.
