58    ALSACE       AND THE CENTRAL           GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

happened to present himself. The mere cost of acquiring and
equipping a barge suitable for such traffic (the normal size
in Strasbourg was 1,500 metric quintals capacity) effectively
confined membership of the local Association to the better-
off merchant carriers. Yet unlike its counterparts in Mainz
and Cologne,’? it was also exclusive to local residents, who
moreover had to ensure the personal supervision of their
barges at each stage of their round journeys down river of
La Wantzenau,         at the confluence        of the Ill] and Rhine. It was
felt that this eliminated the abuses of ‘capitalist’ landlubbers
in the profession. Throughout the Napoleonic period the
Association in Strasbourg remained a closed and rather
inbred body, of precisely the sort which, secure in its rights,
became set in its ways.’! As such, it was not very different
from the old ‘Anchor’, the exclusive bargees’ guild of the pre-
Revolutionary period.’”* Some at least of the difficulties
which hampered Strasbourg’s commercial turnover stemmed
from that same determination to keep the status quo. The
latter had long stamina, for the clause of the Vienna settle-
ment which ‘freed’ the navigation of the Rhine proved to be
a dead letter. The guilds in fact survived, as did many of the
old navigational restrictions. What eventually forced a change
was the steamship. The ‘freedom’ of the Rhine took on prac-
tical meaning only after the settlement of 1831, and even
then by slow degrees.7?

i. The themes of Alsatian protest: a synthesis of generalities

Within the vast area of Alsatian economic activity covered by
the foregoing account, the most forceful rhetorical arguments

     7° Official figures dating from 1808 and 1813 and quoted in Dufraisse (op.
cit. 206-7 and 208-9) exemplify the ‘inter-urban’ and ‘international’ character of
the Associations in those ports, in which non-residents were an important element.
    ” Of the twenty-four bargees officially registered with the Association in 1810,
the names Busch, Eckert, Helck, Kieffer, and Meyer recur twice each, while that
of Zabern appears six times: Annuaire du Bas-Rhin for that year, 367.
    The standard work on the subject for that period is C. Léper, Die Rhein-
schifffahrt Strassburgs in friiherer Zeit und die Strassburger Schiffleut-Zunft
(Strasbourg, 1877).
    On     Rhenish shipping after 1815, besides the cited works by Eckert and
Gothein,   see M. Altmeyer, Die Rheinschiffahrt Strassburgs im XIX. Jahrhundert
(Cologne, 1902).
