            A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC      DISTRESS?            53
Cologne and Holland. The former disinction between two
sorts of freight traffic on the Rhine was also upheld. Article
 19 of the treaty defined ‘la grande navigation’ as that which,
extending from one official stretch of the river to another,
had to pass Mainz and Cologne in either direction. It was
regarded as the preserve of the Associations in those ports,
and technically article 14 confined it to their licensed
members. In practice, allowance was again made for the range
of goods normally exempted from the droit d’étape. ‘La
grande navigation’ was operated on the whole in vessels of
larger tonnage, usually of from 750 to 2,000 metric quintals
capacity, though occasionally more.
    ‘La petite navigation’, often referred to formerly as ‘la
navigation intérimaire’, had a number of meanings and is not
summarized easily. Generally it referred to the relations
between ports and towns on one bank of the Rhine, or
between both banks, which did not pass through the two
‘ports de station’. In principle, then, it applied to traffic
between ports within one of the official stretches, although
direct dealings between one of the staples and another port
up or down river of it were not excluded from this category.
Article 20 of the treaty allowed any bargee on either bank to
engage in such traffic, subject to his having a navigation
licence duly issued by his sovereign. Article 21 further per-
mitted him to trade freely in any port on his own stretch of
the river, on condition that he did not pass the two staples.
This right extended even to ports below Cologne in traffic
to and from the Dutch frontier. As in former times, ‘la petite
navigation’ was considered a privilege granted by the public
authorities to craft not subject to the guild regulations.
    Finally, the convention treaty recognized three clear lines
of authority in the regulation of Rhenish navigation. At the
local level, the chambers of commerce had powers to super-
vise shipping in their respective ports. Above them, French
officials and more particularly the prefects exercised auth-
ority. But the body which had the superior powers of regula-
tion was of course the direction general of the octroi. The
work of all these bodies increased enormously and became
more difficult as the Napoleonic tariffs and commercial em-
bargoes multiplied in and after 1806. Customs officials
