               A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC              DISTRESS?                    BF

as non-signatories the Strasbourgeois had no legal basis for
engaging in the through traffic of the Rhine. The local
bargees were confined to Rhenish traffic up river of Mainz,
unless they were delivering goods there, and to direct trade
with Frankfurt. On their round journeys they had to call at
Mainz and unload all goods destined for local consumption or
for transport to points further down the Rhine, but could
continue up the Main to Frankfurt and back with cargoes
directly intended for the two ports. That such trade was
technically part of ‘la petite navigation’ seems like a juridical
quirk. It bore no relation to the volume or value of Stras-
bourg’s traffic to and from Frankfurt.
   Furthermore, the procedures for revising the treaty of
1804 were cumbersome. Article 129 stipulated that any
amendment of the original terms could be agreed only at a
new convention summoned for that purpose. This precluded
the possibility of any quick and effective reform. In spite of
continuous debate, none was achieved until the Vienna settle-
ment of 1815, and then only nominally. Developments such
as the proposed assimilation of Holland into the imperial
customs system after its annexation in 1810 had not been
catered for. When the imperial decrees of 21 December 1810
and 21 October 1811 extended the octroi regulations to the
new Dutch departments, disputes predictably followed. The
Strasbourgeois of course had no direct river trade with those
parts, or with the north German departments formed in
1810-11, but they were affected by events there. As inter-
mediaries on the upper Rhine — commissioners, expeditioners,
and merchant carriers — their interests were caught up in any
changes lower down the river and on its northernmost
tributaries.
   Whatever      their    differences,     however,     the   Strasbourgeois
were united with the Associations in the staples in opposing
any plans to ‘free’ the navigation of the Rhine. Current regu-
lations often annoyed them, but from another angle touched
their interests benignly. At least they had the assurance
that the profession of a master-bargee (maitre-batelier) on
the upper Rhine would not be open to any aspirant who
sur ses relations postérieures avec l’administration et sur ses réclamations   prés
du gouvernement’: meeting of 24 Sept. 1810, Min. v.
