52     ALSACE     AND THE CENTRAL           GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

(article 46). All dues and other charges hitherto levied in
respect of special rights and privileges were to cease from the
moment the new octroi took effect. Apart from the abolition
of many anomalies current at the old péages, perhaps the
most useful reform was the standardization of dues by weight
(metric quintal or German centner) rather than value.
   The direction general of the Rhenish octroi was established
at Mainz (article 45), and generally the terms of the conven-
tion were heavily weighted in favour of that town and of
Cologne. Thus, for instance, the French negotiators secured
the maintenance of the droit d’étape™ at both towns, which
kept their status as the ‘ports de station’, chiefly in relation
to Frankfurt and Diisseldorf. They also successfully pressed
for confirmation of the tour de réle® in Mainz and Cologne,
and at the same time provision was made for the bargees’
Associations (corps de bateliers) to be reformed there. The
historic division of the river into three parts for official pur-
poses was maintained. That is, the ‘Rhin supérieur’ or ‘Ober-
rhein’ was defined as the stretch up river of Mainz, in which
the Strasbourgeois were directly involved. The ‘Rhin moyen’
or ‘Mittelrhein’ was the stretch between Mainz and Cologne,
and the ‘Rhin inférieur’ or ‘Niederrhein’ that between
     64The droit d’étape, droit de relache, or Stapelrecht had become entrenched
as a traditional privilege enjoyed by Mainz and Cologne. It had been recognized
ultimately by all the Rhenish merchant corps, and article 3 of the convention
treaty formally reaffirmed it with a few modifications. Briefly, it enabled the
authorities in each port to make all bargees from other parts participating in ‘la
grande navigation’ (which see below) call there and unload, both on down- and
up-river journeys. This requirement did not affect passengers but applied to most
classes of goods, which were then transferred to barges belonging to local patrons.
As the latter might thus exercise special carrier rights, the privilege amounted to
an obligation on others to change bargees (droit d’échelle or Umschlagsrecht) in
the local interest. However, certain types of goods (baking clay, construction
materials like timber for civil or naval use, milk, butter, eggs, fruit and green
vegetables, charcoal, peat, firewood) had traditionally been exempt from this
provision,
     °° The tour de réle or Rangfahrt enabled licensed master-bargees in both ports
to arrange the sequence of their journeys as they saw fit. It was in fact a rotary
system applicable to the freight traffic of ‘la grande navigation’. It obliged all
clients from other ports to employ the services of the master-bargee who had
reached the top of the list at any given point, as only one barge at a time might
be loaded. The maximum loading period was ten days, whether or not the barge
in question was fully laden. Article 18 of the convention treaty allowed any
master-bargee to skip a turn on the tour de réle, and also imposed limits on the
size of cargoes.
