            A PORTRAIT   OF ECONOMIC          DISTRESS?              59

are also the most recurrent in the Chamber’s minutes. They
stand out as the central themes, the preferred hobby-horses,
bearing the weight of local protest. They are briefly identi-
fied here.
  There is, first, the common      belief that Alsace was a victim
of the Revolutionary disturbances and the subsequent stric-
tures of Napoleon’s economic policies. In his survey of
Ventose   XI (February-March         1803)        Shée reported   fairly
typically that ‘en général, on ne remarque plus, a la campagne
et dans les petites villes du Bas-Rhin, cette aisance qui distin-
guait le peuple alsacien avant la révolution’.” Many Alsatians,
chiefly the Strasbourgeois, looked back nostalgically to an
era they construed as magnificently prosperous, before the
blight of the more recent past. They publicly bewailed their
lost fortunes and were not shy in harping on current hard-
ships. They felt that the consular and imperial government
had forfeited the opportunity to help them recover their
former prosperity. Their grievances varied in pitch from the
plea of reason unrequited to the pessimism of despair. This
theme is summed up as the ‘Alsatian golden age conceit’,
with ‘missed opportunities’ and ‘the pessimism of circum-
stance’ as two familiar variations.
    Following on from these, Alsatians often argued that much
of their earlier prosperity had crossed the Rhine. What Alsace
had lost, they claimed, the states of the right bank had
gained. This tack was most commonly used       by the Strasbour-
geois to highlight their grievances by ironic and rhetorical
contrast. They did so with the fluctuations of the transit,
tobacco, and hemp trade foremost in view. This theme is
called the ‘Alsatian right-bank foil’, and it was used whenever
the threat of competition across the Rhine seemed a handy
prop to bolster up repeated requests for local redress.
   Equally, the Chamber’s minutes often refer to problems
arising from Alsatian dealings with the French left bank of
the Rhine. The two ‘classic’ forms of this issue were Stras-
bourg’s traditional rivalry with Mainz, which always inspired
Alsatian notables to a jealous vigilance, and the carrying trade
to and from the Low Countries and Switzerland. Entrepot

                       74 A.D. (B-R) XIIM    2.
