50     ALSACE     AND THE CENTRAL          GOVERNMENT         1803-1807

than in the Bas-Rhin. As the prefect Desportes® wrote to the
chief of police Pelet on 8 August 1806, provisions in tobacco
were drawn almost entirely from the other Alsatian depart-
ment.®! His own apparently had only one tobacco enterprise
worthy of the name, though paradoxically he did not name
it. Two-thirds of its annual output was exported to Switzer-
land, the rest consumed locally or in the French interior.
Altogether, then, what might be called the ‘politics’ of the
Alsatian tobacco lobby during the Napoleonic period was
virtually confined to the Bas-Rhin. And in that lobby the
large processers and clearing-houses of Strasbourg had the
predominant voice.



The complexities of one last category of economic problems
raised by the Chamber almost defy brief analysis. Yet some
attempt at such must be made here, for this class of issues on
the whole transcended all others. In its various forms it
dominated the Chamber’s debates. Scarcely a month passed
in the years 1803-13 without some aspect arising in discus-
sion. By far the greatest wordage of the minutes is devoted to
its details, and in a variety of ways: routine reports and in-
quiries, the findings of special commissions, the drafting of
petitions, lengthy transcripts of all relevant commentaries,
and recorded opinions. It recurred most frequently in the
Chamber’s correspondence with the prefects of the Bas-Rhin
and other Rhenish departments, with the directors-general of
the Rhenish       octroi and of the droits réunis, with the director
of customs       in Strasbourg, and with other chambers of com-
merce.     In this connection, too, some of the Chamber’s fullest
and most important statistical surveys were made. The range
of issues may be summed up, as it usually was by contem-
poraries, under the generic heading of ‘Navigation du Rhin’.
   The whole structure and operation of Strasbourg’s river
trade on the upper Rhine were involved here. In perhaps its

     °° The prefecture of Nicolas-Félix Desportes lasted from July 1801 to March
1813. On him see T. Walter, ‘Félix Desportes baron de l’Empire, préfet du Haut-
Rhin 1801-1813’, R. d’Als., Ixxvii (1930), 651-61.
   1 A.D. (H-R) IM 116a/1.
