                 A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC                DISTRESS?                    67
endnee their trades were protected by the guild regula-
tions.?> As for the department’s agriculture, the harvest of
1787 had been poor and that of 1788 only mediocre. Grain
exports had been stopped as the fears of shortage intensified.
The wine harvest of 1788 had been spoilt by ‘scalding’
(€chaudage) during the hot summer and was generally
regarded as a failure. The notoriously harsh winter of 1788-9
had harmed the potato crop and fruit trees, prevented
peasants from going to market, and even for a few months
kept the normally lucrative illicit traffic in grain ice-bound.
A scarcity of meat had added to the furore over the un-
popular butchery laws of 1787 in Strasbourg. Brunschwig
concludes that on the whole ‘an extremely serious crisis’
had overtaken Alsace in the years 1787-90. In such sur-
roundings we are a long way from the ‘golden age’ of plenty.

                                   *    *     *



The periodicity of Alsatian economic troubles in the more
conventional accounts is too glib in other ways. It will not do
to construe the whole Revolutionary decade from 1789 to
1799 as a time of unrelieved disaster. An important chrono-
logical distinction can and should be made at 1793. Until the
controlled economy of the Year II, Alsatian manufacturers
and merchants had experienced the benefits as well as the
shocks of the Revolution. The Constituent Assembly’s liberal
reforms, notably the comparatively generous entrepot and
transit concessions of 10 July 1791°’ and 7 September 1792,
had been welcomed by many Strasbourgeois. Laumond re-
marked later that a ‘prodigious quantity’ of goods of all
sorts had travelled along the route from Speyer to Basel in
terms of the former law, and that Strasbourg had become the
focal point of this transit trade.” The city’s merchants
looked    back    on it later as a most            enviable     concession, one

   °5 Art, cit. 540.                                                     °° Ibid. 542.
   °7Having abolished the corporations on         16 Feb.   1791, the Assembly pro-
claimed the liberty of navigation on all home rivers on 14 July following. It
appears, though, that these measures were partly disregarded, at least to the
extent that the old bargees’ associations on the Rhine continued to function. It
should also be remembered, however, that at this stage Mainz, Coblenz, and
Cologne had not yet been annexed to France.                 °8 Statistique, 120-1.
