60   ALSACE   AND THE CENTRAL       GOVERNMENT       1803-1807

and transit rights were the nub of this problem, while the
specific objects of complaint were the law- of 8 Floréal XI
and the various restrictions on Strasbourg’s Rhenish shipping.
The theme here may be referred to as the ‘Alsatian lower left-
bank foil’ and the gravamen of local protests as ‘reason
unrequited’,
   Another recurrent argument was that Alsace, as a frontier
province, was unusually vulnerable to the counter-effects
of the imperial customs policy. Local merchants felt entitled
to special concessions on this score. As so much of their
normal business depended on easy communication with
foreign states, they sought exemption from the official
import and export restrictions and from the many trade
embargoes. This theme is best summarized as the ‘Alsatian
frontier complex’. It was played out whenever the govern-
ment’s import and export measures came up for discussion.
The grim vision of a mounting war of commercial embargoes
and/or exorbitant tariffs often appeared at the Chamber’s
meetings. The export trade in wines and imports of Levantine
cotton, German or Swiss meat and livestock were always
particularly touchy nerve-points. Any regulations which
threatened their movement across the frontier provoked an
immediate and angry response from Alsatian dealers. Some-
times,   however,   it was   admitted   for rhetorical   effect that
stiffer duties across the Rhine were simply measures taken in
self-defence against the imperial prohibitions and the prefer-
ential tariffs.
   Another      familiar bogy is the problem of Alsatian
markets. It stalks the minutes, as presumably it haunted the
Chamber, from year to year, and not always with the grace
of seasonal tact. Its main features were the loss of old
markets, a serious default of new ones, and a circular reaction
of falling demand within existing markets. Every major
branch of the Alsatian economy was affected by it in some
way. This central theme of my study is referred to simply as
‘market trouble’. Two ancillary variations are the notion of
the ‘leashed industries’, enterprises held back by artificial
restraints from growing to their full potential, and the spectre
of ‘epidemic glut’, or the periodic surpluses caused by a
sudden weakening of demand.
