                  A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC           DISTRESS?                 63

   If that is thought too plebeian a view of the city’s
fortunes, one may further cite evidence of trouble among the
better-off        classes   before     the   Revolution.     There     is, for
example, little to enthuse about in H. Lévy-Bruhl’s account
of their Rhine shipping under the old regime.” Franklin Ford
shares this pessimism for part of the period at least, arguing
that the troubled cycle in Strasbourg’s river trade had begun
in 1775 due to a dispute with Mainz and the competition of
Kehl     across      the    Rhine.®®    Francgois-Yves     Le Moigne       also
depicts a much more variable river trade in the old provinces
étrangeres than the ‘golden age’ myth suggests.®! Roger
Dufraisse reaches a similar conclusion even on the showing
of the Alsatian transit trade, that object of so many fabulous
tales in the later lore of the Chamber in Strasbourg. He
speaks of a ‘crisis’ in the overland carrying trade of the city
on the eve of the Revolution.® It was the result of a conjunc-
tion of factors, of which the progress of rival carriers was
perhaps the most significant. Alternative routes on the right
bank    for the overland         traffic from    north to south, and the
Moselle and Saar river routes for the carrying trade from the
French      interior to the north, had drawn off a sizeable share
of the business that otherwise might have passed through
Strasbourg. The péages on the Rhine had helped the land-
borne transit trade of the right bank and of Kehl, Stras-
bourg’s immediate     neighbour, in particular. Thus, for
instance, 71,427 quintals had travelled up the Rhine valley
towards the Breisgau and Switzerland in 1785, but only
29,701 quintals (41.5 per cent) via Strasbourg, as against
Kehl’s handling of the rest.8? Again, some two-thirds of the
goods which had left the Rhine at Schroeck in 1786 had
taken the right-bank road to Kehl for the next stage of their
journey. Competition from the bargees of the Moselle and
Saar had made a similar impact on the trade from Holland
and Westphalia to Lorraine, and on that travelling in the
opposite direction. This routing had meant that the ores and

   79 Strasbourg et la décadence de la navigation du Rhin au XVIIIe siécle’,
La navigation du Rhin, x (1932), 253-8.
   5° Strasbourg in Transition, 143.      81 ‘A lsace-Evéchés-Lorraine’, 189 ff.
   82 «F onctions commerciales de |’Alsace napoléonienne’, 41-2.
   83 Thid. 42.
