                A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC                  DISTRESS?               61

   Lastly, one should note the evidence of internal divisions
in the Alsatian economy, especially in times of stress.
Different local interests were often set against one another,
and the tensions within and between the various economic
branches were quite as pronounced. This was the symptom
of a splintered market structure and of predominantly local
economic priorities, where the most powerful motive was
sauve qui peut. If charity began at home, there too it ended.
This theme is called ‘economic fragmentation’.
   One exemplary document is worth quoting in detail
because it pulls all the foregoing themes together in a concen-
trated and illuminating way. It is a specimen extract from
one of many reports drafted by the Chamber on the state of
Strasbourg’s four annual fairs.’* The leading themes and their
variations are identified in square brackets in the key passage,
which reads:
La décadence extréme des foires de Strasbourg est notoire [golden age
conceit], lorsque cependant une circonstance avantageuse, celle de
l’enclavement    des 4 nouveaux        départemens       réunis   [lower left-bank
foil] , pouvait en favoriser le développement, si un systéme convenable
de franchise y eut été adopté [missed opportunities] ... Chacun sent
le mal et chacun en cherche le reméde dans le cercle étroit de ses rela-
tions [economic fragmentation, sauve qui peut]. Laissant a part toutes
les considérations    d’intérét   particulier,   nous    dirons avec franchise et
vérité [reason unrequited] que le régime actuel des prohibitions douani-
éres et de la triple ligne qui en est une conséquence, est absolument
incompatible avec la prospérité d’une foire [frontier complex] ; il écarte
tous les négocians et fabriques étrangers [frontier complex, right-bank
foil] et contrarie extraordinairement les fabriques nationales [market
trouble, leashed industries, epidemic glut]... Aussi longtems que ces
événemens et des considérations politiques exigeront le maintien de ce
systéme [reason unrequited], il sera impossible d’espérer une améliora-
tion et superflu de la tenter [pessimism of circumstance] .
This kind of textual commentary could be performed on
dozens of similar documents dating from that time.

iii. The historical record of economic fluctuations in Alsace

The Chamber’s presentation of local grievances was clearly
intended to give the impression of mounting economic
   75 Report to Shée of 1 Prairial XII (21 May 1804): meeting of 24 Germinal
XII (14 Apr. 1804), Min. i; A.D. (B-R) XII M 80.
