64      ALSACE       AND THE CENTRAL        GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

iron products of the Saar destined for the French Midi were
transported by sea from Rotterdam rather than inland
through Alsace. Conversely, colonial goods and particularly
coffee had travelled from Rotterdam to Saarbriicken, whence
they were moved on to Frankfurt and Leipzig. It seems then
that the more numerous péages on the Rhine had certainly
diverted expeditioners to the Moselle route wherever this was
practicable. ‘Ainsi’, Dufraisse concludes, ‘le transit par
l’Alsace n’était pas, a la veille de la Révolution, dans une
situation parfaitement brillante’.%
     Looking        similarly at the position of Alsatian industry
before the Revolution, one finds that it too had a darker side.
The most reliable secondary accounts, at least, do not credit
it with any undisturbed progress. The only branch which may
not have conformed to the typical pattern of periodic ups
and downs is the cotton industry, and even here advances had
not always been smooth.8* The standard work on the
Alsatian cotton industry remains Robert Lévy’s old text,*
and its case cannot be lightly dismissed. Arguably, though, its
account of eighteenth-century developments is too optimistic.
Fernand        L’Huillier, for one, tends to take it at face value in
calling the years 1770-90 ‘l’age d’or’ of the textile industries
in upper Alsace, before their sad decline ‘en léthargie’.®’
In a later article, while noting that exports from Mulhouse to
France fell by some two-thirds after 1790, he allows that this
had been preceded by a drop of more than a third between
1786 and 1788.%* The partisan notion propagated in some
old German textbooks that Alsace underwent a kind of
economic ice-age during its first century of French rule is
unacceptable. Yet so is the overdrawn line in some competing
French writings that the period was blessed with unbroken
prosperity. Common sense, as well as the historical statistics,

     *4 Dufraisse, op. cit. 42.
    85 On this see H. Herkner, Die Anfange der Baumwollindustrie im Ober-Elsass
(Strasbourg, 1886), which concentrates on the 18th century.
     *° Histoire économique de l’industrie cotonniére en Alsace (Paris, 1912).
     87 Alsace napoléonienne, 25.
     ** Deux siécles d’exportation textile haut-rhinoise’, 113. A more detailed
account for this period is P.-R. Schwartz, ‘Les débuts de Vindiennage mulhousien’,
Bull. Soc. ind. Mulh., cxxiv (1950), 21-44; cxxv (1951), 33-56; and cxxvi (1952)
                                                                                     >
5-18.
