68    ALSACE    AND THE CENTRAL           GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

unhappily ended by the représentants aux armées in the
eastern departments in 1793. Here indeed the ‘golden age
conceit’ and the accompanying lament about the Revolu-
tion’s catastrophic effects on Alsatian‘ trade seem to be
crossed in the Chamber’s later minutes. If the law of 10 July
1791 had pleased most merchants of Strasbourg, then clearly
their misfortunes had not run the whole length of the
Revolution. It seems that their main difficulties had set in
during the course of 1793, and more particularly after its
notoriously restrictive law of 24 July. With these had come,
in due course, the excesses of the Terror, massive emigration,
the physical disruption of war, and the assignat crisis. The
worst of the Revolutionary troubles had stretched thus from
the summer of 1793 to the coup d’état of Brumaire.
   The suppression of the old customs barriers in 1790,
furthermore, had not had the expected results. That decision
had been taken in spite of strong protests from all the Alsa-
tian deputies, following repeated petitions in their cahters
de doléances of 1789. Local notables, always their own worst
prophets of doom, had expressed grave fears that the recule-
ment des barriéres would ruin Alsatian trade. Some evidence
suggests, though, that the over-all effects of that policy may
have been more salutary than otherwise. Some privileged
individuals and corporations had indeed lost their exclusive
toll dues without compensation, but the merchant class
as a whole had benefited from the opening up of the Vosges
as something like a commercial freeway from the French
interior to lower Alsace and so on to the Outre-Rhin. The
point was noted by Bottin, the almanac editor,”? and not
long afterwards Laumond             felt able to write that ‘depuis la
suppression des barriéres qui longeaient la chaine des Vosges,
cette branche    [internal carrying trade] est bien plus
étendue’.!©      Certainly,     the repeal had not distributed the
profits of a privileged few evenly through the local popula-
tion; but at least it had removed the obsolete patchwork
of internal tolls. It had enabled many more merchants of
middling or lesser means, including a great many pedlars
    °° Annuaire du Bas-Rhin for the Year VII, 123.
   109 Statistique, 120. See also on this R. Werner, Le Rattachement douanier de
l’Alsace a la France (Paris, 1950).
