            A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC             DISTRESS?      69

(colporteurs), to move about and trade more freely, if only
for a time. Where facility of internal traffic and of links
between   Alsace   and the French interior was concerned, the
Revolution had cleared away the worst of the old obstacles.
In this sense it had helped to prepare the ground for later
commercial expansion.
   Such evidence hardly squares with Ponteil’s conclusion
that the suppression of the barriéres had sacrificed local
interests without any real commercial compensation.!®!
L’Huillier in my view also overstates his case in arguing that
the repeal had ‘overturned’ the Alsatian economy.!” The
transit trade had not in fact ‘died’, as he claims. Both writers
are apt to overlook the commercial showing of 1790-3. They
base their accounts too narrowly on the lamentations of the
notables and on the undeniable losses of the later Revolu-
tionary years. They do no justice to the fortunes of the
middling and lesser merchants, who were the majority, or to
the benefits of freer internal traffic and the widening of
Alsatian contact with the French interior. Once the anoma-
lous status of Mulhouse had been put right, to the economic
advantage if not the political wish of its inhabitants, the
home market was to become much the most important outlet
for its industrial production.
   All in all, it is not an exaggeration to speak of an economic
upheaval in Alsace before Napoleon and not unreasonable to
link this with the Revolutionary events. But it seems equally
clear that the later notion of a sustained ‘golden age’ fol-
lowed by an enduring decline is naively simple. Those times
were of course premature for any elaborate theory of the
business cycle, and yet it offends common sense to imagine
that merchants and manufacturers of the Napoleonic period,
as earlier, were unaware of periodic fluctuations in trade and
all related business. Professional experience alone must have
taught them that, on the biblical analogy, there were periods
of fat and lean kine in such affairs. When trade was in a
downward phase, reduced profits, higher unemployment,
or even temporary losses and financial embarrassment were
not necessarily synonymous with insolvency or the incapacity
             101 Situation économique du Bas-Rhin, 12-13.
             102 Alsace napoléonienne, 21.
