62   ALSACE      AND THE CENTRAL           GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

troubles and of the central government’s unsympathetic
response to them during the Consulate and early Empire.
The next question is how far that record squares with the
facts, how fair its gloomy assertions on behalf of Strasbourg,
the Bas-Rhin, or Alsace as a whole actually were. Now, it
is in a way deceptive to insist on a study of all other sources
for an assessment of the Chamber’s reliability. As so much of
the primary material in the departmental and national
archives had originated in the Chamber, or been based on
information it had itself supplied, one often finds its evidence
there once or twice removed. Yet other more independent
evidence, especially for the Haut-Rhin, ts available and ought
to be considered. It is surely also in order to examine the
internal consistency of the Chamber’s record, as such, and
point out any discrepancies.
   Although this chapter is mainly concerned with the years
1803-7, two important background details should not be
passed over without some comment.’° One is the Alsatian
‘golden age conceit’, the other the belief that the Revolution
had been an economic disaster without parallel in the prov-
ince. On closer inspection the age of pre-Revolutionary pros-
perity appears to have been much less splendid than was
claimed. Though time had embellished this myth, it now
appears that at least some of the difficulties facing lower and
upper Alsace had applied before the Revolution, in certain
cases for many years. According to one historian, the 1770s
had been hard for the poorer inhabitants of Strasbourg.”’ As
from 1770-1, he concludes, ‘le malaise économique et social
gagne toute la ville. Sous-emploi et mendicité deviennent
pour    le Magistrat de Strasbourg    des préoccupations
majeures.’”®

     7° They are more fully discussed in Laumond, Statistique; Ponteil, Situation
économique du Bas-Rhin; Ford, Strasbourg in Transition, 134 ff., which has refer-
ences to the useful works of Fritz Kiener and Ernst Lehr on Alsatian economic
history of the 18th century; and F.-Y. Le Moigne, ‘Le commerce des provinces
étrangéres — Alsace — Evéchés — Lorraine dans la deuxiéme moitié du XVille
siécle’, in Aires et structures du commerce francais, 173-200.
    7 F,-Y. Le Moigne, ‘Population et subsistances a Strasbourg au XVIIle siécle’,
in Contributionsa l'histoire démographique de la Révolution francaise (Commis-
sion d’Histoire économique et sociale de la Révolution, Paris, 1962).
    8 Ibid. 13.
