70   ALSACE   AND THE CENTRAL              GOVERNMENT        1803-1807

to survive. At the same timé, most of the evidence points to a
period of lean kine and economic dislocation from 1793 until
the Consulate. Popular hardship associated with the re-
metallization of the French currency in 1796-8 was not the
least of those troubles. Seen from a point around 1800, the
Alsatian economy was not obviously flourishing. ‘La note
finale est pessimiste’: perhaps, after all, Ponteil’s conclusion
on the long-term effects of the Revolution in the province
holds good.1°


Even Ponteil’s account          bears the sub-heading ‘destruction
partielle de Voutillage         économique’,!™ however, just as
Laumond had referred            in 1802 to ‘la perte momentanée
du commerce’.!® It might then be said that the Alsatian
economy had been down, not out, at the start of the
Napoleonic period. The emphasis is on set-backs rather than
on annihilation. The problem is one of scale, which in turn
implies a quantitative answer. Regrettably, the present state
of Alsatian economic records for the period rules out any
exact statistical analysis. The scattered and often unreliable
figures available have to be treated cautiously, and they
should also be set against the more ‘descriptive’ or ‘impres-
sionistic’ records from which they frequently diverge.
   In the light of all such evidence, it appears that the Alsa-
tian economy had fared less dismally during the first six or
seven years of Napoleonic rule than the minutes of the
Chamber in Strasbourg would suggest. Admittedly, recovery
had not always been fast or steady, and new upsets un-
questionably accompanied the hostilities of 1805-7. Yet
compared with the stunted years 1793-9 the period from
1800 to 1805 had seen some economic headway and, in cer-
tain branches, signal expansion. Contemporary records
suggest that the potential for improvement had been present
from the start. Laumond, speaking for the Bas-Rhin, had
counted a total of almost 7,000 industrial enterprises at the
              193 Situation économique du Bas-Rhin, 141-2.
              194 Thid, (my italics).
              195 Statistique, 90 (my italics).
