                   A PORTRAIT         OF ECONOMIC      DISTRESS?                     71

time of the Consulate’s formation. These, large and small,
were broadly classified into 65 separate branches. Their com-
bined employment was around 30,000 men and women, and
their circulating capital was put at roughly 20 million francs
a year.’ On L’Huillier’s reckoning, furthermore, the value
of the Alsatian carrying trade at the beginning of the Consu-
late had totalled some 70 million francs annually.!®’ Over a
million had been made     up of service charges, to the benefit
of the local middlemen and merchant carriers. The four
annual fairs in Strasbourg had added another 4 million francs-
worth of trade, counting both retail and ‘invisible’ earnings.
   Now, as these figures cannot be verified precisely, they can
hardly be regarded as infallible. Of the 6,974 industrial enter-
prises in the Bas-Rhin, for example, nearly half (3,365) were
small-scale weaving affairs, rurally dispersed and technically
incapable of rapid expansion. They scarcely merit the descrip-
tion of ‘enterprises’, and indeed in contemporary documents
they are usually referred to as ‘establishments’. Yet even as
an approximate guide the cited figures suggest that there was
a firm basis on which to build a more versatile industry.
Laumond at the time believed that the Bas-Rhin had re-
covered        well    from     the    earlier   reverses,    that     commercial
interest rates of between 6 and 8 per cent were an encourag-
ing augury, and that the department was already approaching
‘the old equilibrium’.!® In the event his optimism was not
unfounded. In spite of the Chamber’s protests against the
entrepOt and transit restrictions, Strasbourg’s carrying trade
had emerged from its Revolutionary crisis.
      The    authority      for the last claim         lies, ironically,      in the
Chamber’s own statistical records. Admittedly, these were
not published at the time but compiled retrospectively and
appended to its minute-book for 1813. As such they may
well be suspect, but as the relevant details reproduced in
Table 1 and in Figure 1 show, the volume of Strasbourg’s
      106 These figures, along with a detailed breakdown into the individual branches
and    estimates   of their respective employment,   capital assets, and annual trade
values, appear in the ‘Etat nominatif . . . des fabriques . . .’ of Laumond’s Stati-
stique, 131-63 and specifically 162. Some are reproduced in the Annuaire du Bas-
Rhin for the Year IX, 4-5; and in Ponteil, Situation économique du Bas-Rhin,
113.
    107 Alsace napoléonienne, 20.                               108 Statistique, 195-6.
