               A PORTRAIT         OF ECONOMIC         DISTRESS?                 ae

the decree of 22 February 1806 banning imports of cotton
fabrics suitable for printing. Bucher himself had expressed
uncertainty about the annual output of his tables, since the
total depended on commissions and the type of toiles peintes
required. If orders were for goods of the same sort, he
claimed to be able to produce 50 articles a day, but this level
dropped to 16 at most when clients wanted articles of more
varied range. Sales were effected chiefly in Strasbourg
through a retail store attached to his workshop, but he also
had customers in Besangon, Nancy, Metz, and as far afield as
Ghent.
   Of    the Bas-Rhin’s         other    textile   branches,        woollens   and
linens were mainly small-scale local industries, rurally dis-
persed and subject to seasonal fluctuation. Yet Shée could
record that J.-G. Dietsch in the former category and the
house of Vetter in the latter had achieved some distinction.
Both were based in Strasbourg, and Dietsch was in fact the
department’s largest producer of woollen goods, mainly for
the army’s account. As the expansion of this firm was to
come chiefly during the years 1807-10, for reasons closely
associated with the military market, it is fitting to leave a
fuller discussion of its performance till a later chapter.'!*
   Altogether, twenty-five enterprises in the Bas-Rhin sent
products to Paris for display at the industrial exhibition of
1806. A few won          medals, and several received an honourable
mention./!© Among the former was the firm of Coulaux
fréres, manufacturers of armes blanches, which was widely
respected in France and abroad for the quality of its
products. Output was concentrated at Klingenthal, Mutzig,
and Molsheim, but its major trading depot was in Strasbourg.
It employed between 500 and 600 persons at the time of the
Blockade. While its market lay mainly in military orders,
commercial sales of sabres and lances were also important.
Contemporary statistics for this firm show that its major
expansion came after the proclamation of the Blockade.
There were considerable increases of production in 1807
and     1811-14,     with       a peak    in   1813    of 84,369        weapons,

   115 See below, pp. 216-17.
   116 A.D, (B-R) III M3 and XII M 15; Annuaire du Bas-Rhin for 1807, 201-6.
The Haut-Rhin’s exhibits are specified in A.D. (H-R)    IM 119/1.
