78     ALSACE AND THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT                              1803-1807

mostly sabres. In 1806, according to the same                            source, the
firm manufactured             19,419 sabres, fewer than in the Years XI
(21,750) and XIII (20,469) but more than in the Year XII
(15,921). These figures do not include its output of bayonets,
which were added to its production of firearms and classified
separately.1!7_        All    contemporary            accounts        confirm      that
Coulaux fréres were regarded as among the leading entre-
preneurs of the Bas-Rhin and that they had achieved a
national importance as well.
   A prefectoral table drawn up about a month after the
Berlin decree provides more comparative industrial figures.1!®
Being of its kind the document most contemporaneous with
the decree, it merits particular attention. It is rather like a
crude ‘photograph’ of the department’s major industrial
branches at the beginning of the Blockade, as the details in
Table 2 show.
   Now, Shée’s table has obvious inadequacies. Merely to list
the number of enterprises in the Bas-Rhin and the share
accounted for by Strasbourg in each branch is no guide to
the volume and value of their output, which would have
been more satisfactory indices of their relative importance.
Though        more       numerous        in individual          enterprises,      some
branches listed (especially the top half dozen or so) consisted
mostly of small firms catering for restricted local markets.
It is unfortunate that, unlike Laumond’s statistics five years
earlier,'!9 Shée’s table gives no estimate of the number of
small rural spinners and weavers who worked on a seasonal
basis. They produced for the account of putters-out in both
the cotton and hemp industry. Clearly, Shée’s entries for the’
spinning of cotton and wool and for the manufacture of
woollens include only the enterprises of some size. His details
on the copper- and ironworks are unsatisfactory too, since
it is not clear what he included under the description ‘usines’,
or how these enterprises could be distinguished from those

    117 Archives de l’Artillerie (Fort de Chatillon), 4 f 44. I am grateful to Profes-
sor Crouzet for informing me of the figures here quoted.                           of
    “8Etat numérique approximatif des fabriques et manufactures du départe-
ment du Bas-Rhin’, compiled by Shée for the Minister of the Interior and dated
23 Dec. 1806: A.D. (B-R) XII M 27.
     119 ‘Etat nominatif ... des fabriques . . .’ in his Statistique, 131-63.
