              A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC         DISTRESS?              83

    Beyond their home sales, some indienneurs were able to
export articles, though such outlets were certainly much
more difficult after the Continental hostilities of 1805.
During the Consulate and the first year of the Empire at
least, demand from Frankfurt am Main, Leipzig, Frankfort
an der Oder, and Russia had revived after the Revolutionary
lull. Exports to the fairs of Zurzach, Berne, Milan and other
Italian towns had also improved. It appears that the mule-
jennies used in Mulhouse were of a cut above the primitive
jennies and water-frames installed in other more remote parts
of the department. The crucial innovation in a town whose
manufacturers specialized in totles peintes was cylinder print-
ing, which spread quickly as from 1805. Seeing the prospects
for future growth in the Haut-Rhin, a number of Swiss finan-
cial houses had helped to make the industrial recovery of
 1800-6 possible through advances of capital. They had been
willing in effect to play the role of sleeping partners while the
department’s manufacturers went ahead with the practical
job of extending their enterprises or setting up new ones.
Some      entrepreneurs, like Ziegler, Greuter & Cie of Gueb-
willer    and Petitpierre, Robert & Cie of Thann, had left
Switzerland and set up business in the Haut-Rhin during
1805 in the belief that its grass was greener. So, at the time,
it proved to be.
   Outside Mulhouse, expansion had been quickest in the
mountain valleys, where natural conditions were favourable.
Water for bleaching and to power the mills, the availability
of wood,     charcoal,   and,   in places, coal, access   to supplies
from domestic spinners and weavers, proximity to Swiss
markets and to roads (like that from Thann to Mulhouse) or
canals (like that of Brisach), poorer agricultural soil — all
these factors had helped to shape the map of industrialization
in upper Alsace from its earliest days. An area of concen-
trated activity was the upland expanse sometimes referred to
as ‘l’Alsace vosgienne’, from Masevaux in the south-west on
the river Doller, north-westwards from Cernay up the river
Thur through the valley of Saint-Amarin (Thann, Bitschwiller,
Willer,   Moosch,   Saint-Amarin,     and   on   to Wesserling),   and
northwards towards Munster, the Logelbach near Colmar,
Kaysersberg, Ribeauvillé, and Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines in the
