                A PORTRAIT        OF ECONOMIC        DISTRESS?                   81

articles for printing, had made economical production
more difficult. Inadequate local supplies of primary materials
had also handicapped the linen and ‘mixed’ textile industries.
According to Desportes’s prefectoral report of 29 October
1806,     manufacturers        of the articles       known      as siamotses!?!
in Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines and Mulhouse were hampered by
their dependence on finer hempen cloth from foreign sup-
pliers at a time when hostilities and heavier duties threatened
such imports.'?* Most of the producers of siamoises, the
prefect observed, used foreign cloth and had noaccess to a
suitable alternative locally.
    Yet in spite of those obstacles, the Haut-Rhin’s industries
had moved forward at least by comparison with the blighted
years 1793-9. Where capital assets allowed, progressive
mechanization had helped the larger enterprises to economize
on labour costs. The process was modest in scale, being con-
fined to the more ambitious and better-endowed enterprises.
Some of the machine-models introduced had been known for
decades in Britain, where they were already obsolete, and in
this Alsace reflects the French technological ‘lag’ in the
textile industries of that time. The first mill using mules and
throstles,     for instance,     had been built in Mulhouse              in 1802,
and the fly-shuttle did not make its appearance in weaving
establishments until 1803. The type of machine most com-
monly installed in the Alsatian cotton-spinning works was
known as the ‘mule-jenny’. A hybrid device, like its local
name, it combined the essential functions of the old spinning
jenny and the mule. Though its mechanical equivalents
were already on the way out in Britain, Alsatian manufac-
turers considered the ‘mule-jenny’ a powerful new device
for boosting their output of yarn and plaincloth.'*? The main
impact of the newer English textile machinery and of British
mechanics in Alsace came only towards the end of the
Restoration, as André Brandt has shown. !*4
    121 These, otherwise described as toiles de coton rayées, were of mixed cotton
and linen fabric, worked up into coloured stripes.          122 4D, (H-R) 1M 91/1.
    123 On the early history of industrial mechanization in Alsace, see the Histoire
documentaire de l’industrie de Mulhouse et de ses environs au XIXe siécle (2 vols.,
publ. by the Société industrielle de Mulhouse, 1902); and Lévy, Industrie coton-
niére en Alsace, passim.
   124Notably in ‘Apports anglais a l’industrialisation de l’Alsace au début du
