92     ALSACE      AND THE CENTRAL              GOVERNMENT               1803-1807

of the leading indienneurs in January 1806. Annual output
per head at the four largest firms ranked as follows: Frangois
Verdan (286 articles),'*8 Dollfus-Mieg (47), Gros, Davillier &
Roman (44), and André Hartmann (43). In the middle group
Lhuillier fréres of Sainte-Marie led the way with 42 articles
per head per year, followed by Petitpierre-Robert (36),
Schwartz-Hofer (31), Jean Hofer (30), Nicolas Koechlin (28),
Kielmann & Cie (25), and Haussmann fréres (17). Of the
remaining       eleven     smaller      firms, Baumgartner                of Mulhouse
(43 articles per head per year) and Appenzeller & Cie of
Ribeauvillé (41) were the most concentrated. Productivity
was lowest at Blech, Fries & Cie of Mulhouse (17 articles)
and at J.-J. Ziircher (15).!4?
   Desportes’s tables further show that the market for the
Haut-Rhin’s printed calicoes since 1803 had been largely
confined to France. A few houses still had direct dealings
with clients in Frankfurt, Leipzig, Italy, and Spain — Hauss-
mann fréres are named specifically — but all relied primarily
on home sales. Demand came chiefly from the two Alsatian
departments, from those of the Vosges and the Meurthe, and
from Paris. Gros, Davillier & Roman not surprisingly used its
sister house in the capital to boost sales. Hartmann also bene-
fited from a parent house there and from business links with
Bordeaux. Payment was normally made by the article, often
staggered over an agreed period. The manufacturers generally
produced on commission for known clients; they did not risk
speculative output in the hope of finding customers after-
wards.                                                                                     }
   The remaining branch of the cotton industry was hosiery,
and it was closely linked with the local manufacture of linen
and hempen goods. Supplies of flax and hemp were drawn
mainly      from     the Bas-Rhin,         the Vosges,        and    Flanders.       Raw
cotton was imported from the Levant through Strasbourg
and, like the flax used, was worked manually on old-fashioned
     8 The exceptionally high figure for this firm is due to the very low employ-
ment level in Jan. 1806. If one divides the total output of 35,000 articles by the
figure of 425 recorded for Sept. 1803, then production per head comes out at
the more plausible level of 82 articles, still easily the best of all.
    4°Desportes noted that Ziircher had been particularly embarrassed by the
decree of 22 Feb. 1806, having bought over 6,500 articles of plaincloth from
Swiss suppliers shortly before it.
