                A PORTRAIT OF ECONOMIC                DISTRESS?                   99

imperial towns for supplies, so existing impediments to
exports had restricted their sales very largely to the home
market.
   The tabular synopsis and summarized report by Desportes
give a statistical estimate of the manufacturers’ losses. ‘In
ordinary times’, he states, the combined annual value of out-
put at the twenty-two             leading firms was expected to reach
some 16 million francs. At the time of writing, however, un-
sold articles represented not less than 2,901,525 francs-
worth, or nearly a fifth of local sales. As this figure was based
on incomplete returns, the real value of the surpluses was
probably higher. The departmental output target for 1807
had been lowered consequently from the 227,960 articles
produced in 1806 to 198,900. Again, in June 1807 only
6,080 employees were active at the same enterprises, com-
pared with 7,098 a year earlier. If these estimates are
assumed to be more or less reliable, they hardly testify to a
major ‘crisis’ in the calico-printing industry in 1806-7. But
it does seem that the news of the Berlin decree broke during
a fairly obvious industrial lull in that and in other of the
Haut-Rhin’s cotton branches.!*! This was due most of all to
the difficulty in finding adequate primary materials and to
the slowness of markets during the current hostilities. In
other words, the indienneurs then faced major problems of
supply and demand. This, much more than technical capacity
to expand, was the root of their difficulties.
   The individual reports show that market contraction
was if anything a more serious obstacle than short supplies
of primary materials. Evidence of actual surpluses suggests
that there was no direct relationship between lower supplies
of plaincloth and the demand for printed calicoes. The latter
had not apparently shrunk because of bottle-necks in

   161 The report by the president of the trade tribunal in Colmar to Desportes on
25 Jan. 1807 made the same points. It named the branches of the department’s
economy most in need of a boost as toiles peintes, siamoises ordinaires, and the
rather vaguely described ‘commerce en gros et en détail’, The president believed
that the fault lay with the heavy import duties on or prohibition of essential
primary materials, ‘dont l’entrée devait étre libre et exempte de tous droits, si nos
fabriques d’indiennes et de cotonnade veulent prospérer, trouver des débouchés
a l’étranger et soutenir méme la consommation intérieure . . .’. A.D. (H-R)        IM
128/1.
