94       ALSACE AND THE CENTRAL                    GOVERNMENT           1803-1807

Other industrial branches of the Haut-Rhin are less fully
documented than cottons in the official reports and statistics.
Being also on the whole less mechanized, they operated with
smaller working capital and fewer employees, and were not
so sensitive to the more                    acute     fluctuations of consumer
demand. Their markets were with few exceptions local ones.
Most of them appear to have been less affected than the
cotton industries by the slackening of 1806. The woollen
industries, for example, with 80 installations in Mulhouse and
16     in Sainte-Marie,             then    had     a combined        total   of 4,000
employees.!5* Supplies of raw wool, often of German,
Bohemian, Polish, and Wallachian origin, were usually found
in Basel or Strasbourg. Some local accounts suggest that
woollens in the Haut-Rhin did not escape the temporary
lull of 1806-7. Gaspard Dollfus, for instance, president of the
trade      tribunal       in    Altkirch,         believed     that     woollens    had
suffered set-backs during most of 1806, before recovering
during its last quarter.!°3 What he calls a ‘general calm’ in the
imperial woollen industries had depressed the demand for
raw wool, whose price had then dropped. On the other hand,
Dollfus observed, this had had the compensatory effect of a
cut-back on imports, and during 1806 the Haut-Rhin’s
drapiers had bought most of their supplies in France.
   The primary sources are skimpier on the position of other
towns       and     other      industrial         branches     of the department
around       the     time      of    the    Blockade         decrees.    Colmar,     the
administrative and legal capital of the Haut-Rhin, and also
then its largest town with a population of some 14,000, was
not      an expanding          industrial     centre.   Its woollens,         tanneries,
primary metal works, potteries, and brickworks were mostly
small-scale affairs catering for local demand. Its commercial
role, especially as a distributive centre for wines and for the
salt trade to Switzerland and southern Germany before the
State monopoly of 1806, was more prominent. At least two
local merchants, G.-B. Herr (woollens) and Jean Wichelhausen
(cottons),         were     among       the wealthiest         in the department.

      **? Desportes’s report of 3 July 1806: A.D. (H-R) I M 136/3. The estimated
annual    output   of some     12,000   articles in all did not match   that of any large
calico-printing firm.
    ‘$3 Report to Desportes of 17 Mar. 1807: A.D. (H-R) I M 128/1.
