98     ALSACE    AND THE CENTRAL          GOVERNMENT          1803-1807

actual percentage must surely have been higher, since not all
wives and children of industrial employees will have been
included in Desportes’s estimates.
                                                      S




v. Market trouble in the Haut-Rhin 1806-1807

Granted the importance of the cotton branches and stamotses
in the Haut-Rhin’s industrial inventory, its main market
trends ought to be reflected in those sectors. Official in-
quiries conducted during the spring of 1807 offer a good
view of the calico-printing enterprises, based on a collection
of reports and opinions sent to Desportes by the twenty-two
leading indienneurs in April-May that year.'® These are of
unique importance, being the nearest approximation to
official company reports by the manufacturers themselves
outside the extant private archives.
   The first main point of general concern is that nearly all
the indienneurs considered 1806 a less satisfactory year for
their enterprises than 1805 had been, and most predicted
further reductions of output and employment during 1807.
It is useful to have such detailed confirmation of what the
earlier prefectoral tables and reports had only been able to
hazard by way of forecast. On the manufacturers’ own evi-
dence, the slightly lower employment levels of 1806 had in
fact implied a proportionate drop in production that year.
The scale of such decreases varied from case to case, but the
average was somewhere between 25 and 40 per cent. It
appears, too, that labour costs were high in spite of the lay-
offs and further mechanization, because of the shortage of
skilled workers. Some manufacturers favoured a controlled
immigration policy to meet their needs. While all complained
of the threat which sluggish markets posed for their houses,
several had the more pressing worry of actual surpluses.
Most blamed the continuing hostilities and the ban or stiff
duties on imported primary materials as the cause of their
difficulties. Just as the tougher customs decrees had forced
them    to   turn    to   Paris,   Rouen,     Saint-Quentin,       and    other
   *°° Along with the prefect’s tabular synopsis (7 June) and summarized report
to Champagny (8 June 1807), these documents are kept at A.D. (H-R) I M 127/1.
Desportes’s table and summary are also to be found at A.N. F!? 1569.
