106            THE FRENCH         CONTINENTAL       MARKET     DESIGN

department    was   ‘almost> wholly agricultural’.° On 30
November 1807 it similarly reported to Shee that only Stras-
bourg was worthy of a trade tribunal ‘dans un département
dont l’industrie est principalement vouée a l’agriculture’.”
   Now, one would wish to qualify such statements if they
were     extended        to the Haut-Rhin,          where    the seasonal    links
between agricultural and domestic industrial labour were
often too close to be separated. Both in Mulhouse and in the
valleys of the Vosges the concentrations of industrial labour
were not insignificant beside the wider agricultural (and not
least viticultural) employment of the department as a whole.
Even so, the ratio of agricultural to industrial labour was
probably in the order of 4 or 5 to 1. Mulhouse, Sainte-Marie,
or even Wesserling were no more norms of the Haut-Rhin’s
production and market structure than Strasbourg was of the
Bas-Rhin’s. The discussion of these pages applies to the indus-
trial and commercial branches immediately in view. Terms
like ‘market trouble’, ‘market objectives’, ‘market design’,
‘imperial home market’, ‘domestic demand’, and so on are
used as a form of shorthand and are, of course, relative to the
scale and to the priorities of the European economies preval-
ent in Napoleon’s time. They are not meant to suggest pro-
vocative analogies with more developed industrial economies
of     later      periods,      or,   a fortiori,   with    modern    ‘consumer
societies’. They do not imply that Napoleon and his ministers
had made a conscious and elaborate calculation of marketing
techniques: how, for example, to advertise French products
to best advantage, when good wines needed no bush; how to
relate consumer demand to crude arithmetical growth of
population® or to fluctuations in income per head; how to
determine ratios between consumption and investment; or
even how to introduce simple economies of scale. The
     ° Meeting of 12 Vendémiaire XII (5 Oct. 1803), Min. i; A.D. (B-R) XII M 26.
     A.D. (B-R)     XII M 39.
     ® Napoleon’s   successive annexations added something like 16 million subjects
to the 28 million inhabitants of ‘l’ancienne France’ at the time of the Blockade
decrees. The total population of the subject and allied states (excluding Russia
and other nominal allies in the east) was over 38 million. Theoretically, then,
imperial producers might have aimed to exploit a potential consumer demand
within a politically and militarily dependent area of over 80 million inhabitants.
Further details of the population of the Grand Empire are given in Appendix M
below, p. 295.
