            THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL          MARKET     DESIGN          107
Napoleonic statistics are an inadequate basis for such
approaches to the question of markets.
   Most industrial and commercial dealings in Napoleonic
Europe did not occur on public occasions like town fairs or
even the larger international ones. The latter would give a
rather too concentrated picture of normal trading practice,
and their success indeed was partly due to their infrequency.
Most business took the form of regular and routine exchanges
carried on throughout the year, with allowances for seasonal
variations, either directly in dépéts de vente or on com-
mission.” The manufacturer or merchant manufacturer was as
likely as not to be his own agent, although middlemen played
an increasing role in such dealings. Besides their local sales,
most of the larger houses also traded further afield, employ-
ing the services of other commissioners for distant transac-
tions. Accredited carters or bargees similarly catered for the
transport of goods to destinations other than the local market.
   The industrial norm in the Empire was not the factory
with its growing proletariat producing for mass markets; it
was the small workshop or cluster of workshops providing
for mainly local needs. The language of contemporary
documents ranges from the ubiquitous industrie a domicile
to the intermediate atelier or manufacture and so on to the
larger fabrique or entreprise. Often the unit of production
referred to isno more specific than établissement, which could
mean anything from a simple installation in a peasant’s home
to a large mill or printing workshop. The commercial norm
was not the big international entrepot like Paris (for fashion
and luxury goods, cottons, colonial products, and wines),
or    Strasbourg       (for   textiles,   tobacco,     raw    cotton,     hemp,
madder, colonial goods, and wines), or Lyons (for silks and
silkstuffs); it was the small local market. Financial capitalism,
furthermore, was still in an early phase of its development.
Before the annexation of Holland in 1810 and of the Hanse
towns in 1811, the Empire’s only capital market worthy of
the description was Paris.!° Its Bourse was the only major
     ° The papers of the merchant house of Briansiaux of Lille (A.N. series 3 AQ)
massively illustrate this point. It had regular contact with commissioners and ex-
peditioners in dozens of western European towns.
   10The subject is now handsomely covered in Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et
manufacturiers parisiens, esp. chap. X, ii. 714-802.
