            THE FRENCH          CONTINENTAL      MARKET      DESIGN         109

‘Continental System’ subsumes not only all this but much
more besides. It refers to» the whole _gamut_ of Napoleon’ a
policies on the Continental “mainland: the military|and
 iplomati ic~alliane
                 ances, the family 1 marriages and new dynastic,
 placements,       the _fiscal” and” -administrative reforms. msthe

‘practices in_the lands of certain vassals and the actual endow-
ment  of a new imperial nobility iin others, the introduction of
the codes, and the tapping of resources in the satellite states.
Altogether, the distinction once made has to be maintained,
as much in my account of the ‘Blockade’ would not apply
without qualification to the ‘System’ more widely.
   And yet the same distinction is itself not fully comprehen-
sive. Roger Dufraisse in his reappraisal distinguishes the
‘Blockade’ and the ‘System’ from a third central factor,
French customs policy.!* As he rightly reminds us, of the 32
laws which made up the ‘economic arsenal’ of France from
1793 onwards, 9 had been issued before Brumaire, 17 more
between the coup and the Berlin decree, and only 6 there-
 after.!3 This means in effect that something very like the
 Blockade had applied to France vis-a-vis Britain well before
 21 November 1806. But I cannot see why Dufraisse should
 infer from this that the phrase ‘Continental Blockade’ can
 have meaning only if it refers to a geographical area beyond
 France.!* If he had made more than a passing reference to
 the British naval blockade,!* he might have advanced it as a
 fourth major element of the topic. The Continental
 Blockade,       seen   as a land-based     ‘self-blockade’, was different
 in nature from the British naval blockade. In that sense it
 applies as much to France as to her ‘reunited’, ‘conquered’,
 and ‘allied’ states.




    12 Régime douanier, Blocus, Systéme continental’, 533-7. The development of
French customs policy from the 1790s, chiefly in relation to cotton goods, is
more fully discussed in his ‘La politique douaniére de Napoléon’, Rev. Inst. Nap.
 (1974), 3-25.
    13<Contrebande ... de la rive gauche du Rhin’, 509.
    14 ‘Régime douanier’, 535, and repeated in ‘Contrebande’, 509.
    15«Régime douanier’, 537.
