                                         II
                                                      %




      THE FRENCH CONTINENTAL MARKET DESIGN


i. Clarification of terms

This chapter is best introduced by some preliminary caveats,
lest recurring terms mislead the reader. First, if the present
work focuses mainly on the industrial and commercial sectors
of the Alsatian economy, it should not obscure the essential
fact that agriculture was the predominant resource almost
everywhere. In relative terms, industry and trade were sectors
of secondary importance in the Napoleonic Empire, and were
often referred to as such in official directives. They were
themselves dependent to a great extent on agricultural per-
formance for their raw and primary materials, their food-
stuffs and semi-worked industrial products, and for their
markets. The point holds equally well for markets as such.
The great majority were small-scale agricultural affairs, local
in character and not accustomed to the kind of business
dealings associated with the larger national and intemational
entrepots. This agricultural context, then the economic norm
on   the    Continent,       should     be stressed   as the   fundamental
background of what follows here.
   ‘The detailed official survey compiled by Montalivet in
1813,' not admittedly the most reliable source, puts the gross
agricultural values between three and four times higher than
the industrial ones, although no estimate of specifically com-
mercial income is given. Nevertheless it appears from this
statistical assessment that upwards of three-quarters of the
imperial Gross National Product probably derived from agri-
culture and its immediately related services. As for French
trade itself, Abel Chatelain has warned us against regarding

    ‘Exposé de la situation de l’Empire frangais, et des comptes de finances
publiés a Paris, en février et mars 1813 (Paris, 1818). Sir Francis d’Ivernois’s
Exposé de l’Exposé de la situation de l’Empire francais (2nd edn., Paris, 1814)
is a scathing attack on the Minister’s account.
