108          THE FRENCH CONTINENTAL                 MARKET      DESIGN

stock market, although some provincial cities later acquired
smaller institutions of that sort. In spite of attempts to
expand its business from time to time, the Bank of France
still operated largely as the Bank of Paris. Since credit was
generally tight in France and liable to periodic freezes, the
trade dependent on it was exposed to sudden fluctuations
and crippling disruption.
    Another caveat concerns the use of phrases like ‘imperial
economy’, ‘imperial industry’, and ‘imperial trade’. These are
not intended to imply a degree of national economic coher-
ence which did not exist. The description ‘imperial’ is used
frequently and specifically in preference to ‘French’ where
the reference is to the whole area of the formal Napoleonic
Empire, as distinct from ‘l’ancienne France’, or from the
Grand Empire, which included all the subject states not
directly annexed to France. Just as the social and cultural
complexion of the Empire was diverse, so the term ‘imperial
economy’ could not mean any uniform system. It subsumes
an assortment of often very different regional economies over
which the central government had difficulty in applying a co-
ordinated policy. The climatic variations within such a large
political and customs unit alone demanded some flexibility
of economic control. The fragmentary nature of French
markets,         what       David    Landes    has called    ‘a mosaic   of semi-
autarkic         cells’,!!    must     again   be stressed.     It remains    the
essential context here, even where broader terms are used for
more general points about the ‘imperial economy’. Granted
this, there is no reason to persist with the inverted commas.
   The last caution applies to the historiographical custom’
of using the terms ‘Continental Blockade’ and ‘Continental
System’ as synonymous and interchangeable. The practice
need    cause          no   confusion,   of course,    for Napoleon      and his
contemporaries often barely separated the two. A distinction
can and should be made, however, and it is essentially that
between a part and a whole. ‘Continental Blockade’ or
‘Blockade’ here refers to that part of
                                  Napoleon’s
                                         poleon’s econ
                                                   economic
policy concerned with the aims,working,
                                   and effects of the_
Berlin and Milan decrees, along with their later modifications._
Ra    SRY   TS HRS   ENE               ———




                                1! Unbound Prometheus, 46.
