116        THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL         MARKET        DESIGN

economic resources. The qualitative differences from earlier
projects lay in the fact that the power structure of 1806-13
was unique. The market design of the Blockade was al-
together a more vastly conceived and doctrinaire tour de
force than its predecessors. Bertrand de Jouvenel thinks that
Napoleon,      in declaring the Blockade,             wanted     to crown       his
‘coast system’ with an ‘ideological manifesto’.?* It seems to
me that, in the context of 1806-7, his purpose was more
mundane. Never before had French military might been so
predominant and French political frontiers been so far-flung.
Never before had a system of Continental alliances been so
much in French control. But, conversely, the power structure
of 1806-7 is also distinguished from that before and after it
by the fact of Napoleon’s naval eclipse. Never before had
France been so effectively cut off from the open sea, so
forcibly severed from her colonies and other transmarine
links. The chamber of commerce in Marseilles, writing some
three months before the Berlin decree and under the impact
of local maritime losses, acknowledged as much.** ‘La perte
de notre principale colonie’, it remarked with reference to
Santo Domingo, ‘doit faire attacher encore plus de prix aux
débouchés que nos fabriques et nos manufactures peuvent
conserver en Europe’. It looked to Italy and Spain for alter-
native outlets nearer home, and it pressed for a preferential
treaty with the latter similar to the one agreed with the king-
dom of Italy on 10 June 1806.”4
   Since Napoleon’s power was land-locked, the French
market design had clear physical limitations from the start.
The aim was to develop on the mainland, within the French
military and political domain, economic outlets and sources
of supply to fill the vacuum left by the successive trans-
marine losses. Whatever the ideological motifs of its advocates,
it was an ad hoc attempt to solve the practical problem of
industrial and commercial markets in the face of continuing
   22 Economie dirigée, 242.
   ?3 Report to Champagny of 22 Aug. 1806: A.N. F!? 534.
   **The same carton contains a report by the Conseil général de commerce
of 29 Aug. following, in which French market aims in Spain are positively pro-
jected: ‘Ce que la France peut désirer’, it wrote for instance, ‘c’est de fournir si
non la totalité, du moins la majeure partie de tous les objets de manufactures que
l’Espagne consomme et dont elle approvisionne ses colonies’.
