112       THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL         MARKET      DESIGN

overtook the house of Braganza and the Spanish Bourbons.
By their renunciation at the ‘ambush of Bayonne’ in May,
following Godoy’s secret stratagem, Ferdinand and his father
Charles IV gave up all rights to the Spanish crown. In June,
Joseph Bonaparte was appointed king of Spain, being re-
placed at Naples by Murat. Denmark, finally, was also under
intermittent pressure from Napoleon and the British navy.
Frederick VI had been battling against impossible odds to
preserve the precarious neutrality of his kingdom. At last in
September 1807, unable to equivocate any longer, he opted
for a French alliance, fearful otherwise of military occupa-
tion or even outright annexation of his kingdom. Retribution
soon followed. In the same month Copenhagen was bom-
barded by the British fleet, an event which quickly sealed
the ratification procedures, and Danish neutrality came
thus to a violent end.
   Altogether, by the end of 1807 ‘l’ere de l’alliance con-
fiante’ had begun on a grand scale. By then only Sweden
among Napoleon’s potential allies in Europe had not come
over to him, and was not to do so until 1810. In military
terms the alliances meant that the imperial frontiers in
northern and central Europe were secured well east of the
official line, which ran with the Rhine. In northern Germany
they stretched effectively to the Oder, in southern Germany
to the Inn. The rivet of Napoleon’s system of alliances was
not Russia, in spite of much asseveration at Tilsit and at
Erfurt the following year; it was the Bavaria of Max Joseph
and Montgelas. This was the corner-stone                    of the Rhenish
Confederation and the base of his German policy. Of the
63,000 troops which the Confederation had agreed to raise
for Napoleon in the event of war, the Bavarian share was
30,000. In Max Joseph’s own words, Bavaria was ‘un grand
avant-poste du Grand Empire’.!” It was potentially the ‘Third
Germany’ of which some contemporaries spoke, a counter-
poise in French control to confront Vienna and Berlin alike.
This aspect became more prominent as the new kingdom

    17Quoted in Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 207. Max Joseph also had the
kingdoms of Naples, Italy, and Holland in mind. The first chapter of Dunan’s
book is the most useful source for further details of Napoleon’s German and other
alliances in 1805-7.
