           THE FRENCH   CONTINENTAL    MARKET    DESIGN       119

‘L’industrie étrangére’, it stated, ‘sera repoussée de notre
territoire pendant le tems qui est nécessaire aux fabriques
frangaises pour réparer leurs pertes et consolider leurs établis-
semens’.



The French market design rested from the outset on the bold
presumption that the most troublesome British competition
could be eliminated from Continental markets. Granted an
effective Blockade, it might be asked hypothetically how
French industry and trade would have stood around 1806-7
in a wide market area quarantined from British competition.
That indeed was what the ‘self-blockade’ or ‘boycott’ logi-
cally implied. What then was the position of French industry
and trade in relation to that of other Continental states at
the time of the Blockade decrees?
  It is a fair answer that, vis-a-vis its Continental rivals, the
French economy was stronger than conventional comparisons
with Britain might suggest. Within the vast area brought
under its domination, the Empire clearly had more industrial
and commercial potential than’ its vassal or allied states.
One problem immediately facing French manufacturers, how-
ever, was the risk involved in converting their industries to
more mechanized production. Since so many of their cotton
products (let alone their luxury articles) were expensive and
likely to attract only the better-off class of client, market
expansion seemed to imply the manufacture of cheaper goods.
The problem was how to sell on a large scale in wider markets
at a relatively low profit rather than on a small scale at a
comparatively high one. The industrial adjustment involved
(capital outlay and the social risks of unemployment among
unskilled workers if machines were progressively installed)
was not matched by an obvious indication of where the new
mass markets were to be exploited.
  Yet, in spite of this, many of the more successful textile
houses did in fact mechanize their production more and
more. In an attempt to effect the necessary conversion of
their enterprises, they used machine-models and production
criteria then common in Britain. In some parts of the Empire,
