118              THE FRENCH CONTINENTAL               MARKET     DESIGN

her as ‘the workshop of Europe’. This ideal, later referred to
by Montalivet as ‘cette grande pensée’,”’ frequently recurred
during the Blockade. The Minister anticipated that the
growth of French power would enable the national industries
and trade to attain ‘un degré d’accroissement incalculable,
et les faire arriver au point d’étre les magasins de l’Europe
entiere’.?® By 1810, indeed, the original plan had been ex-
tended from French agricultural products and manufactured
goods to include the whole entrep6t trade in colonial goods
allowed           under     the   ‘licences’.    As     such,   it illustrates   the
development             and modification of the Blockade policy and
of its market design first formulated in 1806-7.
   On another textbook analogy, France lacked the means to
supplant Britain as ‘the engine of growth’ and ‘the school-
master           of industrial Europe’; but at least the market design
might help her to narrow                  the gap. If nothing else, it was
hoped,            British   competition         would     be contained      within
bounds that would leave French producers free to make up
something of their technological leeway. In this sense the
Blockade might even be seen as a holding operation, a play
for time, an attempt to stop the clock, to slow down the in-
dustrial revolution and force Britain into a rate of growth in-
commensurate with her real capacity, to regulate the pace of
the Continent’s economic development effectively enough to
keep France in the race for markets. This ‘time-to-catch-up’
view of the Blockade and of the market design has not been
argued in much detail before, though some writers have made
the suggestion in passing.*? The hypothesis was that if France,
achieved those aims, she would then be able to set the clock
in motion again and would become the industrial pace-maker
of Europe. Napoleon would succeed, where the Jacobins had
ultimately failed, in safeguarding the interests of the small-
scale producer and of the traditional handicrafts. A prelimin-
ary remark in the official Tarif des droits de douane et de
navigation maritime®® is interesting in this connection.

      27 Report to Napoleon of 11 June 1810: A.N. AFIV 1241,
      28 Ibid.
   * See e.g. Viennet, Napoléon et l'industrie francaise,         188; and Bergeron,
‘Problémes économiques de la France napoléonienne’, 499.
   %° Published in Paris in 1804 and revised in 1806.
