110            THE FRENCH          CONTINENTAL           MARKET         DESIGN

ii. The military and political context of the French market
      design

If these preliminary qualifications are allowed, the Blockade
in its more positive and constructive aspects amounted to a
French Continental market design. In the nature of French
power this looked mainly towards inland markets. It was
broadly directed, at least in theory, to the whole arc of satel-
lite states stretching from Holland through the Rhenish
Confederation to Switzerland and Italy, and south-westward
into the Iberian peninsula. It also reached beyond the vassal
states to include the Habsburg lands, Prussia, Poland, Russia,
and even the Levant. It grew out of the extraordinary struc-
ture of Napoleon’s land mastery in the years 1805-7. At the
time of the first Blockade decrees, the political outline of the
Empire squared with the ‘natural frontiers’ of France and
also directly incorporated Piedmont, Genoa, and Tuscany.
Napoleon’s army was triumphant and loyal. Eugene de Beau-
harnais ruled the kingdom of Italy as his viceroy. Joseph and
Louis Bonaparte were respectively kings of Naples and of
Holland. Napoleon was ‘Mediator’ of the Swiss Confedera-
tion, following the constitutional settlement of 1803. The
Habsburg threat to the inland frontiers of the Empire had
been blunted, for the present, in the remarkable power
sequence of Ulm-Austerlitz—Pressburg. Earlier still, at the
‘recess’ of the Habsburg diet of 1803, many German princi-
palities on the Rhenish right bank had been ‘mediatized’, or
secularized, and detached from Austrian overlordship.
   A greater strengthening of French power had followed.
during 1806. In June, Joachim Murat had taken charge of the
newly formed grand duchy of Berg. In July, the crucial exten-
sion of French authority in Germany had taken shape in the
Rhenish Confederation, and in August the historic Holy
Roman Empire had been formally dissolved. At first the Con-
federation         consisted        of sixteen       redrawn          states    and had    a
combined population of some 7.5 million under French tute-
lage.'© Napoleon had special military agreements with its
      *Later    accessions   to   the   Confederation,   especially    by the   kingdoms   of
Saxony (Jan. 1807) and of Westphalia (July 1807), increased its population to
over 12 million by the summer of 1807.
