           THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL         MARKET      DESIGN         115

   What had been envisaged was in effect the blueprint for a
cordon of markets drawn to serve the interests of French
manufacturers and merchants. Historians have described such
aims variously as ‘commercial colonization’, ‘industrial im-
perialism’,    ‘economic nationalism’, and the like. Even where
it is not explicitly stated, the principle of ‘la France avant
tout’ may easily be read back into the earlier plans. The inten-
tion is the same: the creation of outlets for French products
and also of tributaries to boost the flow of revenue for
national needs. During the Revolutionary wars the satellite
states had been expected to help pay France’s way as well as
all their own in men, supplies, and money. From the time of
the Convention’s Commission d’extraction in Belgium, the
annexed and in due course the subject states had been har-
nessed to the French economy. Part of their wealth and
income     had been      commandeered,          so to speak, whether         for
military or other purposes. French relations with the allied
states had been influenced by similar aims, and the market
design also drew more directly on policies which Napoleon
had applied in dealings with foreign states between 1800 and
1806. An example is his insistence on one condition as the
sine qua non of any alliance with France: that all other con-
tracting parties should close their ports and inland frontiers
to British trade. Such alliances had often been followed up
with preferential trade treaties which in practice benefited
France more than her partners.?!
   It would be misleading, on the other hand, to present the
French market design after 1806 as simply a natural out-
growth from the earlier projects. There were quantitative and
qualitative differences between them. Quantitative — because
unlike the ‘plan Delacroix’ and other schemes before it, the
market design of the Blockade theoretically embraced nearly
the whole Continent. It was aimed at much more than the
economic reinforcement of the ‘natural frontiers’, reaching
well beyond that fait accompli towards a still vaster area of

   21.9. with Naples (18 Mar. 1800); Spain (21 Mar. 1801); Portugal (29 Sept,
1801); Russia (8 Oct. 1801, renewing the treaty of 1787); Turkey (25 June 1802);
and with Spain again (Oct. 1803). One might add Napoleon’s prohibitive decrees
of 4 June 1803 (renewed on 27 July 1805) and of 10 June 1806 against imports
from Britain and from Continental states other than France into Italy.
