          THE FRENCH    CONTINENTAL        MARKET   DESIGN   113

grew with Napoleon’s rewards; yet shrewdly he had also
erected counterweights to it within the Rhenish Confedera-
tion. One was the kingdom of Westphalia; another was the
Saxony of Frederick Augustus, which became a kingdom on
1 January 1807.
   Undeniably, then, Napoleon had military, political, and
diplomatic mastery of the Continent by the time of the
Blockade decrees. The irony, however, was that France did
not have an economic predominance on the Continent com-
mensurate with the might of her arms. Lacking it, the French
hoped to build one on the other bases of Napoleonic power.
In a prefectoral circular of 21 February 1806, for example,
several months before Jena and over a year before Tilsit,
Desportes emphasized the need ‘[d’]égaler notre prospérité
commerciale a la gloire de nos armes’.!® For that reason it
may well seem attractive to explain the precise timing of the
Berlin decree tendentiously in terms of current economic
difficulties. It would also be misleading to do so. Many of
those troubles had applied during the Revolutionary distur-
bances and could be seen as the cumulative effects of wartime
irregularities in the French economy. Others had followed
more directly from the rupture of the peace of Amiens in
1803. The Bank panic of 1805 may be explained as a ‘crise
de structure’, but it was hardly likely to reassure manu-
facturers and merchants that the foundations of the imperial
financial system were unshakeable. It demonstrated, yet
again, what perils were involved in quasi-heroic maritime
adventures. Within this wider perspective, 1806 was.a typi-
cally rather than an exceptionally uncertain year for imperial
industry and trade. In some departments it was a high point
of industrial production, but in others it was marked (as in
Alsace) by an over-all slackening of expansion.
   The timing of the Berlin decree should be linked mainly
with developments in Napoleon’s military and_ political
position between the start of the Austerlitz campaign and
November 1806. Among the theoretical projects which had
steered   him towards   the hard line of the Blockade, the con-
fidential reports and other writings of Montgaillard appear to

                        18 A.D, (H-R) IM 119/1.
