           THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL       MARKET      DESIGN                117

maritime weakness. If in one way it was obviously a policy
born of strength, in another it was an oblique reflection of
French economic vulnerability. It may seem to have broad
similarities with earlier and later policies, but these should
not obscure the fact that it was as extraordinary as the power
complex which formed its hard base.
   The Blockade was announced in an atmosphere of immedi-
ate military triumph. Another infusion of ‘la grande espér-
ance’, a tense but optimistic expectancy, was current in the
Empire.”> Frenchmen anticipated a favourable peace and
hoped for new economic benefits from it. In setting out to
cultivate the ‘markets of replacement’ on the Continent,
they believed they could stimulate all branches of the
imperial industry and trade. The government’s presumption
was that what the Empire could not absorb of its own
production, economically dependent neighbours might do.
Another presupposition was that the markets of the allied
states further afield could be opened up to imperial trade as
a condition of their formal friendship with France. Reports
from the Rhenish Confederation, at one receiving end of the
market design, encouraged such hopes. Even before the
Berlin decree, on 12 August 1806, the French minister Otto
in Munich wrote that the expansion into Bavarian markets
had begun four or five years earlier.”° He referred to a large
number of commissioners from Lyons, Paris, the Beaune, and
Rheims who regularly travelled through southern Germany
in search of further trade. French wines, especially burgun-
dies and champagne, were selling well in Bavaria. The
potential market        for silkstuffs, porcelain, bronzes, furniture,
and a variety of other products was said to be good. Otto
claimed that nine out of every ten Bavarian travellers in
France were there to do business.
   The meaning of such evidence might be shown by mixing a
later metaphor. If France could not yet replace Britain as ‘the
workshop of the world’, at least she might aspire to supersede
   25The early response to the Blockade and the official optimism at the end of
1806 and the beginning of 1807 are discussed in Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne,
327 ff. De Jouvenel entitles the relevant section of his book ‘La grande oppor-
tunité’, Economie dirigée, chap. 9.
   26The applicable passage from the Correspondance      bavaroise   is quoted     in
Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 347.
