           THE   FRENCH    CONTINENTAL    MARKET     DESIGN       111

princes, both severally and collectively, and was also offi-
cially their ‘Protector’, In particular he had close links by
family marriage with Berg and a firm alliance with the new
kingdom of Bavaria. Some of the confederates, notably
Bavaria,    Wiirttemberg,    and Baden,   had been    favoured   with
important territorial acquisitions at the expense of the Habs-
burgs or the dispossessed ecclesiastical princes. Prussian
neutrality in all these developments had been secured at first
by the use of Hanover as an acceptable territorial bribe. But
when Frederick William III took the rash decision to mobilize
his army against France, Prussia had suffered the humiliating
defeats of Jena and Auerstadt in October 1806. Quite apart
from the military catastrophe, Frederick William lost many
of his lands. A year later, after the Eylau-Friedland-Tilsit
sequence, he had been deprived of roughly 5 million subjects,
almost half his former population, and had no allies. Napo-
leon then had command of the Weser, Elbe, Trave, Oder, and
much of the coastline to the Vistula. Most important of all,
perhaps, in 1807 Napoleon came to terms with Russia. Who
got the better of whom at the famous Tilsit meeting it is dif-
ficult to say; but the immediate upshot was that Alexander I
agreed to enforce the Blockade decrees against Britain as
the condition of his French alliance. Napoleon thereupon
proceeded to an important realignment of lands in northern
Germany.     Some   were    ceded to Holland, others to Berg; the
rest were    formed into the new kingdom of Westphalia and
their rule entrusted to Jéréme Bonaparte (July 1807). Like
the duchy of Warsaw which took constitutional form at the
same time, the kingdom of Westphalia was a kind of terri-
torial security for Tilsit.
   When the Blockade decrees were first applied in the Grand
Empire, the Bourbons in Spain and the house of Braganza
in Portugal were still nominally in power. Yet already
Napoleon had begun the machinations designed to impose a
French alliance on them. In February 1807 Spain officially
accepted the Blockade decrees. In the following November,
after the secret Franco-Spanish treaty of Fontainebleau in
October, Junot was sent to subjugate Portugal. He was pro-
claimed governor-general of that country in February 1808,
and in the course of that year far more traumatic sequels
