114        THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL          MARKET       DESIGN

have been particularly important. The first use of the phrase
‘Blocus continental’ indeed is usually attributed to this
writer. The whole strategy of the Berlin decree had been
anticipated in his mémoire of 25 July 1805 and its supple-
ment     of 24 March           1806.'? He saw British trade as an
immense system of piracy, as phantom wealth, or what the
mémoire     of 25 July called ‘une véritable hydropisie
politique’. This recalls another polemical image, common
among Anglophobes, of British commercial power resting
on     fragile foundations         (colosse a pieds d’argile). As the
Napoleonic armies advanced their land might in 1805 and
1806, the wish to assault and expose a maritime enemy thus
caricatured intensified. By the end of 1806 the military pre-
requisites of the Blockade had been laid, and it is difficult to
see how the Berlin decree could have been proclaimed before
their achievement. In that sense the Continental market
design, though a distinguishable element of the Blockade,
was grafted on to the wider structure of French power which
formed in 1805-7. In so far as it depended on that structure,
it cannot properly be isolated from its unique power-base.

il. Theoretical variants of the market design

Like the plan for a ‘coast system’, or an extended ban on
British trade, the theory behind the market design had a
pedigree. The ‘plan Delacroix’ under the Directory had been
one such scheme to develop a chain of market interests
overlapping with the satellite states along the periphery
of the French Republic.*° Delacroix himself had drawn of
similar though less officially formulated ideas of men like
Sieyés, Merlin de Douai, and Pelet de la Lozére during the
Year III. All prefigured the market designs variously ad-
vanced in the writings of, among others, Francois de Neuf-
chateau, Chaptal, and Montgaillard himself under the
Consulate and early Empire.

    Both are published in the Mémoires diplomatiques de Montgaillard (1805-
1819) (ed. C. de Lacroix, Paris, 1896).
    ° The ‘plan Delacroix’ is discussed in detail in G. Dejoint, La Politique écono-
spt du Directoire (Paris, 1951), 161-223 (with accompanying appendices,
263-8).
