           THE FRENCH         CONTINENTAL         MARKET       DESIGN       121
system adds further character to this image of the French
industrial soldier.



In the same connection it is still unfortunately necessary to
dispose of a familiar red herring in earlier Blockade studies.
This is the notion that the Blockade was primarily a ‘war on
cottons’. As such it has been construed as a frontal assault
on the genre, qua. genre, of what had become the most
successful branch of British industrial exports. Sometimes
there is a suggestion of industrial and commercial paranoia
in France, of a persecution complex inbred in the response
of her manufacturers to the British challenge. Sometimes
again the implication is rather that the advocates of the
Blockade were a breed of economic puritans, a view
especially common among free traders later in the nine-
teenth century. The ‘war on cottons’ and to some extent also
the ‘war on colonial goods’ were seen’ thus as part of a more
general attack on all ‘exotic’ merchandise. If Napoleon had
had his way, the argument continues, the silk, woollen, and
linen industries would have enjoyed all the imperial favour
and killed off the cotton industries altogether. What frus-
trated him in this retrogressive campaign was the pressure
of current fashion, the caprice of public taste, and in particu-
lar the lure of Anglomanie.
   Now, there is some rather flimsy evidence in contemporary
writings to support the free traders’ later caricature of the
Blockade. One of the most illuminating examples, since it
amounted to a clash between an old-fashioned theorist whose
answer lay in the native soil and a practical industrial expert,
is the dispute between Frangois de Neufchateau and Liévin
Bauwens in 1808. The first threw down the gauntlet in a
printed letter of 1 January to Herwyn, deputy of the Lys
department to the legislative body in Paris.*° For the
redoubtable senator, who had long since declared his support
for the campaign ‘pro Agricola’, the issue was not least a

   36 AN. F!? 533. The letter was published in the Journal du commerce, de poli-
tique et littérature du département de l|’Escaut, no. 949, 18 Feb. 1808.
