124         THE FRENCH      CONTINENTAL        MARKET    DESIGN

most     affected.28     Woollens    had recovered       well under       the
Consulate and early Empire, but Napoleonic rule could offer
the linen manufacturers little cheer. Like the rope-makers
and refiners of colonial cane-sugar of the Gironde, they were
never to recover the position they had enjoyed in the
‘Atlantic sector’ of French trade before the Revolutionary
wars. Their decline was evident in Valenciennes, Cambrai,
Douai,    and other towns          of the Nord, in the Aisne, and in
almost the whole of the west of France, especially Brittany.
Apart from the loss of transmarine markets, which deprived
it of substantial working capital, the French linen industry
was still based largely on the putting-out system and had a
low capacity for technical conversion. It was, in Crouzet’s
assessment, ‘an archaic industry which was doomed any-
way’.°? Altogether, there was little basis for Bauwens’s optim-
ism about its prospects in 1808.
   The champions of French linens and enemies of the cotton
industry kept up their polemical campaign. One need not
doubt that Napoleon and his officials would have liked to see
cotton goods replaced by silkstuffs, woollens, and linens in
Continental usage. It is easy also to see why: France was well
provided in the latter industrial range. She had many enter-
prises specializing in cambrics and lawns as well as in silk-
stuffs, and of course she was not dependent here on primary
materials    from      overseas.   Realism,   however,   had to prevail.
Cottons were not only in fashion; they were cheaper and
often more serviceable than other textile articles. The best
thing then was to make the Continent safer for imperial
cotton manufacturers, in other words to encourage rather
than turn against them. The government was optimistic, at
any rate at the time of the first Blockade decrees, that wider
markets could be found for all imperial industries. The Block-
ade was a ‘war on cottons’ only in the sense that it was a war
on British and the more competitive Swiss and German
cottons in Continental markets. As such it was only a part of
the much broader offensive against all British goods. Francois
Crouzet’s reference to cottons as the ‘strategic sector’ of the
    8 “Conséquences économiques de la Révolution’, 202-3    and   214;   ‘Wars,
Blockade, and Economic Change in Europe’, 572 and 586.
   °° ‘Wars, Blockade, and Economic Change’, 572.
