          THE FRENCH         CONTINENTAL           MARKET       DESIGN      127
proportioned: the more one lost, the more one’s enemies
gained relatively, and vice versa. The Blockade was to be the
first step, taken in wartime conditions, towards a massive
economic replanning which would follow at the peace. Albert
Sorel makes the point in his reference to 1806 as ‘le point de
départ de sa [Napoleon’s] rénovation économique’.*© F. E.
Melvin is more assertive still: ‘in the ultimate analysis’, he
writes, ‘the Berlin decree is chiefly important as the begin-
ning rather than the end of a program’.*’ The long-term aims
might even be seen as the industrial and commercial variant
of the ‘masses de granit’, Napoleon’s metaphor for a solid and
enduring base on which to build his Empire. His purpose was
not to redress the balance of some natural economic order
which the British nation had purportedly overturned, not to
establish an equilibrium fair to all, but rather to build a
French economic hegemony on the ruins of the old. In other
words, he aimed at a new economic imbalance of power
weighted in the French interest.
   Whatever the official optimism, however, the task facing
the French at the beginning of the Blockade was enormous.
One implication of the ‘self-blockade’, for instance, was that
they undertook to provide many primary materials, semi-
worked    and finished articles, and foodstuffs which had been
supplied hitherto mainly by British or by neutral trade. At
the same time they had to find somewhere on the Continent
enough of the same goods for their own use. Part of the plan
was to encourage the ‘new’ or ‘substitute industries’ like beet-
sugar, chicory, pastel and madder-wort dyes, and even cotton
plantations in the kingdom of Naples. Although these initia-
tives came rather late in the day and had only variable
results, the practical difficulties of trying to play the role of
provisioner to the Grand Empire might have been foreseen
in 1806-7. For the Continent as a whole, the price of French
policy was certainly high from the start. On even the most
cautious reckoning French industrial costs and retail prices
were generally higher than those in other European countries.
The protection of French markets at home, and the attempt
to ‘reserve’ the markets of the subject states so far as possible
         46 I Europe et la Révolution francaise, iii. 477 (italics mine).
         47 Navigation System, 10.
