            THE    FRENCH     CONTINENTAL          MARKET      DESIGN               129

soda from Spain or Sicily only where imperial manufacturers
had become dependent on them and were inadequately
supplied at home. Even then, many of the goods concerned
were heavily taxed on entry and were liable to strict verifica-
tion procedures by the French customs officials. The motto
of the market design might well have been: ACHETEZ
FRANCAIS! Just as Napoleon wanted political and military
vassals rather than independent partners, so he wanted
economic dependencies and tributaries, not competitive allies.
   Altogether, the French aim was in effect to build a great
Continental ‘Uncommon Market’ in which buying and selling
would operate according to imperial interests. Louis Bergeron
has described the plan rather nicely as ‘une sorte de “‘marché
commun 4a sens unique’’, au sein duquel des traités de com-
merce imposés ou des décisions unilatérales organisent les
échanges en fonction des seuls intéréts économiques de la
France’.*? British exclusion from it was to be axiomatic from
the start. In the same letter in which he spelt out the prin-
ciple of ‘la France avant tout’,°° Napoleon also instructed
Eugéne de Beauharnais that ‘vous ne devez jamais perdre de
vue que, si le commerce anglais triomphe sur mer, c’est parce
que les Anglais y sont les plus forts; 1 est donc convenable,
puisque la France est la plus forte sur terre, qu’elle y fasse
aussi triompher son commerce;>' sans quoi tout est perdu’.
In polemical abstract the French Continental market design
resembled         a macrocosm        of the    ‘thése    autarkiste’, of what
Fichte      for    instance    had    had     in mind      for much         smaller
national units in his essay Der geschlossene Handelstaat.*?
Professor Sloane once called the latter Fichte’s ‘contribution
to the literature of Utopias’,°? but the French market design
of Napoleon’s time, resting as it seemed on a secure military
base, is not so easily dismissed.

iv. The market design in the ‘Outre-Rhin’
The populous expanse of the Outre-Rhin was potentially a
promising target for imperial exporters hoping to boost their

   49 Episode napoléonien, 195.         5°93 Aug. 1810: Correspondance, xxi. 70.
   51 Italics mine.                     52 Published in Tiibingen in 1800.
   53‘The   Continental   System   of Napoleon’,   Political Science   Quarterly,    xiii
(1898), 216.
