128        THE FRENCH       CONTINENTAL         MARKET      DESIGN

for imperial exporters, in -effect implied the protection of
French price levels, since these determined profit margins
and the béné fice d’entreprise.
   It is hardly surprising, then, that the Blockade and the
French market design were from the start received with
mixed feelings by the Empire’s Continental competitors. The
latter might have hoped to gain like the French from the ex-
clusion of British goods and to boost their own output; but
at the same time they were officially denied access to
primary materials and many semi-worked articles which were
most cheaply available from British suppliers. It soon became
clear, too, that the French were prepared to exert whatever
pressure they could to impose conditions favourable to their
trade, while foreign rivals had no prospect of ever being able
to participate freely in the imperial market. For them, as
indeed for many imperial consumers, the French market
design looked rather like a marché de dupe. It bore the
aspect of a huge contrivance aimed at thrusting the relatively
high French cost of living on the Continentat large. The
breaking-point was reached during and after the economic
crisis of 1810-11, itself precipitated largely by other factors,
but by then there had been mounting protest against rising
costs in the subject states and a ubiquitous resort to
smuggling.
    For those reasons all allusions to the Napoleonic market
design as a would-be ‘French Zollverein’ should be treated
with caution.*8 It is a fair enough analogy where the formal
unit of the Empire applies, and admittedly some primary
sources also suggest that the idea can be extended to the
Continent more widely. In practice, however, the Blockade
decrees, the preferential tariffs, and the ‘marchés réservés’
showed how little the imperial government intended to share
any economic benefits with partners beyond the national
frontiers. It was ready to allow imports of, for instance,
Italian raw silk, Levantine cotton, and (until 1810) ‘vegetable’

    48 See for example Melvin’s chapter entitled ‘The Continental Zollverein’
(Navigation System, 211-34); de Jouvenel’s remark that ‘le Zollverein francais
passe dans l’Histoire comme le réve d’un bon esprit sans lendemain efficace’
(Economie dirigée, 220); and Dunan’s brief reference to the imperial customs unit
as ‘une sorte de Zollverein’ (Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 327).
