126       THE FRENCH CONTINENTAL MARKET DESIGN
The Blockade and the market design had both short-term and
long-term aims. Among the first were all objects immediately
concerned with the imperial war effort and the urgent need to
find markets to compensate for transmarine losses. The pur-
pose was somehow to increase the economic breaking-point
of the area deliberately placed under the ‘self-blockade’.
Most writers have opted for this emphasis in interpreting
the Blockade’s significance. In Eli Heckscher’s opinion, for
instance, ‘the Continental System mainly had immediate ends
in view’. Indeed, for contemporary commentators and for
Napoleon himself, the immediate aims seemed easily the
most important. Thus we have this oracle among many:
‘dans   des circonstances       extraordinaires,     il faut des mesures
extraordinaires. La législation est pour les besoins de la vie.“
The world, as it were, was out of joint; and the Blockade was
the cursed spite born to set it right. The accent here is on its
military objectives, on the element of emergency and siege
warfare. In this sense the Blockade meant blood, sweat,.and
tears. Its ultimate test was which side could hold out longer.
Supporters of the Blockade expected it to deliver a swift
knock-out blow on the enemy’s trade and, as Gaudin put it
in his financial report of 19 September 1807, to force Britain
‘to succumb soon’.
   Yet the longer-term aims of the Blockade and of its market
design should not be overlooked. It was to be at once the
executioner of British industrial and commercial supremacy
and the harbinger of a new economic order of things in
Europe. As Montgaillard wrote in his mémoire of 23
February 1806, ‘la puissance de l’Angleterre est... néces-
sairement au moment d’éprouver des atteintes mortelles sur
le continent européen et le commerce de l’Empire doit
s’accroitre précisément dans la méme proportion que celui
de sa rivale diminuera’.*> This view is also interesting for the
implicit idea, very common among French theorists reared
on mercantilist doctrines, that the total stock of the world’s
wealth was      static. The prosperity or poverty of states was
therefore determined by a kind of felicific calculus inversely
    43 Continental System, 364.
    “4 Napoleon to Cambacérés on 26 Mar. 1807, Correspondance, xiv, no. 12176,
p. 122.                                        45 Mémoires diplomatiques, 167.
