          THE FRENCH           CONTINENTAL       MARKET    DESIGN           123
export of textile machinery from Britain, had brought ‘mule-
jennies’ to Passy in 1798. This feat, he claimed, had been the
true beginning of mechanized spinning in France. So far from
making him an industrial puppet of the enemy, he invoked
the evidence of Lord Erskine’s remark at the time of the
event that ‘this was a conspiracy of the highest importance
and an attempt to deprive us of that branch of manufactory,
so dear to us as the very balls of our eyes’. He contested the
point that ‘dumping’ by the British was tantamount to
the sacrifice of national independence by imperial manu-
facturers, observing that the branded goods were often of
inferior quality and that French enterprises in any case had
access to alternative supplies of cotton from the Levant.
Nor, he went on, could the cotton industry in the Empire
be fairly accused of exercising a growing monopoly over
other textile branches. There was evidence of expansion
among the producers of both silkstuffs and linens: ‘... La
construction des Filatures mécaniques de Coton n’est pas
du tout incompatible avec la culture du Lin... mais...
seulement       l’usage   du     Lin,   son   emploi,   le mode     de   con-
sommation, sont changés depuis quelques années; les fab-
riques de soieries de Lyon, de Nimes, du midi de la France et
de I’Italie, en consomment des quantités prodigieuses qu’elles
mélent avec la soie.” Bauwens ended with a vindication of his
warrior    spirit.   ‘Nous       combattons’,     he    declared,   ‘pour    la
liberté des mers, pour notre Commerce et pour celui de tous
les peuples, en un mot pour sécouer [sic] a jamais le joug de
lAngleterre’.
   Of the two positions, de Neufchateau’s was the more emo-
tional,   but    at least      one   detail   of Bauwens’s    counter-blast
seems doubtful on factual grounds. While French silkstuffs
may have shown no signs of permanent eclipse by the cotton
industry, and the silk manufacturers no craven hearts in fight-
ing for their markets, the supposed buoyancy of imperial
linens must be questioned. Their markets were uncertain,
and the Spanish insurrection of 1808 was further to
undermine one of their traditional outlets. Francois Crouzet
has shown, from an analysis of the available statistics, that of
all the sectors hit by the loss of overseas markets during the
Revolutionary wars, French woollens and linens had been the
