120        THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL         MARKET       DESIGN

Belgium especially, British expatriates themselves gave the
lead.3! Industrial reconnaissance expeditions were sent to
Britain secretly, to investigate the new. techniques, to per-
suade technicians to bring their skills to the Empire, and even
to smuggle out machines. As for the home manufacturers,
the imperial government gave them what backing it could.
Its propaganda actively sponsored the pursuit of industrial
and commercial combat as an integral part of the imperial
war effort. Some of Napoleon’s utterances at the time con-
jure up an image of the French industrial soldier. As he is
reported to have declaimed to the zndienneur Oberkampf,
whose works at Jouy-en-Josas he visited in 1806 and 1810,
‘vous et moi nous faisons une bonne guerre aux Anglais;
vous par votre industrie, et moi par mes armes. C’est encore
vous qui faites la meilleure.’>? One is reminded here of
Metternich’s later remark that Napoleon was eager to protect
the French corsairs because he regarded them as ‘military
merchants’ and their vessels as ‘nobler shops than those of
peaceable citizens’.** Champagny similarly used a military
metaphor in his important report of 5 August 1807 on the
purpose of the Rhenish Confederation. He alluded to an
‘arsenal des chancelleries’ in French service across the Rhine,
and went on to embellish the idea in terms which recalled
the military ethic of the old German Confederation.*
Or again, there is Chaptal’s reminiscence of Napoleon’s
attitude towards      French trade:   ‘il prétendait le faire
manoeuvrer comme un bataillon et exigeait de lui une sou-
mission aussi passive’.*> The whole framework of the livret

   *! A useful introduction to this question, with much individual illustration, is
W. O. Henderson, Britain and Industrial Europe 1750-1870: Studies in British
ae       on the Industrial Revolution in Western Europe (2nd edn., London,
1965).
   * The statement has been-widely quoted, though with variations, in secondary
works. See e.g. Tarlé, ‘Les intéréts économiques de la France’, 135-6. In a direct
allusion to the Jouy pronouncement Ternaux fréres, manufacturers of woollens
in Rouen, headed their mémoire of 30 Nov. 1807 with the epigraph: ‘Et nous
aussi, nous faisons la guerre a l’Angleterre.’ A.N. F!? 618.
    ** Letter to Stadion of 18 Jan. 1808, quoted in Dunan, Napoléon et l’Alle-
magne, 311.
   4 ALN. AFIV 1060.
 : °° Mes Souvenirs sur Napoléon (published by his great-grandson, Paris, 1893),
275.
