           THE FRENCH      CONTINENTAL          MARKET       DESIGN           139

levies should not be imposed in the states of the Confedera-
tion without the express permission of its Protector,
Napoleon himself. He urged the emperor to establish this
principle on a formal basis in the Confederation, at least
where French trade was concerned. He was asking in effect
for a singularly preferential tariff for the French transit trade,
one far more favourable than was then anywhere in force in
international traffic. In return, he again suggested that a
similar transit duty of 1 per cent might be granted to the
Confederate states for their trade through France. One is
left wondering, though, whether he wanted this concession
to be dependent on a maritime peace, as in the first re-
commendation.
    Champagny’s third proposal concerned the tariffs regulating
such French exports as were consumed in the Confederation
itself. He conceded that these so-called ‘douanes intérieures’
were a permissible and recognized form of fiscal income for
each of the Confederate states and could be likened to
domestic consumer taxes on foreign articles. But he also
stressed that the import duties should be strictly. confined
to French goods entering any state and actually consumed
there, and that they should nowhere exceed 10 per cent ad
valorem.    He   mentioned        French     wines, silkstuffs, woollens,
and ribbons specifically, and again suggested that reciprocal
terms might be allowed to similar goods imported from the
Confederate      states. This, though, was a forlorn expectation,
as it was well known that Napoleon was firmly opposed to
the entry of foreign goods which might compete with
imperial products, except in unavoidable cases. He was not
then likely to reciprocate such a favourable import tariff
with mere vassal states, and Champagny must have known
this.
   The last recommendation urged a more effective applica-
tion of the ‘drawback’ arrangement provided for in the
imperial customs decree of 22 February 1806.” Earlier the
report had anticipated that ‘la filature et le tissage du coton
ont pris A peine quelque essor dans les Etats de la Confédéra-
tion du Rhin, lors donc, et ce moment approche, lorsque

            74 For a brief statement of its details see above, pp. 102-3 n.
