              THE FRENCH      CONTINENTAL         MARKET      DESIGN          131
back and most severely undermine economic competitors, in
so far as they — chiefly England — seemed hostile to him’.57
   Yet Leipzig was if anything more important to French
market objectives across the Rhine, generally in the line of
luxury goods but especially silkstuffs manufactured in the
Lyonnais. These products were too dear for the kind of
popular consumption then enjoyed by some cotton and
woollen manufacturers. There was a limit to how far the
imperial Court, the army, and the civilian bureaux could
absorb such output. Although Napoleon and his entourage
could certainly help to sponsor the fashion for silken goods
by a public display of what Odette Viennet calls ‘l’obligation
de    luxe,    méme     de    somptuosité’,°®       the   wider    market     for
French luxury products lay with well-to-do clients, and tradi-
tionally many of them were foreigners who travelled each
year to Leipzig to place their orders. Manufacturers in Lyons
knew that a poor showing at the Leipzig fairs inevitably
rebounded          on their profits.°? The military campaigns                   of
 1805, for instance, had given rise to the usual nervousness
among houses with dealings in the German entrepéts. Writing
to the Minister of the Interior on 12 Vendémiaire XIV (4
October 1805), the chamber of commerce in Lyons referred
to ‘la position vraiment critique de notre place’.© It speci-
fically linked the prospects for recovery with an upturn of
business in Leipzig, although the chamber was then generally
pessimistic on that score.
   Its gloom was apparently not misplaced, since another
report to Champagny almost a year later was equally bleak.®!
This time, in a direct reference to prevailing market trouble,
the chamber noted that: ‘. . . il ne se fait plus, comme dans
les tems ordinaires, de grands approvisionnemens; chacun
réduit ses achats au besoin du moment . . . Ce n’est pas a
Lyon seulement qu’on éprouve cette stagnation, toutes
les villes environnantes qui se pourvoient ordinairement ici,
ont une        égale diminution        dans leur débouché.’ Prospects

     57 Bothe, op. cit. 260.          58 Napoléon et l’industrie francaise, 37.
     59The standard work on the Leipzig fairs remains E. Hasse, Geschichte der
Leipziger Messen   (Leipzig, 1885). Chaps. 7, 8, 15, 16, and the appendices on pp.
495-500 cover the Napoleonic period most fully.
     60 AN. F!? 501D,                   6191 Sept. 1806: A.N. F!? 513.
