138      THE FRENCH       CONTINENTAL      MARKET      DESIGN

    The first recommendation was the free passage of all
French     goods    travelling  through    the   Confederation.
Champagny had in mind mainly the overland trade via Frank-
furt and/or Leipzig to Prussia, Poland, and‘ Russia, and he was
referring to French re-exports as well as domestic exports.
He regarded free transit by road and river as the precondition
of an expansion of French trade to those parts. To this pro-
posal he added his concern for the liberties of the German
fair towns, repeating the petition of many regional chambers
of commerce that historic franchises should not be touched.
Extending his earlier recommendation that the franchises of
Leipzig be guaranteed, he now advised the similar confirma-
tion of the rights and privileges of Frankfurt and Brunswick
at the time of their fairs. Only the twin policy of respecting
the liberties of the major fair towns in Germany and securing
free transit rights for French goods through them would
enable the trade to northern and north-eastern Europe to
operate without crippling cost or disruptive customs delays.
So long as France was denied access to the sea routes, the
freedom of her expeditions inland seemed to him essential:
‘il importe de pourvoir 4 ce qu’aujourd’hui ces Etats arrondis,
étendus, ne s’enveloppent pas d’une ligne de douanes, qui,
sous prétexte de protéger leur propre commerce, repousserait
le notre!’ The   catch in this, however, was that the German
states enjoyed no comparable transit rights in the Empire.
Champagny softened the irony by suggesting that concessions
might be made to help a reciprocal transit trade across
France, but only once British competition was expunged
from   the   Continent,    once   France   had   won    the     maritime’
peace. He believed that such concessions to the Confederate
states would then be to the advantage of France as well.
    The second proposal of the report was an alternative to the
first, in the event of Napoleon’s not insisting on wholly free
transit rights for French trade through the Confederation.
Under no circumstances, Champagny advised, should transit
duties be allowed to exceed 1 per cent ad valorem on French
goods. Duties of that sort fell within the category known as
‘douanes extérieures’. They included local péages, port com-
missions, tariff and transit charges of various kinds. Cham-
pagny’s accompanying recommendation was that all such
