          THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL        MARKET       DESIGN          133

days after the Berlin decree, its consultative chamber for
manufacture, arts, and crafts made a spirited plea for the con-
firmation of Leipzig’s traditional franchises.™ It argued that
the consequences for many imperial towns would be dis-
astrous if the new prohibitive trade laws were ruthlessly
applied to such a vital entrepédt. ‘La ville de Leipseik’, it
claimed, ‘est aujourd’hui non seulement le plus grand marché
de l’Europe, mais pour ainsi dire le seul qu’il y ait dans tous
les états du nord’. It added that all the leading merchants of
northern and central Europe either frequented the Leipzig
fairs or had agents and business associates there. The chamber
mentioned in particular merchants from Prussia, Russia, and
Austria, remarking that they formed the network through
which French industry and trade had access to ‘immense
markets’ beyond the imperial frontiers.
   In Paris itself, market trouble during the months im-
mediately preceding and following the Berlin decree was also
often linked with the disruption of trade across the Rhine.
So, too, all hope of recovery rested on a favourable peace
there and the resumption of normal trade. In a special report
approved by Champagny for dispatch to Napoleon some
time before the Berlin decree,®° unemployment in the capital
was blamed on the general default of markets. As the report
put it,
. . . Ce n’est pas le premier exemple d’une pareille stagnation dans les
travaux de nos ateliers. Elle a lieu toutes les fois que la fabrication
excéde la consommation       ... La difficulté n’est pas de donner de 1’essor
a l’industrie, mais de lever les obstacles qui s’opposent a la consomma-
tion .. . Dans un moment       ou les magazins regorgent de marchandises,
on ne peut augmenter la quantité des articles manufacturés, sans aug-
menter l’engorgement, et sans faire éprouver aux propriétaires de ces
marchandises une perte considérable, en les forgans d’en baisser le prix.
The above is a crucial passage, riveting as it does on the
problem of actual industrial glut in France before the
Blockade.
   If one needed ministerial evidence of the same problem
after the Berlin decree, Champagny’s                 report to the inner
‘cabinet’ (Conseil) on 28 January 1807 would provide it.
   64 AN..F!? 513.
   65 Undated, but contextual references suggest that it was written in Sept. or
Oct. 1806: A.N. F!? 513.                                       66 AN. F!? 4639.
