134       THE FRENCH CONTINENTAL                   MARKET   DESIGN

It is long, and many of its passages would serve the present
purpose well, but the main point focuses again on the dis-
ruption of markets, for in the Minister’s words,
La souffrance de certains genres de fabrication est certaine; elle est
sensible 4 Paris et 2 Lyon; les causes sont faciles 4 déduire, mais les
remédes ne sont pas également faciles a trouver.
    Ce n’est point l’argent qui manquent, ce n’est pas le crédit, et l’on
doit s’en féliciter, car avec ces deux ressources, le principe de vie sub-
siste et les maux ne seront que passagers; mais le plus grand nombre
des débouchés extérieurs sont momentanément interceptés, la consom-
mation   intérieure est réduite; ce qui manque,       c’est l’écoulement pour
les objets fabriqués...
    On doit seulement faire remarquer, que deux ou trois genres princi-
paux sont a ce jour dans une situation assez satisfaisante, la filature de
coton, la fabrication des tissus blancs pour |’impression en particulier,
les étoffes de soye et coton qui se fabriquent a Nismes. Ce sont princi-
palement les soyeries de tout genre, la passementerie, l’ébénisterie, les
toiles, les porcelaines, fayences, bronzes, cristaux, tapis, la bijouterie,
les papiers peints, et toiles peintes qui paroissent avoir besoin de secours.
Now, many would not have agreed with Champagny’s view
on the availability of cash and credit. The financial state of
the Empire early in 1807, with the Continental campaigns
continuing, was rather less ‘liquid’ than his report claims. But
it is unquestionable that the luxury industries were then the
hardest hit by market default. Champagny linked the indus-
trial problems of that winter with both the break in maritime
trade and the repercussions of hostilities on mainland
markets. In the same report he refers bluntly to ‘l’épuisement
de 1|’Allemagne’ and gives figures to back his case. Paris nor-
mally exported nearly 50 million francsworth of goods to
Germany and Russia each year, while Lyons, on the evidence
of its chamber, exported silkstuffs of about half that value to
Russia alone; but all this trade had been undermined by the
campaigns of 1805-7.
   Champagny’s negative emphasis on market trouble was
sometimes accompanied by more positive proposals for deal-
ing with it. In this respect he showed himself sensitive to the
petitions from Paris, Lyons, and other manufacturing centres.
Indeed, his own counsel to Napoleon more often than not
followed the line of those petitions. In one such report’     of

                                ®7 Italics mine.
