136        THE FRENCH          CONTINENTAL        MARKET      DESIGN

from areas in the French interior or the Midi to foreign
clients. Yet the greater share of these travelled via Mainz, if
moving mainly due north,’”° or through Frankfurt, if the
destination lay north-eastwards or eastwards. As far as the
Alsatians were concerned, Frankfurt rather than Leipzig was
the hub of the market design in the Outre-Rhin. For the
Strasbourgeois in particular, the trade down and up river with
Frankfurt was vital to their prosperity. They always took a
special interest in trade reports from that town, for example
in those of the French agent Theobald Bacher,’! whose
observations on the performance of imperial exporters to the
Frankfurt fairs between 1807 and 1811 were regularly sent
to Paris.”



Two documentary sources dating from the first year of the
Blockade deal more fully with the French market design in
the Outre-Rhin and deserve detailed attention. One is Cham-
pagny’s ministerial report to Napoleon of 5 August 1807 on
the commercial prospects for France beyond the Rhine. The
other, which grew out of the Minister’s wish to have fuller
information on this matter, is a series of reports by Camille
Perier written in the course of an industrial mission to

    In a report of Sept. 1806 on Franco-Dutch trade, Champagny informed
Napoleon that ‘la France envoye en général trois ou quatre fois plus de ses pro-
ductions territoriales dans le Nord que dans le midi de l’Europe. Le Nord lui
demande du vin, des eaux-de-vie, des huiles, des fruits; et la Hollande n’a pas
moins d’intérét a les demander que la France a les fournir; la Hollande a intérét
aussi a leur accorder la préférence [over the produce of Spain and Portugal],
soit 4 raison de la proximité, soit a raison de l’union politique qui lui assure une
jouissance plus certaine et plus durable.’ A.N. AF*!V 174, Strasbourg was a major
entrepot on the route from Burgundy and (while the sea lanes were closed) from
the Midi to Holland, and Mainz was of course the principal down-river link for
Alsatian middlemen.       ,
    ™1On whom see Friedrich Otto, Theobald Bacher, ein elsdssischer Diplomat im
Dienste Frankreichs (1748-1813), Strassburger Beitrage zur neueren Geschichte,
vol. iii (Strasbourg, 1910).                                        '
   ™1t is regrettable that Bacher’s reports, which are much the most detailed
contemporary account of how French goods competed with others at the Frank-
furt fairs, are haphazardly    scattered in the sub-series F!? and AFIV: see esp.
F'? 507, 509-10, 616-17, 619, and AFIV 1061. A useful secondary reference
work   on this and related topics is the Geschichte der Handelskammer zu Frank-
furt a.[m] M.[ain] (1707-1908) (ed. H. Trumpler, Frankfurt, 1908).
