130           THE FRENCH         CONTINENTAL            MARKET       DESIGN

trade. Montgaillard once referred to the states of the Rhenish
Confederation as ‘les colonies continentales de |’Empire’.**
The phrase is apt, for the gravity of the market design, as of
the Blockade more generally, extended ‘throughout subject
Germany. Outside of Italy and possibly also Spain, it was
here most of all that the French aimed to develop the
‘markets of replacement’ for their industry and trade.
   Particular importance attached to the trade with Frankfurt
and Leipzig. These towns were still the major international
centres of distribution for industrial goods and merchandise
in central and northern Europe. They gained in relative im-
portance as first the Dutch and then the north German ports
were placed under closer customs surveillance, and they acted
as magnets for all the roundabout or criss-cross routes of ‘le
commerce interlope’. The latter role, however, was certainly
not part of the imperial government’s intentions. Its interest
lay rather in the crucial position Frankfurt and Leipzig held
in the regular entrepot traffic of central and northern
Germany. The concern of imperial manufacturers and
merchants was never more acute than at the time of the
annual Easter and Michaelmas fairs in both towns. Another
less important fair was also held in Leipzig each New Year.
According to Chaptal, French exports to ‘Germany’ before
the Revolution had been worth between 23 and 25 million
francs a year; and of that total, expeditions to the Frank-
furt and Leipzig fairs had accounted for over 15 million, the
greater part in silkstuffs.°* Anton Kirchner, commenting only
a few years after the collapse of the Empire, described Frank-
furt as the ‘Kreuz-, Post- und Querstrasse von Mitteleuropa
und Mercurii beliebter Transito-Mittelpunkt’.®°® This colour-
ful image encouraged Friedrich Bothe, a local historian, to
argue later that Napoleon had envisaged French economic
mastery of the Continent through control of Frankfurt.
‘There’, Bothe writes, ‘Napoleon dared hope to conquer
the European market for the industry of France, drive
      54 Mémoires diplomatiques, 261.
      °5 De l'industrie frangoise (2 vols., Paris, 1819), i. 70-1.
   °°A suitable translation might be: ‘The postal criss-cross road of central
Europe and Mercury’s favoured transit centre’. Ansichten von Frankfurt a.[m]
M.[ain], vol. ii (Frankfurt, 1818), quoted in F. Bothe, Geschichte der Stadt
Frankfurt am Main, 3rd edn, (Frankfurt, 1929), 258.
