132        THE FRENCH           CONTINENTAL        MARKET        DESIGN

for the winter seemed poor, for as yet no sizeable contracts
had been agreed with German and Russian clients. The
chamber’s hope lay in an early peace and an end to the
paralysis of the German trade routes. Again it stressed the
importance of resuming normal business with Leipzig, which
was said to take, for eventual redistribution                    all over Europe,
something like five-eighths of the annual trade of Lyons in
silkstuffs and re-exported silks. In a report to the Minister on
11 December 1806 the chamber further estimated that
Russia absorbed between 80 and 90 million francsworth of
French products in a good year, and that Lyons alone
accounted for some 29 million of this total, either by direct
expedition or through intermediaries in Leipzig.®
   Geneva was another imperial city with vested interests in
Leipzig. Its links with the Saxon entrepot are nowhere better
explained than by Simonde de Sismondi in a letter written on
behalf of the local. chamber of commerce to Champagny less
than a fortnight before the Berlin decree:®?
Les manufactures          frangaises   sont plus particuliérement     intéressées    a
la conservation de l’antique prospérité d’une ville d’Allemagne, qui
étoit le marché général, le marché presque unique de tout le nord et le
levant de l’Europe. Les foires de Leipzig étoient le débouché le plus
important des manufactures frangaises destinées a une consommation
étrangére, et la suppression du commerce de cette ville, en détruisant
toute exportation, ruineroit presque tous les ateliers de France, et
réduiroit les ouvriers 4 manquer de pain. De beaucoup la plus grande
partie de lV’horlogerie et de la bijouterie de notre ville étoit vendue a
Leipzig,   toutes   nos     exportations   pour   1’Allemagne,    le Danemarc,      la
Suede, la Hongrie, la Pologne, la Russie, et la Turquie avoient cette
destination.
Those observations prefaced the real point of Sismondi’s
letter, which was to press for the confirmation and protec-
tion of Leipzig’s historic commercial liberties, especially at
fair time.
   Much      the same message              emanated      from Saint-Etienne.
Writing to Champagny                   on 25 November      1806, only a few

    A.N. AFIV 1060. The same carton has a copy of Champagny’s report to
Napoleon of 8 Dec. 1806 in which it is stated that the overland routes for French
exports to Russia ran from Frankfurt and/or Leipzig via Berlin, K6nigsberg, Mitau
(now Jelgava), and Riga to St. Petersburg; or via Breslau, Warsaw, Grodno, and
Smolensk to Moscow.
   °On 10 Nov. 1806: A.N. AFIV 1060.
