           THE FRENCH         CONTINENTAL         MARKET      DESIGN            137
Germany late in 1807 and early in 1808. These sources form
a bridge between this and the next chapter and are here dis-
cussed in turn.

Champagny’s ministerial report of 5 August 180773
On the preceding 30 July Napoleon had put a number of
questions to the Minister. He wanted to know what French
merchants and manufacturers might reasonably expect from
the princes of the Rhenish Confederation; what measures
were thought most necessary to boost French exports there;
and from which states and from which particular industrial
branches foreign competition in those markets was most
likely to come. Champagny’s report was an attempt, if a
rather    hurried      one    in    the   first   instance,    to   answer     the
emperor’s questions.
   The opening observation was that in giving Germany a new
political and constitutional structure, Napoleon had created
an area of great new economic potential to France. Wines,
eaux-de-vie, silkstuffs,           luxury articles and fashion ware,
woollens, and cottons              were all in constant demand in the
Confederation. Some French goods had had a regular market
there for many years; others could soon penetrate into
German markets and, if suitably encouraged, would long
remain a necessary part of normal business exchanges. The
only rival France had to fear was Britain, Champagny went
on, but he assumed that the Blockade would soon take care
of her. Mistaking the will for the deed, he roundly declared
that: ‘L’Allemagne en ce moment perd lhabitude de recevoir
ses consommations des Anglais et secoue le joug de leur in-
dustrie. Je n’ai rien négligé pour exciter les fabricants frangais
a profiter d’une circonstance aussi favorable. Sans doute
a l’époque de la paix maritime Votre Majesté saura maintenir
ce grand ouvrage qu’ont créé ses triomphes autant que le
permettront les circonstances.” The broad and optimistic
outline thus sketched, the Minister got down to more specific
matters. His report put forward four practical proposals to
safeguard French interests.
   73 A.N. AFIV 1060. The report is printed in Appendix C of Schmidt, Grand-
duché de Berg, 486-9, and is also briefly discussed in Tarlé, ‘Deutsch-franzésische
Wirtschaftsbeziehungen’, 702-5.
