         THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL      MARKET      DESIGN         135
24 November 1806 he made much the same case for Leipzig
to be treated generously.®® That town, he wrote,
est pour les productions   de notre industrie   et méme    d’une partie de
notre sol, notre principal débouché a |’étranger et le canal par lequel
rentre en France le numeéraire que les approvisionnemens tirés du nord
peuvent en faire sortir. Les négocians de Lyon attribuent l’immense
utilité dont cette ville a été au commerce de la France avant et depuis
la révolution, beaucoup moins 4 l’avantage de sa Position et aux inclina-
tions commergantes de ses habitans, qu’aux réglemens municipaux
auxquels le commerce y est assujetti et dont ils vantent beaucoup la
sagesse. Les prodigieux succés de cette guerre raniment le courage des
commergans et des manufacturiers . . . Ils espérent que le commerce
et l’industrie frangaise trouveront aussi leurs avantages dans le nouvel
ordre de choses qui doit sortir des mains de Votre Majesté.
Champagny repeated the advice that Leipzig be kept intact
in any political reorganization of the Outre-Rhin and its com-
mercial franchises, especially at fair time, duly respected.
   For his part, Napoleon also had strong views on where the
national interest lay in the Outre-Rhin, but these were by no
means always consistent. In the formative period of the
Rhenish Confederation (1806-7) he saw ‘mes petits états
fédératifs’ not only as military buffers and diplomatic ciphers
but also as economic dependencies of the Empire, Marcel
Dunan thinks that the Confederation was more interesting
and more rewarding to Napoleon as an economic than as a
military unit.®? Just as he had already incorporated                   ‘la
France allemande’ in political terms, so he hoped to annex
Allemagne frangaise’ in economic terms. His broad objec-
tives in the Confederation have sometimes been summed up
in the trilogy ‘Men-Money-Arms’. In the light of the fore-
going discussion, a fourth major element should be added:
Markets.
   The earlier emphasis on Leipzig’s central importance to the
French market design across the Rhine should not over-
extend the geographical role that Alsace was to have in the
scheme. Alsatian manufacturers and merchants themselves
had few direct dealings with that town or with other German
entrepots of equivalent distance from them. Cotton goods
from Mulhouse were of course regularly routed there, as was
the whole range of commodities passing through Strasbourg
       68 AN. AFIV 1060.         69 Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 343-4.
