                                      IV

       INLAND ECONOMIC EXPANSION 1807-1810:
                THE ALSATIAN EXAMPLE
     PART I: SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES


i. Historiographical versions

At the end of the period here covered an American witness,
writing anonymously but easily identified as the publicist
Robert Walsh, gave an account of the French Empire as he
had seen it during a visit in 1807.' It was all very different
from the spectacle he claimed to be able to record after
similar travels in England. It told of the drying-up of business
activity both internally and with foreign states, of the de-
population and decay of the major towns, of ramshackle
commercial buildings, idle ports, and pervasive poverty. In
Walsh’s words,
. .. The state of France as it fell under my observation in one thousand
eight hundred and seven exhibited quite another perspective [than that
of England] . . . The effects of the loss of external trade were every
where visible: — in the commercial cities half deserted, and reduced to
a state of inaction and gloom truly deplorable: — in the inland towns,
in which the populace is eminently wretched, and where I saw not one
indication of improvement, but on the contrary, numbers of edifices
falling to ruins: — on the high roads, where the infrequency of vehicles
and travellers denoted but too strongly the decrease of internal con-
sumption, and the languor of internal trade; and among the inhabitants
of the country, — particularly of the south, — whose poverty is ex-
treme, in consequence of the exorbitant taxes, and of the want of an
outlet for their surplus produce . . . The number of mendicants in the
inland towns was almost incredible . . . Agriculture languishes in almost
every part of the empire ... [in 1807] the fields were principally cul-
tivated by women....
The author attributed such maladies to the fiscal chicanery
of the imperial government and the wrongheadedness of its
    14 Letter on the Genius and Dispositions of the French Government, includ-
ing a View of the Taxation of the French Empire, by an American recently re-
turned from Europe (London, 1810).                              ?Tbid. 189-92.
