          THE     FRENCH     CONTINENTAL        MARKET      DESIGN          141

plus favorable par l’effet de la Paix Continentale et des
mesures politiques qui tendent chaque jour de plus en plus
a écarter dans les marchés extérieurs, la concurrence pré-
judiciable       de l’éternel ennemi        de notre      industrie’.7° The
measures adopted by the imperial government in that pursuit,
or in crude military terms by Napoleon himself, were to lead
to many disputes. The whole issue of transit rights to and
from France was not the least among them. Champagny’s
vision of a uniform 1 per cent ad valorem duty across the
Rhine remained little more than a recurring bureaucratic
dream.                                           .
   One of Cretet’s administrative achievements of particular
bearing on the market question was the collection of detailed
trade    reports     from    all over    the Continent.’7        They were
written by agents who were resident or had travelled abroad
to send him the information required. He wanted to know
what the current and earlier trading position of France was in
each country, which goods formed the basis of such
exchanges, whether the reciprocation of preferential treaties
would be advantageous to the Empire, and generally how
French exports might be encouraged. The reports cover deal-
ings with Holland, Germany, Russia, Italy, Spain, Portugal,
and even with: lands as far afield as Persia. Cretet followed
Champagny in pressing for the safety of the inland transit
routes and the lowest possible tariffs on French goods travel-
ling abroad. He also urged the strict enforcement of the
Blockade in all the subject and allied states. Trusting the in-
formation of his agents, he was usually optimistic about the
prospects for imperial trade. Like his predecessor, he was
apt to take the will for the deed.

Camille Perier’s industrial mission to Germany (1807-8)”®
Formerly         a student   of the Ecole Polytechnique               and the
Ecole des Mines, Perier had been sent by Champagny on what

   76 A.N. AFIV 1060.
    71 These are variously scattered in A.N. AF*IV 174; AFIV 1060-2, three
cartons rich in material on the Blockade more generally; F'? 534, 549-50, 620-2,
643, and 2401.
   78 Most of the relevant documents are kept at A.N. F!? 622, but some are in
the carton AF*IV 174,
