144     THE FRENCH    CONTINENTAL    MARKET    DESIGN

unprotected markets. In the case of linens, for example,
Silesian articles sold at about half the cost of the French.
Dresden and other Saxon towns enjoyed a similar advantage
over imperial centres like Courtrai and‘Cambrai in the sale of
table linen.
   All this meant that the French market design in the Outre-
Rhin had had little apparent success by the autumn of 1807.
Perier had not found any significant trends towards a change
in buying and selling habits there. Even where the Blockade
had perceptibly reduced the traffic in British goods across
the Rhine, it was   also clear that trade between   the German
states themselves had been adversely affected. This in tum
had reacted on imperial exports. The February fair in Bruns-
wick had not compared favourably with its forerunner of
 1806. Sales had fallen by between a half and two-thirds,
Perier was informed, and it was bluntly reported that German
merchants expected to gain little from preferential treaties
with the Empire. They apparently regarded such agreements,
whether based on ‘most-favoured-nation’ or exclusive trading
rights, as partisan devices which were bound to push up
prices to the imperial advantage and at their own expense.
    So much for the negative side of Perier’s reports; what of
their more optimistic assessments? Undoubtedly the first
message to come across is that imperial producers in certain
industrial and commercial branches might hope for a happier
future in German markets. Perier also underlined the impor-
tance of Germany to the transit of French goods further
afield. The turning-point, he thought, had come with the
Tilsit agreement. It more than made up for the troublesome
customs barriers in Prussia, which for years had trenched
on the overland trade to the east. The Russian and Polish
markets then seemed more open to French exporters than at
any time before. Perier considered imperial producers well
equipped to meet the technical challenge of Continental com-
petitors in most major industries. Apart from some more
advanced spinning machines in Berg and Switzerland and the
mining pumps used in Upper Silesia, the Empire in his
opinion was technologically superior to its vassals and allies.
Here, ironically, he had to record the failure of one part of
his mission. With the stated exceptions, he was not impressed
