146           THE FRENCH      CONTINENTAL       MARKET       DESIGN

its falseness. Scholars this century have shown more con-
vincingly what he could only assert: that the Westphalian
economy was preponderantly agricultural. Helmut Berding’s
Habilitationsschrift®! clearly shows that land and old-style
landlordism, not the middle-class ownership of urban
property and capital, remained the basis of social pre-
eminence in the new kingdom. Many of the land’s resources
moreover were either tapped for Napoleon’s military use or
made over to the private enjoyment of imperial donatarres.
More than any other area of the Outre-Rhin, the kingdom of
Westphalia was geared to Napoleon’s variant of ‘fiscal feudal-
ism’, and the harmful repercussions on French exports there
were soon felt.
   Perier’s reports amply confirm that the main market incen-
tives in Germany came, as they had done for decades, from
Frankfurt and Leipzig. He claimed that Leipzig bought more
silkstuffs from Lyons each year than all other German towns
taken together. He also specified which imperial towns had
the best exporting potential in the Outre-Rhin. The choice is
predictable enough: for silks and silkstuffs — notably the
Lyonnais        but    also Avignon,       Nimes,   and   Saint-Etienne;     for
luxury        and     fashion ware   —     chiefly Paris; for woollens        —
Verviers, Eupen, Aachen, Louviers, Sedan, and Malmédy;
for cottons — Paris, Rouen, Lille, Mulhouse, and the Belgian
centres; for siamoises, lawns, cambrics, and other mixed
articles — Cambrai and Valenciennes. This select list has
some surprising omissions, such as the linen industry and
secondary metallurgy, in both of which the manufacturers of
the   Rhenish         left bank    would    have had      an interest.   Perier,
of course, had already stressed the price advantage enjoyed
by the linen           producers   of Brunswick,       Silesia, and Saxony;
but secondary metal output, or the whole industrial range
included under quincaillerie and dinanderie, may well have
had brighter prospects for export. The opportunities opened
up to the textile towns of Aachen, Cologne, and Crefeld,
furthermore, might have had closer attention in the reports.
But whatever the type of goods or the principal exporting
    81 Napoleonische Herrschafts- und Gesellschaftspolitik im Kénigreich West-
falen 1807-1813, Kritische Studien zur Geschichtswissenschaft, vol. vii (Géttin-
gen, 1973).
