           THE FRENCH       CONTINENTAL         MARKET       DESIGN          145

with the machine-models he had seen in Germany, and he
thought it not worth while to have them brought to France
for imitation.®°
   The reports also gave encouragement on particular details
of the French market design. Perier considered that the best
prospects for imperial exports to Germany, Poland, and
Russia lay with silkstuffs, luxury goods, fashion ware, and
woollens of better quality. An expansion of the trade in raw
silk, wines, eaux-de-vie, oils, and other agricultural products
was also likely. Cotton exports had fair prospects, since most
of the German states still imported the larger part of their
domestic consumption. It was claimed indeed that ‘Germany’
imported two-thirds of its needs in yarn and other primary
materials, by which Perier presumably meant sewing cotton
and the various types of semi-worked cloth. Even Saxony,
one of the states whose cotton industries were comparatively
advanced, was understood to produce only half of its needs
in yarn. How far imperial manufacturers took advantage of
such opportunities, Perier thought, would stand in inverse
relation to the Blockade’s efficacy. He added that in other
ranges of cotton and woollen products there would be stiff
competition        from     the   manufacturers         of   Berg,    Saxony,
Switzerland, and Prussia.
    As for the regional targets of the market design, Perier held
out little hope for the imperial export trade to the kmgdom
of Westphalia. While the Brunswick fairs were still far from
moribund, and while French dealings at them might remain
brisk, this was not where the market design had most
promise. If the hoary textbook platitude that Napoleon
aimed to create a ‘bourgeois monarchy’ out of Jérome
Bonaparte’s Westphalian lands were true, the market poten-
tial of the new kingdom would have been rather more appar-
ent to contemporary observers. Perier did not of course see
the question in terms of that myth; nor could he have had
the necessary archival and statistical detail to substantiate

   8°Cretet accepted this advice in his report to Napoleon of 13 Jan. 1808.
Referring to the models Perier had studied abroad, he concluded that ‘les collec-
tions d’Hanovre, de Gottingue, de Cassel, de Berlin, n’offraient rien qui put
enrichir la conservation des arts et métiers de Paris, ni rien méme qui approdies
de cet établissement le plus complet sans doute de |’Europe’. A.N. AF*IV   174,
