            THE FRENCH        CONTINENTAL      MARKET    DESIGN            143

the fact of Britain’s advantage in most industrial and
commercial branches. He also correctly identified the chief
reasons      for it: her lower labour and other industrial costs,
her superior machinery in the more popular industrial ranges,
the relative cheapness of her semi-worked and finished
articles,    her   flexible      commercial   and   credit   facilities.   He
reported that imperial exporters had made no significant
impact on German markets during the first nine months of
the Blockade. The two contributory factors most im-
mediately apparent to him here were the persistence of hosti-
lities into the summer of 1807 and the stockpiling of British
goods by German dealers in anticipation of the Blockade’s
enforcement in their lands. Perier also emphasized that smug-
gling was a serious problem, that its ubiquity was a sign of
the Blockade’s unpopularity in Germany, and that most
states still had dealings with Britain and would find ways of
continuing them in spite of the Blockade.
    The trade in cotton yarn and sewing cotton was a case in
point. As Perier observed in his report on that subject, ‘.. .
dans le grand nombre des manufactures que nous avons par-
courrues, il nous a été impossible d’en trouver une seule
qui eit employé la moindre quantité de cotons frangais.
Nous n’avons pas rencontré un seul fabricant qui eit cherché
a en connaitre les qualités et les prix. Beaucoup d’entr’eux
ignoroient jusqu’ici l’existence de nos filatures.’ His explana-
tion of the difficulty was that British cotton yarn and sewing
cotton sold so much more cheaply in Germany than the
French varieties that there had been no incentive to buy the
latter. In spite of the long diversions and the additional trans-
port and insurance costs which the Blockade necessitated in
the north, British yarn was still reckoned to be some 16 per
cent cheaper than French yarn in Germany. Perier thought
that the discrepancy would not even out until a maritime
peace was achieved. Even in those branches where French
producers had long been successful and where British com-
petition was not a major threat, he predicted troublesome
rivalry from a number of Continental states. Those men-
tioned      most   often   are    Berg,   Saxony,   Prussia (including of
course Silesia), and Switzerland. Again the theme of his
reports on them is the uncompetitivity of French prices in
