140     THE FRENCH    CONTINENTAL           MARKET   DESIGN

nos établissements auront pourvu a toute notre consomma-
tion, tls pourront verser au dela du Rhin l’excédent de leurs
produits’.’> This quite explicit statement of the French
market design in Germany was tied up with the technical
matter of the ‘drawback’. Champagny believed that if its pro-
cedure was properly applied, if, that is, imperial manufac-
turers could actually recoup their down payments on
imported cotton primary materials provided these were
worked up into finished goods for export, a vast market for
imperial cottons would be opened up across the Rhine.
   Taken as a whole, Champagny’s blueprint of 5 August
 1807 was a strange mixture of apparently liberal but prac-
tically lopsided proposals. In its more generous light it
opened the vista of a whole network of preferential treaties
with the states of the Rhenish Confederation. Its suggestions
of a commercial partnership with ‘French Germany’ would
have been far less one-sided than the Empire’s actual trade
relations with, say, Italy. But as against these aspects the
report was more remarkable for its partisan view of imperial
interests. Its vague suggestion of some reciprocal concessions,
whether immediate or at the peace, carried little weight
before the ‘égoisme sacré’ of the imperial plan. Nor did the
one-sidedness of French customs policy go unchallenged in
the Confederation. Champagny’s blueprint was not imple-
mented in the sense that it passed from the stage of
ministerial recommendations to immediate legislation. In
practice, transit and import duties in the Confederate states
did not satisfy all the wishes of the imperial government.
In the years which followed the report pressure was often.
put on the princes to moderate their tariffs in the interests
of imperial trade, usually with some formal effect.
   Champagny’s successor at the Interior was Cretet, and the
change came only a fortnight after the report of 5 August.
The new Minister lost no time in similarly asserting French
commercial interests in the Confederation and elsewhere. In
a report of 26 August 1807 he presented Napoleon with ‘la
perspective d’une plus grande activité de nos fabriques, dont
les productions ne peuvent manquer d’obtenir un débouché

                         78 Italics mine.
