142        THE FRENCH      CONTINENTAL       MARKET      DESIGN

amounted to an industrial reconnaissance expedition to
Germany. The questions posed by the Minister were the same
as those put to him by Napoleon on 30 July 1807 and to
which his report of 5 August was a provisional reply. Perier’s
instructions were to travel as widely as possible in the states
of the Rhenish Confederation and in Prussia, to observe, and
then report back to Paris. Apart from studying and assessing
French market opportunities in those lands, his mission had
one important practical purpose. It was to advise the Minister
on the propriety, technical rather than ethical, of transport-
ing foreign machines to France for imitation. This particular
object of the mission recalls the function of the Commission
d’extraction in Belgium under the National Convention. In
the event, Cretet had succeeded Champagny at the Interior
by the time the mission got under way, and it was to the new
Minister     that Perier’s reports were     sent. It was     Cretet, too,
who prepared the ministerial synopsis of 13 January 1808,
which was dispatched to Napoleon on 4 February.”?
   The Perier reports offer a detailed account of how imperial
industry and trade stood in relation to foreign competition
in the Outre-Rhin roughly a year after the Berlin decree.
They are much too long to be examined here in individual
detail, but a synthesis of their main findings is in order. The
reader is struck first by the wide range of industrial branches
and regions investigated. One report deals with the linen
trade   of    Brunswick,    Hanover,     and     the   Hesses.    Another,
among the most detailed, discusses the importance of the
Brunswick fairs and goes on to assess the prospects for
imperial exports to the kingdom of Westphalia more widely.
Another looks into the position of the German cotton indus-
tries and their markets, with particular reference to Berg,
Saxony, and Prussia. Other reports examine the prevailing
customs system in Prussia and suggest ways of facilitating
imperial trade to that country or through it to Poland and
Russia. Others again give an account of the mining, metallur-
gical, and textile industries of Silesia and Saxony. Perier was
altogether admirably frank. He did not try to curry favour
with the Minister by building up false hopes. He acknowledged

                            79 ALN. AF*IV 174,
