                 SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                                153

   More        recent    writers,    of     course,      have   not    taken    such
accounts wholly at face value, rightly regarding them as naive
and larger than life. Yet these same historians generally agree
that the first three or four years of the Blockade were a pros-
perous interlude in imperial Alsace. Paul Darmstadter singles
out Strasbourg for special mention as perhaps the chief
beneficiary of the shift of the trade routes inland towards the
Continental interior. The city in his view enjoyed a ‘colossal
increase’ of its commercial activity.? Rodolphe Reuss con-
siders those years as the optimum point of ‘calm and material
prosperity’ after the ‘feverish events’ of the Revolution.!°
Recovering from the earlier paralysis, Strasbourg’s trade
flourished once more, and Alsatian agriculture improved con-
spicuously, helped by the growing demand for industrial raw
materials. According to Félix Ponteil, too, the Consulate and
Empire gave Alsace an economic ‘vigour’ it had not known
for many years.!! He refers to a ‘magnificent prosperity’
and to Strasbourg’s transformation from a ‘Rhenish centre’
into ‘the emporium of the Continent’. It was at once the
chief entrepot for traffic between south-western and north-
eastern Europe and a ‘capital link’ on the trade routes from
the east to the French interior and vice versa. Never before,
Ponteil claims, had so much business been concentrated
there. Huge fortunes were made in a few years. The military
markets, regular traffic by river and road, and of course
incessant smuggling all contributed to the local prosperity.
‘Le crédit n’a pas de limites, l’argent coule a flots. La richesse
se répand partout.’!?
   Paul Leuilliot, one of the most prolific of modern writers
on Alsatian history in the nineteenth century, radiates the
same optimism. He accepts the claim made in a report by the
Chamber of Commerce that Strasbourg was the channel
through which exports from a third of French territory

   °Die Krisis von      1810/11’, 577-8. A similar conclusion is argued in more
detail in the last section of his ‘Verwaltung des Unter-Elsass’, esp. 665-7.
   10Qp. cit. 377.
   These and the following details from Ponteil’s works are a condensation of
his main points in Essai sur l’histoire de l’Alsace (Strasbourg, 1937), 78-9; ‘Les
conséquences    du Blocus continental     dans la région rhénane et plus particuliére-
ment a Strasbourg’, Revue du Rhin, i (Aug.            1937), 9-10; and ‘Jean-Georges
Humann’, in Etudes strasbourgeoises, 95-108.                             12 Fssai, 79.
