152                INLAND       ECONOMIC       EXPANSION        1807-1810

agreed that there was a marked expansion of industrial and
commercial activity in both departments, and that their agri-
cultural performance was more than satisfactory. Some of
these writers attribute the expansion to‘the impact of the
Blockade or wider Continental System on the Empire’s in-
land economies. Indeed, for the earliest among them, the
happier fortunes of 1807-10        seemed indistinguishable
from the benefits of Napoleonic rule more generally. One
‘classic’? statement of the optimistic case appeared a little
over a decade after Napoleon’s defeat. Written by Jean-
Frédéric Aufschlager,® it was based on personal recollections
(or perhaps rather on fond nostalgia), and it was not ob-
viously the sort of account that was likely to endear him to
the Bourbon authorities. As his crude brush-strokes have
been imitated by a number of other writers, it is worth con-
sidering what he had to say. Under Napoleonic rule, he
contended,
L’ordre fut rétabli, le repos public maintenu; les lois étaient suivies;
Vagriculture, l’industrie et le commerce florissaient . . . l’Alsace jouis-
‘sait d’une paix profonde, tandis que le feu de la guerre dévorait les pays
voisins . . . L’argent était dans une circulation perpétuelle et malgré
les fortes impositions qu’on payait, l’aisance des habitans s’accrut;
les terres, les maisons et les marchandises montérent a des prix inconnus
jusque-la. Ces avantages materiels, et la gloire qui rejaillisait des faits
d’armes des guerriers francais, empéchérent beaucoup de gens de
prévoir les malheurs. auxquels le despotisme de Napoléon exposait la
patrie, et leur firent méme regretter son gouvernement aprés sa chute.’
Few of Napoleon’s former supporters could have invoked
their master’s voice more generously during the Restoration.
Bonapartism and its legends battened on such beliefs embel-
lished by the lapse of time. Commenting on the economic
effects of Napoleonic rule in Strasbourg some twenty years
after its disappearance, Jules Sengenwald recalled the days
when ‘l’age d’or semblait avoir refleuri dans l’enceinte de nos
remparts’.8 He considered 1808 and 1809 the years of the
city’s greatest affluence.
      SL’Alsace:    nouvelle    description   historique   et topographique des deux    dé-
partements du Rhin (2 vols., Strasbourg, 1826).
    "Ibid. i, 385-6. An equally optimistic passage from Aufschlager’s Souvenirs
is quoted at length in R. Reuss, Histoire de Strasbourg depuis ses origines jusqu’a
nos jours (Paris, 1922), 379-80.
      **Apercu     historique   et critique   sur le commerce    de Strasbourg,   depuis la
Révolution jusqu’a nos jours’, R. d’Als. (old ser.), i (1836), 199-200.
