156           INLAND ECONOMIC EXPANSION             1807-1810
conviction.    As the trade routes were still under that threat,
most merchants were understandably loath to take un-
necessary risks. Large-scale commercial dealings with the
Outre-Rhin in all but the most essential consumer goods
or in military provisions were resumed only after the treaties
of Tilsit.!© Yet the Chamber’s minutes for the second half
of 1807 give little explicit evidence that the tide was turning
in favour of local trade. Its reports refer to the familiar
‘stagnation’ and ‘decadence’ as late as December. Such
routine statements were not backed by detailed facts, how-
ever;   and   if the minutes      for the   second    half of 1807      are
 taken as a whole, they seem far less plaintive than those
 for the earlier years. From that half-year to the summer of
 1810 they are refreshingly sparse in the kind of protest and
 petitioning which consumes so much space in the earlier
 minutes.
    This comparative lack of protest is surely significant in
itself. The Chamber had always taken the trouble to record
 local grievances in detail and with a self-conscious sense of
 its paternal responsibility. Just as it had never been slow to
 give local anxieties maximum publicity, so it was not in the
 habit of advertising happier fortunes indiscreetly. On the
 latter point prudence urged silence, since too much conspi-
 cuous success might attract the government’s fiscal attention.
The generally less miserable reports might then suggest,
 tacitly and by implication, that trade was improving. This
 hunch is strengthened by the minutes for 1808, which are
 more notable still for their relative absence of jeremiads and
 the worn old catch-phrases of woe. Two types of business
 dominated the meetings that year. One was the hardy annual
 of Strasbourg’s commercial relations with Mainz and Frank-
 furt; the other was the internal organization and functioning
 of the Chamber itself. Both were set in the context of im-
 plied commercial improvement.
    Some of the chamber’s reports for 1808 refer to an
 expanding trade more explicitly. As in 1807, there were no
 serious local bankruptcies to speak of, and larger sales on the
 military market following the return of the troops were often
   6 Between the Empire and Russia on 7 July, between the Empire and Prussia
on 9th.
