158         INLAND    ECONOMIC      EXPANSION       1807-1810

something rather like a traffic jam in the city. It was so rare
for the Chamber to feel able to record a glut of trade that
one must infer a dramatic turn of fortune during the early
months of 1808.                            ‘
   The only two branches which did not fit the pattern of
steady growth that year were the hemp and linen trade and
the traffic in colonial goods. In the first case the continuing
ban on exports of the raw material held back its production.
In the second, prices followed a variable course. The over-all
performance of both branches was satisfactory, however, and
each had brief periods of expansion. Hemp and linens began
the year poorly but recovered later. The Chamber’s report
for the third quarter noted that they had actually ‘succeeded’
as a result of wider sales in the French interior, the Midi, and
Italy.2° Strasbourg’s trade in colonial goods made a reverse
showing. It was quite active during the first half of 1808,7!
but then dropped off sharply in the second.?? The rise in
prices during the earlier half was due to increased orders from
Paris. The goods were described as of ‘permitted origin’,
but in fact the label was often false, for much of the trade
was in contraband which had filtered through the customs
cordons. Sugar, coffee, and pepper were in most demand, but
the slump in prices during the latter half of the year was put
down to the wider availability of such goods in other imperial
towns. It is also likely that the Spanish insurrection and the
rupture in Franco-American relations upset the earlier specu-
lative prognoses. Some of Strasbourg’s industries undoubtedly
felt the effects of the new uncertainty in the supply of trans-
marine primary materials. Most of the dyers, for instance, rah
short of indigo and cochineal and were forced to suspend
work during part of the summer.”? Yet, taking 1808 as a
whole,    the   Chamber      counted     dealings    in colonial    goods
among    the main      currents    of the city’s growing entrepdt
traffic.”4
   The same      quarterly reports for 1808 point to sustained
    ?° Report to Shée of 6 Oct. 1808: A.D. (B-R) XII M 6.
    71 Reports of 1 Mar. and 23 May 1808: ibid.
    2? Reports of 5 Aug. and 31 Dec. 1808: ibid.
    23 Reports of 5 Aug. and 2 Sept. 1808: ibid.
    4 Retrospective report of Apr. 1809: meeting of 24th of the month, Min.
iv; A.D. (B-R)    XM 3.
