                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                              157

noted. On several occasions it was acknowledged that Stras-
bourg was well equipped, by both position and local expertise
in the carrying trade, to take advantage of rising exports to
Germany. But there were two prerequisites, as the Chamber
noted in its report to the prefect Shée of 1 March:!7 the
Rhine freight charges had to be kept as low as possible, and
tariffs in the Confederation had to be prevented from handi-
capping imperial exports there or the transit trade to parts
further east. In another report of 23 May the Chamber gave
its first detailed account of marked improvement at the
entrepot.'® It noted an increase in the export of wines and
eaux-de-vie from the Midi. Champagne and burgundies pass-
ing through Strasbourg were also selling better abroad than in
previous years. Levantine cotton had arrived in greater quan-
tities, in spite of customs delays along the overland routes.!?
The most conspicuous progress had however been made in
that broad sector of trade referred to in the report as ‘la
navigation du Rhin’. Current traffic exceeded all. earlier
expectations. Instead of the normal dispatches to Mainz and
Frankfurt every ten days, the barges were leaving after only
five. Their cargoes were also bigger. As against the usual
load of between         1,400 and 1,900 metric quintals, each barge
then carried from 3,000 to 4,000 metric quintals. On this
prima facie evidence, the sheer volume of traffic through the
city had quadrupled by comparison with preceding years.
   One ironic effect of the commercial expansion in Stras-
bourg was that existing entrepot facilities at the halle
commerciale were soon found to be inadequate. As the
Chamber observed in the same report of 23 May, all efforts
to create more space and improve services had not stopped
the congestion at the entrepdt. The increase in expeditions
had apparently been so sudden and extraordinary that we
here strike a quite different sort of economic problem.
Having followed the Chamber’s earlier complaints of not
enough commercial activity, we are now confronted with

   17 ALD, (B-R) XII M 6.                                           18 Thid.
   19The imperial decree of 9 June 1808 channelled the import of Levantine
cotton through Strasbourg and two Italian towns according to the system of
certificats d’origine and consular verification of goods in the Levant laid down on
23 Nov. 1807: papers in A.N. F!? 533; meeting of 25 June 1808, Min. iii.
