                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                            151
industrial and commercial policies. Some of his descriptions,
along with other contemporary views of the same sort,?
are common       in secondary works which focus on _ the
Blockade’s negative effects.
   Walsh was however at best only a selective witness of the
French economy in 1807. His Letter is regrettably thin in
specific detail on the provinces he visited, and surprisingly
few of the ‘inland towns’ often referred to are even men-
tioned by name. His overt polemical aim to present
Napoleon in the worst possible light raises further doubts
about his factual accuracy, and altogether one suspects
that most of his impressions were gained from what he calls
‘the best informed circles of Paris’. One may then ask what
he would have found if, like the more inquisitive Nemnich,
he had also taken his tourist’s notebook to the eastern
departments of the Empire. The short answer is: an economic
spectacle rather different from that of the depressed coastal
areas. Apart from the troubles in some industries after the
Spanish insurrection of 1808, the period from 1807 to 1810
brought economic expansion to many inland parts of the
Empire. The industries and trade of Paris, the Lyonnais, the
Rhenish left bank, and Belgium developed quickly under the
favourable conditions created by a fully protected home
market and French ascendancy on the Continent. According
to one authoritative account,*® French exports of cotton
goods increased tenfold between 1807 and 1810, thanks to
the enlargement of the Continental market open to them.
Lévy-Leboyer adds that French silkstuffs, woollens, mixed
textiles, secondary metallurgy, and luxury hardware also did
comparatively well in those years.
   Alsace was among the principal areas of that inland expan-
sion. The primary and secondary sources alike present the
period from the summer of 1807 to the autumn of 1810 as
a prosperous one in the province. All the better-known
writers on this period of Alsatian economic history seem

    3See for instance the sad pictures of the main French seaports (Le Havre,
Nantes, La Rochelle, Bordeaux, and Marseilles) given by the Hamburg traveller
P, A. Nemnich in 1809 in his Tagebuch einer der Kultur und Industrie gewid-
meten Reise (8 vols., Tiibingen, 1809-11), v-vi. 136, 144-9, 156 ff., and 316 ff.
    4 Letter, 229.              5 Maurice Lévy-Leboyer, Banques européennes, 55.
