154           INLAND     ECONOMIC        EXPANSION        1807-1810

passed during the Blockade. At the same time, he says, the
city handled a third of all French imports, with obvious
benefits to the local middlemen and merchant carriers. He
further argues, in my view mistakenly, ‘that 1812 was the
high-water mark of the city’s trade under Napoleonic rule.
On the other hand, one could hardly disagree with him that
fortunes could be made more quickly and with less effort
during the Blockade than under the Restoration, especially
among dealers in colonial goods who knew the ropes of the
smuggling trade. His point that the Rhenish area became the
Continent’s commercial centre of gravity during the Blockade
is also fair. Ponteil even suggests that local prosperity is re-
flected in the faster rate of population growth in both Alsa
tian departments at that time.!°
   Fernand L’Huillier’s findings, the most detailed for my
period which have appeared so far, reinforce the same broad
conclusion. Putting together the essential details of his major
work’ and of an earlier article,!* one has ample evidence
that Strasbourg grew enormously in commercial importance
during the first few years of the Blockade but more especially
in 1808 and 1809. It became the leading ‘factorerie’ between
France,     Germany,       and    Switzerland,       and generally between
northern and southern Europe. Having suffered for so long
from the fierce competition of Mainz, it had a ‘brilliant
revenge’ during the Blockade. By the nature of its entrepdt
and transit traffic, and through the widening orbit of its
trade dealings, it came to resemble an ‘inland seaport’. Its
commercial network reached out through many _ inter-
mediaries to make contact with Bordeaux and thence with
Portugal, with Séte, Aix, Marseilles, and Grasse, with Orléans

    '8 The details of the foregoing paragraph are a synthesis of Leuilliot’s evidence
in L’Alsace au début du XIXe siécle. Essais d’histoire politique, économique et
religieuse (1815-1830) (3 vols., S.E.V.P.E.N., Paris, 1959-60), ii. 250-8; and
‘L’Alsace en 1815’, R. d’Als., xxv (1928), 67-8. The Chamber’s report referred
to is dated 12 Dec. 1813: Min. viii. Its estimate that a third of imperial trade
passed by the Rhine through Strasbourg during the Blockade is also repeated in
C. Schmidt, ‘La France a-t-elle eu, au XIXe siécle, une politique économique en
Alsace et sur le Rhin?’, Revue de Paris, xxxi (1924), 555. Fuller details of the
Alsatian population under Napoleon appear in Appendix L below, p. 294.
    % Alsace napoléonienne, 324, 328, 330 (for map showing Strasbourg’s ‘prin-
cipal connections’ within the Empire), and 331.
    ‘5 Le Rhin dans la France napoléonienne’, 203.
