            SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                155
and Paris, with Rotterdam and Amsterdam, with the Hanse
towns, with Frankfurt, Leipzig, and Vienna. It acted as the
‘dynamo’ (moteur) of a European trade properly so called.
The year 1808 marked the ‘wonderful renaissance’ of Stras-
bourg’s commercial life, in the measure that the Rhine
became the crucial artery of European trade. A revival of
the river and road traffic between Nimwegen and Basel
reinforced the city’s prosperity by enriching its leading
houses of commission and merchant carriers.
    Now, if my own research broadly squares with those con-
clusions, it obliges me to add several substantial qualifica-
tions. Some of the more rapturous accounts cited above need
dilution. The difficulty of generalizing satisfactorily for the
period of the Blockade as a whole is plain, and chronological
distinctions are essential. One also needs to distinguish
between the different regions of Alsace and between its main
industrial and commercial branches. Finally one should ask
how far Alsatian prosperity, such as it was, can be directly
attributed to the effects of the Blockade. Some of the writers
named earlier have been too quick to explain the local econo-
mic expansion in terms of the Blockade, and in any case they
often exaggerate the affluence. They have presumed rather
than proved that the prosperity seeped through to the
popular masses below the undoubtedly fortunate commercial
élite. The aim of this and the next chapter is not only to illus-
trate and so far as possible quantify the earlier conclusions
advanced for the period 1807-10, but also to qualify them
and analyse the links between the Blockade and the
economic performance of Alsatian trade and industry in
those years.

ii. The descriptive evidence of the Chamber of Commerce
    in Strasbourg

According to the official descriptive record of the Chamber’s
minutes, there would seem to have been few definite signs
of commercial improvement in the city much before the
spring of 1808. The routine reports for the first half of
1807 are as gloomy as ever, and no doubt the dragging on of
the Continental war well into the summer gives them some
