            SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                159
expansion in other major commercial and industrial branches.
Tobacco output was up by a third on the level of 1807, and
the leading processing enterprises responded well to higher
demand. The cotton spinners and manufacturers of nankeens
had a productive year, again in spite of a short interruption
during the third quarter. Woollens sold well in commercial
as well as in military markets. Wines, eaux-de-vie, and other
agricultural products continued to pass through Strasbourg in
large quantities. Levantine cotton expeditions were bigger
and more frequent. Altogether, 1808 was the best year local
merchants had known under Napoleonic rule. Looking back
on it in April 1809, the Chamber confirmed this assess-
ment.”° It stated that no detailed balance of trade for the
year could be given but that the city had prospered during it.
It seems likely that these more cheerful reports were matched
by actual performance at the entrepdot.

                              *     *    x

On the whole 1809 was a better year still. Indeed, enough
evidence in the Chamber’s records and in other sources sup-
ports the conclusion that it was the annus mirabilis of Stras-
bourg’s trade during the whole Napoleonic period. Traffic
through the entrepo6t then reached its zenith. Local
merchants remained, at least for official purposes, largely
silent and so presumably content. In its report of 8 April?®
the Chamber noted the recurrence of an earlier embarrass-
ment. The city’s entrepot facilities were said to be still
unequal to the volume of goods passing through it. Imports
of Levantine cotton had made a sudden spurt, because
merchants had anticipated the war with Austria and hastened
to stock up supplies before it broke. The export trade in
wines and eaux-de-vie had grown so much that the routine
for inspecting and dispatching cargoes was clogged. The
halle commerciale was stacked with uncleared goods destined
for either side of the frontier. The Chamber appealed for
permission to shorten and speed up the unloading procedures
so as to ease the stoppage. It pressed in particular for the
               25 Retrospective report of Apr. 1809, ibid.
               26 Meeting of the same date, Min. iv.
