162              INLAND      ECONOMIC    EXPANSION     1807-1810

celui d’arrivage pour les denrées coloniales venant de la Hollande et du
Nord et pour les cotons de Macédoine 5... La sireté et le bon ordre
de la navigation marchande sur le Rhin, de Strasbourg a Francfort, est
une des causes les plus actives qui attirait cette expédition vers notre
port.

Several of the leading themes of this book are illustrated
here. During the first three or four years of the Blockade,
Strasbourg benefited where the maritime ports did not and,
more pointedly, because they could not. It lay at the hub
of the inland trade routes which linked France with the
subject and allied states. On this evidence it was one of the
beneficiaries, perhaps even the main beneficiary, of the
Blockade’s effects on some inland regional economies during
the expansionary period.



The year 1810 was on the whole more variable for Stras-
bourg’s trade, and the last quarter at least was fraught with
upsets. Yet the first half and perhaps also the third quarter
remained satisfactory over all. Some commercial branches
like chemical products and (after the government’s export
concessions)             grain sold well abroad.     The performance of
other branches was more irregular. Sales of Levantine cotton,
for instance, were brisk during the first quarter. Sautier in-
formed Briansiaux in a letter of 28 January that ‘Paris nous
assaille de commandes qu’on ne peut remplir et offre des
prix trés avantageux.’* By the summer, however, the in-
coming trade had Crepp ers!in volume. In its report i 20 July
for the second quarter®’ the Chamber put this down to re-
duced demand from the French interior, especially from
Paris, and to Russian troop movements during the prepara-
tion for war with Turkey, which had temporarily halted the
expeditions from the Levant and pushed up the price of
stocks in Vienna.*8
  A fall in the volume of trade in colonial goods passing
through Strasbourg also occurred during the second quarter

      35 Italics mine.           36 AN. 3 AQ 339.          37   A.D. (B-R) XII M 8.
      ** Sautier had noted the same problem in a letter to Briansiaux of 10 Apr.
1810: A.N. 3 AQ 339.
