                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                             165
the carrying trade to and from the new imperial departments.
It stressed the new prospects opened up by the annexation
and, after 5 August and 17 September, by the Trianon tariff
and its supplement. The prefect’s support was solicited and
as usual soon won.*? Since the tariff and its supplement
considerably widened the range of permissible imports,
though at the cost of swingeing increases in the duties, one
can appreciate the Chamber’s impatience to see Strasbourg’s
economic role as a lieu de passage formally improved. In
technical terms its request was that article 53 of the
determining arrété of 8 Floréal XI should be extended to all
classes of goods allowed by the tariff. In the same way the
Strasbourgeois were anxious not to be excluded from any
commercial favours which might follow on the French mar-
riage alliance with Austria of February 1810. They also
sought concessions for easier trade dealings with the Hanse
towns and neighbouring coastal regions after their annexation
took effect at the beginning of 1811.

ill. Statistical evidence of expansion in the Bas-Rhin

It is simpler to state the descriptive record of commercial
expansion in Strasbourg during the years 1807-10 than to
quantify it. The official statistics for the period are dis-
appointing in many ways. They were normally drawn up
after administrative delays, sometimes a year or more after
the periods for which they were supposed to be a current
record. They were usually incomplete and often self-
contradictory. Many do not square with the detailed retro-
spective surveys included in tabular form at the end of
the Chamber’s minute-book for 1813.°° In seeking to
analyse and interpret this material, one works with frequent
    4? Lezay-Marnésia to Montalivet, 22 Aug. 1810: A.D. (B-R) XII M 48.
    5°These are much too full and officially presented to be dismissed out of
hand, but in my view they are unsatisfactory. They diverge, often greatly, from
the quarterly reports for earlier and particular years, and they sometimes make
nonsense of the Chamber’s own descriptive summaries. My preference in this
chapter is for the statistical reports most contemporaneous with the periods to
which they refer. But since a number of earlier writers appear to have based their
findings on the retrospective surveys of 1813, the latter are reproduced for com-
parative purposes in Appendices B and E below, pp. 276-7 and 283 respec-
tively.
