160       INLAND   ECONOMIC       EXPANSION       1807-1810

urgent dispatch of cotton expeditions to Paris, since the
volume of imports was expected to increase.
   The Chamber’s detailed report of 24 April, referred to
earlier, made many of the same points.    ‘It is also interesting
for its mentioning of tobacco and colonial goods among the
expanding commercial branches. Local trade had been
stimulated by what it referred to as the ‘extraordinary cir-
cumstances’ then current. The greater commercial pressure
which preceded the Wagram campaign was certainly one of
these. It is possible that the Chamber was alluding also to the
reorientation of trade routes from the coast towards the in-
land entrepéts. Or again, it might have been thinking more of
the favourable power structure of the Grand Empire and of
the developing French market within it. This last interpreta-
tion fits the Chamber’s meaning best of all, perhaps, as it
went on to say that Strasbourg’s trade to the Outre-Rhin
had been the main stimulus to expansion.
   The Wagram campaign intrudes into the local records on
many occasions during the summer of 1809, but it is not
clear whether traffic through Strasbourg was much affected
by the hostilities. Fargés-Méricourt thought that it was, but
that it soon regained momentum after the peace of Schén-
brunn, signed on 14 October.?”7 The Chamber’s own report
for the third quarter suggests however that the effects had
been minimal.”8 It stated that the transit trade, especially
expeditions to northern Europe, had remained ‘very active’.
On this point the Chamber is probably the better guide.
The Wagram campaign was comparatively short, and in any
case most of the hostilities did not straddle the major trade
routes in the Rhenish Confederation. The mood in Stras-
bourg throughout was more circumspect than depressed. The
firm of Sautier & Cie informed Briansiaux of Lille when the
uncertainty began that ‘les affaires qui s’étoient un peu ralen-
tis [sic] par l’espoir d’une paix viennent reprendre peu a
peu plus d’activité’.2?    ‘Tout prend ici un aspect guerrier
trés formidable’, it added, ‘et il ne nous reste que la presque
certitude de voir incessament commencer les hostilités’.
                27 Annuaire du Bas-Rhin for 1810, 255-6.
                28 AD. (B-R) XM 3.
                2° Letter of 5 Apr. 1809: A.N. 3 AQ 339.
