               SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                               161
What actually followed recalls the tense anticipation of the
outcome of Tilsit in 1807. Just as then, the incidence of
speculative buying counteracted the natural tendency to
restraint in the local market.
   Developments elsewhere in the Empire also boosted Alsa-
tian dealings during the spring and summer of 1809. Sautier
wrote to the same correspondents on 30 May that ‘nous
croyons le moment propice, pour spéculer sur les cotons;
si les Ee         américains ne sont pas admis, ce qui est trés
vraisemblable,*° on verra reprendre les cotons [from the
Levant] avec fureur’.*! According to this letter, Strasbourg
was then an advantageous market for raw cotton, which was
selling between 60 and 100 per cent more cheaply than in
Paris. René Leroux’s correspondence with Briansiaux that
year also supports the evidence of brisk dealings in this
branch during the summer. On 29 September he wrote that
‘malgré qu’en général, il y ait beaucoup de calme, les cotons
font bonne contenance et paraissent devoir se maintenir
a un prix raisonnable’.** Less than a fortnight later he
informed the same correspondents that there was ‘rien encore
d’officiel relativement a la paix, quoique tout le monde la
croye      signée. En attendant les affaires restent calmes.’*?
In general, the Briansiaux papers for 1809, which deal with
several merchant houses of Strasbourg, suggest brisk trade in
spite of the war.
   This conclusion is amply supported by one of the most
enthusiastic reports of the expansionary period. Writing to
the prefect on 5 August,** the Chamber quite explicitly
linked Strasbourg’s commercial prosperity with the reorienta-
tion of trade routes under the impact of the Blockade. The
key passage reads as follows:
Les circonstances de la guerre et le Blocus des ports ont amené au plus
haut point d’activité quelques unes des branches d’affaires que la
localité   de cette ville lui assure constamment          a un degré inférieur.
Notre place est devenue le comptoir presque exclusif des exportations
qui s’effectuaient une partie par mer, pour le Nord et la Russie; et

   304 reference to Napoleon’s likely reprisals, which in fact followed on 18
July, against American shipping which    had been allowed to flout the Blockade
laws in Holland that spring.
   31 AN. 3 AQ 339.             32 Ibid.           33 Letter of 11 Oct. 1809: ibid.
   34 Meeting of 16 Aug. 1809, Min. iv; A.D. (B-R)     XM 3.
