164          INLAND      ECONOMIC       EXPANSION       1807-1810

the evidence of decline inthe local tobacco trade.*© He also
noted the closure of all but one of the city’s sugar refineries,
adding that the cause was the inaccessibility of supplies from
overseas. On 18 October the Chamber concentrated on the
problem of financial embarrassment among some of the mer-
chant commissioners.*”? The decree of 22 February 1810 had
doubled the duty on chemical products of non-colonial origin
and seriously disrupted Strasbourg’s import trade from the
Rhenish Confederation. Worse still, the decree was being
interpreted as a prohibitive measure by customs officials and
indiscriminately extended to other goods. And so, alas, after
a kind of moratorium lasting nearly three years, we are back
with the old chorus of complaints. During the first half of
1810 the language of protest was restrained; during the
second, accompanied by a new spate of petitions, it was again
in full cry. Once more the central issue during the short
hiatus between the expansionary period and the economic
crisis of 1810-11 was the status of Strasbourg’s entrepdt
and transit facilities. It would be unduly pessimistic, though,
to rely on the official reports as balanced accounts of what
was actually happening at the halle commerciale; for while
the protests and petitions were frequent, the Chamber referred
on several occasions to commercial blockage during the third
quarter of the year. It was apparently unaware of the irony
here, as such congestion had been more familiarly the effect
of the earlier commercial expansion.
    Furthermore, many of the letters and petitions which
emanated from the Chamber during the late summer and
autumn of 1810 were less concerned with illustrating ‘Ia
stagnation des affaires’ than pressing for more liberal trading
rights. Certain political events and modifications of economic
policy make the Chamber’s requests seem more tendentious
still. One of the appeals, soon repeated in its correspondence
with the central and local officials, concerned Strasbourg’s
trade links with Holland after the annexation of that country
to the Empire in July.*® It asked for much more freedom in

   “© Report to Montalivet: A.D. (B-R) III M 3.
   ‘7 Report to Lezay-Marnésia: A.D. (B-R) XII M 8.
    “8 Letters to Montalivet, Collin de Sussy (director-general of customs), Lezay-
Marnésia, and Magnier-Grandprez: meeting of 16 Aug. 1810, Min. v.
