170          INLAND       ECONOMIC    EXPANSION        1807-1810

such trade. Similar fortunes overtook the Alsatian trade in
colonial goods during the expansionary years. Since only a
small fraction of these imports was consumed locally, com-
missioners relied heavily on orders from ‘the French interior,
especially from Paris. Clients there might suddenly default
if other entrepdts offered a better market, as the cited
instance of rapid sales in Antwerp in April-May 1810 nicely
illustrates.**
                                 a          See
Whatever the improvement of road traffic through Strasbourg
during the expansionary period, the city’s major advances
were realized in its river trade with Mainz and Frankfurt.
The official statistics, more particularly those compiled in
1810, happily give us rather more to go by in this than in the
overland sector. By far the most important single document
is the Chamber’s report of 23 February 1810, whose
verbatim transcript covers twenty-eight pages of the minute-
book.*® It was addressed to Bérigny, the chief engineer of the
department, in reply to his questionnaire on the city’s ship-
ping. It contains much illuminating material on the practical
routine and legal technicalities of Strasbourg’s river traffic,
but here it is the statistics which matter most. The Chamber
confined itself to the large-scale merchant shipping to and
from Mainz and Frankfurt. In other words, its figures relate
only to the operations of the members of the official bargees’
Associations. Any additional traffic undertaken in smaller
craft up and down the Rhine between Switzerland and Stras-
bourg, or by the military transports down river, was speci-
fically excluded. So was the whole network of river-borne
contraband trade, by its nature secret, unrecorded, and so,
unfortunately, unquantifiable.
   In terms      of its restricted     focus,     then,   the   Chamber     re-
ported. that 24 Strasbourg barges had made a total of 37
return voyages to Mainz and Frankfurt during 1808, while
11 Mainz barges had made the return journey to Strasbourg
once each. In 1809, the same Strasbourg barges had made
75 such journeys and the Mainz barges 12. The frequency of
dispatches had thus apparently doubled among members
        55 See above, Pp. 163.       °° Meeting of the same date, Min. v.
