178       INLAND    ECONOMIC      EXPANSION   1807-1810

the department’s     290    ‘workshops’   (fabriques) in 1810 —
 again the mass of rural and part-time spinning and weaving
 ‘establishments’ is excluded from the latter figure — no less
than 30,000 were said to be employed in or near Mulhouse.
    Unfortunately, no industrial or commercial centre of the
Haut-Rhin has a continuous record of short-term economic
developments to match the minute-books of the Chamber in
Strasbourg for my period. The local archives in Mulhouse are
particularly disappointing in their coverage of specifically
Napoleonic      data.  The    official  consultative   chambers
(chambres consultatives des manufactures, fabriques, arts
et métiers) set up in Mulhouse and Sainte-Marie in 1806 more
or less met the requirement to send quarterly reports to the
prefect, but they did so in a repetitive and rather inadequate
way. There is in consequence no accessible statistical basis
on which to chart the total volume or value of industrial
output there, or anywhere else in the department for that
matter. In general, the official record consists of sundry local
fragments and inadequate departmental synopses.
    One such, dated 15 February 1808, was a report by the
president of the trade tribunal in Belfort to the prefect.”
He claimed that the local industries had increased production
by at least one-twelfth in 1807 compared with the preceding
year. Just how he could have worked out his calculation so
finely in default of specific details (and his report is thin in
them) is a little mysterious. While the figure seems far from
excessive, perhaps one should regard the estimate as a meta-
phor to express expansion. The president named cottons as
the main growth-point, but he added that some drop in out-
put was expected in view of the current uncertainties in the
supply of primary materials. According to another report, the
industrial growth-rate elsewhere in the Haut-Rhin was con-
siderably higher during the same period than the estimated
8 per cent in Belfort. It was written by Gaspard Dollfus for
the arrondissement of Altkirch, which included Mulhouse,
and was sent to the prefect on 29 February 1808.5 It gave
every indication of good industrial headway during the pre-
ceding three quarters. It particularly mentioned the advance

             4 A.D. (H-R) IM 128/1.            8 Tbid.
