                   SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                        LAL
of the local Association in 1809, each of whom then made
at least three return journeys to Mainz and Frankfurt. No
comparable figures for the whole of 1810 appear in the
official records, but one can round off the picture for at least
the first half of that year from later evidence.*” During that
period the Strasbourg barges made 32 down-river journeys
to Mainz and Frankfurt and 17 laden journeys up river.*®
This would imply that the dispatches were less frequent than
the half-yearly average for 1809 but still well up on the cor-
responding figure for 1808, which was itself known to be an
improvement on the position in 1807. Thus so far as any
conclusion may be drawn from these simple statistics, 1809
was the high-water mark of Strasbourg’s river trade during
the expansionary period.
   There is further evidence of this in the Chamber’s supple-
mentary figures for the volume of traffic in question. Accord-
ing to its report of 23 February 1810, the official returns
were complicated by the incidence of what it called ‘un trans-
port de territoire en territoire’. This was a form of transit
trade up and down the Rhine valley, whether by the river or
land routes or both it is not always clear. The Chamber
stated that the value of such traffic could not be reckoned
precisely but that in earlier times it had been worth around
2 million francs a year to Strasbourg alone. Its value during
the expansionary years was presumably higher, especially if
illicit    trade    is also taken    into   account;    but    in default     of
explicit evidence to that effect, this is no more than a reason-
able guess. In any case, the ‘transport de territoire en
territoire’? was not included in the Chamber’s figures of
23 February, which are reproduced as they stand in Table 6
below, along with some discrepant figures from the minutes
of earlier meetings. Even on the basis of such restricted
statistical evidence, the growth of Strasbourg’s down-river
trade during 1808 and 1809 was colossal. It fits the Cham-
ber’s earlier reports of more frequent dispatches and larger
cargoes at that time. It is a fair conclusion that local

    57 Report of 9 Aug. 1810: meeting of the same date, Min. v; and A.D. (B-R)
XII M 8.
    58 Details of voyages made by the Mainz barges (if any) are not given in the
report.
