            SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                                179
of cotton spinning in Masevaux, Lutterbach, and Bollwiller,
before the blow of the May decrees of 1808 struck them.
Cotton weaving, particularly the production of semi-finished
articles for calico-printing, was said to have ‘increased pro-
digiously’ in Mulhouse, in its environs, and in the valleys of
the Vosges. Calico-printing itself, the crucial industry of the
arrondissement, had twenty-six large enterprises in full
activity. This marked an increase of four on the previous
count, and sixteen of the firms were based in Mulhouse.                      All
had done better during 1807 than in preceding years, and the
recent winter production had been generally high. The manu-
facturers were said to be optimistic about their prospects for
1808.   In other      words,     the    rather anxious        forecasts   of the
leading tndienneurs during the prefect’s industrial survey of
April-May 18077° had not apparently materialized. The ex-
pansion in Mulhouse had been achieved in spite of a trebling
of raw cotton prices from the summer of 1807 to the follow-
ing spring, itself due to stiffer import duties and some re-
export from the Empire as foreign demand, especially in
Switzerland and on the Rhenish right bank, attracted stocks.
The favourable domestic market and the return of peace on
the Continent had more than compensated for higher indus-
trial costs. Gaspard Dollfus linked the expansion directly
with the Blockade’s regime and also emphasized how impor-
tant the incentive of the imperial ‘marchés réservés’ in the
kingdom of Italy was becoming.
  For    other      industrial     branches       in   the    arrondissement,
according to the same report, 1807 had also been a satisfac-
tory year. Expansion in the woollen industries had not
matched that in cottons, but output had held steady, with
outlets in Switzerland and Italy as well as good markets at
home. ‘Nos draps’, the report said, ‘sont un vrai article
d’exportation’. The producers of silk nbbons in Mulhouse,
Guebwiller, and Altkirch were ‘in full production’, although
sales had so far been confined to local markets. The paper
industries had increased output and exported well. Iron pro-
duction in the Vosges had been steady, and again there had
been a little export to Switzerland to add to the major

                 7°These are discussed in detail above, pp. 98 ff.
