               SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                            187

its fairs,’ other items from Alsace like ‘boréas’ (otherwise
described as ‘mousselines rayées de l’Inde’) still had a market.
   Hémardinquer also found that the calendar for placing
orders for Alsatian printed calicoes in these western and
southern towns closely followed that on which contracts
were settled. The wholesale merchants who handled the ex-
peditions favoured mid-April and the month of October for
bulk deliveries. It seems, however, that suppliers in Mulhouse
had to be on their guard against late orders from clients
whose earlier prosperity had faded with the progressive loss
of re-export markets overseas. One gathers, too, that the
quality of articles supplied was not always as good as
expected. The demand for the products of Mulhouse from
southern clients was greater than that from the western sea-
board towns, itself no doubt a sign of the eclipse of the
Atlantic coast as a commercial pace-setter. The order-books
of Médard and Parlier, merchants dealing in fine cloth in
Montpellier and Toulouse, reveal important links with
certain Alsatian firms or their associates: Jean-Charles
Davillier of Paris; Gros, Davillier & Roman of Wesserling (for
mignonettes); Vetter, Thierry & Grossmann of Mulhouse
(for scarves); Heilmann pere, fils & Cie of Mulhouse, repre-
sented at Beaucaire by one Hofer; Haussmann fréres of the
Logelbach; and Dollfus-Mieg of Mulhouse, whose output
was recognized as of good quality but ‘horriblement cher’.’°

                                 *    *    *



All the primary and secondary accounts stress that improved
techniques and the use of better machines were vital to the
success of the Haut-Rhin’s printed calicoes. Cylinder printing
was widely extended after its first appearance in Mulhouse in
1805, and the technical headway also extended to other
branches. Spinning in particular was boosted by new and im-
proved devices. During the expansionary period the main
development was the steady replacement of the old and
largely obsolete rouets and fuseaux by ‘mule-jennies’ and
    100The best. account of this topic is Jean Vidalenc,   ‘Departements   médi-
térranéens pendant |’Empire’.
    101 FHémardinquer, op. cit. 317 ff.
