180         INLAND     ECONOMIC      EXPANSION       1807-1810

sales on the home market. The same broad pattern held for
the acids industry in Thann. Clock-making had been less
successful, it appeared, since the prefect referred to its
current ‘stagnation’, but even then expofts were still leaving
for northern Europe and the Levant. The only industrial
branch reportedly in serious trouble was tanning, in which
manufacturers had been battling against the exorbitant
cost of South American leather for several years.
   The evidence for economic growth in Mulhouse, the key
industrial centre of the Haut-Rhin, was confirmed by the
consultative chamber in optimum terms three months later.”
The drift of the following passage seems unmistakable:
La chambre se félicite de pouvoir vous en faire un tableau plus satis-
faisant, que n’étoit celui de 1806 et 1807. Nous ne connaissons aucune
branche qui n’ait fait des progres marquants et aucune qui ne fleurisse.
Tous les atteliers, n’aguerre a demi déserts, refluent a présent d’ouvriers,
notre ville regorge -d’habitans, touttes les avenues présentent des
maisons nouvellement bAaties, les propriétaires obtiennent de leurs
logemens des loyers trés élevés, des établissemens et des atteliers nouv-
eaux sont établis dans les communes qui nous environnent, des ouvriers
étrangers viennent peupler nos vilages et y chercher une subsistance
quw’ils ne trouvoient plus dans leur patrie . . . Tous profitent et bénissent
le gouvernement dont les mestires sages et vigoureuses font revivre le
commerce et |’industrie.

Even allowing for the official lip-service at the end here, this
is a document of quite unusual optimism. Since the hard-
headed industrial magnates of the Haut-Rhin were no more
disposed to exaggerate happier fortunes than their com-
mercial brethren in Strasbourg, it is safe to say that such
optimism was matched by actual prosperity in Mulhouse.
   The same report was equally clear on points of detail.
By far the most conspicuous progress had been made in
calico-printing. The chamber spoke of its ‘full activity’, of
more workshops starting production, and of an ‘easy market’
for old stocks as well as new articles. Merchants from
Germany and Italy had come to Mulhouse to buy or place
orders for goods which they had previously obtained from
Britain. As the primary materials for tozles peintes had to be
secured largely within the Empire, the home weavers had also

         "7 Report to Desportes of 12 May 1808: A.D. (H-R) I M 128/1.
