                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                                185

Outside Alsace, Paris was the largest single market for the
principal cotton products of the Haut-Rhin. The best
example of close professional associations was that between
Gros,    Davillier    &   Roman       and the Parisian         houses    of Gros,
Davillier & Cie and Jean-Charles Davillier. Jacques Bidermann
of Paris was also a sleeping partner (commanditaire) of the
Wesserling firm. Rousseau & Bertin of Paris, which before the
Year XII had traded as Jean-Joseph Rousseau, served as a
dépot de vente for Dollfus-Mieg.?? The close commercial
and financial links of several Alsatian houses with Swiss
partners or associates should also be stressed here. One may
even speak of a Basel-Mulhouse-Paris ‘axis’ for cottons
during the expansionary period.™* One case was that of Blétry
of Belfort, whose son, already established in Paris, formed a
new firm in Mulhouse with another member of the family in
1810. Another was Daguenet, who had interests in Basel,
Belfort, and Vesoul, as well as a depot for muslins in Paris.?°
The house of Jacques-Louis Pourtalés l’ainé of Neuchatel
similarly had dealings with a number of Alsatian and more
especially Mulhouse firms.”
   What these links between Alsatian and Parisian Piha could
mean in terms of capital resources, production, and employ-
ment levels is well illustrated, though on a scale too large
perhaps to be typical, by Gros-Davillier of Paris.*” Its affairs
were chiefly concentrated on the international trade in tozles
and indiennes, for which it took a sizeable business on com-
mission, but it also functioned as a commercial bank. Besides
those vested in the Wesserling enterprise, it had important
financial stakes in five manufactories in the Vosges. These
were    situated     in Saint-Amarin,        Bavilliers, Giromagny, Gritt,
and Orbey, and at the beginning of 1811 they had a com-
bined capital value of 1.2 million francs. What Bergeron
calls the ‘social capital’ of the Parisian house had increased
from 2.2 million francs in 1802 to 4.4 million in 1811.
Its importance is borne out by the fact that the imperial
    °3 Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, li. 452-3.
    °4‘Entre Bale, Mulhouse et Paris, le roulage des toiles, parfois associé a leur
commerce proprement dit, est soigné par des maisons qui s’en font une spécialité.’
Ibid. 455.                           °5 Ibid.                         © Ibid. 505-20.
    27 The details of the following paragraph are a digest of the matter in Bergeron,
op. cit. 551-2.
