                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                              189

Thierry-Mieg & Cie, Schlumberger-Koenig, Paul Blech, and
Zurcher & Cie all had weaving installations to help feed the
printing tables which formed their main industry. In this way
the dependence of the zndienneurs on primary materials from
other imperial towns was reduced, but the department’s
weaving capacity still fell far short of the annual requirement
of some 250,000 toiles blanches. If the indienneurs no longer
needed to turn elsewhere for all but one-eleventh of their
needs,    as in 1805-6,!°         supplies    from within the Haut-Rhin
itself could satisfy only about a third of their over-all demand
at the height of the expansionary period.
                                    *    *    *


The financial network of the Haut-Rhin’s cotton industries had
two main lubricants. One was capital accumulation within
the largely Calvinist fabricantocratie itself, reinforced by
family partnerships and marriages. Autofinancement, or the
systematic reinvestment of profits in the enterprise which
produced them, was a traditional means to its expansion.
The   other factor was the crucial role of financial creditors.
The   Haut-Rhin had financial connections with several other
imperial towns, though it now seems not as many with Paris
as might be suggested by the individual examples noted
earlier.1°7    The     main     external     source    of finance       was    un-
doubtedly Basel, with tributaries from other Swiss towns.
This pattern of investment and credit was of course tradi-
tional, and its most advantageous form was that of sleeping
partners. The sample given in Table 9, which is by no means
exhaustive,!°8 shows the relative importance of such associa-
tions.
   105 Chaptal, De l’industrie frangoise, ii. 147; repeated in Lévy, op. cit. 92;
and above, p. 89.
    106 An excellent discussion of this subject with particular reference to Alsace
is Lévy-Leboyer, Banques européennes, 444-79.
    107 Bergeron comments for instance that Alsace ‘n’est pas représentée dans les
milieux d’affaires parisiens d’une fagon proportionnelle a l’importance économ-
ique considérable    qu’elle a déja au sein de l’Empire. Mais sans doute est-ce la
contrepartie méme de ses succés industriels, qui fixent dans la région un milieu
autonome      d’entrepreneurs actifs.’ Banguiers, négociants et manufacturiers
parisiens, i. 125.
     108 Besides the references in Table 9, see L’Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne,
356-7; J.-J. Hémardinquer, ‘Capitalisme balois et Histoire bancaire’, Ann. JEN
xiii/3 (1958), 564-72; and Bergeron, op. cit. i. 125-7 and 185-6.
