182         INLAND     ECONOMIC       EXPANSION       1807-1810

écartées de nos fronti¢res, mais aussi que tout le Continent
s’approvisionneroit dans les manufactures frangaises, et cela
est.’ This seems a fairly explicit statement of the French
market design. If it is to be believed, thé Empire was indeed
developing into the ‘workshop of Europe’. Even if allowance
is made for the ingratiating tone of the chamber’s report, the
objective world to which it referred was enjoying better
times.
    The official reports are not as clear as might be hoped on
the question of whether or not the Haut-Rhin was much
affected by the brief industrial disturbance discernible else-
where in the Empire during the second half of 1808. The
reality of this out-of-phase downturn, caused partly by the
Spanish insurrection and partly by the government’s new ban
on certain cotton exports in May, is not to be doubted. Ina
detailed study Louis Bergeron has shown, for instance, how
employment and output in the small to middling cotton in-
dustries of Paris dropped between 1 May and 1 November
that year.®! Now Alsace was relatively remote from the ruc-
tions of the Spanish insurrection, but as a frontier province
with traditional trading outlets in Switzerland and across the
Rhine, it was fully exposed to the shock of the May decrees
on cotton exports. And yet the primary evidence is far from
conclusive on this point. Dollfus-Mieg & Cie apparently had
no need to tighten its belt in 1808. According to an estimate
by the mayor of Mulhouse,®? the company bought 24,000
articles from the local weavers for conversion into tozles
peintes during the first eight months of the year. With its
own supplies added in, total output during that period was
46,000    articles,   nearly    a quarter      of the     200,000      articles.
which were estimated as having been manufactured in the
town in those eight months. Looking back on his earlier suc-
cess from a point in the middle of the economic crisis of
1810-11, Dollfus-Mieg lamented his lost profits.8° He recalled
his prosperity during the preceding ten years, -‘c’est-a-dire
depuis l’€poque heureuse           de la régénération de |’industrie
francaise’. No mention is made here of any set-backs before
      *1 Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, ii. 583-4.
      82 Arch. comm. Mulh., FI Cb 1.
      *° Letter of 4 May 1811 to Collin de Sussy: A.D. (H-R) I M 126a/1.
