                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                           181

enjoyed a brisk trade. The report noted that the manufac-
turers of plaincloth (tozles blanches) were expanding output
on a scale they had not reached for many years. That indeed
was why Swiss and other foreign dealers were turning to the
Haut-Rhin for supplies, why some of them actually had trade
depots in Mulhouse,’® and why the immigration of skilled
workers was then so active.’? If such business continued, the
chamber remarked, the finest Swiss weaving crafts would
soon be ‘naturalized’ in Alsace. Even siamoises, that object
of so much ostensible distress at Sainte-Marie, had sold well
in Mulhouse during the first half of 1808. The output of
woollens had held good; so had the manufacture of silk
ribbons     and floss-silk. The tanneries, at last, had also found
the going easier during the second quarter of the year and,
apart from the branch specializing in maroquineries, had
‘an easy market’. ‘En général’, the report concluded, ‘la
situation actuelle de notre commerce et de nos manufactures
est telle que nous ne saurions désigner aucuns besoins, aucuns
moyens d’amélioration’. This happy account was confirmed
about a year later by P. A. Nemnich, the German traveller.
After a visit at the height of the expansionary period, he
wrote that ‘whoever saw Mulhouse ten years ago and sees
it again at this moment would imagine himself in a quite
different locality, so much has the town and its neighbour-
hood increased in population, new houses, large manufac-
tories, busyness (Lebhaftigkeit), wealth, and luxury’.®
   The Mulhousiens were apparently eager to link their pros-
perity with the effects of the government’s economic
policies. The local consultative chamber, in the cited report
of 12 May 1808, roundly declared that: ‘Nous devons cet
état de prospérité aux viies profondes et sages de notre im-
mortel Empereur. Dans sa volonté supréme il fut résolu que,
non seulement touttes marchandises ¢trangéres seroient

   78 Permission was given to several merchants    from Basel and other foreign
towns   to set up depots in Mulhouse   during 1808 and 1809, as recorded in the
documents kept at Arch. comm. Mulh., FII Cb 6-7.
   79 A contributory factor here was the decree of 19 Feb. 1808 which required
of applicants who owned or managed large enterprises only one year’s domicile
in France before naturalization. Several Swiss and German craftsmen, it appears,
came to the Haut-Rhin — ‘rive d’attraction’ — in this way.
   80 Tagebuch, viii. 151.
