188          INLAND     ECONOMIC         EXPANSION      1807-1810

water-frames      of more      recent vintage. Although spinning by
the older type of throstles (continus) was still common in
the department, by the end of 1808 there were, in the pre-
fect’s description, five large ‘fabriques mécaniques’: in Mul-
house (Blech, Fries & Cie), Wesserling (Gros, Davillier &
Roman), Masevaux (Nicolas Koechlin & Cie), Bollwiller
(Ziircher fils & Lischy Dollfus), and Lutterbach (Hollen-
weger & Cie).'°? The first steam-driven machine in the
department was introduced by Dollfus- -Mieg 1in 1812.'° Two
ancillary branches of calico-printing in which there was
accompanying improvement were industrial dyeing and
designing. The chemical industries serving them had good
incentives, particularly for the preparation of artificial
colourings, but the shortage of transmarine dyestuffs re-
mained an obstacle to the designers themselves.
   In cotton weaving, machines were not used on any
comparable scale much before the 1820s. Looms of the
British type were almost unheard of for practical purposes
before then, although the principle of the fly-shuttle and
even some crude adaptations of it for industrial use had been
known in Mulhouse for some years before the expansionary
period. The norm, however, was the old-fashioned hand-
loom. There is some implied evidence that its capacity, if
not its basic efficiency, was increased during the period and
that this was linked with the success of calico-printing and
the constant demand for primary materials (tozles blanches
a imprimer) thus generated. This inspired the weaving enter-
prises of the department to quadruple their total output in
1808 as compared with the 21,760 articles they had pro-
duced in 1806.!™ It appears that the increase was due less to
any notable advance among the small and scattered rural
establishments than to the development of ancillary work-
shops within the larger calico-printing enterprises themselves.
Dollfus-Mieg,       Gros,    Davillier     &   Roman,       Lhuillier     fréres,

     102 A.D, (H-R) IM 127/1; Lévy, Industrie cotonniére en Alsace, 159.
     13 Besides Lévy, op. cit., the mechanization of the Haut-Rhin’s cotton indus-
tries is discussed in Mathieu Mieg, ‘Résumé des notes laissées par M. Hartmann-
Liebach sur Vhistoire industrielle du Haut-Rhin, depuis les premiéres       années
du XIXe siécle’, Bull. Soc. ind. Muth., xlvii (1877), 218-35.
    14 L’Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 365. The figure for 1806 is from Des-
portes’s report to Champagny of 17 Jan. 1807: A.N. F!? 1568.
