                SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                                191

   Even on this incomplete showing the sum invested by
Swiss partners in the department’s textile industries in 1811
was upwards of 6 million francs, and most of it was placed in
calico-printing. Some of the Basel houses had more extensive
investments in the Haut-Rhin than the table indicates. The
Cousins    Mérian,         for instance,        also had a stake in the large
enterprise of Paul Blech of Mulhouse. The Fréres Mérian were
creditors to Graf pére and other houses in Mulhouse apart
from Dollfus-Mieg. It was these two Swiss houses, moreover,
which in 1809 joined with Pierre and Nicolas Koechlin to
establish a cotton imprimene at Lérrach in the grand duchy
of Baden, and equipped it with machines for cylinder
printing.'°? Besides its affairs in Mulhouse, the firm of
Blanchenay, Bridel & Cie kept its workshops in Thann
financed with the help of three merchant bankers in Basel.
Other Haut-Rhin houses had financial links with Ziirich,
Neuchatel, and Lombardy. Yet the role of the bankers in
Basel always had a singular importance, and it was during
1808 and 1809 that they mounted their largest investments
in the Haut-Rhin. Lévy-Leboyer speaks of their action at
this   time      as       ‘une      véritable    colonisation      financiére’.!!°
Christophe           Bourcard,         Preiswerck      &   Zimmerlin,          Frey,
Tourneisen           &    Christ,     Jérémie      Stehelin,    Pierre     Ryhiner,
Legrand        de        Neufville,      Legrand,      Sarasin     &       Heussler,
Emmanuel La Roche, Jean-Rodolphe Gemuseus — all ex-
panded their commitments as sleeping partners in the
Haut-Rhin’s textile enterprises during those years.
   There      was,       furthermore,      a wide     network     of middlemen
serving the industries and trade of both Alsatian departments
during the expansionary period. Official reports often refer
to the importance of ‘facteurs’, “commissionnaires’, ‘contre-
maitres’ and ‘chefs de dépot’ in that connection. These men
were particularly useful as intermediaries between the out-
lying spinners and weavers. They were quite frequently the
link between manufacturers in the Haut-Rhin and wholesale
dealers in other imperial departments or beyond the fron-
tiers. The Strasbourgeois were certainly more versed in such
trade, and had wider connections for it, than their commercial
              109 Fischer, Anfange der Industrialisierung in Baden, 196.
              110 Banques européennes, 450-1.
