               SECTORS, GOODS, AND BENEFICIARIES                            195

Bas-Rhin, the foremost magnates fell within the category
broadly described as ‘la banque’, ‘commission’, and ‘expédi-
tion’. Their main business was the entrepOt and transit trade
in wines, eaux-de-vie, colonial goods, tobacco, and Levantine
cotton, for which they owned the largest clearing-houses in
Strasbourg. They were not so much merchant carriers as
large-scale middlemen-contractors. They employed a whole
network of local carters and bargees, and had many associates
and customers in the French interior, in the Midi, and of
course in the Outre-Rhin. Turckheim, for instance, had im-
portant interests in Paris. Mannberger was associated with a
firm of the same name in Lyons. Livio fréres had close deal-
ings with a fraternal house in St. Petersburg.!!? As the official
lists show, most of the leading enterprises were established
businesses in the sense that they had been founded before
and had somehow survived the Revolution, or else owed their
later inception to family capital accumulated before it. But
the lists also note that a number of these magnates — Dille-
mann,   Holzapfel,         Humann,    Kolb, Leroux, Mannberger,
Marocco, Mennet,          Polti, Renouard de Bussierre, the Saglio
brothers, and Simonis are mentioned among others — had
made their main progress since the Consulate.
   Strasbourg’s industrial ‘notables’, on the other hand, did
not match the local merchant élite or their industrial counter-
part in the Haut-Rhin. Writing to Napoleon on 12 May 1810,
after three years of comparatively good reports from the city,
the Minister Mollien remarked that Strasbourg ‘se trouve
plutdét un lieu d’entrepot momentané qu’une ville de consom-
mation et de manufacture’.!?° Few of its industrial establish-
ments were of any national importance. The tobacco Régie
took shape only in 1811, after the government’s monopoly
of 29 December 1810, and in due course was to employ some
1,500 persons in various parts of the Bas-Rhin. The private
industrial    houses     were   rather smaller concerns,           but relative
to their position in 1807 they had made good headway
during the expansionary years.’?! If Gau fréres maintained

   119 Other examples are cited in L’Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 328.
   120 4.N, AFIV 1088.
    121 See, e.g., the Chamber’s report of 1 June 1807 and Shée’s prefectoral
tables of April 1809 (for 1808): A.D. (B-R) XII M 5 and the Annuaire du Bas-Rhin
