                     THE QUESTION         OF CAUSAL    LINKS                 207

    It is equally plain that illicit trade in the Rhenish area
was    helped,      as elsewhere,       by the conduct        of some customs
officials. The problem went back at least to the time of the
special customs commissioners Jollivet and Le Bas in the early
Consulate, though its roots no doubt lay further back still.
Desportes more           than once called for a ‘purge’ (épuration)
of the customs personnel in the Haut-Rhin. His charge was
that the officials in question either winked at contraband
offences or were themselves actively in league with the smug-
glers. Reports like that by the mayor of Bourglibre — ‘la
contrebande ne se fait pas par Bourglibre .. .”°? and so on —
were hardly reassuring in themselves, for the town was well
known to be a major link on the smuggling trade in and out
of Basel. Bland denials of that sort were rather silly in fact,
for no one believed them, but the difficulty as always lay in
proving otherwise. All over the Empire the decree of 11
January 1808, prescribing the charge of treason against
officials accused of disobeying the Berlin and Milan decrees,
or of helping others to do so, was defied. Even the threat
of the death penalty had little effect.
   According to contemporary accounts and many later
writings, the most notorious case of official corruption in
Alsace was that of the Magnier family. As customs director
in Strasbourg, Magnier-Grandprez was head of the Alsatian
service,    while     his brother       and   cousin   were    lesser officials,
the -first in Strasbourg, the other as principal receiver in
Bourglibre. The professional integrity of these men was
doubted on several occasions by Lezay-Marnésia and by pre-
fects in other departments. Local rumour persistently
accused them of collusion with the smugglers, and the current
quip was that ‘il n’y a que trois magniers pour faire la contre-
bande’.**     Catineau Laroche, who was sent to Switzerland in
1811 as a special customs inspector to see that the new pro-
visions of the Fontainebleau decree (18 October 1810)
were properly applied, and to report on Swiss smuggling,
thought the Magnier were guilty. All three, he wrote to
Montalivet from Berne on 2 June, ‘ont la réputation d’étre
    33 To Desportes on 14 Fructidor XIII (1 Sept. 1805): A.D. (H-R) P 295.
   34 Quoted in Ponteil, ‘Contrebande sur le Rhin’, 270. I have not been able to
find the original source of this pun.
