200          INLAND      ECONOMIC       EXPANSION        1807-1810

measure is the official annual values of the total foreign trade
of France cited there, for instance, the Blockade years show
an advance on the returns for the later Directory, but on the
whole they compare rather poorly witiu*those for the Con-
sulate, for the early Empire, and for the post-Napoleonic
period.®> Since the pre-Revolutionary levels were not to be
reached again until the mid-1820s,° it might be concluded
that the prolonged disruption of the Revolution, the wars,
and the Blockade cost France nearly forty years of over-all
commercial growth, as thus stated in the official values,
allowances made for unrecorded illicit traffic. More signifi-
cantly, a comparison between the figures for total foreign
trade in the years 1807-13 and those for the regular trade
to and from Strasbourg during the same period’ shows a very
rough inverse relationship. They seem rather like the ‘nega-
tive’ and ‘positive’ of the same picture. The shift from coastal
to inland markets and sources of supply reflects more
pointedly in the official inventory of the principal destina-
tions of imperial exports during the Blockade.’ As for the
expansionary cycle of 1807-10 itself, Collin de Sussy was
right to stress the special importance of the Rhenish
Confederation, and of Germany more generally, as an outlet
for imperial exports.
   In those senses, then, Alsatian prosperity during the first
three or four years of the Blockade positively reflects some
of its happier effects in the inland parts of the Empire.’ But
in other ways the links between the Blockade and the Alsatian
expansion      seem    less direct, more       anomalous,       and were even
unintended. The rest of this chapter deals with three com:
mercial functions which have not always been distinguished
from the direct connections clearly enough in earlier works.
    ° See the details reproduced in tabular form in Appendix G (below, pp. 285-6)
and graphically in Appendix H (p. 287) for illustration of the point.
    °The unusually high return for 1792 should be discounted here in view of
the inflated unit of valuation (assignat).
    7The relevant details are reproduced in the tables of Appendices B and D
(below, pp. 276-7 and 281-2 respectively) and in the graph based on them
(Appendix   E, p. 283). But N.B.     The comparison with the official values for
total foreign trade is not exact, since the Strasbourg figures are given in weights.
    * Figures for the years 1805-17 are given in Appendix I below, pp. 288-9.
    ° The later growth of the ‘new’ or ‘substitute’ industries, where links with the
Blockade were sometimes direct, is briefly discussed below, pp. 256-7.
