202          INLAND     ECONOMIC       EXPANSION       1807-1810

to five years of imprisonment, or by ten years of hard labour
with branding,!° or even by death, and the contraband goods
were of course liable to summary confiscation. For a
merchant of any means or reputation, cdnviction on such a
charge was tantamount to professional disgrace and ruin.
Fraud, on the other hand, was more leniently regarded,
with peines correctionnelles of at most six months of im-
prisonment, a fine usually of three times the value of the
offending goods, and five years of surveillance by the police
afterwards.!! Not surprisingly, accused persons preferred to
be charged with fraud rather than smuggling, and reading
between the lines one has the impression that the customs
tribunals were disposed to convict on the lesser offence
where they could not reasonably acquit suspects. On the
whole suspects received a more understanding hearing from
the regular civilian customs tribunals set up in accordance
with   the    autumn      decrees     of   1810,    where     in effect    local
‘notables’ were called upon to judge local men, than from the
earlier and later military commissions, whose processes were
often arbitrary and corrupt.
   My account of the perennial problem of illicit trade during
the Blockade must be confined to Alsace and its Rhenish
environs,!? but a few more general pointers to its incidence
may be useful. One general ‘rule’ is that the efficacy of the
Blockade stood in inverse ratio to the extent of Napoleon’s
military involvements on the Continent at different times.
When he was on campaign and needed his troops, customs
surveillance tended to lapse and smuggling became easier.
When he was at peace with Continental states, exception
made for Spain after 1808, surveillance was usually tighter,
never more so than in the newly annexed parts of northern
    1°The brand-mark ‘V.D.’ meant ‘Voleur des Douanes’, although in the German
frontier lands it apparently also passed for ‘Viel Dumm’: R. Dufraisse, ‘Contre-
bande . . . de la rive gauche du Rhin’, 526. This essay has guided my own account
of the more technical details of the subject here discussed.
    1 Dufraisse, loc. cit. 508.
    2 Apart from the relevant sub-sections of the departmental series M, there are
individual liasses for smuggling in the series L (to 1807) in Strasbourg and P
(notably the three liasses P 295-7) in Colmar. Cases involving Alsatian contraband
after the decree of 18 October 1810 fell within the competence of the new Cour
prévétale des douanes in Nancy. They are classified in the series U for the
Meurthe-et-Moselle.
