204         INLAND       ECONOMIC       EXPANSION       1807-1810

even    before    the    Blockade       was    declared,    focused     on   the
arrondissement          of   Delémont         and    left   no      doubt    that
smuggling was rife throughout it.’7 It singled out the stretch
from Basel to Porrentruy on the Alsatian border as an
especially troublesome area. Later that year the prefect Shée
wrote   to tell the Minister of Police              that a ‘contrebande        de
détail’ was virile along the whole length of the Alsatian
frontier.®
    Smuggling in the eastern departments was not of course
a new phenomenon at the start of the Blockade. It was as old
as the system of protection and prohibition itself. Most
writers on the subject agree that the first big boost to the
smuggling trade came during the Year XII (September 1803-
September     1804), with the renewed embargoes which
followed the rupture of the peace of Amiens. The formation
of the Third Coalition during 1805 also helped to stimulate
it, as did the customs laws of 1806. Its incidence during the
Blockade was therefore different only in scale and subtlety
of technique. The government’s refusal to allow Strasbourg
entrepot and transit rights beyond those of 8 Floréal XI was
a constant spur to contraband transactions. Basel had always
been a conveniently placed and active foyer de contrebande
for Alsatian dealers, more especially for those in the Haut-
Rhin. Smuggling in the other Alsatian department was appar-
ently less rife but more varied in kind. Magnier-Grandprez
observed in his report to Shée of 6 May 1808!° that in the
Bas-Rhin it was rather like an osmotic process (une contre-
bande par filtration), whereas in the Haut-Rhin he saw it as
a much more organized business, practised very often by
roving bands of twenty or thirty racketeers. According to the
same report, illicit trade into the Bas-Rhin was chiefly direc-
ted to foreign tobacco leaves and refined sugar, while out-
going operations mostly concentrated on grain and livestock.
The influx of prohibited or dutiable plaincloth, muslins,
percales, calicoes, and the like was said to be limited and less
of a problem than in the Haut-Rhin. But as the Continental
smuggling lanes were pushed progressively eastwards to
                 17 The report is discussed in Ponteil, art. cit.
                 8 Report of 30 Sept. 1806: A.D. (B-R) III M 3.
                 19 A.D, (B-R) X M 2.
