                  THE QUESTION          OF CAUSAL       LINKS                   205

escape the immediate presence of imperial troops and the
extension of the customs cordons, Strasbourg’s role as a
contraband link increased, as did that of Cologne, Mainz, and
Basel. It became, in L’Huillier’s words, the ‘collecteur de tous
les courants de l’interlope’.*° In the Haut-Rhin there also
formed what the same writer calls ‘une constellation vrai-
ment dense de relais’ — especially in Bourglibre, Altkirch,
Huningue, Kembs, and throughout the forest of the Harth.*!
   There is ample evidence that most merchants, including
many a local magnate, accepted smuggling as a fact of life,
and even regarded it as an ‘honourable’ profession. The
following comments by the sub-prefect of the arrondisse-
ment of Altkirch are typical of many during the Empire:”?
Il est malheureusement       trop vrai que la contrebande        se fait avec une
licence éffrayante pour l’intérét de nos manufactures et celui du trésor
public . . . L’opinion publique       désigne plusieurs individus, méme des
fonctionnaires publics, qui doivent la faire ou la protéger; l’on peut
dire que grands et petits s’en mélent; ces derniers y sont engagés par
lappas du gain que les principaux acteurs leur procurent en payant
grassement le colportage qui se fait ordinairement de nuit.
Lezay-Marnésia once remarked that ‘dans cette ville de
marchands [Strasbourg], il est regu que l’on peut étre en
méme temps contrebandier et honnéte homme’.”* This did
not mean that one could be indiscreet, and indeed smuggling
was often a game of the most secret intricacy and pruden-
tial camouflage. It had its own tricks of the trade, intelligence
network, and warning codes. There was also a kind of ‘smug-
gler’s honour’ not to inform on one’s associates in the event
of arrest. Illicit dealings were carefully phased to coincide
with times when the official customs surveillance was most
sparse or most difficult. At a rough estimate, some two-
thirds of all such transactions were carried out at night.”*
    Mlle Bertrand’s social analysis of the smugglers shows that
they came       from all classes.2* Her sample is the 475 cases
brought before the customs tribunals in the eastern depart-
ments studied between 1811 and 1813. On this evidence
it is clear that the poorer classes provided most of the
   20 Alsace napoléonienne, 326.                                  21 Thid. 310, 326.
   22 Report to Desportes of 18 Fructidor XIII (5 Sept. 1805): A.D. (H-R) P 295.
   23 Report to Montalivet of 24 Aug. 1810, quoted in Bertrand, art, cit. 292.
   24 Ibid. 275; Dufraisse, loc. cit. 521.         .            25 Art. cit. 290-5.
