               THE QUESTION     OF CAUSAL    LINKS             201

il. The paradox of the smuggling trade

A good part of Alsatian prosperity in the expansionary
period stemmed, not from the effective working of the
Blockade decrees, but ironically from their frequent and at
times almost systematic evasion. Again one must emphasize
that the official statistics used in this and other secondary
studies apply only to the recorded and notionally legitimate
trade of France. They are manifestly not a guide to all
commercial dealings in Strasbourg, or elsewhere, many of
which were certainly illicit transactions. In the nature of such
traffic, official records were not regularly kept, and there is
no way of quantifying it accurately. One has to go by in-
complete and scattered records, such as reports by the
douaniers and other officers on particular commercial
rackets, as often as not based on rumour,      or by sundry esti-
mates   of individual cases of goods subjected to confiscation
or sequestration.   No   one,   however,   would   seriously doubt
that illicit trade was rife throughout the Blockade, and in the
frontier areas it was more or less ubiquitous. With a little
indulgence, it might even be regarded as the most common
form of popular resistance to the rigours of Napoleon’s
customs severities, and beyond the frontiers it was often a
function of local opposition to French rule as such.
   In so far as Alsatian prosperity between 1807 and 1810
accrued from contraband and other illicit dealings, its link
with the Blockade was anomalous. It was obviously never the
government’s intention that imperial merchants should enrich
themselves by evasion of the law. So, too, the profits of illicit
traffic derived not from the bona fide realization of the
French Continental market design but from practices
officially regarded as inimical to it. Yet, whatever the source,
there is no denying that the profits were real. The essential
distinction is between the smuggling trade (la contrebande)
and fraudulent trade (/a fraude). The former was the traffic
in goods whose import and export were prohibited by law;
the latter was the illicit import or export of permitted goods
in an attempted evasion of the duties and other customs
procedures applicable to them. Smuggling was always
regarded as the more serious offence. It was punishable by up
