208        INLAND     ECONOMIC        EXPANSION      1807-1810

devenus   immensément         riches’,?> and he believed            that other
officials were in league with them. L’Huillier speaks of ‘la
négligence voulue’ of Magnier-Grandprez and Popp and
points out, as do other writers, that the low pay of customs
officials continuously exposed them to the temptation of
illicit spoils.7° Yet the rumours and even the formal charges
were little good without hard evidence to back them. Often,
too, the prefects intervened to exculpate particular officials
in their reports. Thus Desportes on one occasion, in a con-
fidential report to the police chief Pelet, defended the
customs personnel of Bourglibre and specifically exonerated
Magnier from the current allegations against him.*” As for
Magnier-Grandprez, whose own official reports on smuggling
seem grotesque in the light of prevailing suspicion, retribu-
tion came rather late in the day. He was demoted to the post
of principal receiver at Minden in May 1813, but by then the
Blockade itself was in ruins.

ii.‘ The trade in tobacco and wine

Another part of Alsatian prosperity in the expansionary
period came in commercial branches in which Britain had
never been a serious competitor. The trade in tobacco, wines,
and eaux-de-vie is a case in point. With the exception of such
American tobacco as was handled by British carriers, the im-
perial ban on British goods hardly arose in those branches.
One   cannot   then claim      that the Blockade,        as such, was re-
sponsible for their inland growth during the years 1807-10.
There was, however, a link with the favourable context of the
wider Continental System, and no doubt it is also arguable
that the mainland orientation of the French market design
was propitious.
   In spite of traaitional complaints in Strasbourg about the
unfairness of official policy, the tobacco trade prospered in
this period. Following the Chamber’s own reports to the
prefect of 31 March and 24 April 1809,°8 the tobacco yield
of the Bas-Rhin in 1807 was put at 1.8 million metric quintals.
           35 ALN, F!? 535.          © Alsace napoléonienne, 347.
           37 Report of 1 July 1808: A.D. (H-R) P 296.
           38 Meetings of the same dates, Min. iv.
