                  THE QUESTION         OF CAUSAL       LINKS                  209

It had been wholly consumed during the following year, and
the crop of 1809 was expected to be much larger. During the
first two months of that year, the reports noted, the Stras-
bourgeois alone had contracts for 54,000 metric quintals of
processed tobacco, worth some               900,000     francs. The growers
for their part had orders for an additional 34,000 metric
quintals of leaves due for dispatch to the French interior
during the following five or six months. In the earlier of its
reports the Chamber repeated the old point that tobacco was
the main source of income in certain of the department’s
rural areas, and that it was essential to tax collection there:
*. . . Sa fabrication est a Strasbourg la branche la moins
précaire de l’industrie commerciale, que les circonstances
ont successivement dépouillée de tant d’autres ressources...
Le perfectionnement de la fabrication maintient la culture;
leur réunion diminue la dépendance du Continent a l’égard
de l’Amérique pour un objet qui n’est plus de fantaisie, mais
de premiére nécessité . . .’ More than 6,000 persons in the
department were said to be employed in the plant’s cultiva-
tion. In Strasbourg itself fifteen to twenty merchants alone
accounted for about four million francs in taxes each year,
roughly a quarter of the Bas-Rhin’s total liability on pro-
cessed tobacco. The department’s annual exports were
assessed at between 450,000 and 470,000 kg of processed
goods, along with 20,000 to 30,000 kg of raw leaves. These
figures, based on the returns of processers and merchants
themselves during the Chamber’s recently completed survey,
marked an advance on the annual averages for the preceding
fifteen years. In one of the Chamber’s later documents it was
said that the 6,000 hectares currently used for tobacco cul-
tivation in the department were a good quarter down on the
total area so employed in 1789, but that this had been offset
by a higher yield per unit and better quality of production.”
L’Huillier’s figures for sales in this branch in the expan-
sionary period confirm that it was a fairly happy one for
growers, processers, and merchants alike.*°
                                   *    *     *



    39 Petition to Napoleon of 19 Dec. 1810: A.D. (B-R) XI M 194; and L’Huillier,
Alsace napoléonienne, 447.                                        4° Op. cit. 446.
