216         INLAND    ECONOMIC      EXPANSION      1807-1810

of the market value of such passing demand is again imposs-
ible, but local tradesmen       and officials were well aware of its
importance. Apart from Strasbourg, the principal leu de
passage, other local centres like Haguenau and Saverne
depended to some extent on military markets. Mayoral
reports often recognize this, just as conversely they testify
to local slumps when the units were away on active service.
The presence of troops and military personnel was sometimes
directly linked with the liquidity of cash in Alsace as a whole.
In his report for the third quarter of 1809, for instance, after
the Wagram campaign, Shée remarked that ‘le passage de
troupes rentrant de l’Allemagne a été un autre =           d’aug-
mentation de l’activité commerciale et industrielle’.™
   Now, there        was of course an observe to the Alsatian
military market      for grain, wine, meat, other foodstuffs, and
transport facilities. Not all army purchases were made at the
commercial prices. The commissaries generally expected to
buy, and if necessary had leave to insist on buying, at prices
which would in effect have reduced the potential profits of
producers. Quite often bulk selling by speculators, who prob-
ably did best of all out of military trade, forced market prices
down at times of high demand by the army. The requisition-
ing of horses, carts, boats, and other such equipment was
another burden, and always an unpopular one. In the closing
years of the Empire, when such exactions became more per-
sistent, Alsatians must have been more struck by the strain
than by the benefit of the military presence, not least
because the army was often tardy in paying contractors for
goods and services.
   During the expansionary period, however, the positive side
of the military market in Alsace was the more apparent.
Besides foodstuffs, the most important items were clothes,
arms, and field supplies. The range of goods was wide:
woollen uniforms, jerseys, underclothes, socks, gloves, head-
gear, blankets, boots, belts, straps, saddles, harnesses, iron-
ware, buttons, passementerie, swords, and firearms. In
addition to direct local dealings, several Alsatian merchants

    * A.D. (B-R) X M 4. For similar observations see the reports of 30 Mar.
1806, A.D. (B-R) X M 2, and for the second quarter of 1809, A.D. (B-R) X M3.
