                              VI

     CRISIS, RECOVERY, AND DECLINE 1810-1813:
          THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE


The momentum of economic expansion in Alsace, as in other
inland parts of the Empire, was interrupted by the crisis of
1810-11. In spite of some contradictory statistical evidence,
inconsistent in itself and also at odds with the Chamber’s
descriptive record, the official reports leave no doubt that the
downward turn of the cycle was real enough. Even allowing
for the traditional exaggeration of local hardships and the
tendency of Alsatian merchants and manufacturers to assume
the worst before it had actually happened, the economic
balance-sheet of the last three years of the Blockade was
mixed. If the period from the summer of 1807 to the autumn
of 1810 marks the ascendant phase of local economic perfor-
mance, the next three years were altogether more unsettled.
Modifications of the Blockade in fact preceded the onset of
the economic crisis and were not therefore a direct conse-
quence of it, but they undoubtedly made the recovery after
it more difficult.                                             i
   Early symptoms of the Alsatian troubles appeared some
weeks before the more general crisis broke during the winter
of 1810-11. Conversely, there was a lag of a few weeks
between   the worst financial shocks in Paris, in Lyons, and in
the Swiss banking cities and their counter-effects on Alsace.
The larger merchant houses of Strasbourg were the first to
feel the pressure of all this. Already faced with commercial
uncertainties and disruptions during the preceding summer,
they were most exposed to the repercussions of the financial
crisis towards the end of 1810 and during the first half of
1811. The course of the industrial crisis in the Haut-Rhin
followed rather later, starting in the first quarter of 1811
and reaching its peak during the spring and early summer
of that year. This squares with the industrial record elsewhere
in the Empire. In some towns, indeed, 1810 was the year of
