214                INLAND   ECONOMIC      EXPANSION       1807-1810

divisions, the other smaller services (police and customs for
example) were no doubt also a factor in local demand. The
requirements          of the imperial establishment in dress, house-
hold adornments             of all sorts, and transport, along with the
demands of the civilian bureaux, all added something to the
State’s purchasing function. But alas, it is much easier to
state the economic importance of the military market than to
quantify it. The subject has never been studied in detail for
imperial Alsace, and this is a serious gap. Félix Ponteil was
certainly aware of its importance,°’ but he did not go into it
in depth. Fernand L’Huillier’s authoritative account has a
substantial section on the army,°® but the coverage of
military markets as such is thin. There are no works on
Napoleonic Alsace to set alongside the studies of Robert
Werner and Charles Poisson for the Revolutionary period.*?
Perhaps this merely reflects the present state of the material,
of which there is certainly no shortage of crude matter, in the
central series F°® (Affaires militaires) and its departmental
counterpart, the series R. An Alsatian study of military
contracting and speculation, for instance on the lines of
Louis Bergeron’s account of the Parisian provisioners,®°
would be welcome. I have space here for only the broadest
outlines.
   What one would like to know is the percentage of local
production absorbed by garrisons of the fifth military
division in Alsace during the Blockade. It would also be help-
ful to know if that share varied much between periods of
peace and of war on the Continent. In the present state of
the sources, with markets a rather poorly classified part of
the ‘Affaires militaires’ in this period, such ratios cannot be
accurately established. And yet all the scattered descriptive
evidence suggests that a sizeable part of the gross provincial
product of Alsace was then regularly consumed by the army.
In the Bas-Rhin the demand was most marked at the ‘citadel’
      57In e.g. ‘Les conséquences du Blocus continental’, 13.
      58 Alsace napoléonienne, 188-246.
      5? Werner,   L’Approvisionnement   en pain de la population   du Bas-Rhin   et
lV’Armée du Rhin pendant la Révolution (1789-1797) (Strasbourg, 1951); Poisson,
Les Fournisseurs aux armées sous la Révolution francaise: Le Directoire aux
achats: J. Bidermann, A. Cousin, Marx-Berr (Paris, 1932).
    °° Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, i. 395-427.
