                   THE QUESTION           OF CAUSAL         LINKS                213

Colmar alone. Altogether, he claimed, 305 communes                            in the
department had vital stakes in the wine trade. Alsatian pros-
perity in this branch therefore could not be assumed; it had
to be won.

iy. Military markets

Wines and eaux-de-vie were only part of the range of goods
in demand by units of the imperial and allied armies. Other
foodstuffs,       uniforms,          blankets,      arms,      and    the     whole
inventory of military supplies offered opportunities to many
local producers which offset part of the strain of requisition-
ing and compulsory underpricing. In so far as the imperial
military market helped to make the expansion of 1807-10
possible, it was less a product of the Blockade itself than an
economic function of Napoleon’s military predominance.
It was an integral part of his Continental System in the broad
sense. Its origins cannot however be dated to any one year;
nor was its importance confined to the period of the Block-
ade. It had been a powerful economic factor for many
decades, even centuries, before Napoleon.** Writing during
the Consulate, when its force was certainly becoming more
evident, the prefect Laumond emphasized what it could
mean to local communities: ‘Dans un empire aussi étendu
que la France, dont le systeme militaire est depuis longtemps
au plus haut degré de développement, |’Etat est le plus fort
acheteur; les transactions commerciales que les ministres
signent pour les différents marchés, réglent le mouvement
général, et lui tracent sa direction.’°* In his study of the back-
ground to the Prussian Rhineland between 1815 and 1870,
for instance, Richard Tilly found that the army had been the
largest single consumer in those departments under Napo-
leonic rule.*°
   ‘Military market’ is of course a general term. Although it
is meant to apply to the provisioning of the regular army
   54The point is made for the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in Ford,
Strasbourg   in Transition,    78, and closely examined   in K. Engel, Strassburg als
Garnisonstadt unter dem Ancien Régime (Colmar, 1901).
    55 Statistique, 194.
   56 Financial Institutions    and Industrialization   in the Rhineland    1815-1870
(Kingsport, Tenn., 1966), 57.
