226        CRISIS, RECOVERY, AND DECLINE                1810-1813

had been debated in the Conseil d’administration du com-
merce et des manufactures at its meetings of 1, 8 and 29
October, and again on 5 November.”°.
                                   The feeling at first
was that Strasbourg was much                the best situated entrepot
for such imports and that it should keep its prerogatives in
the trade. But then Napoleon had himself steered the
ministers towards acceptance of the alternative southern
route, regardless of the higher transport costs and the in-
experience of Illyrian and Italian middlemen in large-scale
Levantine cotton transactions. The Conseil général de com-
merce had advised against the change, agreeing unanimously
at its meeting of 5 October that the route through Strasbourg
was the most convenient, economical, and secure.*”? Monta-
livet himself: had been circumspect about the new route and
up to the end had tried to win concessions for Strasbourg.”®
   All this was      to no     avail, however;       Napoleon’s      will had
carried the day. The imperial decree of 12 November had
given notice that the old inlets for Levantine cotton were to
close on 1 January 1811 in Cologne, Mainz, and Coblenz,
and on the following 1 May in Strasbourg. Arguably, then,
the government was not willing to allow much fuss to be
made over an issue already settled in Paris. There were
moments indeed when the ministers’ patience cracked under
the strain of the constant barrage of protests and petitions.
One of the iciest retorts in the official exchanges came on
16 December, when Montalivet rebuked Lezay-Marnésia in
the following terms:??
... Je ne puis que voir avec satisfaction, Monsieur le Préfet, l’attache-
ment que vous portez a vos administrés; mais je dois vous avertir ce-
pendant de vous mettre en garde contre des affections qui tendraient
a vous identifier aux intéréts locaux au point de vous faire envisager les
choses avec d’autres yeux que ceux du veritable administrateur. Vos
lettres qui déposent en faveur de vos voeux ardents pour la prospérité
du département     du Bas-Rhin, ont un accent de plainte et d’amertume
que je suis forcé de vous faire remarquer ...
This verbose mouthful incidentally casts light, albeit obliquely,
on Lezay-Marnésia’s enormous popularity in the department

   26 AN. AFIV 1241 and AF*IV 170,                               27 ALN, F!? 192.
    ?8 Report to Napoleon of 12 Nov. 1810 urging the retention of the city as an
inlet or at least a longer postponement of the closure date: A.N. AF!V 1061.
   ?9 ALN. F!? 2470; A.D. (B-R) XII M 42.
