                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                227

and his reputation ofbeing ‘fou pour le bien’. Both Montalivet
and Collin de Sussy had occasion later to chide him for ad-
ministrative lapses, especially in the dispatch of the routine
departmental statistics. Their case, often repeated in formal
communications, was that the government had to consider
the national interest first, not that of any one region, when
formulating its policies.



And so as the new year began the Strasbourgeois entered it
with grave lamentations. On top of all their other worries,
news that the dreaded tobacco monopoly had been pro-
claimed on 29 December soon reached the city. The
Chamber’s last big effort, the petition of 19 December
straight to the emperor himself, had failed.7° The new State
monopoly forbade tobacco farming in the Haut-Rhin alto-
gether and confined it in the Bas-Rhin to specified areas
which were to be under the authority of the Régie. Tobacco
processing as a private enterprise was to stop as from 1 July
 1811, and if the new system was later modified, this was to
tighten rather than relax its control. The government had
resorted to the monopoly precisely because the industry had
prospered in preceding years and seemed to offer regular
fiscal benefits.*! The decision was not of course unexpected
in Strasbourg, and news of it provoked no immediate debate
in the Chamber; but the matter was often referred to during
1811 as a major factor in the crisis.
   The more immediate anxiety still lay with the sequestra-
tions, surcharges, and the deepening financial panic. There is
a sense of unremitting urgency in the Chamber’s actions and
writings at that time. It appointed a special fact-finding
commission to report in detail on all those troubles.%?
In addition to local inquiries, the commission extended
its work to receive petitions from merchants in Landau,

   30 A.D. (B-R) XI M 194.
    31 The fiscal motives seem clear in the preamble of the decree: Correspondance,
xxi, no. 17250. Napoleon expected the Régie to yield 80 million francs in taxes a
year, but the returns for 1811-14 show much lower actual receipts.
   32 Meeting of 14 Jan. 1811, Min. vi.
