ane           CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND DECLINE        1810-1813

German        governments       were quick to follow up Napoleon’s
Trianon tariff (5 August) and its supplement (17 September)
with similar measures, and the severities of the Fontainebleau
decree were imposed on them no less. As a frontier province
whose trade required a ready two-way flow, Alsace was more
immediately exposed than the cities of the French interior
to such rigours across the Rhine.
   The first major protests of the Chamber on this issue were
directed at the authorities in Baden.!° The specific objection
was that the grand duke’s measure of 16 October, which
imposed a transit duty on cotton equivalent to 200 francs
the metric quintal and laid down tougher procedures of in-
spection, was being applied indiscriminately.'! According
to the Chamber, not only colonial goods but wholly per-
missible Levantine cotton imports were being sequestrated
and irregularly surcharged in Baden. Such practices were also
being extended to some neighbouring customs posts. All
along the final stages of the routes to Strasbourg — at
Bischofsheim,          Pforzheim,       Karlsruhe,       Durlach,      Ettlingen,
Rastatt, Stollhofen, and Kehl — there had been serious
delays. The Chamber argued that since imports of Levantine
cotton through Mainz and Strasbourg had been allowed by
the Trianon tariff, upon payment of the regular duties, they
had the status of ‘marchandises nationalisées’ and ought not
to be subject to the much stiffer duties on colonial cotton.!?
It considered the transit duties quite unjustifiable. A long
letter was sent to Bignon, the French minister in Karlsruhe,
in the hope of immediate redress.! Its delivery was entrusted
to Saglio and Humann, who were sent on a special mission
to the grand duchy and instructed to use all available pressure
for the release of the sequestrated goods and for redemption
of the irregular surcharges. At the same time Lezay-Marnésia


     The most detailed account of this allied state under the Blockade’s regime
is L’Huillier, Etude sur le Blocus continental.
     '! Meeting of 24 Oct. 1810, Min. v.
     These details are taken from the letter to Montalivet of 24 Oct. 1810:
meeting of the same date, Min. v; A.D. (B-R) XII M 41. Sautier’s price quotations
to Briansiaux show that trans-Atlantic cotton cost between 25 and 40 per cent
more than the Levantine varieties then on sale in Strasbourg: A.N. 3 AQ 339.
      ‘3 Meeting of 24 Oct. 1810, Min. v; A.D. (B-R) XII M 41.
