224         CRISIS, RECOVERY, AND DECLINE                  1810-1813

the entry for 10 December.'® The language used to describe
it alone suggests that something altogether bigger and more
serious than customs delays and excessive transit duties was
at stake: ‘Dans un moment                 ou le crédit du commerce se
trouve ébranlé sur les points les plus importans de ses
relations réciproques, par suite de plusieurs dispositions qui
provoquent des alarmes vives . .. , lorsque les capitaux
semblent fuir partout devant les inquiétudes qui se prop-
agent, la destinée du commerce dépend de la promptitude
de ses rentrées.’ That indeed was the link between the
specific and the general alarms. It was precisely because of
the oncoming crisis that, in the Chamber’s view, customs
formalities should be expedited. During the increasingly
fraught December debates the problem of the sequestrations
and transit duties became so engulfed in the worsening finan-
cial and commercial panic that their various elements cannot
be separated easily.
   One essential feature of the wider crisis was a sudden
clamp-down on credit. Alsace mirrors this development, the
defensive     reflex   of bankers       and merchant         creditors, within
weeks     of its first       appearance       in Hamburg,          Amsterdam,
Rotterdam,       Paris,    Lyons,     and   the Swiss       financial    centres.
In his letter to Montalivet of 22 December, Lezay-Marnésia
noted a worrying rise in current interest rates.!? As against
the normal 4 per cent, the rate had increased in Strasbourg
to 9 per cent, ‘ce qui tient au ressérement des espéces,
occasionné par les allarmes du commerce’.”° Other references
to the wider crisis were made in the four mémoires of 25
December noted earlier.*! Here the issue of Levantine cotton
was again related, for example, to ‘la crise qui s’étend de
Pétranger a l’intérieur, et du centre aux frontiéres ... au
milieu de tant de génes et d’anxiétés’. Again, the Bavarian
laws on expeditions of Levantine cotton were linked with
another sensitive problem. During the expansionary period
the credit of merchant bankers in Augsburg had been crucial
to the transit trade through Bavaria. At its meeting of 21
December 1810 the Chamber in Strasbourg voiced concern
     18 Meeting of the same date, Min. v.                         19 ALN. F!? 2469.
    ?° An 8 to 9 percent interest rate had already been noted by Sautier in a letter
to Briansiaux of 25 Nov.: A.N. 3 AQ 339.                                  21 Min. v.
