228           CRISIS, RECOVERY,            AND DECLINE         1810-1813

Haguenau,           Barr,     Colmar,          Sainte-Marie,     Mulhouse,        and
Belfort. Not for the first time, and now more self-consciously
than before, the Chamber was in effect acting on behalf of
Alsace as a whole. Its findings were sent to Montalivet in a
series of long reports which are essential to an understanding
of the local economic crisis. The first of these reports, dated
16 January, was presented in tabular form.** It covers
thirteen pages of the minute-book for 1811 and lists all
known cases of goods sequestrated in the Outre-Rhin and in |
Switzerland. Seventeen merchant and industrial houses were
named in all, half a dozen of them among the leading
Alsatian firms.34 The commission was unable to give figures
for the value of goods in each case, but the most serious
interruptions         affected      Dollfus-Mieg,       Koechlin    & Cie, Masse
de Eissen (who was soon to go bankrupt), Schlumberger &
Cie, Mennet,          Piccard fréres, Samuel            fréres, Menninger,       Rieff
fréres, and Steinheil & Mathys. Most of the sequestrations
had been imposed in Frankfurt, Bischofsheim, Schaffhausen,
and Basel. The              range of goods most commonly                named in-
cluded       Levantine,       Brazilian,       and    Georgian   cotton,      colonial
foodstuffs (coffee, sugar, pepper, cocoa), and industrial
primary materials like indigo, dyewood, and Senegalese gum.
Most of the interrupted contracts, and all the major ones, had
been negotiated during the speculative boom preceding the
winter       crisis. The      Chamber,         in its remarks      on   the    tables,
stressed the deteriorating credit of the houses affected. Given
the recent decline in resale prices, it noted, even the immedi-
ate release of the goods would not ensure profits. Coffee for
instance had sold at around 4.25 francs the quintal before the
crisis; the new duty of 1.70 francs as against the former 0.85
could not be recouped from the current selling price of 4
francs the quintal.
   In the same report the Chamber referred to the counter-
blows on Alsatian merchants and manufacturers of six bank-
ruptcies in Paris, four in Lyons, and six in Basel.and Ziirich.
These had cost Strasbourg at least a million and a half francs
in outright         losses,    to   which       the    Chamber     added      another
      33 Meeting c f the same date, Min. vi.
      54 A supplementary list sent to the prefect three weeks later named eight other
firms as victims of the sequestrations: meeting of 7 Feb. 1811, ibid.
