                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                              223

wrote     to both     Bignon      and     Montalivet    in support       of the
Chamber’s petition.!*
   The outcome of this affair seems to have been inconclu-
sive, and ultimately Strasbourg was to be deprived of its per-
mitted share of the trade in Levantine cotton altogether. In
the short term local merchants received at least some nominal
satisfaction in their protest, since Bignon replied to inform
the prefect that he was pressing the grand duke to repeal the
order of 16 October.'* Since the imperial government had
made it known that Levantine cotton was not liable to the
heavier    duties    on   colonial      varieties,   he had    thé assurance
that the expeditions would be resumed. He added, not per-
haps unaware of the irony, that in this as in other matters
‘on n’a pas et on ne peut pas avoir ici un intérét different du
notre . . .’. Yet in spite of such official interventions and
modifications of policy, the Chamber had further cause for
grievance against arbitrary sequestrations and surcharges
across the Rhine. If these did not apply to Levantine cotton,
other imports like wood and dyestuffs were similarly
threatened. As the Chamber’s minutes for November and
December 1810 often show, similar interruptions of Alsatian
imports through Bavaria, Wirttemberg, and Nassau took
place. On 27 November, for instance, it was still alluding to
‘la tourmente des cotons du Levant’.!® At the same time it
objected to the irregular treatment of French re-exports in
Germany. ‘Le zéle méme des gouvernemens de la Confédéra-
tion pour le maintien du Systeme continental peut les égarer
sur des dispositions de détail’:1” here, in its most polite form,
was the digest of the Chamber’s persistent complaints.

ii. The financial and commercial crisis in Strasbourg
Such protests during the last quarter of 1810 merged in due
course with a larger and more general crisis. The first explicit
reference to the latter in the Chamber’s minutes appears in
    14 On 24 and 25 Oct. respectively: A.D. (B-R) XII M 41.
   1S Letter of 6 Nov. 1810: ibid.
   16T etter to Lezay-Marnésia: Min. v; A.D. (B-R) XII M 41.
   17Meeting of 23 Nov. 1810, ibid. The gravamen of all its charges against the
subject states was spelt out in four long mémoires, all dated 25 Dec. and sent to
Montalivet on 30 Dec. 1810: ibid.
