220         CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND DECLINE        1810-1813

maximum industrial production under Napoleonic rule. This
chapter deals with the last phase of the Blockade in Alsace
itself. A detailed analysis of the wider crisis is beyond its
purpose,    although    the regional example studied here
illustrates the essential features of the French crisis more
generally.!

i. Strasbourg under the ‘terreur douaniere’

The earliest signs of commercial trouble in Strasbourg did not
come    as a reflex of the financial crisis in Paris, or elsewhere,
but in the form of disrupted traffic through the local entre-
pot. The city’s trade during the second half of 1810 moved
in a series of ups and downs. It was conducted on a ‘stop-go’
pattern largely influenced by external forces, some originating
abroad. Seasonal factors were partly to blame for this, and
political events also contributed to the uncertainty of com-
mercial dispatches. As early as 17 October the                   Chamber was
again invoking the old refrain of ‘la stagnation totale des
affaires’.? It lamented the current embarrassment of manu-
facturers in the French interior following the recent stoppage
of Levantine cotton on the frontiers. The problem on this
occasion was not incapacity at the halle commerciale, not a
traffic jam, as had sometimes been the case during the ex-
pansionary period. When on the following day the Chamber
reported a ‘stagnation absolue’ at the entrepét,? it was
referring to the impact of the new customs severities on
expeditions. ‘Stagnation’ meant a customs standstill imposed
on a diminishing trade through the city. Many of the stop-
pages had occurred beyond the imperial frontiers, especially
in the eux de passage in Baden, and the Strasbourgeois had
no direct means of appeal.
   The main alarm was that these stoppages would deprive
local merchants of the quick returns on goods which they
     ‘On the latter, see Viennet, Napoléon et l’industrie frangaise; Labasse, Com-
merce des soies a Lyon; and Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers
parisiens, esp. ii. 787-802. Of recent studies, that which bears on Alsace most
immediately is Roger Dufraisse, ‘La crise économique de 1810-1812 en pays
annexé: L’Exemple de la rive gauche du Rhin’, Francia, vi (1978), 407-40.
    ? Meeting of the same date, Min. v.
    > Monthly report to Lezay-Marnésia: A.D. (B-R) XII M 8.
