                THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                         aod

needed to meet their debts. On 6 November the Chamber
reported that there had been no dealings in Levantine cotton
during October, since the samples previously sent to Paris
for authentication had not yet been cleared.* Writing to
Briansiaux    soon    afterwards,      Sautier & Cie commented         that
‘les cotons s’aquittent [sic] peu a peu a la Douane, mais ca
ne va que lopin-lopant, il semble qu’on se fasse un malin
plaisir de contrarier le commerce dans toutes les formes
possibles’.* The Chamber, in its cited report, had also noted
that the trade in agricultural products was in a lull. German
clients had surpluses on their hands, following large purchases
before the customs reform, and 1810 was regarded as a
mediocre year for burgundies in any case. A month later
there was little improvement to report in the export market
for French wines.® But at least shipments of Levantine cotton
had been cleared by then, and dispatches to the interior had
resumed. If the blockage at the customs had thus been eased,
however, all was not well in this commercial branch. True to
the ‘stop-go’ sequence suggested earlier, a new traffic jam
was building up in the arrivages of Levantine cotton.” And in
that form, through a series of swells and stoppages, the prob-
lem was to recur in the following months.®
    It thus appears that customs rigours rather than any more
general economic crisis was the main worry of the Strasbour-
geois during most of the last quarter of 1810. Charles Schmidt
speaks dramatically of ‘une veritable terreur douaniére’ set
in motion by the Fontainebleau decree of 18 October and its
accompanying regional adaptations.” Coming as they did
before the full force of the crisis was felt, they were if any-
thing a cause rather than an effect of it, although their gener-
ally strict application in the northern and eastern depart-
ments of the Empire until 1812 worsened the impact of the
crisis. The more stringent laws enforced in the Rhenish
Confederation as from the last quarter of 1810 not surpris-
ingly alarmed the merchants of Strasbourg. The various
             4 Meeting of the same date, Min. v.
             5 Letter of 10 Nov. 1810: A.N. 3 AQ 339.
             © Report of 6 Dec. 1810: A.D. (B-R) XII M 8.
             7 Report of 8 Dec. 1810: A-D. (B-R) XII M 34.
             8 See e.g. the debates of 10 and 23 Apr. 1811, Min. vi.
             2 Grand-duché de Berg, 419.
