                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                   225

at the current refusal of those houses to make new loans and
discounting facilities available in the old way.*? The Bavarian
government had recently required higher cautionary pay-
ments as surety for advances on commission and had also
restricted transactions through middlemen.*? With more of
their funds thus committed, the Augsburg bankers had
reacted by withholding the credit that had primed the local
carrying trade to France. Clearly, the financial panic had
spread to Bavaria during December, and Alsatian importers
were among the first to feel the effects of the aquenze on
credit there.
   If much had been said and formally written down in
protest by the end of the year, very little had been achieved
by the Strasbourgeois in the way of redress. Working through
the minutes of that time, one feels that the imperial govern-
ment was not pushing hard enough on the matter of Levan-
tine cotton. It was not until February that the Chamber
learnt of the lifting of the sequestrations in Bischofsheim.”4
Even then, free passage of the goods was not immediately
allowed. It was longer still before the sequestration of
imperial re-exports through Baden was relaxed.”®
   Two factors probably account for the slowness of the im-
perial government to respond to pressure from Strasbourg
and for its reluctance to give way to it. One is that the
ministers in Paris were preoccupied with many other alarms,
for it was during the closing months of 1810 that the crisis
in the capital and other imperial cities built up steadily
towards its peak early in the new year. There was thus no
overriding case for giving priority to the petitions from
Strasbourg. The second explanation may be more material:
the government had already decided to switch the entry-
points for Levantine cotton away from the Rhenish entre-
pots towards the Illyrian provinces and Italy. The question

   22 Min, v.
   23The relevant   measure   limited individual   dealings in Levantine   cotton to a
maximum    value of 30,000 florins (some 66,000 francs). Any one contract was
thereby restricted to 300 metric quintals.
    24 Meeting of the 13th of the month, Min. vi.
    25See the exchange of letters between Lezay-Marnésia, Holzmann (customs
director in Offenburg), Bignon, and Edelsheim (the foreign minister of Baden)
between Feb, and June 1811: A.D. (B-R) XII M 41.
