                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                              237

Once     more,   too, there was       an immediate        issue on which to
focus its sombre predictions. By a directive of 5 September
the government had laid down certain conditions for future
trade dealings with the newly annexed departments of the
Lippe,     Ems-Supérieur,       Bouches-du-Weser,          and     Bouches-de-
’Elbe. One requirement was that such traffic would have to
pas via Wesel rather than Frankfurt. Another was that
customs duties would still have to be levied on goods entering
those departments even if payment had already been exacted
at the point of exit from France. As important intermediaries
in the carrying trade to those parts, the Strasbourgeois were
quite naturally alarmed by these new measures. Here again
they thought that reason was on their side, and so another
spate of protests and petitions was launched in defence of the
vital trade link with Frankfurt.** But, as so often in the past,
the Chamber spoilt its case by some palpable inconsistencies
in its reports. The ministers in Paris had an excuse, yet again,
to think that it was crying wolf. For sometimes the Chamber’s
argument was that Strasbourg was on the verge of commer-
cial collapse, that it was about to lose the few crumbs which
had survived the blight. On other occasions the argument was
that the city had done well in the preceding years and that a
prosperous larder was in jeopardy. The image of conspicuous
decline and conspicuous prosperity — whichever seemed to
fit the moment better — was thus used to back up the
Chamber’s petitions.
   What,    for instance, was        the government             to make   of the
two    accounts     sent by the Chamber             on   7 and 9 October?
In the first, the blunt conclusion was that ‘le commerce                      de
Strasbourg continue d’éprouver une stagnation facheuse’.*>
In the second, the argument was presented from a different
angle:*°
Quiconque a observé avec soin les causes de l’aisance de notre place
dans ces derniéres années, est bien convaincu qu’elle est due principale-
ment 4 ce genre d’affaires [trade with Frankfurt]; et il suffit pour cela
de connaitre     un seul fait: nos expéditions par le Rhin par Francfort,
qui montaient autrefois de 35 a 50,000 anciens quintaux [17,500 to
   54Meeting of 7 Oct. 1811 and letter to Montalivet two days later: Min. vi;
A.D. (B-R) XII M 48.
   55 Meeting of the same date, Min. vi; A.D. (B-R) XII M 1.
   56 Meeting of the same date, Min. vi; A.D. (B-R) XII M 48.
