234           CRISIS, RECOVERY,          AND DECLINE        1810-1813

the Chamber advised not ‘a withdrawal of the foreign coins
but an authorized tariff of exchange rates, to be published in
the local Hétel de monnaies.
   Yet older problems remained more pressing still. As the
expiry date for the Levantine cotton entrepot approached,
the Strasbourgeois entered their last public agony on the
matter. All their earlier efforts had led to was a postpone-
ment of the closure from 1 May to 1 July 1811.*° Far from
pacified, the Chamber had then drafted a long mémoire in
which the old cotton route was defended in every detail.*©
In this it had the support of several other imperial towns,
including Geneva,*” which also benefited from the trans-
continental route from Macedonia to the Habsburg lands and
so on through Bavaria, Wirttemberg, and Baden to Alsace.
Claiming to speak for many interested departments in the
east and in Belgium, and as if to show its willingness to com-
promise, the Chamber had offered two practical proposals.
The first was that the local closure should be postponed at
least until the end of the year, so as to allow current
contracts to be duly completed. The second was that, there-
after, a route         from    Macedonia      through      Serbia, Bosnia,    the
Illyrian provinces, Trieste or Karlstadt, the Italian Tyrol,
Bavaria, Wiirttemberg, and Baden to Strasbourg should be
allowed to operate concurrently with the imperial inlets
through Vercelli, Casatine, and Pietramole.*® On the latter
proposal, the Chamber had suggested that the concurrent
route through Strasbourg might even be confined to Levan-
tine cotton ultimately destined for the eastern and northern
departments alone. And here, as in the case of the expiry
date, it again had the backing of all the major local officials
and of the Conseil général de commerce.*?
   “Imperial decree of 22 Jan. 1811: A.N. AFIV 1243; meeting of 7 Feb. fol-
lowing, Min. vi.
      46 Sent to Montalivet on 18 Feb., meeting of 13 Feb. 1811, ibid.
    ‘7For a short account of Geneva’s position on the issue, see C. Schmidt,
‘Sismondi et le blocus continental’, R. h., cxv (1914), 85-91, which includes
the text of Sismondi’s letter defending the old route to Alsace.
    *® These proposals were repeated in another letter-petition to Montalivet, and
at the same time a similar appeal was made to Collin de Sussy: meeting of 17 Apr.
1811, Min. vi.
    4° See e.g. the formal avis given at its extraordinary meeting of 5 Mar. 1811:
A.N. F!? 192 and F!? 523,
