236           CRISIS, RECOVERY,          AND DECLINE         1810-1813

to me far-reaching. Just as the comparatively effective per-
formance of imperial exports across the Rhine had been a
crucial factor in the expansionary period, so the d'sruption
of that market in 1811 had the opposite result. Indeed, it
was during the crisis of 1810-11 that the limitations and the
false logic of the French Continental market design became
plain. The inherent irony, now exposed, was that the market
design presupposed a stable if not a growing number of well-
to-do clients beyond the frontiers to absorb whatever the
Empire could not of its own production. It also rested on the
assumption that imperial trade with the subject and allied
states could be geared to an exchange of manufactured goods
and agricultural products for essential primary materials with
a strong preferential bias towards France. Ultimately,
however, the Blockade’s impact on many of the client states,
as well as successive measures adopted by the French to
invade and even engross Continental markets, worked against
any sustained achievement of those ends.
   It was, then, precisely the Frenchness of the Continental
market design which eventually proved its undoing. Though
not immediately, and certainly not always directly, its one-
sidedness contributed to the slow impoverishment of many
states on which it depended. Now, it is of course not certain
that the Blockade as such caused the economic crisis of
1810-11, whose origins were more complex and probably
had as much to do with speculative excesses outside France,
and not least in Britain. But there is no doubt that the
Blockade        exacerbated       the    crisis, once     it had     broken,     and
made recovery from it more difficult. It is also undeniable
that the crisis, whatever its causes, knocked the stuffing out
of the French market design. As major beneficiaries of the
good years 1807-10, Alsatian merchants and manufacturers
felt the impact of the downturn which followed all the more
keenly.
   Nevertheless, fat and lean years remained a-question of
degree. Once again there is evidence that the Chamber in
Strasbourg may have been exaggerating local hardships. in
its dreary reports as late as the third quarter of 1811.59
      53 See e.g. that to the prefect of 7 Oct., which brought the list of local bank-
ruptcies up to date: meeting of the same date, Min. vi; A.D. (B-R) XII M 11.
