230         CRISIS, RECOVERY,          AND DECLINE        1810-1813

committed, and this at a time when new credit was virtually
unobtainable. A month later the Chamber summed up its
bleak report with the familiar lament: ‘la stagnation des
affaires a été générale, les inquiétudes [Sont] excessives, le
dissoud est complet’.7® Then, stressing that exports as well as
imports were in trouble, it invoked the old bogy of market
default: ‘peu de demandes de |’Allemagne, les expéditions du
midi moindre que les années derniéres’. A serious victim of
the latter slump was the wine trade. The reports of Marcel de
Serre, a special commissioner appointed in 1811 to look
into the problem of French wine exports, referred to ‘la
diminution des fortunes’ in this branch; and he also estimated
that their consumption in Bavaria had dropped that year to
five-eighths of the immediately preceding annual average.°?

                                   *    *    *



The industrial phase of the crisis in the Bas-Rhin was the last
to show itself, and it followed inevitably as a result of the
sequestrations and the wider financial crisis. As it is the least
documented detail of the crisis in the department, it is not
easy to pin-point the start of the manufacturers’ difficulties.
Cottons and linens, for example, were apparently more affec-
ted by current upsets than woollens; but on the whole set-
backs in all industrial branches were comparatively slight
during the last quarter of 1810. The main drop in output and
employment came during the first quarter of 1811 and con-
tinued into the second.*® Having stocked up with primary
materials at the pre-crisis levels, which were from 25 to 30
per cent higher than those of the following winter, manu-
facturers had pushed up their prices in the hope of ensuring
a profit. It appears that as from January, however, buyers
willing to meet their terms were not forthcoming.
   The official statistical evidence of the Bas-Rhin’s industrial
   °® Report to Lezay-Marnésia of 9 Mar. 1811: A.D. (B-R) XII M 11.
   °° Dunan, Napoléon et l’Allemagne, 344 and 723 (notes).
   “°The details of the following section are based partly on the prefect’s quar-
terly reports to Paris in 1810, which are kept at A.D. (B-R) X M 4, but chiefly on
the industrial tables drawn up by the mayor Brackenhoffer during 1812-13, on
information given by the Chamber, for each half-year between 1810 and 1813,
which are kept variously at A.N. F!? 1583 and A.D. (B-R) XIII M 28.
