232      CRISIS, RECOVERY,   AND DECLINE     1810-1813

usually the precondition of any import concessions, and it
has an important bearing on the nature of the French crisis
more generally. It illustrates the point that the economic
crisis of 1810-11 was not due to a literal dearth of supplies,
the inevitable sequel to the ‘self-blockade’ or, as it were, the
boomerang effect of the official embargoes. The crisis was
not precipitated by a feverish mirage of plenty in a desert
land. It was not the ultimate point of drainage in a long com-
mercial famine and steady run-down of industrial lubrication.
It was not due to a scarcity of essential primary materials and
a sky-rocketing of prices within the Empire, for prices (as
we have seen) generally fell during the critical winter.
    One of the most salient features of the French economic
crisis is that it stemmed partly at least from commercial
OVER-stocking and industrial OVER-production. In spite of
the doctrinal attacks of liberal economists during the last
century and a half, the Napoleonic Blockade was not synony-
mous with an absolute deficiency in essential primary
materials. In the case of silkstuffs, cottons, and wines, for
instance, the problem in 1811 was glut rather than dearth.
Now presumably this means that imperial manufacturers and
merchants had had access to at least enough primary
materials from which to over-produce. The choice, otherwise,
seems bizarre: either one would have to suppose that the
commercial and -industrial surpluses were imaginary, which
would be a grotesque distortion of all the material evidence
that those surpluses were real enough; or else one would have
to think of dearth and glut relative to such appallingly low
quantities of normal production that there would seem to bé
an implicit distinction between dearth and Super-dearth (or
is it Infra-dearth?), which is a needless abstraction.
    In fact, the French crisis, as seen through the Alsatian and
most other angles, had little to do with the physical default
of goods. There was certainly a serious problem of insufficient
credit and specie, but more generally the crisis lay. in demand
rather than in supply. It was this market default which lay at
the root of the commercial and industrial glut of 1811. The
official quid pro quo for import concessions was only one
expedient by which the government hoped to dispose of the
Empire’s surpluses. What annoyed the Strasbourgeois was
