                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                 239

there was what could reasonably pass as a ‘crisis’ in the
regular traffic during the mid-winter months, but on its own
evidence the Chamber had no right to repeat the tales of
‘absolute stagnation’ or ‘progressive decline’. It is tempting to
conclude that Strasbourg’s river trade straddled the crisis in
the same ‘stop-go’ fashion as it had performed during most of
1810. One need not doubt the reality of the winter crisis, but
the wider perspective was one of fits and starts. The expan-
sionary momentum had been lost; traffic adjusted speed and
course to meet the new hazards ahead.
   Comparable statistics for Strasbourg’s land-borne trade
during the crisis are not available. Again it is a fair assump-
tion that the ‘terreur douaniére’ on both sides of the frontier
was harmful to this branch. The switch of the Levantine
cotton route, and all the fuss which preceded it, probably
prolonged the sufferings of the overland trade well into the
summer of 1811, and perhaps beyond it. Yet in spite of all
the uncertainties and set-backs, the essential structure of the
city’s merchant oligarchy remained intact. The main casual-
ties of the crisis were a lesser sort, who lacked the capital and
the credit to see the hard time through, or else were ruined
on the same waves of speculation which had first buoyed
them up.*?
iv. The crisis in the Haut-Rhin

The stoppage of credit and the withdrawal of funds, especially
Swiss funds, hit the manufacturers of the Haut-Rhin at a time
when they already had industrial surpluses on their hands.
Primary materials which had already been paid for, or partly
paid for, were under sequestration in foreign states, and even
traditional markets had fallen away. Output was generally
lower and unemployment higher than in 1810. The main
diagnostic index of these reverses was Mulhouse, but it was
not the only one.

     59 Louis Bergeron, dealing with a bigger and more important sample, reaches a
similar conclusion on the effects of the crisis in Paris. For la haute banque and its
close associates, the crisis was more of a passing nuisance than a profound disloca-
tion. Its main victims were speculators in colonial goods with low capital and un-
certain credit, along with the smaller fry who had overreached           themselves.
Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, ii. 800-1.
