                  THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                             233

that the export requirement was being applied to middlemen
and merchant carriers as well as to the owners of dépéts de
vente, which would ultimately market the goods. Another
objection was that it was being retroactively extended to
earlier contracts which had been interrupted in Switzerland,
the     Rhenish      Confederation,        and   the    Hanse     towns.    The
Chamber protested to Montalivet at once.*? Its practical
proposal was, not unreasonably, that the export quid pro quo
should be confined to the firms for which the ‘licensed’
imports were destined.
   Another symptom of the market crisis which became acute
in the spring of 1811, though it had been developing for
several months, was the shortage of specie. Casting obstacles
in the way of even small-scale transactions, its effects were
felt right down at the level of small local markets. The issue
in Alsace first arose in the form of an official inquiry into the
circulation of debased Swiss coins. The Chamber in Stras-
bourg believed that these coins were in use precisely because
French money was then so hard to come by.*? It saw no
solution except in a more liberal issue of new French coins,
‘... car c’est la rareté de cette derni¢re monnaie, devenue
successivement insuffisante pour les besoins du commerce,
qui a amené forcément l’usage des monnaies suisses. La
disparition de celles-ci ne nous donnerait pas les espéces
frangaises qui nous manquent, et elle enleverait cependant
un moyen d’échange dont nous avons besoin.” The coins
in question corresponded to 75 centimes and 1.50 francs,
and they were used variously to pay day-labourers and arti-
sans or as petty cash in local markets. The economic crisis
increased the tendency to hoard hard cash, however, so that
even relatively isolated village economies felt its impact in
some small measure. The resort to Swiss alternatives illus-
trates yet another variant of the Alsatian ‘frontier complex’,
one particularly common in times of stress. Realizing this,
      42 Letter of 12 Apr., meeting of 10 Apr. 1811, Min. vi.
      43 Report to Lezay-Marnésia of 24 Apr., meeting of 23 Apr. 1811, ibid.; and
Arch. comm. Strasb., B3° 29-158.
    44For a more general discussion of this whole question, see Guy Thuillier,
‘Pour une Histoire monétaire de la France au XIXe siécle: Le rdle des monnaies
de cuivre et de billon’, Ann. E.S.C., xiv (1959), 65-90; and ‘La crise monétaire
de l’automne 1810’, R. h., ccxxxviii (1967), 51-84.
