                  THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                  235

   The minutes for the May debates of 1811 make it clear
that the Chamber was determined to mobilize all possible
support for its case. Besides yet another petition to Mont-
alivet, letters were sent to Collin de Sussy, to the mayor
Brackenhoffer, and to Turckheim in Paris, urgently asking
him to pull what strings he could.*° But all such efforts were
in vain. After a long silence, an unnecessary snub to the
Chamber’s insistence on the urgency of the matter, Mont-
alivet replied.*! The government’s final verdict was negative.
And so in the end the work of months and many petitions
had all failed to shake Napoleon’s resolve. The entrepét for
Levantine cotton in Strasbourg closed officially on 1 July
1811, and the trade thereafter was driven into illicit paths.
On the whole, one may say, the local merchants were justly
aggrieved. The government’s handling of the whole affair was
brusque and unreasonable. If it had ever seriously considered
them, it certainly did not reply in convincing detail to the
Chamber’s arguments for the greater safety, economy, and
facility of the old cotton route. It was rather irrational to
force manufacturers in the northern and eastern departments
to procure supplies of Levantine cotton via an authorized
dog’s-leg through the Illyrian provinces, northern Italy, and
Lyons.
                                     *     *    *


It isnot clear when exactly the economic crisis in Strasbourg
began to abate. A superficial reading of the official routine
reports would suggest that it never did. Brackenhoffer’s
mayoral report and accompanying tables of 10 May 1811 on
the city’s trade and industry matched the Chamber’s for
gloom.** One detail of this report merits particular attention.
According to the mayor, ‘l’appauvrissement de |’Allemagne
et des pays du Nord, qui va en augmentant, se fait ressentir
par une diminution de commissions des produits du sol et
de l’industrie frangaise’. The implications of this point seem

     5° The texts of all these are recorded in the minutes for the meeting of 16 May,
vol. vi.                           51 Letter of 18 July, meeting of 22 July 1811, ibid.
    52 «Etat des fabriques, manufactures et usines, des arts et métiers, du commerce
de la ville de Strasbourg’, compiled in reply to Montalivet’s circular of 23 June
1810: A.N, F!? 1569.
