                  THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                             231

troubles is skimpy, but such as it is it squares with the
descriptive record. During the first half of 1811 the total
work-force of the department’s cotton industries fell from
1,555     to   1,318,    and    in Strasbourg        itself the     figures were
respectively 1,191 and 990.*! The extent of the set-backs
varied considerably among the individual enterprises. Jean
Malapert, for instance, reduced his active spindles by a fifth
to 8,000 and his employment from 390 to 340 workers; but
he made up for the drop in yarn output by increasing his
production of percales and muslins. Engelhardt-Kern and
Sandherr & Redslob were less fortunate. They had to lower
both production and employment levels by at least 40 per
cent during the first half of 1811. The official tables also
show a colossal decline in output at Vetter’s linen enter-
prise, and one suspects that the figures must have been
incomplete.     From 10,050 kg of hemp thread during the first
half of 1810, his production reportedly collapsed to 1,276
kg in the second, and then fell still more during the first half
of 1811. The returns for Dietsch’s workshops during the
latter half-year, which show a drop of about a third in output
and employment        alike, may be equally questionable.
Woollens are generally reckoned to have fared better than
cottons    during the crisis; but, on the other hand, Dietsch’s
problems could have been due to a temporary cut-back in
military demand. In any case the industrial record of the Bas-
Rhin during the winter and spring of 1811 marks a clear
break with that of the expansionary period before it.

iii. Strasbourg and the constraints of policy: the
     government’s response to the local crisis

During the spring of 1811 other features of the wider crisis
appeared in Strasbourg. One was the government’s require-
ment of an export quid pro quo for import concessions
allowed by the issue of new imperial ‘licences’. It obliged
all merchants who had permission to import classified goods
under ‘licence’ to export an equivalent value of surplus
silkstuffs or wines and sometimes both. This indeed was

               41 Loc. cit., and L’Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 378.
