             THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                      247

was more marked in employment levels, as given in the retro-
spective tables. As against the drop of a third in Mulhouse, the
fall in the department’s total work-force employed in calico-
printing (from 22,619 to 16,943) was nearer a quarter. As late
as 12 June 1811 Desportes spoke of at least 15,000 ‘chémeurs
étrangers et régnicoles’ in the department.®° In the same
report he also referred to the ‘sterile valleys’ of Sainte-Marie.
Orbey,   Munster,   and Saint-Amarin,        and his general conclu-
sion stated bluntly: ‘situation vraiment allarmante’.
   Apart from the préts aux manufactures and a few stop-gap
government contracts, which helped certain houses but
whose wider importance is easily exaggerated, industrial com-
pensation had to be found elsewhere. Perhaps the most
important positive development during and after the crisis
was the growth of the kingdom of Italy as a market for the
Haut-Rhin’s manufacturers. This market was not created
because of the crisis, smce the conditioning decree of 10
October 1810 preceded its worst phase by several months,
but it was certainly a ray of hope during the dark times of
1811. Without it, the industrial glut in the Haut-Rhin would
have been more embarrassing, and old stocks would have
depreciated further. The imperial decree had imposed a much
stricter ‘marché réservé’ on the kingdom of Italy.*! It ex-
tended the terms of the decree of 10 June 1806 to cover all
ranges of cotton goods: yarn, plaincloth, hosiery, muslins,
percales, plain calicoes, dimities, nankeens, piqués, toiles
teintes, toiles peintes, as well as-all articles in which cotton
was mixed with flax, wool, or silk. Imports of all such goods
other than from France were banned in the kingdom, and at
the same time the decree halved the duties on permitted
imperial imports within that range. In the ministerial circular
of 20 November 1810 advertising the decree Montalivet
claimed that ‘c’est un grand débouché qu’elle [Sa Majesté] a
fermé, d’une main, aux fabriques de coton étrangéres, et
qu’elle a ouvert,     de l’autre, aux       manufactures   du méme
genre que nous possédons’.®* His encouragement to manu-
facturers to take advantage of this new market had a response
                89 Report to Montalivet: A.N. F’? 1583.
                81
                 4N, F!2 2473; A.D. (H-R) IM 126b.
                82 Thid.
