248          CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND DECLINE         1810-1813

among several of the Haut-Rhin’s leading zndzenneurs. The
export trade to Italy was most brisk in 1812 and 1813, but
it had got well under way during 1811. L’Huillier speaks of
it as a ‘négoce actif’ at that time.®? Following his evidence,
based on the prefectoral tables for the years 1811-14,*° at
least thirty firms of the Haut-Rhin took part in the Italian
trade during the first year of the decree. My own inspection
of the prefectoral tables confirms the conclusion that the
main beneficiaries here were Dollfus-Mieg, the revivified
Gros, Davillier & Roman,              Nicolas Koechlin, Daniel Schlum-
berger, Francois Verdan, and Blech-Fries.
      Altogether, then, the industries of the Haut-Rhin weathered
the crisis of 1810-11. No branch was permanently harmed
by it. A signal expansion into Italian markets partly offset
the contraction of those at home and in the Outre-Rhin,
where much of the earlier purchasing power fell away. The
crisis did not interrupt the technical advance of the depart-
ment’s cotton industries. The headway made since the Con-
sulate, and especially since the summer                    of 1807, had been
cut back but not entirely lost. An inherently strong indus-
trial structure could withstand the general slump in output
and employment averaging something between a quarter and
a third. Calico-printing, the backbone of the Haut-Rhin’s
industrial economy, survived intact. The larger enterprises
either had or found resources to tide over the crisis and
recover      from     it afterwards.      As for the mass             of smaller
concerns, many were pushed to the brink of ruin, but the
great majority lived to fight another day.

v. The aftermath of crisis: Strasbourg and the ‘stop-go’
   cycle 1811-1813

The official records of the last two years of the Blockade
present a frustrating irony. They are very much fuller in
statistical detail than for any other period of the Napoleonic
Empire, but they are also the most unreliable. Indeed, their
very frequency and volume explain their inadequacies. The
requirement         of   routine      monthly        and    quarterly      reports

      *° Alsace napoléonienne, 390.   **Ibid. 394.    °° A.D. (H-R)   IM 126b.
