242          CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND DECLINE         1810-1813

the ‘terreur douaniére’. Most of the serious sequestrations
affected the leading indienneurs and were concentrated in the
first half of 1811. Petitions from the aggrieved parties and
letters of support from the prefect Desportes to Paris multi-
plied in March and April.®* What the hold-up in supplies
meant was that, already denied a cash return on their
surpluses, the affected houses were being further handi-
capped in their efforts to recoup losses by planning for the
year’s production ahead.® The longer the sequestrations
continued, it was argued, the more likely it was that the
manufacturers would suffer a double loss. One would follow
on any subsequent confiscation of or customs surcharge on
the goods, especially those ordered before the higher duties
of the Trianon tariff became. applicable. The other would
affect the convertible value of the goods, gua industrial
material, as the risk of their impairment in the customs
depots was high.
   Several individual examples of this problem are to hand.®©
Dollfus-Mieg had already made an initial advance on 157
bales of Georgian cotton in October 1810. The interruption
of the expedition at the customs in Basel during the winter
threatened a suspension of production in the spinning works
which fed his enterprise. Nicolas Koechlin had 390 bales of
cotton similarly held up in Frankfurt. These had been
ordered from a Prussian dealer as early as the preceding
August, and again an initial payment had been made. That
was also the position of Daniel Schlumberger, who had
ordered 85 bales of American and Levantine cotton in
October, only to see them impounded in Basel during the
winter. The closure of his spinning works in Lutterbach was
foreseen in consequence. Similar protests were made by
Daniel Hornung of Mulhouse, by Ziegler, Greuter & Cie of
      64 AD, (H-R) 1M 116a/1 and 126a/1.
    °§ The need for forward planning was explained by Josué Koechlin, the mayor
of Mulhouse, in a letter of 29 Apr. 1811 to Joliat, the sub-prefect of the arron-
dissement of Altkirch. Linking the question directly with the avoidance of social
unrest, the mayor reported that local manufacturers were already uneasy about
the following winter, since ‘la stagnation dans les affaires en général et le peu de
vente dans les marchandises fabriquées contraindra nos manufacturiers de ren-
voyer beaucoup de leurs ouvriers’, He advised the police to make contingency
plans for the temporary repatriation of foreign workers. A.D. (H-R) I M 125.
   6° A.D. (H-R)   IM 116a/1 and 126a/1.
