 240       CRISIS, RECOVERY,       AND DECLINE         1810-1813

   If the crisis in the Haut-Rhin broke some                    two or three
 months    later than in the Bas-Rhin,          it seems      to have lasted
 longer. Robert Lévy believed that the time of troubles in
 the Alsatian cotton industry was more enduring than that in
 other parts of the Empire. He refers to the whole period from
 1810 to 1814 as one of ‘crisis’ in Mulhouse, Sainte-Marie,
 Colmar,     Munster,     Guebwiller,   Masevaux,    Lutterbach,
 Cernay, Thann, Wesserling, and throughout the valley of
 Saint-Amarin.© This is an exaggeration. One can distinguish
 between the worst set-backs of 1811 and the two or three
 years of rather variable production which followed. But that
 the expansionary momentum of the Blockade’s earlier phase
 was lost in the final years of the Empire is clear. The cotton
 industry again was most affected by the interruption in
 supplies, the default of markets, and the general shortage of
 credit and hard cash. The major slump in profits occurred in
 the larger and more mechanized enterprises, since they more
 than others depended on large-scale working capital and on
 comparatively distant markets in the Empire and abroad. Yet
 these same firms were also best equipped to withstand the
 shock of the crisis, by drawing on their own capital or calling
 in funds from solvent associates. The middling enterprises,
 relative to their scale of operation, probably suffered more in
 the long term. One may also suppose that the mass of rural
 spinners and weavers fared no better, but here the evidence is
 less conclusive. The official reports of the time were usually
 far too preoccupied with the leading casualties to fill in the
 multiple details of rural distress. It is likely, though, that the
 small-scale rural producers had a comparatively slow passage
 into the slump. Owning fewer mechanized workshops and
 being less dependent on large-scale funding than the
industrial magnates, the impact of the crisis on them was
 much less sudden and violent.
   Although the worst industrial set-backs in the Haut-Rhin
 did not   come   until the first half of 1811,               there had been
 forebodings of trouble some months before. Dealers in
 imported primary materials and colonial foodstuffs had felt
 the repercussions
                 of the drop in resale prices during the last

                  6° Industrie cotonniére en Alsace, 283-5.
