              THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                    245

winter had stopped, once the initial withdrawal of funds and
clamp-down on new credit by Swiss bankers had eased a
little, recovery was possible. But Vetter’s letter, which made
it clear that those fortunate enough to get Swiss loans did so
on unfavourable terms, emphasized the hard road ahead. He
believed that the traditional creditors in Basel were crucial to
the industrial future of Mulhouse and that a run on funds like
the one recently experienced would ruin it. He estimated that
the local manufacturers were currently in need of eight to ten
million francs of government aid to make good their losses.
If this is even an approximate guide to the scale of the crisis
in Mulhouse,     it represents    a sizeable part of the city’s
estimated turnover of between 26 and 28 million francsworth
of printed calicoes a year during the expansionary period.
                             *    *   *


Fractional   evidence   like that, however,   is not a satisfactory
guide to the precise statistical scale of the crisis. Nor do the
official sources help much here, and again there are discre-
pancies between the running commentaries and the retrospec-
tive industrial reports. In the table of figures which the sub-
prefect Joliat sent to Desportes on 21 June 1811,” the fall
in total industrial employment        in Mulhouse    (9,613 active
workers compared with 15,308 before September 1810)
was between a third and two-fifths. Yet the axe had fallen
rather variably among the thirty-seven large and middling
enterprises listed, of which apparently only seven had
managed to maintain their pre-crisis employment levels. The
rest had been forced to lay off workers during the troubles.
Vetter, Thierry & Grossmann had reduced their former work-
force by 300 (17.64 per cent); Dollfus-Mieg and Nicolas
Koechlin had each laid off 600 (30 per cent); while Jean
Hofer, with a current level of 700, had dispensed with half
of his employees at the earlier date. Other firms were even
worse affected. Blech-Fries had made a reduction of over
half (from 700 to 300 workers), and Daniel Schlumberger
(whose employment had tumbled from 950 to 350) had
made a cut-back of as much as 63.15 per cent.
                            7 AN, F? 1583.
