244           CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND. DECLINE       1810-1813

markets, the evidence was chronic, especially in the cotton
sector. It was partly to relieve their glutted stocks, and partly
to economize on running costs, that several houses in Mul-
house sought to by-pass the dealings of middlemen though
more direct links with firms in southern and western France.
On      24 December. 1810,          for instance, Jean Hofer            formed     a
society in Montpellier with Barthélémy Euziere & Cie, which
was to survive till 1817. More generally, in June 1811 Pierre
Schlumberger, Mathieu Hofer, Jacques Schlumberger, S.
Schouch, and Daniel (of Pierre Schlumberger solidaires)
entered into an association with Auguste Rigaud in Beau-
caire, which was to last till 1818.7% This ‘avant-poste de
Mulhouse’, as Hémardinquer calls it, was not the only one set
up to supply the market in Beaucaire. Others like it were
formed in Bordeaux and Lyons.”
   Such devices to boost their sales were less readily available
to other manufacturers. One of the clearest and most detailed
statements of market trouble in the Haut-Rhin came from
Jean Vetter, indienneur             of Mulhouse,       in a letter-petition to
Montalivet of 2 June 1811.” Supporting his request for a
‘secours pécuniaire’ to help him tide over the crisis, he gave
a woeful account of his personal hardship and of the town’s
sufferings more widely. ‘Par la stagnation dans les affaires’,
he wrote, ‘les fabricans sont tous plus ou moins génés, — ils
ont leurs magazins remplis de marchandises finies et prétes
a finir. Tous leurs fonds sont arrétés, beaucoup de leurs
débiteurs payent mal ou pas du tout et ayant journellement
a dépenser des écus pour leurs ouvriers, ils ont emprumtés
[sic] des capitaux majeurs a Basle mais a des intéréts
onéreux, ce qui les mine peu a peu.’’”© Vetter claimed that
most local manufacturers had either made no sales since
January or else been forced to undersell ‘pour faire honneur
a leurs affaires’. His evidence is important in another way,
too. It seems that once the major ‘cascade des faillites’ of the
      73 Hémardinquer, ‘Marché frangais des indiennes’, 318-19.
      Ibid. 319.                                                   75 AN. F!? 1583.
      ”° Cf. Oberkampf of Jouy, who in an official reply to the imperial treasury on
the state of cotton    spinning and calico-printing, wrote on 4 Mar. 1811 that ‘les
produits ont dépassé les besoins réels’ and that ‘le nombre des manufactures qui
emploient le coton est hors de proportion avec le débouché de leurs produits’:
quoted in Bergeron, Banquiers, négociants et manufacturiers parisiens, ii. 697.
