                 THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                 241

quarter of 1810. The trend had been less marked than in
Strasbourg, but the effects were ominous. Merchants and
manufacturers who had stockpiled supplies before and in
anticipation of the Trianon tariff, at the comparatively high
prices then current, suffered from their lower quotation
towards the end of the year. Just as the merchants had been
unable to dispose of stocks at a profit, so the manufacturers
had found the market for their goods insufficient to make
good their original outlay on primary materials. Both
commercial and industrial stocks had depreciated during the
last month or two of 1810, and the problem worsened during
the first quarter of 1811. Between 19 January and 12
February some of the major houses in Mulhouse, among
them Jérémie Dollfus, Dollfus-Haussmann & Cie, J.-G.
Schlumberger,        and    J. Koechlin,         were     forced    to    suspend
operations. All were victims of the withdrawal of Swiss funds
and of their inability to raise emergency loans elsewhere.®!
During the first quarter of that year several other firms were
similarly affected, some less, others more adversely. Nicolas
Koechlin,     for instance,      survived     the ‘cascade des faillites’ in
spite of the embarrassment of its associate, the Cousins
Mérian of Basel. But even so powerful an enterprise as Gros,
Davillier & Roman did not go unscathed. It went under for
several months, technically bankrupt, along with its sister
house in Paris, itself stricken by the collapse of Bidermann
during February and March.® The plight of the Wesserling
firm had wide repercussions, not least psychological, since it
was the largest enterprise in the Haut-Rhin. In the event its
sister house was rescued by massive government loans,
about half of which were used in effect to bolster up the
Wesserling enterprise. Gros, Davillier & Roman received
such favours because it was a big and important concern. For
the lesser houses, it was left to the manufacturers to help
themselves, where they could.
   In this difficult task they were not helped by the rigours of

    617 *Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 375. Another list of bankruptcies in Mul-
house during 1811 is given in ibid. 399.
   62 See e.g. the letters of the Parisian firm to Montalivet, on 9 Jan., requesting
a loan of 1.5 million francs, and again two days later, reducing the request to at
least 600,000 francs: A.N. F!? 2405.                        63 See above, pp. 185-6.
