              THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                249

by both the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Trade
and Industry, when this new portfolio took effect as from
1 January 1812, imposed an enormous strain on the prefects
and their subordinate officials. There were frequent com-
plaints that the time allowed for the endless surveys was
insufficient and the range of economic information required
too vast for the compilation of accurate figures. When special
and retrospective surveys were demanded on top of the
current reports, the administrative burden became intolerable,
and our approach to the returns actually made must be
appropriately cautious. Of the 136 ‘especes d’industrie’ on
which Collin de Sussy’s ministerial circular of 6 May 1812
required information, Strasbourg alone had 100. The mayor
complained that his existing staff was wholly inadequate for
the task of making contact with the 2,000 individual houses
concerned in the time available.8° The larger the official
compilations became, the more likely they were to have
errors of progressive dilution. The margin of error must have
widened as the figures were sifted in stages from the units
of the commune, arrondissement, and department to form
the eventual national totals which were presented to
Napoleon. It is of course quite possible that these were
important to the extent that they were taken seriously and
may even have influenced official policy, for instance in the
allocation of imperial ‘licences’, but that is no vindication
of their intrinsic worth. Montalivet’s great Exposé of 1813,
based on the official returns for industry and trade from all
over the Empire, was a labour of monumental unreliability.
   This section of the chapter, then, is an attempt to make
some sense out of the mountains of official records which
exist for the perhaps too-documented years 1811-13. And
yet one general conclusion would not be in doubt: the worst
of the economic crisis had blown over by the end of 1811.
The first clear signs of recovery may be dated to the last and
in some branches to the third quarter of the year. What fol-
lowed was slow and hard-won recovery rather than any new
burst of optimistic expansion. The period from October 1811
to the final disintegration of the Blockade during the summer

  86 Brackenhoffer to Lezay-Marnésia on 4 June 1812: A.D. (B-R) XIII M 6.
