                    THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                 243

Guebwiller,         and      by     Zurlinden,       Lorentz,       Garrotsi,      and
Legrand of Altkirch.
   On 6 April 1811 Montalivet at last replied to the petitions
and the prefect’s letters.®’ He stated that the government was
willing to allow the goods into the Empire upon payment of
the new tariff duties and — here the nuance — provided the
firms concerned undertook to export an equivalent value of
silkstuffs from the glutted storehouses in Lyons, Nimes, and
Avignon. His letter went on to outline the rather compli-
cated procedure for such operations. It was hardly surprising
that these terms satisfied no one. The three magnates Dollfus-
Mieg, Nicolas Koechlin, and Daniel Schlumberger wrote
jointly to Desportes on 19 April to express their dismay at
the export requirement.® The prefect saw their case and sup-
ported their request to have that particular provision dropped
when he wrote to the Minister a fortnight later.® Referring
to those ‘extremely onerous’ terms, he claimed that they
would mean a certain loss of 30 per cent to the manu-
facturers. The latter were apparently even prepared to
abandon the goods altogether rather than commit themselves
to dealings in silkstuffs, in whose technicalities they
professed their ignorance. Dollfus-Mieg repeated in another
letter-petition of 4 May that the export quid pro quo was an
arrangement quite unacceptable to him and asked for a more
reasonable hearing.’° This was not apparently forthcoming. A
report by the consultative chamber in Sainte-Marie on 5 June
repeated many of the old grievances in a way which suggested
that the manufacturers of the Haut-Rhin had still had no
redress on the sequestration issue.’’ The department also had
its instances of summary confiscations, autos-da-fé, public
burnings of goods, and other more extreme forms of the
‘terreur     douaniére’.          It was     estimated     that     some   300,000
francsworth of British cotton goods alone, mostly plaincloth
and neckerchiefs, were burnt there during the crisis.”
   As for the problem of industrial surpluses and the loss of
    67 A.D. (H-R)    IM 116a/1. The ministerial directive followed a decision of the
Conseil   d’administration   du   commerce    et des manufactures    of 18 Mar.:   A.N.
AFIV 1242 and AF*IV 171.                       68 A.D. (H-R)   IM 125.
   6° Letter of 2 May 1811, ibid.              7 AD, (H-R) IM 126a/1.
   71 ALN. F!? 1583; Lévy, Industrie cotonniére en Alsace, 282-3.
   72 Papers in A.D. (H-R) I M 116a/3; Lévy, op. cit. 281-2.
