258         CRISIS, RECOVERY,        AND DECLINE           1810-1813

the first three years of the Régie, which is a question of far
greater economic importance, the evidence is contradictory.
The Chamber’s communications disseminate the view of
general hostility to the new regime, but otherwise there is
little evidence of its universal unpopularity in the department
much before the new tobacco laws of January 1813.11!
The large-scale growers and processers certainly opposed the
monopoly from the start, and no doubt their profits actually
fell after 29 December 1810. The customs rigours and
bureaucratic delays of imperial officials were also often
extreme. In one such instance, which involved the sequestra
tion of a tobacco expedition from Dominique Dangelo &
fils of Strasbourg to Briansiaux in Lille in 1811-12, several
months elapsed before the Régie completed its inspection
and finally gave its consent to the clearance of the goods.!!2
Other houses such as Christophe Dillemann experienced
similar interruptions.!
    On the other hand, there is no decisive evidence of any
major drop in tobacco output during the first two years of
the Régie. It is even possible that the smaller growers
benefited from regular sales to the Régie — sales which had
not been assured under the former system of private engross-
ment. The comparative tables drawn up early in 1813 show
no significant drop in the surface area of the Bas-Rhin
planted in tobacco during 1811 and 1812.'!4 A small reduc-
tion in the number of hectares in the arrondissements of
Wissembourg,       Sélestat, and Saverne         was   matched      by an in-
crease in that of Strasbourg. The tobacco harvest of 1811 was
good, both in output and quality, and in the following year
the Bas-Rhin was able to supply more than a third of all
French needs.'!* The advantages of the Régie to the lesser
producers were sometimes remarked on in official reports.
In that for the second quarter of 1811, for example, the sub-
prefect in Sélestat had little to complain about under the
   “The liasse A.D. (B-R) XI M 188 has documents on official tobacco policy
and the internal organization of the Régie between 1811 and 1830.
   ‘!? Documents in the dossier marked ‘Dangelo & Fils’: A.N. 3 AQ 339.
   13 Relevant documents in ibid.
   ‘4The   tables are undated, but contextual references make it clear that they
were compiled in Jan. or Feb. 1813: A.D. (B-R) XI M 197.
    "5 L?Huillier, Alsace napoléonienne, 451.
