              THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                              259

heading of ‘tobacco sales’.!14© He wrote instead that ‘les
payemens réguliers faits par le gouvernement ont rendu la
vie a Vindustrie et offrent a l’agriculture des moyens de
développement’.       Since the arrondissement               of Sélestat was
if anything more important than that of Strasbourg as a
tobacco-growing (as distinct from tobacco-processing) area,
such evidence offsets the Chamber’s implacable laments. The
latter were naturally much more concerned with the interests
of the large-scale dealers who had its ear, but even the local
evidence did not always fit its woeful picture. In his report
for the second quarter of 1811 Lezay-Marnésia also made the
point that the Régie had ensured a living ‘au grand nombre
d’ouvriers que la suppréssion des fabriques particuliéres avait
laissé en suspens’, and that employment in this branch had
not fallen dramatically.!1”
   As from the early months of 1813, however, when new
tobacco laws took effect, the evidence of widespread opposi-
tion to them becomes overwhelming. The advertised reason
for the new measures had to do with certain fraudulent
practices and the undesirable effects, as the government saw
it, of no restriction on the type of tobacco grown in the
Empire. The official argument was that the emphasis during
the years of private enterprise had been on quantity rather
than quality of output, and that this had led to commercial
abuses. Some producers themselves had expressed concern
about this and blamed it for the comparatively higher sales
of Dutch tobacco of better quality in the Empire as from
the beginning of 1811. The first important step towards a
change of policy came with Collin de Sussy’s arrété of 10
November 1812. To counter the problem of inferior tobacco
and the growing number of professional abuses, it stipulated
that as from 1 January 1813 tobacco farming was to be con-
fined to 10,000 hectares of the Empire, distributed among
seventeen departments, of which the Bas-Rhin’s allocation
was   to be   2,300    hectares.   At      the same   time      stiffer droits
réunis were to be imposed on both tobacco processing and
the retail trade. The theme of ‘quality before quantity’ was
to remain the government’s touchstone in reply to protests

                  116 A.D, (B-R)   XM 5.          "7 Tbid,
