                   THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                                255

intended mainly for known local demand, were less affected.
The 136 ‘maitres-tisserands patentés’ in Strasbourg were
forced to cut back their combined output of table-cloths,
wrapping cloth, and siamoises, but by a smaller percentage
than the larger individual houses. Their reduction in 1811
was between a quarter and a third, with the trend stronger in
the second half-year. After a slight improvement during the
early months of 1812, the decline was slow but steady. The
linen manufacturers of Fegersheim, whose market was also
largely local, did less well in 1812 than in earlier years, and
1813 was still more slack, although the absolute figures for
active installations and workers employed did not change
noticeably over the period. At Gau fréres, manufacturers of
sailcloth, it was the familiar old story of roughly stable
production even in these troubled years, but with output and
employment well below the firm’s real capacity.
   The theme which recurs most often in the industrial
reports is that of market default. Phrases like ‘faute de
débouchés’, ‘défaut de vente’, ‘entraves dans la vente’, and
‘mévente        générale’ abound in them. The brief panic over
threatened agricultural shortage in both Alsatian departments
in 1812, after the poor grain harvest of the preceding year,
made matters worse for atime. The seriousness of this particu-
lar episode should not however be exaggerated.”” The panic
was short-lived and well contained by local officials,'!© and
the good harvest of 1812 righted matters. It would be mis-
leading, then, to invoke the classic formula of ‘prix du ble,
thermomeétre des fabriques’ as a major cause of the com-
mercial and industrial unevenness of the few years following
the crisis, as was certainly to be the case during the serious
shortage of 1816-17. Yet it cannot have been entirely alien
to the Chamber’s meaning when, in its quarterly report of
7    October        1811,     it remarked        that    ‘les   consommations
diminuent sur beaucoup d’articles par suite de leur haut prix
et des causes qui réagissent sur l’aisance de diverses classes’.1°!
    °° On this see F. L’Huillier, ‘Une crise des subsistances dans le Bas-Rhin (1810-
1812)’, A.AR.f, xiv (1937), 518-36.
   100 Papers dealing with Alsatian grain markets during the closing years of the
Empire are kept at A.D. (B-R) III M 3 and IX M 106 and 107; A.D. (H-R) IM
103/1; Arch. comm. Colm., REH       13; and Arch. comm. Mulh., FV!22,
    101 Meeting of the same date, Min. vi.
