256           CRISIS, RECOVERY,        AND DECLINE        1810-1813

This problem, as P.-J. Chedeaux fairly observed in a report to
Collin de Sussy at the end of the Blockade,'”? was more acute
in traditional export markets beyond the Rhine than in the
beleaguered Empire itself.             }



Two details of the Bas-Rhin’s industrial record during the
final years of the Empire call for further comment, either
because of their economic importance or because of their
presumed link with the aims of the Blockade. They are the
development of the so-called ‘new’ or ‘substitute industries’
and the performance of the Alsatian tobacco industry under
the government’s monopoly.
   The first of these need not detain us long, since the
positive results of official policy came rather late in the day
and, in the Bas-Rhin           at least, were      confined to a particular
commodity. In any case the causal link with the Blockade
was not at all clear here. The wider imperial context of this
question can be misleading, because it is tempting to see the
development of new enterprises set up to produce (or rather,
in several cases, to experiment with the production of) cer-
tain foodstuffs and industrial raw materials as a deliberate
attempt to mitigate the deprivations of the ‘self-blockade’.
Sir Francis d’Ivernois once remarked that by accepting the
Blockade, France ‘préfére rester sans jouissances a n’avoir que
des demi-jouissances’.!°? He was not an impartial observer,
though, and a facile caricature of the Continental communi-
ties bitterly making do with ersatz foodstuffs and industrial
primary materials would distort the facts. It is true that the
imperial propaganda encouraged the notion that more home-
grown or home-made goods would cut back the payment of
‘ransom’ for essential imports. There may thus be a tendency
to construe the imperial sugar-beet industry!™ as an integral
function of the Blockade’s outlawry of. ‘tainted’ colonial
      1? Chedeaux, the president of the trade tribunal and a member of the munici-
pal council of Metz, had been sent by the Minister on a trade mission to the
Rhenish Confederation. His report is dated 20 Sept. 1813: A.N. F!? 2377.
      13 Exposé de l’Exposé... de 1813, 117 n.
      ***On which see Chaptal, Mémoire sur le sucre de betteraves (Paris, 1818),
and Drottboom, Wirtschaftsgeographische Betrachtungen, 32-43.
