250         CRISIS, RECOVERY,         AND DECLINE         1810-1813

of 1813 was not an especially happy one for imperial
industry and trade. Maritime trade made a modest revival
under the regime of the ‘licences’. In the inland areas which
had been the main growth-points of 1807-10, output and
employment improved slowly and unevenly to something
under their levels before the crisis. Military markets gave a
new impetus to certain industries as the campaigns of
1812-14 were materially provided for. But the impact of the
crisis lingered on in the form of generally tight credit, and
cash was scarce almost everywhere. Commercial dealings were
carried on under the constant vagaries of the ‘terreur
douaniere’, at least until the smuggling bonanza which fol-
lowed Napoleon’s defeat in Russia. In the subject and allied
states, where the crisis was often exacerbated by monetary
depreciation and agricultural depression, markets were not
what they had been during the expansionary years. Higher
taxes, stiffer requisitioning, and the growing strain of war
all sapped the economic strength of the Empire and its
allies.
    The performance of the Alsatian economy during the
period 1811-13 may be summed up as one of recovery and
recession. No clear sequence is discernible in the two depart-
ments as a whole. The pattern was made up of variable fits
and starts. This reflects in the running commentary of the
Chamber of Commerce in Strasbourg. The ‘stop-go’ cycle
into which the city’s trade fell after the crisis prolonged some
of the features of the latter, but the lulls were less pro-
nounced and never absolute, while the forward spurts were
more vigorous. The fluctuation of traffic through the entre-
pot is better illustrated by the Chamber’s monthly and
quarterly reports (that is, the on-going record)®’ than by its
more     questionable     statistical tables of December             1813, dis-
cussed in earlier chapters. According to the routine reports,
then, the city’s river trade made a good recovery during
October and November 1811, before slowing up in December
and January. This was a common mid-winter trend. February

   *7 These are conveniently pulled together in the summary for the mayor dated
10 Nov. 1812: meeting of 21 Nov. following, Min. vii. See the graphic illustration
of this in Appendix   F (below, p. 284), which is based on the figures in Appen-
dix D.
