260      CRISIS, RECOVERY,        AND DECLINE       1810-1813

from producers during the closing years of the Empire and
indeed under the Restoration.
   The ministerial directive was followed up by local
measures issued through the direction general of the droits
reunts in the eastern departments. Altogether, sixty-three
communes of the Bas-Rhin lost the right to cultivate tobacco.
The 2,300 permitted hectares were distributed among the
other interested communes, which were to be grouped into
two   tobacco-producing       circumscriptions      centred on Stras-
bourg and Sélestat.!!® In spite of a great many protests and
petitions to Paris during 1813, and the vigorous prefectoral
support for them on several occasions, the government
refused to extend its allocations. Perhaps the main effect of
the new laws was that the smaller producers were principally
affected. From January 1813 they were slowly squeezed out
of business, as the larger enterprises became more and more
concentrated, and so for rather different reasons joined the
magnates in the campaign against the official constraints.
In Napoleonic times anyway, such solidarity within the in-
dustry was unique. The administration was aware of the
plight of the small producers but considered it a necessary
sacrifice. As Francay, the director-general of the droits
réunis, explained in reply to a letter of protest from Lezay-
Marnésia, ‘ayant chaque jour une nouvelle expérience sur la
nécessité de restreindre la culture [of tobacco] et de la con-
centrer dans les mains des cultivateurs aisés, je ne pouvais. . .
partager votre opinion sur l’inutilité des circonscriptions’.!!?
Whatever the opposition to the government’s tobacco policy
after 1813, even among the ‘cultivateurs aisés’ thus relatively
favoured, the quality of production in the Bas-Rhin
improved. From this particular point of view the aims of the
imperial policy were to be posthumously achieved.

vi. The aftermath of crisis in the Haut-Rhin 1811-1813

The record of the Haut-Rhin’s industrial performance during
the two years following the crisis presents the same problem
of incomplete    and contradictory evidence. It seems clear
             “8 Documents in A.D. (B-R) XI M 197.
             "9 Letter of 22 Mar. 1813: ibid.
