268                             CONCLUSION
community. Though much less orchestrated and persistent,
protests and petitions from or on behalf of the ‘fabricanto-
cratie’ of the Haut-Rhin sometimes leave one with much the
same impression.                                 .
      A critical examination of the minutes and of other official
sources     soon   shows   up    their inconsistencies,   however,   and
dispels many of the rhetorical myths about local hardships.
One finds, for example, that the Revolution had not in fact
suddenly reduced a glorious Alsatian commonwealth to dust
and ashes. Its economic disruptions in the province were real
and serious enough, but not all of them had made their first
appearance in a kind of malign concentration during the
1790s. Nor did the constraints of official policy, whether
through trade embargoes or stiffer import duties or a more
restrictive definition of local commercial rights, prevent a
signal recovery during the Consulate and early Empire from
the worst of the Revolutionary set-backs. If the problem of
Alsatian markets was acute shortly before and at the time of
the first Blockade decrees, partly because of the prolonged
hostilities of 1805-7, the economic balance of the next seven
years or so was perhaps more positive than otherwise. The
latter, which might be called the ‘Blockade cycle’, had two
distinct phases in Alsace, however. Since the second was far
the less satisfactory, generalizations for the period as a whole
are misleading. Chronological, local, and sectoral distinctions
need to be made-
   Like other inland regions of the Empire, Alsace enjoyed a
period of more or less sustained economic expansion from
the summer of 1807, when peace on the Continent returned,
to the late summer of 1810, when important modifications
of the Blockade policy provoked new upsets and exacerbated
others. There is little evidence that the brief Wagram
campaign of 1809 had much effect on local trade, except
possibly to boost the market in military provisions and en-
courage speculative stockpiling before the hostilities began.
Relative to their position in the base-year 1806, or a fortiori
that of 1803, Alsatian merchants and manufacturers were
among the leading beneficiaries of the French Continental
market design in its ascendant phase of 1807-10. They pros-
pered from their access to a growing and (officially at least)
