                         CONCLUSION                         267

the proclamation of the closed market (marché réservé) in
Italy, and the series of preferential trade treaties with client
states — all joined towards that purpose. Although angled at
Britain above all, the protection and preferential encourage-
ment of imperial industry and trade were also intended to
weaken the challenge of economic competitors on the Con-
tinent itself. While the market design was broadly directed
at all the subject and allied states, the German lands across
the Rhine had a particular importance within it. Imperial
exporters set their sights on Frankfurt am Main and Leipzig,
which were then the main centres of distribution for the in-
dustrial products and merchandise marketed in Germany,
and whose famous fairs were the high-points of the commer-
cial year there.
   Napoleonic Alsace, that is the departments of the Bas-
Rhin   and the Haut-Rhin,   was   central to the French market
design in Germany by virtue of its geographical position.
Special importance attached to Strasbourg as an entrepot
for both the outgoing and incoming trade of the Empire, and
to Mulhouse as a developing industrial town, notably in
cotton manufacture. It has been the main purpose of this
study to follow the economic fortunes of these towns in
particular, and of the two Alsatian departments more
generally, during the decade from 1803 to 1813, and in rela-
tion to the French Continental market design. What now
follows is a digest of my principal conclusions.
   Perhaps the first unavoidable discovery is that the actual
economic achievement of the major Alsatian towns during
the period was often at variance with the official record of
it. In particular, the minutes    of the Chamber   of Commerce
founded in Strasbourg in March 1803, which are continuous
and very detailed for the whole period of the Empire,
cannot be taken at face value. Parti pris, their record is
often narrowly self-centred and rhetorical, just as the
Chamber’s formal communications with the mayor, the pre-
fect, and officials of the central government were frequently
sustained exercises in public protest and entreaty. They give
the impression, reinforced by endless repetition and seem-
ingly implacable frontier discontent, that official economic
policy was unfair and disadvantageous to the local merchant
