                         CONCLUSION                        269

a fully protected imperial home market, which was un-
doubtedly the major single stimulus to higher consumption
and to the boost in certain branches of the Empire’s import
trade through Alsace. They were helped in this by an excep-
tionally good cycle of grain harvests, which not only left
surpluses for export (chiefly in 1809) but also ensured a
fairly stable demand for industrial and commercial goods
among      the agricultural classes.   Furthermore,    Alsatian
merchants and manufacturers took advantage of compara-
tively favourable export markets across the Rhine, as these
attracted a brisker traffic from the mterior and the south of
France in those years. Altogether, their performance reflects
some of the happier effects of Napoleon’s economic policy
in the inland parts of the Empire. The virtual closure to
France of the maritime lanes, exception made for coastal
smuggling and for what survived of neutral traffic, turned the
whole orientation of imperial trade and industry towards
the inland markets. Alsace lay at the hub of the trans-
continental river and land routes used during the Blockade,
and it prospered accordingly.
   More specifically, commercial dealings iin Strasboutg grew
conspicuously to a peak some time in the summer of 1809.
Business was so active on occasion that the local clearing
facilities were inadequate to handle it efficiently. It is alas
impossible to quantify all of the commercial expansion pre-
cisely, partly because the official records are incomplete and
often inconsistent, and partly too because a lucrative illicit
trade went on throughout the period largely unrecorded.
The available statistics suggest that regular Rhine traffic,
Strasbourg’s major concern, may have doubled and in certain
peak months even quadrupled in volume when compared
with the annual average before the Blockade. The city’s
most important connections within the Empire were with
Mainz, Paris, Lyons, and the French Midi. Abroad, the crucial
link was unquestionably with Frankfurt, from which point
contact was extended to Leipzig and so to parts further
north or east. Strasbourg was then the principal imperial
entrepot for the export of silkstuffs, fashion ware, cotton
products of all kinds, wines, and eaux-de-vie to the Rhenish
Confederation and, by the transit trade through it, to clients
