                           CONCLUSION                          265

Continent to match her military might. In default of it,
Napoleon hoped to establish an economic mastery on the
hard base of his military and political power. His motives
were at once aggressive and defensive, his aims at once
destructive and constructive. In the first instance he wanted
to eliminate Britain from all military involvements on the
Continent. But as he had not the means to confront her
directly on the seas and settle scores by a test of naval or
military force, he was driven to an extraordinary adaptation
of the weapon of commercial blockade. The nuance was that
his so-called ‘Continental Blockade’ was in efféct a vastly
conceived   ‘self-blockade’,   or ‘boycott’, and in its short-term
aspect it resembled    a wartime    contingency operation
(machine de guerre). Its logic was that if Britain could be
shut out of Continental markets, she would be left with the
problem of growing commercial and industrial surpluses.
If at the same time her bullion reserves could be drained off
in payment for essential imports, the monetary inflation thus
induced would force her to accept peace terms favourable
to France and also undermine her ability to subsidize further
Continental coalitions.
   Now, as the front line of that policy was obviously drawn
along the Continental coastline, and more particularly its
Channel and North Sea stretches, the historiographical em-
phasis is very properly on the maritime aspects of the whole
conflict. This in turn fairly stresses the more aggressive aims
and destructive effects of the Blockade. It was not, however,
the whole of the imperial plan. Another aim, conceived in
the longer view, was to build up French industry, trade, and
technological prowess to the point where they could fill the
vacuum left by the expulsion of their British counterparts.
This objective was necessarily conditioned by the land-
locked nature of French power. Not only was it formulated
within the extraordinary military and political structure of
1805-7; it would have been inconceivable outside it. In this
sense, too, it was an inverse function of the Empire’s naval
impotence.
   Among the difficulties facing French merchants and manu-
facturers in the years preceding the Blockade, one was
common to the coastal and inland regions. This was the
