266                        CONCLUSION
problem of French markets, in the sense of both outlets and
supply-lines, following successive colonial and other trans-
marine losses. Its rough scale is conventionally put at about
a third of France’s import and a fifth of her export trade, as
registered in the official values current at the end of the old
regime. The eclipse of the imperial navy made any redress
directly on the seas impracticable. Again the Blockade was
not the original cause of those troubles, which had set in a
decade or more earlier with the assertion of Britain’s naval
supremacy and her engrossment of colonial markets over-
seas, but it undoubtedly added to the tribulations of the
maritime ports and the dependent industries of their
immediate hinterlander.
   Against this background, the positive aspect of Napoleon’s
Blockade was that it offered an alternative system of markets
on a much greater scale than any attempted before. It incor-
porated, among other aims, what this work presents as a
French    Continental    market   design (dessein des marchés)
to set   alongside   the image of a ‘war machine’.   The   search
for ‘markets of replacement’ on the Continental mainland
itself had short-term and long-term aims. First, it was an
ad hoc adjustment to the vacuum left by French transmarine
losses. In the wider perspective, it looked beyond the mastery
of the Continental mainland to a future in which the inter-
national balance of maritime power could be righted, or in
which France might even extend her dominance from the
mainland to the seas. But within this optimistic vision of the
realignment of economic forces in Europe, Napoleon’s Con-
tinental or mainland aims were uppermost. As his power was
land-based, so his military, political, and economic priorities
were essentially Europocentric.
   The inherent weakness of the French market design was its
deliberate one-sidedness. It was conceived and operated on
the principle of ‘la France avant tout’. What was envisaged
was not a Continental Zollverein in which all the resources
of the Empire, of the subject and allied states, could be har-
nessed through reciprocal favours and equitable sacrifices to
the common cause of defeating Britain, but rather a vast
‘Uncommon     Market’ geared to French interests. The
Blockade decrees, the rough treatment of would-be neutrals,
