                THE LAST PHASE OF THE BLOCKADE                           261

enough that there was a stretch of recovery before the serious
upheaval of the Allied invasion of 1813-14. L’Huillier thinks
that it ran from the summer of 1812 to the autumn of 1813,
when ‘almost all the lost ground’ was recovered.!”° He adds,
however, that price variations over the Napoleonic period
as a whole make such comparisons between its phases in-
conclusive.
   My own research confirms the conclusion that the depart-
ment’s    cotton    industries,   the essential barometer,        emerged
from the crisis during the last quarter of 1811 and showed
further improvement in the following year. The recovery
may have continued on into 1813, but in my opinion the
pace was less impressive than that of 1807-10, and the ‘lost
ground’ was not almost made up. One reason for the slower
momentum was that Swiss creditors were less willing to con-
tribute to or themselves undertake industrial ventures in
Alsace after the crisis. Only the most creditworthy houses
like Dollfus-Mieg, Paul Blech, and Nicolas Koechlin could
count on large advances of capital from Basel. Others
managed to borrow elsewhere, as Robert Bovet & Cie of
Thann did in Neuchatel. But as against such links one should
set the former Swiss creditors who withdrew in stages from
Alsace. Daniel Schlumberger lost his sleeping partner in 1812;
Vetter, Thierry & Grossmann theirs in 1813; Blanchenay-
Bridel theirs in 1814. Even Paul Blech had to witness the
withdrawal of his Swiss associates in the latter year, and in
1815 Jérémie Risler and Nicolas Koechlin were similarly
affected. In these years, moreover,          some    of the Swiss manu-
facturers who had set up business in the Haut-Rhin in happier
times returned to their native land.'*! As was the case during
the crisis itself, so in 1811-13 the main foreign stimulus to
production in the Haut-Rhin was the ‘marché réservé’ in the
kingdom of Italy. Roughly a fifth of the department’s out-
put of cotton goods was exported in 1812, mostly to that
destination. The proportion was larger still in some of the
leading enterprises. Dollfus-Mieg exported up to a quarter of
his production      that year; Gros, Davillier & Roman,             Robert

   120 Alsace napoléonienne, 398.
   121The details of the above paragraph are drawn mainly from Lévy-Leboyer,
Banques européennes, 451-2.
