                               CONCLUSION                             OL

  Much of the commercial and industrial expansion in Alsace
may be attributed to the working of the Continental
Blockade and the French market design as such. In three
important branches, however, the causal link was either more
tenuous or more anomalous. One was the active but un-
fortunately obscure network of illicit traffic, including both
smuggling (la contrebande, the more serious offence) and
fraudulent trade (la fraude). These certainly enriched a good
many Alsatians, including very probably some of the most
respectable among them, but the connection with the
Blockade was paradoxical. It was obviously never the govern-
ment’s intention that its subjects should prosper by such
means. The illicit profits were real enough, but they derived
from the evasion of rather than from the effective working
of the Blockade. The second case is the Alsatian trade in
wines,    eaux-de-vie,      tobacco,    and   other   products   in whose
range Britain had never been a serious competitor. Here the
expansion of 1807-10          was due less to the Blockade, as such,
than to the wider effect of Napoleon’s Continental System,
of which it was only a part. And yet the link with the market
design vis-a-vis the Empire’s Continental competitors in these
branches was more direct. The third qualification concerns
the imperial military market. It was one of the major spurs
to the expansion of the period, especially in industrial
branches like woollens, armaments, and field supplies
generally. But as the military market was more a function of
Napoleon’s Continental System than of the Blockade itself,
the causal link with the latter should not be overdrawn.
   The ascendant phase of Alsatian economic achievement
during the ‘Blockade cycle’ ended with the crisis of 1810-11.
The next three years were altogether more unsettled and
troublesome, and the earlier expansionary momentum was
not fully regained. After several weeks of anxiety induced
by the ‘terreur douaniére’, following the tougher customs
laws     of October      1810, the trade through Strasbourg was
seriously disrupted by the financial crisis which broke during
the mid-winter months. The Blockade as such was not the
root cause of this crisis, which was much more              the effect of
speculative     excesses,     complicated      by international     reper-
cussions,     but   it hardened        the impact and made       recovery
