                          CONCLUSION                       payfe)

trade, which could not recover its expansionary rhythm of
1808 and 1809. The land-borne trade suffered after July
1811 from the loss of the Levantine cotton route. Across the
Rhine, where   the crisis and its aftermath had an even more
dampening effect on purchasing power, a creeping agricul-
tural depression in the closing years of the Empire under-
mined French export markets. The tobacco industry of the
Bas-Rhin fared variably under the State monopoly after 29
December 1810. The latter was heartily disliked by the larger
producers (farmers and processers alike) from the start, but
the legendary unpopularity of the Régie did not become
universal much before the new restrictions of January 1813.
The one expanding commercial branch in this period was the
export trade in cotton goods to the kingdom of Italy, whose
‘marché réservé’ had been more strictly defined by the im-
perial decree of 10 October 1810. This proved to be an
important lifeline to the zndzenneurs of the Haut-Rhin at a
time when their other more traditional markets were un-
responsive.
   The final judgement on the French Continental market
design must therefore be mixed. The crisis had knocked the
stuffing out of it without doubt, not least in the Rhenish
hinterland, and exposed its intrinsic contradictions and weak-
nesses. Its ultimate failure, after three variable years which
ended in stiffer war taxes, in more persistent recruitment and
requisitioning, and finally in invasion and military defeat,
seems clear. But one should not lose sight here of the earlier
prosperity and technical improvements, or of the solid assets
which survived the final agonies of the Empire. Alsatian mer-
chants and manufacturers were among those who benefited
most of all from the inland orientation of the French
economy for much of the Napoleonic period. By the end
of the Empire, it seems   to me   on balance, the Blockade and
the market design had done more to enrich than impoverish
them.
