7a fe                      CONCLUSION

afterwards more difficult. The industrial phase of the crisis
overtook the Haut-Rhin mostly during the first half of 1811,
and the average fall in output and employment was some-
where between 20 and 30 per cent when compared with the
levels of 1810. In both Alsatian departments there were
major embarrassments, and dozens of houses went bankrupt,
victims of overspeculation and their inability to raise emer-
gency loans. All firms felt the effects of the squeeze on
credit, as associates   called in funds, raised the interest rate,
or withdrew their capital altogether. Default of markets was
a central element of the crisis everywhere, and it was
worsened by the problem of depreciated stocks and unsale-
able industrial surpluses. In many cases the commercial and
industrial stocks had been ordered and partly paid for before
the stiffer import duties of the Trianon tariff of August 1810
became effective. Even where they then escaped prolonged
sequestration or outright confiscation in the customs depots,
as the rigours of the Fontainebleau decree were applied, they
were liable to the higher duties and could not be disposed of
at a profit. The government made matters worse by insisting,
in certain cases, that their import be made conditional on
an undertaking by the interested parties to export an equi-
valent value of industrial surpluses from elsewhere in the
Empire.
   The economic crisis was followed in Alsace by a year of
slow, hard-won, and uneven recovery, and then by eighteen
months of new reverses and of general recession. The ‘terreur
douaniére’ exacerbated these difficulties at least until the
French military disaster in Russia in 1812. A brief panic
over agricultural shortage that year, itself provoked by the
poor harvest of 1811 but in the event promptly and satis-
factorily dealt with, further depressed the demand for com-
mercial and industrial goods among the agricultural classes.
One effect of the crisis had been to intensify the hoarding of
specie, whose disappearance reacted unfavourably on demand
in even small local markets. Among the bigger fry, credit was
generally tight and business confidence circumspect. Al-
together, the final phase of the Blockade in Alsace during the
years 1811-13 was one of fits and starts. The ‘stop-go’ pattern
is best illustrated by the fluctuations of Strasbourg’s river
