270                       CONCLUSION

further afield. It was at the same time the leading imperial
inlet for permitted colonial goods from Frankfurt and of
Levantine cotton arriving by way of Bavaria, Wiirttemberg,
and Baden, until the government enforced a switch of the
latter route in 1811. The local clearing-houses and merchant
carriers had the additional benefit of handling part of the
exchanges between the Low Countries and Switzerland or
Italy which took the route of the Rhine valley.
   Industrial headway during the years 1807-10 was most
marked in the cotton industries of the Haut-Rhin, notably
in Mulhouse. Calico-printing was certainly the most dynamic
branch there, as the rise in the output of tozles peintes
illustrates, but the ancillary weaving and spinning industries
were carried along more quickly by the same momentum.
Over-all production may have risen by a third, or even at
times by as much as half, when set against the average figures
for 1803-6. Advances in mechanization were given a new
stimulus but did not greatly affect employment levels, which
were relatively high in this period. There seems to have been
a slight reverse in the second half of 1808, due mainly to the
May decrees that year which introduced restrictions on
certain cotton exports for a time, but this was short-lived.
Outside Mulhouse, industrial headway was most conspicuous
among   the   cotton   manufacturers   of Masevaux,   Wesserling,
Saint-Amarin, Thann, Cernay, Bollwiller, Guebwiller, and
Munster. The local reports from Sainte-Marie-aux-Mines,
formally regarded as the second industrial town of the de-
partment and one noted for its production of the speciality
called ‘stamotses’, were rarely enthusiastic and often woeful
beyond credence. But even here, it appears, the expansionary
period brought happier fortunes. As for Alsatian industry as
a whole, its markets lay chiefly in the Empire itself, but a not
insignificant share of production (between 20 and 25 per cent
perhaps, depending on the branch) was exported. The capital
to prime its expansion had two main sources: autofinance-
ment, meaning the use of both family capital and ploughed-
back profits, and the resort to Swiss funds, especially through
business associations with sleeping partners (commanditaires)
in Basel. Such ties were particularly important to the leading
indienneurs of the Haut-Rhin.
