                                                    15

Britain's military structurehas also precludedany study of arguablythe more important

subject of the politics of army recruitment - the essentialquestion that all European

stateshad to address- and one that took up much parliamentarytime. Contemporaries

recognisedthat a radical changehad happenedin warfare, particularly in the state's

ability to mobilise its manpower.Mr. Law, speakingin Parliamentin 1813 urged the

governmentto follow the exampleof the continent:
         It was his firm opinion that without a radical change in our military system, millions might
      be thrown away without producing any benefit. A general change of military system has
      taken place in Europe during the last twenty years. Almost all the other powers had
      introduced conscription instead of enlistment. Was it possible that our system could proceed
      successfully against this change? We might as well say that the militia could contend against
      a regular army.  26



        Wellington's description of the army has often been taken to assumethat the

soldier was primarily a criminal, and thus the study of their recruitment is of little use.

However studiesof the recruitment of the army in the eighteenthcentury suggestthat

the soldiers were more representativeof the social structure of the UK at that timcý'

Both Colley and Cooksonpoint out that very little is known of the characterof the army

between 1793 and 1815 and this thesis attempts to close this gap. In spite of

Wellington's attitude, contemporariesalso showed that they did not agree with the

perceptionof the soldier as a social misfit, motivatedonly by the lash. Within the army

a new spirit was emergingthat viewed the soldier as capableof independenthought,

and that officers should be closer to their men; an attitude embodiedparticularly in the

light infantry regiments.Soldierswere encouragedto perform their duty, with tangible

rewardsfor good conduct," and officers were expectedto be positive examplesto the

men under their charge, in keeping with the evangelical revival that stressedmoral

leadership." It must be emphasiscdthat such attitudeswere not universal, although the


26Hansard, 1812-1813,Y-XVI, 890.
27S. R. Frey, The British Soldier in America: A Social History
                                                               of Military Life in the Revolutiona_7
Period, (Texas, 1981), p. 2 1. SteveBrumwelL 'Rank and File: A Profile of one of Wolfe's Regiments,
JSAHR,79 (Spring 2001), pp. 3-24.
2" Gates,TheLight InfantryArm, 97.
                                  p.
29 C. A. Stevens, 'The Rifle Brigade 1800
                                             to c. 1870: A Study of Social, Cultural and Religious
Attitudes'OPhD (University of Sheffield, 1996).
