                                               14

British society in the period 1793-1815.From thesemodern works, only two mention

the recruitment of the army. Hall only devotesnine pagesto the manpowerdemands

and responsesof the government,and so only provides a sketchyoutline of recruitment

policy. The only remaining work to consider army recruitment is The British Armed

Nation, and althoughthis allows a detailedintroduction to the subject,it is firmly in the

context of Britain's manpowermobilisation at every level, and the attemptsto createa

'nation in arms'. It demonstratesthat the British government,just like those of the

continent, had to emulate France, although with their own adaptations,to meet the

massivemanpowerdemandsof the wars. The experienceof the Napoleonic Wars has

been seenas instrumentalin the developmentof national consciousnessin Britain. In

Colley's excellent and controversial Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707 to 1837,

(London, 1992), the volunteer movement,which mobilised 450,000 men in 1803-05,

was an important means of creating a sense of British national identity, and

participation in the regular military forces of Britain, althoughnot examinedby Colley,

would undoubtedlyassistin the developmentof nationalism.

        For the continentalpowers it is undeniablethat there was a military revolution

created by the French revolution, to which they had to respond." Yet the British army

(and navy) are considered exceptions, and generally regarded as unchanging. " Any

adaptations that were made in Britain are considered as the result of different factors

than those that influenced continental states. But it is difficult to comprehend that an

army that stood at 40,000 men in 1792 and expanded to a quarter of million men by

1813 - mirroring the increase of military forces in Europe did not experience any
                                                          -

changes, and that its social composition could still be categorised, without ftirther

examination, as 'the lowest classes of British society. " The denial of any change in

23Ilere is a debateas to the
                             extentof the revolution,mainly concerningtacticaldetails(seeBrent
Nosworthy,Battle Tacticsof Napoleonand his Enemies;it is undoubted     that a changein the scaleof
warfaretook place,GeoffreyParker,TheMilitary Revolution:Military innovationand the rise of the
West,1500-1800,(Cambridge,  1988),p. 153;Black,EuropeanWar  fiare, p. 76.
24Best, War andSociety in Revolutiona? Europe,p. 122
                                     y
23Rothenburg,TheArt of Warfarein the Age
                                          ofNapoleon, pp. 177-78.
