                                            18

that Franceendured,andjustifies examinationto determineif, and how, the recruitment

of the army, and the characterof the                           to
                                     recruits obtained, adapted meet the demands

createdby the massiveincreasein casualties(regardedby the army as any loss from the

strengthof units, not just deaths).As suchthe work will concentrateon the 'disposable

force' of the army (thosetroops that could be sparedfor active service in Europe) and

the army at home which provided drafts to thesetroops.The regimentsusedduring this

period remainedfairly constant,although a major shift in the composition of this force

occured in 1815, when most of the Peninsularregimentswere sent to fight in North

America, andthoseusedat Waterloo were either from the much reducedhome garrison,

or troops returning from colonial duty. In such a study no attempt is made to examine

the combat capabilities, or campaigning conditions of the army. Detailed narrative

studiesof the fighting have already been     "
                                         made, and although some synthesesof the

generalfighting abilities of the British army are required,this justifies the fidl attention

of a separatestudy. This work will analysethe recruitment of the regular army (other

than the artillery, which was a separateestablishmentunder the Board of Ordnanceand

had separaterecords) from two different approaches:examining the measuresfor, and

the outcomesof, recruitmentbetween1807to 1815.


Aims andThemes

       Firstly, an outline of Britain's military strength, its limits and constraints,and

the size of the Napoleonic problem will be made. This will seek to demonstrate the full

extent of the pressures that the government, and the army, were under in these eight

years. In Chapter I the extent of the problem, and the political, strategic, and structural

limitations on a solution are examined, with Chapter 2 making particular reference to

the problems caused by the deployment of the army. A central theme of the Napoleonic

Wars was that in order to fight the French on equal terms, all the major continental


36Gates,TheSpanishUlcer, & TheBritish Light Infant? Arm; % Glover,Britain at Bay. Defence
                                                  y
againstBonaparte,1803-14,(London,1973).
