                                              16

95'h was a modem, progressive regiment, an inspection of the 1/96th,whilst stationed in

the West Indies, testifies the continuing existence of attitudes at a regimental level

which viewed the soldier as worth very little:

       No lessthan 30,000lashesappearto havebeensentenced    on 106 persons,of which
     10,163havebeenactuallyinflicted;the menappearto havegrowncallousevento corporal
     punishmentfrom its extremefreqMency;                      to drunkenness
                                         (they]go frompunishment            andfrom
     drunkennessbackto punishment."


       The recruitment of the army is also important in the wider context of war and

society studies.In Forrest's Conscriptsand Deserters,conscriptionwas the arenawere

state and local interests clashed," and there is little reason to doubt that army

recruitment in Britain was of similar significance, particularly as objections to, and

debateson, the government'smilitary policy could be aired in Parliament.The large

size of the army, and the existenceof locally raised ancillary forces, also emphasisethe

needfor a study of the changingroles andperceptionsof the army.

Why 1807to 1815?

       A thoroughstudy of the entire period would be far beyondthe capacityof a PhD

thesis,and the RevolutionaryWar has alreadybeencovered," so the later stagesof the

war havebeenchosen.After 1807,it was clear that the war would be a long one. Britain

had no major allies and there was no chanceof peacewith Napoleon;" in effect Britain

had to commit to fighting a large-scalewar on the continent. Insteadof a British army

being an auxiliary force to one of the continent's major powers (Austria, Prussiaand

Russia), its army was now a principal fighting force, which could be supportedby

contingents from the smaller powers. Also in 1807 the return to power of a Pittite

governmentsignalleda renewedcommitmentto a continentalstrategy.That year a force

was belatedlysentto Stralsundto supportRussiaand Prussia.A year later Britain began


30Public RecordOffice, War Office Papers,W027/103, Inspection          1/96h,12 May IS II
31Forrest,Conscripts                                         return of
                      and Deserters,p. viii.
32j. I;L Western,'The Recruitment the Land Forcesin Great Britain, 1793-1799',PhD (University of
                                   of
Edinburgh, 1953);Glover, PeninsularPreparation.
33Hall, British StrateSyin the Napoleonic Wars, 78.
                                               p.
