                                                 17

its six year struggle with France in the Peninsula,although it was not immediately

obvious that the small force landed under Wellington in 1808 would develop into the

epic, and much written about, army that it became,it does representa turning point.

Before then Britain had largely concentratedon what were in essencelarge raids, and

althoughanother(the largestever) was mountedon Walcherenin 1809,the government

was mindful of the benefitsderived by having an army in the          "
                                                            Peninsula, and continued

to reinforce it. Only in 1810-11, when a massive French invasion of Portugal by

              threatenedthe British army's foothold in the Peninsula,were thoughts
MarshalMassena.

                           "
of an evacuationentertained.

        The return of a Pittite governmentin 1807 usheredin a seriesof governments

that had a continuation of personnel, despite the splintering of political groups

witnessedin this period, and the uncertaintyof the longevity of theseministries. Robert

Banks Jenkinson,Baron Hawkesbury,who becameSecondEarl of Liverpool in 1808,

was Home Secretaryunder the Portland          of
                                     government  1807 to 1809,and Secretaryof

War in SpencerPcrceval's governmentof 1809 to 1812. He then went on to become

Prime Minister himself. Robert Stewart,Viscount Castlereaghand Earl of Londonderry,

was Secretaryof War in the Portland administration,and although a political outcast

after the break-up of the Portland government and the disaster of 'his' Walcheren

           he
expedition, returnedas Foreign Secretaryin the Liverpool governmentof 1812.For

the army, 1807 also representsan administrative watershed.The office of Inspector

Generalof Recruiting was abolishedthat year, and the responsibility given over to the

Adjutant General,placing control of recruiting more firmly underthe supervisionof the

Commanderin Chief.

        This period representsBritain's closest parallel to the continual campaigning



3" Benefits includedbreakingthe strategicdeadlock,
                                                    gaining new allies, and accessto valuableports (and
potential hostile fleets), while absorbing many of Napoleon's troops thus reducing the chance of an
invasionof Britain. It also provided a convenientexcuseto avoid continentalentanglementselsewhere.
35Muir, Britain and the Defeat ofNapoleon,
                                            pp. 135-138.
