                                             19

powers had to imitate conscription, the administration neededto operate it, and the

tactics usedby the French and its allies. With this is mind the Chapter3 will examine

the measuresproposed,and those adopted,and why drafts from the militia, rather than

any conscriptivemeasure,was usedto maintain the strengthof the army. This work will

then concentrateon the implementationof the government'srecruiting policy, by first

examining ordinary recruiting (Chapter4), and then the implementationof the militia

drafts (Chapter5).

       Secondly,a social examinationof the regimentsand the army's soldierswill be

made in Chapter6, but no attemptwill be madeto study the officers of the army. The

complexities of patronagenetworks, and the probability that large number of personal

histories could be reconstructed,mean that the officers require a separate study,

perhaps,as in this thesis,to seeif the officer corpswas openingup underthe pressureto
fill commissionsin a vastly expandedarmy. Finally, anotherglimpse of the characterof

the British soldier will be gainedby studyingdesertionin Chapter7, a problem that was

also closely linked to recruiting. Desertion was one area where the governmentcould
decreasewastage,thus reducingthe demandson recruiting.

       This work will draw from the papersof the Home Office, and all the various

departmentsthat have collectively beencataloguedas the War Office - the Secretaryof

War's office, the Commanderin Chief's office, and to a lesserextent, the Secretaryat

War. Use will be made of the statistical evidence in the War Office records on the

composition of the regiments,and to give these figures a human aspectthrough the

many personal recollections of soldiers to illustrate the bare facts. However, it is

recognisedthat an understandingof the soldiers themselvescan relate to their fighting

capabilitiesand it is hopedthat further study of the latter will profit from this thesis.

       It is intendedthat this thesis will reveal the massiveimpact of the Napoleonic

Wars upon the British army, and British society. At presentthe PeninsularWar and
