                                                31


willingness of most of thesemen and officers to comply with          wishes,
                                                            government      they,

andthe militia, were gradually brought into somekind of integrated               "
                                                                  military system.


The Political Restrictionson the Size of the A

       The British army was always regardedwith some degreeof suspicion,born of

Britain's experiencesof military rule under Cromwell and later JamesIl. Permanent,or

standing, armies were the tool of despots whých threatenedBritish liberty, and the

            "
constitution. Besides ideologically inspired scrutiny, the army also came under

inspectionbecausethe armedforces were the major expenseof any governmentin the

eighteenthand nineteenthcentury. After every conflict, the army had to contendwith a

Parliamentthat wantedthe size of the army reducedto its pre-war establishment.This

explains why the army was so small in 1792, and why calls were made in 1814 to

reduce the army to its 1780s             "'
                             establishment, showing a total incomprehensionof

Britain's new position as the world's imperial power. Thomas Grenville, Lord

Grenville's brother, declaredthat 'No one can have proposeda peaceestablishmentof

19 millions but with the intention of changingthe constitution of the country in such

sort [sic], that it shall no longer continue a free country           to make this nation rank

     the
among greatmilitary nationsof       "'
                              Europe.

        The intellectual objections to a large army naturally abatedduring wars, but

many members of Parliament still felt duty-bound to examine public expenditure

minutely to insure that no more was spent than was necessary.This ethos had a

powerftd influenceover what governmentministers,and the army, regardedas possible.
Every year the Secretaryat War presentedthe army estimatesto the House,in which he

had to demonstratethat the funds to be voted were essential.This was no formality; in


36Much hasbeenmadeof the localism of many part-time corps,(Cookson,British Armed Nation, pp. 85-
90) but in somecases,local units were successfullymilitarised. Seethe author's article 'A Geographyof
Loyalism?Ilie Local Military Forcesof the West Riding of Yorkshire, 1794-1814', War and Society, 19
P001), pp. 1-21.
  Schwoerer,No StandingArmies.
311
  Hansard, 1813-14,XXVIII, 666.
39Hansard, 1814-15,XXK 919.
