                                                33

discipline and training in the army. 'Me Horse Guards, as this organisation was

collectively known, only had an advisory role to governmenton military policy, as any

ftirther powers had been stripped from the Crown and placed under parliamentary

control in     "
           1688. The cabinet discussedstrategy, with the Secretary for War and

Colonies(createdin 1794and more usually know as the Secretaryof War) particularly

concernedwith the army. The governmentgained financial control of recruiting from

the colonelsby the 1783 Pay Office Act, which accordingly expandedthe concernsof

the Secretaryof War into recruitmentpolicy." The Secretaryof War also oversawthe

deployment of the army on active campaigns, and naturally co-opcrated with the

Foreign Secretary,generalson campaignand colonial governors.The Secretaryof State

for the Home Department also had an involvement in military matters, as he was

concernedwith 'internal defence', whether that be anti-invasion plans, or policing the

country. After reforms in 1782-83, the main concern of the Secretaryat War was

finance,but he was also the traditional point of contactbetweencivilians and the army

            in
establishment  general,and had to sanctionall troop movementswithin the UK. '

        There were also a host of other governmentdepartmentsinvolved in military

matters, such as the Transport Board, and other autonomousmilitary establishments,

like the Board of Ordnance(the Master Generalof which was also a cabinetmember).

The ill-defined post-Union military establishmentin Ireland compoundedthis lack of

central military authority. The Commanderof the Forces in Ireland, createdafter the

separateIrish establishmentand Commanderin Chief were suppressed,reportedboth to

the Lord Lieutenantof Ireland (who in turn answeredto the Home Secretary),and to the

military hierarchy basedon the Horse Guards, which inevitably resulted in conflicts




" Strachan,ThePolitics ofthe British Army, pp. 4447; Bartlettý'The Development the British Army'.
                                                                                of
PhD, pp. 35-38.
45Bartlettý'The Developmentof the British Army', Phl), I 11.
                                                         p.
46J. L. Pimlott, 'The Administration of the British Army, 1783-1793',PhD (LeicesterUniversity, 1975),
pp. 121-208.
