                                             30

but the battalionwas neverraised,althoughthe KGL did havean invalid company."

       Despite the confusion over the composition of the veteran and garrison

battalionsthey ftdfilled two important roles. They retainedmen in the army who would

otherwisehave receiveddischarges,
                                and kept the maximum proportion of the line and

cavalry regiments ready for active service, both by taking over garrison duties and

removing unfit soldiers from their ranks. The processfor transferring men was quite

simple. In the biannual inspectionsmadeby generalofficers, a return of unfit men was

included in their reports,describingif they were suitablefor a discharge,or for dispatch

to a garrison or a veteran battalion. As the local general officer and the inspecting

medical officer madethis decision, it is little wonder that the boundarybetweena man

suitablefor a veteranbattalion and one for the garrisonbattalion was unclear.No doubt

the confusionin Ireland in 1811was simply due to the fact there was a veteranbattalion

nearby,and the overriding concernwas to removeunfit men from the regiment.

       The final formations that supportedthe strength of the army were the units

raised from local populations specifically to defend their communities. There were

many of these units in the colonies, but the most important of this type was the English,

Irish and Scottish Militias. The militia was different from the rest of the army, as it was

not totally under the command of the army. Although once raised they were placed

under the command of army generals, in all other matters (recruiting, establishment,

general correspondence) the Home Secretary was the responsible government minister,

and the Lord Lieutenant controlled each county's militia. The militia held a particular

place amongst the constitutionally minded aristocracy, and Parliament. The militia

brought benefits and problems to the army, as it provided more men for home defence,

but the existence of a separate military force removed ultimate control over Britain's

land forces from the army. Similarly, the various part-time local volunteers retained a

great deal of autonomy, but with the establishment of the local militia in 1808, and the

35W06/122, Liverpool to Duc de Castries,22 February1811.
