                                               41

as part of the Seaforth'sreconciliation to the government;he had raised a regiment in

1777,and also one in the Revolutionarywars,"' andwas a firm governmentsupporter.

        The varying opinions within the militia interestwere shown in the responsesto

Castlereagh'ssuggestion of an annual draft from the militia to the line in 1807.

Significantly someopposition Lords and MPs supportedthe measure.Baron Grantley,

Colonel of the I" Surrey Militia was listed as an Opposition peer, but he agreedwith

Castlereagh'sannual drafL Ile Earl of Mansfield, Colonel of the Perth Militia, who

was usually a governmentsupporter,disagreedwith Castlereagh.The militia interest

was a diverse body, and lacked unity, particularly during the war, when many militia

officers consideredoppositionunpatriotic. Yet the militia interestcould not be ignored.

        Theoretically,there shouldhavebeenan army interestwithin the house,asthere

were always large numbersof MPs who were, or had been, army officers. Between

1790 and 1820 a fifth of all MPs had military experiencein the regulars, and 135

military memberswere addedbetween1793and 1815. But political affiliations usually

camebefore any considerationsas military men, and, given the length of the war, many

of theseMPs were on active duty. 100 memberswent to the Peninsulaat some stage,

besidesthosewho servedon the staff at home and elsewhereoverseas.Only a third of

the military membersever spokein Parliament,and a third of theseonly spokeonce or

twice, often to acknowledgethe thanks of the House." As such, their influence on the

political situationwas minimal.

        The final considerationfor any governmentin deciding policy was the attitude

of the King. Having causedtwo governmentsto collapseover Catholic relief, it is clear
he was still a force in British politics. The army had alwaysbeena particular interestof

the Hanoveriandynasty, and GeorgeIII was no different in this respect." In the early


73In 1793he raisedthe Vý. StephenWood, TheScottishSoldier, (Edinburgh, 1987), 41.
79Thorne, TheCommons,1,306-311.                                               p.
goThe King had shownparticular interestin
                                          reforming the EastIndia CompanyArmy and placing it under
crown control, I- Callahan, The East India Company and Army Reform, 1783-1798, (Cambridge,
Massachusetts,1972).
