                                            40


Besides rousing the usual friends of the militia qedicularly Lords Carnarvon and

Radnor),Grenville's brother-in-law Earl Fortescue,and the ministerial stalwarts,Lords

Sydney and Powis, also objected.71Iffie first militia transfer in .1799 horrified some

militia colonels who had no wish to be 'drill sergeants'for the regular     "
                                                                        army. The

government could not ignore these men, and outside their political remit, no

governmentlegislation on the militia could be enactedwithout the active approval of

the militia officers.

         The militia interestwas not a wholly obstructivegroup. Within their ranks were

men of considerableexpertiseon the militia, and actively encouragedreforms in the

force to make it effective." From the 1780s militia legislation had passedfrom the

preserveprivately sponsoredbills to executiveproposals,and so governmentrelied on

militia officers as vital sourcesof information aboutthe force and its composition.76Nor

was the militia interest a politically homogenousbody. In the 1807 list of political

affiliations in the Lords, the Lord Lieutenants are fairly representativeof the entire

house.

         Two particular examplesserveto emphasisethe diversity in militia officers. Earl

Fitzwilliam was practically the defender of the militia interest. He was heir, both

literally and politically, of the Marquis of Rockingham," and so upheld the virtues of

the militia as a counterpoiseto the executiveand the army. As a committed Whig, he

opposedthe Tory governmentsanyway, but his rhetoric was particularly vociferous

when it was clear that they intendedto use the militia to remedy Britain's manpower

shortage.In contrast to Fitzwilliam was Baron Seaforth. One of Pitt's peers of the

1790s,he was createdBaron Seaforthin 1797,and was Colonel of the RossMilitia. His

ancestorshad forfeited their estatesin 1715for complicity in the Jacobiterebellion, and

73McCahil, Order         Equipoise,p. 54.
                    and
74Cookson,British ArmedNation, p. I 18.
73For instance,H043/16, Hawkesburyto Marquis Buckingham,27 July 1807,thanking Buckinghamfor
su
76
   gg estionson the militia volunteerbill.
   McCahil, Order and Equipoise,pp. 55, & 171-173.
77E. A. Smith, nig Principles
                                 and Party Politics, (Manchester,1975).
