                                                 39

        Within Parliament there were interest groups that could also subject

governmentsto scrutiny, and whose needsrequired to be addressedif legislation that

affectedthem was to be successful.This was particularly so with the militia, seenas the

constitutionalcounter-balanceto the royal army." Although the ideologicalbasisfor the

force had diminishedý"someofficers felt that it should be upheld as a separateforce, as

the county had to meet the cost of raising and maintaining its strength,and, moreover,

becausethe militia regimentswere a nexus of local patronageto the Lord Lieutenants

and the militia colonels. The militia interest                       "
                                               was always significant, and besidesthe

300 plus MPs who were militia officers between 1790 and 1820,"" the militia's main

strengthresidedin Lords. Obviously the Lord Lieutenantswould have a voice there,but

therewere also many other peerswho were connectedwith the militia. As the guardians

of the constitution, they viewed any alterations to the balance of power extremely

suspiciously,and they were particularly concernedaboutthe militia. As many peershad

direct accessto members of the government and the King, they could raise their

objectionswithout sayinganything in the Lords.' If their views were still not taken into

             individual
consideration,          Lords could use their patronagein the Commons,potentially

upsettinggovernmentmajorities.

        The strength of the militia interest was demonstratedin 1798, when the

governmentorderedall the flank companiesof eachmilitia regimentto be detachedand

formed into compositebattalions.After a meeting by the friends of the militia, headed

by Earl Fitzwilliam, representationswere made to the government,and the policy was

abandoned,without ever being raisedin the House.A more damagingincident occurred

when the government proposed to fill up vacant militia officers in the same year.


69Schwoerer,No StandingArmies, p. 195.
69Western,TheEnglish Militia in the EighteenthCentury,       438-440.
70Bartlett, 'Development of the British Army, PhD,       pp.
                                                       p. 113, considersthem an insignificant political
force, but hasfailed to understandwheretheir strengthlied.
71Thorne, TheCommons.1,300. Two thirds them                     lieutenantcolonelsor colonels.
72M. W. McCahil, Order                     of      were  either
                           and Equipoise.,The Peerage and the House of Lords, 1783-1806,(London,
1978),pp. 168-174.
