                                                62

transportsensuredthat this rarely happened.Consequently,the whole unit effectively

ceasedany training, and discipline becamelax."

        Iffiere were also structuralproblemsthat affectedthe colonial army. Many of the

units in those garrisonsdid not have secondbattalions,and so received very few new

troops, if any. The 65h, stationedat Bombay, had no meansof supportat home, and by

1810, although it was well acclimatised,it was so reducedin numbersas to be almost

       " Otherwise,units in the East Indies were generally better, as they had troops
useless.

transportedto them each year, allowing them to keep up their strength. However,

becauseof the huge distances,and the length it took to sail there, the army had to be

careful when, and whom, it sentto India. Units in India were allowed to recruit lads and

boys, and they were chosenspecifically to reinforce local forces. Hopefully their youth

meantthat they could betterwithstandthe climate, and servethe army for many years.97

The West Indies were slightly different, and the official policy was to select men fit

enoughto servethere,which probably meanthaving someexperienceof being a soldier,

but also not being too old."'

        The army therefore sought alternatives to provide for colonial defence. One

option was to sendpenal units to areassuch as the Caribbeanand African coastwhere

desertionwas difficult, if not impossible.This was actively taken up, and, in 1807, a

separatecorpswas createdfor garrisonduty on the African coast,and a large proportion

of the troops in the West Indies were desertersand criminals. A secondalternativewas

to raise colonial corps, in a repetition of the local forces in the UK. in the West Indies,

there were the West India regimentsraised in Africa," and the 60thwas composedof

foreignerswhich besidesthe fifth battalion,was usedexclusively in the West Indies and


93Buckley, Slaves in Redcoats,
                                  pp. 108-109.
96W027/99, Inspection report of 65th, 14 March 1810.
97W03/45, Calvert to Whetham, 9 April 1808, informing Whetham to
                                                                 select all the lads and boys from
the 2/89h to reinforce the first battalion in India.
98W03/49 Wynyard to Lt. Gen. Leighton, 29 November 1809, informing Leighton to               for the
            i/251h                                                                select men
 1/96'h and        from their second battalions.
" Buckley, Slaves in Redcoats, 96.
                                  p.
