                                           72


strength of the regulars and the militia, hoping to humiliate the Talents Ministry, and

strengthenhis campaignto discontinuelimited service. Although the returns were not

produced,becausesuch information would immediately be transmittedto         "
                                                                    Napoleon, it

signalledthe openingof deliberationson Britain's military recruitmentpolicy.

       A complex and lengthy series of debates on Windham's system ensued before

the passingof the 1807Mutiny Act. Castlereaghhad two objectionsto the system:first,

that it was not producing a sufficient number of men; second, that it provided an

automaticright to a pensionregardlessof the length, or the record,of a soldier's service.

On the issue of numbers,Castlereaghpointed out that Parliamentwas being askedto

vote for 293,000 men, yet there was a deficiency of 37,000 men, which the Talents

showedno vigour in trying to remedy. In fact, he assertedthat the strengthof the army

was only preservedin 1806 by measuresintroduced in the previous government(the

PermanentAdditional Force Act, which was in operationin early 1806,and the annual

Irish Militia transfers),and that 'It did not appearthat one man more had enlisted from

the temptation of the right honourable gentleman's system.' This was a particularly

effective criticism, as Windham had previously condemnedthe Addington and Pitt

governmentson the performance of their military policies. Castlereaghclosed his

speechby highlighting the fact that Windham had not dischargedthe soldierswith over

twenty-oneyear's service,as he had promisedto do, demonstratingthat even Windham

was losing faith in his     '
                        plan.

       Windham's main defencewas that he 'never expected,from the adoption of the

it, any suddeneffect, but rather a gradual amelioration in the recruiting of the army,

leading finally to the most beneficial effects'. The systemwas only fully establishedin

October,and he expectedbetter results the longer it was in operation.Appealing to the

ever-presentdesire in Parliamentto see improvementsin public spending,Windham


4Hansard, 1806-07,VIII, 438.
5Hansard, 1806-07,VIII, 472-507.
