                                                76

that the supportersof the Talents administration had lost seatsin the recent election.

Those who voted against Castlereaghin the Commons were sufficiently incensedto

print a list of the minorityýn and this evidenceshowedthat Windham retained support

from outsidethe Grenville-Whig opposition. For instance,Lord Sidmouth and someof

his followers continuedto vote with the Talents, as they had done when they were in

power.'     There was also support from independent members, such as Ralph

Mydddelton-Biddulph, who sat for his wife's family seat of Denbigh, and considered

himself independentof party. He was a member of the select committee on public

spending,which probably explains his support for Windham's measure.William Eliot,

despitehaving had no interest in the Grenville ministry, and a Lord of the Treasury in

the Portland government,voted for the motion to preserveWindham's system.241be

passingof the clausein the Commonseffectively endedthe debate,and so all that could

be done in the Lords was an official protest, written by Windham," from the Whig

Lords Holland, Grey, Jersey,Essex,and Cawdor.'

          Shrewdly, Castlereaghdid not abolish Windham's systementirely, pitching his

objection on the 'prescriptive nature of Windham's system, which enforced limited

service even when the men were perfectly satisfied, and desirous to enter without

limitation'. This allowed those moderatesupportersof Windham's system,to consider

the passing of the Mutiny Bill of 1808 not as a choice between Castlereaghand

Windham, but to allow the soldier the decision. In the Lords, Baron Borringdon,

otherwise a governmentsupporter,summarisedthis attitude: he consideredhimself a

friend of short-service,but thought unlimited servicewas neededto fulfil the different

22Hansard, 1808,X, 1084.
23They were Sir GeorgeBowyer and Benjamin Hobhouse.SidmouthsupportedWindham's systemin the
Lords, Hansard, 1808,X, 1181.
' Although defining political allegianceis difficult in this period, other independentswho supported
Windham, and the Opposition generally, were William Adam, George Anson, Henry Bankes, James
BuRer, N. Calvert; Nicholas William Ridley Colbourne, JamesCraig, William Frederick Elliot Eden,
Maurice Fitzgerald, Lord Henry Fitzgerald, Philip Gell, Benjamin Cooke Griffenhoofe, Henry Arthur
Herbert, William Hoare Hume, CharlesLemon, Sir William Lemon, StevenLushington,Richard Power,
Sir Matthew White Ridley, H. Shelley, William Taylor, John Henry Upton Viscount Templeton. See
entriesin Thorne, TheCommons.
25Baring (ed.), WindhamDiaries, entry for 16 March 1808, 476.
                                                           p.
26Hansard, 1808,X, 1179-1193.
