                                          71

the regulars or the militia, merely raised bounties and encourageddesertion. Short-

service would stimulate ordinary recruiting, and if accompaniedby a compulsory

pension,would makesoldieringmore competitivein the labour market.

        The main points of the short service scheme,which were incorpomtedinto the

1806Mutiny Act, were enlistmentfor sevenyears,after which a soldier could obtain his

dischargeor re-enlist for anothersevenyears at a higher rate of pay. He could re-enlist

for a maximum of two more periodsmaking the maximum length of servicetwenty-one

years. A pension was provided as an automatic right, guaranteeinga soldier some

remunerationfor his time in the service.The plan meantthat a soldier was not signing

away his life, and he would not be destituteif he was unfit to work again after his term

of service. Windham wanted the army to ceasebeing composedof 'those who were

easy to be acted upon by the arts of crimps, or the immediate temptation of a high

bounty.' and to be filled with a 'thoughtful, considerateand undebauchedclass of

men'.' By this measure,Windham hopedto presenta choiceto the 'bargain making part

of society ... that is, on thoughtful and consideratemen, who looked somewhatto

futurity. ' This was an admirable act of enlightenedsocial policy, recognisingthat the

state had some responsibility for those who served it. As Windham emphasisedin

defenceof his schemeduring 1807,it was not just about recruiting men; 'it was a bare

act of justice due to the brave men who had spent their lives in the service of the

country'.3
        Despite the intentions of Windham's system, it failed to produce sufficient

numbersquickly, and becamea party issue- one by which the recently oustedPittites

could embarrass the Talents. Castlereagh, as Secretary of War in Pitt's last

administration,was the obvious choice to lead such an attack. In early 1807, as the

annual renewal of the Mutiny Act approached,he called for returns of the effective


2HanSard,1806-07,VHI, 472.
3Hansard, 1806-07,VIII, 472.
