                                              85


made a recruiting, or perhaps,if he might use the expression,a crimping fund for the

supply of the anny'."

        Besidestheseusual howls from the militia die-hards,the principle of drafting

from the militia had been largely accepted,and the debatein the House shifted to the

effectivenessof the militia drafting system. Castlereagh,again supportedby Colonel

Wood who was becoming the pro-government militia representative,declared that

militia transferswere 'the most effectual, and by far the most expeditious means of

supplying a deficiency in the regular military forces of the country', and that it would

give the country in the least possibletime the largestpossibleforce'." Militia drafts did

createa temporaryweaknessin the defensiveforce, but this was acceptable.Castlereagh

pre-emptedthe Army of Reservesupportersby stating that such a force would do the

opposite,it would massively increasethe defensiveforce, and reducethe efficiency of

the offensive troops.

        This did not prevent some MPs from questioning the means adopted by

govemment. William Eliot, one of Bar-on Eliot's sons and usually a government

supporter,thought that it would injure 'morality throughoutthe country; for suchwould

be the effect of high bountiesgiven to the recruits from the militia to the line, and the

substitutes who were to fill their places in the militia ranks'. He had previously

considered that militia dmfts were a 'fraudulent system of taxation'."OSidmouth's

supportersalso voiced their views; CharlesShaw Lefevre declaredhimself againstthe
bill, becauseof the severity of the ballots, and Sir GeorgeWarrenderpreferred all the

militia going to the line, and balloting directly for the line." Sidmouth admitted the

necessityof militia dmfts and did not opposethe bill, but "He could not approveof the

practiceof enlisting men for one speciesof service,and afterwardsseducingthem into



" Hansard, 1809,XH, 805. The Marquis Douglas              him
                                     of         supported
69Hansard, 1809,XII, 159-191; for Wood's                 Castlereagh,315-316.
70Hansard, 1809,XII, 167,& 313.          speechsupporting
71HanSard,1809,XII, 653-654.
