                                                   81

results. For example, Colonel Edward Lord Stanley, a vociferous detractor of militia

transfers,statedthat 'he would rather the noble lord had brought forward a proposition

for annihilating the militia altogether,than degradingit by making it subservientto the

recruiting of the army'."-' Samuel Whitbread went finther, 'let us not practice it

(conscription) indirectly but more partially and oppressively,by beating up the militia,

and then allowing it to feed til it filled itself, in order to devour it. " They were joined

by similar speechesfrom Lord Henry Petty, John Bastard, and John Calcraft. This

alliance of views was centredon the fact that a militia transfer would perhapsdestroy

the constitutionalforce altogether,for an increaseof 28,000men."'

         Finally there were objectionsto the possibleeffects of the ballot. CharlesPhilip

Yorke agreedto the militia transferand recogriisedthe needto supply the army by some

form of compulsion,but objectedto the large ballot; Sir ThomasTurton, saw the ballot

as an unequaltax, andwantedthe disparity of it to be remediedfirst. It would also entail

a considerableamount of work by the county Lieutenancies,undoubtedly encouraging

some MPs, such as George Henry Fitzroy, Earl Euston, (whose father was Lord

Lieutenantof Suffolk), to supportthe opposition." The supportersof short service felt

ballots would destroy Windham's system,as they raised the price for substitutesin the

militia, and so the lower bounties offered by short-service would not be able to

compete."' Windham had the last word in the debates in the Commons, accusing

Castlereaghof fattening up the militia for his own use; 'Ballot and bounty were indeed

the only resourcesthat seemedever to havebeenthought of "'

        In the new Parliament,however,the governmentalways had it supporters,such

as Thomas Wood, Colonel of the East Middlesex Militia and brother-in-law of

45Hansard, 1807,IX, 932, speechof Col. Stanley.He was colonel of the 2"' LancashireMilitia, son
                                                                                                      of
12'hEarl Derby, and supportedthe Talents.
46Hansard, 1807,M 945, speechof Whitbread.
47Hansard, 1807,DC,935-940(Calcraft and Bastard),962 (Lord Petty) & 1181(Sidmouth).
48Hansard, 1807,IX, 933. He
                              was also Colonel of the West Suffolk Militia, until 1808.His father,the 4h
Duke of Grafton, originally supportedPitt, but cameto terms with Grenville during the Talentsministry.
Thome, TheCommons.
49Hansard, 1807,K 1065,speechof Lord Folkestone.
" Hansard, 1807,K 883.
