                                                96

serviceat any time."' Significantly, the statusof the militia was not mentioned.

        In the following     year, the Adjutant General's department again advocated

balloting for the army with a wide-ranging and comprehensive defence report, written at

a time when it again appeared that Napoleon would turn his attention to invading

Britain. It was recognised that Napoleon would only attempt an invasion with an

overwhelming force, estimated at six armies of 40-50,000 (three against Kent and

Sussex, two against the North and East, and one against Ireland), with a smaller force of

20-25,000 against Cornwall and Devon. The prospect of such a massive force

necessitated a major reform of the army. The militia would be disbanded, the men and

officers going to the regular army, as 'In the old militia the original institution is

completely wom out. By the introduction of a general substitution, and by the term of

enrolment having become indefinite namely the war, the great object of gradually

training the population of the country to anus is entirely fimstrated.' Consequently, the

local militia would replace the militia as the constitutional force. A separate colonial

army would be created by giving higher bounties to recruits who agreed to serve as

such, and although recruiting would continue, a ballot would finnish any deficiency in

the army. This ballot would only be for the infantry, and confined to unmarried men

between 18 and 25. Significantly, substitution would not be allowed, but there would be

fines, and each man would serve for five years in the UK unless he volunteered for

service overseas The author admitted that filling up second battalions with men that

could only serve in the UK would have its limitations, but felt that the only alternative

was conscription. ' 12

        Balloting for the line clearly had supportfrom the army, which is not surprising.

Furthermore,the membersof the Addington government,who introducedthe Army of

Reservein 1803,advocateda return to it from 1807.Lord Melville expressedsuccinctly

111   iv              Add. Mss. 38244, ff. 207-210, Lt. Col. Theophilus Pritzler to Bunbury, with
            ol papers,
    9 by Calvert,24 February1810.
co en
112 30/80, DefenceReport, I January1811,
