                                           95

1803.The Horse Guardsgave detailed proposalsfor re-introducing ballots for the line.

In February1807the Duke of York proposedto the Talentsthat the secondbattalionsbe

maintainedby a ballot but limited to home service,'O"and, in 1809,Calvert presenteda

more detailed version of this, in a memorandumfor 'New Modelling the Army'. He

proposedto createa true territorial army of 100 regiments,each of two battalions: the

first battalionsfor unlimited servicegeographically,thus providing a disposableforce of

100,000men, and the secondbattalionsmaintainedby ballot, for servicein the UK. The

rest of the military force would be in the local militia, volunteersand yeomanry,all of

whom should be trained to be fit to act with the line. These part-time troops would

assumethe identity (i. e. name and regimental distinctions) of the county regiment. In

essencethe plan would encourageenlistmentinto first battalions by establishinga real

connection betweenregiments and counties, and the militia would be 'What it ought

constitutionally to be, the Basis of our National      '
                                                  Force. He finther warned that 'Every

measureadoptedfor the Encrease[sic] of our Military Force,which doesnot place it on

an assuredand permanentFooting, is illusory and inadequateto the object."" The plan

appealedsufficiently to           for
                        Castlereagh   him to presentit to the King. ' 10

       In 1810 the sameidea was presentedto the Percevalgovernment.The end of the

militia volunteering,and the needto 'take accountof the military force and the meansof

supporting it' prompted another initiative. The plan was a more refined version of

Calvert's proposedin 1809, in which every regiment would have a secondbattalion

createdby reducing the existing onesto eight companiesand one field officer, thereby

providing the means for the army to receive 30,000 men. It was also clear to the

Adjutant Generalthat the compulsionwas necessary,and that the ballot could be made

less obnoxious by restricting it to limited service, but with the option of extending




1" Cookson,British ArmedNation,
                                 pp. 83-84.
109W025/3224, Schemefor New Modelling the Army by CalveM November 1809.
110Vane (ed.), CastlereaghCorrespondence,2ndSeries,7,193-197.
