                                            93


not part of his remit as Foreign Secretary, he was more popular than ever and a

recognisedexpert on military matters.In this bill, he declaredthat the militiamen and

officers wantedto serveactively, not passively,and that the governmentwantedto give

them that choice. So the quota of volunteersfor the line would be doubledfor that year,

and, with the arrearsdue, 26,000 men would be addedto the regulars.He appealedto

houseto overcomeits traditional prejudicesagainstthe use of the militia in such a way:

'All the difficulties which frightened our ancestors,and which were important at one

time in point of privilege, ought now to be lost and swallowed up in the necessityfor

exertion imposedon us by the presenttimes."'

       To make this large transfer possible, a variety of options were given to the

militia, with generous benefits to get the 30,000 men. Firstly, men could volunteer as

before for service in the line, and a proportion of officers would be appointed. Secondly,

militiamen   could volunteer in whole companies, and be formed into provisional

battalions under the command of militia officers, for service in Europe. Finally, up to

three-quarters of a militia regiment could volunteer for service in Europe as a complete

and separateregiment. In the last two options, the men would still be militiamen and so

retain the family allowance. This was particularly aimed at the Irish and Scottish

Militias. As part of this 'New Military System, the government also received powers to

call out the local militia for twenty-eight days beyond its own county, to provide for

home defence."'

       The government generally had support for this bill, but some MPs deplored the

use of the militia in this way. CharlesWynn pointed out that the officers would want

men to volunteer for the line, so that they could get regular rank, whilst the men would

want to volunteer as militiamen for Europe." But, there was generalsupport for this

measureas the needfor such actionswas indisputable,and the government'spopularity

1 Hansard, 1813-14,XMI, 9 1.
10454 Geo. III I&c. 19.
              c.
105Hansard, IS 13-14,XXVIL 85-94,114-119,158-191,174-177& 285 (Lords).
