                                               98

the government's reluctanceto consider conscription. Much has been made of two

issuesthat were thought to stop direct balloting for the line: the administrativelimits of

the British state,and the 'manpower ceiling'. It has been assertedthat direct balloting

for the armed forceswould have beendifficult, if not impossiblein Britain, becauseits

administrative machinery could not cope with its rapidly growing and mobile

           To
population. someextent this is true, as the militia relied on the countiesfinding men,

preferably by ballot, but other means were acceptable.This was particularly true in

Ireland, where in some places the parish authorities neededto executeballots hardly

existed, and in large manufacturingdistricts, where densepopulationssimply precluded

fair and quick ballots."' It is unlikely that the proponentsof balloting for the army ever

thought direct personalservice could be enforced,hencethe use of the term balloting,

rather than conscription, but it was clear that counties could be forced to raise men.

Therefore, the governmentchoseto raise men via the militia ballots, and later militia

recruiting, rather than direct intervention.

        The 'manpower ceiling' has beenput forward recently as an explanation,"' and

the argumenthas supportingevidence.Both Castlereaghand Liverpool believedthat the

army, navy and part-time forces were reachingtheir limits from 1807.Castlereaghsaid

as much in Parliamentin 1807, and when Liverpool was drawing up his plans for the

annualmilitia transfersin 1811,he wrote that the army was 'as large a force, combined

with the RegularMilitia and Navy as the Populationand Financesof the Country could

well support'."' But the 'manpower ceiling' was not simply demographic;it was also

financial. In 1810,Britain's financeswere trimmed back in recognition that the war was

likely to be sustainedfor someconsiderabletime. Liverpool felt that the commitmentto

Portugal could be maintainedindefa-fitelyif it cost E3,000,000a year. In 1810, when



 7Western,TheEnglish Militia,
                              pp. 277-285.
   Cookson,British ArmedNation, particularly Chapter4, pp. 95
                                                             -125.
   Hansard, 1807,K 864; BL, Liverpool papers,Add. Mss. 38361, ff. 65-69, Draft Measurefor keeping
up the RegularArmy, (late 1810?).
