                                             94

       its
ensured speedypassage,with minimal debate.The Duke of Norfolk epitomisedthis

           he
support, as was 'anxious that not the slightest obstacleshould be thrown in the way

of the progressof this Bill, which he thought it was         to
                                                     essential  passwithout delay'. " It

becamelaw in late November 1813, and although it was implementedin 1814, very

soon the war was over, and most of the military systemestablishedby Castlereagh,
                                                                               the

Duke of York, and Liverpool, was allowed to lapse.


Plansfor Major Reformsof the Aimy

       It was clear from the Pittite's return to power in 1807 that short-servicewould

not be continued as a policy to supply the army, but throughout the period the

government did have another option available besides transfer from the militia. The

major flaw of the militia transfers was its voluntary nature, which made predictions

about the strengthof the regimentsdifficult. The governmenthad to wait for regiments

to have adequatenumbers,and be sufficiently well trained before they could be sent

        The
overseas.   debatesin the House also highlighted the fact that they were altering the

constitutional arrangementof the military forces of the country, and doing so in a way

that left many questions about the new arrangementsunresolved. As John Cartwig

        in
observed a letter to the Secretaryof War, 'It is not possible for me to conceiveyou

can rest satisfied with our present system of Defence:
                                                     - if system that can be called

which equally violates constitutionaland military principals [sic] and for its inefficiency

is a disgraceto the councils of our country."O' Examining thesealternativesrevealsthe

reasonswhy the governmentchoseto use the militia rather am implement any radical

reform of the army.

       The Horse Guardsconsistentlypresentedalternativeplans to maintain the army,

and there was support for such measures in Parliament. The principal measure

advocatedwas to supply the army by a mechanismsimilar to the Army of Reserveof

106
  Hansard, 1813-1814,XXVII, 177.
07WO 1/1114,JohnCartwig, (Sussex)to Castlereagh,10 July 1807.
