                                                 91

defenceof this M       of the United Kingdom, either for the purposeof repelling a foreign

foe, or for the purpose of crushing internal rebellions'. By interchangingthem with

British regiments, the Irish Militia 'when in England, separatedfrom their priests,

would make, what they will never prove here, good          '
                                                  soldiers'. During the review of

military policy in 1810, the Horse Guards drew up a large exposition of a militia

interchange.Besidesreturning to the argumentthat the Irish militia would be better out

of Ireland, it also suggestedthat such an arrangementwould have important political

results,as it 'would unquestionablylead to an acknowledgementof eachother as part o

the sameEMpi:re; which not be generally admitted either in England or in Ireland at

presenffl!'". The memorandumpresentedan arrangementfor this, which was largely

adopted by government. In future all militia recruits, however they were obtained,

servedin the Militia of the United Kingdom, Whilst those already in the militia could

volunteerfor the new force, and receivea small bounty.

        The Militia InterchangeBill was brought before Parliament on 14 May 1811,

and, like the militia transfers previously, was strongly opposedby supportersof the

militia, for similar reasons.Earl Temple and Lord Stanleydeclaredthat it would negate

the militia's constitutional role. There were also practical concerns. John Bastard

believedthat it gavethe men the power to decidewhere they wantedto serve,reversing

the chain of command,and forcing the officers to acceptthe men's decision or quit the

regiment. Wynn?" observedthat the governmentmay as well sendthe militia to Europe,

and the useof the militia in this mannerwas so objectionableto Lord Hamilton, that he

         the
preferred militia be disbandedthan     in
                                   used sucha way."

        An interchangebetween the Irish and British Militias also raised the thorny

96BI, Windham papers,Add. Mss. 37886, f. 68, A Staff Officer (Athlone) to Windham, 20 February
1807.
97W03/596, Memorandum Irish and British Militia Interchange,20 March 1810. No
                               on                                                     author is given,
but it is likely to be from the Adjutant General'sdepartmentTheseviews were repeatedin the Commons,
Hansard, 1810-1811,XM 218.
98It is not clear of this was CharlesWatkin Williams Wynn (MP for Montgomeryshire),who spokelater
againstthe measure,or Sir Watkin Williams Wynn, MP for Denbighshire,Lord Lieutenantof Merioneth
and Denbigh,and Colonel of DenbighMilitia. Both were Grenvillites.
"Hansard, 1810-1811,XY., 132-133,200-201,292-295.
