                                              97

the Sidmouthiteview- 'It is astonishingto me that, among all the projects for keeping

up the army, there never has been the good senseto revert back to the systemof the

Army of Reserve.By that systemyou could receive a supply of 30,000 men by ballot,

which I am sure, is more than the most sanguineof you can look for from any new

attempt upon the Militia. ""      So why did the government ignore such respected

opinions?

        The government chose militia volunteering for several reasons.In 1807 and

1809, Castlereaghwas particularly keen to get trained men into the army; balloting for

the line would take time, and then thesemen would needtraining."' Militia drafts were

also the only alternativesourceof manpowerthat would not affect ordinary recruiting.",

The failure of the Army of Reserve,which had lapsedwith the demiseof the Addington

ministry, was still a recent memory during the Portland governmentand so there were

doubts about the possiblesuccessof a similar law. Castlereaghinformed the cabinet in

1807that

        With respectto success                hadit evenreceivedthesanctionof Parliament,
                              of sucha measure,
     very considerable  doubtsmust be entertained,when the contemptinto which fines have
     fallen,fromtheir enforcement havingalwaysbeenneglected,    andlatterlywholly abandoned
     by an expressenactment,              andit is clearthat a recurrence
                             is considered:                               to sucha systemat
     presentwouldbe productiveof the utmostresistance  anddissatisfaction  both in andout of
     Parliament.' 16


From a political perspective,a new Army of Reservebill could not have been passed,

and implementedat that time. The collapse of both the Portland government,and its

weak successor,the Perceval ministry, made such an attempt even more unlikely,

especially when it was preoccupiedwith the inquiry into Walcheren, and then the

establishmentof the Regency.

       Apart from thesepolitical considerations,there were other powerful reasonsfor


' 13Vane (ed.), CastlereaghCorrespondence,2ndSeries, 7,79, Lord Melville to Castlereagh,16 July
1807.
114 Hansard, 1807,K 863; 1809,XII, 159
115WO 1/906,Memorandum Militia Volunteering, 1811.
                            of
116Vane (ed.), CastlereaghCorrespondence,2d Series,7,55, Measures
                                                                proposedfor Improving the State
of the Military Force, 12 May 1807.
