                                                100


without a division. This meant that the arguments became increasingly centred on

effectiveness,and balloting for the army only had support from the easily ignored army,

and the small group of Sidmouthites,who were never openly critical of government,

and joined Liverpool in 1812. It also explains why some governmentsupporterswere

openly againstmilitia transfers,whilst membersof the opposition remainedquiet. The

acceptanceof militia transferswas such that the Marquis of Buckingham,who, as Earl

Temple, had spokenout againstmilitia transferin 1807and 1809,went on to command

the militia brigadein France.

        Maintaining Britain's war effort provided governmentswith sometough choices

but rather than military efficiency, it was the immediatepracticalities,both military and

politically, which determinedgovernmentpolicy. Consequently,
                                                           those who advocated

any form of conscription were ignored, and the governmentchose to use what it had,

namely the militia. The militia transfershave the appearanceof a short-term remedy,

but the UK's governmentsdid not have the luxury of being able to plan ahead;the

continued fighting in Iberia meant that nothing could be done to disrupt ordinary

recruiting for any considerableperiod of time. Rather than the 'manpower ceiling' or

administrativelimits, it was the immediate situation that resulted in conscriptionbeing

discardedas an option, and the immediate situation was never dire enough to justify

suchdrasticaction.

        The dismantling of the British military machine after 1815 has hidden the

debates that took place on military policy, and has obscured Britain's plans for

conscription.The debatesand actsof the governmentsthat managedto sustaina war on

the continentfor sevenyears,were, in somecasesliterally, " left on the shelf, and when

the debate was returned to in the mid-nineteenth century, warfare had entered the


122Many of the War Office paperswere consideredas a library for any future Commanderin Chief or
Secretaryat War, to relay the experienceof the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. (Tbey now form
W030. ) The needto reform the army in the beginning of the twentieth centuryprompteda closer look at
the material in them, and J. W. Fortescue'sCounty Lieutenanciesand the Army, 1803-14,(London, 1909)
was written very much as a historical lesson.
