                                                107


party to break regulations,as for every man raisedthey received,in effect, commission.

The party could also increaseits profitability by making surreptitiousdeductionsfrom

the recruit's bounty. Legitimate deductionswere made from the bounty for necessaries

(such as knapsacks), but, as many men were ignorant of what were legitimate
                                                            I
           the
necessaries, party could make their own           '
                                        deductions. These evils were the source

for the continualhostility to recruitment,and the army generally,underthis system:

       Officers drew money from agentsand frequently drew over allowances,creating much
     abuseof  false attestations,etc. Most of the time, recruits were left to drunken Recruiting
     Sergeantsand of Crimps, with who [sic] they were connected.  26



        The regulations neededto be stricter and enforced more effectively because

irregularities in recruiting were endemic,and the army's reforms had not changedthe

underlying financial arrangementwhich createddifferent priorities betweenthe parties

and the army. For the parties, the more recruits they obtained the more money they

made,whilst the army wanted recruits fit enoughto undergotraining immediately and

be soldiersin as short a time as possible.This inevitably resultedin the partiesignoring,

or trying to circumvent the recruiting regulations.The I" Foot was a particularly bad

example:among its various irregularities, it ignored the opinion of the London district

surgeon in 1807 and approved two men." More often individuals simply ignored

recruiting regulations:Corporal Norman enlisted four men in the Taunton district, two

of whom paid smart money (paying money direct to the party before the recruit was

attestedso that he could leave -a trick prohibited in 1807) while the other two proved

unfit. The profit motive also encouragedcollusion betweenthe party and the recruits,

and many young men were enlisted as boys becausethey were not tall enough. One

sergeantrecalled being told by the recruiting sergeantto lie about his age, so he could

enlist as a 'lad' in the light dragoons." Accordingly the IFOs were told to examine


257heRecruiting Regulationsfor 1806specifically ban suchdeductions,CJ, 1806-07,IV, 175
26
26 BL, Windhampapers,Add. Mss. 37886, ff. 194-199,Fitzpatrick to Windham,25 March 1807.
27W03/43, Calvert to Kent, 28 April 1807.
28Joltingfrom
              my Sabretache,by a ChelseaPensioner,(London, 1847),p. 12.
