                                              104

twenty-four hours later he would then be brought before a magistrateto be attested,

where the recruit had the right to refuse to join either if he could prove he was an

apprentice,or if he could repay the party. Once attested,he would receive a medical

examination,and then if he passedthe medical, he becamea member of the regiment

and subject to the Mutiny Act. For each recruit the party was issued levy money

(usually in advancefrom the regimentalagents),most of which went to the recruit as a

bounty, but someof which went to party itself. The recruit would probably remain with

the party for sometime, the Horse Guardsencouragedthis so recruits would spendtheir

bounties before they reachedtheir regiment." The new recruit might even find himself

recruiting: a militia volunteerrecruiteda man whilst he was still with a party of the 95h

            E2
and received as the 'bringer', a massiveincreasein his income from the meagreone

shilling a week he receivedasa recruit!

     From 1796 the Duke of York set about increasing supervision of the recruiting

                                              ' each with a commanding officer
service. Recruiting districts were established,

(Inspecting Field Officer), an adjutant, two staff sergeantsand medical officers. They

set physical examinationsfor all recruits, and generally supervisedrecruiting in their

districts.' Initially, they only had jurisdiction over parties of regiments that were

overseas,but later their authority was extended to all parties. In 1798 a district

paymasterwas addedto the recruiting district establishment,
                                                          who dealt with all financial

transactions,fluther increasingthe InspectingField Officer's (IFO) power." By 1807,

the IFOs were the senior officers in the area and no officer in their jurisdiction could

leave without their permission,althoughthey could not interfere in internal regimental

matters.

     The district staff intermediately approved all recruits, giving them a portion of


6 W03/585, Circular, by Darling, 16 December1812.
7Anthony Brett-James(ed.), Military Memoirs ofEdward Costello, (London, 1967),p. 2.
8 SeeAppendix D for             districts in 1809.
                     recruiting
90Western,
         'Ile Recruitmentof the Land Forces',Phl), pp. 130-134.
1 BL, Windham
               papers,Add. Mss. 37886, ff. 194-199,Fitzpatrick to Windham,25 March 1807.
