                                               115

the southprobably experiencedthe greatestincreasebecauseof the demandsof London,

and the large military presencein the region. The last two factors could accountfor the

results in the Bedford district. The few recruiting parties in Wales were unproductive,

resulting in a very small proportion of the male population of the Hereford and

Shrewsburydistricts joining the army. It may be inferred that the army had given up

recruiting in Wales, becauseit was not worth deploying large numbersof recruiting

parties there for such small returns. In Scotland,the highlands stand out in contrastto

the pattern in England, but as seenabove it required considerableresourcesto recruit

men in this area as the population was dwindling, although the ratio of recruits to

population was high the                          is
                        actual number of recruits small. No conclusions can be
drawn about recruitmentin Ireland, beyondthe fact that it was more successfulthan the

averagefor the LJK."

        It was generallybelievedthat more recruits were obtainedin the winter months,

and this suited the army as it gave the army more men before the campaigrungseason

beganin spring. In November 1807the Horse Guardssent out a circular urging parties

to increasetheir efforts as 'The seasonis now approachingwhich generallyprovesmost

favourableto the recruiting service," but the evidencefrom monthly recruiting figures

does not bear this out; on averagemore recruits were obtained in the summer." This

suggeststhat recruiting was concentratedin urbanareaswhere the annualagrariancycle

was lessof an influence on employment.It is possiblethat the rural unemployed,rather

thanjoin the army immediately,would move to the towns over winter, and thenjoin the

army in the towns, accountingfor the number of recruits obtainedin the summer.The

resultsin London tend to supportthis conjecture.




66SeeAppendix E. The UK raised 1.7 recruits per 1000 mates,whilst the ratio in Ireland was 2.1 per
1000.
67WO 1/612,Circular from HorseGuards,November 1807.
" SeeGraphVHI.
