                                            162


alwaysdcficient.

Encourap,ing the men

       Whatever the opinions of the officers, the government still had to encourage the

militiamen to volunteer. As with recruiting, men were offered a bounty to transfer, but

like ordinary recruiting there were physical standards that potential volunteers had to

pass. This meant that despite some militiamen's desire to volunteer, they were ineligible

because they were too small, or too old. This derived from the fact that there were

differing standards for the militia and the regulars: to join the militia a man had to be at

least 5' 2" tall, and between eighteen and forty-five; for the regulars the height standard

was 5' 4". and under thirty-five. From a sample of the inspection returns of militia in

1807, this did have a variable impact across the militia regiments. On average 15% of

militiamen could not volunteer because of their age, whilst another 9% were ineligible

becauseof their height. However, there were considerable variations across the country;

the age data had a range of 12% above and below the average, ranging from East

Norfolk and the West Middlesex Militias which both had 27% of their regiments

ineligible because of their age, down to the Forfar and Ayr Militias 4% each (the

Scottish Militia had better figures for ages because only men between eighteen and

thirty could join). The height data shows as much variation (a range of 13%), with the

East Middlesex Militia the worst at 25%, whilst the Berkshire, Durham and Yd West

Yorkshire Militias had all of their militiamen above the regulars' standard.112

       There were no inspections of the militia in 1808, and most of the regiments

inspectedin 1809 occurred after the militia transfer began, so often exaggeratingthe

proportion of the regiment unfit for the regulars.From 1811, the interaction of militia

recruiting, and constanttransfersbeing made to the regulars,make any conclusionson

the information in these years unreliable. Only the secondhalf of 1810 was a quiet


122SeeAppendixG, for detailsof militiaregiments                Henceforth,
                                             thathavebeensampled.       thissource
                                                                                 will
bereferred
         to asW027Sample,   MilitiaRegiments.
