                                                 171


                     ChUter 6: Rank and File - the Social Compgsition

                                           of the Army


Introduction

         Only a few historical works have touched upon the subject of the common

soldier during the late eighteenthand early nineteenthcenturies.Western's PhD thesis

on army recruitmentbetween 1793 and 1799,makesa passingmention of the types of

men recruited,' but this was written beforemodem computing madepowerful databases

and analysis with the reach of the historian. Sylvia Frey's The British Soldier in

America.ý A Social History of Military Life in the Revolutionary Period, devotes a

chapter to the social composition of the rank and file in the American War of

           ' and Cookson'sBritish Armed Nation, has madeuse of the large amount
Independence,

of statistical data on nationality, age, and service in the army, contained in the

regimental inspectionreports conductedduring the Napoleonic Wars? However, these

only provide groupeddata (for instancethey give the number of men between 18 and

20), and as eachtable is distinct, making no referenceto eachother, they do not provide

detailed information about soldiers. For further information on the 'average' soldier,

this chapterhas sampledsome regimentalbooks, which give a soldier's place of birth,

age, place of enlistment, and any other details the regiment thought worthy to keep

(usually his physical appearance).The chapter also uses some of the biographiesof

soldiers written after the Peninsular War, some of which are famous and easily

obtained, but others are rare, and a few are still manuscripts. Finally, regimental

historieshavebeenutilised, wherethey containany detailsrelating to the men that filled

their ranksduring the NapoleonicWars.




I Western,'The Recruitmentof the Land Forces', Phl),     220-222.
                                                     pp.
2 Sylvia Frey, TheBritish Soldier inAmerica, Ch. 1.
3Cookson,British ArmedNation, p. 126.
