                                            ISO

for the regiment,and similarly, the 18"' and 88h have only beensampledtwice. But just

becausea regimenthad an Irish title did not necessarilyimply that it was Irish.

       It may be possible that the nationalities in the army came to mirror the UK

through governmentpolicy. The militia transfers took a large number of men from

English and Scottish Militia regiments,and in the years when there were no transfers

from the British Militia (1810,1814 and 1815), there was a higher proportion of Irish

troops in the army. In these years the army's strength was maintained by ordinary

recruiting, which traditionally focused on Ireland, and moreover, in 1810, Irish

militiamen were allowed to volunteerunderthe terms of the 1806Act. Significantly, the

militia transferswere not as successfulfrom the Irish and ScottishMilitias, and so the

drafts they provided to the line were not equalto their populations.In 1809,69% of the

militiamen who volunteeredwere English, whilst only 8% were Scottishand 23% were

Irish. Although the ScottishMilitia rallied in 1811and provided 15% of the volunteers,

Ireland still under performed,providing only 24% of the intake that year. In effect, the

militia transfers were counterbalancingthe army's traditionally heavy recruitment in

Ireland and Scotland.The balancingeffect of the militia volunteersmay also explain the

nationality patternsin the post-Waterlooperiod. A large number of militia volunteers,

especiallyEnglishmen,choselimited service,and when thesemen were dischargedfirst

in 1814 and 1815, the army was left with ordinary recruits and militiamen who had

chosenunlimited service,and in both categoriesthe Irish and Scottishpredominated.

       Turning to individual units in the army, nationalitieswere not evenly distributed.

It is generally assumed that under the pressure to fill the ranks, regiments would send

out recruiting parties to wherever they thought they could get men, so rendering their

regimental titles as virtually meaningless. In some cases this is valid; " the 4/1",, hungry

for men to fill     the ranks of its three sister battalions overseas, went from

overwhelmingly Scottish in 1807, to predominately Irish in 1812, although the battalion

22SeeAppendixH.
