                                          189

have had no choice over where he enlisted, simply joining from the depot where the

militia regimentwas stationed.It is possible that militiamen were not always recorded

       in
as such regimentalbooks.Nowhere in the samplefrom the 2/32ndis any man listed as

a militia volunteer,yet the enlistmentsof Robert Bray, SamuelBread,John Bonney and

Phillip Beswick, all from Cornwall in 1813 at Castlebar,Mayo, by the 2/32nd look

suspiciouslylike transfersfrom the militia. " However, to be consistent,the regimental

books have been taken literally, and only entries that mention the soldier being a

volunteer from the militia have been removed. This deductseighty men from the list,

and leaves721 soldierswith placesof birth and enlistment.

        There are significant variations between the soldier's district of birth and the

district where they enlistecL"'The low percentageof soldiers born in London contrasts

with the high numberof London enlistmentsand this can be explainedby examiningthe

birth district of the men enlisted in London. Of the thirty-six soldiers enlisted in

London, only six (or 17%) were born in London, and the rest were born in sixteen

different districts. This demonstratesthat recruits obtained in London were migrants

from other regions,and the samecan be said of the Maidstonedistrict, where only 2%

of the sixty-five men recruited in the district were born there. Some of these soldiers

were born in adjacentdistricts, suchas the thirteen soldiersenlistedin London from the

Bedford, Maidstone, Southampton,and Gloucesterdistricts. Even including these,the

army was recruiting from the substantialnumberof migrantsto London. It is difficult to
imagine the journey that took CharlesArchibald from Roxburgh, and Alexander Adam

from Lanarkshireto enlist in the Yd Foot Guardsin London, or ThomasSavage,born in

Kerry, to join the 4/1" in London, potentially the longestjourney possiblein the UK. An

anonymoussoldier who went on to record his army career moved from 'never-mind-

where' in Shropshireto London before enlisting." The 2/6h's recruiting party stationed

46
47
   W025/368.
   SeeAppendix 1.
48Jouingsftom
              my Sabrelache,p.5.
