                                             191

                     by
were often garrisoned militiamen making such a possibility more likely: out of the

171 men who gave a place of enlistmentin the Wells district, twelve were recruited at

Pendermis,probably meaning the castle, another twelve in Falmouth, fourteen at

Berryheadbarracks,and forty-eight at Plymouth. Potentially half the recruits enlisted in

this samplefrom the Wells district were militiamen. The degreeof migration of men

before they joined the army was probably less extensive than the enlistment data

superficially indicates.In Wells' case73% of men born in the district joined the army in

their district of birth, and only twenty-two out of the eighty-two future soldiersborn in

the south-west moved before they joined the army, some of whom were probably

militiamen.

        This small level of migration meant that the 2/32ndwas able to have a West

Country presencein the ranks, but even a low level of regional migration made

maintaining any kind of territorial link difficult. The army's recruiting instructions did

suggestsendingpartiesto their counties,but it was likely that the men recruitedwould

not necessarilybe from that county: on        just
                                       average,    over half the men recruited in a

district would be from elsewhere. The regional composition of a regiment also

dependedon its history. The 6th, despite being the I" Warwickshire, had its second

battalion formed from limited-service men raised in Lancashire,and although not in

keeping with its title, it preservedthis identity throughout the period. A quarter of its

recruits enlistedin the Manchesterdistrict, and of the sixty men the party at Chelmsford

recruited,thirty-eight were bom in Lancashire.

        Most regiments in the British army had no real territorial origins, and were given

titles later,"' but the notable exceptions to this rule were the highland corps. Clan chiefs

raised these regiments from their tenants, creating true territorial       "
                                                                     units. This source of

manpower had proved very productive, and massive use was made of highland


49G. H. Cleare,'Countynamesfor regimentsin 1782',MHR, 1962(38),pp.34-38.
" StanleyDeanMacDonaldCarpenter,'Patternsof Recruitmentof the Highland Regimentsof the British
Army, 1756-1815',M. Litt., (University of St. Andrews, 1977),pp. 77-78
