                                               208


status was as important as money, a factor that the short-service scheme failed to

 address.

Conclusions

          This chapter has attempted to describe the average soldier of the period 1807-

 1815,and despitethe shortcomingsof the samples,someconclusionscan be drawn. The

soldiers who fought under Wellington were in their mid-twenties, and already had six

years' service behind them. The NCOs who were immediately in chargeof them would

be a few yearsolder. Before a soldierjoined the army he would possibly have been an

urban artisan, or a rural labourer, and, in both cases,it was likely that he had moved

from his home parishbefore enlisting. The regiment in which he servedwas probably a

mixture of men from other parts of the United Kingdom but it usually had one

nationality dominant although, on account of the recruiting party system, men could

come from different areas.In essence,the army would fairly accurately representthe

lower end of the British society,with a mix of young men from different locations and

trades.

          The men that took the King's shilling often had severalreasonsfor doing so, and

were not always forced to join the army out of economic misfortune. A soldier's life

was attractiveto young men, particularly as the PeninsularWar beganto supply a stock

of victories that glorified the humble rank and file (and the casualtiesfrom which

opened up chances for promotion). During the Napoleonic Wars a cult of heroic

endeavour developed which was not limited to patricians, nor even part-time

volunteers;"' CharlesO'Neil, amongstother reasonsfor enlisting, felt soldiering was the

only choice for a young man because'the fair young damselsof our dear island - were

scarcelywilling to regardany young man as honourableor brave, who did not enlist. ",

It is unquestionablethat there were desperatecharactersin the army, but it is incorrect


97Colley, Britons,     320-321
                   pp.
98CharlesO'Neil, TheMilitary Adventuresof Charles 0 'Neil, 9.
                                                          p.
