                                          200

NCOs and privatesthe enlistmentage is twenty-one. This does not correlatewell with

the averageage of twenty-threefrom the regimentalbook examined(including boys, as

the inspectionreturns do), but, as mentionedabove, it is difficult to tell if the ages in

these books refer to the age when enlisted, or the age when the book started. Men

recruited in their early twentieswere young enoughto completeseveralyearsof active

service,but not so young as to detract from the fighting capabilities of the army. This

contrastswith France,where by 1814 the army was increasingly composedof teenage

conscripts, the notorious 'Marie-Louises'." This must have had an influence on the

fighting capability of the army, becausemen of twenty or more with six years' service

were undoubtedlybetter soldiersthan boys of fifteen or sixteenwho had only had a few

months drill, especially given the physical demandsof campaigning.Young soldiers

                            to
were not physically equipped withstand the strainsof warfare, and if they becameill,

would require replacement,so increasingthe manpowerdemands.The age and service

of the rank and file showsthat the army was very finely balanced:
                                                                any higher casualties,

or the absenceof the militia volunteers,may have resultedin catastrophicresults for the

British army. In the event the British army managedto maintain high standardsin its

recruitment,and this, alongsideother factors,undoubtedlycontributedto the spectacular

performanceof thesemen in the Peninsula.

Occupationsand Motives

        The occupationsthat the soldiersclaimedor were reportedas having before they

joined the army are perhapsthe most interesting,yet daunting, questionin any study of

the composition of any army. This is particularly so for the British army: its soldiers

have often be labelled as criminals, or drawn from the lowest classesof society,but this

judgement may not withstand detailed scrutiny. There were undoubtedly desperate

charactersin the army, suchas a soldier of the 58thwho was


69Forrest,Conscripts
                    andDeserters,p. 36.
