                                                     207

being only a part-time soldier."

          Militiamen had to make a ftuther choice once they had decidedto volunteer for

the line of which regiment they wanted to join. Personal reasonswere undoubtedly

influential: some volunteers from the Derbyshire Militia volunteered for the 19th

becauseits depot was at Hull, and they 'wished to have a long march through the

country.'" The militia volunteerspreferredthe light regiments,probably indicating that

their martial reputation, or their progressive attitudes towards soldiers, was more

important than joining particular county regiments. In 1809, the 2nd West Yorkshire

witnessedsixty-one men volunteer to the 43'd. thirty-nine to the 52nd,fifty-eight to the

68th, five to the 85th and thirty-four to the 95th; a total of 197 out of 313 who

volunteered. Only two other regiments,the 2ndand 50% received militiamen in large

numbersfrom the 2ndWest Yorkshire. The Royal CamarvonMilitia was trained as light

infantry and consequentlytwenty-nineof its forty-six volunteerschosethe 52ndand 128
                                                                           ,
men from the South Lincoln Militia joined the 95th, probably becausethey were

stationedat Hythe barrackswith them. The 95thwas particularly popular in 1809and by

May, had attracted1,286volunteers."

         Army recruits and militia volunteers took the decision to join the line for

numerousreasons,of which their economicsituation was only one. The Lancashiremen

recruited by the 2/6h in the Maidstone district ignored the numerousrecruiting parties

and regimental depots in London and the surrounding area, and were attracted by a

recruiting party that championedtheir Lancashireroots. A Scottish soldier of the 71"

specifically chose that corps becauseof its name, and becauseit already included so

many of his fellow townsmen.' In somerespects,Windham's idea of making a bargain

with a potential recruit materialised,but not in the way he envisaged.To some men,



93John Selby (ed.), ThomasMorris: TheNapoleonic Wars,pp. 2&5.
94Ferrar, TheDiary Colour-SergeantGeorgeCalladine, p. 10.
                    of
95W01/904, Return Militia Volunteers,20 May 1809
                    of
% Vicissitudesin the Life
                          of a ScottishSoldier, written by HimsetC,p. 2.
