                                                   201
         A notorious rebel and a man of so much influence that several of the soldiers of the
       battalion to which he belongsare understoodto have been seducedfrom their allegianceby
       the effect of his persuasionor by his example.70


 More revealing was a letter sent to a deserterof the 22ndfrom his father, relating the

 latest exploits of 'Ned Ludd' in his home county of Nottinghamshire."'

         In order to compareregiments,and make general observationson the class of

men that joined the army, occupationshave beenclassified.Unfortunately, there was no

official contemporaryclassificationof occupations,and the statusof the occupationshas

only been crudely divided. The first breakdown of occupationsis into wage earners

(hereafterreferredto as labourers),artisans,and retailers.This reflects the basic division

between those who were employed and paid directly by others, those who had some

degree of economic independence,and those who owned their own businesses.

However,*duringthis period the statusof artisanswas becoming more diverse. Some,

such as weaverswere becomingpart of a putting out systemthat was threateningtheir

independence,yet those who were in other trades less threatenedby technological or

structural innovation, upheld their status.To reflect this diversity the artisan grouping

hasbeenftirther divided in three categoriesof status,simply known as low, medium and

high. These categoriesare not intended to reflect their wealth, but their position in

society and in their respectivetrade, and in most casestheir       '
                                                             skill. A cabinetmaker

would not consider himself an equal of a sawyer. By using a classification basedon

status,it makescomparisonseasierthan listing every occupationthat has been found,

and reducesthe influence of economic geography,and local differences in titles. For

instance,in the West Country woollen industry, the men who finished the cloth were
                                                                                                 71
known as shearmen,whilst in the West Riding of Yorkshire they were called croppers.

        The rank.and file of the army showsa high proportion of labourers,but equally



70W035/24, Irish Adjutant Generalto Calvert, 5 August 1810.
71HOSO/460,Taylor to Torrens,incl. Letter to 11ornas,Fox, II February1812.
72Wageswere largely
                       gradedby skill anyway; Eric J. Evans, The Forging of the Modern State: Early
Industrial Britah; 1783-1870,(London, 1996),p. 132.
73SeeAppendix J for full list occupations.
                             of
