                                                  205

                       "
every other profession', and 'the roll of the spirit-stirring drum, the glittering file of

bayonets,with the pomp and circumstanceof military parade' inspiredmen, particularly

young men, to enlist. Many envied the 'apparent freedom, the franknessand gaiety of

an open-heartedsoldier's holiday life. "'

        Personal circumstances often influenced soldiers to enlist. A manuscript

biography of a soldier of the 38h details his journey to taking the bounty. After being

apprenticed,and a pious youth (he could read by the age of six), his world fell apart

when the           Chapel
         Independent      he attendedsplit after the minister died. He was in an

'agitated state' until sixteen when he moved to Leicester and, after a year there, he

        "
enlisted. One soldier obtained a position in a theatre when his father became ill,

horrifying his parents.To compoundhis humiliation he froze on his first night and the

next day joined a recruiting party at Leith on its way to the Isle of Wight." Stephen

Morley transferredfrom the Army of Reserveafter his pay-sergeant'swife madehim do

choresfor her."

      More often it was a desirefor a more exciting life. Edward Costello lived with an

old soldier who had fought in Egypt in 1801, and 'became red hot for a soldier's life,

and although rejectedas to [sic] young for the Regulars I "listed", ... , in the Dublin

Militia. ' He later volunteeredinto the 951h"" JamesAnton always wantedto be a soldier,
                                           .
but was rejected for the line, and eventually got into the 42nd via the militia. " The

ChelseaPensionerwho joined the cavalry was perhapsmore typical, after taking the

"professionof the quill', and then a watchmakerin London,

        It was in the month of January 1806, that happening to be on a stroll through Westminster,
     I forget with what obi ect in view, I was attracted by a huge placard on which was
     emblazoned the figure of a light dragoon, mounted on a dashing steed and brandishing a


a' The Veteran Soldier. An interesting Narrative of the Life and Religious Experience of the Late
&rgeant Greenleigh,p. 26.
82Memoirs of a SergeantLate in the Forty-Third Light         Regiment,p. 12.
83NAM, 7912-21,Memoirs of an Unknown Soldier of the 38  .W
                                                           .
84Constable(ed.), Memorials ofthe Late Wars,(Edinburgh, 1828), p. 23-25.
85StephenMorley, Memoirs         Sergeantofthe Yh RegimentofFoot,  (C=bridge, 1999),p. 6.
                             ofa
86Brett-James(ed.), Military Memoirs ofEdward Costello,p. 1.
87James Anton, Retrospectiveof a Military life, during the most Eveniful period of the late War,
(Edinburgh 1941), pp. 3,39.
