                                                215

 as many ashalf all desertersescapedthe army permanently.

 Official Policy on Desertion, and its Implementation.

         The obvious starting point to tackle desertion was to try to stop soldiers leaving

 units. To this end, the Horse Guards used the UK's small islands to hold troops,

 particularly the Isle of Wight, and to a lesser extent the Channel Islands. Any deserter,

 unless he was extremely resourceftd (and sometimes they were), would be automatically

 confined to a small area, and so the chances of recapture were much higher. Even the

 psychological effect of being surrounded by water could resign a soldier to accept his lot.

 But the Horse Guards made no attempts at understanding the problem, and so becauseof

the potential drain on Britain's army and the damaging effects on morale, the official

attitude to desertion was harsh. Any deserter faced the prospect of a general court martial

that could impose the death penalty, and had a whole range of options from transportation

to a penal colony to service abroad, whilst a soldier who deserted twice faced the prospect

of being marked forever by a 'D' two inches below his left armpit. " Nor were these

punishments theoretical. A deserter from the 374' was sentenced to 500 lashes and to be

marked with the letter ID', and although the Prince Regent commuted the flogging, he

was still branded." General courts martial used the array of sentences at their disposal.

Out of the 395 general courts martial held in this period, most culprits were sentencedto

general-service (132, or 33.40/o),which usually meant unlimited service in one of the

penal corps. But the second highest category of sentence was transportation for life (117

men) to New South Wales. If the other sentences of transportation are included (for a

limited period, usually seven years, after which they would be attached to the corps at that

place), then the, total rises to 178 men, roughly half of all sentences. Other sentences

included corporal punishment, prison, and ten deserters were sentencedto death. None
                                                                                     of

these death sentences,however, were carried out in the period; the monarch commuted


1947 Geo. 111,            Mutiny Act, 23 March 1807.
             c32, sec.vi;
20W03/159, Calvert to Deputy Secretaryat War, 29 May IS 13.
