                                                 228

 reality of life in the army vastly different fi-orn their hopes.In the remarkablestory of

 Charles O'Neil (who desertedtwice and enlisted in three different regimentsyet was

 never caught),he recountshis burning desirefor the life of a soldier, fuelled by storiesof

 adventure,but after he joined the 8d' at Belfast, the 'rigid life of discipline baulked,1

 especiallyas he hadenlistedto escapethe constraintsof home.It was now the excitement

 of desertionsthat enthralledhim: 'The very romanceconnectedwith the undertaking,and

 the thrilling interestthat existedin listeningto theseadventures,strengthenedin my mind

 my desire to sharein their experience.
                                     ' However, it was a punishmentfor a breachof

 discipline,when he felt he was innocent,which determinedhim to leave."

                                    exacerbatedin somecasesby disobeyingtheir
         More commonwas homesickness,

parent'swishes.SergeantGreenleighrecollected'the daggerthat piercedme to my heart'

becausehe had rebelledagainsthis parentswishesand enlisted." A sergeantof the 43d

describedhis first night in barracksshortly after he enlisted:

         [my] memory beganto be busy. I could not help thinking of the peaceful fire-side I had
      left; and in despiteof my most vigorous effort to shakeoff the intrusion, consciencewould
      not be denied,and the imageof my mother,descriedat her utmostneed,and pinchedperhaps
      by want, was a sourceof great uneasiness.But having passedthe Rubicon, retreat I knew
      was out of  the         108
                      question.


Thomas Morris also had a similar experience in his first few nights, and like the

sergeantof the 43"d,felt he could not go back." For many, the temptation was too

much, and like CharlesO'Neil, they returnedhome.

        To tackle the problem of recruits deserting,the army reducedthe opportunities

they had to abscond.Recruitswere closely supervised,and the time they spenttravelling

overland was reduced. The overall aim was to remove a recruit from familiar

surroundingsas quickly as possible.For instance,recruits for the 20", 32nd, 38th 61",
                                                                               ,
72nd 70h, and 90'hfrom the north west of Englandwere sentto their regimentsin Ireland
   p

106CharlesO'Neil, TheMililwy Adventuresof Charles ONeil, pp. 19-20.
107The Veteran Soldier. An Interesting Narrative of the Life and Religious Experience the Late
                                                                                     of
&rgeant Greenleigh,p.28.
'08Memoirs      SergeantLate in the Forty- Third Light Infantry Regiment,p. 14.
109        of a
   John Selby(ecl.), ThomasMorris: TheNapoleonic Wars,pp. 7-8.
