                                            223

         to               "
were sent regimentsoverseas, and, by December,
                                             they were joined by 500 more sent

to the EastIndies.'

        Therewas onefmal factorthat contributedto the army's apparentlack of fu=ess

towards desertion:the difficulty in capturing,identifying and prosecutingdeserters.One

                  to
obvious method was senda NCO who knew the deserterto find him, but even this

could prove difficult. The author of Jouings from my Sabretachewas sent on such a

mission. Attired in civilian clothesmadeby the regimentaltailor, his only clue 'was two

dashing London fernale acquaintances'.He waited at their house until the deserters

visited, and then stowedaway in their carriage.When they alighted at Whitechapel,he

attemptedto follow them,but soonhadno sight of them."

        Guildford, a military town on the main route from London to Portsmouth,

providesa snapshotof the desertionproblem.John White claimedhe had beendischarged

from the 7thRoyal VeteranBattalion,and had left his dischargepaperswith a friend, but,

after being confronted by a private of his old corps (the 9d' Light Dragoons), he

        '
confessed. JohnMacGuire,a        from
                          deserter    the       had
                                          1/19'h,   the misfortuneto comeacross

the soldier who enlisted him two years before, albeit when he used the alias of John

Collins." Inevitablymany casesin the town werenot this simple,and one deserterhad the

nerve to let the authorities prove his guilt, which meant a series of voluminous

             betweenthe local magistrate,the War Office, the regiment's agent,and
correspondence

the prisoner's commandingofficer. John Edmundsof the 21" Light Dragoonstold the

local magistrates,under oath, that he had a furlough from his commandingofficer to

attendto some business.He could not completehis affhirs before the furlough expired,

but appliedto his Colonelto prolong it, and went to seesomefriends at Stratford.On his

way back he had lost the furlough somewherebetweenPetersfieldand Guildford. The


75W03/160, Darling to Deputy Secretaryat War, 26 May IS 15.
76W03/16 1, Calvert to Deputy Secretaryat War, 15 December1815.
" Jottingsfrom    Sahretache,pp. 114-115.
               my
78SHC, BR/QS/5/25,Oathsof John White and GeorgeNethercotty,5 February1808.
79SHC, BR/QS/5/25,Information of Nathaniel Lening, 21 December1808.
