                                                   240

 the trial of John Smith and William Langford, a letter was producedwhich was sent by

 Smith to his mother.They had marchedto Newcastlefrom Newark in the hopeof finding

 a place on a ship, (in the first day marchingfor fifty-six miles) but the town was full of

 soldiersand they did not dare stepoutside.They returnedto Smith's mother at Newark,

 wherethe sergeantsentafter themwaswaiting.'" In the caseof ThomasPurton,a deserter

 from the 62nd desertioncould lead to desperateactions.He volunteeredinto the 62ndin
             ,
 1807,

         From where he desertedabout six weeks after, and went to Dorchester in Oxfordshire,
             he
      where was employedas a        Iabourer  in the service of Mr. Parsons,
                                                                           and in  whoseemploy he
      met a young woman named Betty Powell, who knew him to be a deserter, and having
      threatenedto inform a sergeantof the Guardsthen recruiting at Dorchesterthat he was so, he
      determinedto murder her, for which purposehe waylaid her one eveningbetweenthe hours
      of 7 and 8 o'clock at night and killed her by stabbingher with a knife, and then buried her in
      a ditch by the roadsidebetweenDorchesterand Whiteham.


He then fled to Norwood near Croydon, where after working on a cut in the

neighbourhood,he was recognisedas a deserterby a bailiff, who made the mistake of

threateningto inform a local Dragoon officer. Purton duly murdered him. Fleeing to

London, he worked in a stable yard, and stole a horse which he sold at Newbury, and

then stole anotherfrom Launceston(in Somerset)which he sold at Devizics. With his

                he
money all spent, enlisted in the 77thand was sent back to the 62ndas a deserter.He

volunteeredfor the first battalion in Sicily, but was found wandering in the local fields

'much troubled in mind' after which he resolvedto make a confession."'


Conclusion

         Desertion remaineda problem throughout the course of the war, and probably

indicated some of the tensions from the growing presence of the army in British society.

As the large numbers of troops in Britain became permanent, so the sight of soldiers

became commonplace, making capture harder. Equally, parts of civilian society were

sympathetic to deserters, and becoming more knowledgeable of the army system, and


184
  W071/226,Trial of WilliamLangford,17April 1812.
185HO50/459,Wynyardto Beckett, 10 October 1810, incl. Confessionof ThomasPurton.
