                                            249


enoughto justify radical acts.

       The strategic situation also mitigated governmentpolicy. Once the war in the

Peninsulabecamepermanent,no major reforms in army recruitmentwere likely, asthey

would jeopardise the commitment to fight in Iberia in the short-term. The recruiting

results in 1810 were sufficient to scare the government and army into returning to

militia transfers,and the demandsfor compulsion to fill the ranks of the army in 1811

were basedon the assumptionthat an invasion was increasinglylikely. After this report,

the Duke of York produceda paper showing monthly recruiting from 1803, indicating

when ballots     in
             were operation,the clear       being
                                      message     that both could not         17
                                                                      co-exist. It

was therefore             to
             only necessary  cover the gap betweencasualtiesand recruiting, and to

do this with the leastpossibledisruption.

       It is not surprising that Britain's brief flirtation with balloting for the army

occurredin 1803,    it
                when neededto raise an army quickly, and had no seriousoverseas

           However,
commitments.        the period 1807 to 1815 is interestingas it showsthe intricate

relationsbetween         and
                government   the localities in the British state.The militia transfers

were an ideal solution for a number of        but
                                       reasons,   their particular attraction was that

the governmenthad a readymadebody of opinion to listen to, and a group with whom it

could make an agreementin order to obtain what it wanted - men. This was a

particularly subtle way of improving Britain's military stature, but meant that the

         had
government   to           viewpoints
                accommodate          that did not always coincide with its own.

Operating in such a manner is one of the hallmarks of an anden regime state, and

although it is clear that in other areasof the military the governmentwas preparedto

increasestatepower, over solving the manpowershortage,it resortedto tried and tested

methodsof functioning - using the counties to implement policy, and allowing them

particular latitude in doing so. The importanceof Parliamentshould also be stressedin

allowing the governmentto proceed as it did, since it permitted militia stalwarts to

17WO 1/946,Returnof Recruitsraisedfrom 1803,21 March 1811.
