                                             245

Generalwas transferredto the Horse Guards,and under Calvert detailed statisticswere

collectedon recruitment,statisticsthat were not easily available beforehand,
                                                                           which has

enableda deeperunderstandingof the productivity of recruiting during the last yearsof

the Napoleonic Wars. Such information was not intended for posterity, and the clear

messagebehind the assiduouscollection of data by the department of the adjutant

general was that 'ordinary recruitment' was insufficient to meet the demandsof the

army. In this respect,the Horse Guardspresagedthe developmentof the professional

civil service and a modem bureaucracy, which provided information for relevant

ministers to determine suitable policies." Nowhere is this clearer than in the annual

reports sent from the Commanderin Chief to the Secretary for War; without such

intelligence, it is difficult to see how the government could have successfully

maintainedthe commitmentin the Peninsula.

       Perhapsthe single most important issue for reform in the army was how to fill

its ranks. The army, more specifically the adjutant general's department, consistently

pushed for some form of compulsion to supply the army, usually under restricted terms

of service, but at the same time allowing men to volunteer for overseas service.

Although never stated in the various memoranda and letters sent on the issue, the

implementation of these proposals this would have entailed a massive increase in state

bureaucracy, and necessarily a considerable enhancement in the state's power. Of

course, compulsion was a soldier's answer to a military problem, but constitutional

ideology, exemplified by Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England,

pervaded every gentleman in this period, regardless of his position in the government.

To even suggest conscription was a decisive turning point in the development of the

British army - some officers in the Horse Guards had accepted the 'French principle'

and so unwittingly admitted that the British constitution would have to be changed to


10See D. Eastwood, "'Amplifying the Province the Legislature': the Flow of Information and the
                                                 of
English Statein the Early NineteenthCentury', Historical Research,62 (1989), pp. 276-294.
