                                            246


meet the demandsof the modem world. This implied that the 1688constitutionwas not

perfect, and echoesthe developmentof new politics outsidethe frameworkof the Whig

1688 settlement In common with the radicals of the post-Waterlooperiod," the army

was suggestingrational andmodem solutionsto its problems.

       It is easy to overstatethe army's progressivetendencies,and they had their

limits. The Duke of York was consistentlyhostile to Windham's short-servicescheme,

and the Duke was the champion of the regimental system,showing that his reforming

attitude only extendedwithin the fi-ameworkof a long-serving army basedon esprit de

corps, rather than nationalism. Any form of compulsion would be territorial, so

preservingthe regimentalstructureof the army; a British army with regimentsthat were

only administrative units was never conceived. In all the memorandaon balloting,

Ireland was not specifically mentioned,but it was understoodfrom the experienceof the

militia and the Army of Reservethat such a systemwas unworkablein Ireland given its

stateof parochialand county government.

       Moreover, it was easy for soldiers to suggestsuch improvementsin the army

when they did not have to consider the political situation in Parliament, nor face the

reality of implementing them. Even if the governments from 1807 to 1815 had been

            it
more stable, seems unlikely that the army would have got all that it wanted as, after

the Talents, all the governments were Tory. They were particularly sensitive to any

changes in the constitution, and the implications of substantial reforms in the way the

army was recruited would have undermined their stance on political reform. Only under

extreme circumstances, such as 18034 when the very existence of the UK was under

threat, could the raising of the army by compulsion be countenanced. The weakness of

the UK's governments in this period also played its part: after the failures of 1809, the

Perceval government felt that the 'public might take alarm at any ftirther operations. I


11W. D. Rubenstein,'The Endof "Old Corruption"in Britain', PastandPresent,101 (November1983),
p. 81. Rubenstein                               ' endedbecausethe aristocracyreformedBritish
                 also arguesthat "Old Corruption!
governmentitsel&i.e. like thearmy,reformleadership
                                                 emanated   fromthetop.
