                                         249


expresstheir views, but in the end amplified the         that
                                                 consensus    developedover using

the militia to supply the army. On account of these factors, there was no provincial

revolt against the state caused by recruitment, and the only opposition to the

government'smilitary policy came from the militiamen who ignored the bounty being

offered to them and remainedin their regiments.

       The numbersraised by the army and the militia suggestthat the militia was a

valuable extra recruiting service for the army. The case of Wales is a good example.

The yield from the Hereford and Shrewsburydistricts which covered Wales and the

border with England was the worst in the UK, " but the militia regimentsfrom these

districts provided 775 men per year between1809and 1813,just underthreetimes more

than the army obtained." Inevitably, there were problems when the militia in Britain

           to
was allowed recruit openly, but overall militia recruitment, the use of ballots, and

recruiting for the line proved sufficient. Just under 30,000 men a year between1807and

1813joined Britain's military forces through these means,with the militia providing

approximatelyhalf of them. In view of this            it
                                           achievement,  would necessitatea severe

      to
crisis permit the introduction of compulsionfor the line, as eventhe Army of Reserve

had only envisagedraising 30,000men.

       Suchsuccesses
                   were showingtheir limits by late 1813.Although the militia was

successfullyrecruiting, that did not necessarilymean that these men were available to

the army. The government's solution was to allow militiamen to serve overseas.

Clearly, this was sanctionedon the understandingthat it would speedthe end of the war,

but it also reveals that the governmenthad been more skilful in changing Britain's

military systemthan is often realised.In his 1807memorandumon the militia transfer,

Castlereaghalso outlined a plan for a local militia, which after considerablerevision,

was enactedin 1808.Mentioning the two within the samepaperto the militia colonels


18SeeAppendix E.
19SeeAppendix F.
