

II I II

39. Bandarage, The Political Economy, chap. 5.
40. See Ronald Herring, "Redistributive Agrarian Policy: Land and Credit in
South Asia," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1976,
p. 406.

he would soon abandon were he to apply himself to the cultivation of more valuable productions (such as coffee, cocoanut, potatoes, etc.), from the proceeds of which he could purchase rice and other more nutritious substitutes; and the time and labour he now devotes to the cultivation of such unwholesome food as korakan, [finger millet] would be spent much more profitably to himself, and with far greater general benefit, were they expended on the roads and public works, or in aiding the well-directed efforts of landed propri eters towards the public welfare. 4~ Several other provincial officers, however, did acknowl edge the importance of shifting agriculture for the subsistence of the peasantry. They pointed out that peasants turned to dry grain cultivation not from indolence, but out of despair, particularly as irrigational and other facilities necessary for wet rice cultiva tion had been neglected by the colonial state. The officials condemned the state's campaign against swidden by pointing out that it was unjust and inhumane to curtail it when it was the only safety valve of peasant subsistence. 4z Nativesmboth overlords and peasantsmbegan to sell highlands to planters and speculators with the object of making quick money before the state could alienate the land from them. 43 Not surprisingly then, litigation by planters and natives became rampant and the security of title to plantation property was threatened. As Sir Emerson Tennent, the Colonial Secre tary, expressed it: These fraudulent and vexatious proceedings not only dis courage mirlor capitalists from settling in the colony, but they greatly embarrass and disconcert the local arrange ments of the Government. 44 In attempting to reduce the native "encroachment" on Crown lands to manageable proportions, the colonial state intro duced several compensatory measures. These included the sale of swidden plots to people who had already brought them under cultivation; grant of right to shifting cultivation on payment of taxes or purchase of government licenses; and the issue of certificates of Quiet Possession (under clause 7 of the Crown Lands Encroachment Ordinance) to applicants with legitimate claims to highlands. 4s It is obvious that these compromise measures amounted to land sales rather then free land grants to the natives, or a recognition of their customary users' fights. Only natives with money were therefore in a position to take advantage of these opportunities to establish private ownership fights to highlands. As some government officials themselves pointed out, the li cense rate established by the state was beyond the reach of most poor cultivators dependent on swidden agriculture. 46 Further

## 41. BPP

1847-1848, vol. 42, Enclosure in Emerson Tennent's "Report on Finance and Commerce," p. 120. 42. CO 54/345, No.46 of 29 Aug. 1859, pp.233-34; See also SP 1873 No. 15 "Papers Relating to the Cultivation and Survey of Chena Lands," p. 5. 43. CO 54/345 of 29 Aug. 1859,p.334.