

862
1,120
762
2,217
1,751
855
545
764
2,264
2,135
Acres 13,275

At 5 s. s "All sold in one day, and the Ambegammoon Road surveyed and begun forthwith. Much of the above land was resold to other parties at 2s per acre, for it was well known that Government would carry on this line of road." Source: British Parliamentary Papers, Vol. 12, 1850, p. 303.

Collusion Between the Planters and the Colonial State During the early phase of coffee plantation development, that is until about the 1850s, almost all European officials of the state were also coffee planters. The Governor of the island, Edward Barnes ( 1824-1831) and George Bird, a retired major in the colonial army, were among the first to open up coffee plantations in the Kandyan Highlands. These officials used the authority of their administrative positions to introduce legisla tion conducive to large-scale commercial agriculture. For ex ample, Governor Barnes passed ordinances which enabled the colonial state to use pre-colonial corve6 labor services (rdjakariya) of the native peasantry towards the building of roads necessary for commercial expansion and the political integretion of the island. In order to provide further incentives for export agriculture, he also exempted all land producing cash crops from export and import duties. 6 In addition, the reforms introduced by the Colebrooke Cameron Commission of Inquiry in 1833 not only laid down the juridico-political framework for capitalist agricultural develop ment in Sri Lanka, but also helped extend the participation of government officials in plantation agriculture. This was due to the fact that the Colebrooke Commission allowed civil servants to make up for the loss in salaries and pensions created by its own fiscal recommendations through investments in commer cial agriculture. 7 The Crown Lands Encroachment Ordinance, No. 12 of

6. I.H. Van Den Driesen, "Coffee Cultivation in Ceylon (I)." The Ceylon Historical Journal (henceforth CHJ) (July 1953), p.38. 7. K.M. de Silva, "The Development of the Administrative System, 1833 toc. 1910," in K.M. de Silva ed., History of Ceylon vol. 3, (Colombo: Ceylon University Press Board, 1973), p.213.

1840, the chief instrument used for securing land for plantations was designed and implemented by government officials, such as George Turnour, who were also the pioneer coffee planters in the colony. The passage of this bill allowed the colonial state to lay claims to all uncultivated and unoccupied land unless the natives were able to prove ownership by the stringent criteria the state laid down (discussed later). The land that the colonial state thus obtained as "Crown land" was at first made available to planters as free grants and in later years sold at the minimum nominal fee of 5 shillings an acre. The minimum fee was increased to one pound an acre in 1844. Table 1 shows the amount of land sold by the colonial state to various state officials in the course of a single day, within a single district in the Central Province following the enactment of the Crown Lands Ordinance. During the early days of the "land rush" in the Kandyan Highlands, such large-scale land appropriations were not untypical. Apparently, some of the land obtained in this manner was used for speculative purposes in addition to plantation development by these officials. Furthermore, the evidence of George Ackland, a promi nent coffee planter in the colony, given before the British Parliamentary Committee enquiring into the peasant rebellion of 1848 in Sri Lanka, helps validate the thesis that the British in early and mid-nineteenth century Sri Lanka constituted a single "planter-official" class. 8 Q. 3192 (Hume) A. (Ackland)