

Were the district judges them selves coffee planters ? Everybody was a coffee planter in Ceylon, from the Governor downwards, except Lord Tor

8. The term "planter-officials" is generally attributed to historian Van Den Driesen.

rington and Sir Colin Campbell (Successive Governors). Q. 3194 (Major Blackall) Then in the case of any complaint between themselves and the Europeans, the natives had to go to another coffee planter to seek redress? A. (Ackland) Yes Q. 3196 (Major Blackall) Then that would affect their char acter in the eyes of the natives? A. (Ackland) I should think very injuriously.' ,9 Ackland's evidence reveals the complete identification of the colonial state with plantation development. Moreover, it highlights the absence of an independent judiciary in the colony; note that several judges are listed as buyers of "Crown land" in Table 1. The practice of appointing Britishers already resident in the island to official positions was common in the early years of colonial rule. This led to the effective control of many of the most coveted jobs in the higher bureaucracy by two British families in Sri Lankamthe Layards and the Templarsmwho came to be referred to as the "family compact. ''1~ A Captain Layard and "friends" are listed in Table 1 as land buyers. At least in the early years of British colonial rule in Sri Lanka, the colonial administration was far from the neutral bureaucratic type of authority that Max Weber has written about, but Weber himself acknowledged that the British Empire was basically an administration of notables. He pointed out that the Empire provided a vast system of public assistance to the British governing classes, especially for the younger sons of the gentry who did not inherit the ancestral estates and were there fore sent off to the colonies to make their fortunes. 11 The early British colonial administration in Sri Lanka represented a personal form of rule by a few notables. The names of Turnour, Layard, Skinner, Buller, Wodehouse (men tioned in Table 1), crop up again and again in the colonial documents with regard to political, economic, judicial and other matters in the colony. Geroge Ackland, quoted earlier, was himself a merchant, planter, a member of the Legislative Coun cil and.the proprieter of the Colombo Observer, the organ of the planter community and the semi-official newspaper of the co lonial government. 12 In the mid- 1840's, the Colonial Office in London began to acknowledge that the neglect of official duties by the civil servants in Sri Lanka stemmed largely from their involvement in plantation agriculture. In 1844-1845, Lord Stanley, the British Secretary of State, ordered the civil servants to dispose of their properties and issued a strict prohibition against their participa tion in commercial activities. 13 The local governor at the time, Colin Campbell, modified this ruling by allowing civil servants to keep their estates, provided they did not manage them, thereby introducing the principle of separation of ownership and II