

67. Ameer Ali, "Peasant Coffee .... "pp. 57-58; see also D. Wesumperuma,
"The Migration and Conditions of Immigrant Labour in Ceylon, 1880-1910,"
Ph.D. dissertion, University of London, 1974.
68. Michael Roberts, "Aspects of Ceylon's Agrarian Economy in the Nine
teenth Century," in K.M. de Silva, ed. History of Ceylon, p. 148; A.C.L.
Ameer Ali, "Changing Conditions and Persisting Problems in the Peasant
Sector Under British Rule in the Period 1833-1893," Ceylon Studies Seminar,
no. 3a 1970/72 Series, pp. 14-17.
69. Michael Roberts, "Comments on Ameer Ali's Paper," p. 19.
70. For discussion see, Bandarage, Political Economy, chap. 5.

It is probable that few sales will result in much change for the worse as regards the owners, while the good of the greater number will, there is to anticipate, be advanced. A section of the community composed of pauper proprietors who are unable to cultivate their lands for want of energy and want of means and who instead of benefiting their neighbors are a positive burden to them, will be got rid of. If they behave like sensible people, they will see the necessity of working for hire and will thus become of much more use to themselves and to the community in their changed circumstance. There is plenty of work for them, if they choose to seek it. 71 A.M. and J. Ferguson, the foremost journalists and spokesmen of the coffee planting community in the nineteenth century applauded the expropriation of the peasants' means of production, when they wrote that "the pinching of the stomach is morally good because it will induce the peasants to work on plantations."7z

The neglect of the needs and repression of the rights of the natives, particularly the peasant cultivators, was not caused by mere ignorance on the part of British officials.It resulted primarily from the incompatibility of the interests of capitalist export agriculture and that of peasant subsistence and smallhoider production. It resulted in a conflict between opposing modes of eco nomic production, a conflict in which the plantations were victorious because they had the support of the colonial state at every turn.

Neither the land and tax policies of the colonial state nor the expanding market forces were able to create the regular and routine labor force required by the plantations. A detailed dis cussion of this relative failure to create a Sinhalese plantation proletariat cannot be undertaken here. 73 Suffice it to mention that the existence of an alternative source of cash income (peas ant coffee), the intensive use of land in paddy agriculture, and the emergence of rentier over production capital in the village economy helped absorb a potentially surplus population in paddy agriculture. What can be concluded is that although some peasant families lost complete access to land during the coffee period, by the end of the nineteenthcentury a large scale landless Sinhalese proletariat had not yet come into being. In arriving at this conclusion it is important to bear in mind that the defiant actions of the cultivator class, such as the encroachment on Crown land, had an important role to play in delaying the process of their landlessness. The few Sinhalese who did work on the coffee plantations provided mostly non-routine supplementary labor rather than routine field labor. The majority of the Sinhalese who ended up