

castes themselves were primarily wet-rice cultivators possess ing their own means of production. The elaborateness and complexity of the pre-colonial division of labor, especially its caste specificity, prevalence of serfdom, absence of agricultural labor castes, and primarily the availability of land, made it extremely difficult to find the large wage labor force needed by the coffee plantations. 59 Given the absence of social and economic pre-requisites for the emergence of wage labor in Sri Lanka, the colonial state attempted to create such a "free" (i.e. freed from the means of production) labor force externally by administrative fiat. The first step was taken by the Colebrooke-Cameron Commission when it abolished the pre-colonial forced labor services in 1833. The underlying motive in attempting to free forced labor (r(i jakariva) was the creation of a wage labor force needed for capitalist economic development in the island. 6~ However, it needs to be pointed out that the abolition of forced labor introduced by the Colebrooke-Cameron Commis sion was only a partial measure. It was not extended to the villages held under the overlordship of native headmen in office, (nindagam) and villages held by Buddhist monasteries (viharagam and dgvalagam). Furthermore, the Commission allowed the colonial Governor the fight to revoke compulsory labor services to the state during crises61 ma fight which Gover nor Torrington exercised in 1848. For purpose of discussion we need to separate the colonial land and labor policies from each other. But in practice, they were inextricably linked. For example, the alienation of high lands by the state was motivated not simply by the need to make those: lands available for plantation expansion, but also by the desire to create a wage labor force out of the Kandyan peasantry. These dual objectives of the colonial state's land policies were highlighted by Lord Stanmore in his opposition to the Waste Lands Ordinance of 1897: There are two schools of thought.., one which holds that the maintenance of the village communities and smallholders is of vital importance to the well being and independence of the native community, and another which desires to see all such lands in the hands of the Crown to be sold by it forprofit, and the villagers converted into tenants at wi[l working for wages. I strongly hold the first view. Most planters and many officials hold the latter and this ordinance will enable them to realize what seems to be desirable. 62

59. For a discussion of pre-colonial division of labor, see Bandarage, The
Political Economy, chaps. 3 and 6.
60. Colebrooke agreed with the American Missionaries who wrote to him in
1830 that "The practice of obtaining labor by compulsion greatly tends to
increase the difficulty of hiring voluntary laborers." Quoted from a letter by
Messers. Meigs, Poor and other American Missionaries, Jaffna, 20th Sept.,
1830, in "Report of Lieutenant Colonel Colebrooke upon the Compulsory
Services to which the Natives of Ceylon are Subject," G.C. Mendis, ed., The
Colebrooke-Cameron Papers, vol. 1, p. 204. Se.e also the "Introduction,"
p. xli.
61. "Service by Tenure" was abolished with qualifications by the order in
Council of 12 April, 1832. See, A Revised Edition of the legislative Enactments
of Ceylon, vol. 1, pp. 68-72. Governor North first attempted to abolish forced
labor in the maritime provinces (i.e. the non-Kandyan regions) by introducing
the Charter of Justice in 1801, but was unsuccessful. See, G.C. Mendis, ed.,
Colebrooke-Cameron Papers, vol. 2, p. 170.
62. CO 54/635 m quoted in Lalith Jayawardena, "The Supply of Sinhalese
Labour to Ceylon Plantations, ( 1830-1930): A Study of Imperial Policy in a
Peasant Society," Ph.D. dissertation, Cambridge University, 1963, pp. 16-17;
see also CO 54/643, June 11, 1897.