

In their efforts to keep out European invaders, the pre colonial Kandyan Kings deliberately isolated the Central High

II

76. K.M. de Silva, Social Policy and Missionary Organizations in Ceylon, 1840-1855, (London: Langmans, 1965), pp. 238,267. 77. Wesumperuma, "The Migration .... "op. cit., p.52. 78. Michael Roberts, "The Master Servant Laws of 1844 in the 1860's and Immigrant Labour in Ceylon," Ceylon Journal of Historical and Social Studies, vol. 8, 1963, p.25. With the introduction of the railway in 1864 and the "Tin Ticket System" of labor transportation in 1901, the colonial state began to play a more central role in the conveyance of South Indian labor to the plantations. Wesumperuna, "The Migration," p. 86. The "kangani system" of labor recruitment, transportation and control was first evolved to meet the needs of

74. Governor Ward's Despatch to the Secretary of State for the Colonies cited in The Colombo Observer, Nov. 26 1866; see also BPP, 1847-48, vol. 42, p.49; Eric Meyer, "Between Village and Plantation: Sinhalese Estate Labour in Brit ish Ceylon," (uncorrected advance copy) Colloques Internationaux Du Centre National De La Recherche Scientifique, Paris No. 582, 1978; AR 1888, "Report of the Nunara Eliya District," p.78A; Michael Roberts, "Elite Formation and Elites, 1832-1931," in K.M. de Silva, ed., The History of Ceylon, pp.281-2. 75. Bandarage, The Political Economy, chap. 6.

lands from the European ruled coastal lowlands of the island. A thick forest belt prohibited to cultivators (tahansi kale) was maintained between the mountainous core of the Kandyan Kingdom and the maritime provinces. No roads were allowed to link these two areas. 79

In contrast, the construction of communication networks, particularly roads, was a sine qua non for the consolidation of British political authority and commercial development in the Central Highlands. Given the dependence of the estates on imported labor, supplies (including food) and foreign markets, the very profitability of the coffee enterprise came to rest on the availability of an efficient communication system. In outlining the aims of the Road OrdinancemNo. 8 of 1848--Earl Grey, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, made clear the colonial administration's commitment to providing the network of roads needed by the planters. The construction and maintenance of roads was one of the heaviest charges upon the Colonial Treasury. Yet so far from being advisable to curtail [this] work.., it was of the highest importance to the progress and prosperity of Ceylon that the roads should be improved and many new ones made. The imperfections of the existing means of transit and the consequently heavy expense of bringing down their produce and of sending supplies to the higher country, which is the best adapted for the growth of coffee, was one of the greatest difficulties with which planters had to contend. 8~ The response of the colonial state to the infrastructural needs of the plantations was overwhelming. The impressive communication network developed by the colonial state in the nineteenth century was largely concentrated in the planting region and was linked to Colombo, the capital and one of the ports of the island. 81 Governor Barnes, the pioneer planter and road builder of colonial Sri Lanka, had the Colombo-Kandy road constructed by 1820. 82 By mid-nineteenth century, an entire network of roads was completed between the planting regions and the coast. In response to the agitation by the planter community the state also undertook the construction of a rail way system. The first railway line was completed between Colombo and Kandy in 1867. Undoubtedly, the natives, particularly the cashcropping peasantry and those groups engaged in commerce and transpor tation also benefited from the roads built by the colonial state. In fact certain low-country Sinhalese castes such as the Karawa found in the plantation-related transportation activities a basis for their entry into the emergent local capitalist class. 83 However as colonial officials themselves, acknowledged, roads