

plantations in Sri Lanka and later extended to other colonies. Bandarage, The
Political Economy, chap. 6.
79. Pieris, Sinhalese Social Organization, p.46.
80. Quoted in K.M. de Silva, ed. Letters on Ceylon, 1846-1850: The Admini
stration of Viscount Torrington and the 'Rebellion of 1848': The Private
correspondence of the Third Earl Grey and Viscount Torrington, (Kandy:
K.V.G. de Silva and Sons, 1965).
81. See for example the map of roads and railways of nineteenth century Sri
Lanka, provided by G.C. Mendis, Ceylon Under the British (Colombo: The
Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd., 1944), p. 93.
82. A. Wickremaratne, "The Development of Transportation in Ceylon
c. 1800-1947," in K.M. de Silva, ed., History of Ceylon, p.303.
83. Michael Roberts, "The Rise of the Karavas," Ceylon Studies Seminar,
1968-69 Series, paper no. 5, Passim.

and railways were constructed with the European plantation enterprise in mind and the plantations were the chief bene ficiaries of the new communication system. 84 For example, while pointing out the reduction of costs of plantation coffee production due to the introduction of the railway, Governor Robinson did not fail to note that the natives could "never derive any direct advantage unlike the European commercial class from the railway. ,,85 The question that needs investigation is how and where the colonial state obtained the labor and the finances necessary to undertake these large scale infrastructural projects. In the period prior to the Colebrooke-Cameron Reforms, all roads were built using the corvre labor of the Sinhalese peasantry. As noted earlier Colebrooke formerly abolished forced labor to the state in 1833, but Governor Torrington reinstated it in the form of a compulsory road tax via Ordinance No. 8 of 1848.

It can well be argued that had the peasantry received the institutional support of the state and credit agen cies, peasant cashcropping would have become a far more important and dynamic sector that it did in Sri Lanka during the nineteenth century.

The road tax was greatly resented by the peasantry, and as a number of British planters and officials later admitted, it was a decisive factor in the peasant uprising of 1848. George Ack land, the well known planter, stated before the British Par liamentary Committee investigating the 1848 rebellion that the practical effect of the Road Ordinance was to transfer the ex pense of making roads from the colonial treasury to the people at large, s6 In a situation of labor scarcity, the road tax provided the colonial state with a ready made source of labor for road main tenance and construction. As Governor Barnes asked rhetor ically in the 1820s, "who... was there so fit to undertake the task as the people themselves? ''sT Yet road service was so abhorrent to the peasantry that many of them opted to pay its commuted value. Between 1876 and 1880, out of an average of 517,000 people bound to work on the roads, eighty five percent opted to commute, ss There is evidence that at least a few peasants worked on the coffee estates principally to avoid the road tax as it was not levied from plantation laborers. 89 It seems that still others insisted on com muting the labor dues even when they were experiencing severe financial difficulties as when peasant coffee collapsed in the 1880s. 9~ The result of the failure to pay the commuted road tax was either imprisonment or the sale of paddy fields of the defaulters by the state in order to recover the monies due. Meanwhile, the planters who were constantly in search of ave