

!!l
63. A Revised Edition of the Legislative Enactments of Ceylon, vol. I, p. 391,
411.
64. BPP 1850, vol. 12, p. 276; see also Vijaya Samaraweera, "Economic and
Social Developments Under the British, 1796-1832," in de Silva, ed., History
of Ceylon, p. 60.
65. These are discussed in Bandarage, The Political Economy, chap. 5.
66. SP 1890, No. 17 "The Crown Tax Ordinance " 1878, p. 38.

pulsory commutation of the paddy tax was to compel the paddy cultivating peasantry to participate in the cash economy. Given the fact that paddy agriculture was the least profitable form of economic activity, (for reasons to be enumerated later) and was largely subsistence-oriented, the cultivators had either to in crease the cultivation of their cash crops such as coffee, or become wage laborers on the plantations in order to find the cash to pay the commuted paddy tax. Other sources of potential cash income such as trade and transport were few and were monop olized by outside groups such as Muslims and Sinhalese artisan service castes from the coastal lowlands, especially the Karava. The Kandyan peasantry who highly valued their economic and political autonomy, opted overwhelmingly for the former alternative, i.e. the cultivation of their own coffee gardens as opposed to working on the plantations for wages. Colonial taxation then encouraged smallholder cashcropping rather than wage labor on the estates or the production of paddy for the market. It can be argued that by withholding labor from planta tions, peasant cashcropping, specifically peasant coffee, posed a competitive threat to plantation coffee. As economic historian Ameer Ali has pointed out, peasant coffee was the chief monetizer of the Kandyan village economy in the nineteenth century. 67 It helped the peasants not only to pay their cash taxes, such as the road and paddy taxes to the colonial state, but also to buy the few imported articles such as kerosene oil, match boxes and Manchester cloth that they be came accustomed to during British rule. 68 But in the long run, the dependence on peasant coffee to pay the cash taxes due on their paddy fields turned out to be a precarious relationship for many a Kandyan peasant. This was because when the peasants failed to pay their taxes--for exam ple when peasant coffee failed in the 1880s--the colonial state expropriated their paddy fields in order to recover the taxes due. The most widespread sales took place in the 1880s in the Walapane and Uda Hewahata districts of the Central Highlands where peasant coffee had thrived up to then. The colonial state reserved for itself the fight to sell the paddy fields of defaulting cultivators through the legal machin ery provided by Ordinance No. 5 of 1866. 69 The fight of the state to alienate and sell the lands of tax defaulters was an innovation that the British introduced. It did not exist under pre-colonial customary law. These paddy land sales of the peasants, particularly in Walapane and Uda Hewahata, resulted in starvation, and destitution. 7~ But many government officials and planters hailed the indirect but "beneficial" effects of these sales to wards the creation of the wage labor force much needed by the coffee plantations. The Assistant Government Agent of the Badulla District, Aelian King, wrote in his Administration report of 1883: