

## 48. The Partition Ordinance--No

10 of 1863--was introduced in order to do away with the Kandyan institution of joint or undivided ownership of land among family members. The British felt that joint ownership placed impedi ments towards the extension of private property rights, agricultural development and the emergence of wage labor. The Kandyan Marriage Ordinance--No. 13 of 1859--and subsequent amending ordinances were passed to make poly andry, the custom of taking one wife by several men, illegal. The British felt that polyandrous marriages which made the determiniation of paternity and inheri tance difficult, were barriers to the application of the Land Registration, Parti tion and other Ordinances. Details, in Bandarage, The Political Economy, chap. 5. 49. SP 1862, No. 2 "Native Rights," p.5.

fee from European-owned estates had become an organized and systematic enterprise in which the estate laborers, petty traders and neighboring villages colluded, s~ Perturbed by this growing activity, the planters encouraged the state to pass legislation to control it. Thus Ordinance No. 8 of 1878, also known as the Coffee Stealing Bill. In colonial government documents, came to be enacted. The bill made the possession of more than a bushel of coffee by a native without a sales note a penal offense. Unable to sort out plantation coffee from peasant coffee, the colonial state took the easier step of calling the natives to prove ownership by providing receipts or sales notes. In principle then, this Bill was similar to the Crown Lands Ordinance in that the burden of proving ownership was placed on the natives by the stringent criteria set forth by the state. The Ordinance also prohibited the loading of coffee be tween six in the evening and five in the morning. Like those convicted of encroaching on Crown Lands, those convicted of coffee stealing were to be imprisoned with hard labor, sl We lack statistical or other evidence on the extent of convictions made under this Ordinance. But it is plausible that its enactment discouraged the innumerable peasant coffee growers who now had to prove ownership to their crops. Like Colonial Secretary Newcastle before him the Chief Justice in Sri Lanka at the time pointed out the class bias of this legislation. But he too did little to revoke it although he suggested that the state attempt to cultivate a more impartial image in the eyes of the natives. There is a natural prejudice in the public mind against special criminal legislation on behalf of a particular kind of property especially when the owners of that kind of property belong mainly to a single class of the community. But if you show that you are doing no more for it than has been already done for another kind of property belonging to a different class of the community, that prejudice must in reasonable minds, be very much diminished and need no longer be an obstacle to measures for securing the administration of sus tained justice, s2

Land Registration As noted above, the Crown Lands Ordinance did not pro duce a smooth transition from pre-capitalist users' rights to capitalist private ownership rights. The process of commodifi cation of highlands was fraught with many problems and con flicts. In making yet another attempt to bring the land situation under control, the colonial state passed the Land Registration Ordinance--No. 8 of 1863. Through its passage the state aimed to "lay claim to properties that were illegally claimed or en croached upon by natives" and ultimately to " prevent the heavy losses sustained by capitalists for want of reliable infor mation."53 Under the stipulations of this Ordinance, arrangements were made to survey each district, investigate all lands in them, register allotments of ascertained owners, and issue certificates