

## 44. BPP

1847-1848, vol. 4, Tennent's Report. See also CO 54/345 of 29 Aug. 1859, p.334. 45. Michael Roberts, "A Selection of the Documentary Evidence as Aids for the Lecture on 'The Administration of the Waste lands Ordinance No. 12 of 1840 and its Impact in the Coffee Period, 1840-1880s' " The Archives Lecture Series, Ceylon June 20 1969, p. 14. 46. SP 1973, No. 15, p.25.

more, the policy of demarcating separate chena reserves for villagesmyet another strategy adopted by the state in order to bring the encroachment problem under controlmdid not neces sarily benefit the poorer classes of the population. The inher ently conflictual task of sorting out the division of these chena reserves was left to the village itself, much to the advantage of the more powerful classes within the village. 47 As this discussion has shown, the creation of private prop erty rights in land and a land market through the instrument of the Crown Lands Ordinance did not prove to be an easy task for the colonial state. The state therefore found it necessary to pass an assortment of other auxiliary legislation such as the Private Roads Bill, Bill against Coffee Stealing,Land Registration Ordi nance, Partition Ordinance, Kandyan Marriage Ordinances, etc. in order to protect the newly established private property rights. These ordinances, like the Crown Lands Ordinance, point to the partiality of the state towards plantation interests. The Private Roads Bill, the Bill against Coffee Stealing and the Land Registration Ordinance will be discussed here. 48

Private Roads Bill Conflicts between planters and natives over the construc tion of private roads to coffee estates through native landhold ings were common occurences during the period of plantation expansion. Ordinance No. 17 of 1861 was enacted by the state specifically during such a conflict when three planters could not obtain access to a tract of land they had purchased from the Crown because the natives holding the adjacent chena land refused either to permit a road to be built through their land or to sell their land to the planters. The colonial state stepped in on behalf of the planters by passing the Private Roads Bill or Ordinance No. 17 or 1861 which allowed the construction of private roads to plantations through native landholdings. The Colonial Secretary at the time, Newcastle, showed a keen awareness of the class bias of this legislation, although he did not stop its passage, when he said: I must observe that legislation of this kind, the effect ofwhich is to take away one man's property, not for public purpose, but for the benefit of another man, requires to be very carefully watched and not least so when it is for the benefit of a member of the ruling class. 49

Bill Against Stealing During the reign of the "planter raj," as the period of plantation expansion was popularly referred to, stealing of cof

47. Michael Roberts, "The Impact of the Waste Lands Legislation and the Growth of Plantations on the Techniques of Paddy Cultivation in British Ceylon: A Critique," Modern Ceylon Studies (henceforth MCSO vol. 1 1970, p. 171.