

Like colonial land policy, colonial tax policy had its sev eral aims. In addition to the increase of state revenue and the extension of cash economy, it was also used as a means to create a wage labor force for the plantations. The compulsory road tax introduced in 1848 is a good example. All males (except Bud dhist Monks and plantation laborers) between the ages of 18 and 55 were made liable to pay this tax either by road service for six days per year or by commuting it to a cash payment of Rs. 1.50. 63 A week's labor on a coffee estate, it was anticipated, could earn this money for the average peasant. Indeed, the several interests of the state, construction of roads, absorption of the peasantry into the cash economy, and supply of labor for the estates were brought together in the road tax. The introduc tion of this tax by Governor Torrington was in effect a reinstate ment of pre-colonial corvre labor which the Colebrooke Com mission had abolished in 1833. It is also important to point out that the colonial state exacted labor for road construction on the basis of its position as the successor to the pre-colonial Sinhalese monarch. Here again, the colonial state adapted a pre-existing institution to further its own end of extending the market economy and capitalist enterprise. In doing so, it deliberately changed the fundamental character of pre-colonial labor exaction. Under the Kandyan kings corvre labor was a form of service tenure based on peasant landholdings. The Road Ordinance introduced by the British subverted the pre-colonial arrangement by divorcing corvre labor from landholding, and making it into a universal head tax for all males. 64 The colonial state continued to levy a tax of one-tenth of the produce on paddy lands held by the peasantry, until it was finally abolished in 1892. In 1878, the state introduced compul sory commutation of the paddy tax by passing Ordinance No. 11 of 1878. Up to that time the tax had been collected in kind through a variety of rent collecting arrangements such as the "renting system. ''65 It is important to interject here that, as in the case of its claims to highlands and corvre labor, the colonial state justified its fight to the paddy tax on the basis of its assumed role as the successor to the pre-colonial Sinhalese kings. In introducing compulsory commutation, the colonial state justified its actions on the basis of customary usage and the alleged leniency of its implementation under British rule: That a levy by the Crown of a portion of the grain grown on paddy lands has been made from time immemorial, that is in its origin it was a rent and not a tax, that it was heaviest under the rule of the native sovereigns, that it has been continuously reduced during the occupation of the Island by the English, that as last settled by the Ordinance No. 11 of 1878 it is lighter than at any previous time, and that at present it is the survival in a modified and more beneficent form of the rent exacted by the ancient kings as lords para mount of the soil. 66 One of the important reasons for the introduction of com-