

125. Boeke, Economics and Economic Policy . .., pp. 37-38; see also P.T.
Ellsworth, "The Dual Economy: A New Approach," Economic' Develolmtent
and Cultural Change 10 July 1962, p. 437; Donald R. Snodgrass, Cevhm. An
Export Economy in Transition, p. 59.
126. W. Arthur Lewis, "Economic Development within Unlimited Supplies of
Labour," The Manchester School, May 1954, pp. 149-150; see also Jairus
Banaji, "For a Theory of Colonial Modes of Production," Economic' and
Political Weekly, vol. 7, Dec. 23, 1972.

cial; and Salmon, the member of the London Cobden Club, were essentially in agreement with their British contemporaries that the plantation enterprise was the life blood of the colony and that it should be supported by the state. These liberal and humanitarian critics differed with their colleagues only in their idealism that the interests of the planters on the one hand and that of the village and the peasantry on the other hand were mutually compatible. Their criticism it must be noted was hurled against the failures of the colonial administration, not the inherent contra dictions of the capitalist plantation economy. While their agita tion helped bring some of the gross injustices into light such as the evictions of the Walapane peasants from their paddy lands and eventually led to the abolition of the paddy land tax, these critics did not constitute a continuous or organized opposition to the colonial politico-economic structures. Yet, being mem bers of the ruling class, they were able at critical moments to point to the sharp contradictions between the ideological claims of colonial rule and its detrimental effects on the native population. The neglect of the needs and repression of the fights of the natives, particularly the peasant cultivators, was not caused by mere ignorance on the part of British officials. It resulted pri marily from the incompatibility of the interests of capitalist export agriculture and that of peasant subsistence and small holder production. It resulted in a conflict between opposing modes of economic production, a conflict in which the planta tions were victorious because they had the support of the colo nial state at every turn. A statement by Emerson Tennent, a Colonial Secretary in nineteenth century Sri Lanka shed light on the colonial state's position in this conflict. In recognizing the injury caused the peasantry by capitalist agricultural expansion, Tennent merely sighed at what he accepted to be the inevitable costs of this process. It must be obvious that these are grievances of peasants to which we can apply no remedy, because they arise out of legitimate causes which it would be injudicious in us to control, I mean to check coffee-planting. 127

Native Protest and Challenge to the Plantations and the Colonial State In spite of the might of the colonial state, the task of superimposing the capitalist plantation economy upon the pre existing Kandyan village economy and social classes was filled with contradictions and conflicts. A comprehensive analysis of the native opposition to the colonial political economy cannot be undertaken here. Instead, we will briefly discuss the 1818 and 1848 rebellions since they relate to the issues raised above.