

105. Michael Roberts "Aspects of Ceylon's Agrarian Economy .... " op.
cit., p. 159.
106. Jayawardena, "The Supply of Sinhalese Labour .... " op. cit. pp.
266-267.
107. Michael Roberts, "Comments on Ameer Ali's Paper," op. cit.,p. 12.
108. Ameer All, '~Changing Conditions .... " pp. 7-8.
109. The differential effects of colonial land policies and practices on the
cultivators and overlords are discussed in Bandarage, The Political Economy,
chap. 5.
110. AR 1871, Report of the Nuwarakalawiya District quoted in Michael
Roberts , "Waste Lands Legislation .... " pp. 180-18 I.
!11. AR 1884, "Report of the Nuwara Eliya Districts," by Baumgarther,
p.67A; see also AR 1888, "Report of the Ua Province" by F.C. Fisher, p.
223A.

Figure 1 The Articulation of Modes of Production in the Kandyan Highlands

Subsistence Sectors

Market Sectors

Primary Sectors

Secondary Sectors

Paddy a
* rentier capital-free tenant
owner producer
** lord-serf
wage labor +/-

- Plantation Coffee c . . . . . . . * semi-wage, semi-forced labor Indirect linkage shifting wage labor

Swidden/Chena b * owner-producer ** communal village rights Smallholder Coffee d ' * owner-producer rentier capital-free tenant + Complementary relationship - Competitive relationship * Dominant social relations during colonial period ** Dominant social relations a A Feudal Mode during the pre-colonial period b A Communal Mode during the pre-colonial period

c A Capitalist Mode emerged during the colonial period. d A Petty Commodity mode emerged during the colonial period

One of the new and important developments in nineteenth century Sri Lanka was smallholder cashcropping, particularly peasant coffee. The growth of peasant cashcropping reveals the fact that the Kandyan peasantry was quick to respond to market stimuli. Their reluctance to become permanent wage laborers on the coffee estates does not imply indolence or disinterest in profit maximization as colonial officials and some social scien tists would have us believe. ~ ~ 2. The peasantry's decision not to become routine wage labor on the estates was quite rational given the availability of land at the time and the relative eco nomic autonomy associated with smallholder cashcropping. Had the Sinhalese peasantry made a large scale conversion as plantation labor, it would not have helped improve their stan dards of living. The miserable living conditions and debt bond age of the immigrant estate laborers was a constant reminder of

112. For example see statement by Lord Hobart, quoted by Vijaya Samara weera in "Economic and Social Developments," p. 61" Address by Governor Robinson quoted in Leopold Ludovici, Rice Cultivation." Its Past History and Present Condition (Colombo, 1867); J.H. Boeke, Economics and Economic Policy of Dual Societies (New York: Institute of Pacific Relations, 1953), pp. 37-38.

that fact. 113 It is highly plausible that the rates of return from peasant cashcropping were higher than from wage labor on the estates although middlemen traders and distributors did not pay a fair price to the peasants for their coffee and other cash crops. The relationship between plantation and smallholder cash cropping was a conflictual one, particularly in the context that both sectors produced the same crop, coffee. (Figure 1) The competition for land between the two sectors was the most striking feature of this conflict. Coffee smallholding (which included owner-producing units as well as those cultivated by native capitalists) were not able to secure the best land for cashcropping against the European planters who had both money and political force at their disposal. Furthermore, legis lation introduced by the colonial state such as the Coffee Steal ing Bill and the Private Roads Bill protected the interests of the plantation sector at the expense of the smallholding sector. It can well be argued that had the peasantry received the institu tional support of the state and credit agencies, peasant cashcrop ping would have become a far more important and dynamic sector than it did in Sri Landka during the nineteenth century. III I I II I