

114. SP 1890, No. 3, p. 56.
115. Quoted in SP 1890, No. 3 Reports of the Central and Provincial Irrigation
Boards for 1888, p. 3; see also Ludovici, Rice Cultivation .... p. 15.
116. SP 1890, no. 3, p. 7.

But if they (the native rulers) taxed the people severely and worked them slavishly, they repaired the tanks, and pro tected vigilantly the sources of their own wealth and power. They may have oppressed the people perhaps and have devoted too large a share of their earnings to the luxury of their own courts; but they did not export the profits of in dustry either to alientate them permanently to foreign uses or to invest them temporarily in foreign securities whilst their own national enterprise was starving for want of capital. ~ ~ 7 The colonial state's taxation policies were clearly biased in favor of plantation agriculture. The exemption of cashcropping land from taxation, while paddy fields were being heavily taxed, is a clear cut example, as is the paddy tax which was harsh, excessive, and did not take into account the peasants' ability to pay. It was when the peasants were least able to pay, as during the collapse of peasant coffee in the 1880s, that the colonial state in its own efforts to augment the revenue, began to collect the paddy tax with greater efficiency and rigor. Many defaulting paddy cultivators lost their fields when the state sold them off to private buyers. As Government Agent of Nuwara Eliya, Le Mesurier, pointed out, the sale of paddy fields was a death blow to many peasants in the district. Le Mesurier, pointed out that over fifteen percent of the paddy fields in Walapane were sold for default on taxes during 1882-1886. Many of the fields sold were abandoned, thus reducing the extent of paddy cultivation, and many of the peasants who lost their land left the district. ~ ~ 8 Neither the British planters nor the colonial state had any use for the minute paddy plots of the defaulting peasants. They were sold off extremely cheaply to monied classes within and outside the village economy. Many headmen in Walapane and Uda Hewaheta hastened the eviction of defaulting peasants only to buy up their lands at very low prices from the state. ~ ~ 9 Unable to make ends meet, peasants themselves were often forced to sell their ancestral lands to rentier groups such as Muslim traders, Chettiyar moneylenders and low-country artisan castes. Needless to say, these land sales contributed to changes in property relations and ethnic relations within the Kandyan vil lages. Moreover, the new market forces, the cash nexus and private property relations hastenedeconomic differentiation within the cultivator class which had been relatively homogen eous (with respect to land) in the pre-colonial era. In addition to being a threat to peasant subsistence, the paddy tax inhibited domestic rice production. The paddy tax was a proportionate levy, usually one tenth of the produce or its commuted value, and rose or fell with the yield. An increase in the yield meant also an increase in the surplus appropriated by the state or overlord. It is quite likely that the paddy tax dis couraged the peasants from making efforts to increase the pro ductivity of their lands. As in pre-colonial times, rice cultivation continued to be the primary occupation of the people of Sri Lanka during the nineteenth century. Yet, under colonial rule importation of rice from India and Burma (which was then administratively a part [] I I III , ,,-