

Effects of Highland Alienation

It is true that neither the land and tax policies of the colonial state, nor the rapid expansion of commerce and the cash nexus were able to create a large landless proletariat out of the native peasantry by the end of the nineteenth century. It is also true that native "encroachments" on highlands, concessionary meas ures adopted by the state, laxity in the implementation of land policies and the ability of some groups to buy land and convert them to coffee smallholdings, delayed the process of landless ness among the peasantry.

101. James C. Scott, The Moral Economy of the Peasant (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1976), p. 91.
102. For example, see SP 1951, No. 18, "The Report of the Kandyan Peas
antry Commission," pp. 69-77; J.B. Kelegama, "The Economy of Rural
Ceylon and the Problem of the Peasantry " Ceylon Economist, Sep. 1959, pp.
341-370; Van den Driesen, "Land Sales Policy .... "op. cit., pp. 36-52; A.B.
Perera, "Plantation Economy and Colonial Policy in Ceylon," Ceylon Histori
cal Journal 1, July 1951.
103. N.K. Sarkar and S.J. Tambiah, The Disintegrating Village (Colombo:
The Ceylon University Press Board, 1957), pp. xiii-xiv.
104. Donald R. Snodgrass, Ceylon'An Export Economy in Transition (Home
wood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc. 1966)" Jayawardena, "The Supply of
Sinhalese Labour .... " Michael Roberts, "The Impact of the Waste Lands
Legislation and the Growth of Plantations on the Techniques of Paddy Cultiva
tion in British Ceylon: A Critique; .... Land Use and Population Growth in
Colonial Ceylon " in James Brow, ed., Contributions to Asian Studies 9
(Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1976), pp. 64-80.

Nevertheless, the long-term effects of land alienation on dry grain agriculture and peasant subsistence are quite clear. Plantation expansion coupled with the various policy measures of the state reduced the absolute supply of land available for dry grain cultivation, pasturage, etc. Swidden was certainly subor dinated by the plantation--an extreme form of market produc tion as well as the dominant economic sector in the Island (see Figure 1). By the end of the nineteenth century, the extent and importance of dry grain cultivation within the Kandyan village economy had been greatly reduced, lOS

Lal Jayawardena has argued that British land policy did not dispossess the peasantry; instead it created a class of highland peasant proprietors. '~ Michael Roberts has pointed out that some individuals from the "middling-lower strata" in the vil lage were successful in buying Crown land put up for sale, 1~ but it cannot be denied that the majority of the poor peasants were not able to bid against rich planters and speculative buyers. ,o8 Feudal overlords and particularly the village headmen, who had greater access to the colonial administration and to title deeds required as proof of ownership, were far more successful in laying claims to Crown land than the cultivators. ,09 The more important point to be noted is that, while a small group of villagers with money were able to buy land and become "peasant proprietors" in the sense of the new legal norms such as absolute private property fights introduced by the British, the peasantry as a class lost their pre-colonial users' fights to the highlands. The policy of selling Crown land in freehold com pletely eliminated the customary communal village fights to land by the end of the century. A British provincial admini strator observed in 1871 that there were very few villages in the Kandyan coffee districts where the communal fight to village lands had not been totally extinguished. ,,0 The reduction of chena robbed peasants of their traditional safety valve. Its loss was felt most severely when paddy crops failed or when the state expropriated paddy fields for defaulting on cash tax payments. In districts such as Walapane where shifting cultivation was wiped out due to government prohibi tions and Crown land sales, the peasants' primary means of subsistence (paddy) failed in the 1880s, and the peasants had to subsist on roots and leaves gathered from the jungles. "' The loss of swidden cultivation tied the peasantry more firmly to the paddy fields and thereby to the control of the surplus appropriators--the feudal overlords, the new rentier capitalists and the colonial state. In can be argued that the loss of highlands weakened the economic and political autonomy of the peasants traditionally associated with shifting cultivation.