

117. George Wall (Speculum, pseud.)Ceylon .... p. 75.
118. AR 1886, "Report on the Nuwara Eliya District," by C.J.R. Le Mesurier,
p. 37A.
119. D. Wesumperuma, "The Evictions under the Paddy Tax and Their Impact
on the Peasantry of Walapane, 1882-1885," Ceylon Journal of Historical and
Social Studies, vol. 10, 1970, p. 140.
IIIII IIII I IIII I I I of . . . . . . . . . . . . India) increased dramatically, primarily because the entire
supply of rice needed to feed the South Indian plantation labor
ers was being imported. There were several reasons for this.
One was the inadequacy of local rice supplies. Local rice sup
plies were so inadequate that in addition to the estate labor force,
the growing urban population as well as even some peasant rice
cultivators came to depend on imported rice. ~20
Another reason for the importation of rice was that once the
planters had established regular and reliable networks of rice
procurement, they did not want to depend on the vagaries of
local rice production. It is important to note also that the Indian
estate laborers in Sri Lanka plantations were paid their wages
partially in rice. Payment of laborers with Indian varieties of
rice (they supposedly did not like local rice) became a means of
labor control and labor retention on the estates. 121 Any attempt
to develop local rice supplies for the estates would have meant
the introduction of changes in the internal structure and opera
tions of labor control on the plantations, which neither the
planters nor the state wanted to undertake.
Since a large portion of the imported rice was bought up by
the planters to feed their laborers, they came to bear the greater
portion of the import duty collected on rice by the colonial state.
In the absence of a general land tax, the import duty on rice came
to be considered the primary method of taxing the plantation
sector. What is interesting to note is that while the tax on home
grown paddy was proportionate to the yield, the import duty on
rice remained a low and constant levy at 13 cents per bushel of
unhusked rice throughout the nineteenth century. ~z2 This again
shows the partiality of the state' s tax policy towards the planta
tion sector.
The combined effects of the neglect of irrigation, the paddy
tax and cheap rice imports was the stagnation and backwardness
of paddy agriculture. Many critics blamed the extremely low
yields in local rice agriculture on the colonial state. C.S. Salmon
and other members of the Cobden Club in England who were
concerned with starvation among the peasantry pointed out that
while the acreage under cash crops was steadily increasing, the
acreage under paddy was decreasing. ~23 The agricultural statis
tics given in Table 7 show a generally smaller increase in paddy
acreage as compared with the substantial increase in acreage
under cash crops. They also reveal the increasing disparity
between the structures of production and consumption in Sri
Lanka, a characteristic feature of colonial economies.