

Sources of State Revenue In spite of these meagre attempts to shift part of the costs of plantation development on to the planters themselves, the gen eral thrust of colonial state policy was aimed at making the peasantry pay for the maintenance of the plantation economy and the colonial state. An obvious example of this shift of burden is the rural police tax. The Government Agent for the Sabaragamuwa District wrote in 1874 that the rural police tax was a most unpopular tax, and, as an unjust imposition, it was very difficult to collect. 97 Yet another striking example of this is the manner in which the state turned over its financial burden to the peasantry during the economic depression which hit the plantation economy during 1846-48. At this time Governor Torrington came to the rescue of the planters by abolishing the export duty on coffee and reducing or abolishing a number of other levies, such as port duties which fell most heavily on the plantation sector. The total loss of state revenue due to these reductions amounted to s 98 The estimated loss of revenue due to the repeal or modification of taxes is listed in Table 5.

In order to meet the deficit that stemmed from these reduc tions, Torrington imposed a series of new taxes which fell most heavily on the peasantry. 99 These included license fees on dogs, guns, courts, shops; the road tax (discussed earlier) and in creases in various stamp duties. It must be remembered that these new levies made on the peasants' means of subsistence (and even their stray dogs) were in addition to the paddy, salt and other taxes already in operation.They are listed in Table 6.

In justifying the imposition of these new taxes, the Secre tary of State for the colonies, Earl Grey, expounded the dualistic policy of the colonial state vis-a-vis plantation and peasant interests: Nor is to be lost sight of that while direct taxation is in such circumstances calculated to promote the progress of society, indirect taxation has the very opposite effect. To create a taste for the habits of civilised life in a rude popula tion, it is requisite that they should have before them the example of civilised men and the gratification of the wants of civilised life should be rendered as easy to them as possible, but with this view imported articles should be rendered cheap, and those branches of trade and industry which require the direction of civilised and educated men, such as

95. SP 1872, No. 1 "Correspondence Relating to the Medical Treatment of
Coolies."
96. SP 1881, No. 30, p.2.
97. AR 1874, "Report of the Sabaragamuwa District," p.71.
98. K.M. de Silva, ed., Letters on Ceylon..." Introduction," p.7.
99. Ibid., p.6.

Table 6 A List of the several New Taxes imposed since the Arrival of Lord Torrington, stating the Date on which each Tax was Passed, and Estimate of the Amount of Revenue expected from the same; stating also the Dates of subsequent Repeal or Modification of any of these New Taxes

(/) New Taxes Imposed