

113. Wesumperuma, "The Migrations," passim.

The linkages between the commercial plantation and the largely subsistence oriented paddy agriculture were not as obvi ous as the links between plantations and the other two sectors of the village economy, i.e. swidden and smallholder cashcrop ping. (Figure 1) The plantations did not compete for the ir rigated lands on which paddy was cultivated, and planters were not able to obtain to any worthwhile extent their labor needs or food supplies for the estates from the paddy-producing Sinhal ese peasants. Nevertheless, the expansionary tendency of capi talist plantation agriculture, the activities of the colonial state, and market relations in general linked these two sectors, albeit antagonistically.

The Enforced Decline of Paddy Agriculture The colonial state' s policies and activities in support of the infrastructural needs of the plantations sector were systematic and impressive. The pressure placed by the planter community no doubt played an important role in achieving this. On the other hand, there was neither a comparable peasant lobby nor a commitment on the part of the colonial state to provide the infrastructure, particularly irrigation necessary for wet rice ag riculture. The wholehearted commitment of the state to provid ing infrastructure for the plantations resulted in the relative neglect of paddy agriculture. In the period before 1850 when roads were being constructed on a massive scale, almost no irrigation projects were undertaken. ~ 14 The amount spent on irrigation varied with the whims of individual governors and the general state of the revenue. As Government Agent, Bailey, remarked in 1858: I have dwelt on the ruinous condition of such works of irrigation as are still in use. We have ourselves to blame for this, for not only has the Government never devoted a fair portion of revenue towards the rest of these works but by inattention to the agricultural system of the people tacitly permitted the national customs which, under the native gov ernment were the means of keeping all works for irrigation in repair, to fall into disuse. 115 Suffice it to say that many of the ancient irrigation works remained in disrepair throughout the nineteenth century and the beneficial effects of the state's irrigation projects (except per haps in the Eastern Province and the Hambantota District in the Southern Province where a wholly different set of conditions prevailed) were minimal. 116

The British colonial state used pre-colonial corvre labor services towards the construction of roads which were of prim ary use to the plantation sector. In contrast the Sinhalese kings derived the legitimacy to exact corvre labor from the peasantry by using at least a part of that labor towards the benefit of the peasants themselves. This meant that corvre labor was used towards the construction and maintenance of irrigation works necessary for paddy cultivation and peasant subsistence. A contemporary critic of the colonial state, George Wall, pointed out the different uses to which corvre labor was put by the pre-colonial and colonial states when he said: