

142. K.M. de Silva, Letters on Ceylon, pp. 25-26. 143. Discussed in Bandarage, The Political Economy, chap. 7. 144. For examples of the modernization and underdevelopment perspectives on plantations, see respectively, W.O. Jones, "Plantations," The International Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, 1968, ed. s.v., and Backford, Persistent PoverO'.

the colonial politico-economic impact on the Kandyan High lands was a highly differentiated process that varied across modes of economic production and across social classes. While the confluence of the effects of the plantations, the colonial state and market forces helped wipe out one pre existing mode of village agriculture--chena--almost entirely, it gave rise to a new modewsmallholder cashcropping--and fundamentally restructured property relations in the primary mode--paddy. We have also noted, admittedly very briefly, some of the changes that took place in the native class structure during the nineteenth century. These include the incorporation of headmen into the colonial administration, entry of rentier capitalists into the village economy, emergence of a South Indian proletariat on the estates and a native capitalist class largely in the interstices of the European plantation economy. The paper has also sought to demonstrate the dominance of the political sphere as a characteristic feature of capitalist de velopment in the colonies. 14s We have pointed out that the early colonial state represented by the "planter-official" class in fact created the institutions of capital, wage labor, and so forth which were prerequisites for capitalist development in the island. The protest movements against the colonial order took the form of cultural, specifically nationalist struggles aimed at the colonial state rather than the form of class struggles directed against the planters. The primacy of the political sphere made a decisive impact on the dialectics of resistance against colonialism. Colonialism did not simply wipe out the pre-colonial social order or wield a uniform effect on all native groups or institu tions. Selected pre-colonial institutions were utilized for creat ing and maintaining the colonial political economy. Natives were not simply passive victims of the colonial onslaught. The more privileged natives--headmen and entrepreneurial groups m chose to join the colonial political economy at subor dinate levels because of the many advantages to be derived from doing so. The strategies of survival and protest of the peasantry in turnm"encroachments" on "Crown" land for example-had a determining effect on the structure and operation of the superimposed colonial political economy. Colonialism then has to be understood dialectically as a process which engenders its own contradictions and dissolution in the long run.'~l~

I II 9

145. See, Bipan Chandra, "Colonialism, Stages of Colonialism and the Colon ial State," Journal of Contemporary Asia, vol. 10, no. 3, 1980. The issues raised in this article are discussed more extensively in the author's forthcoming book, The Political Economy of Colonialism." Kandyan Highlands of Sri Lanka, 1833-1886 (The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1983).