

The 1818 Rebellion The British came to Kandy in 1815 on the invitation of a faction of the Kandyan aristocracy to depose their king. Upon removing the Kandyan king, the British usurped the throne for themselves, an outcome unanticipated by the aristocracy! From the outset of British rule then, the British and the feudal over lords were envious and suspicious of each other's powers and privileges. Although they signed the Proclamation of 1815 and

127. Quoted in Van den Driesen, "Land Sales Policy .... " p. 45.

agreed to govern according to the customs and conventions of Kandyan society, in practice the British began to violate many of the Kandyan beliefs and practices. The loss of political independence itself was a great blow to the pride of the Kandyans who had fought for several centuries to resist successive European invaders (Portuguese, Dutch, British) from the coastal lowlands. 128 Furthermore the super imposition of a European administration over the feudal ad ministrative hierarchy meant that all Kandyan chiefs were now compelled to pay homage even to a common British soldier. The Buddhist clergy (sangha) too became dissatisfied with the alien Christian government and the severance of the historical link between the state and Buddhism. ~29 The loss of pride and status on the part of the nobility and the clergy ignited their desire to drive out the British and to restore the Kandyan monarchy. There is consensus among his torians that the ensuing rebellion was a post-pacification re volt. 13~ The 1818 rebellion was also a nationalist revolt. The nationalist sentiments shared by the feudal overlords (nobility and clergy) and the peasantry based on their common Sinhalese Buddhist ethnic identity came to the fore in their attempt to drive out the European Christian intruder. Some of the leaders of the 1818 rebellion were notable Kandyan chiefs and Buddhist monks. But as social historian Malalgoda argues, the series of movements against the British in the early years of their rule in the Kandyan Provinces had their origin in the masses rather than the nobility or the clergy. ~3~ It is likely that even at this early stage of British rule, the changes introduced by the British (for example in corvre labor exaction) caused great hardship to the cultivator class and contributed to their desire to restore the pre-colonial social order. Malalgoda points out that after a pretender to the Kandyan throne named Vilbave was "coronated" in 1817-18, the rebel lion gained greater legitimacy and spread rapidly "from the remote areas to the more central provinces and from the lower to the higher strata of society. ''~32 This rebellion, considered the "most formidable insurrection during the whole period of Brit ish occupation in Ceylon" 133 is popularly known as the Great Rebellion of 1818. Before the rebels could capture power, the British inter vened and put down the rebellion most ruthlessly. Nevertheless it was a traumatic experience for the British. Since then, they became highly suspicious of the "rebellious" Kandyans and acted quickly and harshly at the slightest indication of a "dis turbance" in the area. 134