

128. The coastal lowlands were under Portuguese ( 1505-1666), Dutch ( 1666-
1796), and British (1796-1948) rule successively. Until the lowlands was turned
into a British Crown Colony in 1802, it was governed by the British East India
Company.
129. Colvin R. de Silva, Ceylon Under the British Occupation, vol. 1, Col
ombo, Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd., 1953, p. 160; G.C. Mendis, Ceylon
Under the British,. p. 16.
130. Michael Roberts, "Variations on the Theme of Resistance Movements:
The Kandyan Rebellion and Latter Day Nationalisms in Ceylon," Ceylon
Studies Seminar, 1970/1972 Series, No. 9, p. 21.
131. Kitsiri Malalgoda, "Millennialism in Relation to Buddhism," Compara
tive Studies in Society and History, Vol. 12, No. 4, October, 1970, p. 434.
132. Ibid., p. 436.
133. K.M. de Silva, "The Kandyan Kingdom and the British--The Last
Phase, 1796 to 1818," in K.M. de Silva, ed., History ofCeylon, vol. 3, p. 32.
134. Malalgoda, "Millennialism," p. 436.

After putting down the Great Rebellion and a number of other minor revolts in the highlands between 1815 and 1820, the British attempted to break up the nationalist solidarity between the Kandyan overlords and the peasantry which they perceived to be the foremost threat to their political hegemomy in the island. The British made a few attempts to create countervailing social forces in the native society that could weaken the author ity of the aristocracy over the cultivators. The Proclamation of 1818 enacted after the abortive rebellion was aimed both at reducing the powers and privileges of the nobility as well as creating a free peasant proprietor class loyal to the British. ~35 As enumerated in this paper, the policies of the colonial state, such as the paddy tax and highland alienation, as well as the effects of the new market economy and the plantations, militated against the emergence of a strong and independent peasantry loyal to the British. In fact, the peasantry or the cultivator class became the strongest opponents of the British and the new social order they represented.

The Rebellion of 1848 Thirty years after the 1818 rebellion when the next major upheaval took place in the Central Highlands (and the capital city of Colombo), radical transformations were well under way in Kandyan society. A network of roads connecting the Central Highlands to the coast had broken down the isolation of Kandy. The coffee plantations had integrated the region into the national economy (itself the creation of the plantation enterprise), and the world capitalist economy. Cash and commerce, planters and traders, foreign estate laborers were among the new forces and actors in the region. In fact, the 1848 rebellion was largely a reaction against these dramatic changes that had taken place during the short time span since the introduction of the plantations in the 1830s. Many British planters and officials such as George Ackland acknowledged in retrospect that plantation development was the underlying cause of this rebellion. Alienation of the highland for plantations and the exaction of the forced labor of the peasants for road construction had created much antipathy towards the colonial state. Undoubtedly the effects of the new political and economic forces were harsh est on the cultivators. The resistance against the new social order understandably came from this class, rather than the native aristocracy or the emerging entrepreneurial groups, and took such forms as "encroachments" on "Crown" and planta tion lands; passive resistance against corvre labor duties" refusal of wage labor on the plantations; and disregard towards state legislation. While the underlying cause was the contradiction between plantation development and peasant subsistence, the immediate cause that sparked off the rebellion was the imposition of new taxes by Governor Torrington which fell most heavily on the peasant cultivators. The introduction of the new taxes at this time was aimed specifically at shifting the burden of the world economic depression of the mid-1840s from the plantation sec tor and the colonial treasury to the peasantry of the colony. In Colombo, the opposition to the taxes was led by Dr. Christopher Elliot, the editor of The Colombo Observer at the I II I II