

135. See "The Proclamation of 21st November, 1818," in A Revised Edition of the Legislative Enactments. vol. 1.

time. Elliot, an Irishman with great sympathy for the peasantry, sought to stamp the ideas of the European revolution of 1848 into his campaign against the unjust taxes. In a letter printed in The Observer he pointed out that while most natives did not receive more than ten shillings a year, the new taxes alone required them to pay seven or eight shillings a year to the state. 136 Governor Torrington later claimed that the Sinhalese translation of Elliot's letter circulated among the peasantry was a major factor in inciting them to rebellion, but historians have found it difficult to calculate the extent of its circulation or its influence on the "disturbances" that followed. 137 Nonetheless, the news about the taxes and rumors of still more taxes to come spread quickly through the Kandyan region. On July 6, 1848, a mass protest against the taxes took place in Kandy. On July 8, the colonial administration called a meeting of the Kandyan chiefs to explain the need for the new taxes. But between July 8 and July 29, a mass movement against the taxes had already developed. There were several outbreaks of vio lence, the most severe of which took place in the Matale and Kurunegala districts between July 29 and July 31, 1848.138 What distinguished the uprising against the taxes in the Kandyan districts from the agitation in Colombo was that a small group of men "sought to channel this discontent in an attempt to drive the British out of Kandy. ''139 In this respect, the 1848 rebellion was similar to the Great Rebellion of 1818 although the British did not allow the 1848 revolt to last as long or spread as widely as did the earlier rebellion. Although the rebellion in the Kandyan districts was essen tially a peasant revolt, its most well known leader, Puran Appu, was an adventurer from the coastal lowlands. This rebellion, like the earlier one, was given a nationalist stamp by crowning a pretender to the Kandyan throne. Rebel attacks were concentrated on the installations of the colonial state such as jails, court houses (kachcheris), and official residences. Few plantations were damaged, t4~ Peasant hostility then was directed against the state which was correctly perceived to be the immediate oppressor. But as discussed earlier, most of the state officials at the time were also planters. As the situation in the Kandyan region began to get out of hand, the state imposed martial law and harshly suppressed the rebellion. The British had only one soldier wounded, whereas at least two hundred Kandyans lost their lives. Among the reasons for the unduly harsh suppression were the memory of 1818 and the fear among the "planter-officials" that if the rebellion was allowed to spread, it would totally damage their plantations and the coffee crop. 141 The British managed to quell the rebellion before too many other regions and disaffected groups could join it. Nonetheless the rebellion convulsed the British political hegemony and the plantation economy in the island so greatly that the British Parliament appointed a high ranking committee of inquiry which included such notables as Robert Peel, Disraeli, and