

136. Letter by an "Englishman" in The Colombo Observer, reprinted in BPP
1849, vol. 36, p. 153.
137. K.M. de Silva, Letters on Ceylon, p. 12.
138. K.M. de Silva, "The 'Rebellion' of 1848 in Ceylon, CJHSS vol. 7. No. 2,
July-December 1964, pp. 16-17.
139. Ibid., p. 16.
140. K.M. de Silva, Social Policy, p. 17.
141. Ibid., p. 19.

Gladstone to investigate its causes. The evidence given before the Parliamentary Inquiry Com mittee reveals the suspicion among many of the British in Sri Lanka that the rebellion was engineered and led by the Buddhist clergy and the aristocracy as was the rebellion of 1818. The historian K.M. de Silva has pointed out, however, that the Kandyan chiefs stood aloof from this peasant revolt and at no stage were the British able to provide any evidence in support of their contention. 142 Whether the British actually believed that the feudal over lords were behind the rebellion or not, it taught them an im portant political lesson: that it was impossible to control the masses without the support of the native overlords. This realiza tion resulted in a shift of policy and methods of social control over the peasantry. The rivalry between the British and the Kandyan chiefs was quietly forgotten and from 1848 on steps were taken to incorporate the native chiefs or headmen more closely into the provincial administration of the colony. 143 The native aristocracy in turn came to accept the permanency of British rule and to enjoy the benefits that accrued to them in monetary and status terms through this new partnership. By the 1880s, the native headmen had acquiesced in the colonial administration to such an extent that they sought to take advantage of the peasants' plight rather than attempt to incite them into rebellion as the did in 1818, or play a neutral role as they did in 1848. By incorporating the native chiefs into the colonial political economy at subordinate levels, the British ensured that the chiefs did not join the peasantry in their nation alist struggles. Thus, the 1848 rebellion was the last major upheaval against the British in Sri Lanka during the nineteenth century. These developments lead us to conclude that by the 1880s, the British plantation economy and the colonial state had subor dinated and begun the incorporation of the pre-colonial econ omy and society within the colonial politico-economic system and the expanding world capitalist economy. The plantation economy was so firmly set in place in Sri Lanka that in spite of the total collapse of coffee agriculture in the 1880s, tea plantation agriculture came in its place, found the social and instutitonal framework set out by coffee intact and was able to traverse the path of "development" set in motion during the coffee era.

## Conclusion

Modernization theories which focus on aggregate eco nomic growth and infrastructural expansion as indices of "de velopment" and their critiques which point to the stagnation of domestic production and neglect of the peasantry as indices of "underdevelopment" capture only selected aspects of the colo nial experience. 144 One of the underlying attempts of this paper has been to show that bi-polar models which depict an ever expanding modern or plantation sector and a stagnant traditional or village sector are inadequate for understanding the complex ities of colonialism. The paper has sought to demonstrate that