

Perhaps not coincidentally, the most outspoken advocates of the pro-
Jjectability standard in this volume tend to be the most nomothetic in their
overall approach to social science. Bueno de Mesquita and Weingast are not
content with post-hoc exercises in which they fit game-theoretic models to
data; they derive testable implications from theit models and show how
those predictions can be statistically or historically disconfirmed. In a similar
vein, Russet is not satisfied with showing that the democratic-peace hypoth-
is captures an intriguing regularity in the brief slice of history that we call
moder; he seeks out alternative data sources—Greck city-states and tribal
societies—into which we can project the hypothesis. In his computer sim-
ulations, Cederman explores the replicability and robustness of his counter
intuitive result that defense-dominance increases rather than decreases the
likelihood of the emergence of hegemons. And in their critique of structural-
ist theories of revolution, Kiser and Levi raise the suspicion that structuralist
theories—with their emphasis on complex conjunctions of preconditions —
are ultimately exercises in post-hoc data-fitting that will never pass the pro-
jectability test.*

“The strong version of the “projectability” argument teats backward and forward reasoning
{in time as symmetical. There are good reasons, however, for suspecting that even when we can
construct compelling explanations of the past, we will often do a terible job of explaining the
future (Dawes 1993; Chapter 2, Fearon). When we look back into the past from the present, we
‘occupy a privileged but also easily abused position, We know which one of the many futures
that were once possible has actually occurred. With the benefit of this retrospective knowledge,
itbecomes relatively easy to find antecedents that depict the consequence as the inevitable result
‘of some “inexorable” causal process. Yet we risk capitalizing, indeed massively capitalizing, on
chance. By contrast, when we look forward into the future, we cannot avoid the complexity and
indeterminacy of possible relationships among antecedents and consequences. We can draw
‘upon our knowledge of past causal relationships to anticipate the future, but are often disap-
pointed by the results. The causes we identified retrospectively for a class of consequences
prove to be anemic predictors of the same class in the future. Dawes (1993) illustrates this,
lrgument with the crash ofa passenger airplane into a parked truck on a runway under repair at
Mexico City aigport on October 31, 1979. The FAA fight investigators easly constructed &
‘causal story for the outcome that invoked such plausible antecedents as poor weather. smog.
pilot fatigue, radio malfunction, cryptic communication by traffic controllers, and stress. But

