

               17. Ibid., 286.




                                 Published by Duke University Press
                                Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira     1/4/01    5:25 PM      Page 846




           846                                                  HAHR / November / Pedreira


           the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It became one of the more
           dynamic branches of the foreign trade, expanding at a faster rate than gross
           exports and thus increasing to 35 percent its share in the shipments to Brazil.
           Cotton and woolen industries signiﬁcantly enlarged their quotas in the colonial
           market. Nevertheless, this growth could not dislodge large reexports of foreign
           industrial stock to the colonies. In the trade with Brazil, merchandise of national
           manufacture became more important than goods from European origin, but
           when cotton and silk fabrics imported from Asia and forwarded to Brazil are
           brought into the picture, the part of national products comes down to 42.7 per-
           cent. However limited, this was a signiﬁcant industrial spurt.


           From Growth to Collapse

           The prosperity of the Portuguese-Brazilian trade in the late eighteenth cen-
           tury is indisputable. The controversy focuses on the timing and the nature of
           this prosperity. In the early nineteenth century, imports from Brazil kept up at
           a very high level, reaching a maximum of 13.2 billion reis in 1806. At the same
           time, reexports of Brazilian goods grew from less than 10 billion reis in 1796
           to more than 15 billions in 1801, and then displayed a strong stability, record-
           ing values of 13 to 14 billions (with a brief setback in 1803 when they are down
           to 11.8 billions). On the other hand, exports to Brazil rose to an exceptional
           peak of 15.7 billion in 1799 and remained ﬁrm between 9 and 10.6 billions up
           to 1804, before falling to 8.2 billions in 1806. Despite important ﬂuctuations,
           the system of trade remained unchanged. The Portuguese balance of trade
           tended to show small surpluses or small deﬁcits in the transactions with Brazil,
           which were usually more than compensated by the excess of exports over
           imports in the commercial relations with the foreign nations. Before 1807
           there are no real signs of a coming crisis, although in this short period some
           sharp variations do occur, and most of the ﬁgures in 1805 –1806 reveal some
           uncertainty (see table 1).
                The scope of those variations discloses the unstable circumstances of the
           market, which explain — to a large extent — the prosperity itself. The succes-
           sion of wars which followed the French Revolution offered very favorable con-
           ditions for the development of the Portuguese colonial trade. After taking part
           in the Roussillon campaign in 1791, Portugal strove to preserve neutrality in
           the face of very strong pressure exerted by both parties in contention. This,
           although expensive for the state ﬁnances (the government was forced to pay a
           costly indemnity to France to have the neutral status recognized), allowed
           Portugal to take full advantage of the crisis that disturbed other colonial