


                 14. João Luís Ribeiro Fragoso, Homens de grossa aventura: Acumulação e hierarquia na
           praça mercantil do Rio de Janeiro, 1790 –1830 (Rio de Janeiro: Ministério da Justiça, Arquivo
           Nacional, 1992), chaps. 2, 3.
                 15. Pedreira, Estrutura industrial e mercado colonial, 53 – 54.
                 16. Ibid., 55.




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                 Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01    5:25 PM    Page 845




           From Growth to Collapse                                                      845

           although the state withdrew from its former role as an entrepreneur and
           decreased direct ﬁnancial backing to industrial ventures. Exports to the empire
           were specially encouraged and the well-known law of 1785, which was
           designed to perfect the organization of the colonial system, expressly reserved
           manufacturing (sugar reﬁning included) to the metropolis. As a result, several
           workshops in some Brazilian towns were shut down by the authorities.
           However, there was much more to the industrial development of the late-
           eighteenth-century Portugal than the reinforcement of the prevailing division
           of labor between the mother country and the colonies. Moreover growth was
           not conﬁned to exporting branches and the colonies functioned as marginal
           markets to important sectors, such as tanning, ceramics and glass making.
                Part of the industrial growth was unquestionably export-driven. Most
           important among manufactured commodities shipped to the colonies were
           linens and printed calicoes (which together provided a little less than 60 per-
           cent of the total in 1796 –1806). In the rise of cotton printing, long distance
           transactions played a decisive role, as they supplied both the basic material
           (unbleached cotton cloth from India) and the main market (because 60 to 70
           percent of the production was remitted to the colonies). This was an entirely
           new industry, which concentrated in some 50 large workshops and manufacto-
           ries established around Lisbon. On the other hand, linen and lace manufactur-
           ing was a traditional, purely domestic, proto-industrial production; it was scat-
           tered throughout the northwestern districts and used both local and imported
           ﬂax. In a rough estimate, linen exports to Brazil at the turn of the century were
           the equivalent to the yearly output of some 20 to 30 thousand handlooms,
           accounting for about 15 to 30 percent of the total production.17
                Other trades also contributed to the industrial expansion. Silk and woolen
           manufactures, which combined domestic and centralized modes of produc-
           tion, supplied 17 percent of the industrial exports. For these sectors, however,
           the colonial market was not so important, even though between 1776 –1777
           and 1796 –1806 overseas shipments of woolens grew tenfold. Additionally,
           large quantities of hats of both the ﬁner and coarser kinds (the latter to be
           worn by slaves and workers), as well as metal wares, such as nails and farming
           tools, were exported to Brazil. These two sorts of products made up 8 and 4
           percent of the transoceanic trading of national manufactured commodities,
           respectively.
                The growth of the export of national industrial goods is one of the most
           distinctive features of the development of the Portuguese merchant economy in