                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01       5:25 PM      Page 839




           Comments, Criticism, and Debate


           From Growth to Collapse: Portugal, Brazil,
           and the Breakdown of the Old Colonial
           System (1760–1830)

           Jorge M. Pedreira




           The breakdown of the Portuguese-Brazilian empire has been a topic of con-
           troversy for a long time. The dispute has converged on matters of fact as much
           as on matters of interpretation. Historians on both shores of the Atlantic have
           failed to present a common perspective on basic issues, such as the nature and
           scope of the growth that preceded the collapse, or the timing, duration, and
           intensity of the crisis itself. Thus a variety of explanations have been offered
           for this major turning point, as scholars tried to analyze the consequences of
           the collapse of the old colonial system.
                However, beyond the controversy, the crucial signiﬁcance of this period
           for the now diverging history of the two countries must be universally admit-
           ted. For Brazil, of course, this was the time of the birth of the nation, when
           crucial choices were made and many possible lines of historical development
           were discarded. Similarly, for Portugal this turn of events was very important.
           It meant that for the ﬁrst time in nearly four hundred years the country had to
           sustain itself without an empire. The remaining colonies, that is, the trading
           posts and fortresses in Africa and in Asia, had virtually no economic or ﬁnan-
           cial relevance. For almost a century the empire, or what remained, played a
           minor role in the Portuguese economy and, wishful expectations to the con-
           trary notwithstanding, could not compensate for the loss of the vast American
           colony. As a result, Portuguese society had to undergo fundamental socioeco-
           nomic adjustments to accommodate this historical development.
                The climacteric nature of this historical process is unquestionably related
           to the contentious character of the interpretations it has elicited. Bearing this
           in mind, this essay presents the facts and reviews the main topics of this histo-
           riographical controversy. As an active participant in the controversial debates
           on this topic, I will refrain from restating my former arguments, although this

           Hispanic American Historical Review 80:4
           Copyright 2000 by Duke University Press




                                     Published by Duke University Press
                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 840




           840                                                          HAHR / November / Pedreira