


           certainly is an excellent opportunity to make them accessible to an English-
           speaking audience. My aim is to offer a fresher analysis of the available evi-
           dence, with the assistance of the most recent research, and thus extend our
           knowledge of this critical period in the history of Portugal, Brazil, and the
           Atlantic world.


           From Crisis to Prosperity

           For the Portuguese empire, the beginning of the second half of eighteenth
           century spelled disaster. In 1755 a tremendous earthquake and the ensuing ﬁre
           destroyed the best part of the city of Lisbon as well as the cargo of the ﬂeet
           from Brazil, which was stored in the customs warehouses. The damages were
           huge and they had scarcely begun to be assimilated when a second blow caused
           another shock. Gold remittances from Brazil, which had been for some
           decades the most important ﬁnancial resource in the empire and had become
           the major driving force behind its integration into the Atlantic economy,
           began faltering. The decline, which could already be felt in 1760, became very
           serious after 1766.1 This problem led to signiﬁcant ﬁnancial strains in the
           mother country and caused an inadequate supply of hard currency that was
           required to settle international payments, a difﬁcult task for a country with a
           chronic trade deﬁcit. Consequently, the government of the marquis of Pombal
           hastened the economic reforms it had already initiated in the previous decade.
                The government aimed ﬁrst at the reorganization of both the colonial
           trade and the main export sector in the metropolitan economy. It specially
           regulated the sugar and tobacco trade (1756) and created three monopolistic
           companies, two of which were granted exclusive rights over shipping and trade
           with speciﬁc regions of Brazil while the third was entrusted with the control
           over the marketing of Port wine. Pombal tried to secure a tighter control over
           long-distance trade (although the ﬂeet system to Brazil was abolished), which
           he wished to see concentrated in the hands of a smaller mercantile elite ( pre-
           sumably more adept at competing with the foreign merchants). The main pur-
           pose of this program was to cutback the large deﬁcits of the balance of trade.
           To this effect, he later encouraged import-substitution, and devised an ambi-

                1. Jorge Borges de Macedo, Problemas de história da indústria portuguesa no século XVIII
           (Lisbon: AIP, 1963), 187; Virgílio Noya Pinto, O ouro brasileiro e o comércio Anglo-Português:
           Uma contribuição aos estudos da economia atlântica no século XVIII, 2d ed. (São Paulo:
           Companhia Ed. Nacional, 1979), 322; and Kenneth Maxwell, Conﬂicts and Conspiracies:
           Brazil and Portugal, 1750 –1808 (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1973), 253.