


                9. Ibid., 96
                10. Dauril Alden, “Late Colonial Brazil, 1750 –1808,” in Colonial Brazil, ed. Leslie
           Bethell (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987), 312.
                11. Pedreira, Estrutura industrial e mercado colonial, 53, 267 – 68.
                12. Schwartz, “De ouro a algodão,” 95
                13. Alden, “Late Colonial Brazil,” 310 – 36.




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 844




           844                                                         HAHR / November / Pedreira


                Part of this development must be attributed to the growth of the Brazilian
           domestic market itself. New research has suitably stressed the expansion and
           dynamic of that market.14 The expanding production of rice (which also found
           its way to the export market) and wheat can be explained in the ﬁrst place by
           the need to supply a rapidly increasing population. However, large areas of
           Brazil still functioned as a plantation complex, which was the foundation of the
           colonial system. The Portuguese merchant economy lived to a large extent on
           this system and on the carrying trade it made possible. Reexports of products
           from the empire (mainly from Brazil, but also manufactured merchandise,
           especially textiles from India and China) formed a nuclear factor in the inte-
           gration of Portugal into the Atlantic and European systems of foreign trade.
                Even though reexports comprised the bulk of shipments to Europe,
           domestic production also played a part in the newly found economic vitality.
           Until 1789 exports of wine, salt, wool, olive oil, and fruit grew at the same rate
           of reexports, in such a way that commodities from domestic origin regularly
           accounted for 44 percent of all foreign sales (the same ratio as in 1776 –77).
           Once the real boom started in 1790s, they could not keep up with the growth
           of the market for colonial merchandise, and its share declined to 25 percent.15
           However, there was another way in which the domestic production con-
           tributed to commercial development, namely, through overseas shipments of
           manufactured goods.
                Actually, there were two sides to the Portuguese carrying trade. Besides
           the reexports of colonial (mostly Brazilian) products, merchants in Lisbon and
           also, but to a lesser extent, in Oporto forwarded commodities, such as food-
           stuffs (grain, codﬁsh, butter, cheese) and manufactured goods (chieﬂy textiles)
           obtained from European countries to Brazil. In 1776 –1777, despite Pombal’s
           industrial policy, less than one-fourth of the shipments to the colonies con-
           sisted of articles of national manufacture. Portuguese yard goods formed only
           30 percent of all textiles dispatched to the empire. National linens and silks
           already had an important share in the exports, but woolen and cotton fabrics
           came primarily from Britain and India.16
                In the next 20 years, the exporting branches of the industrial sector made
           impressive progress. Government protection, initiated by Pombal, persisted,