

               23. Macedo, Problemas de história da indústria, 236.




                                  Published by Duke University Press
                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01       5:25 PM       Page 852




           852                                                                 HAHR / November / Pedreira




                                                                 Exports of Portugese manufacturing goods to Brazil
                                                                 Imports from Brazil
                                                                 Exports to Brazil
                                                                 Reexports of Brazilian goods




           Figure 1. Portugal’s Brazil-based Trade (1796–1831)
           Source: Data from Balanças geraes do commercio; and Pedreira, Estrutura Industrial, 269.


           colonial system, they found it increasingly difﬁcult to ﬁght foreign competi-
           tion. Thus, they pressed the government, both before and after the liberal
           Revolution of 1820 (in which they performed a relevant role), to have a new
           commercial arrangement approved, under which they could reinstate their
           preeminence. This disposition, combined with the forced return of the king to
           Portugal and the unwillingness of some of the Portuguese revolutionaries to
           compromise, could not help but speed up the insurgence of Brazil and the dec-
           laration of independence in 1822.
                 The immediate economic effects of the independence were not very
           signiﬁcant; it merely made the decline that had begun in 1819 even more
           severe. In the next few years, after Portugal acknowledged the sovereignty of
           Brazil in 1825, the alienation between the two countries proceeded. The fail-
           ure to approve a commercial treaty (despite the fact that the general terms of
           an agreement had been settled in 1826 and again in 1836) consummated that
           alienation. In 1825 –1830, as other European countries established direct and
           regular commercial relations with Brazil, reexports of colonial merchandise
           fell down to 17 percent of the prewar ﬁgures. Brazilian groceries and materials
           still enjoyed a dominant position in the Portuguese domestic market, but
           goods of Portuguese production shipped to Brazil amounted to no more than
           50 percent of the earlier values (30 percent in the case of industrial exports, of




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 853




           From Growth to Collapse                                                                853

           which Brazil still received almost 80 percent). Although de-industrialization
           was restricted to a small group of trades and regions (for instance, silk manu-
           facture, both in Lisbon and in the northeast), the industrial production was hit
           hard by the loss of the Brazilian market. Opportunities for integration in the
           international markets were thwarted and Portugal was now conﬁned to the
           role of a small exporter of primary products. The breakdown of the colonial
           system had a major impact on the Portuguese merchant economy and it
           prompted a major renovation in the business community.24
                The long-term consequences of this collapse for Portugal could be ana-
           lyzed in the light of the model proposed by David Ricardo, precisely at the
           time when the events were taking place. When examining the sudden changes
           in the channels of trade and the effects of the shift between cycles of war and
           peace, Ricardo admitted that, in the face of quick variations and while the nec-
           essary adjustments to the new circumstances had not been made, a large part
           of the capital might be idle, or even lost, and full employment was a practical
           impossibility. This distress could be prolonged by the resistance offered by the
           capital owners to the transfer of their investments to new ventures and by the
           restrictions imposed by states and governments to the free ﬂow of trade.25 In
           view of the fact that many Portuguese merchants held on to their former
           undertakings and that most European countries adopted restrictive trading
           policies in the aftermath of the Congress of Vienna, it is hardly surprising that
           the economic problems arising from the breakdown of the colonial system
           took so long to be assimilated.