

           * Numbers in brackets are estimates
           Sources: Data for this table and charts in this article come from the Balanças geraes do
           commercio de Portugal com os domínios e as nasoes estrangeires and Balanças geraes do commercio
           de Portugal com o Brasil e dominios ultramarinos.




                                        Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 848




           848                                                          HAHR / November / Pedreira


           empires. But the troubles of war, as much as they supported the growth of the
           Portuguese-Brazilian merchant economy, produced sudden changes in the
           course of trade, which sometimes had damaging effects. Under these circum-
           stances, this growth proved to be uncertain.
                 The Portuguese system of trade operated on a very delicate balance. Thus
           the nature of the prosperity it experienced should be questioned. Was it
           merely the result of circumstantial or transient factors — the wars in the Euro-
           Atlantic world and the troubles they occasioned for other empires — or did it
           take root in more permanent conditions? Portuguese historians have not dis-
           cussed this issue at length and although they expressed differing views this did
           not arouse a true debate on the matter. In Brazil, on the other hand, this ques-
           tion was the subject of a more manifest controversy, giving room to a wide
           range of interpretations. Some authors deny the expansion, or tend to restrict
           it to a particular region, namely Maranhão, where cotton was grown.18 There
           are also those who are ready to acknowledge no more than a “seeming pros-
           perity,” generated by incidental factors.19 And those at last who argue for a
           substantial development, beneﬁting from of the structural change in the
           Atlantic economy, which was the joint effect of the demographic increase in
           Europe, the Industrial Revolution, the growth of long-distance trade (and the
           corresponding decline in shipping costs) and the coming of cotton as an indus-
           trial raw material.20 José Jobson de Andrade Arruda has suggested the advent
           of an “actual euphoria,” as against a “false euphoria,” and he even postulates
           that, had the favorable conjuncture not materialized, the structural factors
           would still have produced an economic growth both in Portugal and Brazil.21
                 This last assertion, as every assertion of the same kind, cannot of course
           be substantiated. To be sure, the factors arising from the propitious circum-
           stances of the late colonial period can be analytically distinguished from struc-
           tural factors, but historically both types of factors can hardly be disentangled,
           and the structural conditions only operated inside a particular historical con-
           juncture. The growth of the Euro-Atlantic system may well be the outcome of