

                18. Roberto C. Simonsen, História económica do Brasil, 6th ed. (São Paulo: Companhia
           Ed. Nacional, 1969), 187; and Nelson Werneck Sodré, A formação histórica do Brasil, 3d ed.
           (São Paulo: Ed. Brasiliense, 1964), 131.
                19. Celso Furtado, A formação económica do Brasil, 5th ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Fundo de
           Cultura, 1963), 112.
                20. Cáio Prado Júnior, História económica do Brasil, 6th ed. (São Paulo: Ed. Brasiliense,
           1961), 81.
                21. José Jobson de Andrade Arruda, O Brasil no comércio colonial (São Paulo: Ed. Ática,
           1980), 648.




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                  Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM      Page 849




           From Growth to Collapse                                                               849

           the structural dynamic, but the share of the Portuguese-Brazilian complex in
           that growth was determined by the conjuncture; and it is impossible to even
           “guesstimate” what it would have been in the absence of the favorable events
           occurring in the political-military arena.
                Nevertheless the prosperity, which is indisputable in the overseas trade, as
           much as it was dependent on those events, called for fundamental economic
           changes. The geography and composition of production shifted in both Brazil
           and Portugal. In Brazil, as previously noted, the cultivation of cane sugar
           spread in new areas, while cotton became a major staple for long-distance
           trade; and the agricultural renaissance touched other productions, both for the
           domestic and the export markets. In Portugal, the specialization of the mer-
           chant economy on the colonial trades became even stronger. The manufactur-
           ing activity expanded, with the advent of new industries (such as cotton print-
           ing) and the emergence of more concentrated modes of production. Easier
           access to imported raw materials and to the colonial market, which drained a
           much larger share of the manufacturing output, became the basis for a new
           pattern of industrial location, which invested the regions near the seacoast
           with a more prominent role. To be sure, this industrial development did not by
           any means bring the Portuguese economy to the verge of modern industrial-
           ization, in the road to which it should overcome many serious obstacles. How-
           ever, there were signiﬁcant structural changes and the commercial growth
           must not be underestimated. At the turn of the century, foreign trade per
           capita was larger in Portugal than in Spain, Italy, or Germany, and 5 to 7 per-
           cent of all European exports moved through the Portuguese ports.22
                The structural changes were in part to be reversed by the breakdown of
           the colonial system, which came in the form of a sudden collapse. The political-
           military setting, which had hitherto favored the carrying trade in the Por-
           tuguese empire, now moved against it, entailing the suspension of the colonial
           regime in 1808. The vulnerable position of the empire had already showed in
           the so-called War of the Oranges in 1801, when Spanish troops invaded Por-
           tugal, without any resistance. Had it not been for the general armistice, which
           was shortly signed in Amiens, and the terms of peace dictated by Spain would
           have been rather costly. Subsequently, the problems became even more acute.
           Once Napoleon put the continental system to use as his supreme weapon
           against Britain, the Portuguese-Brazilian empire was doomed. Portugal could