


                  34. It should be noted that Ernst Pijning tends to concentrate on the number of ship
           conﬁscations as the indicator of the administration’s ability to regulate illegal trade,
           arguing that the greater the number of conﬁscations, the more impotent the authorities.
           However, the statistics he offers for cases of prosecution for illegal trade in Rio de Janeiro
           tell a different story. After the peak reached in the 1730s, the number of cases
           increases in 1760 –75 (when supposedly illegal trade was under control and regulated) and,
           after ﬁfteen years of very low legal activity, rises again, although not as much,
           in 1790 –1800. See Pijning, “Controlling Contraband,” 230. This chronology is not
           consistent with Pijning’s assertions based on the frequency of ship conﬁscations and he
           tends to interpret the decline in indictments exactly in the opposite way he sees the
           decrease in conﬁscations. Ibid., 253.




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 858




           858                                                        HAHR / November / Pedreira


           decades before it took effect) must have worked as a deterrent. It restricted the
           economic advantage of illicit transactions, which the customary bribes paid to
           ofﬁcials also compressed.
                Moreover, British traders, who, under the prevailing circumstances, were
           the best suited to explore the opportunities of illegal trade (because they not
           only enjoyed competitive advantages in shipping and manufacturing but were
           also citizens of Portugal’s leading ally), met with a signiﬁcant handicap when
           trying to stretch their pursuits in Brazil. In fact, the British were not the best
           of customers for Brazilian merchandise. They had their own colonies in the
           Caribbean, which supplied them with similar commodities. Therefore, from
           1796 to 1806 they only got about one-ﬁfth of the Portuguese reexports of
           goods from Brazil, with a larger share in the case of cotton (50 percent on
           average), which formed the bulk of their imports (some 85 percent). This
           meant that, ultimately, British illegal trade to Brazil must have been a one-way
           trafﬁc, which certainly raised shipping costs. The only way British merchants
           could circumvent this restriction was by buying more goods in Brazil than
           those needed for British domestic consumption and to perform a distributive
           function similar to the one the Portuguese delivered. This is exactly what hap-
           pened after direct foreign trade was legalized in Brazil, when London became
           an emporium for Brazilian goods.35 However, as much as they used the threat
           of contraband to put pressure on the Portuguese government and have it
           reverse the restrictive trading policies, that pattern of trade could have only
           emerged in the aftermath of the suspension of the colonial system.
                The examination of the foreign trade of Brazil since the opening of the
           ports to foreign shipping may also shed some light on the problem of contra-
           band in the late colonial period. In 1812 the combined exports of Portugal and
           Britain to Brazil were virtually equivalent to the average shipments from Por-
           tugal in the period before the opening of the Brazilian ports. In the next few
           years, until 1817, aggregate exports increased by virtue of the resumption of
           Portuguese trade. Under the Treaty of 1810, British merchants enjoyed very
           favorable conditions for trade in Brazil. They paid tariffs of 15 percent ad val-
           orem, whereas foreign merchandise transported in Portuguese or Brazilian
           ships still paid 16 percent, even after they had been granted a deduction of
           one-third of the regular duties. Nevertheless, Brazilian imports from Britain
           remained fairly stagnant from 1812 to 1821 and although they ﬂuctuated
           around a higher level (2.5 up from 2 million pounds) from 1823 to 1830, they