




                                Published by Duke University Press
                                  Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira     1/4/01       5:25 PM       Page 851




           From Growth to Collapse                                                     851

           than the carrying trade. In 1818 the shipments of national industrial goods
           were just 10 percent off those of 1805 and were far larger than those of 1806.
           This was however an exceptionally good year for the manufacturing sector (on
           average, in 1815 –1818, exports did not go beyond 56.5 percent of the values
           reached in 1796 –1806). In fact, the more favorable results in the trade of
           national commodities must primarily be explained by the growth of wine (and
           especially Port wine) exports to Brazil, which almost doubled in volume and
           increased three-fold in terms of value. In the process of the adaptation to the
           new situation, a different pattern in the transactions with Brazil had emerged.
           The share of foodstuffs, which had formed a little over one-fourth of the
           exports of national merchandise to Brazil in 1796 –1806, went up to 55 per-
           cent. Therefore, the commercial relations with the former colony tended to
           conform to the general pattern of the Portuguese foreign trade. This was the
           beginning of a very important change. However, at least in this period — after
           the end of the old colonial system and before the independence of Brazil —
           products of national manufacture still played a signiﬁcant, though diminished,
           part in the overseas shipments.
                Under the prevailing conditions, Portuguese shipping still enjoyed some
           advantages in long-distance navigation. War inﬂicted severe losses to some
           European ﬂeets, which tended to be equipped with low tonnage ships, best
           suited for European trade.23 Furthermore, non-British products still had to
           pay 30 percent tariffs in the Brazilian market. Accordingly, for some time, only
           Britain successfully disputed the Portuguese monopoly in the trade with
           Brazil. Such circumstances, however, could not allow for more than a tempo-
           rary recovery. Since 1819, imports and exports to and from Brazil enter a new
           descent. This was the inescapable result of the postwar pattern of trade.
           Imports from Brazil kept up at 87 percent of the earlier values, while reexports
           of colonial merchandise did not go beyond 68 percent. At the beginning of the
           nineteenth century, trade between Portugal and Brazil was reasonably bal-
           anced. But after 1809, Portugal accumulated deﬁcits that could no longer be
           offset by Brazilian goods shipped to European markets. The balance of trade
           turned adverse on both fronts: the small deﬁcits (when they occurred) in the
           exchange with Brazil had grown almost ﬁve-fold, and the large surpluses in the
           transactions with the foreign nations had turned into signiﬁcant deﬁcits. The
           compression of Portuguese foreign trade was inevitable (see ﬁgure 1).
                Portuguese merchants themselves were well aware of the importance of
           trading privileges in their relations with Brazil. Without the assistance of the