


                22. Werner Sombart, Der moderne Kapitalismus, 3 vols. (Munich: Duncker &
           Humbolt, 1927), 2:957; and Paul Bairoch, Commerce extérieur et développement économique de
           l’Europe au XIXe siècle (Paris: Mouton, 1976), 267.




                                   Published by Duke University Press
                                Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira     1/4/01    5:25 PM     Page 850




           850                                                 HAHR / November / Pedreira


           not choose between British and French demands and could not resist them.
           Compliance to the continental system would bring about a maritime blockade
           and the occupation of at least some colonies by the British. Not to submit
           would mean war with France and ultimately the foreign rule. As Talleyrand
           himself said, the Portuguese were caught between two terrors. When the gov-
           ernment ﬁnally yielded to Napoleon’s terms, it was too late. The French
           troops invaded the country in 1807.
                As the French armies entered the country, the royal family left hurriedly
           for Brazil, trusting British support to eventually regain possession of the king-
           dom. The consequences of this choice weighted heavily on the future relations
           between Portugal and Brazil. The decree proclaiming Brazilian ports open to
           the ships of all friendly nations was one of the ﬁrst measures to be taken by the
           government on arriving in Brazil. This was envisioned as a temporary solu-
           tion, forced upon the government by the circumstances, but, in fact, it put an
           end to the old colonial system.
                During the next few years, struck ﬁrst by the British blockade and then by
           the calamities of war, the Portuguese merchant economy collapsed. Destruc-
           tion and turmoil hampered both industrial and agricultural production. Inter-
           nal trade was almost paralyzed and large quantities of foodstuffs were imported
           from 1811 to 1815. Colonial trade virtually stopped in 1808 and did not revive
           until 1814. In 1808–1813, exports of national commodities to Brazil had declined
           to 22.4 percent of the value reached in 1796 –1806, and the Portuguese carry-
           ing trade between Europe and Brazil suffered an even greater depression.
           Reexports of Brazilian goods to Europe sunk to 11.6 percent of the prewar
           yearly average and overseas shipments of European goods fell down to 10 per-
           cent of the former value.
                From 1808 upto 1813, Portugal was almost entirely isolated. Trade with
           the Netherlands, Hamburg, Denmark, and France stopped altogether, and
           communication with Sweden, Russia, and Prussia was also sometimes inter-
           rupted. Throughout the war, Portugal depended heavily on British supplies,
           and Britain very nearly monopolized the foreign trade of Portugal and Brazil.
           Furthermore, the 1810 treaties had granted the British a commanding voice in
           Portuguese affairs. Trade was now regulated by an agreement that removed all
           restrictions on British commodities (especially cotton textiles) and levied a sin-
           gle 15 percent ad valorem duty on imports.
                Under the new market conditions and trading regime, Portugal could no
           longer serve as the mandatory emporium for the transactions between Brazil
           and the foreign nations. Nevertheless, between 1814 and 1818 a signiﬁcant
           recovery set in. Once again, exports of Portuguese commodities fared better