


                 30. Ernst Pijning, “Controlling Contraband: Mentality, Economy and Society
           in Eighteenth-Century Rio de Janeiro” (Ph.D. diss., Johns Hopkins Univ., 1997), 81– 91,
           122 – 38.
                 31. Ibid.
                 32. Ibid., 127 – 28.
                 33. Novais, Portugal e Brasil na crise, 182 – 84; and Pijning, “Controlling
           Contraband,” 127.




                                  Published by Duke University Press
                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 857




           From Growth to Collapse                                                                   857

           almost untouched, because Portuguese merchants had long lost the control
           over slave trade to Brazilian-based traders. Yet another set of ships came from
           the region of Rio de la Plata. Trafﬁcking with Spanish America had long been
           an important means of obtaining silver bullion to be used in the East Indian
           trade. It was often encouraged by the government and conducted from the
           Colony of Sacramento until its restoration to the Spanish Monarchy in 1777.
           Now this business passed through the ports of Brazil, and although Por-
           tuguese authorities tried to stop the supply of slaves from those ports to Mon-
           tevideo and Buenos Aires, this did not seriously affect the colonial system.
           Therefore there were many varieties of illegal trafﬁc other than the one that
           posed a real threat to the monopoly the Portuguese merchants held over
           Brazilian trade; which was the direct communication between Brazil and the
           foreign countries (those in particular which were the major customers for
           tropical groceries and raw materials and the suppliers of the products of
           largest consumption in the Portuguese American colony).
                On the other hand, the problem with inferring a rise in contraband from
           the frequency of apprehensions and prosecutions is that it does not take into
           account independent variations in the ability, the disposition and the deter-
           mination of the administration to ﬁght smuggling. In fact, the number of
           conﬁscations may be a function of that ability and determination, rather than
           of the regularity of the clandestine operations themselves.34 And there is no
           doubt that the government was determined to curb contraband and to
           strengthen the colonial system. Evidence of this resolution can be found in the
           laws passed in 1785, banning manufacturing in Brazil and reinforcing the
           penalties and the jurisdiction of the viceroys against smuggling, and in 1772
           and 1803 attacking direct trade between the East Indies and Angola or Brazil,
           respectively. Moreover, the greater risk of harassment or conﬁscation (and
           even when the restitution of an arrested ship was pronounced it could be