


                26. Fernando A. Novais, Portugal e Brasil na crise do antigo sistema colonial, 1777 –1808,
           4th ed. (São Paulo: Hucitec, 1986), 13.
                27. Valentim Alexandre, Os sentidos do império: Questão nacional e questão colonial na crise
           do antigo regime português (Porto: Ed. Afrontamento, 1993), 77 –79.
                28. Novais, Portugal e Brasil na crise, 178.




                                     Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM        Page 855




           From Growth to Collapse                                                        855

           value. However, the deﬁcits he used for this purpose were grossly overesti-
           mated by the addition of money and bullion transactions, which were in part
           meant to reimburse the exchange of goods.29 Once adjusted, as they must be,
           the deﬁcits are unimpressive (a mere 4.2 percent of the imports from Brazil in
           1796 –1806) and the cumulative balance only becomes negative for Portugal
           after 1806. Furthermore, this whole calculation seems a heroic exercise. To
           infer the volume of illegal trade from the disparities in legal trade is a far from
           self-evident procedure. It not only postulates a propensity for short-term bal-
           ance in overseas trade (which cannot be conﬁrmed even in the longer run), but
           it also presumes that contraband was conﬁned to the unlicensed introduction
           of foreign goods in Brazil and that smugglers did not take anything in return
           for the merchandise they sold there.
                 For these reasons, Jobson Arruda’s estimates, about which he is himself
           very cautious, cannot be endorsed. This is not to say that the problem of con-
           traband must not be carefully examined, but the indignant protests of the chief
           comptroller, to which so much credence is given, must be taken cautiously. In
           fact, some of these complaints were directed against those forms of contraband
           that could harm national industrial exports and the Royal Treasury, but did not
           in the least harm the monopoly which Portugal held over the foreign trade of
           Brazil. From the perspective of the system of trade, the introduction of illicit
           goods in Brazil by Portuguese merchants, whom the comptroller strongly
           reproached for their lack of patriotism, as much as it could hurt the manufac-
           turing sector, corresponded to the reexport of foreign goods. This and other
           ways of evading the payment of customs duties and other taxes could damage
           ﬁscal receipts and were a cause for concern in the administration, but had little
           to do with the crisis of the colonial system. Furthermore, as a crown ofﬁcial
           sitting in a department expressly created to ﬁght off contraband, the comptrol-
           ler was bound to overstate his case. It is not surprising that the pessimistic
           forecasts he has to offer and the grumbling about illicit trade ruining legal
           trade are sometimes contradicted by the very ﬁgures he puts together.
                 The preceding remarks are not meant to challenge the notion that there
           was an extension of illegal trade in the early nineteenth century. In his disser-
           tation on the control over contraband in Rio de Janeiro, Ernst Pijning cer-
           tainly suggests that there was, and backs his contention with stronger docu-
           mentation than either Novais or Arruda had done. Ernst Pijning shows that in
           1800 –1807, the average number of foreign ships calling on the port of Rio de
           Janeiro (where they were allowed only when in need of water, food or repairs)