

               29. See Alexandre, Os sentidos do império, 51, 62 – 65.




                                   Published by Duke University Press
                                  Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM      Page 856




           856                                                       HAHR / November / Pedreira


           reached 54, up from 25 in the previous decade (1791–1799). He also sustains
           that during this period the authorities lost the ability to control contraband
           and that the growing number of conﬁscations and prosecutions as compared
           with the 1770s and 1780s only displayed this impotence.30
                This assertion must be understood in the context of the more general
           argument that contraband was inherent in the colonial system and it was the
           object of negotiation between administration and traders. Illegal trafﬁcking
           was either condoned or condemned, depending on the circumstances, such as
           the state of international affairs; the status, nationality and conduct of the
           offender; the sort of trafﬁcked goods; the conspicuousness of the infraction;
           the determination, ability and interests of the authorities and customs ofﬁcers.
           Throughout the eighteenth century, there were cycles in the attitude of the
           administration towards contraband: periods of easier regulation and tolerance
           giving way to decades of tighter control and persecution. In the late eigh-
           teenth and early nineteenth century, widespread smuggling pursuits put too
           much pressure on the authorities and made regulation virtually impossible.
           Therefore, ofﬁcials resorted to conﬁscation and prosecution.31
                This line of argument is of course debatable, and although the rise of ille-
           gal trade may be acknowledged, this acknowledgement must be made under
           strict qualiﬁcations. The admission of foreign ships in Brazilian ports may well
           be an indication of contraband, but it must be taken carefully as such. Not all
           ships were involved in smuggling. In times of war, which made navigation
           more hazardous, it was only natural that more vessels sought entry into the
           harbors of friendly or neutral territories. Furthermore, as Ernst Pijning him-
           self remarks, a sizeable part of those vessels were South Sea whalers, which
           could only sustain lesser smuggling operations, sometimes performed by the
           crews on their own account, against the instructions of the ship owners and
           the ofﬁcial trade policy of Great Britain.32 Furthermore, this was no innova-
           tion, as complaints against this sort of scheme go back at least to the 1770s.33
                Other vessels entering the port of Rio were slaving ships, which tried to
           sell captives in Brazil. This left the role of Portugal in the colonial system