


           Definitions of Crisis and the Problem of Contraband

           So far I have presented the disintegration of the Portuguese Atlantic empire in
           the form of a sudden collapse that interrupted a period of prosperity. How-
           ever, this is not the unanimous perspective on the matter. Leading Brazilian
           historians have proposed an alternative view, suggesting that the downfall of
           the colonial system was the culmination of a protracted crisis, rather than an
           abrupt turn of events.

                 24. In 1827, the aggregate losses from the breakdown of the colonial system and the
           corresponding decline in trade with Brazil were the equivalent of 90 percent of public
           revenue and two-thirds of public expenditure (in constant prices). In a rough estimate,
           this could amount to 8 percent of the GDP. See Pedreira, Estrutura industrial e mercado
           colonial, 364 – 65.
                 25. David Ricardo, The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3d ed. (London:
           John Murray, 1821), 309.




                                   Published by Duke University Press
                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01       5:25 PM       Page 854




           854                                                            HAHR / November / Pedreira


                 In his pathbreaking book on the subject, Fernando Novais postulated a
           deﬁnition of crisis as the result of a set of changes that tended to loosen the
           ties of subordination that bound colonies to the mother nations. In the eco-
           nomic sphere, these changes originated in the Industrial Revolution and in the
           consequent rise of a new industrial capitalism, which, with its inbred dynamic
           of expansion, entailed the breakdown of the colonial empires under their tra-
           ditional merchant conﬁguration. This meant that Portugal would eventually
           become redundant for Brazil and that the opening of the Brazilian ports to
           foreign shipping in 1808 was the epilogue rather than the beginning of the
           story. In the political arena, the American Revolution performed a similar dis-
           solving function. In this sense, the crisis could perfectly run parallel to a cycle
           of expansion in colonial production and trade, such as the prosperity that the
           Portuguese colonial system enjoyed at the turn of the century, which Novais
           fully acknowledges.26
                 The problem with this assertion, captivating as it may seem, is that it can-
           not be either refuted or substantiated, as the demonstration is virtually incor-
           porated in the very deﬁnition of the crisis.27 Since the breakdown of the old
           colonial system is anticipated as the inevitable consequence of major underly-
           ing movements and prominent events, irrespective of the actual course of his-
           torical developments, historical evidence becomes irrelevant, for it is unable to
           corroborate or to rebut the interpretation implicit in the deﬁnition of the cri-
           sis itself. The sole documentation that Novais submits in favor of this assump-
           tion is the possible increase of illegal trafﬁcking in Brazil. But even this is
           offered as a conjecture, and he actually writes, “it is not too daring to suppose
           an extension of contraband in Brazilian shores.”28
                 Based on this suggestion and endorsing the recurrent complaints of the
           chief comptroller of the general superintendence on contraband (who was
           entrusted with keeping the ledgers of the balance of trade), José Jobson de
           Andrade Arruda presented illegal trade as a major indicator of the crisis in the
           colonial system, because it showed that Portugal could no longer supply the
           colony with the goods it needed. To substantiate this assertion, he tried to
           compute the value of illicit trafﬁcking, assuming that the cumulative deﬁcits
           collected by Portugal in the trade with Brazil could be the measure of that