




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira      1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 861




           From Growth to Collapse                                                                 861

           in crisis? Actually, contraband was congenial to the early modern imperial
           structures, built on monopolies and exclusive claims to trading routes and
           territories, which authorities could not strictly enforce. The basis for such
           trafﬁcking was the superiority of some colonial powers vis-à-vis the others,
           and in the case of Portugal, the naval, industrial and military ascendancy of
           England, which was a long established fact, clearly antedating the Industrial
           Revolution.43
                On the other hand, the monopoly that Portugal held over the interna-
           tional and long distance trade of the colonies had always been far from com-
           plete, and the ability and determination towards its enforcement varied widely
           over time. Outsiders played a signiﬁcant role in the building of the Portuguese
           empire. From the earlier tentative steps, merchants and sailors from Italy, Flan-
           ders, and Castile took part in Portuguese undertakings. The navigation and
           trade on the Cape route immediately invited the interest of the great merchant
           houses of the day. Italian and German syndicates were prominent in the out-
           ﬁtting of the ﬂeets, the ﬁnancial arrangements for the expeditions and the
           marketing of spices.44 On the other hand, Flemings shipped a sizeable part of
           Brazilian sugar in the earlier stages of the trade. During the seventeenth cen-
           tury, either as a matter of necessity or as a matter of convenience, British and
           Dutch merchants and their ships were not infrequently admitted in the Por-
           tuguese ﬂeets sailing to Brazil. Under the charter of the General Company for
           the trade with Brazil (1649 –1662), four ships were allowed to sail each year
           from northern Europe directly to the colony, as a way of meeting the local
           demand for codﬁsh. Furthermore, by means of the reexporting business,
           which greatly expanded since the later seventeenth century, other European
           powers secured a signiﬁcant share on the returns from the Brazilian trade.
           Reﬂecting upon this topic, a prominent Portuguese scholar, Ribeiro Sanches,
           estimated in 1735 that this was after all an unwritten condition for those pow-
           ers to tolerate Portuguese rule over Brazil.45
                Inter-colonial exchange was another way in which the monopoly of the
           mother country was circumvented. The East African trading posts had long

                43. Allan Christelow, “Great Britain and the Trades from Cádiz and Lisbon to
           Spanish America and Brazil, 1759 –1783,” HAHR 27 (1947).
                44. Jorge M. Pedreira, “ ‘To Have or not to Have’: The Economic Consequences of
           Empire: Portugal, 1415 –1822,” in The Costs and Beneﬁts of European Imperialism from the
           Conquest of Ceuta, 1415, to the Treaty of Lusaka, 1974, ed. P. K. O’Brien and Leandro Prados
           (Madrid, 1998), 117 –18.
                45. José Vicente Serrão, “Pensamento econômico e política econômica no período
           pombalino: O caso de Ribeiro Sanches,” Ler História 9 (1986): 10.