


                 46. Maxwell, Conﬂicts and Conspiracies, 215; and Pijning, “Controlling Contraband,”
           244 – 45.
                 47. Arruda, O Brasil no comércio colonial, 351– 604, 669 –74; and Novais, Portugal e
           Brasil na crise, 289.




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                       Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira         1/4/01        5:25 PM     Page 863




           From Growth to Collapse                                                                   863




           Figure 2. Percentage of Price Surplus of Reexports of Sugar, Cotton, Cocoa, Coffee, and
           Tobacco Over Imports of Brazilian Goods. The aggregate average is adjusted according
           to relative weight in total reexports.


           system) or the volume of the illegal transactions was insufﬁcient to change the
           price mechanisms. In any case, this conﬁrms that the colonial system had not
           as yet been displaced, and that contraband continued to be assimilated by the
           system.
                There is no evidence, then, of a protracted crisis, caused by either structural
           or circumstantial factors. Suddenly, when the tide turned, the same political and
           military circumstances that had greatly favored the remarkable growth of Por-
           tuguese overseas trade now originated the collapse of the colonial system. Brazil
           was immediately cut apart from Portugal and had to adapt to the new state of
           affairs. The presence of the court and king, with a large following (amongst
           which some merchants), the development of new institutions, and the setting
           up of a British trading community certainly helped that adaptation to come
           through. In the line of preparation (may a momentary teleological reasoning be
           allowed), the build up of a domestic economy and domestic trade, as portrayed
           by João Luís Ribeiro Fragoso, is certainly no less signiﬁcant than the rise of con-
           traband, which did not in any case seriously disrupt Portuguese-Brazilian trade.48

                48. See Pedreira, Homens de grossa aventura.




                                       Published by Duke University Press
                               Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira    1/4/01    5:25 PM    Page 864




           864                                              HAHR / November / Pedreira


           In conclusion, after a strong period of growth, collapse came by way of the
           sudden disintegration of the institutional framework under which the Por-
           tuguese merchant empire had long been working. Without that protective
           structure, in the presence of a government that was now primarily concerned
           with the development of Brazil, and facing Britain’s unchallenged economic
           and military superiority, it was only a matter of time before Portuguese mer-
           chants completely surrendered any chances of reclaiming their former posi-
           tion in the overseas trade.