




                                    Published by Duke University Press
                                    Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM       Page 860




           860                                                          HAHR / November / Pedreira


           strong opportunities for local accumulation.41 However, many of these mer-
           chants — including the most prominent —were only recent emigrants to
           Brazil. They took part in networks of business agents and correspondents, in
           which kinship and marriage bonds played a signiﬁcant role, supplying a base
           for the organization of trading associations and connections.42 This was the
           social fabric of which the colonial system was made. The opening of Brazilian
           ports and the forced interruption of trade with Portugal did not promptly tear
           it a part, and it would be surprising that loose clandestine connections could
           have done anything to actually jeopardize it.


           Conclusion

           The pattern of trade prevalent after the colonial regime had been discontinued
           suggests that the Brazilian market was not so large as to have sustained a mas-
           sive overﬂow of contraband trade. It also shows that Brazil still needed some
           preparation before it could do without an European intermediary, a role that
           the Portuguese merchants played under colonial rule and which they in part
           lost to the British after the opening of the Brazilian ports. Therefore, the
           extension of contraband in the early nineteenth century can hardly be depicted
           as the inevitable consequence of the rise of industrial capitalism. The sudden
           upsurge in the number of foreign ships entering the port of Rio de Janeiro
           (still no more than 27 in 1798, but up to 70 two years later) clearly conﬁrms
           that this was not the effect of a structural economic movement, but rather the
           consequence of the instability in Atlantic trade and shipping and possibly of a
           growing ineffectiveness of the administration, which was in part due to the
           international setting as well.
                 From the perspective of the elucidation of the crisis, the question, how-
           ever, is not that illegal trade existed, or even that it was on a rising tide, but
           that it grew important enough as to displace the colonial system and change its
           basic workings. The fact is that contraband had always been there. In truth, it
           is impossible to assure that during the gold cycle contraband was more or less
           important than it was in the early nineteenth century. Then as well protests
           against smuggling were plentiful. Does that mean that the colonial system was

                 41. Fragoso, Homens de grossa aventura; and Manolo Florentino, Em costas negras: Uma
           história do tráﬁco de escravos entre África e o Rio de Janeiro, séculos XVIII e XIX (São Paulo:
           Companhia das Letras, 1997).
                 42. Jorge M. Pedreira, “Os homens de negócio da praça de Lisboa de Pombal
           ao Vintismo (1755 –1822): Diferenciação, reprodução e identiﬁcação de um grupo social”
           (Ph.D. diss., Univ. Nova de Lisboa, 1995).