




                                   Published by Duke University Press
                                   Hispanic American Historical Review



HAHR 80.4_09 Pedreira       1/4/01      5:25 PM      Page 862




           862                                                         HAHR / November / Pedreira


           fallen into the orbit of the Indian commercial network. In the Atlantic, Por-
           tuguese merchants lost the control over slave trade to Brazilian and African-
           based slavers, who enjoyed more favorable economic conditions (namely the
           access to the by-products of sugar and tobacco cultivation, which were used to
           pay for captives in West Africa). The government did little to stop this,
           although the chartered companies formed under Pombal took an important
           share in this business. In the Gold Coast, where Bahian traders met the agents
           of foreign merchants, slave trade continued to provide a basis for contra-
           band.46 On the other hand, even though the authorities did not always con-
           done the stopover at Bahia of ships returning from the East, trafﬁc between
           India and Brazil (driven by the exchange of tobacco for calicoes to be used in
           slave trade) became very signiﬁcant.
                This discloses the pervious character of the Portuguese colonial system.
           Should contraband be a major indicator of the crisis, then it must be assumed
           that it operated permanently under a crisis. In fact, breaches were probably
           more conspicuous exactly when the government was acting harder to tighten
           the colonial regime. Admittedly the expansion of the late colonial period may
           have attracted more illegal trade. It is only natural that contraband be more
           active when trade is rising and that it takes a share in the prosperity. But how
           did this change the colonial system?
                Arruda has deﬁned the system by an in-built mechanism of exploitation,
           which was based on the monopoly price that Portugal could charge the foreign
           nations for goods from Brazil, at the expense of the Brazilian themselves. The
           surplus of reexport prices over import prices is supposed to be the measure of
           that exploitation, which deprived Brazilians of the proﬁts of the export trade.47
           This notion is not consistent with the signiﬁcance with which Arruda invests
           contraband. The system, as depicted by him, could not operate up against such
           contraband, because to be effective it required the monopoly on which it was
           based to be effective too. Had the monopoly not been in full force and the sur-
           plus price on reexports would have inevitably been trimmed by the rising com-
           petition. Instead there is no clear pattern indicating the decrease of such sur-
           plus (see ﬁgure 2). Either the smugglers paid the same prices as the Portuguese
           merchants for the Brazilian merchandise (and in this case smuggling presented
           no advantage to Brazil, meaning that there was no alternative to an exploitative