

- Sir John Ross

History has all too easily forgotten the naval war following Trafalgar. Napoleon's inyasion and defeat in Russia, and the successes of the British army in the Peninsula, ha\'e detracted attention from the Royal Navy's actions following that seemingly decisive engagement. Julian Corbett recognised this early in the 20 th century and spoke of the temptation amongst historians to 'ring down the curtain there and then,.2 Mackesy in 1957 complained of a similar mentality, arguing that fifty years later 'the struggle at sea has generally been written as though it ended at Trafalgar, before the war had run a quarter of its course,.3 For all of these promptings, this is still the case nearly ninety years after Corbett's article. The Royal Navy's role moved increasingly away from decisive battle from 1805; sea power continued to be the keystone of British strategy, as ever the nation's major offensive and defensive force. It continued to dominate the seas around the globe, resisting Napoleon's Continental System, harassing enemy trade, supporting British forces and those of their allies from the Peninsula to the West Indies, and protecting the crucial maritime trade on which Britain depended. In doing so it made a crucial contribution to the fall of Napoleon. This period lacks the glamour so attractive to battle-focused historians, as the Royal Navy's role became more subtle though no less important.

Nowhere was this more the case than in the Baltic theatre between 1808 and 1812. Barring the ice-ridden winter months, there was a constant British naval presence under

1 John Ross, Memoirs and Correspondence of Admiral Lord de Saumarez, From Original Papers on Possession of the Family (Richard Bentley, London, 1838), pp. 214-5. 2 J. S. Corbett, 'Napoleon and the British Navy After Trafalgar', Quarterly Review, No. 237 (1922), p. 241. 3 Piers Mackesy, The War in the Mediterranean /803-/8/0 (Harvard University Press, 1957) p. vii.

the on1n1and of Sir James Saumarez. By 1808, virtually all of mainland Europe (Sweden e cepted, and it too would join the war in 1810) was in a state of enforced hostility to Britain, a the map below how.

Figure 1

Europe at the height of Napoleon's power, 1808

• D D

French Empire 
'Greater Empire' , subject to 
Napoleon 
Neutral! Nominal 
allies 
Hostile to 
Napoleon 

N

Political hostility became economic hostility, as Napoleon set up his Continental System, a continental blockade aimed at removing British economic power from Europe. The Berlin Decree of 1806 and Milan Decrees of 1807 prohibited all trade with the British, banned all British goods, and declared any captured would be 'fair prize' and confiscated. 4 Napoleon was in a position to wreck Britain's continental trade altogether, particularly in the Baltic where this would damage Britain the most. It was an area of vital strategic importance, firstly because of the quantity of naval stores so crucial to

4 Lance E, Davis and Stanley L. Engerman, Naval Blockades in Peace and War: An Economic History since 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 2006) p, 29.