

than double to all Europe put together'. 16

The importance of the Baltic theatre to Britain thus emerges. Large convoys passed between Britain and the Baltic. In 1805, 11,537 merchant ships passed through the Sound, over half going to Britain.

17

It was essential that the trade continued, despite the war with France. And continue it did: convoys so large that, as one Captain remembered, 'at one time, with over 400 vessels, under charge of the Hero, ourselves, two frigates and a bomb, we never saw the head of the convoy from the time of leaving Wingoe Sound' left the Baltic.

I8

By late 1807 British policymakers had great concerns over their trade with the Baltic nations. Denmark's hostility could be virtually guaranteed, not least due to the pre-emptive attack on Copenhagen that same year.

19

The agreement at Tilsit saw Russia enter into the Continental System, cordoning off many vital ports, centres for British trade, along the Baltic coastline. Prussia, a demoralised French client-state after its humbling at lena in 1806, also continued to pay allegiance to France, and thus the Continental System. In 1808, only Sweden in the Baltic region remained an ally of

16 TNA, FO 22/63/7-11,11 March 1811, J Oddy, extract from Oddy's Treatise on European Commerce. 
17 Hall, British Strategy, p. 89. 
]1' David Bonner-Smith, ed. Recollections of My Sea Life: From 1808 to 1830, Captain John Harvey 
Boteler, RN. (NRS, 1942) p. 10. 
19 In 1807 the British launched an attack on Copenhagen, aimed at removing the Danish fleet from the 
grasp of the French, an operation that was very successful. For the most recent account see Thomas Munch 
Petersen, Defying Napoleon: How Britain Bombarded Copenhagen and Seized the Danish Fleet (Stroud, 
UK: Sutton Publishing, 2007). 

Britain and that country too would become an ally of Napoleon in November 1810. It was decided to send a fleet to the Baltic the following year under Sir James Saumarez charged with the protection of this British maritime trade.

The Baltic fleet under Sir James Saumarez had objectives that were crucial to British interests. In their instructions to Saumarez, the Admiralty decided that the protection of trade was his foremost responsibility. 'Their lordships consider the security of the trade from capture or annoyance as of the first importance' they wrote. 20 Ships under neutral colours would be furnished with licenses to avoid capture. 21 Despite the Continental Blockade Sweden remained open and Gothenburg became a vital centre for British exports, which continued their journey into the Baltic under the guise of neutral goods on neutral ships, especially as the economic incentive to sabotage French prohibitions on traffic with Britain steadily increased.

22

As early as 1808, the hostility to French policies was evident, as was the urge to trade with Britain. Captain Peter Paget, gaining intelligence on the north German coast wrote that: 'The people in general appeared dissatisfied with the French, whom the Masters said took everything, and paid for nothing ... they everywhere speak of the English in terms of praise, and peace is the ,; universal cry' . --'