

Martin Wilcox has been a congenial colleague over the past three years; his knowledge of economic history, victualling contractors and English ales has greatly helped the writing process. Our career paths may diverge, but I will always remember my time on the 'victualling team' fondly. Above all, this thesis owes its existence to my supervisor and mentor Roger Knight. I have been fortunate enough to benefit from his wealth of knowledge and unceasing advice in the course of researching and writing. He has always encouraged: indeed, he has occasionally needed to rein in, and lowe him many thanks. If for nothing else, his efforts to remove the word 'huge' from my vocabulary will always be appreciated. I am obliged to both Roger and Martin for allowing me to peruse the drafts of their forthcoming work on victualling.

Lastly, I would like to thank my parents, who not only nurtured my interest in history from an early age, but also undertook the unenviable task of reading this thesis from cover to cover. I am more indebted to them than they can possibly imagine.

IV

Abstract

This thesis analyses the victualling system that distributed provisions to the Royal Navy tleet in the Baltic between 1808 and 1812, asking how it was done and with what success, measuring its performance over time. It covers the operational and strategic consequences of an improving logistical service, but also enables significant judgments to be made on the 18

th

century state, its performance under pressure of war, the public-private relationship, and the links between supply and diplomacy.

The transportation of prOVISIons to the Baltic posed senous problems for naval administrators, politicians and admirals alike. This thesis shows that in practice, naval supply was conducted very effectively; operations in the Baltic were not harmed for want of provisions. The state used the resources of the private sector, particularly the market for shipping, to serve its interests. In the Baltic itself, means were found to secure provisions locally, even from countries in contlict with Britain. Sweden - forced into an unwanted war with Britain by Napoleon - was happy to supply the British though it required much discretion and diplomatic intrigue to avoid the ears of French spies.

Wide scale governmental reform, particularly the Commission for Naval Revision which reported from 1809, brought enhanced timeliness and efficiency to the victualling service. By 1810 a tleet lying in the Baltic was as well supplied as one lying off Deptford, significantly widening operational capabilities. The successful British blockade in the Baltic could not have been achieved twenty years earlier. It is argued that administrative developments created a strategic watershed, after which naval power could be more fully mobilised than ever before.

v

Table of Contents

Acknowledgelnents ... iii 
Abstract ... v 
List of Figures ... ix 
List of Tables ... x 
l\bbre\'iations ... xii 
Introd Dction ... 1 
The Baltic: A Forgotten Theatre ... 1 0 
The Historiography of Naval Administration and the Significance of Victualling ... 15 
Methodology ... 21 
Supplying the Baltic Fleet ... 24 
Chapter 1: Victualling the Navy and the British State, 1780-1812 ... 27 
th 
The 18 Century State ... 29 
Naval Administration and the French Wars: The State Reforms Itself ... 33 
War and Administrative Reform ... .43 
Chapter 2: Evolution in the Navy: the Strategic Consequences of an Improving Victualling 
~~Sttelll •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• ,,~ 
Victualling in the Early 18 th Century: 1683-1755 ... .48 
Victualling During The Seven Years War ... 50 
The War of American Independence ... 56 
The French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars ... 60 
Chapter 3: The Challenges of Baltic Victualling ... 66 
Concerns for the Fleet: Economics and Administration ... 67 
Previous Precedents and the Confidence of Naval Administration ... 74 
Concerns for the Fleet: Geographical and Climatic ... 77 
Chapter 4: Naval Administration and the Provisioning of Fleets Abroad ... 86 