

finance. Raising money was one thing, how it was used another: the spending of the British state has been overlooked. How effectively were resources used?

In particular and most relevant to this thesis, the success of the Royal Navy during the Napoleonic wars is increasingly seen to depend on the area of government and administration as ITIuch as the fighting capabilities of its fleets or armies. Michael Hayden pointed to the efforts of Graham, and in particular Baugh, when he commented in 1980 that 'the recent trend in British naval history is away from narrative and analysis of tactics and strategy and towards the study of naval administration' .67 No longer can naval history be studied solely in the form of battles and operations; no longer can it be studied in isolation from its administrative, economic and political moorings. As important as battles such as Trafalgar were, there is an increased awareness that administrative efforts in finance and logistics were crucial to Britain's ultimate success.

The pioneer of 'the New Naval History', or at least naval history that aimed to look beyond the battle-fleet and consider the administrative backbone of the Royal Navy, was Daniel Baugh. Two works, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole and a complementary volume of documents supplementing the original monograph of 1965 Naval Administration 1715-1750 set the benchmark for this field, both in originality of his approach and the quality of the scholarship.68 In both he traced the evolution of British naval administration in the 18

th

century, highlighting firstly its complexity and then its effectiveness. Baugh found that the British naval administration in the first half of the eighteenth century was 'basically sound and capable of reform' .69 Given the obstacles facing the 18 th century administrator, not least the problems of size (the Royal Navy swallowed half of public revenue) and overbearing commercial interests, British naval administration actually did sterling work.7o Gradish considered British naval administration in the period of the Seven Years War. The records demonstrate that 'most

67 See foreword to Stephen F. Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy during the Seven Years War 
(Royal Historical Society, London, 1980) p. xii. 
68 Daniel A. Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole (Princeton University Press, 1965), 
Daniel A. Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, (Navy Records Society, 1977). 
69 Baugh, Naval Administration 1715-1750, p. xii. 
70 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 6. 

of the credit for this achievement [furnishing materials of war] has to be given to the nayal administrators who provided the navy with the manpower and material with which

to wage war'. 71 '-

Since the work of Baugh, administrative naval history has almost become a discipline in itself. The administrative and technological capacities of the Royal Navy have been examined in studies of shipbuilding, the royal dockyards, the ordnance and gun production, manning levels and overseas yards. 72 An unpublished thesis by M.J. Williams debates the naval administration of Earl of Sandwich during the American War, and puts forward a more moderate and sympathetic argument about his time in office. 'Sandwich', he argued, 'was perhaps only second to Anson as an administrator'. 73 Mary Ellen Condon's thesis on the administration of the Transport Board is a valuable addition to the field. outlining the creation of the Transport Board and the benefits this brought to naval supply. the inadequacies of which had been revealed by the American war. 74 This was followed by David Syrett's work on transports in 1970, focusing on the hiring of transports during the earlier War of American Independence. 75 N.A.M. Rodger's Command of the Ocean is separated into chapters in which 'administration' is placed on