

More important than the fear over imports was the strategic and political threat Britain could pose to Russia. The sea control exercised by the British Baltic fleet enabled it to go on the offensive. Britain replied to the Continental System with Orders in Council in 1807 and blockaded any port refusing to trade with their merchants. Again, the Baltic would be a crucial theatre for this economic warfare. Sir Stephen Sharp, British consul general in St Petersburg hoped that economic difficulties would persuade the Tsar to abandon his participation in the Continental System. As he wrote in December 1809, 'Let her be one year without exporting and she will really appreciate the value of our connexion' .29 Thus sea power took on an offensive mantle, one that would prove ultimately successful.3o It was Napoleon's fury at the official revival of Russian trade with Britain that led to his invasion of Russia in 1812.

James Cable has argued that there was no 'striking example of the use of naval force for political purposes, nor did Britain attempt to employ it as often, or on the scale, as France ... [it] ... made sense for Britain to engage in naval war for its own sake', since it already had the world's strongest navy.31 As this thesis will show, this is not the case. For

27 Ibid p. 298. 
2x SRO, HA 93/6/1/43, Admiralty Orders, 16 April 1808. 
29 TNA, FO 65171. 
30 In the Admiralty orders there were further lesser orders: to prevent the passage of troops from the 
continent across the Belt into Zealand and Norway. SRO, HA 93/6/1/43, Admiralty Orders, 16 April 1808. 
31 Cable, James, The Political Influence of Naval Force in History (Macmillan, 1998), p. 52. 
9 

the Baltic fleet. command of the sea was not 'incidental' to its political aims; it was a means to ultimate political goals, the protection of its Baltic trade, in particular the naval stores so essential to the Navy itself, and the wearing down of Napoleon's Continental System.

The Baltic Sea: A Forgotten Theatre

GiYen the importance of the Baltic theatre to British interests, it is remarkable that it has been ignored by historians. In the post-Trafalgar period, with isolated exceptions such as the action at Copenhagen in 1807, the attention of historians has turned landwards, concerning itself with the more glorious actions in the Iberian Peninsula, the campaigns in 1813--+ and the Waterloo campaign.

32

Indeed, the Baltic region has been overlooked throughout Britain's span as a great power. For instance, Andrew D. Lambert noted that the Baltic region had been treated as a 'sideshow' by the majority of scholars writing on the Crimean War.

33

Jan Glete too pointed out that syntheses of naval history and ~apoleonic Wars have concentrated on the Atlantic hemisphere; 'why there were considerable regional navies in the Baltic and Levant is not discussed and sometimes

hardly mentioned'. 34

The absence of the Baltic region from the historical mainstream is unfortunate. Historians haye often ignored or downplayed the theatre in calculations of French defeat. Rory Muir underplays the importance of the theatre; he comments that 'the war shifted away from the Baltic' after 1808, somehow ignoring five years of conflict, economic warfare, and on at least one occasion the near possibility of a battle-fleet action to rival any other in the French Revolutionary or Napoleonic Wars. Though he allows that the Baltic was 'the principal theatre for British activity in the first six months of the Portland ministry', its