

12 Aylmer, 'Genesis of Modern Bureaucracy', p. 106. Harling, Old Corruption, p. 10. 
13 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 14. 
14 Geoffrey Holmes, Augustan England: Professions, State and Society 1680-1730 (George Allen and 
Unwin, 1982) p. 244. 
15 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 15. 
16 Ibid p. 23. 
30 

century. the efforts of Harley and Godolphin had begun the process whereby men of business and talent were brought in to government, ahead of political appointees. The new departInents created after 1680 allowed 1 13 commissioners at the head of 18 different Boards; 'most of these commissioners, outside the Admiralty, the Board of Trade and the Board of Ordnance, were essentially non-political', argued Holmes. And indeed, a 1709 investigation ascertained that there had been only two instances in the Board of Ordnance since 1683 of clerks dismissed at the whim of an incoming principal officer. In the Admiralty and Navy Board "the overriding pattern was one of survival, either until death or until retirement, for almost everyone except temporary clerks', rather than political appointments. 17 A permanent, professional state civil service was the result, with increased departmentalism and specialisation, The departmental nature of naval administration \\Oi II be examined in Chapter 4.

'Ability' rather than 'contacts' decided appointments to a much higher degree than has often been thought. For example, the English Revenue Commissioners represented the 'hard core' of experience in the revenue departments of the late 18

th

century. As Ward argues, 'despite all the claims of the aristocratic and political world ... a considerable number of commissioners were in effect professional civil servants to whom administration provided the career of a lifetime', It was possible for men with few advantages to rise to the top of a Government department. 18

This was particularly true of naval departments. As Baugh points out, venality and neglect had been so extensive in the eighteenth century navy 'that an administrative historian, if he did not know in advance that the British navy was by far the strongest and most consistently victorious navy of the period, could easily end with a catalogue of reasons for British naval collapse' .19 The Victualling Board in the mid 18

th

century was certainly not built on foundations of professionalism; in Middleton's words it 'provides one of the worst examples of the 18

th

century patronage system', with all of its members

17 Holmes, Augustan England, pp. 246-7. 
IX WR Ward, 'Some Eighteenth Century Civil Servants: The English Revenue Commissioners 1754-98', 
(English Historical Review, 70, 1955) p. 41-44. 
19 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 2. 

'placenlen to whom hard work and administrative dedication were uncongenial'. For instance. Sir Francis Stiles, Commissioner of the Bakehouse was a cultured man, whose post lay within the patronage of the Treasury and was a mere rung on a ladder. He was not, l\liddleton pithily observed, a man interested in baking. 2o The First Lord of the Adtniralty Anson insisted a seafaring person be appointed hoy taker; his insistence on this point demonstrates that under normal circumstances such positions did not go to men \yho knew their business. 21