

The oyerall efforts of the Victualling Board are remarkable; for example, the Navy's yictualling tonnage between 1803 and 1807 quadrupled, and did so again by 1812, numbering 109 vessels of 31,827 tons.

98

These are numbers unparalleled before in British naval history; provisioning the Napoleonic War was an unprecedented task. Commentaries on the worth of the Victualling Board itself are valuable, but less useful without studies of how the fleets were supplied at lower levels, down the chain of command. Questions of the efficiency of British naval victualling during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars go unanswered.

At a time when government spending is continually challenged and contested, the desire of eighteenth and nineteenth century administrators to improve the effectiveness of the state becomes all the more relevant. Indeed, in an environment in which the utility of the Royal Navy and the political uses of seapower are discussed ever more frequently, the need for logistical excellence, alongside technological change to support fighting capacity, continues to be essential. 99 There is still little known about the administrators who worked on the war effort, on whom policy and management decisions fell. Theatres distant from Wellington and Waterloo are also neglected; it is impossible to disagree with Esdaile on this point. 100 From the First Lord of the Admiralty down to agent victuallers afloat, the supply of the Baltic fleet is an area requiring further investigation. The

97 Ian R. Christie, Wars and Revolutions (Edward Arnold, London, 1982) pp. 290, 296. 
98 Hall, British Strategy, p. 39 
99 For instance Jeff McKnaughton, 'Searching High and Low for Innovative Solutions to Improve Naval 
Logistics Efforts' (Military Logistics Forum, Vol. 2, Issue 4 (July 2008). 
100 Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (Longman, Pearson Education, 1995) pp. ix-x. 
25 

campaIgn for 'economical reform' in Britain urged reductions on government e\.penditure, for them 'all government expenditure was inherently corrupting' .101 The appropriate use of public funds continues to concern us today; such historical issues do not seem that far away.

Ultimately Britain required a flexible and stable administration, combined with practitioners who could carry out the logistical effort at sea. On this rested the whole British war effort. For all the breakthroughs in inter-disciplinary studies mentioned earlier, connections between historical sub-disciplines are still at a primitive stage. i\' .A.~l. Rodger pointed out in his most recent work, for example, that 'economic and agricultural historians, on one side, and naval historians on the other, have built few bridges bet\\'een their subjects' .102 This thesis hopes to bridge a gap between operational, administrative and political history. In 2004, Jan Glete complained that 'it is unfortunate that there are few modern studies of naval warfare and the political roles of sea power in the Baltic' .103 This thesis will redress the balance.