

101 Rodger, The Command of the Ocean, p. 476. 
102 Ibid, p. 582. 
103 Glete, Jan, 'Navies and Power Struggle', pp. 66-7. 
26 

Chapter 1: Victualling the Navy and the British State,

1780-1812

It is said our constitution is not well calculated for war. I know of no reason why, but because men cannot be found to attend to business. - Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782.1

Historians writing on government and administration in the 18 th century are confronted with the idea of 'Old Corruption'. The term's source, the contemporary reformer William Cobbett, defined it as a parasitic system that taxed the wealth of the nation and diverted it into the pockets of a narrow political clique, whose control of patronage, government contracts and rotten boroughs all hit the common man hard. Historians have taken this notion and expanded it, seeing it as something more than simply social inequality. Philip Harling has commented in his work on the subject of 'Old Corruption', that the French Reyolutionary and Napoleonic Wars led to an enormous growth in taxes, public debt, central government agencies and 'bureaucratic sclerosis'; in consequence the government 'inspired serious attacks on the ostensible "extravagance" of the state & insatiable greed of its ministers'. 2 In other words, the efficiency of the state was called into question, in particular how it allocated resources. As Harling comments, 'while the state had turned into a yery efficient tax engine, Committee members [the 1797 Finance Committee] concluded, it was still lamentably wasteful in the manner in which it allocated public money·. 3 From the 1780s there were persistent if irregular calls for 'economic reform'. Criticism was directed against the management of public finance, with repeated parliamentary committees of accounts to examine expenditure and methods of accounting.-+ Herein lies a paradox: how could a state where patronage, favouritism, privilege were rife, order itself to fight and win a global war in which unprecedented revenues were collected and government expenditure exceeded all previous records? The

1 Charles Middleton to Lord Shelburne, 11 September 1782, Barham Papers, Vol. II, p. 66. 
2 Philip Harling, The Waning of 'Old Corruption ': The Politics of Economic Reform in Britain, 1779-1846 
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1996) p. 2. 
3 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 75. 
4 MJ Daunton, Progress and Poverty: An Economic and Social History of Britain 1700-1850 (Oxford 
University Press, 1995) p. 516. 

answer of course is that it could not. The raising and managing of exceptional amounts of revenue required an overhaul of the British state's administrative machinery.

Judging the efficiency of the 18

th

century British state is not an easy task. The functioning of the entire British state is too large a subject for this chapter; instead it will focus on the reforming instincts of the naval branches of government, particularly those involved in the production and movement of provisions. The Victualling and Transport Boards are interesting windows into the nature of the British state, at war and under pressure to reform. Pool has noted that even after Britain's greatest victories at sea the civil administration of the Navy suffered from 'almost continuous criticism because of its alleged corruption and inefficiency,.5 These are but two government departments. There is however good reason to focus solely on these institutions. In 1800 the total naval expenditure was £14,809"+44, of which the victualling component came to £5,209,248 and transports £1,499,007.