

11

The second difference was one of 'good government'. By the mid-nineteenth century, and possibly not until the 1870s with the Northcote-Trevelyan Report, there was an

K Gerald Aylmer, 'From Office-Holding to Civil Service: The Genesis of Modern Bureaucracy' in TRHS, 
5 th Series, part 30 (1980) pp. 91-108. 
9 The 'fiscal-military state' is a concept conceived by John Brewer in his book The Sinews of Power that 
has generally been accepted by historians of the 18 
th 
century. The rising cost of war meant military 
endeavours required increasing higher public spending, itself requiring higher tax revenues. A state's 
ability to wage war depended increasingly on its ability to raise revenue, hence the fiscal-military state. It 
has much in common with Geoffrey Parker's concept of the 'Military Revolution' and indeed can be seen 
as the logical conclusion to it. 
10 Harling, Old Corruption, p. 9. 
11 Ibid p. 12. 

acceptance and adoption of 'rational' standards of administrative efficiency and of 'lofty' standards of public conduct by civil servants and minsters alike. This contrasted markedly with the British state seventy years earlier. Quoting Gerald Aylmer, Harling argues that the British state c.1780 was manifested in 'an extraordinary patch-work of administrative efficiency and waste, of probity and abuse', rather than fairly uniform standards of rational 'good government' .12 The second characteristic however is more debateable. The state was larger, but was it inefficient? This study provides an opportunity to assess this at a mid-way point, during the Napoleonic Wars of 1803-15.

Ho\\' did Harling define 'good government'? Echoing Aylmer's description of 'the old administrative system', he argued that government and administration would not be deeply influenced by political considerations (by which he meant party-political considerations), with the appointment of state servants insulated from politics. Secondly, political office would be a position of public trust, rather than one of private property. Appointments were not sold but earned. Lastly, 'good government' was characterised by strict salaries, formal superannuation arrangements, and transactions of official business by the appointee in person, instead of irregular emoluments and fees. 13

The degree to which the pre-1793 government was corrupt and inefficient has been overstated. Certainly patronage did dominate the political scene. Holmes is right to comment that 'no government, even in wartime, was entirely innocent of patronage considerations' .1-+ Harling himself noted, it is easy to exaggerate the extent of government patronage. IS There was a growing tendency to appoint men on the grounds of ability, merit and experience, in other words a professionalisation of the naval departments. After 1688 professionalism and expertise began to pervade the upper ranks of departments, as Harling notes, 'for the growing volume and complexity of public business called forth the energies of a good many talented and hard-working men' .16 In the early eighteenth