

It is no\\' vital to link administrative and political history to the operational, to analyse how administrative change was effected out at sea. The interaction of administrative and operational naval history has only been examined once, with Christian Buchet's study of the Seven Years War. S5 Superior supply gave Britain the opportunity to keep fleets at sea for longer, multiplying strategic and operational capabilities. Much depended on the solidity and strength of each navy's infrastructure, and its flexibility to respond to unprecedented stresses. S6 It was in this that the Royal Navy was to have a critical advantage. '-

Methodology

This thesis is one part of a Leverhulme funded project investigating the victualling of the Royal Xavy during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. Roger Knight and ~Iartin Wilcox, colleagues on the project, have focussed on the contracting side s7, while this thesis will focus on how provisions were distributed. The first question to consider is, why the Baltic? Firstly, as has been shown above, the Baltic region was perhaps more important to Britain (and certainly its navy) than any other. A discrete period was chosen to examine victualling operations in detail, where success and failure could be measured. Therefore this thesis will focus on the period the Baltic fleet was in existence, with lengthy comparisons with the Mediterranean fleet during the same wars. Again, as highlighted above, the post-Trafalgar period has been worryingly under-studied. The Baltic was a new challenge for victualling officials; consequently it is a good opportunity to judge the speed with which naval administrators learnt. The Baltic fleet's period of action, 1808-12 came just after the Commission of Naval Revision, and thus is an excellent chance to judge the reforming instincts of the British state, and its success in doing so. Victuals were the only supply needed by the Baltic fleet when on station;

R5 Christian Buchet, Marine, economie et societe: un exemple d'interaction: f'avitaillement de la Royal 
Nav.y durant la guerre de sept ans (Paris, 1999). 
R6 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 378. 
R7 To be published as Roger Knight and Martin Wilcox, Sustaining the Fleet 1793-1815: War, the British 
Navy and the Contractor State (forthcoming, Boydell and Brewer, 2010). 

ordnance and naval stores were provided during the winter months when the fleet wintered in British ports.88 Victualling remained a steady and unceasing demand.

One factor assisting this thesis has been the large amount of archival resources available. The Adn1iralty records in the National Archives are extensive, many of which have never been consulted. Each government board kept rigorous accounts and daily minutes and gathered all letters sent and received. MacDonald is dismissive of the Victualling Board minutes as a source. describing them as 'cumbersome' and 'little more than abstracts' .89 On the contrary. they provide significant amounts of data, which if collected and manipulated, tell us much about the performance of naval administrators. The British Library and the Caird Library in the National Maritime Museum are similarly mines of archival information. The papers of Sir James Saumarez are housed in their entirety in the Suffolk Record Office, while the papers of the First Lord of the Admiralty between 1807 and 1809. Lord Mulgrave, are privately held but well-catalogued and accessible.9o