

6

Between them they accounted for 45.3% of the entire naval budget. Given that the naval budget itself took up half of all government expenditure, the two Boards were responsible for a significant proportion of public spending. 7 This chapter will argue that the British state, even before the wars of 1793-1815, was not the corrupt inefficient organisation portrayed by contemporary reformers and subsequent historians. In this it will not take too much issue with Philip Harling's excellent work on the subject. Indeed, Harling acknowledges that the late 18

th

century state was reforming itself, although there still remained many injustices and much corruption across government departments.

Where this thesis differs from other work on this subject is in the emphasis on the reforming tendencies of the naval departments during the Napoleonic War. The succeSSIve administrations of Portland, Perceval and Liverpool increased the effectiveness of the British war machine. The Napoleonic War was a conflict unprecedented in its scope and challenges. As such, it required a monumental effort to

5 Bernard Pool, 'Navy contracts in the Last Years of the Navy Board, 1780-1832', MM, Vo1.50, No.3 p. 
161. 
6 NMM, ADM BP121 a, Navy Board to Admiralty, 18 February 1801. 
7 That in the 18 th century the Navy swallowed half of all public revenue is noted by Daniel A. Baugh, 
British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. vii. 
28 

manage the means to victory. Military departments were (and indeed are) different to other goyernmental departments. This chapter will focus on the Victualling and Transport Boards as case studies of government competence under the pressure of war. It will argue that in these particular government bodies, changes had been made that put them ahead of their peers in other departments. Secondly, the impulse for these reforms did not, as Harling argues. derive from political fear instilled by the events of the French Revolution, or at least, not entirely. It was the escalation of the war against Napoleon that brought hon1e to British governments that something approaching a 'total' effort would be needed to defeat Napoleon. Given a choice between reform or defeat, British governments unsurprisingly chose the latter.

The 18 th Century State

How can we judge an efficient state? Aylmer puts forward six principal features of 'the old administrative system', including entry to office through purchase or patronage, lifetime tenure, the concept of offices as personal property, remuneration of these offices coming from fees and perquisites rather than fixed salaries.

8

In a similar vein, Harling focuses on two key factors differentiating the mid-Victorian state from the fiscal military state of 1780. 9 Firstly, whilst the former was characterised by 'cheap government' and low expenditure compared to other European states, the latter was summed up by very high levels of public expenditure. 1o The first judgement is clearly accurate: wartime spending gave rise to very high levels of public expenditure. Spending was £4.9 per capita in 1801 and £4.5 per capita in 1811, compared to £2.0 per capita in 1851.