

That said there are understandable limits. Firstly, there are small gaps in the archives due to accident. For example, the Bill of Exchange Books in the National Archives were destroyed in a fire in 1923.91 While the papers emanating from the British state are generally well kept. merchants' accounts are less so: it has proven very difficult to locate private-sector papers. Few firms or companies operating in the 1800s are still doing so today. with the exception of Lloyd's insurers and a few of the older banks. This explains the ease with which merchant accounts have disappeared from the historical record. Williams noted the difficulty in discovering the owners of victualling transports, as frequently only the master's were named, and those changed fairly regularly.92 Fortunately, one crucial private-sector archive - that of Henley and Sons, from whom the Transport Board hired transports for much of the war - has been exceptionally useful. The John Constable papers in the New York Public Library have also shed light on the

gg See for example, TNA, ADM 1/8,25 March 1809. 
X9 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', pp. 37-38. 
90 The Mulgrave Archive (MA) in Mulgrave Castle, Whitby, UK. 
91 StiIllisted as TNA PMG1331, these records would have detailed the specific amounts paid in the Baltic 
for locally sourced beef. In their place, the author has had to use ships logs and occasional Victualling 
Board minutes, which are not as routine. 
92 M.1. Williams, 'Sandwich', p. 534 

contracting arrangements from Caribbean merchants to the British state. The key aim of this thesis is to measure the effectiveness of the naval administration, and therefore the British state, in a time of war. The focus will be the state's mobilisation and management of private resources rather than the merchants and ship-owners themselves. It should be stated that researching through the Henley and Constable archives has merely confirmed rather than undermined initial understanding of the power and importance of the state in late 18

th

and early 19

th

century Britain.

The focus of this thesis is on the contracting of transport vessels rather than contracting for provisions. This thesis focuses on the operational and strategic side of victualling: it is fair to say that no operation was ever hampered to due to a lack of provisions in the naval Victualling yards. However bad corn shortages were during the wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France, the Victualling Board always had adequate stocks. 93 Howeyer, the supply of transports did have (at times crippling) effects on the movement of victuals out to fleets: the focus on this side of the state's dealings with the private sector makes more sense.

Wilkinson has noted the limitation based on a survey of government records.

In the past wntmg on the civil affairs of the Navy has concentrated on what administrators and politicians actually said in their official and private correspondence. This highlights the problems they were facing and the decisions taken, but, just as minutes of board meetings merely record the decisions taken rather than the decision making process. this correspondence is often inadequate for an understanding of a course of action.