

It was during Anson' s time that a spirit of professionalism began to enter the ranks of na\'al administration. as he succeeded in filling posts with persons qualified to conduct business. \Vilkinson has also noted the increasingly professional proto-civil service and the implementation of more efficient bureaucratic systems. 22 Men with training and experience in their particular occupation were introduced: if an employee did not live up to expectations the Board could dismiss him.23 As Anson himself stated, in rejecting a recommendation, 'this gives me an opportunity to your Grace, that instead of addirig to the useless people that are allowed in that office (if we should have a war with France), more people of business must be brought into it' .24

The amount of support that ministers were able to purchase through the grant of contracts was by no means enormous. As Norman Baker noted, of the 46 men who held contracts for supplying the armed forces during the American Revolutionary War, only 18 were sitting members of Parliament (and another five close relatives of members).25 Generally, these contracts were not scandalously lucrative, although as Harling notes, their average rate of profit was certainly better than that from most other investments at the time. 26 The total cost of sinecures and pensions were very high, annually £297,000 and £200,000

20 Richard Middleton, The Bells of Victory: The Pitt-Newcastle Ministry and the Conduct of the Seven 
Years War, 1757-1762 (Cambridge University Press, 1985) p. 110. 
21 Ibid pp. 11 0-1. 
22 Clive Wilkinson, The British Navy and the State In The Eighteenth Century (Boydell Press, Woodbridge, 
2004) p. 102. 
23 Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, pp. 22, 146. 
2~ Quoted in Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p. 61. 
25 Norman Baker, Government and Contractors: The British Treasury and War Supplies 1775-1783 (1971) 
ff' 216-8, 244-8. 
Harling, Old Corruption, p. 16. 

respecti\'t~ly.27 However, 'as important as fees still were (and continued to be until the practice came under systematic attack in the 1780's) in determining the records of office in old-established departments, those who profited from them represented, well before 1730. very much the exception to the general rule of a salaried profession' .28 Surprisingly 'modern' terms of service were the norm in departments created after the Reformation, most notably the payment of decent salaries with almost no supplementary perquisites attached to them. 29

Naval Administration and the French Wars: The State Reforms Itself

That being said. there can be no doubt that government departments, including the naval departments were far from any definition of 'good government' at the start of the French Reyolutionary War in 1793. The Victualling Board had been much criticised for corruption before the Wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France. In 1782, there had been a lengthy scandal involving the chief clerk to the Secretary of the Victualling Board, a man named Wilkins, who had divulged confidential information to a naval agent. Lacking support from the Admiralty, George Philip Towry, at this time Secretary to the Board, was forced to reinstate him. An outraged Burgoyne resigned from the Board and wrote to Towry, 'My good friend, I fear you are likely to have a troublesome life of it, & will I fear soon experience how impossible it is to stem the tide of jobbs & dishonesty' .30 Towry, tasked with restoring the good name of the Board saw it as 'absolutely necessary to restore the Victualling Office to the good opinion of the Public', under no illusions as to 'how low it had fallen' .31 Calls for reform of the Victualling Board in 1788 following the Commission on Fees were not heeded. Patronage was still rampant. As Wilkinson points out, 'the Admiralty Board members were often hostage to political fortune, whereas the more minor officials within the Admiralty and the members