

66

By the 1800' s the threat had receded however. There is no correlation between periods of unrest and periods of significant government reform. The major unrest experienced by Britain - the scarcity of wheat in 1795-6, 1801 and 1812-13, and the nayal mutiny of 1797 - do not coincide. The impulse to reform the Victualling and Transport Boards came from the rising intensity of the war with Napoleon.

It was the war and the prospect of defeat that worried those in government more. The main concern of the tenth report of the Commission of Naval Revision's concern was 'the pressure of current business': the war.

67

Britain was committed to war until Napoleon

1i4 Ibid pp. 3-8. 
65 Aylmer, 'Genesis of modem bureaucracy', pp. 91-108. 
66 Boyd Hilton, A Mad, Bad & Dangerous People? England 1783-1846 (Oxford University Press, 2006), p. 
65. 
67 Commission of Naval Revision, Tenth Report, pp. 1-3. 
43 

was defeated.

Accordingly, it required unprecedented means to win. Given a choice between efficiency and defeat. the British government naturally chose the latter. From this arose the movenlent towards efficiency in its military departments that was for the most part completed by 1809. More than any other factor, it was war that forced the goyernment and administration to reform. The state was scrutinised, resulting in radical bureaucratic change in nayal administration, as demonstrated above. As the threat to the country eyolyed, so did the measures to deal with it. The state was looking for efficiency and stepped in where it did not exist.

Lastly. efficiency was also needed to maintain the credit-worthiness of the fiscal-military state.

69

At a tilne when the collapse of public credit would spell ruin for the British state (and it nearly did in 1797 when fears of foreign invasion caused a collapse in confidence and a run on the banks), the British government was always keen to demonstrate its efficiency. as can be seen in its responses to the various enquiries into naval and military administration. The Commission for Naval Revision should also be seen in this light. \Var forcing administrative change was nothing new. In the 1680s and 1690s there was a drive for greater administrative efficiency, especially in revenue raising and collection, 'its mainsprings arising from a rejuvenated Treasury. A strengthening of central authority, the impact of war, and a fundamental change in attitudes towards public service in England came together to bring this about' .70 It was from this that the 'fiscal military state' as described by John Brewer arose. The military and naval administration was quick to reform.

As Holmes has argued of the 1680s, 'the second development in point of time, and one which far more spectacular effects on career opportunity in all three branches of the

fiX The issue of whether the Napoleonic Wars were 'total' or merely the largest of all the 18 
th 
century 
limited wars is hotly debated. Recent scholarship such as David A. Bell's The First Total War 
(Bloomsbury, London, 2007) tends towards the former. It is not the place here to discuss it in detail, since it 
is an argument that depends as much on definition and semantics as on historical argument. 20 
th 
century 
maxims of total war such as confiscation of property were alien to the 18 
th 
century mind. However, 
conscription, and seemingly unlimited political objectives were first seen in these wars. Let it simply be 
said that the Napoleonic Wars were more 'total' than anything seen before, but less total than the later wars 
of the 19 th century in 1861-5 and 1870-1. 
69 Daunton, Progress and Poverty, p. 517. 
70 Holmes, Augustan England, pp. 241-2. 