

state's ser\'ice. was the twenty years of warfare which ensued during the quarter century between 1689 and 1713'. Between 1706 and 1711, there was a constant army size of over 120,000. and in December 1688 there were 100 ships of the line. As Holmes comments, 'nothing to compare with such a force had been mustered by any previous generation'. In other words. war had forced British government to extend itself: 'to organise, equip and direct such armed forces, and to raise and administer the revenue for a military and naval budget that was eventually five times as large as James II's, called not only for a much larger and more complex executive than that of 1688 but for a new attitude towards the officials who composed it".71

Just as in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century, the state during the Napoleonic Wars responded to unprecedented challenges with reforms that changed aspects of the British state. Esdaile has commented that Britain 'brought down Napoleon \\·ithout any fundamental reformation in either Britain's way of making war or her system of government". 72 While this is true in a general structural sense, it neglects the wide ranging reforms brought in to win the war by the naval administration. There was no 'British Revolution', nor a change from parliamentary control. The British State was not an inert institution, obsessed with notions of privilege and patronage. In a war that placed unprecedented strains on Britain, the naval departments of British government, especially in the last years of the war, were able to reform itself to fight a conflict of some magnitude.

Ascribing the changes of 1809 to Benthamite influence is at best doubtful. Like all naval departments, the Victualling Board operated on the principle of collective responsibility, rather than the individual responsibility urged by Samuel Bentham, with all correspondence being signed by a minimum quorum of commissioners.

73

As Morriss points out, after 1805, 'Benthamite thinking went underground'. As he comments, 'there

71 Holmes, Augustan England, p. 242. 
72 Charles Esdaile, The Wars of Napoleon (Longman, 1995) p. 143. 
73 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', p. 168. 
45 

lS no eddence that Barham either sympathised with Bentham's ideas for reform or understood the system he hoped to promote' .74 It seems clear that the impulse came not from fear of re\'olution, but fear of defeat. It was the challenge of war that implemented reform.

Daunton argues that 'the Whigs in the 1830' s were in many ways completing the work of Burke and Pitt rather than embarking on a new radical attack to destroy 'Old Corruption" .75 It was the reforming tendencies of the Portland, Perceval and Liverpool administrations, faced with perhaps the first 'total' war in British history that should take the credit for reforming the naval departments. Improved efficiency of the Victualling Board did not happen for its own sake, but was part of a wider investigation into improving the machinery of government so that it could fight the war against Napoleon. In 1782 Middleton complained that men could not be found for business. This was no longer the case by the 1800s.