

Sourc~. N) PL Constable PIerrepont Papers, Box 7. Why thIS calculatIon was done 10 Amencan dollars between November and December is unclear.

Contracting was therefore a profitable business. However, the rash of contractor bankruptcies in the last years of the war, as Edward Knight and Thomas Pinkerton, to name two large merchants, were forced into bankruptcy, suggests that the Victualling Board was never browbeaten into paying over the odds.

6l

Ship-owners that lent their vessels to the Transport Board could stand to make a profit, though it was normally of the small and secure variety, rather than a highly profitable exercise.

62

Where does the Victualling Board match Harling's and Aylmer's definition of progressive government? On all three of Harling's criteria, it constituted 'good government". The Victualling Board was not influenced by party political considerations. When commissioners were sacked, it was not because of political loyalty but because of incompetence. Political office was certainly not seen as property. Lastly, it was a Board that was characterised by strict salaries, formal superannuation arrangements with business transacted six times a week by the appointed personnel. Harling argues that 'only by 1850 can the administrative structure fairly accurately be described as a 'rational' civil service' .63 Perhaps it took until the mid-19

th

century, or even later, for the entire civil service to match his criteria. The Victualling Board, along with much of the naval administration, was to all intents and purposes a very modern and rational institution.

61 The contracting side of victualling is the large part of a forthcoming monograph entitled Sustaining the 
Fleet, 1793-1815: War, the British Navy and the Contractor State, by Roger Knight and Martin Wilcox. 
62 Chapter 5 will cover the hiring of victualling transport tonnage. 
63 Harling, 'Old Corruption, p. 24. 

War and Administrative Reform

It had to be. The argument that political rather than military reasons were behind economic reform, and the attempts to make the state more efficient, has often been stated. As Harling argues. the tighter regulation of financial and administrative apparatus between 1780 and 1850 were 'matters of chronic and often serious political controversy'. The scale of the war effort allowed an unprecedented opportunity to amass public money and patronage, and the example of the French Revolution threatened the political elite more than at any preyious time, forcing government to move towards policies of economic reform. 'to shield more and more of its authority from the critique of Old

Corruption' .64

It \\'as the war that brought about the need for efficiency, not political pressure. As Gerald Aymler correctly observed, war 'was the great catalyst of administrative discontent and innovation·.

05

It is true that British governments were concerned about the example the French Revolution set for domestic unrest. There was certainly a significant increase in the coerciYe powers of the state. Whether there was a serious threat of subversion in early to mid-1790s is uncertain; what is certain is that the Government responded as if there was.