

I found myself placed by Order of the Board of Admiralty, the Junior Member of the Junior committee in the new arrangement of the Victualling Board; a situation, which I could not possibly occupy without being degraded not only in my own Eyes, but in the opinion of the Public, particularly as two of the Gentlemen who had served as Pursers in the Navy were new Members, and, two other Gentlemen had not been three years at the Board.

3X MA 20/652, JC Searle to Lord Mulgrave, 8 January 1808. It would be small comfort to Searle that in fact 
only five commissioners did receive a 'promotion' to the more senior Navy Board, four them being Navy 
officers. Searle would get a promotion, becoming Chairman of the Victualling Office 11 months later, in 
December 1808. See Knight, 'Politics and Trust', pp. 135, 145. 
39 Hon Edward Richard Stewart, M.P. Wigtown Burghs 1806-20 Jan 1809, Commissioner of the 
Victualling Board 20 January 1809-14 June 1813. See Roger Knight, The Spending and Accounting 
Performance of the British Victualling Board, 1793-1815', WEHC Conference Utrecht 2009. 
40 MacDonald, 'Management Competence', p. 161. 

The mo\'e to bring in able and talented men (in this case pursers) put him 'under the painful necessity of soliciting leave to retire on a Pension'. The rest of his letter went on to ask for a full salary pension, rather than three-quarters, since he has served more than the 35 years stipulated in the Order of Council respecting Superannuation of Officers and Clerks, which he argued was applicable to him. Mulgrave's reply was typically brusque

and dismissi\'e .41

The advent of professionalism can perhaps best be seen in a letter of February 1810. James Archibald Wortley wrote to Lord Mulgrave, wishing for George Watson to succeed his uncle (Mf. Wilkie) as Agent Victualler at Malta where he had been employed oyer the preyious six months. Mulgrave was adamant that no such privileges could be tolerated:

It is \ery unusual to allow officers to resign their situation in favour of their Relations, 
& were this the Practise with respect to Good and permanent situations, Government 
would find it difficult to prevail on competent Persons to undertake temporary 
Service. or accept appointments to small Establishments, which they are now 
encouraged to do in hopes of advancement, & it would be improper in the event of Mr 
\Vilkie being ... otherwise obliged to quit his station to appoint his nephew provided he 
were qualified, over the heads of many who have been, & now are acting in situation 
not pennanent or so good as that of Agent Victualler at Malta. 
42 

Appointments were no longer favours, but were made on merit. Before the wars against Revolutionary and Napoleonic France, patronage dominated naval administration. It could provoke anger in certain quarters. In the years 1779 to 1781, the Comptroller of the Navy Board, Charles Middleton, wrote a series of letters to the then First Lord of the Admiralty, Lord Sandwich, arguing that experience and merit should replace political favour as the basis of civil naval appointments: 'for want of proper men to conduct the business at the ports, no expedition is used in fitting the ships', he complained.