

was the problem preserving provIsIons. Improvements in packing and processIng occurred, but not enough to remove the problem of perishable foodstuffs, until the in\'t~ntion of canning in the 19

th

century. The second problem was transport. In Williams' words, \\Titing of the American War, "in general it can be said that shortcomings in the Victualling Service were not due to failure to purchase or contract for sufficient provisions ... provisions were, in the event, furnished in abundance, but delay often occurred in getting transports,.3 Thus major victualling delays were problems of logistical means rather than issues devolving from contracting. This focus of this thesis is the victualling sen'ice, the system by which provisions were distributed. By the time of the Napoleonic War how far had problems of distribution been solved? Were they really, as Williams argued, "insoluble'? As the century went on, changes in the victualling service meant the range of operations available to the fleet increased. Advances in this area meant naval power became more efficient, with fleets less likely to lose naval strength as ships returned to port to re-victual. The supply system would provide a difference between victory and failure. If the provisioning system excelled, a fleet or squadron was able to pursue its objectives. If the system failed and a fleet was forced to leave its station British naval strategy and sea-power was undermined. The evolution of the victualling service corresponded directly with the increasing effectiveness of British sea-power.

Victualling in the early 18 th Century: 1683-1755

The Victualling Board was first established as a distinct department of the Admiralty in 1683. Throughout the first half of the 18

th

century, and indeed for large periods afterwards, it would grapple with the problems of supplying men on foreign stations. Problems of food preservation at sea were impossible to solve given the state of such technology. Early in the 18 th century there was a high rate of wastage. William Jenkins, the chief dairy product supplier to the navy during the 1740s provided over 200,0001bs of butter & over 400,000lbs of cheese: 23,000lbs of butter and 48,000lbs of cheese were condemned in the Baltic.

4

This was more than 10%, a remarkable amount of waste.

3 M.1. Williams, 'Sandwich', pp. 533-6. 
4 Aldridge, 'British Naval Expeditions to the Baltic Sea', p. 25. 
48 

Stores however were never the maIn problem. An even larger problem was the operational issue: once a fleet was on station, there was no certainty that, assuming ships were initially victualled for between four and six months, re-victualling could be carried out at that period. After this period there was no administrative infrastructure to keep ships at sea supplied. A ships time at sea could be measured by the food they took with them. After this had been consumed, the vessels returned to port, often limiting, or in the worst cases se\'erely harming a fleet's operational viability. On one occasion in August 1717 for instance all but ten ships were sent back from the Baltic to enable the remaining ships to maintain a 'whole allowance' of victuals.s