

The fundamental change was the replacement of the system of patronage with one that \\'as more meritocratic. The Commission of Naval Revision saw the advent of professionalism in naval administration. In January 1808, JC Searle, Commissioner of the Victualling Board. wrote to the Lord of the Admiralty enquiring about a position on the ~ ayy Board. Searle was a man of convention, very much at home in the 18

th

century belief in traditional progression through the ranks of the naval departments. He was to receive a shock. 'I have been informed that Commissioner Inglefield has declined the acceptance of the situation intended for him at Somerset House' he wrote, and

as the seat I know fill at this Board, has hitherto been considered as a preparatory step to the Navy Board, I should be wanting to myself, if I neglected this opportunity of soliciting your Lordship for that appointment. .. few Captains of any reputation in the Navy would accept the situation I now hold but for the prospect of succeeding to a better.

In 1808, he was dealing with a new world. Mulgrave's reply was terse and cutting:

I have never understood that a seat at the Victualling Board has been considered as a preparatory step to the Navy Board by my predecessors, it certainly is not my intention so to consider it, nor could I indeed in that case have proposed the appointments to the Navy Board to Commissioner Inglefield.

Merit rather than seniority was the order of the day: 'If I may judge from the numerous applications which I have already delivered, I can feel no apprehension of finding highly

37 Ibid p. 141.

reputable officers to fill any vacancIes which might arIse at the Victualling Board, \\'ithout any pledge on my part for their removal to better situations which must & always be distant & precarious', wrote Mulgrave. 38 Political influence was generally removed fron1 the Victualling Board. Indeed, one of the consequences of the Victualling Board's lower status was that the Board had no serving MPs. One of the few political placemen who sen'ed on the Victualling Board, the Hon. Edward Stewart, fifth son of the Earl of Galloway, ga\'e up his parliamentary seat in Scotland on the day in 1809 that he was appointed to the Board. 39

A combination of the Commission of Naval Revision's reports and the discovery of misdeeds by the Victualling office led to the replacement of three commissioners, creating embarrassment in Parliament. A motion was proposed by Admiral Sir Charles Pole (chairman of the earlier Commmission of Naval Enquiry) on the necessity to appoint 'professional' and 'indefatigable' commissioners. 4o In 1809 the Victualling Board 'purged' itself. Elderly. ineffectual commissioners were removed in favour of younger, more dynamic - and most importantly - officials who were appointed on merit. Commissioners Marsh, Budge and Moody were all removed from service in the Board. They were fired not because of their political loyalty, but because they were deemed not to be up to the job. Robert Sadley Moody complained avidly to Mulgrave. After listing his 49 years of service, he stated with some degree of snobbery that