

The eighth report of the Commission on Fees detailed many instances of salaries being boosted by fees, gratuities and perquisites from various sources. The accountant for cash and his chief clerk received 2s 6d per bill for despatching bills of freight and demurrage, and from 2s 6d to £2 2s for bills to tradesmen and artificers. His first and second extra clerks receive respectively 2s 6d per search for checking that masters of victuallers had accounted properly for returned casks, and 2s 6d to 5s for entering each bill of exchange. In 1798, the accountant for cash reported an average income over the previous three years of £3169 13s, of which only £120 was salary, while his chief clerk reported an average income over the same period of £1722 2s 2d of which only £60 was salary. The Commission on Fees commissioners recommended that the system of fees as part of salaries should be replaced by a salary-only system, although it was not until 1800 that their salary recommendations for the Victualling Board and its staff were put into effect.5o

Nine years later, a further commission began to report on naval administration, the tenth report covering the working of the Victualling Board. Any form of corrupt behaviour was rooted out. It stated that:

4R Roger Morriss, Naval Power and British Culture, 1760-1850 (Ashgate, London, 2004) p. 31. 
49 Commission of Naval Revision, Ninth Report, p. 5 . 
.'if) Commission on Fees, Eighth Report, pp.695-706, quoted in MacDonald, 'Management Competence', pp. 
175,177. 

No Commissioner. Officer, Clerk, or other person belonging to the Victualling Department shall receivc for his own advantage any fee, gratuity, perquisite, or emolument whatevcr, from nay person having, or had, any transactions with the Victualling Department', and ordered that all Victualling Office employees take an oath, supported hy a bond worth three times their respective salaries. 51

Eyery person entrusted with making purchases, 'or other expenditure of public money abroad' was to 'attest on oath ... that he neither has received, nor expects to receive, directly or indirectly, any benefit whatever from such expenses', again under penalty. 52

In April 1808 for example, ten Victualling Board employees, including the accountant for cash, were sacked for the simple crime of receiving presents from contractors. The Lords of the Admiralty could only 'express their surprize, that the system of corruption which appears in the minutes of the Evidence ... all persons against whom the receiving presents or being concerned as Agents, Brokers, or otherwise, for Contractors ... in violation of their Oaths and their duty has been proved, should be immediately dismissed from their respective employments' .53 This was not the practice of an inefficient government institution. Indeed, the Admiralty's anger was amplified by the fact that the offences 'should have been carried to so great an extent and for such a considerable length of time in direct violation of the regulations of this Office ... without the Board having discovered it' .5'+ This was an unusual event: the Commission of Naval Revision stated that 'we belie\e that the same highly commendable disinterestedness in the Commissioners still continues'. 55 Soon after its establishment in 1794 the Transport Board had made similar efforts to eliminate some of the abuses that still existed. One of the first resolutions passed by the Transport Board stated that no person belonging to, or under the direction of the Board, should have any property vested in transports, or share or shares of any ships or vessels employed as a transport, directly or indirectly, under pain of dismissal from office. 56