

Victualling During the Seven Years War

During the Seven Years War victualling standards continued to rIse, as the naval administration of Britain grappled with the problems of distributing provisions. Stephen Gradish re-emphasised the insoluble problems Williams spoke of, but was otherwise

8 Ibid, p. 374. 
9 Ibid, p. 406. 
10 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, pp. 441-2. 
50 

complimentary of the provisioning service. As he argued, the Victualling Board were 'dedicated and conscientious nlen who were remarkably successful in raising the standards of naval victualling in a day and age when the technology of preparing and preserving victuals in their original state for prolonged periods was virtually non existent'. Gradish is ultimately positive about the Victualling Board: 'on the whole, the picture that emerges of the Victualling Board is favourable', he argues, though follows this with the slightly more circumspect, 'certainly they were not totally incompetent and

• 11 corrupt. 

Victualling efficiency was improved. The proportion of victuals condemned shrank drastically: for Bread only one pound in every 294, and for beef only one pound in every 1,691 was condemned.

12

Calculations of supply became more exact. Ships were given four months of rations: enough to sustain a fleet for that period but not too much that provisions would go off and thus be wasted. In 1756, Admiral Boscawen wrote that 'This ship has know been at sea twelve weeks, which is longer than I ever knew any first-rate ever at sea ... at the beginning of the Spanish War our cruisers would not keep the sea above a fortnight, till one or two of them were broken for it, now three months is but a . . 13 common cruIse .

During the Seven Years War, the key aim of naval strategy was to keep a strong battle fleet off the French Atlantic coast for as long as possible. British strategy centered around the Western Squadron which could cover the English Channel and Atlantic ports: the naval ports of Brest and Rochefort in particular, but also the commercial ports of Le Havre, St Malo, Nantes and Bordeaux.

14

This blockade required constant vigilance, to imprison the French fleet and attack French mercantile commerce; it had to be continuous

11 Gradish, The Manning of the British Navy, p. 146. 
12 Ibid pp. 144-5. 
13 Kemp, 'Boscawen's Letters to his Wife, 1755-56' in Lloyd, Naval ~iscellany IV, p. 248. 
14 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 264. Michael Duffy, 'The EstablIshment of t.h~ Western Squadron as 
the linchpin of British Naval Strategy' in Michael Duffy ed. The Parameters of Brztlsh Naval Power, 1650- 
1850 (Exeter, 1992) pp. 66-81. 
51 

to be effective. The onset of disease was the nlain determinant of the length of a cruise. IS

For the fleet to remain on station they would require provisions greater than the four months worth of provisions they left port with. Early in the war, the navy had yet to organise a system whereby fleets outside victualling ports could be regularly supplied without simply returning to port. As a result a force of at least one and a half times that of the squadron at sea was required so piecemeal detachments could be made for repairs and refreshment. 16 This meant that a significant proportion of ships of war available would be engaged in re-victualling at any given time, rather than serving operational or strategic functions. It was an inefficient use of naval force.