

enemy ships on the French coast, but from the financial collapse of the government: even the nayy' largest contractor could not remain immune from the financial disasters that befell the service in 1759.:'1 Dull too notes the huge financial problems facing the French monarchy. meaning naval administration was often in arrears, and payments to suppliers 'S were often delayed. ,"

EYen when these problems were surpassed, France did not have the logistical infrastructure to support fleets at sea. In 1761 Martinique was captured by a British force under Rodney. A relief force had been sent from France under Rear-Admiral the comte de Blenac-Cordon. but he reached Martinique the day after it fell, and spent the next six months immobilised at Cap Fran<;ois, immobilised by sickly crews. 39 The Royal Navy and British nayal administration was clearly ahead of its major rivals. However, 'until the disasters of the war for American Independence, few Englishmen saw the need, and fewer still felt the inclination, to reform a navy which, for all its faults, was the acknow ledged mistress of the seas' .40

The War of American Independence

Success in the Seven Years War covered up the deficiencies that remained with the victualling service. It took the prospect of defeat against the Americans to shake Britain and her naval administrators into action. British strategic problems in this war were complicated by the unprecedented administrative and logistical problems arising from the necessity of supporting a great army and naval force in the Western Hemisphere.

41

The

twin aspirations of timeliness and efficiency would be much sought after.

During the American war, the Victualling Board was still struggling with wastage. The Agent Victuallers in Cork and Rotherhithe respectively, Marsh and Cherry rejected and

37 James Pritchard, Louis XV's Nav)', 1748-1762: A Stud)' in Organization and Administration (McGill 
Queens University Press, Kingston and Montreal, 1987) p. 183. 
38 Dull The French Navy and Seven Years War pp. 113-4. , , 
39 Rodger, Command of the Ocean, p. 284. 
40 Baugh, British Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole, p: .505. . . 
41 David Syrett, Shipping and the American War: A Study of British Transport OrgamsatlOn (Athlone 
Press, London, 1970) p. vii. 

condemned large quantities of provisions delivered by contractors as being unfit for hmnan consumption. On one occasion in 1780, Cherry reported that one contractor had failed to deliver 54,920 pounds of beef and 229,767 pounds of butter for the last convoy of the year.-+

2

By and large though, the production of foodstuffs was never an issue operationally.-+3 The main challenge was in distributing provisions around the globe.

Victualling success clearly depended on an adequate transport system. Where transports were ayailable, or where inadequacies could be offset by local provisioning, fleets could be supplied, operations could be maintained. However, the regularity with which complaints \\'ere made demonstrates that victualling from a discrete, centralised location had yet to be mastered. M.1. Williams wrote that 'it is clear that there were shortcomings in the yictualling system under Sandwich. There were delays and supplies fell short from time to time. Yet the great difficulties of supplying foreign stations in the days of sail must be remembered. Vital factors were the provisions of adequate transport and convoy escort to say nothing of favourable winds. Delays through failure to meet any of these requirements might result in great loss through provisions becoming rotten' .44 That these problems remained throughout much of the war is an indictment of the naval administration's performance. Delays caused by convoy and transport provision could be overcome.