

Transport procurement was a slow and laborious task. As Syrett put it: 'ordinary business concerning the transport service moved through the hierarchy of British government in a sluggish and inefficient manner ... weeks and in some cases months might be required to resolve simple problems relating to the transport service' .45 He details many examples of delays in transport and victuals. In 1779 a convoy requested by the Navy Board on the 5 June 1779, was only loaded and ready by 4 September 1779. The speed with which a convoy was secured was even slower. That same example of 1779 did not receive its

42 Ibid p. 150. 
43 The contracting side of victualling during the American War is covered admirably in Norman Baker, 
Government and Contractors: British Treasury and War supplies, J 775-83 (University of London 
Historical Society, 1971). 
44 MJ. Williams, 'Sandwich', p. 567. 
45 Syrett, Shipping and the American War, pp. 12-15. 

convoy until the 24 December 1779, despite reminders being sent. Similarly, in 1780 another issue in securing an escort resulted in further delays in months. 46 The problem was not one of technology, or indeed of a more widespread global shortage of mercantile tonnage, but of managen1ent: as the Navy Board observed in 1782, 'if all the shipping in Europe was employed in the service of the Army they would not prove sufficient, under this kind of management' .47 By 1782, the Navy Board did not have the tonnage to meet the logistical needs of 1783. 48

Further evidence of the Navy Board's struggle completing its primary duties comes with its reluctance to take on the army provisioning. In 1778 it wrote:

We find that the great increase of the navy, and equipment of the fleet, which there is in appearance will be further extended, together with the having the heavy load of the transport service upon this office, there now being now near 78,000 tons of shipping under our directions, renders it impossible to undertake the management of a business if such variety and uncertainty in addition to it, without prejudice to His Majesty's affairs, and subjecting them to disappointments and inconveniences more especially in our department as commissioners of the navy which no consideration can lead us to hazard. 49

It was nevertheless, given the responsibility the following year. That the responsibility was given to the Victualling Board early in the Napoleonic War is a relevant judgement on each Boards perceived capability.

Throughout the American Wars there were also consistent failures to provide warships promptly to escort out-ward bound convoys. 'Several times during the years 1779-1780', wrote Syrett, 'the [Navy] Board saw months of preparation and labour wasted by the failure of the naval vessels required to escort the convoy to appear at the appointed time and place' .50 As a result operations were greatly affected by failures of naval administration. In 1779 there were victualling problems with the Channel Fleet, particularly with water. Portsmouth, the nearest watering port, could not meet Admiral Hardy's demands. The most serious problems involved the victualling of the West Indies